The Imamate
===========

The Imamate is a breath of Allah's spirit. It is a favor of His favors.
He has bestowed it on man to lead him to belief and good and to guide
him to the right path. The Shi‘ites believe that it is among the
fundamentals of the religion and the pillars of Islam. That is because
it is the strong base on which Islamic social justice depends. Imam Abu
Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, talked about many dimensions of the
Imamate. The following are some of them:

The Critical Need for the Imam
------------------------------

The Imamate is a necessity of Islamic life. The affairs of society are
not righteous without it. Moslems have unanimously agreed that it is
obligatory and necessary. Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi asked Imam al-Baqir,
peace be on him, about the need for the Prophet and the Imam. Thus, he,
peace be on him, said: “The world remains righteous. That is because
Allah, the Great and Almighty, does not punish the people of the earth
as long as the Prophet or the Imam is among them. Allah, the Great and
Almighty, said: ‘Allah does not punish them as long as you are among
them.’ The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said: ‘The stars
are safety for the people of the sky, and the members of my family are
safety for the people of the earth. If the stars went away, what the
people of the sky hate would hit them. If the members of my House went
away, what the people of the earth hate would afflict them.’ By the
members of his House, he meant the Imams whose obedience Allah, the
Great and Almighty, joined to His obedience when He said: ‘O You who
believe, obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority among
you.’ They were infallible and purified. The did not commit sins nor did
they disobey (Allah). They were supported, successful, and guided (to
righteousness). Through them Allah gives people. Through them the
country is prosperous. Through them rain comes down from the sky.
Through them the blessings of the earth comes forth. Through them the
people of sins are given time and are not punished and tortured quickly.
Gabriel did not separate himself from them (the Prophet's Household) nor
did they separate themselves from him. They did not separate themselves
from the Koran nor did it separate itself from them. Allah's blessings
be on them all.”[^1]

The speech of the Imam, peace be on him, is full of the words concerning
the need for the Imamate, for it leads the world to righteousness and
reforms the deviation from religion. The Imam praised the pure Imams
from the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. He
underlined that they were safety for the people of the earth, and that
through them the tribulation is driven away, rain comes down from the
sky, and the blessings of the earth come forth.

To know the Imam is obligatory
------------------------------

The traditions reported on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, and on the authority of the custodians of the
sciences of the pure Imams have agreed that to know the Imam of the time
is obligatory, and that whoever dies and does not him is like those who
died before Islam, as the Prophetic tradition stated. In this respect,
many traditions were

reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on
him. The following are some of them:

1. Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi reported. He said: [I heard Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, say:]

“Surely, he who knows Allah, the Great and Almighty, and worships Him is
the person who knows Allah and recognizes His Imam from among us, ahl
al-Bayt, and he who does not know Allah, the Great and Almighty, and
does not recognize the Imam from us, ahl al-Bayt, knows and worships
other than Allah.”[^2]

2. Mohammed b. Moslem reported. He said: [ I heard Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, say:]

“Everyone who is obedient to Allah, the Great and Almighty, in worship
in which he exerts effort, but does not have an Imam (appointed) by
Allah, his deeds are unacceptable, and he is astray and bewildered.
Allah detests his deeds. Such a person is like a sheep which has strayed
away from its flock and its shepherd, and which runs in this and that
direction the whole day. When the night descends on it, it sees some
flock of sheep with a shepherd. It goes towards it and is deceived. It
passes that night with that flock in their resting-place. When the
shepherd herds the flock, that sheep refuses to recognize the flock and
the shepherd. It runs in bewilderment seeking its shepherd and its
flock. Then it sees another flock of sheep with its shepherd. Again the
sheep turns towards it and is deceived by the second flock. The shepherd
shouts: ‘Join your shepherd and your flock. You are lost from, and
bewilder over, your shepherd and your flock.’ So, the sheep runs away in
fear, bewilderment and loss, having no shepherd to guide it to a pasture
or back to its own place. Being like this, a wolf takes advantage of its
being lost, and eats it. Thus is it, by Allah, O Mohammed, he who wakes
up in this community without having an Imam (appointed) by Allah, the
Great and Almighty, who is manifest and just, wakes up astray and lost.
If such a person dies in this condition, he dies the death of unbelief
and hypocrisy. O Mohammed, know unjust Imams and their followers have
been expelled from the religion of Allah. They are misguided and they
misguide. So, the deeds which they perform are as ashes whereon the wind
blow strong upon a tempestuous day. They have no power over what they
have earned- that is the far error.”[^3]

Indeed the Imams of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them, must be known. That is because they were the custodians of the
revelation and the trustees of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, and his successors over his community. They were unlike
the Umayyad and the ‘Abbasid kings who committed all sins and spread
oppression and corruption in the earth.

To obey the Imam is obligatory
------------------------------

To obey the Imam is a religious obligation. Allah, the Most High, has
mentioned that in the Koran: “Obey Allah and obey the apostle and those
in authority among you.”[^4] Many traditions have mentioned that. Zarara
reported on the authority of Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, who
said: “The apex of the thing, the height of it, the key to it, the gate
to everything and the good pleasure of (Allah), the Most Merciful, the
Blessed, is to obey the Imam after knowing him.”Then he said: “Surely,
Allah, the Blessed, the Most High, says: ‘Whoever obeys the Apostle,
surely obeys Allah. And whoever turns his back- We have not sent you to
be a watcher over them.’”[^5]

The Right of the Imam against People
------------------------------------

The Imam has a right against people. Meanwhile people have a right
against the Imam. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, talked
about that when Abu Hamza asked him:

-What is the Imam's right against people?

-His right against them is to listen and obey (him). -What is their
right against them?

- He divides among them equally and treats the subjects with
justice.[^6]

Indeed the right of the Imam against people is that they should listen
to him and carry out his orders, for he strives to achieve their
happiness and righteousness. As for their right against him is that he
should divide equally the properties of Allah among them. He should not
prefer one group of people to the other. He should treat them with
justice that is the shade of Allah in the earth.

The Dignity of the Imam
-----------------------

Surely, the Imam has a dignity and high position with Allah. No one of
Allah's servants is able to obtain such a dignity and high position.
Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, talked about that. He,
peace be on him, said to Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi:

“Surely, Allah took Abraham as a servant before He took him as a
prophet. He took him as a prophet before He took him as an apostle. He
took him as an a apostle before He took him as a friend. He took him as
a friend before He took him as an Imam. When He gathered these things
for him, He said to him : ‘O Abraham, I am going to appoint you as an
Imam over the people. ' Abraham regarded the Imamate as great, so he
said: ‘And of my offspring.’ He (Allah) said: ‘My covenant does not
include the unjust.’”[^7]

The meaning of this tradition is that the Imamate is the highest rank
with Allah. The prophets and the apostles were unable to obtain it.
However, Allah singled out His friend Abraham with it. He also singled
out the pure Imams from the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), who were
the custodians of the revelation, the doors of guidance and mercy for
this community.

Accepting the Leadership of the Imams of ahl al-Bayt
----------------------------------------------------

Surely, accepting the leadership of the pure Imams is part of Islam and
proof for belief. The Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
proclaimed this holy religious obligation among his community. He made
it incumbent on the community to adopt it. He took more care of it than
any other religious obligation. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on
him, said:

“Islam has been built on five (pillars): the prayers, zakat (alms),
fasting, the hajj, and accepting the leadership (of my family). He did
not proclaim a

thing more than he proclaimed the leadership (of his family). However,
people have adopted four (pillars) and left this (leadership).”[^8]

It is incumbent on all Moslems to follow the good Imams who are the
source of light in the earth. In other words Moslems must follow the
legal precepts and the rules of morals which have reported on their
authority.

Al-Baqir praised the Imams
--------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, praised the good Imams in
many of his traditions. He talked about their high rank. The following
are some of his traditions:

1. He, peace be on him, said: “We are the custodians of Allah's affairs,
treasurers of Allah's knowledge, and inheritors of Allah's revelation.
It is we who know Allah's Book by heart. Our obedience is an obligation.
Love towards us is belief, and spite towards us is unbelief. He who
loves us is in the garden, and he who hates us is in the fire.”[^9]

2. He, peace be on him, said: “We are the friends of Allah, we are
Allah's choice, we are the trustees of Allah, we are the store of the
inheritance of the prophets, we are the proofs of Allah, we are the
strong rope of Allah, we are the right path of Allah. Allah, the Exalted
said: ‘And (know) that this is My path, the right one, therefore follow
it, and follow not (other) ways.’ We are Allah's mercy for the
believers. With us Allah started (Islam), and with us Allah will end
(it). Whoever cleaves to us is safe. Whoever disobeys us goes astray. We
are the noble honored leaders. Whoever knows us, recognizes our right,
and obeys our order is from us and belongs to us.”[^10]

3. He, peace be on him, said: “We are the treasurers of Allah's
knowledge, we are the custodians of Allah's affairs. With us He started
Islam, and with us He will end it. From us, you learn (Islam). By Him
Who split open the seed and created the breath, Allah has never (put)
His knowledge in anyone except us, and (no one) attains what Allah has
except through us.”[^11]

4. He, peace be on him, said: “We are the people of the House of mercy,
the tree of Prophethood, the source of wisdom, the place of angels, and
the landing place of the revelation.”[^12]

5. He, peace be on him, said: “By Allah, we are Allah's treasurers in
His heaven and on His earth. We are the treasurers, not of gold nor of
silver, but of His knowledge.”[^13]

6. He, peace be on him, said: “We are the treasurers of Allah's
knowledge. We are the expanders of Allah's revelation, and we are the
strong Proof for those who are under heaven and on the earth.”[^14]

Many traditions were reported on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, concerning the outstanding merits which Allah
granted to the pure Imams. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, regarded them as the fountains of wisdom, and the inheritors of
the sciences of prophets. He singled them out with all noble deeds. This
is true. There is no doubt in it. Whoever studies their ways of life
full of guidance, righteousness, and noble deeds believes that they were
the lords of creation, the trustees of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, and the custodians of his sciences. There is no
exaggeration or deviation from the truth in this opinion. Allah endowed
His prophets with knowledge, wisdom,

and sound judgments. However, they were not better than the members of
the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. That is because they were
loyal to Allah. For the sake of His obedience and religion, they made
sacrifices which no reformer in the earth has made.

The Number of the Imams
-----------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, mentioned the number of the
pure Imams, who were the successors of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, over his community, his testamentary trustees, and the
custodians of his sciences. The following are some of what was reported
on his authority:

1. Zarara reported on the authority of Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be
on him, who said: “The Imams are twelve. Among them al-Hasan and
al-Husayn, and then the Imams from al-Husayn's children.”[^15]

2. Abu Basïr reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him, who said: “We are twelve Imams.”[^16]

3. Abu Basïr reported that the Imam said: “There will be nine Imams
after al-Husayn. The ninth of them will be their Qa'im (i. e., the one
who will undertake the office of the Imamate).”[^17]

The great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, announced that.
In this connection, many traditions were reported on his authority.
Salman, the Persian, reported. He said: “We were with Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family. Al-Husayn b. ‘Ali was (sitting) on
his thigh. He gazed at his face, and then he said: ‘O Abu Abd Allah, you
are a lord of our lords. You are an Imam, the son of an Imam, and
brother of an Imam, father of Imams whose ninth will be their Qa'im, the
most knowledgeable of them, the wisest of them, and the most meritorious
of them.’”[^18]

‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar reported. He said: “I heard Allah's Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, say: ‘There will be twelve successors
after me.’”[^19] Shaykh Abu Abd Allah, Ahmed b. ‘Ayyash, commented on
this tradition, saying: “This stipulated number was not of those who
came after Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, nor was
it of the Umayyad successors, for their number was over twelve, nor was
it of those who came after them, for their number was more than them. No
sect of this community has claimed this number for its Imams except the
Imami (Shi‘ites). This indicates that the number they have mentioned is
correct.”[^20]

Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, numbered the
Imams and mentioned their names one by one till he ended at al-Qa'im
(the one who will under take the office of the Imamate).[^21] Thus, the
poet composed:

Indeed the Imams are nine and three,

as it was reported from al-Hadi (the one who guides),

the bringer of good news, the warner.

There is neither increase nor decrease in them,

as it was said (their number) as the number of the months.

Prophethood was confined to people,

and the Imamate was also confined to people.[^22]

The poet ‘Abd Allah b. Ayyub al-Khuraybi addressed Imam al-Jawad after
his father's death, saying:

O You who is the son of the murdered one,

O You who is the son of the roots of the soil,

May his origin and roots be good.

O You who is the son of the eight Imams,

who went westward, and father of the three (Imams),

who went eastward,

Indeed you are the east and the west,

The Book has come to confirm that.[^23]

It is sure that the successors of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, were twelve. Many successive traditions were narrated
concerning them. They were the good Imams from the members of the House
(ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. They represented the guidance and
reputation of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.

The Sufferings of the Imams
---------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, talked to Hamran about the
tyrants who inflicted tribulations and misfortunes on the pure Imams. He
told him that if the Imams, peace be on them, had asked Allah to dispel
those tribulations and misfortunes, He would have responded to them.
However, they had not asked him to obtain that noble rank with Him. He,
peace be on him, said: “O Hamran, Allah, the Great and Almighty, tested
the Imams. The tyrants supported each other against them. So, if they
had asked Allah to drive that away from them and insisted on removing
the tyrants and their kingdom, He would have answered them. Then the
period of the kingdom of the tyrants would have ended. O Hamran, that
which had hit them was not because of a sin they had committed nor was a
punishment for disobedience towards Allah. However, they wanted to
obtain ranks and dignity from Allah. Therefore, do not believe that
concerning them.”[^24]

Al-Baqir urged Reporters and Traditionalists to proclaim the Glorious Deeds of the Imams
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

He, peace be on him, urged reporters and traditionalists to spread the
remarkable deeds and outstanding merits of the Imams of the members of
the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, for they are the good example
to this community. Sa‘ïd al-Iskafi said: “I said to Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir): ‘I sit down to narrate and mention your right (to authority)
and your outstanding merits.’”So, the Imam, peace be on him, thanked him
for his efforts, and then said to him: “I wish that there was a narrator
like you at every thirty cubits.”[^25]

The Knowledge of the Imams
--------------------------

Since the beginning of their history till this day of people, the
Shi‘ites have believed that Allah endowed the Imams of the members of
the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, with knowledge, wisdom, and
sound judgments, as He endowed His prophets and apostles with that.
“That is Allah's favor. He gives it to whoever He wills.”

The historians and the narrators have unanimously agreed on that the
Imams, peace be on them, had great scientific abilities which no one of
the people had, and that they exceeded all the scholars in abilities and
genus.

Their is no blame for this claim, for there are many proofs for it. Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, was the lord and
leader of this family. Did he not say on the pulpit of Kufa: “Question
me before you lose. Question me about the ways of the sky, for I am more
knowledgeable in them than the ways of the earth?”That means that his
knowledge and sciences exceeded the affairs of this planet, on which man
lives, to the affairs of the space, the galaxies, and other planets.
Moreover, this means that his knowledge encompassed the mysteries of the
universe and the obscure things in nature.

Did this great Figure not say: “If the cushion (on which a judge sits)
was folded for me (to sit on), I could give judgments to the people of
the Torah by their Torah, to the people of the Gospels by their Gospels,
to the people of the Psalms by their Psalms, and to the people of the
Furqan (i. e., the Koran) by their Furqan.”This indicates clearly that
Imam ‘Ali had comprehensive knowledge of all laws and religion. Besides
he had knowledge of the legal precepts in those Divine Books.

Is ‘Ali not the owner of Nahjj al-Balagha, which is the richest world
book people have ever known after the Holy Koran. This is the leader of
the pure family. He was the gate of the city of knowledge of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. He was his testamentary
trustee (of authority), for he exceeded all the scholars of the world in
talents and sciences. All the pure Imams, peace be on them, had such
vast knowledge. Among them was Imam ‘Ali b. Musa al-Kazim, peace be on
him. Al-Ma'mun designated him as his successor. Then he summoned all the
scholars of the world to come to Khurasan to test the Imam. He wanted
them to debate with him to show his feebleness. Then he would be able to
destroy the Shi‘ite doctrine and to refute the Shi‘ites who thought that
the Imam was the most meritorious of the people of his time and the most
knowledgeable of them. When the scholars met in Khurasan, al-Ma'mun gave
them a lot of gifts and summoned them to carry out his task. ‘Ali b.
‘Isa prepared many questions for them to ask the Imam. He said that the
Imam was questioned about twenty-four thousand problems. The problems
were about various sciences such as astronomy, stars, medicine, physics,
philosophy, theology, and the like. However, the Imam answered them. So,
the scholars who met the Imam believed in his Imamate. Then ‘Ali b. ‘Isa
said: “Do not believe those who say that Allah has created a person
better than ‘Ali b. Musa.”[^26]

Imam Mohammed al-Jawad, ‘Ali b. Musa's son, assumed the office of the
Imamate after his father's death. He was twenty years of age. Al-Ma'mun
respected and glorified him. The ‘Abbasids were jealous of him. So, they
talked to al-Ma'mun about his affair. However, al-Ma'mun made them know
his Imamate. He told them that Allah endowed the Imam with knowledge and
merits and distinguished him from all creatures. However, the ‘Abbasids
did not believe that. So, he ordered them to test the Imam. Thus, they
hurried to Yahya b. Aktham, who was then the outstanding judge in
Baghdad. They asked him to examine the Imam, peace be on him. He
compiled with their request. They held a science meeting in the ‘Abbasid
Palace. Eminent scholars attended the meeting. Then Yahya b. Aktham

came and asked them about the most complicated problems. However, the
Imam, peace be on him, branched those problems and asked Yahya which
branch he wanted. Thus, Yahya was astonished at the Imam. Feebleness
appeared on his face. So, he asked the Imam to answer those branched
problems. The Imam, peace be on him, answered them, and the meeting was
over. All those who attended the meeting were satisfied with his
scientific abilities. All the historians reported the event. For
example, b. Hajar reported it in his book ‘al-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqa'. How
do explain these scientific abilities of Imam al-Jawad when he was so
young?

However, the knowledge of the Imams, peace be on them, was exactly as
that of the prophets. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
mentioned that. He said to one of his followers:

-What do the Shi‘ites think of ‘Ali, Moses, and Jesus?

- May I be ransom for you, about what are you asking me?

- I am asking you about knowledge.

- By Allah, he is the most knowledgeable of them.

- Do they not say: “Indeed ‘Ali had exactly the same knowledge Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, had?”

- However, they do not prefer any apostle to Uli al-A‘zm
(Arch-Prophets).

- Debate with them on Allah's Book.

- At which place of it?

- Allah, the Exalted, said to Moses: “And We ordained for him in the
tablets admonition of every kind.”[^27] He said to Jesus: “And that I
may make clear to you part of what you differ in.”[^28] However, He said
to Mohammed: “And bring you as a witness against these.”[^29] He also
said in the same verse: “And We have revealed the Book to you explaining
everything clearly.”[^30]

The traditionalists have unanimously agreed that the Imams took their
knowledge from their grandfather, the Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family. The prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, bequeathed
his sciences to his testamentary trustee (of authority) and the gate of
the city of his knowledge, Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful,
peace be on him. Then the pure Imams from his children inherited them
after him.

Al-Baqir predicted Events
-------------------------

The historians and the narrators have unanimously agreed that the Imams
of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, predicted
many bloody fights and events. Then they occurred on the arena of life,
as the Imams predicted. Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace
be on him, predicted that Mu‘awiya would expose the great Companion,
Hajr b. ‘Adi, to various kinds of persecutions. Thus, Hajr suffered from
those persecutions. He, peace be on him, predicted that the government
of Marwan b. al-Hakam would last for a short time. He, peace be on him,
said: “Indeed he (Marwan) will carry the standard of his error when his
temples become white. He will have authority (lasts) as the dog licks
its nose.”[^31] He, peace be on him, predicted the government of the
‘Abbasids. Al-Mubarrad reported: “When ‘Ali b. ‘Abd Allah b. al-‘Abbas
was born, his father brought him to Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him. The Imam
said to ‘Abd

Allah: ‘What have you named him?’ Is it possible for me to name him
before you name him?' asked Abd Allah. So, the Imam said: ‘I have named
him with my name and given him my kunya. He will have authority.’”[^32]
He, peace be on him, predicted the murder of his son, the lord of
martyrs, Imam Husayn, peace be on him. Al-Asbagh reported: “We came with
‘Ali, peace be on him. We passed by the place of the grave of al-Husayn,
peace be on him. So, ‘Ali said: ‘Their camels will kneel down here.
Their baggage will be in this place. Their blood will be shed over
there. Young men from the family of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and
his family, will be killed on this ground. The sky and the earth will
weep over them.’”[^33] He, peace be on him, also predicted man's
technological inventions that will happen in the end of the time.

These predictions were not confined to only Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of
the Faithful, peace be on him. Rather they included all the Imams from
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. For example,
Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, said to al-Mansur al-Dawanïqi: “The boys
from your children will play with it (i. e., the caliphate).”[^34] He,
peace be on him, said to his cousin, ‘Abd Allah b. al-Hasan: “You will
not assume the caliphate. Rather al-Saffah will undertake it.”All these
predictions took place.

Ibn Khaldun recognized these predictions of the Imams of the members of
the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. He said: “If the miracle
happens for other than them (the Imams), then what do you think of those
(the Imams) who had knowledge, religion, signs from prophethood, and
good branches testify their noble origin? Islamic law has decided that
people are unable to see the unseen except those whom Allah make see in
sleep or spiritual office. Ja‘far (al-Sadiq) and the like from the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt) predicted many of those (unseen
events). They, Allah knows better, depended on the spiritual authority
in predicting that. They were the most appropriate of all the people for
these noble ranks and the given miracles.”[^35]

As for the events which Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) foresaw, they are as
follow:

1. He foresaw the government of the ‘Abbasids. Abu Basïr said: “I was
with Mohammed (al-Baqir) b. ‘Ali when al-Mansur and Dawud b. Sulayman
came to him. That was before the government of the ‘Abbasids. Dawud came
to the Imam and greeted him. The Imam, peace be on him, said to him:
‘What prevented (al-Mansur) al-Dawanïqi from coming?’ Dawud b. Sulayman
apologized (to the Imam on behalf of him). Then he said: ‘He has turned
away (from you).’ The Imam, peace be on him, told Dawud about
al-Mansur's future, saying: ‘In the future this man will be a ruler over
the creation. He will persecute the men. He will govern over the east
and west (of the earth). His life will be long. No one will gather
properties as he will do.’”

Dawud hurried to al-Mansur. He brought him the good words of the Imam.
So, al-Mansur walked quickly toward the Imam to understand his words
concerning him. He apologized to the Imam for being so rude. He said:
“Nothing has prevented me from sitting with you but the esteem for

you.”Then he asked the Imam about what he had told Dawud. Thus, the
Imam, peace be on him, said:

“That will happen.”

Al-Mansur asked the Imam for more explanations, saying:

“Will we rule before you rule?”

“Yes.”

“Will one of my children rule after me?”

“Yes.”

“Which will be longer- the Umayyad period or ours?”

“Yours will be longer. Your boys will play with government as they do
with the football. My father had told me about that.”

Al-Mansur went away happy. He was sure that he would assume authority.
He always remembered the Imam's words. When he became caliph, he admired
the Imam's prediction.[^36]

(Al-Mansur) al-Dawanïqi said: “My brother Abu al-‘Abbas and I escaped
from the Umayyads. We passed by the Mosque of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. Mohammed (al-Baqir) b. ‘Ali was sitting there.
He, peace be on him, said to a man sitting beside him: ‘Those two
(persons) will undertake authority.’ He pointed with his hand to us. The
man came and told us about the Imam's words. So, we went to the Imam and
said to him: ‘O son of Allah's Apostle, what you have said?’ He, peace
be on him, said: ‘You will shortly assume this authority. However, you
will mistreat my progeny. Then woe unto you!’”[^37] That happened as the
Imam, peace be on him, predicted. When al-Mansur became caliph, he
mistreated the descendants of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family. He punished them severely. During the time of this tyrant,
the descendants of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
suffered from various kinds of persecution to an extent that they did
not suffer from such persecution during the time of the Umayyad.
Generally speaking, throughout his days, they suffered from disasters,
pains, and tortures.

2. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, predicted that the Black
Stone would be put into the Great Mosque in Kufa.[^38] That happened
during the days of the Karmatnians. They took it from the Kaaba and put
it into the Mosque of Kufa. They thought that the hajj would depend on
it. So, it would be performed in the Mosque of Kufa. Thus, the Black
Stone remained there for about twenty years, and then it was brought
back to its place.

3. He, peace be on him, foretold that Nafi‘ b. al-Azraq would invade
Medina (Yathrib), and that he would permit his soldiers to profane it.
Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, said: “My father was at a general
meeting. He bowed his head, and then he raised it and said: ‘O People, a
man along with four thousand (soldiers) will enter your city. They will
fight against you with the sword for three successive days. They will
kill your fighters. You will be unable to face that tribulation. That
will happen in the next year. Therefore, be on the alert. Know, what I
have told you will surely happen.’ However, the people of Medina paid no
attention to the Imam's words. They said: ‘That will never happen.’ In
the next year Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) took his family along with a group
of the Hashimites and went out of Medina. Then Nafi‘ b. al-Azraq came.
He was accompanied by four thousand

(soldiers). He entered Medina and permitted his (soldiers) to profane it
for three days. So, they killed many people.”[^39] Thus, the people of
Media understood the Imam's truthful prediction.

4. He, peace be on him, foresaw that his brother Zayd would die a
martyr. Zayd b. Hazim reported. He said: “I was with Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him. Zayd passed by us. So, Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir) said to me: ‘Have you not seen this? He will revolt (against
the government) in Kufa. He will be killed. His head will be sent
about.’”[^40] Few days after that, Zayd was killed in Kufa and his head
was sent about to countries and cities.

5. He, peace be on him, foretold that the house of Hisham b. ‘Abd
al-Malik would be demolished. It was the largest house in Medina
(Yathrib). He built it of oil stones. The Imam, peace be on him, said:
“By Allah, the house will be demolished. The oil stones will be
rare.”Abu Hazim said: “When I heard that, I was astonished at it. Then I
said: ‘Who will demolish the house which Hisham, the Commander of the
Faithful, has built?’ Then Hisham died. So, al-Walïd assumed the
Caliphate after him. He ordered the house to be demolished, and then he
ordered the oil stones to be moved from it. So, they became rare in
Medina (Yathrib).”[^41]

6. Al-Fudayl reported. He said: “I asked Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir): ‘We have
heard that the family of Ja‘far (al-Sadiq) will have one standard and
the family of al-‘Abbas will have two standards. Do you have knowledge
of that?’”The Imam, peace be on him, said:

“As for the family of Ja‘far, they will have nothing nor will my family.
As for the family of al-‘Abbas, they will undertake a great kingdom. In
it they will make friends with the strangers and abandon the relatives.
Their authority will be rude. There will be no mercy in it. When they
feel safe from Allah's punishment, He will destroy then all. Then no
house will gather them together nor will an ear hear them. That is due
to the Words of Allah, the Great and Almighty: ‘Until when the earth
puts on its golden ornament.’”[^42]

These are some of the Imam's predictions. They indicate that the Imam,
peace be on him, had vast knowledge, and that he encompassed these
affairs which Allah, the Exalted, had given to the prophets and their
trustees. It is natural that the person is in need of fixed belief and
steadfast conviction to accept this phenomenon concerning the Imams,
peace be on them. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, mentioned
that when he said: “Indeed our speech is difficult and regarded as
difficult. (No one) accepts it except a close angel or a sent prophet or
a servant whose heart Allah tests for belief.”[^43]

These are some of the theological researches the Imam, peace be on him,
carried out and some of the unseen he foresaw. He has other researches
in this respect. We will mention them when we talk about his time.

Jurisprudence
=============

As for the jurisprudence of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them, most of it was taken from the two Imams al-Baqir and
his son al-Sadiq, peace be on them. The Imami jurisprudence
encyclopedias - such as al-Hada'iq, al-Jawahir, and Mustamsak al-‘Urwat
al-Withqa- are full

of the traditions reported on their authority. Imami jurists depend on
them when they conclude legal precepts and give religious opinions. As
for traditions in the encyclopedias- such as Wasa'il al-Shi‘a,
al-Tahdhib, Man La Yahdarahu al-Faqih, and the like- most of them were
taken from them. These encyclopedias are regarded as important
references for Islamic jurisprudence, for they wonderful and rich in
traditions.

Imam al-Baqir and his son al-Sadiq, peace be on them, did their best to
proclaim Islamic jurisprudence. They took care of it at the time when
the Moslem community was absorbed in the political events. Moreover, the
governments at those times neglected completely religious affairs. Thus,
Moslem communities were unable to understand their religious affairs.
Dr. ‘Ali Hasan said: “When we studied the historical texts, we have
concluded many examples of this phenomenon (i. e. neglecting religious
affairs) that included rulers, scholars, and people in the first
century. By that we mean that they had no knowledge of religious affairs
and were irresolute in them even in worship. Among that is when b.
‘Abbas delivered a sermon on the pulpit of Basrah in the end of (the
month) of Ramadan. He said: ‘Take out the alms of your fasting.’
However, the people did not know that. Thus, he said: ‘Is there anybody
from Medina here? Let him stand up to teach his bothers, for they do not
know anything about the obligatory zakat fitir.’[^44] This proves that
the people in the Moslem countries did not know in detail their
religious affairs. Moreover, the Syrians did not know even the number of
the obligatory ritual prayers. So, they asked the Companions (of the
Prophet) about it.[^45] ‘Umar b. Abd al-‘Azïz did not know the times of
the prayers. Some scholars did not know. either. They thought that there
was a certain year for that. However, the government opposed that. For
this reason, it has been mentioned in the tradition: ‘Rulers will come
in the rest of time. They will deaden the prayers. Therefore, perform
the prayers at their limited times.’ The early historians were unable to
explain this condition for us, for they found imposed ways before them.
That was the Umayyads had changed the times of the prayers according to
their opinions.

“Indeed, during the time of the Umayyads, who paid no attention to
religious affairs, the people had little knowledge of jurisprudence and
religious affairs. No one knew these religious affairs except the people
of Medina.[^46] ”[^47]

Imam al-Baqir and Imam al-Sadiq played an important role in proclaiming
jurisprudence and explaining the rules of Allah's law. They offered a
great service for the Moslem world. Were it not for them, Moslems would
lose their great religious wealth.

However, during those times, no one was more knowledgeable than the two
Imams, peace be on them, in the affairs of the Islamic law and the
precepts of religion. So, the children of the Companions (of the
Prophet) and of the next generation, and the heads of the Islamic
doctrines-like Abu Hanifa and Malik- hurried to the two Imams to learn
sciences from them. A large group of jurists- like Zarara b. A‘yun,
Mohammed b. Moslem, and Aban b. Taghlub- studied under Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him. Thanks to them the Imam's traditions were
written. Besides they gave

religious opinions to the Moslems. With that Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him, was able to renew Islam and preserve the religious
wealth.

Worth mentioning, the Shi‘ites were the first to write down
jurisprudence. Mustafa ‘Abd al-Razaq said: “It is natural that the
Shi‘ites were the first to record jurisprudence, for their belief in the
infallibility of their Imams urged them to write down their judgments
and religious opinions.”[^48] With that the Shi‘ites took part in
preserving the Islamic heritage. It is necessary for us to consider
carefully the jurisprudence of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them. That is because they took it from the great Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family.

1. Its Characteristics
----------------------

The jurisprudence of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them, has wonderful characteristics. They have put it in the top of
Islamic and non-Islamic jurisprudence. The following are some of them:

1. Its Connection by the Prophet (may Allah bless him and his family)

The important characteristic of the jurisprudence of the members of the
House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, is that it is directly connected
by the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. That is because the
way to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, were the Imams
of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, from whom
Allah took away uncleanliness, whom He purified thoroughly, and whom the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, regarded as life boats,
safety for people, and equal to the Holy Koran, according to the
successive traditions reported on his authority.

Without doubt, they, peace be on them, were the closest of all the
people to Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and the
most knowledgeable of them in his law and its rules. So, their
narration, if it is reported on their authority in a correct way, is the
most correct of all narrations and the nearest of them to reality. This
urged the Imami jurists to rely only on the narrations of the Imams in
concluding legal precepts. That is because the Imams' narrations have
reliable original proofs on which jurisprudence depends. Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, talked about the narrations of the Imams,
peace be on them. He said that the traditions did not belong to them.
Rather, they belonged to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. He, peace be on him, said: “If we talked according to our
opinions, then we would go astray as those who had gone astray before
us. However, we talk according to the proof which Allah explained to His
prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, so the latter explained it
to us.”[^49] He was asked about the tradition which he mentioned and did
not attribute to (a certain authority). So, he, peace be on him, said:
“When I mention a tradition and do not ascribe it (to a certain a
authority), then my authority concerning it is my father Zayn al-‘Abidïn
on the authority of his father al-Husayn, the martyr, on the authority
of his father ‘Ali b. Abï Talib, on the authority of Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, on the authority of Gabriel on the
authority of Allah.”[^50] Is there an authority brighter or more correct
than this authority? Can the Moslem who seeks Allah's pleasure and the
hereafter find a way safer than this way to Allah?

2. Its Flexibility
------------------

The jurisprudence of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them, goes along with life, keeps abreast with development, does not
deviate from the natural disposition, and meets all needs of life.
Praise belongs to Allah. In it there is neither sin nor narrowness nor
harm nor mischief. Rather, it contains general interests and balanced
rules. All of the jurists have admired it. They have testified that it
is rich in deep genus and creative legislation.

Indeed the jurisprudence of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them, helps researchers find the legislative power that
leads people to cultural scientific development. It is a proof for
absolute justice and pure truth, for it has solutions for all the
problems of society.

3. It has opened a Door to Ijtihad
----------------------------------

The jurisprudence of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them, is distinguished from the rest of Islamic jurisprudence by opening
a door to Ijtihad (concluding religious opinions). That proves the
originality of the jurisprudence of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), its reaction with life, and its continuous solutions to man's
affairs in general. In other words it gives solutions to new discoveries
and inventions which people face at this time, such as artificial
vaccination and transplanting organs. The great Moslem scholars of
al-Azhar have felt that they are in need of opening a door to Ijtihad.
Thus, they have supported the Shi‘ites in this respect. Ahmed Amin said:
“The Moslems have showed their feebleness when they have believed in
closing the door to Ijtihad. That is because there will be no qualified
mujtahid (one who gives religious opinions) among the people. This is
the opinion of some of those who imitate (others), for their confidence
in themselves is weak, and they mistrust the people.”[^51]

Sayyid Rasheed Rida said: “We think that there is no advantage in
leaving Ijtihad. As for the harms of leaving Ijtihad, they are many. All
that has resulted from neglecting intellect, stopping the way of
knowledge, and refraining from exploiting thinking. Indeed the Moslems
have neglected all knowledge when they have abandoned Ijtihad. So, they
have come to what we see.”[^52]

Indeed Islam, praise be to Allah, blames intellect for inactivity. It
summons man to enter the fields of thinking and knowledge. It is not an
act of wisdom to close the door to Ijtihad to impose imitation (on
people). Ijtihad is possible. It depends on logic and proof. As for
closing the door to Ijtihad, it was at a certain time. The governments
standing at those times imposed it (on people), as the researchers said.

4. It resorts to the Judgment of Reason
---------------------------------------

The Imami jurists, unlike the jurists of the other Islamic doctrines,
have regarded reason as one of the four fundamentals (necessary for)
concluding religious precepts. They have glorified it to the extent that
they have regarded it as Allah's inward messenger, among the things with
which (Allah), the Merciful is worshipped, and through steadfastness is
obtained. It is natural (for jurists) to resort to the judgment of
reason when they have no tradition concerning the problem. Indeed reason
occupies a large area in the

science of fundamentals on which Ijtihad depends. Moslem jurists rely on
this science to conclude religious opinions. In the light of the
judgment of reason they have decided that the premise of the obligation
is obligatory, and that the order to carry out a certain thing calls for
forbidding the opposite thing. They have decided that the absolute
conjecture is a proof according to the judgment (of reason), not
according to the discovery. When they face two opposite traditions, they
resort to the judgment of reason. When reason confirms one of them, they
adopt it. Moreover, reason decides other problems. This urges us to
boast of the vitality and originality of Imami jurisprudence.

With this we end our talk about the characteristics of Imami
jurisprudence.

Jurisprudential Problems
------------------------

I cannot mention all the jurisprudential problems reported on the
authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him. Surely, that
needs writing a vast jurist encyclopedia. That is because all the
chapters and researches of jurisprudence have been narrated on his
authority. However, I will mention a brief study on some of the problems
which have been reported on his authority. They are as follows:

The Rules of Fighting in Islam
------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, talked about the rules of
fighting in Islam when one of his followers asked him about the battles
of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him. So, he
said to him:

“Allah sent Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, with five
swords: three of them will not be sheathed till war comes to an end. War
will not come to an end till the sun rises in the West. When the sun
rises in the West, all the people will be believers on that day. Then
such belief will not avail the person who had not believed (in Allah)
before or had not done good with his belief. The forbidden sword, and
the sheathed sword whose drawing is for other than us, and whose belongs
to us.

“As for the three unsheathed swords, they are: the first sword is
against the Arab polytheists. Allah, the Great and Almighty, said:‘ So,
when the sacred months have passed away, then slay the idolaters
wherever you find them, and take them captives and besiege them and lie
in wait for them in every ambush.’[^53] ‘However, if they repent and
keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate, then they are your brethren in
religion.’[^54] Nothing is accepted from these people except killing or
embracing Islam. Their properties are regarded as war booty, and their
families are taken as prisoners. Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, practiced that when he took them as prisoners, forgave
them, and accepted ransom from them.

“The second sword is against the non-Moslem subjects. Allah, the
Glorified, said: ‘And you speak to men good words.’[^55] This verse was
revealed concerning the non-Moslem subjects. However, this verse was
abrogated by these words of Allah: ‘Fight those who do not believe in
Allah, nor in the latter day, nor do they prohibit what Allah and His
Apostle have prohibited, nor follow the religion of truth, out of those
who have been

given the Book, until they pay the jizya (tax) in acknowledgment of
superiority and they are in a state of subjection.’[^56] Nothing is
accepted from the non-Moslem subjects who live in the land of Islam
except jizya or being killed. Moreover, their property is regarded as
war booty, and their families are taken as prisoners. However, when they
accept to pay jizya (tax), then it is forbidden for us to take them as
prisoners and to regard their property as war booty. Furthermore, it is
lawful for us to marry from their women. It is lawful for us to take as
prisoners those who are at the war-area and to regard their properties
as war booty. It is unlawful for us to marry from their women. Nothing
is accepted from them except adopting Islam and paying jizya or killing.

“The third sword is against non-Arab polytheists such as the Turkish,
the Daylam, and the Khazar. Allah, the Great and Almighty, said: ‘So,
when you meet in battle those who disbelieve, then smite the necks until
when you have overcome them, then make (them) prisoners, and afterwards
either set them free as a favor or let them ransom (themselves) until
the war terminates.’[^57]

“As for His words: ‘And afterwards either set them free.’ He means after
taking them as prisoners. ‘Or let them ransom (themselves).’ He means
the ransom between them and the people of Islam. Nothing is accepted
from these people except killing or entering Islam.

“As for the forbidden sword, it is the sword against the people of
aggression and interpretation. Allah said:‘ And if two parties of the
believers quarrel, then make peace between them. However, if one of them
aggresses against the other, then fight that which has aggressed until
it returns to Allah's command.’[^58] When this verse was revealed,
Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:‘ Indeed one
of you will fight on (the basis of) interpretation as I fight (on the
basis) of revelation.’ So, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, was asked: ‘Who is he?’ Thus, he said: ‘The one who mended the
sandals (i. e., the Commander of the Faithful).’ ‘Ammar b. Yasir said:
‘I fought beside Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. I
carried this standard three times.’[^59] This is the fourth time. By
Allah, if they fought against us and reached al-Sa‘afat at Hajr[^60] ,
we would know that we were right and they were wrong.’ The Commander of
the Faithful, peace be on him, treated them in this manner as Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, treated the people of
Mecca. That was on the day when he conquered Mecca. Indeed he did not
take their families as prisoners. Then he (Allah's Apostle) said:
‘Whoever closes his door is safe. Whoever lays down his weapons is
safe.’ Such said the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, at the
Battle of Basrah. He commanded his fighters, saying: ‘Do not take their
children as prisoners. Do not kill the wounded. Do not chase those who
escape. Who closes his door and lays down his weapons is safe.’

“And the sheathed sword: As for the sheathed sword, it is the sword
through which the punishment is inflicted (for wrongdoing). Allah, the
Great and Almighty, said: ‘The soul for the soul and the eye for the
eye.’[^61] The blood heirs draw this sword, and we decide its rule.

“Allah sent Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, to carry these
swords. So, whoever denies them or one of them, denies what Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, has revealed to His Apostle, Mohammed.”[^62]

Wiping the two Light Leather Boots (khuffayn) with Water
--------------------------------------------------------

The jurists of the Moslem doctrines have permitted the two light leather
boots (khuffayn) to be wiped with water during performing the ablution.
They have not considered the touching of the hand on the outward part of
the two feet.[^63] As for the Imams of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, they considered the wiping and did not
permit other than it. Al-Rabï said: “I asked Abu Ishaq about the wiping.
So, he said: ‘I saw the people wipe (the two light leather boots) with
water. Then I met a Hashmite called Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn. I had
never seen a man like him. Thus, I asked him about wiping (the two light
leather boots) with water. He prevented me from that, and then he said:
‘The Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, had not wiped (the two
light leatherboots) with water. He said: ‘The Book had come before
wiping the two light leather boots (with water).’”[^64]

The great Book has proved touching the outward of the two feet. Allah,
the Most High, said: “O You who believe, when you rise up to prayer,
wash your faces and your hands as far as the elbows, and rub your heads
and your feet to the ankles.”The verse clearly denotes the opinion of
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.

Touching the Vestibule of the Vulva does not invalidate Wudu’
-------------------------------------------------------------

Al-Shafi‘i believed that touching the vestibule of the vulva was among
the things that invalidated wudu’. In that he cleaved to what had been
reported on the authority of b. ‘Umar, Sa‘d b. Abu Waqas, Abu Hurayra,
‘A'isha, and Sa‘ïd b. al-Musayyab, who said: “Touching the vestibule of
vulva is among the things that invalidate wudu’.”As for Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, and all the Imams of the members of the
House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, did not believe in that. Zarara
reported on the authority of Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, who
said: “Neither the kiss nor touching the woman's body nor touching the
vestibule of the vulva invalidates wudu’.”[^65] Besides invalidating
ritual purity requests a proof.

Raising the Voice during the quiet Prayer
-----------------------------------------

The Jurists of the Moslem doctrines believed that raising the voice
intentionally during the quiet prayer or lowering it during the loud
prayer was not among the things that invalidated the prayer. As for the
jurists of the doctrine of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace
be on them, they believe that it is among the things that invalidate the
prayer. Zarara reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him, when he was asked about the man who performed the quiet
prayers loudly and the loud prayer quietly. Thus, he, peace be on him,
said: “If he did that intentionally, then he invalidated his prayer. So,
he must repeat it. If he did

that when he was forgetful or heedless or did not know (that), then
nothing was against him. Thus, his prayer was perfect.”[^66]

Asking Allah to bless Mohammed and his Family in Tashahhud
----------------------------------------------------------

Most Moslem jurists believe that it is obligatory to ask Allah to bless
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, in tashahhud (i. e., I
bear witness that there is no god apart from Allah, Who is unique and
without partners. I also bear witness that Mohammed is His servant and
His Apostle. O Allah, bless Mohammed and his family.) Jabir al-Ju‘fi
reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on
him, who said: “Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
said: ‘He who performs a prayer and does not ask Allah to bless me and
my family, his prayer is not accepted from him.’”[^67]

These are some of the jurisprudential problems which Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, stated. Most chapters of jurisprudence in
the fundamentals and branches were taken from him, as we have already
mentioned.

Science of Fundamentals
=======================

Among the sciences which Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, split open was
the science of fundamentals (‘Ilm al-Usul). It is among the greatest
Islamic sciences after jurisprudence. That is because Ijtihad
(concluding religious opinions) depends on it. The mujtahid (one who is
capable of concluding religious opinions) is unable to have the talent
of Ijtihad without studying the chapters of this science.[^68] The
researchers and the scholars have unanimously agreed that Imam Abu
Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, was the first to establish this
science. Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr said: “Imam Abu Ja‘far, Mohammed b. ‘Ali
al-Baqir, peace be on him, was the first to open the chapters of this
science and to split open its problems. Then his son Abu ‘Abd Allah,
peace be on him, came after him to continue it. Then they dictated its
rules and problems to a group of their students. Then the later
generations regulated its chapters in books such as Usul Al al-Rasul,
al-Fusul al-Muhima fi Usul al-A'imma, and al-Usul al-Asïlah. The
reliable narrators reported all these chapters on the authority of the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.”[^69]

The following are some of the fundamentals which Imam Abu Ja‘far
al-Baqir, peace be on him, established or reported on the authority of
his pure grandfathers, and to which Moslem jurists resort to give
religious opinions when they find no tradition concerning the legal
precept. Though most of them are jurisprudential rules, the scholars of
these fundamentals have mentioned them in detail in the science of
fundamentals (‘Ilm al-Usul). However, we will mention them here.

Presumption of Continuity (Istishab)
------------------------------------

It is one of the four fundamentals to which the doubter resorts during
an action. The reason for his doubt is either that the text (tradition)
does not exist or the text is general or the texts (traditions) are
contradictory. The texts are invalid when they are equal, namely they
are not superior to each

other. Presumption of continuity happens when conviction precedes doubt.
The Imam, peace be on him, said that presumption of continuity was
evidence. That was when he was asked about the doubts in the prayer.
Some jurisprudence encyclopedias have mentioned these problems. Among
them is Wasa'il al-Shi‘a.

The Rule of Passing (Qa‘idat al-Tajawiz)
----------------------------------------

This rule means that the doubt occurs in the subsequent act.[^70] For
example, the person may doubt his recitation after he has bowed down.
Concerning this rule, many traditions were narrated on the authority of
Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, and his son Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on
him. They denote that the person should pay no attention to this doubt
and to go on with his praying.

The Rule of Finishing (Qa‘idat al-Faragh)
-----------------------------------------

This rule means that the act is correct at the time of doubt.[^71] This
rule was reported on the authority of Mohammed b. Moslem on the
authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, who said: “If
you doubt all that which you have already completed, then let it as it
is.”[^72] A true tradition which Mohammed b. Moslem reported on the
authority of al-Baqir, peace be on him, also proved that. In this
tradition it has been mentioned: “If doubt occurs after the time of the
prayer has passed, one should ignore the doubt and not repeat (the
prayer)”[^73] In the light of this reliable true tradition, the Imami
Shi‘ites have given a religious opinion. This religious opinion says
that one should pay no attention to the doubt that occurs in the acts of
the prayer which he has completed.

The Rule of Removing Harm
-------------------------

Among the important rules in Islamic law is the rule of removing harm.
Shaykh al-Ansari said: “It means removing the legal precept that leads
to harm. “The jurists have mentioned many legal precepts regarding this
rule. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, underlined this rule
when he, peace be on him, said to Zarara: “Samra b. Jundub[^74] had a
date-palm in the house of a man from the Ansar. The man's house was
facing the gate of the garden. Samra entered the man's house without
permission. Thus, the man spoke to Samra to ask his permission before
entering. However, Samra refused that. So, the man came to the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, and told him about that. Then
Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, sent for Samra and
ordered him to ask the man's permission. However, Samra refused that.
So, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, asked him to sell
the date-palm at a good price. Still, Samra refused to sell it. Then
Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said to him: ‘You
shall have a date-palm in the garden.’ Nevertheless, Samra refused that.
So, Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said to the
(Ansari) man: ‘Go and uproot the date-palm and throw it at him[^75] ,
for there is no harm.’”[^76] The fundamentalists have mentioned the
meaning of this rule and explained its words and the precepts that
result from it.

The Remedy of Contradiction
---------------------------

Many contradictory traditions on the same matter have been reported on
the authority of the Imams of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them. It was impossible for them to say such contradictory
traditions. There are two reasons for this contradiction. The first is
that they said such contradictory traditions for precautionary
dissimulation (taqiya). For the tyrants of that time spared no effort to
oppress the pure Imams. They punished them and their followers severely.
They ordered their spies to keep an eye on them to prevent them from
contacting people. Thus, the pure Imams led a critical life. They were
questioned about a certain problem. However, they doubted the
questioner. Meanwhile they were afraid of those who attended their
assembly. So, they gave religious opinions according to the opinion of
the people to avoid punishment. We will talk in detail about this matter
in the chapters that follow. The other reason for this contradiction is
that one of the two traditions was fabricated and attributed to them.
Noteworthy, many traditions were fabricated during those times. We will
mention that when we talk about the problems of the time of the Imam. It
was difficult for the pious narrators to distinguish the true traditions
from the fabricated ones. They went to Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace
be on him, and asked him about that. So, he, peace be on him, offered
remedies for that. Among them are the following:

### 1. Publicity (al-Shuhra)

###

By publicity we mean the narration not the religious opinion. If one of
the two contradictory traditions is famous among the narrators, then it
should be put into effect. As for the irregular rare tradition, it
should be ignored. The Imam, peace be on him, said to Zarara: “O Zarara,
put into practice the tradition that is famous among your companions.
Leave the irregular rare one.”[^77] This means that one should leave the
irregular, rare tradition, and should rely on the tradition that is
famous among the reporters.

### 2. The Tradition should be harmonious with the Book and the Sunna

###

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, suggested a second way to
know the contradictory traditions. This way is that one should compare
the two contradictory traditions with the Book and the sunna (the
Prophet's practices). If one of the two contradictory traditions is
harmonious with the Book and the sunna, then one should put it into
effect and leave the other. Al-Baqir, peace be on him, said to one of
his companions: “Do not believe (the traditions) which are reported on
our authority except those that are in harmony with Allah's Book and the
sunna of His Apostle.”

### 3. Preferring the Tradition through the Qualities of Narrators

###

The third way to know the authentic tradition is that one should check
the narrators qualities such as trust and justice. Thus, the narration
of the qualified narrator should be put into effect. Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, said to Zarara: “Put into effect the
narration of the narrator who is more just and reliable with you than
the other.”

This narration denotes that the truthfulness and justice of the reporter
is among the necessary ways to check the two contradictory traditions.
With

this we end our talk about the fundamental rules which Imam al-Baqir,
peace be on him, explained during his researches and lectures.

Economic Researches
===================

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, presented during his lectures and his
behavior the most important economic research. The following are some of
them:

1. The Necessity of Improving Livelihood
----------------------------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, urged the Moslem community to strive
hard to seek a livelihood. Thus, man is able to afford his family a
luxurious life. Meanwhile he is able to avoid poverty and unhappiness.
In this connection, the Imam, peace be on him, said: “Whoever strives
hard to seek livelihood, becomes tranquil, his provision becomes light,
and his family leads a life of ease and comfort.”

He, peace be on him, said: “Through wide morals livelihood is good.”

Indeed, if man strives hard to seek livelihood, he is able to secure an
economic life full of welfare, blessings, tranquillity, and stability.

2. Warning from Laziness
------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, warned the Moslems
community from laziness. That is because laziness paralyzes economic
life, freezes man's abilities, and spreads corruption in the earth. He,
peace be on him, said: “Laziness damages the religion and the
world.”[^78]

Laziness damages the religion, for it prevents man from mentioning the
Lord's name and His obligations and His duties. Rather, the lazy person
neglects religious obligations. So, which harm is greater than this
harm? Laziness damages the world, for the lazy person always inclines to
inactivity and wishes for a miserable life full of needs and poverty. He
does not enter the fields of work that secure for him welfare and
happiness.

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, warned one of his children from
laziness. He said to him: “Beware of laziness and boredom, for they are
the key for all evil things. Whoever is lazy, does not carry out a right
(work). Whoever is tired, is impatient toward a right (work).”[^79]

Surely, Islam wants man to work, produce, respect people's rights,
associate with them, and perform the obligations imposed on him.
However, when the person is afflicted by the disease of laziness, he
neglects Allah's and people's rights.

3.Al-Baqir detested those who left Work
---------------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far al-Baqir, peace be on him, detested those who left work.
He thought that leaving work would weaken production, increase
unemployed, and spread economic crises in the country. He, peace be on
him, said: “I hate the jobless person who lies on his back and says: O
Allah, give me. He asks Allah to do him a favor, while the small ant
comes out of its society to seek its livelihood.”[^80]

4. Work is Obedience to Allah
-----------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, thought that work was
obedience to Allah. So, he himself cultivated his own land. Mohammed b.

al-Munzir said: “I went out to one of the suburbs of Medina. There I met
Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) Mohammed b. ‘Ali, peace be on him. He was a
well-built man and he leaning on two servant boys. Either they were
black slaves of his or they were retainers of his. So, I said to myself:
Glory belongs to Allah. Here is a venerable leader (shaykh) of Quraysh
out at this time and in these conditions seeking worldly (advantage). I
must warn him. So, I approached him and greeted him. He returned my
greeting with anger. The sweat was pouring down him. I said to him: May
Allah make you righteous, does a venerable leader of Quraysh go out at
this hour for worldly (advantage)? What would you do if death came upon
you at this hour?”

However, the Imam answered him with Islamic words: “Let death come upon
me when I am obedient to Allah, the great and Almighty. I work to
prevent my soul and my family from you and the people. I fear death when
it comes upon me and I am disobedient to Allah.”

So, Mohammed felt shame. He was unable to answer the Imam. Thus, he said
to him: “You are right. May Allah have mercy on you. I wanted to warn
you, but you have warned me.”

Indeed work is obedience to Allah, as the Imam said. For work prevents
the soul and the family from asking people for alms.

With this we end our talk about the economic researches which the Imam,
peace be on him, did. We also end our talk about the sciences which he
presented in his research during his lectures.

Knowledge and Scholars
======================

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, talked very much about the
importance of knowledge. He urged Moslems to seek knowledge, for it is
the first pillar on which the lives of nations and peoples depend. He,
peace be on him, praised the virtue of scholars, for they are the source
of culture and guidance for the community. The following are some of
what has been reported on his authority in this respect:

1. The Virtue of Knowledge
--------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, glorified knowledge. He
summoned Moslems to cling to it. He urged them to seek it. He lauded
those who sought it. He said: “Learn, for learning is protection.
Seeking knowledge is worship, studying it is glorification (of Allah),
looking for it is jihad, teaching it (to others) is alms, and giving it
to those who are appropriate for it is proximity (to Allah). Knowledge
is the signpost of the garden. It is an intimate in lonesomeness, a
companion in exile, a friend in estrangement, a guide to ease, a help
against affliction, adornment with friends, and a weapon against
enemies. By it Allah promotes some people to make them Imams (leaders)
for good. So, (people) follow their example and report their works. All
wet and dry things, the whales and vermin of the see, and the animals
and livestock of the land ask (Allah) to bless them.”[^81]

No words glorify knowledge, praise scholars, and embrace its fruits and
advantages as these golden words do. Thus, they are worthy of writing in
the institutes and universities of knowledge.

2. The Virtue of the Scholar
----------------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, lauded the virtue of the scholar. He
explained his social rank, and the plentiful reward which Allah has
prepared for him. The following are some of the sayings which have been
reported on his authority:

A. He, peace be on him, said: “The scholar of whose knowledge (people)
make use is better than seventy thousand worshipers.”[^82]

B. He, peace be on him, said: “Whoever teaches a door of guidance, will
have the same reward of those who put it into practice. Nothing of the
rewards of those (who put guidance into practice) will be decreased.
Whoever teaches a door of error, will have the same burdens of those who
put in into effect. Nothing of the burdens of those (who put error into
effect) will be decreased.”[^83]

C. He, peace be on him, said: “The servant who goes early in the morning
to seek knowledge goes into mercy thoroughly.”[^84]

3.Associating with Scholars and the Pious
-----------------------------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, urged Moslems to associate with scholars
and the pious to make use of their guidance and behavior. He, peace be
on him, said: “Indeed association with him whom I trust is more reliable
with me than a year's work.”[^85]

4. Discussing Knowledge
-----------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, summoned Moslems to discuss knowledge
with each other, for that opens new doors to knowledge and science. He,
peace be on him, said: “Discussing knowledge is studying, and studying
is a good prayer.”[^86]

5.Rules for the Student
-----------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, suggested wonderful rules for the
student. He, peace be on him, said: “When you sit with a scholar, then
listen to him more than speaking to him. Learn good listening as you
learn good speech. Do not interrupt (the scholar) while he is busy
talking.”[^87]

6.Proclaiming Knowledge
-----------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, summoned scholars to proclaim and spread
knowledge. So, no one will be ignorant. He, peace be on him, said: “The
zakat (alms) of knowledge is that you teach it to the servants of
Allah.”[^88] He, peace be on him, also said: “Whoever learns knowledge
will have the same reward of him who teaches it, and will be better than
him. Learn knowledge from scholars. Then teach it to your brothers as
the scholars have taught it to you.”[^89]

7. The Imam urged Moslems to learn
----------------------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, urged Moslems to learn (knowledge) and
to ask scholars about it. He, peace be on him, said: “Knowledge is a
treasure and the key is the question. Then, may Allah have mercy on you,
ask (scholars). Indeed four persons will be rewarded out of knowledge:
the questioner, the speaker, the listener, and the one who loves
them.”[^90]

8. Understanding the Religion
-----------------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, summoned Moslems to understand deeply
the religion and to know the lawful and the unlawful. He, peace be on
him, said: “All perfection is in understanding deeply the religion,
patience towards misfortune, and taking livelihood into account.”[^91]

Surely, understanding the religion deeply maintains man's balance and
behavior. It prevents man from committing ugly things. In the mean time
it prevents him from deviating from the religion.

9. Putting Knowledge into effect
--------------------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, urged scholars to put their knowledge
into practice. He, peace be on him, said: “When you hear knowledge, then
put it into effect. Let your hearts be wide. For the person with the
heart that does not encompass his abundant knowledge makes Satan
powerful over him. If Satan disputed with you, then dispute with him
through what you know. Surely, the deception of Satan is weak.”Ibn Abu
Layla asked him: “What is the thing which we know?”So, he, peace be on
him, replied: “Dispute with Satan through the manifest strength of
Allah, the Great and Almighty.”[^92]

10. Action coupled with knowing Allah is accepted
-------------------------------------------------

Knowing Allah is a condition in accepting an act. So, the one who acts
and does not know Allah nor does he know the duty which he performs,
then his action is useless. Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, said: “No
act is accepted except through knowing (Allah). No knowledge (of Allah)
is accepted except through an act. Whoever knows (Allah) his knowledge
leads him to the act. He who does not know (Allah), his action is
invalid.”[^93]

11. The Imam dispraised Boasting of Seeking Knowledge.
------------------------------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, dispraised those who
boasted of seeking knowledge. He urged the scholars to do their best to
seek nearness to Allah and to wish for the hereafter through seeking
knowledge. He, peace be on him, said: “He who seeks knowledge to vie
with the scholars for glory or to dispute with the foolish or to know
the prominent figures, then he shall occupy his place in the Fire.
Indeed leadership is inappropriate for anyone except those who are
appropriate for it.”[^94]

Surely, these corrupt ambitions invalidate the reward which Allah has
prepared for the religious scholar, who is the propagator of Allah in
the earth. Therefore, if the religious scholar wants success in this
world and happiness in the next world, then he should seek knowledge to
please Allah.

12. Giving Religious Opinions without Knowledge
-----------------------------------------------

Several traditions on giving religious opinions without knowledge were
reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on
him, for such opinions mislead people. The following are some of them:

A. Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, said: “Whoever gives people religious
opinions without having knowledge and guidance, the angels of the
Merciful (Allah) and the angels of torment will curse him, and he will
shoulder the sins of those who put his religious opinions into
effect.”[^95]

B. He, peace be on him, said: “Say what you know. When you do not know,
say: Allah knows best. If the person singles out a verse from the Koran
(to misinterpret it), he falls down as far as the sky is from the
earth.”[^96]

C. Zarara asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him: “What is
Allah's right against the servants?”The Imam, peace be on him, replied:
“They should say what they know and refrain from saying what they do not
know.”[^97]

D. He, peace be on him, said: “If the scholar is asked about a certain
thing and he does not know that thing, he should say: Allah knows more.
Other than the scholar has no right to say that.”[^98]

13. The Qualities of the Scholar
--------------------------------

In many of his traditions, Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
talked about the qualities of scholars. The following are some of them:

A. He, peace be on him, said: “The servant who envies those who are
superior to him and scorns those who are inferior to him is not a
scholar.”[^99]

Indeed the servant is a scholar when his soul is free from envy, which
is among the greatest psychological catastrophes. It is envy that throws
people into the tribulation, for it brings about misfortunes. However,
the servant is not a scholar when he scorns those who are inferior to
him. This means that he does not make use of knowledge, which summons
him to respect people and treat them with high morals. Surely, the
Prophet, may Allah bless him, was sent to complete high moral standards.
So, when the scholar follows bad manners, he deviates from the laws and
morals of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.

B. He, peace be on him, said: “The true jurist is he who renounces this
world, wishes for the hereafter, and cleaves to the sunna (practices) of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.”[^100]

C. He, peace be on him, said: “If you see the scholar love the rich,
then he loves (the life in) the world. If you see him associate with the
Sultan (ruler) without a necessity, then he is a thief.”[^101]

When the scholar loves the rich, he wishes for their properties and to
make use of them. This is not among the morals of the scholars whom
Allah has commanded to wish for what He has, not for what the others
have. As for association with the Sultan without a necessity, it proves
that the scholar is not true and that he is a thief, as the Imam said.
Mahmud al-Warraq satirized the religious scholars who made friends with
the Sultan, saying:

They rode their horses and went in groups to the Caliph's house.

They arrived there in the early morning and stayed till evening to
obtain high ranks.

When they got the nice condition they requested,

(When) the Caliph became glad with what the leaf contained,

(When) they harmed those who were inferior to them through oppression
and violent conduct,

they broke the Caliph's promise through the

oppression of fearful ways.

They sold truthfulness for treason and bought carrion for safety.

They hoard fat and weakened those absurd deposits.

The graves of the people became narrow. And their high palaces became
wide.

From the possessors of politeness,knowledge, and wise opinions

to the analogy of Abu Hanifa are in agreement on the gathering of the
tradition.

When the fascinating world charms a person, the person does not make use
of knowledge.[^102]

He forgets Allah and takes shelter in the world through weak means.

Abu al-‘Atahiya also satirized them:

They looked for the vanities of the world

and forgot the grandson of the Prophet.[^103]

With this we end our talk about the traditions reported on the authority
of the Imam, peace be on him. They concern the virtue of knowledge. They
praise scholars. Moreover, they are about the high moral standards which
scholars should follow to be an example to the community.

Traditions on Faith
===================

In his traditions, Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, analyzed
the essence and ranks of faith. In them he talked about the qualities of
the pious and Allah's favors for them. The following are some of the
traditions which have been reported on his authority:

1. The Essence of Faith
-----------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, limited the essence of
faith when he said: “Faith is steadfast in the hearts, and certitude is
notions. Then certitude passes through the heart, so it becomes (as
strong) as the lumps of iron. And it goes out of the heart, so it
becomes (as worn) as the worn rag.”[^104]

Indeed, when faith settles in the depth of hearts and inner selves, they
become as strong as the lumps of iron. So, they bear difficulties and
hardships. Such steadfast belief was the most prominent quality of
prophets, the great, and the righteous, who sacrificed their lives for
their doctrines and opinions.

However, when certitude comes out of the heart, it becomes as old as the
old rag. Thus, the person loses his will and becomes empty of feelings
and sentiments.

2. The Ranks of Faith
---------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, talked about the ranks of
faith, saying: “Indeed the believers have various ranks: one of them has
one (rank); one of them has two (ranks); one of them has three (ranks);
one of them has four (ranks); one of them has five (ranks); one of them
has six (ranks). If you impose two (ranks) on the possessor of the one
(rank), he cannot bear them. If you impose three (ranks) on the
possessor of the two (ranks), he will not bear them. If you impose four
(ranks) on the possessor of the three (ranks), he will not bear them. If
you impose five (ranks) on the possessor of the four (ranks), he will
not bear them. If you impose six (ranks) on the possessor of the five
(ranks), he will not bear them. If you

impose seven (ranks) on the possessor of the six (ranks), he will not
bear them. Such are the ranks (of faith).”[^105]

Surely, the ranks of faith (in Allah) and knowledge of Him vary. Thus,
Allah, the Exalted, informed some of His prophets of the secrets of the
universe and existence, and the events that occurred in the world.
However, He did not inform some other prophets of that, for they were
unable to bear that. Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be
on him, was the gate of the city of the knowledge of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, and the store of his secrets and maxims.
He informed Maytham al-Tammar, a companion of his, of the misfortunes
that would happen at the time of the Umayyads. He informed him of many
secrets and the events that would occur at the rest of time. However, he
did not inform ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas, the great scholar of the community,
of that. For he, peace be on him, was sure that ‘Abd Allah was unable to
bear that. The tyrants exposed the prophets and the righteous to many
tribulations. These tribulations were various according to their various
ranks of faith. The greatest of them in tribulation was the Prophet
Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family. For the tyrants of Quraysh
hurt him to the extent that no community had hurt the prophets of Allah
before. Moreover, he, may Allah bless him and his family, was hurt after
his death. That was when the members of his House were liable to
terrible persecutions. Only fifty years passed after his death.
Nevertheless, the heads of his grandsons were on the spears. His
granddaughters were taken as prisoners and moved from one country to
another. So, which tribulation is greater than this?

3. The Qualities of the Pious
-----------------------------

In a group of his traditions, Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, talked
about the high qualities of the pious. The following are some of the
traditions which were reported on his authority:

A. He, peace be on him, said: “The pious are the easiest of the people
of the world in provision, and most of them in help. When you forget,
they remind you. When you mention your (need), they help you. They
believe in the right of Allah. They undertake the affairs of
Allah.”[^106]

These are the qualities of the unique ones who are the strength and
ideals of people, who lead them to the way of guidance.

B. He, peace be on him, said: “When the believer is pleased, his
pleasure does not make him enter sin and falsehood. When he is
indignant, his wrath does not drive him out of saying the truth. When
the believer is strong, his strength does not take him out to exceed
what is right.”[^107]

The believer should have strong a character and behavior. Moreover, he
should follow the truth in all circumstances.

C. He, peace be on him, said: “Riches and glory wander about the heart.
When they reach the place where the trust (in Allah) is, they settle in
it.”[^108]

Al-Yafi‘i composed poetry about this wisdom, saying:

Riches and glory wander about the believer's heart.

When they find the trust (in Allah) in the cavity of the heart, they
reside in it.

So, the slave is submissive to Allah.

When they (riches and glory) do not find it (trust in Allah), they
depart.[^109]

D. The difference between faith and Islam: Imam al-Baqir, peace be on
him, talked about the difference between faith and Islam. He said:
“Faith is in the heart. Islam regulates marriage, inheritance, etc. It
prevents blood from being shed. Faith is the partner of Islam, while
Islam is not the partner of faith.”[^110] Faith settles in the hearts of
the pious and of those who turn to Allah, the Most High, in repentance.
Through faith they fear Allah and are afraid of His punishment. So, they
leave no obligation nor do they commit any sin. As for Islam, it is the
word of monotheism. When it enters the depth of the heart, the Moslem
becomes a believer. To this meaning the holy verse refers: “The dwellers
of the desert say: We believe. Say: You do not believe, but say we
submit; and faith has not entered your hearts yet.”[^111] In another
tradition, al-Baqir, peace be on him, mentioned the difference between
faith and Islam. He, peace be on him, said: “Faith is acknowledgment and
action; Islam is acknowledgment without action.”[^112]

F. Allah's gift for the believers: Allah granted the believers many of
His favors. Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, talked about these favors of
Allah, saying: “Indeed Allah has given the believers three qualities:
glory in his religion in the world, success in the hereafter, and
dignity in the hearts of people.”[^113]

These are some of the Imam's traditions concerning the essence of faith.

With the Shi‘ites
=================

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, and all the Imams of the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, took great care of
their Shi‘ites. They wanted them to follow their guidance and behavior.
They wanted them to be pious in their earnings. Moreover, they wanted
them to cleave to the affairs of their religion to be an example to all
Moslems. For the Shi‘ites have bright Islamic abilities. With these
abilities they are able to illuminate the way to the perplexed, and to
show the great position of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace
be on them. It was reported on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq, peace be
on him, who said to one of his Shi‘ites: “Be an adornment for us. Do not
be a disgrace for us. So, people say: May Allah have mercy on Ja‘far b.
Mohammed. For he has educated his Shi‘ites.”Imam Musa b. Ja‘far, peace
be on him, knew that one of his Shi‘ites misbehaved and committed what
Allah prohibited. So, he, peace be on him, gave him this wonderful piece
of advice: “The good (thing) from everyone is good, and from you is
better. The ugly (thing) from everyone is ugly, and from you is uglier,
for you follow us, and we are the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt).”[^114]

As for Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, he took great care
of his followers (Shi‘ites). He educated them. He gave them high pieces
of advice and noble teachings. He asked them to follow his teachings and
pieces of advice. The following are some of his commandments:

1. His Commandments to his Shi‘ites
-----------------------------------

It is incumbent on those who adopt the doctrine of the members of the
House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, to follow these immortal

commandments. They should put into effect their bright items to be an
example to people. This is the text of his commandments:

“O People of our Shi‘ites, listen and understand our commandments and
our covenant to our followers. Be truthful in your talk. Fulfill your
oath to your friends and your enemies. Help each other with your
properties. Love each other with your hearts. Give alms to your poor.
Come together in your affairs. Do not cheat nor betray anyone. Do not
have doubts after certitude. Do not escape out of cowardice after
intrepidity. Do not turn away from the people whom you love. Your desire
should not be for the love of other than you nor should your love be for
other than you nor should your act be for other than your lord nor
should your faith and purpose be for other than your Prophet. Ask for
the help of Allah, be patient. Indeed the earth belongs to Allah. He
gives it to His servants whom He wants. And the final result is for the
pious.”

He, peace be on him, added:

“Indeed, our Shi‘ites, the friends of Allah and the friends of His
Apostle, are those who tell the truth when they speak. They fulfill (the
promise) when they promise. They pay (the deposit) when they are
deposited. They endure with justice when they are forced to endure. They
give when they are asked for the obligation. And do justice when they
are asked (to do it). Our Shi‘ites are those whose ears do not pass over
their knowledge. Our Shi‘ites are those who do not praise those who find
fault with us, nor do they make friends with those who hate us, nor do
they associate with those who betray us. When our Shi‘ites meet a
believer, they honor him. When they meet an ignorant person, they leave
him. Our Shi‘ites are those who do not growl as the dog does, nor are
they greedy as the crow is, nor do they ask anyone (for alms) except
their brothers even if they die of hunger. Our Shi‘ites are those who
believe in our doctrine, separate themselves from their beloved ones for
us, approach the strangers who love us, and turn away from the strangers
who hate us.”

One of those who were sitting with the Imam admired these words
concerning the Shi‘ites. Thus, he asked the Imam:

“Where are such as these (people)?”

The Imam replied:

“They are in the ends of the lands. It is they whose livelihood is easy,
who are delighted. When they are present, no one knows them. When they
are away, no one misses them. When they become ill, no one visits them.
When they propose (marriage), no one marries them. When they enter a
way, they do not deviate from (it). When the ignorant ones address them,
they say : peace. And they pass the night prostrating themselves before
their Lord and standing.”

One of those who were sitting with the Imam blamed the Shi‘ites who were
contemporary to the Imam, saying:

“Oh son of Allah's Apostle, what about those who follow you with their
tongues while their hearts are contrary to that?”

Thus, the Imam replied:

“The tribulation will bring about droughts against them to destroy them
utterly, spites to ruin them completely, and disunion to kill them. By
Him

Who supported us at the hands of His angels, no one except Allah will
kill them at their hands. Therefore, cleave to acknowledgment when you
speak (to people). Leave quarreling, for it divides you. Beware, He
(Allah) will raise you from the dead before the fixed time. So, your
blood will appear, your souls will go, those who will come after you
will dispraise you, and you will be an example to the beholders. Indeed
the best of the people in action is the one who leaves the people of the
world- such as the father, the friend, and the adviser- and associates
with his brothers in Allah even if they are Abyssinians or Negroes. No
one of the believers will be raised a Negro from the dead. Rather they
will be as white as hail. They will be washed with the water of the
gardens. They will win immortal Paradise. They will sit with the close
angels, and accompany the prophets. No servant is more honorable with
Allah than the servant who is rendered homeless for Allah till he meets
Allah. Such are our Shi‘ites who are the warners in the earth. They are
lamps, signs, and light for those who seek what they seek. They are the
leaders of the people of obedience to Allah. They bear witness against
those who oppose their summons. They are tranquillity for those who come
to them. They are kind to those who follow them. They are generous,
forgiving, and merciful. So, such are their attributes in the Torah, the
Bible, and the Holy Koran.

“The learned man is from our Shi‘ites when he keeps his tongue, obeys
his leaders, shows enmity towards his enemies with his heart, knows
their defects, does not show them what is in his heart, looks at their
bad deeds with his own eye, and hears their offenses with his own ear.
Those who hate his enemies are his friends. And those who love his
enemies are his enemies. ”

So, one of those who were present asked the Imam: “May my father and
mother be ransom for you, what is the reward of the one whom you have
described when he walks peacefully, gets up peacefully, and spends the
night protected? What is his rank and his reward?”

Thus, the Imam, peace be on him, said: “The Sky commanded him to be
protected, the Earth commanded him to be honored, and the Light
commanded him to be believed.”

So, it was said to the Imam:

“What is his attribute in the world?”

He, peace be on him, replied: “When he is asked (for alms), he gives.
When he is invited, he accepts. When he seeks (something), he obtains
(it). And when he supports an oppressed person, he strengthens
him.”[^115]

I think that no commandments were reported on the authority of the Imams
of the pious such these commandments that raise man to the level of the
righteous and the pious. For they summon man to cleave to high moral
standards and to refrain from bad manners. If Moslems put them into
effect, they would be the lords of nations and leaders of people.

Indeed these commandments are among the treasures of Islam. They contain
the aspects and essence of Islam. They denote that Islam has good,
mercy, and guidance for all people. So, the Moslem must follow them
throughout his life.

2.The Early Shi‘ites
--------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, praised the foremost
Shi‘ites. He mentioned their high moral standards and their high good
qualities. He, peace be on him, said:

“Our friends and Shi‘ites were the best of their period. The Imam of the
mosque in the district was from among them. The caller to prayers
(mu'azin) in the direction to the Kaaba (Qibla) was from among them. The
possessor of the deposit was from among them. The possessor of the trust
was from among them. The religious scholar whom the people asked about
their religious affairs was from among them.”[^116]

These commandments show the qualities of the early Shi‘ites, such as
asceticism, piety, religious devotion, and cleaving to the religion. So,
the people trusted them. They prayed behind them. Moreover, they
regarded them as custodians over their properties and religion.
Generally speaking, the early Shi‘ites were famous for piety and
righteousness. It was reported that a Shi‘ite stood before the judge as
a witness. However, the judge refused to accept the Shi‘ite's testimony,
for he belonged to the Rafida. So, the Shi‘ite burst into tears. Thus,
the judge was astonished at him. He thought that the Shi‘ite wept for
his refused testimony. He asked him about that. So, the Shi‘ites
replied: “You have deviated from the truth. You have ascribed me to this
sect. No one joins it except the prophets and the righteous.”

3.The Attributes of the Shi‘ites
--------------------------------

In many of his traditions, Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
mentioned the high qualities which those who believe in the doctrine of
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, should follow.
The following are some of the traditions reported on his authority:

1. He, peace be on him, said: “Our Shi‘ites fear Allah and obey Him.
They are humble and pious. They pay the trust. They praise Allah very
much. They perform the prayers and the fasting. They obey the parents.
They take care of the poor neighbors, the needy, the debtors, and the
orphans. They are truthful in talking. They recite the Koran. They hold
back their tongues from (speaking against) people except good. Thus,
they are the custodians of their tribes over all things.”[^117]

No one has such qualities except the righteous and the pious who fear
Allah, and are afraid of His punishment.

2. He, peace be on him, said: “The Shi‘ites of ‘Ali, peace be on him,
sacrifice their lives for our authority. They love each other, for they
love us. They visit each other to enliven our affair. When they become
angry, they do not do wrong. When they are pleased, they do not go too
far (in pleasure). They are a blessing for him who is their neighbor
them. And they are peace for him who associates with them.”[^118]

The Shi‘ites who have such qualities are blessing and mercy for those
who are their neighbor. They are a safety and a peace for those who
associate with them. For they do nothing except good for all people.

3. He, peace be on him, spoke to Abu al-Muqdam about the high moral
standards of the Shi‘ites of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful,
peace be on him. He, peace be on him, said: “O Abu al-Muqdam, the
Shi‘ites of ‘Ali are pale, thin, and withered. Their lips are faded,
their

abdomens are slim, their colors are changeable, and their faces are
yellow. When it becomes dark, they use the ground as a bed and receive
the earth with their foreheads. Their prostration is much, their tears
are many, their supplications are many, and their weeping is plentiful.
The people become happy and they become sad.”[^119]

These are the attributes of the Shi‘ites of whom were ‘Ammar b. Yasir,
Abu Dharr, Hijr b. ‘Adi, Maytham al-Tammar, and the like.

4. Al-Baqir's Commandments to Shi‘ites
--------------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, supplied Shi‘ites with
excellent commandments and valuable teachings. The following are some of
them:

A. Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi reported. He said: “We went in a group to Abu
Ja‘far, peace be on him. We ended our ritual prayers. Before we saw him
off, we had said to him: ‘O Son of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, command us.’”He peace be on him, said: “Your strong one
should help your weak one. Your rich one should be kind to your poor
one. The man should be loyal to his brother as he is loyal to himself.
Keep our secrets. Do not force the people to follow us. Consider
carefully our affair and what has been mentioned on our authority. If
you find it in agreement with the Koran, then put it into effect. If you
find it contrary to the Koran, then leave it. If you doubt the affair,
then stop and ask us to explain it to you.”[^120]

Al-Baqir, peace be on him, commanded the Shi‘ites to cling to high moral
standards. He guided them to what reformed their life in this life and
the hereafter. He also commanded them to compare the traditions reported
on the authority of the Imams with the Koran. So, they were able to put
into effect the traditions that were in harmony with the Koran.
Meanwhile, they were able to leave the traditions that were contrary to
the Koran. He ordered them to do that because many traditions were
fabricated. Those who were indifferent to religion fabricated these
traditions to defame the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them, and to distort their precepts.

B. He, peace be on him, said: “Cling to piety, hard work, and truthful
talk. Pay the trust to him who trusts you, whether he is righteous or a
sinner. If the murderer of ‘Ali b. Abï Talib gave a trust to me, I would
pay the trust to him.”[^121]

Are there commandments higher and nobler than these valuable
commandments that lead man to good behavior among people?

C. He, peace be on him, sent one of his companions to some of his
Shi‘ites, and ordered him to tell them the following:

He, peace be on him, said: “Recite my greetings to my Shi‘ites. Order
them to fear Allah, the Great. Their rich one should visit their poor
one. Their sound one should visit their ill one. Their living one should
attend the funeral of their dead one. They should meet each other in
their houses. Indeed their meeting each other enlivens our affair.

“May Allah have mercy on the one who enlivens our affair and puts into
effect the best of it. Say to them: We will suffice nothing for them
with Allah except through the good deed. They will not obtain our
intercession but through piety and hard work. Indeed the most intense of
all people in

regret on the Day of Judgment is the one who describes a certain deed,
and then he does other than it.”[^122]

Al-Baqir, peace be on him, advised Shi‘ites to do all kinds of good, to
support each other, and to refrain from discord and division.

D. He, peace be on him, said: “May Allah have mercy on the servant who
makes people love us, and does not make them hate us. By Allah, if they
report what we say on our authority- if they do not distort it nor do
they change it against us according to their opinions, no one will
comment on it. However, the one of them who hears the word, and then he
adds ten (words) to it and explains it according to his own opinion.
Therefore, may Allah have mercy on the servant who hears some of our
hidden secret, and then he buries it in his heart. By Allah, Allah will
not bring together our followers and our enemies in one house.”[^123]

In this tradition, al-Baqir, peace be on him, warns Shi‘ites from
distorting or changing the traditions of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them. For that will harm and defame them.

5. Love for Ahl al-Bayt
-----------------------

In a group of his traditions, Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on
him, spoke to some of his companions about the love for the members of
the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. He denoted that a great
reward from Allah would result from the love for them. The following are
some of his traditions on that:

A. Some of his Shi‘ites from Khurasan came to him. He, peace be on him,
looked at a man of them. He saw that the man's feet split open. So, he,
peace be on him, asked him: “What is this?” “O Son of Allah's Apostle,
the remote distance (has brought it about). By Allah, nothing has
brought me from where I came except the love for you, ahl
al-Bayt,”replied the man.

“Be cheerful! By Allah, you will be raised from the dead with us,”said
the Imam, peace be on him.

The Khurasani man was so happy that he asked:

“O Son of Allah's Apostle, will I be raised from the dead with you?”

The Imam, peace be on him, replied: “Yes. The servant who loves us,
Allah will raise him from the dead with us. Religion is nothing except
love (for us). Surely, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, said in His Book:
‘Say: If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you and forgive
you your sins.’”[^124]

B. Ziyad al-Aswad came to Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him.
He came to him from a remote distance and a far-off place. He walked so
much that his feet split open. So, Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be
on him, asked him: “Ziyad, what is this?”

“My master, I came on the back of a weak young camel. So, I walked all
the road. I had nothing to buy a camel. I added a thing to a thing so
that I have bought this young camel,”Ziyad replied.

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, felt pity for him. He wept for him.
Then Ziyad said to him: “May Allah make me ransom for you. By Allah, I
have extremely committed sins. Perhaps I said: ‘I have perished!’ Then,
I remember my love for you, ahl al-Bayt. With that I wish for

forgiveness.”So, the Imam turned to him, and then he said to him with
kindness and affection:

“Glory belongs to Allah. Religion is nothing but love (for us). Indeed
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted said in His Book: ‘Allah has endeared the
faith to you and has made it seemly in your hearts.’[^125] He said: ‘If
you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you.’[^126] He said:
‘They love those who have fled to them.’[^127] A man from the desert
came to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and said to
him: ‘O Allah's Apostle, I love those who pray but I do not pray. I love
those who fast but I do not fast.’ So, Allah's Apostle said to him: ‘You
are with those whom you love.’ Whom do you seek? By Allah, If something
occurred to people, they would not resort to anyone except us. And we
would not resort to anyone except our Prophet. You are with us. Be
cheerful, be cheerful! By Allah, Allah will not make you equal to other
than you.”[^128]

C. He, peace be on him, said: “Surely, the garden longs for and its
light becomes intense for the coming of the family of Mohammed, may
Allah bless him and his family, and their followers (Shi‘ites). If a
servant worshipped Allah between the rukn (the corner of the Kaaba) and
the maqam (the standing place of Abraham) to the extent that his bodily
members cut off, Allah would not accept his worship unless he adopts our
authority and loves us.”[^129]

D. He, peace be on him, said to a group of his Shi‘ites: “The one of you
who becomes happy when his soul reaches here. He pointed to his mouth
with his hand. The angel of death comes down to him and says to him: ‘As
for what you wish for, it has been given to you. As for what you fear,
you are safe from it.’ He will open the door of his abode in the garden
and say to him: ‘Look at your abode in the garden! Those are Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, ‘Ali, al-Hasan, and
al-Husayn. They are your friends.’ This is what the words of Allah, the
Great and Almighty, confirm: ‘Those who believe and guard (against
evil), they shall have good news in this world's life and in the
hereafter.’[^130] ”[^131] In this connection, many traditions were
reported on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and the pure Imams. The books of traditions have mentioned them.

6. Why have Shi‘ites been called rafida?
----------------------------------------

Abu Basïr related. He said: [I said to Abu Ja‘far:]

“May I be ransom for you. We have been given a name. Through the name,
the rulers have regarded as lawful our blood, our properties, and our
torture.” He, peace be on him, asked:

“What is it?”

“The Rafida”

He, peace be on him, answered: “Allah has given you this name.”[^132]

This name has become a signpost for the Shi‘ites who spare no effort to
spread social reform in the earth. However, those who have no morals
find fault with them. The Shi‘ites boast of it, for it has become a
proof for their love of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be
on them, “from whom Allah has taken away uncleanliness and whom He has
purified completely.”Imam al-Shafi‘i boasted of this name when he said:

“If the love for the family of Mohammed is rafd,

then let jinn and men (thaqalan) testify that I am rafidi.”

7. Al-Baqir's Supplication for his Shi‘ites
-------------------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, was very loyal to his followers
(Shi‘ites). So, he supplicated for them with this supplication:

“Oh Near, not slow! Oh Most Merciful of all merciful! Make protection
for my Shi‘ites against the Fire. Be pleased with them. Forgive them
their sins. Make easy their affairs. Conceal their defects. Forgive them
the cardinal sins that are between You and them. Oh You Who is not
afraid of oppression! Oh You Who slumber does not overtake, nor sleep!
Relieve my worry, and remove my grief!”[^133]

He, peace be on him, recited the following supplication for his
Shi‘ites:

“O Allah, If I have pleasure and love (with you), then forgive me and
those who follow me from my brothers and my Shi‘ites. Make good that
which is in my loins. By Your mercy, oh Most Merciful of the
merciful.”[^134]

The Lives and Maxims of the Prophets
====================================

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, talked very much about the
lives and maxims of the prophets. The specialists in these subjects have
reported many traditions on his authority. The following are some of
them:

1. Part of Allah's Revelation to Adam
-------------------------------------

The Imam, peace be on him, told his companions about the maxims and high
moral standards Allah revealed to Adam. He, peace be on him said:
“Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, revealed to Adam: ‘I will gather all
good for you in four words: one of them is for Me; one is for you; one
is between Me and you; one is between you and people. As for the one
that is for Me, it is that you should worship Me, and that you should
not be a polytheist. As for the one that is for you, it is that I reward
you for your act at the time when you are in need of the reward. As for
the one that is between Me and you, is that you should pray to Me, and I
shall answer you. As for the one that is between you and people, it is
that you should satisfy people with what you satisfy yourself. ’”[^135]

2. Solomon's Maxim
------------------

Al-Baqir, peace be on him, told his companions about the wonderful maxim
of Solomon, son of David. He, peace be on him, said: “Solomon, son of
David, said: ‘We have been given what has been given to people and what
has not been given to them. We have been taught what has been taught to
people and what has not been taught to them. However, we have found
nothing better than fearing Allah during absence and presence,
economizing during riches and poverty, the word of truth during pleasure
and anger, and supplicating to Allah, the Great and Almighty in all
circumstances. ’”[^136]

This maxim has gathered good traits. For it summons people to fear
Allah, to economize their daily bread. It prevents them from wasting
their property. Moreover, it summons them to say the truth, to prefer it
to all things, and to rely on Allah, the Most High, in whose hand is the
fate of people.

3. A Maxim in the Torah
-----------------------

Al-Baqir, peace be on him, told his companions about a maxim in the
Torah. He, peace be on him, said: “It has been written in the Torah: ‘O
Moses, I have created you, chosen you, strengthened you, commanded you
to obey Me, and forbidden you from disobeying Me. If you obey Me, I will
help you to obey Me. If you disobey, I will not help you to disobey Me.
O Moses, My favor against you is that you should obey Me. My proof is
against you when you disobey Me. ’”[^137]

4. Why was Noah called the Grateful Servant?
--------------------------------------------

Mohammed b. Moslem reported on the authority of Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him, who said: “Noah was called the grateful servant because
he said during morning and evening: ‘O Allah, the blessing and health in
religion and the world are from You. You are unique, there is no partner
with You. I praise and thank You for them till You be pleased (with
me).’”[^138]

5.Noah's Prayer against his People
----------------------------------

Sudayr asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, about Noah's
supplication against his people. He asked: “Do you know why Noah invoked
Allah against his people when he said: ‘My Lord, leave not upon the land
any dweller from among the unbelievers. For sure if You leave them, they
will lead astray Your servants, and will not beget any, but immoral,
ungrateful (children)’ Did he have knowledge of them?”

The Imam, peace be on him, replied: “Allah revealed to him that no one
of his people would believe (in Allah) except those who had believed (in
Him) before. So, Noah recited this prayer against them.[^139] ”

6. Ismael was the first to speak Arabic
---------------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, told his companions that
Ismael, Allah's Prophet, was the first to speak Arabic. He, peace be on
him, said: “Ismael was the first to speak Arabic. He was ten years
old.”[^140]

7. Allah whispered (words) to Moses
-----------------------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, related to his companions that Allah,
the Most High, whispered (words) to Moses. He, peace be on him, said:
“It has been written in the Torah that Allah, the Great and Almighty,
whispered (words) to Moses, son of Imran: ‘O Moses, fear Me during your
secret affairs, I will conceal your defects. Praise Me during your
lonesomeness and your delightful pleasures, I will remind you during
your heedlessness. Restrain your anger from those over whom I have made
you king, I will restrain my anger from you. Conceal my hidden secrets
in your heart. Humor with My enemy and your enemy from among My
creatures. Do not make them curse Me when you manifest My hidden
secrets. So, you make My enemy and your enemy take part in cursing
Me.’”[^141]

8. Al-Baqir denied that the Prophet was Illiterate
--------------------------------------------------

‘Ali b. Asbat reported. He said: “I said to Abu Ja‘far: ‘The people
claim that the Prophet could neither read nor write.’ So, he, peace be
on him, denied that and said: ‘How will that be? Allah, the Exalted,
said: ‘It is He

(Allah) Who raised among the illiterates an Apostle from among
themselves, who recites to them His communications and purifies them,
and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom, although they were before
certainly in clear error.’ How did he teach them the Book and the Wisdom
while he could neither read nor write?”

Then ‘Ali b. Asbat asked the Imam: “Why was he called al-Nabi al-Ummi?”

The Imam replied: “Because he was ascribed to Mecca. That is according
to the words of Allah, the Great and Almighty: ‘That you may warn Umm
al-Qura and those around her.’ Umm al-Qura means Mecca. So, he was
called Ummi.”[^142]

9.Noah and Iblis
----------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, reported that a
conversation took place between Allah's Prophet, Noah, peace be on him,
and Iblis. That was when Noah invoked Allah against his people. The
conversation is as follows:

Iblis: O Noah, you have done me a favor. Now, I want to reward you for
it.

Noah: By Allah, I hate to do you a favor. What is it?

Iblis: Yes. You had invoked Allah against your people, so He had drowned
them. Thus, no one has remained for me to delude him. I am at rest till
Allah creates another generation. Then, I will delude them.

Noah: What is the reward?

Iblis: Mention me during three situations. For I am very close to the
servant during them. Mention me when you become angry. Mention me when
you judge between two persons. And mention me when you are with a woman
and there is no one with you.[^143]

Indeed, Iblis comes to man during these three situations. It is these
situations that make man commit sins and disobey Allah. May Allah
protect us from these evil situations.

10. The Death of Solomon
------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, narrated to Abu Basïr the
death of Allah's Prophet, Solomon. He, peace be on him, said: “Solomon,
son of David, commanded the jinn (unseen creatures) to build a glass
dome for him. He was leaning on his staff and watching the jinn's work.
He happened to turn around. Suddenly, he saw a man in the dome. He asked
the man: “Who are you?”“It is who does not accept bribes nor fear the
kings. I am the angel of death,”replied the man. Then, the Angel of
Death made Solomon die. Solomon was still leaning on his rod in the
dome. The jinn went on working and looking at him. Then Allah, the Great
and Almighty, commanded the wood worm to eat Solomon's rod. ‘When he
fell down, the jinn came to know plainly that if they had known the
unseen, they would not have tarried in abasing torment.’”[^144]

11. Jacob's meeting with Joseph
-------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, reported a story about
Jacob's meeting with Joseph. He, peace be on him, said: “Jacob said to
his

sons: ‘On this day of yours, you and all your family should go to
Joseph.’ Jacob and Joseph's aunt, the mother of Yamin, were with them.
Then, they headed for Egypt with happiness. It took them nine days to
get there. When they met Joseph in the King's house, Joseph embraced his
father, kissed him, and wept. Then, he seated his father and his aunt on
the king's throne. Then, he entered his room. He darkened the eyelids
with kohl, perfumed himself, wore the royal uniform, and went out. When
they saw him, they bowed down for him. Then, they thanked Allah for
that. Throughout those twenty years, Joseph did not darken the eyelids
with kohl nor did he perfumed himself. He did that when Allah gathered
him with his father and his brothers.”[^145]

12. The Period of Jacob's Life in Egypt
---------------------------------------

Mohammed b. Moslem asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
about the period of Jacob's life in Egypt. So, the Imam, peace be on
him, replied: “Jacob lived with Joseph in Egypt for two years.”Then,
Mohammed b. Moslem asked the Imam: “Who was the proof of Allah in the
earth- Jacob or Joseph?”The Imam, peace be on him, replied: “Jacob was
the proof, and Joseph was the king. When Jacob died, Joseph put him in a
coffin and carried him to the land of Sham. He buried him at Jerusalem.
Then, Joseph became the proof after Jacob.”Moreover, Mohammed asked the
Imam: “Was Joseph an apostle and a prophet?”The Imam replied: “Yes. Do
you not hear these words of Allah, the Great and Almighty: ‘Indeed,
Joseph had brought you the clear proofs before.’”[^146]

This is some of what was reported on the authority of al-Baqir, peace be
on him, concerning the conditions and lives of the prophets.

### Notes

###

[^1] ‘Illal al-Sharaiya‘, pp.123-[^124]:

[^2] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^181]:

[^3] Ibid, pp.183-[^184]:

[^4] Koran, al-Nisa’, [^59]:

[^5] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^185]:

[^6] Ibid, p.[^405]:

[^7] Ibid, p.[^175]:

[^8] Ibid, p.[^183]:

[^9] Manaqib Al Abi Talib, vol.2, p.[^336]:

[^10] ‘Yyun al-Mu‘jizat, p.[^34]:

[^11] A‘lam al-Wara, p.[^270]:

[^12] Roudat al-Wa‘izin, p.270

[^13] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^192]:

[^14] Ibid.

[^15] Al-Karajiki, al-Istinsar, p.[^17]:

[^16] Ibid.

[^17] Al-Khisal, p.[^388]:

[^18] Ibn Hamdun (died 401 A.H.), Muqtadab al-Athar.

[^19] Ibid.

[^20] Ibid.

[^21] Al-Saffar, Basa’ir al-Darajat, p.[^108]:

[^22] Ghayat al-Ikhtisar, p.[^131]:

[^23] Muqtadab al-Athar.

[^24] Nasikh al-Tawarikh, vol.2, p.[^202]:

[^25] Al-Kashi, Rijal, p.[^187]:

[^26] ‘Yyun Akhbar al-Rida.

[^27] Koran, al-A‘raf, [^145]:

[^28] Koran, al-Zukhruf, [^63]:

[^29] Koran, al-Nahl, p.[^89]:

[^30] Nazariyat al-Imama lada al-Ithna ‘Ashariya, p.[^147]:

[^31] Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat, vol.5, p.[^30]:

[^32] Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol.7, p.[^358]:

[^33] Al-Riyad al-Nadira, vol.2, p.[^222]:

[^34] Ithbat al-Wasiya, p.[^182]:

[^35] Al-Muqaddama, pp.232-[^234]:

[^36] Jami‘ Karamat al-Auliya’, vol.1, p.[^97]:

[^37] Dala’il al-Imama, p.[^96]:

[^38] Al-Maqrizi, Itti‘az al-Hunafa’, p.[^245]:

[^39] Nur al-Abbsar, p.[^130]:

[^40] Ibid, p.[^131]:

[^41] Dala’il al-Imama, p.[^110]:

[^42] Ithbat al-Hudat, vol.5, p.[^310]:

[^43] A‘lam al-Wara.

[^44] Ibn Hazm, al-Ahkam fi Usul al-Ahkam, vol.2, p.[^131]:

[^45] Abu Dauwd, vol.1, p.[^142]: Al-Nisa’i, vol.1, p.42.

[^46] Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat, vol.1, p.[^47]:

[^47] Nazra ‘Ama fi Tarikh al-Fiqh al-Islami, p.[^110]:

[^48] Tamhid Li Tarikh al-Falsafa al-Islamiya, p.[^202]:

[^49] A‘lam al-Wara, p.[^270]:

[^50] Ibid.

[^51] Youm al-Islam, p.[^189]:

[^52] Al-Wihda al-Islamiya, p.[^99]:

[^53] Koran, al-Touba, [^5]:

[^54] Ibid, [^11]:

[^55] Koran, al-Baqara, [^83]:

[^56] Koran, al-Touba, [^30]:

[^57] Koran, Mohammed, [^4]:

[^58] Koran, al-Hujurat, [^4]:

[^59] The great Companion (of the Prophet), ‘Ammar

b. Yasir, carried the standard during three (battles).

They were the Battle of Badr, the Battle of Uhd, and

the Battle of Hunayn. Abu Sufyan, the leader of the

Umayyads, headed those battles.

[^60] Hajr is a town in the Yemen. It is also the name of

all the land of Bahrain.

[^61] Koran, al-Ma’ida, [^47]:

[^62] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, pp.288-[^290]:

[^63] Al-Khilaf, vol.1, p.[^18]:

[^64] Roudat al-Wa‘izin, p.[^243]:

[^65] Al-Khilaf, vol.1, p.[^23]:

[^66] Ibid, p.[^130]:

[^67] Ibid, p.[^131]:

[^68] Kifayat al-Usul.

[^69] Al-Shi‘a wa Funun al-Islam, p.[^95]:

[^70] Haqa’iq al-Usul, vol.2, p.[^547]:

[^71] Ibid.

[^72] Mustamsak al-‘Irwat al-Withqa, vol.7, p.[^350]:

[^73] Ibid, p.[^349]:

[^74] Sammra b. Jundub, the lying companion, was among Mu‘awiya's
hirelings. He helped him to spread oppression

and terrorism. Zyyad b. Abïh appointed him governor over

Basrah. He killed many innocent people. The historians said

that he killed eight thousand people. In al-Tabari, Tarïkh, vol.6,

p.632, Aba Sawar al-Adawi said :" Sammra killed in the early

morning forty-seven men from my people. They were from

those who collected the Koran." We have talked in detail about

his crimes in our book ‘ Hayat al-Imam al-Hasan, vol.2, p.186-[^191]:'

[^75] Al-Hadhdha' reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be
on him, who said:" Sammra, I do not see you but

harmful. Go, so-and-so. Uproot it and throw it at his face."

[^76] Idah al-Kifaya, vol.3, p.[^439]:

[^77] Abi Jumhur al-Ihsa’i, Ghawali al-Li‘am.

[^78] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul.

[^79] Ibid.

[^80] Al-‘Amal wa Huqquq al-‘Amil fi al-Islam, p.[^139]:

[^81] Ibn Hamdun, al-Tadhkira, p.[^26]:

[^82] Jami‘ Bayan al-‘Ilm wa Fadlah, vol.1, p.[^32]:

[^83] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^34]:

[^84] Nasikh al-Tawarikh, vol.2, p.[^205]:

[^85] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^34]:

[^86] Ibid, p.[^41]:

[^87] Nasikh al-Tawarikh, vol.2, p.[^205]:

[^88] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^41]:

[^89] Nasikh al-Tawarikh, vol.2, p.[^205]:

[^90] Al-Khisal, p.[^223]:

[^91] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^32]:

[^92] Ibid, p.[^45]:

[^93] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^294]:

[^94] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^47]:

[^95] Ibid, p.[^42]:

[^96] Ibid.

[^97] Ibid.

[^98] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^297]:

[^99] Ibid, p.[^294]:

[^100] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^70]:

[^101] Abi Zahra, al-Imam al-Sadiq, p.[^24]:

[^102] Jami‘ Bayan al-‘Ilm wa Fadla, vol.1, p.[^201]:

[^103] Ibid.

[^104] Hulyat al-Auliya’, vol.3, p.[^180]:

[^105]Usul al-Kafi.

[^106] Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol.1, p.[^149]:

[^107] Al-Khisal, p.[^101]:

[^108] Safwat al-Safwa, vol.2, p.[^61]:

[^109] Mirr’at al-Jinan, vol.1, p.[^248]:

[^110] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^297]:

[^111] Koran, al-Hujurat, [^14]:

[^112] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^297]:

[^113] Al-Khisal, p.[^133]:

[^114] Hayat al-Imam Musa bin Ja‘far.

[^115] ‘Yyun al-Akhbar wa Funun al-Athar, pp.223-[^225]:

[^116] Da‘a’im al-Islam, vol.1, p.[^71]:

[^117] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^295]:

[^118] Ibid, p.[^300]:

[^119] Al-Khisal, p.[^413]:

[^120] Diya’ al-‘Amilin, vol.[^3]:

[^121] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^299]:

[^122] ‘Yyun al-Akhbar wa Funun al-Athar, p.[^223]:

[^123] Ibid.

[^124] Ibid, p.[^226]:

[^125] Koran, al-Hujurat, [^7]:

[^126] Koran, Al ‘Umran, [^31]:

[^127] Koran, al-Hashr, [^9]:

[^128] ‘Yyun al-Akhbar wa Funun al-Athar, p.[^226]:

[^129] Ibid, p.[^227]:

[^130] Koran, Younis, 63-[^64]:

[^131] ‘Yyun al-Akhbar wa Funun al-Athar, p.[^227]:

[^132] Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin, p.[^119]:

[^133] Muhajj al-Da‘awat, p.[^18]:

[^134] Al-Kaf‘ami, Musbah, p.[^161]:

[^135] Al-Saduq, al-Amali, p.[^544]:

[^136] Al-Khisal, p.[^219]:

[^137] Al-Saduq, al-Amali, p.[^274]:

[^138] ‘Ilal al-Sharai‘, p.[^29]:

[^139] Ibid, [^31]:

[^140] Al-Bayan wa al-Tabiyyin, vol.3, p.[^290]:

[^141] Al-Saduq, al-Amali, p.[^226]:

[^142] ‘Ilal al-Sharai‘, p.[^125]:

[^143] Al-Khisal, p.[^128]:

[^144] ‘Ilal al-Sharai‘, p[^74]:

[^145] Majjma‘ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, vol.6, p.[^264]:

[^146] Ibid, p.[^166]:
