On the Prophet's Life
=====================

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, reported many things about
the affairs of the Prophet's life. The following are some of them:

1. The Prophet borrowed Weapons from Safwan
-------------------------------------------

Al-Tabari reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace
be on him, who said: “Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, decided to advance against Hozan to fight with them. He was told
that Safwan b. Umayya, who was a polytheist then, had breast-plates and
weapons. So, he sent for him. Then, he said to him: ‘O Abu Umayya, lend
me these weapon of yours to meet my enemy with them tomorrow.’ Safwan
asked: ‘Mohammed, do you want to take them by force?’ ‘Rather, a
gratuitous loan,’ replied the Prophet. ‘There is no harm in this,’ said
Safwan. So, Safwan gave the Prophet a hundred breast-plates with
equivalent weapons.”They (the narrators) claimed that Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, asked Safwan to carry them for him.
So, the latter did that.

Imam Abu Ja‘far said: “One year passed. However, the loan was
guaranteed.”[^1] The Imam concluded a jurisprudential rule from this.
That is the loan should be guaranteed when it is misused. So, whoever
borrows a thing, he should guarantee the thing till he returns it to its
owner.

2. Khalid marched to Bani Judhayma
----------------------------------

Ibn Hisham reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him, who said: “When Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, conquered Mecca, he sent Khalid b. al-Walïd to bani (the
sons of) Judhayma. He sent him to summon them to believe in Allah, not
to fight with them. However, Khalid attacked them. They were afraid of
him, so they carried their weapons. When Khalid saw that, he said to
them: ‘Lay down your weapons.’ The people trusted him, so they did that.
However, Khalid betrayed them. He ordered them to be tied. Then, he
killed some of them. When the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family heard of that, he was full of sadness. Then, he raised his hands
to supplicate, saying:

“O Allah, I disown what Khalid has done!

“Then, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, summoned Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, and said to him:
Go to those people. Solve their problem. Put under your feet the order
of those who lived before Islam.’ Thus, ‘Ali went to them. He had money
with him. He paid blood money. He recompensed them for their damaged
properties to the container in which the dog licked. Still, he had some
money with him. Then, he asked them: ‘Is there any rest of blood money
or property not paid to you?’ ‘No’, they replied. However, he gave them
the rest of money, and then he came back to Allah's Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family. He told him about that. So, the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, said to him: ‘You are right.’ Then,
Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, stood in the
direction of the Kaaba, raising his hands and saying: ‘O Allah, I disown
what Khalid has done.’ He repeated that three times.”[^2]

The Life of Imam ‘Ali
=====================

In many of his traditions, Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, talked
about the life of his grandfather, the Commander of the Faithful, peace
be on him, the pioneer of fairness and justice. The following is one of
his traditions:

Zarara b. A‘yun reported on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, who said: “When ‘Ali,
peace be on him, performed the morning prayer, he went on praying till
the sun rose. When the sun rose, the poor, the needy, and other people
gathered about him. Then, he taught them Islamic jurisprudence and the
Koran. He appointed a time to end that assembly of his. One day, he
ended his assembly and passed by a man. The man hurt his feelings with a
rude word. Thus, the Imam came back (to the mosque). He went up on the
pulpit. He ordered the prayer to be general. When the people gathered,
he thanked Allah and praised Him, blessed His Apostle, and then he said:
‘O People, there is nothing more hateful and more harmful with Allah
than the ignorance and foolishness of an Imam. He who has no preacher of
his own self, Allah will not protect him. Whoever is just of his own
accord, his life will increase nothing but glory. Indeed, humbleness for
obeying Allah is nearer to Him than haughtiness for disobeying Him.’
Then he asked: ‘Where is the one who has already spoken?’ He (the man)
was unable to deny that. Then, he said: ‘Here I am, Commander of the
Faithful. If you wanted (to punish me), you would. If you forgave and
pardoned (me), then you were worthy of that.’ ‘I have forgiven and
pardoned (you),’ replied the Imam.”[^3]

The Commander of the Faithful predicted the Murder of al-Husayn
---------------------------------------------------------------

Many traditions were reported on the authority of the Commander of the
Faithful concerning the murder of his son, Imam Husayn, peace on him.
Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, reported one of those
traditions. He, peace be on him, said: “‘Ali, peace be on him, delivered
a sermon in Kufa. He said: ‘ Question me before you lose me. By Allah,
if you question me about the group (of people) that will misguide a
hundred (persons) and guide a hundred (persons), I will tell you about
its caller and its leader.’ Then a man rose and said: ‘Tell me the
number of the hair in my head and in my beard.’ Thus, ‘Ali said: ‘By
Allah, my friend (i. e., Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family) told me that there was in every hair in your head an angel
cursing you, that there was in every hair in your beard a Satan deluding
you, that there was in your house a lamb (baby) who would kill the
grandson of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, whose
name would be Sinan b. Anas al-Nakha‘i.’”[^4]

Then, this prediction of the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him,
occurred. That was when this wicked person, Sinan b. Anas, was among
those who killed the grandson of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family.

The Characteristics of the Commander of the Faithful
----------------------------------------------------

Ishaq b. ‘Abd Allah b. Abu Farwah asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him, about the characteristics of his grandfather, the
Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him. So, he, peace be on him,
replied: “He was a man with intense brownness, great eyes, and a big
abdomen. He was bald. He was nearer to shortness.”[^5]

The Events of Siffïn
--------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, reported many events about
the (Battle of) Siffïn. Nasr b. Muzahim, al-Tabari, b. Abu al-Haddïd,
and other historians reported these events on his authority. The
following are some of them:

Raising the Siege from the Water
--------------------------------

Mu‘awiya had taken his fighters and headed for Siffïn before the Imam's
army went there. He decided to occupy the Euphrates. He surrounded it
with many fighters to prevent the Imam's fighters from drinking water.
When the Imam's fighters came, they saw Mu‘awiya's fighters occupying
the Euphrates. Thus, they were unable to reach it. Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, reported the way how the fighters of the
Imam, peace be on him, could raise the siege from the Euphrates. He,
peace be on him, said: “Al-Ash‘ath called ‘Amru b. al-‘As. He said to
him: ‘O Bin al-‘As, woe unto you! Let us drink water. By Allah, if you
do not do that, we will fight with you.’ ‘By Allah, we will not leave
the river till we fight against you. Then, our Lord will know today who
is more patient.’ So, al-Ash‘ath, al-Ashter, the wise companions of Imam
‘Ali, peace be on him, along with twelve thousand fighters dismounted
from their horses. They attacked ‘Amru, Abu al-A‘war, and the Syrians
who were with them. They removed them from the river to the extent that
the horses of ‘Ali's fighters entered the water.”[^6]

Worth mentioning, when ‘Ali's fighters recaptured the river, they wanted
to prevent the Syrians from drinking water. However, the Imam did not
permit them to do that. Rather, he treated the Syrians kindly and let
them drink water.

Mu‘awiya and ‘Amru b. al-‘As
----------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, narrated a talk that took
place between Mu‘awiya and ‘Amru b. al-‘As. He, peace be on him, said:
“Mu‘awiya asked ‘Amru b. al-‘As to prepare the ranks of the Syrians.
Then, ‘Amru said to him: ‘I must rule when Allah kills b. Abï Talib and
the country yields to you.’ ‘Are you not the ruler of Egypt?’ asked
Mu‘awiya. ‘Will Egypt be a recompense for the garden? Will the murder of
b. Abï Talib be the recompense for the ever lasting torment or the
fire?’ asked ‘Amru. ‘Abu ‘Abd Allah, you shall have your rule when
(‘Ali) b. Abï Talib is killed. Speak slowly. Do not let the people hear
your words,’ replied Mu‘awiya. So, ‘Amru said to the Syrians: ‘Arrange
your ranks. Lend Your Lord your skulls. Ask Allah, your Lord, for the
help. Fight against the enemy of Allah and your enemy. Kill them. May
Allah kill and destroy them. And be patient. Indeed the earth belongs to
Allah. He causes such of

His servants to inherit it as He pleases. And the final result will be
for the pious.’”[^7]

With deception and error Mu‘awiya was able to fight with Imam ‘Ali, the
Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, the pioneer of wisdom and
justice in the earth.

Imam ‘Ali delivered a Sermon at Siffïn
--------------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, reported the sermon which
his grandfather, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him,
delivered at Siffïn. In the sermon, Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him, talked
about the high moral standards of the great Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, and the heavy loss that inflicted mankind when he, may
Allah bless him and his family, died. In the sermon, the Imam also
talked about his rank and position with the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family. Then, in it, he summoned the Moslems to wage holy war
against his enemy, Mu‘awiya b. Abï Sufyan. The following is the text of
the sermon:

“Praise belongs to Allah for His overabundant blessings for all His
creatures whether they are righteous or the sinners, and for His strong
proofs over his creatures whether they are obedient or disobedient. If
He has mercy (on them), then it is out of His bounty and favor. If He
tortures (them), that is out of what their hands earn. Indeed, Allah
does not wrong the servants. I thank Him for the good tribulation and
the manifest blessings. I ask Him to help us with what has befallen us
from the affairs of here and the hereafter. I believe in Him and trust
in Him. Allah is sufficient as a protector. I bear witness that there is
no god apart from Allah, Who is unique and without partners. I also bear
witness that Mohammed is His servant and His Apostle. He sent him with
guidance and the religion of truth. He settled him for that. He (the
Prophet) was worthy of that. He chose him over all the creatures to
convey His message. He made him as a mercy from Him over His creatures.
He (the Prophet) was, as His knowledge of him, compassionate and
merciful. He was the noblest of all the creatures of Allah in lineage,
the most handsome of them in sight, the most generous of them in the
soul, the most obedient of them to the parents, the most clinging of
them to blood relations, the best of them in knowledge, the heaviest of
them in clemency, the most faithful of them (in fulfilling) the promise
and the most honest of them in agreement. Neither a Moslem nor an
unbeliever had a complaint against him. Rather he was wronged, and he
forgave. He was powerful, and he pardoned and forgave till he, may Allah
bless him and his family, passed away. He was obedient to Allah. He was
patient toward what had inflicted him. He struggled for Allah as His is
due till certitude came to him. Thus, his departure was the greatest
disaster that befell all the people of the earth, whether they were
righteous or sinners. Then he left among you Allah's Book that enjoins
you to obey Allah and prohibits you from disobeying him. Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, made a covenant for me. So,
I will not deviate from the covenant. Now, you are present before your
enemies. You know that their leader is a hypocrite, the son of a
hypocrite. He leads them to the fire. The cousin of your Prophet is with
you and among you. He guides you to the garden and summons you to obey
your Lord. He has put into effect the sunna (practices) of your Prophet.
He

who prays before every praise (of Allah) is not equal. No one preceded
me in prayer with Allah's Apostle. I am from the people who took part
(at the Battle) of Badr. Mu‘awiya is a released prisoner (of war), the
son of a released prisoner. By Allah you are right, and they are wrong.
The people have gathered for their falsehood. Do not separate yourselves
from your right. So, their falsehood will overcome your right. ‘Fight
them. Allah will punish them by your hands.’ If you do not do that,
Allah will punish them by the hands of other than you. So, his
companions answered him, saying: ‘O Commander of the Faithful, lead us
to our enemy and your enemy, if you want that. By Allah, we want no one
other than you. We will die with you and live with you.’ So, he (Imam
‘Ali) said to them: ‘By Him in whose hand is my soul, Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, looked at me before I hit (the
enemies) with my sword. So, he said: ‘There is no sword but Dhu
al-Faqar. There is no youngman but ‘Ali.’ Then, he said: ‘O ‘Ali, your
position to me is as Aaron had with Moses, except that there will be no
Prophet after me. O ‘Ali, your life and your death will be with me.’ ‘By
Allah, I have never told lies nor (anyone) has accused me of lying. I
have never gone astray (nor anyone) has misled me. I have never
forgotten what he has entrusted to me. I say it word by word. I know my
Lord clearly. For I follow the clear path.’”[^8]

The Day of al-Harrïr
--------------------

The Day of al-Harrïr was the greatest of all the days of (the Battle of)
Siffïn, and the most critical of them in the situation. The historians
have called it the Greatest Day. For the fire of war burnt, and its heat
became intense on that day. So, fright and death spread over the people.
Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, talked about that day, saying: “When
the Greatest Day came, Mu‘awiya's companions said: ‘By Allah, we will
not leave the field till we die or Allah grants us victory.’ And the
companions of ‘Ali, peace be on him, said: ‘We will not leave the field
till we die or Allah grants us victory.’ So, they started fighting early
in the morning on a day. It was a long hot day. They threw arrows at
each other to the extent that there were no more arrows. They stabbed
each other to the extent that the spears were broken. Then the people
dismounted their horses. They advanced against each other. Then they hit
each other to the extent that the swords were broken. Then the knights
fought against each other with swords and iron bars. So, the listeners
heard nothing except the mumble of the people, the clashing of the
swords at the field, and the biting of the mouths. Then, the sun was
eclipsed. The fighting was intense. The standards and banners got lost.
The time of four prayers passed. No on prostrated himself in worship to
Allah, except saying ‘Allah is Great’. So, during those critical
moments, the old men shouted: ‘O People of Arabia, fear Allah regarding
the women and the girls.’”

When Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, reached these words,
he wept.[^9] For those painful memories, whose awe melted the hearts,
moved him. He remembered the disaster of his grandfather, the Commander
of the Faithful, peace be on him, when he was afflicted by that
traitorous group of people who spared no effort to eradicate Islam, to
remove its achievements, and to renew the pre-Islamic practices in the
earth.

Among the ugliest tricks in human history was that of ‘Amru b. al-‘As,
who raised copies of the Koran. Rawahost Milar regard it as the ugliest
and the worst trick in human history.[^10] Imam ‘Ali's army was about to
win a victory. Mu‘awiya's army suffered from heavy causalities, so
Mu‘awiya was about to escape. However, he asked the advice of ‘Amru b.
al-‘As. The latter advised the former to raise copies of the Koran.
Al-Ash‘ath b. Qays, who was a wicked cunning person in the army of Imam
‘Ali, cooperated with ‘Amru b. al-‘As to weave this trick.

Imam Abu Ja‘far talked about the number of the copies of the Koran. He,
peace be on him, said: “They received ‘Ali carrying a hundred copies (of
the Koran). Each wing (of their army) carried two hundred copies. So,
all the copies were five hundred.”

Moreover, a group of Mu‘awiya's army called at the Iraqi camp: “O People
of Arabia, keep Allah in view in respect of the women, the girls, and
the children. Tomorrow, beware of the Romans, the Turkish, and the
Persians when you perish. Keep Allah in view in regard of your religion.
This is Allah's Book between you and us.”Imam ‘Ali was displeased with
that trick. So, he said: “O Allah, You know that they do not want the
Book. So, judge between us and them. Indeed, You are the manifest true
judge.”[^11]

This trickery aborted the victory which Imam ‘Ali's army won.
Furthermore, it led the Imam's army to discords. For example, al-Ash‘ath
b. Qays was about to mutiny against the government of the Imam. However,
the realized that critical situation. Thus, he showed matchless slowness
and patience. Accordingly, he unwillingly commanded his fighters to stop
fighting. In the mean time, he commanded Malik al-Ashtar, the leader of
his military forces, to withdraw from the battle field, while he was
about to win the final victory.

The Document of the Arbitration
-------------------------------

Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him, was forced to accept the arbitration that
saved the government of Mu‘awiya and toppled the government of Imam
‘Ali, peace be on him. The leaders of the discord in the army of Imam
‘Ali competed with the Syrians to write the conditions to end the battle
for a time so that the two arbitrators would meet. Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, reported the text of the document. Then the
historians reported it on his authority. The following is the text of
the document:

“In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. ‘Ali b. Abï
Talib, Mu‘awiya b. Abï Sufyan, the judge of ‘Ali b. Abï Talib over the
Iraqis, those who are with him from his followers (Shi‘ites) from among
the believers and the Moslems, the judge of Mu‘awiya b. Abï Sufyan over
the Syrians, and those who are with him from his followers (Shi‘ites)
from among the believers and the Moslems have agreed on this:

“We have yielded to the decree of Allah, the Exalted, and His Book.
Nothing brings us together but He. Indeed, the Book of Allah, the
Glorified and Exalted, is among us, from its beginning to its end. We
enliven what the Koran enlivens and deaden what the Koran deadens. If
the two arbitrators find that in the Book of Allah, they should follow
it. If they do not find it (in the Koran), they should follow the
unified just Sunna. The two arbitrators are ‘Abd Allah b. Qays and ‘Amru
b. al-‘As. The two arbitrators will

impose a commitment on ‘Ali, Mu‘awiya, and the two armies that they (the
two arbitrators) must be two custodians over their souls, and their
properties. The community must support them.”[^12]

The two parties signed this document that did not prevent Mu‘awiya from
requesting the blood of ‘Uthman, which he used as means to mutiny and
aggress against the government of Imam ‘Ali. Surely, Mu‘awiya was
indifferent to ‘Uthman. For ‘Uthman asked Mu‘awiya for help when the
revolutionists besieged his house. However, Mu‘awiya kept silent till
‘Uthman was killed. When the latter was killed, the former used his
murder as means to achieve his ambitions.

With this, we will end our talk about the narrations of Imam Abu Ja‘far
regarding the events (of the Battle of), that made the Moslems liable to
great disasters and misfortunes and threw them into great evil.

The Tragedy of Imam Husayn
==========================

The Moslems were very afraid of the tragedy of Imam Husayn, peace be on
him. For, through this tragedy, the members of the Umayyad Army violated
the sacredness of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, when
they killed his grandsons and attacked his family. They intended to
eradicate the family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.
They committed the ugliest crimes against them. People have never seen
such crimes throughout the stages of this life.

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, was a young man when he attended the
Battle of Karbala'. Thus, he saw those great disasters that befell the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. The Umayyads drew
the events of that tragedy into his inner self. So, he and his father,
Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, remembered them throughout their lives.

The Moslem scholars and narrators came to Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him. They questioned him about the tragedy of Karbala'. So,
he, peace be on him, supplied them with all details about it and they
wrote them down.

Thus, the scholars at that time wrote about sixty thousand books on his
authority. All the books have the title (Maqtal al-Husayn).

The Narration of ‘Ammar al-Dihni
--------------------------------

Al-Tabari reported that ‘Ammar al-Dihni came to Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace
be on him, to question him about the murder of al-Husayn and he, peace
be on him, answered him. Al-Tabari reported the narration in a
disorderly manner. However, we have organised the paragraphs of the
narration. We have mentioned some ideas about it at the end. The
following is the text of the narration:

[Zakariya b. Yahya al-Darir informed me. He said: Ahmed b. Janab
al-Musaysi, who was given the kunna of Abu al-Walïd, informed us. He
said: Khalid b. Yazïd b. Asad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Qasri informed us. He
said: ‘Ammar al-Dihni informed me. He said: I (i. e., ‘Ammar al-Dihni)
said to Abu Ja‘far: Tell me about the murder of al-Husayn as if I had
been present with him.]

He (i. e., Abu Ja‘far), peace be on him, said: “Mu‘awiya died. Al-Walïd
b. ‘Uttba b. Abï Sufyan was (a governor) over Medina. He sent for al

Husayn b. ‘Ali. He (al-Husayn) said to him: ‘Delay me and be kind (to
me).’ So, he delayed him. Then he (al-Husayn) went to Mecca. Then, the
Kufans came to him. They said to him: ‘We will sacrifice our souls for
you. We will not attend the Friday (prayer) with the governor. So, come
to us.’ Al-Nu‘man b. Bashir al-Ansari was (the governor) of Kufa.
Al-Husayn sent for his cousin, Moslem b. ‘Aqïl b. Abï Talib, and said to
him: ‘Go to Kufa and think about what they have written to me. If it was
true, I would go to them.’ So, Moslem walked on till he arrived in
Medina. He took two guides there. They led him through the desert. They
were so thirsty that one of the guides died. So, Moslem wrote to
al-Husayn to ask permission to return. Thus, al-Husayn wrote to him: ‘Go
to Kufa.’ Then, Moslem walked on till he arrived in Kufa. There he
stopped at a man called b. ‘Awsaja.[^13] When the Kufans heard of his
coming, they went to him to pledge allegiance to him. Then twelve
thousand persons pledged allegiance to him. A man from those who were
inclined to Yazïd b. Mu‘awiya rose and said to al-Nu‘man b. al-Munzir:
‘You are weak.’ So, al-Nu‘man said to him: ‘To be weak and to obey Allah
is more lovable with me than to be strong and disobey Allah.’

“So, the man wrote to Yazïd about the words of al-Nu‘man. Thus, Yazïd
summoned a retainer of his called Sargon. Yazïd used to seek his advice.
He told him about the story. Thus, Sargon said to: ‘Would you accept
(the advice) from Mu‘awiya if he was alive?’ ‘Yes,’ replied Yazïd.
‘Then, accept (it) from me. No one can (govern) Kufa except ‘Ubayd Allah
b. Zyyad. So, appoint him over it,’ advised Sargon. Yazïd was indignant
with ‘Ubayd Allah. He tried to remove him from Basrah. So, he wrote to
him to please him. Then, he appointed him governor over Kufa and Basrah.
Then, he wrote to him to look for Moslem b. ‘Aqïl to kill him if he
found him.

“‘Ubayd Allah and the prominent figures from Basrah came to Kufa. He was
veiled. When he passed by an assembly of the Kufans, he said: ‘Peace be
on you.’ ‘And on you be peace, son of the daughter of the Apostle of
Allah,’ they said. They thought that he was al-Husayn b. ‘Ali, peace be
on them. When he stopped at the palace, he summoned a retainer of his.
He gave him three hundred thousand (dirhams) and said to him: ‘Go and
look for this person to whom the Kufans are pledging allegiance. Tell
him that you are from Hams and that you have come for this affair and
that you give him this sum of money to be strong.’ So, the retainer
looked for Moslem b. ‘Aqïl. At last he met an old man from Kufa, who
supported the pledge of allegiance (to Moslem). He asked the old man
about Moslem. So, the old man said to him: ‘Your meeting with me has
pleased me and it has displeased me. As for that which has pleased me
from that, it is what Allah has guided you to. As for that which has
displeased me, it is that our affair has not become strong yet. Then the
old man led the retainer to Moslem. Thus, the retainer handed the sum of
money to Moslem and pledged allegiance to him. Then he came back to
‘Ubayd Allah and told him about that.

“When ‘Ubayd Allah b. Zyyad came, Moslem left the house where he was and
moved to the house of Hani b. ‘Urwa al-Muradi. Then, Moslem wrote to
al-Husayn b. ‘Ali, peace be on him. He told him that twelve thousand
persons from Kufa had pledged allegiance to him. Besides he

ordered him to come (to Kufa). ‘Ubayd Allah said to the notables from
the Kufa: ‘Why did Hani b. ‘Urwa not come with those who came to me?’
So, Mohammed b. al-Ash‘ath and a group of his people went to Hani. While
Hani was standing at the door of his house, they came and said to him:
‘The Emir has mentioned you and found you slow. So, set off to him.’
They insisted on him till he rode with them. He walked till he came to
‘Ubayd Allah. Shurayh, the judge, was with ‘Ubayd Allah. When ‘Ubayd
Allah looked at Hani, he said to Shurayh: ‘The fool's legs have brought
him to you.’ Hani greeted ‘Ubayd Allah. However, ‘Ubayd Allah asked him:
‘O Hani, where is Moslem?’ ‘I do not know,’ replied Hani. So, ‘Ubayd
Allah ordered his retainer, who handed the dirhams (to Moslem), to come
out. When the retainer saw Hani, he affirmed him. So, Hani said: ‘May
Allah make the Emir righteous. By Allah, I did not invite him to come to
my house. However, he came and stopped at me.’ ‘Bring him,’ commanded
‘Ubayd Allah. ‘By Allah, if he was under my own feet, I would not raise
them from him,’ answered Hani. ‘Bring him nearer to me,' commanded
‘Ubayd Allah. So, he was brought nearer to him. Then, ‘Ubayd Allah hit
him on the eyebrow and split it. Hani tried to draw the sword of a
police-man. However, he was prevented from that. ‘Allah has made your
blood lawful,' said ‘Ubayd Allah. Then he ordered him to be imprisoned
by the palace.”[^14]

After this al-Tabari reported a speech regarding the details of the
event. Then he mentioned the speech of Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him,
who said: “While Hani was in prison, Madhhaj (the tribe of Hani) heard
of that. Suddenly, ‘Ubayd Allah heard noise at the gate of the palace.
‘What is this?' he asked. ‘Madhhaj,' they answered. So, ‘Ubayd Allah
said to Shurayh: ‘Go out to them and tell them that he has imprisoned
him to question him.' Then he sent a spy after Shurayh to hear his
words. Shurayh passed by Hani. So, Hani said to him: ‘O Shurayh, fear
Allah. ‘Ubayd Allah will kill me. ' However, Shurayh walked on till he
stopped at the gate of the palace and said to (Madhhaj): 'There is no
harm on Hani. The Emir (‘Ubayd Allah) has imprisoned him to question
him. ' So, Madhhaj said: ‘He is truthful. There is no harm on your
leader. ' Thus, they scattered. Then Moslem heard of that. So, he
declared his slogan. Thus, four thousand Kufans gathered around him.
Then he placed his vanguard at the head and mobilized the right and the
left wings (of his fighters). He was in the middle. Then he marched to
‘Ubayd Allah. For this reason ‘Ubayd Allah sent for leading Kufans. He
gathered them around him in the palace. When Moslem arrived at the gate
of the palace, the leading Kufans spoke to their tribes and held them
back. Then Moslem's companions slipped away. Thus, only five hundred of
them remained with him. When it got dark, they slipped away too.

“When Moslem found himself alone, he frequented in the streets. He saw a
door. He knocked the door. A woman came out. He said to the woman: ‘Give
me water.' She gave him water. She entered and remained for awhile, and
then she came out. She saw Moslem sitting at the door. She said to him:
‘O Servant of Allah, indeed your sitting is doubtful. Stand up.' ‘I am
Moslem b. ‘Aqïl. Have you a shelter?' asked Moslem. ‘Yes,' she replied.
Her son was the retainer of Mohammed b. al-Ash‘ath. So, he went to

Mohammed and told him. Then Mohammed went to ‘Ubayd Allah and told him.
So, ‘Ubayd Allah commanded ‘Ubayd Allah b. Hurayth al-Makhzumi, the
commander of the police, and ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Mohammed b. al-Ash‘ath to
arrest Moslem. Unexpectedly, they surrounded Moslem in the house. When
Moslem knew of that, he went out drawing his sword. He fought them. Then
‘Abd al-Rahman gave him security. He took him by the hand and brought
him to ‘Ubayd Allah. ‘Ubayd Allah ordered Moslem to be taken to the top
of the Palace. There Moslem was beheaded and his body was thrown down to
the people. Then ‘Ubayd Allah ordered Hani to be taken to al-Kanasa.
Hani was hanged there. In this connection their poet said:

“If you do not know what death is,

then look at Hani and (Moslem) b. ‘Aqïl in the market- place.

The command of the governor struck them (down).

and they became legends for those who travel on every road.

Is Asma' riding in safety a mount which moves at walking place

while Madhhajj urged him to seek vengeance?”[^15]

Then al-Tabari mentioned other narrations on the authority of Abï
Mukhnif and the like regarding the details of the events. After that, he
said: [Khalid b. Yazïd b. ‘Abd Allah al-Qasri in formed us. He said:
‘Ammar al-Dihni in formed us. He said: I (i. e., ‘Ammar al-Dihni) to Abu
Ja‘far tell me about the murder al-Husayn as if I had attended it. He
(Abu Ja‘far) said:]

“Then al-Husayn b. ‘Ali came according to the letter which Moslem b.
‘Aqïl sent to him. When there were three miles between him and
al-Qadisiyah (a city in Iraq), al-Hur b. Yazïd al-Timimi met him and
asked him: ‘Where do you want to go?' ‘I want to go to that city,'
replied al-Husayn. ‘Go back. I have left behind me nothing good for
you,' said al-Hur. Al-Husayn tried to return. The brothers of Moslem b.
‘Aqïl were with him. So, they said: ‘By Allah, we will not return till
we have taken vengeance or we are killed.' ‘There is no good in life
after you,' said al-Husayn. Then al-Husayn marched, so the foremost
horses of ‘Ubayd Allah met him. When he saw that, he went to Karbala'.
He dismounted and camped at a land full of reeds to face (his enemy) in
one direction. His companions were forty-five knights and a hundred men.
‘Ubayd Allah b. Zyyad had appointed ‘Umar b. Sa‘d b. Abï Waqqas a
governor over Ray. He said to him: ‘I want you to fight this man on
behalf of me.' ‘Leave me,' said ‘Umar b. Sa‘d. However, ‘Ubayd Allah
refused to leave him. ‘Give time for this night,' said ‘Umar b. Sa‘d.
Thus, ‘Ubayd Allah delayed him. Then, ‘Umar thought of his order. When
he entered upon the morning, he went to ‘Ubayd Allah. He was satisfied
with what he had been ordered. So, ‘Umar b. Sa‘d headed for al-Husayn.
When he came to al-Husayn, al-Husayn said to him: ‘Choose one of three:
either you leave me, then I will go where I came from or you leave me,
so I will go to Yazïd or you leave, so I will go to the border cities.
‘Umar accepted that. Then ‘Ubayd Allah wrote to him: ‘No, he must put
his hand in mine.' Al-Husayn said to him: ‘Ten young men from my family
(have been killed).' Then an arrow came and hit his son who was on his
lap. He began rubbing the blood from him and saying ‘O Allah, judge
between us and the people who summoned us to support us and then they
killed us.'

Then he ordered a garment to be brought to him. He tore the garment and
wore it. Then he went out with his sword. He, peace be on him, fought
till he was killed. A man from Madhhajj killed him. The man cut off his
head and sent it to ‘Ubayd Allah, saying:

“Fill my stirrup with silver or gold,

for I have killed the veiled king.

I have killed the best of all people in father and mother,

and the best in lineage.

“Then ‘Ubayd Allah ordered the man to send the head to Yazïd. Abu Barza
al-Aslami was with Yazïd. When the head was put before Yazïd, he began
hitting the head on the mouth with his cane, and reciting.

“We will split the skull of proud men (who came) against us; they were
very disobedient and oppressive.

“So, Abu Barza said to him: ‘Raise your cane. By Allah, I saw Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, kiss him on the mouth.’
Then ‘Umar b. Sa‘d sent to ‘Ubayd Allah al-Husayn's womenfolk and
children. No one of the family of al-Husayn b. ‘Ali, peace be on him,
remained alive except his womenfolk and an ill boy. Thus, ‘Ubayd Allah
ordered the boy to be killed. So, Zaynab threw herself on him and said:
‘By Allah, you will not kill him till you kill me.’ Thus, ‘Ubayd Allah
felt pity for her, and then he left the boy.

“Then ‘Ubayd Allah prepared them and sent them to Yazïd. So, Yazïd
gathered his Syrian followers. They entered and congratulated him on the
victory. Then a man of them called Azraq Ahmar looked at a female
servant of their womenfolk and said: ‘O Commander of the Faithful, give
me this (female servant).' So, Zaynab said: ‘No, by Allah, you have no
dignity nor him till he comes out of the religion of Allah.' Al-Azraq
repeated that again. Thus, Yazïd said to him: ‘Then Yazïd prepared them
and sent them to Medina. When they entered Medina, a woman from the
family of ‘Abd al-Mutalib received them. The woman was weeping and
saying:

“What would you say if the Prophet asked you: ‘What have you,

the last of the (religious) communities, done

with my offspring and my family after my departure from them?

They are prisoners and slain and have been stained with their own blood.

What sort of reward is this for my advice, that you

should oppose me by doing evil to my blood relations?’”[^16]

With this the narration of ‘Ammar al-Dihni about the tragedy of Karbala'
on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, has come to an
end.

Criticisms
----------

This narration has faced many criticisms. The following are some of
them:

1. ‘Ammar al-Dihni asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, to
tell him in detail about the murder of Imam Husayn, peace be on him, as
if he been present with him. As for the answer, it is brief. Many events
have not been mentioned. Most stages of that tragedy have been
summarized. Thus, this answer does not match the question which Ammar
asked to get detailed information.

2. In this narration, it has been mentioned that Imam Husayn, peace be
on him, asked ‘Umar b. Sa‘d for three affairs when he met him. He asked
him:

A. to let him go back to Medina (Yathrib).

B. to let him go to Yazïd.

C. to let him go to the border cities.

Certainly, the last two requests are incorrect. For, if Imam Husayn,
peace be on him, had mentioned them, the Umayyad Army would not have
fought against him. ‘Aqba b. Sam‘an accompanied the Imam from Medina to
Mecca, and then to Iraq. He was with him till he was killed. Concerning
the fabrication of this narration, he said:

“I accompanied al-Husayn from Medina to Mecca, and then to Iraq. I did
not separate myself from him till he was killed. I heard all his words.
I did not hear from him what the people hand down. He did not say that
he wanted to put his hand in Yazïd's hand nor did he say that he wanted
to go to the border cities. He did not say that in Medina nor in Mecca
nor in Iraq nor at his camp. He never said that till he was killed. Yes,
I heard him say: ‘I will go to this wide land to wait for what the
people reach.'”[^17]

As this narration has these items, then we cannot attribute it to Imam
Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him. It is possible that some items have been
added to this narration and some were omitted from it. Thus, it is
disorderly. Therefore no one can rely on it.

With this we end our talk about the traditions reported on the authority
of Imam Abu Ja‘far concerning the Prophet's life and all the events that
occurred at the early time of Islam.

Imam al-Baqir's Valuable Commandments
=====================================

Many commandments were reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far,
peace be on him. Some of them were to his children; some of them were to
his companions. They are full of noble values and high ideals. They are
rich in rules of conduct and good guidance that protects man from bad
practices and deviation from the truth. The following are his
commandments:

His Commandments to his Son al-Sadiq
------------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, supplied his son al-Sadiq
with a group of valuable commandments. The following are some of them:

1. He, peace be on him, said: “O My little son, indeed, Allah has hidden
three things in three things. He has hidden his pleasure in His
obedience. So, do not scorn anything of obedience. Perhaps His pleasure
is in it. He has hidden His wrath in His disobedience. So, do not scorn
anything of disobedience. Perhaps His wrath is in it. And He has hidden
His friends among His creatures. So, do not scorn anyone. Perhaps he is
a friend.”[^18]

These commandments are full of high moral standards. They urge people to
obey Allah. They warn them intensely from disobeying Him. Moreover, they
urge them to respect each other.

2. Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, related to Sufyan al-Thawri some of
his father's commandments. He said to him: “O Sufyan, my father ordered
me (to do) three, and prevented me (from doing) three. Among what he
said to me is: ‘O My little son, he who makes friends with a bad friend
is not

safe. Whoever enters into evil affairs is accused. He who does not
restrain his tongue is regretful. Then he recited to me:

(If you) habituate your tongue to good words,

you will have a high rank with it.

It is authorized to take the good and the bad

(things) you have established for it.

So, think of the way to habituate it.'”[^19]

These commandments are among the most wonderful maxims, and among the
best commandments of the righteous to their children. For they have all
the necessities of the rules of conduct and virtues.

His Commandments to one of his Children
---------------------------------------

Imam al-Baqir gave commandments to one of his children. They are as
follows: “O My little son, when Allah bestows a blessing on you, say:
praise belongs to Allah. When an intense affair befalls you, then say:
There is neither power nor might but through Allah. When your daily
bread is slow (in coming) for you, then say: I seek Allah's
forgiveness.”[^20]

His Commandments to ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Azïz
------------------------------------------

When ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Azïz became caliph, he asked Imam Abu Ja‘far,
peace be on him, to give him useful commandments to manage his
government. So, the Imam, peace be on him, said: “I advise you to fear
Allah, and to regard the young one of the Moslems as your son, the
middle one of them as your brother, and the old one of them as your
father. So, have mercy on your son, treat your brother kindly, and obey
your father. When you do a favor, then go on (doing) it.”[^21]

‘Umar admired this maxim, saying: “By Allah, you have gathered things.
If we put these things into effect and Allah helps us with them, good
will continue for us, Allah willing.”[^22]

These valuable words have brought together just political affairs. When
the head of the state rules his subjects with justice and fairness and
regard them as the members of his family, then the government and the
people are happy and good continues for them.

His Commandments to Jabir al-Ju‘fi
----------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, supplied his knowledgeable student,
Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi, with immortal commandments full of high moral
standards and ideals through which man becomes sublime when he puts them
into effect. The following are some of them:

“I commend you to (follow) five (commandments): When (people) wrong you,
then do not wrong them. When they betray you, then do not betray them.
When they accuse you of lying, then do not be angry. When they praise
you, then do not be happy. When they dispraise you, then be patient.
Think of what they say against you. If you know that what they say
against you is in yourself, then do not be angry out of the truth. For
to become low with Allah, the Great and Almighty, is more disastrous
than to become low with the people. If you are contrary to what they say
against you, then you obtain a reward while your body is not tired.

“Know that you are not our friend when you become sad when all the
people of your city say that you are an evil man. If they say that you
are a righteous man, that should not delight you. However, you should
compare yourself with Allah's Book. If you follow its way, refrain from
its prohibition, wish for its arousal of an interest, and afraid of its
frightening, then be steadfast and cheerful. For what (people) say
against you does not harm you. If you are dissenting to the Koran, then
noting of your self should deceive you. Indeed the believer should take
care of himself to overcome its caprice. For he sometimes straightens
its crookedness and opposes its caprice out of the love for Allah. His
soul sometimes overcomes him. Then he follows his caprice. So, Allah
refreshes him, and he becomes refreshed. Allah abolishes his stumble, so
he remembers and resorts to repentance and fear. So, he increases in
insight and knowledge, for the fright in him is increased. That is
because Allah says: ‘Surely those who guard (against evil), when a
visitation from the Satan afflicts them, they become mindful, then lo!
they see.'[^23]

“O Jabir, regard as much the little livelihood from Allah to be loyal to
gratefulness. Regard as little your obedience to Allah to belittle
yourself and to ask (Allah's forgiveness). Drive away the present evil
from yourself through the present knowledge. Put into effect the present
knowledge sincerely. Guard against the great heedlessness during the
sincere act through the intense watchfulness. Bring the intense
watchfulness through the truthful fear. Be careful of the hidden
adornment through the present life and beware of the rashness of caprice
through the guidance of reason. Stop during the overcome of caprice
through seeking knowledge. Save the good deeds for Judgment Day. Take
the field of satisfaction through avoiding greediness. Remove the great
greediness through preferring satisfaction (to it). Bring the sweetness
of asceticism through the shortness of hope. Sever the means of
greediness through the coolness of despair. Close up the way of conceit
through knowing the soul. Get to the rest of the soul through soundness
of the authorization. Seek the rest of the body through giving rest to
the soul. Come to the rest of the soul through making few mistakes. Seek
the mercy of the heart through praising (Allah) very much in private.
Bring the light of the soul through the continuity of sadness. Remain
wary of Iblis through the truthful fear (of Allah). Beware of the false
hope, for it throws into the truthful fear. Adorn yourself for Allah,
the Great and Almighty, through honesty in acts. Show love to him
through the quick change. Be careful of postponement, for it is a sea in
which the perished drown. Be cautious of heedlessness, for the cruelty
of the heart is in it. Remain wary of slowness in what you have no
excuse, for the regretful resort to it (the excuse). Recall the past
sins through the intense regret and asking (Allah's) forgiveness very
much. Seek Allah's mercy and forgiveness through the good repetition (of
the past sins). Seek the help (of Allah) against the good repetition
through the sincere supplication and whispered prayer in the darkness.
Reach the great gratefulness through regarding the little livelihood as
much and regarding obedience as little. Bring the increase of blessings
through the great gratefulness. Make use of the great gratefulness
through fearing the vanishing of blessings. Seek the continuity of glory
through

deadening greediness. Push away the abasement of greediness through the
glory of despair. Bring the honor of despair through aspiration. Supply
yourself with (provisions) from this world through the shortness of
hope. Hasten to seize the purpose during the possibility of the
opportunity. There is no possibility like the past days with the
soundness of the bodies. Be careful not to trust the dishonest, for evil
has violence as the violence of food.

“Know that there is no knowledge like seeking safety, no safety like the
safety of the heart, no reason like opposing the desire, no fear like
the protective fear, no hope like the helping hope, no poverty like the
poverty of the heart, no riches like the riches of the soul, no power
like the victory over caprice, no light like the light of certitude, no
certitude like your belittling the world, no knowledge like your
knowledge of yourself, no blessing like health, no health like the
assistance of success, no honor like aspiration, no asceticism like the
shortness of hope, no desire like the competition for the ranks, no
justice like equity, no aggression like injustice, no injustice like
following caprice, no obedience like performing the obligations, no fear
like sadness, no disaster like the lack of reason, no lack of reason
like the littleness of certitude, no littleness of certitude like the
loss of fear (of Allah), no loss of fear like the littleness of sadness
for the loss of fear, no disaster like your disdaining the sin and your
satisfaction with the condition in which you are, no virtue like jihad,
no jihad like striving against caprice, no power like restraining anger,
no offense is like the love of eternity, and no abasement like the
abasement of greediness. Beware of negligence during the possibility of
the opportunity, for it is the field that brings about loss to its
people.”[^24]

These wonderful commandments full of valuable maxims are proofs for the
Imamate of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him. They have
illuminated a great part of his talents and genius. If he had nothing
except these commandments, they would be sufficient evidence for his
greatness and his limitless scientific abilities. For the Imam
considered carefully the depth of the soul, understood it thoroughly,
and analyzed its dimensions. Thus, he knew the psychological diseases
and catastrophes that afflict man. Indeed man has been afflicted by
ignorance, conceit, haughtiness, greediness, avarice, long hope, and the
like. Surely, all these diseases urges man to sink into offenses and
sins. So, he deviates from the right path and straight behavior. The
Imam, peace be on him, studied these diseases and prescribed decisive
remedies for them. If man puts into effect these commandments, he will
be ideal and educated. Moreover, he will protect his soul and cling to
his Creator to Whom he will return. Were it not for lengthiness, we
would explain these commandments in detail and indicate the maxims and
secrets in them.

His Commandments to a Moslem
----------------------------

A Moslem came to Imam al-Baqir. The Moslem asked the Imam to give him
some commandments to follow. So, the Imam, peace be on him, advised him,
saying: “Prepare your necessary things, offer your provisions, and be a
custodian over your soul.”[^25]

Surely, the Imam led the Moslem to what approached him to Allah and
secured safety for him in the immortal abode. If man prepares his
necessary things, he will secure his religion and the hereafter.

His Commandments to one of his Companions
-----------------------------------------

One of the companions of the Imam, peace be on him, wanted to travel.
So, the Imam, peace be on him, supplied him with these valuable
commandments. He said to him:

“Do not walk bare-footed. Do not dismount from your horse at night to
relieve nature unless your feet are in the sandals. Do not urinate into
a crack. Do not taste or smell a plant unless you know what it is. Do
not drink out of a water skin unless you know what it is in it. Be
careful of the one whom you know. Do not accompany the one whom you do
not know.”[^26]

The Imam, peace be on him, advised his companion to follow health
methods and moral lessons that secured for him health and safety.

As for the Imam's commandments concerning health and prevention from
diseases, they are as follows:

1. The Imam advised the Moslem not to walk bare-footed. For walking
without sandals makes man liable to germs that may enter his body
through the pores of his feet, such as the germs that bring about
Bilharzia.

2. He advised him not to dismount his horse and walk bare-footed at
night to relieve nature. For he might be liable to the stings and
bitings of the creatures that had hidden them selves in the earth. So,
they would come and sting or bite him while he did not know.

3. He advised him not to urinate into a crack. For some deadly animals
might hide themselves in the crack. Thus, they would come out and kill
him.

4. He advised him not to eat any plant in the desert. For some plants
might be poisonous. So, if he had eaten them, they would have poisoned
him or made him ill.

5. He advised him not to drink out of the water skin unless he knew what
was in it. For it might have some bad drink. So, if he had drunk it, it
would have killed him or made him sick.

As for the moral lessons, they are as follows:

1. He advised him to be careful of the unknown people. He advised him
not to reveal his secrets for them. He advised him to accompany them
well out of fear of them. Traveling usually discovers the true nature of
a person and reveals his hidden secrets. Many friends travel together.
They love each other. When they come back, they curse each other. So,
during traveling, the righteous person must remain wary of those whom he
knows and those whom he does not know.

2. He advised him not to travel with those whom he did not know. For
such a journey might cause many difficulties for him or it might cause
his death. Many times, that befell travelers who traveled with those
whom they did not know.


