His Preaching
=============

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, preached to his companions
as the prophets preached to their communities. He warned them from the
deception and delusions of the world. He enlightened them on the attack
of time and the disasters of days. He summoned them to think deeply
about what they would come to when they would leave the world for the
dark graves and the lonely narrow spaces within the graves, where
nothing would avail them except their good deeds. The following are some
of his preaching:

1. He, peace be on him, said: “O People, you are targets in this world.
Deaths compete with each other for you. No one of you receives a new day
of his lifetime but through ending another day of his appointed time.
Which meal has no lump (in the throat)? Which drink has no lump (in the
throat)? Set right what you will go to with what you will depart from.
As for today, it is booty. As for tomorrow, you do not know to whom it
belongs. The people of the world are traveling. They will untie their
baggage in (a place) other than it. Origins have left us. We are their
branches. So, what is the survival of the branch after its origin?

“Where are those whose lifetimes were longer than yours, and whose
desires were farther than yours? O Son of Adam, what you cannot repel,
has come to you. What does not come back, has left you. So, do not
number the livelihood that goes away as livelihood. You have nothing of
it except the pleasure that approaches you to your death and brings you
nearer to your appointed time. So, you look like the missing lover and
torn blackness. So, take care of your own soul. Leave other than it. Ask
Allah for help, and He will help you.”[^27]

2. Some of his Shi‘ites came to him. He preached to them and warned them
from the punishment of Allah. However, they paid no attention to his
preaching. That displeased him. So, he bowed his head for a while, and
then he raised it. He admonished them and preached to them again,
saying:

“Surely, if part of this speech of mine came into the heart of one of
you, he would be dead. Indeed you are ghosts without souls and flies
without a lamp. You look like big pieces of wood clad with garments, and
mutinous idols. Do you not take gold from stone? Do you not take light
from the brightest light? Do you not take pearls from the sea? Take the
good word from him who says it even if he does not put it into effect.
That is because Allah says: ‘Those who listen to the word, then follow
the best of it; those are they whom Allah has guided.'[^28]

“O Conceited one, woe unto you! Would you not praise Him Whom you gives
something perishable and He gives you something remaining? (Give) one
perishable dirham for ten dirhams to a hundred fold from the
All-Generous (Allah). Allah has given you a reward from Him. It is He
Who feeds you, waters you, clothes you, heals you, suffices you, and
protects you from those who frighten you. Who protects you by day and
night, fulfills your urgent need, and tests you according to reason? It
seems that you have forgotten the nights of your aches and fear. You
asked Him, and He responded to you. So, He is worthy of gratefulness for
His favor. However, you have forgotten Him concerning him whom He has
mentioned. Woe

unto you! You are a thief from among the thieves of sins. You hasten to
desires and commit sins. You do that through your ignorance. It seems
that your not under the oversight of Allah. Or it seems that Allah does
not watch you.

“O Seeker of the garden, how long your sleep is! How weak your walking
is! How weak your intention is! By Allah, you are invoked and wanted. O
You who escape from the Fire, how quick your walking to it! How fast you
are in earning that which will throw you into it!

“Look at those lines of graves by the yards of the houses. They (the
dead) are near in their lines and their graves. However, they are far in
their meeting. They lived long, and then they were ruined. They
associated (with people), and then they were forced to dwell deserted
places. They were tranquil, and then they were disturbed. They were
hopeless, and then they passed away. Therefore, no one is near and far,
far and near, living and ruined, sociable and lonely, tranquil and
disturbed, inhabitant and departed, except the people of the graves.

“O Son of the three days, (I mean) your day when you were born. Your day
when you will come down into your grave. And your day when you will come
out (of your grave to meet) your Lord. How important this day will be! O
Possessors of the admirable appearance and of thirst-quenching and
kneeling camels, why do I see your bodies sound and your hearts ruined?
By Allah, if you saw what you would meet and what you would come to, you
would say: ‘Would that we were sent back, and we would not reject the
communications of our Lord and we would be of the believers.'[^29]
Allah, the Great and Almighty, said: ‘And if they were sent back, they
would certainly go back to that which they are forbidden, and most
surely they are liars.'[^30] ”[^31]

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, blamed these people when they turned
away from his preaching and directions. He wanted to set right their
behavior. He wanted them to follow righteousness to gain good here and
in the hereafter. He gave them these effective preaching to make them
obey Allah. For Allah is able to do good for them and to deprive them of
that.

He preached to them with these lessons to which souls submit, and of
which hearts are afraid.

3. Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, preached to one of his companions. He
informed him of the reality of this life. He, peace be on him, said to
him: “Regard the world as a house where you live, and then you leave the
house. Or regard (it) as perfection you obtain in your sleep. When you
wake, you find nothing of it.”[^32]

Indeed if man thinks about the world through this correct opinion, he
will be free from conceit, selfishness, greediness, and other
psychological diseases that deviate him from the right path.

4. Among his preaching is this: “If the eye is bathed in tears, Allah
will protect its owner from the Fire. If the tear flows down the cheek,
neither miserliness nor abasement will befall its owner. There is a
punishment for everything except the tear. For Allah, the Most High,
forgives the seas of sins through it.”[^33]

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, summoned Moslems to weep out of fear of
Allah. Weeping is among the signs of faith. It shows the relationship
between the servant and his Lord and Creator.

5. Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, said: “Man should mention death very
much. If he mentions death very much, he will refrain from the
world.”[^34]

Surely, if man mentions death, he will renounce the world and refrains
from its vanities and pleasures.

6. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, was asked about the most
ascetic of all the people. So, he, peace be on him, replied: “It is he
who pays no attention to the world.”Then he was asked: “Who is the most
hopeless of all the people?”“It is he who sells the remaining (life) for
the transitory (life),”he replied. Then he was asked: “Who is the most
important of all the people?” “It is he who thinks that the world is not
important,”he answered.[^35]

7. He, peace be on him, preached to his companions, saying: “Allah, the
Exalted, says: ‘O Son of Adam, I have done you three favors: I have
concealed what your family does not know. For, if they knew it, they
would not take care of you. I have given to you generously. Now, I ask
you for a loan, but you have offered no good. I have had mercy on you in
the third one, but you have offered no good.’”[^36]

These are some examples of the Imam's valuable preaching. He, peace be
on him, reported them to cure and educate souls. This educational
phenomenon is among the most prominent values in the teachings of the
Imams of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.

The Virtue of Reason
--------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, talked about the virtue of reason. He
denoted that it was the greatest of all things which Allah, the Exalted,
created. He, peace be on him, said:

“When Allah created reason, He tested it. Then He ordered it to come
forward and it came forward. Then He ordered it to go back and it went
back. Then Allah said: ‘I swear by My power and majesty that no creation
of Mine is dearer to Me than you are, and I have made you perfect in
those whom I love. Lo! To you are My orders and prohibitions. And for
you are My rewards and retributions reserved.'”[^37]

Surely, through reason, the value of man becomes high. Were it not for
reason, there would be no difference between man and the animal. Reason
is among the fundamental conditions necessary for performing the
religious duties, as the jurists say.

Cleverness
----------

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, praised cleverness. He regarded it as
the only source of man's happiness and righteousness. He, peace be on
him, said: “The goodness of all coexistence and living together is a
full measure. Two thirds of the measure are cleverness. And one third of
it is heedlessness. Nothing has a portion of good and righteousness
except cleverness. That is because man feigns inattention to the things
which he realizes and knows.”[^38]

How wonderful this maxim is! A religious scholar commented on it,
saying: “Indeed, it has gathered together all the righteousness of the
affairs of the world.”

Contemplation
-------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, summoned Moslems to think things over.
He, peace be on him, said: “Through thinking (things) over, the fruitful
opinion is concluded.”[^39]

This word is among the wonderful maxims. Man can come to a correct
genuine opinion through considering things carefully. He can conclude
scientific facts and inventions through contemplating things. It is
impossible for him to come to that without contemplation.

Noble Manners
-------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, took care of spreading high moral
standards among people. For they are necessary for building a Moslem
society. Tradition books are full of his wise words. The following are
some of them:

### 1. Kindness

###

As for kindness to people, it plays an important role in strengthening
social ties and spreading love and friendship among people. Islam has
urged Moslems to cling to kindness to people. Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, said: “Continuous kindness is the best
means with me.”[^40]

The most lovable things with the Imam, peace be on him, was continuing
kindness to people, for he wanted to plant love and affection in their
hearts through it.

### 2. Fairness

###

In many of his traditions, Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, urged
Moslems to treat people with fairness. Among what he said is the
following:

A. He, peace be on him, said: “Indeed, Allah singles out people from
among His creatures for fairness. He makes them love fairness. He makes
them love fair acts. Then He orders the seekers of fairness to go to
them. Then He makes it easy for them to do fairness, as He makes it easy
for rain (to come down) to the arid land to enliven it and its people.
Allah singles out people from among His creatures to be enemies of
fairness. He makes them hate fairness. And He makes them hate fair acts.
He prevents the seekers of fairness from going to them, as He prevents
rain from (coming down) to the arid land to ruin it and its people. And
what Allah forgives is more (than this).”[^41]

B. He, peace be on him, said: “Fair acts prevent evil deaths (from
happening). Every fair act is alms. The people of fairness here are the
people of fairness in the hereafter. The people of the abominable acts
here are the people of the abominable acts in the hereafter. The people
of the fair acts will be the first to enter the garden. The people of
the abominable acts will be the first to enter the Fire.”[^42]

### 3. Kindness should be Equivalent to Fairness

###

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, ordered his companions to repay
fairness with much more kindness. He, peace be on him, said: “Whoever

does a favor like that which is done for him returns like for like.
Whoever doubles the favor is grateful. Whoever thanks (people for their
favors) is generous. He who knows that what he does is for his own
interest should not find people slow in their gratefulness (for him),
nor should he ask them for more love (for him). So, do not ask other
than you to thank you for what you do for your own interest, and through
which you protect your honor. Know that the one who asks you for a need
does not honor himself when he asks you (for a need). So, honor yourself
through fulfilling his need.”[^43]

When the Imam, peace be on him, had ordered his companions to return
like for like, he summoned them to do kindness for kindness. He ordered
them not to ask people for a reward. For they did that for their own
interests and honor.

Rules of Conduct
----------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, urged his companions to
treat people according to the rules of social conduct. Among these rules
are the following:

### 1. Cheerfulness

###

He, peace be on him, asked his companions to meet people with
cheerfulness and good words. He, peace be on him, said: “Good words and
cheerfulness lead to love and nearness to Allah. Bad words and frowning
lead to hate and remoteness from Allah.”[^44]

### 2. Treating people kindly

###

He, peace be on him, urged his companions to treat people kindly. He,
peace be on him, said: “Say to people the best (words) which you want
them to say to you. For Allah hates the one who curses and abuses and
defames the believers. He detests the one who uses an obscene language
and insists on begging. He loves the one who is modest, clement,
chaste.”[^45]

Moslem’s Rights
---------------

He, peace be on him, denoted the rights which Islam legislated for the
Moslem towards his Moslem brother. He, peace be on him, said: “Love your
Moslem brother. Love for him what you love for yourself. Hate for him
what you hate for yourself. When you are in need of (a certain thing),
then ask him for that. When he asks you for (a certain need), then give
(it) to him. If you spare no good for him, he will spare no good for
you. If you help him, he will help you. If he is absent, then keep him
during his absence. If he is present, then visit him, and respect him.
For he is from you, and you are from him. If he admonishes you, then do
not leave him till his hate comes to an end. If good befalls him, then
thank Allah for that. If a tribulation afflicts him, then help
him.”[^46]

If Moslems put into effect these excellent teachings, they will be the
strongest of all the peoples of the world, and nations will not invade
them, enslave them, and plunder their wealth. However, they have
deviated from these true teachings, so they have become weak humble
parties. “Each party is happy with that which it has.”

Fulfilling the Moslem’s Need
----------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, summoned the Moslems to fulfill the
needs of their Moslem brothers. He warned them from leaving them. He,
peace be on him, said: “If the servant refrains from helping his Moslem
brother and does not strive to fulfill his need, he will be afflicted by
the need causing a sin not a reward. If the servants refrains from
spending on that which pleases Allah, then he will be afflicted by
spending a hundred fold on that which displeases Allah.”[^47]

Relations with Womb Relatives
-----------------------------

Islam takes care of the relations with womb relatives. It summons
Moslems to cling to them, for they strengthen the family and lead the
community to fruitful results. Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, urged
the Moslems to cleave to them. He, peace be on him, said: “Relations
with blood relatives increase acts, develop properties, repel the
tribulation, make easy the reckoning, and postpone the a fixed term (of
death).”[^48]

Alms
----

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, underlined alms. He mentioned the
advantages which the one who gives alms obtains. He mentioned that
before his companions. He, peace be on him, said: “Shall I tell you
about the thing that drives away the ruler and the Satan from you?”

“Yes, tell us to do it,”replied Abu Hamza.

He, peace be on him, said: “Give alms early in the morning. For it
blackens the Satan's face and breaks the greediness of the oppressive
ruler on that days of

yours. Love each other for Allah. Help each other with the good deeds.
For such deeds put end to the Satan and the oppressive ruler. Insist on
asking Allah for forgiveness, for such insistence erases sins.”[^49]

Pity for the Orphan
-------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, urged the Moslems to feel
pity for the orphan and to have affection for the weak. He, peace be on
him, said: “Whoever has four (qualities), Allah will build a house for
him in the garden. The one who shelters the orphan, has mercy on the
weak, feel compassion for his parents, and treats his slave
gently.”[^50]

Good Qualities
--------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, talked about the good qualities that
draw the servant nearer to Allah and make him far from His wrath and
punishment. He, peace be on him, said: “Whoever has four (qualities),
his Islam is perfect, is helped with his faith, his sins are erased, and
meets Allah, the Great and Almighty, while He is pleased with him. If he
has sins from his head to his feet, Allah forgives him his sins. They
are: Loyalty to Allah, the truthfulness of the tongue with the people,
shame of the ugly (things) with Allah and people, and good manners
towards the family and people. The believer who has four (qualities),
Allah, the Exalted, will make him live in the rooms on the rooms in the
most high gardens. It is he who shelters the orphan, has mercy on him,
and is like the father for him. It is he who has mercy on the weak,
helps them, and suffices them. It is he who

spends on his parents, treats them gently, and pleases them. And it is
he who helps and suffices his slave.”[^51]

The Imam, peace be on him, ordered man to do all things that drew him
nearer to his Lord. He guided him to the good deeds which Allah loved,
for which He rewarded him very much, and for which He did him many
favors.

Silence
-------

The Imam, peace be on him, summoned the Moslems to cling to silence. He
ordered them to refrain from saying useless words. He, peace be on him,
said: “Indeed, this tongue is the key of all good and evil. So, the
believer must seal his tongue as he seals his gold and silver. For
Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said: ‘May Allah
have mercy of the believer who restrains his tongue from all evil. For
that is alms from him for himself. No one is safe from sins unless he
restrains his tongue.'”[^52]

Bad Qualities and Deeds
-----------------------

The Imam, peace be on him, warned the Moslems from having bad qualities
and abominable deeds. The following are some of the traditions reported
on his authority:

1. He, peace be on him, said: “If some haughtiness enters the person's
heart, some of his reason decreases.”[^53]

He, peace be on him, said: “The haughty one quarrels with Allah about
His gown.”[^54]

Indeed, haughtiness results from ignorance and the decrease of reason.
If man knows that he will be a mass of mean earth after death, he shows
no haughtiness towards Allah's creatures.

2. The Imam, peace be on him, dispraised the hypocrite person, who is
double-faced and double-tongued. He, peace be on him, said: “Bad is the
servant who is double-faced and double-tongued. He flatters his brother
when he is present. He backbites him when he is absent. He envies him
brother when he is given. He betrays him when he is afflicted by a
tribulation.”[^55] These qualities denotes that such a person has an
evil soul, that he has no morals, and that he has no faith in his Lord.

3. The Imam, peace be on him, warned the Moslems from having the
following qualities. He, peace be on him, said: “Bad is captivity after
victory, depression after the misfortune, rudeness with the poor,
cruelty with the neighbor, miserliness towards the relative,
disagreement with the friend, misbehavior towards the family, impudence
through the power, greediness during poverty, backbiting the friend,
telling lies, the slander, perfidy from the ruler, the rage from the
generous. Whoever asks more than his right is worth of deprivation.
Setting right the one who does not know dignity is through disgracing
him. The careful one rises (in rank). The cautious one finds
(good).”[^56]

Whoever refrains from these qualities is endowed with high moral
standards and is among the unique people.

4. The Imam, peace be on him, prevented the Moslems from practicing the
following qualities. He, peace be on him, said: “The owner of three
traits will not die till he sees their evil results: oppression, cutting
off ties of relations, and binding oath through which he fights with
Allah. Indeed the

quickest obedience in reward is the relations with womb relatives.
Perhaps some people are sinners. However, they visit each other. So,
their properties increase and they become rich. Binding oath and cutting
off ties of relations leave houses empty of their people.”[^57]

5. The Imam, peace be on him, hated the people who were endowed with the
following traits. He, peace be on him, said: “Four (traits) lead to the
quickest punishment: The person whom you treat with kindness but he
mistreats you. The person who you do not oppress but oppresses you. The
person to whom you are loyal but he betrays you. The person who visits
his relations but they end their relationship with him.”[^58]

6. The Imam, peace be on him, prevented the Moslems from drinking wine.
For it is among the mortal sins. He, peace be on him, said: “Indeed the
one who is alcoholic is like the one who worships the idol. Wine makes
him shake, and destroys his manhood. It makes him violate the
prohibitions such as shedding blood and committing fornication.”[^59]

Surely, wine is the source of all sins and offenses. It is among the
social catastrophes that defame man and leads him to commit all the
prohibitions. As for its bodily damages, we have talked about them in
one of our books.

7. The Imam, peace be on him, dispraised the person who used obscene
language. He, peace be on him, said: “Surely, Allah detests the one who
uses obscene language.”[^60]

Backbiting and Slander
----------------------

The Imam, peace be on him, made a distinction between backbiting and
slander. He, peace be on him, said: “It is an act of backbiting to say
concerning your brother what Allah conceals for him. As for the manifest
traits of him such as fury and hastiness, there is no harm in mentioning
them. As for slander, it is that you say concerning your brother what he
has not.”[^61]

Anger and its Remedy
--------------------

The Imam, peace be on him, warned the Moslems from anger. He provided a
remedy for it. He, peace be on him, said : “Indeed this anger is an
ember from Satan. The ember is burnt in the heart of the son of Adam (i.
e., man). When one of you becomes angry, his eyes become red and his
jugular veins become swollen. Thus, Satan enters him. When he becomes
angry, he must sit on the ground. With that he removes the cunning of
Satan.”[^62]

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, underlined the affair of
anger. He warned the Moslems of its final results. Imam al-Sadiq, peace
be on him, said: “My father said: 'There is nothing more intense than
anger. Perhaps the person becomes angry. So, he kills the soul which
Allah has forbidden and defames the chaste woman.”[^63]

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, said: “The person sometimes becomes
angry and continues his anger till he enters the Fire.”[^64]

Vanity
------

The Imam, peace be on him, said: “I wonder at the one who is vain and
boastful. He was created from a sperm. Then he becomes carrion. Between
this and that, he does not know what will be done for him.”

Al-Baqir’s Supplications
========================

There is wonderful heritage in the supplications of the Imams of the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. There are
treasures of valuable maxims and morals in them. These supplications
represent the absolute inclination of the Imams, peace be on them, to
Allah. They represent their relation with Him and their devotion to him.
They also represent the spiritual qualities which the Imams had such as
asceticism, pity, and cleaving to religion. Moreover, they are rich in
ethics, philosophy, and theology. Many supplications were reported on
the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him. The
following are some of them:

1. Abu Hamza al-Thumali reported this supplication on the authority of
Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him. He called it al-Jami‘ (the
conclusive). This supplication is as follows: “In the name of Allah, the
Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. I bear witness that there is no god
apart from Allah, who is unique and without partners. I also bear
witness that Mohammed is His servant and His Apostle. I have believed in
Allah, all His Apostles, and all what Allah revealed to His Apostles.
Allah's promise is true. Meeting Him is true. Allah is truthful. The
Apostles conveyed (their messages). Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of
the worlds. Glory belongs to Allah whenever a thing glorifies Allah, and
as He wants (His creatures) to glorify Him. Praise belongs to Allah
whenever a thing praises Allah, as He wants (His creatures) to praise
Him. There is no god but Allah whenever a thing says: there is no god
but Allah, as He wants (His creatures) to say: there is no god but
Allah. Allah is Great whenever a thing says: Allah is Great, and as He
wants (His creatures) to say: Allah is Great.

“O Allah, I ask You (to give me) the keys of good, its ends, its laws,
its precedents, its advantages, its blessings, what its knowledge has
exceeded me, and what my memorization falls short of counting it. O
Allah make clear for me the means of its knowledge. Open for me its
doors. Bestow upon me the blessings of Your mercy. Grant me protection
from the Cursed Satan, for he wants to deviate me from Your religion.
Purify my heart from doubts. Do not busy my heart with my world. (Do
not) distract (my heart) from the later reward of the hereafter through
my sooner livelihood. Make my heart busy with memorizing the thing whose
ignorance You do not accept from me. Make my tongue obedient to all
good. Purify my heart from hypocrisy. Do not make it flow in my joints.
Make my deeds sincere to you.

“O Allah, I seek refuge with You from evil, all outward and inward
ill-deeds, their heedlessness, and all what the stubborn ruler desires
for me. You know that and you are able to keep it away from me.

“O Allah, I seek refuge with You from the misfortunes of the jinn and
men. (I seek refuge with You) from their storms, their followers, their
calamities, their tricks, seeing the sinners from among the jinn and
men, and deviating from my religion so my life in the hereafter is
corrupt. That will be a damage from them against me in my daily bread.
Or intentional

tribulation from them hits me. Thus, I have no ability for the
tribulation nor have I patience to bear it. So, My Lord, do not test me
with its sufferings. For that will prevent me from praising You and
divert me from worshipping You. You are the Preserver, the Protector,
the repeller, and the Guarder from that all.

“O Allah, I ask You (to grant me) ease in my livelihood as long as You
keep me alive in a livelihood through which I can obey You, through
which I can reach Your pleasure, and through which I will get to the
everlasting life tomorrow. Do not provide me with the means of
subsistence that makes me oppressive nor do You test me with poverty
through which I become miserable to press me. Give me an abundant share
in my life in the hereafter, and ample easy daily-bread in my life in
this world. Do not make the world a prison against me. Do not make me
sad when I leave it. Take me out of its temptations and be pleased with
me. Make my deeds acceptable and my efforts laudable in it.

“O Allah, whoever desires evil for me-desire (it) for him! And whoever
deceives me-deceive him. Turn away from me the worries of those who
drive their worries in me. Plan against those who plan against me.
Indeed, You are the best of planners. Tear out for me the eyes of the
unbelievers, the oppressors, and the envious tyrants.

“O Allah, send down to me from you tranquillity and sobriety. Clothe me
Your well-fortified shield. Protect me with Your preventive shelter.
Make me (live) through Your useful health. Accept as true my words and
deeds. Bless for me my children, my family, my property. Forgive me what
I have brought forward, what I have delayed, what I have neglected, what
I have (done) intentionally, what I have (done) slowly, and what I have
concealed, through Your mercy, O Most Merciful of all the
merciful.”[^65]

This supplication denotes the intense devotion of the Imam to Allah. He
relied on Him in all his affairs. He sought refuge in Him from the
temptations and deception of the world. For he was afraid that the world
would prevent him from remembering Allah, the Most High.

2. Al-Rabi‘ reported on the authority of ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abd al-Rahman,
on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, who said: “Shall I
teach you a supplication? We, the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
recite the supplication when a certain affair grieves us, and when we
are afraid of the evil of Satan.”

“Yes, may my father and mother be ransom for you,” replied Abd Allah.

“Say: O You Who were before all things! O You Who created all things! O
You Who will remain after all things! Bless Mohammed and his Household.
Then mention your need....”[^66]

Other traditions were reported on the authority of the Imam. They show
his high soul, and his strong relationship with his Creator.

Imam al-Baqir urged Moslems to Supplication.
--------------------------------------------

The Imam, peace be on him, urged Moslems to supplicate to Allah. He,
peace be on him, said: “Surely, Allah hates that people insist on each
other for their request. However, He, Exalted be His name, loves that
for Himself. He wants them to ask Him for what He has (with
insistence).”[^67]

Wonderful Maxims
----------------

Short wonderful maxims were reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him. They are full of noble morals and are
useful. The following maxims are some of them.

1. He, peace be on him, said: “If you can deal with anyone and do him a
favor, do that.”

2. He, peace be on him, said: “Flatter the hypocrite with your tongue.
Make your love sincere to the believer. When a Jew associates with you,
associate well with him.”

3. He, peace be on him, said: “Nothing is mixed with a thing better than
(mixing) clemency with knowledge.”

4. He, peace be on him, said: “Assume the truth. Leave that which does
not concern you. Avoid your enemy. Be careful of your friends except the
trusty one who fears Allah. Do not make friends with the sinner. Do not
inform him of your secrets. Ask the advice of those who fear Allah.”

5. He, peace be on him, said: “The friendship of twenty years is
kinship.”

6. He, peace be on him, said: “The decree of Allah is good for the
believer.”

7. He, peace be on him, said: “He for whom Allah does not make a
preacher from his own self, the preaching of people do not avail him.”

8. He, peace be on him, said: “He whose outward (deeds) are heavier than
his inward (deeds), his scales are light.”

9. He, peace be on him, said: “How many a person meets a person and says
to him: may Allah ruin your enemy, and he has no enemy except Allah.”

10. He, peace be on him, said: “He who disobeys Allah does not recognize
Him.” Then the Imam composed:

Do you disobey the Lord and show your love (for Him)?

By your life, this is an innovation among deeds.

If your love was truthful, you would obey him.

Indeed the lover obeys him whom he loves.

11. He, peace be on him, said: “The need with the one who has recently
gotten property is like the dirham in the mouth of the snake. You need
him, and you are in danger.”

12. He, peace be on him, said: “Know the love in the heart of your
brother through what he has in your heart.”

13. He, peace be on him, said: “Faith is love and hatred.”

14. He, peace be on him, said: “Four (acts) are among the treasures of
kindness: Concealing the need, concealing the alms, concealing the pain,
and concealing, the misfortune.”

15. He, peace be on him, said: “He whose tongue is truthful, his acts
grow. He whose intention is good, his daily-bread increases. He whose
kindness to his family is good, Allah prolongs his life.”

16. He, peace be on him, said: “Whoever gets a brother in Allah in
addition to faith in Allah and faithfulness to his brotherhood seeking
Allah's pleasure gets a ray from Allah's light, safety from the
punishment of Allah, a pilgrimage (to Mecca) through which he will be
successful on the Day of Judgment, everlasting honor, and increasing
reputation. That is because the

believer is neither mawsool nor mafsool from Allah, the Great and
Almighty.”He was asked: “What is the meaning of mawsool and mafsool?”He,
peace be on him, replied: “Mawsool meaning the believer is not connected
to (Allah). Mafsool meaning the believer is not separated from (Allah).”

17. He, peace be on him, said: “It is sufficient cheat for the person is
that he sees from the people the vague affair of his own soul. Or he
finds faults with other than him through what he cannot leave. Or he
hurts his friend through that which does not concern him.”

18. He, peace be on him, said: “Humbleness is that you should be
satisfied with the humble sitting-place, that you should greet whomever
you meet, and that you should leave the dispute even if you are right.”

19. He, peace be on him, said: “The believer is the brother of the
believer. So, he should not abuse him nor should he deprive him (of his
rights) nor should he doubt him.”

20. He, peace be on him, said: “He to whom clumsiness is apportioned,
faith is veiled from him.”

21. He, peace be on him, said: “Indeed Allah has punishments in the
hearts, the bodies, the daily-bread, and the worship. However, the
cruelty of the heart is the most intense punishment.”

22. He, peace be on him, said: “On the Judgment Day, a caller will call:
‘Where are al-Sabirun (the patient)?' So, a group of people will rise.
Then a caller will call : ‘Where are al-Mutasabbirun?' Thus, a group of
people will rise.”He was asked: “Who are al-Sabirun and
al-Mutasabbirun?”He, peace be on him, replied: “Al-Sabirun are those who
are patient with performing the religious duties. Al-Mutasabbirun are
those who are patient with the prohibitions.”

23. He, peace be on him, said: “Allah says: ‘O Son of Adam, refrain from
what I have prohibited, so you are the most pious of all people.'”

24. He, peace be on him, said: “The best worship is the abstinence of
the private parts and the abdomen.”

25. He, peace be on him, said: “Modesty and faith are coupled with each
other. If one of them goes away, the other will follow it.”

26. He, peace be on him, said: “Allah gives this world to both the
righteous and the sinners. However, He gives this religion to His close
friends only.”

27. He, peace be on him, said: “Allah gives the world to those whom He
loves and those whom He detests. However, He gives religion to those
whom He loves only.”

28. He, peace be on him, said: “If the beggar knew what was in begging,
he would never beg anyone. If the begged one knew was in prevention, he
would never prevent anybody.

29. He, peace be on him, said: “Some blessed rich servants belong to
Allah. They associate with people. People live under their wing. Some
wicked servants belong to Allah. They do not associate with people.
People do not live under their protection. They are like
grass -hoppers.”

30. He, peace be on him, said: “Allah likes spreading greetings.”[^68]

31. He, peace be on him, said: “Everything has a catastrophe. The
catastrophe of knowledge is forgetfulness.”[^69]

32. He, peace be on him, said: “O Allah, help with the world through
riches, and with the hereafter through piety.”[^70]

33. He, peace be on him, said: “The person increases in opinion when he
gives sincere advice.”[^71]

34. He, peace be on him, said: “The weapon of the ignoble person is ugly
words.”[^72] A poet composed this wonderful maxim, saying:

Al-Baqir al-Murtada, the descendant of the Imam, peace be on him, was
truthful when he said: “Ugly words are the weapon of the ignoble.”[^73]

35. He, peace be on him, said: “Thunderbolt strikes the believer and the
unbelievers. However, it does not strike the person who praises
(Allah).”[^74]

36. He, peace be on him, said: “The best deeds are three: Praising Allah
in all conditions, treating people with justice, and giving the friend
money.”[^75]

37. He, peace be on him, said: “Regard the good deed as small. Do it
quickly, and conceal it.”[^76]

38. He, peace be on him, said: “In the Sunna (the Prophet's practices)
and the religion, it is not an act of truthfulness to turn away from the
generous.”[^77]

39. He, peace be on him, said: “How wonderful good deeds are after evil
deeds! How shameful evil deeds are after good deeds!”[^78]

40. He, peace be on him, said: “The person may earn money through four
(sources). They are unfaithful act, usury, treason, and theft. Such
money is not accepted in four (acts). They are zakat, alms, pilgrimage
(to Mecca), and omra.”[^79]

41. He, peace be on him, said: “Allah, the Great and Almighty, refuses
to accept the pilgrimage and omra performed through ill-gotten
gains.”[^80]

42. He, peace be on him, said: “He whose outward (deeds) are heavier
than his inward (deeds), his balance is light.”[^81]

43. He, peace be on him, said: “Lying destroys faith.”[^82]

44. He, peace be on him, said: “I had a companion. The companion
regarded the world as small. Thus, I regarded him as great.”[^83]

45. He, peace be on him, said to his companions: “Do you enter your
hands in the bags of your companions and take what you want?”“No,”they
replied. “You are not our companions as you say,”he, peace be on him,
explained.[^84]

46. He, peace be on him, said: “Kindness may make the father go to
extremes. This is the worst father. Negligence may make the child
disobey (his parents). Such a child is the worst.”[^85]

47. He, peace be on him, said: “Preach to your companions, and respect
them. Do not attack each other.”[^86]

48. He, peace be on him, said: “Sins make misfortunes strike the
servant.”[^87]

49. He, peace be on him, said: “Allah decreed that He would not take the
blessing He bestowed on the servant. However, when the servant commits a
sin, he is worthy of the adversity.”[^88]

50. He, peace be on him, said: “If there is no love in my heart for the
saints of Allah and no hatred for His enemies, nothing will avail me,
even if I fast throughout the day, pray throughout the night, and spend
all my money for Allah.”[^89]

51. Zarara asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him: “What is
the meaning of al-Hanafiya?”He, peace be on him, replied: “It is the
nature Allah has created in men. He has created it in them to make them
recognize Him.”[^90]

52. Imam Abu Ja‘far was asked: “Is there a thing better than gold?”He,
peace be on him, answered: “Yes, the one who gives it.”[^91]

53. He, peace be on him, said: “The tribulation of the people against us
is burdensome. When we ask them (to follow us), they do not respond to
us. When we leave them, they do not follow other than us.”[^92]

54. He, peace be on him, said: “The chasteness of the abdomen and
private parts is the best (quality) through which Allah is
worshipped.”[^93]

55. He, peace be on him, said: “Be patient towards misfortunes. Do not
transgress (Allah's) rights. Do not give the person a thing that harms
you more than it avails you.”[^94]

56. He, peace be on him, said: “Our followers obey Allah.”[^95]

57. He, peace be on him, said: “The friend may take care of you when you
are rich, and abandon you when you are poor. How bad such a friend
is!”[^96]

58. He, peace be on him, said: “Kindness to friends is the best help in
the world.”[^97]

59. He, peace be on him, said: “Whomever is given ethics and kindness is
given good and rest. Besides His state is good here and the hereafter.
Whomever is deprived of them, that will be a way to evil and
tribulations, except him whom Allah protects.”[^98]

60. He, peace be on him, said: “Allah (sometimes) makes a person
recognize the truth. So, the person can remain on the top of a mountain.
He can eat from the plants of the earth till death comes to him. Still,
he faces no problem.”[^99]

61. He, peace be on him, was asked: “The people of the garden will enter
the garden through their deeds. Will Allah release (some people) from
the Fire?”“Surely, Allah will release (some people) from the Fire,”he
replied.[^100]

62. He, peace be on him, said: “He who has no precautionary
dissimulation has no good.”[^101]

63. He, peace be on him, said: “If you want to know that you have good,
consider carefully your heart. Does your heart love obedience to Allah?
Does it detest the disobedience to Him? If it is so, you have good and
Allah loves you. Does it detest the obedience to Allah? Does it love the
disobedience to Him? If it is so, you have no good and Allah detests
you. The person is with his lover.”[^102]

64. He, peace be on him, said: “Among the steps of Satan are the oath
for divorce, the vow for sins, and the swearing by other than Allah, the
Exalted.”[^103]

65. He, peace be on him, said: “When the abdomen is full, (the person)
becomes tyrannical.”[^104]

66. He, peace be on him, said: “Allah detests the full abdomen.”[^105]

67. He, peace be on him, said: “Whoever seeks the world to be chaste
with the people, to maintain his family, and to help his neighbor, will
meet Allah, the Great and Almighty, and his face will be like the full
moon.”[^106]

68. He, peace be on him, said: “Our talk is difficult. It is difficult
(for people) to understand it. No one bears it except a close angel or a
prophet or a servant whose heart Allah has tested for faith.”[^107]

69. He, peace be on him, said: “I hate the person whose words are more
than his knowledge. I also hate the person whose knowledge is more than
his reason.”[^108]

With this we will end our talk about some of the Imam's wise words that
represent genuine creative thinking.

Did al-Baqir write poetry?

The references did not mention that Imam Abu Ja‘far al-Baqir, peace be
on him, wrote poetry. Rather they mentioned that he split open many
doors to knowledge, that he founded most of its rules, and that he was
given wisdom and sound judgments. However, Sayyid ‘Ali Sadr al-Madani
ascribed the following lines of poetry to him.

I wonder at the one who admires his form

while he had been a sperm before.

Tomorrow, after his good form, he will be dirty carrion in the grave.

In spite of his admiration and haughtiness,

He carries stool between his two sides.[^109]

It is no matter whether the Imam, peace be on him, wrote poetry or not.
Surely, he was the foremost eloquent person of the period. The large
group of his first-class eloquent wise words proves that.

Now I want to end the talk about the talents of Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace
be on him. It is an act of truthfulness to say that I have mentioned few
examples of his knowledge and sciences. I do not say that I have
encompassed them. It is difficult for me to do that. Thus, I have left
the door open for other researchers to discover the other bright
dimensions of his life. For it was a personal extension to his
outstanding grandfathers, who illumined the cultural life for people.

### Notes

###

[^1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol.3, p.[^73]:

[^2] Ibn Hisham, al-Sira al-Nabawiya, vol.2, pp.429-[^430]:

[^3] Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol.4, pp.109-[^110]:

[^4] Ibid, vol.2, p.[^386]:

[^5] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol.5, p.[^153]:

[^6] Ibn Abi al-Haddid, Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol.3, p.[^324]:

[^7] Waqq‘at Siffin, p.[^267]:

[^8] Ibid, pp.354-[^356]:

[^9] Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol.2, pp.212-[^213]:

[^10] Al-‘Aqida wa al-Shari‘a fi al-Islam, p.[^190]:

[^11] Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol.2, p.[^212]:

[^12] Ibid, pp.233-[^234]:

[^13] The historians know that Moslem was the first to stop at
al-Mukhtar’s house.

[^14] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol.5, pp.347-[^349]:

[^15] Ibid, pp.349-[^351]:

[^16] Ibid, pp.389-[^390]:

[^17] Hayat al-Imam al-Husayn, vol.3, p.[^129]:

[^18] Al-Fusul al-Muhimma, p.[^29]:

[^19] Al-Khisal, p.[^157]:

[^20] Al-Bayan wa al-Tabiyyin, vol.3, p.[^280]:

[^21] Abi ‘Ali al-Qali, al-Amali, vol.2, p.[^308]:

[^22] Tarikh Dimashq, vol.51, p.[^38]:

[^23] Koran, al-A‘raf, [^200]:

[^24] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, pp.284-[^286]:

[^25] Tarikh Dimashq, vol.51, p.[^38]:

[^26] Ibn Hamdun, Tadhkirat, p.[^27]:

[^27] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^299]:

[^28] Koran, al-Zumar, [^18]:

[^29] Koran, al-An‘am, [^27]:

[^30] Ibid,[^28]:

[^31] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, pp.291-[^292]:

[^32] Mirr’at al-Jinan, vol.1, p.[^149]:

[^33] Akhbar al-Duwal, p.[^11]:

[^34] Jami‘ al-Sa‘adat, vol.2, p.[^61]:

[^35] Al-Bayan wa al-Tabiyyin, vol.3, p.[^161]:

[^36] Al-Khisal, p.[^131]:

[^37] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^10]:

[^38] Al-Mubarrad, al-Kamil, vol.1, p.[^76]:

[^39] Jami‘ al-Sa‘adat, vol.1, p.[^165]:

[^40] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, pp.[^296]:

[^41] Ibid, p.[^295]:

[^42] Al-Saduq, al-Amali, p.[^225]:

[^43] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^300]:

[^44] Ibid, p.[^296]:

[^45] Ibid, p.[^300]:

[^46] Al-Saduq, al-Amali, p.[^288]:

[^47] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^292]:

[^48] Ibid, p.[^298]:

[^49] Ibid.

[^50] Al-Khisal, p.[^204]:

[^51] Al-Durr al-Nazim, p.[^191]:

[^52] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^298]:

[^53] Safwat al-Safwa, vol.2, p.[^61]:

[^54] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul.

[^55] Al-Saquq, al-Amali, p.[^30]:

[^56] Ibn Hamdun, Tadhkirat, p.[^60]:

[^57] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^294]:

[^58] Al-Khisal, p.[^210]:

[^59] Al-Bihar, vol.[^16]: p.771.

[^60] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^296]:

[^61] Ibid, p.[^298]:

[^62] Jami‘ al-Sa‘adat, vol.1, p.[^289]:

[^63] Ibid.

[^64] Ibid.

[^65] Muhajj al-Da‘awat, pp.213-[^215]:

[^66] Ibid, p.[^215]:

[^67] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul.

[^68] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, pp.292-[^300]:

[^69] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol.9, p.[^310]:

[^70] Al-Bayan wa al-Tabiyyin, vol.3, p[^222]:

[^71] Ibn Qutayba, ‘Yyun al-Akhbar, vol.1, p.[^300]:

[^72] Hulyat al-Auliya’, vol.3, p.[^300]:

[^73] Al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf, p.[^53]:

[^74] Hulyat al-Auliya’, vol.3, p.[^181]:

[^75] Ibid, p.[^183]:

[^76] Al-Akhbar al-Muwaffaqiyat, p.[^400]:

[^77] Al-Marzbani, al-Mardda, 2/B.

[^78] Al-Saduq, al-Amali, p.[^224]:

[^79] Ibid, p.[^296]:

[^80] Ibid.

[^81] Ibid.

[^82] Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, p.[^339]:

[^83] Mirr’at al-Jinan, vol.1, p.[^248]:

[^84] Safwat al-Safwa, vol.2, p.[^63]:

[^85] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol.2, p.[^53]:

[^86] Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, p.[^173]:

[^87] Ibid, p.[^269]:

[^88] Ibid, p.[^273]:

[^89] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol.3, p.[^61]:

[^90] Al-Bihar, vol.12, p.[^87]:

[^91] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol.3, p.[^61]:

[^92] A‘lam al-Wara, p.[^27]:

[^93] Jami‘ al-Sa‘adat, vol.2, p.[^16]:

[^94] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol.3, p.[^61]:

[^95] Al-Shiblanji, Nur al-Absar, p.[^131]:

[^96] Ibid.

[^97] Is‘af al-Raghibin, p.[^316]:

[^98] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol.9, p.[^311]:

[^99] Ahmed bin Fahd al-Hilli, al-Tahsin, p.[^225]:

[^100] Al-Durr al-Nazim, p.[^191]:

[^101] ‘Ilal al-Sharai‘, p.[^51]:

[^102] Ibid, p.[^117]:

[^103] Majjma‘ al-Bayan, vol.1, p.[^252]:

[^104] Jami‘ al-Sa‘adat, vol.2, p.[^5]:

[^105] Ibid.

[^106] Ibid, p.[^21]:

[^107] A‘lam al-Wara.

[^108] Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol.7, p.[^92]:

[^109] Anwar al-Rabi‘, vol.6, p.[^300]:
