CHAPTER VII: KUTHAYR ‘AZZAH AND AL-KUMAYT.
==========================================

The two famous poets, Kuthayr ‘Azzah and al-Kumayt al-Asadi, had close
relationships with Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him. For they
believed in his Imamate. They regarded obedience to him as obligatory.
Thus, they devoted themselves to him. So, they were famous for that. We
will mention some of their affairs and their close relationship with the
Imam, peace be on him.

Kuthayr ‘Azzah
--------------

As for Kuthayr ‘Azzah, he was Abu Hamzah al-Khuzai al-Madani. He was
among the Arab lovers. He fell in love with ‘Azzah, daughter of Jamïl.
He had many stories with her. The biographers have mentioned them. Ibn
Ishaq said: “Kuthayr was the best Moslem poet in poetic talents.”[^1]

### His Obedience to the Members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.

###

Kuthayr was very obedient to the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them. He devoted his life to them. He did not hide his
obedience to them from the Umayyads. ‘Abd al-Malik b. Marwan asked him
to swear by Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him,
to tell him about the one who was more than him in love. So, Kuthayr
replied: “If you ask me to swear by you, I will tell you.”Marwan did
that. So, Kuthayr told him about the love of some lovers.[^2]

### His Obedience to al-Baqir

###

Kuthayr loved Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, very much. He
obeyed him and believed in his Imamate. The historians said: “A man saw
Kuthayr riding (his horse). Meanwhile the man saw Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace
be on him, waking. So, he blamed Kuthayr, saying: ‘Why are you riding
(your horse) and Abu Ja‘far is waking?'”

“He ordered me to do that. I prefer his obedience to his disobedience.
So, I have ridden (the horse),”[^3] replied Kuthayr.

This answer proves Kuthayr's good manners and perfect faith. For
obedience to the Imam was obligatory. Thus, he had no way to disobey
him.

### Kuthayr praised the Sons of Marwan

###

Kuthayr praised the sons of Marwan very much. Thus, they glorified and
honored him.[^4] He composed poems to praise them. The poems have been
mentioned in his Divan. However, he was not serious in praising them. He
did not believed in what he said. Rather, he praised them to get their
money and gifts. He mocked them. He likened them to snakes and
scorpions. The historians reported that he came to Imam Abu Ja‘far,
peace be on him. Thus, the Imam, peace be on him asked him: “Are you
from our followers? Why do you praise Marwan's household?”

Kuthayr answered: “I mock them. I liken them to snakes and scorpions.
Have you not heard my poem concerning ‘Abd al-‘Azïz b. Marwan.

Abd al-Malik understood that, so he said to his brother ‘Abd al-‘Azïz:
“He did not praise you. Rather, he likened you to snakes.”‘Abd al-‘Azïz
reported that to me. So I said to him: “By Allah, I will liken him to
the

snake. Then he will not deny that. Then I composed a poem concerning
him.”

When I read the poem before ‘Abd al-‘Azïz, he gave me many gifts. For he
did not understand what I said.[^5]

Accordingly, Kuthayr was not serious when he praised the sons of Marwan.
He did not believe in what he said. Rather, he mocked them. Moreover, he
deceived them to take money from them. For they took the money
illegally. Kuthayr had no way to take money except through this way.

### His Death

###

Kuthayr died in the year 105 A. H. He died on the same day when ‘Ukrima
died. (The people) prayed over them at one place. Then the people said:
“The most knowledgeable of people in jurisprudence and poetry has
died.”[^6] Then the people escorted the deceased to their final resting
place. Among them was Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him.

### Fabricated Narration

###

Some historians have mentioned a narration, but we think that the
narration is among the fabricated narrations. The historians reported
the narration on the authority of Yazïd b. ‘Urwa, who said : “The women
prevailed at the funeral. They wept over him and mentioned ‘Azzah during
their weeping. So, Mohammed b. ‘Ali (Abu Ja‘far) said: ‘Open the way for
me to go to the coffin.’ So, we pushed the women away from the coffin.
Abu Ja‘far hit the women with his sleeve. Then he said: ‘O girl friends
of Joseph, go away! Thus one of the women came to the Imam and said to
him: ‘O Son of the Apostle of Allah, you are right. We are the girl
friends of Joseph. We were better than you towards him. ' Abu Ja‘far
said to one of his retainers: ‘Keep her till we come back.' When they
had buried Kuthayr, he ordered the woman to be brought. He, peace be on
him said to her: ‘Were you who said that you were better than us?' 'Yes,
son of the Apostle of Allah, will you make me safe from your anger?'
asked the woman. ‘You are safe from my anger. So, explain that,' replied
the Imam. So, the woman explained: ‘O Son of the Apostle of Allah, we
summoned Joseph to pleasures such as food, drink, and enjoyment.
However, you, men, threw him into the well, sold him for low prices, and
imprisoned him in prison. Therefore, who are more merciful for him- you
or we?' The Imam admired the woman. Thus, he said to her: ‘What a
generous woman you are! You overcome all women. Have you a husband?' ‘I
have a man whose husband is I,' she replied. The woman went away. A man
from the people, who knew the woman, said: ‘This is Zaynab al-Ansariya,
the daughter of Mu‘ayqib.'”[^7]

### Criticisms

###

1. Why did the women gathered around Kuthayr's corpse? Why was it
difficult for the Imam to reach him? Why did he order the women to be
pushed away? This narration is incorrect. For women were not permitted
to take part in such ceremonies. Rather, she was ordered not to leave
her house.

2. The Imam was rude with the ladies who gathered around the corpse.
This makes the fabrication of this narration sure. That is because the
Imam,

peace be on him, was the ideal example for high manners and noble
morals. So, he was far above obscene words.

3. A conversation took place between the Imam and the Ansari lady. He
asked her whether she had a husband. This also makes us sure of the
fabrication of the narration. Is this appropriate for the Holiness of
the Imam. Accordingly, this narration is imaginary. With this we will
end our talk about the biography of Kuthayr ‘Azzah.[^8]

Al-Kumayt Al-Asadi
------------------

Al-Farazdaq said: “Al-Kumayt was the poet of the first and the
last.”[^9] ‘Ukrima al-Dabbi said: “Were it not for his poetry, there
would be no translator for the language nor would there be a tongue for
explanation.”[^10]

He was the foremost thinker and writer of the period. He played an
important role in developing Arab culture and Islamic scientific
movement. The following are some bright sides of his life.

### His Birth and his Early Life

###

Al-Kumayt was born in the year 60 A. H. It was the year when the Moslem
community was bereaved of Imam Husayn, the Lord of martyrs, peace be on
him.[^11] So, that tragedy impressed him. It reacted on his feelings and
sentiments. That appeared in his poetry through which elegized Imam
al-Husayn, peace be on him.

As for his early life, it was in Kufa, the capital of the Shi‘ites, and
the place of revolts against the Umayyads. He was brought up on the love
for the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. So, the
love for them was among his elements.

### His Talents

###

Al-Kumayt was among the unique in history. He was among the prominent
figure in the Arab nation. He was endowed with noble talents and high
qualities. A historian numbered his qualities as ten. The historian
said: “Al-Kumayt had ten qualities, of which no poet had. He was the
orator of Asad's (tribe). He was the jurist of the Shi‘ites. He was a
memorizer of the Holy Koran. He was steadfast. He was a writer with good
calligraphy. He was a genealogist. He was disputatious. He was the first
to debate (with others) on Shi‘ism. He was a bowman. No one from Asad's
sons was better than him in sharpshooting. He was a pious brave knight.
Moreover, he was famous for open Shi‘ism.”[^12]

### His Poetry

###

As for his poetry, it is among the masterpieces of Arab literature. It
is the most wonderful of all that Arab poets have composed. In his
poetry, he did not incline to joking and impudence. With that he
separated himself from the poets of Umayya and the ‘Abbasid periods. For
they used their intellectual talents in amusement, futility, and corrupt
manners.

As for al-Kumayt, he devoted his poetry to his masters from the
Hashimites. Thus, proclaimed their noble deeds and their outstanding
merits through wonderful Arab poetry.

The historians said : “Al-Kumayt did not announce his poetry till he was
satisfied with it or sure of it. For this reason his poetry has become

masterpieces showing creation, art, and thinking. As for (his poems
called) al-Hashimiyat, they are greater than limitation and evaluation.
He has inserted in them the evidence for his doctrine, which is
indisputable and undoubted. (His poems called) were among the cultural
means at those times. For they are rich in thinking and literature. They
were reported in the clubs and the assemblies. So, the people memorized
them.”

### Al- Kumayt and al-Farazdaq

###

The historians reported that al-Kumayt composed his (poems called)
al-Hashimiyat. However, he concealed them. He did not announce them
among the people. For he wanted to ask the advice of al-Farazad b.
Ghalib, the great Arab poet, about them. So, he went to him. When he met
him, he said to him:

“O Abu Firas, you are the chief of (the tribe of) Madar and their poet.
I am your nephew, al-Kumayt b. Zayd al-Asadi.”

“You are truthful. You are my nephew. What is your need,”al-Farazdaq
asked.

“I have composed poetry. I want to submit it to you. If it is good,
order me to announce it. If it is bad, order me to conceal it. And you
will be the first to conceal it for me,” answered al-Kumayt.

So, al-Farazdaq admired his politeness. Then he said him:

“As for your reason, it is good. I hope that your poetry is as equal as
your reason. Recite to me what you have written. ”

Thus, al- Kumayt recited him his wonderful (poem), saying:

“I am delighted. I am not delighted for the beautiful women”

Al-Farazdaq interrupted him, saying: “My nephew, for what you are
delighted?”

“I am not delighted for play. Does the old man play?” replied al-Kumayt.

“Yes, my nephew, play. You are at the time of play,”said Al-Farazdaq.

“Neither a house nor the trace of the house divert me.

Nor does a finger dyed with henna make me delighted,” said al-Kumayt.

Al-Farazdaq admired this poetry. Then he asked: “My nephew, what has
made you delighted?”

“Nor do the antelopes that pass me on the right hand in the evening
(delight me).

(I am not delighted) whether a sounded-horned (antelope) or a one
broken-horned (antelope) passes,” said al-Kumayt.

“Yes. Do not be pessimistic,” said Al-Farazdaq.

“However, the people of outstanding merits, piety, the best of the
children of Eve (has delighted me). The good are sought,” said
al-Kumayt.

This high wonderful poetry moved Al-Farazdaq, so he said:

“Woe unto you! Who are they?”

Al-Kumayt said: “(I am delighted at) the white group (the Hashimites).
Through love for them I seek nearness to Allah. ”

Al-Kumayt controlled the feelings and sentiments of Al-Farazdaq.

“Relieve me! Woe unto you! Who are they?” shouted Al-Farazdaq.

So, al-Kumayt said: “(They are) the Hashimites, the family of the
Prophet. I am satisfied with them. I always become angry for them. I
have

made my soul obedient to them out of love (for them). I receive them
with pleasure.”

This poetry controlled the feelings of Al-Farazdaq. So, he said:

“My nephew, announce, and then announce (your poetry). By Allah, you are
better in poetry than those who passed away and those who are still
alive.”[^13]

### The Characteristics of his Poetry

###

The poetry of al- Kumayt is distinguished by the religious values
through which he sincerely expressed his feelings towards his masters,
the Hashimites. For he showed sincere affection and love for them. The
unquestionable proofs imposed that on him.

As for the characteristics of his poetry, the following are some of
them:

1. His poetry concerning the Hashimites is not mere sentiment. Rather,
it depends on dispute and satisfaction. Shawqi Dayf said: “Thus, al-
Kumayt's poetry does not express only feelings. Rather, it also
expresses thoughts. Moreover, it expresses the ability of the Arab
reason to dispute and to convince.”[^14] “Perhaps, it expresses thoughts
more than it expresses sentiments.”[^15] These are two lines of his
wonderful poems. They represent this trend:

They said:

We have inherited it (the caliphate) from father and mother.

Neither mother nor father had given it to them by will.

They think foolishly they have obligatory right on the people.

However, the right of the Hashimites is more obligatory.[^16]

With these two lines al-Kumayt condemned the persons who usurped
illegally the caliphate. For they singled out a right for them and
imposed the right on the people. They claimed that they belonged to
Quraysh, the family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.
So, they seized the caliphate. However, the family of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, satisfied perfectly this condition. For
they were the nearest people to him. After these two lines, al-Kumayt
praised the great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. Then he
mentioned the right of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be
on them, to the caliphate. He said:

They (the Umayyads) said:

He (the Prophet) is not inherited.

Were it for his successors, Bakil, Arhab, ‘Akk, Lakhm, al-Sikun,

Himyar, Kinda, al-Hayyan, and Taghlub would equally take part in it (the
caliphate).[^17]

With these two lines, al-Kumayt wanted to refute the Umayyads, who said
that no one would inherit the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. The Explainer of the poems called al-Hashimiyat said: “If this
was true, the above-mentioned tribes would equally take part in the
caliphate.”Thus, the caliphate would not be confined to Quraysh. This is
logical thinking. Through these proofs, al-Kumayt became a jurist. He
composed his poetry as the knowledgeable jurist did. For he was
knowledgeable in discussing and proving the problems, as Dr. Yousif
Khulayf said.[^18]

2. Al-Kumayt quoted some verses from the Koran when he praised the
Hashimites. Addressing the Hashimites, he said:

We have found a verse concerning you in the verses beginning with Ha
Mïm.

The pious and the non-pious from us have explained it.

In other than the verses beginning with Ha Mïm, there are successive
verses concerning you.

They are as signposts (of knowledge) for the possessor of tiring
doubt.[^19]

In the first line, al-Kumayt meant these Words of Allah, the Exalted:
“Say I demand not, of you any reward for it (the toils of preaching),
except the love of my relations.”[^20]

In the second line, he meant these Words of Allah, the Most High:
“People of the House, surely, Allah intends to keep off from you every
kind of uncleanliness, and to purify with a thorough purification.”[^21]
“And give to the near of kin his due.”[^22] “And know that whatever
thing you acquire in war, a fifth of it is for Allah and for the Apostle
and for the near of kin.”[^23]

Al-Kumayt confirmed the outstanding merits of his masters, the
Hashimites, with verses from the Holy Koran. For “falsehood shall not
come to it from before it nor from behind it.”

3. Al-Kumayt's poetry on praising the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, is truthful in language, and strong in
sentiment. It is free from worldly pleasures. It is full of pure of pure
faith. Al-Kumayt composed such kind of poetry to seek Allah's pleasure
and the hereafter. The following words of his prove that:

“(I am delighted at) the white group (the Hashimites). Through the love
for them I seek nearness to Allah.”

Al-Kumayt's love for the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt) was sincere.
For he found no other means to seek nearness to Allah except the sincere
love for them.

4. Al-Kumayt composed poetry on the Hashimites. In this poetry, he did
not depend on the laudable deeds and the outstanding merits he heard.
Rather, he depended on his own observations. For he was contemporary
with them. So, he recognized their ideals that spread throughout the
world. Thus, he adored them. He was like those who adored and admired
virtue. Al-Kumayt's poetry was a live picture. It showed the real state
of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. For “Allah
Kept off from them every kind of uncleanliness, and purified them with a
thorough purification.”These are some characteristics of the poetry. As
for its techniques, they require elaboration. However, we have preferred
shortness to elaboration in most of this research.

### His firm Doctrine

###

Al-Kumayt had firm faith in his doctrine. He based his doctrine on
unquestionable ideas. So, he was the poet of the Shi‘ite doctrine. He
expressed the Shi‘ite ideas and fundamentals. The narrators mentioned
that he was the first to split open the door to the pleas for Shi‘ites
in his poems called al-Hashimiyat. He was their tongue. He defended
them. He offered pleas on behalf of them. His poems called al-Hashimiyat
pictured the cultural and the ideological sides of the Shi‘ite doctrine.
They encompassed

clearly the affairs of the Imamate, which was regarded as among the
basic elements in the Shi‘ite doctrine.

### Al-Kumayt and Imam al-Baqir

###

Al-Kumayt devoted himself to Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him. So, he
was his special poet. He recited to him some of his poems called
al-Hashimiyat, which he wrote about the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them. They impressed the Imam, peace be on him.
So, the Imam thanked him for that. He asked Allah to forgive al-Kumayt
and to be pleased with him.

Al-Kumayt thought there was no one worth of obedience and respect except
his master, Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him. He came to him and said:

There passed away those in whose protection (the people) lived.

No one has remained except the gloating (over other's misfortune) and
the envious.

Only one (person) has remained in the earth. It is he who is wanted.

It is you who is that one (person).[^24]

### His longing for seeing the Imam.

###

Al-Kumayt lived in Kufa. He longed very much for seeing the Imam. So, he
traveled to Medina (Yathrib). When he stood before the Imam, he recited
to him his poem. In his poem, al-Kumayt described his longing for him.
In it he said:

Longing for you has affected me.

So, I covered many places to see you.

O You who are the best one,

to you is my obedience and humbleness.

You are my hope.

Thus, the person strives to come to his hope.

You are the followers of Allah.

You have pictures in my eyes and in my ears.

You order (people to do good deeds) and forbid

(them from doing evil deeds).

You are not tired of asking Allah for good.

You respond to the one who asks you.[^25]

These lines show his great obedience to the Imam and his longing for
him.

### Al-Kumayt elegized al-Husayn

###

Al-Kumayt was born in the year when Imam Husayn, the father of the free,
peace be on him, was killed. When he grew up and understood life, he
knew that the fears of that immortal tragedy perplexed the people. Thus,
they recalled in their assemblies the burdensome misfortunes of Imam
Husayn, peace be on him. So, those disasters moved the feelings and
sentiments of al-Kumayt. They filled his soul with stormy pains. His
soul melted for Imam Husayn. Thus, he elegized him with many poems. The
narrators said that he composed a poem to bewail al-Husayn. Then he went
to Imam Abu Ja‘far to recite it before him. When he came to him, he said
to him:

“O Son of the Apostle of Allah, I have written some lines of poetry
about you. Do you permit me to recite them?”

“These are the white days.[^26] Reciting poetry during them is
abominable,” replied Imam Abu Ja‘far.

“They are especially on you,” explained al-Kumayt.

“Recite what you have,”said the Imam.

Thus, al-Kumayt recited:

The time made me smile, and it made me weep.

The time has changes.

Nine (persons) were betrayed in Karbala'.

When the Imam heard this elegizing about his grandfather, he burst into
tears. His son, Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq, peace be on him, and the ‘Alid
women burst into tears too.

Al-Kumayt went on reciting, saying:

Six (persons) with whom no one competed.

They are the sons of Aqïl, the best of knights,

and ‘Ali, their good lord.

Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, went on weeping. Then he told
al-Kumayt about the abundant reward Allah had prepared for those who
mentioned the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, and
had mercy on them.

Then al-Kumayt went on:

Who was delighted at what afflicted you?

Or who was gloating over it one day?

After that glory, you have become lowly.

Then, I cannot repel oppression when it covers me.

So, the Imam, peace be on him, took al-Kumayt by the hand and invoked
Allah for him, saying:

“O Allah, forgive al-Kumayt his past and present sins!”

Finally, al-Kumayt asked:

When will the Truth rise among you?

When will your Mahdi, the second, rise?

So, the Imam turned to him. He told him about Imam al-Mahdi, may Allah
quicken his appearance. He said: “He is the awaited Imam. He will fill
the earth with justice and fairness as it was filled with oppression and
tyranny.” “When will he appear?” asked al-Kumayt. The Imam, peace be on
him, replied: “Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, was
asked about that. So, he answered: ‘He is like the Hour (of
Resurrection), which will unexpectedly come to you.'”[^27]

### A Poem of his Poems called al-Hashimiyat

###

Al-Kumayt recited one of his poems called al-Hashimiyat before Imam Abu
Ja‘far, peace be on him. It is the most wonderful of Arab poetry. It
clearly describes his personal impressions of the members of the House
(ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. For he observed their noble deeds and
ideals. In this poem he said:

My heart does not yearn for youth, nor does it yearn for night dreams
nor does it long for beautiful women whose cheeks are as white as the
white antelope.

However, my hidden and manifest love is for the

Hashimites,

who are the best of all people, who are near to generosity,

who are far from oppression,

who are right when the people are wrong,

who has established the rules of Islam,

who are the sufficient defenders when the war breaks out,

who are the rain when drought hits the people,

who are the shelter for the orphans' mothers,

who are the sufficient leaders in all conditions,

who are the doctors of the doubters,

who are able to take vengeance.

They are like the camels that carry water for the people.

They are like the seas that quench thirst.

They are good, righteous, truthful, and liberal.

Their faces are bight. Their grandfathers are generous.

Their lineage is clear.

They are knowledgeable chiefs.

Their honor is shining.

They are noble chiefs.

They are clement. They are just in behavior. They skillful in the
critical affairs.

They are the best of all the people in speech and bravery.

In the beginning of his poem, al-Kumayt mentioned that he loved, and
that love controlled his feelings and sentiments. For whom is this
strong love? Surely, it is not for the beautiful women, who charm the
people with their beauty. Rather it is for those who are the best of all
people in importance and the highest of them in position. It is for the
Hashimites, in whom all the elements of honor and glory came together.
They were the best of all people in talents and cleverness. Al-Kumayt
confined his obedience and love to them. He did not depend on feelings
and sentiments when he loved his masters, the Hashimites. Rather, he
found them a wonderful example, of which no one had in the history of
mankind. He saw, observed, and felt the outstanding merits that promoted
them to the highest height, namely the height of thinking and leadership
in Islam.

Al-Kumayt adored his masters, for he observed the following outstanding
merits:

1. They were the sources of generosity and liberality. They gave
generously all what they had to refresh the deprived and to save the
poor.

2. They were the source of justice. They did not prefer close relatives
to common people. Rather, the people were equal with them. They did not
know patronage and the other considerations, which people put into
effect out of their sentiments and desires.

3. They were the bravest of all creatures. Fright did not pass through
their souls. They took part in many battles. They showed extreme
courage, of which no one saw throughout history. For example, Imam ‘Ali,
the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, is known for his
bravery. Imam Husayn, peace be on him, showed unique courage at the
Battle of

‘Ashura’. All the members of the Prophet's family had such an
outstanding merit. They had courage, of which no one of the people had.

4. They were the shelter of the orphans and the deprived people when
drought hit them. The people found no one to have mercy on them except
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.

5. They were the custodians over the affairs of the people. In other
words, the people consulted them when they faced with difficult affairs.
They also resorted to them when crises and events struck them. There was
no one who could solve such difficulties except the members of the House
(ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. They had excellent reason and correct
opinions. So, they were able to solve the difficulties and crises of the
people.

6. They were wise and skillful in curing psychological diseases. Thus,
they could removed the germs of deviation from the truth. They studied
the essence of man. So, they knew why he inclined to greediness,
caprice, and deviation from the truth. Then they gave him excellent
directions to cure his psychological diseases. You find in their words
wonderful maxims and preaching. They said them to reform and educate the
people.

7. They were the noble chiefs, who created wisdom to enlighten people.
Thus, the thirsty (for wisdom) resorted to them. Those who wanted life
depended on their generosity and liberality.

8. They were the seas that quenched the thirst of those who were about
to perish. They were the source of happiness and good for man.

9. They were the best of all people in goodness, truthfulness,
generosity, handsomeness, noble grandfathers, importance, and lineage.

10. They were more important than the people, more just than them, and
more skillful than them in the critical affairs.

11. Throughout history, they exceeded the people in truthful talk,
genuine thinking, and fruitful ideas.

After these lines, al-Kumayt went on mentioning the laudable and the
outstanding merits of his masters, the Hashimites, whom he adored. He
said:

(They are) beneficiary, givers, feeders without miserliness.

(They are) helpers, very obliging, very forgiving, clement toward the
army that devours all things.

They are able to take vengeance and leave it,

even if they are angered with ugly words.

They untie their garments on the day of disturbance.

They are generous Abtahis. They are as manifest as the stars.

They are Ghalibis Hashimites. They have knowledge from the All-Knowing
(Allah).

They are honest in their positions. Thus, they raise their heads high.

When war burns, and the knight walks toward the knight,

they are the lions in war.

They are the lions of war, the rain of drought, cheerful, and eloquent.

They are not prattling in the assembly nor are they silent out of
confutation.

They are chiefs. They defend the women when the battle is like the
battles (of Arabs).

They have the sense of honor. They are courageous at the battle.

They are not unarmed in the battles nor are they sluggish.

They put into effect the most reliable affair out of their piety.

They were the first to respond to the message (of the Prophet).

They perform the pilgrimage (to Mecca).

In these lines, al-Kumayt presented the ideal qualities of the members
of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. They are as follows:

1. They earned money. They generously gave this money. They wanted
neither reward neither thankfulness.

2. When they were wronged, they were able to take vengeance. However,
they left vengeance. For they preferred what Allah has to vengeance. The
ugly words of their enemies did not anger them.

3. They were full of clemency. So, they were patient toward every
disturbance.

4. They were the chiefs of Quraysh. They were generous. So, they were
like the stars or the signposts which the straying follow.

5. They belonged to Ghalib b. Fihr, the lord of the Arabs. So, they
belonged to Hashim. They got knowledge, of which no one got. Allah, the
Most High, endowed them with that knowledge.

6. They were honest in their positions. They were free from sins,
mistakes, and defects. So, they raised their head.

7. They showed extreme courage when the battle started. So, they
received death with smiling lips.

8. They were not talkative in the assemblies. They talked when there was
a necessity to talk. They kept silent when silence was necessary, namely
without confutation.

9. They protected their families from oppression during the most
critical battles of the Arabs.

10. They were bold during the battles. They were the lions of the
battles. They lighted the fire of the battles. They threw themselves
into it. They were neither armless nor were they slow in the battles.
Rather, they were signposts, leaders, and chiefs.

11. Finally, al-Kumayt gave a perfect picture of the character of the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. He mentioned that
they depended on the most reliable affairs, and that they refrained from
doubts. For they were very pious. Then he mentioned that they were the
first to respond to the true message, which the great Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, announced. For Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be on him, was the first to believe in Islam. He was the
first to defend the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and his
message.

After praising the ‘Alids, al-Kumayt satirized their enemies, the
Umayyads. He said:

They (the ‘Alids) are leaders. However, they are not like those who
treat people as they treat the animals.

They are not like ‘Abd al-Malik, al-Walïd, Sulayman, and Hisham, whose
opinions towards their subjects are like those of the shepherd toward
their sheep in the darkness.

Thus, when they (the caliphs) die, their reputation dies, too.

When they live, they do not treat people with justice.

This is the strongest and the most truthful satire of the Umayyads. In
these lines, al-Kumayt unveiled the Umayyad politicians, who regarded
the people as sheep. They did not believe in the rights of the people.
Rather they exposed them to painful tortures. Then al-Kumayt mentioned
that the Umayyad kings would have no reputation. For they violated all
the rights of the people. They did not establish justice. Thus, the
people would not mention them with good. Rather, they would mention
their oppression, tyranny, and severe punishments.

Then al-Kumayt went on praising the Hashimites, saying:

They are near to every goodness. They far from every defect.

They are the most merciful of all the people. They are the most clement
of them.

They have lent a helping hand to people. They have held back the hand of

oppression and ignorance from them.

They have put into effect moderation, and gone on it.

Noble deeds and ancient lineage belong to them.

They are the family of the one with truthful talk, Abu al-Qasim, the
branch of the noble chiefs.

These lines picture the high ideals of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them. For they were near to every goodness and far
from every ugly deed. They fulfilled all promises. They had mercy on the
people. They were the most clement of all the people. These outstanding
qualities and others have made people incline to them, adore them, and
admire them.

In his wonderful poem, al-Kumayt went on praising the great Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, saying:

He was the most perfect human being from his birth till his death.

He belonged to the noblest lineage.

He immigrated from Mecca to Medina (Yathrib), and resided there.

The delusions of the world did not deceive him.

He guided us to Paradise, so he saved us from the Fire.

Through him, Allah removed ignorance from people.

After praising the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
al-Kumayt praised the great martyr, Ja‘far al-Tayyar, the cousin of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. He also praised the
immortal martyr, Hamza, the uncle of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, saying:

The one who is adorned by two wings (i. e, Ja‘far), and the son of Hala
(i. e, Hamza), the lion of Allah, the brave defender, are from them (the
Hashimites).

There is no cousin like this nor is there an uncle like this, who is the
lord of uncles.

Then al-Kumayt praised the lord of the trustees, the gate of the city of
the knowledge of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, saying:

Al-Tajwabi (i. e., Abd al-Rahman b. Muljim) ruined the throne of the
community

through (murdering) the trustee (i. e., Imam ‘Ali).

He (Imam ‘Ali) was chaste, glorious, good, and skillful in solving the
affairs.

He was the trustee (of authority), the ruler, and the knight.

He sometimes fought against the polytheists, and sometimes with the
Kharijites.

Then al-Kumayt mentioned Imam Husayn, the lord of martyrs, and the plant
of sweet basil of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family.
He said:

The trustee of the trustee, the owner of the sound plan,who ruined the
enemies on the day of the enmity.

Then al-Kumayt mentioned the tragedy of Imam Husayn, peace be on him.
For that tragedy has saddened the souls. He said:

Many low people killed him at al-Taf (a place near Kufa).

When Imam Abu Ja‘far heard this line, he burst into tears. Then he said
to al-Kumayt, as Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
said to Hassan: “The Holy Spirit supports you as long as you defend, the
members of the House (ahl-al-Bayt).”[^28]

Then al-Kumayt mentioned Abu al-Fadl al-‘Abbas, the son of the Commander
of the Faithful, peace be on him. For he sacrificed his soul for his
brother, Imam Husayn, the lord of the free, peace be on him. He said:

And Abu al-Fadl, indeed, their pretty remembrance, is the cure of selves
from illnesses.[^29]

Finally, al-Kumayt said:

Allah has made pure my love (for the Hashimites).

When al-Kumayt had finished reciting his wonderful poem, Imam Abu Ja‘far
turned to the direction of the Kaaba. He invoked Allah for al-Kumayt,
saying:

“O Allah, have mercy on al-Kumayt, and forgive him (his sins).”

The Imam repeated this supplication three times. Then he said to
al-Kumayt: “O Kumayt, take this one hundred thousand (dirhams). I have
collected it from household.”However, al-Kumayt refused to accept the
money. He said that he wanted a reward from Allah, the Exalted. Then he
asked the Imam, peace be on him, for a shirt. So, the Imam gave him a
shirt.[^30]

Al-Kumayt saw off the Imam. Then he went to ‘Abd Allah b. al-Hasan. He
recited to him his wonderful poem. So, ‘Abd Allah admired the poem, and
then he said to al-Kumayt: “O Abu al-Mustahal, I have a country estate.
I have been given four thousand dinars for it. This is the contract of
it. I asked some witnesses to testify to that.”

Then ‘Abd Allah gave the contract to al-Kumayt. However, the latter
refused to accept it, saying: “May my father and mother be ransom for
you, I had composed poetry concerning other than you. I had wanted the
world for it. By Allah, what I have said regarding you is for the sake
of Allah. So, I will take neither money nor rewards for what I do for
Allah.”

Then ‘Abd Allah insisted on that. So, al-Kumayt took the contract and
went away. Some days passed. Then he came to ‘Abd Allah and said to him:

“I have a need.”

“What is it? I will fulfill all your needs.”

“Every need?”

“Yes.”

“Accept this contract. And return the country estate.”

Al-Kumayt gave ‘Abd Allah the contract. So, the latter accepted it. Then
‘Abd Allah b. Mu‘awiya b. ‘Abd Allah b. Ja‘far rose. He took a bag and
gave it to four of his retainers. He entered the houses of the
Hashimites, saying:

“O Hashimites, this is al-Kumayt. He says poetry about you while the
people have kept silent towards your outstanding merits. He has exposed
his blood to the Umayyads. Then reward him for that.”

Thus, the ‘Alids put dirhams and dinars into the bag. Moreover, the
‘Alid ladies took off their ornaments and put them into the bag. So,
‘Abd Allah collected one hundred thousand dirhams. Then he brought it to
al-Kumayt and said to him:

“O Abu al-Mustahal, we have brought you a small reward. We are in the
state of our enemy. We have collected this sum of money. The ornaments
of the women are with it. Make use of it against your time.”

However, al-Kumayt refused to accept the money, saying:

“May my father and mother be ransom for you. When I praise you, I want
nothing except Allah and His Apostle. I will take no reward from the
world. Return the money to its people.”

Abd Allah spared nothing to convince al-Kumayt to accept the money.
However, the latter refused to accept it.[^31]

### His Poem called al-Lamiya

###

Al-Kumayt recited before Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, his poem
called al-Lamiya. This poem moved the feelings and sentiments of the
Imam. For, in this poem, al-Kumayt mentioned the painful political
events at that time. He also mentioned the persecutions from which the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, suffered. In the
beginning of the poem, he said:

Does the one who commits sins, follows his caprice, pays no attention to
wisdom, consider carefully the final results? Does the one whose heart
evil and mistreatment control understand the truth?

Does the community wake for its own affair, rise from its lull and
slumber, so it takes off the garment of laziness and cowardice, and
removes the oppression and tyranny that have befallen it?

The silence (of the people) towards oppression has become long. If this
oppression was changed, their silence would be better for them.

In these lines, al-Kumayt summoned the Moslems to end their silence. He
warned them from lull and laziness. Then he encouraged them to revolt
against the Umayyads, who persecuted the people.

In this wonderful poem, al-Kumayt said:

The (religious) precepts have been canceled.

It seams that we follow a religion other than our religion.

Our words are those of the leading prophets.

However, our deeds are those of the people

who lived before Islam.

We are satisfied with the world,

from which we do not want to separate our souls.

Yet, in it, we die and are killed.

We cling to it. It is like a shield of which we are afraid.

In the first line, al-Kumayt mentioned that the Umayyads stopped the
religious precepts and the Islamic fundamentals. Thus, it seemed that
the Moslems followed a religion other than the religion of Islam.

In the second line, he dispraised the Umayyad rulers. For their words
were of the righteous. Still, their deeds were contrary to their words.
Rather, their deeds were of the people who lived before Islam.

In the last two lines, he ascribed that state of the Moslems to their
love for the world. So, they did not revolt against the Umayyad
government. Then al-Kumayt said:

The people are neglected. They are like the camels that graze without a
driver.

O Politicians, answer what we ask you about. By my life, there are
eloquent ones among you.

Are you the people of the Book? Do you rule the people according to it?

In the first line, al-Kumayt said that the Umayyads neglected the
affairs of the people. So, the people became like the neglected camels,
which had no driver to take care of them. In the last two lines, he
asked those politicians if they were the people of the Book, and if they
ruled the people according to it. If they were so, then why did they
deviate from the religion? Why did they neglect its teachings? Then
al-Kumayt went on asking the Umayyads about that negligence. He ascribed
oppression and tyranny to them. He numbered their bad qualities. Then he
summoned the Moslems to revolt against them. Then he mentioned Imam
Husayn, the father of the free, peace be on him, saying:

Their swords selected al-Husayn and his companions, as the one who
selected plants.

Their horses were covered with blood from the family of Mohammed.

The Prophet of Allah was absent from among them. His absence was a
misfortune that befell people.

Al-Kumayt's words and sentiments were truthful when he elegized
al-Husayn, peace be on him. His lines moved Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on
him, very much. Then al-Kumayt said:

The fighters hit him (al-Husayn) through the bow of other than them.

The first (Hisham) gave error to the last.

In this line, al-Kumayt said that the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, were liable to many disasters. The previous
people were responsible for such disasters. For they helped the Umayyads
seize the authority and rule over the Moslems. When Imam Abu Ja‘far
heard this line, he was full of sadness. So, he raised his hands towards
the sky. Then he invoked Allah for al-Kumayt, saying: “O Allah, forgive
al-Kumayt.”[^32]

With this, we will end our talk about al-Kumayt's poem called Lamiya. In
this poem it was mentioned that he elegized Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on
him. In it he said:

I will die for the Truth, as Abu Ja‘far died.

Surely, al-Kumayt composed this line after the death of Abu Ja‘far,
peace be on him. Then the line has been added to his poem called
al-Lamiya.

### His Poem called al-‘Ayniya

###

The following is another wonderful poem of his poems called
al-Hashimiyats. Al-Kumayt came to Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, to
recite this poem before him. He said to him: “I have written poetry. If
I reveal it, I will be killed. If conceal it, I am afraid of Allah, the
Most High.” Then he recited for the Imam, peace be on him, this
wonderful poem:

Sleeplessness has dismissed sleep from your eye.

And a care brings tears from it.

The care has controlled the heart. It moves the illness and sadness (in
the heart), which has been prevented from happiness.

That is for the missing of the chiefs from Quraysh.

In these lines, al-Kumayt described his continuous cares. For they made
him sleepless. They made him know nothing except sadness and sorrow. For
he always thought about the disasters and misfortunes that befell his
‘Alid masters. Those disasters and misfortunes burnt his heart. They
filled him with sorrow and sadness.

In his poem called al-‘Ayniya, al-Kumayt described his master, Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him. He said:

With the Most Merciful (Allah), he (the Prophet) discloses al-Mathani
(Surat al-Fatiha).

Abu Hasan (Imam ‘Ali) was a chosen one for him.

His cousin who degraded his own caprice.

He hastened to please his Creator.

The Prophet chose him, irrespective of those who refused to mention his
outstanding merits.

He announced his authority on the day of Ghadir Khum.

However, the men pledged allegiance to each other.

They forgot his right and wronged him.

In these lines, al-Kumayt mentioned Imam ‘Ali, the commander of the
faithful, peace be on him. He mentioned that the Imam, peace be on him,
supported the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, when he
announced his bright message. The Imam protected him from the oppressive
aggressors. From that he wanted nothing except Allah's pleasure and the
hereafter. The Imam, peace be on him, had outstanding spiritual
abilities. So, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, chose
him. He made him his helper and the successor after him. He announced
that in the general meeting he held at Ghadir Khum. He announced his
Imamate and his succession (to authority) after him. In this connection,
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said: “Whoever I am the
master of, this man, ‘Ali is his master. O Allah, befriend whoever
befriends, be hostile to whoever opposes him, support whoever supports
him and desert whoever deserts him.”[^33] Thus, Allah and His Apostle
pledged allegiance to Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, and the
first leader of the Islamic Message. However, the people paid no
attention to this homage. They ignored their pledge of allegiance to the
Imam and forgot his high rank. So,

they held a meeting under the shelter (saqifa). History books have
mentioned in detail this event.

Then al-Kumayt went on reciting his wonderful poem, saying:

Even you are afraid of the sword and the whip, say to the Umayyads
wherever they are:

Fie on the time when I am cowardly and obedient to you.

May Allah make hungry him whom you have satisfied.

May He make full him whom you have made hungry through your
tyranny.[^34]

In these lines, al-Kumayt mentioned the Umayyads. He invoked Allah
against their hirelings. He asked Allah to starve them and to deprive
them of His mercy. For they were full of the money and gifts of the
Umayyds. Meanwhile he invoked Allah for those whom the Umayyads wronged.
He asked Him to enrich them and to make them lead a happy life. Then
al-Kumayt mentioned the Hashimites. He said that they were the leaders
of the community. So, they would let the community live in comfort.

The historians said: “When Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, heard this
poem, he admired it. Then he said: ‘O Allah, be sufficient to al-Kumayt.
'”

The Imam repeated this supplication three times. So, Allah saved
al-Kumayt from the prison of the Umayyads.[^35]

### His firm Struggle

###

Al-Kumayt struggled firmly for his beliefs and fundamentals. In the most
critical circumstances, he proclaimed the laudable deeds and outstanding
merits of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. He
summoned the people to support them. In the meantime he summoned them to
revolt against the tyrannical Umayyads. He played an important role in
shaking and overthrowing the Umayyad entity. The following is some of
his efforts in this connection:

### 1. His praising ahl al-Bayt

###

Al-Kumayt praised the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them, very much. He numbered their noble deeds and their outstanding
qualities in his poems called al-Hashimyat, which are the most valuable
masterpieces in Arab literature. Worth mentioning, his poems played an
effective role in enlightening the Moslems. The made them detest the
Umayyads.

Al-Kumayt praised the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them. However, the Umayyds officially prevented the people from praising
them. Rather, they forced the people to curse them on the pulpits. They
ordered the teachers to make their pupils detest them. They formed
committees to make traditions to defame them. Moreover, they punished
severely those who mentioned their laudable deeds. So, al-Kumayt
endangered himself when he praised the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them. For he resisted the desires of the
authority. Besides, he opposed its policies.

### 2. His dispraising the Umayyds

###

Al-Kumayt played a dangerous role in opposing the Umayyds. For he
dispraised their kings. He numbered their bad deeds. In his poetry, he

pictured them as the worst creatures. The people memorized what he
composed about them. So, they turned away from the Umayyads. They were
indignant with them. Thus, his dispraise was among the factors that
overthrew the Umayyd government. Among his words on them are:

Even you are afraid of the sword and the whip, say to the Umayyads
wherever they are:

Fie on the time when I am cowardly and obedient to you.

May Allah make hungry him whom you have satisfied.

May He make full him whom you have made hungry through your tyranny.

He recited these lines before Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him. So, the
Imam asked Allah to forgive al-Kumayt and to be pleased with him.[^36]
Al-Kumayt also dispraised Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik. He said:

Our words are those of the leading prophets.

However, our deeds are those of the people

who lived before Islam.[^37]

Al-Kumayt also dispraised the supporters and the hirelings of the
Umayyads. For example, he dispraised al-Hakïm b. ‘Ayyash al-Kalbi. He
prided himself of dispraising the Umayyads.

So, his son al-Mustahal hastened to him and blamed him for boasting of
the Umayyads, saying:

“Father, you dispraised and defamed al-Kalbi. Then you boasted of the
Umayyads. Yet you have regarded them as unbelievers. Would you boast of
‘Ali and the Hashimites, whom you follow?”

So, al-Kumayt replied:

“My little son, al-Kalbi has devoted himself to the Umayyads, the
enemies of ‘Ali. If I mentioned ‘Ali, al-Kalbi would leave mentioning my
name, and he would dispraise him. Thus, I would expose ‘Ali to
dispraise.”

Thus, al-Kalbi refrained from answering al-Kumayt. However, he let
sorrow and sadness hurt him.”[^38]

### 3. His moving Tribalism between the Yemenis and the Nazaris

###

Al-Kumayt played a dangerous role in destroying the Umayyad state. He
spared no effort to stir up discord between the Yemenis and the Nazaris,
the most important of the Arab tribes in number and influence and
supporting the Umayyad government. In his poems, al-Kumayt dispraised
the Yemenis. He numbered their defects. Al-Mas‘udi reported the reason
al-Kumayt dispraised the Yemenis. He said that al-Kumayt visited Abd
Allah b. al-Hasan. The latter asked the former to compose poetry to sow
division among the Arabs to overthrow the Umayyad state. So, al-Kumayt
accepted that. Then he composed wonderful poems. In them, he glorified
the Yemenis, and mentioned their laudable deeds. Meanwhile he dispraised
the Qahtanis.

His poetry had great effects on the hearts. Thus, it moved malice and
hatred between the two tribes. Di‘bil al-Khuza‘i, the Poet of the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, supported the
Qahtanis. I think that there was a secret agreement between al-Kumayt
and Di‘bil. For they were among the poets of the members of the House
(ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.

So, each tribe mentioned its own laudable deeds. Meanwhile they defamed
each other. Thus, enmity took place between them. Then the enmity
included the people of the villages and the desert. Accordingly, their
hearts were full of malice and hatred. Discords occurred between the two
families. Marwan b. Mohammed al-Ju‘di, the last Umayyad king, sided with
the Nazaris. The Yemenis deviated from the Umayyads. Then they joined
the ‘Abbasids. With that the Umayyad state collapsed.[^39] Ahmed Amin
said: “A short time after al-Kumayt, the Umayyad state was
overthrown.”[^40]

### His Arrest

###

Al-Kumayt satirized the Yemenis. His satire became famous. The people
talked about it in their assemblies and clubs. Khalid b. ‘Abd Allah
al-Qasri, the governor of Kufa heard of it. He sided with the Yemenis.
He said: “By Allah, I will kill al-Kumayt.”The historians said: “Khalid
b. ‘Abd Allah al-Qasri bought a very beautiful slave girl. He made her
memorize al-Kumayt's poems called al-Hashimiyat. After she had memorized
them, he gave her as a gift to Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik. He wrote to him
about al-Kumayt's stories and satire against the Umayyads. He sent him
al-Kumayt's poem, in which he said:

O Lord, victory is sought through You.

O Lord, reliance is on You.

It is a long poem. In it al-Kumayt elegized Zayd b. ‘Ali, the great
martyr, and his son al-Husayn b. Zayd, the immortal martyr. In it, he
also praised the Hashimites. When Hisham received the poem and read it,
he became very angry. He wrote Khalid a letter, in which he ordered him
to cut off al-Kumayt's tongue and hand. So, Khalid b. ‘Abd Allah
al-Qasri ordered the police to arrest al-Kumayt. The police arrested him
and imprisoned him. He remained in prison for some days. During them he
suffered from persecutions.[^41]

### His Escape from Prison

###

Al-Kumayt remained in prison. He was afraid and worried. Cares and
troubles controlled him. He did not know the time of his execution. The
historians said: “Al-Kumayt had a close friend called Aban b. al-Walïd
al-‘Ajali. The Umayyads had appointed Aban governor over Wasit. When
Aban heard of al-Kumayt's news, he wrote him a letter. In the letter, he
said: ‘You will be executed. Send for your wife. Put on her clothes, and
order her to stay in prison.' He gave the letter to his retainer and
ordered him to go quickly to al-Kumayt. Al-Kumayt did that and escaped
from prison.”[^42]

### Al-Kumayt received Forgiveness

###

The authorities sought for al-Kumayt everywhere, but could not find him.
For he hid himself from them. Al-Kumayt intended to praise Hisham and
the Umayyads to save himself from them. He had sent his nephew, Ward, to
Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, to ask his permission before he did
that. Thus, the Imam, peace be on him, permitted him. Then Ward came
back to his uncle and told him about the Imam's pleasures.[^43] So,
al-Kumayt and a group of the Asadis headed for Damascus. When they
arrived in it, they went to a group of the chiefs of Quraysh. They told
them about the matter.

They accepted that, and then they except al-Kumayt went to ‘Unbisa b.
Sa‘ïd b. al-‘As. They said to him:

“O Abu Khalid, Allah has given you this noble deed. This is al-Kumayt b.
Zayd, the poet of Madar. The Commander of the Faithful (i. e., Hisham)
ordered him to be killed. However, he escaped. He has come to you and
us.”

‘Unbisa responded to them. He went to Moslima b. Hisham and said to him:
“O Abu Shakir, I have brought you a noble deed through which you reach
the pleiades.”“What is it?”asked Moslima. They told him about the
matter. So, Moslima protected al-Kumayt.[^44] That became famous. When
Hisham heard of it, he summoned his son Moslima and asked him: “Why have
you protected al-Kumayt without an order from the Commander of the
Faithful?”

“I have been waiting for the calmness of his anger,” replied Moslima.

“Bring him immediately,” Hisham commanded.

Moslima left the assembly of his father. He went to al-Kumayt and said
to him: “O Abu al-Mustahal, the Commander of the Faithful has commanded
me to bring you to him.”

“Abu Shakir, do you want to submit me to him?” asked al-Kumayt.

“No,” replied Moslima.

Moslima paved the way to his salvation. He said to him: “Mu‘awiya b.
Hisham has recently died. He (Hisham) is very sad for him. When the
night comes, sit by his grave. I will send you his children. When he
summons you, ask them to tie their clothes to your clothes. Ask them to
say: This man has sought protection with the grave of our father. We are
worthy of protecting him.”Then Moslima left al-Kumayt and went away.
When it got dark, al-Kumayt headed for the grave and sat by it. When
Hisham entered upon morning, he came to the grave of his son. Then he
asked: “Who is that over there?”“Perhaps, he is a seeker of protection
with the grave,”they replied. “Everyone is given protection except
al-Kumayt,”Hisham said. It was said to him: “He is al-Kumayt.”He ordered
him to be brought. He was brought. The children had tied their clothes
to his clothes. When Hisham looked at them, he burst into tears. Then
the children said: “O Commander of the Faithful, he has sought
protection with the grave of our father. My father has died. Forgive
al-Kumayt for him and us.”So, Hisham wept.

Then al-Kumayt praised Hisham with some lines of poetry. So Hisham said:
“Poetry should be like these lines. I am pleased with you”

Al-Kumayt thanked him for that. He asked him to prevent Khalid b. ‘Abd
Allah al-Qasri from pursuing him. Hisham accepted that. Then he ordered
forty thousand dirhams and thirty garments to be given to al-Kumayt.
Then he wrote to Khalid to release al-Kumayt's wife and to give her
twenty thousand dirhams and thirty garments. So, Khalid did that.[^45]

Al-Kumayt could overcome the events with his cleverness, his eloquent
words, and his strong character. He showed neither weakness nor fear
before the tyrannical ruler, Hisham. Rather he showed sold will and firm
determination. He was not satisfied with safety and salvation. Rather,
he asked Hisham to prevent Khalid, the governor of Kufa, from pursuing
him.

### Admonition and Apology

###

Al-Kumayt came to Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him. The Imam welcomed
him, sat beside him, smiled at him, and blamed him in a friendly manner,
saying:

“O al-Kumayt, is it you who said:

Now I have joined the Umayyads?”

Thus, al-Kumayt apologized to the Imam for that. He answered as the
knowledgeable jurist did:

“Yes, I have said that. I do not want the world through these words. For
I have recognized your outstanding merits.”

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, was pleased with al-Kumayt. Then he said
to him: “If you said that out of precautionary dissimulation, there
would be no harm on you. For precautionary dissimulation is lawful.[^46]
That occurred for he asked no permission from the Imam to praise the
Umayyads. Al-Kumayt sincerely loved the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them. He was obedient to them. Many tribulations
befell him for them. Namely, he was liable to the wrath and adversities
of the Umayyads. He ended part of his lifetime in prison. There he was
full of fright. From that he wanted nothing except Allah's pleasure and
the hereafter.

### To Paradise

###

Al-Kumayt was a brave man. He defended the rights of the members of the
House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. Thus, Allah willed to grant him
martyrdom at the hand of the most wicked ones of His creatures. That was
as follows: Khalid al-Qasri, who punished al-Kumayt severely, was
removed from the office. Then Yousif b. ‘Amr was appointed ruler over
Iraq. So, al-Kumayt went to him to praise him with a poem. Meanwhile he
dispraised Khalid al-Qasri. However, Yousif's guards sided with him. So,
they stabbed al-Kumayt in the abdomen with their swords.[^47] He went
out of Yousif's room. He fainted, and then he recovered. He was heard
say: “O Allah, Mohammed's family! O Allah, Mohammed's family!”[^48] Then
he passed away.

### Notes

###

[^1] Al-Darajat al-Rafi‘a fi Tabaqat al-Shi‘a, p.[^587]:

[^2] Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol.3, p.[^266]:

[^3] Al-Murtada, al-Amali, vol.1, p.[^283]:

[^4] Al-A‘lam, vol.6, p.[^72]:

[^5] Akhbar Shu‘ara’ al-Shi‘a, p.[^62]:

[^6] Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol.[^1]: p.269.

[^7] Al-Darajat al-Rafi‘a, p.[^590]:

[^8] Al-Aghani, vol.8, p.[^25]:

[^9] Ibid, vol.15, p.[^115]:

[^10] Roudat al-Jinan, vol.6, p.[^59]:

[^11] Al-Ghadir, vol.2, p.[^211]:

[^12] Khazanat al-Adab, vol.1, p.[^99]:

[^13] Al-Aghani, vol.15, p.[^124]:

[^14] Al-Tatawir wa al-Tajjdid, p.[^241]:

[^15] Ibid, p.[^240]:

[^16] Al-Hashimiyat, pp.41-[^42]:

[^17] Ibid, p.[^42]:

[^18] Hayat al-Shi‘r fi al-Kufa, p.[^713]:

[^19] Al-Hashimiyat, p.[^40]:

[^20] Koran, al-Shura, [^23]:

[^21] Koran, al-Ahzab, p.[^33]:

[^22] Koran, al-Isra’, [^26]:

[^23] Koran, al-Anfal, [^41]:

[^24] Roudat al-Jinan, vol.6, p.[^56]:

[^25] Ta’sis al-Shi‘a li ‘Ulum al-Islam, [^189]:

[^26] The days of bright nights are the thirteenth, the

fourteenth, and the fifteenth. Their nights are called

bright because the moon shines throughout them.

[^27] Al-Ghadir, vol.2, p.[^200]:

[^28] Qasas al-‘Arab, vol.2, p.[^269]: Murujj al-Dhahab, vol.2, p.195.

[^29] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p.[^84]:

[^30] A‘yan al-Shi‘a, 1/4/515-[^516]:

[^31] Murujj al-Dhahab, vol.2, p.[^195]:

[^32] Al-Marzbani, Akhbar Shu‘ra’ al-Shi‘a, p.[^72]:

[^33] The Tradition of al-Ghadir is repeatedly narrated

by successive narrators. All Moslems have unanimously

on its narration. All (the books called) al-Sihah have

mentioned it.

[^34] Al-Hashimiyat, pp.81-[^82]:

[^35] Akhbar Shu‘ara’ al-Shi‘a, pp.72-[^73]:

[^36] Mu‘jam al-Shu‘ara’, p.[^348]:

[^37] Ibid.

[^38] Al-Aghani, vol.15, p.[^129]:

[^39] Hayat al-Imam Musa b. Ja‘far, p.1, p.[^315]:

[^40] Duha al-Islam, vol.3, p.[^206]:

[^41] Al-Aghani, vol.15, p.[^114]:

[^42] Muqaddamat al-Hashimiyat, p.[^17]:

[^43] Ibid.

[^44] Al-Ghadir, vol.2, p.[^206]:

[^45] Al-Aghani, vol.15, pp.115-[^119]:

[^46] Ibid, p.[^126]:

[^47] Ibid, p.[^121]:

[^48] Ibid, p.[^130]:
