CHAPTER IX: THE TIME OF IMAM AL-BAQIR
=====================================

As for the talk about the time of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be
on him, and mentioning the most prominent events that occurred during
it, they are numbered, according to modern studies, among methodical
researches of which the researcher is in need. For studying a certain
time has a strong effect on discovering the behavior of the person on
whom the research is done, and on understanding his cultural and social
qualities.

The time of Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, was the most critical and
sensitive of all the Islamic times. For many Islamic sects grew during
it. They were among the most dangerous intellectual and social phenomena
at that time. Besides the political parties attacked each other to the
extent that they stopped Islam from spreading and deviated it from its
way to another way without a ray of light and awareness.

However, we will talk about all the aspects of life at that time. We
will leave none of them. That is as follows:

The Islamic Sects
=================

At that time many Islamic sects grew. Some of them grew, as the
researchers said, according to the command and support of the Umayyad
government. There were several reasons for that. The most important one
of them was that the Umayyad government wanted these sects to support it
and to justify its attitude and its tendencies. We will briefly mention
some of these sects. We will be honest to the truth as far as possible.

The Mu‘tazilites
----------------

The Mu‘tazilites played a dangerous role in the history of the
intellectual and social life at that time. They left far-range effects
on the intellectual Islamic life. Among them was the foundation of the
ideological bases on which Sunni theology stood.[^1] Cold Zihar thought
that the Mu‘tazilites were the first to enter and maintain the rational
tendency.[^2] It is necessary for us to give a brief idea about the
history of the Mu‘tazilites, their beliefs, and the attitude of Imam
al-Baqir, peace be on him, towards their leaders.

### The History of the Mu‘tazilites

###

Zahdi Jar Allah thought that the theological school of the Mu‘tazilites
started in the beginning of the second history A. H. That was in the
city of Basrah, which was the center of knowledge and literature in the
Islamic state.[^3] However, this school, as a political movement, was
founded before this date. That was when the people pledged allegiance to
Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him. So, a group
of people retired from pledging allegiance to him. Among them were Sa‘d
b. Abï Waqqas, ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar, Usama b. Zayd, and Mohammed b.
Muslima al-Ansari. Hence, they were called the Mu‘tazilites (the ones
who retired from). They also did not support Imam ‘Ali in the Battle of
the Camel and Siffïn. Moreover, al-Ahnaf b. Qays retired from the war.
Then, he said to his people: “It is better for you to retire from the
discord.”[^4] Therefore, the Mu‘tazilites appeared as a political
thought at that time. As for their theological school, it appeared in
the last years of the first century A. H.

### The Mu‘tazilites and Policy

###

The Mu‘tazilites had religious tendencies and theological methods. They
supported the rule standing at those times. Their leaders supported the
authorities and justified their political behavior. Though the leaders
of the Mu‘tazilites affected asceticism and worship, they followed the
governments standing at those times. The reason for that is that they
adopted the Imamate of the mafdul (the less excellent). They said that
it was permitted to prefer him to the fadil (the most excellent). They
embraced this view to justify the caliphate of the Umayyads and the
like, who assumed the leadership of government though there were persons
more knowledgeable than them in the affairs of religion and the precepts
of Islamic law. With that they obtained the absolute support and respect
of the Umayyads. After the end of the Umayyad government, they joined
the Abbasid government. Al-Mansur al-Dawaniqi turned away from the
religious scholars. He was cruel towards them. He showed enmity towards
them and knowledge. However, he admired ‘Amru b. ‘Ubayd, the spiritual
leader of the Mu‘tazilites. The Abbasid kings also respected and honored
Ahmed b. Abï Dawud, the second leader of the Mu‘tazilites. Concerning
him al-Mu‘tasim said: “By Allah, we adorn with the like of this (Ahmed),
rejoice at his nearness. He is loyal to us.”[^5] Al-Mu‘tasim visited
Ahmed when he became ill. But he visited none of his brothers and his
relatives. When he was asked about his visit to Ahmed, he replied: “Of
course, I visit this person. For he rewards me and thanks me. He has
availed me in my religion and my world.”[^6]

The Italian orientalist, Nilino, and the orientalist, Nisboh, thought
that the start of the i‘tizal (retirement) was from a political
origin.[^7]

Ahmed Amïn said: “Surely, the boldness of the Mu‘tazilites in
criticizing the men was a strong support for the Umayyads. For
criticizing and analyzing the opponents and using reason in judgment for
them or against them remove, at least, the thought of glorifying ‘Ali,
which was spread among the masses of the people.”[^8]

However, the Umayyad and the Abbasid governments respected and honored
the Mu‘tazilites because of their support to them.

### The Mu‘tazilites and the Christians

###

It is not logical to say that the beliefs of the Christians had an
effect on the Mu‘tazilites, and that the beliefs of the Mu‘tazilites
were similar to that of the Christians who followed Greek philosophy.
Daybu believed in that. In this connection, he said: “There are separate
proofs for that a group of the early Moslems, who believed in
preference, studied under Christian teachers.”[^9] Dr. Nu‘man al-Qadi
inclined to that. In this respect, he said: “An Iraqi Christian was the
first to talk about fate. The Christian became Moslem, and then he
returned to his religion. Ma‘bid al-Jahni and Ghaylan al-Dimashqi
learned from him.”[^10] What Dr. al-Qadi has mentioned is not a proof
for what he believed in. For the Imams of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, were the first to talk about fate. They
explained it and supplied proof of what they believed in. Suppose that
an Iraqi Christian was the first to speak about doom, this does not mean
that the Christian had ideological effects on the Mu‘tazilites. To say
the truth, the Christians had no effects on the religious and the
philosophical views of the Mu‘tazilites.

### The Fundamental Doctrines

###

As for the general ideological fundamentals in which the Mu‘tazilites
believed, they were five basic fundamentals. Whoever adopted them was a
Mu‘tazilite. Whoever denied one of them or increased them was not a
Mu‘tazilite.[^11] They are as follows:

### 1. Oneness of Allah.

###

The strongest one of the five principles, on which the Mu‘tazilites
agreed, is tawhïd, or belief in the oneness and uniqueness of Allah.
They said that Allah was not similar to His creatures. They thought
Allah was neither body nor accident nor essence, and that neither time
nor space encompassed him. They refused everything opposing the Oneness
of Allah, the Exalted, and His eternity. They denied that Allah had
attributes other than himself.[^12] In this respect, they said: “The
existence of eternal attributes outside the Self (of Allah) leads to the
existence of an eternal thing other than Himself. This requires
multiplicity. This is impossible for Him, the Exalted.”[^13] Moreover,
they interpreted the verses that shows apparently the incarnation of
Allah. Among these verses is : “The hand of Allah is on their hands.”
They simplified the explanation, and supplied wonderful reliable proofs
of it.

### 2. Divine Justice

###

This is the second doctrine of the fundamental doctrines of their faith.
It is Divine Justice. “Allah is not in the least unjust to the
servants.” He does not wrong them. They had many theological studies
about The justice of Allah, the Exalted. Among them are the negation of
fate, proving the freedom, will, and preference of man. It is man who
finds his acts according to his freedom and his preference. That is
because Allah is just and beyond all injustices. Allah does not punish a
person whom he forces to perform a certain act. For whoever forces a
person to perform a certain act and punishes him is unjust. Hence, Allah
is far above injustice. For He, the Exalted, said: “Allah is not in the
least unjust to the servants.” “Allah does not wrong them.”

Therefore reward and punishment follow the act. They do not follow
anything else.

In the Divine Justice, the Mu‘tazilites discussed the things that are
rationally good or bad. The believed that Allah was just, and that He
did only good things to His servants. This urged them to discuss the
acts. In this connection, they asked: “Are the acts good in themselves?
Or do they acquire their goodness and ugliness through an order from
Allah?” They believed that goodness and ugliness were in the things
themselves. The thing is not good through an order from Him. Rather, He
ordered it to be performed for its goodness. Besides the thing is not
ugly through an order from Him. Rather, he forbids it because of its
ugliness. For this reason, the Mu‘tazilites glorified reason, and opened
the way before its maturity and promotion, as some of the researchers
said.[^14]

### 3. Promise and Threat

###

This is the third doctrine of their fundamental doctrines. It means that
Allah is truthful (in fulfilling) His promise and threat on the Day of

Judgment. Nothing will change His words. The people of the garden will
be driven to the garden through their deeds. The people of the fire will
be driven to the fire through their deeds, too. According to this, they
denied the intercession (with Allah) for anybody on the Day of
Resurrection.[^15] Moreover, they denied the verses and the traditions
about it.

### 4. Rank between two Ranks

###

This doctrine means that the person who commits the major sin is neither
believer nor unbeliever. Rather, he is a sinner. Hence, they regarded
transgression as a third independent rank from belief and unbelief. They
regarded it between them. Wasil b. Ata' decided that when he said:
“Belief is good qualities. When they come together, the person is called
believer. It is the name of praise. The sinner has not gathered good
qualities. He is not worthy of the name of praise. Therefore, he is
neither believer nor unbeliever. That is because the shahada and all
good deeds are found in him. There is no way to deny them. However, if
he leaves the world and insists on the major sin without repentance, he
will be among those who will be immortal in the fire.”[^16] ‘Amru b.
‘Ubayd followed Wasil in that. Al-Hasan al-Basri also followed them in
that. Noteworthy, he had insisted on that the person who committed a
major sin was a sinner believer.[^17]

### 5. Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil

###

This is the fifth doctrine of their fundamental doctrines. They thought
that it was incumbent on every Moslem to enjoin good and to forbid evil
with the sword. They called that jihad (armed struggle). If they were
unable to carry that out with the sword, they had to use other than it.
They had no difference in resisting both the unbelievers and the
sinners.[^18] However, the Mu‘tazilites did not use this doctrine
against the Umayyads who deviated from Islam and abased the Moslems and
forced them to follow what they hated.

These are the fundamentals doctrines of the Mu‘tazilites. They have many
important scientific branches. They have been mentioned in the
theological books.

The Shï‘a and the Mu‘tazilites
------------------------------

Some orientalists said that the Shï‘a quoted many of their theological
beliefs from the Mu‘tazilites, and that they constituted intellectual
unity. Among them is Coldzihr, who said: “I‘tizal or retirement has been
firmly established in the books of the Shï‘a till this day of ours. So,
it is a grievous mistake, whether from the viewpoint of religious
history or literary history, to say that no material trace has remained
for i‘tizal or retirement after the decisive victory which the Ash‘arite
beliefs won. The Shï‘a have many ideological books to which they resort
and to follow their examples. They are standing proof that refutes this
claim. We may regard the Shï‘ite ideological books as the books of the
Mu‘tazilites.”[^19]

Among those who held this view is Adam Mitiz, who said: “The Shï‘a had
no private theological doctrine in the forth century A. H. Hence, they
quoted the fundamentals and styles of theology from the Mu‘tazilites.
Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi, the greatest Shï‘ite scholar in the forth century
A. H., followed in his book ‘Ilal al-Sharaiy‘ the method of the
Mu‘tazilites. As for

the faith and doctrine, the Shï‘a are the inheritors of the
Mu‘tazilites.”[^20] This view has no scientific originality. However,
the Shï‘a have not relied on any Islamic sect. For the Imams of the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, supplied them with
rich abilities about theological studies and the like. They were the
first to open the door to this science. Besides they were the foremost
to discuss the researches of Divine oneness, and the like. For example,
Nahjj al-Balagh of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on
him, is full of wonderful sermons that praise the Greatness of the
Creator and consider Him too exalted for the attributes of creatures.
Al-Sahïfa al-Sajjadiyah of the great Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on
him, is rich in these researches. Many traditions were reported on the
authority of the Imams of guidance, peace be on them. In the traditions,
the Imam refuted atheists and the like. All that supplies proof that the
Shï‘a were the first to study theology. So, how do they rely on the
Mu‘tazilites? Shaykh al-Mufïd said: “No Shï‘ite theologian jurist has
taken theology from the Mu‘tazilites.”[^21]

Dr. ‘Urfan ‘Abd al-Hamïd said: “As for the scholars of the Shï‘a in the
past and present, they denied the claim of quotation and imitation and
refuted those who believed in them. In my opinion, that is natural
logical and necessary matter for those who believe in the Imami
doctrine, which says that the general skeleton of the Shï‘ite teachings
stands on the traditions reported on the authority of the infallible
Imam. So, the text of the doctrine requires dismissing every possibility
of the outside effects. Rather, it denies them. For the Shï‘ite doctrine
is an intellectual unity standing by itself and is taken from the
teachings of the Imam.”[^22]

### Generally accepted Matters

###

The Shï‘a and the Mu‘tazilites agreed on some matters from the five
fundamental doctrines such as Divine Justice. Imam Kashif al-Ghita'
said: “What makes the Mu‘tazilites similar to the Shï‘a is their view:
Among the attributes of Him, the Exalted, is justice which the
Ash‘arites deny. On this stands the matter of rational goodness and
ugliness in which the Imamis and the Mu‘tazilites believe, and which the
Ash‘arites also deny. For this reason, the two parties are called the
‘adliyah (the ones who believe in Divine Justice).[^23]

### Generally unaccepted Matters

###

The Shï‘a disagreed radically with the Mu‘tazilites on many matters. The
following is some of them:

### 1. The Imamate of the Mafdul

###

The Mu‘tazilites said that it was permitted to follow the Imamate of the
mafdul (the less excellent) and to prefer him to the fadil (the most
excellent). However, the Shï‘a refused that thoroughly, and regarded it
as disobedience to thinking and deviation from the Koran, which refuses
to make them equal. Allah, the Exalted, said: “Are those who know and
those who do not know equal?” The Shï‘a think that all the crisis from
which the community suffered resulted from preferring the mafdul (the
less excellent) to the fadil (the most excellent). However, the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, nominated the best one of his family
and his companions,

Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, to be his
successor. He took the pledge of allegiance to him at Ghadïr Khum.
However, the political ambitions moved the people to remove him from the
caliphate and to nominate a person other than him. This led to bad
effects on the community throughout history.

However, this sensitive point is among the basic differences between the
Shï‘a and the Mu‘tazilites.

### 2. Intercession.

###

The Mu‘tazilites said that none of the friends of Allah had the right to
intercede with him for any person. Allah will reward man due to his act.
If his acts were good, he would get good. If they were evil, he would
get evil. The intercession of anybody would not avail him. The Shï‘a
opposed that. They thought that the friends of Allah, such as the pure
Imams, will have the right to intercede with Allah on the Day of
Judgment. That is to show their outstanding qualities and their
excellent position with Allah. If they had no right to intercede with
Allah, then what would distinguish them from other people on that day?

These are some of the differences between the Shï‘a and the
Mu‘tazilites. Violent debates occurred between the leading figures of
the Shï‘a and of the Mu‘tazilites.

### Imam al-Baqir and the Leaders of the Mu‘tazilites

###

The main leaders of the Mu‘tazilites met Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him. They debated with him. They are as follows:

### 1. Al-Hasan al-Basri

###

Al-Hasan al-Basri went to Medina (Yathrib). He met Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, and said to him:

- I have come to ask you about certain matters from the Book of Allah.

- Are you not the jurist of the people of Basrah?

- It may be said so.

- Is there a person in Basrah to learn from?

- No.

- Do all the people of Basrah learn from you?

- Yes.

- You have assumed a great affair. I have heard something concerning
you. I do not know whether it is right or wrong.

- What is it?

- They said that you said: Allah created the servants and entrusted
their affairs to them.

Al-Hasan al-Basri bowed his head. He was unable to answer the Imam. So,
the Imam asked him:

Do you know him to whom Allah said in His Book: “You are safe.” Is there
fear for him after the words from Him?

- No.

- I will present a verse for you. I will end addressing you. I think
that you will give it another meaning. If you did that, you would
destroy yourself and others.

- What is it?

- Do you know what Allah meant when he said: “And We made between them
and the towns which We had blessed (other) towns to be easily seen, and
We apportioned the journey therein: Travel through them nights and days,
secure.”[^24] I heard that you gave the people a legal opinion when you
said: “It is Mecca.”

“Yes,” replied al-Hasan al-Basri.

The Imam supplied proof of explaining the verse. So, al-Hasan was unable
to answer him. Then, the Imam prevented him from embracing
authorization. He told him that authorization was invalid.[^25]

### 2. Imam al-Baqir refuted al-Hasan

###

al-Basri.

‘Uthman al-‘Ama came to Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, and
said to him: [Al-Hasan al-Basri said:] “The fire will hurt the stomachs
of the persons who conceal knowledge.” The Imam denied that and said:
“Therefore, the believer of the family of Pharaoh will perish. Allah
praised him for that. Knowledge has been concealed since Allah, the
Great and Almighty, sent Noah. Let al-Hasan go to the right and left. By
Allah, he will not find knowledge in anywhere except here.” He pointed
to his holy chest.[^26]

### 3. Imam al-Baqir and ‘Amru bin ‘Ubayd

###

‘Amru b. ‘Ubayd was the spiritual leader of the Mu‘tazilites. Al-Mansur
al-Dawaniqi respected and honored him.[^27] He came to visit Imam Abu
Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, to test him with questions. He said:
“May I be your ransom, what is the meaning of the words of Him, the
Exalted: Do not those who disbelieve realize that the heavens and the
earth were rataq and We made them fitq?[^28] What is this rataq and this
fitq? “The heaven was rataq (means) that no rain came down from it,”
answered Imam Abu Ja‘far, peace be on him, “and the earth was fitq
(means) that no plants came out of it.”

‘Amru stopped. He could not find any opposition. He went away but then
came back.

“May I be your ransom,” he said, “tell me of the words of Him, the Most
High: On whomsoever My anger alights, he fall (to disaster.)[^29] What
is the anger of Allah?”

“The anger of Allah is His punishment,” replied Abu Ja‘far, peace be on
him, “Whoever thinks that anything changes Allah is an unbeliever.”[^30]

The Murji'a
-----------

The Murji'a appeared on the Islamic arena during Umayyad era. They
played a dangerous role in formulating the political events at those
times. They supported and defended the Umayyad government. It is
necessary for us to give an outline about them and to explain the
attitude of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, towards them.
That is as follows:

### 1. The Meaning of the Murji'a

###

The researchers differed over the meaning of the Murji'a. For they
differed over understanding the word from which the Murji'a was derived.
The following is some of their views:

A. Some of them thought that the word murji'a was derived from the verb
arja'a, which means he gives (someone) time and delays (him). They were
called the Murji'a, for they postponed the affair of those who disagreed
on the caliphate to the Day of Judgment. They did not judge any of
them.[^31]

B. Some of them thought that the Murji'a was derived from the verb
arja'a, meaning hope. For they did not decide that the one who committed
a major sin would be from the people of the fire or from the people of
the garden. Rather, they postponed the decision concerning him to the
Day of Judgment. With that they gave hope for forgiveness. In other
words, they hoped that Allah would forgive every Moslem.[^32]

C. It was said that they were called the Murji'a, for they thought that
the heart and the tongue confirmed faith, and that they delayed
act.[^33] They thought that Allah would save the believers because of
their hearty faith, though they did not pray and fast. With this they
advanced faith and postponed act. Ahmed Amïn favored the first
view.[^34] Yankilson favored the second view.[^35]

### The Growth of the Murji'a

###

We firmly believe that the Umayyads ordered this sect to formed. Then
they spread its beliefs among the people. For this sect regarded as
legal the caliphate of the Umayyads. Meanwhile, it said that Allah would
decide on the Day of Judgment the grievous events which the Umayyads
made, and that no one had the right to criticize their acts.

The Murji'a was formed for political reasons. The main leaders of the
Murji'a obeyed the Umayyad and the Abbasid kings. Al-Ma'mun said:
“Al-Irja' or postponement is the religion of the kings.”[^36] This sect
did not oppose the ugly deeds of the Umayyad kings. So, it deviated from
the true Islam.

Shawqi Dayf said: “The views of the Murji'a served the Umayyad house.
The Shï‘a and other pious people thought that this house deviated from
religion. So, they thought that the Moslems had to replace it with the
‘Alid House. The Murji'a disagreed with the Shï‘a on this opinion. For
they did not want to prefer Moslem to Moslem. They did not want to judge
any person with piety or without piety. It was enough for the Moslem to
be Moslem. No one had the right to judge his act.[^37]

Ukhudabakhsh said: “The Murji'a made an agreement with the Umayyad
government for livelihood.”[^38]

The Murji'a was among the hirelings of the ruling authorities at that
time. They played a positive role in supporting the Umayyad and
justifying its policy standing on oppression and tyranny.

### The Shï‘a and the Murji'a

###

There was an intense disagreement between the Shï‘a and the Murji'a. For
they differed over the succession after the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family. The Shï‘a thought that Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be on him, was the direct successor after the Prophet.
Besides they thought that the Umayyad government was illegal, and that
the Moslems had to destroy it. However, the Murji'a thought that the
Umayyad government was legal, and that no one had the right to revolt
against it.

There was a strong conflict between the two sects. For the Shï‘a vexed
the Murji'a when they mentioned ‘Ali, peace be on him, in their clubs
and assemblies. In this connection, a Shï‘ite poet said:

If you are pleased to see the Murji'a die with their illness before
their death,

then renew mentioning ‘Ali's name before them, and bless the Prophet,
and the members of his house.[^39]

The Shï‘a criticized the Murji'a for preferring the caliphs to Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him. They regarded them
as narrow-minded.

Muharib b. Dithar al-Hadhli, main leader of the Murji'a, tried to refute
the Shï‘a in a poem.[^40] Mansur al-Nimri, a Shï‘ite poet, answered him
in a poem, too.[^41]

The Shï‘a criticized and mocked the Murji'a for postponing Imam ‘Ali,
the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, and making equal between
him and ‘Uthman and Mu‘awiya and the Kharijites. Al-Sayyid al-Himyari
refuted their views in a poem.[^42]

### Grimar's Claims

###

Grimar thought that there were relationships between the principles of
the Murji'a and the teachings of the eastern church. He tried to show
that through the beliefs of the Murji'a, which said that the sinners
would not be abiding in the fire. This is in what the fathers of the
eastern church oppose the western church. He also thought the calm
belief of the Murji'a agreed with the teachings Yohanna al-Dimashqi, who
was busy doing religious studies when the Murji'a appeared, and who was
very famous in the capital of the Umayyad caliphs. Moreover, Grimar
underlined that the beliefs of the Murji'a had close ties with the
religious philosophy of the eastern church.[^43]

As for this view, it is very weak. For the theological studies prospered
in early time in Islam. No study of them was taken from Christianity or
the like. Dr. Yousif Khulayf said: “I think that the irja' or
postponement, such as asceticism, was not Christian in growth and
tendency. Rather, it was Islamic in growth and tendency. This does not
mean that Christianity had no effect on it and supplied it with some of
its trends. However, it has clear Islamic qualities.[^44]

### The Definition of Faith

###

The Murji'a believed that faith was certitude by the heart, and that
words and deeds were not important. If man believed (in Allah) with his
heart, then he was a believing Moslem. That did not depend on his
prayers, his fasting, and his pilgrimage (to Mecca). These religious
duties were not important. With that they opposed the Mu‘tazilites, who
thought the one who committed a major sin was neither a believer nor
unbeliever. Rather, he was in a rank between the two ranks. They also
opposed the Kharijites, who said that the one who committed a major sin
was an unbeliever. In this connection, these words of them are famous:
“No sin harms belief. No obedience avails unbelief.”[^45] So, they said
that the Christians and the Jews were unbelievers. They took care of
them and did not want to hurt their

feelings. For the Umayyad palace was full of the Christians and the Jews
who occupied high offices in the Umayyad state.[^46]

### Imam al-Baqir and ‘Amru al-Masir

###

‘Amru b. Qays al-Masir believed in the irja' or postponement. He and a
companions of his went to Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him.
He said to the Imam: “We do not dismiss our followers from faith because
of sins.” The Imam refuted his corrupt claims, saying: “O Son of Qays,
Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said: ‘The believer
does not commit fornication nor does he steal.’ You and you friend go
wherever you wish.”[^47] The Murji'a limited faith in this way that
opposed the traditions reported on the authority of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family. For the person who believes in Allah and
the hereafter does not commit fornication nor does he steal. Rather it
is the unbeliever who commits such sins. Faith prevents the soul from
committing sin. Therefore, whoever commits sins has no faith.

### Abu Hanïfa and the Irja'

###

Some sources mentioned that Abu Hanïfa believed in the irja' or
postponement, and that his religious school stood on it.[^48] Mohammed
b. ‘Amru said: [I heard Abu Mishir say:] “Abu Hanï was the head of the
Murji'a.” ‘Amr b. Sumayd said: [I heard my grandfather say: I said to
Abu Yousif:]

- Was Abu Hanï from the Murji'a?

- Yes.

- Was he a Jahami?

- Yes.

- Why did you keep silent?

- Abu Hanï was a teacher. We accepted his good words and left his ugly
words.[^49]

This accusation caused Abu Hanïfa many slanders. Some ruling circles
launched a bitter slanderous campaign. However, we are not sure of such
an accusation.

The Kharijites
--------------

The sect of Kharijites were one of the oldest revolutionary sects that
appeared on the arena of the political life in Islam. It appeared when
Mu‘awiya was defeated and was about to escape. Hence, he resorted to
raising copies of the Koran asking Imam ‘Ali to use it as a referee. As
the Kharijites had no political and social awareness they hurried to the
Imam and asked him to accept that. The Imam told them that it was a
military trick, that the Umayyads did not believe in the Koran, and that
they did not respect Allah. However, the Kharijites disobeyed him. They
unanimously agreed on that they would remove him or stop the war
operations. Then they drew their swords in his face. Meanwhile, the
vanguards of the Imam's army headed by the great commander, Malik
al-Ashtar, was about to win victory and capture Mu‘awiya b. Abï Sufyan.
So, a discord was about to occur among the army of the Imam. Thus, the
Imam responded to them and ordered the battle to be stopped. Then, the
document of arbitration was written between the two sides. Noteworthy,
the document did not state that

‘Ali was the Commander of the Faithful. Afterwards, the stupid
Kharijites understood that they followed a plain error, and that the
Umayyads deceived them when they raised copies of the Koran. Hence, the
refused the arbitration. They were so displeased with it that they asked
the Imam to announce his repentance and to go on the battle. However,
the Imam refused to accept this weak view from them. He was not ready to
violate the truce and to announce his repentance. Rather, it was they
who committed such a sin when they disobeyed the Imam and shouted: “No
one has the right to rule except Allah.”

These words were their official motto. When Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him,
heard these words, he said: “They are true words, but they want to
achieve falsehood through them.” However, the rule was for the sword not
for Allah. They illegally spread killing among the people. They also
spread corruption in the earth. Imam ‘Ali spared no effort to convince
them of their corrupt, but all his efforts were in vein. They insisted
on aggression and error. The Imam was forced to fight against them.
Thus, the Battle of al-Nahrwan took place. Most of the Kharijites were
killed at that battle. Shame and dishonor accompanied them. Their blood
was shed while they were in plain error. Moslems were indignant with
them. The poets satirized them. Among them was al-Kumayt.[^50]

Their blood was shed, for they fought against the truth and wanted to
enliven falsehood. This is what Sayyid Hayder showed in his poems.[^51]

Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, uprooted them
at the Battle of al-Nahrwan. He killed their main leaders. However, some
of them escaped. Hence, they began to proclaim their beliefs that
summoned the people to mutiny against the standing rule. They led many
bloody revolutions in the Islamic countries. Many people were killed
during those revolutions. The historians have mentioned them in details.

### Their Religious Views

###

The Kharijites stood alone in their views that deviated from Allah's
book and the Sunna of his Prophet. The following is some of their views:

1. They regarded as unbelievers Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him, Mu‘awiya,
the two arbitrators (‘Amru b. al-‘As and Abu Musa al-Ash‘ari), and the
Companions of the Camel (‘A'isha, Talha, and al-Zubayr).

2. They regarded as unbelievers those who committed major sins. They
decided that such sinners would be immortal in the fire.

3. They said that it was permitted for the non-Qurayshi persons to be
caliphs. With that they opposed all the Sunnis who unanimously agreed on
that the caliph should be from Quraysh. They (the Kharijites), said that
the Imam should not be appointed through nomination and designation.
With that they opposed the Shï‘a who believed in the nomination (of the
Imam). Moreover, they said that it was possible for the world to remain
without an Imam. If the world was in need of an Imam, then the slave,
the free, the Egyptian, and the like had the right to be caliph.[^52]
They had other views the books of the sects and the like have mentioned
them.

### Imam al-Baqir and Nafi‘

###

Nafi‘ al-Azraq, one of the main leaders of the Kharijites, came to Imam
Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, and questioned him about some
religious matters. When he had finished his questions, the Imam said to
him: “Say to these rebels (the Kharijites), with what did you regarded
as lawful the separation from the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on
him? Had you not shed your blood before him to obey him and to approach
Allah through supporting him? They will say to you: He (Imam ‘Ali) had
appointed an arbitrator in the religion of Allah. Say to them: Allah had
also chosen two persons from his creatures (to be arbitrators). That was
when He said: And if you fear a breach between the two (the man and the
woman), then appoint an arbitrator from his family and an arbitrator
from her family. If they both desire an agreement, Allah will effect
harmony between them.[^53] Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, appointed Sa‘d b. Ma‘adh as an arbitrator between himself and
the Banu Qurayza. So, Sa‘d decided between them according to the words
of Allah, the Great and Almighty. Did you not know that the Commander of
the Faithful ordered the two arbitrators to decide according to the
Koran and not to exceed it? He stipulated that he should refuse the
judgments contrary to the Koran. The Kharijites asked Imam ‘Ali: Whom
have appointed as an arbitrator over you? He replied: I have not
appointed a creature as an arbitrator (over me). Rather, I have
appointed the Book of Allah as an arbitrator.”

Nafi‘ admired the words of Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him. Then he said:
“I have never heard such words before. They are true, Allah
willing.”[^54]

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, had other debates with the
Kharijites on The Oneness of Allah. We will mention them when we talk
about the atheist views that invaded the Moslem countries at that time.

The Shï‘a
---------

I want to be sincere to the truth when I will talk about the Shï‘a. I
also want to be neutral when I will speak of their beliefs. For the
Shï‘a has suffered until now from baseless accusations. That is as
follows:

### The Meaning of the Shï‘a

###

In Arabic the Shï‘a means the followers or the supporters. Then this
name (the Shï‘a) has included all those who follow and support Imam
‘Ali, peace be on him, and the members of his house. So, this name
concerned them.[^55] Shaykh al-Mufïd said: “In Arabic, Shi‘ism means to
follow and obey sincerely the followed one. Allah, the Great and
Almighty said: The one who was of his followers (Shï‘a) asked him for
help against the one who was of his enemies.[^56] So, He distinguished
between them according to following and enmity. The reason for Shi‘ism
(following) to one of them is obedience as it is in this clear verse.
When the definite article the is added to the word shï‘a, then the word
refers to the followers of the Commander of the Faithful, the blessings
of Allah be on him and his family.”[^57]

The word Shï‘a refers to those who believe in the Imamate of the
Commander of the Faithful and his succession after the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family. They have unanimously agreed on that the

Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, entrusted succession to the
Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him.

### The Beginning of Shi‘ism

###

We firmly believe that it was the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, who started Shi‘ism. That was when he addressed Imam ‘Ali,
saying: “O ‘Ali, you and your followers (Shï‘a) will come to me very
thirsty at the (sacred) waters (of Heaven).”[^58]

Imam Kashif al-Ghita' said: “The leader of the Islamic law (the Prophet)
was the first to plant the seed of Shi‘ism in the field of Islam. Namely
the seed of Shi‘ism was put alongside the seed of Islam.”[^59]

Al-Noubakhti said: “The Shï‘a was the first of the sects. It was the
sect of ‘Ali b. Abï Talib. It was called the Shï‘a of ‘Ali at the time
of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and after him. They
(the Shï‘a) were known for their obedience to him and their belief in
his Imamate.”[^60]

Shaykh Mohammed al-Husayn al-Mudafar said: “Shi‘ism started on the day
when the great savor, Mohammed, the blessing of Allah be on him, called
at the top of his voice: There is no god but Allah. When these words of
Him: Tell your close relatives, came down to the Prophet, he gathered
the Banu Hashim and asked them: ‘Which of you will be my brother, my
inheritor, my trustee, and my successor among you after me?’ None of
them answered. So, the Prophet said: ‘This is my brother, my trustee, my
helper, my inheritor, and my successor among you after me. Listen to him
and obey him.’ The summons of the leader of the message to follow Abu
al-Hasan (Imam ‘Ali) was side by side with the summons to the twofold
testimony. Then Abu Dharr al-Ghifari was among the followers (Shï‘ites)
of ‘Ali, peace be on him.”

In Khitat al-Sham[^61] , Mohammed Kurd ‘Ali said: “A group of the main
companions were known for their following ‘Ali at the time of Allah's
Apostle. Among them was Salmam al-Farsi, who said: ‘We pledged
allegiance to Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, to be
sincere to the Moslems and to follow and obey ‘Ali b. Abï Talib, peace
be on him.’ Among them was Abu Sa‘ïd al-Khudari, who said: ‘He (the
Prophet) ordered the people (to perform) five (duties). However, they
performed four (duties), and left one (duty). When he was asked about
the four (duties), he replied: (They are) the prayers, zakat (alms),
fasting the month of Ramadan, and the pilgrimage (to Mecca).’ Then he
was asked about the one (duty) which they left, he answered: (It was)
the succession of ‘Ali b. Abï Talib (to authority).”[^62]

Shi‘ism started at the time of the great Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family. Thus, it was he who put its fundamentals. That was when
he nominated the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, as
successor after him. There are many proofs for that. The following is
some of them:

1. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, was the leader of a
message and summons. He came to free and save all the world. He spared
no effort to carry out the message of his Lord. He plunged into fears.
He was engaged in battles. He suffered from many persecutions from which
no social reformer in the earth suffered. So, was it possible for him to
leave the authorities in chaos after him? Was it possible for him to
ignore the affairs

of the succession on which the fate of his community depended? Surely,
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, took care of the
succession after him. Hence, he designated the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be on him, as successor after him. With that he wanted
to protected his community from division and discord. He wanted to
preserve its interests. Moreover, he wanted his community to go on
conveying his brilliant message to all the people.

2. The leadership of the community was in need of outstanding qualities.
All these outstanding qualities came to gather in the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be on him. He was the most knowledgeable of all the
people in the affairs of the Islam message. He was the gate of the city
of knowledge of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. He was
the most knowledgeable of the community in giving legal decisions. He
was the most ascetic of all the people. For he renounced all the
pleasures of life, and he divorced his world three times. Moreover, he
was the most just of all the people. So, was it possible for the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, to ignore this Imam who had
these outstanding qualities?

3. Many traditions were reported on the authority of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, concerning the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be on him. All the Moslems have narrated the traditions
and underlined that they are authentic. Among these traditions are: the
tradition of the grilled bird, the tradition of the house, the tradition
of al-Ghadïr, the tradition of al-Thaqalayn, the tradition of the boat,
and the like. All these traditions and the like have mentioned the
outstanding qualities of Abu al-Husayn (Imam ‘Ali), peace be on him.
Whoever considers carefully these traditions understands why the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, appointed the Commander of
the Faithful, peace be on him, as successor after him.

4. Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him, refrained from pledging allegiance to Abu
Bakr. The main Companions (of the Prophet) also refrained from pledging
allegiance to him. Among them were Abu Dharr, ‘Ammar b. Yasir, Salman
al-Farisi, Khalid b. Sa‘ïd, and the like. They told him that Imam ‘Ali
was the worthier of him of the position of Allah's Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family. Khalid b. Sa‘ïd said to Imam ‘Ali: “We will
pledge allegiance to you. By Allah, none of the people is worthier than
you of the position of Mohammed.”[^63]

Fatima the chaste, daughter of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, was indignant with Abu Bakr. That was when he occupied the
office and position of the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him.
She made a famous speech. In the speech she summoned (the Moslems) to
revolt against the government of Abu Bakr. For she, peace be on her, was
sure of that her father appointed Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him, as
successor after him. The historians said that Fatima asked Imam ‘Ali to
bury her in the darkness of night, and that Abu Bakr and ‘Umar should
not attend her funeral.

5. All the Moslem figures knew that Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him, was the
testamentary trustee of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.
Among them were Khuzayma b. Thabit, the man with two testimonies, ‘Abd
al-Rahman b. Ju‘ayl, ‘Abd Allah b. Abu Sufyan b. al-Harth b. ‘Abd
al-Mutalib, Hijr b. ‘Adi al-Kindi, al-Ash‘ath b. Qays al-Kindi,
al-Nu‘man b. ‘Ajlan, al-Fadl b. Abbas, and Hassan b. Thabit.[^64]

### The Fable of ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’

###

Some spiteful persons have attributed Shi‘ism to ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’.
They said: “It was ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’ who founded Shi‘ism. He created
its fundamentals and propagated them.” The following is some of them:

### 1. Al-Malti

###

Al-Malti was one of those who believed in this fable. He said: “‘Abd
Allah b. Saba’ founded Shi‘ism.”[^65] Moreover, he accused all the
Shï‘ite sects of unbelief. However, he did not supply any proof of what
he mentioned. Rather, he regarded his view as axiomatic. However, his
view is among the views that have no importance in the scientific
studies.

### 2. Al-Nashshar

###

Dr. al-Nashshar was one of those who harbored malice against the members
of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, and hated their followers.
In this connection, he said: “The Jews were the real founders of the
excessive Shï‘ite faith. Some of their scholars adopted Islam. Then they
came to the Islamic world. They made use of removing ‘Ali from the
caliphate through the idea of the infallible Imam or the seal of the
trustees. Islamic belief books have unanimously agreed on that it was
‘Abd Allah b. Saba’, who was the first to summon (the people) to the
idea of holiness which was ascribed to ‘Ali, was a Jew before Islam.”
The Dr. added: “Surely, this idea did not appear at the time of Abu Bakr
and ‘Umar. Rather, it appeared during the caliphate of ‘Uthman at the
hand of ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’. It was among the hidden trends that
intended to destroy the Islamic world.”[^66]

### 3. Shaykh Abu Zahra

###

Shaykh Abu Zahra was among those who believed in this fable. In this
respect he said: “The greatest tyrant, ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’, was the
first to summon (the people) to believe in the authority and trusteeship
of ‘Ali and the return of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. The Shï‘ite doctrine grew during those discords.”[^67]

These views are among the farces of human intellect. They have branded
their owners with infamy. For they have slandered the greatest Islamic
sect that take care of the rights of the persecuted, raise the banner of
human dignity, and records laudable deeds for Islam and Moslems. Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, and the leading
members of his children headed this sect. The main Moslem figures joined
this sect. Among them were ‘Ammar b. Yasir, Abu Dharr, Salman al-Farsi,
Hijr b. ‘Adï, and the like. They enlighten the intellectual life in
Islam. So, why do the people accuse the Shï‘ite sect of that ‘Abd Allah
b. Saba’ was the first to

form it? However, some researchers said that ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’ was a
baseless, fabricated, imaginary person.[^68]

One of the orientalists doubted intellectually the existence of ‘Abd
Allah b. Saba’. Namely he doubted his effect on the Shï‘ite doctrine. In
this connection he said: “However, the modern research has shown that
this is an anticipation for the events and a picture with which it was
acted in the past. The traditionalists of the second century A.H.
imagined it from their prevailing circumstances and ideas at that time.”

After studying the sources critically, Filhauzin Fred Linder said: “The
next generation fabricated the plot and the summons and ascribed them to
‘Abd Allah b. Saba’.”

Kaitani said: “The Arab scholar could not imagine such a plot with such
thinking and organization. For, in 35 A. H., he was known for his tribal
regime standing on the paternal authority. However, it reflects clearly
the circumstances of the first Abbasid age.”[^69]

Dr. Taha Husayn said: “The talk of ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’ was fabricated.
It was created at the time when there were arguments between the Shï‘a
and other Islamic sects. The opponents of the Shï‘ites wanted to insert
a Jewish element in the fundamentals of this doctrine to plot against
them (the Shï‘ites) and to defame them.”[^70]

However, the fable of ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’ was fabricated to defame and
slander the Shï‘a. Moreover, there is no relation between the Shï‘a and
‘Abd Allah b. Saba’ and the persons who deviated from the truth.

### The Shï‘a and Excessiveness

###

The Shï‘a has been unjustly accused of excessiveness towards their
Imams. However, they are innocent of this accusation. We must mention a
brief talk about that.

### The Meaning of Excessiveness

###

As for the meaning of excessiveness, it is that the pure Imams, peace be
on them, are ascribed to divinity. Some of the excessive persons said
that ‘Ali, peace be on him, was the son of Allah.

In satirizing them, Sayyid al-Himyari said:

(They) are the people who have gone too far in loving ‘Ali.

Woe unto them!

They say: He (‘Ali) is the son of Allah. Great is our Creator.

He has neither son nor father.[^71]

.Al-Mufïd b. Sa‘ïd said to Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
“Confess that you know the unseen so that I might come to you to Iraq.”
However, the Imam, peace be on him, scolded and dismissed him. Then,
al-Mufïd went to Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq, peace be on him, and said to him
as he said to his father. Hence, the Imam said: “I seek protection in
Allah.”[^72]

### The Shï‘a have renounced the Excessive

###

The Shï‘a have denounced the excessive. They do not numbered them from
the Moslem sects. They regard them as unbelievers. It was reported on
the authority of Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, who said to Razzam:
“Say to the excessive ones: Turn to Allah in repentance. For you are
sinners, unbelievers, and polytheists.” Concerning ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’,
he, peace be

on him, said: “May Allah curse ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’. He accused the
Commander of the Faithful of divinity. By Allah, the Commander of the
Faithful worshipped Allah willingly. Woe unto those who ascribe
fabrications to us. When I mention ‘Abd Allah b. Saba’, every hair in my
body stands. He said a great affair. What is wrong with him. May Allah
curse him. By Allah ‘Ali was a righteous servant. He did not get the
dignity from Allah but through the obedience to Allah and His Apostle.
Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, did not get the
dignity from Allah but through the obedience to Him.”[^73]

Kathïr al-Nawa said: [I heard Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
say:] “Allah and His Apostle have renounced al-Mughïra b. Sa‘ïd and
Banan b. Sam‘an. For they have ascribed fabrications to us, the ahl
al-Bayt.”[^74]

The Shï‘ite jurists have unanimously agreed on that the excessive are
impure. They treat them as they treat the unbelievers. For example, the
Moslem woman is not permitted to marry from them and the Moslem man is
not permitted to marry from them.

Imam Shaykh Mohammed al-Husayn Al Kashif al-Ghita' said: “As for the
Shï‘a, they renounce those sects.”

As for the Imami Shï‘ites in Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, India, Syria, and
the like, they regard the excessive as unbelievers.

### The Shï‘ite View concerning the Imams

###

As for the Shï‘ite view of the Imams, peace be on them, it is moderate.
There is neither extremism nor excessiveness in love for them. The Shï‘a
believe that the Imams are the honored servants of Allah. They say
nothing contrary to Allah's words. They act according His orders. They
are the people of the remembrance. They are the successors. The are the
abiding ones of Allah in His earth. They are the best of His creatures.
They are the containers of His knowledge. Allah protected and purified
them completely from sins.

Their Leader, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, described
them, saying: “They are the life of knowledge and death of ignorance.
Their clemency tells you of their knowledge, their outward of their
inward, and their silence of their wise thinking. They do not oppose
right nor do they differ with each other over it. They are the pillars
of Islam and asylums of protection. With them right has returned to its
position and wrong has left its place and its tongue is severed from its
root. They have understood religion attentively and carefully, not by
mere heresy or from narrators. For the narrators of knowledge are many
but its understanders are few.”[^75]

The poet of Islam, al-Kumayt, described them, saying:

However, my hidden and manifest love is for the Hashimites,

who are the best of all people, who are near to generosity,

who are far from oppression

who are right when the people are wrong,

who has established the rules of Islam,

who are the sufficient defenders when the war breaks out,

who are the rain when drought hits the people,

who are the shelter for the orphans' mothers,

who are the sufficient leaders in all conditions.[^76]

### The Love of the Shï‘a for the Imams

###

The hearts of the Shï‘a are full of love for the members of the House
(ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. They think that such love is among the
important religious duties. For many verses and traditions urge them to
do that. Among them are: the Verse of Love, the tradition of
al-Thaqalayn, the tradition of the boat, and the like. The Shï‘a has
believed in such love since the beginning of their history. For example,
Abu al-Aswad al-Du'ali answered those who blamed him for his love for
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, saying:

Do you blame me for the love for the

of Mohammed?

May a stone be in your mouth!

(I do not worry) whether you leave your

blame or increase (it).

Whoever does not cling to love for them

should confess the love for the one who

is not rightly-guided.[^77]

Some people criticized Abu al-Aswad for his love for the members of the
House. So, he answered them with these lines of poetry:

I love very much Mohammed, Abbas, Hamza, the trustee (Imam ‘Ali), and
Ja‘far.

They are the children of the uncle of the Prophet.

They are the most lovable with me of all the people.[^78]

Some people blamed ‘Abd Allah b. Kuthayr al-Sahmi for his love for the
members of the House. They regarded his love for them as sin. Hence, he
answered them with these lines of poetry, saying:

Is it regarded as sin that I love them?

Rather, love for them is an expiatory gift.[^79]

Harb b. al-Mudhir b. al-Jarud was satisfied with little food of his
world, for he was ascetic in the world. He announced his victory when he
loved the members of the House, peace be on them. He said:

My love is for the relations of the Prophet Mohammed.

For he (the Prophet) did not demand of us any reward except the love of
his relations.[^80]

The Shï‘a love the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them,
because they seek nearness to Allah, the Exalted, through it. They hope
that they will be safe from the torment on the Day of Resurrection
through the love for the Prophet's relations. Sayyid al-Himyari said:

I want to be safe (from chastisement) on the Day of Judgment through
love for the guide Abu Hasan (Imam ‘Ali).[^81]

Al-Farazdaq thought that his love for the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, was religion, and that hating them was
unbelief. He said:

He is from the people whose love is religion

whose detest is unbelief and whose nearness

is salvation and protection

When the people of piety are numbered, they

(ahl al-Bayt) are their Imams.

Or (when) it said: Who is the best of the

people of the earth? It is said: They (ahl al-Bayt) are.

Al-Kumayt also showed his love for the members of the House, peace be on
them, in many of his poems.[^82]

### The Aspects of Love for the Imams

###

As for the aspects of the love of the Shï‘a for the Imams of the members
of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, they are as follows:

1. The Shï‘a take the fundamentals and branches of religion from the
Imams of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. They
think that it is obligatory to follow their words and deeds because they
are of the obligatory Sunna. With that the Shï‘a has made their
ideological frame, namely with what was reported on the authority of the
Imams of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. In
the legislative matters, they do not depend on the other Islamic
doctrines. This is not because of partiality or fanaticism. However the
authentic traditions, which were reported on the authority of the
Prophet (may Allah bless him and his family) urged them to do that. They
also urged them to confine themselves to the doctrine of the Imams of
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.

Imam Sharaf al-Dïn said: “We are not partial or fanatic when we follow
the fundamentals (of a doctrine) other than the Ash‘arite doctrine and
the branches (of a doctrine) other than the four doctrines. We do not
doubt the religious opinions (ijtihad) of the Imams of the doctrines.
(We do not doubt) their justice, their honesty, and their great
knowledge and deeds).

“However, the religious proofs have forced us to follow the doctrine the
doctrine of the Imams from the members of the House of prophecy, the
place of the (prophetic) mission and angels, and the landing place of
inspiration and revelation. So, we have followed them in the branches
and beliefs of religion, the principles and rules of jurisprudence, the
sciences of the Sunna and the Book, and the sciences of ethics and
behavior and manners. We have followed the proofs that concern the Sunna
(practices) of the Lord of prophets and apostles, peace be on him and
his family.

“If the proofs permitted us to oppose the Imams from the family of
Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, or if we were able to get
the intention of nearness to Allah, the Glorified, when we follow a
doctrine other than their doctrine, we would follow the doctrine of the
Sunnis.”[^83]

Then he added: “I think that no one dare to prefer them (the Imams of
the doctrines) in knowledge and acts to our Imams, who are the Imams of
the pure family, the life-boats of the community, the door of its hitta,
its safety against discords in religion, the signposts of its guidance,
and the valuable ones (thiql) of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, who said: ‘Do not precede them so as not to perish. Do
not fall behind them so as not to perish. For they are more
knowledgeable than you.’ However, it was policy. I wish you knew what it
required at the beginning of Islam.”

The Shaykh of al-Azhar confirmed this bright part of the speech of Imam
Sharaf al-Dïn when he said: “Rather, it might be said that your twelve
Imams are better to be followed than the four Imams. For all the twelve

Imams followed one doctrine. They purified and decided it. However, the
differences among the four (Imams) are famous in all chapters of
jurisprudence. So, its ways are not encompassed and done well. It is
well-known that what one person purifies is unequal to what twelve Imams
purify.”[^84]

It is natural that this aspect, to which the Shï‘a have cleaved and
which they have announced in all fields, has neither excessive nor
extreme love. Rather, it is righteous and moderate.[^85]

2. Among the aspects of love of the Shï‘a for their Imams is that they
mark their anniversaries, praise their outstanding merits, spread their
high moral standards, hold funeral orations, and visit their graves.

The Shï‘a and the Companions (of the Prophet)

The Shï‘a have been accused of defaming the Companions (of the Prophet).
This is a pure fabrication. For the Shï‘a respect the Companions of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and love them very much.
They think that every Moslem should respect them. For they supported
Islam during its early days. Moreover, they spread Islam with their
efforts and armed struggle. Hence, we must talk about them and the
attitude of the Shï‘a towards them.

### The Definition of the Companions

###

The Companions were those who accompanied the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, believed in him, and died for his guidance and
religion. The Companion was not the one who saw the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. For this definition will include all the
children and the unbelievers who saw the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family. This definition will also exclude who did not see the
Prophet because the lost their sight.

### The Position of the Companions

###

The Companionship with the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
has a great position with Allah, the Exalted. However, it did not
protected (the Companions) from errors nor did it save them from the
fire. Hence, the good deed is the only authentic measure with Allah.
Whoever believes (in Allah) and does good, the garden will be his
shelter. Whoever deviates from the truth after he has known guidance,
the fire will be his shelter.

For Allah, the Most High, said: “And that man shall have nothing but
what he strives for. And that his striving shall soon be seen.” “ So, he
who has done an atom's weight of good shall see it. And he who has done
an atom's weight of evil shall see it.”

Allah, the Exalted, based His reward on good deeds and His punishment on
evil deeds. So the Companions and the others are equal with Allah. The
nearest one to Allah is the one who obeys Him. The farthest one from
Allah is the one who disobeys him. The following is some views of the
main Shï‘ites concerning the Companions of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family:

### 1. Sayyid ‘Ali Khan

###

Sayyid ‘Ali Khan al-Madani said: “We think that the justice of the
Companions (of the Prophet) is similar to that of others. Their mere
companionship (with the Prophet) does not make necessary faith and
justice nor does it save (the Companions) from the punishment of the
fire and the wrath of the Almighty (Allah). However, certain faith and
sincere heart should accompanied it. When we know that (some Companions)
had faith and justice and took care of the bequest of Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, concerning his family, and died for
that, we follow them. For we seek nearness to Allah through their love.
Among them were Abu Dharr, ‘Ammar, and Salman al-Farisi. When we know
that the companion retreated from his faith and showed enmity towards
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), we show enmity towards him and
renounce for Allah. However, we keep silent towards the unknown
(Companion).”[^86]

This view is very reliable. We love and respect the good Companions to
seek nearness to Allah. We detest the Companions who deviated from the
truth to seek nearness to Allah Who has ordered us to keep aloof from
falsehood.

### Imam Sharf al-Dïn

###

Imam Sharaf al-Dïn said: “Whoever consider carefully our view about the
Companions (of the Prophet) knows that it is moderate. Our view is not
as excessive as that of the excessive ones who accused all the
Companions of unbelief. Our view is not as excessive as of those who
have regarded them all as reliable. The excessive ones said: ‘All the
Companions (of the Prophet) were unbelievers.’ The Sunnis said: ‘All the
Moslems who heard and saw the Prophets were just.’

“As for us, we think that the mere companionship (with the Prophet),
though excellent quality is not enough for justice. Thus, the Companions
were similar to the other men. There were just men among them. They were
their great figures and their scholars. There were aggressors,
criminals, hypocrites, and unknown ones among them. Hence, we regard
their just ones as proofs, and then we follow them in here and in
hereafter.

“Some of the Companions mutinied against the trustee and brother of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, (i.e., Imam ‘Ali). Among
them were b. Hind, b. al-Nabigha, b. al-Zarqa', b. ‘Aqaba, b. Artat, and
the like. We do not respect such companions. Besides their traditions
are worthless. We give no answer about the unknown (Companions) till we
understand their affairs. This is our view concerning the
traditionalists from the Companions. The Book and the Sunna are between
us. They indicate this view. It is also mentioned in detail in the
principles of jurisprudence.

“However, the Moslem majority (jimhur), went too far in glorifying those
whom they have called Companions. Hence, they have become immoderate
when they have regarded the strong and the weak ones from the Companions
as proof. They have followed every Moslem who heard from the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, or saw him. They rebuke those who
oppose them in this excessiveness.

“They blame us when we refuse to accept the traditions of many
Companions. That is because we openly criticize such Companions or say

that they are unknown. (We do that) to carry out the religious duty that
urges us to purify the religious matters and to look for the authentic
traditions of the Prophet.

“For this reason they doubt us, accuse us of what they say. All that is
out of ignorance. If they resorted to their reason and depended on the
rules of science, they would know that there was no proof for the
justice of the Companions. If they consider carefully the Holy Koran,
they would find it full of mentioning the hypocrites. It is sufficient
to read the Sura of al-Tawba and al-Ahzab.”[^87]

The view of Imam Sharaf al-Dïn represents deep thinking and original
evidence. For the Shï‘a do not behave emotionally towards the Companions
(of the Prophet). Rather, they consider carefully their deeds. So, they
admire the Companions who contributed in building Islam and stood firm
before the events that troubled the Moslems very much after the death of
their Prophet. Moreover, the Shï‘a pay no attention to the Companions
who deviated from Islam and showed enmity towards Allah and His Apostle.
Among them were al-Hakam, Marwan b. al-Hakam, al-Walïd b. ‘Aqaba, Dhï
al-Thidya, Tha‘laba b. Hatib, and the like.

### The Attitude of Imam al-Baqir towards the Companions

###

As for Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, he honored and
respected the good Companions (of the Prophet). Meanwhile he disdained
the bad ones from them. Concerning slandering them, the Imam reported
many traditions on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family. He also mentioned the fabricated traditions that praised
them. That is as follows:

1. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of ‘Abd Allah b. Abï
Nafi‘, on the authority of Abu Hurayra, on the authority of Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, who said: “On the Day of
Judgment, a group of my companions will come to me. However, they will
be dismissed from (the sacred) waters (of Heaven). So, I will say: My
Lord, they are my companions. However, He will say: ‘You do not know
what they had done after you. They had retreated (from their
religion).’”[^88]

Traditions similar to this are numerous. Among them is what Ahmed
reported in his Musnad on the authority of ‘Abd Allah b. Mas‘ud, on the
authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who said
to his Companions: “I will be before you at (the Sacred) waters (of
Heaven). I will be disputed for groups (of my companions). However, I
will be overcome. Hence, I will say: O My Lord, they are my companions.
Thus, He will say: ‘You do not know what they had done after you.’”[^89]

Al-Tirmidhi reported on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, who said: “Men from my companions will be taken to
the right and to the left. So, I will say: O My Lord, they are my
companions. Thus, he will say: ‘You do not know what they had done after
you. They retreated (from their religion) when you left them.’ Hence, I
will say as the good Servant said: ‘If You torture them, they are Your
servants.’”[^90]

2. Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, told some main Companions (of the
Prophet) about the traditions which were fabricated at the time of
Mu‘awiya, who entrusted some committees to fabricate traditions to
praise some

companions and to defame the ‘Alids. Aban asked the Imam to mention some
of the fabricated traditions. Thus, the Imam, peace be on him, mentioned
some of them as follow:

“The two lords of the old men of Heaven are Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.”[^91]

“The angels talk to ‘Umar.”

“The Angel teaches ‘Umar.”

“Tranquillity comes out of ‘Umar's tongue.”

“The angels feel shame of ‘Uthman.”

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, mentioned more than one
hundred fabricated traditions. The people regarded them as true while
they were false.[^92]

### Notes

###

[^1] Al-Falsafa al-Islamiya, p.[^170]:

[^2] Al-‘Aqida wa al-Shari‘a fi al-Islam, p.[^102]:

[^3] Al-Mu‘tazila, p.[^1]:

[^4] Firaq al-Shi‘a, p.[^5]:

[^5] Murujj al-Dhahab.

[^6] Tarikh Baghdad, vol.4, pp.148-[^150]:

[^7] Dirasat fi al-Firaq wa al-‘Aqa’id al-Islamiya, p.[^106]:

[^8] Fajr al-Islam, p.[^295]:

[^9] Tarikh al-Falsafa fi al-Islam, p.[^49]:

[^10] Al-Firaq al-Islamiya fi al-‘Asr al-Umawi, p.[^290]:

[^11] Al-Fasl, vol.2, p.[^113]:

[^12] Al-Milal wa al-Nihal, vol.1, p.[^58]:

[^13] Ibid.

[^14] Al-Firaq al-Islamiya, fi al-Shi‘r al-Umawi, p.[^312]:

[^15] Al-Mu‘tazila, pp.51-[^52]:

[^16] Al-Milal wa al-Nihal, p.[^59]:

[^17] Al-Murtada, al-Amali, vol.1, pp.115-[^116]:

[^18] Al-Maqalat, vol.3, p.[^278]:

[^19] Al-‘Aqida wa al-Shari‘a fi al-Islam, p.[^223]:

[^20] Dirasat fi al-Firaq wa al-‘Aqa’id al-Islamiya, p.[^115]:

[^21] Ajwibat al-Masa’il al-Sagha’iya, p.[^14]:

[^22] Dirasat fi al-Firaq wa al-‘Aqa’id al-Islamiya, p.[^115]:

[^23] Jannat al-Ma’wa, p.[^232]:

[^24] Koran, Saba’, [^19]:

[^25] Al-Ihtijajj, vol.2, pp.62-[^63]:

[^26] Al-Tafsir wa al-Mufasrun, p.2, p.[^33]:

[^27] Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol.1, p.[^548]:

[^28] Koran, al-Anbiya’, [^30]:

[^29] Koran, Taha, [^81]:

[^30] Roudat al-Wa‘izin, vol.1, p.[^144]:

[^31] Al-Firaq al-Islamiya, fi al-‘Asr al-Umawi, p.[^264]:

[^32] Naqd al-‘Ilm wa al-‘Ulama’, p.[^102]:

[^33] Tajj al-‘Arus, maddat raja’a.

[^34] Fajr al-Islam, p.[^279]:

[^35] Al-Firaq al-Islamiya, fi al-‘Asr al-Umawi, p.[^265]:

[^36] Tayfur, Tarikh Baghdad, p.[^86]:

[^37] Al-Tatawir wa al-Tajjdid fi al-Shi‘r al-Umawi, p.[^50]:

[^38] Grimar, Islamic Civilization, p.[^19]:

[^39] Al-Bayyan wa al-Tabiyyin, vol.2, p.[^149]:

[^40] Al-Aghani, vol.7, p.[^10]:

[^41] Ibid, pp.10-[^11]:

[^42] Ibid, p.[^15]:

[^43] Islamic Civilization, p.[^65]:

[^44] Hayat al-Shi‘r fi al-Kufa, p.[^312]:

[^45] Al-Maqrizi, Khutat, vol.4, p.[^171]:

[^46] Al-Firaq al-Islamiya, fi al-‘Asr al-Umawi, p.[^305]:

[^47] Al-Amini, Tafsir Fatihat al-Kitab, p.[^164]:

[^48] Maqalat al-Islamiyyin, vol.1, p.[^202]:

[^49] Tarikh Baghdad, vol.13, p.[^375]:

[^50] Tahdhib al-Kamal, vol.1, p.[^86]:

[^51] Manaqib Al Abi Talib, vol.2, pp.371-[^372]:

[^52] Al-Milal wa al-Nihal, vol.1, p.[^158]:

[^53] Koran, al-Nisa’, [^35]:

[^54] Roudat al-Wa‘izin, vol.1, p.[^245]:

[^55] Tajj al-‘Arus, vol.5, p.[^405]:

[^56] Koran, al-Qasas, [^15]:

[^57] Awa’il al-Maqalat, pp.2-[^4]:

[^58] Majjma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol.9, p.[^131]:

[^59] Asl al-Shi‘a wa Usulaha, p.[^77]:

[^60] Firaq al-Shi‘a, p.[^15]:

[^61] Khutat al-Sham, vol.5, p.[^251]:

[^62] Tarikh al-Shi‘a, p.[^9]:

[^63] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol.2, p.[^105]:

[^64] Al-Imam Sharaf al-Din, al-Muraja‘at, pp.331-[^336]:

[^65] Al-Tanbih wa al-Radd ‘ala Ahl al-Ahwa’ wa al-Buda‘, p.[^25]:

[^66] Nash’at al-Fikr al-Falsafi fi al-Islam, p.[^18]:

[^67] Al-Madhahib al-Islamiya, p.[^46]:

[^68] Al-Sayyid al-‘Askari, ‘Abd Allah bin Saba’, vol.[^1]:

[^69] Nazariyat al-Imama lada al-Shi‘a al-Ithna ‘Ashariya, pp.37-[^38]:

[^70] ‘Ali wa Banuh, pp.98-[^99]:

[^71] Al-‘Aqd al-Farid.

[^72] Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol.5, p.[^209]:

[^73] Al-Imam al-Sadiq wa al-Madhahib al-Arba‘a, vol.1, p.[^235]:

[^74] Lisan al-Mizan, vol.6, p.[^76]:

[^75] Mohammed ‘Abda, Nahjj al-Balagha, vol.2, p.[^259]:

[^76] Al-Hashimiyat.

[^77] Abu al-Aswad, Diwan, p.[^253]:

[^78] Ibid, p.[^176]:

[^79] Al-Bayan wa al-Tabiyyin, vol.3, p.360

[^80] Ibid, p.[^365]:

[^81] Ibid, p.[^360]:

[^82] Al-Hashimiyat, p.[^37]:

[^83] Al-Muraja‘at, pp.40-[^41]:

[^84] Ibid, p.[^44]:

[^85] Hayat al-Imam Musa bin Ja‘far, vol.1, p.[^14]:

[^86] Al-Darajat al-Rafi‘a fi Tabaqat al-Shi‘a, p.[^11]:

[^87] Al-Muraja‘at.

[^88] Al-Ma‘rifa wa al-Tarikh, vol.1, p.[^360]:

[^89] Ahmed, Musnad, vol.5, p.[^231]:

[^90] Al-Turmidhi, Sahih, vol.2, p.[^68]:

[^91] The tradition is fabricated, for it opposes the tradition
successively reported on the authority of the Prophet, who said that
al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the two lords of the youth of Heaven. Imam
al-Jawad was asked about this tradition, so he said: “By Allah the old
people in the garden are not old. Rather, they are young.”

[^92] Hayat al-Imam al-Hasan, vol.2, pp.168-[^169]:
