CHAPTER XI: TO THE SHELTER GARDEN
=================================

Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him, had carried out his
immortal message: he had spread knowledge and Islamic manners among
people. Then Allah chose him to be His neighbor. He wanted him to enjoy
the shade of His mercy and His gardens. He wanted him to be happy
through meeting his grandfathers, who passed the methods of justice and
fairness in the earth. Now, we will talk briefly about the bright end of
the life of the Ima\`m, which he devoted to obedience to Allah,
proclaiming knowledge, kindness to people, and the like It is as
follows:

The Ima\`m announced his own Death.
-----------------------------------

The Ima\`m felt the approach of his certain death. So, he hurried to his
aunt, Fa\`tima daughter of Ima\`m al-Husayn, peace be on him. He
announced his death to her, saying: “I have completed fifty-eight
years.”[^1]

Fa\`tima understood what the Ima\`m meant. Her heart melted with sorrows
for her nephew. For he was the rest of the members of his family, who
were killed by the swords of aggression and error. The Ima\`m completed
fifty-eighty years full of misfortunes. Those years filled his heart
with sorrow and sadness. His father, Ima\`m Zayn al-‘Abidïn, and his
grand father, Ima\`m al-Hasan, peace be on them, departed life at the
same age. Thus, the Ima\`m felt that he was about to die.

The Murder of the Ima\`m
------------------------

Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him, did not die a natural
death. Rather, some sinful persons, who did not believe in Allah and the
hereafter, gave him poison to drink. The historians differed over which
sinful person who committed such a crime. The following are some of the
views:

1. Hisha\`m b. al-Hakam gave the Ima\`m poison to drink.[^2] This is the
most acceptable view. For Hisha\`m was the most spiteful person towards
the family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. His soul
was full of malice and hatred towards them. It was he who forced the
great martyr, Zayd b. ‘Ali, peace be on him, to revolt against him. That
was when he scorned and abandoned Zayd. Surely, the great Ima\`m Abu\`
Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him, shook the position of this
tyrannical person (Hisha\`m). That because the Ima\`m’s knowledge and
outstanding merits were famous. So, the Moslems talked about his talents
and abilities. Hence, Hisha\`m killed the Ima\`m to get rid of him.

2. Ibra\`him b. al-Walïd gave the Ima\`m poison to drink.[^3] Sayyid b.
Tawu\`s thought that Ibra\`him b. al-Walïd took part in murdering the
Ima\`m, peace be on him.[^4] This means that Ibra\`him helped other
persons to murder the Ima\`m, peace be on him.

Some references have ignored the name of the person who assassinated the
Ima\`m, peace be on him. They have only mentioned that the Ima\`m died
of poisoning.[^5] These are some of the views mentioned concerning
murdering the Ima\`m, peace be on him, with poison.

Reasons for the Murder of the Ima\`m
------------------------------------

The Umayyads murdered the Ima\`m, peace be on him. The reasons for that
are as follows:

### 1. The Ima\`m’s high Character

###

Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him, had the highest
character in the Islamic world. Moslems have unanimously greed on his
high character. They have admitted his outstanding merits. All Moslem
religious scholars from all Moslem countries came to him to learn his
sciences and his morals. For the Ima\`m learned that from his
grandfather, Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family.

The Ima\`m, peace be on him, possessed the sentiments of the people.
Thus, they admired and respected him. For the Ima\`m was the most
prominent figure in the family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family. Hence, the Ima\`m’s high social rank displeased the
Umayyads. Accordingly, they decided to murder him to get rid of him.

### 2. The Events of Damascus

###

Among the reasons that moved the Umayyads to kill the Ima\`m, peace be
on him, were the events the Ima\`m faced in Damascus. These events are
as follow:

A. The Ima\`m exceeded the Umayyads and others in shooting. That was
when Hisha\`m summoned the Ima\`m to compete with the Umayyds and others
for shooting. Hisha\`m thought the Ima\`m would fail in hitting the
target. Thus, he would be able to use the Ima\`m’s failure as means to
degrade the importance of the Ima\`m and to mock him before the Syrians.
However, the Ima\`m shot and hit the target several times. The people
had never seen such skillfulness in the world of shooting. Hisha\`m was
full of anger. So, he decided to murder the Ima\`m from that moment.

B. The Ima\`m debated with Hisha\`m on the affairs of the Ima\`mate. The
Ima\`m defeated Hisha\`m. So, the latter was full of malice towards the
former.

C. The Ima\`m debated with the scholar of the Christians on certain
affairs. The Ima\`m also defeated the scholar. So, the Syrians were busy
talking about the Ima\`m’s victory over the Christian scholar. We have
mentioned these matters in detail in the previous chapters.

Al-Ba\`qir designated al-Sa\`diq
--------------------------------

Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him, designated his son
al-Sa\`diq, peace be on him, as an Ima\`m. For al-Sa\`diq was the pride
of the world. He was the pioneer of culture and science in Islam. His
father designated him to be an Ima\`m and successor and general
authority for the community after him. He said to his followers that it
was incumbent on them to follow and obey his son.

Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him, lauded his son,
Ima\`m al-Sa\`diq, peace be on him. He gave an explicit designation for
his Ima\`mte. Abu\` al-Saba\`h al-Kina\`ni reported. He said: [Abu\`
Ja‘far Mohammed looked towards his son Abu\` ‘Abd Allah (al-Sa\`diq),
peace be on him, and said (to us): “Do you see that man? He is one of
those of whom Allah, the Mighty and High, said: We wish to grant a favor
to those who have been humiliated in the land and We will make them
Ima\`ms and inheritors.”[^6]

‘Ali b. al-Hakam reported on the authority of Ta\`hir, who said: [I was
with Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him). When Ja‘far
(al-Sa\`diq) approached, Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir) said:] “Here is the
best of creatures.”[^7]

His Testamentary Enjoinments
----------------------------

Ima\`m Mohammed al-Ba\`qir, peace be on him, gave several enjoinments to
his son, Ima\`m al-Sa\`diq, peace be on him. Among them are the
following:

1. He said: “Ja‘far, I give testamentary enjoinments to you (to treat)
my followers well.” So, Ima\`m al-Sa\`diq, peace be on him, replied:
“May I be your ransom, I will make them (know their religion so well)
that any man among them in the country will not (have to) ask any one
(for advice).”[^8] He, peace be on him, enjoined his son to spend
(money) on them and to take care of their affairs to make them devote
themselves to seek knowledge, to record his traditions, and to spread
his sciences and morals among the people.

2. He, peace be on him, enjoined his son al-Sa\`diq, peace be on him, to
shroud him in the cloak in which he used to perform the prayer.[^9] He
wanted that to be a truthful witness with Allah for his great worship
and his obedience to Him.

3. He endowed some of his money to some female weepers to weep for him
for ten years at Mina.[^10] The reason for that is that Mina was the
greatest center where Moslems gathered, and that there were many female
weepers at it. This would make the Moslems ask about the reason for
weeping. They would be told that the Umayyads persecuted and killed
Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him. So, the Umayyad would
be unable to hide the murder of the Ima\`m.

As for the text of his testamentary enjoinments, it was reported by
Ima\`m Abu\` ‘Abd Allah al-Sa\`diq, peace be on him, who said: [When my
father was near to death, he said (to me): “Call witnesses for me.” I
summoned four men from Quraysh, among them Na\`fi‘, retainer of ‘Abd
Allah b. ‘Umar. (My father said:) “Write this testimony which I bequeath
(like) Jacob did to his sons: My sons, Allah has chosen the religion for
you. So, do not die except as Moslems. Mohammed b. ‘Ali makes this last
testimony to Ja‘far b. Mohammed. He orders him to shroud him in his
cloak in which he used to perform the Friday prayer, to put his turban
on him, to make his grave a square, to raise it the height of four
fingers above the ground, and to take his shabby clothes away from him
at his burial.

Then he said to the witnesses: “Depart, may Allah have mercy on you.”

“Father,” I said to him (after they had gone), “what was in this that
there had to be witnesses for it?”

“My son,” he answered, “I was unwilling for you to be overcome and for
it to be said that no testimony had been mad for him. I wanted you to
have proof.”[^11]

To the Highest Paradise
-----------------------

The poison acted quickly on the body of Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far
(al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him. So, death approached fast. During his
last hours, he gathered all his feelings and sentiments, and cleaved to
Allah, the Most

High. He began reciting the Holy Koran. He asked Allah’s forgiveness.
While his tongue busy praising Allah, death came to him. So, his great
matchless soul ascended to its Creator after it had enlightened the
cultural scientific life in Islam. When the Ima\`m died, the most
wonderful stage of the Islamic message, which provided the Islamic
community with the elements of awareness, development, and prosper,
ended.

His Preparation(for Burial)
---------------------------

Ima\`m al-Sa\`diq, peace be on him, prepared the holy body for burial.
He washed it and shrouded it. He was weeping bitter tears for the
missing of his father, who was the best person under the sky in
knowledge, outstanding merits, and devoutness.

His Burial
----------

The people carried the great body from al-Hamima.[^12] They gathered
around it. They were shouting: “There is no god but Allah! Allah is
Great!” They were happy to touch the coffin of the Ima\`m. They were
mentioning the laudable and favors of Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir),
peace be on him. Then they reached at Baqi‘ al-Gharqad. They dug a grave
alongside the grave of his father, Zayn al-‘Abidïn, the greatest Ima\`m,
peace be on him, and besides his great-uncle, Ima\`m al-Hasan, the Lord
of the Youth of Heaven, peace be on him. Then Ima\`m al-Sa\`diq buried
his father in his final resting place. He buried with him knowledge,
clemency, and kindness to people.

The death of Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him, was the
greatest loss for the Moslems then. For they missed the leader, the
pioneer, and the guide, who spared no effort to spread knowledge and
cultural awareness among Moslems.

His Holy Age
------------

The historians and narrators have differed over his holy age. The
following are some of their views:

1. He died at the age of 73.[^13]

2. He died at the age of 63.[^14]

3. He died at the age of 61.[^15]

4. He died at the age of 60.[^16]

5. He died at the age of 58.[^17]

6. He died at the age of 56.[^18]

7. He died at the age of 55.[^19]

The narrators fully know that the Ima\`m, peace be on him, died at the
age of 58. One of the above-mentioned narrations indicates that.

The Year of his Death
---------------------

The historians differed over the year in which the Ima\`m died. The
following are some of their views:

1. He died in the year 127 A. H.[^20]

2. He died in the year 118 A. H.[^21]

3. He died in the year 117 A. H.[^22]

4. He died in the year 116 A. H.[^23]

5. He died in the year 114 A. H.[^24]

6. He died in the year 113 A. H.[^25]

These are some of the views the historians have mentioned. It is famous
that Ima\`m al-Ba\`qir, peace be on him, died in the year 114A.H.

The Moslems condoled Ima\`m al-Sa\`diq
--------------------------------------

The Moslems were full of sadness. So, they hurried to Ima\`m al-Sa\`diq,
peace be on him, to condole with

him on the death of his father. Among the condolers was Sa\`lim b. Abï
Hafsa, who said: “I said to my companions: ‘Wait for me. For I want to
go to Abu\` ‘Abd Allah (al-Sa\`diq) to condole with him on the death of
his father.’ I went to him and condoled with him and said to him: ‘To
Allah we belong and to Him is our return. By Allah, the one who used to
say: ‘Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said,’ has
passed away. He was not asked about what was between him and Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. I have never seen the like
of him.” He Sa\`lim added: “Ima\`m Abu\` ‘Abd Allah (al-Sa\`diq), peace
be on him, kept silent for an hour. Then he turned to his companions and
said to them: Allah, the Great and Almighty said: ‘Some of My servants
give part of a date as alms. So, I will grow (the alms) for them, as
they grow the foal.’”

Then Sa\`lim went out. He admired Ima\`m Abu\` ‘Abd Allah (al-Sa\`diq),
peace be on him. Hence, he turned to his companions and said to them: “I
have not seen (any person) more wonderful than this (Ima\`m). We
regarded as great Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him, who used
to say without any authority: ‘Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, said.’ Abu\` ‘Abd Allah (al-Sa\`diq), peace be on him, said
to me without an authority: ‘Allah said.’”[^26]

Ima\`m al-Sa\`diq, peace be on him, took his traditions from his
fathers, who took their sciences from their grandfather, Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family.

With this I will end my talk about the life of Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far
(al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him. Before I turn this last page, I would
like to underline that this book, thought comprehensive, has not
encompassed the life of Ima\`m al-Ba\`qir, peace be on him. Rather, it
sheds light on some of the aspects of his character. As for encompassing
his character and recording his sciences, his wonderful wise sayings,
and his excellent literature, they surely require a large encyclopedia.
Before I see off gentle readers, I would like to thank my brother Shaykh
Ha\`di al-Qarashi for his valuable notes concerning the chapters of this
book. In this connection, I would like to thank my son ‘Abd al-Husayn,
who encouraged me to serve the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace
be on them. It is an act of kindness to end my book with the following
commandments of Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him, to
his student Mohammed b. Moslem: “Do not let the people deceive you (with
vain hopes). For the affair will come to you without them. Do not let
the day prevent so-and-so from you. For there is with you the one who
counts against you. Consider not as small the good deed you do. For you
will see it where it pleases you. Consider not as small the evil deed
you do. For you will see it where it displeases you. Do good (to
people). For the good deed erases the past sin. The fear of Allah is

not in long worship. Rather, the fear of Allah is in refraining from the
suspicion.”

### Notes

###

[^1] Tadhkirat al-Khawa\`s, p.[^350]: In Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 2, p.322,
it has been reported on the authority of Ima\`m Ja‘far al-Sa\`diq, peace
be on him, who said: [My father Mohammed al-Ba\`qir, peace be on him,
said:] “‘Ali was killed at the age of fifty-eight. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn
died at the age of fifty-eight. I am fifty-eighty years old.”

[^2] Biha\`r al-Anwa\`r.

[^3] Akhba\`r al-Duwal, p.[^111]:

[^4] Biha\`r al-Anwa\`r.

[^5] Nu\`r al-Abbsa\`r, vol.[^131]: Ibn Tolo\`n, al-A’imma al-Ithna\`
‘Ashar, p.281.

[^6] Usu\`l al-Ka\`fi, vol.1, p.[^306]:

[^7] Ibid.

[^8] Ibid.

[^9] Safwat al-Safwa, vol.2, p.[^63]: Ibn al-Wardi, Ta\`rikh, vol.1,
p.184. Abi al-Fida\`’, Ta\`rikh, vol.1, p.214. Ibn al-Jawzi,
al-Muntazam, vol.7 (photographed).

[^10] Biha\`r al-Anwa\`r, vol.11, p.[^62]:

[^11] Usu\`l al-Ka\`fi, vol.1, p.[^307]:

[^12] Al-Humayma was the name of a village outside Medina. ‘Ali b.
al-‘Abba\`s and his sons owned the village during the time of the
Umayyad government. Ibn Tolo\`n has mentioned that in his book,
“Ta\`rikh al-A’imma al-Ithna\` ‘Ashar, p.[^281]:”

[^13] Safwat al-Safwa, vol.2, p.[^63]: Ibn ‘Asa\`kir, Ta\`rikh, vol. 51,
p.39. Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Muntazam, vol.7. Abi al-Fida\`’, Ta\`rikh, vol.1,
p.214. Ibn al-Athir, Ta\`rikh, vol.4, p.217. Ibn al-Wardi, Ta\`rikh,
vol.1, p.184.

[^14] Abi Isha\`q al-Shira\`zi, Tabaqa\`t al-Fuqaha\`’, p.[^36]:

[^15] Biha\`r al-Anwa\`r, vol.11, p.[^63]:

[^16] Al-Fa\`khu\`ri, Mukhtasar Ta\`rikh al-Isla\`m, p.[^85]:

[^17] Al-Shaykha\`ni, al-Sira\`t al-Sawi, p.[^94]: Ta\`rikh al-Khamïs,
vol. 2, p.319. Safwat al-Safwa, vol. 2, p.63.

[^18] Ta\`rikh al-A’imma, p.[^5]:

[^19] Al-Nafha al-‘Anbariya.

[^20] Al-Fa\`khu\`ri, Mukhtasar Ta\`rikh al-Isla\`m, p.[^85]:

[^21] Khalifa Khayya\`t, Ta\`rikh, vol. 2, p.[^236]:

[^22] Safwat al-Safwa, vol.2, p.[^63]:

[^23] Ibn al-Wardi, Ta\`rikh, vol. 1, p.[^184]: Abi al-Fida\`’,
Ta\`rikh, vol. 1, p.214.

[^24] ‘Ima\`d al-Dïn al-Asfaha\`ni, al-Busta\`n al-Ja\`mi‘. Al-Nafha
al-‘Anbariya. Shadhara\`t al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p.[^149]:

[^25] Wajjdi, Da\`’irat al-Ma‘a\`rif, vol.3, p.[^563]:

[^26] Al-Shaykh al-Tu\`si, al-Ama\`li, p.[^125]:
