Introduction
============

Ima\`m Mohammed al-Ba\`qir, peace be on him, was unique. For he belonged
to the unique members of the pure family (of the Prophet). He was among
the leading Ima\`ms of the House (ahl al-Bayt) peace be on them. He was
among the most prominent of the men of thought and knowledge in Islam.
The historians have unanimously agreed on his importance.For he played
an important role in proclaiming the Islamic culture and founding the
scientific movement in Islam.He dedicated himself to spread knowledge
among the Moslems.That was when the intellectual lull included all the
Islamic world, and when there was no scientific or intellectual
renaissance. The Moslems led successive revolutions and popular
uprisings.They sometimes wanted to get rid of the oppressive Umayyad
regime, and they sometimes wanted to take the reins of
government.Accordingly, they thoroughly neglected the scientific life.
Thus, it had no existence in the arena of life.

Indeed Ima\`m al-Ba\`qir, peace be on him, turned away completely from
those political movements. He did not take part in any political act to
oppose the standing regime then. He devoted himself to knowledge. So, he
raised its standard, founded its bases, and fixed firmly its
sources.Thus, he was the pioneer, teacher, and leader of this community
during its cultural movement.He led it to wide steps in scientific
studies.He played an important role in prospering the bright Islamic
civilization throughout the generations that came after him. Ima\`m
Abu\` Ja‘far (al-Ba\`qir), peace be on him, was famous for
jurisprudence. That is because jurisprudence represents the spirit of
Islam, its essence, and its reaction with life.So, he took care to
enliven it. Then he established his religious school that was full of
main jurists such as Aba\`n b. Taghlub, Mohammed b. Moslem, Barïd, Abu\`
Basïr al-Asadi, al-Fadel b. Sayya\`r, Ma‘ru\`f b. Khrbudh, Zarara b.
A‘yun and the like.

These main figures were among those on whose truthfulness and
jurisprudence the community has unanimously agreed. It was they who
wrote down the traditions of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them. Were it not for them, that large intellectual wealth
would be useless. The Islamic world is proud of this wealth. Besides
this wealth is among the basic sources from which the Shi‘ite jurists
conclude religious rules. The act that makes us boast of the life of the
Ima\`m is that he took care of these jurists. He praised them,
strengthened their position, and summoned the community to resort to
their religious opinions. He, peace be on him, said to Aba\`n b.
Taghlub: “Sit down in the mosque. Give religious opinions to the people.
Indeed, I am glad to see among my followers the likes of you.”[^1]
Indeed, he paid their expenses and what they needed during their life.
He did that to make them dedicate themselves to gaining of knowledge, to
achieve its rules exactly, and to write it down. Then, he asked his son,
Ima\`m al-Sa\`diq, peace be on him, to take care of the jurists. He
asked him to spend on them to help them carry out their religious
duties. Thus, they played a constructive role in writing the traditions
which they heard from him. Besides they taught the religious deputations
what they narrated from him. Indeed, his student, Ja\`bir b. Yazïd
al-Ju‘fi, reported

seventy thousand traditions from him.[^2] Aba\`n b. Taghlub also
reported a large group (of traditions) from him. The jurisprudential
encyclopedias are full of their narrations from him. All the chapters of
jurisprudence - such as the acts of worship, contracts, punishments, and
the like - are confirmed with narrations from him. Therefore, he founded
and published the jurisprudence of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them. Worth mentioning, the jurisprudence of the
members of the House is the best Islamic jurisprudence.

The lectures and researches of the Ima\`m were not confined to
jurisprudence. Rather they included all kinds of sciences such as
philosophy, theology, and medicine. As for the explanation of the Koran,
it engaged his care wholly. Indeed, he appointed time for it. Most
commentators (of the Koran) have written what the Ima\`m adopted and
what he narrated from his grandfathers concerning the explanation of the
holy verses. He (the Ima\`m) wrote a book about the explanation (of the
Koran). Zyya\`d b. al-Mundher, the spiritual leader of the Jarudi group,
reported the book from him.[^3] This book denotes that and gives some
examples of his explanations to some verses. Worth mentioning, the
Ima\`m, peace be on him, talked about the conditions of the prophets and
the persecutions from which they suffered because of the oppressive
rulers of their time. He also talked about their judgments and their
morals. From him most researchers learned the situations of the
prophets. Moreover, he, peace be on him, talked in an inclusive
objective manner about the Prophet's life. He explained the
circumstances of the great Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
his campaigns, and his wars.

The historians of the Prophetic life-such as b. Hisha\`m, al-Wa\`qidi,
al-Halabi, and the like-reported them on his authority, on the authority
of his grandfathers, peace be on them, on the authority of the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family. The Ima\`m narrated a large group of
traditions concerning behavior, good morals, and high qualities Moslems
should follow to be an example to others. He reported in an inclusive
way all the historic events that occurred during the early Islamic time.
Al-Tabari has reported them from him in his book ‘Ta\`rïkh.’ He has also
reported them from him in his book ‘al-Ansab.’

The Ima\`m, peace be on him, debated with some Christian scholars, the
Azraqites, the atheists, and the extremists. He passed all those debates
successfully. The opponent admitted the Ima\`m's scientific abilities.
Namely, the opponent was feeble to debate with him. This book will
indicate that. The Ima\`m left behind him an immense intellectual
wealth. It is regarded as one of the sources and among the mines the
scientific wealth in the earth. It is difficult for me to write about
all what has been narrated from him. For that needs writing several
books. We have referred to only some of them. We have left the door open
to him who wants to study inclusively his scientific wealth.

However, the historians have never seen an Ima\`m like Mohammed
al-Ba\`qir. That is because he devoted all his life to the spread of
knowledge among the people. He was as the narrators said: “He lived in
Median (Yathrib). He was a trusty custodian. He was like the mountain or
the sea.

The thinkers and prominent scholars learned from him jurisprudence and
knowledge. So, he developed not only the life of this community but also
of all people.”

Ima\`m Mohammed al-Ba\`qir, peace be on him, was among the great men of
thought and knowledge in Islam. He was also among the most prominent
Ima\`ms of the Moslems. That is because he had great morals. He freed
himself from selfish materialism.

Thus his behavior represents the essence of the Islamic thought that
came to guide people and to educate their manners. The historians have
unanimously agreed that the Ima\`m was most times busy praising Allah
and that he spent his nights praying to Him and whispering to Him in
prayers. The Ima\`m thoroughly renounced worldly desires. He inclined
with his heart and his feelings towards Allah. He preferred His
obedience to all things. He followed what caused him to be close to
Allah. He did not yield to any desires. Rather he got rid of them
completely. Thus, they had no power over him.

The Ima\`m's life was similar to the life of his grandfather, the great
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, in all qualities. Whoever
reads about his life is full of admiration.

During his childhood, Ima\`m al-Ba\`qir, peace be on him, was liable to
many tribulations. Indeed, he saw the tragedies of Karbala\`'. He saw
the pure family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, when
they were tortured and killed. He saw the Umayyad Army murdering the
innocent children, the women, and the old men. He saw that sinful army
maiming the body of the great Ima\`m (al-Husayn). He saw other tragedies
that filled the heart with terror. He was among the members of the House
(ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them when they were taken prisoners to b.
Marjana (‘Ubayd Allah b. Zyya\`d). The latter humiliated and disdained
them very much. He showed his malice and he rejoiced at the murder of
the progeny of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. Then he
sent them to the sinful oppressive ruler, Yazïd b. Mu‘a\`wiya. The
latter received them with much disdain and mistreatment.

Ima\`m Mohammed al-Ba\`qir, peace be on him, understood fully those
painful events. Thus, they filled his heart with stormy sorrow. They
impressed deeply agony and sadness in his heart. They accompanied him
throughout his life. Thus, his heart was full of bitter sorrow. So he
died while he did not enjoy his life. Among the disasters that hit the
Ima\`m during his childhood was the Battle of al-Hirra. At that battle
Yazïd's Army violated the Holiness of Medina, the city of the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family. The army raped the women, seized
properties, and killed people. It violated all the things which Allah
had prohibited. No one was safe from the terrors of that painful
disaster except Ima\`m Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him. That was
because Yazïd ordered his sinful swordsman Moslem b. ‘Aqaba, not to kill
him. These sad pictures left in the self of the Ima\`m continual
feelings full of sorrow and sadness.

The time of (the Ima\`mate) of the Ima\`m was among the most critical
times in Islam. During this time life was very disorderly. Thus, the
country was liable to many revolutions. Those revolutions from the bad
Umayyad

politicians. That is because they did not take care of the interests of
the Moslem nations. Rather they imposed heavy taxes on the Moslem
community. They plundered its wealth and spent it on their pleasures.
Moreover, they took exclusive possession of its affairs.

We must mention the government with which the Ima\`m was contemporary.
We also must study the political events that occurred during that time.
In other words we must consider them carefully. That is because they had
a close relationship with the cultural and social time when the Ima\`m
lived. The researcher must not ignore those events. That is because he
is unable to understand fully the character of the person whom he wants
to study.

It is an act of honesty for knowledge and the truth to show those
events, to guide people to their references, and to discuss the
references which were not based on the truth. Rather they were based on
the desires that were far away from reality.

Indeed, we think that the study of such events will avail the reader
very much.

The Arab library has never contained a study about this great Ima\`m who
is among the elements of culture and civilizational formation of this
community. Indeed, it is not an act of loyalty to neglect the lives of
our great Ima\`ms. That is because the living nations have immortalized
their great men, praised them, and showed their scientific works. That
is because these nations want to enliven their own originality and their
noble values. Al-‘Aqqa\`d said : “The European scholars have praised
their great figures and studied the sides of their glory. Rather
fanaticism sometimes motivated them to increase the sides of this
greatness. They have created imaginations to justify the defect and to
repair the shortcoming. That is because of the enthusiasm for the self
and the excitement for seeking perfection. As for us, there are dams and
fences between us and our great men. They have prevented our young men
from making use of them.”

No one is worthier of praise than Ima\`m Mohammed al-Ba\`qir, peace be
on him. That is because he was among the most prominent leaders of this
community, and among the geniuses of the world. Among his works was that
he freed the Arab Islamic criticism from the foreign domination. He made
it independent from the Romanian Empire. We will mention that in detail
in this book.

The old historians took care of studying the life of Ima\`m Abu\` Ja‘far
(Mohammed al-Ba\`qir). For example, al-Jaludi, ‘Abd al-‘Azïz b. Yahya\`
(died 304 A. H.), wrote a book. He called the book ‘Akhba\`r Abï Ja‘far
al-Ba\`qir ’.[^4] In the book he has mentioned his conditions and his
affairs. However, we have not found the book among the manuscripts of
which our library is full. Perhaps the book is in the other book cases
in the world or it has become missing like the numerous manuscripts
which the Arab Islamic world has lost.

Thank Allah! Success helped me. Thus, I studied the life of this great
Ima\`m. It is an act of truthfulness to say that I have not found a
person more wonderful than him. That is because he represents all human
values of which every person boasts. I devoted myself to reading a large
group of

manuscripts and books that have mentioned some of his works and his wise
sayings. I firmly believe that the careful researcher will find more
information than what I have written about his (the Ima\`m's) life. That
is because much information has remained secret for me. In other words I
do not claim that I have thoroughly studied his life and that I have
mentioned all his works. Rather I have shed light on his character. I
have left the door open for other researchers to write about his life.
Before I end this introduction, I would particularly like to thank
Sayyid ‘Abd al-Rasu\`l b. Sayyid Rida al-Husayni for financing the
publication of this book. I ask Allah to grant him success in all his
noble efforts. Indeed success is from Allah. He grants it to whomever He
wills from His servants.

***6 / 11 / 1977 - 1397 A. H.***

***Ba\`qir Sharïf al-Qarashi***

### Notes

###

[^1]Al-Naja\`shi, Ja\`mi‘ al-Ruwa\`t, vol.1, p.[^9]:

[^2]Miza\`n al-I‘tida\`l, vol.1, p.[^383]:

[^3]Shaykh al-Tu\`si, Fihrast, p.[^98]:

[^4]Al-Dhari‘a, vol.1, p.[^315]: Al-A‘la\`m, vol.7, p.153.
