CHAPTER l: THE GREAT BABY
=========================

The members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, received the
baby with much rejoicing and pleasure. They were very happy with him,
for he was in whom the elements of the two grandsons (of the Prophet),
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, mixed. Those noble origins through which Allah
strengthened the Arabs and the Moslems mixed in him, too. As for the
noble backbones and the pure from which he branched, they are:

His Mother
----------

As for his mother, she was a pure chaste woman. She was Fatima, the
daughter of Imam al-Hasan, the Lord of the youth of Heaven. She was
given the kunya of Umm ‘Abd Allah (the mother of ‘Abd Allah).[^1] She
was among the Hashimite women. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him,
called her al-Siddïqa (the very truthful one).[^2] Concerning her Imam
Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Sadiq, peace be on him, said : “She was very truthful.
No one in the family of al-Hasan looked like her.”[^3] It is enough for
her highness that she was part of the plant of the sweet basil of the
Apostle of Allah (i. e. Imam al-Hasan), and that she grew up “in the
houses which Allah permitted to be exalted and that His name may be
remembered in them.”She brought up Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, in
her pure lap. She poured upon him rays of her pure soul. She fed him
with her noble ideas that became part of his qualities.

We have no information about the period which he spent with his mother.
That is because the references have neglected that period. Besides we
have no information about all of his affairs.

His Father
----------

His father was the Lord of the prostrators (in worship) and ornament of
the worshipers. He was the best of all the Moslem figures in
jurisprudence, knowledge, and religious piety. We will mention a brief
study on his affairs in the following researches.

The Great Baby
--------------

The world shone on the birthday of the pure Imam (Mohammed al-Baqir).
The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, had given good news to
him before his birth. The members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be
on them, waited for him impatiently. That is because he was among the
Imams of Moslems. Namely the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, nominated those Imams. He made them leaders for his community
and related them to the Koran. Imam Mohammed al-Baqir was born in
Medina, on the third day of the month of Safar, in the year 56 A. H.[^4]
It was said (that he was) on Friday, during the early days of the month
of Rajab.[^5] He was born three years before his grandfather, Imam
Husayn, peace be on him, was killed.[^6] It was said (that he was born)
four years, as he, peace be on him, said, (before the murder oh his
grandfather).[^7] It was also said (that he was born) two years and some
months (before the murder of his grandfather).[^8] The last date is
unusual. No one accepts it.

The religious rituals such as adhan and iqama in his ears were performed
for him when he was born. Other rites were also performed for him on the

seventh day of his birth: His hair was shaved. The weight of his cut
hair in sliver was given to the needy as alms. A ram was sacrificed for
him and was given to the poor as alms.

He was born during the time of Mu‘awiya. At that time the Islamic
countries were full of oppression. Moreover, they were full of disasters
and misfortunes. That was because of the oppression of Mu‘awiya and the
injustice of his governors who spread terrorism and oppression in the
country. Imam al-Baqir talked about that dreadful injustice. We will
mention his speech in this book.

His Name
--------

His grandfather, Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
named him Mohammed. He also gave him the Kunya of al-Baqir. That was ten
years before al-Baqir was born. That was among the Prophet's prophecies,
as some researchers said. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, knew from the unseen that his grandson would do such as
proclaiming knowledge among his community. Thus, he gave good news to
his community about him. He also sent him his greetings through the
great Companion (of the Prophet), Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari. We will
mention that in the following (chapters).

His Kunya
---------

He had only one kunya. It was Abu Ja‘far.[^9] He was called by the name
of his son, Ja‘far al-Sadiq, peace be on him, who renewed the life of
this community and split open the fountains of wisdom in the earth.

His Nick-Names
--------------

As for his nick-names, they indicate the qualities of his great
character and his high inclinations. They are as follows:

1. Al-Amïn (the trusted one).

2. Al-Shabïh (the one who was like the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family).[^10]

3. Al-Shakir (the grateful one).

4. Al-Hadi (the one who guides).

5. Al-Sabir (the patient one).

6. Al-Shahid (the proof).[^11]

7. Al-Baqir (the one who split open knowledge).[^12] This is the most
famous nick-name of his. He and his son, Imam al-Sadiq, were given the
nick-name of al-Baqirayn (the two ones who split open knowledge). They
were also given the nick-name of al-Sadiqayn (the two truthful
ones).[^13]

The historians and the biographers of the Imam have unanimously agreed
on that he was given the nick-name of al-Baqir because he split open
knowledge. Namely, he studied knowledge in detail. Thus, he understood
its origin and its hidden (branches).[^14] Concerning him, Imam al-Rida
said:

“O (you) who split open knowledge (making it available) to the people of
piety and the best of those who seek to answer the call of the
Exalted.”[^15]

It is as if that the people called him al-Baqir because of his great
knowledge and his many sciences. It was also said that he was given the
nick-name of al-Baqir because of his many prostrations (in worship).
Thus,

he split open his forehead.[^16] Moreover, he was given the nick-name
(of al-Baqir) because of these words of his: “The truth called me for
help after the untruth had gathered it in its abdomen. So, I split open
its flank and brought out the truth from its hiding, so it appeared and
spread after it had been hidden.”[^17] However, the first meaning is the
most famous with the historians.

The Greetings of the Prophet to al-Baqir
----------------------------------------

The historians and the narrators have unanimously agreed that the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, sent his greetings to his
grandson, al-Baqir, through the great companion, Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah
al-Ansari. Thus, Jabir was impatiently waiting for his birth to give him
the message of his grandfather. When the Imam was born and became a
grown-up, Jabir met him and gave him the greetings of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family. The historians have reported that in
various ways. The following are some of them:

1. Aban b. Taghlub reported on the authority of Abï ‘Abd Allah, peace be
on him, who said: “Indeed Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari was the last of
the surviving Companions of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family. He devoted himself to us, we, the members of the House
(ahl al-Bayt). He sat at the place of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah
bless him and his family. He wore a black turban. He called out:‘ O you
who will split open knowledge (baqir)! O You who will split open
knowledge!’ Thus, the people of Medina said: ‘Jabir is hallucinating!’
So, he (Jabir) said:‘By Allah, I have never hallucinated. However, I
heard the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family,
say:‘Indeed, you will meet a man who belongs to me. His name is similar
to mine. His qualities are similar to mine. He will split open knowledge
thoroughly. ‘These words have motivated me to say what I say.’ He (Abï
‘Abd Allah) said: “One day while Jabir was walking through some streets
of Medina, he passed by a street. Mohammed b. ‘Ali (al-Baqir) was in the
street. When he looked at him he said: ‘O boy, come.’ The boy came. then
Jabir said to the boy: ‘Turn back.’ The boy turned back. Then Jabir
said: “By him in whose hand is my soul, (they are) the qualities of the
Apostle of Allah. O Boy, what is your name?”The boy replied: “My name is
Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.”Jabir kissed his head and said: ‘May my
farther and mother be ransom for you, your grandfather, Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, sends you his greetings.’ Abï ‘Abd
Allah said: ‘Mohammed came back frightened to his father and told him
about what had happened. His father said to him: ‘My little boy, has
Jabir done it ?’ Mohammed replied:‘Yes.’ His father said: ‘Do not leave
your house, my little boy.’”[^18] As for the contents of this report,
they are as follows:

A. The qualities and features of Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, were
similar to those of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.

B. It was the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, named his
grandson Mohammed and gave him the nick-name of al-Baqir. (The Prophet
told the People that Imam Mohammed al-Baqir) would split open knowledge
completely.

C. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him, feared for the safety of his
son when Jabir reported the tradition of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, concerning him. That is because the Umayyad
government imposed an intense observation on Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn. It
counted his breaths against him. It wanted to know who would succeed him
to punish him severely. So, the Imam, peace be on him, wanted the affair
of his son to be secret lest the Umayyads should mistreat him or subject
him to misfortunes.

2. Ibn ‘Asakir reported that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him, and
his son, al-Baqir came to Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari. Jabir asked
him: “Son of the Apostle of Allah, who is with you?”“My son, Mohammed,
is with me,”replied Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn. Jabir embraced Mohammed. Then
he wept and said: “My death is at hand. Mohammed, Allah's Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, sends you his greetings.”“What is
that?”asked Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn. Jabir replied: “I heard Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, say to al-Husayn b. ‘Ali:
‘A son will be born for this grandson of mine. The son will be the Lord
of worshipers. On the Day of Judgment, a caller will call:‘Let the Lord
of worshipers stand up. So, ‘Ali b. al-Husayn will rise. A son will be
born for ‘Ali b. al-Husayn. The son will be called Mohammed. Jabir, when
you see him, give him my greetings. Jabir, know that al-Mahdi will be
among his sons. Know, Jabir, that you will stay for a short time after
him.”[^19]

3. Taj al-Dïn b. Mohammed, the head of Aleppo, reported on the authority
of Imam Mohammed al-Baqir, who said: “I came to Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah and
greeted him. He said to me: ‘Who are you?' That was after he had become
blind. I said to him: ‘Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.’ He said: ‘May my
father and mother be ransom for you, come nearer to me.’ I came nearer
to him. He kissed my hand, and then he stooped down to my foot to kiss
it. However, I pulled it from him. Then he said: ‘The Apostle of Allah,
may Allah bless him and his family, recites his greeting to you.’ ‘Peace
and Allah's mercy and blessings be on the Apostle of Allah,’ I said.
‘How is that, Jabir?’ He said:‘One day I was with him when he said to
me: ‘Perhaps you will live until you meet one of my descendants called
Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn on whom Allah will bestow light and
wisdom. Then recite to him my greetigs.’”[^20]

4. Salah al-Dïn al-Safadi said: “Jabir walked in Medina and said:
‘Baqir, when will I meet you?’ One day he passed through a street in
Medina. A female slave gave him the boy who was in her lap. He said to
the female slave: ‘Who is this?’ ‘Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn,’ she
replied. He embraced him, kissed his head and his hands, and then he
said: ‘My little boy, your grandfather, Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, sends you his greetings.’ Then he said: ‘Baqir, my
death is at hand.’ He died at that night.”[^21]

5. Some Isma‘ilis reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, said to Jabir: “You will meet a son of this son of mine. He
appointed at al-Husayn. When you meet him, give him my greetings. Say to
him: O you who will split open knowledge, split it completely.”Jabir did
that.[^22]

6. Al-Hafiz Nur al-Dïn al-Haythami reported on the authority of Abu
Ja‘far, peace be on him, who said: “Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah visited me while
I was reading the Book. He said to me: ‘Uncover your abdomen.’ I
uncovered my abdomen. He kissed it, and then he said: ‘Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, ordered me to give you his
greetings.’”[^23]

These are some reports that have unanimously agreed that the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, ordered Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah
al-Ansari to send his greetings to Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him. The
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, knew from beyond the unseen
that his grandson would spread knowledge among people and that he would
split open wisdom and light in the earth.

His Features
------------

Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari said that his features were similar to
those of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family.[^24] His
morals were also similar to the Prophet's high ones that distinguished
him from the other prophets.

Some contemporary people have described Imam al-Baqir as follows: He was
a man of medium height. He was brown.[^25] He had soft skin with moles.
He had a thin waist. His voice was good. He always bowed his head.[^26]

His Early Cleverness
--------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, was clever and genius during his
childhood. The reporters said that Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari, though
an old man, came to him, sat before him, and learned from him. Jabir
admired the Imam's abundant knowledge and sciences. Thus, he said:
“Baqir, you have been given wisdom while you are still a boy.”[^27]

The Companions (of the Prophet) knew that the Imam was endowed with
outstanding merits and abundant knowledge. So, they consulted him
concerning the problems which they did not understand. The historians
said that a man ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar about a certain problem. However,
‘Abd Allah could not answer the problem. So, he said to the man: “Go to
that boy, he pointed at Imam al-Baqir, ask him, and tell me about his
answer.”The man went to the Imam and asked him. The Imam, peace be on
him, answered his problem. Thus, the man came back to ‘Abd Allah b.
‘Umar and told him about the Imam's answer. So, the latter admired the
Imam, saying : “They are the knowledgeable members of the House.”[^28]

Allah singled out the Imams of the members of the House, peace be on
them, with knowledge and outstanding merits. He granted them absolute
perfection which He had granted to His prophets and His apostles. The
historians said that the Imam was nine years of age when he was asked
about difficult problems and answered them.

His Solemnity and His Prestige
------------------------------

The features of the Imam, peace be on him, represented the solemnity and
the prestige of the prophets. Everybody respected and admired him. For
example, Qattada, the jurist of the people of Basrah, met him. Still his
heart trembled because of the Imam's solemnity. Thus, he said to him: “I
sit

before the jurists and b. ‘Abbas. My heart does not tremble because of
them as it does because of you.”[^29]

The Imam was the rest of Allah in His earth. Allah bestowed solemnity
and prestige on His friends and His lovers. Their qualities appeared in
the Imam's character. Among those who admired the Imam's solemnity was
the Moroccan poet, who described the Imam, saying:

O you who was the son of him by whose tongue and eloquence people were
guided and the revelation was sent down.

The Book talked about his outstanding merits. The Torah and the Bible
announced his coming.

Were it not for the cessation of the revelation after Mohammed, we would
say: Mohammed was the alternative to his grandfather.

He was similar to him in outstanding merits, but Gabriel did not bring
him a message.[^30]

The historians reported that nobody saw the Imam, peace be on him,
laughing. When he laughed, he said: “O Allah, do not detest me.”[^31]
Indeed, he refrained from all that which contradicts solemnity and high
character. Among his prominent qualities was that he always praised
Allah. We will mention that when we talk about the aspects of his
character.

The Inscription of his Ring
---------------------------

As for the inscription of his ring, it was: “All might is for
Allah.”[^32] He wore the ring of his grandfather, Imam Husayn, peace be
on him, whose inscription was: “Surely Allah attains His purpose.”[^33]
This indicates that he devoted himself to Allah and cleaved to Him
strongly.

His Residence
-------------

The Imam, peace be on him, resided in Medina throughout his life. He did
not leave it for another city. In it, he was the first teacher and great
pioneer for scientific cultural movements. He used the Prophetic Mosque
as school for him. There he gave his lectures to his students.

### Notes

###

[^1] Thahdhïb al-Lughat wa al-Asma’, vol.1, p.[^87]: Ibn Khullakan,
Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol.3, p.384. Al-Mahbar, p.57. Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh,
vol.2, p.60. A‘yan al-Shi‘a, 1/4/464.

[^2] Abu al-Hasan al-‘Amili, Diya’ al-‘Amilin, vol.[^2]: Al-Dur
al-Nazïm, serial 2879.

[^3] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^469]:

[^4] Ibn Khullakan, Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol.3, p.[^314]: Tadhkirt
al-Huffaz, vol.1, p.124. Nazhat al-Jalis, vol.2, p.36.

[^5] Dala’il al-Imama, p.[^94]: Farid Wajjdi, Da’irat al-Ma‘arif, vol.3,
p.563.

[^6] Ibn al-Wardi, Tarikh, vol.1, p.[^184]: Akhbar al-Duwal, p.111. Ibn
Khullakan, Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol.3, p.314.

[^7] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol.2, p.[^60]:

[^8] Al-Husayn b. ‘Abd al-Wahab, ‘Yyun al-Mu‘jizat, serial, [^975]:

[^9] Dala’il al-Imama, p.[^94]:

[^10] Al-Dur al-Nazim fi Manaqib al-A’imma. Diya’ al-‘Amilin, vol.[^2]:
A‘yan al-Shi‘a, 1/4/464.

[^11] Jannat al-Khuld. Nasikh al-Tawarikh.

[^12] Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol.1, p.[^124]: Nazhat al-Jalis, vol.2,
p.36. Mirr’at al-Jinan, vol.1, p.247. Farid Wajjdi, Da’irat al-Ma‘arif,
vol.3, p.563.

[^13] Shaykh al-Turayhi, Jami‘ al-Maqal.

[^14] ‘Yyun al-Akhbar wa Funun al-Athar, p.[^213]: ‘Umdat al-Talib,
p.183.

[^15] Jawhart al-Kalam fi Madh al-Sada al-A‘lam, p.[^133]:

[^16] Mir’at al-Zaman fi Tawarikh al-A‘yan, vol.5, p.[^78]:

[^17] Ibid.

[^18] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, pp.496-[^470]: Al-Kashi, Rijal, pp.27-28.

[^19] Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol.51, p.[^41]:

[^20] Ghayat al-Ikhtisar, p.[^64]:

[^21] Al-Wafi bi al-Wafayat, vol.4, p.[^102]:

[^22] Masa’il Majmu‘a mina al-Haqa’iq al-‘Aliya wa al-Asrar al-Samiya,
p.[^99]:

[^23] Majjma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol.1, p.[^22]:

[^24] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^469]:

[^25] Akhbar al-Duwal, p.[^111]: Jawhart al-Kalam fi Madh al-Sada
al-A’lam, 132.

[^26] A‘yan al-Shi‘a, 1/4/[^471]:

[^27] ‘Ilal al-Sharai‘, p.[^234]:

[^28] Al-Manaqib, vol.4, p.[^147]:

[^29] Ithbat al-Hudat, vol.5, p.[^176]:

[^30] Al-Manaqib, vol.4, p.[^181]:

[^31] Safwat al-Saffwa, vol.2, p.[^62]: Tadhkirat al-Khawas, p.349.

[^32] Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol.3, p.[^189]:

[^33] A‘yan al-Shi‘a, 1/4/[^169]:
