CHAPTER II: UNDER THE AUSPICES OF AL-HUSAYN AND ‘ALI
====================================================

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, grew up in the House of the
message, the place of descent of the revelation, and the source of
radiation in the world of Islam. His grandfather, Imam Husayn, peace be
on him, and his father, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, fed him with noble ideals.
They taught the ways of good and guidance that settled in themselves.
Moreover, they taught him bright behavior and a sound direction to be an
example to this community. The following is an account of his early life
under the wing of his grandfather and his father.

Under the Care of his Grandfather
---------------------------------

Imam Husayn, peace be on him, took care of educating his grandson. He
bestowed upon him rays of his holy soul that illuminated the horizons of
this world. The historians narrated that he seated him on his lap,
kissed him very much, and said to him: “Indeed, Allah's Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, sends you his greetings.”[^1]

This was a hint from the grandfather to his grandson that the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, wanted him to practice his leading
role for his community. In other words he wanted him to split open the
fountains of wisdom in the lands of his community, to proclaim knowledge
all over them, and to guide his community to the right path. In his
early life, Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, saw his grandfather, Imam
Husayn, peace be on him, facing the critical situation. That was when
his grandfather was afflicted by the tyrant of his time and the pharaoh
of this community, namely, Yazïd b. Mu‘awiya, who endangered Islam,
summoned Imam Husayn to pledge allegiance to him, and to yield to his
rule. Thus, Imam Husayn, peace be on him, cried out at his face and
continued his immortal movement to raise Allah's word high in the earth
and to carry out his Islamic message with honesty and loyalty. So, he
sacrificed his life, the members of his house, and his companions to
establish the glory of Islam, and to destroy his enemies and his
opponents. His sacrifice was full of noble values and high ideals. It
moved the people's sentiments and their feelings. It was abounding in
positive results. It offered the most wonderful lessons about the
sacrifice for the truth and the duty. It will be immortal forever.
Moreover, it will represent man's honor and his high purpose.

The stages of that immortal tragedy took place before Imam al-Baqir
while he was in his early life. He, peace be on him, said: “My
grandfather was killed while I was four years of age. Indeed, I remember
his murder and what hit us during that time.”[^2]

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, reported many of its stages. Al-Tabari
reported some of its pictures on his authority. A group of the prominent
Companions (of the Prophet) wrote a book. They called the book ‘Maqtal
al-Husayn’. In it, they have written what they heard from him and from
other than him about the tragedies of Karbala'. Ibn al-Nadïm has
mentioned many of them in his book ‘al-Fihrast’. However, that immortal
tragedy left great pain and sorrow in his soul. Its sorrows accompanied
him throughout his life.

Under the Auspices of his Father
--------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, lived for more than 34
years under the care of his father, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on
him. He accompanied him throughout that period. He did not leave him. He
was impressed by his bright guidance that represented the guidance of
the prophets and of the apostles. The people did not see the likeness of
Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn in his God-fearingness, his piety, his asceticism,
and his strong cleaving to Allah. We will mention some of Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidïn's affairs and conditions. That is because his behavior had
great influence on Imam al-Baqir's deep soul. They are as follows:

Admiration and Glorification
----------------------------

The intellectuals and the scholars admired and glorified Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidïn. They preferred him to others. The following are some of
their words concerning him:

### 1. Sa‘ïd b. al-Musayyab

###

The solemnity of the Imam and his greatness astonished Sa‘ïd b.
al-Musayyab. Thus, he said: “I have never seen (a person) better than
‘Ali b. al-Husayn. I have never seen him but I detest myself. I have
never seen him laughing.”[^3]

### 2. Al-Zuhri

###

Al-Zuhri adored the Imam. He said: “I have never seen a Qarashi (person)
better than him.”[^4] He also said: “I have never seen (a person) more
knowledgeable than ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.”[^5]

### 3. Zayd b. Aslam

###

Zayd b. Aslam said: “I have never seen (a person) similar to ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn.”[^6]

### 4. ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Azïz

###

When ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Azïz heard of the death of the Imam, he said:
“The lamp of the world, beauty of Islam and adornment of worshipers
passed away.”[^7]

### 5. Abu Hazim

###

Abu Hazim said: “I have never seen a Hashimi better than ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn.”[^8]

### 6. Malik

###

Malik said: “There was nobody similar to ‘Ali b. al-Husayn in the
members of the House of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and
his family.”[^9]

### 7. Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah

###

Among those who adored the Imam was the great Companion (of the
Prophet), Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari, who said: “I have never seen a
boy of the Prophets similar to ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.”[^10]

### 8. Al-Waqidi

###

Al-Waqidi said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn was the most wonderful of all the
people in worship and the most pious of them for Allah, the Great and
Almighty.”[^11]

These words denote the impressions of these great figures concerning the
Imam. They have unanimously agreed that he was at his time the best of
all the family of the Prophet in knowledge and outstanding merits that
represent man's absolute perfection.

His high Morals
---------------

As for his high morals, they were gifts from Allah. The perplexed person
follows the right way with them. The straying person is guided by them.
In this phenomenon, the Imam imitated his grandfather, Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family who was distinguished from the
prophets by his high morals.

The historians have unanimously agreed that the Imam, peace be on him,
treated kindly those who mistreated him. He forgave them and bestowed
liberally upon them to uproot from them aggression against others. The
following are some of his attitudes towards them:

A. The historians said: “Isma‘ïl b. Hisham al-Makhzumi was the governor
of Yathrib (Medina). He harbored hatred against the members of the
House, peace be on them. He hurt Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn very much and
abused his grandfathers on the pulpits to approach the rulers of
Damascus. When al-Walïd b. ‘Abd al-Malik became caliph, he removed
Hisham from office because of a previous enmity. Then he ordered the
people to take their rights from him. Hisham was very afraid of the
Imam, peace be on him, for he mistreated him very much. So, he said: “I
am afraid of no one but of ‘Ali b. al-Husayn. He is a righteous man.
Thus, the ruler will hear his words concerning me. “However, the Imam
ordered his companions and followers not to mistreat him. Rather, he
went to him, smiled at him, asked him about his need during his critical
situation, and then said to him: “Cousin, my Allah forgive you. Indeed,
what has been done towards you has displeased me.So, summon us to what
you like.”

Hisham was astonished. Thus, he said with admiration: “Allah knows where
to put His mission.”[^12]

Among his high morals is the following attitude that raises him to the
level which no reformer has reached except his grandfathers. It also
indicates his Imamate.

The historians reported that he slaughtered every day a ewe. He cooked
the ewe and divided it among the poor and the deprived. One day his
retainer carried a bowl of broth. The broth was boiling because of the
intense heat. The retainer stumbled over a child of the Imam. Thus, the
child died at once. So, the ‘Alid women wept loudly. The Imam was
praying. When he had finished his prayers, he was told about the death
of his child. However, he, peace be on him, hurried to the retainer. He
found him shaking with fear. He met him with kindness and affection, and
said to him: “You have doubts about ‘Ali b. al-Husayn. You have thought
that he will punish you. Go, you are free for Allah. These are four
thousand dinars as a gift for you. Excuse me for the fear that has hit
you because of me.”[^13]

How wonderful this soul is ! It is superior to the good servants whose
hearts Allah tested with belief. The Imam inherited these great morals
from his grandfather, the great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, who established the standard of manners in the earth.

C. Among his high morals was that while he was going out of the mosque,
a man from those who hated him began cursing and abusing him. Some of
the Imam's companions and followers became angry with the man. However,
the Imam, peace be on him, calmed them, and then he treated the man
kindly, saying: “You do not know our affair completely. Do you have a
need to help you against it.”

The man felt shame. He wished that the earth would hide him. Defeat and
regret appeared on his face. The Imam, peace be on him, walked towards
him. He gave him a shirt. Besides he ordered one thousand dinars to be
given to him. Thus, the man said: “I bear witness that you are among the
children of the prophets.”[^14]

These are some of his attitudes that are full of mercy, clemency, and
self- denial. Indeed the morals of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on him, are a school that is based on honor,
nobility, and on every thing through which man becomes high.

His Proclaiming Knowledge
-------------------------

After the tragedy of Karbala', Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him,
devoted himself to proclaiming knowledge among the people. He did not
confine himself to the science of tradition and jurisprudence. Rather,
he took care of ethics, literature, philosophy, and wisdom. Moreover, he
supplied the Islamic thought with large abilities of knowledge, wisdom,
and etiquette. His book called ‘ al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya', his treatise
on rights, the encyclopedias of tradition, and the books of ethics are
full of them.

His Urging (the Moslems) to seek Knowledge
------------------------------------------

He, peace be on him, urged the Moslems to seek knowledge. He summoned
them to strive to study knowledge because it is the creative means for
their development and the prosper of their life. He, peace be on him
said: “If people knew what is in seeking knowledge, they would seek it
even through shedding blood and wading into the depth of the sea. ”

He, peace be on him, advised some of his companions to spread knowledge.
In addition he ordered them not to be proud towards the teacher. He,
peace be on him, said: “Indeed if you are good in teaching the people
and do not show pride towards them, Allah will increase you from His
favor. If you prevent them from learning your knowledge, then it is
incumbent on Allah, the Great and Almighty, to deprive you of knowledge
and its splendor and to drop your position from the hearts.”[^15]

His Honoring the Seekers of Knowledge
-------------------------------------

He, peace be on him, took care of the seekers of knowledge and raised
their position. When he saw one of them, he said: “Welcome to the will
of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family. “Imam
al-Baqir, peace be on him, said: “When my father, Zayn al-‘Abidïn,
looked at the young men who sought knowledge, he made them nearer to
him, saying:‘

Welcome to you, you are the deposits of knowledge. If you are the young
men of people, you are about to be the elders of others.'”[^16]

The Readers of the Koran cleaved to him
---------------------------------------

The readers of the Koran devoted themselves to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn to
learn from him sciences, knowledge, and manners of conduct. Sa‘ïd b.
al-Musayyab talked about their cleaving to the Imam, saying: “Indeed,
the readers of the Koran did not go to Mecca till ‘Ali b. al-Husayn went
there. He went there and a thousand riders went with him.”[^17]

His Freeing of Slaves
---------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him, felt pity for slaves. Thus, he
bought them and their women. Then he released them all to enjoy freedom
and dignity. When he released them, he gave them enough money to be in
no need of people.

He adopted a group of slaves. Then he taught them various kinds of
knowledge and sciences. A large group of them graduated from his school.
They were among the great scholars at that time. That was the reason why
the slaves headed the scientific movement during those times. That was
also the reason why they followed the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, and joined every political movement that
summoned the people to get rid of the Umayyad government and to return
the caliphate to the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them, who were the refuge for every poor and deprived person.

His Worship and his Piety
-------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn was among the monks of this community in his
worship and piety. He was given the nick-name of Dhi al-Thafanat (the
one with calluses). That was because of his many prostrations (in
prayer). He was also given the nick-name of al-Mujtahid (the hardworking
one), Zayn al-‘Abidïn (the ornament of the worshipers), and Sayyid
al-‘Abidïn (the Lord of the worshipers).[^18] The nick-name of al-Sajjad
refers to his constant worship and his great cleaving to Allah. The
historians reported that when he used to perform ritual ablutions, his
skin would turn yellow. Thus, his family said to him: “What is that
which hits you during the ablution? “He said to them: “Do you not know
before whom I want to stand?”[^19] His son, al-Baqir, came to him. He
found him worshipping Allah to the extent that he turned pale because of
staying up at night, his eyes had white secretion because of weeping,
his forehead festered because of much prostration (in prayer), and his
legs swelled because of praying at night. So, his son burst into tears.
However, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn was praying. When he saw his son, he
ordered him to give him the parchments in which there was the (practice
of) worship of his grandfather, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be
on him. His son gave him those parchments. He considered them carefully.
Then he left them out of boredom and said: “Who is strong enough to
perform the worship of ‘Ali b. Abï Talib ?”[^20]

When he, peace be on him, rose to pray before Allah, he turned toward
the Great Creator with his heart and his feelings. No affair of this
life made him busy. Imam al-Baqir said : “When my father rose to pray,
he did not

busy himself in other than it and did not hear anything, for he devoted
himself to it. “One of his children fell and broke his hand. His family
cried. Then they sent for the bone setter. He set the hand of the child
who was crying because of the intense pain. The Imam did not hear
anything. When he entered upon morning and saw the boy's splint hand, he
asked about that. So, his family told him about that.[^21]

Worship strained him very much. Indeed he overexerted himself for it.
Thus, his family feared for his safety. They begged him to decrease his
worship. However, he refused that. Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, said:
“When Fatima, the daughter of the Commander of the Faithful, saw her
nephew, ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, overexerting himself in worshipping, she went
to Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari and said to him: “O Companion of the
Apostle of Allah, indeed, we have rights with you. Among our rights with
you is that when you see one of us overexerting himself, you must make
him remember Allah and ask him to relieve himself. The nose of ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn, the rest of his father, al-Husayn, has been torn. His
forehead, his kneels, and his palms (of the hands) have become swollen.
That is because he has overexerted himself in worshipping.”

So, Jabir went to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn. He found him overexerting
himself in worshipping at his mihrab. The Imam rose to receive Jabir. He
seated him beside him and asked him very much about his condition. Then
Jabir asked the Imam:

“O Son of the Apostle of Allah, do you not know that Allah has created
Paradise for you and for those who love you and created Fire for those
who hate you and show enmity towards you ? So, why do you overexert
yourself ?”

The Imam answered Jabir with kindness and affection: “O Companion of the
Apostle of Allah, do you not know that Allah has forgiven my
grandfather, Allah's Apostle, his past and following faults ? Still he
overexerted himself for Allah. May my father and mother be ransom for
Allah's Apostle, he worshipped Allah till his leg and his foot became
swollen. It was said to him:‘ Do you do that while Allah has forgiven
you your past and following faults ?' Thus, he said:‘ Should I not be a
grateful servant ?' ”

When Jabir knew that the Imam insisted on overexerting himself, he said
to him: “O Son of the Apostle of Allah, spare your life. That is because
you are from the family through whom the tribulation is driven away,
through whom the illness is cured, and through whom the sky rains.”

The Imam replied him with a faint voice: “I will continue the way of my
father and of my grandfather. I will follow their example till I meet
them.”

Jabir was astonished. Thus, he said to those who were around him : “No
child of the prophets was like ‘Ali b. al-Husayn except Joseph, the son
of Jacob. By Allah, the children of al-Husayn are better than the
children of Joseph, the son of Jacob. Indeed one of them will fill the
earth with justice as it had been filled with injustice.”[^22]

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn was the Imam of the pious and the repentant. Indeed
he overexerted himself in his worshipping. He was loyal in his
obedience. He cleaved to Allah to the extent that even saints did not do
that.

His Alms and his Kindness
-------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn was the kindest of all the people to the weak, the
gentlest of them to the needy and the most merciful of them to the
miserable. He preferred the poor to himself and his family. The
historians have unanimously agreed that he carried a bag of bread on his
back and divided it among the poor as alms. He said: “Indeed the secret
alms put out the Lord's wrath.”[^23] He maintained one hundred families
in Medina.[^24] He had kissed the poor person before he gave him the
alms.[^25] He did that lest the poor should feel abasement. The
historians said: “When Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) washed his father,
some of those who attended his washing saw that his kneels and the
outside of his feet were like those of the he-camel. That is because the
Imam prostrated (in prayer) very much. Meanwhile they looked at his
shoulders and saw that they were similar to his kneels and feet. Thus,
they asked Imam al-Baqir about that. He, peace be on him, said: “If he
was living, I would not tell you about that. Every day, he as far as
possible fed a needy person up wards. When the night came, he looked at
what remained from the food of his family at that day of theirs. He put
the food into the bag. When the people became calm, he put the bag on
his shoulder. He went through (the streets) of Medina. He intended to
reach a group of people who did not ask the people for alms. He reached
them while they did not know him. No one of his family knew that except
me. I knew that he wanted to give alms secretly with his own hand. He
said: “The secret alms put out the Lord's wrath.”[^26]

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, reported some of his father's alms,
saying: “Perhaps my father bought a silk garment for fifty dinars. He
spent the winter wearing it. He entered the mosque wearing it. When the
summer came, he ordered the garment to be given as alms or he ordered it
to be bought to give its price as alms.[^27]

Indeed Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn was unique in the history of mankind. That
is because his moral criteria and his psychological merits raised him to
the level which nobody reached except his grandfathers.

The Wonderful Poem of al-Farazdaq
---------------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him, went to the Sacred House of Allah
to perform the pilgrimage. Meanwhile Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik went there
for the same purpose. The latter did his best to touch the Black Stone
but he was unable to do that, for the people overcrowded around it. A
pulpit was installed and he sat on it. He began looking at the
circumambulation of the people. Then Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn came to
perform his circumambulation. When the pilgrims saw him, they were
astonished at his solemnity that was similar to the solemnity of his
grandfather, Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. The
people were shouting loudly: “There is no god but God! Allah is
great!”They made two queues for him. Happy was he who saw him, kissed
his hand, and touched his shoulder. That is because the Imam was the
rest of Allah in his earth. The Syrians were astonished when they saw
that situation. That is because the pilgrims did not received Hisham,
who was the nominated caliph after his father, warmly though the Syrians
honored him and the policemen surrounded him.

One of Hisham's companions asked him: “Who is that man whom the people
have honored very much?

Hisham burst into anger, shouted at the man, saying : “I do not know
him!”

He claimed that he did not know the Imam lest the people should know
him. Al-Farazdaq was there. He did not control himself. Thus, he said to
the Syrians:

“I know him.”

“Who is he, Abu Firas?”asked the Syrians.

Hisham shouted at al-Farazdaq, saying:

“I do not know him!”

“Yes, you know him,”replied al-Farazdaq.

Then he rose and composed the following poem whose effect was stronger
than the hitting of the swords and the stabbing of the spears against
Hisham. He said:

This is the son of Husayn and the son of Fatima the daughter of the
Apostle through whom the darkness dispersed.

This is he whose ability the valley (of Mecca) recognizes, and whom the
(Sacred) House (as do) the sanctuary and the area outside the sanctuary
(al-hill).

This is the son of the best of Allah's servants. This is the pure pious
man, the pure eminent man.

When Quraysh saw him, their spokesman said:

Liberality terminates at the outstanding qualities

of this (man).

He belongs to the top of glory which the Arabs

of Islam and non-Arabs fall short of obtaining.

When he comes to touch the wall of the Kaaba, it

almost grasps the palm of his hand.

He takes care to be modest and he is protected from his terror. He only
speaks when he smiles.

There is a cane in his hand. Its smell is fragrant from the hand of the
most wonderful (of all the people), who is proud.

The prophets yielded to his grandfather's favor. The nations yielded to
the favor of his community.

The light of guidance emanates from the light of his forehead. He is
like the sun whose shining disperses darkness.

His tree belongs to the Apostle of Allah. Its elements, its natures, and
its qualities are good.

This is the son of Fatima if you do not recognize him. The prophets of
Allah were ended by his grandfather.

Allah honored and favored him from antiquity.

Your words ‘ who is this?’ do not harm him. The Arabs and non-Arabs
recognize him whom you deny.

Both his hands are relief. Their advantage has prevailed. The hands are
equal. Nonexistence does not befall them.

He is the carrier of the burdens of the people when they are oppressed.

His qualities are good. The ‘ yes’ is sweet with him.

He does not break the promise. His soul is blessed. His courtyard is
wide. He is clever when he decides.

He is from the people whose love is religion, whose hate is unbelief,
whose approach is refuge and protection.

If the God-fearing are numbered, they are their Imams. If it is said who
are the best of the earth, it is said they are.

No generous man can reach their far purpose. No people, though generous,
can compete with them (for generosity).

They are rain when a crisis happens. They are lions

when fear becomes intense.

Poverty does not decreases the relief from their hands. That is the
same, whether they are rich or poor.

Misfortune and tribulation are driven away through their love.

Kindness and the blessings are regained through it.

In every affair their praise is after the praise of Allah. The speech is
ended by it.

Abasement refuses to stop at their space. Their natures are noble, and
their hands are full of liberality.

None of mankind has within their souls such primacy as he does nor such
grace as he does.

Whoever knows Allah, knows His friend. Religion is from the House of
this man.

Hisham burst into anger. He wished that the earth would swallow him up.
He was displeased to hear this poem called al-‘Asma'. That is because it
indicated the high social rank of the great Imam. Besides it made the
Syrians recognize him, for they did not recognize him nor did they
recognize his grandfathers. Accordingly, Hisham ordered al-Farazdaq to
be imprisoned at a place called ‘Asfan between Mecca and Medina. Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidïn heard of that, so he sent al-Farazdaq twelve thousand
dirhams. However, al-Farazdaq returned them. He refused to accept them
and said: “I said that concerning you as anger for Allah and His
Apostle.”The Imam returned them and al-Farazdaq agreed to accept them.
Then al-Farazdaq began dispraising Hisham.[^28]

Deep Sadness
------------

In this world nobody was afflicted with disaster as Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him. That is because he suffered from the fears
of the disaster of Karbala'. He saw the stages of that tragedy that is
immortal in the world of grief. He was ill, for illnesses and diseases
attacked him. Those sad sights melted his heart. Thus, they moved him to
weep continuously. His deep sadness increased in the course of days. So,
sadness melted him. His sadness for his father became great to the
extent that he mixed his food with his tears.[^29] Thus, some of his
followers begged him to be patient, saying : “We are afraid that you
will be among the perished. “However, the Imam answered them kindly : “I
express my grief and my sadness before Allah. I know what you do not
know. Indeed Jacob was a prophet. He had twelve children. Allah
concealed on of his children. Jacob knew that his child was living.
Still, he wept over him to the extent that his eyes became white because
of sadness. For me, I looked at my father, my brothers, my uncles,

and my companions. They were killed around me. So, how does my sadness
end ? When I remember the murder of the son of Fatima (Imam Husayn), I
burst into tears. When I look at my aunts and my sisters, I remember the
day when they escaped from tent to tent at the Battle of Karbala'.
Nevertheless, the caller of the people shouted:‘ Burn the tents of the
oppressive. ' ”

Those painful sights that occurred at Karbala' motivated his sadness and
sorrow. So, he is numbered as one of the five weeping persons who have
represented sadness and weeping in the arena of life for centuries.

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, witnessed that exhausting sadness that
befell his father. Thus, he became very impatient. Perhaps he shared his
father his weeping and his grief.

His Commandments to his Son al-Baqir
------------------------------------

The great Imam supplied his son al-Baqir and all his children with
educational commandments full of high manners and noble values. They
achieve safety, rest, and tranquillity to those who put them into
practice. The following are some of them:

1. He, peace be on him, said to his son, al-Baqir: “O My little son, do
not make friends with five (persons), and do not talk with them. Do not
make friends with the sinner, for he sells you for a meal or less than
it. I (al-Baqir) said:‘ My father, what do you mean by less than it ?'
He replied:‘ He wishes for it, then he will not obtain it. ' Do not make
friends with the miser, for he abandons you when you are in need of him.
Do not make friends with the liar, for he is like the mirage. He makes
the near (things) far for you, and he makes the distant (things) near
for you. Do not make friends with the fool, for he wants to avail you
but he harms you. It was said:‘ A wise enemy is better than a foolish
friend. ' Do not make friends with him who abandons his close relatives,
for he is cursed at three places in Allah's Book: in the Chapter of
Mohammed, Allah, the Most High, said:‘ But if you held command, you were
sure to make mischief in the land and cut off the ties of kinship! It is
those whom Allah has cursed. So, He has made them deaf and blinded their
eyes.'[^30] In the Chapter of al-Ra‘d, Allah, the Exalted, said: ‘And
those who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation and cut
asunder that which Allah has ordered to be joined and make mischief in
the land; (as for) those, upon them shall be a curse and they shall have
the evil (issue) of the abode.’[^31] In the Chapter of al-Ahzab, Allah,
the Most High, said:‘ Surely (as for) those who speak evil things of
Allah and His Apostle, Allah has cursed them in this world and the
hereafter, and He has prepared for them a chastisement bringing
disgrace.’[^32] ”[^33]

In these commandments the Imam, peace be on him, warned Moslems of
making friends with the above-mentioned persons whose morals are bad,
for the psychological illnesses of such people pass along their friends.
Indeed friendship has a great effect on forming the personal behavior of
the individual.

2. He, peace be on him, recommended his son, al-Baqir, with these
valuable commandments. He said to him: “Do good for everybody who asks
you for it. If he is appropriate for it, then you are right in giving
it. If he is inappropriate for it, then you are appropriate for it. If a
man abuses you on

your right hand and then the man moves to your left hand and apologizes
to you, then accept his apology.”[^34]

These commandments are full of the noble ethics which the members of the
House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, adopted. They urged the Moslems
to do good and asked them to forgive those who mistreated them. These
are the most prominent qualities of them.

3. Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, said: “My father, ‘Ali b. al-Husayn,
said to his children:‘ Be careful of small and big lies during
seriousness and joking. That is because if the person tells a small lie,
he will tell a big one.’”[^35]

The Imam, peace be on him, urged his children to adopt good deeds. He
planted noble qualities in themselves. He prevented them from practicing
the deeds that corrupt man's behavior.

4. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him, recommended his son, Imam
al-Baqir, to cleave to the following excellent commandments. He, peace
be on him, said: “My little son, intellect is the guide of the soul.
Knowledge is the guide of the intellect. Intellect is the translator of
knowledge. Know that knowledge is more surviving, the tongue is more
prattling, and that the reform of all the world is in two words-
cleverness and heedlessness.[^36] For man does not neglects what he has
already regonized. Know that the hours decrease your lifetime. You do
not obtain a blessing but through leaving another blessing. Beware of
the long hope.”[^37]

These are some of his commandments. They are full of high morals,
valuable wise sayings, and sound directions. The Imam did not put them
for his children only. Rather he put them for all people regardless of
their nationalities and their religions.

His Supplications for his Children
----------------------------------

As for all his supplications, they represent an origin bright side of
the sides of Islamic education. They are the best ways to educate souls
and to improve morals.

The great Imam knew that black clouds of social, moral and religious
deterioration prevailed in the community during his time. So, he put his
supplications known as‘ al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya'. Through them he wanted
to cure psychological diseases and to renew the mental and spiritual
qualities of the community. The supplications are among the most
valuable Islamic works after the Holy Koran and Nahjj al-Balagha.

Indeed Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn's supplications are full of knowledge, wise
sayings, and spiritual Islamic belief. They supply the community with
the teachings necessary to achieve its individual and social balance.
Among his holy supplications for his children is the following. He,
peace be on him, said:

O Allah, be kind to me through

the survival of my children,

setting them right for me,

and allowing me to enjoy them!

O Allah, make long their lives for me,

increase their terms,

bring up the smallest for me,

strengthen the weakest for me,

rectify for me their bodies,

their religious dedication,

and their moral traits,

make them well in their souls, their limbs,

and everything that concerns me of their affair,

and pour out for me and upon my hand

their provisions!

Make them pious, fearing, insightful, hearing,

and obedient toward You,

loving and well-disposed toward Your friends,

and stubbornly resistant and full of hate

toward all Your enemies!

Amen!

O Allah, through them strengthen my arm,

straighten my burdened back,

multiply my number,

adorn my presence,

keep alive my mention,

suffice me when I am away,

help me in my needs,

and make them loving toward me,

affectionate, approaching, upright,

obedient, never disobedient, disrespectful

opposed, or offenders!

Help me in their upbringing, their education,

and my devotion toward them,

give me among them from Yourself male children,

make that a good for me,

and make them a help for me

in that which I ask from You!

Give me and my progeny refuge from the accursed Satan,

for You have created us, commanded us, and prohibited us,

and made us desire the reward of what You have commanded

and fear its punishment!

You assigned to us an enemy

who schemes against us,

gave him an authority over us

in a way that You did not give us an authority over him,

allowed him to dwell in our breasts

and let him run in our blood vessels;

he is not heedless though we are heedless,

he does not forget though we forget;

he makes us feel secure from your punishment

and fill us with fear toward other than You.

If we are about to commit an indecency,

he gives us courage to do so,

and if we are about to perform a righteous work,

he holds us back from it.

He opposes us through passions

and sets up for us doubts.

If he promises us, he lies

and if he raises our hopes, he fails to fulfill them.

If You do not turn his trickery away from us,

he will misguide us,

and if You do not protect us from his corruption,

he will cause us to slip.

O Allah, so defeat his authority over us through Your authority,

such that You hold him back from us

through the frequency of our supplication to You

and we leave his trickery

and rise up among those preserved by You from sin!

O Allah, grant me my every request,

accomplish for me my needs

withhold not from me Your response

when You have made Yourself accountable for it to me,

veil not my supplication from Yourself,

when You have commanded me to make it,

and be kind to me through everything that will set me right

in this world and the next,

in everything that I remember or forget,

display or conceal,

make public or keep secret!

In all of this, place me through my asking You among

those who set things right,

those who are answered favorably

when they request from You

and from whom is not withheld

when they put their trust in You,

those accustomed to seek refuge in You,

those who profit through commerce with You,

those granted sanctuary through Your might,

those given lawful provision in plenty from Your bound less bounty

through Your munificence and generosity,

those who reach exaltation after abasement through You

those granted sanctuary from wrong through Your justice,

those released from affliction through Your mercy,

those delivered from need after poverty through Your riches,

those preserved from sins, slips, and offenses through reverential fear
toward You,

those successful in goodness, right conduct, and propriety through
obeying You,

those walled off from sins through Your power,

the retainers from every act of obedience toward You,

the dwellers in Your neighborhood!

O Allah, give all of that through Your bestowal of success and Your
mercy,

grant us refuge from the chastisement of the burning,

and give to all the Moslems, male and female,

and all the faithful, male and female,

the like of what I have asked for myself and my children,

in the immediate of this world

and the deferred of the next!

Verily You are the Near, the Responder,

the All-hearing, the All-knowing,

the pardoner, the Forgiving,

the Clement, the merciful!

And give to us in this world good,

and in the next world good,

and protect us from the chastisement of the Fire![^38]

Indeed the great Imam put the methods of education and the ethics of
Islam through this holy supplication, which is among the gifts of
Prophethood, the fragrant smells of the Imamate, and the bright pages of
the heritage of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them. The Imam took care of this supplication to educate the morals of
his children and to purify their souls from deviation from the right
path and sins. He prayed for Allah to set right their religion, to
protect them from committing what he prohibited, and to set right their
conduct so that they would be the delight of his eye and a help for him
to achieve the affairs of this life. It is natural for the father to be
happy when his child is righteous. When the child deviates, he turns his
parents' life into an unbearable inferno.

In Protection from Immortality
------------------------------

The great Imam overexerted himself in worship. He was very loyal to
Allah. The people saw nobody like him in piety and intense cleaving to
the religion. His life was a school for piety, belief, education, and
reform. The people admired him very much, for he was the rest of the
Prophethood and of Allah in His earth. Thus, they were happy to see him,
to sit with him, and to talk with him. This was difficult for the
Umayyads who were the most malicious of all the people towards the
Prophet's family. They were afraid of the Imam, for the people admired
him very much, and talked about his vast knowledge. Among the most
malicious towards him was al-Walïd b. ‘Abd al-Malik. Al-Zuhri reported
that al-Walïd said: “I have no rest as long as ‘Ali b. al-Husayn is in
this world.”[^39] When this spiteful person became caliph, he decided to
kill the Imam.

Al-Walïd poisoned the Imam
--------------------------

Al-Walïd committed the most dangerous crime in Islam. He sent deadly
poison to his governor of Medina (Yathrib). He commanded him to give the
poison to the Imam to drink.[^40] His governor carried out that order.
When the Imam was given the poison to drink, he suffered from severe
pains. He remained alive for some days on the death bed expressing his
grief to Allah. The people crowded to visit him. However, he, peace be
on him, wa

praising Allah for granting him martyrdom at the hands of the worst of
His creatures.

His Designation for the Imamate of al-Baqir
-------------------------------------------

He, peace be on him, charged his son, al-Baqir, with the Imamate after
him and designated him as the Imam. Al-Zuhri said: [I went to him to
visit him. Then I said to him:] “If Allah's unavoidable order occurs,
whom shall we follow after you ?”

The Imam looked at me kindly and said to me: “This son of mine, pointing
to his son al-Baqir, for he is my trustee, my inheritor, and the
container of my knowledge. He is the origin of knowledge and the one who
will split it open. ”

“Will you not designate your eldest son ?”

“Abu ‘Abd Allah, oldness and youngness do not concern the Imamate. In
this manner, Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
nominated us. Thus, we have found it written in the tablet and the
parchment. ”

“Son of the Apostle of Allah, did your Prophet entrust you to be the
trustees (of authority) after him ?”

“We have found twelve names in the parchment and the tablet. Their
Imamate, their fathers' names, and their mothers' names have been
written in the tablet.”Then he said: “Seven of the trustees will come
forth from the back of Mohammed, my son. Al-Mahdi will be one of
them.”[^41]

Some prominent Shi‘ites came to him. He told them about the Imamate of
his son al-Baqir. He appointed him as the authority and leader for the
community of his grandfather. Then he gave him a basket and a box in
which were the prophets' heritage and the weapon and the books of the
Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family.[^42]

His Bequests to his Son al-Baqir
--------------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him, entrusted his trustee and the
Lord of his sons, Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, to carry out his
bequests that are as follow:

1. He said to him: “Through this she-camel of mine, I performed the hajj
twenty times. I have never whipped it. When it dies, bury it so as the
beasts of prey do not eat its meat. That is because Allah's Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, said: “Allah numbers the camel from the
blessings of Heaven when the pilgrim performs the hajj seven times
through it. And He makes blessed its progeny.”Imam al-Baqir carried that
out.[^43]

2. He advised him to carry out the following valuable bequest that
denote some bright qualities of the members of the House (ahl al-Bait),
peace be on them. He said to him: “I advise you with what my father
advised me when death came to him. He said to me: “My little son, beware
of oppressing him who has no supporter against you but Allah.”[^44]

3. He entrusted him to wash and shroud him and to take care of all his
affairs till he buried him in his final resting place.[^45]

To the High Comrade
-------------------

The Imam was in a critical condition, for the death pangs became more
serious. The members of his House were told that he would move to
Paradise in the darkness of the night. He fainted three times. When he
got well, he read the chapter of al-Waqi‘a and the chapter of Inna
Fatahna, and then he, peace be no him, said: “Praise belongs to Allah,
Who has made good to us his promise, and has made us inherit the land;
we abide in the garden where we please; so goodly is the reward of the
workers.”[^46]

Then that great soul ascended to its Creator as the souls of the
prophets and of the apostles ascended. The angels of the Merciful
surrounded it. Allah's favors, greetings, and pleasure surrounded it
too. His soul ascended to Heaven after it had enlightened the horizons
of this universe and the worlds of this world had shone through it. That
is because it had left behind it noble practices through which the
perplexed one and the straying one follow the right way.

His Preparation for Burial
--------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) prepared his father's body. When he washed
his body, the people saw the places of his prostration (in prayer). They
were similar to the camel's kneels because of his many prostrations for
his Creator. The people looked at his shoulders. They looked like the
camel's kneels too. Thus, the people asked al-Baqir about that. He told
them that his father's shoulders were so because of the food bag he
carried on them for the poor and the deprived.

After al-Baqir had washed his father's body, he shrouded it and prayed
over it.

His Funeral
-----------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn was escorted to his final resting place in the
manner which Medina (Yathrib) had never seen before. The pious and the
sinners paid him the last hours. All the people wept over him, for they
lost much good at his death. Moreover, they lost that high soul of which
no soul was created. The people crowded around that holy body. They were
happy to raise it. It was strange that Sa‘ïd b. al-Musayyab, one of the
seven jurists in Medina, did not escort the Imam and did not pray over
him. Hushrum, Ashja‘s retainer, blamed him for that. Sa‘ïd said to him:
“To pray two raq‘as in the mosque is more lovable for me than to pray
over this good man from the good House.[^47] Sa‘ïd was deprived of
escorting the Imam who was the most pious human being Allah created
after his pure grandfathers.

To his final Resting Place
--------------------------

The people were around the great body praising and glorifying Allah.
They brought it to the (cemetery) of Baqi‘ al-Gharqad. They dug a grave
for it beside the grave of his pure uncle, Imam al-Hasan b. ‘Ali, the
Lord of the youth of Heaven. Imam al-Baqir buried his father's body in
its final resting place. He buried with it kindness, piety, clemency,
and the spiritual qualities of the prophets and of the pious.

Then the people hurried toward Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, to
condole him. The Imam, his bothers, and all the Hashimites thanked them
for that.

After he had buried his father at the (cemetery) of Baqi al-Gharqad,
Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, went home weeping The
Hashimites, the children of the Companions (of the Prophet), and the
notable Moslems surrounded him. They were weeping over Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidïn and mentioning his traits and his deeds. They were also
mentioning with great sorrow the heavy loss that befell the Moslems at
his death.

After his father's death, Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, undertook the
spiritual leadership and the general authority of the Moslem world. The
Imamate and the religious leader with the Shi‘ites passed to him.[^48]
From that moment, he began to proclaim knowledge and to teach the
scholars special lessons about the affairs of Islamic Law and the rules
of religion. Most historians mentioned that he lived for 39 years under
the protection of his father.[^49] The orientalist Roait M. Reynolds
made a mistake when he mentioned that the Imam's age was 19 years when
the Imamate passed to him.[^50] That has occurred because of the paucity
of the studies on the affairs of Islamic history.

Fabrication
-----------

In his book ‘ al-Tarïkh', b. ‘Asakir reported some fabrications on the
authority of Mohammed b. Ja‘far al-Samiry, who said: I heard Abu Musa,
the educator, say: Qays b. al-Nu‘man said: “One day I went to some
graveyards of Medina. Suddenly, I found a boy. The boy was sitting
beside a grave and weeping loudly. Rays of light were coming out of his
face. I walked toward him and said: “O Boy, what has made you sad to the
extent that it has made you lonely at the graveyards and weep over the
deed while you are in the inexperience of boyhood paying no attention to
the difference of the times and the longing of grief? The boy raised his
head and lowered it. He kept silent for an hour without giving an
answer. Then he raised his head and said:

Indeed the boy is he whose intellect is young.

Neither youngness nor oldness has abased the wise from us.

Then he said to me: You have no ability to think. Your bowels are free
from sorrow. You feel safe from the approach of death through the long
hope. Indeed the thing that has made me lonely at the graveyard reminds
me of the Words of Allah, the Great and Almighty :‘ And the trumpet
shall be blown, when lo! from the graves they shall hasten on to their
Lord. ' So, I said: May my father and mother be ransom for you, who are
you? He said:‘ The unhappiness of the fools is that their knowledge of
the children of the prophets is little. I am Mohammed b. ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn. This is the grave of my father. Which sociability is more
sociable than his nearness? Which loneliness is with him? Then he
composed, saying:

When my tears decrease at a misfortune,

I make weeping a cause for it.

Qays said:‘ I went away. I did not leave the visitation of the graves
from that time.[^51] ’” This report was fabricated, for it denotes that
the Imam was still young after his father's death. However, the
historians have unanimously agreed that his holy age was 39 years. Thus,
when we consider carefully this report, we understand that it is among
the fabrications.

With this our talk about Imam Mohammed al-Baqir under the wing of his
father and of his grandfather is over. He inherited from them the
greatest thing which the branches inherit from the origins. He inherited
from them knowledge, wisdom, and sound judgments.

### Notes

###

[^1] Tarikh Dimashq, vol.51, p.[^38]: Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol.4,
p.241.

[^2] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol.2, p.[^61]:

[^3] Ibid, vol.2, p.[^46]:

[^4] Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol.7, p.[^305]:

[^5] Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol.3, p.[^309]:

[^6] Tabaqat al-Fuqaha’, p.[^34]:

[^7] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol.2, p.[^48]:

[^8] Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol.3, p.[^141]:

[^9] Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol.7, p.[^305]:

[^10] Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p.[^73]:

[^11] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol.9, p.[^104]:

[^12] Wasilat al-Mal fi ‘Ad Manaqib al-Al, p.[^208]:

[^13] Saffwat al-Safwa.

[^14] Wasilat al-Mal fi ‘Ad Manaqib al-Al, p.[^208]:

[^15] Radi al-Din al-Tubrisi, Makarim al-Akhlaq, p.[^143]:

[^16] Al-Dur al-Nazim, p.[^181]: Al-Anwar al-Bahiya, p.103.

[^17] Bihar al-Anwar, vol.2, p.[^83]:

[^18] Al-Dur al-Nazim, p.[^179]:

[^19] Durr al-Abkar fi Safwat al-Akhyar.

[^20] A‘lam al-Wara, p.[^360]:

[^21] Al-Dur al-Nazim, p.[^179]:

[^22] Ahmed Fahmi, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, pp.72-[^73]:

[^23] Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol.3, p.[^136]:

[^24] Ibid.

[^25] Ibid.

[^26] Da‘a’im al-Islam, vol.2, p.[^188]:

[^27] Ibid, p.[^156]:

[^28] Nihayat al-Irab, vol.21, pp.327-[^331]:

[^29] Hayat al-Imam al-Husayn, vol.3, p.[^327]:

[^30] Koran, 47, 22-[^23]:

[^31] Koran, 13, [^25]:

[^32] Koran,33, [^57]:

[^33] Al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf, p.[^282]:

[^34] Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.[^282]:

[^35] Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol.3, p.[^232]:

[^36] Many authors ascribed these golden words

to Imam al-Baqir.

[^37] Al-Khazzaz, Kifayat al-Athar, p.[^319]:

[^38] Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, supplication
no.[^25]:

[^39] Hayat al-Imam ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, p.[^426]:

[^40]Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusul al-Muhimma, p.[^233]:

[^41] Ithbat al-Hudat, vol.5, p.[^264]:

[^42] Ibid, p.[^268]:

[^43] Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin, vol.2, p.[^635]:

[^44] Al-Khisal, p.[^185]:

[^45] Al-Khara’ijj, p.[^20]:

[^46] Roudat al-Kafi.

[^47] Al-Kashi, Rijal, p.[^76]:

[^48] Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol.5, p.[^204]:

[^49] Ibn Abi al-Thaljj al-Baghdadi, Tarikh al-A’imma, p.[^5]:

[^50] ‘Aqidat al-Shi‘a, p.[^123]:

[^51] Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh, vol.51, pp.44-[^45]:
