CHAPTER lll: HIS BROTHERS AND HIS CHILDREN
==========================================

As for the research bout the Sharifs from the brothers and children of
Imam al-Baqir and about their relationship with him, it is necessary
according to modern studies. That is because it denotes a side of his
life under the wing of his family and it is numbered among the
educational factors that affect the individual's character as the
educationalists say. That is as follows:

His Brothers
------------

As for the Imam's relationship with his brothers, it was very strong.
Love and familiarity prevailed. It was far from bitter obscene language.
It was said to him:

“Which of your brothers is the most lovable you?”

He, peace be on him, replied that he did not discriminate against anyone
of them and that he loved them all and was loyal to them all. He said:

“As for ‘Abd Allah, he is my hand with which I assault.[^1] As for
‘Umar, he is me eye through which I see. As for al-Husayn, he is
clement. He walks calmly on the earth. When the ignorant address them,
they say: greetings.”[^2]

The Imam's brothers had all the noble qualities such as piety,
God-fearingness, and righteousness. Their father, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn,
peace be on him, fed them from his guidance and bestowed on them rays
from his soul. Thus, the rays enlightened their hearts through the true
Islam and the true belief. Now, we will give a brief idea about their
affairs:

Zayd the Martyr
---------------

As for Zayd the martyr, he filled the world with his knowledge and his
outstanding qualities. He was among the notables of the Prophet's family
who raised Allah's Words high in the earth and sacrificed their souls
for Allah to establish Islamic justice, to repeat the Koranic government
among people, and to end the social oppression which the Umayyad regime
spread among the people. Now, we will mention some of his life and his
affairs.

His Birth
---------

Zayd the martyr was born in the year 78 A. H.[^3] It was said that he
was born in the year 75 A. H.[^4] When his father, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn,
peace be on him, was given good news, he took the Holy Koran and opened
it. Thus, the holy verse appeared: “Surely Allah has bought of the
believers their souls and their property for this, that they shall have
the garden.”[^5] He closed the Koran and then he opened it again, so
this verse appeared: “And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way
as dead; nay they are alive (and) are provided sustenance from their
lord.”[^6] He closed the Koran and opened it, so this verse appeared:
“Allah has made the strivers with their property and their souls to
excel the holders back a (high) degree.”[^7]

The Imam was dazzled and began saying:

“I have been condoled concerning this boy. Surely he will be among the
martyrs.”[^8]

The Imam, peace be on him, predicted the martyrdom and told his
companions about it. Thus, they had no doubt about that.

His Early Life
--------------

Zayd grew up in the Houses of Prophethood and of the Imamate. His
father, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, who was the best human being during his
time, fed him with the essence of wisdom. He took care of his manners.
He drew the way of guidance and good for him. He affected his behavior.
Thus, his father's bright habits were impressed in his mind. The
historians said: “Zayd's most prominent qualities were asceticism,
piety, and conforming to the religion. He did not follow the leadership
of himself. Rather he preferred the pleasure and obedience of Allah to
all things. ”

From his childhood, Zayd had a close relationship with his brother
al-Baqir who was the successor and trustee of his father and the
inheritor of his knowledge. It is natural that this relationship had a
great effect on his behavior and his character. That is because his
behavior and his character were similar to those of his grandfathers
whom Allah purified from uncleanliness and made far from them the sins
of this world.

His Worship and his Piety
-------------------------

Zayd was loyal to Allah in worship and turned to Him in repentance.
'‘Asim b. ‘Ubayd al-‘Umari said: “When Zayd was a young man in Medina, I
saw him praise Allah to the extent that he fainted. Thus, the people
said that he would not come back to this world.”[^9] With the people of
Medina, he was known as the Ally of the Koran.[^10] The prostration (in
prayer) affected his face[^11] because of his many prayers during whole
the night.[^12] With his sentiments and his feelings, he turned his face
toward Allah. Moreover, he followed everything that brought him near
Allah in station.

His Knowledge and his Literature
--------------------------------

Zayd was among the prominent scholars of his time. He was an
encyclopedia of traditions, jurisprudence, the explanation (of the
Koran), language, literature, and theology. Jabir asked Imam Mohammed
al-Baqir, peace be on him, about Zayd. He, peace be on him, replied:
“You asked me about a man who is full of belief and knowledge from the
ends of his hair to his foot.”[^13]

He, peace be on him, said: “Indeed Zayd was given abundant
knowledge.”[^14] Zayd talked about his vast knowledge and education when
he prepared himself to lead the community and to revolt against the
Umayyad government. He said:

”By Allah, I did not go out nor did I make this uprising of mine till I
have read the Koran, mastered the religious duties, have command of the
sunna (the Prophet's practices), and morals, known the interpretation as
I have known the Koran, understood the abrogating (verse) and the
abrogated, the specific and general, the clearly defined and the
ambiguous, and the necessary needs of the community. Indeed I know my
Lord clearly.”[^15]

Surely Zayd was among the most prominent jurists and among the greatest
reporters of tradition. He learned his knowledge from his father, Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him, and from his brother, Imam al-Baqir,
peace be on him, who split open knowledge as his grandfather, the
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said. They fed him with all
kinds of knowledge. Moreover, he learned from them the principles and

branches of the thought and the explanation (of the Koran). Thus, he was
among the first-class figures in his outstanding merits and knowledge.

Al-Shahristani thought that Zayd studied under Wasil b. ‘Ata' and
learned al-i‘tizal (seclusion) from him. He said: “He (Zayd) wanted to
know the principles and the branches to be endowed with knowledge, so he
learned the principles from Wasil b. ‘Ata', the head of the Mutazilites.
Worth mentioning, Wasil b. ‘Ata' thought that Zayd's grandfather, ‘Ali
b. Abï Talib, peace be on him, was not sure of correctness during his
battles against the Companions of the Camel and the Syrians and that one
of the two parties was wrong. For this reason, Zayd learned al-i‘tizal
(seclusion) from him.”[^16]

This idea is incorrect, for Zayd did not take his religious knowledge
from Wasil. Rather he learned it from his father and his brother, who
enlightened the scientific intellectual life of Islam.

The jurists and the heads of the Islamic Schools took their religious
knowledge directly from the Imams of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, or from one of their students. So, why would
Zayd go to Wasil to take knowledge from him?[^17] Shaykh Abu Zahra said:
“Zayd met Wasil to debate with him. He was not his student, for they
were of the same age. Zayd was grown-up. “He added: “Zayd learned the
branches of the rules from his family. That was in Medina, the cradle of
the science of the branches. ”[^18]

Zayd learned his religious knowledge from his father and his brother. He
was among the prominent jurists during his time. Abu Khalid al-Wasity
reported a group (of traditions) on his authority. They are about
jurisprudence such as worships and transactions. He called them ‘Musnad
Ahmed'. We have mentioned the criticisms of this book in our study on
the beliefs of the Zaydis.

As for Zayd's literary position, he was among the first-class in
literature and eloquence. He was similar to his grandfather, the
Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, in eloquence.[^19] The
historians said: “Zayd debated upon a bequest with Ja‘far b. al-Hasan.
When they debated upon the bequest with each other, the people
overcrowded around them to hear their debate. The people memorized and
wrote Ja‘far's and Zayd's words. Then they learned them as they learned
the obligatory religious duties, rare poetry, and proverbs. ”[^20]
Sibawayh quoted Zayd's poetry. Zayd's opponent, Hisham the tyrant,
acknowledged his literary abilities and his skillful speech. He said:
“Zayd has a sweet tongue and a strong style. He is appropriate for
hiding the speech. ”[^21] History and literature books are full of his
wonderful wise sayings, which are among eloquent Arabic speech.

Imam al-Baqir admired Zayd
--------------------------

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, revered and admired his brother, Zayd.
He showed the deepest affection and the sincerest love towards him. That
is because Zayd was among the peerless men and was a living example of
unique heroism. The historians reported examples of that affection and
admiration. The following are some of them:

1. Imam al-Baqir said: “Indeed, Zayd, the mother who bore you was
highborn. O Allah, strengthen my back by Zayd. ”[^22] This indicates
that the Imam revered and admired his brother, Zayd.

2. Sudayr al-Sayrafi reported: “I (Sudayr) was with Abu Ja‘far al-Baqir,
peace be on him. Suddenly, Zayd b. ‘Ali entered. Abu Ja‘far patted him
on the back and said to him: 'This is the Lord of the Hashimites. When
he orders you, then obey him. When he asks you for the support, then
support him. '”[^23] This indicates that the Imam summoned (the people)
to support and defend him. He also regarded his uprising as legal.

3. The historians reported on the authority of a man from the
Hashimites, who said: “We were sitting with Mohammed (al-Baqir) b. ‘Ali
b. al-Husayn. His brother, Zayd, was also sitting. Then a man from Kufa
came in. Mohammed b. ‘Ali said to the man: 'You narrate original poetry.
What did al-Ansari say to his brother?'“The man recited for the Imam
some lines of poetry having noble qualities.

Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) put his hand on Zayd's shoulder and said to him:
“My brother, these are your qualities. I ask Allah to protect you so as
not to be killed in Iraq.”[^24]

The above-mentioned lines denote that Zayd had a strong will and
resolution. He was obedient to his brother. His qualities were noble. He
was appropriate for carrying out great tasks. Nobody has such qualities
but the matchless ones.

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, gave the highest qualities to his
brother and granted him his loyal love. The factor of brotherhood did
not motivate al-Baqir to treat his brother in such a way. That is
because his spiritual position did not permit him to follow sentiments
and desires. Rather he thought that his brother was among the most
perfect human beings. So, he granted him such love and honor.

With Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik
----------------------------

Hisham bore malice against the Prophet's family and harbored hatred
against them. He ordered his security agents to keep an eye on the
‘Alids and to know their political activities. His security agents
informed him of Zayd's high social rank and his remarkable abilities.
They told him that the people followed Zayd and that they looked forward
to his government. Thus, Hisham plotted against him. He ordered his
governor over Medina (Yathrib) to send Zayd to Damascus. When Zayd
arrived in Damascus, Hisham did not receive him to weaken and disdain
him. When the Syrians saw that Zayd had high morals, eloquent speech,
strong proofs, and religious devoutness, they followed him. Hisham heard
of that, so he burst into anger. Then he asked the advice of some of his
followers to abase and weaken Zayd before the Syrians. They said to him:
“Permit all the people to come to meet you. Prevent Zayd from coming
with them. Then let him enter after them all. When he enters and greets
you, do not greet him and do not order him to sit down.”Hisham did that.
He thought that such an action would decrease Zayd's importance and
weaken his character. Some historians said: “Zayd came in and greeted
Hisham. However, Hisham did not greet him. Thus, Zayd burst into anger.
He addressed him violently, saying: ‘Cross-eyed, greetings! Indeed you
see yourself appropriate for this

name!’”[^25] These words destroyed the tyrant's might and abased his
haughtiness. So, he shouted at Zayd, saying: “I have heard that you
mention the caliphate and wish for it. Still, you are inappropriate for
it. Moreover, you are the son of a slave-wife.”

Zayd opposed Hisham. He mocked at him. He brought proofs to refute
Hisham's words, saying: “Surely, mothers do not hold back men from their
aims. Indeed Ismael's mother was a slave for Isaac's mother. However,
Allah appointed him prophet, made him the father of the Arabs, and
brought out from his back the best of prophets, Mohammed, may Allah
bless him and his family.”[^26]

Hisham could not control himself because of these wonderful words. He
shook all over. Thus, he attacked Imam Mohammed al-Baqir, saying: “What
does your brother, the cow (al-baqara), do?”

Nobody uses these obscene words except the ignorant ones who have no
proof. Zayd felt pain when Hisham abused his brother. So, he turned to
the tyrant and said to him: “Allah's Apostle has called al-Baqir (the
one who splits open knowledge). Why do you call him al-baqara (the cow)?
That is because of the great difference between you and him. You will
oppose him in the hereafter as you have opposed him in this world. So,
he will enter Paradise and you will enter the Fire.”[^27]

These words shook the tyrant's throne. They made the Syrians know that
the tyrant was the worst creature and that he was not worthy of being a
police man. He opposed Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family. So, why was he the Caliph over the Moslems? Hisham was unable to
control himself, so he ordered his police to take Zayd out of his
meeting.[^28] Zayd went out. His heart was full of anger and pain. The
tyrant (Hisham) began saying to his family: “Do you not claim that the
members of this House have perished? No, by my life, the people whose
descendant is this have not perished.”[^29]

Zayd went out. He was very eager to announce his uprising against the
Umayyad government that denied all human values and disdained the
people's dignity. Zayd declared his uprising through his immortal words
that became a motto and anthem for the revolutionists who entered the
fields of armed struggle. He said:

“If people hate the heat of the swords, they become low. ”

This confrontation between Zayd and Hisham took place during the
lifetime of Imam Mohammed al-Baqir, peace be on him. The books have not
mentioned the Year when this confrontation occurred. However, from that
moment, Zayd decided to revolt against the Umayyad regime. Some of his
followers said that they went to him and heard reciting the following
words of the poet:

Whoever seeks the forbidden glory with the spear

lives glorious or the spears tear him.

When you gather together a clever heart and a sword

and a refusal soul, the oppressive will avoid you.

When a group of people invade me, I invade it.

O Family of Hamadan, am I oppressive in that?[^30]

These lines of poetry indicate that Zayd decided to revolt against the
Umayyad regime through entering the field of armed struggle. He chose
this method to live glorious and noble, to make the oppressive avoid
him, and to protect himself from the plot of the aggressors. Oh You who
are great revolutionary, you are not oppressive nor are an aggressor.
Rather you are the one who saved and freed the Arabs and the Moslem
community from oppression, injustice, and despotism.

The Legal Uprising
------------------

It is certain that Zayd was not joyful nor ungrateful nor oppressive nor
corruptive when he announced his uprising. Rather he wanted to obtain
Allah's pleasure and the hereafter. Surely he saw prevailing oppression
and general injustice. He saw the Umayyad rulers violate all the things
Allah prohibited. Thus, he revolted against them for Allah and the
truth. The reporters said: “When Zayd decided to revolt (against the
Umayyads), Jabir b. Zayd al-Ju‘fi came and said to him:‘ I heard your
brother, Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), say:‘ Indeed my brother, Zayd b. ‘Ali,
will revolt and he will be killed. He is right. Woe unto him who betrays
him! Woe unto him who fight against him! Woe unto him who Kills him. '”

So, Zayd said to him: “I cannot keep silent. That is because they have
disobeyed Allah's Book. Moreover, they have believed in idols and false
deities. I saw a man with Hisham. The man was abusing Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family. Thus, I said to the man:‘
Unbeliever, woe unto you. When I meet you, I will kill you and send you
quickly to the Fire. '“So, Hisham said to me: “Zayd, keep silent. He is
our friend. “Then I (Zayd) said: “By Allah, if there was nobody except I
and my son, Yahya, I will go out and fight against him till I have
perished.”[^31]

Imam Abu Allah al-Sadiq, peace be on him, praised his uncle (Zayd) very
much. He also glorified his reformative uprising. “The narrators said:
“Al-Sadiq said to his companions:‘Do not say that Zayd disobeyed.
Surely, Zayd was a religious scholar. He was very truthful. He did not
summon you for himself. Rather, he summoned you to follow al-Rida from
the family of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family. If he had
appeared, he would have fulfilled what he had promised you. Surely, he
revolted against the supreme authority to change it.”[^32] Al-Sadiq,
peace be on him, gave ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Sayyaba a thousand dinars to
divide them among the families of those who were wounded with Zayd.[^33]

If the uprising had been illegal, Zayd would have not done that. That is
because he was far above emotions and sentiments.

Some reports have condemned Zayd's uprising. They have regarded it as
illegal. However, our master sayyid Imam al-Khu'i has discussed Zayd's
uprising. He has proven that the chain of the reporters is weak. So,
nobody can rely on such a chain to defame Zayd's character and
uprising.[^34]

However, Zayd's uprising made intellectual social change in the Islamic
society and made it ready to revolt against the Umayyad government. Few
years passed, then the black standards waved in Khurasan. Then they
crept to conquer the Islamic countries and to purify them from the
hirelings of the Umayyad authority. Thus, they overthrew the Umayyad
throne and put an end to its haughtiness and despotism.

The Great Uprising
------------------

Zayd revolted against the Umayyad rule through his faith that
represented the essence and guidance of Islam. Indeed he saw a liar
living, a truthful one was accused of lying, riches without piety,
common injustice, and despotism in the affairs of the Moslems. So, he
was unable to keep silent. Some of his Shi'ties said: “We went out with
Zayd. When it was mid night and the Pleiades appeared, he said to us:‘
Do you not see the Pleiades? Do you thing that there is anyone who can
reach them?'”

“No,”they replied.

“By Allah, I wish that my hand was attached to them and I fell on the
ground or where I fell and cut into pieces and that Allah reformed the
community of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family.”[^35]

These words of his indicate his reformative nature and his great loyalty
to the community of his grandfather, may Allah bless him and his family
and his full dedication to general reform.

‘Isa b. ‘Abd Allah reported on the authority of his grandfather Mohammed
b. ‘Umar b. ‘Ali, peace be on him, who said: “I was with Zayd b. ‘Ali
when Hisham sent us to Yousif b. ‘Umar. When we left Hisham, we headed
for Qadisiya (a province in Iraq). When we arrived there, Zayd said:‘
Isolate my provision from yours. ' So, his son said to him:‘What do you
want to do?' ' I want to return to Kufa. By Allah, if I know that Allah
is pleased with me when I strike fire with my hand to throw myself into
it when it is ablaze, I will do so. However, I know that there is
nothing that pleases Allah, the Great and Almighty, more than striving
against the Umayyads.[^36]

Zayd did not revolt against the Umayyads for the Caliphate or the
supreme authority. Rather he revolted to obtain Allah's pleasure and the
hereafter. He thought that striving against the oppressive was among the
greatest things that would make him near him to Allah. Then he headed
for Kufa, for it was the general center of the Shi‘ites who asked him to
come to them to pledge allegiance to him to revolt against the Umayyad
government and to overthrow it. The historians said that a group of his
loyal companions warned him of going to Kufa and blamed him for having
trust in the Kufans who were known for treason and breaking promises.
However, he did not pay attention to that, for he found no strategic
place for his uprising other than Kufa. He was reciting the following
words of ‘Antara al-‘Absi:

She got up early in the morning to make me afraid of death.

It was as if I was in isolation from the accidents of life.

So, I answered her that death was a watering place and that

I would be surely watered by the glass of the watering place.[^37]

These lines of poetry indicates that Zayd decided to enter the field of
armed struggle and that he strove bravely to drink out of the glass of
death to get rid of abasement, as his grandfather, Imam Husayn, the Lord
of the free, and of the abstinent ones in Islam.

When Zayd arrived in Kufa, the Kufans received him warmly and hurried to
pledge allegiance to him. The number of those who pledged allegiance to
him was fifteen thousand people. It was said that their number was more
than this. Moreover, the jurists, the judges, the great thinkers, and
the

prominent poets pledged allegiance to him. Among them were al-A‘mash,
Sa‘d b. Kaddam, Qays b. al-Rabï‘, al-Hasan b. ‘Ammara, and the
like.[^38] Abu Hanifa was asked about Zayd's going out, so he said: “His
going out was similar to the going out of the Apostle of Allah, may
Allah bless him and his family, at the Battle of Badr.”He added: “If I
had known that the people would not abandon him as they had abandon his
father, I would have fought along side him. However, I helped him with
money.”[^39]

As for the form of the pledge of allegiance which Zayd took from those
who pledged allegiance to him, it is as follows: “I summon you to
(follow) the Book of Allah, the Sunna (practices) of His Apostle, to
strive against the oppressive, to defend the oppressed, to give to the
deprived, to divide booty among its people, to pay the rights to their
owners, to support the people of the truth, and the like.”[^40]

This form gives a picture about the original principles for which Zayd
revolted. They are:

1. He summoned (the people) to enliven the Book of Allah and the Sunna
of His Prophet. That is because the Umayyad policy drove them away from
life.

2. He summoned them to strive against the Umayyad oppressive rulers who
led the Moslems through oppression and injustice and forced them to
adopt what they hated.

3. He summoned them to defend the rights of the oppressed and to give to
the deprived. Indeed this class of people were deprived of all their
legal rights throughout the Umayyad rule.

4. He summoned them to divide equally booty and all financial rights
among the Moslems. The Umayyads blundered such rights and spent them on
their pleasures and their private desires.

5. He summoned them to support the righteous people who took care of the
lawful affairs of the community. They were the guides from the members
of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.

Zayd revolted (against the Umayyads) to achieve these great aims in the
Islamic homeland and to save the community from injustice, oppression,
and severe punishments of the Umayyads.

The historians said: “Zayd had a large armed force. Their number was
forty thousand people. Thus, he thought that he had to announce his
uprising and to creep with his armies to occupy Kufa and to over throw
the Umayyad government.

His armies started from Jabbanat Salim.[^41] They were hailing their
great leader, Zayd. They were very eager to over throw Umayyad rule.
They were shouting: Ya Mansur, amit. “O He who is victorious, bring
death.”[^42]

When Zayd saw the standards waving over his head, he said: “Praise
belongs to Allah Who has guided me. By Allah, if I do not enjoin (the
people) to do good, I will feel shame of Allah's Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, when I meet him at al-Hawd (holy water in
Heaven).[^43] Then he addressed his armies, saying: “Cleave to the
behavior of the Commander of the Faithful in Basrah and Syria. Do not
follow the fugitive, do not kill the wounded, and do not open a closed
thing.”[^44]

The war broke out at a very cold night.[^45] That was in Muharram 23rd,
in the year 122 A. H. Armed clashes occurred between Zayd's followers
and the Umayyad armies headed by the Governor of Kufa, Yousif b. ‘Umar.

Treason and Perfidy
-------------------

The Kufans betrayed Zayd after they had made a covenant with Allah to
support and defend him. They abandoned him at the battle. They left him
with the few of his companions in the field of armed struggle (jihad).
When Zayd knew of their treason, he said:

“They have done towards me as they had done towards al-Husayn.”

The Kufans betrayed him as they had betrayed his grandfather, al-Husayn,
before. Zayd was sure of the failure of his uprising. It seemed to him
that the Kufans had no protection nor had they loyalty. Thus, he and his
companions took part at the battle that happened in the streets of Kufa.
He proved himself brave. The people did not see a knight braver than
him.[^46]

Under the Protection of Immortality
-----------------------------------

Zayd showed bravery and heroism which nobody can depict. He pursued the
armies and inflicted on them heavy causalities. So, the Umayyad army was
unable to resist Zayd's successive attacks. He attacked them and recited
the following words of a poet:

I abase life and honor death.

I see them both unhealthy taste.

If one of them is necessary,

then I will walk towards death in a pretty way.

Surely Zayd preferred the glory of death to the abasement of life, as
his grandfathers preferred that. He did not yield to abasement and
enslavement. Rather, he died honorably under the shade of swords.

When it got dark, an arrow hit Zayd in the forehead.[^47] The arrow
reached his noble brain that thought of nothing but of man's
righteousness and happiness.

The disaster befell his companions. They were full of sorrow and
sadness. Thus, they sent for a doctor. The doctor took the arrow out of
Zayd's forehead. However, Zayd died immediately. With that the glowing
candle that illuminated the way and made clear the purpose for the
Moslems went out.

Zayd died as a martyr to achieve social justice in the earth, to secure
equal chances for the Moslems, and to divide the blessings of the earth
among the poor and the deprived whose rights the Umayyad authority
denied.

The historians said : “Indeed Zayd's companions were perplexed at
burning his body. That is because the Umayyad authority would maim it in
a sinful way. After a discussion, they decided to bury his body in a
river. They went to the river and stopped its water. They dug a gave in
it and buried the pure body in it. They made the water flow on it. Then
they went away weeping over the great leader who took care of the rights
of the oppressed and the persecuted.

One of the spies of the authorities was among Zayd's companions. The spy
saw their movements. Thus, he hurried to Kufa to tell its governor about

the place of the grave. So, the governor ordered the grave to be dug up
to take the body out of it. Thus, the body was taken out and carried to
the Palace of Kufa. There the governor ordered the body to be hung
upside-down at al-Kanasa Market. Then he ordered the head to be cut off
to be sent as a gift to the Syrian tyrant, Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik. The
cruel tyrant ordered the head to be put at his meeting. He ordered those
who came to him to step on it with their shoes to abase it very
much.[^48] Then he made the hens peck its brain. In this connection, the
poet said:

Dismiss the rooster from Zayd's brain

as long as the chickens did not tread on him.[^49]

(He is) the grandson of the Prophet, the noblest of all Allah's
creatures, the adornment of the delegations and pilgrims.

They carried running his head to Syria in the early morning.[^50]

The tyrant (Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik) ordered the head to be hung on the
gate of Damascus. Then the head was sent to Medina.[^51] It was
installed at the grave of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, for a day and a night.[^52] Then it was sent to Egypt. All that
was done to spread fear and terrorism among the people and to make them
know that the authorities were able to suppress any anti-government
opposition.

The tyrant of Damascus wrote to the assassin, Yousif b. ‘Umar, the
governor of Kufa, to let Zayd hang. With that he intended to abase the
‘Alids and to disdain their Shi‘ites. It escaped him that such an action
lighted the fire of revolution in their souls. Thus, they were ready to
sacrifice their lives for their doctrines.

The Umayyads boasted of hanging Zayd's body. Al-Hakïm b. ‘Ayyash, an
Umayyad hireling, boasted of that, saying:

We have hung Zayd for you on the trunk of a date-palm.

We have never seen a Mahdi hung on the trunk.

You have compared ‘Uthman with ‘Ali owing to foolishness.

While ‘Uthman is better than ‘Ali.

A handful of earth is in al-Hakïm's mouth. Surely Zayd was hung because
he wanted to achieve the rights of the oppressed and the persecuted. He
was hung because he wanted to establish social justice in the earth and
to put an end to social oppression and the playing with the fate and
blessings of the community.

When Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Sadiq heard of these lines of poetry, he felt
pain very much. So, he raised his hands to supplicate (Allah), saying:
“O Allah, if your servant is a liar, then empower Your dog. “Allah
accepted the Imam's supplication. A lion ate al-Hakïm when he was
walking in the streets of Kufa. When the Imam heard of that, he
prostrated himself in prayer to thank Allah, saying: “Praise belongs to
Allah Who has fulfilled His promise.”[^53]

Torturing Zayd's Supporters
---------------------------

When the Umayyad authority had suppressed Zayd's uprising, it went too
far in spreading panic and fear in Kufa. It punished the innocent person
because of the guilty one and the comer because of the fugitive. It
resorted to punishing Zayd's supporters severely. It went to extremes in
doing that. It tortured not only the men but also the women. That was
forbidden even with

the people who lived before Islam. However, the authorities regarded
that as lawful to achieve their political aims. The historians said:
“The bloody tyrant, Yousif b. ‘Umar, ordered a woman to be arrested, for
the woman supported Zayd. When she stopped before him, he ordered her
hand and her leg to be cut off. However, she asked them to cut off her
leg first to gather her clothes. When they responded to her, they cut
off her hand and her leg. So, she bled till she died. Then the bloody
tyrant ordered her husband to be summoned to behead him.[^54] He also
ordered a woman to be arrested, for the woman married her daughter to
Zayd. He ordered her clothes to be torn. Then he ordered her to be
whipped. She was whipped till she died. Then her body was thrown into
the desert. A group of people took it and buried it in their
cemetery.[^55]

The tyrant committed many crimes of such a kind. All these crimes
indicate that he had neither conscience nor feelings.

The Moslems' Discontent
-----------------------

The Moslems were annoyed when Zayd was killed. They harbored malice
against the Umayyads who violated the holiness of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, when they killed Zayd. Worth mentioning, the
Prophet ordered the community to treat his progeny kindly.

The Umayyads committed the Karbala' terrible massacre. Only few years
after that, they murdered Zayd, who was among the notables of the
Prophetic family. They were not content with his murder. Thus, they dug
up his grave and hung his body on the trunk of a tree. They did not
permit (his family) to bury his body. They did that to avenge themselves
sinfully on the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.
With that they disobeyed the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, who ordered them to love his Household. Moreover, they disobeyed
Islam that ordered them to respect the dead and not to maim them.

Zayd's painful disaster was among the heavy events from which the
Moslems feared and which they regarded as great. Thus, their poets began
praising Zayd to the extent that they depicted the sorrow and the agony
that befell the Moslems. So, al-Fadl b. al-‘Abbas composed:

O Eye, shed abundant tears!

The grandson of the Prophet has been hanged at al- Kanasa.[^56]

These are some lines of the poem. Through them the poet has depicted his
deep sadness over the great martyr the Moslems lost. The poet asked his
eyes to shed abundant tears. That is because the misfortune was great
and heavy. Then he regarded as great taking out Zayd of his grave and
hanging him. Though the Umayyads maimed the body of the great
revolutionary, they were unable to force his pure soul that resisted
falsehood, abominable deeds, and injustice and that it has resided in
the gardens with the souls of the immortal martyrs who were killed at
Karbala' to defend the rights of the oppressed and the persecuted. That
made the misfortune easy for the poet. Then he blamed the Kufans for
betraying Zayd, as they had betrayed before his grandfather, al-Husayn,
peace be on him. Thus, treason was among the traits of the Kufans. It
was said: “The Kufan does not fulfill (his promise). ”

Abu Thumayla al-Abbar was among those who praised Zayd. He said:

You are always killed in the way of Allah.

The people are safe, while the members of the family of

Mohammed are killed or are made homeless.[^57]

In these lines the poet has described his exhausting sorrow over Zayd,
the great revolutionary. He has mentioned the heavy loss that was
inflicted on the community when it lost Zayd. That is because the
community wanted him to solve its hardships and crises. The poet added
that Zayd illuminated the way for the free combatants through his
martyrdom. He filled their hearts with content and pleasure through his
mighty uprising that aimed at achieving the decisive affairs of his
community. Through his martyrdom, Zayd obtained the maximum rank
obtained by the glorious martyrs from his grandfathers who raised the
banner of truth, which was stained with their pure blood. The poet added
that Allah wanted Zayd to die a martyr and to behave among the people
through the behavior of those who save and free their communities and
their homelands. That is because being murdered for Allah was the nature
of the ‘Alids. It has been reported on the authority of one of them:
“Being murdered is our custom and martyrdom is our dignity from Allah. ”

In his last lines, Abu Thumayla has mentioned the severe persecutions
which the Umayyad rulers imposed on the ‘Alids. That is because the
Umayyad rulers killed the ‘Alids, made them homeless, and filled them
with fright. The bird spent the night peacefully while the family of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, did not spend their night
peacefully because they were afraid of the Umayyads. He censured those
who rejoiced at the murder of Zayd who revolted (against the Umayyads)
to establish social justice in the earth. He also condemned those who
pledged allegiance to him and then deserted him. That was when they
entered the mosque of Kufa. Then Zayd asked them to support him and to
defend his uprising. However, they did not respond to him.

Burning the Great Body
----------------------

Zayd's body remained hung on the gallows. It was illuminating the way of
freedom and dignity for the people. It urged them to refuse abasement
and submission. It renewed in their souls the uprising against
oppression and injustice. Thus, the authorities put guards around it.
Their number was four hundred people. The authorities appointed a
hundred guards to watch the body every night. It built a house for the
guards around the trunk (of the date palm). That is because it thought
that the people would take the body and bury it.[^58]

Hisham died. Then al-Walïd b. Yazïd, the licentious one of the Umayyads,
succeeded him. The latter wrote to the governor of Kufa, Yousif b.
‘Umar, to bring down the holy body from the gallows and to burn it with
fire.[^59] The murderer carried out al-Walïd's orders. Thus, the pure
body was burnt, for Zayd wanted to purify the earth from the oppressive
and to return man's dignity and rights.

When the great body had been burnt, Yousif b. ‘Umar, the licentious one,
sprinkled it into the Euphrates. Then he said (to the Kufans): “By
Allah, Kufans, I will make you eat it in your food and drink it in your
water.”[^60]

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, freed his community
from the life of straying in the desert. However, the Umayyads rewarded

him when they killed his progeny and his family. They maimed them
sinfully, for they (the Prophet's progeny) wanted to achieve the
community's rights, security, and welfare.

With al-Mas‘udi
---------------

Here one thing has remained. The great historian, al-Mas‘udi, has
mentioned: “Zayd asked the advice of his brother, Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
when he wanted to go to Iraq to revolt against the Umayyads. Thus, the
Imam advised him not to trust the Kufans, for they were perfidious and
cunning. Indeed, they killed his grandfather, the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be no him, stabbed his uncle al-Hasan, and killed his
grandfather al-Husayn. However, Zayd insisted on asking (the Umayyads)
for the truth. So, Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) said to him: 'I am afraid that
you will be killed at al-Kanasa, in Kufa tomorrow. ' Then Abu Ja‘far saw
him off and told him that they would not meet each other.”[^61] These
words of al-Mas‘udi make the person understand that Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir) was alive when Zayd decided to revolt (against the Umayyads).
Some of those who wrote about Zayd mentioned that, too. This is
incorrect, for Imam Abu Ja‘far died in the year (114 A. H.)[^62] , and
Zayd was killed in the year (122A.H.). Perhaps al-Mas‘udi wanted to say
that Zayd had a hunch of revolting against the Umayyads at that time.
This is also incorrect. With this we end our talk about Zayd's life and
his uprising that was the brightest of all the uprisings at that time
and the most useful of them in serving the community.

Al-Husayn al-Asghar (the younger)
---------------------------------

Al-Husayn the younger was Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn's son. His mother was a
slave-wife (umm walad).[^63] He was among the glorious figures of the
Prophetic family, for he was meritorious, pious, and talented. The
following are some of his affairs:

His Religious Knowledge
-----------------------

He was among the prominent scholars of his time. He reported many
traditions on the authority of his father, his aunt, Fatima, daughter of
Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him, and his brother, Imam Abï Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him.[^64] His son, Mohammed, reported on his
authority the tradition of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and
his family, concerning the murder of his son, Imam al-Husayn, peace be
on him.[^65]

His Clemency and his Solemnity
------------------------------

Al-Husayn was clement and sober. The dignity of the pious and the
righteous presented itself in him. The lineaments of light appeared on
his face. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) described him, saying: “As for
al-Husayn, he is clement. He walks on the earth in humbleness. When the
ignorant address him, he says: Peace”[^66]

His Devotion and his Piety
--------------------------

He was pious and devout. He feared Allah very much. Sa‘ïd, the companion
of al-Hasan b. Sahib, said: “I did not see anyone who feared Allah more
than al-Hasan b. Salih till I came to Medina. So, I saw al-Husayn b.
‘Ali b. al-Husayn. I saw that nobody feared Allah more than he

did. (It was) as if he had been taken into the fire (of Hell) and then
taken out of it because of the intensity of his fear.”[^67]

Ahmed reported on the authority of his father, who said: “I saw ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn pray, so I said: ‘He will not put down his hand until his
prayer for all creatures is answered.’”[^68]

Al-Husayn grew up in the center of piety and devotion and in the origin
of wisdom and virtue of Islam. His father, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, fed him
with his ideals and his psychological perfect qualities. Thus, he was
similar to his father in cleaving to Allah, refraining from this world,
and conforming to the religion.

His Death
---------

He died in Medina (Yathrib) at the age of about (57 years).[^69] It was
said that he died at the age of (74 years).[^70] He was buried beside
his father, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, and his brother, al-Baqir, at the
(cemetery) of Baqi‘ al-Gharqad.

‘Abd Allah al-Bahir

He was the son of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him. He was Imam
al-Baqir's full brother. He was among the glorious children of the pure
Imams, for he was knowledgeable, pious, and devout. We will mention
briefly some of his affairs:

His Nickname
------------

He was nicknamed al-Bahir because he was handsome. The historians said:
“(The people) looked at his handsomeness when he attended a certain
meeting. Everybody respected and admired him.”[^71]

His Religious Knowledge
-----------------------

He was among the prominent scholars. His father, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn,
took care of educating him. He fed him with his sciences and his
outstanding qualities. The historians said: “He was among the jurists of
the members of the house (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.”He reported
many traditions on the authority of his grandfathers on the authority of
the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family. He related
traditions to the people. Thus, they reported the traditions on his
authority.[^72] He reported directly on the authority of his
grandfather, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, and on the
authority of his grandfather, Imam al-Hasan, peace be on him. ‘Ammara b.
Ghuzayya, Musa b. ‘Aqaba, ‘Isa b. Dinar, and Yazïd b. Abï Zyyad reported
on his authority. Ibn Hayyan numbered him among the reliable
(narrators). Al-Turmidhi and al-Hakïm regarded his traditions as
correct.[^73]

His Authority over the Heirlooms of the Prophet
-----------------------------------------------

‘Abd Allah assumed on behalf of his brothers the heirlooms of the
Prophet, peace be on him, and of Imam (‘Ali), the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be on him.[^74] He divided their revenues according to
the will of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and of Imam
(‘Ali), the Commander of the Faithful.

His Death
---------

He died at the age of (57 years).[^75] The references have not mentioned
the year when he died or the place where he was buried.

‘Umar al-Ashraf
---------------

He was the son of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him. His mother was
a slave-wife. Al-Mukhtar bought her for a hundred thousand dirhams. Then
he sent her to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn. She bore him ‘Umar, Zayd, and
‘Ali.[^76] ‘Umar al-Ashraf was among the most meritorious people. His
affairs are as follows:

His Kunya
---------

He was given the kunya of Abu ‘Ali. It was said that he was given the
kunya of Abu Ja‘far.[^77] The Shaykh (al-Tusi) said: “He was given the
kunya of Abu Hafs.”

His Nickname
------------

He was nicknamed al-Ashraf to distinguish him from ‘Umar al-Attraf, the
uncle of his father. Sayyid al-Muhanna said: “(He was nicknamed so)
because he obtained honor and outstanding merit from his grandfather,
al-Husayn, peace be on him, who was born from the Mistress of the Women
of the World, Fatima the Chaste, peace be on her, while ‘Umar al-Attraf
obtained honor from his father, Imam (‘Ali), the Commander of the
Faithful. “Our master, Imam al-Khu'i, commented on this, saying:
“Through his lineage, his outstanding merit, his piety, ‘Umar al-Ashraf
is more honorable than ‘Umar al-Attraf.”[^78]

His Religious Knowledge
-----------------------

He was a meritorious (religious) scholar. The Shaykh (al-Tusi) numbered
him among the companions of his brother, Imam al-Baqir. He reported on
the authority of his father. Fatr b. Khalifa reported on his
authority.[^79]

His Authority over the Heirlooms of the Prophet
-----------------------------------------------

He undertook the heirlooms of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and of Imam (‘Ali), the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on
him. Al-Husayn b. Zayd said: “I saw my uncle, ‘Umar, make a condition on
him he bought (Imam) ‘Ali's heirlooms that he should break so-and-so in
the wall and should not prevent those who entered them from
eating.”[^80] This indicates his generosity, his nobility, and his
humanity.

His Death
---------

He passed away at the age of (65 years).[^81] The references have not
mentioned the year when he died or the place where he was buried. They
have neglected that.

‘Ali
----

He was Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn's son. He died at Yanbu‘ and was buried
there.[^82] He was thirty years old.[^83] We have not found a full
biography about his life. Biography and lineage references have
neglected him. With this we end our talk about the righteous Sharifs
from the brothers of the Imam.

Imam al-Baqir's Children
------------------------

As for the Imam al-Bqir's children, they were from the good ones of the
Prophetic family and from the glorious figures of the Moslems, for they
were rightly-guided and righteous. Moreover, they refrained from the
sins of the world. The Imam educated them with his noble morals. He
planted in their souls his outstanding natures and his high ideals.
Thus, they represented his great soul whose aroma prevailed the world.
As for his pure male descendants, they are as follows:

### 1. Ibrahïm

###

He was the son of Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him. His mother was Umm
Hakïm, the daughter of Usayd b. al-Mughïra b. al-Akhnas al-Thaqafi.[^84]
We have found no information about him.

### 2. Imam Ja‘far

###

He was the master of the children of his father, the leading Imam after
him, among the glorious figures of this world, and the vanguard of the
geniuses of the world. That is because he made an immense development on
the intellectual and the scientific levels. Among them was his creation
in chemistry. Jabir b. Hayyan, who was the glorious figure of the Arab
east, studied this science under him. This science is regarded as the
creative means for the technological progress in the world. Modern
sciences have not discovered many of the chemical theories which the
Imam made nor have the specialists known.[^85] Imam Ja‘far (al-Sadiq) is
regarded among the early theologians and philosophers. Hisham b.
al-Hakam, who is regarded as a wonderful example of these studies,
studied under him.

Imam Ja‘far founded the rules and principles of the Islamic
jurisprudence after his pure grandfathers. He took care of this science
very much. Rather he devoted himself to it. The juristic encyclopedias
are full of what has been reported on his authority. Thus, most chapters
and branches has been reported on his authority. Moreover, he took care
of other Islamic sciences, such as the science of tradition,
interpretation (of the Koran), and morals. History has never known a
person more knowledgeable and meritorious than him, except his
grandfathers, peace be on them. If we want to talk in detail about his
character, then we are in need of a big encyclopedia.

### 3.‘Abd Allah

###

He was the son of Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him. His mother was Umm
Farwa, daughter of al-Qasim b. Mohammed b. Bakr.[^86] His father brought
him up and took care of educating him. So, he was among the virtuous
‘Alids. He died a martyr. A sinful Umayyad gave him poison to drink. The
historians said: “The Umayyad came to him. However, ‘Abd Allah was
afraid of him and said to him: ‘Do not kill me. I will intercede for you
with Allah.’”[^87]

However, the Umayyad paid no attention to him and forced him to drink
the poison. When he was given the poison to drink, his bowels were cut
off. He remained alive for a short time, and then he passed away.[^88]
He went as a martyr to Allah. He was similar to his grandfathers whom
the evil powers and the sinful souls killed. Those evil souls killed
them because they belonged to the original lineage that raised the
banner of human dignity.

### 4.‘Ali

###

He was the son of Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him. He lived under the
care of his father. He followed his father's guidance and behavior.
Thus, he was an example of virtues and perfection. He was nicknamed
al-Tahir (the pure one), for his soul was pure and his position was
great. He died in a village, at al-Khalis near Baghdad. In his (book)
al-Tarïkh, Muhib al-Dïn b. al-Najar said: “The shrine of al-Tahir is in
a village, at al-Khalis near Baghdad. An old grave has appeared in it. A
stone is on it. On the stone it has been written: In the name of Allah,
Most Gracious, Most Merciful. This is the shrine of al-Tahir ‘Ali b.
Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Abï Talib, peace be on him.
“The rest of the stone broke down. So a dome of adobes has been built
over it. There was a shaykh called ‘Ali b. Na‘ïm. The Shaykh was among
the secretaries. He assumed writing the Divan of al-Khalis. So, he
decorated the shrine and hung brass lamps in it. Then he built a wide
courtyard around it. Thus, the shrine has become among the shrines which
are visited.[^89] It was reported on the authority of the author of '
Riyad al-‘Ulama' that the grave of ‘Ali is in Kashan and that there is a
great dome over it and that it has clear miracles.[^90]

### 5.‘Abd Allah

###

His mother was Umm Hakïm, daughter of Usayd b. al-Mughïra
al-Thaqafi.[^91] He died during the lifetime of his father.[^92] We have
not found a full biography in the references which we have.

The Ladies of Virtue from his Daughters

As for the ladies of virtue from his daughters, they are as follows:
Zaynab whose mother was a slave-wife. Umm Salama[^93] whose mother was a
slave-wife. She was the mother of Isma‘ïl b. al-Arqat. Her son, Isma‘ïl,
became ill. So, she hurried frightened to Imam al-Sadiq. He ordered her
to go into the house and say two ruk‘as and supplicate with this
supplication: “O Allah, surely You granted him to me while he was
nothing. O Allah, I ask you to grant him to me. So, lend him to me.
”[^94] She did that, and Allah healed him.

With this we end our talk about the righteous Sharifs from the children
of the Imam, peace be on him.

### Notes

###

[^1] ‘Abd Allah was Imam al-Baqir’s full brother.

[^2] Safinat al-Bihar, vol.2, p.[^273]:

[^3] Ibn ‘Asakir, al-Tahdhib, vol.6, p.[^18]:

[^4] Al-Hada’iq al-Wardiya, vol.1, p.[^143]:

[^5] Koran, 9, [^111]:

[^6] Koran, 3, [^169]:

[^7] Koran, 4, [^95]:

[^8] Al-Roud al-Nadir, vol.1, p.[^52]:

[^9] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p.[^128]:

[^10] Ibid, p.[^130]:

[^11] Ibid, p.[^128]:

[^12] Al-Khara’ijj wa al-Jara’ih, p.[^328]:

[^13] Imam Zayd, Muqaddamat al-Musnad, p.[^8]:

[^14] Ibid, p.[^7]:

[^15] Al-Maqrizi, Al-Khutat wa al-Athar, vol.2, p.[^440]:

[^16] Al-Millal wa al-Nihal, vol.2, p.[^208]:

[^17] Wafayat al-A‘yan, vol.5, p.[^60]:

[^18] Mohammed Abu Zahra, Imam Zayd, p.[^225]:

[^19] Al-Hada’iq al-Wardiya, vol.1, p.[^144]:

[^20] Zahr al-Adab, vol.1, p.[^87]:

[^21] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol.2, p.[^390]:

[^22] ‘Umdat al-Talib, vol.2, p.[^127]:

[^23] Ibid.

[^24] Zahr al-Adab, vol.1, p.[^118]:

[^25] Ibn ‘Asakir, al-Tahdhib, vol.6, p.[^22]:

[^26] Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil, vol.5, p.[^84]:

[^27] Sharh al-Nahjj, vol.1, p.[^315]:

[^28] Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil, vol.5, p.[^84]:

[^29] ‘Umdat al-Talib.

[^30] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p.[^129]:

[^31] Taysir al-Matalib, pp.108-[^109]:

[^32] Roudat al-Kafi.

[^33] Al-Majjlisi, al-Amali, p.[^54]:

[^34] Mu‘jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.7, pp.350-[^358]:

[^35] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p.[^129]:

[^36] Taysir al-Matalib, pp.108-[^109]:

[^37] Al-Roud al-Nadir, vol.1, p.[^75]:

[^38] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin.

[^39] Al-Kamil, vol.5, p.[^56]:

[^40] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin.

[^41] Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.3, p.[^203]:

[^42] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol.8, p.[^273]:

[^43] ‘Umdat al-Talib, vol.2, p.[^127]:

[^44] Al-Hada’iq al-Wardiya, vol.1, p.[^148]:

[^45] Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.3, p.[^202]:

[^46] Ibid.

[^47] Al-Muqrim, Zayd al-Shahid.

[^48] Ibn Abi al-Haddid, Sharh.

[^49] Al-Niza‘ wa al-Takhasum, p.[^7]:

[^50] Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.3, p.[^292]:

[^51] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol.8, p.[^77]:

[^52] ‘Umdat al-Talib, p.[^258]:

[^53] Al-Sira al-Halabiya, vol.1, p.[^327]:

[^54] Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.3, p.[^255]:

[^55] Ibid.

[^56] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, pp. 148-[^149]:

[^57]Ibid, p.[^150]:

[^58] Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.3, p.[^256]:

[^59] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, pp. [^147]:

[^60] Al-Ya‘qubi, Tarikh, vol.2, p.[^391]:

[^61] Murujj al-Dhahab, vol.3, p.[^139]:

[^62] Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol.4, p.[^217]:

[^63] ‘Umdat al-Talib, vol.2, p.[^29]:

[^64] Al-Mufïd, al-Irshad, p.[^302]:

[^65] Mu‘jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.6, p.[^44]:

[^66] Safinat al-Bihar, vol.2, p.[^273]:

[^67] Al-Mufïd, al-Irshad, p.[^302]:

[^68] ‘Umdat al-Talib, vol.2, p.[^29]:

[^69] Mu‘jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.6, p.[^44]:

[^70] ‘Umdat al-Talib, vol.2, p.[^29]:

[^71] Ibid, p.[^127]:

[^72] Al-Mufïd, al-Irshad, p.[^300]:

[^73] Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol.5, p.[^324]:

[^74] Al-Mufïd, al-Irshad, p.[^300]:

[^75] ‘Umdat al-Talib, vol.2, p.[^127]:

[^76] Ibid.

[^77] Mu‘jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.13, p.[^54]:

[^78] Ibid.

[^79] Ibid.

[^80] Safinat al-Bihar, vol.2, p.[^273]:

[^81] ‘Umdat al-Talib, vol.2, p.[^127]:

[^82] Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol.5, p.[^450]: Yanbu‘ is to the right of Radwa
for those who leave from Medina to the sea. It belonged to the sons of
al-Hasan. It has abandunt fresh springs, water and plants. Some of them
said that it was a fort with date-palms. In it there were the religious
endowments of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him.
His sons inherited them.

[^83] ‘Umdat al-Talib, vol.2, p.[^129]:

[^84] Mir'at al-Zaman fï Tawarikh al-A‘yan, vol.5, p.[^78]: Ibn Sa‘d,
al-Tabaqat, vol.5, p.320.

[^85] Dr. Mohammed Yahya al-Hashimi has mentioned that in his book Imam
al-Sadiq Mulhim al-Kïmya'.

[^86] Al-Mufïd, al-Irshad, p.[^303]:

[^87] In his speech:" I will be a helper for you against Allah." He
meant that he would be an intercessor for him with Allah.

[^88] Ghayat al-Ikhtisar, p.[^64]: Safïnat al-Bihar, vol.1, p.309.

[^89] Ghayat al-Ikhtisar, p.[^63]:

[^90] Safïnat al-Bihar, vol.1, p.[^309]:

[^91] Al-Mufïd, al-Irshad, p.[^303]: Sayyid Kazim Yamani, al-Nafha
al-‘Ambariya. It is among the manuscripts of Imam Kashif al-Ghita'
Public Library. ‘Abd Allah has not been mentioned in Jamharat Ansab
al-‘Arab nor has he been mentioned in ‘Umdat al-Talib nor has he been
mentioned in Mir'at al-Zaman.

[^92] Al-Sirat al-Sawi, p.[^194]:

[^93] Mir'at al-Zaman fï Tawarikh al-A‘yan, vol.5, p.[^78]: Ibn Sa‘d,
al-Tabaqat, vol.5, p.230. In al-Nafha al-‘Ambariya, his daughters were
Zaynab the elder, Zaynab the younger, and Umm Kulthum.

[^94] Safïnat al-Bihar, vol.1, p.[^309]:
