CHAPTER IV: ADMIRATION AND GLORIFICATION
========================================

The learned, the scholars, the researchers, and the authors glorified
Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him. They acknowledged his outstanding merits
and his priority in knowledge to those other than him. They unanimously
agreed that he was the greatest scholar whom the Islamic and the Arab
world has ever known. The following are some of their words concerning
him:

1. Imam al-Sadiq
----------------

Imam Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Sadiq, peace be on him said: “My father was then
the best Mohammedan on the surface of the earth.”[^1]

This means that Imam al-Baqir was then the best of all the Moslems in
knowledge, devotion, conforming to the religion, and the like through
which the Moslem person becomes high.

2. Mohammed b.al-Munkadir
-------------------------

Mohammed b. al-Munkadir was among those who were contemporary with Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidïn and his son, Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him. He stated
his impressions of him, saying: “I did not think that ‘Ali b. al-Husayn
would leave a successor similar to him in outstanding merits, abundant
knowledge, clemency, etc., till I saw his son, Mohammed. ”[^2]

3. Sudayf al-Makki
------------------

Sudayf al-Makki was among the companions of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir).
He communicated with him. He was among those who admired and glorified
him. He said: “I have never seen a Mohammedan similar to him.”[^3]

4. Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik
--------------------------

As for Hisham, he was among the most spiteful towards the Imam and among
the most mortal enemies of his. Still, he acknowledge the high rank of
the Imam and his great importance. Thus, he addressed him, saying: “O
Mohammed, Quraysh will lead Arabs and non-Arabs as long as there are
(persons) among them similar to you.”[^4]

5. Al-Mansur al-Dawanïqi
------------------------

(At an assembly), Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, talked about the Oa'im
(the one who will undertake the office of the Imamate) of the family of
Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family, and the Mahdi (the
rightly-guided one) of the this community. Al-Mansur al-Dawanïqi was at
the assembly. He was astonished at that. Thus, he told Sayf b. ‘Umayr
about what he had heard of the Imam, saying: “If all the people of the
earth tell me (about that), I will not accept (it) from them. However,
he is Mohammed b. ‘Ali.”[^5] These words indicate that he admired and
glorified the Imam. If the people of the earth had told him about that,
he would have not accepted (it) from them nor would he have believed
them. However, the Imam told him about it. So, al-Mansur acknowledged
that the Imam was superior to all the people in truthfulness and
reliability.

6. Abd Allah b.‘Ata'
--------------------

Abd Allah b. ‘Ata' talked about the admiration, glorification, and
humbleness of the scholars for the Imam (al-Baqir), peace be on him. He
said: “I have never seen the scholars with (a person) inferior to them.
(However, I have seen them) with Abï Ja‘far (al-Baqir), for they behaved
humbly and modestly before him, knew his right and his knowledge, and
learned from him. Although al-Hakam b. ‘Utayba was great and old, I saw
him before al-Baqir to learn from him. He was like the boy before the
teacher.”[^6] He added : “I saw al-Hakam with al-Baqir. He was like a
helpless bird.”[^7]

We must mention a brief idea about al-Hakam b. ‘Utayba to understand his
scientific rank so that we are able to understand the vast sciences of
Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, and his high rank with the scholars. The
narrators said : “Al-Hakam was among the greatest and the most important
scholars of his time. “Mujahid b. Rumi said: “I saw al-Hakam in the
mosque of al-Khif. The scholars of the people were around him. “Jarïr
reported on the authority of al-Mughïra, who said: “When al-Hakam came
to Medina, the people left the praying-place of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, for him to pray at it.”[^8] Ibn Sa‘d said: “He
was a reliable jurist and prominent scholar. He had many
traditions.”Al-Hakam had vast knowledge and a high rank. Nevertheless he
was like a powerless boy before Imam al-Baqir. Therefore, the Imam was
the most knowledgeable of all the people of his time in all sciences.
The Shi‘a believe in this and produce it as evidence in support of his
abundant sciences.

7. Jabir b.Yazïd
----------------

Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi was among the most famous Moslem scholars and
among the greatest reporters of traditions. He was among those who
studied under Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him. He reported
seventy thousand traditions on the authority of the Imam, as al-Dhahabi
said. He was among those who knew the Imam's scientific position. Thus,
when he narrated traditions on his authority, he said: “The trustee of
the trustees and inheritor of the knowledge of prophets related to
me.”[^9]

8. Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah
----------------------

The great companion (of the Prophet), Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari was
famous for following the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them. He loved them very much. It was he who sent the greetings of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, to Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, as we have already mentioned. He was among
those who understood the high rank of the Imam, peace be on him. He
glorified and respected the Imam from his childhood. When he addressed
him, he said: “You are the son of the best of all the creatures. Your
father is the Lord of the Youth of Heaven.”[^10]

9. Ibn Hajar al-Haythami
------------------------

Shahab al-Dïn, Ahmed b. Hajar al-Haythami, said: “Abu Ja‘far, Mohammed,
was called al-Baqir. The word al-Baqir was derived from baqara al-ard,
meaning he splits open the ground and lights the hidden

things in it. Thus, the Imam brought to light hidden things, such as the
treasures of sciences, the facts of the rules, the maxims, and the good
things. He made them so clear that nobody misunderstands them except
those with bad insight and corrupt interior. Concerning him it was said
that he split open knowledge and collected it. He made famous his
knowledge and raised it. His heart became clear. His knowledge and his
deeds were honest. His soul became pure. His morals were noble. His
times were spent in Allah's obedience. The tongues of describers fall
short of depicting his marks in the positions of the gnostic. This quick
talk is unable to encompass all his words on behavior and
sciences.”[^11]

These words display some bright sides of the life of Imam Abï Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him. Among them was that he brought to light the
treasures of sciences and the facts of the rules, while the people were
unable to do that. We will talk about that in the researches that
follow.

10. Ibn Kuthayr
---------------

Abu al-Fida', al-Hafiz b. Kuthayr, wrote Imam al-Baqir's biography.
Concerning him he said: “Al-Baqir was among the leading members of the
next generation. He had a great rank. He was among the great figures of
this community in knowledge, deeds, leadership, and honor. He was called
al-Baqir, for he split open knowledge and concluded the rules. He
remembered Allah. He was humble and patient. He was among the progeny of
the Prophet. He was of a noble lineage. He was cognizant of the hearts.
He wept very much. He refrained from arguments and quarrels.”[^12]

Ibn Kuthayr talked about the vast sciences of the Imam. (He also talked
about) his worship, his patience, his much weeping because of his fear
of Allah, and his refraining from the argument and the disputes. Because
of these qualities, the scholars admired and glorified the Imam, peace
be on him.

11. ‘Abd al-Hamïd al-Hanbali
----------------------------

‘Abd al-Hamïd b. al-‘Imad al-Hanbali wrote the Imam's biography. He
said: “Al-Baqir was among the jurists of Medina. He was called al-Baqir
because he widely split open knowledge. He was among the Twelve Imams
according to the faith of the Imami (Shi‘a).”[^13]

12. Al-Nabahani
---------------

Shaykh Yousif b. Isma‘ïl al-Nabahani said: “Mohammed al-Baqir b. ‘Ali,
Zayn al-‘Abidïn, b. al-Husayn was one of the Imams of our masters, the
noble members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), and was among the prominent
scholars.”[^14]

13. Al-Qirmani
--------------

Ahmed b. Yousif Al-Qirmani wrote the Imam's biography. He said: “He was
called al-Baqir, for he split open knowledge. He was, out of (all) his
brothers, the successor and testamentary trustee of his father. He
undertook (the office of) the Imamate after him. None of the sons of
al-Hasan and al-Husayn showed the same ability in knowledge of religion,
the laws, the knowledge of the Koran, the ways of life, and the
techniques of literature, as Abï Ja‘far (al-Baqir) did. The surviving
Companions (of the Prophet) and

the leading members of the next generation reported the principal
features of religion on his authority.”[^15]

14. Al-Dhahabi
--------------

In many of his books, al-Dhahabi has written the Imam's biography.
However, he was irregular in some of his words, which are as follows:

A. He said: “Al-Baqir was the best of the Hashimites at his time in
outstanding merit, knowledge, and righteousness.”[^16]

B. He said : “Al-Baqir was the lord of the Hashimites of his time. He
was known as al-Baqir, for he split open knowledge. Thus, he knew its
hidden origin.”[^17]

C. He said : “Al-Baqir was among those who had knowledge, deeds,
righteousness, honor, trust, and sedateness. He was appropriate for the
succession (to authority). He was among the Twelve Imams whom the Imami
Shi‘a respect and in whose infallibility and knowledge in all religion
they believe.

“Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) was a qualified Imam. He recited Allah's Book. He
was of great importance. However, he was not the same level with b.
Kuthayr in the Koran, nor was he the same level with Abï al-Zannad and
Raï‘a in jurisprudence, nor was he the same level with Qattada and b.
Shahab in memorizing and knowing the traditions.”[^18] Al-Dhahabi
deviated from the truth when he preferred b. Kuthayr, Abï al-Zannad,
Raï‘a, Qattada, and b. Shahab to the Imam. Indeed these eminent men are
not compared with his students, such as Zarara b. A‘yun, Mohammed b.
Moslem, and Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi. This is because knowledge and
outstanding merits which have been reported on their authority are much
more than those which have been reported on the authority of Qattada and
his group. The Imam (al-Baqir) debated with Qattada and defeated him.
However, al-Dhahabi was narrow-minded. He bore malice and hatred against
the family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and their
followers. He has mentioned that in many of his researches. How
wonderful what has been said concerning him is!

You are today called al-Dhahabi.

This name was derived from dhihab al-‘aql (madness)

not from al-dhahab (gold).

15. Mohammed b. Abï Bakr
------------------------

Mohammed b. Abï Bakr, known as b. Hammad Dakkin died 700 A. H., said:
“Our master Imam Mohammed, son of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn, peace be on him,
showed an outstanding merit in knowledge, asceticism, and righteousness.
He was of noble reputation and great importance. None of the sons of
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace be on them, showed the same ability in the
knowledge of religion, traditions, the sunna, the knowledge of the
Koran, the life of the Prophet, and the techniques of literature, as Abu
Ja‘far showed. The scholars of religion, the surviving Companions (of
the Prophet), the leading members of the next generation, and the heads
of the jurists of the Moslems reported on his authority. By virtue of
his outstanding merit he became a signpost (of knowledge) to his family.
Proverbs were coined about him and reports and verses were written to
describe him.”[^19]

16. Mohammed al-Jazri
---------------------

Mohammed b. Mohammed al-Jazri said: “Abu Ja‘far, Mohammed b. ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Abï Talib, was called al-Baqir, for he split open
knowledge. Thus, he knew its apparent and hidden (origins). He was the
best of the Hashimites in knowledge, outstanding merit, and
tradition.”[^20]

17. Kamal al-Dïn al-Shafi‘i
---------------------------

Kamal al-Dïn al-Shafi‘i said: “He was the one who split open knowledge
(al-baqir) and gathered it. Then he made it famous. His heart was clear.
His act was honest. His soul was pure. His morals were noble. His times
were spent in Allah's obedience. His foot was steady at the place of
devotion. The features of closeness (to Allah) and the purity of
kindness appeared on him. Thus, virtues competed with each other for
him, and qualities were noble through him.”[^21]

18. Idrïs al-Qarashi
--------------------

Idrïs al-Qarashi said: “Mohammed b. ‘Ali (al-Baqir) was the first to get
the honor of the two origins, and the birth of al-Hasan and al-Husayn
came together for him. He grew up on the virtue, purity, leadership,
mastership, and knowledge. He followed the behavior of his pure
grandfathers. He moved through the degrees of virtues and went deeply
into high glorious deeds.”[^22]

19. Jamal al-Dïn
----------------

Jamal al-Dïn, Yousif b. Taghari Bardi al-Atabaki, said: “Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir) b. ‘Ali, Zayn al-‘Abidïn, b. al-Husayan, b. ‘Ali b. Abï Talib
was the Lord of the Hashimites at his time. He was among the Twelve
Imams in whose infallibility the Rafida (the Shi‘ites) believe.”[^23]

20. Mohammed al-Sabban
----------------------

Mohammed al-Sabban said: “As for Mohammed al-Baqir, he was the owner of
sciences and was the brother of the details and the pleasant things. His
miracles appeared. His hints in behavior were many. He was called
al-Baqir, for he split open knowledge. Thus, he knew its hidden
origin.”[^24]

21. Ibn Abï al-Haddïd
---------------------

‘Abd al-Hamïd b. Abï al-Haddïd said: “Mohammed b. ‘Ali al-Baqir was the
Lord of the Jurists of Hijaz (Saudi Arabia). The people learned
jurisprudence from him and his son, Ja‘far. He was called al-Baqir.
Allah's Apostle nicknamed him so while he was not created yet. He
(Allah's Apostle) announced good news to him. He promised Jabir to see
him.”[^25]

22. Shaykh al-Mufïd
-------------------

Shaykh al-Mufïd said: “Al-Baqir Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. Al-Husayn, peace be
on them, was out of (all) his brothers, the successor of his father,
‘Ali b. al-Husayn, his testamentary trustee, and the one who undertook
the office of Imam after him. He surpassed all of them through his
outstanding merit in traditional knowledge, asceticism, and leadership.
He was the most renowned of them, the one among them who was most
esteemed by both non-Shi‘a and Shi‘a, and the most able of them. None of
the sons of al-

Hasan and al-Husayn, peace be on them, showed the same ability in
knowledge of religion, traditions, the sunna, the knowledge of the
Koran, the life of the Prophet, and the techniques of literature, as Abu
Ja‘far (al-Baqir) showed. The surviving Companions (of the Prophet), the
leading members of the next generation, and the leaders of the Moslem
jurists reported the principal features of religion on his authority. By
virtue of his outstanding merit he became a signpost (of knowledge) to
his family. Proverbs were coined about him and reports and verses were
written to describe him.”[^26]

23. Abu al-Hasan al-Tubrisi
---------------------------

Shaykh Abu al-Hasan al-Tubrisi said: “Indeed al-Baqir has become famous
in the world, for he surpassed the creatures in knowledge, asceticism,
and honor. None of the (grand) sons of the Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, showed the same ability in the knowledge of the Koran,
the traditions, the life of the Prophet, sciences, wise sayings, and
literature, as he showed. The great surviving Companions (of the
Prophet), the leading members of the next generation, and the jurists of
the Moslems visited him frequently. The reporters of the traditions
narrated that Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
called him Baqir al-‘Ilm (the one who splits open knowledge).”[^27]

24. Tajj al-Dïn
---------------

Tajj al-Dïn b. Mohammed, the head of Aleppo, said: “Abu Ja‘far, Baqir
al-‘Ilm (the one who splits open knowledge), was the first for whom the
birth of al-Hasan and al-Husayn came together. He had vast knowledge and
plentiful clemency. Many traditions and abundant knowledge were reported
on his authority.”[^28]

25. Mahmud b. Whayb
-------------------

Mahmud b. Whayb al-Baghdadi said: “His name al-Baqir was derived from
baqara al-ard, meaning split open the ground and brought to light its
hidden things. Thus, he brought to light the hidden things of the
treasures of sciences, the facts of legal precepts and wisdom, and the
pleasant things. He made them so clear that nobody misunderstands them
except those with bad insight and corrupt interior. Concerning him, it
was said that he split open knowledge and gathered it. He made famous
his knowledge and raised it. Thus, his heart was clear. His knowledge
and his deed were honest. His soul was pure. His morals were noble. His
times were full of Allah's obedience. So, describers' tongues fall short
of depicting his marks in the positions of the gnostic.”[^29]

26. ‘Abbas al-Makki
-------------------

Sayyid ‘Abbas b. ‘Ali al-Makki said: “Al-Baqir is among the Twelve Imams
with the Imami (Shi‘a). He was a great scholar. He was called al-Baqir,
for he widely split open knowledge.”[^30]

27. Sayyid Kazim al-Yamani
--------------------------

Sayyid Kazim al-Yamani said: “Imam al-Baqir was the second grandson (of
the Prophet) and the Fifth Infallible Imam in the opinion of those who

believe in that. (He was) the fourth pious one in the opinion of all
Moslem legal scholars. It was he who was given the kunya of Abu
Ja‘far.”[^31]

28. Ibn Taymiya
---------------

Ibn Taymiya said: “Mohammed al-Baqir was the greatest of all the people
in asceticism and worship. The prostration (in prayer) split open his
forehead. He was the most knowledgeable of the people of his time.
Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, named him
al-Baqir.”[^32] Ibn Taymiya mentioned the tradition which Jabir
reported. However, he refrained from what he said. He denied that the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, nicknamed (Mohammed)
al-Baqir. He said: “(This tradition) has no origin with the people of
knowledge. Rather, it is among the fabricated traditions.”[^33] Surely,
b. Taymiya bore malice and hatred against the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, and their followers. He ascribed all stories
and fables to them. Indeed Allah, knowledge, and history will punish him
for that. Perhaps the greatest punishment that has afflicted him is that
all historians mistrust all his writings.

29. Al-Shaykhani
----------------

‘Abd al-Qadir al-Shaykhani said: “Mohammed al-Baqir was the most famous
of all the people of his time, the most perfect of them in outstanding
merits, and the greatest of them in nobility. None showed at his time
the same ability in the knowledge of religion, traditions, the knowledge
of the Koran, the life of the Prophet, and the techniques of literature,
as he showed.”[^34]

30. Al-Majlisi
--------------

Shaykh al-Majlisi said: “None of the sons of al-Hasan and al-Husayn
showed the same ability in sciences, the interpretation (of the Koran),
theology, religious opinions, the lawful, and the unlawful, as he
(al-Baqir) showed. The surviving Companions (of the Prophet), the
leading members of the next generation, and the leaders of the Moslem
jurists reported the principal features of religion on his authority.
Among the Companions (of the Prophet) was Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari.
Among the leading members of the next generation were Jabir b. Yazïd
al-Ju‘fi, and Kaysan al-Sakhtyani, the leader of the Sufis. Among the
jurists were b. al-Mubarak, al-Zuhri, al-Awza‘i, Abï Hanifa, Malik,
al-Shafi‘i, Zyyad b. al-Mundhir, and al-Nahdi. Among the authors were
al-Tabari, al-Baladhari, and al-Khatib, in their books called ‘Tarïkh'.
(The principal features of religion have been also reported on his
authority in various books, such as:) al-Muwatti', Sharaf al-Mustafa,
al-Ibana, Hulyat al-Awliya', al- Sinan by Abï Dauwd, al-Musnad by Abï
Hanifa, al-Targhib by al-Asfahani, al-Basït by al-Wahidi, al-Tafsïr by
al-‘Ayyashi, (al-Tafsïr) by al-Zumakhshari, and Ma‘rifat al-Usul by
al-Sama‘ani. They said:‘ Mohammed b. ‘Ali. ' Perhaps they said:‘
Mohammed al-Baqir. '”[^35]

The speech of al-Majlisi refers to the scientific aspect of the
character of the great Imam, who encompassed all the sciences. Thus, the
Moslem scholars studied jurisprudence, history, interpretation (of the
Koran), and the

techniques of maxims and literature under him. This played an important
role in developing Islamic thought.

31. Al-Nawawi
-------------

Al-Nawawi said: “(Mohammed) al-Baqir was a leading member of the next
generation. He was a skillful Imam. (The Moslem scholars) have
unanimously agreed on his greatness. He was numbered among the jurists
and Imams of Medina.”[^36]

32. Abu Zar‘a
-------------

Abu Zar‘a said: “Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) was among the greatest
scholars.”[^37]

33. Ibn ‘Anba
-------------

Jamal al-Dïn, Ahmed b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. al-Muhanna b. ‘Anba, said:
“Mohammed al-Baqir had vast knowledge and plentiful clemency. His great
position is more famous than calling (someone's) attention to it.”[^38]

34. ‘Ali b.‘Isa al-Arbali
-------------------------

The minister, ‘Ali b. ‘Isa al-Arbali, talked about the high behavior of
Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him. Then he ended his talk, saying:
“Indeed al-Baqir's virtues are too many to count, and his outstanding
merits are too high to encompass. When his glorious deed are numbered,
glorious and laudable deeds prostrate themselves before them. That is
because his honor surpassed the limit and reached the end. His great
rank overcame security and reached the highest degree. His place in
knowledge and act raised a thousand banners for him. How many a mark of
righteousness, an expression of leadership, a sign of generosity,
enthusiasm, noble rank, high lineage, glorious origin, purity of mother
and father he had. He learned liberality and purity through the
strongest means. If he competed with the sky for highness, he would be
higher than it. If he wanted the stars in their zenith, he would attain
them.”[^39]

35. Ahmed Fahmi
---------------

Shaykh Ahmed Fahmi said : “Imam al-Baqir is the fifth Imam with the
Imami (Shi‘a). He, may Allah be blessed with him, was the most truthful
of all the people, the best of them in splendor, and the most wonderful
of them in language.”[^40]

36. Farïd Wajdi
---------------

Farïd Wajdi said: “Al-Baqir was a noble scholar and great lord. He was
called al-Baqir because he split open knowledge widely.”[^41]

37. Abu Zahrah
--------------

Shaykh Abu Zahrah said : “His (Imam Zayn al-‘Abidïn's) son, Mohammed
(al-Baqir), was his heir in leading knowledge and obtaining guidance. So
the scholars from all the Islamic countries came to him. All those who
visited Medina went to Mohammed al-Baqir's house to learn from
him.”[^42]

38. Al-Talmasani
----------------

Al-Talmasani said: “Mohammed b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. Abï Talib was Imam
Ja‘far al-Sadiq's father. He was called al-Baqir because he went deeply
into knowledge. He was a just, reliable member of the next generation
and famous Imam.”[^43]

39. ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Halabi

‘Abd al-Qadir al-Halabi said: “Al-Baqir was the first ‘Alid who was
between two ‘Alids. He was a member of the next generation with a great
rank. He was a skillful Imam. (The Moslem scholars) have unanimously
agreed on his Imamate and his greatness. (They) numbered him as one of
the jurists and Imams of Medina.”[^44]

These are some of the words which the great scholars and researchers
made concerning Imam al-Baqir. They have recorded their admiration for
the character of the Imam. They have also revealed some dimensions of
his bright life. Among them are the following:

1. Imam al-Baqir surpassed all the scholars of his time in knowledge and
outstanding merits. No one was similar to him in scientific abilities
and talents. He surpassed in outstanding merit and knowledge his
brothers, the children of his uncles, and all the children of the
Prophetic family who were the source of light and awareness in the
earth.

2. The scholars of his time lowered themselves before him. They
recognized his high scientific rank and his high authority for the
Islamic world.

3. Imam al-Baqir had vast knowledge not only in Islamic jurisprudence
but also in all sciences, such as theology, philosophy, interpretation
(of the Koran), history, maxims, and literature. With that he became the
bright signpost of Islamic sciences.

4. He brought to light the hidden origins of some sciences, which the
people did not know.

5. He was the first pioneer of the scientific movement of his time.
Thus, the scholars quoted from his pure knowledge. The researchers, the
authors, and the writers took from his vast sciences.

6. He conformed to religion very much. He was very pious and feared
Allah to the extent that he became one of the Imams of the pious and the
repentant.

### Notes

###

[^1] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol.9, p.[^309]:

[^2] Roudat al-Kafï.Words similar to these have been mentioned in
al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf ( p.53 ) and in Tahdhïb al-Tahdhïb, vol.9,
p.[^352]:

[^3] Al-Saduq, al-Amali, p.[^297]:

[^4] Diya' al-‘Amilin, part 11 on the Life of Imam Mohammed al-Baqir.

[^5] Al-Ghazali, al-Fara’id, vol.6, p.[^143]:

[^6]‘Uyyun al-Akhbar wa Funun al-Athar, p.[^14]: Similar words have been
mentioned in Hulyat al-Auliya' (vol.3, p.186), Shadhrat al-Dhahab
(vol.1, p.149),Tarïkh by b. ‘Asakir (vol.51,p.43), and Mir'at al-Jinan (
vol.1, p.248).

[^7] Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol.2, p.[^133]:

[^8] Ibid, p.[^134]:

[^9] Ibn Shar Ashub, al-Manaqib, vol.4, p.[^180]:

[^10] Bihar al-Anwar, vol.11, p.[^64]:

[^11] Al-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqa, p.[^120]:

[^12] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol.9, p.[^309]:

[^13] Shadharat al-Dhahab.

[^14] Jami‘ Karamat al-Awliya’, vol1, p.[^97]:

[^15] Akhbar al-Diwal, p.[^111]:

[^16] Tadhib al-Kamal, 3/Q4/262 (manuscript).

[^17] Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol.1, p.[^124]:

[^18] Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol.4, p.[^241]:

[^19] Roudat al-A‘yan fi Mashahir Akhbar al-Zaman.

[^20] Ghayat al-Nihaya fi Tabaqat al-Qurra’, vol.2, p.[^202]:

[^21] Matalib al-Sa'ul fï Manaqib Al al-Rasul.

[^22]‘Uyyun al-Akhbar wa Funun al-Athar, p.[^212]:

[^23] Al-Nijum al-Zahira, vol.1, p.[^273]:

[^24] Is‘af al-Raghibin, p.[^316]:

[^25] Ibn Abi al-Haddid, Sharh.

[^26] Al-Mufid, al-Irshad, p.[^293]:

[^27] Alam al-Wara bi Alam al-Huda, p.[^268]:

[^28] Ghayat al-Ikhtisar, p.[^401]:

[^29] Jawhart al-Kalam fi Madh al-Sada al-A‘lam, p.[^132]:

[^30] Nazhat al-Jalis, vol.2, p.[^36]:

[^31] Al-Nafha al-‘Anbariya.

[^32] Minhajj al-Sunna, vol.2, pp. 114-[^115]:

[^33] Ibid, p.[^123]:

[^34] Al-Sirat al-Sawi, p.[^194]:

[^35] Bihar al-Anwar, vol.11, p.[^84]:

[^36] Tahdhib al-Lughat wa al-Asma’, vol.1, p.[^87]:

[^37] A‘yan al-Shi‘a, Q1/4/[^485]:

[^38] ‘Umdat al-Talib, vol.2, p.[^29]:

[^39] Kashf al-Ghumma, vol.2, p.[^363]:

[^40] Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p.[^18]:

[^41] Wajjdi, Da’irat al-Ma‘ari, vol.3, p.[^563]:

[^42] Al-Imam al-Sadiq, p.[^22]:

[^43] Al-Khafaji, Sharh al-Shafa, vol.1, p.[^292]:

[^44] Al-Hadith al-Mufahhas ‘an Sharaf Nasl al-Imam ‘Ali, p.[^139]:
