CHAPTER VI: HIS TALENTS AND HIS GENIUS
======================================

The talents and genius of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
resulted in great abilities of knowledge that included all sciences,
such as the tradition, philosophy, theology, jurisprudence, high maxims,
and standard morals. Moreover, it included the events the Imam had
predicted before they occurred. Then they happened on the arena of life.
His knowledge was vast. Though the scholars learned a lot of his pure
knowledge, he found narrowness in himself because of his many sciences
for which he found no way to proclaim. He, as the narrators said, heaved
deep sighs and said with grief:

“If I found (carriers) for my knowledge which Allah, the Great and
Almighty, has given to me, I would proclaim monotheism, Islam, religion,
and Islamic laws. How can I do that? My grandfather, the Commander of
the Faithful, peace be on him, found no carriers for his knowledge for
his knowledge. Thus, he sighed deeply on the pulpit and said: ‘Question
me before you lose me, for there is much knowledge among the ribs.’”[^1]

The historians and the narrators have unanimously agreed that the Imam
was the richest of all the thinkers and the scholars of his time in
scientific abilities and talents. Besides, the biographers have
mentioned that he proclaimed knowledge and discovered its treasures and
facts, as we have mentioned in the previous chapters. Before discussing
the sciences which he discovered, it is necessary for us to present some
important points concerning the topic.

The Scientific Life at his Time
-------------------------------

The scientific movement at the time of the Imam was afflicted with much
inactivity and dullness. In other words, it had no shade on the arena of
life. That is because the political parties turned the people away from
knowledge. The high houses pounced upon winning the government. So, they
threw their human and financial powers into astonishing, horrible,
violent battles that afflicted the community with heavy causalities and
disasters. The members of the community launched armed attacks against
each other. So, they turned away from knowledge and thought. In other
words, they abandoned that light which Islam brought for mankind, and
abandoned its orders to follow it to achieve their aims in life, such as
security, welfare, and development.

The Bright Role of the Imam
---------------------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, came to a world full of
discords, disturbances, and events. He saw that the Islamic community
had lost all of its qualities. It lost all the characteristics which
Allah wanted for it, such as unity, perfection, and development in the
fields of knowledge and production. So, through his spiritual
leadership, the Imam did his best to renew the glory of the community
and to rebuild its cultural entity. Thus, he proclaimed knowledge and
thought. He refrained from practicing all political activities, and
devoted himself to knowledge only. The orientalist, Rowit M. Ronaldson,
said: “He (al-Baqir) lived honored. He dedicated himself to knowledge
during his isolation in Medina. The people came to him to ask him about
the Imamate.”[^2]

Some notables of the community went to the Imam to study knowledge under
him. Among them was the great scholar, Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi. When the
Imam met him for the first time, he asked him:

-Where are you from?

- From Kufa.

- From which tribe?

- From Ju‘f.

- What has brought you here?

- Seeking knowledge.

- From whom?

- From you.[^3]

Then knowledge-loving deputations came to the Imam frequently to learn
knowledge and sciences from him. Shaykh Abu Zahra said: “All the
scholars who went to (Medina), the city of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, went to him to learn the principal features of
religion from him.”[^4] The jurists learned from him the lawful and the
unlawful.[^5]

However, the Islamic world took from the Imam all the elements of its
development and progress. The cultural movement that depended on the
Imam was not confined to his time only. Rather it included all the times
that followed him. Thus, the scientific life appeared, and sciences
developed very much. For this reason, the scientific life in Islam
prospered.

Surely, the cultural life in Islam is indebted to this great Imam, for
he renewed and led it throughout history.

The Sciences the Imam Discussed
-------------------------------

The Imam studied several sciences, and then he taught them to the
scholars in the Mosque of the Prophet or in the yard of his house. Among
these traditions are the following:

The Tradition:
--------------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be no him, took great care of the
traditions which were reported on the authority of his grandfather, the
Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, and on the
authority of his pure grandfathers, peace be on them. That is because
the tradition is the second source of the Islamic law after the Holy
Koran. It is of great importance in the Islamic law, for it specifies
the general (verses) of the Book, limits its absolute (verses), it
distinguishes its abrogated (verses) from its abrogating (ones), and its
vague (verses) from its clear (ones). The tradition also denotes the
jurisprudential rules concerning worships and dealings. It gives the
general rules which the jurists use to conclude the religious opinion.
It has bright rules for individual and social behavior. It has rules for
organizing the family and preserving it from committing sins. Moreover,
it has all what people need for their individual and social life. For
this reason, Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, took care of
tradition and adopted it positively. Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi reported
seventy thousand traditions on the authority of the Imam. Aban b.
Taghlub reported a large group of them on his authority. Great figures
from the Companions reported a large group of traditions on his
authority.

The important thing is that Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
took care of understanding the meanings of the tradition. He regarded
understanding the meanings of the tradition as a criterion for
preferring the narration. Yazïd al-Razzaz reported on the authority of
his father on the authority of Abu Abd Allah on the authority of his
father, who said:

“Know the positions of the Shi‘ites according to their narration and
their knowledge. Indeed knowledge is understanding the narration.
Through understanding the narration, the believer reaches the maximum
degree of belief. I looked at a letter that belonged to ‘Ali. I found in
the letter that the value and importance of the person depend on that he
should know that Allah will reckon people according to the reason He has
given to them in the world.”[^6]

That the narrator understands the meanings of the narration indicates
his high scientific rank.

As the Imam took great care of the tradition, he put certain rules to
distinguish the correct tradition from the incorrect one when they
contradict each other. We will mention that when we talk about the
science of the fundamentals which the Imam treated.

The Reports of the Imams
------------------------

As for the traditions which were reported on the authority of the pure
Imams, peace be on them, they do not denote the personal ideas of the
Imams. Rather, they denote the words of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, and his ideas. Thus, the Shi‘ites have added the Imams'
traditions to the sunna (practices of the Prophet). Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, referred to that in two traditions he told
Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi.

1. He, peace be on him, said to Jabir: “If we speak to you according to
our idea, we will be from the perished. However, we speak to you
according to the traditions we gather on the authority of the Apostle of
Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, as they gather their gold and
silver.[^7]

2. He, peace be on him, said to Jabir: “By Allah, Jabir, if we speak to
the people according to our opinion, then we will be from the perished.
However, we speak to them according to the traditions we report on the
authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family.
We inherit the traditions successively. We gather them as they gather
their gold and silver.[^8] ”

Therefore, the Imams of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be
on them, did not ascribe the traditions to themselves. Rather they
ascribed them to their grandfather, the Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family. Thus, it is they who preserved the Prophet's scientific
heritage. In other words they gathered it as the people gathered their
gold and silver.

The Traditions of Imam al-Baqir
-------------------------------

As for the traditions which Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
reported on the authority of his grandfather, Allah's Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, and on the authority of Imam (‘Ali), the
Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, they are of two kinds:

1. (Ahadith) mursala; they are the traditions which the Imam recorded
without mentioning the chain of the narrators. The Imam attributed the
tradition directly to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
or Imam (‘Ali), the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him. The
Imam, peace be on him, was asked about the chain (of the narrators), he
said: “When I report a tradition, I do not mention the chain (of the
reporters), for I report it on the authority of my father, Zayn
al-‘Abidïn, on the authority of his father al-Husayn, the martyr, on the
authority of his father, ‘Ali b. Abu Talib, on the authority of the
Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, on the authority
of Gabriel, on the authority of Allah, the Great and Almighty.”[^9]

2. (Ahadith) musnada; they are the traditions which the Imam recorded on
the authority of his pure grandfathers on the authority of the Apostle
of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family.

Whether the Imam's traditions are mursala or musnada, they are proof
with the Shi‘ites without difference. That is if the chain (of the
narrators who reported) on his authority is correct; otherwise they are
treated like the other traditions that may be weak or reliable or
acceptable.

His Traditions from the Prophet
-------------------------------

As for his traditions from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, they sometimes concern Islamic jurisprudence. The encyclopedias
of jurisprudence and traditions have mentioned them. They sometimes
concern behavior and morals. Some of them also concern the outstanding
merits and obligatory love of the pure family (of the Prophet). The
following are some of the Imam's traditions from the Prophet:

1. The Imam, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his
grandfathers on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, who said: “The virtue of knowledge is more lovable
with Allah than the virtue of worship. The best (thing) in your religion
is piety.”[^10]

This tradition summons and urges people to seek knowledge, for knowledge
is better than worship of which its owner makes no use. The tradition
also urges people to refrain from what Allah has forbidden and to turn
away from the sins that corrupt the person and deviate him from the
right path.

2. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers on
the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who
said: “Adding clemency to knowledge is better than adding a thing to a
thing.”[^11]

Indeed knowledge and clemency raise the level of the person. They
distinguish him from other than him, for there is nothing better than
these two qualities.

3. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers on
the authority of the of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and
his family, who said: “There is obedience over every obedience. However,
when (the person) is killed for Allah, then there is no obedience over
that. There is disobedience over every disobedience till the person
kills one of his parents. If he kills one of them, then there is no
disobedience over that.”[^12]

Surely, the maximum degree of obedience is martyrdom for Allah. If the
person is killed for that, then he will reach the maximum degree of
obedience. Also the maximum degree of sin and disobedience is that when
the person kills one of his parents. If he does that, then he will reach
the maximum degree of sin and disobedience.

4. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “It is an act of generosity to reclaim
property.”[^13]

The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, urges the
capitalists to invest their capitals to improve the general economy, to
increase the individual income, and to meet the needs of the country.
Meanwhile he prevents them from wasting and freezing capitals. That is
because such acts harm the economy of the country.

5. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family said: “Indeed Allah, the Blessed and Most High, has given
me and my community a gift which He had not given to any of the
communities. It is dignity from Allah to us.”So, his Companions said: “O
Apostle of Allah, what is that?”He said: “It is breaking the fast and
shortening the prayers during the travel.”[^14]

Indeed shortening the prayers and breaking the fast during the travel
are among the favors of Allah, the Glorified, for this community. That
is because the traveler suffers from tiredness during the travel. If
Allah made it obligatory on the traveler to fast and complete the
prayers, then He would add tiredness to his tiredness.

6. He, peace be on him, said: A man came to the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, and said to him: “Why do I not like death?”The
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said: “Have you a
property?”The man said: “Yes.”The Prophet said: “Have you offered
it?”The man said: “No.”The Prophet said: “For this reason, you do not
like death.”[^15]

Surely, if this person had offered his property for the hereafter and
striven for it, he would have loved it to take the reward of what he had
done. However, he had done nothing to approach him to Allah. So, he
hated death and meeting Allah, the Most High.

7. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Indeed the wicked of my community are those who
are honored for their wickedness. Indeed whom the people honor to avoid
his wickedness does not belong to me.”[^16]

Surely, the wicked of this community are those who are honored and
respected not for a virtue in them or for kindness they do for the
people, but to avoid their evil or for fear of their oppression. Thus,
such a kind of people do not belong to Islam that has brought mercy and
kindness for people.

8. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “The head of intellect after the belief in Allah,
the Great and Almighty, is showing love to people.”[^17]

How wonderful and beautiful this wisdom is! Surely, showing love to
people through meeting their needs or doing good for them or saving them
from oppression results in spreading love among people and strengthening
the links among them. This what Islam wants to establish its society.

9. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “O Group of the readers of the Koran, fear Allah,
the Great and Almighty, in respect with His Book. I am responsible and
you are responsible. I am responsible for conveying the message. You
will be asked about undertaking the responsibility of the Book of Allah
and my sunna (practices).”[^18]

In this tradition (the Prophet) summons the readers of the Koran and all
the men of religion to play an important role in guiding people and
informing them of Allah's orders and prohibitions.

10. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “I and ‘Ali were created from the same
light.”[^19]

Indeed Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and ‘Ali,
peace be on him, were created from the same light that has illuminated
the horizons of the universe. They are the source of thought and
awareness of this community. They are the pioneers of people for all
what they become high through.

11. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Allah's anger and my anger are intense against
him who sheds my blood and hurts me in respect with my family.”[^20]

Woe unto the traitorous group that did not keep the will of the Apostle
of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, in respect with his family
and his progeny! That is because this group killed them, cut off their
limbs, took their women and children as prisoners, and violated their
sacredness.

12. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “My (grand)father Abraham and ‘Ali will be
gathered together. A caller will call: O Mohammed, the best
(grand)father is your (grand)father and the best bother is your
brother.”[^21]

Indeed, blessed is that pure fatherhood of Abraham, the friend of the
Merciful (Allah), and that truthful brotherhood of the Imam, the
Commander of the Faithful, towards the great Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family. On the day when the people will be gathered together
on the land of the truth and justice, a caller will call Abraham and
‘Ali to show their outstanding merits and their high rank with Allah.

13. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said to ‘Ali: “Were it not for you, the believers would
not be known after me.”[^22]

The Imam, the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, is the
criteria of faith, the truth, and justice. No one believes in him except
those who believe in their Lord, their homeland, and their community. No
one disbelieves in him except those who disbelieve in justice and the
interest of their community, turn away from praising Allah, and take his
communications as mockery.

14. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “My daughter Fatima will be raised from the dead.
Blood stained clothes will be with here. She will cling to the pillar of
the throne and say: O Almighty, judge between me and the killer of my
son (i. e. al-Husayn). By the Lord of the Kaaba, He (Allah) will give a
judgment in favor of my daughter.”[^23]

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, announced several times
the murder of his great grandson, Imam Husayn, peace be on him, among
the people. In this tradition, he announces that his part, the Mistress
of the Women of the World, Fatima the Chaste, peace be on her, will
raise on the Day of Judgment with her son's shirt stained with his pure
blood. She will request the Just Judge (Allah) to judge between her and
his killer. Woe unto him against whom the pure family will bring suit on
the day when the liars will be losing.

15. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Indeed Allah created the progeny of Mohammed, may
Allah bless him and his family, from ‘Ali's back.”[^24]

Surely, blessed is that progeny through whom Allah strengthened the word
of truth, through whom He illuminated the way, through whom He made
clear the aim, and whom He made guides to His obedience and leaders to
His way.

16. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Whoever performs his ritual ablution properly,
performs his prayers well, pays the zakat (alms) of his property, stops
his anger, prevents his tongue, does his favor, asks (Allah) to forgive
him his sins, and is loyal to the members of my House meets the facts of
belief and the doors of Paradise are open for him.”[^25]

Indeed these deeds approach the servant to his Creator. The person
reaches the fact of belief and is worthy of the gardens through them.

17. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Bear two strange (things): accept the word of
wisdom from the fool and forgive the word of foolishness from the wise
man.”[^26]

It is strange that the fool says a wise word. If he says it, we must put
it into effect regardless of him. It is also strange that the wise man
says a foolish word, for he is wise and perfect. However, if he says it,
we must not blame him for it.

18. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “(The people are) ungrateful for two blessings:
security and good health.”[^27]

Surely, the people are ungrateful for these two blessings while life is
not good without them. Moreover, they do not thank Allah for them.

19. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “If two kinds (of people) from my community are
righteous, my community is righteous. When they are corrupt, my
community is corrupt. It was said: O Apostle of Allah, who are they? He
said: the jurists and the rulers.”[^28]

Surely, social righteousness depends on the righteousness of these two
kinds of people. When they are righteous, the community is happy and
achieves its aims. When they deviate from the laws of the truth and
justice, the community will suffer from a quick decline in all fields.

20. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “The smell of the garden is found from the walk of
five hundred years. However, neither the disobedient one nor the cuckold

finds it. It was said: O Apostle of Allah, who is the cuckold? He said:
He whose wife commits adultery and he knows (that).”[^29]

Indeed the person who disobeys his parents and the cuckold who has no
honor are not worthy of Paradise that is the abode of the prophets and
the righteous. Rather they are not worthy of anything except that they
are shackled in the Fire.

21. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “There is no good in livelihood except for two
men: an obeyed scholar and an aware listener.”[^30]

Surely, good in this world is for the scholar whom the people obey when
he orders them to follow noble values and high ideals. When the scholar
finds such a kind of people, he is successful in conveying his message
and achieving his aims. Good in life is also for the listener who is
aware of the noble objectives in the message of the righteous and puts
them into practice.

22. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Whoever helps the poor and treats the people with
justice is a true believer.”[^31]

Indeed, to help the poor materially and spiritually indicates strong
perfect faith. To treat the people with justice also indicates that the
person is noble and is free from selfishness and all psychological
diseases. This is the reality of faith and essence of Islam.

23. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “The parents are ungrateful for their son when the
son is righteous as the son is ungrateful for them.”[^32]

Surely, ungratefulness is not confined to the son when he is ungrateful
for his parents. Rather, it includes the parents when they treat their
son illegally. Thus, they commit a sin when they treat him in such a
way.

24. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “The believer does not spend an expense more
lovable with Allah, the Great and Almighty, than saying the truth during
consent and anger.”[^33]

How wonderful this wisdom is! It is the rule of Islam that orders people
to prefer the truth and justice to anything else.

25. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Two kinds of my community have no share in Islam.
(They are) : the extremists and the fatalists.”[^34]

As for the extremists, the claim that the Imam, the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be on him, is Allah, the Exalted, or the son of Allah.
The Shi‘ites say that they do not belong to them. Rather, the Shi‘ites
say that they are unbelievers and are treated like them.

In satirizing them, Sayyid al-Himyari said:

(They) are the people who have gone too far in loving ‘Ali.

Woe unto them!

They say: He (‘Ali) is the son of Allah. Great is our Creator.

He has neither son nor father.[^35]

As for the fatalists, they say that all good and evil are from Allah.
(That happens) through his determination and will.[^36] They have no
share in Islam.

26. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Whoever has three qualities or one of them will
be in the shade of the throne of Allah, the Great and Almighty, on the
Day of Judgment, the day when there will be no shade except His shade.
(These qualities are): He should treat people with justice. He should do
no thing till he knows that (his deed) pleases Allah or angers Him. He
should find no fault with his Moslem brother till he frees himself from
that fault. For when he frees it from a fault, he finds another fault in
it. It is enough for the person that his soul diverts him from the
people.”[^37]

This tradition summons the persons to cleave to high moral standards and
good behavior towards people. It warns him of mentioning the faults of
people.

27. He, peace be on him said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Lying is good in three (cases): the trick during
war, your promise to your wife, and making peace between (two) people.
Truthfulness is bad in three (cases): tale bearing, your telling the
person about his wife with what he hates, and your accusing the person
of lying (when he tells) about good. Sitting with three (kinds of
people) deadens the heart: sitting with the low, conversation with
women, and sitting with the rich.”[^38]

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, permitted telling lies
in these cases because of the interests that result from them. The
scholars said: “Telling lies is not the perfect cause of ugliness.
Rather it is a necessity for it. So, when the interests that remove its
ugliness are found, the person is permitted to it. Truthfulness is also
ugly in these cases because of evil that arises from it.

28. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Every eye will weep on the Day of Judgment except
three eyes: the eye that weeps out of the fear of Allah, the eye that
blinks at what Allah has prohibited, and the eye that stays awake at
night for Allah.”[^39]

29. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “The quickest good in reward is benefaction and
the quickest evil in punishment is oppression. It is enough fault for
the person that he looks at what the people have while he has it, that
he disgraces the people with what he cannot leave, and that he hurts his
friend with that which does not concern him.”[^40]

This tradition urges people to do good, to be careful of evil and
aggression against people, and to censure the person who looks for the
faults of people and does not look for his own faults.

30. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “No staying up at night but for three (cases):
spending the night in (reciting) the Koran or in seeking knowledge or in
directing the bride to her husband.”[^41]

31. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Whoever does not have three (traits) does not
belong to me nor does he belong to Allah, the Great and Almighty. It was
said: O Apostle of Allah, what are they? He said: clemency through which

he drives back the ignorance of the ignorant, good manners through he
lives among the people, and piety that prevents him from disobeying
Allah, the Great and Almighty.”[^42]

This tradition summons the Moslem person to build his character
according to noble foundations such as clemency, good manners, and
refraining from what Allah has prohibited.

32. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Three (groups of people) have the right to
intercede with Allah, the Great and Almighty: the prophets, the
scholars, and the martyrs.”[^43]

33. He, peace be no him, said: The Apostle of Allah bless him and his
family, said: “Belief is appreciation with heart, acknowledgment with
tongue, and action with limbs.”[^44] Belief is not a word on everybody's
lips. Rather, it is an affair settled in the depth of the heart and
inner self. It motivates man to act out of conviction and loyalty.

34. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said to Abu Dharr: “O Abu Dharr, beware of begging, for
it is present abasement and quickens poverty. There will be a long
reckoning concerning it on the Day of Judgment. O Abu Dharr, you will
live by yourself, die by yourself, and enter Paradise by yourself. Some
Iraqis will be happy because of you. They will wash and prepare you for
burial. Do not beg with the palm of your hand. When a thing comes, then
accept it. Then he, may Allah bless him and his family, said to his
Companions: Shall I tell you about your wicked ones?”

“Yes, O Apostle of Allah.”

“Those who go about with slander, sow division among the friends, and
find fault with the innocent.”[^45]

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, advised Abu Dharr to
cling to abstinence and self-esteem. He, may Allah bless him and his
family, recognized from behind the unseen that this great reformer would
suffer from severe punishments and persecutions because of carrying out
his immortal reformative message. Thus, Abu Dharr was indignant with the
Umayyads who turned away from the rights of the community and possessed
alone its wealth. So, they inherited successively the property of Allah
and enslaved His servants. Thus, Abu Dharr defended the rights of the
oppressed and the persecuted and showed their sufferings. So, the
Umayyads were unable to bear him. Accordingly, they banished him to
al-Rabadha and imposed a house arrest. He lived at that barren area.
Then this great revolutionist died of hunger. He was banished from the
home of Allah and of His Apostle. However, the Umayyads possessed the
gold of the land and the wealth of the community. They spent them on
their pleasures.

Abu Dharr sacrificed his life for achieving social justice, finding
equal opportunities for the people, removing poverty and oppression, and
returning the government of the Koran and the justice of Islam to them.

35. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “O ‘Ali, four (persons) whose supplication is not
refused are: the just Imam, the father (who invokes Allah) for his son,
the man who invokes (Allah) for his absent brother, and the oppressed
one to

Allah, the Great and Almighty, says: By My Greatness and Might, I will
support you even after a while.”[^46]

36. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said to ‘Ali: “O ‘Ali, indeed, Allah, the Great and
Almighty, looked thoroughly over the people of the earth and chose me
from them. Then He looked over them a second time and chose you from
them after me. Then He looked over them a third time and chose from them
the Imams from your children. Then He looked over them a forth time and
chose Fatima from the women of the world.”[^47]

Surely, Allah, the Most High, chose His great Prophet and his
testamentary trustees, the pure Imams, from His creatures. He made them
keepers for His knowledge, store for His wisdom, pillars for His
monotheism, signpost (of knowledge) in His earth, and guides for His
pleasure and obedience. May Allah bless them all.

37. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Whoever has four (attributes) is in Allah's great
light: the protection of his affair is that there is no god but Allah
and that I am the Apostle of Allah. When a misfortune hits him, he says:
to Allah we belong and to Him is our return. When he gains good, he
says: praise belongs to Allah. When he commits a sin, he says: I ask
Allah's forgiveness and turn to Him in repentance.”[^48]

38. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Whoever has four (traits), Allah spreads His
protection over him and makes him enter the garden through His mercy:
good manners through which he lives among people, leniency towards the
grieved, piety for the parents, and kindness to the slave.”[^49]

This tradition summons the people to cleave to good manners, good
behavior among the people, and leniency and mercy towards the afflicted
(with disaster) and the unfortunate.

39. He, peace be on him reported on the authority of his grandfathers on
the authority of the Apostle of Allah, who said: “Four (acts) deaden the
heart: sin after sin, much talk with the women, disputing with the fool,
(You say and he says, he never returns to good), and sitting with the
dead. It was said to him: Who are the dead? He said: All the
extravagant.”[^50]

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, warned (his community)
of these affairs, for they deaden the conscience and stiffen the heart.
However, Islam has taken great care of man's conscience. Meanwhile Islam
wants man to be aware, free, educated, and merciful.

40. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said in his testamentary bequest to the Imam, the Commander
of the Faithful, peace be on him: “O ‘Ali, act through four: your youth
before your old age, your health before your illness, your riches before
your poverty, and your life before your death.”[^51]

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, summoned (his
community) to do good and to seize the opportunity to do what approaches

the servant to his Creator before it is too late, so man loses the
blessings which Allah has prepared for him in the eternal abode.

41. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, peace be on him, who said:
“Among the signs of unhappiness are: the impudence of the eye, the
cruelty of the heart, the intensity of greediness in seeking livelihood,
and the persistence of the sin.”[^52]

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, warned (the community)
of these things that make man far from his Lord and throw him into great
evil.

42. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said on his pulpit: “Indeed the best names are: ‘Abd Allah,
‘Abd al-Rahman, Haritha, and Hammam. The worst names are: Derar, Murah,
Harb, and Zalim.”[^53]

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, ordered the Moslems to
call their children with blessed names and prevented them from calling
them with evil names.

43. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah
bless him and his family, who said: “The servant will be asked about
four (things) on the Day of Judgment before his legs disappear: in what
he used up his age, in what he wore out his youth, from where he earned
his money and in what he spent it, and our love, we, the members of the
House (ahl al-Bayt).”[^54]

Indeed Allah, the Exalted, will ask man on the Day of Judgment about all
the affairs of his life in this world. He will ask him about whether he
had used up his age in the obedience and pleasure of Allah to reward him
or he had used it up in committing sins and oppressing the creatures to
punish him. He will especially ask him about in what he had worn out his
youth. He will ask him about whether he had lawfully earned his money to
reward him or he had unlawfully earned it to punish him. He will also
ask him about his love for the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace
be on them, for they are the source of light and good in the earth. If
he (man) loves them, he will be successful; otherwise he will be
unsuccessful.

44. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers,
who said that the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family,
addressed the people on the last Friday of the month of Sha‘ban. He
thanked Allah, praised Him, and then said:

“O People, indeed, a month will shade you. In it there is a night (that)
is better than a thousand months. It is the month of Ramadan. Allah has
imposed the fasting in it (on you). He has made performing a prayer
willingly in a night of it as performing prayers willingly in seventy
nights in months other than it. He has made (the reward) of him who does
willingly good and kindness as the reward of him who carries out a
commandment of the Commandments of Allah. Whoever carries out a
commandment of the Commandments of Allah is like him who carries out
seventy commandments in (months) other than it. It is the month of
patience. The reward of patience is the garden. It is the month of help.
It is the month in

which Allah increases the livelihood of the believer. Whoever breaks the
believer's fast, with that, has with Allah, the Great and Almighty,
releasing a slave and forgiving his past sins.

“It was said to him: O Apostle of Allah, not all of us are able to break
the believer's fast. He said: Indeed Allah, the Blessed, is generous. He
gives this reward to those of you who have nothing to break someone's
fast except milk mixed with water or a drink of fresh water or few
dates. Whoever helps his slave in it, Allah will commute his punishment.
It is the month whose beginning is mercy, whose middle is forgiveness,
and whose end is answer and releasing from fire. In it you are in need
of four qualities: Two qualities through which you please Allah. Two
qualities are necessary for you. As for the two (qualities) through
which you please Allah, they are: Testify that there is no god but
Allah, and that I am the Apostle of Allah. As for the two (qualities)
that are necessary for you, they are: In it ask Allah for your needs and
Paradise. In it ask Allah for good health and seek refuge with Him from
the Fire.”[^55]

Surely, the month of Ramadan has holiness and sacredness with Allah.
Thus, Allah has preferred it to the other months. In it the Apostle
summoned the people to obey (Allah) and to do good and kindness to the
poor. He distinguished it very much from the other months.

45. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said to ‘Ali in his testamentary bequest: “O ‘Ali, four
(things) are in vain: eating after fullness, the lamp in the moon,
planting in the salt ground, and doing a favor for the people who are
not worthy of it.”[^56]

46. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “I summon (my community to follow) five (practices)
till death: I will eat with the slaves at the foot (of the mountain). I
will ride the donkey with saddle. I will milk the she-goat with my hand.
I will greet the boys so as to be a practice (sunna) after me.”[^57]

These affairs were among the high morals through which the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, became the Lord of all the prophets and
made the people believe in Islam.

47. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Whoever sells and buys should refrain from five
qualities; other wise he should refrain from selling and buying: usury,
swearing (by Allah), concealing the defect, praising when he sells,
dispraising when he buys.”[^58]

In the light of this tradition, the jurists have given religious
opinions in the Chapter on Sale as follows:

1. The seller and the buyer should understand the affairs of dealings to
avoid the usurious dealings that are among the great prohibitions in
Islam.

2. They should avoid swearing (by Allah) during the dealing. If they are
truthful, it is hateful for them to do that. If they are liars, they
commit a sin and a prohibition.

3. They should not conceal the defect whether in the cost or in the
goods. When concealment occurs and then it is discovered, the deceived
one has the right to repudiate the dealing.

4. The seller should avoid praising his commodity.

5. The buyer should avoid dispraising what he has bought when it is
sound.

48. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers,
who said that a man came to the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, and asked him:

- O Apostle of Allah, what is knowledge?

- Listening.

- Then what?

- Listening to it.

- Then what?

- Memorizing it.

- Then what?

- Putting it into practice.

- Then what?

- Proclaiming it.[^59]

49. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, said to his Companions: “Feel shame before Allah very much. They
said: What shall we do? He said: If you want to do (that), then no one
of you should spend the night but he is in fear of Him. He should keep
the head and what it has contained and the abdomen and what it has
included. He should recall the grave and death. Whoever likes the
hereafter should leave the embellishment of the world.”[^60]

Indeed man can accomplish shame through fearing his Lord, holding back
his tongue from telling lies, preventing his eyes from looking at the
unlawful, and recalling the grave and the fright therein. When man does
that, he feels shame before Allah.

50. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, was asked about the best servants. So, he said: “When
they do good, they are cheerful (about it). When they misbehave, they
ask Allah's forgiveness. When they are given, they thank. When they are
tested, they are patient. When they are angered, they forgive.”[^61]

51. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers,
who said that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said to
‘Ali in his commandment:

“O ‘Ali, there are six qualities in fornication: three of them are in
the world, and the others are in the hereafter. As for those in the
world, they take away glory, hasten ruin, and stop livelihood. As for
those in the hereafter, (they will lead to) evil reckoning, the wrath of
the Merciful (Allah), and immortality in the Fire.”[^62]

Indeed fornication is a social catastrophe that destroy morals. Thus,
Islam has intensely forbidden it and threatened those who commit it with
various kinds of torment in the hereafter.

52. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Monopoly is in six things: Wheat, barley, dates,
raisins, (cooking) fat, and (animal) oil.”[^63]

Monopoly is among the factors that paralyze the economic movement in the
country and spread poverty and need among the people. Islam has severely
forbidden monopoly, and ordered the rulers of the Moslems to price
commodities so as not to harm the people.

53. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Ill-gotten property is the price of the dead animal,
of the dog, and of wine. (It is) the prostitution rate, the bribery in
government, and the wage of the magician.”[^64]

Islam has forbidden spending money on these affairs, for they ruin
morals and spread corruption in the earth.

54. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfather on
the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Allah and every prophet with accepted (prayers) have
cursed six (persons): the one who increases the Book of Allah, the one
who accuses the determination of Allah of lying, the one who leaves my
practices (sunna), the one who regards as lawful what Allah has
prohibited concerning the members of my House (ahl al-Bayt), the one who
dominates through tyranny to degrade those whom Allah has consolidated,
to strengthen him whom Allah has lowered, and to possess alone the booty
the Moslems gain without fighting and regards it as lawful.”[^65]

55. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said to ‘Ali: “O ‘Ali, seven things of the sheep are
prohibited: blood, the penis, the bladder, the spinal cord, the glands,
the spleen, and the gall bladder.”[^66]

Islam has forbidden these parts to preserve public health and to guard
society against diseases. Modern medicine has proved that they harm
public health. Thus, it advises people to refrain from eating them.

56. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said to ‘Ali: “O ‘Ali, indeed, Allah has given me seven
qualities concerning you: You and I are the first to whom the grave will
split open. You will be the first to stop with me on the path. You will
be the first to be clothed when I will be clothed and to live when I
will live. You will be the first to dwell with me in the highest
gardens. You will be the first to drink with me from the pure drink that
is sealed (to others), whose sealing is musk.”[^67]

57. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostles of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Allah, the Great and Almighty, is not worshipped with
a thing better than reason. The believer is not wise till ten qualities
come together in him: good from him is hoped, evil from him is safe,
regards little good from other than him as much, regards his own good as
little, is not tired of

seeking knowledge throughout his life, is not fed up with those who
request needs from, humbleness is more lovable for him than high rank,
poverty is more lovable for him than riches, his portion of the world is
food, the tenth (quality), what is the tenth (quality)? When he sees
someone, he says: he is better and more pious than me. People are two
men- one man is better and more pious than him, the other is more evil
and lower than him. So, if he sees the one who is better and more pious
than him, he should behave humbly towards him to follow him. If he sees
the one who is more evil and lower than him, he should say: perhaps the
good of this (person) is hidden, and his evil hidden. May (Allah) make
his final result good. If he does that, his glory becomes high and he is
the lord of the people of his time.”[^68]

This traditions, like the other Prophetic traditions, urges (people) to
reform their souls and to educate them with good manners and deeds to be
the source of guidance for people.

58. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Ten (persons) are cursed because of wine: the one who
plants it, the one who guards it, the one who presses it, the one who
gives it, the one who drinks it, the one who carries it, the one to whom
it is carried, the one who sells it, the one who buys it, and the one
who takes its price.”[^69]

Islam has strictly prohibited all the above-mentioned cases of wine.
That is because wine is among the social catastrophes that harm public
health and corrupt values and morals.

59. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Blessing is ten parts: ten parts are in trade and one
part is in the skins (i. e. sheep).”[^70]

60. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Islam has been built on ten parts: Testifying
that there is no god but Allah- it is the religion, the prayer- it is
the religious duty, fasting - it is the garden, zakat (alms)- it is
purity, the hajj- it is the Islamic law, jihad (armed struggle) - it is
invasion, enjoining (people) to do good deeds - it is the fulfillment,
forbidding (them) from doing bad deeds - it is the proof, unity - it is
familiarity, and infallibility - it is obedience.”[^71]

61. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “When you ask Allah, then you ask Him with the palm of
the hand. When you ask him for protection, then do not ask him with the
outside of the hand. ”[^72]

62. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “If my community does fifteen qualities, the
tribulation will afflict it: if they steal properties successively,
regard the deposit of booty and zakat (alms) as loss, the men obey their
wives and disobey theirs mothers, treats his friend with kindness and
turns away from his brother, the voices become loud in the mosques, a
man is honored out of fear of his evil, the leader of the people is the
lowest of them, silk is worn, wine is drunk, female singers and stringed
instruments are adopted, and the last

(generation) of this community curses the earlier (generation) of it,
after that, they must look forward to three qualities: red wind,
transformation, and humiliation.”[^73]

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, warned (his community)
of these affairs, for they ruin nations and peoples. If the Islamic
community commits them, then Allah will punish it.

63. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Whoever spends the night tired from earning the
lawful spends the night forgiven.”[^74]

Islam has also urged the community to earn its livelihood lawfully. It
has regarded such a kind of livelihood as jihad and honor for its owner.
Whoever strives to earn (the livelihood) of his family spends the night
forgiven.

64. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, was asked about the best creatures. So, he, may Allah
bless him and his family, said: “When they do good, they are cheerful.
When they are given, they are grateful. When they are tested, they are
patient. When they are angered, they forgive.”[^75]

Whoever has these qualities is the best of all the people and the most
honorable than them. In other words he possesses the rein of his soul
and his reason controls his desire.

65. He, peace be on him said, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah
bless him and his family, said: “You are unable to encompass the people
with your money, so encompass them with your ethics.”[^76]

How high this wisdom is! It makes people love each other and unifies
their feelings and sentiments. The power of money is unable to achieve
that. However, morals are the strongest factor in building society on
sound bases.

66. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, passed by a group of people raising stones, so he said:
“What is this?” “With that we know the strongest of us,”they said.
“Shall I tell you about the strongest of you?”asked the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family. “Yes,”they said. He, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “The strongest of you is he whose content enters
him in neither sin nor falsehood when he is pleased, he whose discontent
does not prevent him from saying the truth when he is displeased, who he
does not take other than his right when he is powerful.”[^77]

Islam takes care of only the strength of conscience towards the truth.
As for the boast of the muscles is among the customs of the pre-Islamic
times. However, Islam has forbidden them.

67. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Sitting with the people of religion is the honor
of here and the hereafter.”[^78]

Sociology has proven that man has an effect on the environment.
Meanwhile the environment has an effect on him. Thus, it is natural that
the righteous have an effect on those who makes friends with them. They
protect them from practicing evil habits and make them love doing good.
So, with that, they obtain the honor of here and hereafter.

68. He, peace be on him, said: [The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, said:] “Indeed this religion is strong. So, go
deeply into it gradually. Do not make the servants of Allah hate
worshipping Allah.”[^79]

69. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Whoever wants to seek access through me (to Allah)
and that there will be a hand for him, through which I intercede for him
(with Allah) on the Day of Judgment, then he should keep in contact with
the members of my family and make them happy.”[^80]

70. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said to ‘Ali: “O ‘Ali, I am the city of knowledge and you
are the gate. He who claims that he can reach the city not through the
gate tells lies.”[^81]

71. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of Umm Salama on the
authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family,
who said: “The hajj is the jihad of every weak (person).”[^82]

72. He, peace be on him, said: [The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, said:] “Whomever Allah moves from the abasement of
sins to the glory of (religious) devotion, then He (Allah) makes him
rich without money, strong without a tribe, and entertains him without a
close friend. Whoever fears Allah, Allah makes everything afraid of him.
Whoever does not fear Allah, Allah makes him afraid of everything.
Whoever is satisfied with the little livelihood of the property of
Allah, He (Allah) is satisfied with his little deed.”[^83]

73. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers
on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “Indeed I and twelve members from my family, of whom
‘Ali is the first, are the stakes through which Allah prevents the earth
and its people from sinking. If the twelve members from my family
depart, the earth and its people will sink.”[^84]

74. He, peace be on him, said: The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, said: “Twelve chiefs are from my family. They narrate
traditions. Among them will be the one who will undertake (bring about)
the truth (al-Qa'm bi al-Haqq).”[^85]

With this we end our talk about the traditions Imam al-Baqir, peace be
on him, reported on the authority of his grandfather, the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family.

His Traditions on the Authority of the Imam, the Commander of the Faithful
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

On the authority of his grandfathers, Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him,
reported a group of the maxims of his grandfather, Imam (‘Ali), the
Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him. The following are some of
them:

1. He, peace be on him, said: A man from the people of Basrah rose and
said to Imam (‘Ali), the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him:

“O Commander of the Faithful, tell us about the brothers (i. e.
friends).”

The Imam, peace be on him, answered him: “The brothers are of two kinds:
the reliable brothers and the laughing brothers. As for the reliable
brothers, they are the hand, the wing, the family, and the property. If
you have a reliable brother, then sacrifice for him your property and
your body, be sincere to those who are sincere to him, make an enemy of
those who make an enemy of him, conceal his secret and defect, and show
his good (deeds). O Questioner, know that they are less than red sulfur.
As for laughing brothers, you obtain your pleasure from them. Do not
stop that from them. Do not request what is beyond that from the most
lowly of them. Give them what they give you such as cheerfulness and
sweet words.”[^86]

As for the laughing brothers at this time, they are the overwhelming
majority. Ambitions, interests, and desires move them. As for the
aspects of their friendship, they are cheerfulness and smooth words, as
Imam ‘Ali said.

2. He, peace be on him, said: The Commander of the Faithful, peace be on
him, said: “The temptations are three (kinds): the love of women- it is
the sword of the Satan, drinking wine- it is the brain of the Satan, the
love of the dirham and the dinar- it is the arrow of the Satan. Whoever
loves women does not make use of his livelihood. Whoever likes drinking
(wine) is deprived of Paradise. However loves the dirham and the dinar
is the slave of the dinar. He, peace be on him, added: Jesus, son of
Marry, said: The ailment of religion is in the dinar. The (religious)
scholar is the doctor of religion. When you see the doctor perform the
ailment against himself, then accuse him. Know that he is not loyal to
other than him.”[^87]

3. He, peace be on him, in ‘Ali's letter there are three qualities:
Their owner will never die till he sees their evil results: oppression,
estranging blood relatives, and false oath through which (the person)
fights with Allah. Linking blood relatives is the quickest obedience in
reward. Perhaps the people are sinners. However, they link each other.
Thus, their properties grow. They treat each other with kindness. So,
their lives increase. False oath and estranging blood relatives make
houses empty of their people. They disturb blood relatives. Disturbing
blood relatives stops birth.”[^88]

This paragraph of the letter of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful, peace be on him, is full of commandments on kindness,
religious devotion, and what does general good for man in this life.

4. He, peace be on him, said: The Commander of the Faithful, peace be on
him, said: “Religion depends on four (persons): The scholar who
proclaims and uses it. The rich one who does not refrain from granting
his favor to the people of the religion of Allah. The poor one who does
not sell his life in the hereafter for his life in this world. The
ignorant one who does not abstain from seeking knowledge. If the scholar
conceals his knowledge, the rich one refrains from granting his money,
the poor one sells his life in the hereafter for his life in this world,
and the ignorant one abstains from seeking knowledge, then the world
moves backward. So, many mosques and the different bodies of a certain
group of people should not tempt you. It was said: How will (we) live at
that time? He, peace be on him said: Associate with them apparently and
oppose them internally. The person will have what he earns. He will be
with those whom he loves. Nevertheless, wait for the ease from Allah,
the Great and Almighty.”[^89]

Indeed such kinds of people are able to reform the world when they
shoulder their responsibilities and carry out their religious duties.
However, if they deviate from that, life will move backward and all the
high values in it decline.

5. He, peace be on him, said: The Commander of the Faithful, peace be on
him, was questioned: “How much is between truth and falsehood.”He, peace
be on him, replied: “Four fingers.”He put his hand on his eyes and ears,
and then he said: “What your eyes see is true. Most of what your ears
hear is false.”[^90]

6. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfathers on
the authority of the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, who
said: “The Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family,
mentioned ten qualities concerning me. Each is more lovable for me than
what the sun rises over. He said to me: You are my brother here and in
the hereafter. You are the closest of all the creatures to me in the
standing. You are my helper and successor and inheritor about my family
and property. You are the carrier of my standard here and in the
hereafter. Your friend is mine. My friend is Allah's. Your enemy is
mine. My enemy is Allah's.”[^91] Allah, singled out Imam (‘Ali), the
Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, with many outstanding
merits. He granted him many favors. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, mentioned some of them in this tradition.

7. He, peace be on him, said: [The Commander of the Faithful, peace be
on him, said:] “The pious have signs. They are known with them: truthful
talk, paying the deposit, fulfilling the promise, little pride,
miserliness, consideration for blood relatives, having pity on the weak,
little sleeping with women, doing favors, good manners, vast clemency,
adopting knowledge that bring (them) closer to Allah, the Great and
Almighty. ‘A good final state and a goodly return shall be
theirs.’”[^92]

8. He, peace be on him said: [The Commander of the Faithful, peace be on
him said:] “Indeed ambitions control the hearts of the ignorant. Desires
take them as security. Tricks cling to them.”[^93]

This tradition pictures the condition of the ignorant. It includes their
qualities of which are: ambitions control their feelings and sentiments.
Desires take their hearts as security. Tricks convince them easily, for
they have little experience and knowledge.

9. He, peace be on him, said: [The Commander of the Faithful, peace be
on him said:] “All good has been gathered in three qualities: thinking,
silence, and speech. So, every thinking that has no viewpoint is
inattention. Every silence that has no idea is heedlessness. Every
speech that has no praise (of Allah) is nonsense. Therefore, a good
final state shall be for him whose thinking is a viewpoint, silence is
an idea, and speech is praise (of Allah), who weeps over his sin, of
whose evil people are safe.”[^94]

These are the qualities of those who know their Lord and turn to Him in
repentance. They are appropriate for the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, and those who follow them.

10. He, peace be on him, said: The Commander of the Faithful, peace be
on him, said: “We, the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), are the tree
of

the Prophet, staying place of (Divine) Message, descending place of
angels, sources of knowledge.”[^95]

11. He, peace be on him, said: [The Commander, peace be on him, said:]
“The one who acts with oppression, the one who supports him, and the one
who is satisfied with him are three partners.”[^96]

His Narration from his Grandfather al-Husayn
--------------------------------------------

He (Imam al-Baqir), peace be on him, reported on the authority of his
father on the authority of his grandfather Imam Husayn, peace be on him,
who said: [I heard my grandfather Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, say:]

“Act according to Allah's obligations to be the most pious of all
people. Be satisfied with Allah's apportionment to be the richest of all
people. Refrain from what Allah has forbidden to be a believer. Be a
good friend of him who makes friends with you to be a Moslem.”[^97]

His Narration from his Father
-----------------------------

He reported on the authority of his father ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be
on him, who said: “He whose eyes shed tears for the murder of al-Husayn,
Allah will settle him at the highest place in the garden. The believer
whose eyes are filled with tears for the persecution our enemy practiced
against us, Allah will settle him in the seat of honor. The believer who
suffers from persecution for us and then his eyes shed tears for us,
Allah will not punish him on the Day of Judgment and make will him safe
from the wrath of the Fire.”[^98]

His Narration from Jabir al-Ansari
----------------------------------

He, peace be on him, reported a group of traditions and events on the
authority of Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah. Among them are:

1. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of Jabir, who said:
“Indeed, when Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
stopped at al-Safa (a hill in Mecca near the Kaaba), he exclaimed three
times:‘Allah is Great’, and then he said: ‘There is no god but Allah. He
is One. There is no partner with Him. Supreme power and praise belong to
Him. He has power over all things.’ He (the Prophet) did that three
time. He did the like of that at al-Marwah (a hill near the
Kaaba).”[^99]

2. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of Jabir, who said:
“Indeed, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, wore a ring on
his right finger.”[^100]

3. He, peace be on him, asked Jabir about what had happened between ‘Ali
and ‘A'isha. So, Jabir said: “One day I went to ‘A'isha and asked her
about her opinion concerning ‘Ali. She bowed her head. Then she raised
it and composed:

When gold is rubbed against a touchstone

its adulteration appears without doubt.

Corruption is in us, and ‘Ali, the purified gold,

is like the touchstone among us.”[^101]

His Narration from ‘Umar
------------------------

He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of ‘Umar b. al-Khattab,
who said: [I heard the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
say:] “Every means and lineage will break on the Day of Judgment except
my means and lineage.”[^102]

His Narration from b. ‘Abbas
----------------------------

He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas,
who said: [‘Ali looked at the faces of the people, and then he said:]
“Indeed I am the brother of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, and his helper. You know that I was the first to believe in
Allah and his Apostle. Then you entered Islam one by one after me. I am
the cousin of Allah's Apostle may Allah bless him and his family, his
brother, and his partner in his lineage. (I am) the father of his
(grand)sons, and his son-in-law (being married to his) daughter, the
mistress of his children and of the women of the garden. You know that
when we went out with Allah's Apostle and came back, he loved and
trusted me more than you. I was the most intense of you in defeating the
enemy and affecting the equipment. You know when he sent me to Bara'a.
He made the Moslems associate with each other as brothers. He chose
nobody other than me. Then he said to me: ‘You are my brother and I am
your brother in this life and the hereafter.’ He took the people out of
the mosque and left me. Then he said to me: ‘Your position to me is as
Aaron with Moses, except that there will be no prophet after me.’”[^103]

His Narration from Zayd b. Arqam
--------------------------------

He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of Zayd b. Arqam, who
said: [We were sitting before the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. He, peace be on him, said:] “Shall I show you him whom if you
ask for advice you will not go astray nor will you perish?” “Yes, O
Allah's Apostle,”they said. He said: “This.” He pointed to ‘Ali b. Abï
Talib. Then he said: “Associate with him as brothers, help him, believe
him, and be loyal to him. Indeed Gabriel has told me about what I have
said to you.”[^104]

His Narration From Abï Dharr
----------------------------

He, peace be on him, reported a group of sayings of the great reformer,
Companion (of the Prophet), Abï Dharr. Among them are the following:

“O you who seek knowledge, do not let your family and your money divert
you from your soul. On the day when you leave them, you will be like the
guest. (You will) spend the night among them, then you will leave them
to other than them. Here and hereafter are like the house from which you
move to other than it. There is nothing between death and raising from
the dead except a short sleep, then you will wake up. O You who seek
knowledge, indeed, the heart without knowledge is like the ruined
house.”[^105]

These are some of the traditions which have been reported on his
authority. They concern the rules of conduct, morals, and the
outstanding merits of the pure family that is equal to the Holy Book.

The Exegesis of the Holy Koran
------------------------------

Among the sciences which Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
presented during his lectures was the exegesis of the Holy Koran. Indeed
he devoted a time of his times to it. He discussed all of its affairs.
The scholars of exegesis, though they had different opinions and trends,
studied under him. Thus, he was the most brilliant explainer in Islam.
Among his studies on the Koran are the following:

### The Virtue of Reciting the Koran

###

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, urged (the community) to
recite the Holy Book, for it is the abundant source that guides people
to righteousness, enlivens their hearts, and supplies them with
abilities of light and awareness. He, peace be on him, reported what his
grandfather Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said
concerning the virtue of reciting the Koran. He, peace be on him, said:
[Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:] “Whoever
recites ten verses on a night is not written among the heedless. Whoever
recites fifty verses is written among those who praise (Allah). Whoever
recites a hundred verses is written among the obedient. Whoever recites
two hundred verses is written among the humble. Whoever recites three
hundred verses is written among the successful. Whoever recites five
hundred verses is written among the strivers. Whoever recites a thousand
verses, a hundredweight of gold is written for him.”[^106]

Traditions similar to this have been reported on the authority of the
Imams of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. They
urge Moslems to recite the Koran and to consider carefully its verses
and to understand their secrets. Without doubt the verses of the Koran
develop intellect, educate souls, protect them from deviation, and guide
them to the right path.

### Repetition of Reciting the Koran

###

As for repeating and reciting the Koran with a good voice, it penetrates
the depth of the heart and inner self. It reacts with sentiments, for
the Koran has maxims and sciences necessary for life.

The Imams of the members of the House (ahl al Bayt), peace be on them,
took care of reciting the Holy Koran. Thus, Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him, was the best of all the people in reciting the Koran
with a good voice.[^107]

Abu Basïr reported: I said to Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir): “When I recite the
Koran loudly, Satan comes to me and says: with this (recitation) you
want to please your family and the people.”Imam al-Baqir, peace be on
him, said: “Recite the Koran in an intermediate recitation. Let your
family listen (to that). Read the Koran with a good voice. Indeed Allah
likes reciting the Koran with a good voice.”[^108]

### The Koran far above Falsehood

###

The Holy Koran is the great miracle of Islam. “(This is) a Book, whose
verses are made decisive, then are they made plain, from One Wise,
All-aware.” “(This Book), there is no doubt in it, is a guide to those
who guard (against evil).”There is no contradiction in its rules nor is
there any incompatibility in its verses. “And if it were from any other
than Allah, they

would have found in it many a discrepancy.” “Surely this Koran guides to
that which is most upright.” “Falsehood shall not come to it from before
it nor from behind it.”Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
explained this verse, saying : “Falsehood does not come to it from
before the Torah nor before the Bible and the Zabur (David's psalms).
Nor from behind it means that no Book will come after it to abrogate
it.”In a narration from al-Sadiq, peace be on him: “There is no
falsehood in what the Koran has told about the past nor is there
falsehood in what it has told about what will happen in the future.”

### The Imam dispraised those who distort the Koran

###

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, dispraised those who
distort Allah's Book. It is they who interpret its verses according to
their own desires. Thus, he, peace be on him, wrote a letter to Sa‘d
al-Khayr: “Among their neglecting the Book is that they have rectified
its letters and distorted its penal law. Indeed they see the Koran but
they do not conform to it. The ignorant admire memorizing the narration.
The religious scholars are sad when they leave the care.”[^109]

### Figurative Usage in the Koran

###

Figurative usages are famous in the language of Arabs. They are famous
in many matters such as figurative predication, figurative word. Among
them is the chapter on allusions. It is said that allusions are more
eloquent than direct expressions. These expressions are among the nice
usage and beauties of this language. The Holy Koran has a large group of
figurative usage. Among them is the following Words of Allah, the
Exalted: “He said: O Iblis! what prevented you that you should do
obeisance to him whom I created with My two hands?”The meaning of the
word hand is the special organ. However, this is impossible for Allah,
the Most High. That is because the hand is in need of a body, while this
is rationally impossible for Allah, the Exalted. Mohammed b. Moslem
asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) about that. So, he, peace be on him,
replied: “The word hand (yad) in the speech of Arabs means power and
blessing. Allah, the Exalted, said: “And remember Our servant Dauwd with
hands.”He said: “And the sky We built it with hands.”It is said:
“So-and-so has many hands with me, favors and kindness. He has a white
hand with me, meaning blessing.”[^110]

This means that the word hand (yad) is not used in its real meaning.
Rather it is used in other than it, either figuratively or truly. That
is because it includes all these meanings the Imam mentioned.

### The Basmalah is Part of the Suras of the Koran

###

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, and all the Imams of the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, believed that the
basmalah (i. e., in the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most
Merciful) is part of the chapters of the Holy Koran. A large mass of the
Moslem scholars and readers followed them in that.[^111] Yahya b. Abï
‘Umran al-Hamadani wrote a letter to Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace
be on him. In the letter he mentioned: “May I be your ransom, what is
your opinion of a man (who) started his prayers with: In the Name of
Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful, in the mother of the Book
(i. e., the first

sura of the Holy Koran), and when he reached to a sura other than the
mother of the Book, he left it (the basmalah)? The ‘Abbasid (man) said:
There is no harm in that.”So, the Imam, peace be on him, replied to him
with a letter in which he mentioned: “He (i. e., the man who left the
basmalah) should repeat it twice in spite of him (the ‘Abbasid
man).[^112] The traditions of the two parties (Sunna and Shi‘a) have
unanimously agreed on that the basmalah is part of the suras of the Holy
Koran. Those who deny that are irregular.

### The Koran was revealed in Seven Letters

###

The commentators have made known that the Koran was revealed in seven
letters. They claimed that Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
said: “The Koran was revealed in seven letters.”[^113] The ideas in this
connection are so many that Abu Hatam has mentioned that they are
thirty-five.[^114]

It is necessary for us to give a brief idea about the meanings of the
seven letters to know whether they are truly attributed to Imam Mohammed
al-Baqir, peace be on him, or not.

### The Seven Letters

###

There are various views about the meanings of the seven letters. The
following are some of them:

1. The seven letters are: promise, threat, order, prohibition, stories,
controversy, and proverbs. Ibn ‘Atiya weakened this idea. He said:
“These are not called letters.”[^115]

2. They are the differing words that have close meanings such as aqbil
and halum (come! come on!), ‘ajjil and asri‘ (be quick). Al-Tabari chose
this meaning.[^116] However, this meaning is untrue. That is because
man, according to this meaning, has the right to read the Koran in
various ways. So, this will lead to a big difference such as adding a
verse or omitting it. That is because the differing words bring about
differing sentences, as al-Qurtubi said.[^117]

3. They are the seven chapters which the Koran brought: the prevention,
the order, lawful, the unlawful, the clearly defined (verses), the
ambiguous (verses), and the proverbs.[^118] These chapters are not
called letters. Besides the prevention and the unlawful are one chapter.
They are therefore not seven chapters.

4. They are the classical dialects from the dialects of the Arab. They
are differing in the Koran. So, some of the Koran was revealed in the
dialect of Quraysh; some of it in the dialect of Hudhayl; some of it in
the dialect of Hawzan; some of it in the dialect of the Yemen; some of
it in the dialect of Kinana; some of it in the dialect of Tamïm; some of
it in the dialect of Thaqïf. This idea is ascribed to al-Bayqahi,
al-Abhari, and the author of al-Qamus. However, ‘Umar opposed this idea
when he said that the Koran was revealed in the dialect of Madar.[^119]

5. They are seven recitations. Our master, the Professor, opposed that
when he said that the famous recitations are more than seven.[^120]

These are some of the opinions. Our master, the Professor, numbered ten
opinions. However, he disproved them and proved that they did not lead
to

any result. Abu Shama wrote a book on these meanings and refuted most of
them.

### The Imam denied the Seven Letters

###

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, denied the seven letters.
What was attributed to him that he reported them is incorrect. In the
(book) al-Sahïh, Zarara reported on the authority of the Imam, who said:
“Indeed the Koran is one. The One (Allah) revealed it. However, the
reporters have brought about these differences.”[^121] It was reported
on the authority of the Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, that he denied
that. Al-Fudayl b. Yasar asked him: “Surely, the people say: The Koran
was revealed in seven letters.”So, al-Sadiq, peace be on him, said: “The
enemies of Allah have told lies. However, the Koran was revealed in one
letter from the One and Only.”[^122]

### The Method of Exegesis

###

The trends of the commentators of the Holy Koran are different. In that
they followed differing methods. Among them are:

### The Exegesis through the transmitted Sayings

###

By that we mean interpreting the Koran through the traditions reported
on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and
the Imams of guidance. Most Shi‘ite commentators followed this method.
Among them were al-Qummi, al-‘Askari, and the like. Their proof was that
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, were
professional in the real knowledge of the Koran. Those other than them
had no share in that. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
referred to that when he said: “No one can claim that he has the deep
and the surface (knowledge) of the Koran except the testamentary
trustees of authority.”[^123] It is therefore the testamentary trustees
of the authority who had the deep and surface knowledge of the Book. The
proofs have unanimously agreed that it is incumbent on the explainers to
refer to them on interpreting the Koran. Shaykh al-Tusi said:
“Interpreting the Koran is not permitted except through the authentic
traditions from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and the
Imams whose words were similar to those of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family.”[^124]

### The Exegesis through the Opinion

###

By that we mean following the hypothetical rational considerations that
belong to the approbation.[^125] The Mu‘tazilite and the Batanian
commentators adopted that. They did not follow the traditions reported
on the testamentary trustees of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, in their exegesis. Rather, they depended on the rational
approbation. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, prevented them
from that. Qattada, the famous jurist, came to the Imam. So, the Imam
said to him:

“Are you the jurist of the people of Basrah?”

“Yes, such they claim.”

“I have heard that you interpret the Koran.”

“Yes.”

So, the Imam blamed him for that, saying:

“O Qattada, If you interpret according to your own opinion, then you
will be perished and perish (the people). If you interpret it according
to the opinions of the men, then you will be perished and perish (the
people). Qattada, woe unto you! Those who have been addressed in the
Koran know it.”[^126]

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, confined the knowledge of
the Holy Book to the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them. That is because they knew the clearly defined (verses), the
ambiguous (verses), the abrogating (verses), and the abrogated (verses).
The people other than them had not such knowledge. It was reported on
the authority of the Imams, peace be on him, who said: “There is nothing
farther from the mind of the men than the exegesis of the Koran. The
beginning of the verse is on a thing and its end is on other thing. It
is a coherent speech with various meanings.”[^127]

As for following the surface of the Book is not numbered of the exegesis
through the opinion which is forbidden. Some traditionalists opposed its
proof. They cleaved to proofs which the fundamentalists refuted.[^128]

### Imam al-Baqir's Exegesis

###

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, wrote a book on the
exegesis of the Holy Koran. Mohammed b. Ishaq al-Nadïm mentioned the
book in his book al-Fihrast when he mentioned the books written on the
exegesis of the Holy Koran. He said: “Abu al-Jarud Zyad b. al-Munzir,
the head of the Jarudiya, reported the book of al-Baqir Mohammed b. ‘Ali
b. al-Husayn.”Sayyd Hasan al-Sadr said: “A group of the reliable
Shi‘ites reported the book from him from the days of his righteousness.
Among them was Abu Basïr Yahya b. al-Qasim al-Asadi. ‘Ali b. Ibrahïm b.
Hashim al-Qummi mentioned it in his book al-Tafsïr on the authority of
Abu Basïr.[^129] The narrators said: “Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi wrote a
book on the exegesis of the Holy Koran. He learnt the exegesis from the
Imam.”[^130]

### Examples of al-Baqir's Exegesis

###

The explainers reported many verses of the Holy Koran interpreted by the
Imam. The following are some of them:

1. The Words of Allah, the Exalted, : “These shall be rewarded with the
ghurfa (house) because they were patient.”[^131] Al-Baqir, peace be on
him, said: “The ghurfa (house) is the garden. It is a reward for them,
for they were patient towards poverty in the world.”[^132]

2. The Words of Allah, the Most High: “And to whomsoever My wrath is due
he shall perish indeed.”[^133] Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
was asked about the wrath of Allah. So, he peace be on him, replied:
“His dismissal and His punishment.”[^134]

3. The Words of Allah, the Exalted, “And most surely I am most Forgiving
to him who repents and believes and does goods, then continues to follow
the right direction.”[^135] The Imam, peace be on him, interpreted
“following the right direction”as following the Imams of the members of
the House (ahl al-Bayt). Then he said: “By Allah, if a person worships
Allah throughout his life between the corner (of the Kaaba) and the
standing place

(of Abraham) and does not follow us, Allah will throw him down on his
face into the fire.”[^136]

4. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “O Apostle, deliver what has been
revealed to you from your Lord.”[^137] He, peace be on him, said: “By
that Allah meant what He revealed to the Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, concerning the outstanding merits of ‘Ali.”[^138] He,
peace be on him, reported that Allah revealed to His Apostle to appoint
‘Ali successor. However, he was afraid that that would be difficult for
a group of his Companions. So, Allah, the Most High, revealed this verse
to encourage him to carry out His order.[^139]

5. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “Leave Me and him whom I created
alone.”[^140] This verse was revealed concerning al-Walïd b. al-Mughïra
al-Makhzumi, who accused the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, of magic. The people called al-Walïd the alone. Thus, the verse
was revealed to threaten him. Mohammed b. Moslem reported on the
authority of Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), who said: “The alone is the
illegitimate child.”Zarara said: “Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) was told that
one of the Hashimites said in his oration: “I am the son of the
alone.”So, the Imam said: “Woe unto him! If he knew who the alone was,
he would not boast of him.”Thus, we said to him: “Who is he?”He said:
“The unfathered child.”[^141]

6. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “The angels and Gabriel descend in
it by the permission of their Lord.”[^142] He, peace be on him, said:
“The angels and the recorders descend to the lower world. They record
the affairs that hit people within a year. That is up to Allah's
will.”Allah makes to pass away and establishes what He pleases, and with
Him is the mother of the Book.”[^143]

7. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “So, they shall be thrown down into
it, they and they erring ones.”[^144] The meaning of the verse is that
the erring ones and the atheist powers will be thrown all together into
the fire. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, said: “The verse
was revealed concerning the people who described just things with their
tongues, and then they did other than them.”[^145]

8. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “And they did not do Us any harm,
but they made their own souls suffer loss.”[^146] Interpreting this
verse, the Imam, peace be on him, said: “Allah is not oppressed, for He
is Great and Powerful. However, He mixed us with Himself. So, He
regarded the oppression against us as oppression against Him and our
authority as His authority. So, He said: ‘Only Allah is your authority
and His apostle and those who believe.’”He meant the Imams from us. In
another place He said: “And they did not do Us any harm, but they made
their own souls suffer loss.”[^147]

9. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “So, ask the people of the reminder
if you do not know.”[^148] Mohammed b. Moslem said: I said to Imam Abu
Ja‘far (al-Baqir): “Some of us claim that this verse concerns the Jews
and the Christians.”He said: “Therefore they summon you to their
religion.”Then he, peace be on him, pointed to his chest and said: “We
are the people of the reminder and we are the people who are
questioned.”[^149]

10. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “Are those who know and those who
do not know alike? Only the men of understanding are mindful.”[^150] He,
peace be on him, said: “It is we who know and our enemy is he who does
not know. Our followers are the men of understanding.”[^151]

11. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “Nay! these are clear
communications in the breasts of those who are granted knowledge.”[^152]
Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) said that “those who are granted
knowledge”concerns the Imams of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them.[^153] Abu Basïr reported that Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir) recited this verse and pointed with his hand to his
chest.[^154]

12. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “(Remember) the day when We will
call every people with their Imam.”[^155] Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi
reported on the authority of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on
him, who said: When this verse was revealed, the Moslems said: “O
Allah's Apostle, are you not the Imam of all people?”He, may Allah bless
him and his family, said: “I am the Apostle of Allah for all people.
However, there will be Imams over the people. They will be from my
Household. They will assume the Imam over the people. However, the
people will accuse them of lying. The Imams of unbelief and misguidance
and their followers will oppress them. So, whoever supports, follows,
and believes them will belong to me, be with me, and meet me. Whoever
oppresses them, accuses them of lying will not belong to me nor will he
be with me. Moreover, I will disown myself of him.”[^156]

13. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “Then We gave the Book for an
inheritance to those whom We chose from among Our servants, but of them
is he who makes his soul suffer a loss, and of them is he who takes a
middle course, and of them is he who is foremost in deeds of goodness by
Allah's permission.”[^157] Salim asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) about
this verse. So, he, peace be on him, said: “He who is foremost in deeds
of goodness is the Imam. He who takes a middle course is he who knows
the Imam. He who makes his soul suffer a loss is he who does not know
the Imam.”[^158] Zyad b. al-Munzir reported on the authority of the
Imam, peace be on him, who said: “As for him who makes his soul suffer a
loss is he who does a good deed and another bad one. As for him who
takes a middle course is he who worships (Allah) very much. As for those
who are foremost in deeds of goodness are ‘Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn, and
those who died martyrs from the family of Mohammed, may Allah bless him
and his family.”[^159]

14. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “Surely in this are signs for those
who examine.”[^160] He, peace be on him, said: The Commander of the
Faithful said: “Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, was
the one who examined. I, after him, and the Imams from my progeny are
the ones who examine.”[^161]

15. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “And that if they should keep to
the (right) way, We would certainly give them to drink of abundant
water.”[^162] He (al-Baqir), peace be on him, said: “By that Allah meant
that if they should keep to the authority of ‘Ali b. Abï Talib, the
Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him, and the testamentary
trustees of authority from his sons, and obey their orders and
prohibitions, He would certainly give

them to drink of abundant water, namely He would fill their hearts with
belief. The (right) way is the belief in the authority of ‘Ali and the
testamentary trustees.”[^163]

16. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “Say: Allah is sufficient as a
witness between me and you and whoever has knowledge of the Book.”[^164]
Barïd b. Mu‘awiya asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him,
about those whom the Words of Allah the Exalted: “And whoever has
knowledge of the Book” concern. So, he, peace be on him, said: “He meant
us. ‘Ali was the first of us, the most meritorious of us, and the best
of us after the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.”[^165]

17. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “But indeed We have given to
Abraham's children the Book and the wisdom, and We have given them a
grand kingdom.”[^166] Barïd al-‘Ajali asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him, about this verse. So, he, peace be on him said: “He
made Abraham's children Apostles, Prophets, and Imams. Why do they
accept that in the family of Abraham and refuse to accept it in the
family of Mohammed, may Allah bless him and his family?”Barïd said:
“What is the meaning of ‘And We have given them a grand kingdom?’”The
Imam replied: “llah made them Imams. Whoever obeys them obeys Allah.
Whoever disobeys them disobeys Allah. That is the grand kingdom.”[^167]

18. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “And I breathed into him of My
spirit.”[^168] The Imam, peace be on him, was asked about the spirit.
So, he said: “It is the power.”[^169]

19. The Words of Allah, the Exalted: “Were it not for that he had seen
the manifest evidence of his Lord.”[^170] The Imam, peace be on him,
said to Jabir al-Ju‘fi: “What do the Iraqi jurists say concerning this
verse?”Jabir replied: “He (Joseph) saw Jacob biting his thumb.”Thus, the
Imam, peace be on him, said: [My father related to me on the authority
of my grandfather, ‘Ali b. Abï Talib, who said:] “As for the manifest
evidence which Joseph saw when she made for him and he made for her was
that she went to an idol crowned with pearls and corundum in the house
to cover it with a white garment so that it would not see her or she
felt shame of it.”So, Joseph asked her: “What is this?”She replied: “It
is my lord. I feel shame of it when it see in this manner.”So, Joseph
said: “Do you feel shame of an idol that does not avail nor does it harm
nor does it see? Then why do I not feel shame of my Lord Who has the
power over every soul? By Allah, you will never obtain that from
me.”That is the manifest evidence.[^171]

These are some of the verses which Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be
on him, interpreted. With this we end our talk about his exegesis of the
Holy Koran.

Theology
--------

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir) researched many theological matters during
his lectures. He was asked about the most complicated matters in this
science. He answered them. Worth mentioning, the time of the Imam was
the most sensitive of all the times. That is because the Islamic conquer
included most areas of the world and the peoples of the earth. That
moved a wave of spite in the souls of the enemies of Islam, from the
helpless peoples and other than them. Thus, they launched a propagating
campaign against

the Islamic thought. They proclaimed doubts and imaginations among the
children of the Moslems. Meanwhile the Umayyad governments encouraged
anti-Islam thoughts. No one has mentioned that the Umayyad rulers
resisted these thoughts and prevented them from spreading among the
Moslems. In the meantime nobody was ready to save the Moslems from these
thoughts except Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, who refuted
them with strong proofs. We will mention that in detail when we talk
about the time of the Imam.

However, the following are some of the theological researches which the
Imam did:

### Monotheism

###

Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, studied the most important
matters of monotheism. He uncovered them. He refuted the doubts and
imaginations which were raised about them. Among what he studied are:

1. Allah is not attained through Reason The unquestionable thing is that
man is unable to know with all his intellectual the reality of Allah,
for reason has limited imaginations. Al-Shafi‘i said: “Indeed reason has
a limited end as the eye has.”

All things which man senses are found at a certain place and time.
Reason cannot imagine beings without a place or things without time.
Thus, reason is unable to attain the reality of Allah, for neither time
nor place can encompass it. In other words, Allah created the time and
the place. Besides reason is unable to understand the reality of many
things in the universe. Among them is the unseen reality which reason
has not understood yet.

The conceptualization of the heart, though it has vast imagination, is
unable to attain the essence of Allah. The eye is unable to attain it,
too. Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, stated that when he
was asked about these words of Allah, the Exalted: “The eyes attain Him
not, but He attains the eyes.”[^172] He, peace be on him: “The
conceptualization of hearts are keener and sharper than the perceptions
of the eyes. Through the conceptualization of the heart you can perceive
countries like Sind, Hind (India) and other cities which you have never
visited, although you have not seen them with your eyes. How can your
eyes see Him when the conceptualization of your heart cannot attain
Him?”[^173]

Indeed the eye shall come back confused and fatigued when it tries to
perceive the essence of Allah, the Most High, the Creator of the cosmos,
and giver of life. Ibn Abï al-Haddïd said:

O Miracle of the cosmos, thinking has become unsound concerning You.

Whenever my thinking moves toward You a span of the hand, it escapes for
a mile.

You have perplexed men of understanding and confused intellect.[^174]

There is nothing remoter than attaining the essence of Allah, the
Exalted, for reason is unable to attain it. Thus, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abï
al-Najran asked Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, about Allah, the
Most High. He said: “Should I think of anything (to understand
Allah)?”The Imam, peace be on him, replied: “Yes, but you have to
imagine a thing which the mind cannot contain and which is without
limit. He is unlike whatever comes into your mind. Nothing resembles Him
nor can any thought reach

Him. How can He be perceived when He is totally different from whatever
is conceived and is the reverse of whatever is imagined. (Because Allah
cannot be limited through the limitations of the mind or the senses.)
Certainly, the thing which cannot be encompassed by the mind and which
is without limits is that which should be imagined.”[^175]

2. The Eternity of the Necessary Being As for the Eternity of the
Necessary Being, it is among the keenest theological and philosophical
studies. A man asked Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him: “Tell
me from when your Lord has been in existence?”The Imam replied: “Woe
unto You! The question when and how long arises only in respect of
things that (previously) were non-existant. Verily, my lord, the Blessed
and Exalted, has always been Ever-living, without time or modality.
Coming into existence does not apply to Him Who exists eternally nor
does ‘how He exists’ apply to His existence nor does ‘where He exists’
apply to him, for He is neither in a thing nor on a thing. He did not
invent a place for His location, nor was there any enhancement in His
might after He had created the universe, nor had He been weak before its
creation, nor was He alone before His act of creation, nor does He
resemble anything that can be remembered, nor was He without dominion
before creating the universe, nor will He be bereft of dominion after
the universe passes away. He is Ever-living, Self-subsisting, the
Almighty Lord without the category of life. He was the Almighty Lord
before creating things, and He is the Absolute Lord after the creation
of the universe. None of the categories of ‘how’ or ‘where’ or ‘when’ or
‘how much’ nor any ‘limit’ apply to his existence. He is not recognized
by resemblance with anything nor does He become decrepit due to His
endless existence. Nothing can strike awe in Him. Rather, all things are
awe-struck by fearing Him. He was in existence before the appearance of
life as such. Neither is He in existence such as can be described, nor
can it be confined to any state and condition. He does not rest anywhere
nor does He abide at a place that is in the neighborhood of another
place. However, He is known as Living, the Lord whose might and dominion
will never end. He has created of His own will whatever and whenever He
desired. He can neither be confined, nor fractioned, nor can He be
destroyed. He is the First without any modality and the Last without any
space. ‘And all things are perishable except His face.’ ‘His are the
creation and the command. Blessed be Allah, the Lord of all beings.’

“O Questioner, woe unto you! Surely, my Lord can never be encompassed by
the imagination. Doubts cannot descend upon him. Nor can He be affected
(by anything). Nor is He anybody's neighbor. Nor can events happen to
Him. He can neither be questioned about anything nor is He ashamed of
anything. ‘Slumber seize Him not, neither sleep.’ ‘To Him belong all
that is in the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, and
all that is underneath the soil.’”[^176]

This wonderful paragraph of the speech of the great Imam has encompassed
the eternity of the Necessary Being and His Unity. It has deemed Him far
above comparison with His creatures which genus and species limit, and
which are in need of the cause in their existence and non-existence.
Moreover, they are in need of time and place. Allah is far above

all that, for He is the first and the last, outward and inward, and He
knows all things. A researcher asked the Imam: “Who is Allah?” He
replied: “The One and Only.” It was said to him: “How is He?” He
answered: “He is a Powerful King.” It was said to him: “Where is He?” He
replied: “He is watching.” So, the researcher said: “I am not asking you
about this.” He said: “These are the attributes of Allah. Other than
them are the attributes of creatures.”

They wanted to know the essence of Allah through their senses and
reason. They did not know that He was far above what reason attains and
what conceptualization perceives. There is no god but He, the Ever
living, the Self-subsisting.

However, in this speech, the Imam, peace be on him, discussed the most
important theological matters which no one of the Moslem theologians and
philosopher had discussed before him except his grandfather Imam ‘Ali,
the Commander of the Faithful, peace be on him. As for encompassing and
explaining the speech of the Imam, peace be on him, it needs a detailed
study. The Moslem philosophers have taken care of the points which the
Imam has mentioned in his speech. They have produced evidence in support
of them.[^177]

3. Talking about the Essence of Allah is forbidden Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, prevented Moslems from talking about the
essence of Allah, the Most High. That is because that depends on a deep
philosophy which the reason of the simple people is unable to
understand. In other words they have little knowledge. Thus, they fall
into the tricks of the Satan. Then they go out of belief and come into
polytheism. In this connection the Imam, peace be on him, said: “Talk
about all things, but do not talk about the essence of Allah.”[^178]

He, peace be on him, said: “Talk about the creation of Allah, but do not
talk about Allah Himself, for that increases the owner of the talk
nothing except perplexity.”[^179]

Indeed talking about the essence of Allah increases man nothing except
perplexity and throwing destructive manners and doubts. As for thinking
of the creation of Allah and considering carefully the universe, they
will lead man to belief in Allah. That is because the creation of all
creature indicates the Great Creator. Darwin said: “It seems that all
the creatures that live in the earth belong to one eternal shape. The
Creator has breathed life into them.”[^180] It is false to say that
chance has created all these worlds. It is impossible for chance to find
a well-woven regulation that depends on knowledge. Why does chance not
create the plane and modern sets which thinking and science have found?

4. The Knowledge of Allah The knowledge of Allah has encompassed all
things. The knowledge of Allah is the same before and after the creation
of things. That is because He has created them. He knows what souls and
hearts have. Mohammed b. Moslem reported on the authority of Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him, who said: “Allah, the Great and Almighty,
was there when nothing else existed. He has been eternally knowing
whatever come into being. And His knowledge of a thing before it comes
into being is exactly the same as it is after its being.”[^181]

5. The Essence of Monotheism Jabir b. Yazïd al-Ju‘fi asked Imam Abu
Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, to teach him something of
monotheism. So, he, peace be on him, said: “Indeed Allah, whose names
are blessed and Who is Exalted in the transcendence of His Essence, is
the One (the only One). He is unique in Oneness, and He attributed
Oneness to Himself when He was alone. Then, He made His Unity evidently
known to His creatures. Thus, Allah is One, Unique, Self-dependent, and
All-holy. All things worship Him and turn to Him in repentance. And His
knowledge embraces all things.”[^182]

6. The Attributes of Allah Surely, the attributes of the Wise Creator
are exactly the same as His Essence. There is no number among them, as
it has been proved in theology. Some Iraqis deviated from the right
path. So, they proclaimed that Allah, the Most High, heard with other
than with He saw, and saw with other than with He heard. In that He is
similar to His creatures. Mohammed b. Moslem told Imam Abu Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on, about that. So, the Imam said: “They have told
lies, become atheists, and likened (Allah to His creatures). Far is
Allah above that. Indeed He is All-Hearing, All-Seeing. He hears with
what He sees, and sees with what He hears.”

Then Mohammed b. Salim said: “They claim that He sees according to what
they think.”So, the Imam, peace be on him, refuted their claims, saying:
“Be Allah Exalted, the one who has the attribute of the creature
perceive, but Allah is not such.”[^183]

7. Doubt and Unbelief Surely, the doubt and unbelief in Allah, the
Creator of the skies and the earth, have bad final results. Among them
is that no deed is accepted from the one who doubts Allah and the one
who disbelieves in Him. Their deeds will not avail them on the Day of
Judgment. For this reason, the Imam, peace be on him, said: “The deed
with doubt and unbelief is useless.”[^184]

With this we end our talk about the words of Imam Abu Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him, on monotheism.

### Notes

###

[^1] Safinat al-Bihar, vol.[^2]:

[^2] ‘Aqidat al-Shi‘a, p.[^123]:

[^3] Al-Manaqib, vol.3, p.[^331]:

[^4] Al-Imam Zayd, p.[^22]:

[^5] ‘Uyyun al-Akhbar wa Funun al-Athar, p.[^213]:

[^6] Nasikh al-Tawarikh, vol.2, p.[^219]:

[^7] Ibid, p.[^217]:

[^8] Ibid.

[^9] A‘lam al-Wara, p.[^270]:

[^10] Al-Khisal, p.[^4]:

[^11] Ibid, p.[^5]:

[^12] Ibid, p.[^10]:

[^13] Ibid, p.[^11]:

[^14] Ibid, p.[^14]:

[^15] Ibid.

[^16] Ibid, p.[^15]:

[^17] Ibid, p.[^17]:

[^18] Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, p.[^616]:

[^19] Al-Khisal, p.[^31]:

[^20] Ibn al-Maghazili, Manaqib ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, p.[^40]:

[^21] Ibid, p.[^42]:

[^22] Ibid, p.[^44]:

[^23] Ibid, p.[^64]:

[^24] Yanabi‘ al-Mawadda, p.[^266]:

[^25] Ibn al-Maghazili, Manaqib ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, p.[^40]:

[^26] Al-Khisal, p.[^34]:

[^27] Ibid, p.[^35]:

[^28] Ibid, p.[^36]:

[^29] Ibid.

[^30] Ibid, p.[^41]:

[^31] Ibid, p.[^47]:

[^32] Ibid, p.[^58]:

[^33] Ibid, p.[^60]:

[^34] Ibid, p.[^71]:

[^35] Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol.5, p.[^277]:

[^36] Safinat al-Bihar, vol.2, p.[^409]:

[^37] Al-Khisal, p.[^78]:

[^38] Ibid, p.[^84]:

[^39] Ibid, p.[^94]:

[^40] Ibid, p.[^106]:

[^41] Ibid, p.[^108]:

[^42] Ibid, p.[^138]:

[^43] Ibid, p.[^147]:

[^44] Ibid, p.[^164]:

[^45] Ibid, p.[^167]:

[^46] Ibid, p.[^180]:

[^47] Ibid, p.[^188]:

[^48] Ibid, p.[^203]:

[^49] Ibid, p.[^205]:

[^50] Ibid, [^208]:

[^51] Ibid, p.[^217]:

[^52] Ibid, p.[^221]:

[^53] Ibid, p.[^228]:

[^54] Ibid, p.[^231]:

[^55] Ibid,p.[^236]:

[^56] Ibid, p.[^240]:

[^57] Ibid, p.[^247]:

[^58] Ibid, p.[^260]:

[^59] Ibid, p.[^262]:

[^60] Ibid, p.[^267]:

[^61] Ibid, [^288]:

[^62] Ibid, p.[^292]:

[^63] Ibid, p.[^300]:

[^64] Ibid.

[^65] Ibid, p.[^308]:

[^66] Ibid, [^310]:

[^67] Ibid, p.[^311]:

[^68] Ibid, p.[^403]:

[^69] Ibid, p.[^414]:

[^70] Ibid, p.[^415]:

[^71] Ibid, p.[^416]:

[^72] Al-Bayan wa al-Tabiyyin, vol.2, p.[^263]:

[^73] Ibid, p.[^262]:

[^74] Al-Saduq, p.[^257]:

[^75] Ibid, p.[^9]:

[^76] Ibid, p.[^11]:

[^77] Ibid, p.[^18]:

[^78] Ibid, p.[^54]:

[^79] Usul al-Kafi.

[^80] Wasilat al-Mal fi ‘Ad Manaqib al-Al, p.[^61]:

[^81] Ibn al-Maghazili, al-Manaqib, p.[^85]:

[^82] Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol.4, p.[^242]:

[^83] Al-Sirat al-Sawi, p.

[^84] Al-Karajiki, al-Istinsar, ‘ala al-A’imma al-Athar, p.[^8]:

[^85] Ibid.

[^86] Al-Khisal, p.[^49]:

[^87] Ibid, p.[^109]:

[^88] Ibid, p.[^119]:

[^89] Ibid,p.[^180]:

[^90] Ibid, p.[^215]:

[^91] Ibid, p.[^398]:

[^92] Ibid, p.[^454]:

[^93] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^23]:

[^94] Al-Khisal, p.[^95]:

[^95] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^220]:

[^96] Al-Khisal, p.[^103]:

[^97] Al-Saduq, al-Amali, p.[^178]:

[^98] Kamil al-Ziyarat, p.[^108]:

[^99] Tarikh Dimashq, vol.51, pp.37-[^38]:

[^100] ‘Illal al-Sharai‘, p.[^158]:

[^101] Al-Sirat al-Sawi, p.[^119]:

[^102] Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat, vol.8, p.[^463]:

[^103] Al-Khawarizmi, al-Manaqib, p.[^226]:

[^104] Al-Maghazili, p.[^245]:

[^105] Nasikh al-Tawarikh, vol.2, p.[^204]:

[^106] Al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, p.[^25]:

[^107] Usul al-Kafi.

[^108] Al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, p.[^210]:

[^109] Al-Wafi, p.[^274]:

[^110] Nasikh al-Tawarikh, vol.1, p.[^434]:

[^111] Tafsir al-Alusi, vol.1, p.[^39]:

[^112] Furu‘ al-Kafi, vol.3, p.[^312]:

[^113] Ghayat al-Nihaya fi Tabaqat al-Qurra’, vol.2, p.[^202]:

[^114] Al-Qurtubi, Tafsir, vol.1, p.[^9]:

[^115] Nazra ‘Amma fi Tarikh al-Fiqh al-Islami, p.[^67]:

[^116] Al-Tabari, Tafsir, vol.1, p.[^15]:

[^117] Al-Qurtubi, Tafsir, vol.1, p.[^36]:

[^118] Al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, p.[^183]:

[^119] Ibid, p.[^185]:

[^120] Ibid, p.[^191]:

[^121] Usul al-Kafi.

[^122] Ibid.

[^123] Al-Wafi, vol.2, p.[^130]:

[^124] Al-Tibyan, vol.1, p.[^4]:

[^125] Al-Ansari, Fara’id al-Usul.

[^126] Al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, p.[^267]:

[^127] Fara’id al-Usul, p.[^28]:

[^128] Ibid.

[^129] Al-Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Fihrast, p.[^98]:

[^130] Al-Njashi.

[^131] Koran, al-Furqan, [^70]:

[^132] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol.9, p.[^301]:

[^133] Koran, Taha, [^82]:

[^134] Al-Fusul al-Muhimma, p.[^227]:

[^135] Koran, Taha, [^83]:

[^136] Majjma‘ al-Bayan (Beirut), vol.7, p.[^23]:

[^137] Koran, al-Ma’ida, [^67]:

[^138] Khasa’is al-Wahi al-Mubin, p.[^30]:

[^139] Majjma‘ al-Bayan, vol.4, p.[^223]:

[^140] Koran, al-Muddathir, [^11]:

[^141] Majjma‘ al-Bayan, vol.11, p.[^378]:

[^142] Koran, al-Qadr, [^4]:

[^143] Da‘a’im al-Islam, vol.1, p.[^334]:

[^144] Koran, al-Shu‘ara’, [^94]:

[^145] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^47]:

[^146] Koran, al-Baqara, [^57]:

[^147] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^146]:

[^148] Koran, al-Anbiya’, [^7]:

[^149] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^211]:

[^150] Koran, al-Zumar, [^9]:

[^151] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^212]:

[^152] Koran, al-‘Ankabut, [^49]:

[^153] Majjma‘ al-Bayan, vol.7, p.[^288]:

[^154] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^212]:

[^155] Koran, al-Isra’, [^17]:

[^156] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^215]:

[^157] Koran, Fatir, [^32]:

[^158] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^214]:

[^159] Majjma‘ al-Bayan, vol.7, p.[^409]:

[^160] Koran, al-Hijr, [^75]:

[^161] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^219]:

[^162] Koran, al-Jinn, [^16]:

[^163] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^220]:

[^164] Koran, al-Ra‘d, [^43]:

[^165] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^229]:

[^166] Koran, al-Nisa’, [^54]:

[^167] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^206]:

[^168] Koran, al-Hijr, [^29]:

[^169] Tafsir al-Burhan, p.[^55]:

[^170] Koran, Yousif, [^24]:

[^171] Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol.9, p.[^310]:

[^172] Koran, al-An‘am, [^103]:

[^173] The tradition has been ascribed to Imam al-Jawad.

[^174] Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol.13, p.[^51]:

[^175] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^82]:

[^176] Ibid, pp.88-[^89]:

[^177] The great Moslem Philosopher, Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi,

has discussed that objectively in his book

‘al-Shawahid al-Rabawiya’.

[^178] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^92]:

[^179] Ibid.

[^180] Al-Nishu’ wa al-Irtiqa’, p.[^47]:

[^181] Usul al-Kafi, vol.1, p.[^107]:

[^182] Ibid, p.[^123]:

[^183] Ibid, p.[^108]:

[^184] Jami‘ al-Sa‘adat, vol.1, p.[^117]:
