The Fifth Infallible The Third Imam
===================================

Al-Husayn Ibn Ali Sayyidu'sh-Shuhada' (Peace be on him)
-------------------------------------------------------

Name: al-Husayn.  
 Title: Sayyidush-Shuhada'.  
 Agnomen: Abu \`Abdillah.  
 Father's name: Ali Amir al-Mu'minin.  
 Mother's name: Fatimah (daughter of the Holy Prophet).  
 Birth: In Medina on Thursday, 3rd Sha'ban 4 AH.  
 Death: Martyred in Karbala' (Iraq) at the age of 57, on Friday, 10th
Muharram 61 AH and buried there.

In the house of the Holy Prophet, which presented the best image of both
the worlds - the heaven and the earth - a child who benefited humanity
as if he was a Divine Impression reflecting the earth, was born on one
of the nights of the month of Sha\`ban. His father was Imam Ali, the
best model of kindness towards his friends and the bravest against the
enemies of Islam, and his mother was Hadrat Fatimah, the only daughter
and child of the Holy Prophet, who had as universally acknowledged,
inherited the qualities of her father. Imam Husayn, is the third
Apostolic Imam. When the good news of his birth reached the Holy
Prophet, he came to his daughter's house, took the newly-born child in
his arms, recited adhan and iqamah in his right and left ears
respectively, and on the 7th day of his birth, after performing the
rites of aqiqah, named him al-Husayn, in compliance with Allah's
command.

\`Abdullah ibn Abbas relates: "On the very day when Imam Husayn was
born, Allah ordered angel Gabriel to descend and congratulate the Holy
Prophet on His Behalf and on his own. While descending, Gabriel passed
over an island where the angel Futrus had been banished due to his delay
in executing a commission assigned by Allah. He was deprived of his
wings and expelled to the island where he remained for several years
praying and worshipping Allah and asking for His forgiveness.

"When the angel Futrus saw Gabriel, he called out, 'Where are you going,
O Gabriel?' To this he replied, 'Husayn, the grandson of Muhammad is
born, and for this very reason Allah has commanded me to convey His
congratulations to His Apostle.' Thereupon, the angel said, \` Can you
carry me also along with you? May Muhammad recommend my case to Allah.'
Gabriel took the angel along with him, came to the Holy Prophet, offered
congratulations to him on behalf of Allah and himself and referred the
case of the angel to him. The Holy Prophet said to Gabriel, \`Ask the
angel to touch the body of the newly-born child and return to his place
in Heaven.' On doing this, the angle re-obtained his wings instantly and
praising the Holy Prophet and his newly born grandson, ascended towards
the Heaven."

Hasan and Husayn, the two sons of the Holy Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib and
Hadrat Fatimah, our Lady of Light, were respected and revered as the
\`Leaders of the Youths of Paradise' as stated by the Holy Prophet.

The Holy Prophet Muhammad, peace be on him and his progeny, had openly
prophesied that the faith of Islam would be rescued by his second
grandson Husayn, when Yazid, son of Muâ€™awiyah, would endeavour to
destroy it.

Yazid was known for his devilish character and brutish conduct. He was
known as the most licentious of men. The people having known and
understood the character of Yazid, formed a covenant by which Mu'awiyah
could not appoint Yazid as his successor. This undertaking was given by
Mu'awiyah to Imam Hasan from whom Mu'awiyah had snatched power.
Mu'awiyah violated this undertaking and nominated Yazid who succeeded
his father.

Immediately as he came to power, Yazid began acting in full accordance
with his known character. He started interfering in the fundamentals of
the faith and ,practised every vice and wickedness freely with the
highest degree of impunity and yet held himself out as the successor of
the Holy Prophet, demanding allegiance to himself as the leading guide
of the faith. Paying allegiance to Yazid was nothing short of
acknowledging the devil as God. If a divine personality like the Holy
Imam Husayn had agreed to his authority, it would be actually
recommending the devil to humanity in place of God. Yazid demanded
allegiance from the Holy Imam Husayn, who could have never agreed to it
at any cost. The people fearing death and destruction at the hands of
the tyrant had yielded to him out of fear. Imam Husayn said that come
whatever may, he would never yield to the devil in place of God and undo
what his grandfather, the Holy Prophet had established.

The refusal of the Holy Imam to pay allegiance to this fiend, marked the
start of the persecution of the Holy Imam. As a result he had retired to
Medina where he led a secluded life. Even here he was not allowed to
live in peace, and was forced to seek refuge in Mecca where also he was
badly harassed, and Yazid plotted to murder him in the very precincts of
the great sanctuary of Ka'bah.

In order to safeguard the great sanctuary, Imam Husayn decided to leave
Mecca for Kufah just a day before the hajj pilgrimage. When asked the
reason for the mysterious departure from Mecca foregoing the pilgrimage
which was only the next day, Imam Husayn said that he would perform this
year's pilgrimage at Karbala', offering the sacrifice not of any
animals, but of his kith and kin and some faithful friends. He
enumerated the names of his kith and kin who would lay down their lives
with him in the great sacrifice at Karbala'.

The people of Kufah getting tired of the tyrannical and satanic rule of
Yazid, had written innumerable letters and sent emissaries to Imam
Husayn to come over and give them guidance in faith. Although Imam
Husayn knew the ultimate end of the invitations, he as the divinely
chosen Imam could not refuse to give the guidance sought for. When the
Holy Imam with his entourage had reached Karbala', his horse
mysteriously stopped and would not move any further. Upon this the Holy
Imam declared: "This is the land, the land of sufferings and tortures."
He alighted from his horse, and ordered his followers  
 to encamp there saying: "Here shall we be martyred and our children be
killed. Here shall our tents be burned and our family arrested. This is
the land about which my grandfather the Holy Prophet had foretold, and
his prophecy will certainly be fulfilled."

On the 7th of Muharram water supply to the Imam's camp was cut and the
torture of thirst and hunger started. The Holy Imam's camp consisted of
ladies, innocent children including babies and some male members of the
Holy Prophet's family; along with a small band of some faithful friends
of Imam Husayn who had chosen to die with the Holy Imam, fighting
against the devil for the cause of Allah.

The Day of \`Ashura (10th of Muharram):
---------------------------------------

At dawn the Imam glanced over the army of Yazid and saw \`Umar ibn Sa'd
ordering his forces to march towards him. He gathered his followers and
addressed them thus: "Allah has, this day, permitted us to be engaged in
a Holy War and He shall reward us for our martyrdom. So prepare
yourselves to fight against the enemies of Islam with patience and
resistance. O sons of the noble and self-respecting persons, be patient!
Death is nothing but a bridge which you must cross after facing trials
and tribulations so as to reach Heaven and its joys. Which of you do not
like to go from this prison (world) to the lofty palaces (Paradise)?"

Having heard the Imam's address, all his companions were overwhelmed and
cried out, "O our Master! We are all ready to defend you and your
Ahlu'l-bayt, and to sacrifice our lives for the cause of Islam."

Imam Husayn sent out from his camp one after another to fight and
sacrifice their lives in the way of the Lord. Lastly, when all his men
and children had laid down their lives, Imam Husayn brought his
six-month old baby son \`Ali al-Asghar, and offering him on his own
hands, demanded some water for the baby, dying of thirst. The thirst of
the baby was quenched by a deadly poisoned arrow from the brute's
forces, which pinned the baby's neck to the arm of the helpless father.
At last when the six-month old baby also was killed, Imam Husayn
addressed Allah: "O Lord! Thy Husayn has offered in Thy way whatever
Thou hath blessed him with. Bless Thy Husayn, 0 Lord! with the
acceptance of this sacrifice.

Everything Husayn could do till now was through Thy help and by Thy
Grace." Lastly, Imam Husayn came into the field and was killed, the
details of which merciless slaughter are heart rending. The forces of
Yazid having killed Imam Husayn, cut and severed his head from his body
and raised it on a lance. The severed head of the Holy Imam began
glorifying Allah from the point of the lance saying, 'Allahu Akbar'.
"All glory be to Allah Who is the Greatest!"

After the wholesale, merciless and most brutal slaughter of the Holy
Imam with his faithful band, the helpless ladies and children along with
the ailing son of Imam Husayn, Imam \`Ali Zaynu1-\`Abidin, were taken
captives.

Some Sayings of the Holy Prophet During his Lifetime with Reference to Imam Husayn:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Hasan and Husayn are the Leaders of the Youths of Paradise.  
 2. Husayn is from me and I am from Husayn, Allah befriends those who
befriend Husayn and He is the enemy of those who bear enmity to him.  
 3. Whosoever wishes to see such a person who lives on earth but whose
dignity is honoured by the Heaven dwellers, should see my grandson
Husayn.  
 4. O my son! thy flesh is my flesh and thy blood is my blood; thou art
a leader, the son of a leader and the brother of a leader; thou art a
spiritual guide, the son of a spiritual guide and the brother of a
spiritual guide; thou art an Apostolical Imam, the son of an Apostolical
Imam and the brother of an Apostolical Imam; thou art the father of nine
Imams, the ninth of whom would be the Qa'im (the last infallible
spiritual guide).  
 5. The punishment inflicted on the murderer of Husayn in Hell would be
equal to half of the total punishment to be imposed on the entire
sinners of the world.

6. When the Holy Prophet informed Hadrat Fatimah of the martyrdom in
store for his grandson, she burst into tears and asked, "O my father!
when would my son be martyred?" "In such a critical moment," replied the
Holy Prophet, "When neither I nor you, nor \`Ali would be alive." This
accentuated her grief and she inquired again, "Who then, O my father,
would commemorate Husayn's martyrdom? " The Holy Prophet said, "The men
and the women of a particular sect of my followers, who will befriend my
Ahlu'l-bayt, will mourn for Husayn and commemorate his martyrdom each
year in every century."

Ibn Sa'd narrates from ash-Sha'bi:
----------------------------------

Imam Ali, while on his way to Siffin, passed through the desert of
Karbala', there he stopped and wept very bitterly. When interrogated
regarding the cause of his weeping, he commented that one day he visited
the Holy Prophet and found him weeping. When he asked the Apostle of
Allah as to what was the reason which made him weep, he replied, "O Ali,
Gabriel has just been with me and informed me that my son Husayn would
be martyred in Karbala', a place near the bank of the River Euphrates.
This moved me so much that I could not help weeping."

Anas ibn Harith narrates:
-------------------------

One day the Holy Prophet ascended the pulpit to deliver a sermon to his
associates while Imam Husayn and Imam Hasan were sitting before him.
When his address was over, he put his left hand on Imam Husayn and
raising his head towards Heaven, said: "O my Lord! I am Muhammad Thy
slave and Thy Prophet, and these two are the distinguished and pious
members of my family who would fortify my cause after me. O my Lord!
Gabriel has informed me that my son Husayn would be killed. O my Lord!
bless my cause in recompense for Husayn's martyrdom, make him the leader
of the martyrs, be Thou his helper and guardian and do not bless his
murderers."

Sir Muhammad Iqbal says:
------------------------

Imam Husayn uprooted despotism forever till the Day of Resurrection. He
watered the dry garden of freedom with the surging wave of his blood,
and indeed he awakened the sleeping Muslim nation.

If Imam Husayn had aimed at acquiring a worldly empire, he would not
have travelled the way he did (from Medina to Karbala'). Husayn weltered
in blood and dust for the sake of truth. Verily he, therefore, became
the bed-rock (foundation) of the Muslim creed; la ilaha illa Allah
(There is no god but Allah).

Khwaja Mu'inud-Din Chishti says:
--------------------------------

He gave his head, but did not put his hand into the hands of Yazid.
Verily, Husayn is the foundation of la ilaha illa Allah. Husayn is lord
and the lord of lords.

Husayn himself is Islam and the shield of Islam. Though he gave his head
(for Islam) but never pledged Yazid. Truly Husayn is the founder of
"There is no Deity except Allah."

Brown in his A Literary History of Persia writes:
-------------------------------------------------

As a reminder, the blood-stained field of Karbala' where the grandson of
the Apostle of-God fell at length, tortured by thirst and surrounded by
the bodies of his murdered kinsmen, has been at any time since then
sufficient to evoke, even in the most lukewarm and heedless, the deepest
emotion, the most frantic grief and the exaltation of spirit before
which pain, danger, and death shrink to unconsidered trifles. Yearly, on
the tenth day of Muharram, the tragedy is rehearsed in Persia, in India,
in Turkey, in Egypt, wherever a Shi\`ite community or colony exists; . .
. As I write it all comes back; the wailing chant, the sobbing
multitudes, the white raiment red with blood from self-inflicted wounds,
the intoxication of grief and sympathy.

al-Allamah at-Tabataba'i writes:
--------------------------------

Imam Husayn (Sayyidush-Shuhada', "the lord among martyrs"), the second
child of \`Ali and Fatimah, was born in the year 4 AH, and after the
martyrdom of his brother, Imam Hasan Mujtaba, became Imam through Divine
Command and his brother's will. Imam Husayn was Imam for a period of ten
years, all but the last six months coinciding with the caliphate of
Mu'awiyah. Imam Husayn lived under the most difficult outward conditions
of suppression and persecution. This was due to the fact that, first of
all, religious laws and regulations had lost much of their weight and
credit, and the edicts of the Umayyad government had gained complete
authority and power. Secondly, Mu'awiyah and his aides made use of every
possible means to put aside and move out of the way the Household of the
Prophet and the Shi'ah, and thus obliterate the name of Ali and his
family. And above all, Mu'awiyah wanted to strengthen the basis of the
caliphate of his son, Yazid, who because of his lack of principles and
scruples was opposed by a large group of Muslims. Therefore, in order to
quell all opposition, Mu'awiyah had undertaken newer and more severe
measures. By force and necessity Imam Husayn had to endure these days
and to tolerate every kind of mental and spiritual agony and affliction
from Mu'awiyah and his aides - until in the middle of the year 60 AH,
Mu'awiyah died and his son Yazid took his place.

Paying allegiance (bay'ah) was an old Arab practice which was carried
out in important matters such as that of kingship and governorship.
Those who were ruled, and especially the well-known among them, would
give their hand in allegiance, agreement and obedience to their king or
prince and in this way would show their support for his actions.
Disagreement after allegiance was considered as disgrace and dishonour
for a people and, like breaking an agreement after having signed it
officially, it was considered as a definite crime. Following the example
of the Holy Prophet, people believed that allegiance, when given by free
will and not through force, carried authority and weight.

Mu'awiyah had asked the well-known among the people to give their
allegiance to Yazid, but had not imposed this request upon Imam Husayn.
He had especially told Yazid in his last will that if Husayn refused to
pay allegiance he should pass over it in silence and overlook the
matter, for he had understood correctly the disastrous consequences
which would follow if the issue were to be pressed. But because of his
egoism and recklessness, Yazid neglected his father's advice and
immediately after the death of his father ordered the governor of Medina
either to force a pledge of allegiance from Imam Husayn or send his head
to Damascus.

After the governor of Medina informed Imam Husayn of this demand, the
Imam, in order to think over the question, asked for a delay and
overnight started with his family toward Mecca. He sought refuge in the
sanctuary of God which in Islam is the official place of refuge and
security. This event occurred toward the end of the month of Rajab and
the beginning of Sha'ban of 60 AH.

For nearly four months Imam Husayn stayed in Mecca in refuge. This news
spread throughout the Islamic world. On the one hand many people who
were tired of the iniquities of Muâ€™awiyaâ€™s rule and were even more
dissatisfied when Yazid became caliph, corresponded with Imam Husayn and
expressed their sympathy for him. On the other hand, a flood of letters
began to flow, especially from Iraq and particularly the city of Kufah,
inviting the Imam to go to Iraq and accept the leadership of the
populace there with the aim of beginning an uprising to overcome
injustice and iniquity. Naturally, such a situation was dangerous for
Yazid.

The stay of Imam Husayn in Mecca continued until the season for
pilgrimage when Muslims from all over the world poured in groups into
Mecca in order to perform the rites of the hajj. The Imam discovered
that some of the followers of Yazid had entered Mecca as pilgrims
(hajjis) with the mission to kill the Imam during the rites of hajj with
the arms they carried under their special pilgrimage dress (ihram).

The Imam shortened the pilgrimage rites and decided to leave. Amidst the
vast crowd of people he stood up in a short speech announced that he was
setting out for Iraq. In this short speech he also declared that he
would be martyred and asked Muslims to help him in attaining the goal he
had in view and to offer their lives in the path of God. On the next day
he set out with his family and a group of his companions for Iraq.

Imam Husayn was determined not to give his allegiance to Yazid and knew
full well that he would be killed. He was aware that his death was
inevitable in the face of the awesome military power of the Umayyads,
supported as it was by corruption in certain sectors, spiritual decline,
and lack of will power among the people, especially in Iraq.

Some of the outstanding people of Mecca stood in the way of Imam Husayn
and warned him of the danger of the move he was making. But he answered
that he refused to pay allegiance and give his approval to a government
of injustice and tyranny. He added that he knew that wherever he turned
or went he would be killed. He would leave Mecca in order to preserve
the respect for the House of God and not allow this respect to be
destroyed by having his blood spilled there.

While on the way to Kufah and still a few days journey away from the
city, he received news that the agent of Yazid in Kufah had put to death
the representative of the Imam in that city and also one of the Imam's
determined supporters who was a well-known man in Kufah. Their feet had
been tied and they had been dragged through the streets. The city and
its surroundings were placed under strict observation and countless
soldiers of the enemy were awaiting him. There was no way open to him
but to march ahead and to face death. It was here that the Imam
expressed his definitive determination to go ahead and be martyred; and
so he continued on his journey.

Approximately seventy kilometres from Kufah in a desert named Karbala',
the Imam and his entourage were surrounded by the army of Yazid. For
eight days they stayed in this spot during which the circle narrowed and
the number of the enemy's army increased. Finally the Imam, with his
Household and a small number of companions were encircled by an army of
thirty thousand soldiers. During these days the Imam fortified his
position and made a final selection of his companions. At night he
called his companions and during a short speech stated that there was
nothing ahead but death and martyrdom. He added that since the enemy was
concerned only with his person he would free them from all obligations
so that anyone who wished could escape in the darkness of the night and
save his life. Then he ordered the lights to be turned out and most of
his companions, who had joined him for their own advantage, dispersed.
Only a handful of those who loved the truth about forty of his close
aides and some of the Banu Hashim remained.

Once again the Imam assembled those who were left and put them to a
test. He addressed his companions and Hashimite relatives, saying again
that the enemy was concerned only with his person. Each could benefit
from the darkness of the night and escape the danger. But this time the
faithful companions of the Imam answered each in his own way that they
would not deviate for a moment from the path of truth of which the Imam
was the leader and would never leave him alone. They said they would
defend his Household to the last drop of their blood and as long as they
could carry a sword.

On the ninth day of the month the last challenge to choose between
"allegiance and war" was made by the enemy to the Imam. The Imam asked
for a delay in order to worship overnight and became determined to enter
battle on the next day.

On the tenth day of Muharram of the year 61 (680) the Imam lined up
before the enemy with his small band of followers, less than ninety
persons consisting of forty of his companions, thirty some members of
the army of the enemy that joined him during the night and day of war,
and his Hashimite family of children, brothers, nephews, nieces and
cousins. That day they fought from morning until their final breath, and
the Imam, the young Hashimite and the companions were all martyred.
Among those killed were two children of Imam Hasan, who were only
thirteen and eleven years old; and a five-year-old child and a suckling
baby of Imam Husayn.

The army of the enemy, after ending the war, plundered the haram of the
Imam and burned his tents. They decapitated the bodies of the martyrs,
denuded them and threw them to the ground without burial. Then they
moved the members of the haram, all of whom were helpless women and
girls, along with the heads of the martyrs, to Kufah. Among the
prisoners there were three male members: a twenty-two years old son of
Imam Husayn who was very ill and unable to move, namely, \`Ali ibn
al-Husayn, the fourth Imam; his four years old son, Muhammad ibn Ali,
who became the fifth Imam; and finally Hasan al-Muthanna, the son of the
second Imam who was also the son-in-law of Imam Husayn and who, having
been wounded during the war, lay among the dead. They found him near
death and through the intercession of one of the generals did not cut
off his head. Rather, they took him with the prisoners to Kufah and from
there to Damascus before Yazid.

The event of Karbala', the capture of the women and children of the
Household of the Prophet, their being taken as prisoners from town to
town and the speeches made by the daughter of \`Ali, Zaynab, and the
fourth Imam who were among the prisoners, disgraced the Umayyads. Such
abuse of the Household of the Prophet annulled the propaganda which
Mu'awiyah had carried out for years. The matter reached such proportions
that Yazid in public disowned and condemned the actions of his agents.
The event of Karbala' was a major factor in the overthrow of Umayyad's
rule although its effect was delayed. It also strengthened the roots of
Shi'ism. Among its immediate results were the revolts and rebellions
combined with bloody wars which continued for twelve years. Among those
who were instrumental in the death of the Imam not one was able to
escape revenge and punishment.

Anyone who studies closely the history of the life of Imam Husayn and
Yazid and the conditions that prevailed at that time, and analyses this
chapter of Islamic history, will have no doubt that in those
circumstances there was no choice before Imam Husayn but to be killed.
Swearing allegiance to Yazid would have meant publicly showing contempt
for Islam, something which was not possible for the Imam, for Yazid not
only showed no respect for Islam and its injunction but also made a
public demonstration of impudently treading under foot its basis and its
laws. Those before him, even if they opposed religious injunctions,
always did so in the guise of religion, and at least formally respected
religion. They took pride in being companions of the Holy Prophet and
the other religious figures in whom people believed. From this it can be
concluded that the claim of some interpreters of these events is false
when they say that the two brothers, Hasan and Husayn, had two different
tastes and that one chose the way of peace and the other the way of war,
so that one brother made peace with Mu'awiyah although he had an army of
forty thousand while the other went to war against Yazid with an army of
forty. For we see that this same Imam Husayn, who refused to pay
allegiance to Yazid for one day, lived for ten years under the rule of
Mu'awiyah, in the same manner as his brother who also had endured for
ten years under Mu'awiyah, without opposing him.

It must be said in truth that if Imam Hasan or Imam Husayn had fought
Mu'awiyah they would have been killed without there being the least
benefit for Islam. Their deaths would have had no effect before the
righteous appearing policy of Mu'awiyah, a competent politician who
emphasized his being a companion of the Holy Prophet, the "scribe of the
revelation," and "uncle of the faithful" and who used every stratagem
possible to preserve a religious guise for his rule. Moreover, with his
ability to set the stage to accomplish his desires he could have had
them killed by their own people and then assumed a state of mourning and
sought to revenge their blood, just as he sought to give the impression
that he was avenging the killing of the third caliph. (Shi\`ite Islam)

al-Imam al-Husayn ibn \`Ali, peace be on him, said:
---------------------------------------------------

\* Beware of your apologies; for a true believer does not sin and does
not have to apologize, whereas the hypocrite commits sins everyday and
apologizes everyday.  
 \* When other people turn to you in need, consider it a favour of
Allah. Do not be wearied of this favour, or it will move on to someone
else.  
 \* Experience enhances the intellect.

\*\*\*\*\*


