The Sixth Infallible The Fourth Imam
====================================

Ali Ibn Al-Husayn Zaynu'l-\`Abidin (Peace be on him)
----------------------------------------------------

Name: Ali.  
 Title: Zaynu’l-’Abidin.  
 Agnomen: Abu Muhammad.  
 Father's name: al-Husayn Sayyidu'sh-Shuhada'.  
 Mother's name: Shahr Banu, daughter of Yazdeger III, the King of
Persia.  
 Birth: In Medina, on Saturday, 15th Jumadi '1-ula 36 AH.  
 Death: Died at the age of 58, in Medina; poisoned by al-Walid ibn
\`Abdi'1-Malik ibn Marwan on 25th Muharram 95 AH; buried in Jannatu
'1-Baqi', in Medina.

The Holy Imam \`Ali Zaynu'1-Abidin is the Fourth Apostolic Imam. His
epithet was Abu Muhammad and was popularly titled as "Zaynu'1-Abidin".
The mother of this Holy Imam was the royal personage, Shahr Banu, the
daughter of King Yazdeger, the last pre-Islamic Ruler of Persia.

Imam Zaynu'1-\`Abidin spent the first two years of his infancy in the
lap of his grandfather \`Ali ibn Abi Talib and then for twelve years he
had the gracious patronage of his uncle, the second Holy Imam al-Hasan
ibn \`Ali. In 61 AH, he was present in Karbala', at the time of the
gruesome tragedy of the wholesale massacre of his father, his uncles,
his brothers, his cousins and all the godly comrades of his father; and
suffered a heartless captivity and imprisonment at the hands of the
devilish forces of Yazid.

When Imam Husayn had come for the last time to his camp to bid goodbye
to his family, \`Ali Zaynu'l-\`Abidin was lying semi- conscious in his
sickbed and hence he escaped the massacre in Karbala'. Imam Husayn could
only manage a very brief talk with the inmates of his camp and departed
nominating his sick son as Imam.

The Holy Imam Zaynu’l-’Abidin lived for about thirty-four years after
his father and all his life he passed in prayers and supplication to
Allah and in remembrance of his martyred father. It is for his ever
being in prayers to A11ah, mostly lying in prayerful prostration, that
this Holy Imam was popularly called "Sajjad".

The knowledge and piety of this Holy Imam was matchless. az-Zuhri,
al-Waqidi and Ibn \`Uyaynah say that they could not find any one equal
to him in piety and godliness. He was so mindful of Allah that whenever
he sat for ablution for prayers, the complexion of his face would change
and when he stood at prayer his body was seen trembling. When asked why
this was, he replied, "Know ye not before whom I stand in prayer, and
with whom I hold discourse?"

Even on the gruesome day of Ashura when Yazid's forces had massacred his
father, his kith and kin and his comrades and had set fire to the camp,
this Holy Imam was engrossed in his supplications to the Lord.

When the brutal forces of Yazid's army had taken the ladies and children
as captives, carrying them seated on the bare back of the camels, tied
in ropes; this Holy Imam, though sick, was put in heavy chains with iron
rings round his neck and his ankles, and was made to walk barefooted on
the thorny plains from Karbala' to Kufah and to Damascus; and even then
this godly soul never was unmindful of his prayers to the Lord and was
always thankful and supplicated to Him.

His charity was unassuming and hidden. After his passing away, the
people said that hidden charity ended with the departure of this Holy
Imam. Like his grandfather Ali ibn Abi Talib, Ali Zaynu’l-’Abidin used
to carry on his own back at night bags of flour and bread for the poor
and needy families in Medina and he so maintained hundred of poor
families in the city.

The Holy Imam was not only hospitable even to his enemies but also used
to continually exhort them to the right path.

Imam Zaynu'l-\`Abidin along with the Ahlu'l-bayt passed through dreadful
and very dangerous times, for the aggressions and atrocities of the
tyrant rulers of the age had reached a climax. There was plunder,
pillage, and murder everywhere. The teachings of Islam were observed
more in their breach. The heartless tyrant al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf
ath-Thagafi was threatening everyone who professed allegiance or
devotion to the Ahlu'l-bayt; and those caught were mercilessly put to
death. The movement of the Holy Imam was strictly restricted and his
meeting with any person was totally banned. Spies were employed to trace
out the adherents of the Ahlu'1-bayt. Practically every house was
searched and every family scrutinized.

Imam Zaynu’l-’Abidin was not given the time to offer his prayers
peacefully, nor could he deliver any sermons. This God's Vicegerent on
earth therefore, adopted a third course which proved to be very
beneficial to his followers. This was in compiling supplication prayers
for the daily use of man in his endeavour to approach the Almighty Lord.

The invaluable collection of his edited prayers are known as as-Sahifah
al-Kamilah or as-Sahifah as-Sajjaddiyyah; it is known also as az-Zabur
(Psalm) of Aal Muhammad. The collection is an invaluable treasury of
wonderfully effective supplications to the Lord in inimitably beautiful
language. Only those who have ever come across those supplications would
know the excellence and the beneficial effect of these prayers. Through
these prayers the Imam gave all the necessary guidance to the faithful
during his seclusion.

On the 25th of Muharram 95 AH when he was in Medina, al-Walid ibn
Abdil-Malik ibn Marwan, the then ruler got this Holy Imam martyred by
poison. The funeral prayers for this Holy Imam were conducted by his son
the Fifth Imam, Muhammad al-Baqir and his body was laid to rest in the
cemetery of Jannatu '1-Bagi ' in Medina.

al-\`Allamah at-Tabataba'i writes:
----------------------------------

Imam Sajjad (Ali ibn al-Husayn entitled Zaynu’l-’Abidin and Sajjad) was
the son of the Third Imam and his wife, the queen among women, the
daughter of Yazdegerd the King of Iran. He was the only son of Imam
Husayn to survive, for his other three brothers \`Ali Akbar, aged
twenty-five, five-year-old Ja'far and \`Ali al-Asghar (or Abdullah) who
was a suckling baby were martyred during the event of Karbala'. The Imam
had also accompanied his father on the journey that terminated fatally
in Karbala', but because of severe illness and the inability to carry
arms or participate in fighting he was prevented from taking part in the
holy war and being martyred. So he was sent with the womenfolk to
Damascus. After spending a period in imprisonment he was sent with
honour to Medina because Yazid wanted to conciliate public opinion. But
for a second time, by the order of the Umayyad caliph, \`Abdul-Malik, he
was chained and sent from Medina to Damascus and then again returned to
Medina.

The Fourth Imam, upon returning to Medina, retired from public life
completely, closed the door of his house to strangers and spent his time
in worship. He was in contact only with the elite among the Shiites such
as Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali, Abu Khalid Kabuli and the like. The elite
disseminated among the Shi'ah the religious sciences they learned from
the Imam. In this way Shi'ism spread considerably and showed its effects
during the Imamate of the Fifth Imam. Among the works of the Fourth Imam
is a book called Sahifah Sajjadiyyah. It consists of fifty-seven prayers
concerning the most sublime Divine sciences and is known as "The Psalm
of the Household of the Prophet."

The Fourth Imam died (according to some Shiite traditions poisoned by
al-Walid ibn \`Abdil-Malik ibn Marwan through the instigation of the
Umayyad caliph Hisham) in 95/712 after thirty-five years of Imamate.

al-Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be on him, said:
---------------------------------------------------

\* Refrain from lying in all things, big or small, in seriousness or in
jest. For when one starts lying in petty matters, soon he will have the
audacity to lie in important matters (also).

\* A man need not fear Allah except on account of his own sins, and
should place his hopes only with his Lord. When about something one does
not know, one should not be ashamed of having to learn about it. And
patience is to faith what the head is to the body; one who does not have
patience also lacks faith.


