The Eighth Infallible The Sixth Imam
====================================

Ja\`far Ibn Muhammad As-Sadiq (Peace be on him)
-----------------------------------------------

Name: Ja'far.  
 Title: as-Sadiq.  
 Agnomen: Abu Abdillah.  
 Father's name: Muhammad al-Baqir.  
 Mother's name: Umm Farwah.  
 Birth: In Medina, on Monday, 17th Rabi’ul-awwal 83A.H.  
 Death: Died at the age of 65, in Medina on Monday, 25th Shawwal 148 AH;
poisoned by al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi, the \`Abbasid caliph.

The Holy Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq was the sixth in the succession of the
twelve Apostolic Imams. His epithet was Abu \`Abdillah and his famous
titles were as-Sadiq, al-Fadil and at-Tahir. He was the son of Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir, the Fifth Imam, and his mother was the daughter of
al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr.

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq was brought up by his grandfather, Imam
Zaynu'1-Abidin in Medina for twelve years and then remained under the
sacred patronage of his father Imam Muhammad al-Baqir for a period of
nineteen years.

Imamate:
--------

After the death of his holy father in 114 AH, he succeeded him as the
Sixth Imam, and thus the sacred trust of Islamic mission and spiritual
guidance was relayed down to his custody right from the Holy Prophet
through the succession of the preceding Imams.

Political Condition:
--------------------

The period of his Imamate coincided with the most revolutionary and
eventful era of Islamic history which saw the downfall of the Umayyad
Empire and the rise of the Abbasid caliphate. The internal wars and
political upheavals were bringing about speedy re-shufflements in
government. Thus, the Holy Imam witnessed the reigns of various kings
starting from \`Abdu '1-Malik down to the Umayyad ruler Marwan al-Himar.
He further survived till the time of Abu 'l- Abbas as-Saffah and
al-Mansur among the \`Abbasids. It was due to the political strife
between two groups viz., the Umayyads and \`Abbasids for power that Imam
was left alone undisturbed to carry out his devotional duties and
peacefully carry on his mission to propagate Islam and spreading the
teachings of the Holy Prophet.

In the last days of the Umayyad rule, their Empire was tottering and was
on the verge of collapse, and a most chaotic and demoralized state of
affairs prevailed throughout the Islamic State. The \`Abbasids exploited
such an opportunity and availing themselves of this political
instability, assumed the title of "Avengers of Banu Hashim". They
pretended to have stood for the cause of taking revenge on the Umayyads
for shedding the innocent blood of the Holy Imam Husayn.

The common people who were groaning under the yoke of the Umayyads were
fed up with their atrocities and were secretly yearning for the progeny
of the Holy Prophet to take power. They realized that if the leadership
went to the Ahlu'l-bayt, who were its legitimate heir, the prestige of
Islam would be enhanced and the Prophet's mission would be genuinely
propagated. However, a group of the Abbasids secretly dedicated their
lives to a campaign for seizing power from the hands of the Umayyads on
the pretext that they were seizing it only to surrender it to the Banu
Hashim. Actually, they were plotting for their own ends. The common
people were thus deceived into supporting them and when these \`Abbasids
did succeed in snatching the power from the Umayyads, they turned
against the Ahlu'l-bayt.

Religious Condition:
--------------------

The downfall of the Umayyads and the rise of the \`Abbasids constituted
the two principal plots in the drama of Islamic history. This was a most
chaotic and revolutionary period when the religious morals of Islam had
gone down and the teachings of the Holy Prophet were being neglected,
and a state of anarchy was rampant. It was amidst such deadly gloom that
the virtuous personage of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq stood like a beacon of
light shedding its lustre to illuminate the ocean of sinful darkness
around. The world got inclined towards his virtuous and admirable
personality. Abu Salamah al-Khallal also offered him the throne of the
caliphate. But the Imam keeping up the characteristic tradition of his
ancestors flatly declined to accept it, and preferred to content himself
with his devotional pursuits and service to Islam. On account of his
many debates with the priests of rival orders like Atheists, Christians,
Jews, etc.

Teachings:
----------

The versatile genius of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq in all branches of
knowledge was acclaimed throughout the Islamic world, which attracted
students from far-off places towards him till the strength of his
disciples had reached four thousand. The scholars and experts in Divine
Law have quoted many ahadith (traditions) from Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq. His
disciples compiled hundred of books on various branches of science and
arts. Other than fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence), hadith (tradition),
tafsir (exegesis of the Holy Qur'an), etc., the Holy Imam also imparted
mathematics and chemistry to some of his disciples. Jabir ibn Hayyan
at-Tusi, a famous scholar of mathematics, was one of the Imam's
disciples who benefited from the \\Imam's knowledge and guidance and was
able to write four hundred books on different subjects.

It is an undeniable historical truth that all the great scholars of
Islam were indebted for their learning to the very presence of the
Ahlu'l-bayt who were the fountain of knowledge and learning for all.

al- Allamah ash-Shibli writes in his book Siratu'n-Nu\`man: "Abu Hanifah
remained for a considerable period in the attendance of Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq, acquiring from him a great deal of precious research on fiqh
and hadith. Both the sects -Shi'ah and Sunni - believe that the source
of Abu Hanifah's knowledge was mostly derived from his association with
Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq."

The Imam devoted his whole life to the cause of religious preaching and
propagation of the teachings of the Holy Prophet and never strove for
power. Because of his great knowledge and fine teaching, the people
gathered around him, giving devotion and respect that was his due. This
excited the envy of the Abbasid ruler al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi, who fearing
the popularity of the Imam, decided to do away with him.

al-\`Allamah at-Tabataba'i writes:
----------------------------------

Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad, the son of the Fifth Imam, was born in 83/702.
He died in 148/765 according to Shiite tradition, poisoned and martyred
through the intrigue of the Abbasid caliph al-Mansur. After the death of
his father he became Imam by Divine Command and decree of those who came
before him.

During the Imamate of the Sixth Imam greater possibilities and a more
favourable climate existed for him to propagate religious teachings.
This came about as a result of revolts in Islamic lands, especially the
uprising of the Muswaddah to overthrow the Umayyad caliphate, and the
bloody wars which finally led to the fall and extinction of the
Umayyads. The greater opportunities for Shiite teachings were also a
result of the favourable ground the Fifth Imam had prepared during the
twenty years of his Imamate through the propagation of the true
teachings of Islam and the sciences of the Household of the Prophet.

The Imam took advantage of the occasion to propagate the religious
sciences until the very end of his Imamate, which was contemporary with
the end of the Umayyad and beginning of the Abbasid caliphates. He
instructed many scholars in different fields of the intellectual and
transmitted sciences, such as Zurarah ibn A'yan, Muhammad ibn Muslim,
Muminu 't-Taq, Hisham ibn al-Hakam, Aban ibn Taghlib, Hisham ibn Salim,
Hurayz, Hisham al-Kalbi an-Nassabah and Jabir ibn Hayyan (the
alchemist). Even some important Sunni scholars such as Sufyan
ath-Thawri, Abu Hanifah, the founder of the Hanafi school of law,
al-Qadi as-Sukuni, al-Qadi Abu '1-Bakhtari, and  
 others, had the honour of being his students. It is said that his
classes and sessions of instructions produced four thousand scholars of
hadith and other sciences. The number of traditions preserved from the
Fifth and Sixth Imams is more than all the hadith that have been
recorded from the Prophet and the other ten Imams combined.

But toward the end of his life the Imam was subjected to severe
restrictions placed upon him by the \`Abbasid \\caliph al-Mansur, who
ordered such torture and merciless killing of many of the descendants of
the Prophet who were Shi\`ite that his actions even surpassed the
cruelty and heedlessness of the Umayyads. At his order they were
arrested in groups, some thrown into deep and dark prisons and tortured
until they died, while others were beheaded or buried alive or placed at
the base of or between walls of buildings, and walls were constructed
over them.

Hisham, the Umayyad caliph, had ordered the Sixth Imam to be arrested
and brought to Damascus. Later, the Imam was arrested by as-Saffah, the
Abbasid caliph, and brought to Iraq. Finally, al-Mansur had him arrested
again and brought to Samarrah where he had the Imam kept under
supervision, was in every way harsh and discourteous to him, and several
times thought of killing him. Eventually the Imam was allowed to return
to Medina where he spent the rest of his life in hiding, until he was
poisoned and martyred through the intrigue of al-Mansur.

Upon hearing the news of the Imam's martyrdom, al-Mansur wrote to the
governor of Medina instructing him to go to the house of the Imam on the
pretext of expressing his condolences to the family, to ask for the
Imam's will and testament and read it. Whoever was chosen by the Imam as
his inheritor and successor should be beheaded on the spot. Of course,
the aim of al-Mansur was to put an end to the whole question of the
Imamate and to Shi’ite aspirations. When the governor of Medina,
following orders, read the last will and testament, he saw that the Imam
had chosen four people rather than one to administer his last will and
testament: the caliph himself, the governor of Medina, \`Abdullah Aftah,
the Imam's older son, and Musa, his younger son. In this way the plot of
al-Mansur failed. (Shi\`ite Islam)

Death:
------

On 25th Shawwal 148 AH, the governor of Medina by the order of
al-Mansur, got the Imam martyred through poison. The funeral prayer was
conducted by his son Imam Musa al-Kazim, the Seventh Imam, and his body
was laid to rest in the cemetery of Jannatu 'l-Baqi'.

al-Imam as-Sadiq, peace be on him, said:
----------------------------------------

\* One who has these five characteristics is the choicest of men: one
who feels joyous when he does something good; one who repents when he
does something bad; one who is grateful when he receives something from
Allah; one who patiently endures Allah's trials; one who forgives when
he is done some injustice or wrong. closer to Allah: forgiving one who
has wronged him; being generous to one who had deprived him; being kind
to a kinsman who has not observed his rights of kinship.

\* The true believer does not transgress the limits of fairness in a fit
of anger; he does not do anything unjustifiable for the sake of favour
to some; neither does he take more than his due share, though he may
have the power.


