The Ninth Infallible The Seventh Imam
=====================================

Musa Ibn Ja'far Al-Kazim (Peace be on him)
------------------------------------------

Name: Musa.  
 Title: al-Kazim.  
 Agnomen: Abu Ibrahim.  
 Father's name: Ja'far as-Sadiq.  
 Mother's name: Hamidah al-Barbariyyah.  
 Birth: In Abwa' (between Mecca and Medina) on Sunday,7th Safar 128
AH.  
 Death: Died at the age of 55, in Baghdad, on 25th Rajab 183 AH;
poisoned by Harun ar-Rashid; buried in al-Kazimiyyah, Baghdad.

The Holy Imam Musa al-Kazim is the Seventh Apostolic Imam. His epithet
was Abu 'l-Hasan and his famous title was al-Kazim. His matchless
devotion and worship of God has also earned him the title of "
al-'Abdu's-Salih" (virtuous slave of God). Generosity was synonymous
with his name and no beggar ever returned from his door empty handed.
Even after his death, he continued to be obliging and was generous to
his devotees who came to his holy tomb with prayers and behests which
were invariably granted by God. Thus, one of his additional titles is
also "Babu'l-Hawaij" (the door to fulfilling needs).

Parents:
--------

The Holy Imam Musa al-Kazim was the son of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, the
Sixth Imam. The name of his mother was Hamidah, the daughter of a noble
man hailing from the States of Barbary.

Childhood:
----------

Imam Musa al-Kazim passed twenty years of his sacred life under the
gracious patronage of his holy father. His inherent genius and gifted
virtues combined with the enlightened guidance and education from the
Holy Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, showed in the manifestation of his future
personality. He was fully versed with the Divine Knowledge even in his
childhood.

al-\`Allamah al-Majlisi relates that once Abu Hanifah happened to call
upon the holy abode of Imam Ja'far as-\\Sadiq to ask him about some
religious matters (masa'il). The Imam was asleep and so he kept waiting
outside till the Imam's awakening. Meanwhile, Imam Musa al-Kazim, who
was then five years old, came out of his house. Abu Hanifah, after
offering him his best compliments, enquired:

"O the son of the Holy Prophet! what is your opinion about the deeds of
a man? Does he do them by himself or does God make him do them?"

"O Abu Hanifah", the five years old Imam replied at once, in the typical
tone of his ancestors, "the doings of a man are confined to three
possibilities. First, that God alone does them while the man is quite
helpless. Second, that both God and the man do equally share the
commitment. Third, that man does them alone. Now, if the first
assumption is true, it obviously proves the unjustness of God who
punishes His creatures for sins which they have not committed. And if
the second condition be acceptable, even then God becomes unjust if He
punishes the man for the crimes in which He is equally a partner. But
the undesirability of both these conditions is evident in the case of
God. Thus, we are naturally left with the third alternative to the
problem that men are absolutely responsible for their own doings."

Imamate:
--------

The Holy Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq breathed his last on 25th Shawwal 148 AH,
and with effect from the same date Imam Musa al-Kazim succeeded the holy
office of Imamate as the Seventh Imam. The period of his Imamate
continued for thirty-five years. In the first decade of his Imamate,
Imam Musa al-Kazim could afford a peaceful execution of the
responsibilities of his sacred office and carried on the propagation of
the teachings of the Holy Prophet. But soon after, fell victim to the
ruling kings and a greater part of his life passed in prison.

Political Condition:
--------------------

Imam Musa al-Kazim lived under the most crucial times in the regimes of
the despotic \`Abbasid kings who were marked for their tyrannical and
cruel administration. He witnessed the reigns of al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi,
al-Mahdi and Harun ar-Rashid. al-Mansur and Harun ar-Rashid were the
despotic kings who put a multitude of innocent descendants of the Holy
Prophet to the sword. Thousands of these martyrs were buried alive
inside walls or put into horrible dark prisons during their lifetime.
These depraved caliphs knew no pity or justice and they killed and
tortured for the pleasure they derived from human sufferings.

The Holy Imam was saved from the tyranny of al-Mansur because the king,
being occupied with his project of constructing the new city of Baghdad,
could not get time to turn towards victimizing the Imam. By 157 AH the
city of Baghdad was built. This was soon followed by the death of its
founder a year later. After al-Mansur, his son al-Mahdi ascended the
throne. For a few years he remained indifferent towards the Imam. When
in 164 AH he came to Medina and heard about the great reputation of the
Imam, he could not resist his jealousy and the spark of his ancestral
malice against the Ahlu'l-bayt was rekindled. He somehow managed to take
the Imam along with him to Baghdad and got him imprisoned there. But
after a year he realized his mistake and released the Imam from jail.
al-Mahdi was succeeded by al-Hadi who lived only for a year. Now, in 170
AH, the most cruel and tyrannical king Harun ar-Rashid appeared at the
head of the \`Abbasid Empire. It was during his reign that the Holy Imam
passed the greater part of his life in a miserable prison till he was
poisoned.

Moral and Ethical Excellence:
-----------------------------

As regards his morality and ethical excellence, Ibn Hajar al-Haytami
remarks: "The patience and forbearance of Imam Musa al-Kazim was such
that he was given the title of \`al-Kazim' (one who swallows down his
anger). He was the embodiment of virtue and generosity. He devoted his
nights to the prayers of God and his days to fasting. He always forgave
those who did wrong to him."

His kind and generous attitude towards the people was such that he used
to patronize and help the poor and destitute of Medina and provide for
them cash, food, clothes and other necessities of sustenance secretly.
It continued to be a riddle for the receivers of gifts throughout the
Imam's lifetime as to who their benefactor was, but the secret was not
revealed until after his death.

Literary Attainments:
---------------------

Time and circumstances did not permit the Holy Imam Musa al-Kazim to
establish institutions to impart religious knowledge to his followers as
his father, Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq and his grandfather, Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir had done. He was never allowed to address a congregation. He
carried on his mission of preaching and guiding people quietly.

Death:
------

In 179 AH, Harun ar-Rashid visited Medina. The fire of malice and
jealousy against the Ahlu'l-bayt was kindled in his heart when he saw
the great influence and popularity which the Holy Imam enjoyed amongst
the people there. He got the Imam arrested while he was busy in prayer
at the tomb of the Holy Prophet and kept him in prison in Baghdad for a
period of about four years. On the 25th Rajab 183 AH, he got the Imam
martyred by poison. Even his corpse was not spared humiliation and was
taken out of the prison and left on the Bridge of Baghdad. His devotees,
however, managed to lay the holy body of the Imam to rest in
al-Kazimiyyah (Iraq).

al-Imam al-Kazim, peace be on him, said:
----------------------------------------

\* No charity is superior to giving a helping hand to the weak.

\* Never bother to learn something not knowing which does not do you any
harm, and never neglect to learn something whose negligence will
increase your ignorance.


