The Eleventh Infallible The Ninth Imam
======================================

Muhammad Ibn Ali Al-Jawad (At-Taqi) (Peace be on him)
-----------------------------------------------------

Name: Muhammad.  
 Title: al-Jawad or at-Taqi.  
 Agnomen: Abu Ja'far.  
 Father's name: \`Ali ar-Rida.  
 Mother's name: Sabikah (or Khayzuran).  
 Birth: In Medina, on Friday, 10th Rajab 195 AH.  
 Death: Died at the age of 25, in al-Kazimiyyah on Wednesday, 29th
Dhu’l-qi’dah 220 AH, poisoned by Mu'tasim, the \`Abbasid caliph; buried
in al-Kazimiyyah, Baghdad.

Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (or at-Taqi) is the Ninth Apostolic Imam. His
epithet was Abu Ja'far and his famous titles were al-Jawad and at-Taqi.
Since Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, the Fifth Imam was called Abu Ja'far,
historians have mentioned this Imam as Abu Ja'far the Second.

Childhood:
----------

Imam Muhammad al-Jawad was brought up by his Holy father Imam \`Ali
ar-Rida for four years. Under the force of circumstances Imam \`Ali
ar-Rida had to migrate from Medina to Khurasan (Iran), leaving his young
son behind him. The Imam was fully aware of the treacherous character of
the ruling king and was sure that he would return to Medina no more. So
before his departure from Medina he declared his son Muhammad al-Jawad
as his successor, and imparted to him . all his stores of Divine
knowledge and spiritual genius.

Imamate:
--------

Imam \`Ali ar-Rida was poisoned on 17th Safar 203 AH and with effect
from the same date Imam Muhammad al-Jawad was commissioned by Allah to
hold the responsibility of Imamate. At the tender age of eight there was
no apparent chance or means of the young Imam reaching great heights of
knowledge and practical achievements. But after a few days he is known
not only to have debated with his contemporary scholars on subjects
pertaining to fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence), hadith (tradition), tafsir
(Qur'anic exegesis), etc. and outwitted them, but also to exhort their
admiration and acknowledgment of his learning and superiority. Right
from then the world realized that he possessed Divine knowledge and that
the knowledge commanded by the Holy Imam was not acquired, but granted
by Allah.

Literary Attainments and Excellence:
------------------------------------

The span of the life of Imam Muhammad al-Jawad was shorter than that of
his predecessors as well as his successors. He became Imam at the age of
eight years and was poisoned at the age of twenty-five; yet his literary
attainments were many and he commanded great respect and esteem.

The Holy Imam al-Jawad was the symbol of Prophet Muhammad's affability
and Imam \`Ali's attainments. His hereditary qualities comprised of
gallantry, boldness, charity, learning, forgiveness and tolerance. The
brightest and most outstanding phases of his nature and character were
to show hospitality and courtesy to all without discrimination, to help
the needy; to observe equality under all circumstances, to live a simple
life; to help the orphans, the poor and the homeless; to impart learning
to those interested in the acquisition of knowledge and guide the people
to the right path.

Migration to Iraq:
------------------

For the consolidation of his empire, it was realized by al-Ma'mun, the
\`Abbasid king, that it was necessary to win the sympathy and support of
the Iranians who had always been friendly to the Ahlu'l-bayt.
Consequently, al-Ma'mun was forced, from a political point of view, to
establish contacts with the tribe of Banu Fatimah at the expense of the
ties with Banu Abbas and thereby win the favour of the Shi'ah.
Accordingly, he declared Imam \`Ali ar-Rida as his heir even against the
Imam's will and got his sister Umm Habibah married to him. al-Ma'mun
expected that Imam Ali ar-Rida would lend him his  
 support in political affairs of the State. But when he discovered that
the Imam was little interested in political matters and that the masses
were more and more submitting themselves to him due to his spiritual
greatness, he got him poisoned. Yet the exigency which directed him to
nominate Imam \`Ali ar-Rida as his heir and successor still continued.
Hence he desired to marry his daughter Ummu'l-Fadl to Muhammad al-Jawad,
the son of Imam \`Ali ar-Rida and with this object in view, he summoned
the Imam from Medina to Iraq.

The Banu \`Abbas were extremely disconcerted when they came to know that
al-Ma'mun was planning to marry his daughter to Imam Muhammad al-Jawad.
A delegation of some leading persons waited on him in order to dissuade
him from his intention. But al-Ma'mun continued to admire the learning
and excellence of the Imam. He would say that though Imam Muhammad
al-Jawad was still young, yet he was a true successor to his father in
all his virtues and that the profoundest scholars of the Islamic world
could not compete with him. When the Abbasids noticed that al-Ma'mun
attributed the Imam's superiority to his learning they chose Yahya ibn
Aktham, the greatest scholar and jurist of Baghdad, to contend with him.

Al-Ma’mun issued a proclamation and organized a grand meeting for the
contest which resulted in a huge gathering of people from all parts of
the kingdom. Apart from noble and high officials, there were as many as
nine hundred chairs reserved for scholars and learned men only. The
world wondered how a young child could con-test with the veteran judge
in religious laws (qadi'1-qudat) and the greatest scholar of Iraq.

Imam Muhammad al-Jawad was seated beside al-Ma'mun on his throne face to
face with Yahya ibn Aktham, who addressed the Imam thus:

"Do you permit me to ask you a question?” "Ask me whatever you wish,"
said the Imam in the typical tone of his ancestors. Yahya then asked the
Imam, "What is your verdict about a man who indulges in hunting while he
is in the state of ihram." (In the code of religious law hunting is
supposed to be forbidden for a pilgrim.)

The Imam at once replied, "Your question is vague and misleading. You
should have definitely mentioned whether he hunted within the
jurisdiction of the Ka'bah or outside; whether he was literate or
illiterate; whether he was a slave or a free citizen; whether he was a
minor or a major; whether it was for the first time or he had done it
previously; also whether, that victim was a bird or some other creature;
whether the prey was small or big; whether he hunted in the day or at
night; whether the hunter repented for his action or persisted in it;
whether he hunted secretly or openly; whether the ihram was for umrah or
for hajj. Unless all these points are explained no specific answer can
be given to this question."

Al-Qadi Yahya was staggered in listening to these words of the Imam and
the entire gathering was dumbfounded. There was no limit to al-Ma'mun's
pleasure. He expressed his sentiments of joy and admiration thus,
"Bravo! Well done! O Abu Ja'far! (Ahsanta, ahsanta ya Aba Ja'far), your
learning and attainments are beyond all praises."

As al-Ma'mun wanted that the Imam's opponent be fully exposed, he said
to the Imam, "You may also put some question to Yahya ibn Aktham."

Then Yahya also reluctantly said to the Imam, "Yes, you may ask me some
questions. If I know the answer, I will tell it; otherwise, I shall
request you to give its answer."

Thereupon, the Imam asked a question to which Yahya could not reply.
Eventually, the Imam answered his question.

Then al-Ma'mun addressed the audience thus: "Did I not say that the Imam
comes of a family which has been chosen by Allah as the repository of
knowledge and learning? Is there any one in the world who can match even
the children of this family? "

All of them shouted, "Undoubtedly there is no one parallel to Muhammad
ibn \`Ali al-Jawad." In the same assembly al-Ma'mun wedded his daughter
Ummu'l-Fadl to the Imam and liberally distributed charity and gifts
among his subjects as a mark of rejoicing. One year after his marriage
the Imam returned to Medina from Baghdad with his wife and there he set
about preaching the Commandments of Allah.

Death:
------

When after the death of al-Ma'mun, al-Mu'tasim ascended the throne, he
got an opportunity to persecute the Imam and to ventilate spite and
malice against him. He summoned the Imam to Baghdad. The Imam arrived at
Baghdad on 9th Muharram 220 AH and al-Mu'tasim got him poisoned in the
same year. He died on 29th Dhi'l qi'dah 220 AH and was buried beside his
grandfather, Imam Musa al-Kazim the Seventh Imam, in al-Kazimiyyah, in
the suburb of Baghdad (Iraq).

al-Imam al-Jawad, peace be on him, said:
----------------------------------------

\* The trust in Allah is the price of everything that is precious and
the ladder to every goal which is high and sublime.  
 \* One who follows his desires, concedes to the wishes of his enemy.  
 \* Do not be an apparent friend of Allah in open and a secret enemy of
His in private.


