The Thirteenth Infallible The Eleventh Imam
===========================================

Al-Hasan Ibn Ali Al-Askari (Peace be on him)
--------------------------------------------

Name: al-Hasan.  
 Title: al-Askari.  
 Agnomen: Abu Muhammad.  
 Father's name: \`Ali al-Hadi (an-Naqi).  
 Mother's name: Hadithah (or Susan).  
 Birth: In Medina, on Friday, 8th Rabi\`u'th-thani 232 AH.  
 Death: Died at the age of 28, in Samarra', on Friday, 8th  
 Rabi\`ul-awwal 260 AH; poisoned by al-Mu'tamid, the Abbasid ruler;
buried in Samarra' (Iraq).

The Holy Imam Hasan al-Askari spent twenty-two years of his life under
the patronage of his father, Imam Ali al-Hadi (an-Naqi) after whose
martyrdom he became his divinely commissioned Imam.

Imam Hasan ibn Ali al-Askari, the son of the Tenth Imam, was born in
232/845 and according to some Shiite sources was poisoned and killed in
260/872 through the instigation of the Abbasid caliph al-Mu'tamid. The
Eleventh Imam gained the Imamate, after the death of his noble father,
through Divine Command and through the decree of the previous Imams.
During the seven years

of his Imamate, due to untold restrictions placed upon him by the
caliphate, he lived in hiding and dissimulation (taqiyyah). He did not
have any social contact with even the common people among the Shi\`ite
population. Only the elite of the Shi'ah were able to see him. Even so,
he spent most of his time in prison.

There was extreme repression at that time because the Shi\`ite
population had reached a considerable level in both numbers and power.
Everyone knew that the Shi'ah believed in the Imamate, and the identity
of the Shiite Imams was also known. Therefore, the caliphate kept the
Imams under its close supervision more than ever before. It tried
through every possible means and through secret plans to remove and
destroy them. Also, the caliphate had come to know that the elite among
the Shi'ah believed that the Eleventh Imam, according to traditions
cited by him as well as his forefathers, would have a son who was the
promised Mahdi. The coming of the Mahdi had been foretold in
authenticated hadith of the Prophet in both Sunni and Shi\`ite sources..
For this reason the Eleventh Imam,. more than other Imams, was kept
under close watch by the caliphate. The caliph of the time had decided
definitely to put an end to the Imamate in Shi'ism through every
possible means and to close the door to the Imamate once and for all.

Therefore, as soon as the news of the illness of the Eleventh Imam
reached al-Mu'tamid, he sent a physician and a few of his trusted agents
and judges to the house of the Imam to be with him and observe his
condition and the situation within his house at all times. After the
death of the Imam, they had the house investigated and all his female
slaves examined by the midwife. For two years the secret agents of the
caliph searched for the successor of the Imam until they lost all hope.

The Eleventh Imam was buried in his house in Samarra' next to his noble
father.

Here it should be remembered that during their lifetime the Imams
trained many hundreds of scholars of religion and hadith, and it is
these scholars who have transmitted to us information about the Imams.
In order not to prolong the matter, the list of their names and works
and their biographies have not been included here.

al-Imam al-Hasan al-\`Askari, peace be on him, said:
----------------------------------------------------

\* Generosity has a limit, which when crossed becomes extravagance;
caution has a limit which when crossed becomes cowardice; thriftiness
has a limit, which when crossed becomes miserliness; courage has a
limit, which when crossed becomes fool-hardiness. Let this moral lesson
suffice: refrain from doing anything which you would disapprove of if
done by someone else.


