The Fourteenth Infallible The Twelfth Imam
==========================================

Muhammad Al-Mahdi (Peace be on him)
-----------------------------------

Name: Muhammad.  
 Title: al-Mahdi, al-Qa'im, al-Hujjah, al-Gha'ib, Sahibu'z-Zaman, Sahibu
'l-Amr.  
 Agnomen: Abu 'l-Qasim.  
 Father's name: al-Hasan al-\`Askari.  
 Mother's name: Narjis.  
 Birth: In Samarra', on Friday, 15th Sha'ban 255 AH.  
 He is still living and will appear before the end of the world.  
 Minor Occultation: 8th Rabi\`u1-awwal 260 AH.  
 Major Occultation: 10th Shawwal 329 AH.

There existed a good deal of harmony and uniformity between the aspects
pertaining to the births of Prophet Muhammad, the last Apostle of Allah
and Imam al-Mahdi, the last Apostolic Imam. Just as the coming of the
Holy Prophet was prophesied well in advance by the preceding prophets,
similarly the impending news of the gracious birth of Imam al-Mahdi was
foretold by the Holy Prophet.

Innumerable traditions in this context, quoted right from the Holy
Prophet, from the glowing contents of many books of Masanid, Sihah and
Akhbar, and of Shiite scholars (ulama') existed. Many Sunni scholars
have accumulated these traditions in complete volumes also, e.g.:
al-Bayan fi akhbar Sahibi'z-Zaman by al-Hafiz Muhammad ibn Yusuf
ash-Shafi'i and Dhikriyyatu'l-Mahdi by al-Hafiz Abu Nu'aym al-Isfahani
as well as as-Sahih of Abu Dawud and as-Sunan of Ibn Majah. All  
 of the above books record the traditions bearing evidence of the coming
of this Holy Imam.

The promised Mahdi, who is usually mentioned by his title of
Imamu'l-\`Asr (the Imam of the Period) and Sahibu'z-Zaman (the Lord of
the Age), is the son of the Eleventh Imam. His name is the same as that
of the Holy Prophet. He was born in Samarra' in 255/869 and until
260/874 when his father was martyred, lived under his father's care and
tutelage. He was hidden from public view and only a few of the elite
among the Shi'ah were able to meet him.

After the martyrdom of his father he became Imam and by Divine Command
went into occultation (ghaybah). Thereafter, he appeared only to his
deputies (na'ib) and even then only in exceptional circumstances.

The Imam chose as a special deputy for a time \`Uthman ibn Said
al-\`Amri, one of the companions of his father and grandfather who was
his confident and trusted friend. Through his deputy the Imam would
answer the demands and questions of the Shi'ah. After \`Uthman ibn Said,
his son Muhammad ibn \`Uthman al\`Amri was appointed the deputy of the
Imam. After the death of Muhammad ibn \`Uthman, Abu'l-Qasim al-Husayn
ibn Ruh an-Nawbakhti was the special deputy, and after his death Ali ibn
Muhammad as-Samuri was chosen for this task.

A few days before the death of Ali ibn Muhammad as-Samuri in 329/939 an
order was issued by the Imam stating that in six days \`Ali ibn Muhammad
as-Samuri would die. Henceforth the special deputation of the Imam would
come to an end and the major occultation (ghaybatu'1-kubra) would begin
and would continue until the day God grants permission to the Imam to
manifest himself.

The occultation of the Twelfth Imam is, therefore, divided into two
parts: the first, the minor occultation (ghaybatu's-sughra) which began
in 260/872 and ended in 329/939, lasting about seventy years; the
second, the major occultation which commenced in 329/939 and will
continue as long as God wills it. In a hadith upon whose authenticity
everyone agrees, the Holy Prophet has said, "If there were to remain in
the life of the world but one day, God would prolong that day until He
sends in it a man from my community and my household. His name will be
the same as my name. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as
it was filled with oppression and tyranny."

On the Appearance of the Mahdi:
-------------------------------

In the discussion on prophecy and the Imamate it was indicated that as a
result of the law of general guidance which governs all of creation, man
is of necessity endowed with the power of receiving revelation through
prophecy, which directs him toward the perfection of the human norm and
the well-being of the human species. Obviously, if this perfection and
happiness were not possible for man, whose life possesses a social
aspect, the very fact that he is endowed with this power would be
meaningless and futile. But there is no futility in creation.

In other words, ever since he has inhabited the earth, man has had the
wish to lead a social life filled with happiness in its true sense and
has striven toward this end. If such a wish were not to have an
objective existence it would never have been imprinted upon man's inner
nature, in the same way that if there were no food there would have been
no hunger. Or, if there were to be no water there would be no thirst and
if there were to be no reproduction there would have been no sexual
attraction between the sexes.

Therefore, by reason of inner necessity and determination, the future
will see a day when human society will be replete with justice and when
all will live in peace and tranquillity, when human beings will be fully
possessed of virtue and perfection. The establishment of such a
condition will occur through human hands but with Divine succour. And
the leader of such a society, who will be the saviour of man, is called
in the language of the hadith, the Mahdi.

In the different religions that govern the world such as Hinduism,
Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism and Islam there are
references to a person who will come as the saviour of mankind. These
religions have usually given happy tidings of his coming, although there
are naturally certain differences in detail that can be discerned when
these teachings are compared carefully. The hadith of the Holy Prophet
upon which all Muslims agree, "The Mahdi is of my progeny," refers to
this same truth.

There are numerous hadiths cited in Sunni and Shi\`ite sources from the
Holy Prophet and the Imams concerning the appearance of the Mahdi, such
as that he is of the progeny of the Prophet and that his appearance will
enable human society to reach true perfection and the full realization
of spiritual life. In addition, there are numerous other traditions
concerning the fact that the Mahdi is the son of the Eleventh Imam,
Hasan al-Askari. They agree that after being born and undergoing a long
occultation the Mahdi will appear again, filling with justice the world
that has been corrupted by injustice and iniquity.

As an example, \`Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida (the Eighth Imam) said, in the
course of a hadith, "The Imam after me is my son, Muhammad, and after
him his son \`Ali, and after Ali his son, Hasan, and after Hasan his son
Hujjatu'1Qa'im, who is awaited during his occultation and obeyed during
his manifestation. If there remain from the life of the world but a
single day, Allah will extend that day until he becomes manifest, and
fill the world with justice in the same way that it had been filled with
iniquity. But when? As for news of the \`hour;' verily my father told
me, having heard it from his father who heard it from his father who
heard it from his ancestors who heard it from \`Ali, that it was asked
of the Holy Prophet, \`Oh Prophet of God, when will the "support"
(al-Qa'im) who is from thy family appear?' He said, \`His case is like
that of the Hour (of the Resurrection). He alone will manifest it at its
proper time. It is heavy in the heavens and the earth. It cometh not to
you save unawares (Qur'an, 7:187).' "

Saqr ibn Abi Dulaf said, "I heard from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn \`Ali
ar-Rida (the Ninth Imam) who said, 'The Imam after me is my son, Ali;
his command is my command; his word is my word; to obey him is to obey
me. The Imam after him is his son, Hasan. His command is the command of
his father; his word is the word of his father; to obey him is to obey
his father.' After these words the Imam remained silent.' I said to him,
\`Oh son of the Prophet, who will be the Imam after Hasan?' The Imam
cried hard, then said, \`Verily after Hasan his son is the awaited Imam
who is "al-Qa'im bi'l-haqq" (He who is supported by the Truth). "'

Musa ibn Ja'far Baghdadi said, "I heard from Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
ibn \`Ali (the Eleventh Imam) who said, \`I see that after me
differences will appear among you concerning the Imam after me. Whoso
accepts the Imams after the Prophet of God but denies my son is like the
person who accepts all the prophets but denies the prophethood of
Muhammad, the Prophet of God, upon whom be peace and blessing. And whoso
denies ( Muhammad) the Prophet of God is like one who has denied all the
prophets of God, for to obey the last of us is like obeying the first
and to deny the last of us is like denying the first. But beware!
Verily, for my son there is an occultation during which all people will
fall into doubt except those whom Allah protects."

The opponents of Shi'ism protest that according to the beliefs of this
school the Hidden Imam should by now be nearly twelve centuries old,
whereas, this is impossible for any human being. In answer it must be
said that the protest is based only on the unlikelihood of such an
occurrence, not its impossibility. Of course, such a long lifetime or a
life of a longer period is unlikely. But those who study the hadiths of
the Holy Prophet and the Imams will see that they refer to this life as
one possessing miraculous qualities. Miracles are certainly not
impossible nor can they be negated through scientific arguments. It can
never be proved that the causes and agents that are functioning in the
world are solely those that we see and know and that other causes which
we do not know or whose effects and actions we have not seen nor
understood do not exist. It is in this way possible that in one or
several members of mankind there can be operating certain causes and
agents which bestow upon them a very long life of a thousand or several
thousand years. Medicine has not even lost hope of discovering a way to
achieve very long life spans. In any case, such protests from "Peoples
of the Book" such as Jews, Christians and Muslims are most strange for
they accept the miracles of the prophets of God according to their own
sacred scriptures.

The opponents of Shi\`ism also protest that, although Shi'ism considers
the Imam necessary in order to expound the injunctions and verities of
religion and to guide the people, the occultation of the Imam is the
negation of this very purpose, for an Imam in occultation who cannot be
reached by mankind cannot be in any way beneficial or effective. The
opponents say that if God wills to bring forth an Imam to reform
mankind, He is able to create him at the necessary moment and does not
need to create him thousands of years earlier. In answer it must be said
that such people have not really understood the meaning of the Imam, for
in the discussion on the Imamate it became clear that the duty of the
Imam is not only the formal explanation of the religious sciences and
exoteric guidance of the people. In the same way that he has the duty of
guiding men outwardly, the Imam also bears the function of waldyah and
the esoteric guidance of men. It is he who directs man's spiritual life
and orients the inner aspect of human action toward God. Clearly, his
physical presence or absence has no effect in this matter. The Imam
watches over men inwardly and is in communion with the soul and spirit
of men even if he be hidden from their physical eyes. His existence is
always necessary even if the time has not as yet arrived for his outward
appearance and the universal reconstruction that he is to bring about.

al-Imam al-Hujjah, peace be on him, said:
-----------------------------------------

\* Rest assured that no one has a special relationship with Allah.
Whoever denies me is not my (follower). The appearance of the Relief
(al-faraj) depends solely upon Allah; therefore, those who propose a
certain time for it are liars. As to the benefit of my existence in
Occultation, it is like the benefit of the sun behind clouds where the
eyes do not see. Indeed, my existence is an amnesty for the people of
the earth. Pray much to Allah to hasten the Relief, for therein also
lies the release from your sufferings.


