The Glorious Qur'an
===================

The Glorious Qur'an (Qur'anu'l-Majid) is the Word of Allah as revealed
to His Prophet, Muhammad, peace be on him and his progeny.

From the time of its revelation till today, people have tried to cast
doubt about the Divinity of the Holy Qur'an, but they have not succeeded
because of its inherent truth. The Book itself gives guidance and
wisdom, and it has a lot of good to offer to humanity. Every
right-minded reader can derive a lot of benefit from it.

The Book of Allah constantly appeals to one to think, ponder and
understand; and forbids one to drown one's reason or believe blindly.
About six hundred million Muslims believe in it, live and die by it.

To every prophet, Allah gave some miracle, but gone are the prophets and
their miracles. The Holy Prophet Muhammad, peace be on him and his
progeny, is the Last Prophet of Allah Who gave him an imperishable
miracle and that miracle is the Holy Qur'an.

The Word of Allah (Kalamullah, i.e., the Holy Qur'an) is a wonderful
piece of poetry and Arabic literature, full of wisdom and guidance. On
reading it one is at once convinced that it is the Word of Allah, for no
man can write such perfect guidance on so many subjects.

The Holy Qur'an says that no man will be able to forge even a part of it
and that no corruption shall touch it from any side. It is a miracle
that the Holy Qur'an has remained unchanged and unaltered during all
these 1400 years and it shall remain so till the Day of Resurrection,
for Allah, has taken it on Himself to protect it.

The Book of Allah is like an ocean. The less learned, like children,
collect pebbles and shells from its shores. The scholars and thinkers,
like pearl divers, bring out from it the highest philosophy, wisdom and
rules of a perfect way of living. In order to understand the Glorious
Qur'an, it is necessary to know the lives of Muhammad, \`Ali, Fatimah,
Hasan and Husayn, who translated every command and order of Allah into
action. Muhammad being the perfect example for men, Ali for youths,
Fatimah for women and Hasan and Husayn for children.

It is not necessary to refer to, or quote scholars, translators,
commentators and narrators to prove the existence of Allah and His
Prophet Muhammad.

Allah is the Creator, and He exists whether one believes it or not. The
proof of His existence is His creation. The proof of Muhammad's
prophethood is the Holy Qur'an.

For those who want to believe, these proofs are enough, and those who do
not want to believe, will never believe, no matter what proofs or
arguments, however strong they may be, are brought before them.

For easy daily recitation, the Qur'an is divided into thirty equal
parts. One part takes only twenty-four reading minutes, and the whole
Book requires twelve reading hours. There are 114 chapters, and 6,226
verses, containing 99,464 words made up of 330,113 letters.

Millions of Muslims read the Qur'an daily. Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq has said
that, the minimum daily reading of the Qur'an should be fifty verses or
one-fourth of the part, about five minutes reading.

Historical and scholarly footnotes have been specially avoided to keep
the volume from becoming cumbersome. Those interested in deeper studies,
should have recourse to several libraries.


