Islam and Muslim
================

The word \`Islam' means, submission to the will of Allah, and a
\`Muslim', is he who submits to the will of Allah. Islam is a religion,
which can be followed easily by everyone, everywhere, in a day-to-day
life.

It is the religion of every prophet of Allah from Adam to Muhammad, and
is as old as humanity. In fact, every child that is born, is a Muslim.
It is the parents that make him a Jew, Christian or Hindu, etc.

Allah has sent numerous prophets to all the nations and races. As the
human race progressed, the prophets were sent with laws that suited the
requirements of that time. Each new prophet, brought a new Divine Law
(shari\`ah), which abrogated or cancelled the previous law. Muhammad is
the Last Prophet of Allah and he has brought the last and the most
perfect law, in the Holy Qur'an. History shows us, that this law has
suited the requirements of the people for the last 1400 years and shall
continue to do so, till the Day of Resurrection.

Islam is a way of life. It is a simple and uncomplicated religion,
giving one maximum freedom without encroaching on the freedom of others.
It enjoins one to believe in One God, and do good; to keep up prayers
and pay the poor-rate; to fast during the month of Ramadan; to perform
the hajj and to fight for the sake of Allah, whenever necessary; to
believe in the Justice of Allah, in the life after death, in the
Prophethood of Muhammad and the teachings of the twelve Apostolic Imams.
Islam forbids evil and tyranny, prohibits intoxicants and games of
chance, adultery and indecencies, and blood and flesh of swine and dead
animals.

***“There is no compulsion in religion”*** (Surah al-Baqarah 2:256); and
there is no harsh and hard rituals or unreasonable dogmas in Islam.

Among many reforms, which the Holy Prophet of Islam, gave to the world,
he taught, that all human beings whether brown, black, red, white or
yellow, are sons of Adam, and no man has any superiority over another
man, because of his colour, rank or riches. He taught: *The most
honourable man, in the sight of Allah, is he, who is most careful of his
duty to Allah and that man has rights only to the extent of the duties,
he performs.* (Shakir, M.A.: Islamic History)


