The First Infallible: The Holy Prophet Of Islam,  Muhammad Ibn `Abdullah (Peace be on him and his progeny)
==========================================================================================================

Name: Muhammad.  
 Title: al-Mustafa.  
 Agnomen: Abu'l-Qasim.  
 Father's name: Abdullah ibn Abdi'1-Muttalib.  
 Mother's name: Aminah bint Wahb.  
 Birth: Born in Mecca on Friday, 17th Rabiu'l-awwal, in the Year of
Elephant.  
 Death: Died at the age of 63 in Medina on Monday, 28th Safar, 11 AH;
buried in his apartment adjoining the mosque, in Medina.

Lineal Chart of the Prophets:

Adam

Nuh

Ibrahim

Isma\`il Ishaq

Banu Hashim Banu Isra'il

Musa

\`Isa

Muhammad .

Lineage
-------

The Holy Prophet said: “The first thing God created was my nur (light).”

The oldest and noblest tribe in the whole of Arabia was Banu Hashim.
They were the descendants of Ibrahim through his son Isma'il. The Arabs
respected and loved them for their goodness, knowledge and bravery.

'Abdu'l-Muttalib
----------------

\`Abdu'1-Muttalib was the chieftain of Banu Hashim and lie was also the
guardian of the Ka'bah. Among his ten sons, \`Abdullah was the father of
the Holy Prophet and Abu Talib was the father of \`Ali.

Muhammad
--------

In Mecca, baby boy Muhammad was born on 17th Rabi’ul-awwal, 570 AD. His
father \`Abdullah, son of 'Abdu1-Muttalib, died before he was born and
when he was six, he lost his loving mother Aminah bint Wahb.

His grandfather, \`Abdu1-Muttalib, took the responsibility of bringing
up the orphan. At the age of ten, he was berefted of his venerable
grandfather. On his deathbed, he appointed his son Abu Talib as the
guardian of Muhammad.

Gentle, soft spoken, tall and handsome boy, Muhammad, accompanied the
trading caravans of Abu Talib, across the deserts, giving him deep
insight into nature and man.

In his youth, Muhammad participated in Hilf (Confederation of) al-Fudul
for helping the widows and orphans and protecting the oppressed.

Khadijah
--------

The wealthy noble widowed lady Khadijah, looking for a manager for her
rich mercantile caravans, selects Muhammad, the Trustee. Able and fair
dealing, Muhammad is a tremendous success. Khadijah already an admirer,
made him an offer of marriage, Muhammad was twenty-five and Khadijah
forty. In spite of this disparity in age, the marriage proved to be a
very happy one.

The Prophet
-----------

Lover of nature and quite, worried about human sufferings, Muhammad very
often retired to Mount Hira' for meditations. One night, laylatul-qadr
(the Night of Majesty) a voice addressing him, commanded ***"Recite in
the Name of thy Lord."*** (Surah al-‘Alaq 96:1). Deeply excited by the
strange phenomena of Divine Visitation, Muhammad hurried home to his
wife, Khadijah, who listened to him attentively and said that "I bear
witness that you are the Apostle of God."

After an interval, the voice from heaven spoke again ***"O thou shrouded
in thy mantle, arise, and warn, and*** ***magnify thy Lord."*** (Surah
al-Muddathir 74:1-3) This was a signal for him to start preaching the
gospel of truth of One God.

In the beginning Muhammad invited only those near him, to accept the new
Faith. The first to embrace Islam among women was Khadijah and among men
\`Ali. Soon after, Zayd ibn al-Harithah became a convert to the new
Faith followed by Abu Bakr and \`Uthman. \`Umar hitherto a violent
opponent of Islam, notorious for the persecution of the Muslims and a
bitter enemy of the Prophet, embraced Islam, later.

Caliph
------

For three long years, he laboured quietly to wean his people from the
worship of idols and drew only thirty followers. Muhammad now decided to
appeal publicly to the Quraysh to give up idol worship and embrace
Islam.

He invited forty of his kinsmen to a feast. At the gathering, Muhammad
stated that he had lived a lifetime among them and asked if they had
ever found him lying? The general response was "We have never found you
lying, O al-Amin!" The Prophet of Islam asked if he were to tell them
that their enemies had collected beyond the saridhills to attack them,
would they believe? The reply was, "Yes." "Will you believe anything I
will now say?" Again the reply was, "Yes." The Prophet addressed them:
“I know no man in all Arabia, who can offer his kindreds, a more
excellent thing than I now do. I offer you happiness both in this life
and that which is to come. God Almighty has commanded me to call unto
Him. Who, therefore, among you will assist me herein shall become my
Brother and my Caliph?”

All of them hesitatingly declined the matter. \`Ali (who was then given
the title of "Amiru'1-Mu'minin" (the Commander of the faithful) by the
Prophet, stood up and declared that he would assist the Prophet and
vehemently threatened those who would oppose him. Muhammad with great
demonstration of affection, embraced \`Ali and declared to all, to hear
and obey \`Ali as his Deputy and Caliph. The gathering broke out into
laughter, taunting Abu Talib that now he will have to obey his son.

Islam
-----

Muhammad is the founder of the great religion of Islam, meaning
submitting (oneself or one's person to Allah). The adherent of Islam is
usually designated by the corresponding adjective Muslim. The Persians
adopted a different adjective Musalman, from which are derived the
Anglo-Indian Mussulman. But Muslims, certainly, dislike the terms
Mohammedan and Mohammedanism, which seem to them to carry the
implication of worship of Muhammad, as Christian and Christianity imply
the worship of Christ.

The new Faith is simple, without complications, practical and useful for
every day life. It commands to believe and do good, keep up prayer and
pay the poor rate. Two orders giving four principles of a successful way
of life.

The new Creed had set in motion a terrific revolution, shaking the very
foundations of the world. The vested interests, kings, priests,
racketeers, and tyrants all were against, and they united to crush the
movement of Islam.

The keepers of Ka'bah and owners of the idols, came to Abu Talib to stop
Muhammad from saying, "There is no god but Allah (la ilaha illa Allah)."
The guardian uncle conveyed the request of the delegation to give
Muhammad fortune larger than possessed by any, to make him a chief and
even a king, if he agreed to give up his mission. Muhammad refused.
Angry Arab chieftains threatened social boycott, destruction and death.
Abu Talib (who actually became Muslim but did not announce his faith so
that he may be able to defend the Prophet) promised to defend Muhammad.

Boys and louts of Mecca started pelting stones and abuses on Muhammad.
Brave and loyal \`Ali, son of Abu Talib, stopped this by his strong
fists. The harassment and tortures, which the Prophet and his small band
of faithful followers suffered at the hands of Quraysh were excruciating
in the extreme. Some of the believers were dragged over burning sand,
imprisoned, flogged and starved, but they firmly held to their Faith
till death. Umayyah, master of Bilal, took Bilal to the desert and
exposed him bare-back with his face, to the noon-day sun and placed a
big stone on his chest and said, "There you shall remain, until thou art
dead or thou hast adjured Islam." Dying with thirst in the heat he would
only answer "Ahadun! Ahadun! (One [God]! One!)."

Almost ten years of hard work and preaching, in spite of all
persecution, produced over a hundred followers. Physical cruelties and
social boycott made life unbearable in Mecca. The Holy Prophet of Islam
advised his followers to seek refuge in the neighbouring country of
Ethiopia. Eighty-eight men and eighteen women sailed to the hospitable
shores of the Negus, under the leadership of Ja'far at-Tayyar (brother
of \`Ali) and the cousin of the Holy Prophet. Arab chieftains pursued
them and demanded their extradition.

Ja'far, pleading the cause of the refugees said to the king: O King! we
were plunged in the depth of ignorance and barbarism; we worshipped
idols, we lived in unchastity, we ate dead bodies and we spoke
abominations; we disregarded every feeling of humanity and the duties of
hospitality and neighbourhood; we knew no law, but of the strong
(power), when God raised among us a man, of whose birth, truthfulness,
honesty and purity we are aware; and he called us to the Unity of God
and taught us not to associate anything with Him; he forbade us the
worship of idols; and enjoined on us to speak the truth, to be faithful
to our trusts, to be merciful and to regard the rights of neighbours; he
forbade us to speak evil of women or to eat the sustenance of orphans;
he ordered us to fly from vice and to abstain from evil; to offer
prayers, to render alms, to observe the fast. We have believed in him,
we have accepted his teachings and his injunction to worship God and not
associate anything with Him. For this reason our people have risen
against us, have persecuted us in order to make us forego the worship of
God and return to the worship of idols of stone and wood and other
abominations. They tortured and injured us, until finding no safety
among them, we have come to thy country and hope wilt protect us from
their oppression. The demand of the Quraysh were rejected and they
returned to Mecca.

Several times the chieftains came to Abu Talib saying, "We respect your
age and rank, but we have no further patience with your nephew. Stop him
or we shall fight you."

Abu Talib asked Muhammad for his decision. With tears in his eyes the
Apostle firmly replied, "O my uncle! if they place the sun on my right
hand and the moon on my left, to force me to renounce my mission, I will
not desist until God manifests His cause or I perish in the attempt."

Tragedies
---------

In a period of troubles, trials and tribulations two major tragedies
afflicted Muhammad. First the venerable guardian uncle Abu Talib died
and shortly afterwards his noble wife Khadijah died, leaving behind her
daughter Fatimah (peace be on her) - the only child she had from the
Holy Prophet - the daughter who looked after her father so much so that
the Prophet called her Umm Abiha (the mother of her father).

Muslim Era
----------

With the death of the old patriarch Abu Talib, the Meccans planned to
assassinate the Prophet. Under Divine guidance, he asked \`Ali to sleep
in his bed and Muhammad put his green garment on \`Ali. While the
murderers mistook ‘Ali for Muhammad, the Holy Prophet of Islam escaped
to Medina. The Muslim era of Hijrah (Emigration) is named after this
incident and dated from 17th Rabi’ul-awwal, 622 AD.

From the time he came to Medina, he was the grandest figure upon whom
the light of history has ever shone. We shall now see him as, the king
of men, the ruler of human hearts, chief law-giver and supreme judge.
The Preacher who went without bread, was mightier than the mightiest
sovereigns of the earth. No emperor with his tiaras was obeyed as this
man in a cloak of his own clothing.

He laid the foundation of the Muslim commonwealth and drew up a charter
which has been acknowledged as the work of highest statesmanship; a
master-mind not only of his age, but of all ages.

Unlike the Arabs, the Prophet had never wielded a weapon, but now he was
forced to defend Islam by force of arms. Commencing from the battle of
Badr, a series of eighty battles had to be fought, which the infant
community defended successfully.

One day Muhammad was sleeping under a tree, away from his camp. He was
awakened by his enemy Du'thur ibn al-Harith with sword, standing over
him. "O Muhammad! Who is there now to save you?" "God!" replied the
Apostle. The wild Bedouin suddenly began to shiver and dropped his
sword. The Prophet picked the sword and asked, "Who is there now to save
you?" "Alas, no one!" "Then learn from me to be merciful." The Arab's
heart was overcome and he embraced Islam.

Uhud
----

Next year, Abu Sufyan, the famous long-lived enemy of Islam, again
attacked the Muslims at Uhud. Hamzah, the first flag-bearer of Islam and
uncle of the Prophet, was killed in action. In spite of strict
instructions from the Prophet, a few Muslim soldiers deserted their post
when victory was in sight. This changed the course of the battle. Khalid
ibn al-Walid attacked the Prophet and the grave situation was saved by
the timely arrival of \`Ali. The enemies ran away and the issue was
decided. Muhammad was deeply grieved at the death of Hamzah.

Mubahilah
---------

In the 10th year AH, a Christian deputation from Najran came to the
Prophet at Medina for religious discussions. Even after convincing
arguments, the Christians refused to believe because they were not
willing to give up their religion for the religion of Islam.

According to Divine instructions in the Holy Qur'an:

***“And whoso disputes with thee concerning him, after the knowledge
that has come to thee, say: ‘Come now, let us call our sons and your
sons, our women and your women, our selves and your selves, then let us
humbly pray and so lay Allah's curse upon the ones who lie.’"*** (Surah
al-Imran 3:61)

Muhammad suggested that next morning that the Christians should bring
their women, sons and near ones and the Prophet would bring his, and
they should pray, to invoke the curse of God on the liars, in order to
end the argument.

At dawn Muhammad entered the maydan (field) with his grandsons, leading
Hasan by the hand, carrying Husayn in his arms, his beloved daughter
Fatimah following him and ‘Ali walking behind her, with the banner of
Islam. The Christians watching this procession from far, came to the
conclusion that Muhammad was the true Prophet of God, for he had brought
with him his dearest and nearest ones.

The Christians came to the Prophet and informed him that they were not
willing to pray for the curse on the liars, instead they were willing to
pay the jizyah (poll-tax or tithes payable by non-Muslims in the realm
of Islam) and to come to a settlement. The Prophet referred them to Ali
for terms.

Hudaybiyyah
-----------

The Muslims had been in self exile for six years and began to feel a
keen yearning for their homeland, Mecca. The Prophet desired to perform
a pilgrimage to Ka'bah. When he forsook his home town he was weak, but
when he wanted to return, he was strong. He did not use his strength to
force an entry into the sacred city.

Finding the Quraysh hostile, Muhammad entered into a treaty known as the
Peace of Hudaybiyyah, appearing not very advantageous to the Muslims,
but which revealed the Islamic character of moderation and magnanimity.
For the strong to exercise restraint and toleration is true courage.
Having reached up to the door of their birth place with hearts
over-flowing with impatient longing to enter it, the Muslims retraced
their steps peacefully to Medina, under the terms of the treaty, which
allowed them to perform the pilgrimage next year.

Khaybar
-------

The harassment and murders by the Jews, forced the Prophet into leading
an army against Khaybar in the 7th year AH. The Muslims under the
command of \`Umar and others turned back and were in despair. The
Prophet said: "Tomorrow I shall assign the command of the Muslim force
to a person who will be crowned by God with victory." The daybreak saw
the Islamic banner waving gallantly in the hand of \`Ali.

The fateful battle began with Jewish champion warrior Marhab. With soul
stirring shout of Allahu Akbar, the Dhulfiqar (sword) of \`Ali descended
on Marhab, piercing his skull. In the general encounter that followed,
the Jews were defeated. The great victory of Islam was won and made ‘Ali
the immortal conqueror of Khaybar.

Mecca
-----

Towards the end of the year, Muhammad with his followers availed of the
truce of Hudaybiyyah to accomplish the pilgrimage to Mecca. For three
days, the Quraysh evacuated the city and watched the Muslims perform the
pilgrimage. The strict observance of the terms of treaty, the
self-restraint and regard for their pledged word displayed by the
believers, created a great impression on the idolaters. Struck by
Muhammad's kindness of heart and nobility of nature many Qurayshite
chieftains adopted the Faith.

In the 8th year AH, the idolaters violated the peace of Hudaybiyyah by
attacking the Muslims. The enemies were defeated and Mecca was
conquered.

The Prophet who fled from Mecca as a fugitive, now returned home as a
mighty conqueror. The Rahmatun lil'alamin (mercy unto all beings, i.e.,
the Prophet) entered the city with his head bowed low in thankfulness to
the Almighty (Allah) and ordered a general amnesty, instead of the mass
massacre of those who persecuted him and his followers.

Tabuk
-----

In the middle of the 9th year AH, the Prophet had to lead an expedition
to Tabuk near the border of Syria, owing to the threatening attitude of
the Roman Emperor. The hypocrites and holders back out of spite, taunted
\`Ali, who was left in charge of Medina in the absence of the Prophet.
Unable to bear the taunts of the hypocrites, the brave and faithful
\`Ali mounted a fast camel and reached the Muslim army. ‘Ali related to
the Prophet the taunts of the hypocrites that \`Ali was frightened and
that the Prophet was displeased with him. Muhammad smiled and said: "O
\`Ali! Do you not wish that your position with me should be like Harun's
position with Musa, with this difference only, that after me there will
be no prophet?" The pacified ‘Ali returned to Medina. The Muslim army on
reaching Tabuk found, the Romans had diverted to other fields of action.
The Prophet returned to Medina without having to fight.

Wives
-----

A great number of Muslim soldiers were killed in battles at Badr, Uhud,
Khaybar, Hunayn and other places, leaving behind young wives and
children. The serious problem of taking care of the widows and orphans,
threatened to break up the moral fabric of the Muslim Society. Muhammad
decided to marry these widows and set an example for his followers to do
likewise.

Before the advent of Islam, a man could marry any number of wives but
the Holy Prophet of Islam was different in every way. History bears out,
the unimpeachable character of Muhammad up to the age of twenty-five,
when he married the widowed lady Khadijah. She remained his one and only
wife till she died when Muhammad was fifty. At the ripe age of
fifty-five when the blood cools down, in order to solve the problem of
war, widows and orphans, he started marrying one wife after another in
quick succession, even though he was old and burdened with the
responsibilities of Prophethood and the affairs of the Islamic State.

The conditions for marrying more than one wife, are so strict, that
hardly anybody can fulfil them, in times of peace. The Qur'an says:

***“And if you fear that you cannot act equitably towards orphans then
marry such women as seem good to you, two, three and four, but if you
fear that you cannot do justice between them, then marry only one...”***
(Surah an-Nissa 4:3)

King
----

Though a Prophet and a King, Muhammad was the man of the common people.
He sat and ate with them. Shared their joys and sorrows, helped the
weak, widows and orphans and sympathized with the distressed. He found
the world sunk deep in degrading ignorance, superstition, vice and
cruelty. He saw people disunited and engaged in perpetual wars,
practising most revolting cruelties; daughters were buried alive and the
widows of their fathers were inherited or sold by the eldest son. Among
all this chaos, Muhammad established order and inspired in them the
belief of One God; prohibited idolatry and made them think, not only of
this world, but beyond the grave on a higher, purer and diviner plain,
asking them to practise charity, goodness, justice, reasonableness and
universal love. The whole mission was achieved in his lifetime.

The Five Purified Ones (Ahlul-Kisa')
------------------------------------

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanliness from you, O People
of the House! and purify you a (thorough) purifying.*** (Surah Ahzab,
33:33)

The Five Purified Ones - Muhammad, Ali, Fatimah, and their two sons
Hasan and Husayn - became perfect examples of human conduct. They lived
a life of extreme devotion, loyalty, utility, goodness, trust and
charity, giving a standard of human values to every action of humanity.
Their record of life is that of a work nobly and faithfully done,
preaching the Unity of God, the equality of men and obliterating the
tyranny of priests and rulers, breaking the shackles of wrangling
creeds, oppressive rituals, and soul crushing dogmas; he broke down the
barriers of caste, exclusive privileges and tyranny of vested interest.
He proclaimed the importance of knowledge learning and hard work.

Though the Holy Prophet was occupied in looking after the affairs of
people, but he used to pay special attention to his family too. Some
believers, requested him to allow them to buy lands and build houses for
him. The reply was revealed by God:

***Say: "I do not ask of*** ***you any reward, but love for my***
***relatives...; surely Allah is Forgiving, Grateful."*** (Surah
ash-Shura 42:23)

Thereupon, the believers asked the Prophet whose love was made incumbent
on them? Muhammad answered "Love for \`Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn."

Last Pilgrimage
---------------

Under the Divine intuition of his approaching end, Muhammad prepared to
make the farewell pilgrimage to Mecca.

Before completing all the ceremonies of hajj, he addressed a huge
multitude from the top of mount 'Arafat on 8th Dhi'l-hajjah, 11 AH in
words which shall ever ring and live in the atmosphere:

O ye people! listen to my words, for I know not, if another year will be
vouchsafed to me after this year, to find myself amongst you at this
place. Your lives and property are sacred and inviolable to one another,
until ye appear before the Lord, as this day and this month is sacred
for all, and remember ye shall have to appear before your Lord, Who
shall demand an account of all your actions. O ye people, ye have rights
over your wives and your wives have rights over you... Treat your wives
with kindness and love. Verily, ye have taken them on the security of
God and made their persons lawful unto you by the Words of God. Keep
faithful to the trust reposed in you and avoid sins. Usury is forbidden.
The debtor shall return only the principal and the beginning will be
made with the loan of my uncle Abbas son of \`Abdul-Muttalib. Henceforth
the vengeance of blood practised in the days of ignorance is prohibited;
and all blood feuds abolished, commencing with the murder of Ibn
Rabi\`ah son of al-Harith son of Abdu1-Muttalib. And your slaves! see
that ye feed them with such food as ye eat yourselves, and clothe them
with the stuff ye wear; and if they commit a fault which ye are not
inclined to forgive, then part from them, for they are the servants of
the Lord and are not to be harshly treated.

O ye people! listen to my words and understand the same, know all
Muslims are brothers unto one another. Ye are one brotherhood, nothing
which belongs to another is lawful unto his brother, unless freely given
out of goodwill. Guard yourselves from committing injustice. Let him
that is present tell it unto him that is absent. Haply he that shall be
told may remember better than he who hath heard it.

Hadith of Ghadir
----------------

Soon after finishing the hajj the Holy Prophet started for Medina. On
his way, at 'Ghadir Khumm' the Voice from Heaven cried:

***“O Apostle! deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and
if you do it not, then you have not*** ***delivered His message and
Allah will protect you from the people, surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people”\**** (Surah Maida 5:67).

Muhammad immediately ordered Bilal to recall the Muslims, who had gone
ahead, who were behind and who were proceeding to their homes at the
junction, to assemble. The famous Sunni mutakallim and commentator,
Fakhru'd-Din ar-Razi in his at-Tafsiru'l-kabir, (vol. 12, pp. 49 - 50),
writes that the Prophet took \`Ali by the hand and said: Whoever whose
mawla (master) I am, \`Ali is his master.

O Allah! love him who loves \`Ali, and be the enemy of the enemy of
\`Ali; help him who helps \`Ali, and forsake him who forsakes \`Ali. He
(ar-Razi) writes further that Abu Bakr and \`Umar congratulated \`Ali in
the following words:

Congratulations, O son of Abu Talib! This morning you became my mawla
and mawla of every believing man and woman. Once again the voice from
Heaven proclaimed:

This day have I perfected your religion and completed My favour on you
and chosen for you Islam

\* The hadith of Ghadir is mutawatir to Shi\`ahs and Sunnis, because it
has been narrated through so many chains of transmission by both sects
that no doubt can be entertained. As, for the Shiite transmission of
this hadith see al-Bihar, vol. 37, pp. 108 -253; and as for others see
the book of Imamate, by S . S . A . Rizvi, part 2, pp. 39 - 105, 1985,
WOF IS, Tehran - IRAN. as a religion (5:3).

Death
-----

On Muhammad's return to Medina, he got busy settling the organization of
the provinces and the tribes which had adopted Islam. His strength
rapidly failed and the poison (administered at Khaybar by a Jewess) took
its deadly toll. So ended the life dedicated to the service of God and
humanity from first to last, on 28th Safar, 11 AH.

The humble Preacher had risen to be the ruler of Arabia. The Prophet of
Islam not only inspired reverence, but love owing to his humility,
nobility, purity, austerity, refinement and devotion to duty. The Master
inspired all who came into contact with him. He shared his scanty food;
he began his meals in the Name of Allah and finished them uttering
thanks; he loved the poor and respected them, he would visit the sick
and comfort the heart broken; he treated his bitterest enemies with
clemency and forbearance, but the offenders against society were
administered justice; his intellectual mind was remarkably progressive
and he said that man could not exist without constant efforts.

There is no god but One God and Muhammad is the Apostle of God, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him and his descendants.

The lives of Muhammad and \`Ali are so interwoven that one cannot think,
read or write without mentioning both.

Imam Ali said:

"I testify that there is no god but Allah and I testify that Muhammad is
the servant and Prophet of God sent with the famous Faith and the
written Book with strong commands and prohibitions to remove the doubts
and superstitions of the people and to give reasoning and proofs.

"He was sent to make the people fear the signs of God and His
punishment. God has done us a big favour by giving us such a Prophet, so
that we may follow him.

"Then Allah deputed Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny, as a
witness, giver of good tidings and warner, the best in the universe as a
child and the most chaste as a grown up man, the purest of the purified
in conduct, the most generous of those who are approached for
generosity.

"The hearts of the virtuous and good people turn to him. He has
established brotherhood. His word is the Word of God. He gave them the
Message of God without minimizing or magnifying it.

"He gives eyes to those who earnestly seek guidance and be recited the
Holy Qur'an. He is the Fountain of Knowledge and Light of the World.

"He is a great Physician. The ointment of his knowledge is very
effective and unfailing. He searches for houses where there is no peace
and confusion reigns.

"May Allah give height to his (the Prophet's) construction above all
other constructions, heighten his position with Thee, grant perfection
to his effulgence and perfect for him his light. In reward for his
discharging Thy prophetship, grant that his testimony be admitted and
his speech be liked for his speech is just, and his judgments are
clear-cut. May Allah put us and him together in the pleasures of life,
continuance of bounty, satisfaction of desires, enjoyment of pleasures,
ease of living, peace of mind and gifts of honour.

"He is Thy Trustee and knows Thy secrets. He shall testify on the Day of
Judgment. Reward him handsomely. Let him intercede for his followers,
for he is just and can distinguish between right and wrong.

"All praise is due to Allah, who cannot even be imagined. No person,
however, wise he may be, can understand Him.

"Muhammad is the last of all the prophets. There shall be no prophet
after him. Revelation came to an end on his passing away. The sons of
the Holy Prophet are the best sons and his Ahlu'l-bayt, are the best
Ahlu’l-bayt. Follow your Apostolic Imams." (See photo p. 26)

Some Of The Ahadith Of The Holy Prophet
---------------------------------------

The Apostle of Allah was the handsomest of men and the most liberal and
the bravest. He said:

1. Convey to others no words of mine save, those you know for a
certainty.  
 2. Whosoever ascribes doctrines or precepts to me, and they are not
mine, the same shall go to hell.

Backbiters:  
 3. A slanderer and backbiter shall be shut out from Paradise.

Charity:  
 4. Charity averts impending calamities.  
 5. The tax of Charity should be collected from the rich and given away
to the poor.  
 6. A man giving in alms one piece of silver in his lifetime is better
for him than giving one hundred when about to die.  
 7. To meet friends cheerfully and invite them to a feast are charitable
acts.  
 8. To extend consideration towards neighbours and send them presents
are charitable acts.

Death:  
 9. Wish not for death, before its time comes.  
 10. Speak well of your dead and refrain from speaking ill of them.  
 11. To commit suicide is one of the mortal crimes.

Dignity of Labour :  
 12. Whoever is able and fit and does not work for himself or for
others, Allah is displeased with him.  
 13. Those who can earn an honest living are the beloved of Allah.  
 14. Allah is Gracious to him who earns his living by his own labour and
not by begging.  
 15. Whosoever opens unto himself the door of begging, Allah will open
unto him the door of poverty.  
 16. O Allah! Keep me from inability and laziness.  
 17. Whoever monopolizes trade is a transgressor.

Education:  
 18. To acquire knowledge is binding upon all Muslims, whether male or
female.  
 19. Man has free will and is responsible for his actions.  
 20. The ink of the scholar is more holy than the blood of the martyr.  
 21. He who travels in search of knowledge, to him Allah shows the way
to Paradise.  
 22. Seek after knowledge though it be in China.  
 23. Acquire knowledge, because he who acquires it, in the way of the
Lord, performs an act of piety; who speaks of it praises the Lord; who
seeks it, adores Allah; who dispenses instruction in it, bestows alms;
and who imparts it to its fitting objects, performs an act of devotion
to Allah. Knowledge enables its possessor to distinguish what is
forbidden from what is not; lights the way to Heaven; it is our friend
in the desert, our companion in solitude, our companion, when bereft of
friends; it guides us to happiness; it sustains us in misery; it is our
ornament in the company of friends; it serves as an armour against our
enemies. With knowledge the creature of Allah rises to the heights of
goodness and to noble position, associates with sovereigns in this world
and attains the perfection of happiness in the next.  
 24. The worst of men is, a bad learned man and a good learned man is
the best.  
 25. He dies not who takes to learning.

Enemies of Allah:  
 26. The greatest enemies of Allah are those who profess Islam and do
acts of infidelity and who without cause, shed man's blood.  
 27. The Prophet said: "The mortal crimes are to associate another with
Allah, to vex your father and mother, to murder your own species, to
commit suicide and to swear to a lie."

Envy:  
 28. Do not look for the faults of others and do not envy others.  
 29. Keep yourselves far from envy, because it eats up and takes away
good actions, like the fire that eats up and burns wood.

Fasting:  
 30. A keeper of fast, who forsakes not lying and slander, Allah cares
naught for his leaving off eating and drinking.

Favoured of Allah:  
 31. Who is the most favoured of Allah? He from whom the greatest good
comes to His creatures.  
 32. Verily Allah loves a Muslim who is poor with a family and withholds
himself from what is unlawful and from begging.

Forgiveness :  
 33. Whoever suppresses his anger, when he has in his power to show it,
Allah will give him a great reward.  
 34. The person is most esteemed in the sight of Allah who pardons, when
he has in his power, him who shall have injured him.  
 35. He is not strong and powerful, who throws people down, but he is
strong who withholds himself from anger.  
 36. Thus said Allah: Verily, those who exercise patience under trials
and forgive wrongs are righteous.

Hypocrites:  
 37. He is a hypocrite who when he speaks, speaks untruth; who making a
promise breaks it; and who, when trust is reposed in him, fails in his
trust.  
 38. Muslims are those who perform their trust, fail not in their word
and keep their pledge.

Islam and Others:  
 39. One of the followers of the Prophet asked him to curse the
infidels. The Prophet said: "I am not sent for this, nor was I sent but
as a mercy to mankind."  
 40. Every child is born with a disposition towards the natural religion
(Islam). It is the parents who make it a Jew, a Christian or a Magian.  
 41. Deal gently with people, and be not harsh; cheer them and condemn
not.

Manners:  
 42. Much silence and a good disposition; there are no two works better
than these.  
 43. The best of friends is he who is best in behaviour and character.  
 44. The exercise of religious duties will not atone for the fault of an
abusive tongue.

Marriage:  
 45. Marriage is incumbent on all who can afford or who possess the
ability.

Modesty  
 46. One who does not practise modesty and does not refrain from
shameless deeds is not a Muslim.  
 47. The adultery of the eye is to look with an eye of lust on the wife
of another; and the adultery of the tongue is to utter what is
forbidden.  
 48. I swear by Allah, there is not anything, which Allah so condemns,
as his male and female servants committing adultery.  
 49. The person who drinks liquor, commits adultery and steals, calls
upon himself severe punishment.

Muslims and Muslim Brotherhood:  
 50. A Muslim is he from whose tongue and hands Muslims are safe.  
 51. A true Muslim is thankful to Allah in prosperity and resigned to
His will in adversity.  
 52. It is not worthy of a speaker of truth to curse people.  
 53. That person is not a perfect Muslim who eats his full and leaves
his neighbours hungry.  
 54. No man has believed perfectly, until he wishes for his brother that
which he wishes for himself.  
 55. All Muslims are like one wall, some parts strengthening others; in
such a way they must support each other.  
 56. Muslims are brothers in religion, and they must not oppress one
another nor abandon assisting one another nor hold one another in
contempt; and all things of one Muslim are unlawful to another, his
blood, property and reputation.  
 57. To abuse a Muslim is disobedience to Allah and it is infidelity to
fight with one.  
 58. The duties of Muslims to each other are six  
 i. When you meet a Muslim salaam (greet) him;  
 ii. When he invites you to dinner, accept it;  
 iii. When he asks you for advice give it to him;  
 iv. When he sneezes and says "al-Hamdu li'llah" (Praise be to Allah),
you should say "Rahimaka'llah ( may Allah have mercy on you) ;  
 v. When he is sick visit him; and  
 vi. When he dies, follow his bier.

Oppression:  
 59. Allah loves not the tyrants and he desires not tyranny in the
world.

Orphans:  
 60. The best Muslim house, is that in which an orphan is well cared
for.  
 61. I and the guardian of orphans will be in one place in the next
world like my two fingers, touching each other.

Qur'an, Prophet and His Near Relatives:  
 62. O Lord! grant to me the love of Thee; grant that I love those that
love Thee; grant that I may do the deeds that win Thy love; make Thy
love dearer to me than self, family or wealth.  
 63. Verily Allah instructs me to be humble and lowly and not proud, and
that no one should oppress another.  
 64. The Prophet would go out in advance to receive his daughter
Fatimah, when she came from her husband's house.  
 65. I have left two Precious Things among you and you will not go
astray as long as you hold fast to them - one is the Book of Allah
(Qur'an), and the other is my near relatives (Ahlu'1-bayt).  
 66. I and \`Ali are created from one nur (light).  
 67. I am the City of Knowledge and \`Ali is its Gate.  
 68. O \`Ali! your position with me is the same as Harun's was with
Musa, with this difference only that there will be no prophet after
me.  
 69. Whoever believes me to be his mawla, \`Ali is also his mawla. O
Lord! befriend him who befriends \`Ali and be the enemy of the enemy of
\`Ali.  
 70. Fatimah is a piece of my heart.  
 71. Husayn is from me and I am from Husayn.  
 72. Hasan and Husayn are the leaders of youths of Paradise.

Paradise:  
 73. A person will not enter into Paradise, who has one atom of pride in
his heart. A person will not enter into Paradise, who has one atom of
pride in his heart. A person will not enter into Paradise, who has one
atom of pride in his heart.  
 74. Hell is veiled in delights and Heaven in hardships and miseries.  
 75. They will enter the garden of Bliss who have a true, pure and
merciful heart.  
 76. Guard yourselves from five things and I am your surety for
Paradise:  
 i. When you speak, speak the truth;  
 ii. Perform when you promise;  
 iii. Discharge your trust;  
 iv. Withhold your hand from striking; and  
 v. From taking that which is unlawful and bad.

Parents and Family:  
 77. Paradise lies at the feet of thy mother.  
 78. Allah's pleasure is in father's pleasure and Allah's displeasure is
in father's displeasure.  
 79. He who wishes to enter Paradise must please his father and
mother.  
 80. It is a pity, young persons may not attain Paradise by not serving
their old parents.  
 81. A man must do good to his parents, although they may have injured
him.  
 82. Kindness is a mark of faith and whoever has not kindness has no
faith.  
 83. No father has given his children anything better than good
manners.  
 84. Treat children with a view to inculcate self respect in them.  
 85. Whoever does good to daughters will be saved from Hell.  
 86. He is of the most perfect of Muslims, whose disposition is most
liked by others.

Pride  
 87. No one who keeps his mind focussed entirely upon himself, can grow
large, strong and beautiful in character.  
 88. A community must desist from boasting of their ancestors. Mankind
are all sons of Adam and he was from earth.

Reason:  
 89. The first thing created was my nur (light).  
 90. Honourable thoughts create honourable results.

Recommendations:  
 91. The greatest jihad is that for the conquest of self.  
 92. The best of acts in Allah's sight, is that which is constantly
attended to, though it be in a small degree.  
 93. Trust in Allah but tie your camel.  
 94. The best of acts are found in the golden mean.

Remembrance of Allah:  
 95. A good disposition, deliberation in works and to adopt the golden
mean in all affairs, are of the qualities of prophets.  
 96. There is a polish for everything and the polish for the heart is
the remembrance of Allah.  
 97. Whoever loves to meet Allah, Allah loves to meet him.  
 98. The five stated prayers erase the sins which have been committed
during the intervals between them, if they have not been mortal sins.  
 99. Say your prayers standing. If you are not able, do it sitting and
if not sitting, do it in bed.  
 100. Order your children to say the stated prayers, when they are seven
years of age and punish them if they do not do so when they are ten
years old; and when they reach ten years, divide their beds.

Suspicion:  
 101. Suspicion is the blackest lie.

Sympathy:  
 102. Allah is not merciful to him who is not so to mankind. He who is
not kind to Allah's creation and to his own children, Allah will not be
kind to him.  
 103. He who will do good to the needy, Allah will do good to him in
this world and the next.  
 104. Whosoever visits a sick person, an angel calls from Heaven: "Be
happy in the world and happy be your walking; and take your habitation
in Paradise.

Women:  
 105. A virtuous wife is a man's best treasure.  
 106. Do you beat your wife, as you would a slave? That must you not.  
 107. A Muslim must not hate his wife. If he is displeased with one bad
quality in her, let him be pleased with another, which is good.  
 108. The things which is lawful but disliked by Allah is divorce.  
 109. Do not prevent your women from coming to mosque; but their homes
are preferable for them.  
 110. When a woman observes the five times of prayer, fasts during the
month of Ramadan and is chaste and is not disobedient to her husband,
then tell her to enter Paradise by whichever door she pleases.

World  
 111. The love of the world, is the root of all evils.  
 112. Wealth properly employed is a blessing; and a man may lawfully
endeavour to increase it by honest means.


