The Fourth Infallible The Second Imam
=====================================

Al-Hasan Ibn Ali Al-Mujtaba (Peace be on him)
---------------------------------------------

Name: al-Hasan.  
 Title: al-Mujtaba.  
 Agnomen: Abu Muhammad.  
 Father's name: Ali Amir al-Mu'minin.  
 Mother's name: Fatimah (daughter of the Holy Prophet).  
 Birth: In Medina on Tuesday, 15th Ramadan 3 AH.  
 Death: Died at the age of 46, in Medina on Thursday, 28th Safar 50 AH;
buried in Jannatu 'l-Baqi', in Medina.

Imam Hasan was the eldest son of Imam \`Ali and Hadrat Fatimah. When the
Holy Prophet received the happy news of the birth of his grandson, he
came to the house of his beloved daughter, took the newly born child in
his arms, recited adhan and iqamah in his right and left ears
respectively, and in compliance with Allah's command named him al-Hasan.

Childhood:
----------

The first phase of seven years of his infancy was blessed with the
gracious patronage of the Holy Prophet, who gifted him all his great
qualities and adorned him with Divine knowledge, tolerance,
intelligence, bounty and valour. Being infallible by birth and decorated
with heavenly knowledge by Allah, his insight had an access to
al-lawhul-mahfuz (the Guarded Tablet on which the transactions of
mankind have been written by Allah for all eternity).

The Holy Imam immediately became conversant with all the contents of any
wahy (Qur'anic verses) revealed when the Holy Prophet would disclose it
to his associates. To the great surprise of the Holy Prophet, Hadrat
Fatimah would often recite the exact text of a newly revealed way before
he disclosed it personally to her. When he inquired, she would inform
him that it was Hasan through whom she had learned the Revelation.

Remembrance of Allah:
---------------------

The Holy Imam devoted himself to prayers in such abundance, that all the
limbs employed in prostration bore scars and impressions of his sajdah
(prostration). Most of the nights were spent on the prayer-carpet. The
sense of his absorption and humiliation in prayers to Allah were in such
earnest that he would shed tears profusely out of fear of Allah. While
performing ablution, he trembled with the fear of Allah and his face
grew pale at the time of prayers. His earnest meditation in the offering
of prayers and his extreme absorption in communion with Allah would
render him entirely unconscious of his environments.

His Piousness and Contentment:
------------------------------

Imam Hasan had the worldly possessions at his disposal and could have
well enjoyed a luxurious life, but he utilized all of it in the
betterment of the condition of the poor. He was so courteous and humble
that he never hesitated to sit along with the beggars in the lanes and
on the thoroughfares of Medina to reply to some of their religious
queries. Through his cordial attitude and hospitality he never let the
poor and the humble feel inferior to him when they visited his abode.

Imamate:
--------

The demise of the Holy Prophet was followed by an eventful era when the
Islamic world (under the false ruling bodies) came in the grip of the
fever of expansionism and conquest. But even under such a revolutionary
phase, Imam Hasan kept devoting himself to the sacred mission of
peacefully propagating Islam and the teachings of the Holy Prophet along
with his great father Imam 'Ali.

The martyrdom of Imam Ali on the 21st Ramadan marked the inception of
Imam Hasan's Imamate. The majority of Muslims pledged their allegiance
to him and finalized the formality of bay'ah (oath of allegiance). No
sooner had he taken the reins of leadership into his hands than he had
to meet the challenge of Mu'awiyah, the Governor of Syria, who declared
a war against him. In compliance with the Will of Allah and with a view
to refrain from causing the massacre of Muslims however, he entered into
a piece treaty with Mu'awiyah on terms (though not totally respected and
carried out by Mu'awiyah), yet saved Islam and stopped a civil war. But
this peace treaty was never meant as surrender by him of the permanent
leadership to Mu'awiyah. It was meant only as an interim transfer of the
administration of the Islamic kingdom, subject to the condition that the
administration would be surrendered back to Imam Hasan after Mu’awiya’s
death and then it would in turn be inherited by Imam Husayn. Having
relieved himself of the administrative responsibilities, Imam Hasan kept
the religious leadership with himself and devoted his life to the
propagation of Islam and the teachings of the Holy Prophet in Medina.

Mu'awiyah's malice against Imam Hasan led him to conspire with the
Imam's wife Ja'dah, the daughter of Ash'ath. She was made to give the
Imam some poison which affected his liver. Imam Hasan thus succumbed to
Mu’awiyah's fatal mischief and attained his martyrdom on 28th Safar 50
AH. His funeral was attended by Imam Husayn and the members of the
Hashimite family. His bier while being taken for burial to the Holy
Prophet's tomb was shot at with arrows by his enemies, (under direct
supervision and consent of A'ishah), and it had to be diverted for
burial to the Jannatu’l-Baqi\` at Medina. His tomb was demolished along
with others on 8th Shawwal 1344 (21st April 1926) by the Saudi rulers
when they came to power in Hijaz.

The terms of the peace treaty were soon violated, but earned only a
short-lived glory for Mu’awiyah. Its aftermath proved disastrous and
doomed the fate of his son Yazid and dealt a fatal blow to the entire
family of Umayyads. After the death of Mu'awiyah, Imam Husayn emerged as
the insurmountable mountain of truth and determination. In the gruesome
tragedy of Karbala', by sheer force of numbers, and by isolating the
seventy-two members of Imam Husayn's party and stopping them from even
getting water to drink for three days, Yazid succeeded in annihilating
the seventy-two persons including members of the Imam's family who were
with him.

This dastardly success of Yazid was, however, short-lived. The Muslims
turned against him on learning of the heinous act he had committed and
this resulted in the downfall of Yazid and the extinction of the Umayyad
power from the face of the earth.

al-\`Allamah at-Tabataba'i writes:
----------------------------------

Imam Hasan Mujtaba, upon whom be peace, was the second Imam. He and his
brother Imam Husayn were the two sons of Amir al-Mu'minin \`Ali and
Hadrat Fatimah, the daughter of the Prophet. Many times the Prophet had
said, "Hasan and Husayn are my children." Because of these same words
\`Ali would say to his other children, "You are my children and Hasan
and Husayn are the children of the Prophet."

Imam Hasan was born in the year 3 AH, in Medina and shared in the life
of the Prophet for somewhat over seven years, growing up during that
time under his loving care. After the death of the Prophet which was no
more than three, or according to some, six months earlier than the death
of Hadrat Fatimah, Hasan was placed directly under the care of his noble
father. After the death of his father, through Divine Command and
according to the will of his father, Imam Hasan became Imam; he also
occupied the outward function of caliph for about six months, during
which time he administered the affairs  
 of the Muslims. During that time Mu'5wiyah, who was a bitter enemy of
\`Ali and his family and had fought for years with the ambition of
capturing the caliphate, first on the pretext of avenging the death of
the third caliph and finally with an open claim to the caliphate,
marched his army to Iraq, the seat of Imam Hasan's caliphate. War ensued
during which Mu'awiyah gradually subverted the generals and commanders
of Imam Hasan's army with large sums of money and deceiving promises
until the army rebelled against Imam Hasan. Finally, the Imam was forced
to make peace and to yield the caliphate to Mu'awiyah, provided it would
again return to Imam Hasan after Mu’awiya’s death and the Im5m's
Household and partisans would be protected in every way.

In this way Mu'awiyah captured the Islamic caliphate and entered Iraq.
In a public speech he officially made null and void all the peace
conditions and in every way possible placed the severest pressure upon
the members of the Household of the Prophet and the Shi'ah. During all
the ten years of his Imamate, Imam Hasan lived in conditions of extreme
hardship and under persecution, with no security even in his own house.
In the year 50 AH, he was poisoned and martyred by one of his own
Household who, as has been accounted by historians, had been  
 motivated by Mu'awiyah.

In human perfection Imam Hasan was reminiscent of his father and a
perfect example of his noble grandfather. In fact, as long as the
Prophet was alive, he and his brother were always in the company of the
Prophet who even sometimes would carry them on his shoulders. Both Sunni
and Shi\`ite sources have transmitted this saying of the Holy Prophet
concerning Hasan and Husayn: "These two children of mine are Imams
(leaders) whether they stand up or sit down" (allusion to whether they
occupy the external function of caliphate or not). Also, there are many
traditions of the Holy Prophet and \`Ali concerning the fact that Imam
Hasan would gain the function of Imamate after his noble father.
(Shi\`ite Islam)

al-Imam al-Hasan ibn Ali, peace be on him, said:
------------------------------------------------

\* If you fail to obtain something of worldly benefit, take it as if the
thought of it had never crossed your mind at all.  
 \* Never did a nation resort to mutual counsel except that they were
guided by it towards maturity.  
 \* It is love which brings closer those who are remote by ancestry, and
it is (the absence of) love which causes dissociation between those who
are related by ancestry.  
 \* Opportunity is something which is quick to vanish and late to
return.

\*\*\*\*\*


