Bahlool's Advice To Haroon
==========================

Haroon Al-Rashid once requested Bahlool for his advice in matters of
administration of his Caliphate. In reply Bahiool said:

"Suppose for a moment that you get trapped into a jungle and you are
suffering from intense thirst whilst there is no water available. If by
good luck someone comes to offer you a cup of water to save your life,
what would you givel him in return?"

Haroon said: "One hundred Dinars of Gold". Bahlool said: "If he was not
satisfied with this and willing to accept, then what?"

Haroon said: "I would offer half of my kingdom" Bahlool. then asked:

"Supposing after quenching your thirst, you were to suffer from
strangury (restriction in passing urine), what would you offer to get
cured?" Haroon replied:

" The Balance half of my kingdom" Bahlool then advised:

"Do not be arrogant on your kingdom whilst you are willing to give away
so much in return for a cup of water and cure of your sickness. It is
only wise that you should treat your people fairly and kindly" How
rightly has the Prophet said that:

"The worldly life is subject to changes. What good is meant for you
would reach you even in your state of weakness. And what bad is to have,
you will not be able to discard even with your power".

**HIS OUTSTANDING WISDOM**

A trader accompanied by his slave was travelling in a boat to Basra. By
chance Bahlool happened to travel in the same boat. The slave got
perturbed with the storm in the river water and started panicking and
crying. Bahlool seeked the permission of the Master to calm him by some
way.

When the permission was granted Bahlool ordered that the slave be
thrown into the water and this was done .When the slave was on the verge
of drowning, he gave instructions then to rescue him. Following this,
the slave sitting quietly in one corner of the boat behaved calmly.

When asked on the wisdom of such a treatment to the slave, Bahlool
explained that he had no understanding of a boat and its movement in the
water. Only when he was thrown out into the water did he then come to
appreciate the condition of a boat.

The Prophet of Islam has encouranged people to travel by saying:
"Travel snd you will enrich yourselves' (by new experiences and
contacts}

**Debate With A Jurist**

A Faqih (jurist) happened to come to Baghdad from Khorasan and Haroon
Rashid invited him to his court. When he arrived, Haroon accorded him
every honour and made him sit next to him. By chance Bahlool also
appeared in the court and Haroon also accorded him due respect and made
him sit nearby.

The jurist on seeing the crazy outlook of Bahlool remarked that it was
rather surprising for the Caliph to welcome such people hear him. When
Bahlool overheard this rernark, he, retorted by telling the jurist not
to be puffed up with his little and imperfect knowledge.

He further claimed that he was prepared to debate with him and prove
his ignorance. The jurist reacted to this by saying that what could he
talk to an insane person. And Bahlool responded by saying:

" I may confess my insanity but you do not accept the challenge to your
own ignorance and imperfect knowledge"

On hearing this hot, exchange, Haroon tried to calm Bahlool but he
would not. Again he challenged the jurist to enter a polemic
conversation with him if at all he was confident of his knowledge.
Haroon said to the jurist:

"What is the objection, why not put some questions to Bahlool?" To
this, the jurist responded by saying: "I am willing to do so on
condition that if he failed to answer satisfactorily, he should pay a
thousand dinars in gold coins. Likewise he would pay similar amount if
he failed."

Bahlool responded that from the worldly treasure he had nothing but
should he be defeated, he was willing to enter into the slavery of the
jurist. The jurist then put forward this question:

"Supposing a woman was sitting in a house with her husband. And a man
was occupied in prayers and another person was in the state of fasting.
During that period another man entered that house, the marriage of wife
and husband became mutually null and void, whilst the prayer of the one
who was praying and the fasting of the one who fasted also became
unacceptable. Who was the person who entered the house?"

In reply to the above question, Bahlool promptly answered by explaining
that the person who entered that house was the previous husband of that
woman. He had gone on a journey and had not returned for quite some
time. The woman was informed that he had died, so after securing the
consent of Hakime Sheria (Executer of Islamic Laws) she married again
with the man with whom, she was sitting.

Besides she had arranged with those other two men on behalf of the
husband who was reckoned to be dead.

Now as soon as her first husband who was alive entered the house , the
first marriage revived and the second marriage became automatically null
and void. And that prayer and fasting on his behalf also became
unnecessary, since prayer and fast on behalf of one who is alive is not
acceptable in the Islamic Sharia Haroon and his courtiers were much
impressed by this logic answer. Bahlool then took his turn and posed the
following question to the jurist:

"Supposing one bowl is full of sugar syrup and while another one with
vinegar.

If for the purpose of preparing 'Sikanjabin' (a kind of vinegar syrup),
we put them in third bowl and we find a small rat in it. How can we
determine whether that rat originally was in the bowl of vinegar or in
that of the supar syrup?" To this question put forward by Bahlooi, the
jurist had no answer to give. Haroon noticing his. silence, called for
the answer from Bahlool himself and Bahlool answered:

"We should first remove the dead rat from the syrup, wash it with water
and thence tear open its body to see what was there in its tummy. If we
find vinegar, we can conclude that the rat had got into the bowl of
vinegar. If however, we find sugar syrup in its tummy, we conclude that
it was originally in the bowl of syrup."

On hearing this answer to tne question, all those present in the court
were awe struck with the remarkable intelligence of Bahlool.

Finally the jurist had to part with the agreed sum of a thousand dinars
of gold to Bahlool who instead of pocketing them himself, distributed
among the poor. This polemic between Bahlool and the jurist denotes the
deep knowledge he had in Islamic jurisprudence. This made htm famous to
be held in high esteem despite his insanely ways of living.

The following sayings of the Prophet are herewith worth noting: "He
whose knowledge is higher is considered more in value than others" "A
slip by a learned becomes widely publicized whereas that of an ignorant
gets covered up under his ignorance".

"The happiness of this world and the next Has in learning and the evil
of this world .and the next in ignorance"


