A Joke With Bahlool
===================

Once Bahlool was sitting in the court of Haroon. In order to create
some fun, one of the vazirs of the Caliph said this to him:

"Congratulations Oh Bahlool! I understand the Caliph Haroon has decided
to entrust to you the kingdom and rulership over the animals of the
cocks and the pigs etc."

Promptly Bahlool reacted to this by saying:

"Be careful not to go against any rule in my kingdom. I shall be very
strict to those going against. But I shall be very considerate to those
obeying me and providing more grass and water."

On hearing this, Haroon was much amused. He laughed and laughed till he
fell backward. What a logic and prompt way Bahlool always responded to
any matter put forward to him.

"Throw a stone in return from where one comes to you because evil can
be met only with evil."

**ADVICE TO ABDULLA MUBARAK**

Abdulla Mubarak once approached Bahlool with a request to show him a
way of salvation and purification from sins. Bahlool replied that what
could be expected from him when he was considered as an insane person by
people.

Why not find a sensible person to guide you? he added. Abdulla said
that insane persons are quite often expert in their profession hence one
ought to listen to words of wisdom from those considered mentally
unbalanced. On Abdullah's insistence, Bahlool agreed upon four
conditions narrated as under:

What better reason other than this could it be for one always to remain
on the path of obedience to Allah.

Firstly: "If you go against any command of Allah then you should
refrain from eating from His sustenance. How dare you as a sensible
person, claiming to be servant of Allah and enjoying His bounties yet
turn against Him?"

Abdulla admitted that this was the absolute truth Secondly: "When you
disobey Him, you should not reside in His domain." Adbulla said: "This
was rather, difficult condition to comply with" Bahlool said:

"But how unfair it was to enjoy His blessings and reside in His doinain
yet disobey and go against His commands. Allah Himself has said in the
Holy Qura'n:

"Surely to Us is their turning back, Then surely upon Us is the taking
of their account." (88:25-26) Thirdly; "If you are bent upon committing
a sin, then do so at a place where Allah cannot see you at all"

Abdulla said: "This is impossible" Bahlool said: "How unfair it was for
one to enjoy His bounties, reside in His domain and yet commit sins
despite the fact that He is seeing you. And Allah has stated in the Holy
Qura'n:

"And do not think Allah to be heedless of what the unjust do; He only
respites them to a day on which the eyes shall be fixedly open." (14:42)
Fourthly: "When the angel of death approaches you for taking away your
soul, tell him to wait so that you may bid farewell to people and
perform some good deeds for the benefit of life after death" Abdulla
responded saying:

"This was impossible because the angel of death does not allow any
respite to anyone"

Bahlool reacted to this by saying:

"How dare you then commit a sin when you know for certain that you are
not going to be spared anytime when death approaches. Is it not possible
that death comes to you at the very moment when you are committing sin
and you are unable to move. And Allah had said in the Holy Quran:

"And for every nation there is a doom, so when their doom is come they
shall not remain behind the least while, nor shall they go before."
(7:34) Abdulla told Bahlool that he had carefully listed and understood
his four conditions and wanted to hear more from him. Bahlool then
added: "Man,when committing action, or uttering, or hearing any word,
ought to keep in view the commands of Allah"


**Inquiry On Bahlool's Welfare**

Haroon once inquired from Bahlool about his welfare and how he was
keeping. In reply he said:

"So long as I do not take over upon myself the responsibility of
governing and matters pertaining to the Muslim Ummah, I shall remain
alright" "But don't you know that to maintain justice and fairplay among
Muslims is Ibadat - an act of virtue", said Harooh.

"I know that but the Cafiph himself ought to be obedient and not an
usurper since the caliphate is the right of the children of Ali (A.S.)".
retorted Bahlool. "Don't you like to live forever with pleasure and
happiness?". asked Haroon.

"No, because if I were always to enjoy the pleasure of worldly
blessings, I am likely to forget Allah, the reality of my true self and
my welfare and salvation in the next world and I do not want to risk
that. I am only willing to accept and be satisfied with what is my
right", replied Bahlool.

Thus Bahlool demonstrated his profound sense of contentment besides his
strong belief in the fact that the more one is attached to worldly
pleasures, the more the risks of forgetting Allah and the life
hereafter. How truly is the saying of the Prophet:

"Contentment is such a wealth which does not get exhausted" Contentment
has been regarded as capital and estate for the reason that just as the
estate and area under sway dispels need in the same way when a man
adopts contentment and feels happy over his livelihood he becomes free
of turning to others in the time of need.

Whoever is contented with the morsel he gets, dry or wet, is the king
of all the land and sea.


**VISIT TO THE GRAVEYARD**

Once people saw Bahlool sitting between graves at a graveyard. They
joked with him saying: "Oh Bahlool! You are still alive, why do you have
to remain seated here between the dead?"

"I prefer to sit with such people because they keep me away from pride
and negligence of my moral duties, and are the cause of good advice to
me" replied Bahlool. And once Bahlool was returning from a visit to the
grave-yard, some people asked him:

"Wherefrom do you come. Oh Bahlool?" "I am coming back from a visit of
those people who have already descended under the earth", he replied.

"Have you talked and asked them anything?", those people asked. "Yes! I
asked them when were they to move away from their present station and
they told me that they were awaiting your arrival there. They will move
when you also arrive there", replied Bahlool.

That graveyard is the final place we all have to go to one day Is the
moral lesson given by Bahlool. Therefore wise is the one who remains
always thoughtful and prepared for this ultimate destination.

"I also advise you to remember death and to lessen your heedlessness
towards it. Why should you be heedless of Him Who is not heedless of
you? Why expect from him (i.e., the angel of death) who will not give
you time?

The dead whom you have been watching suffice as preachers. They were
carried to their graves, not riding themselves, and were placed in them
but not of their own accord. It seems as if they never lived in this
world and as if the next world had always been their abode.

They have made lonely the place where they were living, and are now
living where they used to feel lonely. They remained busy about what
they had to leave, and did not care for where they were to go. Now they
cannot remove themselves from evil, nor add to their virtues They were
attached to the world and it deceived them. They trusted it and it
overturned them." (Nahjul Balaghah; sermon 188)

**DISCUSSION ON LIFE HEREAFTER**

Haroon once asked Bahlool whether he new where his place was after
death in accordance with this Quranic Ayat:

"Most surely the righteous are in bliss, And most surely the wicked are
in burning fire," (82:13-14) And what is to happen to my tie of
relationship to the Prophet? Haroon also asked. In reply Bahlool recited
the following Ayat of the Qura'n:

"So when the trumpet is blown, there shall be no ties of relationship
between them on that day, nor shall they ask of each other." (23:101)

"Without good deeds, your tie of relationship with the Prophet will be
of no benefit to you. Whosoever oppresses the decendants of the Prophet
shall be denied his intercession on the day of Judgement." Haroon on
hearing this asked:

"In what way have the decendants of the Prophet suffered because of
me?" Bahlool in reply to this said:

"Imam Musa ibn Jaffer who is the decendant of the Prophet is without
any fault or reason in your prison. Could there be worse sin than this?"
Haroon thought deeply for a while and wept then asked: "If I were to
repent and make Tauba, would I not achieve salvation?" To this Bahlool
responded by saying:

"You are so much overtaken by the love of power and so negligent of the
life hereafter that you would not refrain from your misdeeds and sins
even if the Prophet were to descend from heaven and reproach you giving
good advice."

The foregoing polemic denotes the deep concern Bahlool cherished in his
heart for the oppressive treatment of the descendants of the Prophet by
the Abbasid rulers of his time. That Bahlool dared to raise his voice of
protest before Haroon shows the degree of his great courage and
uprightness.


