A Mosque Slab
=============

It is related that Fazl bin Rabee built a mosque in Baghdad. At the
time of placing a plaque on the door, he was asked what should be
written on it and he expressed his desire that his name as the donor of
the mosque was to appear. By chance Bahlool was present there and he
asked him this question: "For whose sake have you constructed the
mosque?"

Fazl replied: "For the sake of Allah"

Bahlool said: "If it is for the sake of Allah then do not mention your
name on the plaque"

Hearing this, Fazl became angry and said:

"Why not mention my name on the plaque. Let people come to know who the
founder of the mosque was!" Bahlool then said: "Why not mention my name
then on the plaque". Fazl said: "I shall never agree to that"

Bahlool in response said "If you have built this mosque to show off and
boast your name, you will forego your reward from Allah." Hearing this,
Fazl became dumb-founded and maintained silence. Thereafter he said:

"whatever Bahlool suggests, you may inscribe on the plaque." At that
junction Bahlool instructed that an ayat from the Holy Qur'an be
inscribed on the plaque and placed on the door of the mosque.

"And that the mosques are Allah's, therefore call not upon any one with
Allah:"(72:18)

**DESCRIPTION OF THE VIRTUES OF ALI**

One day Bahlool went to visit Haroon who was in a relaxed and good
mood. He asked Bahlool this:

"Was Ali (A.S.) of higher status and more elevated than Abbas the uncle
of the Prophet or was Abbas higher than Ali (A.S.)?" Bahlool replied:

"Would I be guaranteed safety from you if I were to tell the truth?"
When Haroon guaranteed this, Bahlool then said:

"Ali (A.S.) after Prophet Mohamed (S.A) was in status higher than all
the Muslims. Not only that but higher than all the previous Prophets.
The reason for this is that Ali (A.S.) was that exalted personality who
possessed all the good qualities. His staunch faith in Islam is
unquestionable.

His bravery in the wars in defence of Islam is unparallel. He
sacrificed not only his but also the lives of his kith and kin in the
safe-guarding the tenets of Islam. In all the Islamic wars of defence,
he was in the forefront never did he turn his back and run away from the
front against the enemies.

And when he Ali (A.S.) was asked: "Why don't you ever look behind when
fighting lest an enemy strikes you from behind" he would reply this:
"Fighting in a battle for me is for the sake of Islam. No fear of any
sort nor any personal interest concerns me. I fully submit to Allah. If
I am killed, it would on the way of Allah,and what better achievement
could it be than this."

"Moreover, when Ali (A.S ) was a Caliph of the Muslims, he rested
neither during the day nor at night in the sarvice of the people. He did
not allow wastage or over-spending of the treasury lest the rights of
the needy and poor were ignored."

When Aqeel his brother went to his house and saw how Ali (A.S.) as the
Caliph lived so simply, he became ashemed of requesting for favours from
the state treasury; He always acted with extreme fairness and justice
and terminated the appointment of any state officer found to commit
injustice.

For example, Ibne Abbas, when he was the governor of Bassah, once spent
an amount from the public-treasury for his personal matters. Ali (A.S.)
demanded the return of the money and reaproached him considerably for
doing so. A time limit for the return of the money was set but Ibne
Abbas failed to return.

Ali (A.S.) summoned him to return to Kufa but he instead went to Kaaba
in Mecca seeking forgiveness. Ali (A.S.) was such a man to principle and
discipline."

Oh hearing this, Haroon rather upset, decided to argue the subject and
put this question to Bahloof:

"Despite all these virtues and elevations, why was he then killed?"
Bahlool replied:

"Most of the people on the path oif truth have been persecuted. Even
the Prophets like Issa, Dawood and Yahva were not spared by the people
of their times" The Prophet of Islam in one of his numerous sayings
about Ali bin Ali Taleb had said:

"The Truth is with Ali and Ali is with the Truth".

**Bahlool In Basrah**

Bahlool once happened to go to Basrah. Not being acquainted with anyone
there, he was obliged to rent a room for some days. But it was so old
and in bad condition thaT a blow of strong wind or rainfall would make
the roof and doors rattle and create unusual sound.

Bahlool went to the owner to complain saying that the room was so bad
that a slight blow of the wind would make the roof and the walls rattle
and create frightening sound.

The owner of the room being of jovial nature responded by arguing that:
"As you know. Oh Bahlool, that all creatures in this world sing the
praise of Allah and declares His glory. Hence the rattling and sound
making of the roof and walls is for that purpose."

Bahlool reacted to this by saying:

"It is true but don't you know that the singing of praise and glory by
creatures leads to Sajda, i.e. prostration. I am worried what would
happen when the room prostrates into Sajda (i.e. when it falls and
collapses by the gush of the wind)."

What a remarkable degree of intelligence possessed by Bahlool. No
shrewed argument could ever beat him in his wit and ability to retort
instantly.


