The Events of The 9th of Muharram
=================================

Ibn Sa‘d Advances Against al-Husayn (as)
----------------------------------------

[Harith bin Hasirah] reports: “Ibn Sa‘d announced after the *‘asr*
prayers [saying]: “O soldiers of Allah! Get on your mounts and receive
the good tidings [of Heaven]!” The soldiers mounted and advanced against
[al-Husayn (as) and his companions].

Al-Husayn (as) was [at that time] sitting in front of his tent with his
sword on his lap and his head on his knees having a short sleep. His
sister, Zainab, heard the clamour [of the approaching soldiers] so she
went near her brother and said: “O my brother! Do you not hear the
noises that have drawn nearer?!”

So al-Husayn (as) raised his head and said: “I have just seen the
Messenger of Allah (S) in my sleep and he said to me: ‘You are coming to
us [soon].” So his sister struck her face and cried out [in grief]: “Woe
onto me!” So he said to her: “May you not see any distress O sister.
Keep calm, may the All-merciful have mercy on you!”

‘Abbas bin ‘Ali (as) said: “O my brother! The army has come!” So
al-Husayn (as) got up and said: “O ‘Abbas! Get on your mount, may I be
sacrificed for you -O brother, and go to meet them and ask them: ‘What
is the matter with you? What has appeared [appropriate] to you? And what
has brought them?”

So ‘Abbas went to meet them with about twenty horsemen, among whom were
Zuhair bin al-Qain and Habib bin Mu³ahir. ‘Abbas said to them: “What has
appeared to you? What do you want?”

They replied: “We have received an order from the governor that we
should offer you [an opportunity] to submit to his authority, or else we
should force you to do so.”

He said: “Do not hurry until I have gone back to Abu ‘Abdillah and told
him what you have said.”

So they stopped and said: “Go to him and inform him, and tell us what he
says to you.”

‘Abbas went galloping back to al-Husayn (as) to give him the
information. His companions stood [by the enemy] addressing the people.
Habib bin Mu³ahir[^1] said to Zuhair bin al-Qain: “Talk to this people
if you like, or else I shall speak to them.” So Zuhair said to him: “You
came up with this [idea], so you be the one to talk to them.”

Habib bin MuZahir told him: “By Allah, the most wretched of the people
before Allah tomorrow are a people who shall meet Him while they are
guilty of having killed the children, progeny and household of His
Prophet (S), and the devout men of this city who strive [in worship] at
dawn and who remember Allah much.” [He said this to Zuhair bin al-Qain
such that the army could hear him, and among those who heard was ‘Azarah
bin Qais].

‘Azarah bin Qais[^2] said to him: “You are asserting purity for
yourself!”

So Zuhair replied him: “O ‘Azarah! Allah has indeed purified and guided
his soul. Fear Allah O ‘Azarah; I am [sincerely] advising you. I beseech
you by Allah, O ‘Azarah, not to be of those who help the misled in
killing the pure souls!”

‘Azarah said: “O Zuhair! We had never been -in our opinion- among the
followers of the people of this House. Rather, you were a partisan of
‘Uthman (*‘uthmani*).”[^3]

Zuhair answered: “Have you still not come to know –after seeing my
stand- that I am one of them! By Allah! I never wrote to [al-Husayn],
nor did I send to him any messenger, nor did I promise him my support.
But it was the way that brought us together. When I saw [al-Husayn], he
made me recall the Messenger of Allah (S) and his position to him. So I
knew the enemy he is going to face, that is your party. So I decided to
help him and be in his party and lay down my life for him, in defence of
those rights of Allah and His Prophet (S) which have been violated by
you.”

When ‘Abbas bin ‘Ali came to al-Husayn (as) with the proposal of ‘Umar
bin Sa‘d, he said to [‘Abbas]: “Go back to them and if you can, delay
them until the morning and keep them away from us this evening. Perhaps
we may [be able to] spend the night praying to our Lord, supplicating to
him and seeking his forgiveness; for he knows that I have always loved
praying to Him, reciting His Book, [making] many invocations and seeking
His forgiveness.”

So ‘Abbas bin ‘Ali (as) galloped his horse and went back to them and
said: “O people! Abu ‘Abdillah is requesting you to grant him respite
for tonight, so that he may consider the matter; for there has not taken
place any discussion [so far] between you and him concerning this
[proposal]. So we shall now meet in the morning, if Allah wills.
[Either] we would give consent to it and do what you want from us and
are insisting upon; or we would dislike it and therefore reject it.”

By doing so [al-Husayn (as)] intended to keep them away that night so
that he might [have the opportunity to] give his instructions and make
his will to his family.

‘Umar bin Sa‘d said: “O Shamir! What do you think?”

He said: “It is up to you. You are the commander and the decision lies
with you.”

[‘Umar] said: “I wish I had not been there!” He then turned to his army
and said: “What is your opinion?”

‘Amru bin al-Hajjaj bin Salamah al-Zubaidi said: “Glory be to Allah! By
Allah! [Even] if they were from Dailam and had asked from you such [a
thing], it would have been incumbent on you to grant them their demand.”

Qais bin Ash’ath[^4] said: “Grant them their request. I swear by my life
that they are definitely going to fight you tomorrow morning!”

[Ibn Sa‘d] said: “By Allah, if I knew that they are going to do so, I
would not have left them for tonight.”[^5]

‘Ali bin al-Husayn (as) says: “Then a messenger came to us from ‘Umar
bin Sa‘d and stood at a point where he could be heard. He said: ‘We have
granted you a day until tomorrow. If you surrendered, we will send you
to our governor, ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad. But if you refused to do so,
then we are not going to leave you!”[^6]

[^1]: We mentioned him when discussing those among the followers of the
Imam (as) who wrote to him from Kufah.

[^2]: We have given his biography when mentioning those among the
hypocrites of Kufah who had written to the Imam (as).

[^3]: This is the first report related to the events of Karbala’ in
which this title has been attributed to Zuhair bin al-Qain. This is the
first title that caused disunity among the Muslims in their differences
about whether ‘Uthman was on the right or wrong. Accordingly, one who
followed ‘Ali (as) was called ‘alawi or shi’i, while the one who
followed ‘Uthman and believed that he was on the right and was killed
unjustly, came to be known as ‘uthmani.

[^4]: Al-Tabari: On the day of ‘Ashura’ he was leading the quarter of
Kindah and Rabi’ah (5:422). He was the one who plundered the Imam’s
silken cloak and came to be known after that as ‘Qais of the cloak’
(5:453). He was with Shamir bin Dhi al-Jaushan, ‘Amru bin al-Hajjaj and
‘Azarah bin Qais in carrying the heads of the companions of the Imam
(as) to Ibn Ziyad in Kufah (5:456). He was leading the Kindah who were
carrying thirteen of these heads (5:468). Ibn al-Ash’ath is the brother
of Muhammad bin Ash’ath -the assassin of Muslim, and the brother of
Ja’dah -the killer of al-Hasan (as).

[^5]: Al-Tabari (5:415): “[I narrate] on the authority of Harith bin
Hasirah, from Sharik al-Amiri who said…” See also al-Irshad (pg.230).

[^6]: Al-Tabari (5:417): “Harith bin Hasirah has related to me from
‘Abdullah bin Sharik al-Amiri, who reported from ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (as)
that…”


