The Day Of ‘Ashura’
===================

On the day of ‘Ashura’ –which fell on Saturday- ‘Umar bin Sa‘d offered
the morning prayers and then came out with his men.[^1]

‘Abdullah bin Zuhair al-Azdi[^2] was at the time leading the quarter of
the people of Madinah. The quarter of Madhhij and Asad was led by ‘Abd
al-Rahman bin Abi Sabrah al-Ju’fi[^3], while Qais bin al-Ash’ath bin
Qais [al-Kindi] was in charge of the group of Rabi’ah and Kindah. Hurr
bin Yazid al-Riyahi [al-Tamimi al-Yarbu’i] was leading the quarter of
Tamim and Hamdan.

‘Umar bin Sa‘d put ‘Amru bin al-Hajjaj al-Zubaidiyy on his right wing
and Shamir bin Dhi al-Jaushan al-Dabbabi al-Kilabi on his left wing.
‘Azarah bin Qais al-Ahmasi was given the command of the cavalry and
Shabath bin Rib’i al-Riyahi [al-Tamimi] of the foot soldiers. He gave
the standard to Dhuwaid, his retainer.[^4]

When the cavalry approached al-Husayn (as) in the morning, he raised his
hands and said: “O Allah, it is You in whom I trust amid all grief. You
are my hope amid all difficulties. You are my trust and provision in
everything that happens to me. How many a calamity in which the heart
may seem to weaken and trickery may seem to diminish and the friend may
seem to desert [me] and the enemy may seem to rejoice, [but] I brought
[it] before You and complained to You of it; that was because of my
turning away from [all] other than You; and You averted it and warded it
off. You are the Master of all blessings, the Possessor of all goodness
and the Ultimate Resort of all desire.”[^5]

[Dahhak bin ‘Abdullah al-Mushriqi, the one among the companions of
al-Husayn (as) who survived on the day of ‘Ashura’] reports:

“When they approached us and saw the fire burning the firewood and
cane -which we had set on fire behind our tents to prevent them from
attacking us from the rear- one of them came towards us galloping [his
horse] while he was fully armed. He did not speak to us but just passed
by our tents and had a look at them, but he saw nothing except the
firewood that was ablaze. So he returned and called out at the top of
his voice: ‘O Husayn! Are you hurrying to the fire before the Day of
Resurrection?’

Al-Husayn (as) said: ‘Who is that? [It sounds] like Shamir bin Dhi
al-Jaushan?’

His companions said: ‘Yes, may Allah guide you. It is him.’

[Al-Husayn] then said: ‘Son of a goat-herdess! You deserve most to be
burnt therein!’

So Muslim bin ‘Awsajah said to him: ‘O son of the Messenger of Allah!
May I be your ransom, should I not shoot him with an arrow? He is within
my range and I never miss the target. This vicious man is one of the
great tyrants.’

[But] al-Husayn (as) said to him: ‘Do not shoot at him, for I dislike to
begin [fighting] against them.”[^6]

The First Speech of the Imam (as)
---------------------------------

When the enemy had neared him, he [called] for his mount and mounted it.
He then called out at he top of his voice which was heard by most of the
people [and said]:

“O people! Listen to my words and do not hurry [to attack me] so that I
may remind you of the duties you have towards me, so that I may free
myself from any blame for coming to you. If you accept my excuse,
believe in what I say and give me justice, you will become happier
through that and you will have no reason to fight against me. [But] if
you do not accept my excuse and do not give me justice of your own
accord, ‘So conspire together, along with your partners, leaving nothing
vague in your plan, then carry it out against me without giving me any
respite.’[^7] ‘My guardian is indeed Allah who sent down the Book, and
He takes care of the righteous.’”[^8]

When his sisters heard what he said, they screamed and lamented. His
daughters also [began] weeping and their voices rose. So [al-Husayn
(as)] sent to them his brother, ‘Abbas bin ‘Ali, and his son, ‘Ali, and
told them: “Make them silent. For by my life, they are going to weep
even more.”

When the women became quite, he praised Allah and extolled Him and
mentioned what He is entitled to. He called for blessings on Muhammad
(S) and on the angels and the prophets.

[Here the reporter says:] “By Allah, I have never heard a speaker before
or after him more eloquent in his speech than he was.”

He then said: “Trace back my lineage and consider who I am?! Then look
back at yourselves and remonstrate with yourselves. Then consider
whether it is right for you to kill me and to violate my sanctity. Am I
not the son of the daughter of your Prophet, and the son of his
successor and cousin, the first of the believers in Allah and the one
who believed [first] in what the Messenger brought from his Lord? Was
not Hamzah, the lord of the martyrs, the uncle of my father?! Was not
Ja’far, the martyr, the one who flies [in Heaven] and the one with two
wings, my uncle?! Have you not heard the words common amidst you that
the Messenger of Allah (S) said to me and my brother: ‘These [two] are
the lords of the youths of Paradise?’

If you believe in what I am saying, [then know that] it is the truth,
for, by Allah, I never thought of lying since I learnt that Allah hated
the liars and that he punishes the one who lies. [But] if you regard it
as a lie, then there are among you those who, if you asked them about
it, would inform you [that the Prophet (S) had said so]. Ask Jabir bin
‘Abdillah al-Ansari[^9], or Abu Sa’id al-Khudhri[^10], or Sahl bin Sa‘d
al-Sa’idi[^11], or Zayd bin Arqam[^12],

or Anas bin Malik[^13] and they will inform you that they have heard
this statement from the Prophet of Allah (S) concerning myself and my
brother. Is there not [sufficient] in this to prevent you shedding my
blood?!”

Shamir bin Dhi al-Jaushan said: “Whoever understands what you are saying
is [indeed] worshipping Allah on the fringe.”[^14]

So Habib bin MuZahir said to him: “By Allah, I think you are worshipping
Allah on seventy edges. I testify that you are right, you do not
understand what he is saying; for indeed Allah has sealed your heart
[from the truth].”

Al-Husayn (as) then told them: “If you are in any doubt about this, then
are you going to doubt what I am going to say after this? Am I not the
son of the daughter of your Prophet? By Allah, there is no son of the
daughter of a prophet, between the East and the West, other than me;
neither from among you, nor from other than you. I, only, am the son of
the daughter of your Prophet. Now tell me, are you seeking retribution
from me for one of your dead whom I have killed, or for property [of
yours] which I expropriated, or are you seeking retaliation for a wound
[which I have inflicted on one of you]?”

[They remained silent and] did not say anything to him.

Then he called out: “O Shabath bin Rib’i, O Hajjar bin Abjar, O Qais bin
al-Ash’ath, O Yazid bin Harith! Did you not write to me [saying]: ‘The
fruits have ripened, the gardens have grown green and the water spots
have been filled. You are only coming to an army which has been prepared
for you. So come’?”

They replied: “We did not!”[^15]

So he said [with amazement]: “Glory be to Allah! Indeed, by Allah you
did so.” Then he said: “O people! [Now] that you dislike me, let me go
away from you to a secured place on this earth.”

So Qais bin al-Ash’ath said to him: “Will you not submit to the
authority of the sons of your uncle [i.e. the Banu Umayyah]?! They will
only treat you the way you wish and nothing detestful will touch you
from them!”

Al-Husayn (as) said: “You are the brother of your brother [i.e. Muhammad
bin al-Ash’ath]. Do you want the Banu Hashim to seek [retribution] from
you for more than the blood of Muslim bin ‘Aqil?! Nay by Allah, I will
not give them my hand like one who has been humiliated, nor will I
submit [to their demands] like the submission (*iqrar*) of the
slaves![^16] O servants of Allah! ‘I seek the protection of my Lord and
your Lord, lest you should stone me.’[^17] ‘Indeed I seek the protection
of my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant one who does not believe in
the Day of Reckoning.’”[^18]

Then, [he returned to (his tent)] and made his mount kneel and ordered
‘Uqbah bin Sim’an to tie it up and he did so.[^19]

The Speech of Zuhair bin al-Qain
--------------------------------

Zuhair bin al-Qain then went out on his thick-tailed (*dhanub*) horse
[while he was] fully armed. He said to them:

“O People of Kufah! Beware of the punishment of Allah, beware! Indeed a
Muslim is obliged to admonish his fellow Muslim brother. So long as the
sword does not separate us, we are [all] brothers, following the same
religion, members of the same nation and [in that case] you are worthy
of our advice. But when the sword comes [inbetween us], the bond [of
brotherhood] will get severed. We will become a community and you will
become a [different] community.

Allah has put you and us into test through the children of his Prophet,
Muhammad (S), so that He may see what we and you are going to do in
their right. We are inviting you to support them and to abandon the
tyrant, ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad; for, indeed, you have only seen evil
throughout their rule. They gouged your eyes, severed your hands and
legs, mutilated your bodies and crucified you on date palms. They killed
the exemplary personalities among you and the reciters of the Qur’an
like Hujr bin ‘Adiyy[^20] and his companions, Hani’ bin ‘Urwah and his
likes.”

[Hearing this,] they started abusing him and praising ‘Ubaidullah bin
Ziyad and prayed for him. They said: “By Allah, we will not leave [this
place] until after we have killed your master and those with him, or
send him and and his companions to the governor, ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad
as captives!”

Zuhair said: “O Servants of Allah, the children of Fatimah, may Allah’s
pleasure be with her, are more entitled to [your] love and help than the
son of Sumayyah.[^21] If you are not willing to help them, then I seek
refuge for you with Allah that you should kill them. Leave this man
[alone] with his cousin, Yazid bin Mu’awiyah. For by my life, Yazid will
consider you obedient even if you do not kill al-Husayn (as).”

[Here] Shamir bin Dhi al-Jaushan shot an arrow at him and said: “Quite!
May Allah silence your voice. You have wearied us by your prattle!”

So Zuhair said to him: “O Son of the one who used to urinate on the
heels of his feet. I am not speaking to you; you are, indeed, an animal!
By Allah, I do not think that you can read properly even two verses from
the Book of Allah! Humiliation and a painful punishment is awaiting you
on the Day of Resurrection!”

Shamir said to him: “Allah is soon going to kill you and your master!”

[Zuhair] said: “Do you threaten me with death? By Allah, it is dearer
for me to die with him than to live with you [people] forever!” He then
turned to the people raising his voice and said:

“Servants of Allah! This rude and rough man and his likes should not
deceive you with regard to your religion; for by Allah the intercession
of Muhammad (S) shall not reach those who spill the blood of his
offspring and household, and kill those who helped them and defended
their sanctity!”

A man called out [Zuhair] and said: “Abu ‘Abdillah is saying [to you]:
“Come back. By my life, if the believing man from among the people of
Fir’aun[^22] had admonished his people and did his best in inviting them
[to the right path], you also have admonished these people and done your
best, if only admonition and invitation was of benefit to them.”[^23]

The Return of Hurr al-Riyahi
----------------------------

When ‘Umar bin Sa‘d began to march [against al-Husayn], Hurr bin Yazid
said to him: “May Allah guide you! Are you going to fight this man?!”

He said: “Yes, by Allah! I am going to fight him a battle the least part
of which will be heads falling and severed hands flying.”

[Hurr] said: “Is not any of the options he proposed to you acceptable?”

‘Umar bin Sa‘d said: “By Allah, if the matter rested with me, I would
have [considered it]. But your governer has refused [any alternative].”

So Hurr went and stood apart from the people. With him was a man from
his tribe called Qurrah bin Qais.[^24] [Hurr] said: “Qurrah! Have you
watered your horse today?”

He replied: “No.”

[Hurr] asked: “Do you want to water it?”

[Here Qurrah] says that: “By Allah, I thought that (Hurr) intended to
leave the battle so that he may not witness it, but was unwilling to be
seen by me when he left lest I should report against him. So I asked
him: ‘I have not watered it, but I am [just] going to water it.’ Then I
left the point where he was. By Allah, had he told me what he was
intending to do, I would have gone with him to al- Husayn (as).”

[In the meanwhile,] Hurr gradually began to move closer to al-Husayn
(as). A man from among his tribe called Muhajir bin Aws[^25] asked him:
“What do you want to do, O son of Yazid? Do you want to attack [them]?”

[Hurr] remained silent and [instead] a great shudder came over him. So
the man said: “Son of Yazid! By Allah, the state you are in makes me
suspicious. By Allah, I have never seen in you something like this
before. If I was asked who was the bravest [man] from the people of
Kufah, I would not neglect to mention you. So what is this I see in you
[today]?”

[Hurr] said: “By Allah, I see myself between Heaven and the fire [of
hell]. By Allah, I will not choose anything before Heaven, even though I
am cut to pieces and burnt.” [With that] he whipped his horse and joined
al-Husayn (as).

[When he saw al-Husayn (as)] he said to him: “May I be your ransom, O
son of the Messenger of Allah! I was your companion who stopped you from
returning. I accompanied you along the road and made you stop in this
place. By Allah beside whom there is no diety, I did not think that the
people would refuse to respond to what you have offered them and that
they would ever come to this position [which they have now come to] with
regard to you. Thus I said to myself: I am not concerned if I obey the
people in some of the matters, so that they may not think that I no
longer obey them. [I told myself] that these people will accept the
offer al-Husayn has made to them. By Allah, if I had known that they
would not accept that from you, I would not have done what I did with
you. [But now] I have come to you repenting to my Lord for what I have
committed and [I now intend] to support you until I die before you. Are
you going to accept this as repentance?”

The [Imam (as)] said: “Yes, Allah will accept your repentance and
forgive you. What is your name?”

He replied: “I am Hurr bin Yazid.”[^26]

[Al-Husayn] said: “You are indeed a freeman (*hurr*) as your mother
named you. You are free, by the will of Allah, in this world and the
hereafter. Get down.”

[Hurr] said: “You will have no horseman better than me. I will fight
with them on my horse for sometime and when I come down, [then] that
will be my end.”

Al-Husayn (as) said: “Do as you deem fine.”

The Speech of Hurr
------------------

So [Hurr] advanced in front of [al-Husayn’s] companions and said
[addressing the army of Ibn Sa‘d]: “O people! Are you not going to
accept from al-Husayn what he has offered you so that may Allah save you
from having to go to war with him and fight him?”

They replied: “Here is the commander, ‘Umar bin Sa‘d. Talk to him.” So
[Hurr] told him all that he had told him and his army before this.

‘Umar [bin Sa‘d] replied: “I have done all that I could. If I had a way
to that, I would have certainly considered [his offer].”

[Hurr then turned towards the people and] said: “O people of Kufah! May
destruction befall your mothers! For you summoned him [to come to you],
[now] when he has come to you, you have handed him over [to his
enemies]! You claimed to fight with your own lives for him, [but] you
have begun to attack him in order to kill him. You have laid hold of his
life and seized his throat. You have encircled him on every side in
order to prevent him from going to the broad land of Allah so that he
and his family might be safe.

He has become like a captive in your hands; he has no longer the power
over his profit or loss. You have prevented him, his womenfolk, his
children, and his companions from [drinking] the water of the Euphrates
which Jews, Christians and Majians may drink, and in which the pigs and
the dogs of Sawad wallow. Here are the [family of al-Husayn] who have
been overcome by thirst. How wickedly you have treated the offspring
left by Muhammad after him! May Allah not give you water to drink on the
Day of Thirst if you do not repent and desist from this stand of your’s
on this day and at this moment.”[^27]

Some of the foot-soldiers attacked him by shooting arrows at him. So he
went and stood infront of al-Husayn (as).[^28]

One of the people who had advanced [from Kufah] with ‘Umar bin Sa‘d
against al-Husayn was Yazid bin Ziyad bin Muhasir. When they rejected
the conditions [and the offer] of al-Husayn (as), Yazid got inclined to
[al-Husayn (as) and joined him].[^29] [Therefore, he was among those who
were guided on the day of ‘Ashura’ by the speech of Hurr al-Riyahi].

[^1]: Al-Tabari (5:421-422): “Abu Mikhnaf reports: ‘[I narrate] on the
authority of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Asim from Dahhak bin ‘Abdullah al-Mushriqi…”

[^2]: Al-Tabari: He was on the right wing of ‘Adiyy bin Wattad –the
leader of the pilgrims from Rayy- during his battle with Mutarraf bin
al-Mughirah bin Shu’bah in Isfahan (6:296). The last thing we read about
him in al-Tabari is that he was among the guards of al-Saghd in 102 H
and sustained many injuries therein, such that he became like a
porcupine as a result of the arrows that struck his body (6:613). There
is no mention of him before Karbala’ [in the books of history].

[^3]: Al-Tabari: He is the one whose name appeared in the list of those
who testified against Hujr bin ‘Adiyy in the year 51 H (5:270). He was
leading the foot soldiers from the Madhhij and Asad. Shamir had incited
him to slaughter (dhibh) al-Husayn (as) but he refused and cursed him
(5:450).

[^4]: Al-Tabari (5:422): “Fudhail bin Fadij al-Kindi has narrated to me
on the authority of Muhammad bin Bishr from ‘Amru al-Hadhrami that…”

[^5]: Al-Tabari (5:423): “[I relate this] on the authority of some of
the companions [of Abu Mikhnaf] who reported from Abu Khalid
al-Kahili...” See also al-Irshad (pg.233) who narrated it from ‘Ali bin
al-Husayn (as). Since Abu Khalid is among the companions of Imam
al-Sajjad (as), he must be relating the report from him, though
al-Tabari does not explicitly mention this.

[^6]: Al-Tabari (5:423): “‘Abdullah bin ‘Asim has related to me saying:
‘Dahhak al-Mushriqi narrated to me…” See al-Irshad (pg.234).

[^7]: Qur’an, 10:71.

[^8]: Qur’an, 7:196.

[^9]: Al-Tabari: Jabir bin ‘Abdullah al-Ansari refused to pay allegiance
to Mu’awiyah at the hands of Busr bin Artat in the year 40 H, that was
before the martyrdom of the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali (as). Jabir
maintained that this was an allegiance to falsehood. But he came under
pressure from Busr and had to give allegiance out of fear for his life
(5:139). In the year 50 H, when Mu’awiyah went on pilgrimage and was
intending to move the pulpit and the staff of the Prophet of Allah [s]
to Sham, Jabir stopped him and he desisted [from doing that] (5:239). In
the year 74 H when Hajjaj entered Madinah on the orders of ‘Abd
al-Malik, he treated the companions of the Prophet [s] contemptuously
and branded their necks, among them was Jabir bin ‘Abdillah al-Ansari
(6:195).

[^10]: Al-Tabari: When the Holy Prophet (S) was examining his companions
for the battle of Uhud, he rejected Abu Sa’id because of being too young
(2:505). Abu Sa’id used to relate traditions from the Holy Prophet (S)
on the merits of ‘Ali (as) (3:149). However, he was one of those who
refused to pay allegiance to ‘Ali (as) after the murder of ‘Uthman and
was among his partisans (‘uthmani) (4:430).

[^11]: Al-Tabari: He used to relate traditions from the Holy Prophet (S)
on the merits of ‘Ali (as) (3:409). He also reported that ‘Aishah had
ordered ‘Uthman bin Hunaif to be killed and later to be imprisoned
(4:468). He has also narrated reports about ‘Ali (as) (4:547). In the
year 74 H when Hajjaj entered Madinah on the orders of ‘Abd al-Malik, he
treated the companions of the Prophet [s] contemptuously and branded
their necks, among them was Sahl bin Sa’d. Hajjaj had accused him of
betraying ‘Uthman (6:195).

[^12]: Al-Tabari: He used to narrate the merits of ‘Ali (as) (2:310).
Zayd is the one who informed the Holy Prophet (S) of the words of
‘Abdullah bin Ubayy bin Salul, the hypocrite (2:605). He was [also] the
one who objected to Ibn Ziyad and stopped him from hitting the lips of
Abu ‘Abdillah (as) (5:456). Zayd passed away in the year 68 H, as
reported in A’lam al-Wara (4:188).

[^13]: Al-Tabari: It was by the assistance of Anas bin Malik that ‘Umar
[bin al-Khattab] could appoint Abu Musa al-Ash’ari over Basrah in 17 H
(4:71). He participated in the conquest of Tustar (4:86). He was among
those who aroused people in Basrah to help ‘Uthman in the year 35 H
(4:352). He was [also] among those in Basrah from whom Ziyad bin Abih
had asked for help in 45 H (5:224). Anas was in Basrah on the day of
‘Ashura’. After Ibn Ziyad was killed in 64 H, Ibn al-Zubair appointed
him as the governor of Basrah. He led the people in prayers for 40 days
(5:528). When Hajjaj took over Madinah in 64 H for ‘Abd al-Malik and was
treating contemptuously the companions of the Prophet [s] and branding
them by their necks, he [also] branded Anas with the intention of
humiliating him on account of his acceptance of the governership for Ibn
al-Zubair (6:195).

[^14]: See also Tadhkirat al-Khawass (pg.252; Najaf edition).

[^15]: Ibn al-Jawzi writes in al-Tadkhirah (pg.251): “They said: ‘We do
not know what you are talking about. Hurr bin Yazid al-Yarbu’i was one
of their chiefs, so he said: ‘Yes, by Allah, we have written to you and
we are the ones who have invited you to come. May Allah distance the
falsehood and its followers. By Allah, I will not choose this world over
the hereafter.”

[^16]: Both al-Mufid in al-Irshad (pg.235) and after him Ibn Nama in
Muthir al-Ahzan (pg.26) have recorded this statement of the Imam (as) in
the following manner: “And I will not flee like a slave.” Al-Muqarram
has preferred [in al-Maqtal] this version [to the one which appears in
this text]. However, the more suitable statement [among these two] as an
answer to Ibn Ash’ath’s question is [that which contains the concept of]
‘submission’ (iqrar), and not ‘fleeing’ (firar); because what Ibn
al-Ash’ath proposed to the Imam (as) was submission [to the authority of
the Banu Umayyah], not to flee [to some secured place]. Although
al-Muqarram attests the validity of his preference by citing the
following statement of Imam ‘Ali (as) regarding Masqalah bin Hubairah:
‘And he fled like the fleeing of a slave’, but that action of Masqalah
does not, in any way, conform with the circumstances al-Husayn (as) was
in, as it is very obvious.

[^17]: Qur’an, 44:20.

[^18]: Qur’an, 40:27.

[^19]: Al-Tabari (5:423-426): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘‘Abdullah bin ‘Asim
has narrated to me that Dahhak al-Mushriqi said…”

[^20]: Al-Tabari: Hujr was in the reinforcement troops sent from Yemen
to the battle of al-Qadisiyyah in 16 H (4:27). He was among the first
people from Kufah to answer to the call of ‘Ali (as) for the battle of
Jamal (5:485). He was one of those who had risen against ‘Uthman
(4:488). Hujr was the head of the Madhhij and the Ash’ariyyin, who were
from Yemen residing in Kufah (4:500). He was with ‘Ali (as) at Siffin
and participated in the battle (4:574). He was among the witnesses to
the agreed document for [choosing] the two arbitrators at Siffin (5:54).
He was on the command of the right wing of ‘Ali (as) in the battle of
Nahrawan against the Khawarij (5:85). In the year 39 H, ‘Ali (as)
dispatched him with 4000 men from Kufah to encounter the raid of Dahhak
bin Qais who had come with 3000 soldiers. Hujr met Dahhak at Tadmur in
the Syrian border. He had killed twenty men from Dahhak’s army when the
night set in and Dahhak fled, so Hujr returned (5:135). When Mu’awiyah
came to Kufah in the Year of Unity, he appointed Mughirah bin Shu’bah
over the city. Mughirah used to abuse ‘Ali (as) and Hujr used to
strongly refute him. This continued until Mughira died. When Ziyad bin
Abih was appointed by Mu’awiyah to replace Mughirah [and he continued
with the same practice of abusing ‘Ali (as),] Hujr once again stood
against him in defence of ‘Ali (as). Ziyad thus arrested him and sent
him to Mu’awiyah who killed him (5:270).

[^21]: Al-Tabari: Sumayyah was the adulteress slave. She was among those
prostitutes who had banners [on top of their houses reflecting their
identity] during the days of Ignorance (jahiliyyah). Six men from
Quraish had slept with her and as a result she gave birth to Ziyad. The
six men contended for the child but his actual father could not be
known. He thus came to be known as Ziyad bin Abih, or Ziyad bin ‘Ubaid,
or Ziyad bin Sumayyah. Later, Mu’awiyah claimed him as the son of his
father, Abu Sufyan, thus he also came to be known as Ziyad bin Abi
Sufyan. When Mu’awiyah appointed him over Kufah, he arrested Hujr and
gathered witnesses against him. When Ziyad saw the name of Shaddad bin
Bazi’ah among the witnesses, he said: “Has he not a father to be
attributed to him! Take him off from the witnesses.” So it was said to
him: “He is the brother of al-Husayn, son of Ibn al-Mundhir.” Ziyad
said: “Then attribute him to his father.” So his name was recorded
together with that of his father. When Shaddad heard about this incident
he retorted: “Woe onto the son of the adulteress! Is not his mother much
known than his father is?! By Allah, [Ziyad] has not been attributed but
to his mother, Sumayyah!” (5:270). Yazid bin Mufarragh al-Himyari was
with ‘Abbad bin Ziyad, the brother of ‘Ubaidullah, during the wars on
Sajistan. They happened to be under constraint when Ibn Mufarragh swore
at ‘Abbad by reciting the following verses: When Mu’awiyah bin Harb
perishes, know that the base of your bowl has broken. Be witness that
your mother did not sleep with Abu Sufyan as a chaste woman. It was a
dubious affair surrounded by great apprehension and dismay. He also
said: Has not the parcel from the man from Yemen reached Mu’awiyah bin
Harb, Do you get angry when it is said that your father is chaste, but
are pleased when it is said that your father is a fornicator? Know that
your kinship with Ziyad is like the relationship of an elephant with the
young of a she donkey. A man from descendants of Ziyad called al-Sughda
bin Salam bin Harb came to see Mahdi, the Abbasid caliph, while he was
looking into public complaints. So he asked him: “Who are you?” The man
replied: “Your cousin.” “Which cousin of mine are you?” asked Mahdi. So
the man traced back his lineage to Ziyad! So Mahdi said to him: “Son of
Sumayyah, the adulteress! When did you become my cousin?” He then
ordered him to be beaten and taken out. Mahdi then turned towards those
who were present and said: “Who has knowledge about the family of
Ziyad?” But no one of them knew anything. Later, one of those who were
present in the court of Mahdi called Isa bin Musa, or Musa bin Isa,
happened to meet Abu ‘Ali Sulaiman and requested him to write for him
all he has been saying about Ziyad and his family, so that he could take
it to Mahdi. So Abu ‘Ali wrote and sent it to the caliph through Isa bin
Musa. Harun al-Rashid was at that time the governer of Basrah for Mahdi.
So Mahdi wrote a letter to Harun al-Rashid instructing him to remove the
names of the members of the family of Ziyad from the account books of
the treasury (diwan) of the Quraish and the Arabs. Some of what he wrote
to him is as follows: “The decision of Mu’awiyah bin Abi Sufyan in
claiming Ziyad -son of ‘Ubaid who was a slave of the family of ‘Alaj,
from the tribe of Thaqif- as the son of Abu Sufyan was rejected by the
community of the Muslims after the death of Mu’awiyah. This decision was
not accepted even during his lifetime by many personalities known for
their contentment, merits, piety and knowledge; that was because they
knew well [the personality of] Ziyad, his father and mother. Mu’awiyah
had not done that out of piety or guidance, or because of following an
upright tradition, or due to the authority he received from the past
rightful leaders; rather, he did that [for several reasons:] out of
desire to destroy his religion and the hereafter, his determination to
oppose the Book and the Sunnah, taking pride in the extension of his
kinsmen and influence, and [finally] because he expected him to support
and assist him on [the path of] falsehood he was inclined to, from his
evil deeds to his evil conduct. [All this on one side,] while the
Prophet of Allah (S) has said: ‘The child belongs to the husband
(firash) [i.e. the husband of the woman who committed adultery], and the
adulterer (‘ahir) gets the stone [i.e. the man who committed adultery
with the married woman gets nothing].’ He also said: ‘Whoever is named
behind other than his father, or traces back his origin to other than
those who are related to him, then the curse of Allah, [His] angels and
of the mankind is upon him. Allah will not accept from him repentance or
[any] ransom.’ By my life, Ziyad was neither born in the lap of Abu
Sufyan [i.e. under his guardianship], nor in his bed [i.e. as a result
of his sleeping with Sumayyah]. Nor ‘Ubaid was his slave, nor was
Sumayyah his maid. Neither of the two were part of his possession, nor
did they become part his property through any means. Therefore, by
claiming Ziyad as the son of Abu Sufyan, Mu’awiyah went against the
ruling of Allah, the Almighty, the Majestic, and against the orders of
the Prophet of Allah (S). He followed in that his own desire [becaused
he] disliked the truth and wanted to move away from it. Allah, the
Almighty, the Majestic, says: ‘And who is more astray than him who
follows his desires without any guidance from Allah? Indeed Allah does
not guide the wrongdoing lot’ [Qur’an, 28:50]. And Allah tells [Prophet]
Dawud (as), whom he had granted wisdom, prophethood and wealth: ‘O
Dawud! Indeed We have made you a vicegerent on the earth. So judge
between people with justice’ [Qur’an, 38:26]. In a similar incident
known to the people who preserve the narrations, when Mu’awiyah was
speaking to the associates of the Banu Mughirah from the Makhzum, who
intended to claim Nasr bin Hajjaj al-Salami as one of their family
members, he threw at them a stone which he had prepared for that beneath
his bed –following the words of the Holy Prophet: ‘…And the adulterer
deserves the stone’. So the Banu Mughirah retorted: ‘Should we let you
do what you did in the case of Ziyad, but you are not ready to accept
what we have done in the case of our companion [i.e. Nasr]? So Mu’awiyah
replied: ‘The ruling of the Prophet of Allah (S) is better for you than
the judgement of Mu’awiyah!” (8:131). It is known from here that though
Zuhair bin al-Qain was a follower of ‘Uthman before he was guided aright
and he answered the call of the Imam (as), he was angry on Mu’awiyah
[right from those days]; because of his claiming Ziyad as his family
member and killing Hujr bin ‘Adiyy. This shows that, in reality, Zuhair
was prepared from within to leave the side of ‘Uthman and to show his
resentment for Mu’awiyah, his son Yazid, and their governers, as he was
equally ready to answer the call of the Imam (as) for rising against
them.

[^22]: The Imam (as) likens him to the believer from the people of
Fir’aun because Zuhair was previously a partisan of ‘Uthman. So it is as
if he was from among the Banu Umayyah [who later changed his stance and
joined the camp of truth].

[^23]: Al-Tabari (5:426): “‘Ali bin Han¨alah bin As’ad al-Shami has
narrated to me from a man from his tribe called Kathir bin ‘Abdullah
al-Sha’bi -who witnessed the martyrdom of al-Husayn- that: ‘When we
advanced against al-Husayn, Zuhair bin al-Qain came out to us…’” This
speech has also been related by al-Ya’qubi (2:230; Najaf edition).

[^24]: We have given his biography under the reports which discuss the
arrival of the Imam (as) at Karbala’. Habib bin Mu¨ahir had invited him
to help the Imam (as) and he promised him to think about this, but he
did not come back. It seems that he is relating this report and claiming
it.

[^25]: He, together with al-Sha’bi, were the killers of Zuhair bin
al-Qain.

[^26]: Perhaps Hurr was armed to the teeth and his head bowed in shame
that the Imam (as) could not recognize him, and so he had to inquire
about his identity. Otherwise, he knew him from before.

[^27]: See also al-Irshad (pg.235) and Tadhkirat al-Khawass (pg.252).

[^28]: Al-Tabari (5:427): “[Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘I relate on the authority
of Abu Janab al-Kalbi from ‘Adiyy bin Harmalah who said…” See also
al-Irshad (pg.235).

[^29]: Al-Tabari (5:445): “Fudhail bun Khudaij al-Kindi has narrated to
me that Yazid bin Ziyad, who is Abu al-Sha’sha’ al-Kindi, from the Banu
Bahdalah…”


