The Martyrdom Of The Family Members Of Al-Husayn (as)
=====================================================

The Martyrdom of ‘Ali bin al-Husayn al-Akbar (as)
-------------------------------------------------

‘Ali al-Akbar bin al-Husayn bin ‘Ali (as)[^1] was the first to be killed
on that day from the Banu Abi Talib. His mother was Laila, daughter of
Abu Murrah bin Mas’ud al-Thaqafi.[^2] He began attacking the people
while he recited the following:

I am ‘Ali, son of Husayn bin ‘Ali; by the Lord of the House, we are
closest to the Prophet.

By Allah! A man born of fornication [i.e. Ibn Ziyad] shall not judge
us.[^3]

He did that several times. Then Murrah bin Munqidh bin al-Nu’man
al-‘Abdi[^4] saw him. He said: “May the felonies of the Arabs come on
me, if he gets past me doing the same as he has been doing [and] I do
not deprive his mother of him.”

[‘Ali bin al-Husayn (as)] continued to attack the people with his sword.
Murrah bin Munqidh came against him and stabbed him. He was struck down
and the people fell upon him, cutting him with their swords. [^5],[^6]

Al-Husayn (as) came to [his body] saying: “May Allah kill [the] people
who killed you, my son! How foolhardy they are against the Merciful and
in violating the sacredness of the family of the Prophet! There will
[only] be dust on the world after you.”

A woman came hurrying out, crying: “O my brother! O my nephew! She came
up and threw herself on [his body]. Al-Husayn (as) came near to her,
held her by her hand and led her back to the tent. He the turned towards
his young men and said: “Carry your brother [back].” They carried him
from the place he was killed and put him before the tent which they had
been fighting in front of.[^7]

The Martyrdom of Qasim bin al-Hasan (as)
----------------------------------------

Humaid bin Muslim says: “A young lad came out against us, his face was
like the first splinter of the new moon and he carried a sword. He was
wearing a shirt and a waistcloth (*izar*), and a pair of sandals, one of
whose straps was broken, and I will not forget that it was the [strap of
the] left [foot].

‘Amru bin Sa‘d bin Nufail al-Azdi[^8] said to me: ‘By Allah, I am going
to attack him.’

I said to him: ‘Glory be to Allah! What do you want to do that for?
These people whom you see surrounding him are enough [to kill him]!’

[‘Amru] insisted: ‘By Allah, I will attack him.’ So he rushed against
him and did not turn back until he had struck his head with his sword.
The lad fell face downwards and called out: ‘O uncle!’

[At this,] al-Husayn (as) showed himself just like the hawk shows
itself. He launched into attack like a raging lion and struck ‘Amru with
[his] sword. ‘Amru tried to fend off the blow with his arm but his arm
was cut off from the elbow. The cavalry [of the enemy] made a move [in
order to save him] but they [only] trampled him to death.

[As] the cloud of dust settled, al-Husayn (as) was seen standing by the
head of the young lad. He was rubbing his heels on the ground while
al-Husayn (as) was saying: ‘Away with the people who have killed you, a
people against whom your grandfather will complain on the Day of
Judgement on your behalf. By Allah, it is hard on your uncle that you
called him but he could not answer you, or he answered but could not
help you. By Allah, it was a cry whose avengers were many, but whose
helpers [at the moment] are few!’[^9]

Then he carried him [in his arms]. It is just as if I am looking at the
two legs of the body making marks [as they trail] on the ground, while
al-Husayn (as) had put the chest [of the lad] on his chest. He took him
and put him with his son ‘Ali bin al-Husayn around whom were [other]
bodies of those slain from among his household.”

[Humaid continues with his report and says:] “I asked about the boy and
was told that he was al-Qasim bin al-Hasan bin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib
(as).”[^10]

The Martyrdom of ‘Abbas bin ‘Ali (as) and His Brothers
------------------------------------------------------

‘Abbas bin ‘Ali (as) then said to his brothers on his mother’s
side -‘Abdullah, Ja’far and ‘Uthman: “O sons of my mother! Go forward
[and fight] so that I may mourn over you; for you have no children [to
grieve over you]!

They did so [and went out and fought a severe battle until] they were
killed. [May Allah have mercy on them].[^11],[^12]

The Martyrdom of the Infant of al-Husayn (as)
---------------------------------------------

Al-Husayn [(as) then] sat down and his baby was brought to him. [He was
an infant or [a little] older than that] called ‘Abdullah bin
al-Husayn[^13]

and he seated him on his lap.[^14] [The baby] was in his lap as one of
the Banu Asad [either Harmalah bin Kahil or Hani’ bin Thubait
al-Hadhrami] shot an arrow which slaughtered him. Al-Husayn (as) caught
[the child’s] blood [in the palm of his hand]. When his palm was full,
he poured it on to the ground and said: “O Lord, if it be so that You
have kept the help of Heaven from us, then let it be for something
better [according to Your wisdom]. Take vengeance on these oppressors on
our behalf.”[^15],[^16]

The Martyrdom of the Two Sons of ‘Abdullah bin Ja’far
-----------------------------------------------------

The people encircled them from all sides. ‘Abdullah bin Qutbah
al-Nabahani al-Ta’i attacked ‘Aun bin ‘Abdullah bin Ja’far bin Abi Talib
and killed him.[^17] Then ‘Amir bin Nahshal al-Taimi attacked Muhammad
bin ‘Abdullah bin Ja’far bin Abi Talib and killed him.[^18]

The Martyrdom of the Members from the Household of ‘Aqil
--------------------------------------------------------

‘Uthman bin Khalid bin Asir al-Juhani and Bishr bin Haut al-Qabidhi
al-Hamdani launched an attack on ‘Abd al-Rahman, son of ‘Aqil bin Abi
Talib, and killed him.[^19] [Thereafter,] they plundered [his
belongings].

‘Abdullah bin ‘Azarah al-Khath’ami[^20] shot [an arrow] at Ja’far,
[another] son of ‘Aqil bin Abi Talib and killed him.

Then ‘Amru bin Subaih al-Sudda’i[^21] shot an arrow at ‘Abdullah, son of
Muslim bin ‘Aqil[^22], which stitched his hand to his forehead, such
that he could no longer move his hand. [‘Amru] then shot another arrow
at him which tore his heart.[^23] Labit bin Yasir al-Juhani killed
Muhammad, son of Abi Sa’id bin ‘Aqil.[^24]

The Martyrdom of other Two Sons of al-Hasan bin ‘Ali (as)
---------------------------------------------------------

‘Abdullah bin Uqbah al-Ghanawi[^25] shot an arrow at Abu Bakr, son of
al-Hasan [^26] bin ‘Ali and killed him.[^27] ‘Abdullah, [another] son of
al-Hasan bin Abi Talib, was [also] killed; [that is when] Harmalah bin
Kahil[^28] shot an arrow at him and killed him.[^29]

[^1]: Al-Tabari: In his narration on the authority of Sulaiman bin Abi
Rashid from Humaid bin Ziyad, Abu Mikhnaf describes Imam al-Sajjad (as)
as ‘Ali bin al-Husayn al-Asghar [i.e. the younger ‘Ali] (5:454). He
names the other child of the Imam (as) who was killed in his lap as
‘Abdullah bin al-Husayn, through the same chain of narration (5:448). In
his book Dhayl al-Mudhayyal (pg.630; Dar al-Ma’arif publications),
Tabari says: “As for ‘Ali bin al-Husayn al-Akbar [the older], he was
killed along with his father by the river [Euphrates] in Karbala’. He
did not have any offspring. ‘Ali bin al-Husayn al-Asghar was present at
Karbala with his father and he was 23 years of age. He was ill, confined
to the bed. ‘Ali [al-Asghar] says: ‘When I was taken before Ibn Ziyad,
he asked me: ‘What is your name?’ I replied: ‘‘Ali bin al-Husayn’. He
said: ‘Has not Allah killed ‘Ali?’ I said: ‘I had a brother called ‘Ali
al-Akbar who was older than me and was killed by the people.’ He said:
‘Nay, Allah killed him.’ I said: ‘Allah takes the souls at the time
their death.” [Qur’an, 39:42]. Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani has related the
above incident in al-Maqatil (pg.80; Najaf edition) also. Al-Ya’qubi
(2:233; Najaf edition) also refers to ‘Ali bin al-Husayn as al-akbar and
to Imam al-Sajjad (as) as al-asghar. And so has been done by al-Mas’udi
in Muruj al-Dhahab (3:71) and by Ibn al-Jawzi in al-Tadhkirah (pg.225).
Al-Mufid mentions ‘Ali bin al-Husayn in al-Irshad (pg.238) but without
referring to him as al-akbar.

[^2]: Al-Tabari: In the 6th year of Hijrah ‘Urwah bin Mas’ud fled from
the Banu Thaqif in Taif and went to Makkah. There he came in alliance
with the Quraish, together with his family and his followers. When the
Messenger of Allah (S) visited Makkah in the year of Hudaibiyyah with
his companions for the ‘umrah and Budail bin Warqa’ al-Khuza’i informed
them of what the Prophet [s] said [regarding the peace treaty], ‘Urwah
stood up and said to the wise men of the Quraish: “This man has proposed
a sensible thing to you. Accept it and allow me to go to see him.” They
said: “You can go.” Thus, [‘Urwah] went to see the Prophet (S) and
talked to him. The Prophet [s] told him the like of what he had told
Budail, that is: “We have not come to fight anyone. We have only come to
perform the ‘umrah. The Quraish have been worn out by war and they have
been harmed by it. [Accordingly,] if they wish to accept what [other]
people have accepted [i.e. make a peace treaty with us], they should do
so. [Otherwise, they should know that the Muslims] have [today] grown in
number. [But] if they reject [our proposal], then I swear by the one in
whose hand is my soul, I will fight them on this issue [i.e. Islam]
until I am killed or Allah enforces his affair.” Here ‘Urwah said: “O
Muhammad! Tell me, if you are thinking of destroying your people, then
have you [ever] heard of any Arab before you who has annihilated his
community! I swear that I see different faces and people surrounding
you, who will flee and leave you alone if such a thing is going to
happen!” With that, he began looking at the companions of the Prophet
(S). He then returned to his people and said: “O people! I have, indeed,
visited [different] kings. I have visited Choesroe, Caesar and Negus!
But I swear that I have never seen any king esteemed by his followers
more than Muhammad. I swear that he does not spit but it falls on the
hands of one of them, who would then rub it on his face and skin. When
he commands them, they vie with each other to carry out his order. When
he performs ablution, they almost fight to obtain the water [he uses].
When they speak in his presence, they lower their voices. They never
stare at him out of their respect for him! Such a man has proposed to
you a sensible proposal, [you had better] accept.” (2:627) ‘Urwah was in
Jordan during the battle of Hunain in the year 8 H, learning the skills
of making weaponry and catapults and therefore could not participate in
it (3:628). ‘Urwah was related to Abu Sufyan as he had married his
daughter, Aminah. Abu Sufyan and Mughirah bin Shu’bah went to Taif on
the day of Hunain and there they called out the Banu Thaqif: “Grant us
protection so that we may speak to you!” So they granted them
protection. The two men then invited the women from Quraish [who were in
Taif to come with them to Makkah], fearing that they might be taken as
prisoners. But they rejected their invitation (3:84). When the Prophet
of Allah (S) left Taif, ‘Urwah bin Mas’ud followed him and met him
before the Prophet [s] reached Madinah. He embraced Islam and asked the
Prophet [s] to allow him to return to his people with the message of
Islam. Since ‘Urwah was a beloved personality among the Thaqif and
obeyed by them, he began inviting them to Islam, hoping that they would
not oppose him because of the position he held between them. But they
showered him with arrows from all sides and he was killed. He was asked
before he was killed: “How do you find dying?” He replied: “It is an
honour bestowed on me by Allah, and a martyrdom driven by Allah towards
me. My position is the same as of those martyrs who were killed
alongside the Messenger of Allah (S) before he left your [city]. So bury
me with them.” And they did so. It is reported in Sirah Ibn Hisham
(3:97) that the Prophet of Allah [s] said concerning him: “His example
in his community is that of the believer [mentioned] in Surat Yasin”
(2:325). The Messenger of Allah [s] repaid his debts and those of his
brother, Aswad bin Mas’ud, from the jewellery of al-Lat, the idol
[worshipped by] the Thaqif (3:100).

[^3]: Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani narrates in al-Maqatil (pg.77) that:
“[‘Ali al-Akbar] would attack [the enemy] and then return to his father
saying: ‘O father, thirst [is overcoming me]!’ and al-Husayn (as) would
say to him: ‘Have patience, O love of my heart; for the Messenger of
Allah [s] is going to give you a drink with his chalice by this
evening.’ [According to Ibn al-Jawzi, ‘Ali (as)] did this for several
times.”

[^4]: Al-Tabari: His lineage goes back to the Banu ‘Abd al-Qais. He was
with his father Munqidh bin Nu’man at Siffin along side [‘Ali], the
Commander of the Faithful (as). There Murrah took from his father the
standard of the ‘Abd al-Qais and it remained with him (4:522). In the
year 66 H, Mukhtar sent ‘Abdullah bin Kamil al-Shakiri against him. He
surrounded his house and so [Murrah] forced his way out on a fine horse,
with a spear in his hand. Ibn Kamil struck him with [his] sword but he
guarded against it with his left hand and escaped. He then [went and]
joined Mus’ab bin al-Zubair, while his hand was paralysed (6:64).

[^5]: Al-Tabari (5:446): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Zuhair bin ‘Abd al-Rahman
bin Zuhair al-Khath’ami narrated to me that…” Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani
has related the incident in al-Maqatil (pg.76) from Abu Mikhnaf, who
narrated it from Zuhair bin ‘Abdillah al-Khath’ami. According to another
chain of narration: “When ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (as) came out to the
people, al-Husayn (as) lowered his eyes and wept. He said: ‘O Allah, be
witness against these people, for [now] a youth has gone out to them who
resembles the Messenger of Allah (S) most among all the creatures.”

[^6]: Abu al-Faraj says is al-Maqatil (pg.77): “[‘Ali al-Akbar] then
called out: ‘O father! Peace be upon you. Here is my grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah, sending you salutations and saying: come to us
quickly.’ Then he sighed deeply and [his soul] departed.”

[^7]: Al-Tabari (5:446): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi Rashid
related to me from Humaid bin Muslim al-Azdi that…” See also Maqatil
al-Talibiyyin (pg.76&77) through the same chain of narration.

[^8]: His name appears in al-Tabari (5:468) as Sa’d bin ‘Amru bin Nufail
al-Azdi. Both the names have appeared in the report of Abu Mikhnaf.

[^9]: This statement of the Imam (as) means that the cry of Qasim has
many helpers amidst the Banu Hashim, though they could not be present at
Karbala’ to help him.

[^10]: Al-Tabari (5:447): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi Rashid
related to me from Humaid bin Muslim who said…” See also al-Irshad
(pg.239).

[^11]: Al-Tabari (5:448): “Abu Mikhnaf says…”

[^12]: The Martyrdom of ‘Abbas bin ‘Ali (as) does not appear in
al-Tabari. Hence, we mention it from al-Irshad of Shaikh al-Mufid
(pg.240; Najaf edition). He says: “The thirst of al-Husayn (as) became
severe. He set off towards the dam, trying to reach the Euphrates. In
front of him was his brother, al-‘Abbas. However, the cavalry of Ibn
Sa’d, may Allah curse him, blocked his way. Among these was a man from
the Banu Darim, he said [to the cavalry]: ‘Woe upon you! Prevent him
from reaching the Euphrates, do not let him get water!’ Al-Husayn (as)
said: ‘O Allah, make him thirsty!’ So the man from Darim became angry
and shot an arrow at him which lodged in his throat. Al-Husayn (as)
pulled out the arrow and held his hand below his throat. He put his
hands under his throat, and both his palms were filled with blood which
he shook away and said: ‘O Allah, I complain to you about what is being
done to the son of the daughter of your Prophet!’ He then returned to
his position, while his thirst had become [even more] severe.
[Meanwhile,] the people [had] surrounded al-‘Abbas and cut him off from
[al-Husayn (as)]. Single-handed he began to attack them until he was
killed, may Allah have mercy on him. The [two] who took part in killing
him -after he had been covered with wounds and could not move- were Zayd
bin Warqa’al-Hanafi\* and Hakim bin al-Tufail al-Sinbisiyy. \*Al-Tabari
refers to him as Zayd bin Ruqad al-Janabi (5:468). In the same book
(6:64), he says: “He was a man from Janab. He is the one who killed
‘Abdullah bin Muslim bin ‘Aqil and Suwaid bin ‘Amru al-Khath’ami, who
were among the companions of al-Husayn (as). His biography has been
given earlier under the reports of the martyrdom of Suwaid. ‘Al-Hanafi’
is obviously a phonetic distortion (tahrif) of the word.

[^13]: Al-Tabari: His mother was Rabab, daughter of Imru’ al-Qais
al-Kalbi (5:468). Al-Irshad (pg.240) has also related this incident and
says that [‘Abdullah] was a [small] child (tifl).

[^14]: Al-Tabari (5:448): [Abu Mikhnaf reports that:] ‘Uqbah bin Bashir
al-Asadi said: ‘Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin al-Husayn told me
that…”

[^15]: Al-Tabari (5:448): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi Rashid
narrated to me from Humaid bin Muslim who said…”

[^16]: Al-Tabari relates on the authority of ‘Ammar al-Duhani from Imam
al-Baqir (as) who said: “And an arrow came and struck his son who was in
his lap. [Al-Husayn (as)] began wiping the blood from him and saying: ‘O
Allah, You judge between us and a people who invited us in order to help
us, and now they are killing us” (5:389). Al-Ya’qubi writes in his
Tarikh (2:232; Najaf edition): “Then [the companions of al-Husayn (as)]
came forward one after another. [They fought and were all killed] until
he remained alone. There was no one with him from among his family,
children or his kinsmen. He was on his horse when a new-born baby, who
had just born, was brought to him. He recited the adhan in his ear and
gave him a bit of chewed dates. Just then an arrow came and struck the
throat of the child and slaughtered it. Al-Husayn (as) removed the arrow
from [the child’s] throat and began to spread the blood on the [child’s
body] saying: ‘By Allah, you are more honourable in the eyes of Allah
than the she-camel [of Prophet Salih]. And indeed Muhammad is more
honourble before Allah than [Prophet] Salih.’ He then came and put [his
body] together with [the bodies of] his son and nephews.” Sibt al-Jawzi
says in his al-Tadhkirah (pg.252; Najaf edition): “As al-Husayn (as)
looked [around], [he saw] his son crying of thirst. He took him in his
arms and said [to his enemies]: ‘O people! If you have no mercy on me,
then have mercy on this child! [In reply,] a man from among them shot an
arrow at [the child] and slaughtered it. [At this] al-Husayn (as)
started weeping and saying: ‘O Allah, judge between us and a people who
invited us in order to help us, and [now] they are killing us.’ A cry
was heard from the heavens: ‘Leave him O Husayn! For he has a wet-nurse
[who will suckle him] in Heaven.”

[^17]: Al-Tabari (5:469): “His mother was Jumanah, daughter of Musayyab
bin Najabah al-Ghazari.” Musayyab was one of the heads of the Tawwabun
movement, from among the Shi‘ah in Kufah. Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani says
in al-Maqatil (pg.60; Najaf edition): “‘Aun’s mother was [Lady] Zainab,
the wise lady (al-‘aqilah) [of the Banu Hashim], daughter of ‘Ali bin
Abi Talib (as).”

[^18]: Al-Tabari (5:469): “His mother was Khawsa’, daughter of Khasafah
bin Thaqif al-Taimi, from the clan of Bakr bin Wa’il.” So has been
narrated by Abu al-Faraj also in al-Maqatil (pg.60; Najaf edition). But
bin Ibn al-Jawzi mentions her in al-Tadhkirah (pg.255; Najaf edition) as
Hawt, daughter of Hafsah al-Tamimi.

[^19]: Al-Tabari (6:59): “Mukhtar had dispatched ‘Abdullah bin Kamil
against them while they were trying to move to al-Jazirah [i.e. Mosul].
Ibn al-Kamil and his men chased them up and caught up with them at
al-Jabbanah. They [were arrested and] brought before [Ibn Kamil]. He
then took them to a place called Bi’r al-Ja’d. There he beheaded them
and burnt their bodies. They were mourned by A’sha’ al-Hamdani.”
However, according to al-Tabari (5:469): “The assassin of ‘Abd al-Rahman
bin ‘Aqil was ‘Uthman bin Khalid al-Juhani only, without the association
of Bishr bin Hawt al-Hamdani.” Abu al-Faraj mentions both of them as his
assassins in al-Maqatil (pg.61; Najaf edition), through the same chain
of narration (sanad) which has appeared in al-Tabari.

[^20]: According to al-Tabari (5:469), He was killed by Bishr bin Hawt
al-Hamdani, whereas in (6:65) he mentions al-Khath’ami saying:
“‘Abdullah bin ‘Urwah al-Khath’ami, the one who was pursued by Mukhtar
but he escaped and joined Mus’ab.” Abu al-Faraj refers to him in
al-Maqatil (pg.61; Najaf edition) as ‘Abdullah bin ‘Urwah al-Khath’ami,
through the same chain of narration as mentioned in al-Tabari.

[^21]: Al-Tabari: Mukhtar was chasing him. His men entered upon [‘Amru]
at night when people were asleep. He was in his bed and did not realize.
They arrested him while his sword was beneath his head, so he said
regarding this [afterwards]: ‘Shame on you O sword. You were very close,
yet so far!’ He used to say [after his arrest]: ‘I have [only] stabbed
and wounded some of [the members of the household of the Prophet in
Karbala’]. I did not kill anyone of them.’ He was brought to Mukhtar who
imprisoned him in the palace. The next morning when Mukhtar allowed
people to visit him, [‘Amru] was brought before him in shackles. He
said: ‘O the infidels and the wicked! By Allah, had I a sword in my
hand, you would have come to know that I do not tremble infront of a
sword, nor am I a coward. If I am going to die by being killed, then it
is not dear to me to get killed by any of the creatures other than you!
For I know that you are the worst of the creatures of Allah! But I still
wish that I had a sword in my hand, so that I would have fought with you
for a while!’ Then he raised his hand and slapped the eye of Ibn Kamil
who was [standing] by his side. Ibn Kamil laughed [at this] and grabbed
his hand, stopping him [from repeating that act]. [Ibn Kamil] then said
[to Mukhtar]: ‘He claims to have [only] wounded and stabbed [some] among
the family of Muhammad. So give us your order concerning him.’ Mukhtar
said: ‘Bring me a spear.’ So he was brought [a spear]. He then ordered:
‘Stab him to death!’ and he was stabbed to death” (6:65). Al-Tabari
reports in (5:469) from Abu Mikhnaf that: “[‘Amru] is the one who killed
‘Abdullah bin ‘Aqil bin Abi Talib (as).” Whereas in (6:64) he says that:
“The one who shot an arrow at ‘Abdullah bin Muslim bin ‘Aqil was Zayd
bin Ruqad al-Janabi. [Zayd] used to say: ‘I shot a young man from among
them with an arrow [on his forehead]. He tried to guard against it by
putting his hand on his forehead, but I stitched his hand to his
forehead such that he was unable to take it off from it! As his hand was
stuck to his forehead, [the young man said: ‘O Allah, they have
belittled us and humiliated us. O Allah, kill them the way they have
killed us.’ [Zayd] then shot another arrow at him which killed him. He
used to say about this: ‘He was dead when I got to him. I had to wrench
the arrow off his forehead. I managed to take it off but its arrowhead
was stuck on his forehead such that I was unable to take it out.”
[Sometime after the event of Karbala’,] Mukhtar dispatched ‘Abdullah bin
Kamil al-Shakiri to pursue him. The latter came to his house and
surrounded it. His men forced their way [into the house] and al-Janabi
came out with his sword drawn. Ibn Kamil said: “Shower him with arrows
and stone him.” They did so until he fell on the ground. Ibn Kamil then
ordered for fire and burnt him while he was still alive (6:64).

[^22]: Al-Tabari (5:469): “His mother was Ruqayyah, daughter of ‘Ali bin
Abi Talib (as).” See also Maqatil al-Talibiyyin (pg.62; Najaf edition).

[^23]: Al-Tabari (5:469): “Abu Mikhnaf says…” See also Maqatil
al-Talibiyyin (pg.62; Najaf edition).

[^24]: Al-Tabari (5:447): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi Rashid
narrated to me from Humaid bin Muslim al-Azdi who said…”

[^25]: Al-Tabari: He was among those who had revolted with Mustawrad bin
‘Alafah in Kufah in the year 43 H, during the governership of Mughirah
bin Shu’bah over the city. Al-Ghanawi was a scribe, so al-Mustawrad
instructed him to write [a letter for him] and then take it to Sammak
bin ‘Ubaid, the governer of Madain, inviting him to [pay allegiance to]
al-Mustawrad. He did so and then returned to al-Mustawrad. (5:190) When
the followers of al-Mustawrad were killed, al-Ghanawi fled and entered
Kufah [and put up at] Sharik bin Namlah’s [place]. He asked the latter
to go to see Mughirah bin Shu’bah and request him for a safe-conduct for
him. [Sharik] did so and Mughirah [accepted his request and] said: “I
have granted him protection (5:206). After the event of Karbala’,
[al-Ghanawi] fled from Mukhtar and joined Mus’ab bin al-Zubair. Later,
he joined ‘Abd al-Rahman bin Muhammad bin Ash’ath (5:205). Mukhtar tried
to pursue him but found him to have escaped, so he demolished his house
(6:65).

[^26]: He was the son of al-Hasan (as) as recorded in al-Tabari (5:468).
On page 448 of the same volume, his name appears as Abu Bakr, son of
al-Husayn bin ‘Ali, which is incorrect.

[^27]: Al-Tabari (5:448): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘‘Uqbah bin Bashir
al-Asadi reports that ‘Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin al-Husayn said
to me…” Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani has narrated this report in Maqatil
al-Talibiyyin (pg.57; Najaf edition) [from two different chains of
narration]. [The first chain of narration reads as follows:] “From
al-Madaini who was narrating on the authority of Abu Mikhnaf from
Sulaiman bin Abi Rashid...” [While the second one reads:] “From ‘Amru
bin Shamir who related on the authority of Jabir from Abu Ja’far
al-Baqir (as)…”

[^28]: Ibn Kahil as reported by al-Tabari (6:65). However, in (5:468) he
says Ibn Kahin, which is [definitely] not correct. [Al-Tabari] has not
mentioned that Mukhtar was in pursuit of him and the manner in which he
[eventually] killed him. Hisham says: “Abu al-Hudhayl –a man from the
Sakun- related to me saying: ‘I saw Hani’ bin Thubait al-Hadhrami
sitting in a gathering of the Hadramis during the time of Khalid bin
‘Abdillah, who was an old man at that time. I heard him say: ‘I was
among those who witnessed the killing of al-Husayn. By Allah, I was
standing in a group of ten men, all of whom were on the horses. The
cavalry [of Ibn Sa’d] were moving around and were scattered apart.
Suddenly a young boy from the family of al-Husayn came out from those
tents, with the pillar of a tent in his hands. He was wearing a
waist-cloth and a shirt. He seemed frightened and was [repeatedly]
looking to his right and left. It is just as if I am looking at the two
pearls on his ears swinging as he turns. A man approached him, galloping
his horse. As he drew closer to the boy, he bent down from his horse,
targeted the boy with the sword and cut him down!” Abu al-Faraj relates
this report from al-Madaini in his al-Maqatil (pg.79; Najaf edition).
Abu Mikhnaf says: “Hasan bin al-Hasan and ‘Umar bin al-Hasan were
considered too young by the people and were, therefore, not killed
(5:449).” Among the retainers (mawali) killed in Karbala’ were Sulaiman
and Manjah, the retainers of al-Husayn (as) (al-Tabari:5:469).

[^29]: This is as it has been reported in al-Tabari (5:468) and Maqatil
al-Talibiyyin (pg.58; Najaf edition) from al-Madaini. However, the
predominant view is that he is the one who escaped from the tents to the
point where his uncle [al-Husayn] had come to the ground, and was killed
there, as we shall see later. And this is the version recorded by
al-Mufid in al-Irshad (pg.241; Najaf edition).


