The Martyrdom Of Al-Husayn (as)
===============================

Al-Husayn (as) Advances Towards the Battlefield
-----------------------------------------------

When [only] three or four people had remained with al-Husayn (as), he
called for a pair of dazzling Yemeni trousers (*sarawil*). He tore them
[and put them on], so that he should not have them plundered [after his
martyrdom].[^1],[^2]

He waited for a good part of the day. Whenever someone from the people
came to him, he would go away, disliking to take up the responsibilty of
killing him and [to shoulder] the great sin.

Malik bin al-Nusair [al-Baddi al-Kindi][^3] came to him and struck his
head with [his] sword. It cut through the hood he was wearing and
reached his head. He started bleeding and the hood was filled with
blood. Al-Husayn (as) said to Malik: “May you not eat or drink with
[your hand]. May Allah resurrect you with the oppressors!”

[Al-Husayn (as)] then threw away the hood and called for a cap. He wore
it and surrounded it with a turban.[^4],[^5]

So he had the cloth tied [over the hood which was made of black silk].
He put on a shirt[^6] [or] a cloak of made of silken material, while his
hair was dyed. [Al-Husayn (as)] fought like a brave knight, guarding
against the [arrows], availing the weak points [of the enemy] and
attacking the cavalry fiercely.[^7]

[Meanwhile,] Shamir bin Dhi al-Jaushan advanced with around ten foot
soldiers from among the Kufan army towards the tent of al-Husayn (as),
inside which there was his load and family. [Seeing this, al-Husayn (as)
began] walking towards [the tent], but [the people] came between him and
the tents. So al-Husayn (as) said: “Woe upon you! If you have no
religion and do not fear the Day of Resurrection, then be free men of
noble descent in this world! Protect my tent and family from your rabble
and ignorant men!”

Ibn Dhi al-Jaushan said: “You are granted that O son of Fatimah!” and
proceeded towards him with the foot soldiers. [At this] al-Husayn (as)
began attacking them and they would disperse from him.[^8]

‘Abdullah bin ‘Ammar al-Bariqi[^9] says: “The foot soldiers that were on
his right and left side launched an assault on him. He thus attacked
those who were on his right such that they were frightened [and
retreated]. [He then attacked] those on the left and they [also] were
terrified. By Allah, I have never seen a broken [and a wounded] person,
whose children, kinsmen and companions had been slain, so tranquil, more
resolute and more courageous than him. By Allah, I have not seen his
like, neither before him, nor after him. Indeed, the foot soldiers were
fleeing from his right and left as goats would flee [and scatter] from a
wolf.

As ‘Umar bin Sa‘d drew closer to al-Husayn (as), his sister Zainab,
daughter of Fatimah, came out and said: “O ‘Umar bin Sa‘d! Is Abu
‘Abdillah being killed while you [stand by and] watch?! So he turned
away his face from her[^10]. It is just as if I am seeing the tears of
‘Umar running down his cheeks and beard!”[^11]

[Meanwhile,] al-Husayn (as) was attacking the cavalry and saying: “Are
you inciting one another to kill me! By Allah, you are not going to kill
any servant of Allah after me whose killing will incur more wrath upon
you than [killing] me. By Allah, I anticipate that Allah shall honour me
by disgracing you, and shall take vengeance on you from where you do not
perceive[^12]. By Allah, if you kill me, Allah will cause you to fight
one another and to shed your blood. Then he will not leave you until he
doubles for you the severe punishment.”[^13]

Thereafter, Shamir bin Dhi al-Jaushan advanced towards al-Husayn (as)
with the foot soldiers. Among them were Sinan bin Anas al-Nakha’i,
Khauliyy bin Yazid al-Asbahi[^14], Salih bin Wahab al-Yazani, Qash’am
bin Amr al- Ju’fi and ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Ju’fi.[^15] Shamir bin Dhi
al-Jaushan began inciting them [against Husein (as)], so they completely
encircled [al-Husayn (as)].

A boy[^16] from among his household came out towards al-Husayn (as).
Al-Husayn (as) said to his sister, Zainab bint ‘Ali: “Stop him.” So she
held him in order to stop him, but he refused [to take notice of her]
and determinedly advanced towards al-Husayn (as).

Bahr bin Ka’b rushed towards al-Husayn (as) with [his] sword. The young
lad said [to him]: “O son of an impure woman! Are you [trying to] kill
my uncle?!” [Bahr] struck at him with [his] sword. The boy tried to fend
off [the blow] with his arm, but the sword cut through [his arm] to the
skin [on the other side]. The boy cried out: “O my mother!”

Al-Husayn (as) took hold of him and embraced him. He said: “My nephew,
be patient on what has come to you, and anticipate in this the best
[from Allah], for Allah will unite you with your righteous ancestors,
the Messenger of Allah, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib, Hamzah and Hasan bin
‘Ali.[^17] May Allah bless them all. O Allah, withhold rain from them
and deprive them of the blessings of the earth. O Allah, if you are
going to give them comfort till a time, then divide them into factions
and make them sects following different ways. Let their rulers never be
pleased with them. They summoned us so that they might support us, [but]
they became hostile to us and killed us.”[^18]

He waited for a large part of the day. Had the people wished to kill
him, they could have done so. But [they were hesitant in killing him
such that] each of them would take refuge in the other and a group among
them would wish that the other group may spare it [the great sin]. Then
Shamir shouted at the people: “Woe onto you! Why are you waiting for the
man?! Kill him! May your mothers be deprived of you!” So he was attacked
from every side.

The Martyrdom of al-Husayn (as)
-------------------------------

Zur’ah bin Sharik al-Tamimi struck him on his palm[^19] and struck
[another blow] on his shoulder. Thus, he would [try to] stand, but would
fall prostrate on his noble face. In such a condition, Sinan bin Anas
al-Nakha’i stabbed him with a spear such that he (as) fell [to the
ground]. No one would get closer to al-Husayn (as) except that Sinan bin
Anas would charge on him, fearing that the head of [al-Husayn (as)] may
fall in the hands of someone else. He then bent down, slaughtered him
and separated his head.[^20] Thereafter, he handed [the head] to
Khauliyy bin Yazid [al-Asbahi].

Al-Husayn (as) was plundered of all that was on him. Qais bin
al-Ash’ath[^21] took his plush, while Ishaq bin Haiwah al-Hadhrami his
shirt[^22]. A man from the Banu Nahshal took his sword. His slippers
were taken by Aswad [al-Audi] and Bahr bin Ka’b took his trousers[^23],
leaving him uncovered.[^24]

[^1]: Al-Tabari (5:451): “Some of his companions said to him: ‘You
better wear a tabban (short dress) under [the trouser].’ He said: ‘That
is the garment of humiliation. It does not befit me to wear it.’ When he
was killed, Bahr bin Ka’b plundered [the trouser] from him. Abu Mikhnaf
says: ‘‘Amru bin Shu’aib narrated to me from Muhammad bin ‘Abd al-Rahman
that the hands of Bahr bin Ka’b used to sprinkle drops of water in
winter, and they would become dry in the summer as if they were sticks.”

[^2]: Al-Tabari (5:451): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi Rashid
related to me from Humaid bin Muslim that…” See also al-Irshad (pg.241).

[^3]: Al-Tabari: He was the messenger of Ibn Ziyad who brought his
letter to Hurr bin Yazid while he was on the way, [instructing him] to
force al-Husayn (as) to halt. (5:408)

[^4]: Al-Tabari (5:448): The hood was made of silk. Al-Kindi came [to
the body of the Imam (as) and] plundered it. When he went back with it
to his family, he started washing off the blood from it. His wife saw
him doing that and she understood [the matter]. So she said: ‘Do you
bring into my house that which you have plundered from the son of the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah (S)?! Take it out from me!’ The
friends of Malik say that he continued to remain poor with it [as a
result his action] until he died.” Al-Mufid has also related this report
in al-Irshad (pg.241). He refers to Malik as ‘Ibn al-Yasr’ instead of
Ibn al-Nusair. According to Majma’ al-Bahrain, the hood (al-barnas) was
a long cap made of cotton. It was worn by Christian monks and was later
adopted by Muslim ascetics during the early period of Islam.

[^5]: Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani narrates in al-Maqatil (pg.78; Najaf
edition) from Abu Mikhnaf who said: “Hisham reports from Qasim bin
al-Asbagh bin Nubatah on the authority of his father, Muhammad bin
Sa’ib, that: ‘Someone who happened to see al-Husayn (as) in his camp has
related to me that: ‘When the army of [al-Husayn (as)] was overpowered,
he whipped his horse and set off towards the dam, trying to reach the
Euphrates. A man from the Banu Aban bin Darim said: ‘Woe upon you!
Prevent him from reaching the water!’ So the people chased him and came
between him and the Euphrates. The man from the Banu Darim took an arrow
[and shot it at him] which lodged in his throat. Al-Husayn pulled out
the arrow and held his hand below his throat. Both his palms were filled
with blood and then he said: ‘O Allah! I complain to you about what is
being done to the son of the daughter of your Prophet. O Allah, afflict
him with thirst!” Qasim bin Asbagh says: “Indeed I have seen him, by his
side there were jugs of milk and pitchers of water. The water was being
cooled for him and sweetened with sugar. He would say: ‘Woe onto you!
Give me water to drink. I am dying of thirst!’ So they would give him
the jug or the pitcher and he would have some from it. The moment he
removed it from his lips and the satisfaction would go away, he would
[again] say: ‘Woe upon you! Give me a drink! I am dying of thirst!’ By
Allah, it was not long before his belly bursted like the bursting of the
stomach of a camel.” Al-Tabari (5:449-450): “Hisham says: ‘‘Amru bin
Shamir related to me from Jabir al-Ju’fi who said: ‘Al-Husayn (as) was
thirsty. When his thirst became severe, he drew near [the Euphrates] to
drink from its water. So Husayn bin Tamim shot an arrow at him which
lodged in his mouth. [Al-Husayn (as)] began collecting the blood from
his mouth and throwing it to the sky. He said: ‘O Allah, take account of
them, destroy them entirely and do not leave a single of them on the
earth.’(5:449-450). In (5:447-448) [the chain of narration of this
report appears as such:] “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi Rashid
related to me from Humaid bin Muslim that…”

[^6]: Al-Tabari (5:452): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Saq’ab bin Zuhair has
narrated to me from Humaid bin Muslim that…”

[^7]: Al-Tabari (5:452): “[Abu Mikhnaf reports] on the authority of
al-Hajjaj from ‘Abdullah bin ‘Ammar al-Bariqi who said…”

[^8]: Al-Tabari (5:450): “Abu Mikhnaf reports…” See also Maqatil
al-Talibiyyin (pg.79).

[^9]: Al-Tabari (5:565): He is the person who gave an account of the
order of the Commander of the Faithful [‘Ali (as)] -as he was advancing
towards Siffin in the year 26 H- that a bridge be built over the
Euphrates.

[^10]: See also al-Irshad (pg.242; Najaf edition).

[^11]: Al-Tabari (5:451): “[Abu Mikhnaf reports] from ‘Abd al-Rahman bin
‘Ammar al-Bariqi, who narrated from Hajjaj that...” Al-Mufid has
narrated the report in al-Irshad (pg.241) from Humaid bin Muslim.

[^12]: The prayer of the Imam (as) was answered. Thus came Mukhtar and
sent Abu ‘Umrah to ‘Umar bin Sa’d, ordering him to bring Ibn Sa’d to
him. Abu ‘Umrah came to ‘Umar and said: “The governor is summoning you.”
As ‘Umar stood up, he was tripped by his garment. So Abu ‘Umrah struck
him with [his] sword and killed him. Then he put his head under his
cloak, [went to Mukhtar,] and placed it before him! Hafs bin ‘Umar bin
Sa’d was sitting with Mukhtar. So Mukhtar asked him: “Do you know this
head?” Hafs recited the verse: ‘Indeed we belong to Allah and to Him do
we indeed return’, and said: “Yes, and life is worthless after him!”
Mukhtar said: “But you [too] are not going to live after him.” He then
ordered him to be killed and he was killed. His head was then put with
that of his father. (See al-Tabari: 6:61).

[^13]: Al-Tabari (5:452): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Saq’ab bin Zuhair
narrated to me from Humaid bin Muslim that…”

[^14]: Al-Tabari (6:59): Mukhtar had sent Ma’adh bin Hani’ bin ‘Adiyy
al-Kindi -the nephew of Hujr bin ‘Adiyy, and Abu ‘Amarah -the head of
his bodyguards, in pursuit of him. Khauliyy hid himself near the exit
[of his house]. So Ma’adh ordered Abu ‘Amarah to search for him in the
house. As they were entering the house, his wife came out to them. They
said to her: “Where is your husband? She replied: “I do not know” and
pointed towards the exit. So they entered [the house] and found him [at
its exit], with a basket made of date palm leaves on his head. They took
him out and burnt him.

[^15]: Al-Tabari: He was among those who gave witness against Hujr bin
‘Adiyy al-Kindi (5:270). He was in command of the Madhhij and Asad in
the army of ‘Umar bin Sa’d on the day of ‘Ashura’(5:422).

[^16]: According to Shaikh al-Mufid in al-Irshad (pg.241), he was
‘Abdullah bin al-Hasan. There are indications [also] that support this
view. It has been mentioned earlier that Harmalah bin Kahil was the one
who shot an arrow at him which killed him. Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani also
has narrated this incident -at this particular point of the event of
Karbala’- in al-Maqatil (pg.77; Najaf edition), from Abu Mikhnaf who
reported from Sulaiman bin Abi Rashid, who related from Humaid bin
Muslim.

[^17]: Al-Tabari (5:450): “Abu Mikhnaf says in a report…” See also
Maqatil al-Talibiyyin (pg.77; Najaf edition). He narrated it from Humaid
bin Muslim on the authority of Sulaiman bin Abi Rashid.

[^18]: Al-Tabari (5:451): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi Rashid
has narrated to me from Humaid bin Muslim who said…” See al-Irshad
(pg.241).

[^19]: It was his left shoulder according to al-Irshad (pg.242) and
Tadhkirat al-Khawass (pg.253). ‘Abd al-Razzaq al-Muqarram narrates this
report in al-Maqtal (pg.16) from the book al-Ithaf bi-Hubb al-Ashraf.

[^20]: Ibn al-Jawzi mentions five different views concerning the assasin
of the Imam (as) and [ultimately] prefers that it was Sinan. He then
narrates that [one day] Sinan entered upon Hajjaj, so he asked him: “Are
you the killer of al-Husayn?” “Yes”, he replied. Hajjaj said: “Good news
to you, as you will never be with him in the same abode.” The people
said that Hajjaj has never been heard saying a better word than this!”
Ibn al-Jawzi further says: “[After the martyrdom of al-Husayn (as)],
people counted [the number of wounds] on his body and found that he was
stabbed 33 times and 34 sword strikes [were evident on his body]. And
they found on his clothes that he was shot 120 arrows.”

[^21]: Al-Tabari (5:453): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Saq’ab bin Zuhair
narrated to me from Humaid bin Muslim that…”

[^22]: Al-Tabari (5:455): “[Abu Mikhnaf reports:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi
Rashid has related to me from Humaid bin Muslim…”

[^23]: Al-Tabari (5:452): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Saq’ab bin Zuhair has
narrated to me from Humaid bin Muslim that…”

[^24]: Al-Tabari (5:451): “[Abu Mikhnaf reports:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi
Rashid related to me from Humaid bin Muslim, who said…” Sibt al-Jawzi
has clearly stated this fact in al-Tadhkirah (pg.253) saying: “They
plundered all that was on him, even his trousers which was taken by Bahr
bin Ka’b al-Tamimi.” Al-Mufid mentions this in al-Irshad (pg.241&242)
adding that: “After this, the two hands of Bahr bin Ka’b, may Allah
curse him, used to become so dry in the summer that they were like
sticks, and then soaking wet in the winter such that they sprinkled
blood and pus, until Allah destroyed him.”


