The Household Of Al-Husayn (as) In Kufah
========================================

‘Umar bin Sa‘d remained [there for the rest of] that day and the next
day.[^1] He ordered the heads of the remainder [of al-Husayn’s followers
who had been slain] to be cut off. He then sent seventy-two heads[^2]
with Shamir bin Dhi al-Jaushan, Qais bin Ash’ath, ‘Amru bin al-Hajjaj
and ‘Azarah bin Qais. They journeyed until they brought them to
‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad.

[‘Umar] then ordered Humaid bin Bukair al-Ahmari[^3] to summon the
people for the journey to Kufah. He took with him the daughters and
sisters of al-Husayn (as), the children, and ‘Ali bin al-Husayn who was
[still] sick.[^4]

Qurrah bin Qais al-Tamimi reports: “I will not forget Zainab, the
daughter of Fatimah, when she passed by her brother al-Husayn (as) lying
dead. She was crying: ‘O Muhammad! O Muhammad! The angels from the
heavens salute you! Here is al-Husayn lying in the plains, covered in
[his] blood, with his limbs severed from his body. O Muhammad! And your
daughters have become captives, while your offspring have been killed
and left for the east wind to blow on them.’ By Allah, her wails made
every friend and foe weep[^5]. The women lamented and struck their
faces.”[^6]

The Burial of al-Husayn (as) and His Companions
-----------------------------------------------

[Some of] the Banu Asad, who had been staying at al-Ghadhiriyyah, buried
al-Husayn (as) and his followers, a day after they were killed.[^7],[^8]

The Head of the Imam (as) Before Ibn Ziyad
------------------------------------------

Humaid bin Muslim narrates: “Umar bin Sa‘d summoned me and sent me to
his family members to give them the good news of the victory of Allah
granted to him and that he was in safety. So I proceeded until I came to
his family and informed them about that.

There [I saw] Ibn Ziyad sitting, while the delegation that brought [the
heads] had [just] entered on him. The [people of] Kindah, led by Qais
bin al-Ash’ath, came forward with thirteen heads. The [people of]
Hauzan, under Shamir bin Dhi al-Jaushan, came with twenty heads.
Seventeen heads were brought by the [men from the] Tamim. Banu Asad
brought six heads. Madhhij came with seven heads and the rest of the
army came [in] with seven heads. This comes up to seventy heads.

[Ibn Ziyad] let them in and granted the [rest of] people the permission
to enter. I was one of those who went in. I saw the head of al-Husayn
(as) placed in front of him, while he was poking at his front teeth with
a staff. When Zayd bin Arqam[^9] saw that he would not stop poking [the
teeth], he said: ‘Take your cane away from those [two] lips. For, by He
beside whom there is no deity, I have seen the lips of the Prophet of
Allah (S) on those two lips, kissing them!’ [With that] the old man
broke into tears.

Ibn Ziyad said to him: ‘May Allah make your two eyes weep! By Allah, if
it was not for the fact that you are an old man who has become silly and
your mind has left you, I would cut off your head.’

[Zayd bin Arqam] stood up and went out[^10] saying: ‘A slave has
appointed [another] slave to rule and he is treating [the people] as his
[own] property. O the community of the Arabs! [Know that] you have
become slaves henceforth! You have killed the son of Fatimah and taken
the son of Marjanah as [your] ruler! He will kill the righteous among
you and enslave the wicked. You have thus accepted humiliation! And away
from the people who have accepted humiliation!’[^11]

After he went out, I heard people saying: ‘By Allah, Zayd has said
something that if Ibn Ziyad had heard, he would have killed him.’

The Captives in the Court of Ibn Ziyad
--------------------------------------

When [al-Husayn’s] sisters, his womenfolk and children were brought
before ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad, Zainab, the daughter of Fatimah, put on
her mean clothes, pretending not to be herself. Her maids crowded around
her and she sat.

‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad said: ‘Who is that woman sitting?’ She did not
answer him. He repeated that three times, but she did not speak.

One of her maids [then] said: ‘This is Zainab, daughter of Fatimah.’

‘Ubaidullah said to her: ‘All praise is due to Allah Who has disgraced
you, killed you and revealed the false nature of your claims.’

[Zainab] replied: ‘Praise be to Allah Who honoured us with Muhammad (S)
and purified us with a thorough purification. It is not the way you have
said. Only a sinner is disgraced [by Allah] and [only] the false nature
of the wicked is revealed!’

He said: ‘How do you consider Allah has treated the members of your
household?!’

She replied: ‘Death had been decreed for them and they went forward
[bravely] to their resting places. Allah will gather you and them, and
you will argue against each other and dispute with one another before
him.’[^12]

[At this] Ibn Ziyad became enraged and he burnt with anger. He said to
her: ‘Allah has cured my soul from your tyrant [brother] and the
rebellious members of your family!’

[Here] Zainab wept. She then said: ‘By my life, you have killed my
elders and destroyed my family. [You have] cut my branches and extracted
my roots! If this is what cures you, then you have been cured!’

‘Ubaidullah said: ‘This is a woman who rhymes her speech
(*sajja’ah*).[^13] By my life, your father used to speak in rhymed prose
and was a poet.’

She answered: ‘What has a woman to do with rhythmic construction of
statements! I have [things] to distract me from that. But this is the
agony of my heart that is flowing on my tongue.’[^14]

Thereafter, ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad looked at ‘Ali bin al-Husayn and asked
him: ‘What is your name?’

He replied: ‘I am ‘Ali bin al-Husayn.’

[Ibn Ziyad] said: ‘Did Allah not kill ‘Ali bin al-Husayn?!’ [At this,
Imam al-Sajjad] remained silent.

So Ibn Ziyad said to him: ‘Why are you not speaking?’

[Al-Sajjad] said: ‘I had a brother who was also called ‘Ali. The people
killed him.’

Ibn Ziyad said: ‘Allah has indeed killed him.’ [Again] he remained
quiet. So Ibn Ziyad said: ‘Why are you not speaking?’

He said: ‘Allah takes the souls at the time of their death.’[^15] ‘No
soul may die except with Allah’s leave.’[^16]

Ibn Ziyad said: ‘By Allah, you are one of them [i.e. the rebellious].’
[Then he said to Mariyy bin Ma’adh al-Ahmari:] ‘Woe onto you! Kill him.’

His aunt, Zainab, clung on to him and said: ‘O Ibn Ziyad! You have had
enough of our blood! Have you still not quenched your thirst by our
blood?! Is there anyone you have left among us?!’ Then she embraced
[al-Sajjad] and said: ‘I beseech you by Allah -if you are a believer-
that if you [intend to] kill him, then kill me with him.’

‘Ali [bin al-Husayn] called on him: ‘If you have a bond of kinship with
them [i.e. these women], then ask a pious man to accompany them in a
manner worthy of Islam.’

Ibn Ziyad looked at them and said: ‘How wonderful is family
relationship! By Allah, she likes me to kill her with him, if I were to
kill him. Leave the boy.’[^17],[^18]

‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad then stuck the head of al-Husayn [(as) on a spear]
and ordered it to be taken round [the city of] Kufah.”[^19]

The Stand of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Afif
--------------------------------

[After the gathering was over], it was announced: “Offer your prayers in
congregation.” So people gathered in the great mosque [of Kufah]. Ibn
Ziyad ascended the pulpit and said:

“Praise be to Allah Who has revealed the truth and the followers [of the
truth], and has given victory to the commander of the faithful, Yazid
bin Mu’awiyah, and his party, and has killed the liar son of the liar:
al-Husayn bin ‘Ali, and his followers.”

Ibn Ziyad had not yet finished his speech when ‘Abdullah bin ‘Afif
al-Azdi al-Ghamidi -who was among the Shi‘ah of ‘Ali -[lit.] may Allah
honour his face, and who would hardly leave the great mosque as he used
to [be busy] praying in it the whole day[^20]- sprung up as he heard
[these words from] Ibn Ziyad. He said:

“The liar, son of the liar, is you and your father, and the one who
appointed you as the governer [i.e. Yazid] and his father. O son of
Marjanah![^21] You kill the sons of Prophets and speak the speech of the
men of truth?!”

Ibn Ziyad said: “Get him for me.”

The soldiers rushed towards him and arrested him. He gave the battle cry
of al-Azd [saying]: “O the kind one!” So a number of young men from Azd
quickly came forward, freed him and took him to his family.[^22]

Ibn Ziyad then sent someone who brought [Ibn ‘Afif] to him. He killed
him and ordered him to be crucified in al-Sabkhah, so he was crucified
there.[^23]

[^1]: See also al-Irshad (pg.243).

[^2]: See al-Irshad (pg.243). Sibt bin al-Jawzi says in al-Tadhkirah
(pg.256; Najaf): “There were ninty-two heads.” But this is, perhaps, due
to the misspelling of seventy (sab’in), for he himself asserts on page
259 of the same book: “There were more than seventy heads.”

[^3]: Al-Tabari (5:368): “He was one of the bodyguards of Ibn Ziyad. Ibn
Ziyad had sent him with Shuraih, the chief judge, to monitor [Shuraih]
when he sent the latter to see Hani’ and then to inform his clansmen
that he was safe. Shuraih later used to say: “I swear by Allah, had he
not been with me, I would have conveyed to the followers of Hani’ what
he had asked me to tell them.”

[^4]: Al-Tabari (5:453-455): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi
Rashid narrated to me from Humaid bin Muslim that…”

[^5]: See Maqatil al-Talibiyyin (pg.256).

[^6]: Al-Tabari (5:455): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Abu Zuhair al-‘Absi
related to me from Qurrah bin Qais al-Tamimi that….”

[^7]: Al-Tabari (5:453-455): “[Abu Mikhnaf report:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi
Rashid has narrated to me from Humaid bin Muslim who said…”

[^8]: See al-Irshad (pg.243&249) and Muruj al-Dhahab (3:72). However,
the predominant opinion is [that the burial took place] three days after
they were [martyred] and in the presence of Imam al-Sajjad (as), as the
the debate between ‘Ali bin Hamzah and Imam al-Ridha (as) attests to
this fact. See Maqtal al-Husayn (pg.415) of ‘Abd al-Razzaq al-Muqarram.

[^9]: Sibt bin al-Jawzi narrates in al-Tadhkirah (pg.257) from Ibn Sirin
on the authority of al-Bukhari that: “When the head of al-Husayn (as)
was placed in front of Ibn Ziyad, it was put in a wash-bowl. [Ibn Ziyad]
began striking [al-Husayn’s] teeth with a cane. Anas bin Malik was with
him and so he started weeping and said: ‘He is the most resemblance of
them to the Prophet of Allah.”

[^10]: See also al-Irshad (pg.243).

[^11]: Sibt bin al-Jawzi has narrated this incident in al-Tadhkirah
(pg.257). He further adds: “[Zayd] then said: ‘O Ibn Ziyad! I am indeed
going to tell you a word which is harsher for you than this: I have seen
the Prophet of Allah (S) seat al-Hasan on his right lap and al-Husayn on
his left. Then he placed his hand on the crown of their heads and said:
‘O Allah, I commend to Your protection both of them and the righteous
among the believers!’ So how have you treated the trust of the Messenger
of Allah (S) with you, O Ibn Ziyad?!” Ibn al-Jawzi then says: “Hisham
bin Muhammad reports: ‘When the head [of al-Husayn] was put before Ibn
Ziyad, his fortuneteller said to him: ‘Stand up and put your foot on the
mouth of your adversary! So he stood and put his foot on [al-Husayn’s]
mouth. Then he said to Zayd bin Arqam: ‘How do you find this?’ [Zayd]
said: ‘By Allah, I have seen the Prophet of Allah (S) keeping his mouth
where you have kept your foot.” Ibn al-Jawzi then writes: “Al-Sha’bi
said: ‘Qais bin ‘Abbad was with Ibn Ziyad. So he asked [Qais]: ‘What is
your opinion regarding me and al-Husayn?’ He said: ‘His grandfather, his
father and mother will come and intercede for him on the Day of
Judgement, while your grandfather, your father and mother will come and
intercede for you!’ [At this,] Ibn Ziyad became angry and asked him to
leave the gathering.” Ibn al-Jawzi relates from al-Tabaqat of Ibn Sa’d
that he said: “Marjanah, the mother of Ibn Ziyad, said to his son [Ibn
Ziyad]: ‘O vicious [man]! You have killed the son of the Prophet of
Allah! By Allah, you will never see the heaven!” See al-Tadhkirah
(pg.259). Ibn al-Athir has also narrated this in al-Kamil (4:265).

[^12]: See al-Irshad (pg.243) and al-Tadhkirah (pg.258&259; Najaf
edition).

[^13]: The word sajja’ah and saja’ah in the text above have been
recorded by Tabari as shaja’ah and shuja’ah (a brave woman). In
al-Irshad (pg.244; Najaf edition), al-Mufid has recorded these words in
the same manner as we have brought them in the text, which is more
appropriate and suitable as far as the context of the speech is
concerned.

[^14]: Al-Tabari (5:456-457): “[Abu Mikhnaf says:] ‘Sulaiman bin Abi
Rashid has narrated to me from Humaid bin Muslim that…”

[^15]: Qur’an, 39:42.

[^16]: Qur’an, 3:145.

[^17]: Al-Tabari (5:457): “[Abu Mikhnaf reports:] ‘As for Sulaiman bin
Abi Rashid, he related to me from Humaid bin Muslim who said…”

[^18]: Tabari writes in Dhayl al-Mudhayyal that: “‘Ali [bin al-Husayn
al-Asghar] said: ‘When I was brought before Ibn Ziyad, he asked me:
‘What is your name?’ I answered: ‘Ali bin Husayn.’ He said: ‘Did Allah
not kill ‘Ali?’ I said: ‘I had a brother who was older than me and the
people killed him!’ He said: ‘Rather Allah killed him.’ I said: ‘Allah
takes the souls at the time of their death.’ So he ordered me to be
killed. Zainab bint ‘Ali (as) then said to him: ‘O Ibn Ziyad! You have
had enough of our blood! I beseech you by Allah -if you are a believer-
that if you [intend to] kill him, then kill me with him.’ So he left
him.” Tabari then relates in Dhayl al-Mudhayyal (pg.630; Dar al-Ma’arif
publications), quoting from al-Tabaqat of Ibn Sa’d (5:211-218), that he
narrated from Malik bin Isma’il, who was relating from Sahl bin Shu’aib,
who reported from his father Shu’aib, that Minhal bin ‘Amru said: “[One
day] I went to see ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (as). I said to him: ‘How are you
this morning, may Allah guide you?’ He said: ‘I have not seen an old man
like you in this city, who does not know our condition! But if you are
not aware and do not know about it, then I will inform you. [He then
said:] ‘Our position among our people is that of the children of Israel
amidst the people of Fir’aun. ‘They were slaying their sons and sparing
their women.’ Abusing and cursing our master and leader [‘Ali bin Abi
Talib] from the pulpits has become a means of gaining closeness to our
enemy. The Quraish consider themselves superior than the Arabs because
Muhammad was from them, not because of any other reason; while the Arabs
are acknowledging that for them. The Arabs [on their part] see
themselves to be superior to the non-Arabs because Muhammad is from
them, and they have no other reason for their superiority except this;
while the non-Arabs have accepted this from them. [Now], if the claim of
the Arabs that they are superior to the non-Arabs is true, and if the
claim of the Quraish that they enjoy superiority over the Arabs is
[also] true, because [both the sides] argue that Muhammad is from them,
then we, the household of Muhammad, certainly enjoy superiority over the
Quraysh, because Muhammad was from us. But [unfortunately] they began
taking our right and do not acknowledge any right for us! This is our
situation, if you do not know what our condition is.” Ibn Sa’d says:
“‘Abd al-Rahman bin Yunus narrated to us from Ja’far bin Muhammad
[al-Sadiq] on the authority of Sufyan that: ‘‘Ali bin al-Husayn died at
the age of 58 years.’ This implies that ‘Ali bin al-Husayn was with his
father [in Karbala’] when he was 23 or 24 years old. Therefore, the view
that says that he was still a child at that time, who had not grown up,
is in no way correct. Rather, he was sick at that time and thus could
not fight. Besides this, how can he be a child at that time while Abu
Ja’far Muhammad bin ‘Ali [al-Baqir] (as) had been born to him?” See also
al-Irshad (pg.244) for the conversation that took place between
al-Sajjad and Ibn Ziyad. Ibn al-Jawzi has briefly related the actual
report [i.e. the conversation between Ibn Ziyad, Lady Zainab and Imam
al-Sajjad] in al-Tadhkirah (pg.258; Najaf edition).

[^19]: Al-Tabari (5:459): “Abu Mikhnaf says…”

[^20]: Al-Tabari (5:458): “He lost his left eye in the battle of Jamal,
fighting alongside ‘Ali (as). He was struck on his head in the battle of
Siffin and a second strike on his eyebrow. He thus lost his other eye
too.” See al-Irshad (pg.244) for the actual incident. Sibt bin al-Jawzi
has also narrated the incident briefly in al-Tadhkirah (pg.259).

[^21]: Marjanah is an Arabicized version of the Persian word mehrgan.
She was the mother of Ibn Ziyad, who was a slave girl supposedly from
Khuzistan.

[^22]: Al-Tabari: ‘Abd al-Rahman bin Mikhnaf al-Azdi was sitting. So he
said: “Woe onto other than you! You have destroyed yourself and your
clan!” (5:459). ‘Abd al-Rahman was the uncle of Abu Mikhnaf’s father,
for he was the brother of Sa’id, the grandfather of Abu Mikhnaf. He
participated in the battle of Siffin and had also stood against the
raids launched by Mu’awiyah’s army, as reported in al-Tabari (5:133). He
was with ‘Abdullah bin al-Muti’ al-‘Adawiyy –the governer of Ibn
al-Zubair in Kufah- during the uprising of Mukhtar in 66 H. Al-‘Adawiyy
had sent him with some horsemen to the cemetery of the people of Said
(6:18). ‘Abd al-Rahman was also among the advisers to al-‘Adawiyy, who
advised him to leave Kufah and go to Hijaz (6:31). He disliked rising
against Mukhtar, but when they insisted him to do so, he [ultimately]
rose against him (6:44). He fought [the followers of Mukhtar [near] the
Euphrates. He was covered with wounds and was carried away by the
soldiers (6:51). [‘Abd al-Rahman] then joined Mus’ab bin al-Zubair in
Basrah, along with those noblemen of Kufah who had risen [against
Mukhtar] (6:55). Mus’ab sent him to Kufah in 67 H to invite people to
pay allegiance to Ibn al-Zubair and to persuade them to go [and join]
Mus’ab (6:95). He remained with Mus’ab throughout his war against
Mukhtar (6:104). In the year 74 H, during the rule of ‘Abd al-Malik bin
Marwan, [‘Abd al-Rahman] fought against the Azariqah sect of the
Khawarij, on the order of Bishr bin Marwan, the governor of Basrah
(6:197). He pursued them up to Kazarun, where they [bravely] fought him.
[Most of] his followers were put to flight except for a few of them.
‘Abd al-Rahman continued to fight until he was killed in the year 75 H
(6:212).

[^23]: Al-Tabari (5:458): “[Abu Mikhnaf relates that:] ‘Humaid bin
Muslim said…”


