Preamble
========

**In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.**

All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds. Blessings and peace be
on the noblest of His creation, the seal of His messengers, Muhammad,
and upon his pure and distinguished household.

The narration of the lord of the martyrs, Abu ‘Abdillah, (as), is one of
the greatest historical events and the everlasting recollections, which
has served as a beacon for mankind. This event teaches that true honour
and life lies only in confronting the tyrants, even though it may lead
to sacrificing lives and being killed at the hands of the oppressors.
Such was the slogan of Imam al-Husayn (as) when he said: “I consider
death to be nothing but martyrdom, and living with the tyrants as
disgusting.”

Therefore, it is incumbent upon the seekers of eternal felicity to keep
this event before their eyes and to deal with the despotic rulers of
their time in the manner Imam al-Husayn (as) dealt with them.

Because of the importance of this great event, [different] researchers
have written numerous books on the martyrdom (maqtal) of the lord of the
martyrs (as). The first of these researchers is Lut bin Yahya bin Sa’id,
[famously known as] Abu Mikhnaf. He compiled a book in this regard,
recounting the events that occurred to al-Husayn, his children, brothers
and companions (as). Shaikh al-Najjashi describes him in his Rijal as
“The master of the narrators in Kufah and a leading figure among
them.”[^1]

The eminent scholar, Shaikh Muhammad Hadi al-Yusufi al-Gharawi has
undertaken the research and editing of [Abu Mikhnaf’s] work. This
institute has endevoured to publish this work for the benefit of the
seekers of knowledge and virtue. We are grateful to Allah, the Glorious,
for granting us success in this regard. We would also like to extend our
thanks to the honourable researcher of this work for his great efforts.
We pray to Allah to grant this institute and him the tawfiq in spreading
the teachings of Islam, as He is, indeed, the Hearing, the Responsive.

**The Institute of Islamic Publications Under**  
**The Association of the Instructors (jami’ah al-mudarrisin)**  
**The Holy City of Qum**

[^1]: See Introduction for his biography.


