The Household Of Al-Husayn (as) In Madinah
==========================================

When they intended to return, Yazid bin Mu’awiyah said: “O Nu’man bin
Bashir! Prepare for them whatever they need and send a righteous and
trustworthy person from among the people of Sham with them. [Also] send
some horsemen and helpers with him to guide them towards Madinah.

[Nu’man] thus went with them. He used to advance with them at night.
[During the journey], the [family of al-Husayn (as)] moved ahead of him
so that they should never be out of his sight. When they stopped, he
would go aside from them, and he and his followers would separate around
them like a group of guards over them. They would keep away from them
such that if any person from the [group] wanted to wash or perform a
need, he would not be ashamed. He continued to stop [the caravan] on the
way in this manner, being kind to them and looking after them until they
entered Madinah.[^1]

The Arrival in Madinah
----------------------

When the news of the death of al-Husayn (as) reached the people of
Madinah, Umm Luqman[^2], the daughter of ‘Aqil bin Abi Talib, came out
together with the [other] women -while her head was unveiled and she was
covering herself with her garment. She recited:

What would you say if the Prophet asked you: What have you done while
you are the last of the nations.

With my offspring and my family after my departure? Some of them have
become prisoners, and some other stained with blood.[^3]

When ‘Abdullah bin Ja’far bin Abi Talib[^4] heard about the death of his
two sons [Muhammad and ‘Aun] along with al-Husayn (as), people [began]
coming up to him to condole him. He turned to those sitting around him
and said: “All praise is due to Allah -the Almighty and the Majestic-
for [every misfortune, even for the] martyrdom of al-Husayn (as). If my
two hands could not assist al-Husayn (as), then my two sons have [at
least] helped him. By Allah, had I been with him, I would have loved not
to part from him until I am killed with him. By Allah, what makes me too
glad to give up [both of] them and makes easy for me to bear their loss,
is [the fact] that they were killed together with my brother and cousin,
while they supported him and persevered with him.”[^5],[^6]

[^1]: Al-Tabari (5:461): “[Abu Mikhnaf relates this] from Fatimah on the
authority of Harith bin Ka’b...” See also Maqatil al-Talibiyyin (pg.80)
and al-Tadhkirah (pg.264).

[^2]: Shaikh al-Mufid says in al-Irshad (pg.248): “Umm Luqman, the
daughter of ‘Aqil bin Abi Talib, may Allah have mercy on them, came out
crying when she heard the news of the death of al-Husayn (as). Her head
was uncovered as she came out with her sisters: Umm Hani, Asma’, Ramlah
and Zainab, daughters of ‘Aqil bin Abi Talib, may Allah have mercy on
them. She wept for her [relatives] slain on the bank [of the Euphrates],
saying…” Sibt bin al-Jawzi has also related this in al-Tadhkirah
(pg.267) from Zainab bint ‘Ali on the authority of al-Waqidi.

[^3]: Tabari has related these verses from Imam al-Baqir (as) on the
authority of ‘Ammar al-Duhani. [Al-Baqir says:] “He prepared them [for
the journey] and took them to Madinah. When they entered [Madinah], a
woman from the Banu ‘Abd al-Muttalib came out with dishevelled hair and
with the sleeve [of her garment] on her head. She approached them
wailing and saying: What will you answer if the Prophet asked you, what
have you done, while you were the last of the nations. To my progeny and
household after my death? from them are captives and others are covered
with their blood. This was not the recompense to which I directed you,
that after me you deal with my kin with such evil.

[^4]: Al-Tabari: He is the one who narrated the incident of Halimah
al-Sa’diyyah (2:158). In the year 8 H, when the soldiers returned from
the battle of Mu’tah [and his father, Ja’far, had been martyred], the
Messenger of Allah [s] asked [the family of ‘Abdullah to bring him. So
they brought him to the Prophet and] he took him in his hands (3:42).
‘Abdullah was the one who suggested to ‘Ali (as) to dismiss Qais bin
Sa’d from the governorship of Egypt and to appoint over it his half
brother from his mother’s side, Muhammad bin ‘Abi Bakr. The Imam (as)
accepted his suggestion (4:36). ‘Abdullah was with ‘Ali (as) in Siffin
(5:61). He, together with al-Hasan and al-Husayn, undertook the
arrangement for the burial of Imam ‘Ali (as). Then he returned with them
to Madinah (5:165). We have given his biography when we mentioned his
letter to al-Husayn from Makkah through his [two] sons, Muhammad and
‘Aun.

[^5]: Al-Tabari (5:466): “[Abu Mikhnaf says that I narrate this] from
‘Abd al-Rahman bin ‘Ubaid Abu al-Kanud, on the authority of Sulaiman bin
Abi Rashid…”

[^6]: Hisham reports: “‘Awanah bin al-Hakam has related to me saying:
‘When ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad killed Husayn bin ‘Ali, he summoned ‘Abd
al-Malik bin Abi Harith al-Salami and said: ‘Go to Madinah and meet
‘Amru bin Sa’id bin al-‘Ass -who was then the governor of Madinah- and
give him the news of the death of al-Husayn. None other than you should
inform him of the news. Do not fall ill. If your mount happened to tire,
buy another one.’ He [also] gave him some money (dananir). ‘Abd al-Malik
says: ‘So I came to Madinah and went to see ‘Amru bin Sa’id. He said:
‘What is the news?’ I said: ‘That which would please the governor!
Al-Husayn bin ‘Ali has been killed!’ He said: ‘Then announce his death!’
So I announced it. I had never heard before the like of the wails of the
women of the Hashimite from their houses, mourning al-Husayn. ‘Amru bin
Sa’id laughed [at this] and said: The women of the Banu Ziyad raised a
great lament like the lamentation of our women, mourning [after the
battle] of al-Arnab.’\* ‘Amru then ascended the pulpit and informed the
people about his death.” See also al-Irshad (pg.247; Najaf edition). [In
another report] Hisham says: “‘Awanah related to me that: ‘Ubaidullah
bin Ziyad said to ‘Umar bin Sa’d: ‘O ‘Umar! Where is the letter that I
wrote to you [instructing] you to kill al-Husayn?’ He said: ‘I carried
out your order, [but] the letter is lost.’ ‘You must bring it!’ insisted
Ibn Ziyad. ‘It is lost’, ‘Umar replied. ‘By Allah, you must bring it to
me,’ he repeated. ‘Umar said, ‘By Allah, it has been left in Madinah to
be read for the olden women of Quraish, as an apology to them! By Allah,
I have been sincere [enough] with you with regard to the issue of
al-Husayn, such that if I had acted with such loyalty to my own father,
Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas, I would have discharged my duty towards him.’
[Here] ‘Uthman bin Ziyad, the brother of ‘Ubaidullah, says: ‘By Allah,
he has said the truth. I wish I would have seen the mark of slavery on
every man of the Banu Ziyad till the Day of Resurrection, but that
al-Husayn should not have been killed!” Hisham says: “‘Amru bin Haizum
al-Kalbi narrated to me from his father that he heard a voice calling
out: O men who ignorantly killed al-Husayn, hear the news of punishment
and chastisement. All the people of heaven, prophets, angels and their
likes, are cursing you. You have been cursed by the tongue of the son of
Dawud, and [that] of Musa and [that] of the bearer of the Injil. See
also al-Irshad (pg.248) and al-Tadhkirah (pg.270; Najaf edition). \* The
verse is of ‘Umar bin Mu’id Yakrub al-Zubaidi. They had waged a battle
against the Banu Ziyad in retaliation to the battle fought by the latter
against the Banu Zubaid. Sibt bin al-Jawzi has briefly narrated this
report in al-Tadhkirah (pg.266). He also narrates from al-Sha’bi that:
“Marwan bin al-Hakam was in Madinah. So [Abd al-Malik] took the head [of
al-Husayn] and placed it before [Marwan]. He touched the tip of his nose
and said: ‘How excellent is [the touch of] your coldness for the hands,
and [the sight] of redness on [your] cheeks!’ He then said: “By Allah!
It is as if I am looking at the days of ‘Uthman!’ Ibn Abi al-Hadid
writes in his Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah (4:72): “The correct version is
that: Ubaidullah bin Ziyad wrote to ‘Amru bin Sa’id bin al-‘Ass, giving
him the good news of al-Husayn’s death. ‘Amru read his letter from the
pulpit and recited the verses [mentioned above]. He pointed towards the
grave of the Prophet and said: ‘Today for the day of Badr.’ So a group
of Ansar reproached him for [saying] that.” This has also been mentioned
by Abu ‘Ubaidah in al-Mathalib.


