The Stations On The Way To Kufah
================================

Tan’im
------

Al-Husayn (as) continued with his journey until he passed by Tan’im[^1].
There he met a caravan which had been sent to Yazid bin Mu’awiyah and
was headed by Buhair bin Raisan al-Himyari[^2], Yazid’s governor in
Yemen. The caravan was carrying *waras*[^3] and Yemeni dresses to Yazid.

Al-Husayn (as) took the things [from them] and continued with his
journey. He then told the owners of the camels:

“I will not force you; whoever [among you] wishes to come with us to
Iraq, we will pay his hire in full and be a good company for him. [But]
whoever wishes to part with us right from this place, we will pay his
hire for the distance he has travelled.”

Those among them who left him, [their account] was settled and he paid
them in full. Those of them who accompanied him, he gave them their hire
and [also] clothed them.[^4]

Sifah
-----

‘Abdullah bin Salim [al-Asadi] and Mudhri [bin Mushma’il al-Asadi]
report:

“We moved on until we reached al-Sifah[^5] where we met Farazdaq bin
Ghalib[^6], the poet, who came near al-Husayn (as) and said to him: “May
Allah grant you your request and [fulfil] your hope in what you love [to
achieve].”

Al-Husayn (as) asked him: “Tell me about the people you have left behind
you?”

Farazdaq replied: “You have asked one who is well-informed. The hearts
of the people are with you but their swords are with the Banu Umayyah.
[Verily,] the divine decree comes from the heaven and Allah does what He
wishes.”

Al-Husayn (as) said to him: “You have said the truth. The affair (*amr*)
belongs to Allah. Allah does what he wills. ‘Every day our Lord
manifests [Himself] in a [new] splendour’. If the decree is as we like,
then we praise Allah for his blessings and He is the one whose help is
sought in order to give thanks to him. But if fate hampers [the
fulfilment of our] hopes, then he whose intention is [to attain the]
truth (*haqq*) and whose heart is [filled with] God-conciousness
(*taqwa*) is never concerned [about that].”

Thereafter, al-Husayn (as) set his mount in motion and said [to
Farazdaq]: “Peace be upon you” and then they parted. [^7],[^8]

When ‘Ubaydullah bin Ziyad learnt of the journey of al-Husayn (as) from
Makkah to Kufah, he sent Husayn bin Tamim [al-Tamimi], the head of his
bodyguards, to al-Qadisiyyah.[^9] [Al-Tamimi] stationed at this place
and set up a [protective] link of cavalry between [the area of]
al-Qadisiyyah to Khaffan,[^10] and [the area of] al-Qadisiyyah to
Qutqutanah[^11] and La’la’.[^12]

Hajir
-----

Al-Husayn (as) went on with his journey until when he reached
al-Hajir[^13], which is situated in Batn al-Rumma, he sent Qais bin
Musahhar al-Saidawi with a letter to the people of Kufah. He wrote to
them:

“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. From Husayn bin
‘Ali to his brothers from among the believers and the Muslims; peace be
on you. I praise Allah beside who there is no deity except Him. Muslim
bin ‘Aqil’s letter came to me, informing me of your sound opinion and
the agreement of your people to support us and to seek our right. I have
asked Allah to make your actions good and reward you with the greatest
reward. I have set out to you from Makkah on Tuesday, eight of Dhu
al-Hijjah, the Day of Tarwiyah. When my messenger reaches you, be urgent
and serious in your affairs; for I am coming to you within the [next
few] days, if Allah wills. Peace, mercy and blessings of Allah be upon
you.”

Qais bin Musahhar al-Saidawi set of for Kufah with al-Husayn’s letter.
When Qais reached al-Qadisiyyah, Husayn bin Tamim arrested him and sent
him to ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad.

Ibn Ziyad said to him: “Go on top of the palace and curse the liar son
of the liar!”

He went up and said: “O people! Verily, Husayn bin ‘Ali -the best of
Allah’s creatures- is the son of Fatimah, daughter of the Messenger of
Allah. I am his messenger to you. I parted with him at Hajir. Answer
him.” Then he cursed ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad and his father, and sought
Allah’s mercy for ‘Ali bin Abi Talib.

[Hearing this from him,] ‘Ubaidullah ordered him to be thrown down from
the top of the palace. He was thrown down and his body crushed into
pieces and he died. [May Allah have mercy on him].[^14]

A Watering Place of the Arabs
-----------------------------

Al-Husayn (as) continued to proceed towards Kufah till he arrived at a
watering place of the Arabs where ‘Abdullah bin Muti’ al-‘Adawi[^15]
happened to have camped. When he saw al-Husayn (as) he approached him
and said: “May my father and mother be your ransom, O son of the
Messenger of Allah! What has brought you [here]?”

Al-Husayn (as) answered him: “The people of Iraq have written to me
calling me towards them.”

‘Abdullah bin Muti’ said: “O son of the Messenger of Allah, I remind you
of Allah and the sanctity (*hurmah*) of Islam lest it be violated! By
Allah, I implore you not to let the sanctity of the Messenger of Allah
(S) be broken! I adjure you before Allah [to think] about the sacredness
of the Arabs! For by Allah, if you seek that which is in the hands of
the Banu Umayyah, they will surely kill you. If they kill you, they will
never fear anyone after you.[^16] By Allah, it is the sanctity of Islam
which shall indeed be violated, and the sacredness of the Quraish and
that of the Arabs. Do not do that and do not go to Kufah. Do not expose
yourself to the Banu Umayyah.”

But [al-Husayn (as)] insisted on continuing with the journey.

Khuzaimiyyah
------------

Al-Husayn (as) proceeded till he reached a watering place somewhere
above Zarud[^17] [known as al-Khuzaimiyyah].[^18]

Zuhair bin al-Qain Joins al-Husayn (as)
---------------------------------------

A man from Banu Fazarah reports that: “We were with Zuhair bin al-Qain
al-Bajali when we left Makkah. [Although] we were travelling alongside
al-Husayn (as), there was nothing more hateful to us than that we should
stop with him at a halting place. Such that when al-Husayn (as) would
start out, Zuhair bin al-Qain would linger behind, and whenever
al-Husayn (as) would halt, Zuhair would move ahead, until we reached a
station where we could not avoid halting with him. Al-Husayn (as) halted
at one side and we halted at the other side. While we were sitting,
eating our food, al-Husayn’s messenger approached us, greeeted us and
entered [our tent]. He said: “O Zuhair bin al-Qain! Abu ‘Abdillah Husayn
bin ‘Ali has sent me to summon you to him.” [Here] each one of us threw
away what was in his hands in amazement; it was [as surprising] as if
birds had alighted on our heads.[^19]

Dalham bint ‘Amru, Zuhair’s wife, says: “I said to him: “The son of the
Prophet of Allah has sent for you and you are not going to him?! Glory
be to Allah! Go to him and see what he says, and then come back.”

So Zuhair bin al-Qain went to see him. It was not long before he
returned joyfully while his countenance was glowing.

Then he said to his companions: “Whoever among you wishes to follow me
[may do so], otherwise this is the last time [we see each other]! I will
tell you a story: ‘We participated in the expedition of Balanjar[^20]
and Allah granted us victory and we won booty. Salman al-Bahili
said[^21]: ‘Are you happy with the victory which Allah has granted you
and the booty you won?’ We replied: ‘Yes.’ Then he said to us: ‘If you
met the young men from the family of Muhammad (S), then be happier to
fight with them than you are because of the booty you have obtained
today.’ As for me, I leave you [all] to Allah’s protection!”

Then he told his wife: “You are divorced. Go back to your family; for I
do not want anything to befall you because of me except
good.”[^22],[^23]

Somewhere on the way [to Kufah], Al-Husayn (as) dispatched ‘Abdullah bin
Buqtur al-Himyari[^24] to Muslim bin ‘Aqil[^25], but he was arrested by
the soldiers of Husayn bin Tamim at al-Qadisiyyah. He sent him to Ibn
Ziyad who said to him: “Go to the top of the palace and curse the liar
son of the liar. Then come down and I will give my judgment on you!”

So he went up. He said while he was looking down at the people: “O
people! I am the messenger of al-Husayn, son of Fatimah, daughter of the
Messenger of Allah (S). [He is asking] you to help and support him
against the son of Marjanah, son of Sumayyah, the bastard!”

‘Ubaidullah [bin Ziyad] ordered him to be thrown from the top of the
palace. He [fell on the ground and] broke his bones but was still
breathing. Then ‘Abd al-Malik bin ‘Umair al-Lakhami[^26] came to him and
slaughtered him (*dhabahahu*).

Zarud
-----

**Zarud**[^27]

‘Abdullah bin Salim [al-Asadi] and Mudhri bin Mushma’il [al-Asadi]
report:

“After we finished the pilgrimage, there was no concern more important
to us than to join al-Husayn (as) on the way, so that we may see how his
affair develops. So we speedily set off on our camels until we joined
him at Zarud.[^28]

As we neared him, we saw a man from Kufah who changed his way when he
saw al-Husayn (as). Al-Husayn (as) had stopped as if he wanted [to
speak] to him, but then he ignored him and went on. One of us said to
the other: ‘Come with us to ask this man. If he has news of Kufah, we
will get to know it.’

We went to him and said: ‘Peace be upon you.’

He replied: ‘Peace and mercy of Allah be on you [too].”

Then we asked him: ‘Which tribe do you come from?’

He said: ‘[I am] an Asadi.’

We said: ‘We are from the Banu Asad as well. What is your name?’

He said: ‘I am Bukair bin al-Matha’bah.’ We [also] told him our lineage.

Then we asked him: ‘Tell us about the people you have left behind you.’

He answered: ‘I only left Kufah after Muslim bin ‘Aqil and Hani’ bin
‘Urwah had been killed. I saw them being dragged by their legs in the
market.”

[Ibn Salim and Mushma’il] continue: “We went on to al-Husayn (as) and we
were travelling close to him until he stopped.

Tha’labiyyah
------------

He stopped at al-Tha’labiyyah[^29] in the evening. So we approached him
when he stopped and greeted him. He returned our greeting. Then we said
to him: ‘May Allah have mercy on you, we have a news. If you wish, we
can say it publicly, and if you wish, in privacy.’

Al-Husayn (as) looked at his companions and said: ‘Nothing is to be
concealed from these [people].’

We said to him: ‘Did you see that rider who you confronted yesterday
evening?’

He replied: ‘Yes, I wanted to inquire from him.’

We said: ‘We have collected for you the news that he had and spared you
[the trouble of] questioning him. He was a man from the Asad, our
[tribe], of sound judgement, truthful, of merit and intelligence. He
told us that he had only left Kufah after Muslim bin ‘Aqil and Hani bin
‘Urwah had been killed, and he had seen them being dragged by their legs
in the market!’

[Hearing this,] he said: ‘Indeed, we belong to Allah and to him do we
indeed return’. May Allah’s mercy be on them both!’ He repeated this
several times.[^30]

Then we said to him: ‘We implore you before Allah for your own life and
for your family members that you should go back [right] from this point;
for you have [now] no any helper or follower in Kufah. We are afraid
that the [people of the] city will be against you!’

On hearing this, the sons of ‘Aqil bin Abi Talib[^31] sprung up and
said: ‘Nay, by Allah! We shall not leave until we have taken our
vengeance, or have tasted what our brothers have tasted!’[^32]

They continue with their report and say: “Al-Husayn (as) then looked at
us and said; ‘There is no good in life after these [men].’

So we knew that he is determined to continue with his journey. We said
[to him]: ‘May Allah choose the best for you.’

He replied: ‘May Allah have mercy on you both.’

Then he waited till dawn when he told his young men and servants: ‘Take
plenty of water.’ So they drew water and stored it in large quantities.
Then they set out and went on until they reached Zubalah. [^33]

Zubalah
-------

There[^34] he received the news of the martyrdom of his foster brother,
‘Abdullah bin Yuqtur. So he read out a written statement to the people
and announced:

‘In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. Shocking news has
reached us! The martyrdom of Muslim bin ‘Aqil, Hani bin ‘Urwah and
‘Abdullah bin Yuqtur. Our followers[^35] have indeed deserted us. So any
of you who like to leave, may leave; we have freed him of all
obligations.’

The people began to disperse from him to right and left until there
remained with him only those of his companions who had come with him
from Madinah.

He did that because the Bedouins who had followed him were thinking that
he was going to a city where he was being steadfastly obeyed. And he
disliked them to accompany him without being [fully] aware of what they
were getting into. He well knew that if they were informed [of the
reality], none would accompany him except he who is determined to help
him and die beside him![^36]

At dawn he ordered his young men [to get prepared], so they drew water
and stored it in large quantities. Then he set out until he passed by
Batn al-‘Aqabah[^37].

Batn al-‘Aqabah
---------------

He stopped at this point[^38] [and a man from the Banu ‘Ikrimah told him
saying:] ‘I beseech you in the name Allah that you should return;
for -by Allah- you are only advancing toward the points of spears and
the edges of swords. If those who sent for you had spared you [the
trouble of] fighting and had prepared the ground for you, and then you
had gone to them, [then] that would be reasonable. But in this situation
that you are describing, I do not think that you ought to do so.’

[Al-Husayn (as)] said to him: ‘O servant of Allah! This [i.e. wise
decision] is not hidden from me. Your opinion is the [right] opinion.
But Allah is never defeated in His affair.’[^39] Thereafter, he set out
from there.[^40]

Sharaf
------

Al-Husayn (as) went on till he stopped at Sharaf. [^41] At dawn he
ordered his young men [to get prepared], so they took enough water with
them and then left the place. They sped in their journey in the early
hours of the day until it was midday. [Suddenly,] a man [from his
followers] exclaimed: ‘Allah is the greatest!’

Al-Husayn (as) said: ‘[Indeed,] Allah is greatest! [But] why did you say
the *takbir*?’

He replied: ‘I saw palm trees.’

[‘Abdullah bin Salim and Mudhri bin Mushma’il] the two men from the Banu
Asad said to him: ‘This is a place in which we never see a palm-tree.’

Al-Husayn (as) said: ‘In your opinion what did he see [then]?’

They replied: ‘We think he has seen the heads of horses.’

The [man] responded: ‘By Allah, I think so too.’

Dhu Husam
---------

**Dhu Husam**[^42]

Here al-Husayn (as) said: ‘Is not there any shelter we can seek refuge
to and put it at our rear, so that we can face the people in one
direction [i.e. so that we are not surrounded]?”

We said to him: ‘Yes, there is [the hill of] Dhu Husam on your side.
Turn left to go towards it. If you reach it before them, it will be [in]
just [the position] you want.”

So he veered left towards it and we went in that direction with him. We
tried to get there before them and we managed to do so. When they saw
that we had moved off the road, they [also] moved off towards us.
Al-Husayn (as) halted there and ordered for his tents and they were
erected.

It was not long before the heads of their horses appeared to us. Their
flags looked like the wings of birds. They were one thousand men led by
Hurr bin Yazid al-Tamimi al-Yarbu’i. He and his cavalry stood facing
al-Husayn (as) under the midday heat, while al-Husayn (as) and his
companions were in turbans and with their swords.

Al-Husayn (as) ordered his young men: ‘Provide water to these men and
quench their thirst and give some (*tarshif*) to the horses [also].’

So the young men served them water till they quenched their thirst.
[Then] they began filling their jugs, vessels and bowls and take them
near [their] horses. When a horse had drunk three or four or five
draughts[^43], it was taken away from it and provided to another one
until they had all been watered.”[^44],[^45],[^46]

The time for the *Zuhr* prayer set in and al-Husayn (as) ordered Hajjaj
bin Masruq al-Ju’fi to make the call to prayer and he did so. When it
was time for the *iqamah*, al-Husayn (as) came out [before the people]
dressed in a waist-cloth (*izar*), a cloak (*rida’*) and slippers. He
praised and glorified Allah, then he said:

“O people! This is [my] excuse before Allah and you: I did not come to
you until your letters came to me and your messengers [saying]: ‘Come to
us, for we have no leader (*imam*); perhaps Allah shall unite us under
guidance through you.’ [Now] if you are still on the [same stance], then
I have come to you. If you give me promises and pledges that assure me
[of your support], I will come to your city. But if you will not and are
averse to my coming, I will leave you [and go back] to the place from
which I came to you.”

They were silent before him. They said to the caller to prayer
(*mu'adhhin*): “Make the *iqamah*”, and he did so.

Al-Husayn (as) said to Hurr: “Do you want to lead your followers in
prayer?”

He replied: “No, you pray and we will pray [following the lead of] your
prayer.”

Al-Husayn (as) thus led them in prayers. Then he entered [his tent] and
his followers gathered around him.

Hurr also went back to his place and entered the tent which had been
erected for him. Some of his followers gathered around him while the
rest returned to their ranks which they had been in and which now they
went back to. Each one of them held the reins of his mount and sat in
the shade [of its body].

At the time of *‘asr*, al-Husayn (as) ordered [his companions] to
prepare for departure. He then came out and ordered his *muadhhin* [to
make the call for prayers], and he made the call for the *‘asr* prayers
and the *iqamah*. Al-Husayn (as) came forward and led the people in
prayer. After saying the final greeting [of the prayer], he turned his
face towards the people. He praised and glorified Allah and then said:

“O people! Verily, if you fear Allah and recognize the rights of those
who have rights then that is more pleasing for Allah. We, the People of
the House (*ahl al-bait*), are more entitled to the authority
(*wilayah*) of this affair [i.e. the caliphate] over you than those who
claim what does not belong to them and who rule amidst you with
injustice and oppression! But if you dislike us and do not know our
right, and your view is now other than what came in your letters and was
brought by your messengers, then I will go away from you!”

So Hurr bin Yazid said to him: “By Allah! We do not know of these
letters that you are talking about!”

Al-Husayn (as) said: “O ‘Uqbah bin Sim’an! Bring out the two saddle-bags
which contain their letters to me.”[^47] So he brought out two
saddle-bags full of letters and spread it before them.

So Hurr said: “[But] we are not among those who wrote [them] to you. We
have only been ordered that when we meet you we should not leave you
until we have brought you to ‘Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad!”

Al-Husayn (as) said: “Death is closer to you than doing such a thing!”
Then he said to his companions: “Rise and get on your mounts!” So they
all mounted and waited until their women had been mounted.

When they set out to leave, the people [with Hurr] prevented them from
going. So al-Husayn (as) said to Hurr: “May your mother mourn for your
death! What do you want?!”

He replied: “By Allah! If any of the Arabs other than you were to say
that to me even though he were in the same situation as you, I would not
leave him without mentioning his mother being deprived of him, whoever
he might be. But -by Allah- there is no way for me to mention your
mother except by [saying] the best things possible!”[^48]

Al-Husayn (as) said to him: “What is it that you want?”

Hurr replied: “By Allah, I want to go with you to ‘Ubaidullah bin
Ziyad!”

Al-Husayn (as) said: “Then by Allah I will not follow you!”

Hurr said: “Then by Allah I will not leave you!”

When the conversation between them became lengthy, Hurr said to him: “I
have not been ordered to fight you. I have only been instructed not to
leave you until I take you to Kufah. If you refuse [to do that], then
take any road which will not bring you into Kufah, nor take you back to
Madinah, let that be a compromise between us until I write to Ibn Ziyad
[and await further instructions]. And if you wish, you can write to
Yazid bin Mu’awiyah, or if you want to ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad. Perhaps
Allah will cause something to happen by then which will relieve me from
having to do anything against you. So take this [road] here and bear to
the left of the road to al-‘Udhaib and al-Qadisiyyah.”

[All this happened while they were still at Dhu Husam] which is situated
at 38 miles from ‘Udhaib. Al-Husayn (as) moved with his companions while
Hurr [and his army] set out travelling close by him.[^49]]

Baidhah
-------

At al-Baidhah[^50], al-Husayn (as) addressed his companions and those of
Hurr. He praised and glorified Allah and then said:

“O people! The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: ‘Whoever sees a
tyrannical ruler making lawful what Allah has forbidden, breaking the
covenant of Allah, opposing the *sunnah* of the Messenger of Allah and
behaving sinfully and unjustly with the servants of Allah, but does not
[rise to] change the situation neither by his action nor his word, then
it is binding on Allah to make him enter where the tyrant shall enter.”

Indeed these people have clung to the obedience of *shaitan* and have
forsaken obeying the All-Merciful. They openly indulge in corruption and
have stopped the enforcement of *hudud*.[^51] They have appropriated for
themselves the spoils of war, they have made lawful what Allah has
forbidden and have prohibited that which Allah has made lawful. And I am
more entitled to bring changes than anyone else.

Your letters reached me and your messengers had come to me with your
allegiance that you will not surrender me [to the enemy] nor desert me.
[Now] if you are still on your pledge, [then] you have shown sound
judgement; for I am Husayn, son of ‘Ali, and son of Fatimah, daughter of
the Prophet of Allah (S). I am with you [i.e. living amidst you] and my
family members with your families; you have an example (*uswah*) in me.

[But] if you do not [do so] and break your pledge and free yourselves
from [the] allegiance [you paid me], then I swear by my life that this
is not unexpected of you. You did the same to my father, my brother and
my cousin, Muslim [bin ‘Aqil]! A deceived is he who has been deceived by
you. You have lost your felicity and wasted your share [in the
hereafter]. ‘So whoever breaks his oath, breaks it only to his own
detriment.’[^52] And Allah will avail [me] against you. Peace, mercy and
blessings of Allah be upon you.”[^53]

Hurr said to him as he moved along with him: “O Husayn! I implore you
for the sake of Allah to save your life. I bear witness that if you
fight [these people], you will definitely be killed. And if they fight
you, then I think you will surely be destroyed!”

Al-Husayn (as) said to him: “Do you seek to frighten me with death? Are
you going to kill me just because the war has been waged [against me]?!
I do not know what to tell you? I can only tell you what the man from
the [Banu] Aws said to his fellow tribesman when he met him as he was
intending to support the Prophet of Allah (S). [His tribesman] told him:
‘Where are you going? You are indeed going to be killed.’ He said [in
reply]:

I will advance, for death is not a shame upon a young man,

When he intends the truth and fights as a Muslim.

And when he consoles the righteous by [sacrificing] his self,

And parts with the sinful who is a deceiver and whose nose shall be
rubbed onto the ground.”[^54]

When Hurr heard this [he understood that he is ready to die but not to
accept humiliation], so he drew away from him. He and his followers
travelled on one side [of the road] while al-Husayn (as) travelled on
the other side, until they reached ‘Udhaib al-Hijanat[^55].

‘Udhaib al-Hijanat
------------------

[When the caravan of al-Husayn (as) reached this point] there appeared,
all of a sudden, four people who came from Kufah on their mounts and had
the horse of Nafi’ bin Hilal with them, accompanied by their guide,
Tirimmah bin ‘Adiyy, who was riding on a horse. When they reached
al-Husayn (as), they recited him the following verses:

O my camel, do not get terrified by my swift drive,

And get ready [to take me quickly] before the break of dawn.

With the best of riders and in the best of journeys,

Till you get adorned by [being in the presence of] the noble in lineage
[i.e. al-Husayn (as)].

A praiseworthy, free and generous man,

Whom Allah has sent to carry out the best mission.

May He preserve him forever!

[Al-Husayn (as)] said: “Indeed by Allah; I hope that Allah has decreed
for us the best, whether we are killed or become victorious!”

Hurr bin Yazid came forward and said: “These people who have come from
Kufah are not among those who came with you [from Madinah]. I will
arrest them or send them back.”

Al-Husayn (as) said to him: “I will indeed defend them against that
which I defend myself. These people are my helpers and supporters. You
had given me [promise] not to confront me in any matter until after you
receive letter from Ibn Ziyad.”

Hurr said: “Yes, but they did not come with you.”

[Al-Husayn (as)] retorted: “They are my companions. They enjoy the same
position as those who have come with me. If you stand by the word agreed
upon between you and me, [then well and good]. otherwise I will fight
you!”

Thus, Hurr desisted [from arresting them].

Then al-Husayn (as) asked them: “Tell me the news of the people you have
left behind.”

Mujamma’ bin ‘Abdullah al-‘A’idhi -one of the four men who had just come
to him[^56]- said: “As for the noblemen, they have been heavily bribed
and their pockets filled. Their hearts have been won and their loyalty
secured for them. So they are [now] all united against you! With regard
to the rest of the people, their hearts are inclined towards you, but
tomorrow their swords shall be drawn against you!”

[Al-Husayn (as)] said: “Tell me, did my messenger come to you?”

They asked: “Who was he?”

He replied: “Qais bin Musahhar al-Saidawi.”

They said: “Yes. Husayn bin Tamim had arrested him and sent him to Ibn
Ziyad. [Ibn Ziyad] instructed him to curse you and your father, but he
instead invoked [Allah’s] blessings on you and your father, and cursed
Ibn Ziyad and his father. He invited [people] to support you and
informed them of your coming. So Ibn Ziyad ordered him to be thrown [to
the ground] from the top of the palace.”

The eyes of al-Husayn (as) filled with tears and he could not restrain
his tears. Then he said: ‘Of them are some who have fulfilled their
pledge, and of them are some who still wait.’[^57] O Allah grant them
and us the heaven as an abode, and gather us all under your mercy and
your desired reward which is reserved [for the believers].”[^58]

Then Tirimmah bin ‘Adiyy drew closer to al-Husayn (as) and said to him:
“By Allah, I see that there is no one to support you. If only these
people whom I see following you [i.e. Hurr and his army] were to fight
you, they will be enough [to defeat you]. A day before I left Kufah, I
saw at the back side of the Kufah and I found there [a crowd of] people
such that my eyes had never seen a gathering bigger than that at one
place. So I inquired about them and was told: ‘They have gathered [here]
to be inspected and then they are going to be sent against al-Husayn
(as).’ I implore you not to move towards them even a span if you can!
And if you wish to stay in a town through which Allah would protect you
until you have considered [the matter] and it has become clear for you
what [exactly] you are going to do, then come with me and I will take
you to an impenetrable hill which belongs to us and is called
*Aja’*.[^59] Then I will accompany you until [we] halt at
*al-qurayyah*.”[^60]

[Al-Husayn (as)] replied him: “May Allah reward you and your kinsmen
with the best of rewards. There has been an agreement between us and
these people, so we cannot leave. And we do not know how will this
matter come to an end between us and them!”

Tirimmah bin ‘Adiyy [continues with his report and] says: “So I bade him
farewell and said: may Allah avert from you the mischief of the jinn and
the mankind.”[^61]

Al-Husayn (as) set out until he reached Qasr Bani Muqatil[^62].

Qasr Bani Muqatil
-----------------

He halted [at this point] and there a tent had [already] been
erected.[^63] He said: “Whose tent is this?” ‘It belongs to ‘Ubaidullah
bin al-Hurr al-Ju’fi’[^64], he was answered.

He said: “Ask him to come to me” and send [a messenger] to him. When the
messenger came to him he said: “Husayn bin ‘Ali is calling you.”

‘Ubaidullah replied: “Indeed, we belong to Allah and to Him do we indeed
return! By Allah, I only left Kufah out of dislike that al-Husayn would
enter it while I am there. By Allah, I do not want to see him nor him to
see me.”

The messenger returned to him and informed him. So he put on his
slippers, stood up and went to see him. He entered [his tent], greeted
him and sat down. Then he asked him to accompany him, but Ibn al-Hurr
repeated the [same] words [he had said to the messenger]!

[Al-Husayn (as)] said to him: “If you are not going to help us, then
fear Allah in that you should be of those who fight us. For by Allah,
one who hears our cry but does not come to our help will [indeed] be
destroyed!” Then he rose from him.[^65]

‘Uqbah bin Sim’an says: “At the final hours of the night al-Husayn (as)
ordered [us] to get provisions of water. Then he ordered us to
[continue] the journey and we did so. An hour after we left Qasr Bani
Muqatil al-Husayn (as) dropped his head drowsily and then woke up
saying: “Verily, we belong to Allah and to Him do we indeed return. All
praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds.” He repeated this twice or
three times.

His son, ‘Ali bin al-Husayn (as) approached him [while he was] on his
horse and said: “Indeed, we belong to Allah and to Him shall we return,
and all praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. O my father! May
I be sacrificed for you. Why have you praised Allah and [pronounced] the
verse of returning (*istirja’*)?”

He replied: “O my son! I nodded off and a horseman appeared to me,
riding a horse, and he said: “The people are advancing and death is
advancing towards them!” So I understood that it is our own souls
announcing our deaths to us.”

He said to him: “O father! May Allah never let you see evil! Are not we
on the right?”

He replied: “Indeed [we are], by Him to Whom all his servants will
return.”

He then said: “O father! Then we need have no concern. We will die
righteously.”

He said to him: “May Allah reward you with the best of what he has
rewarded a son on account of his father.”

He stopped in the morning and offered the Morning Prayer. Then he
hurried to remount and began veering to the left with his companions,
with the intention of separating from [the army of Hurr]. So Hurr bin
Yazid came to him, driving them back. When he [tried] to forcefully turn
them towards Kufah, they resisted him, so they desisted from doing that,
but still accompanied them until they reached Nainawa[^66].

Nainawa
-------

This is a place where al-Husayn (as) halted. There appeared, suddenly, a
rider who was on a horse of a noble breed, carrying weapon with a bow on
his shoulder, coming from Kufah. They all stopped, waiting for him. When
he reached them, he greeted Hurr bin Yazid and his followers but did not
greet al-Husayn (as) and his companions. He handed a letter from
‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad to Hurr. It read:

“When this letter reaches you and my messenger comes to you, make
al-Husayn come to a halt. But only let him stop in an open place, with
no shelter and water. I have ordered my messenger to stay with you and
not to leave you until he brings me [news of] your carrying out my
instructions. That is all.”

When he had read the letter, Hurr told them: “This is the letter of the
governor, ‘Ubaidullah bin Ziyad. He has ordered me to stop you at a
point I received his letter. This is his messenger and he has ordered
him not to leave me until I carry out his order.”

[Abu] al-Sha’tha’ Yazid bin Ziyad al-Muhasar al-Kindi al-Bahdali[^67]
looked at the messenger of ‘Ubaidullah [bin Ziyad], stood infront of him
and said: “Are you Malik bin al-Nusair al-Baddi[^68] [from the tribe of
Kindah]?”

He answered: “Yes.”

So Yazid bin Ziyad said to him: “May your mother mourn you! What an
affair you have come to?!”

He replied: “I have not done so! I have [only] obeyed my leader
(*imami*) and remained faithful to my pledge of allegiance.”

Abu al-Sha’tha’ said: “You have been disobedient to your Lord and have
obeyed your leader to your own destruction. You have earned shame and
hell fire! Allah, the Almighty, the Majestic, says: ‘We made them
leaders who invite to the fire, and on the Day of Resurrection they will
not receive any help.’[^69] Such [a person] is your leader!”

Hurr bin Yazid [al-Riyahi] began to make the people halt at that place
which was without water and where there was no village.[^70]

So they said: “Allow us to stop at this village –meaning Nainawa, or
that one –meaning al-Ghadhiriyyah[^71], or that one –meaning
Shafiyyah[^72].”

He replied: “No! By Allah I cannot do that. This man has been sent to me
as a spy.”

Zuhair bin al-Qain said to [al-Husayn (as)]: “O son of the Messenger of
Allah! Fighting these people [now] is easier than fighting those who
will come against us after them. By my life, after these there will come
against us such [a number] that we will not have the power to face
them.”

Al-Husayn (as) said to him: “I will not begin to fight against them.”

Zuhair bin al-Qain said to him: “Let us go to this village and halt
there, for it is secured and is situated on the bank of the Euphrates.
If they stopped us, we will fight them, as it is easier for us to fight
these [men] than to fight those who will come after them.”

So al-Husayn (as) said: “Which village is it?”

He replied: “Al-‘Aqr.”[^73]

Al-Husayn (as) said: “O Allah! I seek refuge with you from *‘aqr*
(destruction).” Then he stopped. This was on Thursday, second of
Muharram 61 H.

On the next day, ‘Umar bin Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas[^74] arrived from Kufah
with four thousand soldiers

[^1]: Mu’jam al-Buldan (2:416) reports that Tan’im is a place two
farsakh away from Makkah. There is a hill on its right known as Na’im
and another one on its left called Na’im, and the valley itself is known
as Na’iman. There is also a mosque there and beside that it is the
nearest miqat and the closest point where the holy sanctuary ends
(hill). Today it is located six kilometres from Makkah and therefore it
is only one farsakh away from it, and not two. It is connected to Makkah
for those who enter the city on the way from Madinah and Jiddah.

[^2]: Al-Tabari: It seems that he was an astrologer and had augured ill
for ‘Abdullah bin Muti’ al-‘Adawi when he was sent to Kufah as the
governer by Ibn al-Zubair (9:6). The renowned Tawus al-Yamani was his
master who died in Makkah in the year 105 H (6:29).

[^3]: Al-wars is a sesame-like plant used for dying and from which
saffron is collected and which is not found except in Yemen.

[^4]: Al-Tabari (5:385): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Harith bin Ka’b al-Walibi
narrated to me from ‘Uqbah bin Sim’an that…”

[^5]: It is located between Hunain and the points which identify the
sanctuary of the haram. It is situated on the left of one who enters the
city of Makkah [from Mushash].

[^6]: Al-Tabari: He is Hamam bin Ghalib bin Sa’sa’ah. His two uncles
were Dhuhail and Zahaf, who were in the treasury office (diwan) of Ziyad
bin Sumayyah, each being in charge of a thousand people. Farazdaq had
mocked the Banu Nahshal and Faqim, so they sued him before Ziyad and the
latter summoned Farazdaq but he fled. Whenever Ziyad would come to
Basrah, Farazdaq would go to Kufah, and if Ziyad was to come to Kufah,
he would go to Basrah. Ziyad used to stay in Basrah and Kufah each for
six months. Farazdaq then went to Hijaz seeking refuge with Sa’id bin
al-‘Ass from Ziyad until the latter died (5:242-250). Farazdaq scorned
at Ziyad and one who elegized him, saying: “You are mourning a
disbeliever from the family of Sufyan, who was like Choesroe or Ceaser
in aggression” (5:290). Farazdaq then returned to Basrah and resided in
the city. He went to hajj with his mother in the year 60 H and this is
why he did not accompany al-Husayn (as) (5:386). Later, he composed a
poem in praise of Hajjaj! (6:380&394) and was among the courtiers of
Sulaiman bin ‘Abd al-Malik (5:548). Farazdaq was alive till the year 102
H (6:616). At the time when he mocked at the Banu Nahshal he was a young
man, rather a bedouin young boy residing in the desert (5:242).
Therefore, he must have been less than thirty years old when he met
al-Husayn (as).

[^7]: Al-Tabari (5:386): “Abu Mikhnaf says: “[I narrate] on the
authority of Abu Janab from ‘Adiyy bin Harmalah who related from
‘Abdullah bin Salim that…” This report of Ibn Salim and Ibn Mushma’il is
not in consistance with what we shall narrate from them that they joined
al-Husayn (as) at a point called Zarud, which is located a several
stations after Sifah on the way to Kufah. Unless we say that they meant
by the statement: “We moved on until we reached Sifah…” that they moved
on from Kufah and reached Sifah on their way to Makkah, and then, after
finishing the hajj rituals, they joined al-Husayn (as) at Zarud.

[^8]: Al-Tabari says: “Hisham has narrated on the authority of ‘Awanah
bin Hakam from Lubtah bin al-Farazdaq bin Ghalib who reported from his
father that he said: ‘I went to hajj in the year 60 H and entered the
holy sanctuary during the days of pilgrimage. I met Husayn bin ‘Ali
outside Makkah, so I approached and asked him: ‘May my father and mother
be your ransom, O son of the Messenger of Allah! What made you to rush
and leave the pilgrimage [incomplete]?’ He replied: ‘If I do not rush I
will be caught.’ Then al-Husayn asked me: ‘Where are you from?’ so I
replied: ‘I am from Iraq’, and, by Allah, he did not inquire about me
more than this. Then he continued: ‘Tell me about the people behind
you.’ So I said: ‘The hearts are with you and the swords are with the
Banu Umayyah; and the decree is in the hands of Allah.’ Al-Husayn (as)
then said: ‘You have said the truth.’ Then I asked him about some issues
related to vowing (nudhur) and hajj rituals, and he explained them to
me.” (5:386)

[^9]: Al-Qadisiyyah is situated fifteen farsakh from Kufah and just four
miles from ‘Adhib. It is also called al-Diwaniyyah as it was the first
big city on the way to the deserts of Hijaz from Iraq. Al-Qadisiyyah was
the first place in Iraq to be conquered by the Muslims under the
leadership of Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas.

[^10]: According to Mu’jam al-Buldan (3:451), Khaffan is a village near
Kufah and contains a water-spring owned by the Banu ‘Abbas.

[^11]: Qutqutanah is some twenty miles away from al-Rahimah on the way
to Kufah, as reported in Mu’jam al-Buldan (7:125). According to
al-Ya’qubi (2:230; Najaf edition): “The news of the martyrdom of Muslim
reached the Imam at Qutqutanah.”

[^12]: Al-Tabari (5:394): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Yunus bin Abi Ishaq
al-Sabi’i narrated to me saying…”

[^13]: According to Mu’jam al-Buldan (4:290) and Taj al-‘Arus (3:139),
al-Hajir is a valley in the highlands of Najd, whereas Batn al-Rummah is
a point where travelers coming from the cities of Kufah and Basrah meet
on their way to Madinah.

[^14]: Al-Tabari (5:394): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Muhammad bin Qais related
to me [saying]…” Al-Mufid has reported the report in al-Irshad (pg.220)
also, but he has confused the account of Ibn Qais with that of ‘Abdullah
bin Buqtur. The [above] report has also appeared in Tadhkirat al-Khawass
(pg.245; Najaf edition].

[^15]: His biography has appeared when mentioning the sources of this
text.

[^16]: The sancitity of Islam or that of the Messenger of Allah [s], the
Arabs, or of the Quraish was not violated because of the move of the
Imam (as), rather it was violated because of the actions of the enemies
of Islam. Ibn Muti’ was indeed mistaken when he said: “…If they kill
you, [then] they would not fear anyone else after you…” For in contrary
to what Ibn Muti’ was thinking, even those among the people of Makkah,
Madinah and Kufah who could not dare oppose the Banu Umayyah before the
Imam’s martyrdom, became daring after that, including Ibn Muti’ himself
as he ruled over Kufah for Ibn al-Zubair. Rather, if it was not for
al-Husayn’s movement, no one could dare stand against the Banu Umayyah
and they would, accordingly, have done all they wanted to destroy Islam
[without encountering any opposition].

[^17]: Al-Tabari (5:394): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Muhammad bin Qais related
to me that…’ He is, perhaps, Ibn Qais bin Musahhar.

[^18]: Al-Khuzaimiyyah is situated before Zarud as one comes from
Makkah, and after it for one who comes from Kufah as reported in Mu’jam
al-Buldan. It has also been said that al-Khuzaimiyyah is thirty-two
miles from Tha’labiyyah, as it is one of the stopping points of the
pilgrims coming from Kufah after Tha’labiyyah.

[^19]: Al-Tabari (5:396): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Al-Siddi narrated to me
from a person among the Banu Fazarah saying: ‘During the time of Hajjaj
bin Yusuf we used to hide in the house of Zuhair bin al-Qain al-Bajali,
as the people of Sham would not enter it. So [one day] I said to this
man from the Banu Fazarah: ‘Tell me about your journey with Husayn bin
‘Ali.’ He said…” See also al-Irshad (pg.221) and al-Maqtal (pg.325) of
al-Khwarazmi.

[^20]: A city around the Caspian sea at Bab al-Abwab which was conquered
in the year 33 H, during the reign of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan, at the hands
of Salman bin Rabi’ah al-Bahili. See Mu’jam al-Buldan.

[^21]: Al-Tabari (4:305) says: Both Salman al-Farsi and Abu Hurairah
were among the conquerors of Balanjar. Ibn al-Athir clearly says in
al-Kamil (4:17) that the one who spoke to them [about the young men of
the family of Muhammad] was Salman al-Farsi, not Salman al-Bahili. This
is keeping in mind that the aim of Ibn al-Athir in writing al-Kamil fi
al-Tarikh was to supplement Tarikh al-Tabari, and for this very reason
he quotes most of his reports from al-Tabari. Among others who have
asserted that it was Salman al-Farsi [and not al-Bahili] are al-Mufid in
al-Irshad, al-Fatal in Rawdhat al-Wa’i³in (pg.153), Ibn Nama in Muthir
al-Ahzan (pg.23), al-Khwarazmi in al-Maqtal (1:275) and al-Bakri in
al-Mu’jam min-ma Ustu’jima (1:376). This assertion is also supported by
al-Tabari’s report that Salman al-Farsi was present in the expedition.
However, what has been said here does not seem to be correct; for what
is apparent is that Salman al-Farsi was the governer of Madain after it
was conquered in the year 17 H and did not leave the city for any other
expedition until he died; and also that he passed away before this
[expedition] during the time of ‘Umar.

[^22]: Al-Tabari (5:396): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Dalham bint ‘Amru, Zuhair
bin al-Qain’s wife, narrated to me that…”See also al-Irshad (pg.221).

[^23]: It will be known later from the speech of Zuhair in Karbala’ that
he was angry right from the beginning about Mu’awiyah’s declaration of
Ziyad as his brother and his killing of Hujr bin ‘Adiyy.

[^24]: His mother was a nurse-maid of al-Husayn (as) and this is why it
has been said about him that he is al-Husayn’s foster brother. The word
‘Buqtur’ has appeared with the letter ‘ba’ in al-Tabari and so has been
recorded by al-Jazari in al-Kamil. But our masters (mashaikh) like
al-Samawi in Ibsar al-‘Ain (pg.52) have recorded it with the letter ‘ya’
(Yuqtur). We shall later see that the news of al-Yuqtur’s martyrdom
reached the Imam (as) at a point called Zabalah; that is before he
received the news of the martyrdom of al-Saidawi. Therefore, it seems
that Ibn Yuqtur was sent [to Muslim bin ‘Aqil] before al-Saidawi [was
dispathecd to the people of Kufah].

[^25]: Al-Tabari (5:348): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Abu ‘Ali al-Ansari
narrated to me from Bakr bin Mus’ab al-Muzniyy [saying]…” Al-Irshad
(pg.220) has related the report also, but he confused the report of Ibn
Yuqtur with that of Qais bin Musahhar al-Saidawi.

[^26]: Al-Lakhami took up the judgeship in Kufah after al-Sha’bi, and
died in 136 H at the age of hundred and three, as reported in Mizan
al-I’tidal (1:151) and Tahdhib al-Asma’ (pg.309).

[^27]: Zarud is located between al-Khuzaimiyyah and al-Tha’labiyyah on
the way to Kufah. See Mu’jam al-Buldan (4:327).

[^28]: This report is inconsistent with what has been narrated from them
earlier about their meeting Farazdaq at Sifah, which is several stations
before Zarud; for according to this report they joined al-Husayn (as) at
Zarud and not before that. It was, however, not possible for them to
join him at Sifah if they were to complete their hajj, for Sifah is
situated in the beginning of the way [to Kufah] while the Imam (as) had
left [Makkah] on the Day of Tarwiyah. Therefore, if they had joined him
at Sifah, [then] they could not have completed their hajj. [And since
they left Makkah after the completion of hajj, then this implies that
they joined him at Zarud]. What is surprising here is that the narrators
of both the reports were they themselves, but neither Abu Janab, nor Abu
Mikhnaf, nor Tabari could realize the contrariety in the reports. Unless
we reconcile between the two reports by saying that they met al-Husayn
(as) at Sifah before the hajj and then joined him at Zarud after the
pilgrimage.

[^29]: It comes after al-Shuquq for one traveling to Makkah from Kufah.
It has been named after a man from the Banu Asad known as Tha’labah. See
Mu’jam al-Buldan.

[^30]: What is apparent from this narration is that the news of Muslim's
martyrdom had already spread by the time [the Imam (as)] reached this
point. But as we shall see later, the Imam (as) informed his companions
about this through a letter he read out to the people at Zubalah.
Accordingly, it is highly probable that by his statement [at
Tha’labiyyah]: “…Nothing is to be concealed from these people”, the Imam
(as) meant to say that “Apart from these people who are present, the
news must be kept secret”. Hence, it was not disclosed till at Zubalah.
But according to al-Ya’qubi (2:230; Najaf edition), the news of Muslim’s
martyrdom reached the Imam (as) at Qutqutanah.

[^31]: Al-Tabari (5:397): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Abu Janab al-Kalbi related
to me on the authority of ‘Adiyy bin Harmalah al-Asadi, from ‘Abdullah
that…” Al-Irshad (pg.222; Najaf edition) says: “‘Abdullah bin Sulaiman
reported that…”

[^32]: Al-Tabari (5:397): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘‘Umar bin Khalid narrated
to me on the authority of Zayd bin ‘Ali bin al-Husayn, from Dawud bin
‘Ali bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas who said that the sons of ‘Aqil reported
that…” See also al-Irshad (pg.222), Muruj al-Dhahab (3:70) and Tadhkirat
al-Khawass (pg.245; Najaf edition).

[^33]: According to Mu’jam al-Buldan, Zubalah comes before al-Shuquq for
one traveling to Makkah from Kufah. It contains fortresses and a large
mosque belonging to the Banu Asad. Zubalah is, in fact, the name of a
lady from the ‘Amaliqah.

[^34]: Al-Tabari (5:398): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘I narrate on the authority
of Abu Janab al-Kalbi from ‘Adiyy bin Harmalah who related from
‘Abdullah bin Salim that…” See also al-Irshad (pg.222; Najaf edition).

[^35]: This is a clear assertion from the Imam (as) that his followers
in Kufah have betrayed him. This is the first announcement of the news
about Kufah and the martyrdom of Muslim bin ‘Aqil (as), though he had
already received the news before this at Zarud, but it apparently
remained disclosed -by the order of the Imam (as)- for other than those
who were present around him at the time, until he announced it to them
at this point.

[^36]: This is the most complete answer as to why the Imam (as) allowed
them to leave him, and it suffices from all other answers.

[^37]: It is a station after Waqisah and before al-Qa’ on the way to
Makkah.

[^38]: Al-Tabari (5:398): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Abu ‘Ali al-Ansari
narrated to me from Bakr bin Mus’ab al-Muzniyy that…” See also al-Irshad
(pg.222; Najaf edition).

[^39]: According to al-Irshad (pg.223), the Imam (as) then continued:
“By Allah, they will not leave me until they take this beating [heart]
out of my body. If they do so, then Allah will establish over them who
will humiliate them until they become the most disgraced people of all
nations.” The same has been reported in A’lam al-Wara (pg.232) also.

[^40]: Al-Tabari (5:399): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Laudhan -one of the Banu
‘Ikrimah- related to me that one of his uncles narrated to him that…’”

[^41]: Sharaf is two miles from Waqisah and is situated before [one
reaches] Iraq. Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas had stopped here before he reached
al-Qadisiyyah. Sharaf is named after a person who was known by this name
and had discovered a spring in the area. Later several huge wells
producing sweet drinking water were dug in the area. See Mu’jam
al-Buldan.

[^42]: According to Mu’jam al-Buldan, it is the name of a hill where
Nu’man used to go for hunting. It is 33 miles from ‘Udhaib al-Hijanat on
the way to Kufah as reported by al-Tabari. Ibn al-Jawzi relates in
al-Maqtal (pg.245; Najaf edition) from [some] scholars of history that
the Imam (as) did not know about what had befell Muslim bin ‘Aqil until
when he was three miles from al-Qadisiyyah, where he met Hurr bin Yazid
al-Riyahi who informed him of the martyrdom of Muslim bin ‘Aqil and
Hani’ bin ‘Urwah and also about Ibn Ziyad’s arrival in Kufah and his
preparation against him, and [then] asked him to return.

[^43]: Drinking a few draughts of water is what exactly tarshif means.

[^44]: Al-Tabari (5:400) says: “I have been informed on the authority of
Hisham who related from Abu Mikhnaf who said: ‘Abu Janab narrated to me
on the authority of ‘Adiyy bin Harmalah from ‘Abdullah bin Salim and
al-Mudhri that…’” See also al-Irshad (pg.223) and Maqatil al-Talibiyyin
(pg.73) of Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani.

[^45]: Al-Tabari (5:401) says: “Hisham said: ‘Laqit narrated to me from
‘Ali bin al-Ta’an al-Muharibi that: ‘I was together with Hurr bin Yazid
[al-Riyahi] and I was among the last of his companions [in the army] to
arrive at Dhu Husam. When al-Husayn (as) saw how thirsty my horse and I
were, he said: ‘Make the horse (rawiyah) kneel.’ I thought that by
rawiyah he meant ‘the waterskin’. [But when he saw that I misunderstood
him] he said: ‘O cousin! Make your camel kneel.’ So I made him kneel.
Then he said: ‘Drink!’ So I started drinking but whenever I tried to do
so the water used to spill on the ground from the waterskin. So
al-Husayn (as) told me: ‘Fold (ikhnith) the waterskin’, but al-Muharibi
says I did not know how to do that! So al-Husayn (as) stood up and
folded it for me; so I drank myself and watered my horse also.” See
al-Irshad (pg.224) and al-Maqtal of al-Khwarazmi (pg.230).

[^46]: Al-Tabari (5:401): “From here Abu Mikhnaf’s chain of reports
misses a link. So we had no choice to make up for what was missing
except by bringing in the account of Hisham al-Kalbi from Laqit, who
narrated from ‘Ali bin Ta’an al-Muharibi. See also al-Irshad (pg.224)
and Tadhkirat al-Khawass (pg.231).

[^47]: Khirjain is the dual form of khirj. According to Majma’
al-Bahrain, it is a sack with two straps. Later, we shall see the report
by Ibn al-Jawzi in Tadhkirat al-Khawass (pg.251) that when the Imam (as)
addressed his opponents on the day of ‘Ashura’ and appealed to them that
they were the ones to write to him, they responded saying: “We do not
know what you are saying.” So Hurr said: “Indeed -by Allah- we had
written to you and we are the ones who invited you to come [to our
city]. May Allah eliminate falsefood and its followers! By Allah, I
shall not prefer this world over the hereafter.” He then stroke his
horse and joined the camp of al-Husayn (as).

[^48]: See also Maqatil al-Talibiyyin (pg.74; Najaf edition) of Abu
al-Faraj al-Isfahani, who narrated it from Abu Mikhnaf.

[^49]: Here comes to an end what al-Tabari reported from Hisham to fill
up the missing link in Abu Mikhnaf’s report. See also: al-Irshad
(pg.225) and Tadhkirat al-Khawass (pg.232).

[^50]: According to Mu’jam al-Buldan, this point is situated between
Waqisah and ‘Udhaib al-Hajanat.

[^51]: The legal punishment prescribed by the Shari’ah. [Editor]

[^52]: Qur’an, 48:10.

[^53]: Al-Tabari (5:403): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘[I narrate] from ‘Uqbah
bin Abi al-‘Ayzar…”

[^54]: Both Ibn al-Athir in al-Kamil and al-Mufid in al-Irshad have
narrated these verses but with the following addition: “If I live, I
will do so without regret and if I die, I shall not be blamed, suffices
you as humiliation that you live while your nose is rubbed onto the
ground.”

[^55]: Gramatically ‘udhaib is a diminutive noun of ‘adhib. ‘Udhaib
al-Hijanat was a valley owned by the Banu Tamim situated on the border
of Iraq (al-sawad). A military base of the Persians was [also] situated
in the area. It is six miles from al-Qadisiyyah. The horses of Nu’man,
king of Hirah, used to graze there, thus the area came to be known as
‘Udhaib al-Hijanat as al-hijanat is the plural of al-hajin meaning an
animal with mixed blood (i.e. a hybrid).

[^56]: Al-Tabari (5:446): “They were probably Jabir bin al-Harith
al-Salmani, ‘Umar bin Khalid al-Saidawi and Sa’d, the servant of
al-Saidawi, about whom Abu Mikhnaf says that they fought together in the
beginning of the battle and were killed at one place.”

[^57]: Qur’an, 33:23.

[^58]: Al-Tabari (5:403): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘… and ‘Uqbah bin Abi
‘Ayzar has reported that…” See also al-Irshad (pg.225; Najaf edition).

[^59]: Aja’ is a noun and its grammatical form is fa-‘a-l. It is the
name of a person after who the hill of Tay’ has been named. It is
situated in the west of this area and on the left of the hill of
Sumaira’.

[^60]: Qurayyah is the diminutive noun of qaryah. It is one of the areas
in Tay’.

[^61]: Al-Tabari (5:406): “Abu Mikhnaf reports: ‘Jamil bin Murid related
to me from Tirimmah that…” The complete report is as follows: [Tirimmah
said to al-Husayn (as):] “I have prepared some provision for my family
from Kufah and I am carrying their expenditure with me. So I am going to
leave the things with them and then I will proceed towards you, if Allah
wills. If I happened to join you, then I shall be –by Allah- among your
helpers.” Al-Husayn (as) said: “If you are determined to do so then
hasten! May Allah shower his mercy on you.” [Tirimmah] says: “When I
reached my family I gave them what was of help to them and made my will
and informed them of my intentions. Then I set out [to join al-Husayn],
but when I neared ‘Udhaib al-Hijanat’, Sama’ah bin Badr approached me
and gave me the news of his martyrdom, and so I returned.”

[^62]: According to Mu’jam al-Buldan, this point is situated between
Qurayyat, Qutqutanah and ‘Ain al-Tamr.

[^63]: Al-Tabari (5:407): “Abu Mikhnaf reports…”

[^64]: His biography will follow towards the end of this book.

[^65]: Al-Tabari (5:407): “Abu Mikhnaf says: ‘Mujalid bin Sa’id narrated
to me from ‘Amir al-Sha’bi that…” See also al-Irshad (pg.226).

[^66]: Nainawa was a village on the bank of the Euphrates which was
inhabited until the end of the 2nd century H.

[^67]: He was an archer in al-Husayn's army and was among the first ones
to be martyred. He shot [about] a hundred arrows and then stood up and
said: “Only five arrows of these [hundred] fell on the ground and so I
have come to know that I have certainly killed five men.” Abu Mikhnaf
has narrated from Fudhail bin Khudaij al-Kindi that: “Yazid bin Ziyad
was with ‘Umar bin Sa’d in the beginning. But when [‘Umar bin Sa’d and
his army] refused to make peace as proposed by al-Husayn (as), Yazid bin
Ziyad got inclined towards him and fought on his side until he was
martyred.” However, this account is not in consistence with the report
mentioned in this text.

[^68]: Al-Tabari: Malik bin al-Nusair from the Banu Badda’. Tabari
narrates on the authority of Abu Mikhnaf that he was present in Karbala’
and had struck the head of Imam al-Husayn (as) with his sword, cutting
his hood and thus causing bleeding. The Imam (as) said to him: “May you
never eat or drink with your hand, and may Allah resurrect you with the
oppressors.” After the Imam’s martyrdom Malik had snatched his cap from
him and as a result he lived a life of poverty till his death. (5:448)
It has been narrated also that ‘Abdullah bin Dabbas had pointed out for
Mukhtar a number of men who had killed al-Husayn (as) and among them was
Malik bin al-Nusair al-Baddi. So Mukhtar sent to them Malik bin ‘Amru
al-Nahdi who met them at al-Qadisiyyah. Malik arrested and took them to
Mukhtar one evening. Mukhtar said to al-Baddi: ‘Are you the one who took
his cap?’ ‘Abdullah bin Kamil said: ‘Yes! He is the one.’ Mukhtar then
said: ‘Cut off his hands and legs and then leave him to writhe till he
dies.’ So was done to him and he bled to death. He died in the year 66
H.” (6:57)

[^69]: Qur’an, 28:41.

[^70]: This indicates that Karbala’ was not the name of a village,
rather a name of an area known as Kur Babil, i.e. the villages of Babil,
as reported in Kitab al-Dalail wa al-Masail of Sayyid Hibah al-Din
al-Shahristani. Ibn al-Jawzi reports in his Tadhkirat al-Khawass
(pg.250; Najaf edition): “… Al-Husayn (as) then said: ‘What is this land
called?’ They replied: ‘Karbala’. It is also called Nainawa which is a
village in it.’ [Hearing this,] al-Husayn wept and said: ‘Karb wa Bala’
[i.e. grief and tribulation].’ He then said: ‘Umm Salamah informed me
that: ‘[One day] Jibrail was with the Messenger of Allah [‘s] and you
[i.e. al-Husayn] were with me. You happened to cry, so the Messenger of
Allah [‘s] said: ‘Leave my son alone’, so I left you alone. He then
lifted you and placed you on his lap. So Jibrail said: ‘Do you love
him?’ He replied: ‘Yes.’ Jibrail then said: ‘Your nation will [one day]
kill him. And if you wish I can show you the earth of the place where he
shall be killed.’ So he said: ‘Yes! [Show it to me].’ So Jibrail spread
his wing on the land of Karbala’ and showed it to him.’ [After relating
this] al-Husayn [(as) took in his hands the sand of this place and]
smelled it and said: ‘By Allah! This is the land about which Jibra’il
informed the Messenger of Allah, [the land] I shall indeed be killed
in.” Ibn al-Jawzi continues and says: “Ibn Sa’d has mentioned something
similar in meaning to this report in his al-Tabaqat from al-Waqidi.” Ibn
al-Jawzi then says: “Ibn Sa’d has also reported [the following incident]
from al-Sha’bi who said: ‘When ‘Ali (as) passed by Karbala’ on his way
to Siffin and stood opposite Nainawa –a village on the Euphrates, he
stopped and called upon the one who carried water for ablution and said:
‘O Aba ‘Abdillah, tell me what is this land called?’ ‘Karbala’, he
replied. So he wept till the place [where he was standing] became wet
with his tears. He then said: ‘[One day] I went to see the Prophet of
Allah (S) and saw him weeping. So I asked him: ‘What has made you to
weep?’ He said: ‘Jibrail was with me a moment ago and he informed me
that my son, al-Husayn, shall be killed by the bank of the Euphrates, at
a place called Karbala’.’ Jibrail then took a handful of sand [of that
land] and made me smell it, so I could not hold my tears.” Ibn al-Jawzi
says: “Hasan bin Kathir and ‘Abd Khair have said: ‘When ‘Ali (as)
reached Karbala’, he stopped [there] and wept and then said: ‘May my
father be sacrificed for the young men who shall be killed here. This
[land] shall be the resting place of their mounts. This is [the land]
where they shall camp. This [land] shall be the battleground of the
[young] men.’ [Saying this] he wept [even] more.” Ibn Muzahim has
narrated this report through four [different] chains of narration in
Waq’at Siffin (pg.140-142; Harun publications).

[^71]: Al-Ghadhiriyyah is named after Ghadhirah which belong to the Banu
Asad and which are in fact lands around the grave of ‘Aun which are now
a farsakh from Karbala’. There stand the ruins of a fortress which is
today known as the fortress of the Banu Asad.

[^72]: These were wells owned by the Banu Asad situated near Karbala’.

[^73]: This was a place where the way station of Nubukhadh Nasr from Kur
Babil was located. Kur Babil was later misspelt and came to be
pronounced as Karbala’.

[^74]: We have given his biography earlier.


