Genesis of the Work
===================

As a result of the popularity of *Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or
Heterodoxy*, many readers have inquired about its genesis. In light of
such interest, we decided that it would be worthwhile to contextualize
the historical moment in which the work was created, as well as its
ultimate objective. As a close friend and colleague of the author, it is
our privilege to share our inner knowledge of the work’s origin.

Although some rough drafts had been presented in the course of classes
and conferences, it was not until 1994 that Luis Alberto Vittor felt the
need to complete *Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy*. The author’s
desire to finish the work was motivated by two violent events: the
explosions of the Israeli Embassy and the *Asociación Mutual
Israeli-Argentina* or AMIA which occurred in Buenos Aires, Argentina on
March 17th and July 18th, 1994, terrorist attacks which were both
arbitrarily attributed to Shī‘ite Muslims.

Due to the circumstances in which it was written, the work was redacted
rapidly in response to an urgent need to confront journalists,
specialists, and international observers who joined together to label
Shī‘ite Islām as a “sect” which was “heterodox” with respect to
“orthodox” Sunnī Islām. The author was also responding to seditious
attempts to separate the Sunnī and Shī‘ite schools of thought, labeling
Shī‘ites a minority of hard-core religious fanatics with a history of
violence. **The enemies of Islām rallied around the tragic events in
Argentina denouncing Shī‘ites as “fundamentalists” and “terrorists.”
Their objective was clear: a callous attempt to isolate Shī‘ite Muslims
from the Islamic Ummah as an unorthodox faction composed of radical
extremists.**

In an unparalleled fashion, many Argentinean and American Orientalists,
made *tabula rasa* with everything written about Shī‘ite Islām from
Corbin to the present, and started to echo the most hostile attitudes
towards Islām expressed by early Orientalists and which had long been
rejected. It was evident from the onset that **certain academics were
benefiting from the terrorist attacks in Argentina to launch an
ideological assault against Shī‘ite Muslims.**

In their zeal to prove that Shī‘ite Muslims had been the instigators or
perpetrators of the most serious criminal attacks ever suffered by
Argentineans, Argentinean and American academics stressed the minority
character of Shī‘ite Muslims, characterizing them as a group of
sectarian zealots who stood in clear contrast to the moderation and
orthodoxy of the Sunnī majority. Academic specialists, journalists,
international observers, so-called “experts” on the Middle East, along
with ex-intelligence officers, and military envoys, stressed the
minority status of Shī‘ites in order to accentuate their sectarianism.

Like cockroaches crawling from under the wood-work in the dark hours of
night, these “experts” on Islām attempted to give the Shī‘ah Ithnā
‘Asharī traits which belonged to other Shī‘ite schools like the
Ismā‘īliyyah or the Zaydiyyah. They associated Twelver Shī‘ites with
Zaydī revolutionaries, and the Ismā‘īlī *ḥashashīn* or Assassins, in
order to establish that Shī‘ites were historically a group of extremist
rebels who never hesitated to use radically violent methods against
their enemies. The enemies of Islām employed Iblīsī analogies to say
that Shī‘ite Muslims were all murderers. They argued that since the
*ḥashashīn* or Assassins were Ismā‘īlīs, and the Ismā‘īlīs were
Shī‘ites, then every Shī‘ite was a potential assassin.

Evidently, both the premises and the conclusion were false.
Nevertheless, this syllogism had the expected effect. The press and the
airwaves were soon speaking about Shī‘ite terrorism, Shī‘ite
fundamentalism, Shī‘ite extremism, as if they were all synonyms. It was
imperative for someone to come forward to demonstrate that these terms
were the result of false logic or a false logical construct whose sole
objective was to demean Shī‘ite Muslims.

In an attempt to give credence to accusations against Shī‘ite Muslims,
there are those who continue to insist that the terrorist attacks which
took place in 1992 and 1994 in the city of Buenos Aires were the work of
Shī‘ite Muslims. In effect, the majority of encyclopedias continue to
attribute these crimes to Ḥizbullāh or the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Despite such stubbornness, nobody in Argentina believes in these
accusations and Argentinean authorities are now exploring an Israeli
trail. As a result, Washington is putting pressure on the Argentine
government to put an end to its investigation which is starting to annoy
the United States and Israel.

The Argentinean people, however, want the guilty parties brought to
justice as the events were not without deadly consequence for Argentine
society. On March 17th, 1992, a violent explosion destroyed the Israeli
Embassy in Buenos Aires and seriously damaged the adjacent Catholic
Church and school. Twenty-nine people were killed and 242 were injured.
The deaths were gruesome. Argentine television broadcasted streets
littered with human remains and rubble, pieces of mutilated corpses,
like the leg of a woman with a sock and shoe which was severed from her
body.

In the early days of the investigation, efforts were directed towards
the Islāmist trail. It was believed that the attack had been committed
by a Palestinian suicide bomber who drove a mini-van full of explosives.
It was suggested that he was a member of Islamic Jihād who wanted to
avenge the death of ‘Abbās al-Mūsāwī, the head of the Lebanese
Ḥizbullāh, and his family. According to this version, the Buenos Aires
operation had been prepared by a group of Pakistanis and coordinated by
Moḥsen Rabbanī, the Cultural Attaché from the Iranian Embassy. This
later was even detained, one year later, while he was in Germany, only
to be liberated later due to lack of evidence.

On July 18th, 1994, another explosion devastated the Buenos Aires
building of the *Asociación Mutual Israelita-Argentina* (AMIA) resulting
in 85 deaths and 300 injured. The investigation into this new terrorist
bombing also attempted to uncover an Islāmist trail. The attack was
attributed to a so-called Islamic “kamikazi:” 29 year old Ibrāhīm Ḥusein
Berro who supposedly drove a vehicle full of explosives. While it is
true that Ibrāhīm Ḥusein Berro existed, his brother demonstrated that he
died in Lebanon several years before and not in the attack in Buenos
Aires. Whoever drove the vehicle full of explosives, it could not have
been Ibrāhīm Berro. Years later a warrant was released for the arrest of
‘Imād Mughniyyah, a member of the Lebanese Ḥizbullāh. Later, the
ex-Ambassador of Iran in Argentina, Hade Soleimanpur, was detained in
the United Kingdom but had to be released due to lack of evidence.

All of these elements, which seem to be definitive conclusions, have
been reflected for years in various encyclopedias, books, and
journalistic articles, although nothing can confirm them. The most
interesting thing is that with the passing of time some Argentinean
investigative journalists have debunked the versions of events proposed
by the Israelis and the Americans, developing their own hypothesis,
which is the exact opposite. **According to investigations conducted in
Argentina, the two attacks were committed by Israeli agents in order to
counter the growing anti-Zionism of the Jewish community in Argentina.**
This discovery, however, took place after Vittor published his article
in *Epimelia*.

At present, the supposed intellectual or material connection of
Islāmists to the Buenos Aires attacks has largely lost credibility. The
Islāmist trail is simply inconsistent with the facts and it for this
reason that the American and Israeli governments are pressuring the
Argentineans to put an end to their investigation. While it is presently
possible to speak about these events with hindsight and tranquility,
**the only individual who dared speak about such events, and defend
Shī‘ite Islām when it was being attacked by international public
opinion, was Luis Alberto Vittor.**

**Like Prophet Yaḥyā, Luis Alberto Vittor was a voice in the
wilderness,** exposing himself to criticism, threats, and physical
danger. Unlike some of the official Islamic authorities who stood still,
making themselves complicit through their silence, **Vittor raised his
voice and pen in defense of Shī‘ite Islām at a time when doing so was
associating oneself, explicitly or implicitly, to a Muslim minority of
“extremists” and “terrorists**.” Putting his trust in Almighty Allāh and
the solidarity of his fellow Muslims, all of whom were simple believers
with no power or political influence, Vittor produced the present work
which was viewed as a moral and intellectual duty. Surely, in this lies
the greatest value of his work. ***Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or
Heterodoxy*** **must be viewed as a work of service in defense of the
followers of** ***ahl al-bayt*****.** At the time it was written, there
was not a single Orientalist, Arabist or Islamologist, in Argentina or
abroad, who was willing or capable of defending Shī‘ite Islām.

While the Shī‘ite community was being attacked from all sides, some
Sunnī Muslims sought to separate themselves from the Shī‘ites, echoing
the arguments of the enemies of Islām who claimed that the followers of
*ahl al-bayt* were sectarian extremists (*ghulāt*). As if that were not
enough, Shī‘ite converts were accused of having links to so-called
“Iranian-inspired Islamic terrorism.” In order to divert attention from
themselves, some sectors of the Sunnī community insisted on proving the
Orientalists thesis correct, accusing the Shī‘ite community of
committing the terrorist bombings when the real perpetrators of the
atrocities were not even Muslims.

As a result of these actions, many Shī‘ites, both Iranians and Latinos,
suffered from severe social discrimination. Many *mu’minīn* [believers]
lost their jobs. Many *mu’minīn* were forced out of university,
including a group of Iranian medical students. Being both Shī‘ite and
Iranian was seen as synonymous with terrorism and criminality. Fear ran
so high during those days that, out of the entire community, only six or
seven brothers, two of them converts, dared to attend the sole Shī‘ite
mosque in the city.

Rather than coming to the rescue of Shī‘ite Muslims who were falsely
accused of being violent sectarian terrorists, Orientalists like Bernard
Lewis came forth to add fuel to the fire, arguing that there was a
historic continuity and an ideological bond between medieval Muslims
assassins, who were Ismā‘īlīs, and contemporary Shī‘ite fundamentalists
or extremists, who were Ja‘farīs. For those who dabble in academic
dishonesty, they were one and the same: socially maladjusted minorities
who resorted to violence and terrorism as their only means of
expression.

When one reads *Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy*, it is important
to remember the context in which it was created. At a moment in which
the enemies of Islām were attempting to divide the Ummah, Luis Alberto
Vittor pulled up his sleeves and pulled out his pen to demonstrate that
Shī‘ite Islām, despite being a minority, was as orthodoxy as the
majority Sunnī Islām. And not only that, the author demonstrated that
Shī‘ite Islām was the only group which remained faithful to the will of
Allāh and the Prophet Muḥammad: to hold fast to the Two Weighty
Treasures, the Qur’ān and the Household of the Prophet.

Besides presenting the Shī‘ite position, the author’s goal was to
reestablish the balance between Sunnism and Shī‘ism which some sectors
were attempting to destabilize, labeling one group as orthodox and
another as sectarian, heterodox, extremist, and heretical. It is for
this reason that the author devotes so much time to explaining why it is
improper to label Muslims as “fundamentalists.”

Considering the context and extraordinary circumstances in which the
book was written, completely changes one’s critical appreciation of the
work. ***Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy*** **was a lone voice
denouncing despots in the desert, a strident voice denouncing the
indifference of academia and the vested interests of those who sought to
define Shī‘ite Islām as a radical, sectarian, heterodox form of Islām,
rather than a traditional expression of its orthodoxy and orthopraxis.**

Although the author has accepted that his work to be annotated, he has
always insisted that it remain intact as a reflection of the
socio-historical context in which it was created. Attempting to modify
certain concepts would undermine the very objective of the work,
reducing it to a vain theoretical discussion. The author’s goal, of
course, was other: to demonstrate that the claims made by the detractors
of Shī‘ite Islām were false and illogical and that the fact that Shī‘ite
Islām has a minority status does not imply, from an Islamic point of
view, that it represents a sect in the sense in the Western Christian
sense of the term.

The events of 1992 and 1994 which occurred in the city of Buenos Aires
are not a thing of the past. Attempts to support the allegations made
against the Shī‘ite Muslims of Argentina continue to be made, accusing
them of implication in the terrorist bombings. Despite the fact that
fourteen years have passed since this work was originally published, it
continues to be current. **The enemies of Islām never sleep and nor do
we.**

**Dr. John Andrew Morrow**
Associate Professor of Languages and Literature
Eastern New Mexico University


