Author’s Preface
================

The article “Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy” was first published
in 1994 in the journal *Epimeleia: revista de estudios sobre la
tradición*. It was written with the purpose of analyzing the various
arguments and approaches employed by Western scholars and opinion-makers
to characterize “Islamic fundamentalism,” an ill-defined and
ill-understood social phenomena occurring in the Muslim world.

The very term “fundamentalism,” as applied to Islām, is inappropriate
and arbitrary, and finds its sole justification in the language of the
press. The immediate objective of the article was to explain why such a
characterization of Islām was not only erroneous in application, but a
serious oversimplification, a tendentious interpretation motivated by a
hidden agenda.

The article also sheds light on questions related to the use and abuse
of certain arguments. It exposed some of the mistakes made by
Orientalists and corrected, once and for all, a series of serious
shortcomings. It demonstrated how well-known Arabists and Modernist
Muslim thinkers repeatedly misapply various terms. It exposed their
misappropriation of Western religious terminology--filled with false
assumptions and prejudices--and how they indiscriminately apply them to
a wide variety of spiritual traditions.

Those who profess expertise in the study and understanding of Islām and
Shī‘ism, often without possessing even basic proficiency in Arabic and
Persian, take terms from the Western world and attempt to apply them to
the Eastern world. They take Christian terminology and attempt to impose
it upon Islām.[^1] Not only are these technical terms misappropriated,
they are applied to traditional Islamic concepts which are taken totally
out of context. This common practice is as ludicrous as taking Islamic
terminology and applying it to the Christian world. Some scholars could
argue that the Catholics are “Shī‘ites,” followers of the “infallible”
Popes. Others would argue that the Catholics are the Sunnīs, and the
Catholic Church is the Caliphate. The Protestants would be labeled as
“Shī‘ites,” sectarian heretics who broke from the main body of
believers. Yet others would say that the Protestants are “Wahhābis”
since they are literalist fundamentalists while the Catholics are
“Shī‘ites” because of their hermeneutical tradition. Christianity would
not be without its Ṣūfīs like Saint Theresa of Avila, San Juan de la
Cruz, Dionysius the Pseudo-Areopagite, Master Eckhardt, John Tauler, and
Henry Suso and “martyrs” like Saint Joan of Arc. As misguided as it may
be, this practice of imposing a Western religious framework on the
Islamic faith has been done with impunity so much so that authors have
not even seen the need to justify their extrapolations, to confirm their
correctness, or to consider their relevance.

When we first wrote the article, we focused our criticism on Western
Orientalism. Now, however, we have extended our critique--and most
justifiably so--to the social and political sciences in general. In
recent decades, these two fields have erroneously employed certain
scientific and non-scientific terms. This includes terms like
“fundamentalism” which the social and political sciences apply to
anything in the Islamic world which seems reactionary or conservative.
In fact, the half-religious, half-political phenomenon they are
observing has nothing to do with “fundamentalism.” **According to its
original meaning, “fundamentalism” denotes a dry literalist spirit, a
concept which is completely alien to the Islamic tradition.** As a
result, the application of the derogatory term “fundamentalism” to Islām
is a distortion of the true nature of things. It reflects an attempt to
impose a label by lexical manipulation. To make matters worse, **the
application of the term “fundamentalism” gives a false impression of
Islām to Westerners. Rather than presenting Islām as it is, they present
it as it is not.**[^2]

Sacred tradition--the source of all spirituality--and religion, which is
its outer aspect--cannot be subjected to the same scrutiny as the pure
sciences. One cannot approach a spiritual tradition like a physicist
deals with gravity, a biologist deals with life, a meteorologist deals
with the climate or an entomologist deals with insects. Studying
religious tradition is not the same as observing natural phenomena. For
the sociologist, political scientist or philosopher, it is impossible to
split religious phenomenon into bits and pieces with the same callous
indifference a coroner employs to dissect a cadaver. According to
Positivism, such an aloof attitude is natural and to be expected of any
scientist.

While the social sciences are not pure sciences, researchers in these
fields also focus on observation. Social scientists employ rigorous
methods of research, documentation, and analysis when studying a social
system. They use statistics to bring together all the determining
factors and conditions in order to describe social change. They attempt,
to the highest degree possible, to be as strict and exhaustive as
physicists and biologists when dealing with human factors. This
scientific spirit forms the very basis of research in the social
sciences. However, unlike the pure sciences, which are based on
scientific facts, the social sciences rely on human factors, information
provided by people, and so-called public opinion, making them
particularly susceptible to subjectivity.

From the time the original article was written to the publication of the
first English edition of this book over a decade has elapsed. During
that time, we have observed how English terms like “fundamentalism” and
“radical Islāmism,” along with Spanish and French terms like
*integrismo* and *intégrisme*, have been consistently interchanged as if
they were equivalents. These terms were treated as synonyms by
specialists in Islamic Studies. They have been and continue to be used
by social critics and political analysts when commenting upon foreign
policy and international affairs. These spokespersons are often the
initial source of public opinion. Subsequently, whether it embellishes
or minimizes, public opinion is one of the greatest influences on public
life in the Western world.

A nation’s likes, dislikes, admiration, indifference and contempt are
all sentiments which are based on public opinion. One has only to look
at the popular media in the United States for proof of this assertion.
**The powers that be are notorious for using public opinion to their
advantage to bring people in line with their plans. It is apparent that
wars of conquest are no longer waged in the name of expansionism and
imperialism.** Whether it is called the New World Order of the
Freemasons, the Illuminati, George Monbiot, and George W. Bush; the
Jewish Conspiracy of the *Protocols of the Elders of Zion*, Adolf
Hitler, and Henry Ford; Karl Krause’s World Republic; Aldous Huxley’s
Brave New World; George Orwell’s Big Brother; the World Arrogance or the
Great Satan of Imām Khumaynī; the Z.O.G. of the Neo-Nazis; the Evil
Empire of Paul Hellyer; the Shadow Government, the Trust, the Syndicate,
the World Government or the Invisible Empire from popular culture;
**globalization--the new term for socio-political and economic world
domination--is now being carried out in the name of democracy and
freedom of expression, effectively muzzling opposition from human rights
activists.**[^3] **People are no longer conquered and colonized, they
are “liberated” and brought into the fold of Western-style “democracy,”
the new imperialism with its extreme economic model of carnivorous and
cannibalistic capitalism.** **As for the “freedom of expression,” it
only applies to imperial propaganda aimed at manufacturing public
opinion based on its socio-economic and political interests.**

Since the message, which is emitted, serves the interest of the powers
that be, it comes as no surprise that it has been systematically
manipulated.[^4] While such spin can be detected by expert analysts, it
usually passes unnoticed by the masses. In many cases, the message is
diluted by means of subliminal mechanisms which are not recognizable or
even perceptible at a conscious level.[^5]

This *public opinion*--which is really nothing more but the opinion of
the socio-economic elite--is controlled and constructed by means of the
mass media. Public opinion influences the minds of people and affects
many aspects of their lives: from personal relations to group relations,
from religious to political convictions, and even questions of personal
taste. If public opinion is manufactured, as Noam Chomsky has eloquently
postulated, the social sciences, which depend on the daily offerings of
the mass media, find themselves in a particularly dubious position.
Within the framework of this conundrum, it is imperative to examine how
attempts to construct public opinion by means of the mass media result
in what Jürgen Habermas calls a “non-public opinion.”[^6] It is a
“non-public opinion” because--in reality--it merely reflects the
interests of a certain sector of political and economic power. The
creation of public opinion serves social, economic, and political
purposes. Part and parcel of this political and economic sector is to
use derogatory terms like “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* or *integrismo*
to describe Muslims. By doing so, the *nouveaux maîtres du monde*, the
new rulers of the world, as Jean Ziegler calls them, group all Muslims
with violent extremists, and isolated groups of radical reformists. In
this way, the manufacturers of public opinion act as if the term
“fundamentalism” could be universally applied to all those who
legitimately defend their traditional political and religious beliefs.

Considering the fact that the mass media is manipulated on a mass scale,
the question begs to be asked: “Should the social sciences cast aside
their objectivity and simply submit to this ‘virtual reality’ built upon
falsehood and deceit?” The obvious answer is no. It should not and it
must not. However, when we look at the cultural landscape in the Western
world, when we read newspapers and watch television, we see that many
social scientists are merely echoing false and deceitful public opinion.
In fact, many of them use the same concepts and terms that social
engineers use to falsify the facts. The situation has become so blurred
in the social sciences that scholars need to seriously reassess their
basic assumptions, academic objectives, and research tools. They need to
start addressing these preoccupying epistemological problems. As Barbara
Castleton explains:

We live in an age in which a selection of a dozen or so buzz words can
turn a nation from protector to aggressor. We live in an age where lies
revealed bring no shame in the liar, merely a restatement of the lie in
a configuration that both extends and perpetuates it. Ours is not the
first era in which this has occurred. History is replete with such
episodes, notably the Crusades and the Holocaust. But the direction
taken by the West in its pursuit of “terrorists,” and in America’s
attempts to “protect the homeland” from said “terrorists” through a “war
on terror” has ceased to have any meaning beyond the utterance of the
words themselves.[^7]

As any scientist or scholar knows, true science and epistemology is
contrary to opinion because opinion is a notoriously flawed source of
information. Opinion, be it personal or public, is subjective, and
impossible to be validate scientifically. As Gaston Bachelard has
pointed out, opinion does not think and when it does, it thinks poorly,
turning need into knowledge.[^8] Since public opinion is constructed, it
can contribute nothing to science unless it is deconstructed à la
Jacques Derrida.

The role of the scientist is to overcome opinion, to be utterly
objective, to uncover the facts, and to let them speak for themselves.
This is even more important for social scientists, those who work with
human factors, since prejudice and falsehood can creep into opinion,
interfering with the scientific spirit in a multitude of ways. Unless
social scientists can overcome this epistemological obstacle--the
perilous problem of tainted sources--their results will be flawed and
their conclusions will be distorted. If social scientists compromise the
scientific spirit, allowing distorted data to interfere with their
observations, the result will be a slanted view of reality. These
methodological mistakes will be implicit in their theoretical framework,
inevitably leading to erroneous conclusions based on false premises.

Unfortunately, due to its reliance on public opinion, the field of
social sciences now abounds with bias, resulting in a reductionist
rendition of social reality. We could not have it any other way since
public opinion, as generated by the mass media, reflects the surreal
attitude of those who inhabit the world of “virtual reality.” This
virtual world has no relation whatsoever to the real world, with actual
and factual representations of reality. The virtual world is merely a
reflection of television which deforms images, creating a slanted vision
of the world. Journalism, too, both oral and written, is aimed at
creating public opinion. And it is from journalism that social
scientists draw their material for the study of conflicts in the Middle
East. **Journalism, to a large extent, is merely officially falsified
information.** It describes the Islamic world with inaccurate and
tainted terminology. In some cases, it is not only social scientists,
but commentators and philosophers, who draw from this same terminology,
who err in this way. These professionals, rather than clarifying
concepts, employ terms as primitive weapons tossed at one’s opponent in
a grand scheme of international intrigue.

Within the field of social sciences are those who believe that
traditional Islamic society can be conveniently split apart for the
purpose of study. They attempt to separate Islām’s sociopolitical
aspects from its religious and legal ones. They attempt to separate
Islām’s outer aspects from its inner ones. By isolating elements, rather
than studying them as parts of a cohesive system, they attempt to depict
Islām as a type of reactionary conservatism. In order to make the
definition even more damaging, they label Islām as “fundamentalist,”
*intégriste* or *integrista*. None of these verbal constructions are
capable of providing a proper definition. To use the words of Saint
Thomas Aquinas, the signifier and the signified are simply not the
same.[^9]

If this terminological incoherence, reminiscent of the Tower of Babel,
existed solely among Western sociologists and political scientists,
there would not be much at which to marvel. However, some modern Arab
sociologists like Fāṭimah Mernessi, and even Islāmized Western
philosophers like Roger Garaudy, have joined this chorus of confusion.
By embracing erroneous terms like “fundamentalism” and *intégrisme*,
scholars like Mernessi and Garaudy give them scientific and
philosophical legitimacy. Sociologists, political scientists,
historians, and social thinkers, all use the terms “fundamentalism,”
*intégrisme* and *integrismo* with complete confidence, as if these
words expressed a positive reality and a defining characteristic of
Islām. What is worse is that some of them use these terms in radically
different ways. If we were to apply the judgement of R. Otto with
respect to the term “irrational,” we would say that social scientists
have made a “field day” or a real obsession of these words.

There are those who argue that sociology, political science, and
history-- being reality-based sciences--must work within the framework
of facts, concepts, terms, and materials provided by the mass media.
However, since the terminology these social scientists use is drawn from
the press-which is loaded with inaccuracies--the very basis of their
studies can be called into question. If the terminology is incorrect, it
undermines the understanding of the social phenomenon being studied. The
terms “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* and *integrismo* are examples of
terms which journalists use abusively and irresponsibly. While these
concepts can describe a positive reality when used appropriately
according to their scientific sense, they are misused by the press,
presenting readers with an erroneous interpretation of social events.

It makes little difference to the mass media whether “fundamentalism” is
a cause or whether it is a response. For the social sciences, the
phenomenon is studied in isolation. It is examined independently of its
causes. As a result, the true nature of the subject is lost in thought,
pigeonholed, and given the pejorative label of “fundamentalism,”
*intégrisme* or *integrismo*. One must wonder whether this biased
approach--which fails to contextualize its subject--is not the most
blatant form of fundamentalism.

Whether it is close reading, the Feminist Criticism of Simone de
Beauvoir, Julia Kristeva, Luce Irigaray, Hélène Cixoux; the New
Historicism of Michel Foucault, Walter Benjamin, and Mikhail Bakhtin;
the Psychoanalytic Criticism of Jacques Lacan; the Structuralism of
Roman Jakobson, Claude Lévi-Strauss, and Roland Barthes; the Marxist
Criticism of Georg Lukács and Keith Ellis; the Postcolonial Criticism of
Edward Sa‘īd, Homi Bhabha, Benita Parry, Kwame Nkrumah, Albert Memmi,
Aimé Césaire, Derek Walcott, and Gayatari Spivak or the Phenomenological
Hermeneutics of Paul Ricoeur, Martin Heidegger, Hans-Georg Gadamer or
Mario Valdés, a subject should never be studied outside of its context.

As I.M. Lewis asserted almost fifty years ago, “Islām can be analyzed
sociologically only within the context of the actual life and…beliefs of
living Muslim communities” (2). On what basis, then, do social
scientists apply the label of “fundamentalism” to Islamic movements?
Have they conducted fieldwork among Muslim activists? Have they analyzed
the socio-political and economic causes of Islamic activism? On the
contrary, much of what has been written about Islamic fundamentalism has
been based on the media. One such book, dealing with the Islamic
Revolution of Iran, was based exclusively on newspaper and magazine
articles. Since such work is neither scholarship nor investigative
journalism, it does not even merit to be mentioned by name. Clearly, if
social scientists persist in viewing their subject in isolation, no
religious or political movement which resists globalization will be safe
from the labels of “fundamentalism*.*” This is the same reductionist and
essentialist attitude adopted by Formalism and New Criticism with
regards to literature.

Unless the methodology of the social sciences is modified, unscientific
slurs such as “fundamentalism*,*” *intégrisme* or *integrismo* will
continue to circulate. Rather than describing and defining social
behavior and concepts, terms like “fundamentalism” confuse them,
diluting and distorting their true meaning. The only purpose these words
play is to obfuscate, disqualify, discredit, abase, and reject…They
reflect the very worst of sociological jargon.

As a result of this terminology confusion, it is necessary to clarify
certain concepts like “Islamic fundamentalism,” *intégrisme islāmique*,
*integrismo islámico*, and “radical Islāmism.” Despite the fact that
these terms are used synonymously in the mass media as well the academic
world, they refer to different political attitudes and currents. The
only thing they have in common is that they are rooted in the Islamic
cultural universe. Introducing the term “Islāmism” or “radical Islāmism”
into our discussion is relevant as it is another label which is pinned
to Muslims on top of “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* and *integrismo*
which have been worn down through constant use. As for Shī‘ite Islām, it
is commonly considered the very manifestation of “radical Islāmism” in
its most militant and combative form.

In the lexical world, there exist words which are erroneous from every
perspective: whether considered etymologically, semantically or
lexically. One such term is “Islamic fundamentalism” which is
erroneously employed in the French and Spanish sense of *intégrisme* or
*integrismo*. All of these terms are drawn from modern Christian
religious experience and all predate the phenomenon wrongly labeled as
“Islamic fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* or *integrismo*. Despite this
fact, they are almost exclusively applied to Islām, without taking into
consideration that **the term “fundamentalism” was introduced into
Christian theological language as the result of a Protestant controversy
which took place at the beginning of the twentieth century.** After
that, the term was adopted into the language of secular philosophers and
historians who were more or less unabashed enemies of both Christianity
and Islām.

If we look beyond the present frenzy for the word “fundamentalist,” we
see that the concept serves to supplant an earlier term: *intégrisme* or
*integrismo*. Despite the fact that “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* and
*integrismo* have different etymologies they all express the same
incorrect concept. As a result, they are interchanged without
distinction and are considered synonymous. Rather than a desire for
terminological precision, these terms reflect an ideological motive, a
means of legitimizing sociologically what is in reality a political
objective.

A Catholic writer, when speaking about traditional Islām, might employ
the term “fundamentalist,” associating it with Protestant conservatism.
A Protestant, Marxist or secular liberal--all anti-Catholic to the
core--might opt for the term *intégrisme* or *integrismo*, associating
it with the reactionary conservative Catholicism of the nineteenth
century. As can be seen, the choice of terms depends on the ideological
inclination or conviction of the social scientist or philosopher**. The
selection of terms like “fundamentalism,”** ***intégrisme*****,**
***integrismo*****, and “radical Islāmism” are not casual or arbitrary.
They are used as part of a deliberate and intentional political
policy.**

The general application of terms like “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme*,
*integrismo*, and “radical Islāmism” to every Islamic group which
opposes Western secularism and cultural imperialism misleads those who
seek to understand the true nature of Islām. This terminological
mudslinging leads to confusion, giving the impression that traditional
Muslims reflect the same reactionary and conservative attitude as some
recalcitrant sectors of Christianity. It gives the impression that
Muslim “fundamentalists” are the Islamic equivalent of Christian
fundamentalists.

The use of terms like “fundamentalist,” *intégriste*, *integrista*, and
“radical Islāmist” may be well-established in the press; however, the
language of the media merely reflects the vague, imprecise and
indefinite terminology from the colloquial language. Consequently, it is
not well-adapted to the use of science. It can only be of relative value
to those who hide their ideological motives under the façade of a
pseudo-scientific language.

The use of imprecise notions to describe the socio-political reality of
Islām is clearly objectionable. It is inappropriate because it forces
the reader to make mental contortions in search for the meaning behind
such empty terms such as “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme*, *integrismo*
and “radical Islāmism.” There is no doubt that reality-based sciences
are based on information taken from daily life. This applies to
psychology, sociology, political science, history, and so forth.
However, one cannot construct something concrete on the basis of
concepts which are predicated on an entirely different socio-historical
experience. If concepts are transformed into fact, they will vanish as
soon as one attempts to reduce them to an abstract formula.
Consequently, any sociological concept which is devoid of an
intelligible and objective structure is inconceivable. Any sociological
concept must refer to the concrete relation with an object. It must
constitute a typical plexus of the significant intentions grouped
together in the definition of the social reality. Let us analyze, then,
the term “fundamentalism.”

Examining any aspect of the Islamic world on the basis of erroneous
terms like “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* or *integrismo* can only lead
to perilous postulations. As we explained before, these terms are
erroneous because they fail to consider the correlations between
doctrine and social groups. As a result, the use of such terms prevents
an objective analysis of the relationship between traditional Islamic
thought, the Modernist mentality or any other political and religious
currents.

No religious or political movement can be understood from the outside.
It is essential to examine any such movements within the broader
doctrinal controversies from which they surge and develop. In the case
of traditional Islamic though, this is particularly relevant. **When
applied to Christianity, the term fundamentalism fits the context: it
has antecedents, off-chutes, and aberrations. When applied to Islām, the
term** ***fundamentalism*** **is outside the framework of its
socio-religious evolution.**

Unlike Christian fundamentalism, which has a history and a development
which can be traced, *Islamic fundamentalism* does not reflect a
concrete doctrine like liberalism, fascism, socialism, communism or
anarchism. The terms *Islamic fundamentalism*, *Islamic fascism*,
*intégrisme* and *integrismo* are applied to a vast array of imprecise
ideas covering virtually every political current in Islām. These
multifarious manifestations of *intégrisme* or *integrismo* share a
combination of social concern with religious doctrine. At the same time,
they constitute other complex realities which are frequently only
definable by their opposites.

As we have seen, the mass media is responsible for spreading falsehood
and legitimizing slanderous and scientifically inaccurate terms like
“fundamentalism,” *intégrisme*, *integrismo* and “radical Islāmism.”
This does not mean that the mass media is the mother of all evil--quite
the contrary--it is the very concept of secular modernity and
globalization, the “progressive” anti-traditional attitude of modern man
which poses the greatest threat to humanity.

From the time concepts like secularism and Positivism first emerged in
the West, the world has been transformed into a “global village,”
according to the definition of Marshall McLuhan. It is not the mass
media, then, which is the cause of certain aberrations of interpretation
which offend the good sense of any critic. It is part and parcel of the
Western worldview.

As for us, we will continue to criticize social scientists and
philosophers for converting “opinion” into “fact.” While we risk
sounding like a “fundamentalist,” *intégriste* or *integrista*, our
stance forms part of a long line of spiritual resistance to all attempts
to homogenize the world and the word, seeking to lower language to the
lowest common denominator; in this case, taking the language of science
down to the level of the mass media.

As social scientist and philosopher, we find it difficult to digest that
scholars in the social sciences--particularly anthropologists,
sociologists, political scientists and modern historians--have refused
to redefine the terms “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* or *integrismo*.
Despite the rich body of terminology at their disposition and their
ability to coin new terms, they have failed to reconsider the terms
“fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* or *integrismo*. This scholarly
stagnation is startling considering the central importance of
scientifically accurate terms to the social sciences. At the very least,
one would have expected social scientists to employ different terms than
the biased ones used by political commentators and opinion makers. It is
certainly strange to see social scientists and philosophers give
credibility to terms like *intégrisme* or *integrismo* when their use is
technically inappropriate. Such terms contribute nothing to scholarship,
nor do they enrich the language of journalism.

**When people speak of “Islamic fundamentalism,” they often forget that
“fundamentalism” is a modern Christian term.** Even though the concept
has left its Christian origin and found broader applications, it
continues to convey the idea of American Protestantism. Its application
to Islām, which is completely distinct, contributes nothing to the
understanding of the social reality in question.

The term “fundamentalism” may be appropriate as an analogy when
comparing Christianity to Islām. In the Muslim world, the term
“fundamentalist” might be partially applicable to radical reformist
movements like Wahhābism or Salafism.[^10] However, if the term
“fundamentalism” ceases to be used as an analogy and is considered as a
definition, the end result is an erroneous oversimplification. We must
always remember that fundamentalism is rooted in American Protestantism.
The term does not refer to a universal phenomenon and is applicable
exclusively to certain Christian currents in the United States.

Fundamentalism, per se, refers to a form of American Protestantism which
opposes scientific and hermeneutical methods of scriptural criticism.
Christian fundamentalists adopt a reactionary attitude which insists on
a literal interpretation of the Bible. This is especially so with
regards to those parts of the Scripture which refer to Creation. As a
result of a literalist reading of Genesis, Christian fundamentalists
reject the modern theory of biological evolution. As a result of this
attitude, the issue of teaching evolution in public schools became a
political controversy. Defending the infallibility of Scripture,
Protestant fundamentalists attempted to organize a solid Christian block
against Darwin’s theory of evolution.

Besides American Protestantism, there are other doomsday cults and
charismatic evangelical movements that interpret contemporary events in
light of biblical prophecy. Not only are they opposed to Western
secularism, they are fervent defenders of the cultural supremacy and
religious hegemony of Christian civilization. Religious fundamentalism,
in the true sense of the term, is a purely Western phenomenon. It is the
product of the “cultural wars” which took place at the beginning of the
twentieth century and which have polarized American society into secular
liberal democrats and neo-conservative right-wing Christian
fundamentalists

The origin of Christian religious fundamentalism in the United States
traces back to 1830. This was a period in which evangelical
Protestantism had essentially become the official religion of American
civil society. National identity was based on the perception that the
United States was a Christian country. The defense of Christianity was
viewed as the law of the land. During the nineteenth century, and
despite the process of secularization and the separation of Church and
State, Protestant Evangelism undeniably maintained its hegemony with
regards to the religious, cultural and social life in the United States.

It was in this context, between 1910 and 1915, that a group of 64
Anglo-Americans published a series of twelve booklets titled *The
Fundamentals: A Testimony to the Truth* which caused a controversy
between two Christian currents: a radical conservative one and a more
theologically liberal one. Written from a conservative Protestant
perspective, the goal of the work was to confront modern liberal
Christians who interpreted the Gospel in light of secular modernity. As
a result of advances in science and scholarship, these liberal
Christians came to view certain Biblical passages as allegorical and
metaphorical rather than historical. This was fiercely opposed by
Christian fundamentalists who insisted that the Bible was the literal
word of God which could not be subjected to scientific scrutiny.

As a whole, *The Fundamentals* established five points which became the
basis of Christian fundamentalist identity: 1) the belief in divine
inspiration and the infallibility of the Bible; 2) the belief in the
divinity of Jesus, including his virgin birth; 3) the belief in his
physical resurrection; 4) the belief in redemption through Christ’s
sacrifice on the cross; and, finally, 5) the belief in the immanent
second coming of Jesus Christ. Adherence to these five fundamentals
became a symbolic starting point for the fundamentalist movement. The
title of the publication was used to identify this literalist movement
within American Protestantism, which already had a long history.

As can clearly be gathered, fundamentalism is Christian in origin and is
undoubtedly associated with Protestantism. Fundamentalism developed in
the United States as a modern reaction of American conservatism. It is
essentially anti-liberal and anti-modern. It opposes the critical
analysis of the Bible, the secularization of the educational system, and
Darwin’s theory of evolution. Furthermore, it opposes socio-cultural,
linguistic and racial diversity in American society.

It was only in the 1920’s that Protestant fundamentalism joined its
forces to fight its cultural and legal battles. They declared war
against “heretical” modernism, secular humanism, and the liberal ideas
circulating among Christians who were open to Darwinism, Freudism, and
Marxism, which were being taught in high schools and universities
throughout the country. Stressing the infallibility of the Bible and the
messianic mission of the American people, Protestant fundamentalists
struggled against modern liberal thought which they viewed as a foreign
influence on the “American way of life.”

For most of the twentieth century, Christian fundamentalists viewed
Catholicism, secularism, and Socialism, as the greatest threats to their
ideology. The first line of battle between fundamentalists and secular
liberals was drawn around the teaching of evolution in the public school
system. While the fundamentalists were able to win cases against
Darwinist professors, the fall-back from public opinion was costly as
Christian fundamentalists came across as backwards and intolerant. Their
anti-modernist rhetoric had little resonance with an American society
firmly focused on perpetual progress. **It is on the basis of this
pre-existing public opinion of Christian fundamentalists that the mass
media constructed the image of “Islamic fundamentalism,”** associating
it excessively with the American Protestant fundamentalism of that
period.

Protestant fundamentalism spread much easier in the southern states and
the Mid-West than it did in the western and north-eastern states. The
fundamentalist lobby was so strong in Tennessee that the state
effectively prohibited the teaching of the theory of evolution, the
culmination of the famous trail against Professor John Thomas Scopes in
1925. The law was later deemed unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of
the United States in 1968. Despite this set-back, fundamentalist efforts
opposing the teaching of biological evolution have continued to this day
under the guise of presenting a “balanced view” of the two
theories--evolutionism and creationism--and the recent incorporation of
the “theory of intelligent design.”

After 1925, Protestant fundamentalism lost much of its credibility.
Unable to unite the nation under the banner of fighting the enemies of
Christianity, the fundamentalist movement remained relatively inactive
in American society for the next fifty years. Nonetheless, the years of
absence from the public sphere helped renew the ranks of the
fundamentalist forces. The fundamentalists survived as a marginalized
religious movement and remained vigorously persistent. It was thus that
a Protestant fundamentalist sub-culture came to be created in the United
States.

Although not numerous, Christian fundamentalists represents a solid,
well-organized group with a strong identity. Protestant fundamentalists
have attempted to present themselves as an alternative to liberalism,
Catholicism and, in recent decades, to Islām, which has spread rapidly
among African Americans. As part of their evangelical mission,
fundamentalists have created their own particularly powerful press on
top of their already Abundant body of publications thus helping to
spread their theological message.

In the early 1930s, the programs *Old Fashion Revival* and *Lutheran
Hour* greatly increased the fundamentalist presence in the mass media.
In 1941, Carl McIntire, one of the leading fundamentalists in the
Presbyterian Church, created the ACCC, the American Council of Christian
Churches, to counter the creation of liberal organizations organized
around the ecumenical FCC or Federal Council of Churches.

After the Second World War, the ACCC became one of the founders of the
International Fundamentalist Council and one of the main opponents of
the World Council of Churches. McIntire, the founder of the ACCC, and
host of *20th* *Century Reformation Hour*, became the most fervent and
closest collaborator of Joseph McCarthy, the Senator for Wisconsin and
Chief of the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee, notorious for the
famous “witch hunts” he started during the presidency of Harry Truman.
McIntire, the fundamentalist leader, would prepare black lists of
pastors suspected of collaborating with the Communists and would hand
them to McCarthy. McIntire, who crusaded against communism, ecumenism,
and liberal theology, was convinced that the new translation of the
Bible, the Revised Standard Version, was the result of a “red
conspiracy.”

All of these factors contributed to the resurgence of fundamentalism in
the public sphere and political activity in the 70’s and 80’s and its
impact on Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush has been decisive. In
the most recent Presidential elections in the United States, the
neo-conservative protestant fundamentalist camp turned towards George W.
Bush just like secular liberals turned towards John Kerry.[^11]

In light of the above, it can be seen that **the term
“fundamentalism”*****--*****as applied to Islām--has a pejorative
connotation.** Originally, the term fundamentalism represented an
intolerant attitude combined with a literalist interpretation of the
Scriptures which was devoid of spirituality. When applied to Islām,
however, the term “fundamentalist” represents a categorical rejection of
modernism, secularism, and pluralism. While the meaning of the word has
shifted semantically, it also serves as a politically motivated slur
which poorly describes a social phenomenon.

As regards the other term, *integrismo*, it was first used in 1898 by
Cándido Nocedal, a Spanish politician and journalist of Catholic faith,
founder of the *Partido Integrista*. The term was used in the party’s
political organ, *La Constancia*. It was also used by Cándido Nocedal’s
son, the Spanish journalist and playwright, Ramón Nocedal y Romea, the
founder of the newspaper *El Siglo Futuro*. The term *integrista* was
employed by the *Partido Integrista* to designate a political attempt to
*integrate* and *unite* all Catholic and Republican forces opposed to
progressive liberal policies under the banner of Isabel II and the
Spanish monarchy.

In our days, the words “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* and *integrismo*
are applied to completely different issues, thus impeding a correct
understanding of the actual phenomenon. Unfortunately, these terms
continue to circulate from article to article and from book to book,
gaining more contemptuous connotations with each subsequent use. To add
chaos to confusion, there are scholars who insist that there are
different types of “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* and *integrismo*. This
amplification, multiplication, and variation of these base terms--which
are inherently flawed--makes it increasingly difficult to differentiate
between the American Protestantism--which is truly fundamentalist--and
traditional Islamic thought emanating from the Muslim world. The very
ambiguity of the term “fundamentalist,” *intégriste* and *integrismo*,
should be sufficient to demonstrate that they do not designate anything
objectively. They merely gather everything which is deemed intolerant
under the same subjective umbrella.

The terms “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* and *integrismo* do not provide
an objective description the Islamic phenomena they are supposed to
describe. As a result, the validity of these terms cannot be
acknowledged. They simply do not meet the scholarly standards
established by the social sciences. Rather than reflecting a reality,
the application of terms like “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* and
*integrismo* to Islām manifests a psychological problem on the part of
the observer. Since the observer is biased, the observer is subjective.
Since the observer is subjective, the observer makes value judgments,
dismissing as backwards anything which is contrary to personal concepts
of progress and modernity. The observer views Islām as an obstacle to
personal advancement. The observer is terrified by the term
“fundamentalist,” particularly when preceded by the adjective “Islamic,”
reflecting the observer’s insecurity as well as an utter ignorance of
the true nature of Islām. In fact, **if what is wrongly labeled “Islamic
fundamentalism” were properly defined, it would no longer arouse fear.**

To object to the shortcomings of terms like “fundamentalism,”
*intégriste*, *integrista*, and “radical Islāmist” is not a mere
intellectual exercise. Besides being used as weapons against Islām,
these terms are full of conceptual flaws. They impede a proper
description of the phenomena in question because they identify it
erroneously. **When Westerners think about “Islamic fundamentalism,”
they are not thinking about a spiritual tradition, but rather a type of
Christian religious extremism characterized by a rejection of science,
an attitude which is completely alien to Islām.** If it is an opposition
to modernity which they wish to characterize, then it might be proper to
qualify some types of Islamic activism as “traditionalism.” This term,
it should be noted, is coined for descriptive purposes. It is not used
pejoratively as we have no malicious intent to discredit those who
oppose the Western worldview.

As a result of this terminological confusion, we wrote a series of
articles between 1994 and 1998 in which we attempted to differentiate
between Protestant fundamentalists and Catholic *integristas* from the
ill-named “Islamic fundamentalists” or *integristas.*[^12] We referred
to the latter as “principialists” rather than *integristas* or
“fundamentalists.”[^13] The term “principialist” is far better suited to
describe those who adhere to the principles of faith than term
“fundamentalist,” with its strong right-wing Christian connotations. The
term “principialist” is also the correct translation for the Arabic
*uṣūl al-dīn* or the Basic Principles of Faith.

We proposed the term *principialist*, not to add another label*,* but as
an objective acknowledgment that in Islām following the principles of
faith is neither backwards nor the reflection of a medieval mentality.
The principles of faith [*uṣūl al-dīn*] are the pillars [*al-arkān*] on
which any interpretation [*ijtihād*] of Islām rests: its formulation,
articulation, and development. At the same time, the *uṣūl al-dīn*
represent the metaphysical or transcendent principles of the
illuminative wisdom of Islamic Gnosis. The concept of the *uṣūl al-dīn*
can also be translated as “roots,” “bases,” or “basic components” of
faith. The *uṣūl al-dīn* represent the cultural foundation of what is
erroneously labeled as Islamic fundamentalism. The *uṣūl al-dīn* are the
roots or foundation of Islām because the term *aṣl*, the singular form
of *uṣūl*, contains all of these shades of meaning.

The correct term to describe those who defend the integrity of
traditional Islamic principles would be “Islamic principialists,” which
is far better than “Islamic fundamentalists,” as the term
“principialist” indicates a call for a return to the principles of
Islām. What we refer to as “traditional principialism” is the common
cultural foundation of Islamic thought. Like a polished diamond,
“traditional principialism” presents multiple faces, reflecting
different points of view with respect to political and doctrinal
questions, yet which always emphasizes a strong Islamic identity.

Whether they are from the East or from the West, whether they are
traditional activists or radical reformists, **Muslims have no doubt
that Islām is the solution to all the problems faced by the world
today.** This conviction is based on the fact that the Prophet Muḥammad,
as the Final Messenger of God [*Rasūl Allāh*], brought forth a
revelation, the Qur’ān, which would last until the end of times.
**However, moderate or radical Muslims may be in the eyes of the Western
world, they universally agree that Islām can solve every single
economic, political or personal problem.** On the same token, these
principles constitute the pillars or foundations [*al-arkān*] of the
Islamic tradition. These principles have governed the formation of
Islām, its expression, and the development of its legal code.

At the same time, these principles are the metaphysical foundations of
Islām. They transcend the limitations of the legal experience. They
extend to speculative or contemplative matters of Gnostic illumination.
They lead to Divine Truth, the Primal Cause, the source from which all
knowledge flows as a guide to human beings, covering every dimension of
human existence. For Muslims, the *uṣūl al-dīn* are *universal unitarian
principles* which allow us to perceive the multiplicity within Divine
Unity [*al-tawḥīd*].

Besides Islām, all of the great religious, philosophical or legal
traditions of the world are *principialist* because they are all based
on their respective doctrinal principles. As the famous saying of Latin
philosophers goes, *nihil est sine ratione*, “Nothing is without a
reason.” For many people, including a large number of specialists, the
first problem posed by a study of Islamic movements is as elementary as
the inappropriate use of the term “fundamentalism.”

In general terms, the word “fundamentalism” can be used with
extraordinary dexterity. It can be applied to many differing religious,
political, and social phenomena. This very versatility, however, is the
single greatest proof that the term is nothing more than an insidious
and malicious label rather than the true formulation of a concept
solidly grounded in a sociological, political or historical description.

Furthermore, the use of the term “fundamentalism,” with regards to
Islām, excludes the notion of spiritual tradition. This is because the
term “fundamentalism” refers to modern attitudes which, by definition,
are anti-traditional. **In the Islamic context, so-called
“fundamentalism”** **is actually a traditional attitude in defense of
the immutable principles of divine truth.** It is certainly strange to
see how quickly certain ideas spread, imposing themselves with
authority, when in fact, as in the case of “fundamentalism,” they are a
recent invention.

Considering this background of bias towards Islām, no sociological,
political or historical study on so-called “Islamic fundamentalism,”
*intégrisme* or *integrismo* can be entirely objective. Rather than
attempting to understand the phenomenon, they have simply labeled it,
avoiding any other explanation. At no point in time have Western
scholars considered that what is perceived on the outside as
“fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* or *integrismo*, may in fact correspond
to an entirely different type of social conduct. The very term
“fundamentalist” has become hopelessly confused due to excessive
comparisons to the Christian model: be it Protestant fundamentalism or
Catholic *intégrisme* or *integrismo*.

The use of terms like “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* and *integrismo* to
refer to Islamic activism manifests “the fallacy of comparing Christian
phenomena to Muslim phenomena. It is the proverbial case of comparing
apples to oranges or, in this case, apples to cactus. By doing so, one
commits an implicit logical error. Once established, however, and
conveniently disseminated, terms like “fundamentalism,” *intégrisme* and
*integrismo* have become accepted by specialists as official truth and
objective reality. As we have seen, however, these terms are not the
least bit objective; they were drawn from Christian religious
terminology and imposed on Islām when the model simply does not fit the
mould.

Terminological half-truths can only be maintained by eradicating any
conceptual differences, thus negating any distinctive traits in the
observed phenomena. When one wishes to mislead, to misguide, to conceal
and to camouflage a reality, there is nothing more fitting than
reductionism. As a result, **whether they are Protestant, Catholic,
Jewish, Hindu or Muslim, those who adhere to their principles of faith,
their traditional belief, and reject modernity, secularization and
globalization, are denounced as irrational “fundamentalists,”** without
the desire to understand or expose the reasons for their resistance.

The result of this biased outlook, this desire to assimilate, to
confine, to reduce, and to redefine reality, can be seen in the social
sciences when scholars attempt to make the facts fit the definition. By
doing so, they undermine a true interpretation of “Islamic
fundamentalism” as a legitimate form of traditional resistance against
an invading cultural force. **What is erroneously described as “Islamic
fundamentalism”** **is the normal defensive mechanism of a healthy
organism against a foreign body, a phenomenon described as
“Occidentosis” by Jalal Aal Aḥmad and “Westoxication” by ‘Alī
Shariatī.**

Clearly, the biased approach of the social sciences is self-evident. The
stubborn desire to follow a line of thought which goes against the
observed facts, blindly following footsteps founded on fallacy, impedes
any possibility of real research. Social scientists need to be reminded
that the term *investigate* comes from the Latin *investigare* which
means to “carefully research,” “to follow the path,” and to “discover.”
It is derived from *vestigare* which means “to follow the track,” “to
find the path,” and to “discover the traces,” in other words, the
*vestigio*, from the Latin *vestigium* or “trace.” Any approach which
claims to be critical and scientific, but which does not meet these
conditions, does not merit to be called investigation or research.

If one wishes to identify scholars who seek to subvert Islām, it is
quite simple: their works have the sole purpose of reinforcing the
belief in “Islamic fundamentalism.” As a result of their myopic
approach, they refuse to examine any evidence that might lead to a
rectification or refutation of the concept in question, replacing the
inexact term with one of greater precision. In other words, the approach
of these scholars is biased from the beginning. Rather than being
empirical from the beginning, letting the facts lead them to a
conclusion, they commence their research with a thesis they seek to
confirm at any cost**.**

In science, the theory needs to fit the facts. In pseudo-science, the
facts are made to fit the theory. When studying Islām, many scholars
collect evidence to support their hypothesis that Muslims are
“fundamentalists,” failing to pursue other possibilities that might
invalidate their arguments. As can be appreciated, this is not the
approach of a scientist. It is the approach of a dogmatic fanatic: one
who holds on to his dogma at all cost, refusing to examine other
avenues.

When it comes to describing a social reality, sociology and political
science already have a large body of technical terms. These words gain
credibility through their use in the daily press which loads them with
popular notions, giving rise to substantial interference. Considering
this rich body of terminology, it is inconceivable that there does not
exist a noun which can describe the phenomenon knows erroneously as
“fundamentalism.” **Of all religions, Islām is the tradition which is
the most opposed to the literal interpretation of Scripture.** It
opposes any reading of the Qur’ān which does not consider the various
layers of meaning and their interrelationship. The Qur’ān itself is
opposed to literal exegesis. As the Prophet Muḥammad explained, the
Qur’ān has seven layers of meaning, and each of these seven levels
contain numerous other levels of meaning which help interpret the
others.[^14] Both Ṣūfī and Shī‘ite Gnostics share this point of view.

Since Ṣūfīsm and Shī‘ism are both spiritual branches of Islām, they are
the ones that least deserve the groundless label of “fundamentalism.”
None of these two branches of Islām engage in a dry literalist
interpretation of the Scripture or the Prophetic Traditions and neither
of them adopt characteristics of Catholic political conservatism known
as *integrismo*.

Islamic activists are not “fundamentalists.” With the exception of the
Wahhābis, they are not literalists. Islamic activists are not opposed to
science and modernity. They are opposed to secularism. Merely because
they are opposed to liberalism does not mean that they are
conservatives. They are political and economic centrists. If one does
not wish to accept our proposal to replace the term “fundamentalist”
with that of “traditional principialists,” then it would suffice to
simply refer to them as “traditionalists.” Islamic activists are
traditional Muslims who advocate a re-rooting in the principles of
faith.

Our goal in writing this preface to the English edition is to call for
greater accuracy in socio-political, religious, and philosophical
terminology. Besides providing a proper definition for the term
“fundamentalism,” we explained the nature of this religious phenomenon.
We examined whether its application to Islām was justified and found
that it was excessive.

The term “fundamentalism,” when applied to Islām, simply fails to
distinguish between radical reformist literalists like the Wahhābis and
genuine Muslims, disenchanted with secularism and liberalism, who wish
to defend the fundamentals of faith of Islām from outside interference
or distortion.

We noted that the term “fundamentalist,” traditionally applied to
literalist Protestants, is now almost exclusively applied to radical,
violent, and intolerant expressions of Islām, without analyzing the
problem in depth. When properly contextualized, so-called **“Islamic
fundamentalism” is not a cause, it is an effect. It is not an action, it
is a reaction. It is not aggressive, it is defensive. It is a response
to centuries of Western colonialism and cultural imperialism.**

As part of its anti-Islamic onslaught, the Western world tries and tests
the patience of Muslims, deliberately provoking them by insulting their
faith, their religious symbols, mocking their lifestyle, the values they
most treasure, and even slandering the Prophet Muḥammad. These
provocations are not isolated incidents. They form part of a campaign to
offend Muslim sensibilities organized by Western operatives and
*agents-provocateurs*. Their purpose is two-fold. Their first goal is to
determine the depth of commitment to Islām in a certain region, to see
whether more political pressure needs to be placed or whether it can be
eased. The second goal is to incite violent reactions from Muslims in
order to depict them as intolerant and backwards.

In most cases, Western media focuses exclusively on the effect, and not
on the cause. In the event that they mention the cause, they never
contextualize it. They trivialize the offence to make the reaction seem
all the more absurd to Western readers and viewers. Western arrogance,
with its notions of cultural supremacy towards traditional cultures
continues to be a source of permanent conflict throughout the world.
**Unless people are Western in their attitude, attire, and lifestyle,
they are condemned as backwards. This attitude of cultural superiority
is no longer a simple prejudice. It has become a motive to encourage
cultural, linguistic, and political assimilation of the entire Islamic
world.**

Many “progressive” Westerners are fascinated with showing off their
“cultural superiority.” They are fond of contrasting their “tolerance”
with traditional cultures which, for the sole fact that they are not
ostentatiously “modern,” are deemed backwards. In the Western world, it
suffices for a Muslim student to appear in public with some
“ostentatious” religious symbol like the *ḥijāb* to offend the
sensibilities of French and Québecois politicians. As soon as an
incident like this comes to the fore, reactionary secular
fundamentalists, the guardians of the flame of liberty which burns in
the altar of modernity, rush forth in the name of “democratic values.”
They rise up to show off their “progressive mentality” and their
incomparable “cultural superiority.” They pass laws suppressing the
civil and religious liberties of Muslim women which, had they been
passed by so-called “Islamic fundamentalists,” would have been denounced
as backwards and medieval when in fact the laws of modesty called for by
Muslim activists are merely a normal defensive reaction to so-called
“progressive” and “modern” ideas.

In the Western world, “freedom of expression,” “democracy,” “liberalism”
and “secularism” have all been used as a double-edged sword. As the
Native American saying goes: “The white man speaks with a forked
tongue.” With the help of the mass media, terms like “freedom of
expression,” “democracy,” “liberalism,” and “secularism” are a highly
effective instrument. They serve to construct public opinion in accord
with the interests of the powers that be, supporting or discrediting any
movement in accord with their interests.

The Muslims of the world have long understood the hypocrisy of Western
rhetoric. However, as Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn Faḍlullāh observed in the
1980’s, the West claims to defend human rights and international justice
while violating them at home and abroad: “Human rights are for them, not
us.” **Proud of its double-speak and unveiled hypocrisy, the Western
world demands the Islamic world to respect freedom of religion and
freedom of conscience while at the same time denying those liberties to
the Muslims living in their midst, by prohibiting “ostentatious displays
of religious symbols.”** If Muslims nations require women to cover
themselves, it is denounced as an oppressive violation of human rights.
If Western nations oblige Muslim women to uncover themselves, it is
viewed as an act of progress. The double-standards of the Western world
speak for themselves.[^15]

**Professor Luis Alberto Vittor**
**Technical Support Person for Scientific Research**
Center for Research into the Philosophy and History of Religion
(CIFHIRE)
Department of Philosophy
School of Graduate Studies
John F. Kennedy Argentine University

**Director**
Mullā Sadrā Center for Islamic Studies and Research (CEDIMS)
Department of Social and Political Sciences in Africa and the Middle
East
Catholic University of Argentina de la Plata (Sede Bernal)
Center for Oriental Studies National University of Rosario

[^1]: Editor’s Note: While most Orientalists have traditionally compared
Shī‘ites to Protestants, and Sunnis to Catholics, Bernard Lewis has
suggested that the Sunnis are Protestants and the Shī‘ites are
Catholics. See: Lewis, Bernard. Islām in History: Ideas, People, and
Events in the Middle East.

[^2]: Editor’s Note: Take, for example, the depiction of Arabs and
Muslims by Hollywood. In Reel Bad Arabs, a comprehensive study of nearly
one thousand films, Jack Shaheen has documented the tendency to portray
Muslim Arabs as Public Enemy \#1; brutal, heartless, uncivilized
“others” bent on terrorizing civilized Westerners. Another older, but
still useful, book is Edward Sa‘īd’s Covering Islām: How the Media and
the Experts Determine How we See the Rest of the World.

[^3]: Author’s Note: For more on the subject, see: Morrow, John Andrew
“The Impact of Globalization on the Arabic Language.” Intercultural
Communication Studies (2007); and the anonymously published review of
Scott Ritter’s Target Iran: The Truth about the White House’s Plans for
Regime Change which appeared in Crescent International in June of 2007.

[^4]: Author’s Note: The bibliography on this subject is extensive.
Consequently, we shall limit ourselves to suggesting a few introductory
titles. Regarding the psychological manipulation of public opinion, see:
Schiller, H.I., Los manipuladores de cerebros, Ed. Gedisa, (Buenos Aires
1974); for the use of stereotypes to defend political interests and to
construct public opinion, see the following classic work: Lipmann, W.,
Public Opinion, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich (New York 1922). The latter
work is available in a Spanish translation under the title of La opinión
pública, Compañía Fabril Editora (Buenos Aires 1949). The third and
eight parts are especially relevant. For more recent work on the topic,
see: Price, V., Public Opinion, Sage Publications (Newbury Park,
California, 1992). For a clear example of media manipulation used to
influence public opinion, we need look at no further than the treatment
of the war in Iraq. The media coverage of this war by major broadcasting
corporations like CNN highlights the way information is perverted by
what Mattelart has labeled the “global democractic marketplace” in which
the economic elite has become the political elite. During the Gulf War
and the present invasion and occupation of Iraq we have witnessed
various strategies of disinformation and media manipulation. Information
has been censured, altered, and even invented in order to manipulate
public opinion. This transmission of falsified information could only
have been made possible through the complicity of the media
conglomerates and the military and political establishment. This has
been highlighted by Susan L. Carruthers who denounced the fact that the
Rendon Group was hired to organize the clandestine propaganda campaigns
of the Pentagon. Cfr. Carruthers, S. L., The Media at War, Ed. Macmillan
Press Ltd., (London, 2000), 142-43. She says, Indeed, to understand how
television became ‘Pentavision,’ it is necessary to consider not just
how negative dimensions of the management system prevented news media
from reporting certain aspects of the war but how readily reporters
succumbed to the positive side of news management, relaying event
through the eyes, and in the terminology, of the military. [...]
Euphemisms were the order of the day. Emitting a stream of ‘bovine
scatology’ (one of Schwarzkopf’s more colorful coinages, though applied
by him to journalists’ stupid questions rather than to the briefings)
the briefer used opaque jargon to obscure reality, so that civilian
casualties became ‘collateral damage’ while ‘degrading capabilities’ was
the preferred substitution for bombing. For more on this issue, see:
Mattelart, A., Historia de la utopía planetaria. De la ciudad profética
a la sociedad global, Ediciones Paidós Ibérica, (Barcelona 2000),
431-32.

[^5]: Author’s Note: Cfr. Chomsky, N. and Herman, E., Los guardianes de
la libertad, Editorial Grijalbo-Mondadori, (Barcelona, 1990): The mass
media acts like a system of transmission of messages and symbols for the
average citizen. Its function is to entertain and to inform as well as
inculcating values, beliefs, and modes of behavior in people that will
ensure that they integrate into the institutional structures of society.
In a world in which wealth is concentrated and in which there are great
conflicts of interest between the classes, the fulfillment of such a
role requires systematic propagation.

[^6]: Author’s Note: Cfr. Habermas, J., Conciencia moral y acción
comunicativa, Editorial Península, (Barcelona. 1985).

[^7]: Author’s Note: The gravest terrorist threat in the world comes
from its nuclear superpowers who threaten the planet with complete
annihilation. For a striking analysis of the subject, see the anonymous
review of Dr. Helen Caldicott’s The New Nuclear Danger: George W. Bush’s
Military-Industrial Complex published in Crescent International in May
of 2007.

[^8]: Author’s Note: Cfr. Bachelard, G. La formation de l’esprit
scientifique. Paris, Librairie philosophique Vrin, 1999 (1ère édition :
1938), chapitre 1er; 13-14: La science…s’oppose absolument à l’opinion.
S’il lui arrive, sur un point particulier, de légitimer l’opinion, c’est
pour d’autres raisons que celles qui fondent l’opinion; de sorte que
l’opinion a, en droit, toujours tort. L’opinion pense mal; elle ne pense
pas: elle traduit des besoins en connaissances. En désignant les objets
par leur utilité, elle s’interdit de les connaître. On ne peut rien
fonder sur l’opinion: Il faut d’abord la détruire. Elle est le premier
obstacle à surmonter. Il ne suffirait pas, par exemple, de la rectifier
sur des points particuliers, en maintenant… L’esprit scientifique nous
interdit d’avoir une opinion sur des questions que nous ne comprenons
pas, sur des questions que nous ne savons pas formuler clairement.
[Science…is absolutely opposed to opinion. If it happens to confirm
opinion, it is based on reasons other than opinion because opinion, in
and of itself, is always wrong. Opinion does not think properly. It does
not think for itself. Opinion turns need into knowledge. By designating
objects on the basis of their need, opinion prevents a proper
understanding of them. Nothing can be based on opinion: it must first be
destroyed. Opinion is the first obstacle which must be surmounted. It
would not suffice, for example, to correct some aspects of it at the
moment... The scientific spirit forbids us from having an opinion on
questions which we do not understand, on questions we do not even know
how to formulate clearly.]

[^9]: Authors’ Note: S. Tomás, Summa Theol. I, XIII, 8: Non est semper
idem id a quo imponitur nomen ad significandum, et id ad quod
significandum nomen imponitur.

[^10]: Author’s Note: As Morrow explains in Arabic, Islām, and the Allāh
Lexicon, the wahhābiyyah and salafiyyah follow a literalist and
essentialist interpretation of Islām which stands in sharp contrast to
the intellectual and hermeneutic traditions of the mainstream Sunnī,
Shī‘ah and Ṣūfī. In an attempt to “return to the roots of Islām,” and
“follow the letter of the law” as opposed to its spirit, the Salafīs
wish to disregard and even wipe out fourteen centuries of sound
scholarship (48). For more on the literalist approach of the Wahhābīs,
see Wrestling Islām from the Extremists by Khaled Abou El Fadl and
Islām, Fundamentalism, and the Betrayal of Tradition, edited by Joseph
Lumbard.

[^11]: Author’s Note: For more on the rise of the Christian right in the
United States, see the anonymously published review of Chris Hedges’
American Fascists: The Christian Right and the War on America which
appeared in the August 2007 edition Crescent International under the
title “Incisive Analysis of the Emergence of the Christian Right in
America.”

[^12]: Author’s Note: Cfr. Vittor, L. A., “La Religión en el mundo
contemporáneo: El fundamentalismo como encrucijada entre la tradición y
la modernidad” en Enfoques. Revista de Ciencias Sociales y Comunicación
(Buenos Aires 1998), Año I, Nº 4; 11-23; as well as “Situación actual
del pensamiento tradicional en el mundo moderno” in Enfoques: Revista de
Ciencias Sociales y Comunicación, Año II, Nº 5, (Buenos Aires 1999),
11-29; and especially “El Islām Ši’ita: ¿principialismo tradicional o
integrismo iraní? Una respuesta a Roger Garaudy,” published in three
parts in Enfoques: Revista de Ciencias Sociales y Comunicación (Buenos
Aires 2001), Año III, Nº 12; 17-35; Año IV, Nº 13, (Buenos Aires 2002),
11-29 y Año IV, Nº 14 (Buenos Aires 2002), 9-25.

[^13]: Editor’s Note: Attempting to find an adequate term to describe
the phenomenon ackwardly defined as “fundamentalism” is no easy task.
The term “principalism” is already an accepted term in English, French,
and Spanish, and refers to those who defend the principles of a
scientific method or a philosophical or legal school. The term
“revivalism,” in its general sense of “reviving practices or ideas of an
earlier time,” might be suitable. A “revivalist,” however, refers to “a
preacher of the Christian Gospel” and can be used pejoratively.
“Revivalism” is thus an inadequate term, not only because it alludes to
evangelical movements, but because Corbin has used it to refer to
sectarian movements like the Bābis and the Bahā’ī who were opposed to
Shī‘ite Islām. The term “foundationalism” can also be discarded as it
refers to any theory in epistemology that holds that beliefs are
justified based on what are called basic beliefs. The Arabic term uṣūlī
conveys the sense of “foundationalist;” however, it is inextricably
linked to the struggle between Shī‘ite rationalists, the uṣūlī, and the
traditionalists or akhbarī. Despite the fact that it is used in the
field of bioethics and jurisprudence, with the sense of respect for
beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, and justice, the neologism
“principialism” remains the most adequate term to describe
“fundamentalist,” “revivalist” and “activist” Islām. The author, of
course, does not limit the term “principialism” to its ethical uses. In
reality, by selecting the term “principialism,” the author follows in
the footsteps of French metaphysician René Guénon, a revert to Islām and
naturalized Egyptian citizen, who took the name of ‘Abdul Wāḥid Yaḥyā.
Guénon was the first to use the term “principial” to refer to the
transcendental principals of faith which constitute the roots [uṣūl] or
pillars [arkān] of a traditional doctrine. By using the term
“principialism,” the author is echoing notions which are more
metaphysical than they are legal, ethical or philosophical, although
from a traditional perspective none of these aspects exclude one
another.

[^14]: Author’s Note: According to a ḥadīth, the Prophet Muḥammad said,
“The Qur’ān has a beautiful exterior and a profound interior” (Kulaynī).
He said that “The Qur’ān has an inner dimension, and that inner
dimension has an inner dimension up to seven inner dimensions”
(Kulaynī). Other versions of the ḥadīth explain that each of the seven
levels has seventy to seven hundred levels. Each inner level is more
profound than the previous one, yet each level contains and illuminates
the others. According to some sources, each dot on the Arabic letters of
the Qur’ān contains 70,000 meanings. The numbers 7, 70, 700, and 70,000
are symbolic in nature. They are used to indicate that the
interpretation of the Qur’ān is limitless and inexhaustible. Attempting
to empty the Qur’ān would be as absurd as attempting to empty the ocean
in a glass. The Qur’ān will always be protected from any such attempts
eminating from literalist or Gnostic sectors. As Imām ‘Alī has
explained, There is no Qur’ānic verse but it has four meanings: an outer
one [al-ẓāhir], an inner one [al-bāṭin]; a limit [ḥadd] and a divine
designation [muṭlaq, lit. “something which is absolute”]. The outer
meaning is for oral recitation. The inner meaning is for in-depth
understanding. The limit determines the legal and the illegal. The
divine design is what Allāh proposes to achieve in humankind by means of
each verse. The Sixth Imām, Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq, said that: The Divine Book
contains four modes: enunciated expression [‘ibārāt], allusion
[ishārāt]; hidden meanings relating to the subtle word [laṭā’if], and
elevated metaphysical truths [ḥaqā’iq]. The enunciated expression is the
one which applies to all believers [‘awāmm]; the allusion concerns the
spiritual elite [khawāṣṣ]; the hidden meanings are the domain of the
awliyyā’ Allāh [the Holy Friends of the Divine]; and the elevated
metaphysical truths belong to the Prophets [anbiyyā’].

[^15]: Editor’s Note: For an analysis of the French attack against the
ḥijāb, see: Morrow, John Andrew “El futuro del francés frente al
anti-islamismo chiraquiano” o “El francés en manos de musulmanes.”
Revista Cultural Ariadna (Feb. 2004); as well as “The Future of French
in Light of French Anti-Islamism.” The Message International (March
2004). Unfortunately, this secular anti-Islāmic cancer has now spread to
the province of Québec in Canada which opposes religious, cultural, and
linguistic diversity. From a left-wing revolutionary movement with ties
to Palestinian and Algerian freedom fighters, as well as African
American Muslims, the separatist movement in Québec has moved more and
more to the right over the past fifty years, becoming increasingly
fascist in philosophy. Québec always encouraged immigration from North
Africa, as Maghrebi Muslims were proud Francophones who integrated well
into the French-speaking culture of the province. These Muslims are now
becoming deeply disenchanted with the cultural and political situation
in the province where attempts to outlaw the ḥijāb in schools, sports,
and public venues are common-place. Once encouraged to immigrate to
Québec with promises of religious freedom, Maghrebi Muslims in Québec
are now being told that it is not sufficient that they live and work in
French. They are now been told that they must abandon their religion and
embrace secularism.


