Chapter 1: Towards a Definition of Heterodoxy in Islam
======================================================

The word “sect” comes from the Latin *sequi* or *sequor* and means “to
follow.” According to this definition, the term excludes the idea of
schism or doctrinal rupture. In Christian usage, the term “sect” is not
free from pejorative connotations although it is much better than the
label “heretic.” Nowadays, in Christian terminology, the word “sect”
refers mostly to a body of people sharing religious opinions who have
broken away from a larger body. “Sect” in the sense of “cult” refers to
a group of people who follow the “revelations” made by its founder. Such
sects, like the Mormons for example, differ from the Church, in the
non-theological sense of the term, in that they recognize another new
revelation. The sect insists on the need to understand the
neo-testamentary text which is different in essence from the sacred
scriptures.[^1] Besides that distinction, and as can be observed within
the Adventists and Jehovah’s Witnesses, the cult believes in collective,
not individual salvation, which is exclusively limited to its
members.[^2]

It must be understood, however, that the sects which the Church opposes
in the name of orthodoxy are merely other religions with their own rites
and dogmas which are only heretical with respect to official orthodoxy.
If we attempt to remove the slippery polish from the word “sect,”
turning it into a simple technical term devoid of subjectivity, we will
see that “the meaning of sect is closer to the Spanish word *séquito*
[group of followers, adherents and devotees] than to what is commonly
understood by *secta* [sect] and its derivative *sectario* [sectarian]
which curiously and arbitrarily are applied to it” (García Bazán
114-18).[^3]

As has been regularly documented, a persistent residue has adhered to
the word “sect” as a result of use and abuse. In its common meaning, it
applies to exclusivist religious minorities which are opposed to a
commonly accepted Church tenet. Sects are born through dissent and view
themselves as a small flock of chosen ones. This is how quantitative
differences come about between Church and sect. For the Western
religious historian, what defines a sect is its character as a separate
group, much more than its minority status, which can eventually reach
the size of a Church. This is where we see the motives which drive
Western religious historians like Gibb to come up with unilateral
interpretations of complex concepts and doctrines. They explain and
analyze them in terms that prevent the possibility of truly
understanding what a sect or religion, such as Islām, really
represents.[^4]

It can never be sufficiently stressed that the general application of
Western terms like “orthodoxy,” “heterodoxy,” “church” and “sect” to
Islām is grossly misapplied, especially as Islām does not have a Church
to define orthodoxy or the powers to excommunicate.[^5] The use of such
terms ends up simplifying complex issues, associating them with Western
religious phenomena which do not have equivalents in the language of
Islām. There is no place for such terms as “orthodoxy, “heterodoxy,”
“church,” “sect,” and “heresy” in an Islamic tradition rooted in the
concept of divine unity.[^6]

While there is diversity within Islām, there is not, simply by a slight
difference in approach, a contradiction of its central doctrine of
divine unity nor the gregarious separation in its fundamentals of faith
or its community [*ummah*]. Rather, they are diverse tendencies that
make up Islām and so long as they do not stray from the fundamentals of
faith, they can all claim with some justification to represent its most
authentic expression.[^7] With this understanding, one can appreciate
that in Islām there does not exist a clear line between orthodoxy and
heterodoxy. As a result, the various Islamic currents are neither
radically misguided groups which have broken from official orthodoxy nor
are they separated from one another, as are the Christian sects of
today.

Unlike the Western world, the Islamic world defines orthodoxy by means
of the profession of faith or *shahādah*: *Lā ilāha illā Allāh* /
*Muḥammadun rasūl Allāh* [There is no god but Allāh and Muḥammad is the
Messenger of Allāh]. The *shahādah* is the most universal proclamation
of divine unity and is not a strictly defined theological formula. There
exists, of course, an orthodoxy in Islām, without which no doctrine or
tradition is possible. However, contrary to Gibb’s affirmation, Islamic
orthodoxy has not been defined by *ijmā’* [scholarly consensus] in any
restricted or limited sense. What is more, in Islām there has never
existed a religious institution capable of deciding who is orthodox and
who is not.[^8]

Infatuated with every Western prejudice, Gibb seems to have translated
the old axiom of *divide et impera* [divide and conquer] into the more
modern: classify and discard! But to understand the history of Islām,
however, requires more than merely counting or organizing dates. The eye
of the scholar must be capable of discerning the profound print of his
subject, its depth, its substance and its essence. He must belong to a
tradition and provide us with comprehensive and broad formulas called
critical approaches and methodologies. Gibb easily forgets that in
Islām, **so long as a practice or a belief does not contravene the**
***sharī‘ah*** **[Islamic law] and can be traced back to the Qur’ān and
the** ***sunnah*** **it is clearly orthodox and cannot be deemed
heretical.** This principle also applies to the genuine spiritual paths
of Islamic mysticism [*taṣawwuf*] in the Sunnī world whose devotional
practices and metaphysical doctrines cannot be judged on the criteria of
“orthodoxy” that govern the exoteric forms of the religion. This is
particularly so since the esoteric can never face the exoteric on the
same plane. Both operate on different but not divergent orders of the
same reality.[^9] In other words, they constitute the “core” [*al-lubb*]
and the “skin” [*al-qishrah*] of the religion.

In *Nahj al-balāghah* [*The Path of Eloquence*]--a collection of
sermons, epistles, and aphorisms of ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib compiled by
Sharīf al-Razī (406/1015)--the First Imām most brilliantly and
masterfully settles the question of the diversity of schools and
currents in Islamic thought. He describes them as parts of the spiritual
freedom given by God which are in accord with His Oneness:[^10]

Praise be to Allāh who established Islām and made it easy for those who
approach it and gave strength to its columns against any one who tries
to overpower it … It is the most bright of all paths, the clearest of
all passages. It has dignified minarets, bright highways, burning lamps,
prestigious fields of activity, and high objective. (Sermon 105: 249)

This Islām is the religion which Allāh has chosen for Himself … He made
Islām such that its constituent parts cannot break, its links cannot
separate, its construction cannot fall, its columns cannot decay … It
consists of columns whose bases Allāh has fixed in truthfulness, and
whose foundation He has strengthened, and of sources whose streams are
ever full of water and of lamps, whose flames are full of light, and of
beacons with whose help travelers get guidance. (Sermon 197: 408)

As one can gather from these words, **the Islamic tradition has, in a
general sense, provided a broad umbrella which embraces a multiplicity
of points of view** as distinct as the doctrinal masters of thought who
formulated them. The only tension between them--when there was any at
all--has normally been between the exoteric and esoteric dimensions of
the tradition. This tension has always alternated harmoniously within
the same dynamic rhythm. The temporal predominance of one over the other
in the successive manifestations of the same living organism is
comparable to the diastole and the systole of the heartbeat. Without
alternation, these two essential movements continue in harmony, like the
exoteric and the esoteric. Like any other tradition, Islām would cease
to beat without them and would turn into a rigid form without a
pulse.[^11] In other words, the orthodoxy of the distinct schools of
thought in Islām does not manifest itself solely through the
preservation of its outer forms. It is expressed equally by its natural
development and, especially, by its capacity to absorb any spiritual
expression which is not essentially alien to the doctrine of divine
unity.[^12]

It is true that in Islām there is what in the language of the West is
defined as “sect.” The word “sect” in Arabic is *firqah* which comes
from the Arabic *farraqa* which means “to separate” and “to divide.”
**Let us not make the mistake, however, of considering Sunnī and Shī‘ite
Islām as the two main sects of Islām. Let us not differentiate between
them by applying normative and schematic judgments to decide,
unilaterally, in accord with the mental and moral modes of historically
European-based societies, which one of them is “orthodox” and which one
is “heterodox.”** If we have acknowledged that there is diversity in
Islām, we need to recognize that there is also a means to understand its
unity. The unity of Islām rests on one sole factor: the uninterrupted
event of the Qur’ānic revelation. In synthesis, the oneness of God and
Islām is manifested in every aspect of its doctrinal reach in the
affirmation of divine unity [*tawḥīd*], the proclamation that the
beginning of existence is one as ratified by the apothegm *al-tawḥīdu
wāḥidun*: “the doctrine of oneness is one**.” For Islām, divine unity
constitutes the only** ***raison d’être*** **[reason for being] and the
essential criteria upon which all “orthodoxy” is based, regardless of
its contingent modes of expression.** We can go further and affirm that,
as far as Islamic thought is concerned, the doctrine of “divine unity”
is the common denominator shared by all traditional monotheistic faiths
without exception, so long as they adhered to pure and original
monotheism.[^13] We can expand upon this more and proclaim that the
universal and the continuous in all things operate through this Unique
Principle which invariably is everywhere and always identical to Itself.

The great metaphysical currents from East and West unanimously agree
that the ultimate reality of all things, the essential state of all
creatures, their beginning and their return, is divine unity.[^14] In
this sense, this Islamic concept runs parallel to those of Xenophanes,
Parmenides, Plato, Aristotle, and Plotinus.[^15] It runs parallel with
those of Judaism, Taoism and Buddhism as well as those of the Advaita
Vedanta, formulated by Master Sankara as a recapitulation of the Veda
which, according to Muslim Gnostics, is the revelation God made to
Adam.[^16] This also applies to Alexandrine hermeticism--to the extent
that it is a continuation of the tradition of Hermes or Idrīs, as he is
known in the Islamic world--which is also embraced and integrated into
Islām.[^17]

The truth of the One Absolute, the identification of all things with a
Sole Beginning, was revealed by the Qur’ān for Islām in the form of the
*shahādah*.[^18] The divine profession of faith stresses that “He is
Allāh, the One and Only” (112:1), “there is no god but Allāh” (47: 19)
and that “He has no partners” [*waḥdahu lā sharīka lahu*] or, as the
chapter “Divine Unity” [*Sūrat al-tawḥīd*] or “Purity of Faith” [*Sūrat
al-ikhlāṣ*] declares, “there is none like unto Him” [*wa lam yakun lahu
kufu’an aḥad*] (112:-4). **To be considered as orthodox, Islām requires
a true and sincere belief in monotheism.**[^19] The contrary of *tawḥīd*
is *shirk*: the attribution of partners or associates to God, idolatry
and polytheistic paganism. *Shirk* is a mortal sin without possibility
of pardon.[^20] It is heresy incarnate which is why the Qur’ān warns:
“Allāh forgiveth not that partners should be set up with Him; but He
forgiveth anything else, to whom He pleaseth; to set up partners with
Allāh is to devise a sin Most heinous indeed” (4:48).[^21]

**For Islām, the essential element which guarantees true orthodoxy is
the belief in “monotheism**.**”** This applies not only to its own
schools of thought or spiritual paths, but also to any traditional
religion prior to Islām.[^22] The term “monotheism,” however, is
inadequate when it comes to translating the sense of *al-tawḥīd*. The
word “monotheism” can only be used to accommodate the lack of a better
term in English and other Western languages, without giving it an
exclusively religious connotation. The doctrine of “divine unity” is
essentially metaphysical in the true and original sense of the term. But
in Islām, as in other traditions, it also implies--in its direct
application to diverse contingent domains--a whole network of
complicated and interlacing parts. These parts, within Islām, are not
necessarily incompatible, despite their respective characters, as they
are in the West since in Islām there is no division between the
functions of “religion” and “state.”

Islām is a complete civilization and a complex culture in which all
activities and spheres of daily life, individual, societal and
governmental must reflect divine unity.[^23] Islām is not merely a
“religion” if by religion one exclusively means an ecclesiastic system
of belief and practice. More than that, Islām is a way of life with a
faith or, if one wants, a traditional way of life [*dīn*] which, through
the Qur’ān, the *sunnah* and the *sharī‘ah*, proclaims a faith and
establishes rituals. It also prescribes an established social order on
the basis of the “fundamentals of faith” or the “pillars of Islām”
[*arkān al-islām*] for individuals and society in all areas that
determine the condition and the *raison d’être* [reason for being] of
the orthodox Muslim. An orthodox Muslim, as we have seen, is anyone who
is sincere in his faith. A 20th century Gnostic, al-Shaykh al-‘Alawī
from Mostagan, a *quṭb* or spiritual pole of Sunnī Islām of the Shādhilī
school,[^24] said that to be an orthodox Muslim it is sufficient to
observe five things: to believe in God and recognize Muḥammad as his
final prophet, perform the five daily prayers, give the prescribed alms
to the poor, fast, and make the pilgrimage to Makkah (Lings 23).[^25]
The *arkān al-islām* or pillars of Islām*,* as a whole, are the formal
expression of Islām and encompass everything which Western language
designates as strictly religious.[^26] The pillars of Islām also include
all of the social and legislative realms which in the Islamic world
integrate into the religion. Hence, the Western concept of separation
between “religion” and “state” is something foreign to orthodox Islamic
thought.

Besides these five fundamentals of faith there are five other pillars of
religion [*uṣūl al-dīn*] according to Shī‘ite Islām which are in
conformity with the *sunnah* of the Prophet.[^27] They include *tawḥīd*,
the belief in divine unity; *nubuwwah*, the belief in the prophecy;
*ma‘ād*,[^28] the belief in resurrection and the hereafter; *imāmah*,
the Imāmate, the belief in the twelve Imāms as successors of the Prophet
and depositories of his *wilāyah* [guardianship], the spiritual and
temporal power of Islām and; *‘adl* or divine justice. Sunnīs and
Shī‘ites agree upon the three basic pillars, namely, *tawhīd*,
*nubuwwah*, and *mī‘ād*. They only differ on the other two. **In terms
of the Imāmate, what distinguishes the Shī‘ite perspective from the
Sunnī one is the insistence on the esoteric function and spiritual
supremacy of the Imām.** In Sunnī Islām, this difference is formerly
overcome through gnosis [*ma‘rifah* or *‘irfān*] of Ṣūfīsm [*taṣawwuf*]
in which the *quṭb* or spiritual pole of the age represents the esoteric
and initiatory role that the Imām plays in Shī‘ism.[^29] In terms of
*‘adl* or divine justice what distinguishes Shī‘ism is the stress given
to this attribute as an essential quality of the divine reality. In its
concept of divine justice, Shī‘ism considers this aspect as
co-substantial with divinity.[^30] God cannot act unjustly because it is
impossible for the Just to be unjust. There can be no division or
contradiction in the One.

Finally, despite their external differences, Sunnīs, Shī‘ites and Ṣūfīs
share a stress on practice and conduct as opposed to doctrine. The
faithful observance of the fundamentals of faith is what lies at the
center of their thought and differences. It is only on the esoteric
plane that every religious perspective can be placed so long as it does
not contradict the transcendental unity which goes beyond any such
limitations. It is this unity which is found in the external expressions
of each religion or theological school. **The transcendental unity of
all religions is not broken in any way by the transcendence of
Islām.**[^31] Such unity is not a material extension and gradual
development but rather the fundamental identity of the one within the
multiple.[^32] Even if it varies to infinity, it responds in different
ways to the needs of different human cultures and races.[^33] For this
reason, the establishment of “orthodoxy” in Islām, based on uniformity
instead of unity, as it exists with other religious forms, especially in
the West, could never depend on the *ijmā‘* or the consensus of
scholars. Gibb’s reductionist doctrine wishes to liken Islamic *ijmā‘*
to the “councils of the Christian Church” (90). It is only the
metaphysical doctrine of unity which can reconcile all types of
differences while maintaining the unity of the Islamic tradition, both
exoteric and esoteric, over and above any tension or conflict of a
political or religious order.

In this sense, Shī‘ite Islām represents a balancing totality of various
points of view. Due to the profoundly esoteric character of its
doctrine, it represents a “middle path” between the excessive formal
legalism of the jurists and the excessive introversion of the
mystics.[^34] The *taṣawwuf*, depository of gnosis in the Sunnī world,
can be defined spiritually as the Shī‘ism of ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, the
Fourth Caliph and First Imām of Islām.[^35] Both Ṣūfīsm and Shī‘ism, in
accord with the traditions of the Prophet, view ‘Alī as the “gate” of
initiation to the esoteric knowledge [*bāṭin*] of Muḥammad who stated
quite clearly: “I am the city of knowledge and ‘Alī is its gate. Whoever
wants to enter this city must first pass through its gate.”[^36]

The symbol of the “gate” [in Arabic *bāb*] alludes to the esoteric
function of the First Imām since it is through him that one gains access
to initiation [from the Latin *inire* or to “enter”]. Found in many
traditions, the “gate” alludes to initiation into the Muḥammadan
“mysteries” or “secrets” [*sirr*].[^37] In its universal sense, the
“gate” refers to the spiritual office as the “seal” of the absolute
*wilāyah* [guardianship] and the esoteric pole of the prophecy who has
opened the Cycle of Initiation [*dā’irat al-wilāyah*] which, at the same
time, has been sealed by the Twelfth Imām, al-Mahdī, who closes the
Muḥammadan *wilāyah*.

In short, the completion of the doctrinal legacy of Islām explains, as
does the absence of any unanimously accepted human authority who has
received spiritual and temporal power from the Most High, the rather
indefinite character of the notion of orthodoxy outside of what is
established by the Qur’ān, the *sunnah* and the *sharī‘ah*. In specific,
with the exception of the Mahdī, there does not exist in Islām a
universally recognized magistrate capable of formulating new laws. The
*Ayātullāh*s[^38] [from the Arabic *āyāt*, signs and *Allāh*, God] which
in our epoch appear more and more as the jurists [*mujtahidūn*] and the
depositories of the *wilāyat al-faqīh*,[^39] that is, the spiritual and
political leadership of Shī‘ite Islām, limit themselves to interpreting
the prescriptions and mandates of the Qur’ān. They do so in accord with
a tradition passed down from generation to generation by the Twelve
Imāms but with nuances and even considerable differences from one
*mujtahid* to another.[^40] One thing that must be clarified as well is
that when we speak of Shī‘ism we refer to the *ithnā ‘āsharī* or
“Twelver” branch, also known as the Ja‘farī school of
jurisprudence.[^41] The term Shī‘ism embraces many branches, each with
its own interpretation of Qur’ānic doctrine. The term Sunnism embraces
various exoteric branches, including the four most famous schools of
Islamic jurisprudence, the Shāfi‘ī, the Ḥanafī, the Ḥanbalī and the
Mālikī. The term Ṣūfīsm also embraces various branches. In the esoteric
world of *taṣawwuf* it is possible to distinguish spiritual paths
[*ṭuruq*] equal in number to the infinite variety of souls or
beings.[^42] As Ibn Khaldūn explains in his *Muqaddimah*
[*Prolegomenon*], the profession of divine unity is the very secret
[*sirr*] of these doctrines.[^43]

So far, we have examined the fundamental *ubi consistam* [point of
reference] of Islamic thought regarding the concept of “orthodoxy.”
Clearly, Shī‘ite Islām must not be removed from this definition.
**Excluding Shī‘ite Islām from the realm of Islamic orthodoxy--by
omission or by excess--is one of the most common mistakes made by
Western scholars** who wish to give it a sectarian nature similar to
reformist Christian sects. These scholars even go to the extreme of
giving Shī‘ism an allegedly “fundamentalist” character which, in the
broadest sense, applies exclusively to certain forms of modern American
Protestantism.

In present times, the term “fundamentalist” is commonly applied to
Shī‘ite Islām and to Islamic groups characterized by a rejection of all
manifestation of secularism in the Eastern world.[^44] This is despite
the fact that, in every sense, **Shī‘ism represents the living tradition
of Islām.**[^45] **Both in politics and religion, Shī‘ite Islām is
traditional.**[^46] When faced with outbreaks of innovation [*bid‘ah*]
Shī‘ite Muslims, like all orthodox Muslims, react with the same
hostility as any who face a subversive movement which seeks to overthrow
the established order.[^47] **Due to its imminently esoteric nature and
its acceptance of** **diverse levels of interpretation of the
scriptures--each one more profound than the other--Shī‘ism is, in the
Islamic world, what least resembles “fundamentalism” if understood in
its correct sense of extreme superficial and sterile literalism**.[^48]

It may be worthwhile to mention at this point that **“fundamentalism” is
a purely Christian term.** It seems to have come into use at the
beginning of the twentieth century and describes, first and foremost,
certain American Protestant sects, particularly those with a puritanical
perspective. The sects in question are noted for interpreting the
scriptures to the letter of the law, from a narrow-minded perspective.
They reject any profound interpretation of the Bible, prohibiting any
hint of hermeneutics. Notably, the term “fundamentalist” is now applied
on a daily basis by many Muslims but stripped from the pejorative
sectarian sense. Through a strange semantic distortion, they give the
term the erroneous meaning and the distorted sense of a “return to the
fundamentals” of the Islamic faith. They do so as if at some time in
Islamic history, the *arkān al-islām* [pillars of Islām] had somehow
ceased to exist, visibly or invisibly, in all spheres of Muslim
existence and in all their manifestations in the Islamic world. Even
when they are relinquished or temporarily placed on the back burner--as
in the atypical case of Turkey--they have always been fully maintained
in the spiritual and esoteric order without which any return to original
Islām is impossible.[^49] In this sense, **the integral restoration of
the true and original sense of the revelation depends on the**
***ta‘ālīm*** **[spiritual guidance] of the Imāms, the fundamental
touchstone of the illuminative awakening of Islamic gnosis.** They are
invested with the initiatory function due to their condition as
divinely-inspired men and perfect interpreters of His message, well
beyond the literary and philosophical paraphrase of rationalist jurists
and theological puritans like Ibn Taymiyyah[^50] and those of Abd
al-Wahhāb.[^51]

A return to the fundamentals implies that a distancing or a partial
separation [*firqah*] from them has taken place. If returning to the
founding principles of the Islamic faith is used in the sense of
returning to the straight path, then this may very well require a
reencounter with Shī‘ite Islām since its doctrine has always remained
firmly grounded in the teachings of the Imāms who are effectively the
*arkān* [pillars] *par excellence*.[^52] In the Shī‘ī view, **the Imāms
are the fundamental pillars of Islām in the sense that the essence of
the revelation was passed on to them by the Prophet, both exoterically
and esoterically, through the function of the Imāmate or spiritual
inheritance**, that is, the esoteric guidance of the prophetic *bāṭin*
[secrets]. According to the famous *ḥadīth* *al-kisā’* [The Tradition of
the Cloak], the Prophet called his daughter Fāṭimah along with ‘Alī,
Ḥasan, and Ḥusayn, and covered them completely with his cloak.[^53] This
act symbolized the transmission of the universal *wilāyah* of the
Prophet, through the epiphany [*maẓhar*] of the partial *wilāyah*
[*wilāyah fāṭimiyyah*], to the plethora of the Twelve Imāms, the
Prophet’s immaculate progeny [*ma‘ṣūmīn*].[^54]

Within the bounds of the excessively arid exteriorist “literalism” which
defines Protestant fundamentalism, we can only include, in relation to
Islām, the exceptional case of Wahhābism.[^55] This obscure puritanical
and reformist sect [*firqah*], derived from Sunnī Islām’s strict Ḥanbalī
school of thought, was founded by **Muḥammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhāb**,
**who** **can be called, without exaggeration, the Martin Luther of the
Muslim World.**[^56] His doctrine was inspired by the ideas of Ibn
Taymiyyah, a rationalist rigorist who opposed the ideas of Ibn
al-‘Arabī.[^57] ‘Abd al-Wahhāb found his ideological support in the
political opportunism of the upstart emir of the Dariya tribe, Muḥammad
ibn Sa‘ūd, the ancestor and founder of the actual Saudi dynasty which
became the secular arm and executor of Wahhābism.[^58]

**Like Luther with respect to Christianity, ‘Abd al-Wahhāb called for a
“return to the fundamentals” of faith.** These, however, were
reformulated literally and were stripped of the doctrinal complement
brought by the teachings of the Imāms and the exegetic and hermeneutical
methods instituted by the Prophet as sacred sciences aimed at discerning
the inner meanings of the scripture. **A “return to the fundamentals” of
Islām, as proposed by ‘Abd al-Wahhāb, can only be brought about by the
restorative action of the** ***ta‘ālīm*** **or esoteric guidance of Imām
Mahdī, the Hidden and Awaited Imām, and never through human
initiative.**[^59] We “return” [*ta’wīl*] the revealed letter [*tanzīl*]
to the plane where it becomes real. The revelation [*tanzīl*], according
to Shī‘ite Islām, is both exoteric [*ẓāhir*] and esoteric [*bāṭin*]. The
process of understanding consists in starting from the exoteric in order
to reach the esoteric. Metaphysical internalization, the cornerstone of
Islamic Gnosticism, tends to revive, in the symbolic articulation of the
scripture, its profound spiritual sense as revealed by Angel Gabriel to
the Prophet according to its original enunciation. Consequently,
*ta’wīl*, [the allegorical interpretation], is the “returning ascent,”
the march up country [anabasis] of the *ẓāhir* [exoteric] and the
*bāṭin* [esoteric].[^60] The mission of the Prophet was the founding of
the *ẓāhir* which implies a descent by the spirit to every formal point
of expression of the scripture.[^61] **The mission or** ***ta‘ālīm***
**of the Twelfth Imām al-Mahdī is to lead the** ***ẓāhir*** **[exoteric]
to the** ***bāṭin*** **[esoteric] in our present cycle. This is why he
is called** ***ṣaḥib al-zamān*** [the Lord of the Age].[^62] In order
for there to be a “return to the fundamentals” of Islām, it is also
necessary for there to be a universal restoration of the esoteric
sciences in all of their traditions. For that same metaphysical reason,
it requires a man who, besides being inspired by God and being a perfect
interpreter who masters the exoteric and the esoteric scripture, is a
spiritual heir, an inheritor and direct descendant of the Prophet from
the line of Ḥusayn, the Third Imām.

According to Islamic metaphysics, which stems more or less directly from
Shī‘ism, the “heterodoxy” of any idea implies, in one way or another,
the falsity of its formulations which are in absolute disagreement with
the metaphysical and esoteric principles of the tradition. This is
precisely what René Guénon[^63] warns of with respect to the
Vedanta.[^64]According to this definition, orthodoxy lies in a constant
balance between immutable principles. In the Islamic tradition, these
principles are contained in the Qur’ān. **The balance between the letter
and spirit of the revealed text constitutes the criteria of Islamic
orthodoxy which is founded on faith in the oneness of God**.[^65]

The discussion of Islamic sects would be worthwhile if the term was
restituted, as García Bazán demands, to the original sense the Romans
gave it when they translated the Greek word *hairesis* as “sect” (114).
The Greek word which has evolved into “heretic” merely means
“selection,” “option,” or philosophical or religious “inclination”
(115-17). It does not imply the idea of difference, separation or
breaking from a tradition, nor does it possess the pejorative
connotation that it has in Western languages. As García Bazán explains,
even the middle form of *haireo* and *haireomai*, from which *hairesis*
derives, simply means “selection” or “option.”

In terms of Wahhābism, whose influence continues to be observed in Saudi
Arabia and much of the Muslim world, “sectarian” deviations are not
ritual or doctrinal: they are scriptural.[^66] With regards to the
sacred text, **the Wahhābi “heresy” consists in a deformation and
literal reinterpretation of the Qur’ānic text and even of innovation in
the Islamic canon.**[^67] **They are “heretics” who are formally
separated from the Islamic community, not by ritual practice, but by
scriptural deviation.**[^68] These rigid rigorist literalists adhere to
the external aspect of the written text and reject any extensions or
interpretations transmitted through the oral and written tradition. In
contrast, Shī‘ite religious practice, as strict and legalistic as it may
be, which assures a solid orthodoxy and orthopraxy, is accompanied, in
the matter of faith, with a profound spirituality of a metaphysical and
esoteric character which extends to its interpretation of the Qur’ān,
the *sunnah* and the *sharī‘ah*. It is for these reasons, for its
Gnostic character, that the application of the term “fundamentalist” to
Shī‘ite Islām is totally unjustified. **In every sense, Shī‘ite Islām**
**represents Islamic orthodoxy as much as Sunnī Islām.**[^69] Without a
doubt, it is the minority status of Shī‘ism in the Muslim world, as
opposed to ritual, doctrinal or scriptural deviation, that gives
Westerners the impression that it is a “sect.”

From ancient times until the present, the notion of “sect” has not been
freed from the prejudice that it applies only to small religious groups.
As the old Latin proverb goes: *Si duo faciunt idem*, *non est idem* [If
two do the same thing, it is not the same thing]. Obviously, these ideas
about sects are applied by Westerners to whatever phenomenon they can
reduce to this label. Evidently, this is done without considering their
inner aspects, where major spiritual differences are really hidden.
Moreover, we cannot dismiss the ill-concealed aims of certain
specialists to place all minority religions into the framework of a
single verdict of justification or rejection. They wish to do this by
exclusively considering the external manifestations of religion, which
constitute the visible skeleton of orthodoxy, when it is essentially a
question of interiority.

Finally, if we have spent more time than necessary dealing with term
“fundamentalism,” it is because the general use of this term conveys a
“sectarian” attitude. Its use is obviously misguided and distorted
because it is born out of a fanatic and uncompromising attitude in favor
of one party or one idea. **It is always convenient to give a sectarian
nature to Shī‘ite Islām by means of the “fundamentalist” label, without
understanding that the real reason for its existence is clearly
traditional.** The phenomenon we refer to is a common vice. In fact, it
is the main reason why the Western mentality is unable to understand the
Eastern spirit. Clearly, it is not a question of cultural differences or
contradictions in term, but, to paraphrase the words of Suhrawardī,[^70]
forms of spiritual participation or perspectives between an Orient of
Illumination [*ishrāq*] and an Occident of Exile.

There is no point in denying that the most esoteric of these Islamic
sciences was related to neo-Pythagoreanism[^71] and hermeticism.[^72] It
was through them that Islām came into close contact with the Sabians of
Ḥarrān.[^73] They were responsible for transmitting astronomy, astrology
and mathematics from Babylonian sources and later Chaldeans bound with
the hermetic-Pythagorean ideas of Alexandria to Islām. All of this is
true.[^74]

It is also true that medicine and cosmology reached the Muslims by means
of the Hindus and the Persians. These sciences were eagerly embraced by
Islām since, far from being secular forms of knowledge, they were
intrinsically linked to the central doctrine of “divine unity.” On the
other hand, some aspects of classical Greek and Hindu culture, like the
secular philosophies of the Epicureans,[^75] some of the cynics[^76] and
the naturalism of the anatomists, barely aroused the interest of the
Muslims. It was impossible for knowledge of this type, based on
sensuality and a dualistic relativism, to be integrated into Islamic
thought in a cohesive and cogent form since they were outside of the
nature of the Gnostic experience. The Mu‘tazilite’s refutation of
certain aspects of dualist and Trinitarian theories, however, brought
Islām a theological solution in accordance with the concept of divine
unity. In their defense of Greco-Alexandrian philosophy, the
Mu‘tazilites created favorable conditions for study and scholarship in
Shī‘ite intellectual circles. This affinity and sympathy between the
Mu‘tazilites and the Shī‘ites must not be confounded in any way as
identity.[^77] On fundamental issues, such as the significance and
function of the Imām, they differ completely. On that issue, the
Mu‘tazilite perspective is much closer to that of the Sunnī. What is
clear is that during the entire history of Islām, the pre-Islamic legacy
of cosmological sciences and metaphysical doctrines were united, as they
were in the Jabirian corpus or in the *Rasā’il* [Epistles] of the
*ikhwān al-ṣafā’* [The Pure Brethren / The Brotherhood of the Pure][^78]
in a perfect synthesis. Science and scholarship from external sources
never ruptured Islām’s monotheistic mandate.

Modern Muslim scholars like Seyyed Ḥossein Naṣr, ‘Allāmah Sayyid
Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ṭabātabā‘ī, Aḥmad Aḥmadī, and Orientalists like Henry
Corbin,[^79] Titus Burckhardt, René Guénon, and Frithjof Schuon,[^80]
teach us to view Islām from a perspective which appreciates the
diversity within its unity. The harmonious integration of diverse
systems of thought within its unitarian perspective makes it all the
more appealing particularly since it is the product of the Muḥammadan
spirit which is essentially metaphysical and ethical. Thanks to the
research of these scholars and the research of those who follow in their
footsteps like William C. Chittick, Christian Jambet, and Pierre Lory,
to mention only a few, Islām is no longer a mass which crushes us under
its enormous religious weight.[^81] It is also no longer a primitive
pastoral religion of shepherds or an Arab imitation or adaptation of
Judaism and Christianity.[^82] On the contrary, Islām is now presented
as a type of intelligent filter that magically selects, cleans and
purifies, preserving what is of value, while filtering out and rejecting
what is harmful and useless, from profane secular knowledge. Like these
scholars, we view the transfer or transmission of the pre-Islamic legacy
as a natural unveiling of the universal continuity of the same spiritual
inheritance.[^83] Due to its metaphysical nature, its development is
indefinite. It manifests itself in given historical moments and takes
root in the most fertile field to ensure its spiritual blooming. This is
how we see things as opposed to embracing theories of “influx” and
“imitation.” Our perspective is not a personal one. It is entirely in
accord with the eternal sacred tradition.

But let us be candid. Even if we were to view Islām as the result of
some historical “influx” or as a “copy” or a pre-Islamic religious
model--rejecting everything that is authentic and unique in its own
revelation--we should recognize as well, as does Cruz Hernández, that
even under such conditions **no religion has turned out better than
Islām.**[^84]

It was Cruz Hernández, the distinguished professor from the Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, who presented a staunch criticism of the methodology
employed by Asín Palacios. As Cruz Hernández points out, Palacios’
attitude is not only the product of his social context, and his training
as a Catholic priest, it also reflects the state of scientific thought
of his time (490). Like Cruz Hernández, our goal is not to cast doubt on
the value of Asín Palacios work as a whole by criticizing a widely held
prejudice against Islām which was also applied to other religions. We
all owe a debt of gratitude to Palacios for his important contributions
to the knowledge of Islām during the period of al-Andalus. Although much
of his work has merit, it must be stressed, however, that the
methodology he employs, which is employed by Gibb as well, is completely
wrong. Their approach is erroneous for the simple fact that it is based
on a principle which is inherently flawed. The problem with their
approach is the belief that for religious studies to be scientific, to
come to an understanding of religion in general and Islām in particular,
it is necessary to narrow things down to a few facts.[^85] Once
non-essential elements have been reduced to minimal terms, to abstract
formulas and to skeletal hypotheses, all traditions can be condensed
into an imaginary framework of classifications that conveniently explain
certain similarities between the Judeo-Christian and Islamic traditions
through theories of “assimilation” or “successive reproduction.”[^86]

As can be appreciated, we would exhaust ourselves uselessly attempting
to criticize such an understanding of religion. The case has been judged
and the verdict has been given. As René Guénon has observed in relation
to the Vedanta, Eastern and Western concepts of “religion” are
profoundly different.[^87] In order to prevent such confusion from
extending to Islām, it is important to remember here that tradition, as
opposed to religion, is the vital source of all religious forms. A
tradition does not have established dogmas or precepts; it has universal
meanings which are applied to dogmas and religious precepts. **At the
end of this cycle and the beginning of the next cycle, it is exceedingly
important not to reject tradition.**[^88] **So long as we believe that
the part is present in the whole there will be religion. Revelation,
faith, truth, and religion are neither fact nor are they ideas. They are
expressions of a sole spiritual beginning.**[^89] In the Western world,
however, specialists have a very different conception of religion. Some
will argue that if you know one religion then you know them all. Others
hold that if you know one religion, you know none of them. And there are
still others who hold that a religion outside of your own is incapable
of teaching you anything and is not even worthy of consideration.[^90]
These are the very same specialists who stubbornly insist on portraying
Islām as an Arab invention based on Judeo-Christian traditions or a
classic case of “assimilation” or “successive reproduction.”[^91]
Religious traditions from East and West do indeed share many
similarities which are more or less obvious to scholars.[^92] Nowadays,
most sincere scholars are willing to drop the term “religion” in favor
of the more appropriate term “tradition,” a concept that acknowledges
God as the eternal source of all revelation.

[^1]: Editor’s Note: The Mormons are followers of the Church of Latter
Day Saints founded by Joseph Smith (1830) in the state of New York. His
authority rested on the revelation to him of The Book of Mormon, an
alleged pre-Columbian work giving the history of American peoples of
Hebrew origin from the Diaspora to 800 A.D. After Smith’s death, Brigham
Young became leader and transferred the movement to Salt Lake City, Utah
(1847), where a prosperous community was established. When the practice
of polygamy was stopped, Utah was incorporated (1896) into the Union as
the 45th state. Mormons believe that The Book of Mormon is of equal
inspiration with the Bible. The Church of Latter Day Saints is
considered by some to be a cult.

[^2]: Editor’s Note: The Seventh Day Adventists are members of an
Adventist sect founded in 1844 in the U.S.A. Like the Mormons, they also
follow a modern “prophet.” As for the Jehovah’s Witnesses, they are a
Christian sect founded in 1872 in Pennsylvania by Charles T. Russell.
They accept a literal interpretation of the Bible and stress the
imminent coming of a terrestrial, theocratic kingdom, into which only
the Witnesses will pass. The Seventh Day Adventists hold that Ellen G.
White (1827-1915) was given the gift of prophecy by the Holy Spirit and
was the Lord’s messenger, her writings serving as an authoritative
source of trust, guidance, instruction and correction. See “Fundamental
Beliefs,” Seventh Day Adventist Church:
http://www.adventist.org/beliefs/ fundamental/index.html. The Ellen G.
White Estate, Inc. Website, explains that: Seventh-day Adventists
believe that Mrs. White was more than a gifted writer; they believe she
was appointed by God as a special messenger to draw the world's
attention to the Holy Scriptures and help prepare people for Christ's
Second Advent. From the time she was 17 years old until she died 70
years later, God gave her approximately 2,000 visions and dreams. The
visions varied in length from less than a minute to nearly four hours.
The knowledge and counsel received through these revelations she wrote
out to be shared with others. Thus her special writings are accepted by
Seventh-day Adventists as inspired. (White)

[^3]: Author’s Note: For the development of heterodoxies in
Christianity, the following should be considered: A. Orbe, Parábolas
evangélicas en San Ireneo-I-II (460 and 515 respectively).

[^4]: Editor’s Note: Some Orientalists seek to cause confusion, to put
up smoke screens and to undermine Islām at the behest of certain states,
for purely political reasons. Historically, some Orientalists served the
imperial intentions of colonial masters. For more on Orientalist efforts
to undermine Islām, see Aḥmad Ghurāb’s Subverting Islām: The Role of
Orientalist Centers. The book is also available in Spanish translation
by Héctor Abū Dharr Manzolillo, under the name Subvertir el Islām: La
función de los centros orientalistas.

[^5]: Editor’s Note: As Nwyia explains, On sait que les fuqahā’, qui
lisent le Coran en philologues ou en juristes, rejettent la lecture
spiritualiste des soufis comme une nouveauté étrangère et infidèle au
texte sacré. Or, parce que leur point de vue légaliste s’est imposé dans
l’Islām officiel et est devenu pour ainsi dire le point de vue de
l’orthodoxie, les soufis ont pris, aux yeux de l’histoire, figure de
secte plus au moins hétérodoxe, leur lecture du Coran a été considérée
comme une lecture tardive et étrangère à l’Islām primitif. (23) [It is
well-known that the fuqahā’, who interpret the Qur’ān as philologists or
jurists, reject the mystical interpretations of the Ṣūfis as a foreign
innovation which is unfaithful to the sacred text. Since their
legalistic perspective imposed itself in official Islām it became the
orthodox position. In the eyes of history, the Ṣūfis were relegated to
the status of a more or less heterodox sect and their interpretations of
the Qur’ān viewed as a later development which was alien to primitive
Islām.] As Murata observes, Though the proponents of al-kalām
[scholastic philosophy] have often been looked upon by Western scholars
as the representatives of ‘orthodox’ Islām, this is to impose an
inappropriate category upon Islāmic civilization, as many other scholars
have pointed out. In fact, by and large the criteria for being Muslim
have been following the sharī‘ah and acknowledging the truth of a
certain basic creed. Beyond that, a variety of positions concerning the
details of the creed was possible, and none could be said to be
‘orthodox’ to the exclusion of others. (8) Ṭāriq Ramaḍān, grandson of
Ḥasan al-Bannā, founder of the Muslim Brotherhood, confirms that “[a]ll
Muslims--Orthodox, Sunnī, Ṣūfī, or Shī‘ah--are part of the same
understanding of the sharī‘ah” (211-212).

[^6]: Editor’s Note: Muslims, in general, should oppose the labels
imposed on them by outsiders. This applies to the terms “heterodox,”
“heretical,” “sect,” “fundamentalist” and “Islāmist.” The author and the
editor, however, must use them in order to disprove them.

[^7]: Editor’s Note: In this sense, Sunnism, Shī‘ism and Ṣūfism can all
claim to be authentic expressions of Islām. As Sachiko Murata explains,
“When we look at the Islāmic intellectual history…we see...that there is
no question of a universally recognized ‘orthodox’ school of thought,
but rather a large number of schools that debate among themselves
concerning how the basic items of the creed are to be understood” (The
Tao of Islām 8).

[^8]: Editor’s Note: As Naṣr has put it, “There is no Magisterium in
Islām” (The Heart of Islām 85). While Vittor and Naṣr are correct that
there is no official institution which speaks for Islām in matters of
orthodoxy, for Shī‘ites, there is a Magisterium in Islām, the Imāmate,
the throne of which is mostly empty, in the absence of the chief
magistrate, Imām Muḥammad al-Mahdī.

[^9]: Editor’s Note: In simpler and more modern terms, the esoteric and
the exoteric are two faces of the same coin. For scholars like Corbin,
Shī‘ism and Ṣūfism were identical in essence and Shī‘ism was only the
outer form of Islāmic mysticism. Evidently, this is not the case as
Shī‘ism represents a balancing totality between both the esoteric and
exoteric dimensions of the dīn [religion].

[^10]: Author’s Note: The following quotations are from Nahj al-balāghah
/ Peak of Eloquence translated by Sayed ‘Alī Reẓā. It contains an
interesting preface, a brief biography on the compiler, and abundant
notes. Editor’s Note: The work is also available in a Spanish
translation titled La cumbre de la elocuencia. An abridged Arabic /
French edition translated by Samih Atef El-Zein also exists but devoid
of most of the sermons dealings with the status of the ahl al-bayt .

[^11]: Editor’s Note: Allawī’s “Sufyānī and Muḥammadī Islām” gives an
exposition of two distinct interpretations of the Muslim religion. There
cannot, however, be two versions of Islām, a good Islām and a bad Islām.
There is only Islām and what is not Islām. As Hector Abū Dharr
Manzolillo explains in his article “La filosofía de Abū Sufyān,” “Abū
Sufyān no veía ni entendía cual era la misión de Muḥammad (tenéis ojos
pero no veis, tenéis oídos pero no oís, como decía Jesús). Lo único que
veía y entendía era que la religión daba poder mundanal que era lo que
él quería” [Abū Sufyān could not understand the mission of Muḥammad. As
Jesus, peace be upon him, used to say, “You have eyes but you can’t see.
You have ears but you can’t hear.” Likewise, the only thing that Abū
Sufyān could understand was that religion leads to worldly power, which
was exactly what he wanted.]

[^12]: Editor’s Note: The Ṣūfī Muslims, for example, embrace music and
poetry from other cultures as a means of drawing people into Islām. As
Naṣr explains, “Ṣūfism has had the greatest role in the spread of Islām,
in addition to its vital function in the preservation and purification
of ethical life, the creation of the arts, and the exposition of unitive
knowledge [ma‘rifah] and metaphysics within Islāmic society” (Heart of
Islām 63-64). Massignon notes that “In India, Islām was spread not by
war but by mysticism and the great orders of mystics” (61). Islām is a
great syncretic sponge. Its survivability is the result of its
adaptability.

[^13]: Editor’s Note: Strictly speaking, the ahl al-kitāb, the People of
the Book, are the Jews and Christians. Ṭabātabā‘ī and Lankarānī include
Zoroastrians in this definition. Mawlānā Muḥammad ‘Alī, the Aḥmadiyyah
scholar, is the most liberal, claiming that “the Pārsīs, the Buddhists
and the Hindus all fall into this category” (614). He even believes that
“Pārsī and Hindū women may be taken in marriage, as also those who
follow the religion of Confucius or of Buddah or of Tao” (615). He
criticizes the narrow conception of the word ahl al-kitāb adopted by
jurists and holds that “there is no reason why the Magians, the Hindus
and others who profess a religion and accept a revealed book, should not
be treated as such” (615).

[^14]: Editor’s Note: This is an allusion to the Qur’ānic verse: “From
Allāh we come and to Him is our return” (2:156).

[^15]: Editor’s Note: Xenophanes (6th c. B.C.) was a Greek philosopher
and poet known for his monotheism. He is not to be confused with
Xenophon (c. 430-c. 355)--the Greek general and writer--the disciple of
Socrates. Xenophanes, who particularly objected to the anthropomorphism
of Homer and Hesiod in their portrayal of the gods, gave the following
definition of the Divine: “God is one, greatest among gods and men, in
no way like mortals either in body or in mind” (qtd. Netton 1).
Parmenides (c. 504-450 B.C.) was a Greek Eleatic philosopher. He
regarded movement and change as illusions, and the universe as single,
continuous and motionless. Plato (c. 428-c. 348 B.C.) was a Greek
philosopher who was a follower of Socrates. Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) was
a Greek philosopher, pupil of Plato, tutor of Alexander the Great, and
founder of the Peripatetic School at Athens (335 B.C.). His philosophy
grew away from the idealism of Plato and became increasingly concerned
with science and the phenomena of the world. His analyses were original
and profound and his methods exercised an enormous influence on all
subsequent thought. Plotinus (205-70) was a Roman philosopher of
Egyptian birth. After studying in Alexandria, he established his
Neo-Platonic School in Rome (244). He used the metaphysical truths of
Plato [esp. the dialectic of love] to create a mystic religion of union
with the One through contemplation and ecstatic vision. Through Saint
Augustine his theory of the human spirit entered into the mainstream of
Western philosophy.

[^16]: Author’s Note: For a comparison of the doctrines of Plotinus and
Sankara, see García Bazán, in Baine Harris (ed.), Neoplatonism and
Indian Thought (181-207); Neoplatonismo y Vedanta; La doctrina de la
materia en Plotino y Sankara and for a paragon between Plotinus and Isām
see Nabi, “Union with God in Plotinus and Bayazid” in Harris (227-232).
Most importantly, one should consult the volume prepared by P.
Morewedge, Neoplatonism and Islāmic Thought. Editor’s Note: Sankara was
a commentator on the Upanishads and the Bhagavadgita, writing in c. 800
A.D. He was an upholder of traditional monistic Hinduism, which reduces
all reality to a single principle or substance.

[^17]: Editor’s Note: Idrīs is the Arabic name for the Hebrew Hanokh and
the English Enoch, the Biblical prophet who supposedly lived from 3284
to 3017 B. C. In the Holy Qur’ān, Almighty Allāh says that: “He was a
man of truth and a prophet. We raised him to a lofty station” (19:56-57)
and refers to him as a man of “constancy and patience” whom Allāh
admitted to His Mercy as a righteous one (21: 85-86). More than a man,
Idrīs is an archetype, a sublime soul appearing in various cultures as
Thoth, Hermes, and Metraton, among others.

[^18]: Editor’s Note: The first sentence of the shahādah is typically
translated as “There is no god but Allāh” but it can also be translated
as “There is no god; only Allāh.” The attributes of Allāh can also be
used in the shahādah as in “There is no Reality but the Reality” which
leads to the metaphysical notion that nothing exists outside of Allāh.

[^19]: Editor’s Note: The words “faith” and “belief” cannot convey the
sense of the Arabic imān which means “absolute knowledge, belief and
conviction.”

[^20]: Editor’s Note: As Shaykh Ṣadūq explains, “There can be no
forgiveness for skeptics [ahl al-shakk] and polytheists [ahl al-shirk];
nor for unbelievers [ahl al-kufr] and those who are persistent in their
denial [ahl al-juḥūd]. But the sinful among those who believe in the
unity of Allāh [ahl al-tawḥīd] may be forgiven” (122).

[^21]: Editor’s Note: For the Qur’ānic quotes in this translation, we
have relied mostly on the English translation of ‘Abdullāh Yūsuf ‘Alī.
We have also consulted Muḥammad Marmaduke Pickthall and M.H. Shakir; the
French translations of Muḥammad Ḥamīdullāh and Denise Masson, as well as
the Spanish translations of Julio Cortés and Juan Vernet. The Yūsuf ‘Alī
translation is closer to conveying the style as opposed to the literal
sense of the Qur’ān which Pickthall adheres too more closely. The
original Yūsuf ‘Alī commentary was a fine work of scholarship. Over
successive editions, however, the text and tafsīr [commentary] have been
“purged” of any and all ideas which are not in line with Wahhābī
ideology. The value of Shakir’s translation resides primarily in its
clear modern English. The Ḥamīdullāh translation, the product of two
years of labor, adequately conveys the meaning of the scripture and is
accompanied with a basic commentary. The Masson translation, however,
the result of three decades of effort, is far superior stylistically.
However, the modified Ḥamīdullāh version prepared in Saudi Arabia is the
most perfect. While the Vernet translation manifest a pro-Christian bias
which often substantially modifies the sense of certain figures of
diction and classical Arabic formulas its literary value far exceeds the
crude and vulgar translation made by Cortés. While the Vernet
translation is more manicured, both the Vernet and Cortés translations
manifest distortions and corruptions of the Qur’ān. Vernet’s
introduction and notes are devoted to casting doubt on the authenticity
of the text on the basis of sloppy scholarship which is easily dismissed
by Ayātullāh Mīrzā Mahdī Pooya Yazdī’s comprehensive criticism of taḥrīf
[textual change], “Originality and the Genuineness of the Holy Qur’ān in
its Text and Arrangement” which accompanies Aḥmed ‘Alī’s translation of
the Qur’ān which itself is very poor and which can only be partially
redeemed by its philosophical commentary. See also, Taḥrīf al-Qur’ān: A
Study of Misconceptions Regarding Corruption of the Qur’ānic Text” by
Muḥammad Bāqir Anṣārī.

[^22]: Editor’s Note: As Almighty Allāh explains: Those who believe [in
the Qur’ān], and those who follow the Jewish [scriptures], and the
Christians and the Sabians,- any who believe in Allāh and the Last Day,
and work righteousness, shall have their reward with their Lord; on them
shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve. (2:62, see also 22:17 and 5:69)
This could also be applied to Vedic Hinduism. In the Vedas, we read that
God has many names but the wise call Him One. In the 20th century, the
Arya Samaj reformist movement was formed within Hinduism. It calls for a
rejection of all polytheism and idolatrous worship in favor of the Vedas
alone. This acceptance of previous religions applies to pre-Islāmic
times and to those who, since the advent of Islām, were not reached by
its message. According to the Qur’ān and Sunnah, it is incumbent on all
believers to accept Muḥammad as the final Messenger of Allāh.

[^23]: Editor’s Note: Tawḥīd is also the union of the divine order and
the worldly order, between religion and state.

[^24]: Editor’s Note: As Gibb explains: al-Shādhilī (d. 1258) studied in
Fez under a disciple of Abū Madyan. Eventually settling in Alexandria, a
circle of pupils gathered around him. He had no monastery and no set
form of rituals. He discouraged his followers from giving up their
trades and professions for the contemplative life. But little more than
a generation later, his disciples adopted the normal organization of a
ṭarīqah, which spread over North Africa and into Arabia. The town of
Mokha in the Yemen in particular adopted al-Shādhilī as its patron saint
and venerates him as the originator of coffee-drinking. The Shādhiliyyah
order is in general more extravagant in ritual and more ecstatic than
the Qādiriyyah, but is remarkable especially for the large number of
sub-orders to which it gave rise, both directly and in conjunction with
the Qādiriyyah. Among the best known are the ‘Īsāwiyyah, with its famous
sword-lashing ritual, and at the other extreme the orthodox and austere
Derqāwā of Morocco and Western Algeria (108).

[^25]: Editor’s Note: When asked what one needed to do to attain
Paradise, the Messenger of Allāh stated: “Offer your five obligatory
prayers, observe fast during the whole of the month of Ramaḍān, pay the
poor due (zakāh) out of your wealth and obey whatever He commands you,
then you will enter the Paradise of your Lord” (Aḥmad). The Qur’ān and
the Sunnah are explicit in establishing Muḥammad as the final prophet
and messenger. Almighty Allāh says that: “Muḥammad is not the father of
any of your men, but (he is) the Messenger of Allāh, and the Seal of the
Prophets [khātim al-nabiyyīn]: and Allāh has full knowledge of all
things.” (233:40). The Messenger of Allāh said on numerous occasions
that “There will be no prophet after me” (Bukhārī, Muslim, Hākim, Ṣadūq,
Mufīd, Kulaynī, Majlisī). Consequently, the sects and cults who believe
in a prophet after Muḥammad cannot be considered Muslims. These include
the Aḥmadiyyah who believe that Mīrzā Ghulam Aḥmed was a prophet, the
Nation of Islām and its offshoots (the Five Percenters, the Anṣārs, and
so forth). The followers of Elijah Muḥammad and Louis Farrakhan are
outside of the fold of Islām for, as the “Muslim Program” explains on
their web site and their publications, they “believe that Allāh (God)
appeared in the Person of Master W. Fard Muḥammad, July, 1930; the
long-awaited “Messiah” of the Christians and the “Mahdī” of the
Muslims.” The NOI believes that Master W. Fard Muḥammad was Allāh and
that Elijah Muḥammad was his Final Messenger. This is whom they refer to
when they say “There is no God but Allāh and Muḥammad is His Messenger.”
The belief in ḥulūl [incarnation] is the antithesis of tawḥīd [oneness
of God] and the belief in a prophet after Muḥammad is clearly
inconsistent with the Qur’ān and Sunnah. The NOI believes in racial
separation and that “intermarriage or race mixing should be prohibited”
while Islām has abolished racism (49:13: 4:1; 2:213; 6:98; 7:189; 21:92;
23:52). As the Prophet said in his Farewell Sermon, “All mankind is from
Adam and Eve, an Arab has no superiority over a non-Arab nor a non-Arab
has any superiority over an Arab; also a white has no superiority over a
black nor a black has any superiority over a white - except by piety and
good action” (Muslim, Aḥmad, Dārimī, Ibn Mājah, Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Ḥibbān et
al.). The NOI believes “in the resurrection of the dead--not in physical
resurrection--but in mental resurrection” while Islām believes in
physical resurrection. The NOI believes that black people “are the
people of God’s choice” while Islām does not believe in Chosen People.
In short, the Nation of Islām has little in common with Islām besides
its name. Claude Andrew Clegg is thus in error when he claims that “in
regards to traditional or orthodox Islām, the Nation of Islām was
heterodox in many of its views and practices; however, it was arguably a
legitimate Muslim sect given its marginal adherence to central tenets of
the Islāmic faith.” (68). He adds that “overall, the basic outlines of
both religious traditions do appear to overlap enough to allow the black
organization to reasonably claim membership in the body of Islām, albeit
as a heretical limb” (69). The Nation of Islām cannot be heterodox, a
legitimate Muslim sect, a member in the body of Islām, and a heretical
limb at the same time.

[^26]: Editor’s Note: The term arkān al-dīn is not used by Shī‘ah
scholars, but there is mention of da‘ā’im al-Islām in Shī‘ah tradition
with five items with an interesting modification: ṣalāt, ṣawm, zakāt,
ḥajj and, nota bene, wilāyah. For example, Imām Muḥammad al-Bāqir said,
“Islām is based on five [pillars]: on ṣalāt, sawm, zakāt, ḥajj and
wilāyah--and nothing has been promoted more than the promoting of
wilāyah” (Kulaynī). In another ḥadīth, the same Imām has been quoted in
the same way with the addition of the following sentence at the end
“…but the people took the four and abandoned this one [ie. wilāyah].”

[^27]: Editor’s Note: Shī‘ite scholars prefer to list belief, uṣūl
al-dīn [the pillars or religion] and practice, furū‘ al-dīn [the
branches of religion], separately.

[^28]: Editor’s Note: The term qiyyāmah [Resurrection] is used
synonymously to express this pillar.

[^29]: Editor’s Note: Whereas the Shī‘ite might seek the intercession of
the Imāms, the Ṣūfis seek the intercession of their awliyyā’ or saints.
For more on intercession in Islām, see ‘Abd al-Karīm Bi-Azar Shirāzī’s
“Tawassul.” The Salafīs do not believe in tawassul.

[^30]: Editor’s Note: Most Sunnis, however, follow the Ash‘arite school
of theology established by Abū al-Ḥasan ‘Alī al-Ash‘arī (c. 874-935), a
famous Arab theologian from Iraq. Ash‘arī insists that, since God is
All-Powerful, he can do as He pleases, placing a good person in hell and
a bad person in Heaven. The Ash‘arites give precedence to God’s
All-Powerful attribute as opposed to the integral attribute of justice
which is stressed by Shī‘ite theologians. They also hold that the Qur’ān
is the uncreated word of God, an idea rejected by Shī‘ites as only Allāh
is eternal. For more on the differences in the approach to the concept
of divine justice among the theologians and philosophers of Shī‘ah
Islām, see the introduction to Shahīd Muṭahharī’s al-‘adl al-ilāhī which
has recently been published in English as Divine Justice.

[^31]: Author’s Note: For the distinction between “tradition” and
“religion,” see Guénon, Introduction générale à l’étude des doctrines
hindoues (4) and García Bazán, “La tradición y la unidad transcendente
de las religiones” in Atma Jnana (5-8). See, as well: Schuon, L’unité
transcendente des religions. Editor’s Note: Islām recognizes all
revealed religions. In the Islāmic view, Judaism and Christianity are
steps on the spiritual road to salvation: its followers are People of
the Book. The religions revealed by God are different crystallizations
of the divine message. It should be noted, however, that the author is
not advocating religious relativism or pluralism. His thoughts are more
in line with the perennial philosophy of René Guénon and Frithjof Schuon
which holds that all religions teach the same thing, but in different
ways. However, in order to see this universal core, one must turn from
the exoteric to the esoteric aspects of the religions. As regards the
divinely sanctioned nature of religions outside of Islām, Muslims
scholars are divided. Western-trained Orientalists like Naṣr and
Sachedina believe that all Abrahamic religions remain valid, based on
the following Qur’ānic verses: Those who believe [in the Qur'ān], and
those who follow the Jewish [scriptures], and the Christians and the
Sabians,- any who believe in Allāh and the Last Day, and work
righteousness, shall have their reward with their Lord; on them shall be
no fear, nor shall they grieve. (2:62; 5:69) According to Naṣr “al-islām
refers to that universal surrender to the One and that primordial
religion contained in the heart of all heavenly inspired religions, not
just to Islām in its more particular sense” (The Heart of Islām 17). Ibn
al-‘Arabī, the great spiritual master, observes that: Religion is of two
kinds, the religion of God and those whom God has taught His religion
and those whom they have taught and, second, the religion of created
beings, which God acknowledges. The religion of God is that chosen by
Him and set by Him at a level far above the religion of creation.
(Bezels 113) According to the Shaykh al-Akbar, the Qur’ānic verse “The
religion with Allāh is Islām” (2:132) means following, obeying, yielding
and submitting to God, regardless of one’s religion. In the eyes of Ibn
al-‘Arabī, there is truth even in pagan deities since “in every object
of worship there is a reflection of the Reality” (Bezels 78). Ayātullāh
al-Uẓmā Shaykh Yūsuf Sanā‘ī goes even further arguing that: I am of the
opinion that paradise is the result of doing good deeds and avoiding
evil deeds according to the best of one’s understanding. Regardless of
the religion people practice, and so long as they are convinced without
a doubt of the righteousness of their belief, they will get what they
deserve. God says, “Good deeds will be rewarded ten times as much as
they deserve, and evildoers will be given punishment which fits the
evil; You shall not be unfairly treated.” According to Molla-Sadra,
paradise inevitably evolves from spiritual development. In some Qur’ānic
verses, faith is a vital prerequisite for paradise. According to my
interpretation, faith is a sincere belief in the goodness of one’s
deeds, not belief in God. Strong belief is associated with the mental
serenity, and it contributes to spiritual development. However, someone
with a sense of being under compulsion can never be consistent in doing
good deeds and improve. Neither identification nor label, be it
Christian, Muslim, or Buddhist, is the requirement for paradise, but
indeed good deeds are. An agnostic involved in his skepticism cannot
believe in God or prophet. Neither do Christians put trust in Prophet
Muḥammad. It would be utterly inconceivable if God called for a
particular identification on the Doomsday. Would it be unfair? The
Qur’ān says reassuringly: “God shall not be unfair to any of his
creatures.” Similarly, evil doing mortifies the human soul, which leads
to hell. It makes no difference which religion or belief you follow but
the deeds you perform. If doubt is cast upon the authenticity of one’s
religion, one must seek the truth; otherwise one is guilty of laxity.
(http://www.saanei.org/page.php?pg=showmeeting&id=22&lang=en) With all
due respect, Ayātullāh Sanā‘ī’s interpretation of the Qur’ānic imān as
faith in one’s deeds and not faith in God is clearly untenable as it is
duly defined by Almighty Allāh as āmana bi Allāhi wa al-yawmi al-ākhiri
wa al-malāikati wa al-kitābi wa al-nabiyyina, namely, belief in Allāh,
and the Last Day, and the angels, and the Book, and the Messengers
(2:177). Ayātullāh Sanā‘ī further holds, “all non-Muslims, including
Hindus, fire-worshippers, and cow-worshippers, are pure,” only atheists
are unbelievers. He holds that spiritual impurity is the result of
ascribing partners to God while one knows that He is One. He claims that
“ascribing partners to God through neglect does not make one an
unbeliever, merely unenlightened.” However, if Muḥammad had adopted this
pluralistic position, the prophetic mission would surely have failed.
According to traditional Muslim scholars and jurists, Islām has
fulfilled all previous monotheistic religions, superseded them,
abrogated them and replaced them. In their view, Islām has precedence
over its predecessors. As Legenhausen explains: Islām not only shatters
previous forms in the name of the spirit, however, it also imposes its
own form in place of those it has shattered. It is that form, or
exterior, which constitutes the gateway to its spirit, or interior,
which, by virtue of its content and the position of Islām in the line of
succession of revealed religions, is more comprehensive than any other
is. Furthermore, Islām does not violate the truths of the previously
revealed religions; rather it confirms them. What Islām shatters is what
is false in the other religions because of corruption and deviation or
because of the temporal limitations of their validity. Sachedina was
reproached by Ayātullāh al-‘Uẓmā Sistānī for his belief that salvation
can be obtained through any major monotheistic religion so long as one
submits to God (Sachedina “What Happened”). His position find support in
Imām al-Riḍā’s ḥadīth which states that: “Whoever denies the Prophet of
Allāh is like one who has denied all the prophets of Allāh.” Sachedina’s
belief that all Abrahamic religions are valid and equal in truth was
dismissed by Ayātullāh Sistānī as “nonsense” (“What Happened”).
According to Sachedina, the word islām, as it appears in the Qur’ān,
merely means an act of submission and is not the name of a religion
(“What Happened”). According to Ayātullāh Sistānī this is not the case.
Sachedina’s interpretation is based on a failure to understand the basic
rules of Arabic grammar regarding definite and indefinite nouns (“What
Happened”). The word islām is accompanied by the definite article al-
[the] which makes it a proper noun. As such, the Qur’ān is speaking
about Islām as a religion and not “submission” as a vague, indefinite,
generalized concept. Scholars like Sistānī cite the following verses of
the Qur’ān to argue that, since the coming of Muḥammad, the Final
Messenger, there can be no salvation outside of the religion of Islām:
The Religion before Allāh is Islām. (3:19) O ye who believe! Fear Allāh
as He should be feared, and die not without being Muslims. (3:102) Those
whom Allāh willeth to guide, He openeth their breast to Islām; those
whom He willeth to leave straying. (6:125) This day have those who
reject faith given up all hope of your religion: yet fear them not but
fear Me. This day have I perfected your religion for you, completed My
favor upon you, and have chosen for you Islām as your religion. But if
any is forced by hunger, with no inclination to transgression, Allāh is
indeed Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful. (5:3) If anyone desires a religion
other than Islām, never will it be accepted of him; and in the Hereafter
He will be in the ranks of those who have lost [all spiritual good]. (3:
85) Those who die rejecting faith, and die rejecting, on them is Allāh’s
curse, and the curse of angels, and of all mankind. (2:161) The
followers of past monotheistic religions, prior to the advent of Islām,
have nothing to fear: Those who believe [in the Qur’ān], and those who
follow the Jewish [scriptures], and the Christians and the Sabians,- any
who believe in Allāh and the Last Day, and work righteousness, shall
have their reward with their Lord; on them shall be no fear, nor shall
they grieve. (2:62; 5:69) According to most traditional scholars of
Islām, the Qur’ānic verses which reassure that the People of the Book
will have their reward (2:62; 5:69) apply to monotheists of all times
who were not reached by the prophetic message but who would have
embraced it had they heard about it. From the time of Muḥammad, they
argue, there is only one path, one right religion, for as Almighty Allāh
says, “But set thou thy face to the right Religion before there come
from Allāh the Day which there is no chance of averting” (30:43). And as
the Messenger of Allāh warned, “Any Jew or Christian who heard about me
and did not believe in me and what was revealed to me in the Holy Qur’ān
and my traditions, his ultimate destiny is the [Hell] Fire” (Bukhārī).
As for Sachedina, Ayātullāh al-‘Uẓmā Sistanī has expressed the
following: I have looked at the presentation of the writings and
statements of Dr. ‘Abdul ‘Azīz Sachedina that was sent [to me]. Whereas
his views on the issues presented are based on incorrect understandings,
and are incompatible with religious and academic standards, and cause
confusion in minds of the mu’minīn [believers] all the brothers and
sisters in imān [faith] (may Allāh help them in [gaining] His pleasure)
are enjoined to refrain from inviting him for lecturing at religious
gatherings, and not to approach him for seeking answers to questions
pertaining to beliefs. [21 August 1998] (Sistānī “Translation of the
Letter”)

[^32]: Editor’s Note: The author is alluding to the Prophet’s saying
that “The number of paths to God is equal to the number of human souls”
(qtd. Chittick, A Shī‘ite Anthology). Since Dr. Chittick did not provide
the source of this saying, I contacted him for more details. He
responded to me that: When I wrote A Shī‘ite Anthology, I was much more
inclined to accept the oral reports of my teachers than I am now. Also,
the grammar of the passage demands “breaths” rather than “human
souls,”given that anfas is the plural of nafas, not nafs. Anyway, in one
passage in the Futūḥāt (II 317), Ibn al-‘Arabī cites it without
ascription, and says, “which means that every breath is a path to God,
and that is correct,”and goes on to add some clarification. In another
passage (III 411), he ascribes it to ahl Allāh, “the folk of God” (i.e.,
great Ṣūfis), and says, “Each breath emerges from the heart according to
the heart's belief concerning God”(cf., the gods of belief, Chap. 19,
Ṣūfī Path of Knowledge). A couple of the Fuṣūṣ commentators cite it with
the expression, “It has been said” (qil). So, I would say that opinion 2
is correct. (Personal email from Dr. William Chittick to the editor,
dated Dec. 18, 2007) In short, the tradition attributed to the Prophet
should read: “The number of paths to Allāh is equal to the number of
human breaths.” In one passage, Ibn al-‘Arabī attributed the tradition
to the Prophet; in another, he presents it as a Ṣūfī saying. Although
the content of the tradition is correct in the sense that it agrees with
the Qur’ān and the Sunnah, it does not have an isnad [chain of
narration] and would thus be rejected by ḥadīth scholars.

[^33]: Editor’s Note: The differences in Islāmic schools of thought are
a mercy upon the Muslims. As the Prophet said, “Difference of opinion
among the ummah is a blessing from Allāh” (Bayhaqī, Maqdisī, Daylamī).
It is clear from the Holy Qur’ān that Almighty Allāh appreciates
differences and diversity: O mankind! We created you from a single
[pair] of a male and a female, and made you into nations and tribes,
that ye may know each other [not that ye may despise each other]. Verily
the most honored of you in the sight of Allāh is [he who is] the most
righteous of you. And Allāh has full knowledge and is well acquainted
[with all things]. (49:13)

[^34]: Editor’s Note: The author is alluding to the Qur’ānic teaching
concerning the middle path (17:110; 35:32). As Almighty Allāh says in
the Holy Qur’ān, “We have appointed you a middle nation, that ye may be
witnesses against mankind, and that the messenger may be a witness
against you (2:143). As Imām Khumaynī explains, “The faqīh imagines that
there is nothing but fiqh; the mystic, that there is nothing but
mysticism; the philosopher, that there is nothing but philosophy; and
the engineer, that there is nothing but engineering… Knowledge, once
seen in this way, becomes the thickest of all veils” (Islām and
Revolution 395). To be a complete Muslim requires a balance between the
inward and the outward.

[^35]: Editor’s Note: As Naṣr explains, “the Imāms of Shī‘ism are seen
in the Ṣūfī perspective as the spiritual poles of their age. They appear
in the spiritual chain [silsilah] of various Ṣūfī orders, even those
which have spread almost exclusively among Sunnis” (Ṭabātabā’ī A Shī‘ite
Anthology 7). The Shī‘ite origins of Ṣūfism are well-documented by Naṣr
in his “Shī‘ism and Ṣūfism: their Relationship in Essence and in
History” found in his Ṣūfī Essays. As Naṣr explains, “from the Shī‘ite
point of view Shī‘ism is the origin of what later came to be known as
Ṣūfism” (106). According to Moosa, “since the early period of Islām, the
Shī‘ites...were strict zāhids [ascetics], who were the forerunners of
later Ṣūfis (xxii). Awani confirms that There is a close relationship
between Shī‘ism and Ṣūfism… From an esoteric Shī‘ite point of view,
Shī‘ism is the origin of what came to be known as Ṣūfism. Shī‘ite Imāms
play a very basic and fundamental role in Ṣūfism, but not as Shī‘ite
Imāms, rather as representatives, par excellence, of Islāmic
esoterism…almost all Ṣūfī orders [salāsil] trace their spiritual
pedigree to the Holy Prophet through Imām ‘Alī. (172-73) As he explains,
“Both Shī‘ism and Ṣūfism can be described as the Islām of Alī ibn Abī
Tālib. Both emphasize the principle of wilāyah [friendship of God or
proximity to Him] which in both is traced to the Shī‘ite Imāms and
Fāṭimah. Both believe that the cycle of sanctity [dā’irat al-wilāyah]
starts immediately after the termination of the cycle of prophecy
[dā’irat al-nubuwwah] (173). As Naṣr explains, the cycle of initiation
guarantees the ever-living presence of an esoteric way in Islām (Ṣūfī
Essays 108).

[^36]: Editor’s Note: This ḥadīth can be found in Ḥākim, Ibn Kathīr,
Ṭabarānī, Suyūṭī, Kulaynī and Mufīd. A variant version is also found in
Tirmidhī, Ibn Jarīr and Suyūṭī.

[^37]: Author’s Note: For the symbolism of the “gate” see Guénon,
Símbolos fundamentales de la ciencia sagrada, especially chapters 25 and
41.

[^38]: Editor’s Note: The Ayātullāhs, it should be noted, are jurists
and not theologians. The titles Mawlānā, Ḥujjat al-Islām and Ayātullāh,
among many others, are honorary titles given by the people and have no
theological or jurisprudential implications. In the Shī‘ite system of
scholarship, the main academic titles are ‘ālim or scholar, an
individual who has completed approximately 10 years of study in the
ḥawẓah or Islāmic seminary; mujtahid, a Muslim lawyer or attorney, an
individual who has reached the level of jurist, after an average of 20
years of study; and Marja‘ al-Taqlīd, popularly known as Ayātullāh
al-‘Uẓmā or Grand Ayātullāh, a title acquired after 30 to 50 years of
study by individuals who have devoted their entire lives to the Islāmic
sciences and who are acknowledged by their peers as the foremost jurists
and de facto heads of the ḥawẓah. At present, some of the top Shī‘ite
Sources of Emulation in Najaf include: Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā al-Sayyid ‘Alī
al-Ḥusaynī al-Sistanī, Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā Bashīr al-Najafī, Ayātullāh
al-Uẓmā Muḥammad Isḥāq al-Fayyād, and Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā Sayyid Muḥammad
Sa‘īd al- Ṭabātabā’ī al-Ḥakīm, among others. Some of the top Shī‘ite
Sources of Emulation in Qum include: Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā al-Shaykh
Muḥammad Taqī Behjat Fumanī, Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā al-Shaykh Nāṣir Makarim
Shirazī, Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā al-Sayyid Mūsā Shubayr Zanjanī, Ayātullāh
al-Uẓmā al-Shaykh Luṭfullāh Sāfī Gulpayganī, Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā al-Shaykh
Nurī Hamadanī, Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā al-Shaykh Ḥusayn Waḥīd Khurasānī,
Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā Sayyid ‘Abd al-Karīm Mūsawī Ardebilī, Ayātullāh
al-Uẓmā Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusaynī Shahroudī, and, according to some,
Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā al-Shaykh Yūsuf Sanā‘ī. Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā al-Sayyid
‘Alī Khamene’ī has muqallidīn [followers] from mostly outside of Iran.
Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā al-Sayyid Muḥammad Ḥusayn Faḍlullāh, whose ijtihād
[authority to interpret Islāmic law] is called into question by the
Sources of Emulation in Iraq and Iran, is also very popular among young
people due to the more pragmatic and lenient nature of his edicts; his
greater accessibility to the laity, and his acquaintance with Western
culture (Takīm). For links to all the leading scholars of Shī‘ism, the
Marji‘iyyah al-dīniyyah (Religious Authority), see: Aalulbayt Global
Information Center: http://www.al-shia.com/html/eng/p.php?p=Miscellaneo
us&url= Ulama.

[^39]: Author’s Note: See Ayātullāh ‘Alī Mishkinī, “Wilāyat al-Faqīh:
its meaning and scope” in al-Tawḥīd: A Quarterly Journal of Islāmic
Thought and Culture (Tehran 1406/1985): III, 1, 29-65. Editor’s Note:
The concept of the “Authority of the Jurisconsult” was developed by Imām
Khumaynī who brought Shī‘ite political thought in line with the Sunnī
perspective which views the head of the Islāmic state, the Caliph or
Imām, as political successor of the Prophet. Traditionally, Shī‘ite
scholars have considered all governments to be illegitimate in the
absence of the Twelfth Imām.

[^40]: Editor’s Note: The differences between Shī‘ite jurists are mainly
ones of degree, expressing different dimensions of the same issue. For
example, one jurist may hold that a certain act is forbidden [ḥarām],
another one may consider it a precautionary prohibition [ḥarām iḥtiyyāṭ
wājib] and yet another may hold that it is merely reprehensible
[makrūh].

[^41]: Editor’s Note: The complete name of this branch of Islām, which
represents 10 % of Muslims worldwide, which is the majority in Iran and
Iraq, and is strongly represented in Lebanon, Afghanistan and Pakistan,
is shī‘ah imāmiyyah ithnā-‘ashariyyah or Twelve Imām Shī‘ism. Its school
of jurisprudence, the Ja‘farī madhhab, is named in honor of the sixth
Imām, Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq who, along with his father, Muḥammad al-Bāqir,
were the founding fathers of fiqh. The Ja‘farī madhhab is also known as
the fifth school of thought in Islām, along with the four Sunnī schools.
The orthodox nature of the Ja‘farī school of jurisprudence was admitted
by Shaykh Mahmood Shalṭūṭ, the head of al-Azhar University, in his
historic ruling of 1959 in which he recognized the ithnā ‘asharī school
as an acceptable school of jurisprudence in Islām which Muslims were
free to follow like any other school of jurisprudence among the Sunnis:
Islām does not command any of its followers to follow a particular
Islāmic madhhab. On the contrary, it establishes for every Muslim the
right to follow, at the beginning, any one of the correctly conveyed
madhāhib, whose verdicts are recorded in their respective books. It is
permissible also for any one that follows one of these schools to change
to another one--any other school--and he is not sinning by doing that.
The Ja‘farī school which is known as ‘the madhhab of the ithnā ‘asharī
imāmī shī‘ī’ is a sound madhhab. It is permissible to worship God
according to its teaching, like the rest of the Sunnī madhhabs. The
Muslims ought to know this and get rid of their undue bigotry for
particular madhāhib. The religion of Allāh and His law do not follow,
nor are they bound to, a particular madhhab. All [the founders of these
madhāhib] are mujtahids [jurists], reward-deserving from Allāh, and
acceptable to Him. It is permissible to the ‘non-mujtahid’ to follow
them and to accord with their teaching, whether in devotions or
transactions. (“Epilogue” Chirrī) Shī‘ite minorities are present
wherever there are Muslims. For a study on the Shī‘ites of the Maghreb,
see “Shī‘ism in Morocco.” The article was published in Jafariya News on
July 27th, 2006 and has appeared on many websites.

[^42]: Editor’s Note: See note 29 and Aḥmad Aḥmadī, “‘Irfān and Taṣawwuf
(Ṣūfism)” in al-Tawḥīd (Tehran 1404/1984), I 4: 63-76.

[^43]: Author’s Note: See, Ibn Khaldūn, Muqaddimah (Cairo 1957) 321; as
well as the English version by F. Rosenthal, Ibn Khaldūn, The
Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History (New York: 1958): 3 vols.
Editor’s Note: ‘Abd al-Raḥmān Ibn Khaldūn (1332-1406) was an Arab
historian most famous for his Muqaddimah in which he develops a
scientific philosophy of history. While he recognized the Shī‘ite
influence on Ṣūfism (Awānī 172-73), he held some distorted views about
Shī‘ism and rejected the belief in Imām Mahdī (al-Kāfī, 2:4, 479, note
2).

[^44]: Editor’s Note: Naṣr defines “fundamentalism” as a reaction to the
onslaught of modernism and secularism (The Heart of Islām 40). It is
worth recalling that terrorism is strictly prohibited in Islām and the
events of September 11th were condemned by Muslim scholars, both Sunnī
and Shī‘ī. Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā Yūsuf Sanā‘ī has said, In [the] Shī‘ite
religion terror is definitely condemned. Therefore you are not able to
find a Shī‘ite Muslim in [the] Ṭālibān movement. We are Shī‘ite Muslims,
and my interpretation as well as that of other religious leaders in
Islām, is that Islām does not accept terror. Terror in Islām, and
especially [in] Shī‘ite [Islām], is forbidden. (MacIntyre)

[^45]: In an interview with Christiane Amanpour for the CNN
investigative report God’s Warriors, Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā Yūsuf Sanā‘ī
stated that “Terrorists should go to hell.” For rulings against
terrorism, see Hārūn Yayhā’s Islām Condemns Terrorism
http://www.geocities.com/ Islamicissues/terrorism.html which has been
translated into Spanish by Abū Dharr Manzolillo; “Muslims against
Terrorism,” Internet: http://www.islamfortoday.com/ terrorism.htm;
“Muslims Condemn Terrorist Attack; http://www.muhajabah.com/
otherscondemn.php, as well as the following links:
http://groups.colgate.edu/ aarislam/response.htm and
http://www.cair-net.org/html /911statements.html; http://www.unc.edu /~
kurzman/terror.htm. Editor’s Note: Shī‘ite scholars are unanimous in
their insistence that, in matters of fiqh, one can only commence the
taqlīd of a living mujtahid. For Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā Sayyid Muḥammad
Ḥusayn Faḍlullāh, it is a question of precaution
(http://www.bayynat.org/www/english/Fatawa/ijtihad.htm). For all others,
it is an obligation. See A Concise Commandments of Islām by Khumaynī
with footnotes from Shariatmadārī, Najafī-Marashī, Gulpaygānī, Khunsarī,
Shirazī, Khu’ī 3; Khumaynī’s The Practical Laws of Islām 18; Khu’ī 18;
Gulpaygānī 22; Lankarānī http://www.lankarani.com/English/
onlinepub/tawdhih-al-masael/taqleed.htm; Sistānī http://www.sistani.org/
html/eng/main/index.php?page=3&lang=eng&part=1. This prevents scholarly
stagnation and allowing for gradual evolution of interpretation. The
Shī‘ite sharī‘ah is not static nor is it stagnant.

[^46]: Editor’s Note: Both the quietist and activist approaches are
sanctioned by Shī‘ism and find ample justification from the lives of the
Prophet and the Imāms. In the early days of Islām, the Most Noble
Messenger was obliged to adopt a quietist approach. After the
establishment of an Islāmic State, his policy became an activist one.
While his Caliphate was usurped, Imām ‘Alī adopted a policy of strategic
compromise. When he assumed power, he adopted an activist line. Imām
Ḥasan moved from activism to quietism while Imām Ḥusayn took activism to
its glorious pinnacle of martyrdom. All of the Imāms after Ḥusayn
adhered to the quietist line. Since the Occultation of the Twelfth Imām,
Shī‘ite scholars have followed the quietist approach, which predominates
in the ḥawẓah in Najaf or the activist approach, which finds its bastion
in the seminary in Qum. For more on the quietist and activist
approaches, see my “Strategic Compromise in Islām” For more on activist
scholars refer to Ten Decades of ‘Ulamā’s Struggle by Aqīqī
Bakhshayeshī.

[^47]: Editor’s Note: The Shī‘ite condemnation of bid‘ah is as strong as
the Sunnī one. The Messenger of Allāh is quoted as saying “When
innovation appears among my people [the Muslims], it is the obligation
of scholars to declare thei knowledge. May Allāh curse the scholars who
do not declare [the truth]” (al-Kāfī 1:2 141: ḥadīth 160). The Messenger
of Allāh is also reported to have said that For each and every
innovation [in Islām] which deceives the very faith, there will be after
my death, a sentinel and guide Imām from my progeny, being in charge of
the belief to challenge it, to defend it. He will speak under
inspiration from Allāh, will declare and enlighten the truth, will
negate the wiles of the cunning and will speak on behalf of the meek.
(143: ḥadīth 163) The Messenger of Allāh has also said that “Every
innovation [in religion] is misguidance. And every misguidance leads to
hell” (146: ḥadīth 166). Imām ‘Alī has said that “No innovation is
introduced unless one sunnah is forsaken, keep away from the innovations
and stick to the broad road. Surely the old tested ways are the best and
the innovated ones are bad” (Nahj al-balāghah 302).

[^48]: Editor’s Note: Shī‘ism belongs to a true living hermeneutic
tradition. As Imām Khumaynī explains, “The Qur’ān has seven or seventy
levels of meaning, and the lowest of those levels is the one where it
addresses us” (Islām and Revolution 391). He was referring to the
tradition of the Prophet which states that “The Qur’ān has been revealed
on seven levels (aḥruf), each having an outer and inner meaning, and
‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib has knowledge of both” (430). A similar tradition is
related in Sunnī sources on the authority of Ibn Mas‘ūd (Khaṭīb
al-Tabrīzī, Book 3, Chap. 37 No. 605). It is also related that the
Prophet said that: “The Qur’ān has a beautiful exterior and a profound
interior” (Ṭabātabā’ī, The Outward).

[^49]: Editor’s Note: The author alludes to Muṣṭafā Kāmel Atātürk
(1881-1938), the Turkish soldier and statesman who was the founder and
first President of the Republic of Turkey. He contributed to the
destruction of the Ottoman Empire and abolished the Caliphate in 1924.
As a result, Islām ceased to be a political force in the world. He
closed theological schools and replaced the sharī‘ah with a law code
based on the Swiss legal code, the German penal code and the Italian
commerce code. He outlawed traditional Islāmic headdress for men and
insisted that all Turks wear European style hats. He banned the ḥijāb
and encouraged women to wear western dress and enter the work force. In
1928, in an effort to distance the people from the Qur’ān, the
government decreed that the Arabic script was to be replaced by a
modified Latin alphabet. All citizens from six to 40 years of age were
obliged to attend school to learn the new alphabet. The Turkish language
was “purified” by the removal of Arabic and Persian words and replaced
by new Turkish ones. Muṣṭafā Kāmel opened art schools so that boys and
girls could engage in the visual representation of human forms which has
been banned during Ottoman times. Atātürk, who was most fond of the
national liquor, raki, and consumed vast quantities of it, legalized
alcohol which is strictly forbidden in Islām. In 1934, he required all
Turks to adopt Western style surnames. Ironically, after waging war
against the Turkish culture and religion, he adopted the name Kemāl
Atātürk meaning “father of the Turks.” He died in 1938 of cirrhosis of
the liver, the result of years of excessive drinking. He left Turkey
with a divided identity, trapped between East and West, Europeanized but
not quite European, alienated from the Islāmic world but still a Muslim
country.

[^50]: Editor’s Note: Ibn Taymiyyah (661- 728) was a scholar of the
Ḥanbalī school of thought. He held that Allāh’s “hand,” “foot,” “shin”
and “face” were literal [ḥaqīqī] attributes and that Allāh is upon the
throne in person. Sunnī authorities like Taqī al-Dīn as-Subkī, Ibn Ḥajar
al-Haythamī and al-‘Izz ibn Jama‘ah passed rulings against following him
in matters of ‘aqīdah [religious beliefs] as his views fell outside of
the consensus of Sunnī scholars. Ibn Taymiyyah is considered one of the
ideological forefathers of Wahhābism and Salafism. For more on his views
see Allawī’s “Sufyanī or Muḥammadī Islām.”

[^51]: Editor’s Note: Muḥammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhāb (1703-92) founded the
puritanical Wahhābī sect of Islām in Nejd c. 1744. The Wahhābis
conquered Arabia (1803), were beaten by the Ottoman Turks (1819) and
acquired political power under King ibn Saud (early 20th c.). They
destroyed the tombs of the Prophet’s Family and Companions in the
Cemetery of al-Bāqī in Madīnah. They were poised to raze the Prophet’s
tomb but were forced to retreat due to Egyptian threats of war.
Extremist Wahhābīs hold that all Muslims, with the exception of
themselves, are heretics and infidels whose blood is ḥalāl. This has
resulted in the rape and slaughter of Sunnī, Shī‘ite and Ṣūfī Muslims
throughout the Islāmic world, most particularly in Arabia, Afghanistan,
Iraq, Pakistan, and India.

[^52]: Editor’s Note: It is for this reason that Shī‘ite Islām is
described as Islām-Original and the Imāms are viewed as the Pillars of
Islām.

[^53]: Author’s Note: The word kisā’ means “mantle” or “cloak.” In
Shī‘ite Gnosticism, the practice of wearing and passing on the mantle is
associated with the passing of the spiritual and temporal authority of
the Muḥammadan wilāyah. Among the Ṣūfis from the Sunnī world, the
practice of wearing and passing on the mantle is intimately associated
with the transmission of the “sanctifying grace” of “blessed influx”
[barakah] of the wilāyah [holinesss] which, in its origins, is related
to Shī‘ite esoterics and the Gnostic doctrines of the Imāms. This ḥadīth
appears in different form in Shī‘ite sources like Ghāyat al-marām
(Tehran 1272, 287). The recognition of the spiritual supremacy of ahl
al-bayt (The Prophetic Household), namely, Fāṭimah, ‘Alī, Ḥasan and
Ḥusayn by Umm Salamah, the wife of the Prophet, who did not include
herself among them, appears in many Sunnī sources like, Ṣaḥīḥ Tirmidhī
(vol. 5, 31 (H. 3258), 328, (H. 3275); 361, while the recognition of
this spiritual supremacy by another wife of the Prophet, ‘Ā’ishah, who
also excluded herself from the ahl al-bayt, appears in Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim
(Cairo, many different editions), ed. ‘Isā al-Halabī, vol. 2, 368, vol
15, 194; as well as Ṣaḥīḥ Bukhārī (Cairo, 1932) vol I, 39, and Tirmidhī
V. 31.

[^54]: Editor’s Note: The author refers to al-Kawthar, [the Fountain],
the titled bestowed upon the Prophet’s daughter, Fāṭimah al-Zahrā’, the
wife of ‘Alī, the First Imām, and the mother of the eleven Imāms that
followed. According to some Shī‘ite sources, Sūrat al-Kawthar was
revealed by Almighty Allāh regarding the birth of Fāṭimah al-Zahrā’.

[^55]: Editor’s Note: For an analysis of the genesis of Wahhābism, see
Ḥamīd Algar, Wahhābism: A Critical Essay. Oneonta (N.Y.): Islāmic
Publications International, 2002. See also, Wahhābism by Ayātullāh
Ja‘far Subḥanī.

[^56]: Editor’s Note: Martin Luther (1483-1546) was the leader of the
Protestant Reformation. By labeling ‘Abd al-Wahhāb as the “Luther of the
Arab World,” the author wishes to stress the similarities between
Protestant and Wahhābī reformism. Luther, like ‘Abd al-Wahhāb, was
opposed to all metaphysical speculations, that is, to any interpretation
which was not strictly literal. Luther, like ‘Abd al-Wahhāb, was a rigid
and uncompromising moralist and Luther, like ‘Abd al-Wahhāb was a
simpleton, devoid of intellectual lucidity. When the author makes an
analogy between Luther and ‘Abd al-Wahhāb, he does so to stress the dry,
literalist and fundamentalist spirit of these Christian and Muslim
innovators. While Luther is widely considered a “reformer,” he did not
reform Christianity in the least bit. Protestantism remained the same as
the Catholic Church from which it separated: Trinitarian, believing in
the divinity of Jesus, his incarnation, and his crucifixion. The only
change that Luther instituted was a moral reform, a reform in customs,
in much the same way as ‘Abd al-Wahhāb did. If the author has compared
these two figures it is because they wanted to adjust the sense of the
scripture to their own literal interpretation. Furthermore, both figures
manifested a narrow-minded, fundamentalist and fanatical spirit. If
Netton is justified in saying that “Ibn al-‘Arabī is the Meister Eckhart
of the Islāmic tradition,” the author is amply authorized to compare
‘Abd al-Wahhāb to Luther, particularly considering the audience to which
the book is addressed: the Western World. As the Qur’ān says, speak to
the people in the language of the people (14:14). In the present-day
Shī‘ite world, reformist figures include the philosopher ‘Abd al-Karīm
Soroush, often likened to Martin Luther, and Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā Yūsuf
Sanā‘ī who is at the head of what has been described as a full fledged
Islāmic Reformation, an event comparable in many ways to the Christian
Reformation of the 16th century. Sanā‘ī has passed many modernist
reformist rulings. He allows sex change operations under certain
circumstances (Fatḥi). He has legalized abortion in the first trimester,
and not only due to a mother’s health and fetal abnormalities. He
believes that “under some conditions--such as parents' poverty or
overpopulation--then abortion is allowed.” The Ayātullāh even writes
letters of consent for women to take to their doctors (Wright). He
believes in a slack enforcement of ḥijāb: “There is no need for
admonishing against women who leave their hair uncovered if it is
considered as inefficient” (Hamshahri Newspaper). His attitude toward
nikāh al-mut‘ah is the most restrictive of all Shī‘ite scholars. In his
view, “temporary marriage basically is not a lawful revelry in Islām or
something parallel to permanent marriage. So for those whose wives are
available and they can provide their sexual needs with her, temporary
marriage, even with Muslim women is problematic, in my idea, and even
possible to prohibit” (Hamshahri). He has even ruled that: “There is no
oppression and denial of rights [in Islām] and all human beings are
honored. And Allāh says, “We have honored the children of Adam.” Thus,
there is no racial discrimination in Islāmic laws and the black and the
white are equal. There is no sexual or national discrimination either.”
Several years ago I suggested to Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā Lankarānī that an
edict prohibiting racism would be in order. He explained that no edict
was required for such a matter as “Islām has abolished racism.” Rulings
and edicts are only required for new issues and developments. There is
no need for a fatwā against racism because Islām clearly condemns racial
discrimination. The populist apologetic edicts of Sanā‘ī, who is
described as “Khomeini’s feminist protégé,” find ample support among
liberals, reformists, feminists and non-Muslims. Nonetheless, Sanā‘ī has
made some important rulings regarding women’s rights which are most
welcomed, namely: “Blood money for intended-like murder of women and men
is equal and this is provable from reasons of blood money” (Hamshahri);
and “Studying science and jurisprudence cannot be excluded to men, since
all humans are encouraged to study and they can have all decrees of
judgement, jurisprudence, authoring, and leadership” (Hamshahri). Women
are thus equal before the law and free to assume any role within
society.

[^57]: Editor’s Note: Ibn al-‘Arabī (1165-1240) is perhaps the most
famous mystic of Islām. His chief works, Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam and al-Futūhāt
al-makkiyyah [The Makkan Openings] form an encyclopedia of Ṣūfī
doctrines. The attitudes of philosophers towards Ibn al-‘Arabī are
divided.

[^58]: Editor’s Note: Saudi petrol dollars, the CIA, and the Israeli
secret services, are accused of spreading the Wahhābī ideology
worldwide. See, Richard Labevière’s Dollars for Terror.

[^59]: Author’s Note: For the eschatological notion of the parusia of
the Twelfth Imām al-Mahdī, the Hidden and Awaited Imām, see Corbin,
“L’Imām et la rénovation de l’homme dans la théologie shī’ite” in
Erannos-Jahrbuch (Zurich 1960), XXVIII, 87; Muṭahharī and Bāqir al-Ṣadr,
L’Imām Occulto (Roma 1987), translated and edited by Palazzi; ‘Allāmah
Ṭabātabā‘ī, Shī‘ite Islām (Qum 1409/1989), especially chapters VII,
210-214; as well as Shaykh al-Mufīd’s Kitāb al-irshād: The Book of
Guidance (Tehran 1377), with a preface by Naṣr and translated by Howard,
IX, 524-551. Editor’s Note: Numerous traditions establish Imām Mahdī’s
role as religious reformer. According to the Sixth Imām, When the Qā’im,
peace be on him, rises, he will summon the people to Islām anew and
guide them to a matter which had become lost and from which people had
gone astray. He is only called the Mahdī [the one who has been guided]
because he guides to a matter from which [men] have deviated. He is only
called the Qā’im [the one who rises] because of his rising. (Mufīd 551)

[^60]: Editor’s Note: Ta’wīl can be translated as spiritual
hermeneutics. Literally, it means to go to the origin of a thing. As
Naṣr explains, “It means to penetrate the external aspect of any
reality, whether it be sacred scripture or phenomena of nature, to its
inner essence, to go from the phenomenon to the noumenon” (Shī‘ite Islām
85). According to Nwyia, Sunnī exegesis is a tafsīr, an explication of
the text at the level of the letter of alfāẓ whereas Shī‘ite exegesis is
more of a ta’wīl, that is, an interpretation at the level of the ma‘nā:
it seeks, beyond the literal sense, the hidden sense, the secret of
which belongs to the ahl al-bayt, the Family of the Prophet (33). The
book then becomes an esoteric revelation, a sealed treasure which can
only be opened by the Imāms, the retainers of ta’wīl and the guardians
of the book (33). To speak of Sunnī exegesis as literal and Shī‘ite
exegesis as profound is a groundless generalization since most tafāsīr,
of both branches, is simply tafsīr, commentary. It is only the Gnostics,
of both branches, who have interpreted the Qur’ān according to the
ta’wīl. Nwyia’s comments need to be further qualified as they imply an
inaccessibility of the Scripture to all but an exclusive elite of
initiates, the Prophet and His Family. As Imām Khumaynī explains, “The
Qur’ān is like a banquet from which everyone must partake according to
his capacity. It belongs to everyone, not to any particular group; there
is a share in it for everyone” (Islām and Revolution 424); “The Qur’ān
possesses everything. It is like a vast banquet that God has spread out
in front of all humanity and that everyone partakes of according to his
appetite” (414). “The highest share,” however, “is reserved for the one
to whom it was revealed: ‘The only person who truly knows the Qur’ān is
he who was addressed by it’” (415); “only he who was addressed by it
fully understands it” (393-94); “Full benefit can be drawn from the
Qur’ān only by the man to whom it was addressed--The Messenger of God”
(392). “All others are deprived of such complete benefit,” he continues,
“unless they attain it by means of instruction from him, as was the case
with the awliyyā’.” (392). We can understand only a given aspect or
dimension of the Qur’ān; interpretation of the rest depends upon the ahl
al-‘iṣmah (365-66). This is consistent with the Qur’ānic verse which
states that: “We bequeathed the Book on those of Our servants We chose”
(35:32). As Imām Khu’ī explains, “the knowledge of the Qur’ān’s reality
is exclusively with the Imāms (A) and others do not have a share in it.”
The Prophet made it clear that personal interpretation of the Qur’ān was
forbidden. He stated that: “Whoever interprets the Qur’ān according to
his opinion, let him seek his abode in the fire” (Tirmidhī); and “He who
makes tafsīr according to his own opinion has become an unbeliever”
(Kashānī and Ibn al-’Arabī qtd in Murata 227). The interpretation of the
Qur’ān lies with the Prophet and the Holy Imāms for as Imām al-Ṣādiq has
said, “We are the custodians of Allāh’s affairs, the treasurers of
Allāh’s knowledge and the containers of Allāh’s revelation” (Kulaynī 2:1
74: ḥadīth 505). By tafsīr bi al-ra’ī, the Prophet and the Imāms were
referring to interpreting the Qur’ān without the necessary skills.

[^61]: Editor’s Note: As Imām Khumaynī explains: The Qur’ān indicates
that it descended to the Prophet: ‘The Trusted Spirit descended with it
to your heart’ (26:193). The Qur’ān underwent a descent to the Prophet
by means of the Trusted Spirit so that it might be received by him at
his station. In the same connection, God says, ‘We sent it [the Qur’ān]
down on the Night of Power’ (97:1); that is, ‘We sent it down in its
entirety to the Prophet on the Night of Power, in the form of a
manifestation.’ First, the Qur’ān was in the keeping of the Trusted
Spirit, and then it underwent a descent in order to enter the heart of
the Prophet. The Qur’ān descended, then, from level to level, from
degree to degree, until finally it assumed a verbal form. The Qur’ān is
not verbal in substance; it does not pertain to the audiovisual realm …
When the manifestation of God Almighty emerges from the unseen and
descends to the world of nature or bodies, there is a vast distance
separating this lowest degree from the infinite realms of the unseen,
and beyond them, the first appearance of that manifestation. There is a
correspondingly vast distance separating our perception from that of
those superior to us, at the pinnacle of whom stand the awliyyā’ and the
prophets of God. (Islāmic Revolution 393) The Qur’ān is a mystery, a
mystery within a mystery, a mystery veiled and enveloped in mystery. It
was necessary for the Qur’ān to undergo a process of descent in order to
arrive at the lowly degree of man. Even its entry into the heart of the
Prophet was a descent, and from there it had to descend still further in
order to become intelligible to others. (409) Or, as the Prophet put it,
“This Qur’ān is God’s banquet” (Dārimī qtd. in Murata 291).

[^62]: Editor’s Note: The Mahdī is also known as Imām al-‘Aṣr, the Imām
of the Age.

[^63]: Editor’s Note: René Guénon became a Ṣūfī Muslim in 1912 under the
influence of ‘Abdul-Hādī (1869-1917), formerly known as Yvan Aguéli, a
Swedish painter who was a convert to Islām. Upon taking his shahādah,
Guénon adopted the name ‘Abd al-Wāḥid Yaḥyā. Shortly thereafter, he
received the barakah, namely, the spiritual initiatory influence of
Muslim mysticism from ‘Abd al-Raḥmān Alish al-Kabīr, a shaykh of the
Shādhilī order. Guénon left Paris in 1930 and moved to Cairo, where he
lived the rest of his life as a Ṣūfī, married to Fāṭma Hānem, the
daughter of Shaykh Muḥammad Ibrāhīm, with whom he had four children, two
girls and two boys, Aḥmad and ‘Abd al-Wāḥid. Since the 1930s, he had
been surrounded by numerous European “disciples” who were drawn to Islām
and Ṣūfism, including Frithjof Schuon who visited him in Cairo in 1935,
as well as Titus Ibrāhīm Burckhardt, Martin Lings, whose Muslim name is
Abū Bakr Sirāj, Michel Muṣṭafā Vâlsan, and others. René Guénon was the
restorer or reviver of traditional thought in the West and its most
eloquent exponent. Subscribing to the doctrine of perennialism, the
Traditionalists believe that all “traditional” religions share the same
essence. They believe that salvation can be found by means of Judaism,
Buddhism, Hinduism, Christianity, and Islām. They reject Sikhism,
Bahā’ism, and other newer religions, sects, and cults. The
Traditionalist movement divided in 1948-50 after a split between Guénon
and the Swiss Ṣūfī Shaykh Frithjof Schuon (1907-98), founder of the
Maryamiyyah ṭarīqah. As Mark Sedgwick explains, Traditionalism was
developed in different directions by Schuon and by two other followers
of Guénon: Baron Julius Evola (1896/8-1974), and the scholar Mircea
Eliade (1907-86) who had a far-reaching influence in American academia.
Over the second half of the twentieth century, “Schuon’s Ṣūfī order
remained secret, but grew in influence in Europe and America, and in
Iran under the leadership of Seyyed Ḥossein Naṣr (1933-). Although many
of Guénon’s followers professed the shahādah, not all Guénonian
Traditionalists are Muslims. Guénon died in 1951, shorty after becoming
a naturalized Egyptian. Unlike Henry Corbin, who left no Muslim
followers, René Guénon brought hundreds of thousands of people into
Islām in France, the United States, Latin America, Spain and Portugal.
Like many Sunnī Muslims, Guénon had many misconceptions about Shī‘ites.
He did acknowledge, however, that all Islāmic spirituality was Shī‘ite,
in the true sense of the term. There are those who wish to dismiss
Guénon for being a Freemason, however, it should be recalled that he
wrote strong articles against modern Masonry and was even a member of
the magazine La France Antimaçonique. It must be recalled that Masonic
Lodges operate independently. There is also a major difference between
the Masonry practiced in France and the Masonry practiced in Scotland,
for example. Guénon was opposed to the modern, anti-traditional,
Speculative Masonry, not the traditional Operative Masonry of the middle
Ages which build magnificent cathedrals. The original Freemasons
disappeared in the XVII century and were replaced by a speculative
Masonry based on Protestant ideas of free thought and progress. Despite
being a Mason, Guénon lived and died as a pious Muslim, having brought
many Masons into the fold of Islām.

[^64]: Author’s Note: See R. Guénon, Introduction général à l’étude des
doctrines hindoues. III 3. Editor’s Note: The Vedanta is the orthodox
Hindu school of philosophy concerned chiefly with the latter part of the
Vedas, the four books of the ancient Hindu scripture.

[^65]: Editor’s Note: The goal of Islāmic hermeneutics is to establish a
balance between the letter of the law and its spirit; not focus
exclusively the letter of the law as the Wahhābis and Salāfis do; nor
focus exclusively on the spirit of the law as some mystics do.

[^66]: Editor’s Note: While Wahhābism aims to cleanse Islām of what its
adherents view as innovations, deviations, heresy and idolatry, most
historians (both Arab and non-Arab) hold that Wahhābism is in fact a new
form of Islām, containing many changes in both theology and practice.
Shaykh Hishām Kabbanī from the Islāmic Supreme Council of America has
estimated that 80% of mosques in the United States follow the Wahhābi
ideology. He was criticized, however, for failing to substantiate his
claim.

[^67]: Editor’s Note: The Wahhābis accuse ahl al-sunnah and ahl al-bayt
of innovations when they themselves are the greatest of innovators.

[^68]: Editor’s Note: An example of Wahhābī scriptural deviation
includes the application to Muslims of Qur’ānic verses that were
specifically revealed regarding polytheists. For a contentious overview
of Wahhābī / Salafī / Deobandī beliefs, see Zubair Qamar’s “Wahhābism:
Understanding the Roots and Role Models of Islāmic Fanaticism and
Terror” and Fayad Aḥmad’s “Some Beliefs of the Sipah e Sahaba and
Lashkar e Jhangavi.”

[^69]: Editor’s Note: As Asaf Fyzee observes, “As for ‘orthodoxy,’ a
minority, however small, may well have retained a very close touch with
the original tradition; the majority, however preponderant, may
conceivably have lost it in the stress of political conflicts” (3-4).

[^70]: Editor’s Note: Suhrawardī was the founder of the School of
Illumination in which the symbolism of light and darkness prevails.

[^71]: Editor’s Note: Neo-Pythagoreanism refers to the doctrines of an
Alexandrian school of philosophy (1st c. A.D.) which put a mystical
interpretation on many Pythagorean ideas. Pythagoras (c. 580-c. 500
B.C.) was a Greek mathematician and philosopher. He founded the
Pythagorean School which believed in metempsychosis, that the soul
imprisoned in the body could be purified by study, and following a
strict discipline of purity and self-examination.

[^72]: Editor’s Note: Hermeticism pertains to alchemy or magic relating
to the writings attributed to Hermes Trismegistus.

[^73]: Editor’s Note: The Sabians were a sect from Ḥarrān which followed
astrological doctrines. According to some interpretations, they were
Manicheists. They are not to be confused with the Sabaeans, the
inhabitants of Saba, mentioned in the Qur’ān. These latter developed a
flourishing kingdom (c. 930-c. 115 B.C.) in South Arabia. They are
mentioned in the Qur’ān but are no longer extant. Author’s Note: Both
the origin and meaning of the term Sabian is uncertain, and many
etymologies have been suggested to define it. Many linguists lean
towards the Arabic verb ṣabba (convert, namely, one who receives the
“baptism” instituted by John the Baptist). The term ṣabba is known to
Arabic-speaking Muslims and the Sabians are mentioned in the Qur’ān
(5:73; 2:59; 22:17) as People of the Book. The title of “Baptists” is
based on the regular use of baptism as a religious discipline. It is for
this reason that the Christian Patriarchs referred to them by the Greek
term emerobaptistai, namely, those who practice baptism on a daily
basis. Even the term soubaioi was known among Greek writers.
Nevertheless, the most common name used in religious literature is that
of Nasoreans, from the Arabic naṣārā). This extraordinary coincidence is
startling since the Nasoreans are not the least bit inclined to
Christianity. On the contrary, they look down upon it and detest it.
Their doctrines are also far removed from Christian beliefs, with the
exception of the belief in a Saviour, and some superficial similarities
their ceremonies have with Christian rites. It has also been argued that
the term Sabean is derived from the Hebrew saba [one who walks]; the
Ethiopian Sbh [scattered souls], and even the Syrian sb [to baptize].
Some claim that the term probably derives from the Egyptain root sba
which means “star-guide” and “star-god.” This is quite possible as the
Sabians of Ḥarrān were the ancient Chaldeans who professed a doctrine
containing neo-Pythagorean and Hermetic elements. As such, they were the
last representatives of Alexandrine Hermetic gnosis. They are those with
whom the prophet Abraham dealt with since he was born among
“star-worshippers.” Muslim researchers have identified the Sabians of
Ḥarrān as the true Sabians mentioned in the Qur’ān and which are
described as “star-worshippers” and “idol-worshippers.” Both practices
were very common among the Sabians of Ḥarrān and Abraham struggled
against them. Ḥarrān was founded as a city some 4,000 years ago, as a
business post for the city of Ur, the birthplace of Abraham, located on
the commercial route of Mesopotamia. Despite the fact that they
worshipped idols and celestial bodies, the Sabians of Ḥarrān believed in
one God, IL, unique and unknowable, beyond the comprehension of His
creatures. They also believed in the need for messengers of God to
educate humankind. The Sabians believed that they had received their
religión from Seth, the son of Adam, which is why they are identified
with the Gnostic Sethians and with Idris or Enoch who is usually
identified with Hermes Trismegisto. The Islāmic tradition recognized
Hermes or Enoch as a prophet. The names Hermes, Idri or Enoch all refer
to the same Person. Sabianism flourished from the 9th to the 10th
centuries under Islāmic rule. They Sabians produced philosophers,
astronomers, medical doctors, and botanists. The most distinguished
figure from that renaissance was the great Sabian astronomer Thābith ibn
Qurrah, one of the main trasmittors of ancient science to Islām, who
attempted, unfruitfully to reform his religion and to free it from the
superstitions of its priests. In the year 717, the Caliph Umar the
Second, founded the first Islāmic university in Ḥarrān. To get the
university off to a good start, the Caliph invited the last Hermenesian
philosophers from Alexandria to move to Ḥarrān. In the 9th century A.D.,
there existed four hermenesian schools in Ḥarrān.

[^74]: Editor’s Note: Like Ayātullāh Miṣbāh Yazdī, the author does not
deny the existence of foreign elements among Muslim Gnostics or Ṣūfis.
Both scholars assert the originality of Islāmic Gnosis. This does not,
however, mean that they condone whatever has been called gnosis or
Ṣūfism in Islām since many of the views and manners of behaviour of the
Ṣūfī Orders are disputable. The key to differentiating between a true
Muslim mystic and a pseudo-Ṣūfī charlatan is the respect, application
and practice of the sharī‘ah. There can be no esoteric without its
exoteric grounding. It was these pseudo-Ṣūfis who were cursed by the
Imāms, and not the true followers of the spiritual path. For more on the
image of the path in Islām, refer to our study on this subject: Morrow,
John Andrew “The Image of the Road in Islamic Literature.” Proceedings
from the Image of the Road Conference. Eds. Will Wright and Steven
Kaplan. Pueblo: SISSI, Colorado State U-Pueblo, 2005.

[^75]: Editor’s Note: Epicureans were the followers of Epicurus (341-270
B.C.), an Athenian atomist philosopher. He regarded sense perception as
the only basis of knowledge and believed that material objects throw off
images which enter our senses. He considered the highest good to be
pleasure, but this meant freedom from pain and emotional upheaval,
achieved not through sensual indulgence but through the practice of
virtue. His teachings formed the basis of the De rerum natura of
Lucretius.

[^76]: Editor’s Note: The Cynics were members of a school of Greek
philosophy founded by Antisthenes. They taught that virtue is the only
good and that it is to be won by self-control and austerity, not by
social conventions.

[^77]: Editor’s Note: Bilāl Philips is wrong to link Shī‘ite and
Mu‘tazilite philosophy (5).

[^78]: Author’s Note: For the ikhwān al-ṣafā’, see S.H. Naṣr, An
Introduction to Islāmic Cosmological Doctrines (London 1978), 1, I to
IV, 25-104; Islāmic Life and Thought (London 1981), especially chapters
10 and 11.

[^79]: Editor’s Note: Henry Corbin privately professed to be a Shī‘ite
Muslim mystic. He acknowledged his belief in the secret of Shī‘ism,
namely, the existence of the Living Imām. ‘Allāmah Ṭabātabā’ī, Ayātullāh
Ḥasanzadeh Amoli, Seyyed Ḥuseinī Tehranī, and Seyyed Ḥossein Naṣr have
all attested to Corbin’s acceptance of Twelver Shī‘ism. It is said that
Corbin performed the pilgrimage to Makkah with Naṣr. A perusal of
Corbin’s scholarship, however, demonstrates his interest in “spiritual
Shī‘ism,” consisting of the ghulāt and the Ismā‘īlīs, as opposed to
“official Shī‘ism,” namely, the mainstream legal tradition of Twelver
Shī‘ism. Although he greatly admired the Twelve Imāms, Corbin held many
“heterodox” beliefs. For example, he believed that the occulutation of
the Mahdī was permanent and that he would only reappear in the hearts of
believers. According to Ismael Velasco, Corbin’s work “constitutes a
philosophical bridge between the Bābī-Bahā’ī Faiths and the
philosophical and religious matrix within which they were conceived” and
may be seen “as a veritable Prolegomenon to the study of Bābī and Bahā’ī
scripture.” In the words of Velasco, “Corbin followed the thread of
Islāmic spirituality from the Twelve Imāms at its genesis, to the
Shaykhī school at its terminus.” It is important to mention, however,
that although his works represents a conceptual link between Shaykhism,
Bābism, and Bahā’ism, Corbin was critical of these last two movements.
For more on the subject, see the following works by Vittor: “La fe bahai
y la contra-tradición en el mundo islámico,” a paper read on October
23rd, 1997 at the Joseph de Maistre Institute of Traditional Studies in
Buenos Aires, and amplification and expansion of an article previously
published in Atma-Jñana. Revista Bimestral de Síntesis Espiritual 8
(Buenos Aires 1990): 17-29; “Guénon y la iniciación en el esoterismo
islámico” a paper read on August 23 rd, 2001, during the Primera Semana
Guenoniana de Buenos Aires, celebrated in the Library of Congress, as
well as the article “El Concepto del ta’wil desde la perspectiva
fenomenológica de H. Corbin” in the cultural suplement Letras e Ideas 18
(Buenos Aires 1991): 3-8.

[^80]: Editor’s Note: Editor’s Note: Frithjof Schuon (1907-1998) was a
German-Swiss scholar. A convert to Islām, his Muslim name was ‘Īsa Nūr
al-Dīn Aḥmad. He was a student of René Guénon, the reviver of the
Traditionalist theory, with whom he broke from in 1950. He claimed to
have been visited by the Virgin Mary in the 1960s. According to Schuon,
the Virgin Mary gave him the universal message of proclaiming the
transcendental unity of religion. As a result of this series of visions,
he formed his own ṭarīqah known as the Maryamiyyah. It should be
stressed that the Maryamiyyah, which was named after the Virgin Mary,
was an invention of Schuon, who claimed she had invested him from on
high. In an interview with the magazine Vers la tradition Khaled
Bentounès, the present Shaykh of the ṭarīqah ‘Alawiyyah categorically
denied any ties between Schuon’s group and the mother ṭarīqah from 1954
onwards. As such, there was a clear rupture in the silsilah, the chain
of transmission, which is an essential compoment of the spiritual
universe of Islāmic initiatory orders. While Shaykh Bentounès does not
deny the value of Schuon’s work, he views the Swiss as a scholar and not
as a spiritual guide. In his article “René Guénon y la iniciación en el
esoterismo islámico” (Buenos Aires 2001), Luis Alberto Vittor makes the
following observation: As is well-known, while Schuon was living in
Paris in the early 1930s, he wrote to Guénon, then a resident of Cairo,
asking his advice as to which “spiritual guide” he should associate
himself with. Before receiving a response from Guénon, Schuon moved from
Paris to Marseilles. While at a zāwiyyah with some Algerian fuqarā’ from
the ṭarīqah ‘Alawiyyah, he was persuaded to pay a visit to Shaykh Aḥmad
Muṣṭafā al-‘Alawī. In the middle of all this turbulence, he received the
response from Guénon advising him to head to Mostagan to contact Shaykh
al-‘Alawī. This answer finally convinced Schuon, who set off to Mostagan
in 1932, to join the ṭarīqah of Shaykh al-‘Alawī. It was in Mostagan
that Schuon embraced Islām, adopting the Muslim name ‘Īsā Nūr al-Dīn. By
this time, Guénon had already established ties with Shaykh Salama Raḍī,
the founder of the ṭarīqah Ḥamīdiyyah Shādhiliyyah, whom he met on his
way to Mosque of Sayyidinā al-Ḥusayn where he regularly went to pray. In
order to avoid controversy, and simple “refutations,” we will not pass
judgement, but merely pose a question. Why did Guénon advise Schuon to
go to Mostagan to contact Shaykh al-‘Alawī rather than having him
contact his own shaykh in Cairo? Perhaps some passages intersperced
through his letters may give us a hint. In a letter dated November 1st,
1927, Guénon made the following comments regarding the opening of a
zāwiyyah of the ṭarīqah ‘Alawiyyah in Paris: “It seems that this
brotherhood is spreading to great extent. I have also been informed that
it has a zāwiyyah in Paris, on Boulevard Saint-Germain, a few steps from
here. Otherwise, it arouses suspicion that it might become too open and
can mislead like many others.” In another letter dated December 31st,
1927, he repeats: I think I already mentioned that the ‘Alawis have a
center in Paris which is aimed exclusively at Arabs and Kabyles.
Although I have been invited to contact them I have not had time to do
so, despite the fact that I am close by. Nonetheless, it would be
interesting to see it, as it might be more interesting than the
brotherhood presently in formation and in which Europeans will also be
admitted. As I believe I already mentioned, the introduction of Western
elements can easily become a cause of misguidance. Note that both
passages correspond to letters written in 1927, three years before
Schuon requested Guénon to recommend him a spiritual guide. A detractor
of Schuon might easily wonder why Guénon directed him to the ṭarīqah
‘Alawiyyah when he apparently disapproved of the openess to Western
elements manifested by the Parisian zāwiyyah. It is not our aim to
examine the reasons which led Schuon to deviate from straight path. It
suffices to say that it is likely related, consciously or
subconsciously, to the influence of anti-traditional forces which made
him a mere instrument. One must wonder whether Guénon viewed Schuon as
one of those destructive Western influences through which misguidance
might enter Islām. Later developments regarding the devious practices
and innovations made by Schuon seem to give credence to those who affirm
that Guénon had perceived the shadow of his twisted spirituality. It
should be stressed that Shaykh ‘Abd al-Wāḥid Yaḥyā never had issues with
the ṭarīqah ‘Alawiyyah itself as its chain of initiation is legitimate
and unobjectionable. His only concern was that one of its branches in
the West might undermine traditional principles, distorting its
teachings, and introducing innovations. As far as the author and Editor
of this work are concerned, we have no doubts that these were the
concerns of Guénon as we have both observed deviant developments
throughout the Western world. Whether Schuon was a bona fide Ṣūfī Shaykh
revolves around the famous ijāzah he received from the hands of Shaykh
Adda Ben Tūnisī. Luis Alberto Vittor was fortunate enough to have an
Arabic copy of the ijāzah before his own eyes, graciously provided to
him by ex-members of the ṭarīqah. As he explains in his article: From
the beginning of Schuon’s trip to Mostagan and his contact with Shaykh
al-‘Alawī, a great misunderstanding developed which we now hope to
clarify. This misunderstanding--which has nothing to do with the ṭarīqah
‘Alawiyyah--revolves around the supposed ijāzah [authorization] that
Schuon had received as muqaddam [delegate] at the hands of Shaykh Adda
Ben Tūnisī, the successor of Shaykh al-‘Alawī, allegedly authorizing him
to initiate others in the Western world. The dispute between Schuon and
Guénon derives precisely from a misinterpretation of the contents of the
licence, particularly with regards to the true role Schuon was supposed
to play as muqaddam. In the famous document, whose Arabic original we
have before our eyes, Shaykh Adda Ben Tūnisī clearly says, qad adhintu
fī nashr al-da‘wah al-islāmiyyah [I grant him permission to call people
to Islām], talqīn kalimāt at-tawḥīd: Lā ilāha illā Allāh [to preach the
profession of faith: There is no god but Allāh], and most importantly,
to teach al-wājibāt al-dīniyyah [the religious obligations]. This means
that Shaykh Adda Ben Tūnisī merely gave Schuon a permission [idhn] to do
da‘wah, namely, to spread the message of Islām in the West, that is, to
teach the basic exoteric aspects of the religion. The Shaykh did not, in
any means, grant him the authority to act as a spiritual guide or
initiator. On the basis of the evidence, Shaykh Adda Ben Tūnisī never
authorized Schuon to transmit the ṭarīqah to others. Guénon himself
seems to have been confused with respect to the reach and restrictions
of the permission [idhn] since in a letter dated July 7th, 1949, he
writes: “In any event, Shaykh ‘Īsa’s title of muqaddam, with the power
of transmission which it implies, cannot be questioned.” In all
fairness, we must admit that the “permission” [idhn] which Schuon
received from Shaykh Adda Ben Tūnisī does not specifically grant the
authority to initiate others into Islāmic esoterism. Schuon had claimed
to have the ijāzah of Shaykh al-‘Alawī, and Guénon, out of good faith,
had accepted his word. The ijāzah in question, however, merely mentions
that Schuon is designated the muqaddam or representative of the Shaykh
with regards to simple daily observances, the basic, elementary
teachings used to spread the exoteric or universal pillars of Islām. In
other words, the license given by Shaykh Adda Ben Tūnisī only permits
Schuon to fulfil the basic works which every Muslim must accomplish de
motu propio [on his own] and which does not require any special
permission. Schuon may have been a great scholar, philosopher, and
talented artist; he was not, however, a certified shaykh of the
‘Alawiyyah Order. In 1954, Schuon cut his ties with the ṭarīqah
‘Alawiyyah, abruptly breaking the chain of initiation in a fashion
which, to say the least, is entirely unusual. The break was formalized
when Schuon founded his own, entirely autonomous, ṭarīqah, separate from
the mother branch, and which he eventually named the Maryamiyyah. By
breaking ties with the ṭarīqah ‘Alawiyyah of Mostagan in 1954, Schuon
created a Ṣūfī order which was totally anomalous. Unlike other orders,
it was devoid of any silsilah or initiatic chain of transmission. In the
Ṣūfī world, any ṭarīqah needs to provide a silsilah tracing its
spiritual lineage back to the Prophet, thus assuring its authenticity.
It is perhaps due to this reason that Guénon described the Maryamiyyah
as a “vague ‘universalist’ order.” In a letter from Cairo dated October
9th 1950, Guénon says, …in Lausanne, the ritual observances have been
reduced to a strict minimum. Most of them no longer fast during the
month of Ramaḍan. I never thought things could reach such a point. It
seems that I was entirely correct when I said that, soon enough, it
would no longer be a ṭarīqah but a vague “universalist” order, more or
less like the disciples of Vîvêkânanda! In yet another of his letters
from Cairo dated September 18th 1950, Guénon makes the following
observations with regards to Schuon, Burckhardt, and other members of
the ṭarīqah Maryamiyyah: On the other hand, I received a letter from
Burckhardt regarding my responses to M.L. [Martin Lings] saying that
“the violence of my letters has deeply troubled him, and that he cannot
understand the reasons for such severe remarks.” It seems to me that it
should not be very difficult to understand! ... It is shocking how far
bad faith can go. I, for one, am not the least bit surprised since, from
a technical point of view, the ignorance of those people, starting with
F.S. [Frithjof Schuon] himself, if truly frightening… Ex-members of the
Maryamiyyah have revealed disturbing information about its founder and
the ritual practices of the secretive ṭarīqah to several Muslim
scholars, including a Shaykh from the Jerrahi Order. Some of the early
followers of Schuon included Marco Pallis, Charles Le Gai Eaton, John
Levy, and Léo Schaya. The Swiss born Charles Le Gai Eaton (1922-)
embraced Islām in 1951 and is presently a consultant to the Islāmic
Cultural Center in London. Other Schuonian writers include: Thomas
Merton, Huston Smith, Jean Borella, Joseph Epes Brown, Titus Burckhardt,
Rama Coomaraswamy, Keith Critchlow, James Cutsinger, Victor Danner,
Michael Oren Fitzgerald, Martin Lings, Jean-Louis Michon, Vali Reza
Naṣr, Osman Bakar, Roger du Pasquier, Whithall Perry, Philip Sherrard,
Huston Smith, and William Stoddardt. Seyyed Ḥossein Naṣr was a member of
the Maryamiyya ṭarīqah, a discipline of Schuon, and is now his most
influential student. Dr. Mark Sedgwick’s academic website,
traditionalism.org, describes Naṣr as “the leading Maryami author” who
took over from Schuon.

[^81]: Editor’s Note: As Naṣr notes, “the voices of Louis Massignon,
H.A.R. Gibb, and Henry Corbin, followed by a later generation of
sympathetic Western scholars like Annemarie Schimmel, remain truly
exceptional” (Heart of Islām xii). It would also be worthwhile to add
Sachiko Murata to this list.

[^82]: Editor’s Note: As Murad Wilfried Hofmann explains in his review
of Muḥammad Musṭafā al-‘Azīmī’s History of the Qur’ānic Text, Christian
demagogues like John of Damascus, Peter the Venerable, Raymundus Lull,
and Martin Luther, followed by infamous Jewish, Christian or secularist
Orientalists like Julius Wellhausen, Gustav Flügel, Theodor Nöldeke,
Ignaz Goldziher, Alphonse Mingana, Snouck Hurgronje or Joseph Schacht,
all did their best to prove that Islām was a corrupted Jewish-Christian
copy, based on forged aḥādīth, without any originality or saving grace.

[^83]: Editor’s Note: As Héctor Abū Dharr Manzolillo explains in his
article “Los ‘conversos’ en países con minorías musulmanas,” revealed
religions correspond to different steps along the same path to spiritual
perfection. Hence, going from Judaism to Christianity and from
Christianity to Islām is part of a logical continuation established by
God.

[^84]: Author’s Note: See M. Cruz Hernández, “Los estudios Islāmólogos
en España en los siglos XIX y XX” in A. Heredia Soriano (ed.), Exilios
filosóficos de España (Salamanca 1990): 490. Editor’s Note: The author
is playing the devil’s advocate with Orientalists. Even if scholars
subject Islām to the most rigid and merciless scientific analysis,
Islām, even as an allegedly man-made religion, comes out on top.

[^85]: Editor’s Note: As Naṣr notes, “most of these Orientalists studied
Islām in the arrogant belief that they possessed a flawless scientific
method that applied universally to all religions” (Heart of Islām xii).

[^86]: Editor’s Note: The Islāmic attitude, however, is not that Muslims
copied Christians who copied Jews who copied Egyptians and Babylonians
but that the similarities between their legislation can be accounted for
the fact that they come from the same eternal source: God.

[^87]: Editor’s Note: The Western concept of religion is narrow. The
Eastern concept of religion is much broader and encompasses all aspects
of human existence.

[^88]: Editor’s Note: According to Islāmic sources, the hundreds of
prophecies signaling the End of Days have been fulfilled. Only the final
major signs remain: the appearance of the anti-Christ, the return of
Imām Mahdī along with Jesus, the Messiah, and the sun rising in the West
which, for some, is not meant to be taken literally and refers to the
rise of Islām in the Western world. The return of the Twelfth Imām is
imminent.

[^89]: Editor’s Note: This is an allusion to the Qur’ānic verse: “To
Allāh We belong, and to Him is our return” (2:156) and (49:13). The
author is also alluding to the prophetic traditions concerning God
creating everything out of his own light.

[^90]: Editor’s Note: We remember vividly how Nigosian, our religious
studies professor at the University of Toronto, started his class on
world religions: “Religion is the product of the human imagination…” For
many such scholars, atheism is the basis for the “scientific” study of
religion.

[^91]: Author’s Note: See Henry Daniel-Rops, La vida cotidiana en
Palestina en tiempo de Jesús (Buenos Aires 1961), III, 1, 382-83; as
well as Hans-Joachim Schoeps, El judeocristianismo: Formación de grupos
y luchas intestinas en la cristianidad primitiva (Valencia 1970:
146-150).

[^92]: Editor’s Note: Similarity between religions does not imply that
they borrowed from one another but rather that they have the same
spiritual origin: God.


