Chapter 2: Towards a Definition of Shi‘ism
==========================================

As we have seen before, “election,” “option,” and “inclination” are some
of the comprehensive meanings the Greek language gave to the term
*hairesis*. These meanings were passed into Latin, with the necessary
etymological adjustments, as *hoeresis* which conveys the ideas of
“opinion,” “dogma,” “party” and “sect.” Dictionaries define the meaning
of “sect” as a “body of people sharing religious opinions who have
broken away from a larger body.” It is often used as a term of
disapproval and is thus inconsistent with its original meaning of
“doctrine of a particular teacher who developed it and explained it and
which is accepted and defended by a group of followers.” By straying
from their original meanings and etymological roots, the words “heresy”
and “sect” have been applied for centuries to those who professed
“false” beliefs worthy of excommunication. In this limited sense, the
word “heresy” has more in common with the Hebrew term *herem*, meaning
excommunication and anathema, and the Arabic word *ḥarām*, from the root
*ḥarrama*, which means to deprive, to anathematize, to remove and to
excommunicate. The words “heresy” and “sect” were used in ancient times
to describe various schools of philosophy. Over the course of centuries,
however, the terms acquired pejorative connotations which eventually
came to dominate and replaced their original meanings. The terms
“heresy” and “sect” came to be commonly applied to all religious groups
which broke away from an original doctrine and who were in disagreement
with the dogmas and rituals which were officially orthodox.

For the Roman Catholic Church, all protestant sects born from the
Reformation were, in a strict sense, “heretical” and “heterodox” from
the moment they broke away from the Vatican. From around 1971, the term
“heretic,” with all of its connotations, was suppressed from the
Catholic ecclesiastic lexicon.[^1] Consequently, there are no longer any
“heresies”, these have been replaced with “mere doctrinal errors” which
do not merit excommunication. The modern mentality was evidently
unsatisfied with its classical lexical heritage and along with the older
terminology, it developed a wide body of new definitions. The Western
world uses these terms in so many contradictory ways that they do not
have a constant meaning. They apply them to religious phenomenon which
they view with suspicion but which they rarely try to understand. This
state of confusion is created by the modern habit of calling everything
into question.[^2] It is also a reflection of the total failure of the
“opinion-makers” who insist on taking the concept of “sect”--as vague as
it may be--as their sole starting point.

As Rudolf Otto has explained, the use and misuse of terms like “sect”
and “fundamentalism” quickly reaches an irrational point. What is most
surprising, however, is that this feeble conceptual chain has been
forged and molded to subject the same unknown enemy who frequently
changes forms like a many-sided proteose. The multitude of contradictory
definitions proposed by the “opinion-makers”--in a dry attempt to
describe diversity--actually impede proper classification.

The situation further complicates itself when some Orientalists, rather
than researching thought, move on to studying ideological struggles. As
a result, they divide themselves between scientific and political work.
If we focus so much on this issue, it is because our critical stance
requires us to do so. We are well within our rights to criticize the
attitude of those who, deliberately or involuntarily, by a mere
concession to modern language, spread falsehood and error.[^3] It is as
if the terms “sect” and “fundamentalism” were merely simple theological
references or epithets without any moral implications. We must ask
ourselves: Is it really possible that the richness of classical
definitions and terminology has been reduced to the point of describing
general ideological types?

It should be noted that the term “sect” is unduly applied to Shī‘ite
Islām without doctrinal justification and without paying attention to
whether such a definition is actually compatible with its perfectly
orthodox and traditional spirit. If this is not a case of terminological
standardization, then what is the point of insisting on its application?
Should the generic sense of “sect” be applied by default to every
religious minority on the basis of the same rigid and arbitrary
interpretation? We refer, of course, to those scholars who fancifully
turn every minority tradition into a “sect” without considering the true
meaning of its definition. In fact, these scholars often label certain
religious groups as “sects” when their followers are numerically equal
to the main groups within their tradition. Certain religious minorities
which are considered as “sects” in the West are perfectly orthodox
religious expressions. Such is the case with Shī‘ite Islām in the Middle
East, Buddhism or Taoism in the Far East, to mention some of the most
common examples. But, as we have seen, the tendency to give Shī‘ite
Islām the stigma of “sect” is premeditated. It is not by chance that
some “opinion-makers” and Orientalists have agreed on applying this
term. The definition of “sect,” as they know better than anyone else,
can conveniently be substituted--in a theological and philosophical
sense--by the more insidiously political and provocative one which
defines a sect as a “group of partisans with extreme and violent ideas.”

Faced with simplistic and reductionist interpretations which are
obsessed with grouping all religious minorities under one general label,
the indiscriminate application of the term “sect” continues to be
accepted. This is despite the fact that the commonly accepted meaning of
the term is nothing more than a convention or a deep-rooted prejudice
accepted by all without reserve. Even among educated people, the very
idea of “sect” always presupposes a deep-rooted reactionary and
intolerant attitude, which is how the *factio* [sect] can be recognized
and differentiated from the other majority “factions.” If anything novel
is added to this connotation, it reduces itself to concrete applications
that are called upon by the same semantic concessions of language that
adapt to changing circumstances. We refer specifically to the neologism
“fundamentalism” which implies an entire axiological classification
which, when dealing with Shī‘ite Islām, even descends to the basest
contempt.[^4]

The term “fundamentalist” can be correctly applied to American
Protestantism since its attitude and behavior is consistent with such a
definition. However, the new tendency is to give the term a political
sense linking it even more strongly with Shī‘ite Islām. The use of the
term “fundamentalist” in a political sense is really a recent
development. It traces back to the famous controversy between American
Protestants and the supporters of Darwin’s Theory of Evolution. The
dispute centered on the question as to whether state education should be
separated from religion as a means to promote the atheist doctrine of
evolution which is incompatible with the idea of God and divine
creation.[^5] At that time, the use of the term “fundamentalist” was far
from commonplace. The term “fundamentalist” has acquired a political
connotation which every day is more effectively integrated into the
vernacular, becoming normal in English and standard in other Western
languages. It is applied to a series of Islamic groups which resist and
reject any type of Western interference. It should be noted that the
French prefer the term *intégriste* and the Spaniards the word
*rigorista* when they try to define the same phenomenon.

Due to limitations of time and space, we cannot examine in depth the
reasons why the Western world insists on applying “sectarian” and
“fundamentalist” labels to Shī‘ite Islām. For the sake of brevity, we
will limit ourselves to saying that the application of such terms to
Shī‘ism is a form of reductionism which attempts to tarnish an entirely
orthodox expression of Islām. Not only do such labels impoverish
understanding and distort definitions, what is worse today is that they
are used without any conceptual contact with the true reality of its
thoughts and doctrine. Such definitions are often taken “lightly”
because they do not destroy the doctrines of Shī‘ite Islām. Nonetheless,
we must avoid indiscriminately applying such labels to Shī‘ism and other
schools of thought since they imply inclusion or exclusion of Islamic
doctrines on the basis of the one and only orthodoxy.

The same definition of “sect,” with some slightly different shades,
prevails among the Orientalists who wrote about Ṣūfīsm and Islamic
gnosis in the nineteenth century. Likewise, certain Orientalists have
applied the label of “sect” to Shī‘ite Islām. They were fond of giving a
Christian character to certain Shī‘ite beliefs and practices rather than
recognizing them as entirely Islamic in origin. These Arabists preferred
the term “sect” to that of “heresy.” They categorized Muslims on the
basis of Christian standards. For them, the “heretics” were those
Muslims who broke away from the doctrinal unity of the Islamic “Church”
while the “sectarians” were those who broke away from its
socio-political hierarchy. In this respect, it is important to remember
that, Saint Augustine, particularly in his admonitions against the
Pelagian, Manichaean, and Donatist heresies, rejected reductionism.[^6]
He categorically warned how difficult, if not impossible, it was to give
a definition of “heresy” that corresponds exactly to its essential
characteristics. For that reason, he warned against the temptation of
labeling doctrines as “heretical” considering how harmful the label of
“heretic” can be.[^7]

From a subjective psychological perspective, the characteristics of
heretics include intolerance, obstinacy, rebellion, and unsociability.
Those who hold erroneous, misguided or false ideas, yet believe with
good faith that their doctrine is the same as taught by the Church,
cannot be labeled as heretics or sectarians.[^8]

Imbued with such ideas, some Orientalists use the Catholic concept of
heresy as their theoretical framework. As a result, they labeled the
Ṣūfīs as heretics because they were “mystics” who believed in doctrines
which differed from those of the majority orthodox Sunnī “Church.”
Despite the fact that they profess the same fundamentals of faith, the
Shī‘ites were labeled as sectarian because they broke away from orthodox
Sunnism. After drawing these dogmas from Christian doctrine,
Orientalists rushed to apply them to Shī‘ism, labeling it as
“heretical,” “schismatic” and “sectarian” merely because it represented
a minority tradition, a fact which *in se* and *per se* [in and of
itself] does not constitute heresy. They failed to heed Saint
Augustine’s warning that appearances can be deceiving. [^9] They reduced
Shī‘ism to the level of a “heretical sect” despite the fact that there
are no doctrinal differences between Sunnī and Shī‘ite Islām.
Unfortunately, some contemporary Orientalists--the heirs of the old
mentality--continue to stubbornly label Shī‘ism as a “sect” outside the
fold of Islām. **Although Shī‘ites profess to be Muslims and share the
same beliefs as Sunnīs, they are, in the eyes of these specialists,
openly sectarian extremist heretics.**[^10]

In short, the tendency of some Orientalists to separate Shī‘ite Islām’s
visible or exoteric aspects--social and political--from its esoteric
aspects-- mystical and metaphysical--started in the nineteenth century
and intensified in the twentieth and early twenty-first century.
According to Alessandro Bausani, the increasingly radical
differentiation between a political and religious Shī‘ism provides an
opportunity for Arabists and Orientalists to eclipse the West from the
spiritual, metaphysical and esoteric aspects of a formal traditional
expression (4: 112-15). We have reason to fear that this initiative is a
last ditch effort on the part of the West to subject one of the last
genuine reserves of traditional thought into an indefinite zone of
relative obscurity and of temporal oversight. In other words, **when
some Orientalists and “opinion-makers” take** **interest in Shī‘ite
Islām, these professional polemicists are motivated by a desire to
create a false and distorted image of Shī‘ism**, isolating and stressing
**its exclusively political aspect.**[^11] Is this not a most extreme
case of ideological “fundamentalism?”

The one thing these theories--and others which are even more groundless
and fanciful--have in common is a desire to single handedly understand
the global reality of Shī‘ite Islām in all of its dimensions: exoteric
and esoteric, political and religious, metaphysical and spiritual. But
in fact, **the only thing they want to retain from their research is
that Sunnī Islām is the rule and Shī‘ite Islām is the exception.** The
Shī‘ites, they claim, view themselves as a small flock of chosen ones.
They are those who split from the orthodox majority, those who were
schismatic, who sought to foment dissent, spread discord, and provoke
division, because of some political question related to the succession
of the Prophet.[^12] As will be seen, these claims made by scholars are
based exclusively on Sunnī sources.[^13] And it is these Sunnī scholars
who brought the idea to Western scholars that, like the councils of the
Christian Church, the election of the Caliph or successor of the Prophet
can be decided “democratically” by means of consensus [*ijmā‘*].

[^1]: Editor’s Note: This was an extension of the innovations agreed
upon by the Second Vatican Council which was held between 1962 and 1965.
It included liturgical reform, called for mass to be held in the
language of the people and not Latin, removed the requirement for
religious dress for nuns, as well as the need for women to cover their
hair while in Church.

[^2]: Editor’s Note: Modern popular thought is characterized by cynicism
and contradictory reasoning. This attitude can be traced back to
Descartes who, by calling everything into doubt, laid the foundations of
modern philosophy.

[^3]: Editor’s Note: The author alludes to the Qur’ānic verses: “There
will every soul prove [the fruits of] the deeds it sent before: they
will be brought back to Allāh their rightful Lord, and their invented
falsehoods will leave them in the lurch” (10:30); “[In such falsehood]
is but a paltry profit; but they will have a most grievous Penalty” (16:
117); and “These our people have taken for worship gods other than Him:
why do they not bring forward an authority clear [and convincing] for
what they do? Who doth more wrong than such as invent a falsehood
against Allāh” (18:15).

[^4]: Author’s Note: Recent studies fully illustrate the changes the
term “fundamentalism” has undergone from a theological sense to an
ideological one. See E. Patlagean and A. Le Boulluec, Les retours aux
Écritures: Fondamentalismes présents et passés (Louvain: Paris 1993);
especially J. Bauberot, “Le fondamentalisme: Quelques hypothèses
introductives, ibid, 13-30 ; J. Séguy, “Le rapport aux Écritures dans
les sectes de terrain protestant” ibid 31-46; and tracing the modern
misguided aberations we already denounced, we must also present the
contrasting opinion of M.A. Amir-Moezzi, ”Réflections sur une évolution
du shī’isme duodécimain: tradition et idéologisation.” Ibid 63-82.

[^5]: Editor’s Note: For a scientific attempt to refute the theory of
evolution, see Hārūn Yaḥyā’s Evolution Deceit.

[^6]: Editor’s Note: Pelagianism is the “heresy” originated by Pelagius.
It denied original sin and the need for baptism, and held that grace was
not necessary for salvation. It asserted that free will and the law are
sufficient for man to live without sin. It arose in a reaction to
Gnosticism and Manichaeism, in the interests of a higher morality which
Pelagius found lacking in Rome. Originally, an attempt to heighten human
responsibility, it fell into the extreme of diminishing divine grace.
Opposed by Saint Augustine of Hippo, the “heresy” and Pelagius were
condemned by several synods (411-18). A form of the “heresy,” with
emphasis on free will, arose briefly (late 5th c.) in France but was
condemned (528-9). Pelagianism long continued as a trend in Christian
philosophy. Manichaeism is the religion founded by Mani (c. 216-c.276),
a Persian who held that the universe is dually controlled by opposing
powers of good and evil, which had become intermingled in the present
age, but at a future time would be separated and return to their own
realms. Mani’s followers were to aid this separation by leading an
ascetic life. The religion spread widely in Asia and around the
Mediterranean, but died out in the West by the 6th c., although it was a
major religion in the East until the 14th c. It influenced several early
Christian heresies. Donatism is a 4th century schism in the North
African Church which followed the apostasies during the Diocletian
persecutions. Donatists held that sacraments were invalid outside the
one visible Church, that sinners should be excommunicated, and that the
State had no rights in ecclesiastical matters. It is named after one of
its leaders, Donatus, who was bishop of Carthage. The schism drew from
Saint Augustine his lasting definition of the nature of the ministry and
sacraments of the Church.

[^7]: Editor’s Note: The Prophet has condemned the practice of takfīr,
namely, accusing Muslims of being infidels and unbelievers. The
Messenger of Allāh has said that: “If a Muslim calls another kāfir, then
if he is a kāfir let it be so; otherwise, he [the caller] is himself a
kāfir” (Abū Dāwūd); “No man accuses another man of being a sinner, or of
being a kāfir, but it reflects back on him if the other is not as he
called him” (Bukhārī). Likewise, the scholars of ahl al-sunnah have
warned against the takfīr of Muslims. Imām Abū Ḥanīfah said that he did
not consider anyone who prays facing the qiblah [Makkah] to be a kāfir
and that this was the consensus of the majority of ‘ulamā’. He wrote in
his will that “The followers of Muḥammad can be sinners but they are
believers, not kuffār.” Imām Shāfi‘ī said, “I do not consider anyone who
prays to be a kāfir on account of his sins.” For more on this, see “Who
is a Believer and who is an infidel?” in Naṣr’s The Heart of Islām. The
general rule in Islām is to treat as Muslims all those who assert that
they are Muslims unless their words, beliefs or actions clearly
demonstrate the contrary. Abū Sufyān, Mu’āwiyyah and Yazīd in days of
old; the Shah of Iran and Saddam Ḥusayn in recent times all claimed to
be Muslim while waging war against Islām.

[^8]: Editor’s Note: Likewise, in Islām, God judges people according to
their intentions: “Allāh will not call you to account for
thoughtlessness in your oaths, but for the intention in your hearts; and
He is Oft-forgiving, Most Forbearing” (2: 225). While there are certain
beliefs that lead to disbelief--for example, believing that the ḥarām is
ḥalāl or the ḥalāl is ḥarām--this does not apply to those who do so out
of ignorance.

[^9]: Editor’s Note: Saint Augustine of Hippo (354-430) is known as the
African Latin Church Father. He converted to Christianity through the
influence of his mother, St. Monica. His speculation on freedom,
history, time and the nature of man give him a prominent place in the
history of philosophy. The profundity of his thought was such that both
Catholics and Protestants look to him (esp. to his treatise on grace)
for doctrinal authority. His De civitate Dei (413-26) has been the basis
of much political theory. He sought to reconcile Platonic thought and
Christian dogma, reason and faith.

[^10]: Author’s Note: For example, the Spanish Arabist D. Cabanelas,
professor at the Universidad de Granada, believes that the label “sect”
“must only be applied to those groups who are opposed to consensus on
fundamental issues, who separate themselves from the orthodox Sunnah and
form a dissident community… The faithful followers of ‘Alī, on the other
hand, were given the name of Shī‘ites, openly dividing themselves into
various sects, some of a markedly extremist character.” D. Cabanelas,
“No hay más Dios que Allāh,” apud J. Samso, J. Vernet, D. Cabanelas and
J. Vallve, Así nació el Islām (Madrid 1986) fasc 2, 23.

[^11]: Editor’s Note: This equally applies to some Orientalists who take
interest in Islām in general.

[^12]: Editor’s Note: As Fyzee explains, “earlier Orientalists believed
that Shī‘ism was a pernicious corruption of Islām, concocted mainly, if
not solely, for political reasons. Also that the Sunnī faith is the
‘orthodox’ faith and the Shī‘ite, the ‘heterodox’ one” (3).

[^13]: Editor’s Note: The general acceptance of Sunnī views over
“heterodox” Shī‘ite views by Orientalists demonstrates “the profound
Sunnī bias of Western scholarship on Islām” which Richard W. Bulliet
observes.


