Chapter 5: Mukhtar al-Thaqafi
=============================

**Chapter 5: Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī, The Enlightened Messianic Activist, The
Shī‘ite Insurrection as Political Reaction, Reparation and Revenge**

In order to explain the transformation that Islām went through since the
rise of Shī‘ism, Muslim and non-Muslim historians point to two factors
derived from the same cause: the political struggle for the Caliphate.
The first factor was the political influence of the oligarchy which
transformed itself into a timocratic power, a state in which political
power increases with the amount of property one owns, through the
support of the triumphant majority. The second factor was the political
will of a marginalized minority which became a medium of resistance.
Depending on the personal inclinations of previous researchers, they
argue in favor of one of these two factors. For us, both factors are two
aspects of the same cause. For Western research scholars, it is not
always easy to accept the idea that in Islām, the relationship between
the religion and politics is much closer than it is in the West between
the Church and State. It is even more difficult for them to accept that,
**in Shī‘ism, religion and politics are two aspects of the orthodox
development of the same doctrine**, rather than parallel or separate
tendencies that revolve around the same sphere but without any effective
connection between them.

“Recent studies,” says Bausani, “distinguish more between a political
Shī‘ism, which included the purely political partisans of ‘Alī and his
family…, a religious Shī‘ism, which included activists impregnated with
Gnostic ideas, who were based mostly in Kūfah, in Mesopotamia, and whose
main representative … was the politico-religious agitator al-Mukhtār who
took over Kūfah in 685-686. He preached Messianic doctrines and started
some very interesting customs like the cult of the vacant throne and so
forth” (112-113). As a result of these events, some Orientalists
attempted to establish a clear distinction between an “extremist”
political Shī‘ism, a “moderate” religious Shī‘ism, and an “intermediate”
Shī‘ism. This latter, which shares both political and religious aspects,
is at times “extremist” and at others “moderate” according to Bausani’s
definition of Twelver Shī‘ism. It comes as no surprise that, centuries
after the birth of Shī‘ism, Orientalists seeking support for the
“democratic” orientation of Abū Bakr would use this inappropriate
division to supposedly distinguish between a political Shī‘ism and a
religious Shī‘ism.[^1]

The origin and early development of Shī‘ite Islām is, to a great extent,
a history of divisions, dissensions, and internal quarrels relating to
the problem of succession. A considerable number of movements, some of
which went from partial or relative dissidence [*inshi‘āb*] to outright
rupture [*fitnah*], were drawn into the center of this great storm as a
result of the violence perpetrated by the political and religious
authorities. It must be mentioned, however, that while some of these
groups may have reached the state of sects [*furaq*] in the Christian
sense of the world, in our view, even this barrier between differences
does not produce clear-cut division. On the contrary, under this
umbrella, many branches flourished, some longer-lived than others, which
developed alongside Shī‘ism without breaking the tie, as weak as it may
have been, with the Islamic trunk from which they were born.[^2]

In truth, the development of sects--that is, groups which diverge on the
basis of important beliefs or practices--is the result of the closer
ties established between Shī‘ism and the surrounding esoteric
traditions. The divergence and conflict between the distinct groups is
related to the reaction towards an ocean of doctrinal wealth. The
Ismā‘īliyyah,[^3] for example, have a doctrine which, in many respects,
makes them the heirs of the Sabian tradition of Ḥarrān which, as is
known, was the depository of Hermetic and neo-Pythagorean doctrines
combined with elements from Hindu occultism and Gnosis.[^4] These
Sabians must not be confused with the Sabaeans or Mandaeans from
southern of Iraq and Persia.[^5]

One of the common mistakes made in relation to Shī‘ah Islām is the
attempt to compare it with the various schisms found in Christianity.
Shī‘ism is often portrayed as a schismatic coextension of dissident
groups organized in small cells or brotherhoods driven by an
uncompromising parochial spirit. **The concept of** ***inshi‘āb***
**[division] in the Islamic religion must not be confused with that of**
***fitnah*****, definitive division and irreparable rupture.** In fact,
Shī‘ism suffered no “division” [*inshi‘āb*] or rupture [*fitnah*] during
the Imāmate of the first three Imāms: ‘Alī, Ḥasan, and Ḥusayn.

After the death of Ḥusayn, however, the majority of Shī‘ites placed
their trust in ‘Alī ibn al-Ḥusayn Zayn al-‘Ābidīn,[^6] while a minority,
known as al-Kaysaniyyah, believed that the right to succession belonged
to Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥanafiyyah. He was the third son of ‘Alī, but not
through Fāṭimah. As a result, he cannot be considered a descendant of
the Prophet.[^7] Despite this fact, Muḥammad ibn Ḥanafiyyah was
proclaimed by his partisans as the Fourth Imām and the promised Mahdī.
During the time he sought refuge in the mountains of Rawḍah, which form
a cordillera in Madīnah, Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī served as his
“representative.”[^8] It was believed that Muḥammad ibn Ḥanafiyyah would
come down one day and appear as the rightly-guided and long-awaited
Messiah.

In accordance with Shī‘ite thought, the Mahdī is a man motivated by God
who is also a military chief and a warrior. Even if the followers of
Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī gave an extremist character to the eschatological
idea of the Hidden Imām, the Islamic figure of the Messiah as restorer
of revealed religion is not an invention of Mukhtār or a Christian
influence. **The Mahdī is a spiritual synthesis of all revealed forms
and not a mere uniform syncretism. It is a concept that is expressed in
all its dimensions and depth in many** ***aḥādīth*** **of the Prophet as
well as many traditions of the Imāms.**[^9]

In synthesis, we can say that after the death of Imām Zayn al-‘Ābidīn,
the majority of Shī‘ites accepted Muḥammad al-Bāqir as the Fifth Imām,
despite the fact that a minority followed his brother Zayd al-Shahīd,
who were known from that moment on as Zaydis.[^10] Imām Muḥammad
al-Bāqir was succeeded by his son Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq the Sixth Imām and,
after his death, his son Mūsā al-Kāẓim was recognized as the Seventh
Imām. Nevertheless, an opposition group insisted that the successor of
the Sixth Imām was his elder son Ismā‘īl who had died when his father
was still alive.[^11] This group split from the Shī‘ite majority and
became known as the Ismā‘īlīs. Others, instead, preferred ‘Abdullāh
al-Aftah and some even chose Muḥammad, both sons of the Sixth Imām.
Still, there were even those who considered Ja’far al-Ṣādiq as the Last
Imām and were convinced that none would succeed him. Likewise, after the
martyrdom of Imām Mūsā al-Kāẓim, the majority followed his son ‘Alī
al-Riḍā as the Eighth Imām. But there were those who refused to
recognize any Imām after al-Kāẓim and came to constitute the brotherhood
of the Wāqifiyyah.[^12] From the Eighth to the Twelfth Imām, considered
by the Shī‘ite majority as the Awaited Mahdī, no important division
[*inshi‘āb*] took place within Shī‘ism.

However it occurred, what is important to retain here is that, since its
origins, Shī‘ite Islām represents, more than a spiritual and political
rebellion against illegitimate authority, a movement of “awakening,”
like that of Ṣūfīsm in the Sunnī world. It was not a reformist movement
in the Christian sense, like the one that took place in Europe during
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Shī‘ite Islām represents an
integral restoration of Muḥammadan theosophy and metaphysics through the
application and practice of all the teachings of the Holy Imāms, who
linked the outer meanings of the text to the inner meanings of the
divine word.

The root cause for the development of Shī‘ism is utterly alien from
worldly affairs. The source of Shī‘ism is not a simple heresy or a
political disagreement. **Shī‘ite Islām** **springs from a metaphysical
reality, a process of epiphany which establishes a new logophonic
manifestation of Prophethood.** **Shī‘ism,** **as the Islām of ‘Alī and
the** ***ahl al-bayt*****, is the temporal and earthly pillar of the
eternal and celestial reality of the** ***wilāyah*****.** **The**
***wilāyah***, **the spiritual guidance of the Imāms, is a manifestation
of Prophethood.** The *wilāyah* is an inner or occult reality which is
found in potential and action within the same Prophethood. The *wilāyah*
is a manifestation of Prophethood that is revealed in a new way. The
*wilāyah* is not the renovation of the anterior Qur’ānic revelation but
its closure. The *wilāyah* is an unveiling of the esoteric and
metaphysical truths found in the Qur’ān. **While the Prophet sealed the
age of formal revelation, by means of the divine concession of the**
***wilāyah*** **and the** **Imāmate to his descendants, a new age of
profound “revelations” was opened.**[^13] **Just as the pleroma of the
Twelve Imāms** **represents the fullness of the Muḥammadan Reality,
their teachings and doctrines are flashes from the sole Muḥammadan
Light, the logophonic effusions and manifestations of the Qur’ānic
revelation: its perfect synthesis and exact formulation.**

Finally, in order for there to be a living branch from the Islamic
trunk, a favorable doctrinal terrain was required, a spiritual identity
with its own characteristics which were qualitatively different from the
other ideological options of its age. With such an understanding, the
historical appearance of Shī‘ism seems to be completely inevitable.
Without its presence, of course, the history of Islām and the world
would have totally changed. In our judgement, any attempt to reduce the
historical development of Shī‘ism to a mere political problem related to
the succession or to some insurgent elements is misguided at best. This
applies to figures as fictitious as ‘Abd Allāh ibn Saba’, the Yemenite
of Jewish extraction, and as real and historical as Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī.

Abd Allāh ibn Saba’ and Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī are presented by Alessandro
Bausani as “extremists” [*ghulāt*][^14] and precursors of a political
Shī‘ism. Muslim and non-Muslim specialists have long disputed which one
deserves the inappropriate title of “founder of Shī‘ite Islām.” The
Italian Orientalist briefly refers to ‘Abd Allāh ibn Saba’ as an exalted
personality, an ex-Jewish Yemenite who deified ‘Alī during his lifetime.
The feeble historical foundation surrounding someone considered to be no
less than the “founder of Shī‘ite Islām” should have led Bausani and
other contemporary Orientalists to infer that they were dealing with a
fictitious character or an insignificant individual whose existence had
not even been faithfully documented by the annals of time.

It is shocking to learn, nonetheless, that the refusal to recognize
Shī‘ism as a historical and meta-historical reality profoundly rooted
since the dawn of Islām has led certain Orientalists to discard the
strongest evidence in favor of the weakest. In reality, **‘Abd Allāh ibn
Saba’** **is a literary character, a fabrication of Sayf ibn ‘Umar
al-Zindīq** **[the Atheist or Dualist], a famous falsifier of**
***aḥādīth*** **or prophetic traditions.**[^15] The absence of any
convincing evidence to support the existence of ‘Abd Allāh ibn Saba’,
partnered with the constantly contradictory and nebulous character of
his life, convinced some Shī‘ite scholars long ago that they were facing
the figure of an imposter. Despite this body of bona fide doubts, it
took longer than expected for this fact to be confirmed. In fact, it
took no less than one thousand years before a perspicacious research
scholar, the erudite Shī‘ite ‘Allāmah Sayyid Murtaḍā al-‘Askarī, shed
light on this somber subject. For many centuries, the detractors of
Shī‘ism used the tale of ‘Abd Allāh ibn Saba’ as a pretext to deny its
purely Islamic origin and to corrupt its genuine Muḥammadan connection.
They have stubbornly presented Shī‘ism as the creation of an ex-Jew,
thence as the political scheme of an upstart Muslim convert. As a
result, the figure of the “convert” in the Muslim world continues to be
the center around which all suspicions converge, whether reasonable or
groundless.[^16]

Along with ‘Abd Allāh ibn Saba’, Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī is often cited as
one of the persons directly responsible for the creation of Shī‘ism. He
appeared as the inspiration for an armed resistance that took place in
the year 40 of the Ḥijrah, during the regime of Mu‘āwiyyah. The
revolutionary movement was directed against the Caliph and the powerful
governors of the Ummayad clan who were all considered, without
exception, as preachers of moral perdition and religious innovation.
During the period of the first three *khulafā’ al-rāshidūn*
[rightly-guided Caliphs]--Abū Bakr, ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb and
‘Uthmān--between the years 632 and 656, ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib and his
followers were subjected to a considerable degree of political coercion
which relaxed temporarily when ‘Alī acceded to the Caliphate. After the
death of ‘Alī, however, the persecution of the Shī‘ites became
increasingly intense and intolerable under the Ummayad regime.[^17]

With the proclamation of Mu‘āwiyyah as the Caliph in Jerusalem in the
year 660, the Caliphate was moved to Damascus and acquired an entirely
different character than the one it possessed during the rule of the
four rightly-guided Caliphs.[^18] The defining characteristics of
Mu‘āwiyyah’s rule were nepotism and tyranny. The Caliph turned into a
“king” [melik] who governed as an absolute sovereign in the manner of
the Persian and Byzantine emperors.[^19] With the death of Mu‘āwiyyah,
he was succeeded by his son Yazīd [680-683], described by historians as
a degenerate drunkard.[^20] Successive uprisings against him broke out
through all of Arabia, inspired and encouraged by the Shī‘ites who
despised the moral and spiritual decadence of the Umayyads. The Shī‘ite
revolts multiplied throughout the Umayyad Caliphate. The political
reaction and righteous revenge for the death of Ḥusayn, the youngest son
of ‘Alī and Fāṭimah, occurred in Karbala during the reign of Yazīd. The
revolution was led on behalf of Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥanafiyyah, whom we have
already mentioned, and its goal was accomplished by Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī
of Kūfah in the year 685. It was in Kūfah, one of the holiest cities in
Islām, that the various esoteric and political branches of Shī‘ism
appeared. Fond of the old Christianizing formula of the Orientalists,
Hitti affirms that “the blood of Ḥusayn, and the blood of his father,
was the seed of the Shī‘ite Church.”[^21]

The unequal efforts of the distinct Shī‘ite groups against the Umayyad
regime, each distinct in nature, meaning, purpose and reach,
definitively did nothing but lead the insurgents to disaster, to
merciless, heartless, and relentless repression and to brutal martyrdom.
But, despite these vagaries, they are not movements undeserving of
attention. They have their place, which is not at all negligible, in the
course of the historical evolution of the Shī‘ism we attempt to trace.
In short, Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī lived in a period of difficult transition
in the history of Shī‘ism. As we have mentioned, it was, to a great
extent, a time of violent dissent and disputes. Bribery and political
crimes were routinely used by the Umayyad regime to suppress its
opponents. As a result, the division of Shī‘ite Islām into distinct
parties or factions, each one following ‘Alī and some of his
descendants, became an instrument of political struggle and the sole
means of liberation and hope for the oppressed.

It was then, during those dark days of despotism, that Mukhtār
al-Thaqāfī appeared on the scene, transforming himself into one of the
most active combatants and one of the most outstanding and ingenious
revolutionaries of his time. It goes without saying that Mukhtār
al-Thaqāfī was Shī‘ite, and probably forcibly so. In the religious and
social framework of his time, he was also a messianic revolutionary,
illuminated by Gnostic ideas. In line with the goals and aspirations of
his political program, he accomplished his mission to kill ‘Ubayd Allāh
ibn Ziyyād and, in so doing, he avenged the death of the Third Imām,
Ḥusayn al-Sibṭ al-Aṣghar, the youngest grandson of the Prophet. The
personality and character of Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī aroused a great deal of
controversy in the early history of Shī‘ite Islām. Some sources present
him as an ambitious adventurer and a faithful follower of the political
authority of *ahl al-bayt*. For others, he was an enlightened being who
was almost raised to the rank of a prophet by his contemporaries.
Although he never made such a claim himself, he did indicate directly
and indirectly, as we will see shortly, that his actions were inspired
by the angel of revelation. After overcoming some initial hurdles,
Mukhtār’s personal success was great and long-lasting. He finished his
days with praise and acclaim, recognized as one of the bravest heroes
and one of the most efficient military leaders of Shī‘ism. He was the
implacable avenger of Ḥusayn, the standard of the *tawwābūn* [penitents]
who consolidated the aspirations of this revolutionary Shī‘ite movement
whose appearance was motivated by the tragedy of Karbala.[^22] The
*tawwābūn* or penitents constituted the first avenging movement of
Karbala. However, as soon as Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī appeared on the scene,
the *tawwābūn* were assimilated, and perhaps rightfully so, into his
brand of revolutionary Messianism.

Regardless of the reason behind Mukhtār’s popularity, the question of
his religious commitment coincides with the establishment of an
initiatory hierarchy which is distinct from the Shī‘ite structure. Since
Shī‘ite thought was already sufficiently delineated, we must say without
hesitation that his divergent approach did not arouse much sympathy
among the Shī‘ites. The cause for such aversion is to be found in an
accidental slip related to Imām Ḥasan. During his conflict with
Mu‘āwiyyah, the Imām sought asylum in Madā’in, in the house of the
governor Sa‘d ibn Mas‘ūd who was Mukhtār’s uncle. Unexpectedly and
inexplicably, Mukhtār suggested to his uncle that he should turn in Imām
Ḥasan to the Umayyad Caliph, who was searching for him. He told his
uncle that he could subjugate the deposed Caliph and declare that “The
treaty made with Ḥasan is null and void. It is under my feet.”
Obviously, the governor emphatically rejected the treacherous suggestion
made by his nephew. From this incident, we can only lament Mukhtār’s
political blunder which did not go unnoticed by the Shī‘ites. They
unanimously and severely reproached him for being so inconsiderate and
disloyal towards the first son of ‘Alī and the oldest grandson of the
Prophet.[^23] Further on, in an isolated and equally accidental
incident, he regained the confidence and the appreciation of the
Shī‘ites. This occurred when he refused to appear before Ziyyād ibn
Abih, the Governor of Kūfah, to testify against Ḥujr ibn ‘Adī, the
leader of the one of the Shī‘ite rebellions to overthrow the tyrant. It
seems that, from that moment onwards, Mukhtār adopted a position that
was increasingly favorable towards the Shī‘ite cause. At the same time,
his revolutionary rhetoric acquired an undeniable messianic character
which occasionally resembled revelation. Mukhtār was a man who possessed
psychological qualities in line with his strong and unusually esoteric
religious mentality. He quickly converted himself into a spontaneous
orator. His rhetoric was smooth and eloquent. It overflowed with obscure
reflections and periphrastic expressions, which gave it a poetic flow
which superficially resembled the revealed word. His speeches gave the
impression that they came from an inspired source. It was for this
reason that Mukhtār often alleged that his spirit was illuminated by
Gabriel, the Angel of Revelation, who, in an ineffable and mysterious
way, warned him of the unexpected.

Mukhtār’s ingenious rhetorical slips had a tremendous influence on his
followers and convinced them of the appearance of the Awaited Mahdī,
identified with Muḥammad ibn Ḥanafiyyah, who was coming to restore order
and justice. Due to this deep-rooted Shī‘ite conviction, he was
considered by his followers as the “Representative of the Mahdī,”
namely, a delegate of the third son of Imām ‘Alī. This is the manner in
which he was recognized and allowed himself to be addressed. In the
years 685 and 686, he established a Shī‘ite-oriented government in
Kūfah.[^24] This was the first time this was done since the time of Imām
‘Alī when he finally received his much delayed turn to occupy the
Caliphate and to fully assume the supreme role he had inherited from the
Prophet.

It must be remembered, however, that similar excesses on the part of
Mukhtār caused, if not serious religious worries, at least considerable
annoyance to the ruling religious authorities. His influence was great
in the genesis of one sect, the Mukhtāriyyah, but did not shake the
foundation of Imāmī Gnosis. Although Mukhtār’s ideas were not free from
doctrinal errors, they did not radically alter the esoteric concept of
the Hidden Imām which is the real touchstone of all Shī‘ite thought:
past, present, and future.[^25] The repercussion of his ideas was
sufficient to inspire the partial development of an erroneous path
which, in its true sense, was nothing more than a stubbornness to
maintain ideas which were contrary to those espoused by the majority of
Shī‘ites.

In fairness, the interesting and eventful life of this unique man
brought him the opportunity to regain the sympathy of the Shī‘ites. As
we have said, avenging the death of Ḥusayn, the martyr of Karbala, was
the mission that was thrust upon Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī, as well as Sulaymān
ibn Ṣurad, leader of the *tawwābūn*. The target of this vengeance was
‘Ubayd Allāh ibn Ziyyād, considered unanimously among Shī‘ites to be the
direct instigator and the main executor in the death of Imām Ḥusayn and
his family. And here is one of those interesting facts that mark the
lives of the chosen ones; the martyr Maytham al-Tammār, one of the
closest companions of Imām ‘Alī and one of the saints of Islām who is
highly venerated by Ṣūfīs, was imprisoned as a political prisoner by
‘Ubayd Allāh ibn Ziyyād on charges of conspiring against the Umayyad
regime. Destiny would have it that Mukhtār was also in the same prison.
It is there that Maytham predicted that, once he was released, he would
fulfill his mission of avenging Ḥusayn which is, after all, exactly what
happened.[^26]

We have focused our attention on Mukhtār for the purpose of clearing up
some common confusion related to the creation of the Party of ‘Alī. We
wish to take advantage of this opportunity to clarify another error.
Bausani says that Mukhtār took over Kūfah and preached messianic
doctrines and starting very interesting customs like the cult of the
vacant throne. While this is true, it is not the complete truth. As
“interesting” as this custom may be to Bausani--perhaps due to its
symbolism--we must point out that Mukhtār never introduced “a cult of
the vacant throne.” As Dozy explains, the idea of the throne was simply
an ingenious ruse that this clever and brilliant strategist contrived to
incite his army to battle. He had the idea of purchasing an old armchair
that he had re-upholstered with a fine and expensive silk, converting it
into the famous “vacant throne” of ‘Alī. This unusual inducement brought
forth its desired fruit. Ibrāhīm, the commander of Mukhtār’s troops,
fought in an unusually brave and heroic fashion and killed ‘Ubayd Allāh
ibn Ziyyād with his own sword. In the minds of the Shī‘ite soldiers the
supposed throne of ‘Alī truly acquired a highly symbolic value. Mukhtār
had told them at the beginning of the battle that the throne would
represent for them what the Ark of the Covenant represented to the
Children of Israel.

As serious as the political events that coincide with the start of
Shī‘ism were, they cannot be considered a sufficient reason for its
historical appearance. It is certain that Abū Bakr’s assumption of the
Caliphate of the Islamic Community instead of ‘Alī, the coerced
resignation of Ḥasan and the martyrdom of Ḥusayn, the division of the
Islamic world into various groups as a result of the bloody raids and
forays of Mu‘āwiyyah and Yazīd--the founders of the Umayyad
dynasty--forced Muslims, Gnostics included, to take sides. However, the
reason for which they were fighting goes well beyond what today is
qualified as “political.”

Not all of the political insurrections which took place in the name of
Shī‘ism reflected the complex reality of the Imāmate and what it
represents metaphysically. Likewise, the development of the esoteric
doctrine and thought of Shī‘ism in Islām should not be linked to the
appearance of the word “Shī‘ite” or “Shī‘ism.” These terms simply
designate a particular “party” or a “group” of Muslims.[^27] As Muḥammad
Bāqir al-Ṣadr observes, one thing is the meaning of the term, and the
other is the distinct doctrine it designates. To say that the Shī‘ites
are a “party” of legitimistic minority Muslims merely expresses one
aspect of the term.

In the time of the Prophet, as can be seen in many *aḥādīth*, there are
references to the “Shī‘ah of ‘Alī” and the “Shī‘ah of *ahl al-bayt*
”[^28] In Arabic, shī‘ah means “partisans,” “adepts,” or “followers” of
someone.[^29] As a result, it is said that Shī‘ites are those who are
partisans of Imām ‘Alī and his descendants. They are those who consider
that the fulfillment of the sunnah of the Prophet demands the complete
and obligatory observance of all of its dispositions and rulings. This
evidently, and most importantly, includes the designation [*naṣṣ*] made
by the Prophet of Imām ‘Alī as his successor [*khalīfah*].

[^1]: Editor’s Note: This current which seeks to split Shī‘ism into
fractions has even spread among Muslim scholars. Sachedina holds that
Shī‘ism was a political movement which acquired religious undertones
(Islāmic Messianism 5). Jafrī recognizes the division between political
Shī‘ism and religious Shī‘ism (97) as does Rasūl Ja‘fariyan who speaks
of three forms of Shī‘ism: political, creedal and Iraqī. The truth of
the matter, however, is that “Shī‘ism was a religious movement that also
encompassed social and political aspects of society” (Rizvī Chapter 1).

[^2]: Editor’s Note: The author’s attitude is all-encompassing, eager to
embrace, and stresses the common ground of tawḥīd on which all Muslims
stand. This can be contrasted with Tījānī’s attitude which seeks more to
splinter than to soothe, even rejecting the close legal, theological,
philosophical and political ties which bind Twelvers, Seveners and
Zaydis: “Our discussion does not invoke the other sects as Ismā‘īliyyah
and Zaydiyyah, as we believe in their being like other sects in not
adhering to Ḥadīth al-thaqalayn, and their belief in ‘Alī’s imāmah after
the Messenger of Allāh is of no use” (The Shī‘ah 331 Note 1). This
attitude also ignores the similarities between Sunnism, Ṣūfism, and
Shī‘ism. As M.G.S. Hodgson explains, “in its whole piety Sunnī Islām can
be called half-Shī‘ite” (4). Similarly, Naṣr observes that “In certain
areas of the Islāmic world…one meets among Ṣūfis certain groups as
devoted to the Shī‘ite Imāms, especially ‘Alī and Ḥusayn, as any Shī‘ite
could be, yet completely Sunnī in their practice of the law [madhhab]”
(Ṣūfī Essays 107). In reality, these so-called “half-Shī‘ites” are
neither one thing nor the other, but rather “seekers of the straight
path.”

[^3]: Editor’s Note: The Ismā‘īliyyah are known as Seveners as they
follow Seven Imāms, the first six Shī‘ite Imāms and Ismā‘īl as the
seventh.

[^4]: Editor’s Note: Some Ismā‘īliyyah adapted the Qarmathian
syncretistic catechism to other forms of monotheism, to Ḥarrānian
paganism, and even to Mazdeism (Massignon 60). As ‘Allāmah Ṭabāṭabā‘ī
notes, “The Ismā‘īlis have a philosophy in many ways similar to that of
the Sabaeans [star worshippers] combined with elements of Hindu gnosis”
(Shī‘ite Islām 78).

[^5]: Editor’s Note: As Netton explains, “The Sabians were a pagan sect
who, according to some, had cleverly identified themselves with the
Ṣābi’ūn of the Qur’ān to avoid persecution” (15). Ḥarrān, in what is now
southeastern Turkey, was the home of the star worshipping Sabians with
their transcendent philosophy. The Sabians of Ḥarrān must not be
confused with the Sabaeans who lived in what is today Yemen and who
founded colonies in Ethiopia and Eritrea. As for the Mandaeans, they are
members of an ancient Gnostic sect surviving in southern Iraq and which
used the Aramaic language in their writings.

[^6]: Editor’s Note: Zayn al-‘Ābidīn is responsible for one of the great
masterpieces of Shī‘ite supplications, al-Ṣaḥīfah al-ṣajadiyyah,
rendered beautifully into English by William Chittick as The Psalms of
Islām.

[^7]: Author’s Note: He was the fruit of the marriage between the Imām
and a woman from the Ḥanafī tribe, rather than from the Prophet’s
daughter.

[^8]: Editor’s Note: We must remember that, despite his accomplishments,
Mukhtār al-Thaqafī did not recognize the Imām of his Age. If prophets
and Imāms are infallible, ordinary human beings like Mukhtār are far
from perfect. Although Mukhtār did a great deal of good and will always
be remembered for avenging the death of al-Ḥusayn he was misguided in
many matters, including following Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥanifiyyah as the
Mahdī. As as followers of the Twelve Imāms, Shī‘ite Muslims have always
opposed and denounced all fabricators of false traditions, even when
those traditions are favorable to their cause. Shī‘ite muḥadithūn reject
Mukhtār as an authority on the basis that he became an extremist. For
the sake of historical accuracy, it is important to show human beings
with their vices and virtues. The author does not present a romantic,
idealized version of Mukhtār: he shows him warts and all.

[^9]: Editor’s Note: For more English-language books on the Mahdī,
consult Shaykh al-Mufīd’s Kitāb al-irshād, Sachedina’s Islāmic
Messianism; An Inquiry Concerning al-Mahdī by Ayātullāh Muḥammad Bāqir
al-Ṣadr and Discussions Concerning al-Mahdī by Ayātullāh Luṭfullāh Ṣāfī
al-Gulpaygānī.

[^10]: Editor’s Note: The Zaydis are followers of Zayd ibn ‘Alī ibn
al-Ḥusayn, the son of the Fourth Imām, who led a revolt against the
Ummayads and was killed in 738. Initially, the Zaydis held that the true
Imām was the Ḥusaynid Imām who rose up in revolt. Many of the Zaydis
accepted the Caliphate of Abū Bakr and ‘Umar, and some even accepted the
early part of ‘Uthmān’s. This attitude forms part of the theological
doctrine of the Imāmate of the mafḍūl [the less excellent]. It was
agreed that ‘Alī was al-afḍal [the most excellent] but conceded that the
Imāmate of the less excellent could occur when the most excellent did
not publicly assert his right to the Imāmate by armed revolt. For more
on the beliefs of the Zaydis, see Howard’s “Introduction” to Shaykh
al-Mufīd Kitāb al-Irshād (xxiii-xxv) and ‘Allāmah Ṭabātabā‘ī’s Shī‘ite
Islām (76-77).

[^11]: Editor’s Note: Although the sources differ on the subject,
Ismā‘īl may not have been qualified for the Imāmate for several reasons:
firstly, because his father Imām al-Ṣādiq had appointed Mūsā as his
successor, and secondly, because Ismā‘īl passed away before his father.
The Imāmate is not a system of royalty or inheritance. It is a matter of
divine pre-ordinance, a covenant from Allāh. In any event, the Sixth
Imām did not designate his eldest son to be his successor, nor did it
cause a great doctrinal or theological problem among the Shī‘ah.

[^12]: Editor’s Note: The Wāqifites were those who held that Mūsā was
the Imām who would return as the Madhī.

[^13]: Editor’s Note: The belief in post-prophetic guidance is not
exclusively Shī‘ite. It is related in Sunnī traditions that the
Messenger of Allāh said, “Surely Messengership and Prophethood are
terminated, so there will be no messenger or prophet after me except
mubashshirāt” (Tirmidhī). He also stated that: “There is nothing to come
of Prophethood except mubashshirāt.” People asked, “What are they?” The
Holy Prophet replied, “True visions” and these were declared by the Holy
Prophet to be one forty-sixth of Prophethood (Bukhārī).

[^14]: Editor’s Note: Ghulāt, plural of ghāli, is an Arabic term
deriving from the verb ghālā which means “to exaggerate or exceed the
proper bounds.” The verbal noun is ghuluw and means “exaggeration.” The
ghulāt or extremists are sects which deify ‘Alī. In Iran, they are known
as the Ahl al-Ḥaqq [people of the truth], ‘Alī Ilāhis [‘Alī
worshippers]: in Iraq they are called Shabak, Bajwan, Sarliyya, Kkaiyya,
and Ibrāhīmiyyah. In Syria, they are known as Nuṣayris or ‘Alawis. In
Turkey, they are called Bektashis, Kizilbash (Alevis), Takhtajis and
Çepnis. The Shaykhīs are also a modern ghulāt group. They are followers
of Shaykh Aḥmad al-Aḥsā’ī (d. 1830) who taught that the infallible
fourteen are the cause of the universe, in whose hands are the life and
death and the livelihood of humanity. According to Moosa, al-Aḥsā’ī
seems to justify this belief by explaining that God is too transcendent
to operate the universe by Himself and therefore deputized the
infallible fourteen to operate the universe on his behalf (109). If this
is correct, the Shaykhīs resemble the mufawwiḍah [the delegators]. As
Fyzze explains, The mufawwiḍah are those who believe that God created
the Prophet and ‘Alī and then ceased to function. Thereafter, it was
these two who arranged everything in the world. They create and sustain
and destroy; Allāh has nothing to do with these things. (141). When
examining the Shaykhīs, it is important to differentiate between the
Bahā’ī-controlled group from the original teachings of Shaykh Aḥmad
al-Aḥsā’ī. As far as Shī‘ism is concerned, there is no doubt that the
Imāms are the Lords of Existence. What happens with Aḥmad al-Aḥsā’ī is
that he developed entirely esoteric doctrines and many have understood
him literally without understanding that the ideas he was expressing
were metaphysical rather than philosophical or theological. For
Gnostics, the role of the Imāms is viewed cosmically. There is no doubt
that the Bābis and Bahā’is have misinterpreted this role in an extreme
fashion, the first in an esoteric way, and the latter in a literal way,
distorting the doctrines of Shaykh Aḥmad al-Aḥsā’ī. The Universal
Legislator is the one who initiates a cycle and brings it to its end. He
does not destroy the world in a physical sense but in a historical one.
He closes one cycle and commences a second. The Imāms closed the cycle
of prophecy only to initiate the cycle of the wilāyah. Imām Mahdī will
come to close the cycle of wilāyah of the Prophet Muḥammad. If Shaykh
Aḥmad al-Aḥsā’ī said that the Imāms controlled the universe, he said so
in the sense of prophetic ḥadīth which states that without an Imām, the
world would be destroyed and would not last a single second. There are
also other Sunnī and Shī‘ite traditions regarding Imām ‘Alī making it
clear that the Imām is center or heart of the world without whom the
world would stop to exist. There is also the ḥadīth which states that
when Imām Mahdī returns, reason would leave the world and humanity would
degenerate into destruction. The work of Shaykh Aḥmad al-Aḥsā’ī need to
be re-examined from a Twelver Shī‘ite perspective. This is the only way
his scholarship can be saved from Bābi-Bahā’ī interpretations which have
distorted his original doctrines. As for the ghulāt, they are of
different ethnic origins, speak different languages and are divided into
different denominations. They share the common belief in the apotheosis
of ‘Alī and in a trinity of God, Muḥammad and ‘Alī or, as among the
Nuṣayris, of ‘Alī, Muḥammad and Salmān al-Fārisī. They practice holy
communion and public or private confession. According to Moosa Matti,
“their religion is a syncretism of extreme Shī‘ite, pagan, and Christian
beliefs, and they fall outside the pale of orthodox Islām” (418). In
fact, “some of the beliefs of the ghulāt have a greater affinity with
ancient astral cults and Christianity than with Islām” (ix). The Prophet
Muḥammad prophesized their appearance when he told ‘Alī: “In one
respect, you are like Jesus. The Jews went so far in hating him that
they turned hostile towards him and calumniated his mother and the
Christians loved him too much that they elevated him to an undeserved
status.” On another occasion, he told him that “I fear some sects of my
community will say of you what the Christians said of Jesus” (Nīsābūrī
1: 112-13) and “‘Alī, if it was not for the fact that I am concerned
that some factions will say of you what the Christians say of Jesus, son
of Mary, I would say of you today words such as (after them) you would
never pass a gathering of men without them taking the soil from your
feet” (Mufīd 79). Imām ‘Alī warned against the extremists, saying that
“Two groups will fall into perdition: The extremist who adore me unduly;
and the enemies whose animosity leads them to calumniate me.” The
naṣībīs are those who hate ‘Alī bitterly; the ghulāt are those who
literally adore him. The Imāms who followed ‘Alī condemned the
extremists in the harshest terms (Rayshani). Despite its deficiencies,
Matti’s Extremist Shī‘ites is one of the only scholarly books on
extremist Shī‘ites available in English. Regrettably, the author makes
some ludicrous claims; namely, 1) asserting that when the muezzins in
Iran call the people to prayer they cry out ‘Allāhu Akbar! Allāhu Akbar!
Khomeini is Rahbar, Khomeini is Rahbar’ (Allāh is Most Great; Allāh is
Most Great! Khomeini is the religious guide) thus placing Khomeini
before the testimony of faith that ‘There is no god but Allāh and
Muḥammad is the Messenger of Allāh’ (99); 2) claiming that the Shī‘ites
of Iran believe that ‘Alī is close to being a God (xxiii); 3) asserting
that Sunnism represents Islāmic orthodoxy (421); 4) and, finally, 5)
categorizing the ghulāt as heterodox as opposed to heretical (418). It
should also be noted that the term ghulāt has different connotations
depending on who uses it. In Sunnī sources, even moderate figures are
seen as ghulāt.

[^15]: Editor’s Note: As Naṣr explains, “The zanādiqah [sing. zindīq]
are identified specifically in Islāmic history with Manichaeans, but the
word is also used more generally … to mean unbeliever and heretic” (A
Shī‘ite Anthology 65, note 125). Saif ibn ‘Umar al-Tamīmī is
categorically discredited by ‘Allāmah Murtaẓā ‘Askarī in his ‘Abdullah
ibn Saba’ and Other Myths, 3rd. ed. trans. M.J. Muqaddas, Tehran:
Islāmic Thought Foundation, 1995. Sukaynah bint Ḥusayn, who died shortly
after the tragedy of Karbala, was also transformed into a literary
character by story-tellers and is now exploited by feminist writers like
Fāṭimah Mernessī (192-94).

[^16]: Editor’s Note: Héctor Abū Dharr Manzolillo’s article “Los
‘conversos’ en países con minorías musulmanas” [“Muslim ‘Converts’ in
Countries where Muslims are a Minority”] addresses this issue with
eloquence.

[^17]: Editor’s Note: As Jafrī explains, “Mu‘āwiyyah seems to have been
trying to destroy, at the slightest pretext, those of ‘Alī’s followers
who could not be bought or intimidated into submission” (167). In short,
the history of Shī‘ism is written with the blood of martyrs.

[^18]: Editor’s Note: Rather than ‘Umar, the “abomination of desolation”
(Daniel 9:27; Matthew, 24:15; Mark 13: 14) might more appropriately
refer to Mu‘āwiyyah’s coronation as Caliph.

[^19]: Editor’s Note: At the beginning of the reign of ‘Uthmān when the
Ummayads occupied prominent positions, Abū Sufyān said, “O Children of
Ummayyah! Now that this kingdom has come to you, play with it as the
children play with a ball, and pass it from one to another in your clan.
We are not sure whether there is a paradise or hell, but this kingdom is
a reality.” (al-Isti‘ab by Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr 4: 1679) In Sharh ibn Abī
Ḥadīd, the last sentence is quoted as follows: “By him in whose name Abū
Sufyān swears, there is neither punishment nor reckoning, neither Garden
nor Fire, neither Resurrection nor Day of Judgment!” (9: 53) Then Abū
Sufyān went to Uḥud and kicked at the grave of Ḥamzah [the uncle of the
Prophet who was martyred in the Battle of Uḥud in fighting against Abū
Sufyān] and said, “O Abū Ya’lā! See that the kingdom which you fought
against has finally come back to us.” (Sharḥ ibn Abī Ḥadīd, 16: 136).
When Mu‘āwiyyah took over the Caliphate, he said, “I did not fight you
to pray, fast, and pay charity, but rather to be your leader and control
you” (Tadhkirat al-khawāṣ, Sibṭ Ibn al-Jawzī al-Ḥanafī, 191-194; Ibn
‘Abd al-Bārr, in his Sīrah; Abū Nu‘aym; al-Suddī and al-Sha‘bī). There
are numerous instances where Mu‘āwiyyah is recorded as saying, in
reference to himself, “I am the first king in Islām” (Jafrī 154). When
Yazīd became Caliph, he said, “Hashimite played with the throne, but no
revelation was revealed, nor was there a true message” (History of
al-Ṭabarī, Arabic, 13: 2174; Tadhkirat al-khawāṣ; Sibṭ Ibn al-Jawzī
al-Ḥanafī 261). The Caliph Manṣūr defiantly declared: “Only I am the
authority of God upon His earth” (Jafrī 280; Ṭabarī, Tārīkh III 426).
The Turkish Sultāns described themselves as the “Shadows of God on
Earth.”

[^20]: Editor’s Note: Yazīd, son of Mu‘āwiyyah, son of Abū Sufyān ruled
from 60 A.H. to 64 A.H. His army sacked Madīnah in 63 A.H., killing
17,000 Muslims, and leaving 1,000 Muslim women pregnant as the result of
rape. Thereafter, his army marched on Makkah, destroying one of the
walls of the Holy Ka‘bah and setting it on fire (Dār al-Tawḥīd 139). He
enacted the wholesale massacre of the Prophet’s Family at Karbala in
which Ḥusayn, the second son of ‘Alī and Fāṭimah, was martyred along
with his faithful band of 72 followers. Only ‘Alī, the son of Ḥusayn,
was providentially spared, due to illness.

[^21]: Editor’s Note: See P. K. Hittī, History of the Arabs from the
Earliest Times to the Present 10th ed. (London 1970): 191.

[^22]: Editor’s Note: The very name, “the Place of Suffering” or “Land
of Anguish,” is indicative of the tragedy that befell there.

[^23]: Editor’s Note: For a more complete understanding of the
circumstances that led Imām Ḥasan to make a treaty with Muā‘wiyyah, see
‘Abbās Aḥmad al-Bostānī’s Pour une lecture correcte de l’imam al-Ḥassan
et de son traité de réconciliation avec Mu‘âwieh. For an overview of the
quietist as opposed to activist approach to politics in Shī‘ite Islām,
see my “Strategic Compromise in Islām.”

[^24]: Editor’s Note: It is important to remember that Imām Zayn
al-‘Abidīn did not respond positively to the call of Mukhtār al-Thaqafī
to rise up against the Umayyads. The Imām was fully aware that
opposition forces could not succeed in tearing down Umayyad rule and
deemed that any participation in such activities would lead to the
extermination of the real bearers of the divine message on earth: he
himself and the ahl al-bayt. As a result, the Imām distanced himself
from any and all movements which might draw the attention of the
authorities. For more on the subject, see: Imām Zayn al-‘Abidīn. Qum:
al-Balagh Foundation, 1994: 49-50. Surprisingly, another book by
al-Balagh claims that the Imām supported the revolutionaries. While he
did sympathize with the resistance and pray for Allāh’s mercy on
Mukhtār, this should not be interpreted as support. The book also claims
that the Imām’s supplications “are a clear expression of his political
and ideological opposition to the rulers of the time.” See: Ahlul Bayt:
Their Status, Manner and Course. Qum: al-Balagh Foundation, 1992: 148.
This view, which is an echo of Padwick’s comments on the Ṣahīfat
al-khāmisa, give a false impression of the work. As Chittick clarifies:
“Though the Imām makes a number of allusions to the injustice suffered
by his family and the fact that their rightful heritage has been
usurped, no one can call this a major theme of the Ṣahīfah” (xx).

[^25]: Editor’s Note: The belief in the Invisible Imām is at the heart
of Shī‘ite Islām.

[^26]: While in prison, Maytham told Mukhtār: “You will escape and you
will rebel to avenge the blood of Ḥusayn, peace be upon him. Then you
will kill this man who is going to kill us” (Mufīd).

[^27]: Editor’s Note: The term ahl al-sunnah wa al-jama‘ah appeared for
the first time during the time of Mu‘āwiyyah. During the rule of ‘Alī,
the Islamic Empire was divided into two parts: the part controlled by
Imām ‘Alī, and the part controlled by Mu‘āwiyyah. After the martyrdom of
Imām ‘Alī, Mu‘āwiyyah assumed control over the entire community. That
year was proclaimed “the year of the jama‘ah” or “the year of the
majority of the community.” The term ahl al-sunnah wa al-jama‘ah appears
in its complete form during the peace treaty between Mu‘āwiyyah and Imām
Ḥasan ibn ‘Alī. The term was chosen to differentiate the followers of
Mu‘āwiyyah, the ahl al-sunnah, from the followers of the Prophet’s
family, the ahl al-bayt. The term sunnī is an abbreviated form of ahl
al-sunnah wa al-jama‘ah. The early Muslims were also known as Shī‘ites
(followers): the shī‘ah of ‘Alī, the shī‘ah of Muā’wiyyah, and so forth.
See Ja‘fariyan’s “Shī‘ism and its Types during the Early Centuries.”

[^28]: Editor’s Note: The Messenger of Allāh said, “Glad tiding O ‘Alī!
Verily you and your companions and your Shī‘ah will be in Paradise”
(Sunnī References: Faḍā’il al-ṣaḥābah, by Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, v. 2, 655;
Ḥilyatul awliyyā’, by Abū Nu‘aym, v. 4, 329; Tārīkh, by al-Khaṭīb
al-Baghdādī, v. 12, 289; al-Awsaṭ, by al-Ṭabarānī; Majma‘ al-zawā’id, by
al-Haythamī, v. 10, 21-22; al-Darqutnī, who said, “This tradition has
been transmitted via numerous authorities;” al-ṣawā‘iq al-muḥriqah, by
Ibn Ḥajar al-Haythamī, ch.11, section 1, 247; al-Durr al-manthur,
Suyūṭī, vol. VI, 379). The Messenger of Allāh said the following about
‘Alī: “I swear by Him who holds my life in His hands, this person and
his partisans [shī‘ah] will have salvation on the Day of Judgment”
(Suyūṭī). The Messenger of Allāh said, “‘Alī and his Shī‘ah are the
successful ones” (Mufīd 25, Muwaffaq). The Prophet said to ‘Alī: “I,
you, Fāṭimah, al-Ḥasan, and al-Ḥusayn were created of the same clay, and
our partisans [the Shī‘ites] were created from the remainder of that
clay” (Nisābūrī 101-02; Muḥammad ibn Abī al-Qāsim al-Ṭabarī 20, 24, 96).
In another tradition, the Most Noble Messenger says that: “I am a tree
whose main branch is Fāṭimah, whose pollen is ‘Alī, whose fruit is
al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn, and whose leaves are the Shī‘ites and lovers of
my community” (Ibn Ibrāhīm 222; Muḥammad ibn Abī al-Qāsim al-Ṭabarī 40,
63). The Messenger of Allāh said, “Seventy thousand of my community will
enter Heaven without any reckoning and punishment against them.” Then he
turned to ‘Alī and said, “They are your Shī‘ah and you are their Imām”
(Mufīd 26). The Messenger of Allāh said, “‘Alī, the first four (men) to
enter heaven are myself, you, al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn. Our progeny [will
come] behind us and our loved ones will be behind our progeny. To our
right and left will be our Shī‘ah” (Mufīd 26; al-Manāqib by Aḥmad;
al-Ṭabarānī, as quoted in al-Ṣawā‘iq al-muḥriqah, by Ibn Ḥajar Haythamī,
ch. 11, section 1, 246). The Messenger of Allāh said, “O ‘Alī! [On the
Day of Judgment] you and your Shī‘ah will come toward Allāh well-pleased
and well-pleasing, and there will come to Him your enemies angry and
stiff-necked” (al-Ṭabarānī, on the authority of Imām ‘Alī, al-Ṣawā‘iq
al-muḥriqah, by Ibn Ḥajar al-Haythamī, ch. 11, section 1, 236). The
Messenger of Allāh said, “O ‘Alī! On the Day of Judgment, I shall resort
to Allāh and you will resort to me and your children will resort to you
and the Shī’ah will resort to them. Then you will see where they carry
us [to Paradise]” (Rab al-abrār by al-Zamakhsharī). Ibn ‘Abbās narrated:
When the verse “Those who believe and do righteous deeds are the best of
the creation” (Qur’ān 98:7) was revealed, the Messenger of Allāh said to
‘Alī: “They are you and your Shī’ah.” He continued: “O ‘Alī! [On the Day
of Judgment] you and your Shī‘ah will come toward Allāh well-pleased and
well-pleasing, and your enemies will come angry with their head forced
up.” ‘Alī said, “Who are my enemies?” The Prophet replied: “He who
disassociates himself from you and curses you. And glad tiding to those
who reach first under the shadow of al-‘arsh on the Day of
Resurrection.” ‘Alī asked: “Who are they, O the Messenger of Allāh?” He
replied: “Your Shī‘ah, O ‘Alī, and those who love you” (al-Ḥāfiẓ Jamāl
al-Dīn al-Dharandī, on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbās; al-Ṣawā‘iq
al-muḥriqah by Ibn Ḥajar, Ch. 11, section 1, 246-247). On the basis of
this evidence, we can safely conclude that “Shī‘ism existed in the
lifetime of the Prophet as a nascent movement” (Moosa 95). However,
while there are discernable Shī‘ite elements during the lifetime of the
Prophet, “the hard-and-fast divisions of later centuries are not
discernible in the earlier period. There were Sunnī elements with
definite Shī‘ite tendencies, and there were Shī‘ite contacts with Sunnī
elements both intellectually and socially” (Naṣr Ṣūfī Essays 106-107).

[^29]: Editor’s Note: The word Shī‘ite derives from the Arabic verb
shāya‘a, meaning “to adhere to; to support a common cause; to be a
partisan of it.”


