About the Author
================

![](/sites/default/files/vittor.jpg)

**Prof. Luis Alberto Vittor**

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Professor Luis Alberto Vittor is a Professional Technical Support Person
for Scientific Research at the Center for Research into the Philosophy
and History of Religion (CIFHIRE) [*Centro de Investigaciones en
Filosofía e Historia de las Religiones*]. The Center forms part of the
Department of Philosophy at the School of Graduate Studies at John F.
Kennedy Argentine University.

Professor Vittor is a writer, research scholar, lecturer, cultural
journalist, and translator. His areas of expertise include medieval
literature, religious symbolism, and the philosophy of Eastern
religions, particularly with relation to Islām, the Middle East, Asia,
and the Far East. He is proficient in multiple modern languages, and has
reading comprehension of Classical and Semitic languages.

From 1989 to the present, Professor Vittor has served as a Professional
Technical Support Person for Scientific Research. He has collaborated on
the Critical Spanish Edition Project of the Coptic Library of Nag
Ḥammādī under the direction of Dr. Francisco García Bazán. This project
is sponsored by the National Commission for Scientific and Technical
Research (CONICET), an organism dependent on the Secretary of Science
and Technology (SECYT) of the National Government of the Republic of
Argentina.

As part of his work as a Professional Technical Support Person for
Scientific Research, he edits and reviews scholarly works in his areas
of expertise, including graduate and post-graduate research projects. In
his role as Professional Technical Support Person for Scientific
Research, he has contributed to many different projects, including, Dr.
John Andrew Morrow’s *Allāh Lexicon Project* at Northern State
University’s Department of Modern Languages in South Dakota.

From 1989 to the present, Professor Vittor has been the Editorial
Secretary for the academic journal *Epimeleia:* *Revista sobre Estudios
Tradicionales*, the official organ of the CIFHIRE. He is also the
Director of the Mullā Sadrā Center for Islamic Research and
Documentation (CEDIMS) and the Editorial Center for Digital Islamic
Texts (CETEDI). These research centers operate within the Department of
Social and Political Studies for Africa and the Middle East, and have
offices at the Universidad Católica Argentina de La Plata (Sede Bernal).
Professor Vittor also participates in research projects, translations,
and editions of traditional Islamic texts, in conjunction with the
Center for Oriental Studies at the Universidad Nacional de Rosario
(Santa Fe, Argentina). He is also the Coordinator for Arabic and Islamic
Studies at the Center for Oriental Studies at the University of Rosario
in Santa Fe, Argentina.

As textbook editor, Professor Vittor has also been the director of
collections of Fraterna Publishers of Buenos Aires from 1989-1991;
literary director of the cultural supplement *Letras e ideas* from
1990-1992; director of the Journal of Oriental Studies, *Atma-Jñana*,
from 1989-1992. As a cultural journalist, he has published various
articles and essays dealing with Islamic literature, thought, art,
culture, and spirituality. He is also the author of several books,
including, *Simbolismo e iniciación en la poesía de Alberto Girri*
(Fraterna, 1990), *El islam shiita: ¿ortodoxia o heterodoxia?*
(Biblioteca Islámica Ahlul Bayt, 1998), and *Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or
Heterodoxy* (Anṣariyān, 2006).

In collaboration with Dr. John Andrew Morrow and Professor Barbara
Castleton, Professor Vittor has completed the book *Arabic, Islām, and
the Allāh Lexicon* (2006), published by the Edwin Mellen Press. He has
published introductory studies for three of Dr. Morrow’s books,
*Amerindian Elements in the Poetry of Rubén Darío: The Alter Ego as the
Indigenous Other* (Edwin Mellen 2008), *Amerindian Elements in the
Poetry of Ernesto Cardenal: A Contemporary Voice for an Ancient People*
(Edwin Mellen 2009), and *The Encyclopedia of Islamic Herbal Medicine*
(McFarland, 2010). He is currently collaborating with Dr. Morrow on
various projects.


