Chapter 8: The Wilayah
======================

**Chapter 8: The** ***Wilāyah*****, The Spiritual and Temporal Authority
of the Imāms**

If we focus on the term *wilāyah* [primacy, guide, lordship] and words
related to spiritual authority and temporal power, as Ayātullāh
Muṭahharī did in a formidable and authoritative synthesis, we note that
this terminological repertoire has a very precise meaning in Shī‘ite
thought which is related to the idea of a unified government.[^1]
*Wilā’*, *walāyah*, *wilāyah*, *walī*, *mawlā*, are nominal forms of the
verbal substantive of the trilateral root WALLA (*waw*-*lam*-*alif
maksūrah*) which has the primary meaning of “being close,” from which is
derived “to be at the front of,” from which is derived the meanings of
“government” and “governor” in the temporal and political sense of the
words and “leader” and “chosen” in the spiritual sense. The same root
gives place to a series of words which denote power and authority, that
is, being close to the center [*wasaṭ*] of sovereignty. And the Arabic
word *wasaṭ* [center] gives a gamut of terms which indicate “mediation”
or “intercession” [*tawassuṭ*].

Other unfamiliar terms derived from the same trilateral root
*waw*-*lam*-*ya* are *walī* and *mawlā*. *Walī* means “friend,”
“intimate,” “close,” and with the respect to the Imāms “holiness” and by
extension spiritual “closeness” to the divine center. The passive
participle *mawlā* means, among other things, “one who deserves a
clientele,” and more frequently “boss,” “lord,” “protector,” “tutor,”
“master,” “owner” and so forth. In Shī‘ism, *mawlānā* [our lord / our
master] is used to address the Prophet and the Imāms and, in Ṣūfīsm, it
is used to refer to the great spiritual masters like Rūmī[^2] or Ibn
al-‘Arabī. We have listed the various forms and verbal nouns because
with the auxiliary one can better understand everything which is implied
by the idea of Imāmate or Caliphate and how it is conceived in Shī‘ite
thought in relation to spiritual authority and temporal power. In the
time of the Prophet, the title *mawlā* [master] had the connotation of
spiritual authority and universal temporal power. The basis of any
Caliphate or true government is the transcendence of its foundation, the
very basis of its sovereignty, authority, and legitimacy. However, with
the downfall of effective power in the succession of the Caliphate,
starting with Abū Bakr, the title *khalīfah* also suffered from the same
process of depreciation. After the four *khulafā’ al-rāshidīn*
[rightly-guided Caliphs], the Caliphate ceased to have the connotation
of sovereignty and, in fact, to admit the sense of effective authority.
This can be seen clearly with Mu‘āwiyyah, the founder of the Umayyad
dynasty, who considered himself the “first king [*melik*]” of Islām.[^3]
He is responsible for losing the effective [spiritual] authority of the
Caliphate and diminishing the meaning of many titles which, in the early
days, were exclusive Caliphal prerogatives. This includes the very term
*khalīf* which, upon entering the common language, became so diluted
that any governor of Islām could claim to be the Caliph of his own
dominion.

Among some Sunnī commentators and misinformed Orientalists, there are
those who believe that when ‘Alī became the Fourth Caliph, according to
the temporal and political precedence more than the spiritual, he was
implicitly accepting the authority and the method of election of the
previous Caliphs in that they accomplished similar political and social
functions as governors and elders of the Islamic community.[^4] From a
Shī‘ite perspective, it is clear that **‘Alī never accepted the
Caliphate in the sense that the three Caliphs who preceded him did.** On
the contrary, as Imām--in the Shī‘ite sense of spiritual and political
regency as well as *ta‘ālīm*, the esoteric faculty of perfectly
interpreting the intertexual mysteries of the Qur’ān and the
*sharī‘ah*--‘Alī was the legitimate spiritual heir and political
successor of the Prophet, something which he and his successors always
insisted upon. As he explains explicitly in his letters and sermons,
‘Alī accepted the function of Caliph--in the Sunnī sense of governor and
legal administrator--to avoid schism while preserving the function of
*wilāyah* for himself. As Naṣr says, this is how ‘Alī can simultaneously
be seeing as Caliph and Imām, by both Sunnīs and Shī‘ites, in accord
with the different perspectives on the issue (see Naṣr’s preface to
Ṭabātabā‘ī’s *Shī‘ite Islām* 10-12).

The *wilāyah* inherently implies certain legal and political faculties.
The Imām, as we have said, exercises the spiritual magistrate and the
esoteric guidance of the *wilāyah*. He also performs the function of
administrator of the *sharī‘ah*, fully interpreting its legal code and
legitimately dispensing justice through his role as perfect monarch, by
the fact that he embodies spiritual authority and temporal power. The
monarch [from the Greek *monos*, “the sole one” and *arjé*, “rule,”
“principle”] is the “supreme sovereign,” unique and universal,” and not
merely a “king” [*melik*] since a king only administers the temporal
functions of government while the monarch is the one who rules according
to the monarchy of divine right, established from above, by the mandate
of God and not by human choice.

As Lord Acton, a British historian of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, said, “Power corrupts and absolute power corrupts
absolutely.” As human history has shown us, human lust for power can
become exacerbated by its very existence. It can make man dream of
limitless power, causing him to rebel against his plight, his powerless
limited being. Justice and peace are then viewed as unacceptable unless
they can help increase and maintain power and wealth. They are soon
placed on the backburner due to innate egocentrism and worldly
ambitions. This is why the Gospel refers to heads of nations as tyrants
who rule like absolute sovereigns while the powerful ones oppress them
with their power (Matthew 20:25; Mark 10: 42). In a divine monarchy,
based on balance, harmony, justice and peace, quite the opposite is
true.

On the basis of the above, it can now be understood why in Shī‘ism, the
sovereign authority of Imām al-Mahdī has an eminently regulating and
restorative function which is proper and non-transferable. In other
words, he is worthy, by divine design, of the “central” position he
occupies. As an “intercessor” between heaven and earth, he is beyond the
distinction between the spiritual and worldly realms of existence. The
very nature of “intercessor” in the true sense of the word is
quintessential to the Seal of the Cycle of Initiation. It is for this
reason that he is referred to as the “center” [*wasaṭ*].[^5]

The “center” in question is the fixed point around which the world
rotates. It is designated symbolically by all religious traditions as
the “pole” [*quṭb*] and is generally represented by a “wheel.” The most
obvious sense of this symbol is the absolute dominion over the worldly
order. This is why Imām al-Mahdī receives the majestic titles of *ṣāḥib
al-zamān* [Lord of the Age], *al-arkān* [The Pillars], *al-qā’im* [The
Restorer], *al-muntaẓar* [The Awaited One], *al-ḥujjah* [The Proof] as
well as *al-quṭb* or the Spiritual Pole of the Age. The title of *ṣāḥib
al-zamān*, in its most sublime sense, applies exclusively to the Mahdī.
He is granted this title in virtue of his role as the primordial
universal legislator who formulates the most appropriate laws in
accordance with the conditions during our cycle of existence. He directs
the movement of our cycle without participating in it in a visible
fashion. He maintains himself simultaneously present and hidden in the
world, the same as in Aristotle’s notion of the “unmoving motor.”

In light of these considerations, it is understood why Imām al-Mahdī has
the fundamental attributes of “Justice” and “Peace.” He shares these
attributes with *çakravarti,* [from the Sanskrit: “he who makes the
wheel turn”], the “Universal Monarch” of the Hindu and Buddhist
traditions; with *wang*, the “Pontiff King” of Taoism and with
*melki-tsedeq*, the “King of Justice and Peace” of the Jewish
tradition.[^6] The Invisible Imām’s attributes of justice and peace are
veiled forms of his spiritual functions which, by an effort of cosmic
unity, are identified with earthly equilibrium and harmony. In light of
these concepts, we can affirm that the Shī‘ite concept of *wilāyah*, the
spiritual and temporal authority of the Imām, is the Islamic equivalent
of all of these traditional notions from both East and West, including
the Hellenist and Hellenist-Christian concept of the *panbasileus* or
“Absolute King,” who was the lord of a unique and universal empire.

Imām al-Mahdī is particularly revered for his role as Executor of
Prophetic Knowledge or First Intellect. At the same time, he is the
Archetype of Man, the Visible and the Invisible, the First and the Last,
the Alpha and the Omega. As Henry Corbin perceived from the development
of Shī‘ite Prophetology, this human form in its pre-eternal glory is
called Original Adam [*Ādam al-ḥaqīqī*], the Perfect Man [*insān
kāmil*], the Supreme Spirit and Scribe, the Absolute Caliph, and the
Pole of the Poles [*quṭb al-aqṭāb*].[^7] Imām al-Mahdī is also the
Eternal Muḥammadan Reality [*ḥaqīqah muḥammadiyyah*], the Light of His
Glory, His Sanctifying Virtue, His Primordial Logos or Divine Word and
his Perfect Epiphany.

In light of the above, we can say that in the beginning of Islām,
Shī‘ism, like Ṣūfīsm, was a latent and nameless reality profoundly
rooted in the esoteric dimension of the Qur’ānic revelation.[^8] **In
the Islamic world, the function of Shī‘ism, like that of Ṣūfīsm, is
similar to the human heart in the sense that the heart is the vital**
**center of the human body as well as being, in reality, the
intellectual “center” of a reality that transcends any formal
determination.**[^9] This “central” role of Shī‘ism at the heart of the
Islamic world has always, and continues to be, hidden from outside
observers, who insist upon its non-Islamic origin. They insist on this
theory because Shī‘ite doctrine does not appear in the first centuries,
particularly during the life of the Prophet, with all of the
metaphysical development that would manifest itself later on.[^10]

From a historical perspective, **Shī‘ism surfaced immediately after the
death of the Prophet and can be defined as “Alī’s Islām” or the “Islām
of** ***ahl al-bayt*****.”** The emergence of Shī‘ism was not merely the
consequence of a political conflict related to the succession of the
Prophet, although this certainly helped to precipitate the events. What
is important, above all, is the “central” role that Shī‘ism played in
the Islamic world after the demise of the founder of Islām.[^11] As a
continuation and a doctrinal complement to the *nubuwwah*, it was
imperative for the *wilāyah* to manifest itself in the world upon the
completion of the prophetic mission. Since *wilāyah* implies the same
possibility of prolonging the spiritual leadership and the esoteric
guidance of the Prophet, it cannot be superimposed on the *nubuwwah* as
long as the Prophet was alive.[^12]

In other words, Shī‘ite Islām, which was supposed to serve as a support
for the *wilāyah*, the spiritual and esoteric dimension of the
*nubuwwah* must manifest itself upon the death of the Prophet. This
moment, both cosmologically and metaphysically, signals the start of the
*wilāyah*, the beginning of its temporal and exoteric manifestation. It
is at that point when the *wilāyah* [guardianship] ceases to be a
latent, nameless reality, and transforms itself into a manifest and
named reality**. Due to its cosmological and metaphysical nature, the
historical apparition of Shī‘ism was meant to coincide with the Cycle
of** ***wilāyah*****, the start of ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib’s earthly mission.
The esoteric function of the first Imām, hidden until the moment of the
Prophet’s death, was meant to manifest itself in a partial opening of
the Muḥammadan** ***wilāyah*** **and the seal of the universal**
***wilāyah*****.** We can thus fully appreciate the importance of the
designation [*naṣṣ*] of ‘Alī as successor [*khalīfah*] and executor
[*waṣī*] of the Prophet.[^13] ‘Alī, the first link in the spiritual
chain of the Imāmate and the *rukn* or pillar of Islamic Gnosticism,
represents the complementary dimension of the Prophethood; his path,
Shī‘ism, is a dimension of the depth found at the core of the Qur’ānic
message.

[^1]: Author’s Note: Concerning the various implicit meanings of the
technical term wilāyah and other related terms derived from the
trilateral Arabic root W-L-Y, see M. Muṭahharī Wala’ha wa Wilāyat ha
(Qum 1976). There is an English version by Yayha Cooper, Wilāyah: The
Station of the Master (Tehran 1982), 21-48. Concerning the levels of
wilāyah, see D. Martin “The Return to ‘The One’ in the Philosophy of
Najm al-Din al-Kubra” in P. Morewedge (ed.) 216-222.

[^2]: Editor’s Note: Jalāl al-Dīn al-Rūmī, author of the Masnavi was a
famous Ṣūfī poet and founder of the whirling dervishes. He is the most
widely read poet in the United States.

[^3]: Editor’s Note: As a result of “the usurpation of rule by
Mu‘āwiyyah from ‘Alī… caused the system of rule to lose its Islāmic
character entirely and to be replaced by a monarchical regime” (Khumaynī
Islām and Revolution 200).

[^4]: Editor’s Note: As Ja‘fariyan explains, “When ‘Abd al-Raḥmān ibn
‘Awf laid down the condition that he would deliver the office of the
Caliphate to the candidate who would follow the practice [sīrah] of the
Shaykhayn [i.e. Abū Bakr and ‘Umar] … Imām ‘Alī insisted that he would
base his policy only on the Qur’ān, the sīrah of the Prophet and his own
judgments [ijtihād].”

[^5]: Editor’s Note: The existence of divinely determined intercession
for believers is unquestionably Qur’ānic: Who is there can intercede in
His presence except as He permitteth? (2:255) Verily your Lord is Allāh,
who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and is firmly
established on the throne [of authority], regulating and governing all
things. No intercessor [can plead with Him] except after His leave [hath
been obtained]. (10:3) None shall have the power of intercession, but
such a one as has received permission [or promise] from [Allāh] Most
Gracious. (19:87) On that Day shall no intercession avail except for
those for whom permission has been granted by [Allāh] Most Gracious and
whose word is acceptable to Him. (20:109) He knows what is before them,
and what is behind them, and they offer no intercession except for those
who are acceptable, and they stand in awe and reverence of His
[Glory].(21:28) No intercession can avail in His Presence, except for
those for whom He has granted permission. (34:23) Say: To Allāh belongs
exclusively [the right to grant] intercession. (39:44) How many-so-ever
be the angels in the heavens, their intercession will avail nothing
except after Allāh has given leave for whom He pleases and that he is
acceptable to Him. (53:26) Intercession, however, is not available to
unbelievers, as is clearly stated in the Qur’ān (6:51; 2:123; 2:254;
6:70; 6:94; 7:53; 10:18; 19:87; 26:100; 30:30; 32:4; 36:23; 39:43;
40:18; 43:86; 74:48). Intercession is not available to those who are
guilty of kufr or shirk. Almighty Allāh addresses the polytheists,
warning them that their partners will be unable to intercede with them
on the Day of Judgment. According to Shaykh Ṣadūq: The right to
intercession belongs to the prophets [anbiyyā’] and awliyyā’. And among
the believers [mu’minīn] also there are some who can intercede on behalf
of people equal in number to the tribes of Rabī‘ah and Muḍar. Even the
least of the believers will be liable to intercede on behalf of 30,000.
(122) It is narrated in Ṣadūq’s Risālatu al-i‘tiqādāt, Fakhruddīn b.
Aḥmad al-Najafī’s Majma‘ al- baḥrayn and Ḥasan b. Yūsuf b. ‘Alī Ibnu’l
Muṭahar al-Ḥillī’s al-Bābu al-ḥādī ‘ashar, that the Prophet said, “May
Allāh not grant my intercession to him who does not believe in my (power
of) intercession.” All of the various orthodox manifestations of Islām
believe in the intercession of the Prophet and the awliyā’. See
Kabbānī’s Encyclopedia of Islāmic Doctrines: http://www.sunnah.
org/ibadaat/ twsl.html. The belief in intercession does not mean that
there is an intermediary between human beings and God. It is merely an
extra means of attaining His mercy.

[^6]: Editor’s Note: The Hidden Imām is also the Philosopher King of the
Greeks.

[^7]: Author’s Note: In general, Corbin deals with this theme in his
diverse works dedicated to some of the internal or esoteric currents of
Shī‘ism, although with slight variations. See “La filosofia islámica
desde sus orígenes hasta la muerte de Averroes” in collaboration with
S.H. Naṣr and O. Iahia, in B. Parain, Del mundo romano al Islām
medieval: Historia de la filosofía (Mexico 1972), III, 253-259; 265-266;
Terre céleste et corps de résurrection: De l’Iran Mazdéen à l’Iran
shī‘ite (Correa 1960); 106-107; 112-115; Temples et contemplation:
Essais sur l’Islām iranien (Paris 1980), 75-76; 192-193; 220; 244-249;
and Shaykh al-Mufīd’s Kitāb al-irshād.

[^8]: Editor’s Note: The mystical dimension of the Holy Qur‘ān and
teachings of the Prophet were present from the very beginning, even
though they were not labeled taṣawwuf, Ṣūfism or ‘irfān. To borrow
Sausurrian terms, the signified exists before the signifier. Imām ‘Alī
was criticized by some Companions of the Prophet for speaking of things
which had never been spoken before by the Prophet. The Imām responded
with a reference to the Qur’ān that “Prophets speak to the people in the
language of the people.” It was the obligation of the Prophet to teach
the fundamentals of faith and the outer dimensions of the religion. It
was the obligation of the Imāms to expound upon in their inner
dimensions. As the Messenger of Allāh said, “There is among you a person
who will fight for the interpretation of the Qur’ān just as I fought for
its revelation.” He then indicated that it was ‘Alī (Aḥmad, Hākim,
Bayhaqī, Abū Nu‘aym, Muttaqī). It is unfortunate that Sayed ‘Alī Reza,
the English translator of Nahj al-balāghah, would engage in the
wholesale takfīr of the Ṣūfī, claiming that “According to Shī‘ah ‘ulamā’
all these sects are on the wrong path and out of the fold of Islām”
(422), an intolerant attitude which tarnishes his otherwise informative
commentary. It is equally regrettable that a scholar of the caliber of
Ayātullāh al-Uẓmā Shaykh Fazel Lankarānī would reject mysticism ruling
that “Ṣūfism, in the eyes of Shī‘ism, in general, [as well as]
Islāmically, has no religious basis, and there is no sign of it in the
teachings of the Prophet” (http://www.lankarani.net/
English/faq/en.htm). Similar views have been expressed by Grand
Ayātullāh Makarem Shirāzī, Grand Ayātullāh Tabrīzī, Grand Ayātullāh Sāfī
Gulpayganī, and Grand Ayātullāh Nūrī-Hamadānī. In response to whether it
was possible for Shī‘ites to participate in activities organized by
Nimatullāhī Gonabadi Ṣūfis, the five aformentionned Sources of Emulation
emited the following rulings which were published on Monday, July 12th,
2004, in the newspaper of the Hawẓah in Qum: 1. Grand Ayātullāh
Nūrī-Hamadānī declared on August 15, 2006 that the Ṣūfism has been
created by the enemies of the Prophet and his family; and when they saw
people rushing towards Islām, they created the abbeys and the groups and
all the 72 branches of the Ṣūfism are wrong. 2. Grand Ayātullāh al-Ḥajj
Shaykh Javad Tabrīzī: “In the name of Allāh. Participation in non-usual
meetings of Shī‘ites as those cited above are not allowed. ” 3. Grand
Ayātullāh Fazel Lankarānī: “In the name of God. Participation in the
meetings not in connection to Ahl al-Bayt is not allowed at all, and is
full of problems, and participation in the meetings of the Sufis is
absolutely not permitted. ” 4. Grand Ayātullāh Sāfi Gulpaygānī: “In the
Name of Allāh, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful. Participation
in the meetings of the named sect under any reason such as mourning,
remembrance, hosseyniyeh and the other ceremonies are ḥarām (prohibited)
and it is preaching of heresy and blasphemy and it is destruction.” 5.
Grand Ayātullāh Makarem Shirāzī: “In the name of God. The Ṣūfis sects in
general are deviation from truth, and participation in their meetings is
not allowed and the misguided Ṣūfī must be informed and be driven back
by fine words of erudite people. I wish you the success.” Grand
Ayātullāh Nūrī-Hamadānī remarked that following the Islāmic Revolution
there is no longer a need for Ṣūfī orders in Iran. During his teachings
of Kharaj at one of the largest mosques in Qum, he warned that: The
world-vision of Ṣūfism is very dangerous and harmful against the
Muslim-world, and we should watch their conspiracy… Many points in their
thoughts and ideas are closer to the polytheism, and it is rejected from
our point of view…. They try to propagate their ideas in different
gatherings and assemblies, and because of this danger, all Muslims
entirely should be aware and vigilant when dealing with them…the Ṣūfis
are a most disastrous phenomenon for Islām… many important men from the
religious sciences, like Ayātullāh Mar’ashí Najafī, have felt their
dangers, and warned about their harmful blows against Islām…many Ṣūfis
are supported by the enemies of Islām in order to harm the
religion. (http://www.insideofiran.com /en/?p=694) Grand Ayātullāh
Muntazerī responded to these rulings saying that attacking the places of
worship of the Ṣūfis had no religious justification. While we have the
greatest respect and admiration for Grand Ayātullāh Lankarānī, Grand
Ayātullāh Makarem Shirāzī, Grand Ayātullāh Tabrīzī, Grand Ayātullāh Sāfī
Gulpayganī, and Grand Ayātullāh Nūrī-Hamadānī as leading legal
authorities, their views on ‘irfān are diametrically opposed to those of
Grand Ayātullāh Khumaynī, ‘Allāmah Ṭabātaba’ī, Ayātullāh Muṭahharī,
Ayātullāh Beheshtī, Ayātullāh Bahonar, Ayātullāh Dast-Ghayb, Grand
Ayātullāh Arakī, Grand Ayātullāh Sistānī, Grand Ayātullāh Behjat, Grand
Ayātullāh Zanjanī, Ayātullāh ‘Alī Ṭabātaba’ī, Ayātullāh Misbāḥ Yazdī,
Ayātullāh Jawādī Amulī, Grand Ayātullāh Shahabadī, Ayātullāh Baḥr
al-‘Ulūm, Grand Ayātullāh Isbahānī, Grand Ayātullāh Burujerdī, Ayātullāh
‘Abd al-Ghaffar, Grand Ayātullāh Khu’ī, Grand Ayātullāh Ṣādiq al-Ṣadr,
and Grand Ayātullāh Bāqir al-Ṣadr, not to mention all of the classic
Shī‘ite authorities which include the likes of Mullā Sadrā and Kashānī.
When a person asked whether ‘irfān was permissible or was a form of
pantheistic blasphemy, Grand Ayātullāh Sistānī responded that: “‘Irfān
is a synonym for cognition. According to us, true ‘irfān is achieved by
following the Book of Allāh and the Sunnah. Those who are acquainted
with ‘irfān certainly do not believe in what you wrote in your message.”
When asked what he thought about ‘irfān as taught by ‘Allāmah
Ṭabātaba’ī, Shahīd Muṭahharī, and Imām Khumaynī in the book Light within
Me, Grand Ayātullāh Sistānī responded that: “‘Irfān is good in itself,
if one is found to be bearing it.” Historically, Twelver Shī‘ite
scholars have been divided on the issue of ‘irfān, with one camp
opposing it, and another endorsing it. In Islām and Revolution, Imām
Khumaynī lamented that: We find some scholars...denying the validity of
mysticism and thus depriving themselves of a form of knowledge. It is
regrettable… Those who wear cloaks and turbans and denounce the mystics
as unbelievers do not understand what they are saying; if they did, they
would not denounce them. (423-424) The Imām used to quote Ibn al-‘Arabī,
Suhrawardī, and Rūmī as spiritual authorities, demonstrating the
legitimacy of Islāmic mysticism. In his letter to Mikhail Gorbachov,
Imām Khumaynī referred to Ibn al-‘Arabī as “Abar Mard” (the greatest
man). ‘Allāmah Ṭabātaba’ī is also reported to have said that “everything
written about Islām does not amount to two sentences of Ibn al-Arabī’s
works.” Merely because the words ṣūfī and ‘ārif are not found in the
Islāmic texts of the first century of Ḥijrah, it does not signify that
mysticism and Gnosis did not exist. They did in fact exist under the
general umbrella of ‘ilm [knowledge]. As official institutionalized
Islām became increasingly legalistic and focused on the exoteric
foundations of the faith, the adherents of its mystical and esoteric
dimension needed to distinguish themselves by calling their science
‘irfān and by designating themselves as Ṣūfis (Awānī 169). All prophets
were mystics as were their faithful followers. The first paragons of
Ṣūfism were the aṣḥāb al-sūfah, the Companions of the Ledge, about whom
Sūrah 18:28 was revealed (170). They included such distinguished
companions as Salmān, Abū Dharr and ‘Ammār ibn Yāsir (170). The early
Ṣūfis were called zuhhad or ascetics, many of whom were associated with
Shī‘ite Imāms (170). Among the companions of ‘Alī were found spiritual
figures and ascetics like Kumayl and Maytham al-Tammār (170). In his
Essay on the Origins of the Technical Language of Islāmic Mysticism,
Massignon shows that Islāmic mystics or rūḥāniyyah have existed since
the dawn of Islām. Islāmic mysticism is clearly based on the practice of
the Prophet, the Imāms and their Companions and is directly derived from
the Qur’ān and the Sunnah, both of which are oceans of mystical
manifestations. As Awānī observes: The ḥadīth literature in Shī‘ism and
the anthologies of the ḥadīths handed down from the Imāms are the
veritable mines of Islāmic gnosis. The Uṣūl al-kāfī of Kulaynī and the
other compendia of Shī‘ī ḥadīth are real treasures of ‘irfān… Moreover,
the Shī’ī prayers and litanies found in al-Ṣaḥīfah al-sajadiyyah of the
fourth Imām…is the best exposition and representation of Islāmic gnosis.
Some Shī’ī prayers, like Du‘ā’ Sha‘bāniyyah, Du‘ā’ ‘Arafah, and Du‘ā’
Kumayl highlight the highest themes of Islāmic gnosis. Shī‘ī prayer
books are replete with ritual formulae for acts of supererogation
[nawāfil] also much emphasized in Ṣūfism and sometimes with identical
formulations. The ritual invocation of the Beautiful Divine Names is the
focus of emphasis in both Shī‘ism and Ṣūfism. For example, Du‘ā’ Jawshan
kabīr, found in Shī‘ī prayer books contains one thousand divine names
and is recited by pious Shī‘ī on many occasions and at least once a
week. Some identical formulae based directly and indirectly on the
verses of the Qur’ān are reiterated in both. The Shī‘ī canonical books
of ḥadīth are filled with themes which can be made the object of
meditation and contemplation and which can find their true explanation
in real ‘irfān. (174) As Ayātullāh Muḥammad Ṭaqī Miṣbāh Yazdī explains,
“The points which can be found among the narrations attributed to the
Noble Prophet and Pure Imāms, may Allāh bless all of them, and in their
supplications and intimate devotions related to the above topics
[‘irfān, Ṣūfism, ḥikmah] are uncountable.” A religion without mysticism
would not be a religion. As Ayātullāh Miṣbāh Yazdī explains, gnosis is
not only a part of Islām, but the kernel and spirit of it which comes
from the Qur’ān and prophetic Sunnah, just as the other parts of Islām.
It would be a dry carcass and an empty shell. As Awanī explains,
“esoterism in each religion, which constitutes its core and kernel, is
an integral part of that religion without which it cannot be a religion
to start with;” “esoterism is the sine qua non of every religion,
without which the religion would lose its vertical dimension and would
be reduced to a horizontal and mundane level” (172). Ṣūfism is not an
extraneous accretion super added to Islām … it is its esoteric or inward
aspect [bāṭin] as distinguished from the exoteric or external aspect
[ẓāhir]” (171-72). It is safe to say that “Ṣūfism is totally based upon
the Holy Qur’ān, the sunnah of the Prophet, and the Household [‘itrah]”
(172). The mystical dimensions of Islām have been fully appreciated by
Ayātullāhs Khumaynī, Ṭabātaba’ī and Muṭahharī who left us their insights
in Light Within Me which is also available in an excellent Spanish
translation titled Luz interior. Besides the aforementioned, the
following Ayātullāhs recognize the mystical dimensions of Islām:
Muḥammad Taqī Behjat, ‘Izz al-Dīn Ḥusaynī Zanjanī, Sayyid Mīrzā ‘Alī
Ṭabātaba’ī, Jawādī Amulī, Mīrzā Muḥammad ‘Alī Shahabadī, Muḥammad Ḥusayn
al-Burujerdī, Abū al-Qāsim al-Khu’ī, Muḥammad Ṣādiq al-Ṣadr, etc.
‘Allāmah Ṭabātaba’ī was a specialist in exegesis, mysticism and
philosophy while Ayātullāh Muṭahharī was an expert in both Eastern and
Western thought. Imām Khumaynī has also left us his Forty Ḥadīth: An
Exposition of Ethical and Mystical Traditions, which has been partly
translated into English, as well as a beautiful body of mystical poetry.
The greatness of Imām Khumaynī was that, like the Prophet, he
established equilibrium between the exoteric and the esoteric, between
the worldly and the spiritual, and between religion and politics. He was
able to function on various levels. Scholars like Khumaynī, who are
jurists, exegetes, mystics, philosophers, sociologists and poets, are
few and hard to find. As Murata observes, “One of the most unfortunate
signs of the contemporary malaise of the Islāmic world is that the
intellectual authorities have all but disappeared from the scene, while
the jurists have a free hand to say what they want” (3).

[^9]: Editor’s Note: For the Arabs, Aztecs and Incas, the heart is the
center of human intellect and spirituality. For them, reasoning is
related to feelings and emotions. In the Western world, the intellect
resides in the mind.

[^10]: Editor’s Note: The Imāms inherited and enriched Islām. As Fyzee
observes, “it is not possible to dismiss contemptuously the possibility
of the personal religious tradition of the Prophet, at least in some
important matters, being carefully handed down to the Imāms of the House
of the Prophet, the people who undoubtedly had the best opportunity of
knowing the true interpretation of many a principle of Islām” (4). As
Naṣr explains, “The sayings of the Imāms are in many ways not only a
continuation but also a kind of commentary and elucidation of the
prophetic ḥadīth, often with the aim of bringing out the esoteric
teachings of Islām” (A Shī‘ite Anthology 7). As Algar observes, “the
Imāms inherited from the Prophet a certain body of teaching concerning
the interpretation of the Qur’ān, which they enriched as they
transmitted it” (Khumaynī Islāmic Revolution 427 note 7).

[^11]: Editor’s Note: Islām teaches that God sent 124,000 prophets since
the time of Adam. Every tribe and nation received a prophet. The
fundamental teachings of these prophets were the same: belief in One
God, belief in the prophets and messengers of God, belief in the Day of
Judgment, belief in the Hereafter, promote the good and forbid the
wrong. Islām accepts all past prophets, including Adam, Abraham, Moses
and Jesus. In Islāmic thought, Judaism was the one true religion,
followed by Christianity and finally followed by Islām. In essence,
Islām embraces all revealed religions, all of which taught islām or
“submission” to God’s will. When the author says that Muḥammad was the
founder of the Islāmic religion, he expresses a limited truth. In the
universal order of things, all revealed religions were “Islām” and the
Islāmic religion is merely its final and complete manifestation.

[^12]: Editor’s Note: It is related in al-Kāfī that Imām al-Ṣādiq was
asked whether there could be two Imāms [at one time] to which he
responded: “No, except in the case of one [of them] being silent”
(Kulaynī 35: ḥadīth 447)

[^13]: Editor’s Note: The appointment of ‘Alī as Imām was co-dependent
on the appointment of Muḥammad as Messenger and an intrinsic aspect of
the divine message. After receiving the revelation, the Prophet gathered
the Banū ‘Abd al-Muṭṭālib in order to make the following solemn pledge:
“Whoever helps me in this matter will be my brother, my testamentary
trustee [waṣī], my helper [wazīr], my heir and my successor after me.”
‘Alī stood before the gathering and he said, “O Messenger of Alláh, I
will help you.” Then the Prophet said, “Sit down, you are my brother, my
trustee, my helper, my inheritor, and successor after me” (Ṣadūq, Mufīd,
Kulaynī). This event is recorded in Guillaume’s rendition of Sīrat Rasūl
Allāh by Ibn Isḥāq, the oldest extant biography on the life of the
Prophet, where we read that the Messenger of Allāh laid his hand on the
back of ‘Alī ‘s neck and said, “This is my brother, my executor, and my
successor among you. Hearken to him and obey him” [Inna hadhā akhī wa
waṣiyyī wa khalīfatī fīkum, fasma‘ū lahu wa aṭī‘ūhu]. It is also
recorded by Ibn Jarīr, Ibn Abū Ḥātim, Ibn Marduwayh, Abū Nu‘aym, Imām
Bayhaqī, Tha‘labī and Ṭabarī (Mūsawī 152). It appears in Ibn ‘Asākir,
Sūyūṭī, ‘Alā’uddīn al-Shāfi‘ī, al-Hasakānī, al-Muttaqī al-Hindī; Abū
al-Fida, and Haykal. It is related in somewhat different words by Ibn
al-‘Athīr, Imām Abū Ja‘far al-Iskāfī Mu‘tazalī, Ḥalabī, Ṭaḥāwī,
al-Maqdisī, Sa‘īd ibn Manṣūr, Aḥmad, Nasā‘ī, Hākim, Dhahabī and many
others (Mūsawī 152-54). It is also recorded by many Orientalists
including T. Carlyle, E. Gibbon, J. Davenport and W. Irving. This event
is conveniently suppressed from some Sunnī biographies of the Prophet.
While the second line of the Prophet appeared in the first Arabic
edition of Ḥasanayn Haykal’s Life of Muḥammad, it has been deleted in
the second editions and those which have followed. Apparently, the
author was pressured by al-Azhar to remove the reference. For more on
Haykal’s censorship, see Chapter 2 of Rizvi’s Shī‘ism: Imāmate and
Wilāyah. There are a multitude of other traditions in which the
Messenger of Allāh explicitly appoints ‘Alī as his heir and successor.


