Chapter 9: The Imamate, The Esoteric Inheritance or the Batin of the Prophet
============================================================================

**Chapter 9: The Imāmate, The Esoteric Inheritance or the** ***Bāṭin***
**of the Prophet**

To sum up the political aspects of Islamic history, it is clear that the
Caliphate is transmitted by way of *naṣṣ* through which the Prophet or
the Imām designates who will succeed him in the Imāmate.[^1] **The
Imām** **is the sole expert of the inner sense of the Scripture and the
Sunnah. This exclusive knowledge was passed directly from the Prophet to
‘Alī and through him to his descendants.**[^2] The Imām is thus the
definitive authority on religion obligations [*wājibāt/furūḍ*] and the
esoteric interpretation [*tafsīr/ta’wīl*] of the *sharī‘ah* [Islamic
law]. Furthermore, the Imām possesses the quality of *‘iṣmah*,
infallibility and impeccability.[^3] The controversial and contentious
issue of the succession of the Prophet, disputed by Sunnīs and Shī‘ites
for over a millennium, can never be understood if the essentially
esoteric function of the Imāmate, as a prolongation and complement to
the Prophethood, is overlooked. **The issue of the Imāmate** **is more
than an abstract question. It is the legitimate expression of Muḥammadan
spiritual authority and temporal power.** It is a concrete existential
reality which needed to manifest itself in the world to continue
expounding the *bāṭin* [esoteric aspect] of the Prophethood.

For Shī’ites, **the completion of the “Cycle of Prophethood**”
**[*****dā’irat al-nubuwwah***] **marks the beginning of the “Cycle of
Initiation**” [*dā’irat al-wilāyah*]. For metaphysical and cosmological
reasons, the Cycle of *wilāyah* was to be opened through its own “door”
[*al*-*bāb*], ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, due to his role as “spiritual
successor” [*khalīfah rūḥānī*] and “executer” [*waṣī*] of the Prophet’s
*bāṭin* [secrets] or initiator into the Muḥammadan mysteries. This is
why the Imāmate is not merely a question of blood ties to the
Prophet.[^4] The issue is not the degree of relation with him, be it
wives, daughters, grandchildren, sons-in-law or parents-in-law. On the
contrary, the worldly family union is the result of the pleromatic unity
of the *nubuwwah* [Prophethood] and the *wilāyah* [guardianship].

As Corbin senses, **the concept of the Imāms can only be understood if
one considers them as divine luminaries and pre-cosmic entities.**[^5]
**They** themselves affirmed so during the course of their worldly
existence. Many traditions to this effect were gathered by al-Kulaynī in
his voluminous compilation *al-Kāfī*.[^6] They stress the fact that the
Prophet and the Imām are from the same essence and the same light[^7]
and what is said of one is applicable to any one of the twelve.[^8]

Shī‘ite gnosis enables us to understand the importance of the situation
and exactly what was on the line with the Caliphate.[^9] **By the
political substitution of Abū Bakr for ‘Alī, the organic link between
the** ***ẓāhir*** **[exoteric]** **and the** ***bāṭin*** **[esoteric]
was temporarily broken. In** **Sunnism, this led to the development of a
legalistic religion, based on a purely juristic interpretation of
Islām.**[^10] **It was thus** **left to Ṣūfī and Shī‘ite Islām to
preserve, in their exoteric practices and doctrines, the lost esoteric
equilibrium.**

[^1]: Editor’s Note: The naṣṣ or appointment of ‘Alī and the succeeding
Imāms is one of the issues stressed by Shaykh Mufīd in Kitāb al-irshād.

[^2]: Editor’s Note: As Imām al-Ṣādiq explains, “‘Alī was a man of
knowledge, and knowledge is inherited. And a man of knowledge never dies
unless another one remains after him who knows his knowledge” (al-Kāfī,
156: ḥadīth 590). Imām al-Riḍā wrote in a letter that “Muḥammad was
Allāh’s custodian over His creatures. When he was taken, we, the
Household, were his inheritors” (160, ḥadīth 598).

[^3]: Editor’s Note: ‘Iṣmah may also be translated as “a state of
sinlessness.”

[^4]: Editor’s Note: There can be no monarchy in Islām as can be seen in
Imām Khumaynī’s “The Incompatibility of Monarchy with Islām,” Islām and
Revolution (Berkely: Mizan P, 1981): 200-208. The Imāmate was given to
those appointed by Allāh, and was not necessarily from father to eldest
son. As Imām al-Ṣādiq explains “Do you think that he who appoints a
successor from among us, appoints anyone he wishes? No, by Allāh, indeed
it is a covenant from the Messenger of Allāh to one man after another,
until it comes down to the one who is entrusted with it” (Kulaynī 1:2,
IV, 320: ḥadīth 739). In another ḥadīth, he explains that “The Imāmate
is a covenant from Allāh, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, which is
entrusted to men who are named” (320: ḥadīth 738).

[^5]: Editor’s Note: As Naṣr explains, “Shī‘ism believes that there is a
‘Primordial Light’ passed from one prophet to another and after the
Prophet of Islām to the Imāms. This light protects the prophets and
Imāms from sin, making them inerrant [ma‘ṣūm], and bestows upon them the
knowledge of divine mysteries” (Ṣūfī Essays 111). ‘Allāmah Muḥammad
Bāqir al-Majlisī lists numerous traditions concerning this “Primordial
Light” and how it was passed down from the prophets, to Muḥammad and
then to the Imāms (see chapters 1 and 2 of Ḥayāt al-qulūb). According to
Imām Khumaynī: The Most Noble Messenger and the Imāms existed before the
creation of the world in the form of lights situated beneath the divine
throne; they were superior even in the sperm from which they grew and in
their physical composition. Their exalted station is limited only by the
divine will, as indicated by the saying of Jibra‘īl recorded in the
traditions on the mi‘rāj: “Were I to draw closer by as much as the
breadth of a finger, surely I would burn.” The Prophet himself said, “We
have states with God that are beyond the reach of the cherubim and the
prophets.” It is part of our belief that the Imāms too enjoy similar
states… (Islām and Revolution 64-65) Concerning these attributes of the
Imāms, see Henry Corbin, Histoire de la philosophie Islāmique (Paris,
1964): 77 ff. It is recorded in al-Kāfī that Imām al-Ṣādiq was asked
about the verse: “Therefore, believe in Allāh and His Messenger and in
the Light which we have sent down” to which he responded: The Light, by
Allāh, is the Light of the Imāms from the Household of Muḥammad till the
Day of Resurrection. They, by Allāh, are the Light which Allāh has sent
down, and they, by Allāh, are the Light of Allāh in the heavens and on
the earth.” (Kulaynī l80: ḥadīth 514) In Lantern of the Path, Imām
al-Ṣādiq relates a fascinating tradition on the authority of Salmān
al-Fārisī in where the Messenger of Allāh explains that: Allāh created
me from the quintessence of light, and called me, so I obeyed Him. Then
he created ‘Alī from my light, and called him, and he obeyed. From my
light and the light of ‘Alī He created Fāṭimah. He called her and she
obeyed. From me, ‘Alī and Fāṭimah, He created al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn. He
called them and they obeyed Him. Allāh has named us with five of His
names: Allāh is al-Maḥmūd [the Praised] and I am Muḥammad [praisworthy];
Allāh is al-‘Alī [the High], and this is ‘Alī [the one of high rank];
Allāh is al-Fāṭir [Creator out of nothing], and this is Fāṭimah; Allāh
is the One with Iḥsān [beneficence], and this is Ḥasan; Allāh is
Muḥassin [the Beautifying] and this is Ḥusayn [the beautiful one]. He
created nine Imāms from the light of al-Ḥusayn and called them and they
obeyed Him, before Allāh created either Heaven on high, the
out-stretched earth, the air, the angels or man. We were lights who
glorified Him, listened to Him and obeyed Him.

[^6]: In The Origins and Development of Shī‘ah Islām, Jafrī questions
the authenticity of the traditions describing the Imāms as supernatural
human beings and the miracles attributed to them (300, 303). Miracles
and mysticism are clearly incompatible with his training as a historian.
He holds that “a great many traditions ascribing supernatural and
superhuman characteristics to the Imāms, propounded by semi-ghulāt
circles in Kufah, crept into Shī‘ī literature” (303). He therefore
dismisses the traditions concerning the light of Allāh in ‘Alī and the
description of the Imāms as the “shadows of light” and “luminous bodies”
(302). Shī‘ite scholars, however, have always shown the greatest
aversion towards ghuluw [extremism] and would not have accepted
traditions from ghulāt or even semi-ghulāt sources. Shī‘ite fuqahā’
[jurists] are unanimous in their takfīr [declaration of infidelity] of
the ghulāt (Khu‘ī 28; Gulpāygānī 30 et al.). As Shaykh Ṣadūq says, Our
belief concerning those who exceed the bounds of belief [ghāl, pl.
ghulāt] and those who believe in delegation [al-mufawwiḍah] is that they
are deniers [kuffār] of Allāh, Glory be to His name. They are more
wicked than the Jews, the Christians, the Fire-Worshippers, the
Qadarites or the Kharijites, or any of the heretics [ahl al-bid‘ah] or
those who holds views which lead astray [al-ahwā’ al-muḍillah].
(141-142) While Jafrī may believe that excessively zealous Shī‘ites
exaggerated the status of the Imāms, turning them into divine
luminaries, what accounts for the presence of similar traditions in
Sunnī and Ṣūfī sources? In ‘Abd al-Raḥmān Sulamī’s (d. 1021) famous
compilation of the Qur’ān titled Haqā’iq al-tafsīr, we find an exegesis
of Sūrah 2:37 which is startling for a Sunnī source. In interpreting the
verse “and Allāh taught Adam the names,” Sulamī quotes a tradition from
Imām Ja‘far to the effect that: Allāh existed before His creation
existed. He created five creatures from the light of His Glory and gave
each one a name from among His Names: Being the Praised One [maḥmūd], He
called His Prophet, Muḥammad; being the Most High [‘alī], He called the
Leader of the Believers, ‘Alī; being the Creator [fāṭir] of the heavens
and the earth, he forged the name Fāṭimah; and since he has the most
beautiful names [ḥusnā], He forged two names for Ḥasan and Ḥusayn. He
then placed them to the right of His Throne… The traditions in question
are numerous and widely recorded. We are not dealing with isolated
traditions with weak chains of narrations [sanad] which can easily be
dismissed. Author’s Note: See al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī (Karachi 1965). There
is also a more recent edition (Tehran 1400/1980). Editor’s Note: al-Kāfī
fī ‘ilm al-dīn [The Sufficient in the Knowledge of Religion] is one of
the “Four (Fundamental) Books” of the Shī‘ites. The others include Man
lā yaḥduruhu al-faqīh [For Him not in the Presence of a Jurist] by
Shaykh al-Ṣadūq Muḥammad ibn Bābawayh al-Qummī (d. 381/991), Tahdhīb
al-aḥkām (Rectification of the Statutes) by Shaykh Muḥammad al-Ṭūsī (d.
460/1068) and al-Istibṣār fī mā ukhtulifa fīhi min al-akhbār (Reflection
upon the Disputed Traditions) also by al-Ṭūsī.

[^7]: Editor’s Note: It is related that Imām Muḥammad al-Bāqir said that
“The first beings that Allāh created were Muḥammad and his family, the
rightly guided ones and the guides; they were the phantoms of light
before Allāh” (Kulaynī 1: 279).

[^8]: Editor’s Note: The Messenger of Allāh said of his Holy Household:
“We are exactly the same as regards command, understanding, and what is
lawful and what is unlawful” (Kulaynī 314: hadīth 728). As Naṣr
explains, The Imāms are like a chain of light issuing forth from the
“Sun of Prophecy” which is their origin, and yet they are never
separated from that Sun. Whatever is said by them emanates from the same
inviolable treasure of inspired wisdom. Since they are an extension of
the inner reality of the Blessed Prophet, their words really go back to
him. That is why their sayings are seen in the Shī‘ite perspective as an
extension of the prophetic ḥadīth, just as the light of their being is
seen as a continuation of the prophetic light. In Shī‘ite eyes, the
temporal separation of the Imāms from the Blessed Prophet does not at
all affect their essential and inner bond with him or the continuity of
the “prophetic light” which is the source of him as well as their
inspired knowledge. (A Shī‘ite Anthology 6-7)

[^9]: Editor’s Note: The office of the Imāmate and Caliphate was meant,
by divine design, to function as the Government of God on earth. The
Prophet has said that: “He, who denies ‘Alī his Imāmate after me, verily
denies my Prophethood [nubuwwah]. And he who denies my Prophethood has
denied Allāh His divinity” (Sadūq 107). He also stated that The Imāms
after me are twelve, the first of them is the Prince of Believers ‘Alī
ibn Abī Ṭālib, and the last of them is the Mahdī [rightly-guided], the
Qā’im [the upholder of the true religion]; obedience to them is
obedience to me and disobedience to them is disobedience to me; and who
denies one of them has verily denied me. (108) Imām al-Ṣādiq has said
that: “He who denies the last among us is like him who denies the first
among us” (108). The following tradition from Imām al-Ṣādiq illustrates
what is at stake when the authority of ahl al-bayt is forsaken: We are
those obedience to whom Allāh has made an obligation. Nothing is proper
for the people except to know, nor are the people absolved from being
ignorant about us. He who knows us is a believer, and he who denies us
is an unbeliever. He who neither knows us nor denies us is misguided,
till he returns to the path of guidance, which Allāh has made an
obligation for him as a binding obligation to us. If he dies in
misguidance, Allāh will do with him whatever he pleases. (Kulaynī 60
ḥadīth 489) The Imām has also issued the following firm warning:
“Whoever dies without having known and acknowledged the Imām of his Age
dies as an infidel” (Kulaynī I 318). Recognition of the Imām is an
absolute duty of every believer. Loving the Household of the Prophet is
mandatory. As we read in the Holy Qur’ān: “No reward do I ask of you for
this except the love of those near of kin” (42:23). This is not to imply
that failure to recognize the Imāms is an act of disbelief. As Ayātullāh
Muṭahharī clarifies in Islām and Religious Pluralism: The verses and
traditions that indicate that the actions of those who deny Prophethood
or Imāmate are not acceptable are with a view to denial out of obstinacy
and bias; however, denial that is merely a lack of confession out of
incapacity (quṣūr)--rather than out of culpability (taqṣīr)--is not what
the verses and traditions are about. In the view of the Qur’ān, such
deniers are considered musta‘af (powerless) and murjawn li’amr illah
(those whose affair is referred to God’s command).

[^10]: Editor’s Note: Sunnism is primarily ritualistic while Ṣūfism is
primarily spiritualistic. Shī‘ism presents a balance between the ritual
and the spiritual. As Naṣr explains, “Ṣūfism does not possess a
sharī‘ah; it is only a spiritual way [ṭarīqah] attached to a particular
Sharī‘ite rite such as the Mālikī or Shāfi‘ī. Shī‘ism possesses both a
sharī‘ah and a ṭarīqah” (Ṣūfī Essays 107).


