Conclusions
===========

For the sake of concision, and to avoid repeating what has already been
explained, we will limit ourselves to recalling that in Shī‘ism, the
question of the Caliphate is eminently transcendental. As such, **‘Alī’s
right to succession cannot, in any way, be subjected to human
scrutiny.** For Shī‘ites, the supreme spiritual status of ‘Alī is
peerless and cannot be compared to the rank held by other Islamic
leaders. He belongs to a unique and superior spiritual category which
was conferred on him by the grace of God. By bestowing the *wilāyah* of
the Prophet on Alī, God perfected Islām and brought the prophetic
mission to a close.

The fundamental doctrine of *wilāyah* is based on the concept of the
*ta‘ālīm* of the Imāms. What continues in Islām under the name of
*wilāyah* is, *de facto et de iure* [by fact and by right], a form of
esoteric guidance [*al-hidāyah al-bāṭiniyyah*] from which humanity
cannot stray without perishing.[^1] The *wilāyah* is the guaranteed
living embodiment of the spiritual authority of the Prophet which, by
the temporal succession of the Twelve Imāms, continues throughout human
history until the end of times.

Understandably, it is impossible to separate the historical development
of Shī‘ite Islām from the meta-historical antecedents of *wilāyah*.
‘Alī’s Islām cannot be separated from the metaphysical truths which are
its *telos*, its fundamental and final cause. In closing, it is
inconceivable to claim that we have dealt with the issue of Imāmate and
*wilāyah* in all of its depth.

We have limited ourselves to addressing the issue of its origins and
leaving the topic open to further research. As a result, this study on
the origins of Shī‘ism must remain incomplete for the time being. In
order for it to be complete, it would have been necessary to compile
some of the traditions that attest to the extraordinary importance of
the secret spiritual life of Shī‘ism and the Shī‘ite ethos of the Hidden
Imām, the seal of the Muḥammadan *wilāyah*, for, as the Prophet has
stated, without the continuous living presence of the Imām, neither
human beings nor the world can subsist.[^2]

[^1]: In the previous versions of this work published in Spanish, the
author stated “what continues in Islām under the name of wilāyah is, de
facto et de iure [by fact and by right], a form of esoteric Prophethood
[nubuwwah bāṭiniyyah].” What the author was attempting to convey was
that Shī‘ism is the only expression of Islām which, in the words of
Corbin, “has preserved and perpetuated the link of divine guidance
between man and God through its belief in the Imāmate” unlike Sunnism
which “believes that the link between man and God has been severed with
the end of the Prophethood” (qtd. Baqr al-Ṣadr, The Awaited Saviour). As
Sayyid Rizvī has pointed out, however, the term “Esoteric Prophethood”
for imāmah and wilāyah is problematic as it may lead readers to believe
that Shī‘ites beliveve in the continuation of nubuwwah. An Imām, after
cessation of the Prophethood, still has access to divine guidance
through true visions and the voices of angels without actually seeing
them [al-muḥaddath], as explained in the section of al-Kāfī which
describes the Imāms as al-muḥaddathun. As per the suggestion of Sayyid
Rizvī, the author has opted for the term al-hidāyah al-bāṭiniyyah which
more aptly captures the sense he was attempting to convey.

[^2]: Editor’s Note: Imām Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq said that: Amīr al-mu’minīn is
the gate of Allāh, except through which one cannot reach Him, and the
path to Him, such that if someone passes along another (path) he will
perish, and this is applied to all the Imāms, one after another. Allāh
has made them the pillars of the earth. (Kulaynī 88 ḥadīth 521) It is
related in al-Kāfī that Imām al-Sādiq was asked whether the world could
exist without there being an Imām in it, to which he responded: “No”
(Kulaynī 35: ḥadīth 447). The Imām is also reported to have said that
“Verily, the world can never be without an Imām” (36, ḥadīth 448), “As
long as the world lasts, there will be in it a Proof of Allāh” (36:
ḥadīth 449); “The earth can never last without an Imām who is Allāh’s
proof for His creatures” (37: ḥadīth 454). Muḥammad al-Bāqir also said
that “If the Imām is removed from the earth (even) for an hour (of the
day), the earth will surge up with those in it like a sea surges up with
those in it” (39: ḥadīth 458).


