Exordium
========

Luis Alberto Vittor’s *Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy* addresses
many essential issues concerning the split between the followers of *ahl
al-bayt* and the followers of *ahl al-sunnah*. Transcending the
historical, the author focuses on ahistorical aspects in the genesis of
adherence, stressing the esoteric foundation of Shī‘ī Islām, as opposed
to the exoteric foundation of Sunnī Islām which forces its followers to
find spirituality in various Ṣūfī orders.

Vittor’s book challenges the prevailing view among Western academics,
namely, the contention that Shī‘ite Islām is “heterodox” while Sunnī
Islām is “orthodox.” He contends that **there is nothing non-orthodox or
un-orthodox in Shī‘ite Islām**, since the very principles that give life
and identity to Shī‘ite Muslims are deeply rooted in the Sunnah of the
Prophet and the Twelve Imāms.

According to Vittor, **definitions such as “orthodox” and “heterodox”
are misnomers when applied to Islām: they are Western impositions on an
Islamic construct that are entirely false.** As the author explains, if
one respects the meaning of the word “orthodox,” which implies adherence
to a specific set of beliefs and instructions, **Shī‘ite Muslims are as
orthodox as Sunnī Muslims.**[^1] The book challenges the common
misconceptions of Western academics, their bias towards Islām, and their
tendency to interpret Shī‘ite Islām through Sunnī lenses.

Unlike polemical publications dealing with the Sunnī-Shī‘ī debate, the
work does not belittle or put down the followers of *ahl al-sunnah*. The
author explores Shī‘ite Islām from within and examines the religious
tradition on its own terms. As a result, he has produced a work of great
critical importance, revealing the spiritual depth of Shī‘ism to which
many Shī‘ites are oblivious.

As one reads the work, one develops a greater understanding of the inner
meaning of essential elements of Shī‘ite faith and religious practice.
The work is sure to have great resonance during the month of *Muḥarram*,
a time when Shī‘ism is more or less viewed through Sunnī lenses. When
Shī‘ites commemorate the martyrdom of Imām Ḥusayn, they are often
assaulted with questions and criticism. Unless the spiritual foundations
of Shī‘ism are fully understood, Shī‘ite efforts are expended to
rebuttal at best or attack of *ahl al-sunnah* at worst. Both a defensive
and an aggressive approach to inter-Islamic understanding are futile and
reinforce the status quo. The solution to any Sunnī confusion regarding
*‘Āshūrā’* will not be resolved in the realm of the political, but in
the sphere of the spiritual. As Vittor’s work reveals, **the sweetness
of Shī‘ite Islām is to be found in the inner meanings of the outer
rituals.**

The chapter on Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī is particularly revealing. Although
I.K.A. Howard has provided a good historical rendition of Mukhtār in
*al-Serat*, Vittor captures the sense of spirituality emanating from his
uprising. In the words of Howard Zinns, time has a way of nurting a
certain moral and spiritual outrage: a sense of indignation that is
missing at least today. As one reads Vittor’s work, one senses the deep
suffering and empathy that Shī‘ites feel for the suffering of *ahl
al-bayt.*

Although not a survey of the Shī‘ite faith, Vittor’s work covers the
spiritual foundation of the Imāmate to a sufficient degree. His work
also touches upon the treatment of the Shī‘ite minority in the face of
oppression, and the role of silent and quietist revolution as a means of
protest, an approach which stands in stark contrast to the violent modes
of expression and opposition seen in the Muslim world today.

Rather than radicalize, Vittor’s work helps to sensitize Shī‘ites, an
achievement of incalculable importance in the aftermath of the Iraqi
quagmire.[^2] **These are times of reconciliation, not revenge. These
are times of unity and not division.** Despite the dark moments that
Shī‘ites have suffered, and continue to suffer, the tide of time is
changing in the right direction, and many people are realizing the
spiritual force of Shī‘ite Islām, made obvious through its
supplications, prayers, and salutations, as well as its Qur’ānic
commentaries and scholarly works, all of which are grounded in
spirituality.

Luis Alberto Vittor’s *Shī‘ite Islām*: *Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy* is a
very concise book, and the greater portion of the work consists of
highly informational scholarly notes making it an easy read for the
novice or even the beginner. Due to its academic value and
accessibility, its intellectual integrity, and its call for Islamic
unity, we tremendously recommend this book, and hope to see it widely
disseminated for the purpose of *da’wah* and *tablīgh*.

[^1]: Editor’s Note: The word “orthodoxy” refers to “the traditional
beliefs of a religious group which are considered normal and acceptable
by most people.” When we say that most Muslim groups are “orthodox,” it
means that they form part of mainstream Islām. It does not necessarily
mean that the path they follow is perfectly straight. It merely means
that they are within the main body of Islām as opposed to outside of it.
When the author and editor say that Sunnis are orthodox Muslims, they
refer to those Muslims who followed the four first Caliphs and who
always maintained their love and respect for ahl al-bayt. The author and
editor do not consider the followers of Mu‘āwiyyah, Yazīd, and other
despotic figures as ahl al-sunnah. When the author and editor say that
Ṣūfis are orthodox, they refer to authentic Islāmic ‘irfān and not
Pseudo-Ṣūfism. The author and the editor are strongly opposed to the
Pseudo-Ṣūfism which is currently spreading throughout the West and which
operates as a type of fifth column within Islām. The author’s fieldwork
has shown that some Bahā’ī groups cultivate a typo of Pseudo-Ṣūfism or
Pseudo-‘irfān which is dangerous because they do not present themselves
as a ṭarīqah al-‘irfāniyyah al-bahā’iyyah, but rather as a ṭarīqah
al-‘irfāniyyah shī‘iyyah. The purpose of such deception is to cause
confusion in the minds of Westerners who seek to spiritually connect
themselves with Shī‘ite ‘irfān. Neither the author nor the editor make
any references to contemporary Ṣūfism, but rather to the traditional
‘irfān of Ibn al-‘Arabī, Sa‘dī of Shirāz, Ḥāfiẓ, Mullā Ṣadrā, and so
forth.

[^2]: Author’s Note: For an insight into the crimes committed by Western
mercenaries in Iraq, see the anonymously published review of Jeremy
Scahill’s Blackwater: The Rise of the World’s Most Powerful Mercenary
Army, which appeared in Crescent International in October of 2007.


