Opening Remarks: The Foundations of Islamic Unity
=================================================

Considering the current Sunnī-Shī‘ah conflict occurring in the Middle
East, and much of the Muslim world, Luis Alberto Vittor’s *Shī‘ite
Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy* could not come at a more opportune time.
Radically departing from the confrontational polemicist propaganda of
the past, Vittor demonstrates that **the greatness of Shī‘ite Islām does
not reside in a denigration of Sunnī Islām.** Shī‘ite Islām is great in
and of itself. One does not need to criticize the Companions or the
Caliphs to exalt the Twelve Imāms. The Imāms of *ahl al-bayt* are great
in and of themselves. One does not need to criticize the Imāms of the
Sunnī schools of jurisprudence to exalt Imām Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq. The Sixth
Imām is great in and of himself, having left legions of scholars as a
legacy.

Unlike some authors, who approach Shī‘ite Islām from an apologetic
perspective which seeks to appease Sunnī Muslims, Vittor approaches
Shī‘ism from a position of strength, examining the religious tradition
independently, in and of itself, from within, and on its own terms. He
makes no apologies for Shī‘ite beliefs and practices and does not
compromise on questions of principle. Unlike some overly enthusiastic
authors, **Vittor does not exalt Shī‘ism at the expense of Sunnism.** As
an honest, objective, and open-minded academic, he treats both of his
subjects with respect, viewing them in complement rather than
opposition: **there would be no Shī‘ism without Sunnism, and there would
be no Sunnism without Shī‘ism**.

When engaging in inter-Islamic dialogue, it is important to respect the
sensibilities of one’s target audience. In every instance, those who
speak for Shī‘ism should avoid negative marketing, which focuses on
belittling one’s adversary, as opposed to positive marketing, which
focuses on the qualities of your candidate. Extremist sources which
attack *ahl al-sunnah* only serve to drive Sunnīs away from Shī‘ite
Islām. As such, c**asting doubt on the character of the Prophet’s
Companions in order to replace them with the Twelve Imāms is a misguided
effort of marketing.**

The Imāms themselves criticized such comportment. Rather than make value
judgments, it is often better to allow the historical sources to speak
for themselves. Rather than attacking individuals and beliefs, Shī‘ites
should speak exclusively about the Prophet, citing the Qur’ānic verses
and *aḥādīth* in favor of the *ahl al-bayt*. Presented properly, by
means of an intelligent, tolerant, and respectful approach, the Shī‘ite
message is sure to have greater resonance among Sunnī Muslims.

In order to guide an interested Sunnī into Shī‘ite Islām, all one has to
do is cite the Qur’ān, repeat the words of the Prophet, and demonstrate
the wisdom of the Imāms, and that will be sufficient. One must address
issues of faith, and the importance of the *imāmah* and *wilāyah*,
before tackling controversial issues from the early days of Islamic
history. Once a person is open to the divine authority, everything else
will fall into place, and then, and only then, are individuals
interested in Shī‘ism ready to deal with Tijanī’s informative works*.*
In our experience, works like *Then I was Guided*, *Ask those who Know*,
*To be with the Truthful*, and *The* *Shī‘ah are (the Real) Ahl
al-Sunnah* have an important place, but not necessarily in the first
line of *da‘wah*.

Many Shī‘ite Muslims seem to forget that ***taqiyyah*** **is a form of
tact** and every educational endeavor must proceed by stages. As Imām
Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq has said, “This affair (*amr*) [the Imāmate and the
esoteric meaning of religion] is occult (*mastūr*) and veiled
(*muqanna‘*) by a covenant (*mīthāq*), and whoever unveils it will be
disgraced by Allāh” (Kulaynī). Certain things are better left unsaid
when dealing with people who are potential enemies of *ahl al-bayt*. As
Imām Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq warned:

*Keep our affair secret, and do not divulge it publicly, for whoever
keeps it secret and does not reveal it, Allāh will exalt him in this
world, and put light between his eyes in the next, leading him to
Paradise...Whoever divulges our affair publicly, and does not keep it a
secret, Allāh will disgrace him in this world and will take away light
from between his eyes in the next, and will decrease for him darkness
that will lead him to the Fire...Taqiyyah is of my religion, and of the
religion of my father, and who does not observe taqiyyah has no
religion...It is necessary to worship in secret and it is necessary to
worship openly...the one who reveals our affairs is the one who denies
them. (Kulaynī)*

Imām Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq also condemned those who spread the secrets of
*wilāyat Allāh* among the common people, saying: “Our secret continued
to be preserved until it came into the hands of the sons of Kaysān and
they spoke of it on the roads and in the villages of the Sawād”
(Kulaynī).

Imām Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq warned his Shī‘ites to: “**Fear for your religion
and protect it (lit. veil it) with** ***taqiyyah*****, for there is no
faith in whom there is no** ***taqiyyah***” (Kulaynī). He also advised
his followers to: “Mix with the people (ie., enemies) outwardly, but
oppose them inwardly so long as the Emirate is a matter of opinion”
(Ṣadūq). The Imām always avoided controversy and conflict, saying:
“Verily, when I hear a man abusing me in the mosque, I hide myself
behind a pillar so that he may not see me” (Ṣadūq). On one occasion,
Zakariyyā ibn Sābiq was enumerating the Imāms in the presence of Imām
Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq.

When the Companion reached the name of Muḥammad al-Bāqir, the Imām
interrupted him and said, “That is enough for you. Allāh has affirmed
your tongue and has guided your heart” (Kulaynī). The Imām also said
that “**Verily, diplomacy (*****al-ri’ā’*****) with a true believer is a
form of** ***shirk*** **(polytheism); but with a hypocrite in his own
house, it is worship**” (Ṣadūq). These traditions are not saying that
Shī‘ite Muslims should not be sincere, and that they form some sort of
secret esoteric sect. They are simply saying that they should not be
stupid, and that they should only share their beliefs with a receptive
audience in order to avoid provocation and enmity.

**Rather than promote division and conflict, Imām Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq urged
Shī‘ites to pray with Sunnīs:** “He who prays with them standing in the
front row, it is as though he prayed with the Prophet in the first row”
(Ṣadūq). The Imām also encouraged Shī‘ites to treat Sunnīs as their
brethren: “Visit their sick, attend their funerals, and pray in their
mosques” (Ṣadūq). Since the improper behavior of followers reflects
poorly on their leader, the Imām told his followers to “Become an
ornament for us, and not a disgrace” (Ṣadūq). He also called upon his
Shī‘ites to encourage goodwill among all Muslims, saying, “May Allāh
have mercy on a person who inculcates friendship towards us among men,
and does not provoke ill-will among them” (Ṣadūq). This Shī‘ite spirit
of Islamic unity was shown by ‘Allāmah Sharīf al-Dīn al-Musawī who ruled
that the Shī‘ites of Lebanon should celebrate the birth of the Prophet
on the same day as the Sunnīs. Imām Khumaynī took this a step further by
declaring the entire week, from the Monday to the Friday, as Islamic
Unity week.

In twenty years of Islamic activism, we have observed that works like
*al-Muraja‘āt* by ‘Allāmah al-Mūsāwī, which are calm, courteous, gentle,
and convincing, are far more effective than caustic criticism. We have
also found that **the most effective tools in Shī‘ite** ***da‘wah***
**are the works of the Imāms themselves**, *Nahj al-balāghah* by Imām
‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, the *Ṣaḥīfah al-sajadiyyah* by Imām ‘Alī Zayn
al-‘Abidīn, the *Lantern of the Path* by Imām Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq, as well
as other biographical books such as *The Book of Guidance* by Shaykh
al-Mufīd, which demonstrate the depth of knowledge of the Imāms, as well
as their profound wisdom, and piety.

Many Shī‘ite Muslims would be well advised to live what they learn, to
exhibit the true characteristics of followers of *ahl al-bayt*, to live
according to Islām, and to lead by example. **The best converts to
Shī‘ite Islām never received a book. They were moved by the piety of
Shī‘ite Muslims, and their devout love and attachment to the Prophet and
his family.** It should also be understood that the formal spreading of
Islām is *wājib kifāyah*; it is the obligation of certain members of the
community, and should be left to the knowledgeable, competent, and
qualified. The Prophet and the Imāms warned us not to argue with the
ignorant. In order to ensure that Islām was rightly represented the
Twelve Imāms trained Muslim missionaries to propagate the faith
properly.

**As any business professor can explain, attacking a rival is never good
marketing.** An advertiser should never point out the faults of others.
It is not permitted in the best of mediums and is never good policy. The
selfish purpose is always evident. It is unfair, impolite, unbefitting
of a Muslim, and counter-Qur’ānic. As Almighty Allāh says, “Call unto
the way of thy Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and reason with
them in the better way” (16:125). The Most High has also said, “Revile
not those who invoke other than Allāh, lest wrongfully they revile Allāh
through ignorance” (6:108). **If Muslims must not mock the beliefs of
polytheists, the prohibition is even greater when it comes to the
beliefs of other Muslims.**

While negative advertising has some advantages, it can evoke aggressive
responses towards the source of the advertising. While it can motivate
base support, verbal assaults against the opponent can alienate
non-sectarian Muslims and outrage committed Muslims from the other camp,
radicalizing rhetoric. What is worse, negative advertising often
produces a backlash, which can result in violence, destruction, and
death. While some Sunnīs and Shī‘ites may pledge to refrain from
negative marketing when discussing their differences, the pledge is
often soon abandoned when the opponent is viewed as “going negative,”
inciting a series of retaliatory remarks.

Negative advertising is also entirely un-academic. Campaigners from one
camp present twisted or spun information under the guise of bringing
hidden negatives into the light. Such individuals have no place in the
Sunnī-Shī‘ite debate as they have the wrong intention from the onset.
Their goal is not to unite, but to divide. They come to the table with a
closed mind. They are not genuinely interested in inter-Islamic
dialogue. They prepare their cases like lawyers. They are concerned with
winning the case, rather than searching for truth. They concentrate on
being quick, witty, and winning the argument, rather than analyzing the
issues at hand. They use rhetorical devices such as straw man or red
herring arguments to insinuate that an opponent holds a certain idea.

**The Sixth Imām was highly critical of the superfluous debates of
skilful verbal gymnasts**: “When you debate, the nearer you are to truth
and tradition on the authority of the Prophet, the further you are from
it: you mix up the truth with what is false. A little truth suffices for
what is false” (Mufīd). Without a judge or moderator to keep parties
disciplined, Sunnī-Shī‘ite debates soon degenerate into slander, libel,
and defamation of character. Such efforts are of no benefit to the
Islamic Ummah as they increase tension between the Sunnī and Shī‘ite
communities.

The very idea of “debate” between Sunnīs and Shī‘ites is misguided as
“debate” implies opposition with each party trying to defeat the other.
It is foolish to believe that any party could actually “win” such a
debate considering that Muslims have been polarized into two camps for
nearly 1,500 years. **The very idea of Sunnī-Shī‘ah debate should be
cast aside and replaced by inter-Islamic dialogue.**

In order for Shī‘ites and Sunnīs to move towards reconciliation, they
need to recognize that any extreme polar position is only going to
aggravate the conflict. For starters, all Muslims, Shī‘ite, Sunnīs, and
‘Ibadīs, must cease cursing Companions of the Prophet and cursing one
another as such actions merely increase animosity. We have witnessed
Salafis insult Fātimah, ‘Alī, Ḥasan, and Ḥusayn; Sunnī Muslims insult
the *ahl al-bayt*, Twelver Shī‘ites insult the Sunnī Caliphs, Ismā‘īlīs
insult Imām Mūsā al-Kāẓim, Ṣūfīs insult Sunnīs, and ‘Ibādīs insult Imām
‘Alī. Surely, such behavior must cease from all sides. As Imām Ja‘far
al-Ṣādiq warned: “Do not revile them, lest they revile your ‘Alī”
(Ṣadūq). What goes around comes around, and it is time for a truce if
not a treaty of perpetual peace.

As any historian of early Islām is aware, the Companions of the Prophet
had their differences, cursed each other, and killed each other. Surely,
the sounds of mind do not seek to perpetuate such belligerent behavior
*ad-eternam*. Questions of who was right and who was wrong are a matter
of personal belief. There is no need to express them openly in contexts
that arouse undue emotion. When it comes to some matters, **Muslims need
to let differences die with those who differed.**

Over the course of 1,400 years of Sunnī and Shī‘ite sectarianism,
positions have become polarized and differences have become deeply
entrenched. Muslims need to leave a little room for ambiguity. Despite
what most Muslims would like to believe, early Islamic history was not
black and white, and not everything was cut and dry. Muslims need to
open up to uncertainty, move from the black areas into gray areas, and
creative processes will emerge.

**If Shī‘ites and Sunnīs are sincere in seeking reconciliation, if they
are honest about starting a dialogue, then they must agree to talk with
respect.** Both sides of the conflict need to be recognized. Both have
wronged and been wronged. Muslims need refrain from belligerence and
leave room for forgiveness. They need to set emotion aside or moderate
it with intelligence. They need to stop trying to prove each other
wrong. They must unite on the values and beliefs that they hold in
common.

When outsiders look at Islām, all they see are Muslims. They do not
distinguish between various sects. If they were to examine issues of
*‘aqīdah* between the various Muslim groups, they would be hard-pressed
to find grounds for division. The Sunnī Muslims believe in:

***Tawḥīd*****: Oneness of God**

**Nubuwwah/Risālah: Prophethood and Messengership**

***Kutub*****: Divinely Revealed Books**

***Malā‘ikah*****: Angels**

***Qiyyāmah*****: The Day of Judgement**

**Qadar: Predestination**

They are also fond of combining both faith and belief in Five Pillars of
Islām, consisting of:

***Shahādah*****: Profession of Faith**

***Ṣalāh*****: Prayer**

***Ṣawm*****: Fasting in Ramaḍān**

***Ḥajj*****: Pilgrimage to Makkah**

***Zakāh*****: Alms**

The Twelver Shī‘ite theologians prefer to separate creed from practice,
presenting two lists, the Foundations of Faith, and the Branches of
Faith.

***Uṣūl al-dīn***

***Tawḥīd*****: Oneness of God**

***‘Adl*****: Divine Justice**

***Nubuwwah/Risālah*****: Prophethood and Messengership**

***Imāmah/Wilāyah*****: Imāmate or Guardianship**

***Qiyyāmah*****: Day of Judgement**

***Furū’ al-dīn***

***Ṣalāh*****: Prayer**

***Ṣawm*****: Fasting in Ramaḍān**

***Ḥajj*****: Pilgrimage to Makkah**

***Zakāh*****: Alms**

***Khums*****: Alms**

***Jihād*****: Struggle**

***Amr bi al-ma‘rūf*****: Promoting good**

***Nahī ‘an al-munkar*****: Forbidding evil**

***Tawallī*****: Attachment to ahl al-bayt**

***Tabarrī*****: Separation from the enemies of ahl al-bayt**

For all intents and purpose, the Zaydiyyah share the same beliefs of the
Ithnā ‘Ashariyyah. The main difference between both groups is in their
concept of the Imāmate, and the fact that Zaydiyyah *fiqh* is closer to
Sunnī Ḥanafī and Sunnī Shāfi‘ī *fiqh*, with some elements of Shī‘ah
Ja‘farī elements.

The Ismā‘īliyyah theologians have organized their beliefs into Seven
Pillars of Islām, consisting of:

***Wilāyah*****: Guardianship**

***Ṭahārah*****: Purity**

***Ṣalāh*****: Prayer**

***Zakāh*****: Alms**

***Ṣawm*****: Fasting in Ramaḍān**

***Ḥajj*****: Pilgrimage to Makkah**

***Jihād*****: Struggle**

‘Ibādiyyah theologians have organized their beliefs into the following
Five Pillars:

***Tawḥīd*****: Oneness of God**

***‘Adl*****: Divine Justice**

***Qadar*****: Predestination**

***Wilāyah*****/*****Tabarrī*****: Attachment to Muslims and separation
from infidels**

***Amr*****/*****Nahī*****: Promoting good and forbidding evil;
implementing the Imāmate when possible**

As can be appreciated from this overview, all Muslims believe in the
following articles of faith:

***Tawḥīd*****: Oneness of God**

**Nubuwwah/Risālah: Prophets and Messengers**

***Qiyyāmah*****: The Day of Judgement**

Although non-Sunnīs do not list the divinely revealed books (*kutub*) or
the angels (*malā‘ikah*) in their creeds, these are fundamental aspects
of beliefs for all groups. If they do not cite them as individual items,
it is because they form part of the belief in God and His Prophets.

The ‘Ibādiyyah and some of the Sunnīs adds *qadar* or predestination to
their articles of faith while other groups insist on free will. Along
with Shī‘ite groups, the ‘Ibādiyyah focus on *‘adl* or divine justice,
whereas some of the Sunnīs insist on *qādir* or omnipotence. This
difference is the result of philosophical differences in which the Sunnī
stress Allāh’s Omnipotence over His Justice, while the Shī‘ites stress
Allāh’s Justice over His Omnipotence.

In practical matters, the hierarchical differences between divine
attributes are inconsequential and do not make or break a Muslim. In
fact, the majority of Muslims are completely unaware of such
philosophical subtleties. If a Muslim does not believe in *tawḥīd*, he
is outside the fold of Islām. If a Muslim does not believe that Muḥammad
is the Final Messenger of Allāh, he is outside the fold of Islām. If a
Muslim does not believe in angels or in the Day of Judgement, he is
outside the fold of Islām. If a Muslim prioritizes the attributes of
Allāh differently, he is a complete and total Muslim: he merely follows
a differently philosophical school.

The Shī‘ah Ithnā ‘Ashariyyah, the Shī‘ah Zaydiyyah, the Shī‘ah
Ismā‘īliyyah, and the ‘Ibādiyyah all believe in *imāmah* although their
chains of Imāms are different as are their qualities, attributes, and
qualifications. In many respects, the Shī‘ite and ‘Ibadī belief in
*imāmah* is similar to the Sunnī belief in *khilāfah*. Whether it is an
Imām or a Caliph, whether he inherits his title or is elected, whether
he is a righteous leader or an infallible Imām, Sunnī, Shī‘ite, and even
Ṣūfī Muslims believe in some form of religious authority, both spiritual
and political, which should rule the Ummah and establish the *sharī‘ah*.

As can be seen, **all Muslims share the same creedal concepts and
religious practices.** They all believe in one God, the Prophethood, and
the Day of Judgement. They all believe in angels and revealed books.
They all pray, fast, make the pilgrimage to Makkah, and pay charity.
Although the Sunnīs do not list *khums*, the 20% tithe, *jihād*,
promoting the good and forbidding evil, in their creed, all Sunnīs
accept these as religious obligations. Although the Nāṣibī would reject
the obligation to love the Prophet’s Family, and the prohibition of
dealing with those who hate the Prophet’s family, every true Sunnī loves
and blesses the Prophet and his Family. Evidently, every true Muslim
follows the *shar‘īah,* be he Sunnī, ‘Ibādī, Shī‘ī Ithnā ‘Asharī, Shī‘ī
Ismā‘īlī, Shī‘ī Zaydī, or Ṣūfī.

Although most Sunnīs and many Twelver Shī‘ites consider all the
Ismā‘īliyyah outside the fold of Islām based on the erroneous belief
that they all fail to perform *ṣalāh*, fast during the month of Ramaḍān,
or perform the *ḥajj*, the Ismā‘īliyyah as a whole cannot all be
condemned as *kuffār*.

The Nizārī or followers of the Āghā Khān, who are approximately 90% of
Ismā‘īlīs, do indeed believe that the *sharī‘ah* has been abrogated.
Like some Ṣūfī sects which believe Islamic law no longer applies, the
Nizārī are misguided and, in many regards, outside the fold of Islām.
Still, as they profess the *shahādah*, they should be encouraged to mend
their ways, complete the five daily prayers, fast in Ramaḍān, and
perform the pilgrimage in order to integrate entirely into the Islamic
Ummah.

It should also be remembered that there are Twelver Shī‘ites, Sunnīs,
and Ṣūfīs who do not pray, do not fast, do not eat *ḥalāl*, and commit
all sorts of *ḥarām*, insisting that faith is sufficient for their
salvation. Muslims should be careful to cast all Ismā‘īlīs in the same
light as the Aghā-Khānīs since the Musta‘alī and their off-chute the
Dāwūdī Bohras, who follow the Fāṭimid school of jurisprudence, all
observe the *sharī‘ah* and are very close to the Ithnā ‘Asharī in belief
and to Ja‘farī jurisprudence in practice.

If there are any differences between Sunnī, Shī‘ite, ‘Ibādī, and Ṣūfī
Muslims, they are relatively minor and revolve around aspects of
religious practice. Muslims need to recognize and respect their tiny
technical differences. They need to remember that jurisprudence is not a
goal in and of itself but a means to a goal, namely, the remembrance of
Almighty Allāh. As important as proper observation of Islamic practices
may be, far too many Muslims focus on the form of worship as opposed to
the essence of worship.

**Islamic unity certainly does not mean uniformity.** It does not mean
that all schools of *fiqh* [jurisprudence] should merge into one. It
merely means that there is more than one “right way” to do things, and
that jurists have differences of opinion, based on different
interpretations of the Qur’ān and Sunnah and on different methodologies.
Every ruling is “right” according to the jurist who derived it. Every
opinion is “correct” depending on one’s point of view. All jurists agree
on the issue, but they view the issue from a different perspective. One
issue can be viewed as *ḥarām*, *makrūh*, and *ḥalāl* [forbidden /
reprehensible / permissible]. In Islām, every issue can be seen from a
360 degree angle and there is ample room for a wide range of opinion.

Take the issue of consuming the meat of *ahl al-kitāb* [People of the
Book]. According to most Sunnī scholars, it is permissible for a Muslim
to eat meat from animals slaughtered by Christians or Jews. They base
themselves on the Qur’ānic verse: “The food of the People of the Book is
lawful unto you and yours is lawful unto them” (5:5). Some Sunnī
scholars say that while it is permissible to eat the meat of Christians
and Jews, it is preferable to eat *ḥalāl* meat if available.

Yet other Sunnī scholars forbid the consumption of the meat of the
Christians and Jews. They argue that the Christians and Jews of today
are not truly “People of the Book,” that they no longer slaughter
animals in the name of Allāh, which is a condition for the meat to be
*ḥalāl*, and that there is no guarantee that the meat in non-Muslim
countries was even slaughtered by a Christian or a Jew. A secular
liberal, an agnostic, an atheist, a heathen, a Satanist or another
unbeliever may easily have slaughtered the animal. And rather than
having its throat slit in the name of Allāh, it was likely killed
incorrectly through an electric bolt, a gunshot, a blow to the head, a
spike to the brain, a knife to the back of the skull, toxic gas or other
brutal methods.

Twelver Shī‘ite scholars have always been unanimous that the meat of
Jews and Christians is *ḥarām*. The reason for this position is lexical
hermeneutics. As we read in Mir Aḥmed ‘Alī translation of the Qur’ān:

According to Imām Ja‘far ibn Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq the word *ṭa‘ām* implies
food made of grains not containing flesh of permitted animals. The Jews
and the Christians do not follow the prescribed method of slaughtering
the animals, nor do they seek Allāh’s pleasure before killing the
animal, therefore, to eat flesh of any animal offered by them is not
lawful for Muslims. “Whosoever denies faith, his deeds will be rendered
useless” clearly lays down the principle that good deeds cannot be of
any use unless one believes in Allāh, His Messengers and guides
appointed by Him, and the Day of Judgement.

According to Ayātullāh Pooya Yazdī: “This verse gives permission to the
Muslims to eat the food (made of grains) offered by the people of the
book.”

As can be seen, the Islamic attitude towards the meat of Christians and
Jews ranges from *ḥalāl* to *makrūh* and *ḥarām*, which are all equally
valid opinions. As *muqallidīn* of *mujtahidīn* [followers of jurists],
Muslims are free to follow any of the rulings of their particularly
*madhhab* [school of law] with confidence that they have acted
correctly, complying with a valid interpretation of the Qur’ān and
Sunnah.

In many areas of Islamic law, differences of opinion are mainly
differences of degree. These differences are a mercy and a blessing from
Allāh. No Muslim is obliged to submit to one set of rulings. Each Muslim
is free to follow the rulings of the *mujtahid* [jurist] of his choice,
to leave the *taqlīd* [emulation] of one *faqīh* [jurist], and to
commence the *taqlīd* of another he deems to be the most learned. Since
all people are different, they have different levels of *dīn*
[religion], different levels of faith, and different levels of
understanding. There is no coercion when it comes to conforming to
certain rulings.

In the absence of *ḥalāl* meat, a meat-loving Sunnī Muslim who cannot
find meaningful sustenance out of salad is free to feed himself the meat
of *ahl al-kitāb*. As Almighty Allāh says in the Holy Qur’ān, “No soul
shall have a burden laid on it greater than it can bear” (2:233). For
another Sunnī Muslim, being a part-time vegetarian while traveling in
*dār al-kufr* [the land of the unbelievers] is not a hardship, and he
may wish to abstain from the meat of *ahl al-kitāb*. Merely because one
is stricter does not make one better Allāh judges actions according to
intentions and judges all people according to their intellectual
abilities. As far as we are concerned, the arguments allowing the
consumption of *ahl al-kitāb*’s meat are weak and the Shī‘ite argument
is the strongest. This does not mean that we wish to impose the Ja‘farī
ruling on others, not does it imply disrespect to some of the Sunnī
rulings. They are opinions we respect, but opinions we do not share.

When a Salafī Shaykh was asked about Nūh Ḥa Mīm Keller’s belief that the
references to the “hands” of Allāh mentioned in the Qur’ān (38:75;
48:10; 51:47) were figurative, representing the power of God, the Shaykh
said that Allāh indeed has literal hands and anyone who says otherwise
is a *kāfir* [infidel]. This is exactly the type of outrageous behavior
that is unacceptable in Islām.

**If the Salafiyyah wish to follow the Qur’ān literally, they have the
freedom to do so. They do not, however, have the right to denounce
others as unbelievers because they believe the Qur’ān contains
allegorical and metaphorical meanings.** Not only do Muslims need a
lesson in moderation and tolerance, they need a lesson in basic manners.

The role of Islamic law is to set the limits of the permitted and the
prohibited. When differences of opinion exist among Muslim jurists, it
is the least restrictive ruling that becomes the law. If some *fuqahā’*
[jurists] believe that women can show their faces and hands, and others
believe that they must veil their faces, the most accommodating ruling
becomes the law of the land, and veiling the face becomes an issue of
personal choice. Attempts of extremists in Afghanistan, Iraq, and
abroad, to impose the most severe interpretation of the *sharī‘ah* have
been detrimental to the public image of Islām, alienating Muslims and
non-Muslims from the Islamic religion.

It should also be recalled that the implementation of the *sharī‘ah* by
the Prophet was gradual and progressive, an example which must be
emulated by any Muslim state. The punishment for theft should not be
enforced until unemployment and poverty are eradicated. The punishment
for adultery should not be enforced until temptation has been eradicated
through modesty and marriage. **Proper conditions need to exist for
Islamic punishments to be administered. The creation of socio-economic
and spiritual justice is a necessary precursor to** ***sharī‘ah***
**law.**

In closing, we would like to encourage all Muslims to unite on the basis
of their common beliefs, remembering that unity does not imply
uniformity. Muslims may come from various legal, theological, and
philosophical traditions, but they are all one in the Oneness of God.
**Muslims must reject absolutist literalist attitudes and embrace a
Universal Islām**, **becoming multi-dimensional Muslims far removed from
the fundamentalist fallacy.** **They need to embrace Islamic pluralism
and Islamic diversity** **in accord with the Oneness of Allāh and the
Qur’ānic message brought by the Messenger of Allāh,** **an Islām which
includes rather than** **excludes, an Islām which enriches rather than
impoverishes, a centrist, middle-road Islām (2:143), which opposes
extremism, for as Almighty Allāh says, “Do not be excessive in your
belief” (4:165; 5:81).**

While Islām rejects religious relativism and exoteric religious
pluralism, it does accept that all revealed religions share the same
esoteric spirit. Whether it is Judaism, Christianity or Islām, all
revealed religions believe in One God, the Prophets, the Day of
Judgement, and the Ten Commandments. However, **before Muslims can unite
socio-politically with the true** ***ahl al-kitāb*****, they must unite
with themselves, embracing Islām as a totality, accepting the entire
Islamic pie rather than a single slice. If the Europeans say, “All roads
lead to Rome,” we say, “All roads lead to Allāh,” and this is precisely
what the Qur’ān teaches:** ***Tawḥīd*** **is one, but the number of
paths to Allāh is equal to the number of human souls.**[^1]

**Dr. John Andrew Morrow**
Associate Professor of Languages and Literature
Eastern New Mexico University

[^1]: Author’s Note: For a series of studies addressing this subject,
see: Morrow, John Andrew “The Image of the Road in Islāmic Literature.”
Proceedings from the Image of the Road Conference. Eds. Will Wright and
Steven Kaplan. Pueblo: SISSI, Colorado State U-Pueblo, 2005: 329-336;
Morrow, John Andrew “Arabic Instruction in France: Pedagogy or
Politics?” Humanities Journal 4:6 (2006): 17-24; Morrow, John Andrew
“The Persian Alphabet in Peril.” Iran Daily (May 27th, 2006): 2; Morrow,
John Andrew “La enseñana de idiomas y la política exterior.” Revista
Cultural Ariadna (April 2004); “Language Study as an Indicator of
Foreign Policy.” Iran Daily (Dec. 7th, 2004); “Amoo Sam beh madreseh
miravad: Defense Language Institute Program as an Indicator of U.S.
Foreign Policy” (Dec. 7th, 2004) Iranian.; Morrow, John Andrew “El
idioma árabe en camino de convertirse en un arma contra el Islam.”
Revista Cultural Ariadna (Oct. 2003).


