Foreword by Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi
=================================

Body and soul are the two components of human beings; one is the husk
and the outer shell while the other is the kernel and an inner spirit.
Both dimensions need nourishment as well as protection. Almighty God
says, “[I swear] by the soul and Him who shaped it [perfectly], and then
inspired it [the innate ability to understand] what is right and wrong
for it! Indeed successful is he who purifies it and indeed failure is he
who corrupts it.” (91:7-10) Each human being has the potential of
soaring to the level higher than that of the angels and that top place
in the pyramid of God’s creation can only be reached by developing one’s
spiritual dimension.

Islām guides humans on both planes of their being: the ritual as well as
the spiritual. The Prophet Muḥammad instructed the people on simple
matters of hygiene, such as cleanliness, *wuḍū’* and *ghusl*, as well as
on loftier matters of spiritual ascension; he urged his followers to be
physically strong to defend themselves in battlefields, and also charted
for them the heavenly path of spiritual wayfaring.

After the death of the Prophet, regrettably the majority of Muslims were
unable to combine the ritual and the spiritual dimensions in their
religious life. They experimented with their faith in different ways:
from the absolute freewill theory of Mu‘tazilah to the disguised
predetermination [*kasb* or *iktisāb,* lit. “acquisition”] of Ash‘arī,
from literalism or “fundamentalism” of the Ḥanābilah to the esoteric
explanations of the extremists, from indiscriminate adherence to
*ḥadīth* by the Mālikis to the personal opinions [*qiyyāṣ*] of Abū
Ḥanīfah. Eventually, the Sunnī Muslims settled with the Ash‘arī theology
and the jurisprudence of their Four Imāms. However, the lack of
spirituality in this strand of Islām gave rise to Ṣūfīsm among the
Sunnīs.

All along there was a minority which maintained, preserved, and spread
the wholeness of Islamic teachings, and that was the Shī‘ah strand of
Islām headed by the Imāms from the family of the Prophet, the *ahl
al-bayt*. **Shī‘ism emerged as the natural product of Islām which
combined within itself its ritual as well as the spiritual dimensions.
It is a path whose theology,** **jurisprudence, and spirituality flow
from the same spring, the** ***ahl al-bayt.*** And, therefore, you will
observe that the Shī‘ah very rarely felt the need to form distinct
spiritual fraternities like the Ṣūfīs among the Sunnīs. You will indeed
find *‘urafā’* [scholars who specialize in gnosis] among the Shī‘ah but
not *murshidīn* [spiritual masters] as found among the Ṣūfīs.

A Shī‘ī Muslim refers for all his religious guidance--from theology to
jurisprudence, from ritual or spiritual--to the *ahl al-bayt.* Even if
he just follows the rituals with understanding and comprehension, he
will be led to the spiritual path. For example, a simple recitation of
the Du‘ā’ Kumayl, taught by Imām ‘Alī, elevates a Shī‘ī from the basic
level of worshiping God out of fear [*khawf*] to the level of worshiping
God out of love [*ḥubb*]. And so there is no wonder when we see that
almost all the Ṣūfī fraternities trace their chain of masters back to
one or the other Imām of *ahl al-bayt.*

In this background, it was indeed a pleasure to read and review the
English translation of Professor Luis Alberto Vittor’s *Shī‘ite Islām:
Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy* translated by Dr. John Andrew Morrow. The book
has excellently captured the exoteric as well as the esoteric dimensions
of Imāmate. I am sure that readers will come to realize that while
Sunnism is more a legalistic aspect of Islām and Ṣūfīsm is more a
spiritual, mystical dimension, **Shī‘ism is the true legacy of the
complete Islām of the Prophet Muḥammad** (peace be upon him and his
progeny).

May Almighty Allāh bless the writer as well as the translator and
commentator for their worthwhile contribution towards the understanding
of Shī‘ah Islām!

**Hujjat al-Islām wa al-Muslimīn Sayyid Muḥammad Rizvī**
Jaffari Islamic Center
Toronto, Canada


