Translator’s Preface
====================

In 1994, our friend and colleague Héctor Manzolillo, a prolific
professional translator, presented us with two volumes of the academic
journal *Epiemelia* which contained the article “El islam shiita:
¿ortodoxia o heterodoxia?” [Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy?]. He
asked us to read the article and wondered whether we could translate it
from Spanish into English. At the time we had recently completed our
Honors B.A. at the University of Toronto, and were starting graduate
school. While we were impressed with the arguments made by the author
Luis Alberto Vittor, and we appreciated the scholarly contribution of
his work, we declined the request to translate the article due to lack
of time. We assured Héctor Manzolillo and Luis Alberto Vittor that we
would translate the book at some time in the future.

It was only in the summer of 2004 that we were able to devote our time
to the translation of the article in question. We had completed our
Ph.D. in the year 2000, and found a position as an Assistant Professor
at Park University in Kansas City in 2001. It took us several years to
get settled in, both academically and financially, before we could
devote our time to translating the article. It was thus, in the summer
of 2004, that we informed Luis Alberto Vittor, now a close friend and
colleague, a spiritual advisor and academic mentor, that we were ready
to get to work.

Due to the specialized nature of the work, we felt it necessary to add
extensive notes to make it more accessible to non-experts. While a
scholar of Islām, a Muslim philosopher or an intellectual might
comprehend the allusions being made by the author, most of them would
escape the average reader as many of his sentences could be paragraphs,
many of his paragraphs could be chapters, and many of his chapters could
be books. What was supposed to be a small summer project turned into a
major multiple year endeavor, as we found ourselves continuously
expounding upon his arguments to the point that the article gradually
turned into a full-fledged book.

The final product, a critically annotated translation of Luis Alberto
Vittor’s *Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy*, was thus finally
completed. Reviewed by several Islamic scholars, including Dr. Liyakat
Ali Takim, Shaykh Feisal Morhell, Professor Ḥasan ‘Abd al-‘Alī Bize and
Sayyid Muḥammad Rizvī, the book was embraced by Mr. Muḥammad Taqī
Anṣariyān. As most academics who read the book have acknowledged, the
value of the work resides in the fact that it is the first scholarly
study to deal with Sunnī-Shī‘ī polemics from an esoteric and
metaphysical perspective while providing a general criticism of Western
Orientalism.

Luis Alberto Vittor’s criticism of Western Orientalism is amply
justified and is certainly not the first. As is well-known, Edward Sa‘īd
condemned Orientalism categorically, claiming that it served political
ends. It is indeed correct that Orientalism was used to justify European
imperialism in colonial times. It is equally correct that **Orientalism
is used to support American and Zionist interests in the Muslim world in
contemporary times.** While there is truth in Sa‘īd’s statement, it
remains an over-generalization. The mistakes made by some Orientalists
are not necessarily malicious. Many merely have a limited view because
they never release their own history when looking at another’s. As
Barbara Castleton explains,

It should be remembered that people can only look at something from a
perspective they have experienced. While de Toqueville managed a
brilliant analysis of America after being here a mere six months, this
is not the norm. Nevertheless, he acknowledged that he wrote as an
observer. An Orientalist, Arabist or Islāmicist, can never bring real
veracity and authenticity to a subject that they are merely observing.

For some scholars, Islām is like an ocean which they explore from the
shoreline. They can dip their toes in it, they can wade in it, and kick
their legs up forcefully, but they never really learn to let go and swim
in the sea. They never let go of the edge to feel the swirl of their
topic ebbing and flowing all around them. Despite their shortcomings,
many of these Orientalists have made contributions to the field of
Islamic Studies. Others, however, are arrogant, insolent, and openly
hostile to the Muslim faith. These scholars have never approached the
ocean of Islām. Rather than revel in its riches and drink from its
pristine purity, they stand firmly on its shoreline, pouring pollutants
into its waters, vainly seeking to cloud its clarity.

While the English version of Luis Alberto’s book is sure to be embraced
by Shī‘ite scholars and open-minded individuals, it may be criticized or
conveniently ignored by some Western Orientalists who will allege a lack
of objectivity on the part of the author. Ironically, they may accuse
him of their own single greatest shortcoming: subjectivity. They may
claim to see a mote in his eye while being blind to the beam that veils
their own vision (Matthew 7:5). They may even complain that the author
is writing from a Shī‘ite perspective and has not remained impartial, a
rule which apparently applies only to Muslim scholars since most
Christian scholars rarely detach themselves from their own religious and
ideological points of view. In the worst of cases, Christian scholars do
not even pretend to detach themselves from their own biases, prejudices,
stereotypes, and other professional vices.

After calling into question his objectivity, this sector of Orientalists
might move on to their second line of attack: Vittor’s approach and
methodology. Despite the author’s expressed aim to present the Shī‘ite
position--in all of its esoteric and metaphysical dimensions--he may be
criticized for writing from a religious perspective. To be succinct,
this would be a polite way of saying he is subjective, biased, and
partial. They might argue that the book is directed to English-speaking
Muslims, rather than recognizing it as a scholarly work aimed at an
academic audience.

If Luis Alberto Vittor had said that Shī‘ite Islām was a Persian
creation, that the Qur’ān was the work of Muḥammad which was copied from
Jews and Christians, and that the corpora of prophetic traditions were
mere legends, he would be embraced like a brother, cited incessantly,
invited to conferences, and given generous grants. Eventually he might
even be appointed to a prestigious Chair of Islamic Studies or counsel
the American President regarding policies in the Muslim world. **While
some Orientalists are eager to attack scholars who study Islām
objectively, they rarely dare to criticize the pro-Christian or
pro-Zionist perspectives of some of their most distinguished
colleagues.**

Rather than dealing with concrete facts and responding with sound,
solidly-based arguments, some Orientalists may dismiss the author’s
scholarship as subjective. These are the same scholars, however, who
have shown little concern for the subjectivity of their own colleagues.
There almost seems to be a consensus that Islām must only be studied by
non-Muslims. If this is the case, it is certainly a strange
double-standard as most scholars of Judaism are Jewish, and most
scholars of Christianity are Christians, yet one rarely hears any of
them being criticized for being biased.

It does not require much effort to find Orientalists responsible for
reductionist readings of the Islamic faith. Take, for example, the
attitude of the Islamologist Félix María Pareja who argued that “Islām
is the religion of the sword.” If a Muslim academic said that
Christianity was a religion of Crusades, Inquisitions, and genocide,
Western scholars would never let their roar of outrage recede. God
forbid if a Muslim academic dared to say that Judaism was the religion
of Zionism, Jewish imperialism, Palestinian concentration camps, Dayr
Yāsīn, Ṣabrā and Shātīlā, as well as the mass expulsion of Muslims. The
words of Father Pareja, however, are not denounced by Western religious
scholars. On the contrary, they are cited, and passed from textbook to
textbook without the author’s objectivity being called into question. As
a priest who wrote from a Catholic perspective, can he be truly
objective?

Rather than questioning the scholarship produced by Muslim scholars,
Western Orientalists might consider criticizing the likes of Asín
Palacios. Many Spanish Orientalists and Arabists now openly admit that
he was slanted. Paradoxically, they continue to use his work as standard
reference material despite his claims that Ṣūfīsm was merely a
Christianized form of Islām. If the thesis is wrong, the entire argument
leading up to it is equally erroneous and needs to be discarded. The
inconsistencies of Western philosophers are so widespread that Alan
Sokal and Jean Bricmont have spoken of “intellectual imposters” who rely
on verbosity to cover their argumentative deficiencies. Unfortunately,
there are some Western Orientalists who remain “slaves of old ideas,”
unable to appreciate the value of works written with academic freedom.

Despite their allegations of subjectivity with regards to the author,
Western Orientalists would be hard-pressed to present a concrete
criticism of the present work as its content is objective and
scientific, both methodologically and epistemologically. While the work
may have its shortcomings--for example, focusing only on certain aspects
of the topic due to limitations of time and space--this certainly does
not invalidate the text as a whole. That would be like discarding an
Armani suit because the sewing-lady overlooked a tiny detail in the
lining. Finally, what some Orientalists will find the most annoying
about the current work of Luis Alberto Vittor is that it is a scientific
study completed within the framework of the Islamic faith, without
succumbing to bias or attempts to proselytize.

While their criticism may seem harsh to some, scholars like Edward
Sa‘īd, Aḥmad Ghurāb, and Luis Alberto Vittor, are neither “assassins of
Orientalists” nor propagandists for the Islāmist cause. They are not out
to destroy Western Orientalism nor do they have any missionary agenda.
On the contrary, their comprehensive criticism addresses important
methodological mistakes. It is a call for true scholarship at the
service of science rather than political and economic ambitions. For
Edward Sa‘īd, Aḥmad Ghurāb, and Luis Alberto Vittor, Orientalism should
be a means of *rapprochement*, a means of knowing others, not turning
them into alter-egos, not demonizing them, not exoticizing them, not
eroticizing them, and certainly not undermining them.

According to Sa‘īd, Ghurāb, and Vittor, certain subjects are sacred, and
while they can be studied scientifically and critically, this must
always be done with an attitude of respect and tolerance. Whether it is
Hinduism, Taoism or Buddhism, whether it is Judaism, Christianity or
Islām, **all religious traditions deserve to be studied without being
slighted, tarnished or disrespected.** This applies equally to any
discussions of Shī‘ite Islām which, due to Orientalist opinion, has been
stigmatized as sectarian. **Showing a blatant disregard for etymology,
many Orientalists have equated** **Shī‘ism with the schism, claiming
that the very word** ***shī‘ah*** **signifies “sect” when it merely
means “followers.”** This misrepresentation of the Arabic language and
Islamic reality was opposed by J. Spencer Trimingham almost forty years
ago when he explained that:

In Western thought, a ‘sect’ is regarded as a group which has broken
away from the parent religious community because of differing views. On
such criteria Shī‘ism is not a sect in its origins, since it springs
directly from the main stream of Islamic development, which branched
into two streams, following different interpretations, hardening into
doctrines, about the origins and ordering of Islamic society. (79)

Clearly, Islām is not composed of a single Sunnī stream, from which
heretical sects flow out as rivulets, drying out in the sands of
infidelity and heresy rather than reaching the sea of eternity. If
anything, Islām is an eternal tree. Its roots are the pillars of Islām;
its trunk is the *sharī‘ah*; its branches are its interpretations; and
the fleeting leaves are its followers, coming and going with each
revisited season. The dialogue between Shī‘ism and Sunnism, however, has
been far less poetic, ecumenical, and fraternal.

As experts in the field are aware, the debate between Sunnism and
Shī‘ism has provided a large body of polemical literature. The Shī‘ite
scholarship on the subject tends to be characterized by a scholarly
approach. The Sunnī and most particularly Salafī work, however, tends to
be characterized by an attitude which is both divisive and destructive.
In the best of cases, the authors are misinformed and misrepresent the
teachings of Twelve Imām Shī‘ite Islām. In the worst of cases, they
lance allegations against Shī’ites based on dubious documents,
fabrications and fantasy, in order to accuse them of heresy.

The classical Sunnī heresiographers and polemicists include Abū al-Ḥasan
al-Ash‘arī (d. 935-6), Abū al-Muẓaffar al-Isfarā’inī (d. 1078-9), Abū
al-Qāṣim ‘Abd al-Wāḥid b. Aḥmad al-Kirmānī (d. before 1131), Abū
al-Faraj ‘Abd al-Raḥmān ibn ‘Alī ibn al-Jawzī (d. 1201), Shahrastānī (d.
1135) and Mu‘ī al-Dīn Mīzrā Makhdūm (d. 1587). More modern authors
include Aḥmad b. Zaynī Dahlān (d. 1886), a Shāfi‘ī *muftī* from Makkah,
and Mūsā Jār Allāh (d. 1949).

In the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, Salafis, rather
than Sunnīs, have been at the forefront in producing polemical
anti-Shī‘ite tracts. The most notorious of these authors include Aḥmad
al-Afghānī, Sayyid Abū al-Ḥasan Nadvī, Abū Amīnah Bilāl Philips, Shaykh
‘Abd al-Raḥmān Dimashquī, Shaykh Yaḥyā Silmī al-Saylanī, and Shaykh
Faisal. Some of these people, like Bilal Philips, a Canadian convert of
Jamaican origin, have been supported by the Saudi establishment and
represent the pro-Saudi Salafis. Others, like Shaykh ‘Abdullāh
al-Faisal, a Jamaican convert formerly known as Trevor William Forrest,
represent the anti-Saudi Salafis. Shaykh Faisal is presently in prison
in the U.K, convicted to a nine-year term in 2003 for incitement to
murder. In his defense, he explained that the teachings he was given
were “in accordance with the same at Imām Muḥammad ibn Sa‘ūd Islamic
University in Saudi Arabia” and that “all my teachings are from the
Koran and Saudi Arabia” (Gillan).

**To accuse Shī‘ite Muslims of “heresy,” as many Salafis do, is to play
judge and executioner.** It is well-known among Muslims that Islamic law
prescribes the death penalty for heretics and apostates. Of course, not
all authors are so subtle as to call Shī‘ites heretics and then drop the
issue. There are those like Aḥmad Shāh Mas‘ūd from the Afghan
*Mujāhidīn* and Northern Alliance, Gulbuddīn Ḥekmatyār, founder of the
*Hezb-i Islāmi*, Mullā ‘Omar from the *Ṭālibān,* and Usāmah ben Laden,
Ayman al-Ẓawāhirī and the recently deceased Abū Mus‘ab al-Zarqāwī from
*al-Qā‘idah*, who have openly advocated murder, declaring Shī‘ites to be
worse than infidels, and claiming their blood is *ḥalāl*. Books like
*Talbīs Iblīs*, [*The Devil’s Deception of the Shī‘ites*], extremist
websites, and anti-Shī‘ite pamphlets are often all it takes to incite
ignorant fanatics to vigilante violence. **The massacres of Shī‘ite
Muslims in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iraq are partly the result of
anti-Shī‘ah propaganda. The individuals responsible for encouraging and
committing these atrocities are true terrorists with innocent blood on
their hands.**

In many Western nations, like Canada, there are laws against hate
literature. **It is time for all supporters of human rights to demand
their application, put a halt to anti-Shī‘ī hate propaganda**, prohibit
its dissemination, and press for the prosecution of those who produce
it, distribute it, and profit from it. If Canada, the United States and
other nations can ban David Irving, the Holocaust revisionist, from
entering their countries, then surely they can ban extremist Salafis.

**In the past fifty years, the ruling family and government of Saudi
Arabia has indoctrinated millions of Muslims into the Wahhābī ideology
through its Islamic universities at home and** **affiliated institutions
abroad, through its publishing houses, and through its network of
Islamic organizations, mosques and associations.** The vast majority of
mosques in North America are controlled by ISNA, the Islamic Society of
North America, which is the “official organ” of Saudi Salafism in the
Western World. Frank Gaffney, founder and President of the Center for
Security Policy in Washington and former Assistant Secretary of Defense
for International Security Policy under President Ronald Reagan, reveals
that:

The Islamic Society of North America is a front for the promotion of
Saudi Arabia’s Wahhābī political, doctrinal, and theological
infrastructure in the United States and Canada. Established by the
Saudi-funded Muslim Students Association, ISNA has for years sought to
marginalize leaders of the Muslim faith who do not support the
Wahhābists’ strain of ‘Islāmofascism,’ and, through sponsorship of
propaganda and mosques, is pursuing a strategic goal of eventually
dominating Islām in America. ISNA provides indoctrination materials to
about 1,100 of an estimated 2,500 mosques in the North American
continent. Through its affiliate, the North American Islamic Trust
(NAIT)--a Saudi government-based organization created to fund Islāmist
enterprises in North America--it reportedly holds the mortgages of
between 50-79 percent of those mosques. Through this device, ISNA exerts
ideological as well as theological influence over what is preached and
taught in these institutions and schools.

Saudi oil money has spread Salafism to such an extent that, for a great
part, Sunnism has morphed into Salafism. The “Muslim fundamentalist”
menace has now hit home and Saudi Arabia is facing the return of their
prodigal sons. Surely, Saudi dollars would best be spent delivering
humanitarian aid to Muslim countries, supporting economic development,
and encouraging Islamic unity, rather than encouraging Islamic
extremism.

On December 7-8, 2005, a symbolic step towards Islamic unity was taken
with the “Makkah al-Mukarramah Declaration” of the Third Session of the
Extraordinary Islamic Summit Conference in which member states,
including Saudi Arabia, reaffirmed their “unwavering rejection of
terrorism, and all forms of extremism and violence.” As Saudi King ‘Abd
Allāh bin ‘Abd al-‘Azīz declared, “Islamic unity would not be reached
through bloodshed as claimed by the deviants.”[^1]

Considering the rise of sectarian violence in Iraq and the threat it
poses to the entire region, **Saudi Arabia should reassess its
state-sponsored Salafism and decide to work towards Islamic unity.** As
Muṣṭafā Rāfi‘ī, Dr. Kalīm Siddīquī, Iqbal Siddiquī, Zafar Bangash,
Shaykh Aḥmad Deedat, Imām Muḥammad al-Asī, Imām ‘Abdul-‘Alīm Mūsā, Amīr
‘Abdul Mālik ‘Alī, ‘Abd al-Malik Mujahid, Dr. Shahīd Athar, and other
mainstream Sunnī Muslims have impressed, **the fundamental beliefs which
Muslims have in common far outweigh the historical differences which
emerged after the passing of the Prophet.**[^2] **Regardless of whether
they are Sunnī, Shī‘ī or Ṣūfī, regardless of the school of jurisprudence
they follow, Muslims are Muslims first** **and foremost and should pose
a united, non-sectarian front when confronting the enemies of Islām.**
Opinions regarding the succession of the Prophet and interpretations of
Islamic law are primarily personal convictions belonging in the private
domain. Such ideas can be addressed in the proper academic context, to
increase knowledge, and to develop an appreciation for the various
expressions of the Islamic faith. There is no place, however, for
divisive argumentation in Islām.

In contrast to the Sunnī side, where calls for unity remain voices in
the wilderness, the Shī‘ite side has a long history of scholarship with
a fraternal foundation. With rare exception, **it has been the general
consensus of Shī‘ite scholars that the followers of** ***ahl
al-sunnah*** **are bona fide believers**; the only heretics being the
Kharijites, the earliest Islamic sect which traces its beginning to a
religio-political controversy over the Caliphate and which holds that
‘Alī and his followers became infidels; the *nawāṣib*, those who profess
hatred towards the Prophet’s Family and the *ghulāt*, the extremists who
deify ‘Alī.

Among the first Shī‘ite scholars to formulate the fundamentals of faith
of the Twelver Shī‘ites from a polemicist perspective was Shaykh Ṣadūq,
one of the scholarly pillars of Shī‘ism, in his famous *I‘tiqādāt*,
translated loosely as *A* *Shī‘ite Creed*. He lived during intolerant
times, a period of rampant *takfīr* [or accusations of infidelity] when
tensions ran high between the various schools of thought in Islām, each
one vying for supremacy. Although he was a deeply committed Shī‘ite, he
was forthcoming in presenting Shī‘ite beliefs clearly and concisely in
comparison with other currents in Islamic thought. Shaykh Ṣadūq’s
*I‘tiqādāt* was commented upon by one of his students, Shaykh al-Mufīd,
under the title of *Sharḥ ‘aqā’id al-Ṣadūq*, and remains a popular
theological text to this date. Numerous other Shī‘ite scholars wrote
valuable books in which they contrasted Sunnī and Shī‘ī beliefs,
including Shaykh Abū Ja‘far al-Ṭusī (d. 1067-8) and ‘Abd al-Jalīl
al-Qazwīnī (d. 1190), who put forth some strikingly moderate view, as
well as ‘Allāmah al-Ḥillī (d. 1325).

In the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, the leading figures
of inter-Islamic ecumenism have included Shaykh Muḥammad Ḥusayn Kāshif
al-Ghiṭā, Ayātullāh Muḥammad Ḥusayn Burujerdī--who worked to unite the
various schools of Islamic jurisprudence--‘Allāmah Muḥammad Jawād
Mughniyyah, Ayātullāh Shariatmadarī, Ayātullāh Ḥasan al-Shirāzī, Imām
Mūsā al-Ṣadr, and Ayātullāh Mar’ashī-Najafī--who had the unique
distinction of having *ijāzah* [permission] of *riwāyah* [to teach
Islām] from nearly 400 Shī‘ī, Sunnī and Zaydī scholars--as well as
Ayātullāhs Beheshtī, Muntazerī, Muṭahharī, among many others, all of
whom defended the cause of Muslim unity. In recent years, Ayātullāh
al-Uẓmā Sayyid ‘Alī al-Ḥusaynī al-Sistānī, has repeatedly called for
calm between both communities in the most trying of circumstances. **The
greatest advocate of Islamic unity in recent history was none other than
Imām Khumaynī**. In fact, the late founder of the Islamic Republic ruled
that:

Muslims should be awake, Muslims should be alert that if a dispute takes
place among Sunnī and Shī‘ite brothers, it is harmful to all of us; it
is harmful to all Muslims. Those who want to sow discord are neither
Sunnī nor Shī‘ite, they are agents of the superpowers and work for them.
Those who attempt to cause discord among our Sunnī and Shī‘ite brothers
are people who conspire for the enemies of Islām, and want the enemies
of Islām to triumph over Muslims. Muslim brothers and sisters will not
be segregated by the pseudo-propaganda sponsored by corrupt elements.
The source of this matter--that Shī‘ites should be on one side and Sunnī
on the other--is on the one hand ignorance and, on the other hand,
foreign propaganda. If Islamic brotherhood comes to the fore among
Islamic countries, they will become such a great power that none of the
global powers will be able to contend with them. Shī‘ite and Sunnī
brothers should avoid every kind of dispute. Today, discord among us
will only benefit those who follow neither Shī‘ah nor Sunni. They
neither want this nor that to exist, and know the way to sow dispute
between you and us. We must pay attention that we are all Muslims and we
all believe in the Qur’ān; we all believe in *tawḥīd*, and must work to
serve the Qur’ān and *tawḥīd*.

This message of Islamic unity is one that all Muslims, be they Sunnī,
Shī‘ī, or Ṣūfī, should remember, as many of them seem to have forgotten
it. While Imām Khumaynī worked tirelessly towards Islamic unity, some
Shī‘ite scholars have failed to follow in his footsteps and have
promoted proselytism and sectarianism, rather than Islamic pluralism.
Fortunately, for those interested in Islamic unity within diversity,
there exists an excellent body of literature.

While there are many excellent books on Sunnī-Shī‘ah dialogue, perhaps
the finest work of scholarship on the subject was produced by the
Lebanese erudite ‘Abd al-Ḥusayn Sharīf al-Dīn al-Mūsawī in his legendary
*Murāja‘āt* or *The Evidence*, a discussion by correspondence which took
place between the Shī‘ite sage and his Sunnī counterpart, Shaykh Salīm
al-Bishrī, the Dean of the University of al-Azhar in Cairo, Egypt. In
fact, the debate was so productive in increasing Sunnī-Shī‘ite
understanding that it eventually resulted in Shaykh Shalṭūṭ issuing a
historic *fatwā* recognizing the Ja‘farī Ithnā ‘Asharī *madhhab* as a
legitimate school of jurisprudence in Islām which all Muslims are
permitted to follow freely. The work is a model of the proper Muslim
mores which are to be observed in any and all debates.

Another well-known polemical work is *Peshawar Nights*. While claims
have been made that the book is of dubious origin, perhaps produced for
propaganda purposes as part of Shī‘ite missionary activities, this does
not debilitate the arguments it contains. In recent years, the Tunisian
Muḥammad al-Tījānī, has written several valuable books including *Then I
was Guided*, *The Shī‘ah: The True Followers of the Sunnah*, *Ask Those
Who Know*, and *With the Truthful*, all of which have been translated
into numerous languages.

On the positive side, Tījānī’s books present a wealth of information and
documentation supporting Shī‘ism and have served to bring many Sunnīs
closer to and even into Shī‘ism. On the negative side, the author is
neither an academic nor a traditional scholar of Islām, as he readily
admits. As a result, his books are not always free from error,
contradiction, value judgments, and unbridled enthusiasm. At times, his
arguments are expressed in terms which seem abrasive to some Sunnīs,
sometimes accentuating division rather than attenuating it.

The belligerent attitude towards *ahl al-sunnah* is especially evident
on websites like *answering-ansar.org* and in certain articles published
on *shianews.com*. While both of these websites are informative, they
fight fire with fire when they should be fighting fire with water. In
the Preface of *Devil’s Deception of the Nāṣibī Wahhābis* which appears
on answering-ansar.org, ‘Abdul Ḥakeem Orano clearly explains that “This
book takes the method of attack.” Evidently, this is an inappropriate
approach. As Almighty Allāh instructs, “Invite (all) to the Way of thy
Lord with wisdom and beautiful preaching; and argue with them in ways
that are best and most gracious: for thy Lord knoweth best, who have
strayed from His Path, and who receive guidance” (16:125).

As can be observed from the previous survey, the most serious
shortcoming of scholarship in the area of Shī‘ite-Sunnī dialogue is that
it centers on the exoteric aspects of the religion. It deals with
concrete, down to earth doctrines, as opposed to matters of
spirituality, mysticism, and metaphysics. The present study, **Luis
Alberto Vittor’s** ***Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy*** **takes
the debate between Shī‘ism and Sunnism to a higher plateau, elevating
arguments to the spiritual sphere** in his profound philosophical tract.

In closing, we would like to thank Professor Luis Alberto Vittor for
trusting us with this translation. We have remained as faithful to the
text as possible and attempted to render it into a scholarly yet
idiomatic English. We would like to thank Mr. Abū Dharr Manzolillo, a
true friend and father figure, who has stood by our side for decades.

We would like to thank all the scholars who shared their knowledge with
us, from Sayyid Muḥammad Zaki Baqri and Sayyid Muḥammad Rizvī in Canada,
to the Grand Ayātullāhs in Qum and Najaf. We are equally indebted to our
early guides and mentors, Ahmad Haneef, Khalid Haneef-Jabari, and Ali
Muḥammad Shaheed Hasib.

We would like to thank Rachida Bejja, for repeatedly reviewing,
correcting, and editing the Arabic transliteration, as well Yā-Sīn and
Ṭā-Hā. They all served as a constant source of support and solace and
this work could never have been completed without them.

We would also like to send a special thanks to Mr. Muḥammad Taqī
Anṣariyān for graciously supporting this scholarly endeavor and commend
him for his inestimable contributions to the field of Shī‘ite studies
through the publication and distribution of academic titles.

We hope and pray that the following translation will be a welcomed
contribution to scholarship in the field of Islamic Studies, will
benefit both scholars and students of Islām, serve as a wake-up call to
Western Orientalists, and bring about a greater degree of understanding
and appreciation for the unity within the diversity of Islamic
orthodoxy.

Finally, as the translator and editor of Vittor’s work, we have always
accepted full responsibility for its content and committed ourselves to
correcting any shortcomings that it may contain in future editions. As
such, this second English edition contains some corrections of style,
typos, and transliteration. While far from exhaustive, the index has
also been considerably expanded. The second English edition has also
been emended and amplified with an “Exordium,” extremely important
“Introductory Remarks” on “The Foundations of Islamic Unity,” as well as
an insight into the “Genesis of the Work.” If there is any good in this
work, it comes from God; only the errors are ours.

**Dr. John Andrew Morrow**
Associate Professor of Languages and Literature
Eastern New Mexico University

[^1]: “Moderation and Tolerance Urged at OIC Summit: Stress on Combating
Extremism,” The Dawn, Dec. 8, 2005.

[^2]: Editor’s Note: Muṣṭafā Rāfi‘ī’s Islāmunā is one of the first
efforts of a Sunnī scholar to understand Shī‘ī Islām from within.
Although the distinguished expert on Islāmic law does not always fully
understand the Shī‘ite views on certain subjects, his contribution to
Islāmic unity and Islāmic reconciliation are significant. Dr. Kalīm
Siddīquī was one of the leading intellectuals and Islāmic movement
activists of the modern era. Founder and director of the Muslim
Institute, London, he helped forge the philosophy of the contemporary
Islāmic movement. He was a staunch defender of Islāmic unity as is his
son Iqbal Siddīquī, the current editor of Crescent International. Zafar
Bangash, a close colleague and associate of Dr. Kalīm Siddīquī, is
currently the director of the Institute of Contemporary Islāmic Thought.
He is the former editor of Crescent International, the leading
publication of the international Islāmic movement. Shaykh Aḥmad Deedat
was a famous South African scholar specializing in Comparative Religion.
A transcript of his speech on Sunnī-Shī‘ah unity can be found on the
following web page: http://islam-usa.com/e114.htm Imām Muḥammad al-Asī
is the elected Imām of Washington D.C.’s Islāmic Center, a regular
contributor to Crescent International, and a leading activist in the
Islāmic movement. He is a staunch opponent of sectarianism. Imām
‘Abdul-‘Alīm Mūsā is a Muslim activist and director of Masjid al-Islām
in Washington, D.C. He is also the founder and director of the
al-Sabiqūnmovement which provides social and spiritual services to urban
America. A supporter of the Islāmic Revolution of Iran and Imām
Khumaynī, he made several visits to Iran as a representative of American
Muslims and a supporter of the Islāmic revival. Imām Mūsā has spent the
past two decades bridging the gaps between Muslims and stresses that the
success of the Islāmic movement depends upon Sunnī and Shī‘ah unity.
Amīr ‘Abd al-Malik ‘Alī is one of the leaders of al-Sabiqūn. His speech
opposing the present Shī‘ah-Sunnī fitnah and encouraging Islāmic unity
is widely distributed on the internet through various podcasts. ‘Abd
al-Malik Mujāhid, is President and director of the Sound Vision
Foundation and an Imām in the Chicago area. His “Call for Shī‘ah Sunnī
Dialogue” and “Resolution” to be distributed to Imāms, preachers,
mosques, Muslim organization, and opinion leaders, can be found on the
following web page: http://soundvision.com/info/muslims/shiasunni.asp
Dr. Shahīd Athar is a Muslim activist from Indianapolis, Illinois. A
Sunnī by creed, Dr. Athar is an advocate of Islāmic unity. His writings,
many of which demonstrate his appreciation for Islām in all of its
dimensions, can be found on the following web page:
http://www.Islam-usa.com/


