Acknowledgments and Observations
================================

The present book is the second English edition of an article which was
published in an academic journal in 1994 under the name “El islām
shiita: ¿ortodoxia o heterodoxia?” [Shī‘ite Islām: Orthodoxy or
Heterodoxy?]. The article was well-received in academic circles and was
soon widely circulated on various Islamic sites on the Internet thanks
to a digital edition published by the *Biblioteca Islámica Ahlul Bayt*
in Sevilla, Spain. Thereafter, in the year 2000, the article was
published in three parts in *Az-Zaqalain*, a Spanish language academic
journal published in Qum, Iran.

In response to the interest received by the article, Dr. John Andrew
Morrow decided to translate, edit, and turn it into a book. As often
occurs in such cases, the challenge of turning an article into a book
relates to its amplification. Dr. Morrow resolved this problem by
including an exhaustive amount of notes and bibliographical information
from Arabic and Persian sources. In both quantity and quality, his notes
make a notable contribution to the original work of the author.

For all intents and purpose, this book constitutes a slightly modified
version of that article originally published in *Epimelia: Revista de
Estudios Sobre La Tradición*. The journal in question is the official
academic organ of the Center for Research into the Philosophy and
History of Religion (CIFHIRE) [*Centro de Investigaciones en Filosofía e
Historia de Las Religiones*] at the Department of Philosophy of the
School of Graduate Studies at John F. Kennedy Argentine University.

The book, in its present form, contains nothing new with the exception
of the valuable critical and biographical notes, the opening remarks,
the translator’s preface, the genesis of the work, and the detailed
index, provided by Dr. Morrow. It also contains an exordium, a foreword
by Sayyid Muḥammad Rizvī, and a commendatory preface by Professor
Barbara Castleton, as well as an author’s preface in which we expand our
criticism of Orientalism from the point of view of the philosophy of the
history of religion to the broader field of social studies.

Besides these addenda, we have not modified the original text in any
substantial fashion for obvious reasons. For starters, it would be
impossible to alter the sentences without changing their original
intent. Furthermore, any such changes might arouse suspicion, leading
some readers to believe that they were done for editorial reasons.

Finally, one of the main reasons for not making any changes, save those
slight details brought to our attention by those who reviewed the
original Spanish version or its English translation, is that the work
was written with great haste in the space of two months. It was produced
with the specific purpose of responding to endless allegations of
Orientalists who, unsatisfied with characterizing Shī‘ism as a
fundamentalist form of Islām, stubbornly insisted on labeling it as a
heterodox sect. By doing so, these scholars were merely echoing old
Orientalist prejudices and supporting Muslim reformists.

**This reformist sector was quickly embraced by Western Orientalists as
proponents of “moderate Islām” while the traditional sector was labeled
as representatives of “extremist Islām,” dangerous “fundamentalists” who
make militant and violent interpretations of faith based on the
Qur’ān.**

The purpose of the original study, which has now been converted into a
book, was to address this conceptual error which is incessantly
repeated, *ad nauseam*, in academic circles and which passes from
textbook to textbook. However, when the time came to review the book for
publication, we felt much less optimistic with regards to our goal of
conveying to Western readers that Shī‘ite Islām is not an extreme,
heterodox, fundamentalist or fanatical sect. Evidently, we never
pretended to provide a definitive “solution” to such a complex problem.
Any such effort would require broader and more detailed studies. We
acknowledge that many of the issues related to the topic remained
outside the scope of our study. Although we are most conscious of the
gaps in our study, we would never even dream of trying to fill them in
the space of this exposition. Such exclusion is the understandable
result of the need to assume a determined perspective, forcing us to be
selective in our choice of the material covered.

In order to avoid confusing or misleading our readers, we must point out
that we never proposed to write an introduction to Shī‘ite Islām. This
book does not study certain aspects which are crucial in the
understanding of the political and metaphysical thought of Twelver
Shī‘ism. It may touch upon them, it may gloss over them, but it
certainly does not study them in depth.

Although we have drawn from primary sources in Arabic and Persian,
presenting various legal and theological views with respect to issues
like consensus [*ijmā'*], as well as traditional exegesis, both ancient
and contemporary, it was not the objective of this book to expound
exhaustively upon the views of every school of thought.

Our immediate and most pressing goal was to demonstrate that Shī‘ite
Islām is a genuine, legal and spiritual expression of traditional Islām,
both in orthodoxy and orthopraxy. In the same way that Sunnī Islām is
based in doctrine and practice on the basic principles of the Qur’ān and
prophetic tradition, so is Shī’ite Islām, which, in its traditional
form, has the added advantage of having been preserved and reaffirmed by
a continuous and direct line of successors, the Holy Imāms, the natural
heirs of the *wilāyah*, the Cycle of Prophecy.

The goal of this book, then, is to demonstrate that, far from being a
heretical schismatic sect or fundamentalist form of Islām, as one hears
over and over again, and which is more or less groundless, **Shī‘ism is
the living expression of original Muḥammadan Islām, perfectly preserved
by his successors, the Holy Imāms from the Prophetic Household [*****ahl
al-bayt*****].** It was for this reason, that we proposed, without any
polemical or apologetic intent, to present the Shī‘ite point of view,
with the highest possible degree of objectivity, without any concession
to the prejudiced views of its detractors, be they Muslim or non-Muslim.
We have presented Shī‘ite Islām from a Shī‘ite point of view. We made
sure to put aside outside influences received during our academic
formation for, as G. Bachelard has pointed out, these can turn into real
epistemological obstacles which impede objectivity.

Readers should not be offended if, at given moments, they get the
impression that they are reading a panegyric. This impression is to be
expected as this work does not contain the redundant repetition of
pejorative postulations presented in Orientalist works which claim to
present Islām and the Arab world “objectively.” Despite the overt
contempt its secular ideologists manifest towards Islām, the West
remains cynically passive. This attitude, however, can only be
understood within its historical context.

**Western animosity towards Islām forms part of a long history of
cultural encounters through which the West attempted to impose its
hegemony on the East. It should come as no surprise that the unrepressed
hatred towards Islām and Arabs forms the very basis of much Western
Orientalism.**

In many cases, Orientalism has been more or less officially at the
service of the intellectual self-satisfaction of secular illustrated
despotism and the conservatism of Western imperialist authoritarianism.
**Be it politically, militarily or intellectually, Western imperialism
rarely hides its overwhelming aversion towards those who resist being
physically or economically annexed into colonies, and those who refuse
to be assimilated culturally, linguistically, mentally and
spiritually.**

It should be known from the onset that we are not unaware of the various
aspects which have fallen outside of the reach of our study. Despite
shortcomings related to time and space, we have attempted to develop our
arguments in the most satisfactory fashion, using all our abilities to
help readers overcome their resistance to the topic, the result of
heightened sensitivities caused by events of worldwide repercussions
which, directly or indirectly, involve Shī‘ite Islām.

Since this book was written so rapidly as a response to current events,
it cannot be considered an introduction to Shī‘ite Islām. Any such claim
would do a grave injustice to Muslim scholars who have devoted their
entire lives to the study of one of the many fields which this book has
merely surveyed with a bird’s eye view. We have merely shown some of the
scenery of Shī‘ism, not its depth and detail. However, in our own
defense, the general overview we have provided may be justified by the
fact that it is not the fruit of improvisation.

This book is the result of years of study on the origins of Shī‘ite
Islām. Even though the book was written during the first semester of the
1994 academic year, it should be mentioned that its final form was based
on various preliminary versions and partial drafts from courses and
lectures that we delivered in the *Seminarios de historia, pensamiento y
cultura del mundo islámico* [Lectures on the History, Thought, and
Culture of the Islamic World] between 1991 and 1992. This serie of
lectures was organized by the Argentinean Institute for Islamic Culture
and the Cultural Bureau of the Iranian Embassy in Buenos Aires and took
place in the Faculty of Social Sciences of the University of Buenos
Aires. Any good which comes from this limited contribution to the topic
of Shī‘ite Islām is due, in great part, to the valuable critical
interest displayed by colleagues, friends, and students, whose questions
and observations contributed considerably to the preparation of the
final version of the book.

The very idea of writing an article on the basis of those classes and
lectures owes much to the guidance of Dr. Francisco García Bazán, Dean
of the Department of Philosophy, and Director of the Center for Research
into the History and Philosophy of Religion at John F. Kennedy Argentine
University, as well as the Editor of the journal *Epimeleia*. Dr. García
Bazán must be thanked first and foremost for encouraging me to write
this article. He deemed the article a necessary contribution to
scholarship. He understood, much better than most Orientalists, that
**Shī‘ism, although representing a minority tradition, represents a
spiritual current of Gnostic illumination, law and theology, which is
entirely Islamic in orthodoxy and orthopraxy, to the same extent as
mainstream and majority Sunnī Islām**. To be sincere, we must recognize
that it was our director, Dr. García Bazán, who revived our interest in
writing that article which was always in an indefinite state and which
we could never come around to completing.

Dr. García Bazán’s constant encouragement gave us an almost journalistic
rhythm of redaction and, in little time, he granted us the time and the
confidence to transform those initial rough drafts into a completed
work. We are greatly indebted to the generous spirit of Dr. García
Bazán, who, besides always knowing how and when to help us, from start
to finish, has been of great benefit due to his scholarly knowledge and
experience, counseling and guiding us with mastery in many ways. We will
always consider it a privilege and an honor to have worked besides this
great master of philosophy and comparative religion. We also thank him
for permitting us to republish our work.

We are equally grateful to *Ḥujjat al-Islām wa al-Muslimīn* Feisal
Morhell of the *World Center of Islamic Sciences* of the *Ḥawẓah
‘Ilmiyyah* from Qum in the Islamic Republic of Iran, who also happens to
be the Director of Cultural Affairs for the *Fundación Cultural Oriente*
and editor of the Spanish version of the academic journal *Az-Zaqalain*,
for his interest in republishing the article which gave origin to this
book. *Ḥujjat al-Islām wa al-Muslimīn* Feisal Morhell is a young
specialist in traditional Islamic sciences who is not alien to this work
since he proof-read our Arabic and Persian translations and,
furthermore, provided us access to all of the primary Islamic sources
which appeared in the original article.

The bibliography for the book, however, has been greatly amplified by
Dr. John Andrew Morrow. We would also like to thank *Ḥujjat al-Islām wa
al-Muslimīn* Murtada Beheshti, General Director of the *Islamic Thought
Foundation* of Tehran, and the Editor-in-Chief of the Spanish version of
the journal *Az-Zaqalain*; *Ḥujjat al-Islām wa al-Muslimīn* Sayyid
Muḥammad Rizvī, the resident *‘ālim* at the Ja‘farī Islamic Center in
Toronto, Canada, and Dr. Liyakat Ali Takim, Associate Professor of
Religious Studies at the University of Denver, whom we thank especially
for reviewing the doctrinal, juridical, and historical aspects dealt
with in the present book, with truly limitless dedication, patience and
generosity.

There is no doubt whatsoever that we would have faced many difficulties
during the preparation of this work were it not for the constant advice
and observations made by these great scholars and brilliant Muslim.
Thanks to their help, however, we have overcome many obstacles and we
will be certain to include their contributions in a future edition of
the Spanish version of the book.

There are many people in Argentina, the United States, Canada, the U.K.,
Spain, and Iran, who collaborated with us during the preparation of this
study, in its dissemination, and in its first English translation. In
this sense, we are particularly grateful to Mrs. Sumeia Younes from the
*World Center of Islamic Sciences* of the *Ḥawẓah ‘Ilmiyyah* in Qum in
the Islamic Republic of Iran and Editorial Secretary for the journal
*Az-Zaqalain*, for reading the manuscript of the first Spanish article.
We are grateful to Professor Barbara Castleton from Ohio University for
proofreading the English translation and preparing a commendatory
preface. We are equally grateful to Rachida Bejja for painstakingly
correcting the Arabic transliteration and to Professor Gustavo César
Bize, Associate Professor of Arabic and Islamic Thought at Universidad
de Buenos Aires and at the Universidad Nacional de 3 de Febrero, for
reviewing the English translation.

We are also grateful to the following young Islamologists, Professor
Ángel Horacio Molina and Professor María Eugenia Gantus, who read the
final Spanish and English versions of the work. They are both young
research scholars at the Center for Oriental Studies at the Universidad
Nacional de Rosario, in Santa Fe, Argentina, an institution associated
with the Mullā Sadrā Center for Islamic Studies and Research (CEDIMS)
[*Centro de Estudios y Documentación Islámicos Mullā Sadrā*] at the
Universidad Católica Argentina de La Plata (Sede Bernal). We are
particularly grateful to its General Coordinator, Dr. Horacio López
Romano, for the generous institutional space he has provided, and to Dr.
Sonia Yebara, Director of the Center for Oriental Studies of the School
of Literature of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at the Universidad
Nacional de Rosario, for their unselfish institutional support.

Other friends and colleagues read fragments or complete version of our
rough drafts, providing an impressive volume of critical observations
and facts. It would be impossible to mention them all. Nevertheless, we
would like to express our gratitude to the following persons for their
constant kindness and cooperation. We would like to thank Mr. Ángel
Almazán de Gracia, the Spanish cultural journalist, writer and historian
who specializes in Sorian culture and Numantine archeology for
enthusiastically reading this work and citing it in many of his articles
and books. We would like to thank Mr. Mikail Álvarez Ruiz, Director of
the *Biblioteca Islámica Ahlul Bayt* from Sevilla, Spain, to whom we owe
the first digital version of the Spanish original, which was well
received and distributed over the Internet. He was the first to conceive
of the idea of turning our article into a book, and he is one of the
most energetic promoters of our work on the Internet. Dr. John Andrew
Morrow based his English edition on the digital edition prepared by him.
I would also like to acknowledge the valuable collaboration of Mr.
Héctor H. Manzolillo, one of the most prolific and recognized
translators of Islamic texts in Spanish. He was kind enough to review
the notes to the English translation, and make greatly appreciated
corrections.

Finally, we would like to express our endless gratitude to the editor
and translator, Dr. John Andrew Morrow, Associate Professor of Languages
and Literature at Eastern New Mexico in the United States, to whom we
owe the Spanish and English editions of our work, as well as his
scrupulous critical annotations. Through of years of collaboration, we
have come to know a marvelous human being who is wise, but humble, and
who honors us with his irreplaceable friendship. We would also like to
thank our wife Mónica Delia Pereiras, for supporting patiently and
lovingly our domestic “absences” through all the time it took us to
write and correct this book. We would also like to thank our daughters
Ruth Noemí, María Inés and María de los Ángeles, whose affectionate
interruptions made the labor of this book both pleasant and possible;
our parents, Saturnino and Elvira; our brothers, Daniel and Cristina;
and all our family and friends for standing by us, unconditionally, in a
thousand and one ways. Last, but certainly not least, we would like to
thank Mr. Muḥammad Taqī Anṣariyān and Mawlanā Muḥammad Rizvī for
encouraging and supporting this academic endeavor.

**Professor Luis Alberto Vittor**
**Technical Support Person for Scientific Research**
Center for Research into the Philosophy and History of Religion
(CIFHIRE)
Department of Philosophy
School of Graduate Studies
John F. Kennedy Argentine University

**Director**
Mullā Sadrā Center for Islamic Studies and Research (CEDIMS)
Department of Social and Political Sciences in Africa and the Middle
East
Catholic University of Argentina de la Plata (Sede Bernal)
Center for Oriental Studies National University of Rosario


