Preface
=======

By: Ayatullâh Al-Uzma Marashi Najafi (r.a.)

In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful

After due Praise and Blessings, it should be said that this is one of
the most beneficial books. It proves the veracity of Ahle-Bayt (a.s.)
and speaks about the injustices inflicted on them. It is simple but
sweet in style. Few books can match it on this count. Though it has been
printed many times, its demand exceeds supply. Thus Agha Mirza Nasrullah
Meherkhwan has decided to publish a fresh edition of this book and
requested the humble slave to write a brief introduction, especially
about the author. I have complied with his request, albeit briefly, due
to my busy schedule.

Biography of the Author

Name and Lineage

Qazi Muhammad is famous by the name of Bohlool Bahjat ?fandi, son of
Qadi Muhammad alias 'Sa'dat'. He was the son of Qadi Muhammad Mukhallis,
son of Qadi Muhammad, the writer of Bughyatil Faqih, son of Qadi Salâm.
The author himself mentions this same lineage, and it reaches up to Abu
Ayyub Ansari, the famous companion of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).

**Teachers and Guides**

The writer was well versed in rational and traditional sciences as also
gnosis (irfan). In the field of Islamic jurisprudence, he was trained by
his father Qadi Muhammad Sa'dat and Shaykh Najibuddin Zangizuri. His
peers in the rational sciences were Shaykh Muhammad Shaykhul Islam and
Shaykh Muhammad Qadizadaj. In gnosis, he preferred Mashrab Mulla
Sirajuddin Naqshbandi and followed this Tariqah (school).

He received permission to relate traditions from his father Qadi
Muhammad Sa'dat, Sayyid Abul Huda Syadi Rufai, Shaykhul Islam Islambol
and related traditions from Sihah Sitta and other books of Prophetic
traditions by their permission. This humble servant had the honor of
meeting the respected writer a few times and in course of his travel in
Iran, he was seen at Tabriz and Hamadan. He was distinguished in
numerous qualities and accomplished in many arts. He was very religious.
He sought permission from the humble servant to relate ahadith from Shia
books, which was duly given. And this humble servant in return got
permission to quote from him prophetic traditions.

**Religion and School (Tariqat)**

Initially, the author was a follower of the Hanafi School. In
jurisprudence, he followed Abu Hanifah. At last he gave up the Hanafi
School and began to follow the Shafei Maslak, which he continued for the
rest of his life. In the matter of Tariqah, he followed the Naqhsbandi
School, which terminated at Shaykh Bahauddin Naqshbandi.

**Writings**

The author has penned various works, including the book presently in
your hands, Analysis of the History of Aale Muhammad. It can be said
that this book was singularly responsible for the popularity of the
author. In its impartiality and unbiased reporting, it is
incomparable.

His other books are Sharhe Aqaid-e-Nasafi, Hundred Days, Study of
Battle of Siffeen, Tract on the teachings of Hamuyi and Hujr bin Adi,
The Companion of Amirul Mo-mineen Ali ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) (where his
life and martyrdom have been documented). Another work of his is the
supplementary on the Tafseer of Baydawi. Kitab Wadud wa Naqood dar
Manazirate Mazhabi is yet another of his important work. He wrote tracts
wherein he has collected the names of Ahle Sunnat scholars who have
recorded the incident of arson at the door of Fatemah Zahra (s.a.). This
book was written at the request of this humble servant (Agha Mar'ashi)(
r.a.)

A tract on the Naqshbandi Order, A tract on the necessity of Wiping
(Masah) of feet, A tract on the monuments of Azerbaijan, A tract on the
punctuation of the Confession of the Oneness of God (Kalemtut Tauheed),
a book on the exposition of democracy, socialism and other schools. The
writer was from Zangizur. He visited Islambol (Istanbul) a few times,
and visited Egypt, Baghdad, Iran and Bukhara once each. He had the grace
to perform Hajj once. He was good-natured, honest, brave, humorous and
broad faced. He was a handsome personality with a sweet tongue and
corpulence. He was born in 1288 A.H. in the city of Zangizur. According
to authentic sources, he passed away in 1350 A.H. However some people
maintain that he was murdered. He has left three sons and a daughter
named, Bahauddin, Abdullah, Ali Jamaluddin and Fatemah. I pray to the
Almighty for the tawfeeq for the righteous and those who propagate the
faith.

Shahaabuddin Al Husaini al Najafi Al Marashi

11th Jamadi al-Oola, 1362

**Introduction**

By the Grace of the Almighty and under the shade of the attention and
guidance of the universal wisdom, the guide of the path, the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.), we begin the book TASHREEH WA MUHAAKAMAH DAR
TAAREEKH-E-AALE MUHAMMAD [Analysis of the History of Aale Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.)]. With all humility, the author hopes this book will be
considered as the foremost among such works.

It is well known that love and affection for the family of the
infallibles and pure ones (Ahle Bayt (a.s.)) is incumbent on the Muslim
Ummah. Hence, it is our most important duty to know the conditions and
the history of events connected with this pious household (a.s.).

It is highly regrettable that, until now, what is going on is quite the
opposite. That is, the Islamic scholars, who have compiled huge tomes on
various subjects, have made no contribution to the history of Ahle Bayt
(a.s.) whose love and affection is the basic and important condition for
true faith. For instance, many works have been published on the history
of Samanids, Seljuks, Buwayhids, Ottomans, etc. but we have no book on
the history of the Aale Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). Is this not a matter of
shame and regret?

The Muslim scholars have not paid more attention to any science other
than history and the transmission of events. The works of Ibne Khaldun,
Ibne Athir, Ibne Khallekaan, Masoodi and other well-known scholars are
the best examples of the science of narration and history.

The best examples of the extraordinary importance given by Muslim
scholars to such narration and history are History of Damascus by Ibne
Asaakir in fifty volumes and History of Baghdad by Khateeb-e-Bagdadi in
eighty volumes. In the field of narration too, we have works like Osodul
Ghaabah. Also, some of the valuable works have been side tracked despite
their importance. In spite of all these works of great importance what
is regrettable is that the history of the Holy Prophet's (s.a.w.a.)
progeny has not received any serious attention. Historians have not paid
as much attention to Imam Reza (a.s.) as they have given to Mutanabbi (a
false prophet). It has paid more regard to Abu Yusuf than to Imam Moosa
Kazim (a.s.).

If prejudice is set aside and the matter is looked into impartially,
what will appear is quite the opposite. If somebody claims otherwise,
the pages of history would readily support the truth.

It is very regretful that a well-known historian like Tabari, in his
famous Tarikh, does not given importance to some really important events
and regards them as unworthy of mention. He does not utter even a few
words in favour of the established rights of the Holy Progeny of the
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) but discusses worthless things like Nimrud riding a
vulture, which raises him, high towards the sky! He lifts the head of
Awj bin Unaaq right into the clouds! Wonderful! What was the wisdom
behind all this neglect and indulgence? Astonishing! Did it not occur to
Tabari that his works would be critically evaluated in future? It is the
duty of every impartial historian to make thorough investigation in
every matter even if it is minor, because those preceding try their best
to enlighten the minds of the coming generations. They do not want to
leave them groping in the darkness of superstitions, confused! While
facts related to Islam and Muslims remained concealed and unknown to the
Muslim world, those, which were vain and had nothing to do with the
world of Islam, have been discussed at length. The fact that the
position of the Holy Progeny of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has a very
high rank is as bright as the sun and nobody is unaware of it.

We have said earlier that love and affection for the Holy Progeny
(a.s.) is among the most important duties of a Muslim. It is indeed
astonishing as to why a proportionate study has not been made in this
significant matter? In my humble opinion, this subject does deserve a
detailed study.

It is a clear and established fact that in the early period of Islam,
Khilafah from the time it got deviated from its original and natural
course, the rights of the Holy Progeny of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) have
been suppressed and trampled upon. The period of caliphs did not last
long but the duration was enough to change the course of history for the
worse. The oppressive and hated regime, and sinister and usurper rule of
Bani Umaiyyah came into power. People lacking wisdom and Islamic
behaviour, gathered around the oppressive and cunning Moaviyah. Reality
was suppressed under pressure of deceit, threat, oppression and
punishment.

White turned into black and black into white. Hypocrisy flourished and
truth vanished. What is more regrettable is that the Companions (of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)), while witnessing a whole series of events, due
to absolute cowardice and timidity to testify against the same, did not
display the requisite courage to fulfil the duty entrusted to them. The
pits were that some companions even rose up openly and followed the path
of falsehood and innovation, and dived into the depths of abominable
deeds and hateful acts! Let me state a little more explicitly. Abu
Hurayrah, who was a permanent companion of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
and has narrated hundreds of thousands of hadiths and events from the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.), in order to safeguard his honour and respect, was
just a mute spectator in front of the oppressions and tyranny of Bani
Umayyah. So much so that he did not feel an iota of shame to dine on the
table of Mu'awiyah, the evil oppressor, whose innumerable cruelties and
savageries can astonish the reader? (The details, of course, will
deviate us from our aim). But Abu Hurayrah supported him shamelessly,
devouring royal delicacies. He is reported to have said, "Prayer behind
Ali is most perfect but the table of Mu'awiyah is more colourful."

Despite his confession that prayer behind Ali (a.s.) is better, the
tasteful food of Syria supplied by Mu'awiyah lured him and he
disregarded the best of prayers. Thus, meanness and voracity made him
accept abjectness and drove him to give licence to the deeds of the
oppressors and cruel tyrants.

The notorious enemy of the Holy Progeny (a.s.), Basar bin Artaat, who
had stormed, massacred and plundered Medina on behalf of Mu'awiyah. He
was known in history by the name of the Perpetrator of the Night of
Hurra, wherein he killed seven hundred companions of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) and dishonoured nearly three hundred women. In this entire
sorry episode, Abu Hurayrah had been his assistant and even his deputy!
How lowly and mean can a creature become! What is regrettable is that
despite this wickedness, Abu Hurayrah is remembered in history with
reverence! Only being a narrator of traditions makes him honourable and
respectable!

In the humble view of the author, after gaining the honour of being the
Prophet's (s.a.w.a.) companion, Abu Hurayrah's friendship with the likes
of Mu'awiyah, Marwan and Basar bin Artaat is the proof of his apostasy,
the decay of his intent, the hypocrisy behind his deeds and the
deception in his righteousness. Moreover, Mughairah bin Shu'bah, a
famous companion, who supervised all these evils, crimes and
innovations, gained terrible notoriety and infamy in the world of
Islam!

In order to serve the lust and greed of Mu'awiyah and to please his
commanding desires, he continuously abused the Holy Progeny of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) (we seek refuge in Allah). He cursed Ali (as), in
particular, publicly from the pulpit. The description of such
heartrending events here is not intended to narrate history but to
confirm that in those days, discussion of the excellence and virtues of
the Holy Progeny (a.s.) was extremely difficult.

Yes, in the time of the rule of Bani Umayyah, there was no trace of
truth and truthfulness. Therefore, facts remained concealed behind the
veil of intrigue. The era of Bani Umayyah ended as a result of the great
and earnest self- sacrifices of the blessed nation, and through the
revolution of Abu Muslim Khurasani. Consequently, the Bani Abbas came to
power. During the regime of this autocratic and tyrannical dynasty too,
the Holy Progeny of Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was deprived of its rights. Just
as Bani Abbas attained caliphate through the nations grand sacrifices,
the Holy Progeny, as was its condition during the treacherous rule of
Bani Umayyah, continued to remain in the clutches of strangulation and
negation. It became forlorn and distanced with the deceit and intrigues
of the native and each one of them was either poisoned or killed.
Verily, this era also was turned into a time of calamities.

Any sympathy for the holy family (a.s.) in itself was extremely risky.
Rather nobody dared even the mention their names. The scholars,
traditionalists and jurists, who belonged to the Holy Progeny (a.s.)
were pushed aside. They were intentionally kept away from the people.
Self-interest and greed made people to align with those in power. They
alienated Baqir, Kazim, Reza-e- Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) from the nation
through perfidy and oppression under the pretext that the progeny of
Fatima (a.s.) was desirous of caliphate. So they drove them away one by
one from public arena.

If a deep insight is made in the history of the lives of the Holy
Progeny, it will be known that all of these precious personalities were
either made captive or were made to drink the nectar of martyrdom at the
merciless and ruthless hands of the treacherous rulers.

It will be understood from the above that during the rule of Bani
Abbas, conditions were not favourable for the Holy Progeny and it was
difficult to talk about their rights.

After the attack of Genghis Khan on the Islamic world, an era of feudal
rule began. This era, which began in the seventh century Hijri, though
did not last long, to some extent, was favourable for freedom of
expression. The scholars born in this period were, compared to their
predecessors, away from blind following and nearer to research and
scrutiny. Among the scholars who came up in this era were Khaandmir,
Mirkhaan, and the author of the book 'Rawzatus Safaa' wherefrom the book
'Rawzatul Ahbaab' was translated. Again after this period, conditions
turned for the worse. Old politics returned and undue prejudice became
the order of the day. Truth and reality again went into concealment.
Yes, a kingdom opposed to the Ottoman was founded.

The expansion of the circle of this epoch was quite essential. The
outward (zahiri) caliphate too shifted to Sultan Salim-I, who was a very
competent king. He also made efforts to unite the Muslim countries but,
unfortunately, an aim that should have been pursued with logic, was
instead sought through force. What a pity that this high and popular
view was not followed through proper and natural channels. History has
proved, time and again that the structures based on force and false
foundations do not yield good results.

Against this great conqueror, rose another contender who longed to
capture the whole world. Shah Ismail Safavi, for fulfilling his desire
of conquering the world, resorted to some means and ways. To achieve his
selfish aim and motive, he used religion to the hilt. Yes, two kings,
with a view to expand their territories and strengthen their influence,
created a world of a difference (in religious matters) in the nation.
Both the parties, following their desires besides wielding the sword,
also used the pen. They wrote books explaining their aims and objects
and penned their views unceasingly. Can you imagine the extent to which
the truth was concealed? How much falsehood concocted? How much of the
white has been turned into black and vice versa, which were later
converted to acceptable facts? A group of scholars sacrificed their
conscience and intelligence for self-interests at the altar of the
rulers and influential people. Selfishness and prejudice ruled the roost
and consequently, thousands of books were left as heritage for us! Yes,
swords were silenced but blood still drips from the body of Islam
because of the wounds inflicted by the pen!

Yes, we deeply desire that this wound should be healed through expert
medical treatment with pens and self-sacrificing deeds of Islamic
scholars. You know that this era also is not congenial for the
upliftment and spread of truth. A book has been written about Karbala.
Though the intention of the author is to exhibit the heart-rending event
he has under cover of the description of the calamities, been partial
toward the filthy Yazid and his obstinate companions and says at the
end,

"On the day of Qiyamat, Hazrat Fatima Zahra (s.a.) will arrive in the
field of Mahshar with the blood-stained shirt of her son and will
complain about the oppression to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) will say, "O my daughter! This day is not the day for
making complaints. This is the day for intercession." So, all the
offenders will be forgiven and admitted to Paradise!" Now, see how the
writer of the tragedy while describing the calamities, wants to defend
Shimr, Yazid, Umar Sa'ad, Ubaidullah ibne Ziyaad and their cahoots. How
he provides the means of their pardon and permits their entry to
Paradise! But this shameless fellow, does not, even for a moment, ponder
how can the merciless killer of the son of the Prophet of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) and the dearest offspring of Lady Fatima (s.a.) in the desert
of Karbala be forgiven at all? They are unpardonable because the cursed
ones had turned deniers and a denier's permanent abode is hell. So much
so that even those who were delighted or satisfied with what happened at
Karbala are in the hell-fire too.

Yes, what we want to establish is that the history of the Holy Progeny
has not been written truthfully. If there are books on this subject,
most are based on selfishness and malafide intention. Thus the history
of the Holy Progeny has remained under cover of prejudice and
selfishness.

We want that this problem should be studied more deeply. Just see as to
what extent the politics of establishing a state in Islam has created
harmful functions and executed them? Here are some examples from Bani
Umayyah: Once when, in the time of Bani Umayyah, Abdullah Ibn Zubair
claimed caliphate in Mecca and confronted Abdul Malik Marwan, and fought
for few years, Abdul Malik, merely with an intention that the people of
Syria and all Muslim countries should stop visiting K'abaa, built a
mansion and called upon people to visit that house for performance of
Hajj! Imagine the extent the question of kingdom and rule has, through
this route, harmed religion, that a cursed fellow, for securing his own
kingdom, changes the holy Kaaba, among the greatest pillars of Islam!

Here is another example from Bani Abbas:

When the people of Medina refused to recognize the caliphate of Ja'far
Mansoor Abbasi and paid allegiance to a man from the family of Zahra
whose name was Muhammad bin Abdullah and they battled several times with
Ja'far Mansoor. On the one hand, he fought with Muhammad bin Abdullah,
and on the other, with an intention of turning away the Muslims from the
holy shrine of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and from the holy city of
Mecca, built a house and named it "Qubba-e-Khazraa" (Green Tomb) and
invited people to visit that place instead of visiting Mecca for Hajj.

Now, an Abbasi Caliph, like the ruler of Bani Umayyah, for safeguarding
his government, massacred even the progeny of Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and
executed them and distorted quite a few Islamic rules and regulations.

Another example:

The caliphs of Bani Abbas not only did not popularise the respect for
the Holy Progeny but, instead, gave rewards to poets to libel the pure
and pious progeny. There are thousands of proofs substantiating this
claim but we suffice here with only one:

A poet named Abaan bin Abdil Hameed wanted to earn a prize from Haroon
Rashid. In order to gain access to his court, he approached Yahya
Barmaki. Yahya told him, 'The condition to attend the court and gain
access to the caliph is to curse Ali (a.s.) and his sons. Initially
Abaan was reluctant to commit this abominable deed but later, wilting
under the pressure of Yahya, composed a poem cursing Hazrat Ali (a.s.)
and presented it to Haroon. Haroon rewarded Abaan by appointing him as
one of his councillors!

The aim of these statements is to show that during the days of Bani
Umayyah and Bani Abbas, the life and condition of the Holy Progeny was
in a great danger. This noble race was pushed aside and having been cut
off from the entire ummah, they were passing their days in social
isolation. Not only that it was not possible to show any sympathy toward
the Holy Progeny's condition but even taking their name was regarded as
a great offence and disloyalty.

One of the errors and negligence of the historians was that they
followed the idiom "to find fault in the great ones is a fault" to the
hilt. They almost seemed bewitched and enchanted. They not only refused
to condemn one of the many Muslim oppressors who passed in the history
of Islam nor did they ever criticise them, rather, they listed their
names among the truthful ones. They regarded the deadly poison that had
permeated into the body of the ummah, as a useful and effective tonic.
They named most of the criminals as reformers and benefactors, thereby
beguiling the innocent ummah.

Of course, the problem later turned into a deadly disease and an
incurable wound for Islam, whose sufferings continue unabated.

We are obliged to give here some examples for further clarification.
Take a glance at Tarikh-e-Tabari, which claims maximum importance among
other history books because of its antiquity and being replete with
quotations. You will see that many tyrants have been mentioned therein
as truthful. This history showers great appreciation for people like Abu
Hurayrah and Mughirah bin Shu'bah. Tabari has never taken the trouble to
critically evaluate the deeds of these characters. For him, their
company with the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was sufficient to accord them
honour and reverence. This attitude, in my humble opinion, is a big
mistake and a serious error.

How is it possible that sheer company of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
prevents a historian from a critical dissection of a person? On the
contrary, being a companion of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) must make the
punishment of their mistakes all the more severe.

You can see what Allah the Almighty, in the verses relating to the
wives of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), says, "O wives of the Messenger!
You are not like all other women. If any one of you commits a sin her
punishment will be doubled." (Ahzaab: 30) Hence reward and punishment is
proportionate to one's status. It is incumbent for everyone to follow
the good deeds of the Prophet's companions and also to avoid praising
those who committed wrongs. Such people should be criticised instead.

It is true that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said, "Do not malign my
companions". But, then, criticism of erroneous and evil deeds is not
slander. Not only the companions, is slander not permitted of anybody.
If criticism is called defamation then the criticism or looking into the
deeds of any of the evildoers is also disallowed. Such a belief is
totally wrong and what is correct is that the deeds of every person
without discrimination, is worth praise and/or censuring.

Abu Hurayrah might have been worthy of God's Grace because of his being
one of the companions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). But thereafter he
became a puppet of Mu'awiyah and, worse than that of Basr bin Artaat. We
shall condemn him because of this very fact and due to his misdeeds
afterwards! If one looks at the reward of one's good deeds one should
also think of the punishment of his evil deeds and mischief. We do not
deny that Abu Hurayrah was one of the companions of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) and his servant and also a narrator of many traditions. But
then, do you know, apart from this, what Abu Hurayrah has done? If no,
then ask me.

When Mu'awiyah intended to obtain allegiance for his son Yazid, the
people of Medina objected to this criminal innovation and intended to
oppose that evil move. Mu'awiyah, in order to frighten the gentle
citizens of Medina, sent the harshest and heartless beast Basr bin Artat
to Medina to get the said allegiance. Then, on Mu'awiyah's orders, Basr
killed seven hundred persons and also arrested three hundred honourable
and chaste Muslim women and engaged himself for three consecutive days,
in allowing the Syrian robbers plunder and ravage the residents around
the Prophet's (s.a.w.a.) shrine!

At that time, Abu Hurayrah, this very companion of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), was a helper and accomplice, in all of his cruel and
oppressive misdeeds! Now, we cannot overlook this crime because,
otherwise, we will also be considered as selfish destroyers of truth.
Yes, it is due to this cruelty that we will always condemn Abu
Hurayrah.

Another historical fact that needs to be pondered upon. It is clearly
known that Ziyad, on behalf of Mu'awiyah, killed one by one all the
partisans of the Holy Progeny of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). At that
time, he sent Hujr bin Adi, who was a famous companion of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.), with his friends to Mu'awiyah. There Hujr and others
of his like, as a result of the plots of Abu Hurayrah and his ilk, who
had sold their religion for gold coins (dinars), were martyred on the
charge of being in favour of the Holy Progeny. In this crime, Abu
Hurayrah was with Mu'awiyah and so also in every cruelty that was meted
out to the holy family. Therefore, we will never close our eyes from the
crimes of Abu Hurayrah even though all historians have ignored these
crimes only on account of his being a companion of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.).

Now let us consider some other blunders of Tabari and the rest of
historians. It cannot be imagined that there is anyone who does not know
that Mughairah bin Shu'bah, who also was an accomplice of Mu'awiyah in
all his crimes, was always maligning Ali (a.s.) from the pulpits of the
mosques and was using bad words for the Holy Progeny too. Yes, many
historians have not taken into account the evils of Mughairah bin
Shu'bah and they take his name with respect only because he kept company
with the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) for some time!

His being in the circle of the companions is praiseworthy but what
about his being in favour of Mu'awiyah and Yazid and his becoming the
cause of the coming to power of a snake like Yazid, who fanned a fire
which will not cool till the Day of Judgement? This sin is so serious
that it is not at all pardonable and we can never ignore it. While we
agree that he was a companion of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), we will
openly condemn his evils and atrocities during our discussion.

Here, let us elaborate how the historians have erred. It is common
knowledge that the battle of Jamal was a serious tragedy in the history
of Islam and that it was the first blow to the unity of Muslim ummah.
History records this battle in detail. It even separates truth from
untruth. Why the condemners of this tragedy narrated it in a particular
way is not a secret, to some extent. The only regret is that the
historians have attempted to describe this event in such a way that
truth and untruth and the identities of the oppressor and the oppressed
are ambiguous, and most of the facts remain hidden. They have, through
stupid excuses and baseless pretexts, concealed the truth both in
ignorance and intentionally. Alas! Alas! They have forgotten the
ultimate aim of chronicling history, curtailed its importance and also
delivered a deadly blow to this respectable science.

In our opinion, the cause of this covering up is 'companionship'. True,
the perpetrators of the battle of Jamal were among the companions,
rather the closest companions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Simply
because they were companions, historians did not take into account their
serious misdeeds and the harm they caused to the world of Islam. They
did not display the courage of discriminating truth and falsehood. They
did not like to express their opinion in this matter. They thought they
were doing Islam good turn by resorting to unfair forgiveness and
unreasonable overlooking.

But we say that the duty of a historian is to reveal the root and the
truth of the facts to the public so that the succeeding generations may
not remain helpless in identifying truth from falsehood. Pardon and
forgiveness is related to the Lord of the Day of Reckoning on the Day of
Judgement. To forgive and pardon is not the duty of the historian.

It is absolutely clear that the ummah has, against the wish of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.), disintegrated into different branches and the cause
of this dissipation has been the said silence in telling the truth and
the nonchalance in adjudication. It is known to all as to how much the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has prohibited the ummah from disunity.

Let us come somewhat closer to reality.

In days gone by, the policies whereof we still continue to follow,
might was right. In the era of Bani Umayyah, and Bani Abbas, writers,
poets, and even religious scholars had entered the assemblies and courts
of the notorious caliphs. They have praised loudly their pomp and glory
and luxury in magical words and songs. Not a single fellow has ever
condemned such gatherings of evil and sin. They only earned thousands of
gold coins and engaged themselves in luxury. All this pleasure was
before the eyes of the people and needs no explanation. Though rule and
power do not justify anybody's evil deeds in the eyes of the just,
Mu'awiyah bin Abu Sufyan and Harqoos bin Zuhair should have ranked equal
but the power and kingdom of Mu'awiyah placed him prominently in the
line of caliph and Amirul Momineen making him look honourable! The
unlucky Harqoos, because of being powerless, was condemned and maligned!
Had he possessed power, his oppressions also would have been covered. To
be more explicit,

Harqoos bin Zuhair was one of the companions of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) and also one of the Ashaabe Badr (who had fought at Badr) and
other Islamic battles and displayed enough courage too. But fortune did
not favour him and he became a criminal by forsaking Ali (a.s.) in the
tragedy of Siffin. He fought in the battle of Nahrawan and became one of
the Khawarij. Now all the historians have mentioned Harqoos with
contempt and condemnation and no one has taken into account his
companionship with the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) because he rebelled
against the rightful Imam and, after fighting for one day against him,
was killed. But Mu'awiyah, whose atrocities put Islam to various
calamities, who made many innovations, who had abused the Holy Progeny
of Prophet (s.a.w.a.), who went up the pulpit of the Prophet's mosque
and abused Ali (a.s.) and his holy sons before many companions of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), who turned an Islamic State on the pattern of
Caesar and Chosroes,

and who killed great companions of the Prophet (s.a.) like Ammar Yasir
and Owais Qarni, has been converted into a reverend and honourable
figure! We can say that even if we overlook all of his misdeeds and
discuss only the killing of Hujr bin Adi, we will find no reason at all
for not considering Mu'awiyah as a mischief maker, oppressor, rebel and
condemnable! Alas! Despite all these innumerable cruelties Mu'awiyah has
been given the title of Amirul Mu'minin and all of his evils have been
put behind the veil of forgetfulness. Not only this, his misdeeds and
offences too have been regarded as his Ijtihaad. It has been mentioned
that in his own Ijtihaad (thinking), despite being in error, he has
earned a prize or reward (sawaab)! I say down with such a Mujtahid,1 who
martyred the Prophet's favourite son Hasan Mujtaba (a.s.) and made this
misdeed an object of Ijtihaad! The whole world should condemn such a
Mujtahid, who hoisted a dishonest man like Yazid on the head of the
pitiable Muslim Ummah and then rejoiced at it!

Umar an-Nasafi in his book Aqaaid an-Nasafi says that the battles and
all other acts of Mu'awiyah were based on Ijtihaad! If someone asks why
the deeds of Harqoos bin Zuhair also should not be considered as
Ijtihaad? What will be his reply? Astonishing indeed! In the humble view
of the writer, Harqoos neither possessed dirham and dinaar nor a
bloodthirsty sword so as to get the power of 'Ijtihaad'. It is a popular
saying that 'a king can do no wrong'.

It is a fact that the pomp and power of Bani Umayyah has covered all
the misdeeds of Mu'awiyah. The ulamah and the historians have not dared
to discuss and criticise his cruelties and oppressive acts and all the
rules and policies of that era became a continuing style of law.

Here the aim of all this detail is to show that the historians have, in
most of the affairs and events, kept mum without expressing what is
right and therefore, the history of the Progeny of the Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) has also remained behind the curtain of secrecy and it has
not been revealed as it deserved to be. In order to substantiate this
claim we find it necessary to mention some historical examples. A
scholar named Yaqub bin Sikkit was sitting in the court of Mutawakkil,
the Abbasi emperor, when two sons of the caliph viz. Motamad and Motaz
entered the assembly. At that moment the caliph asked Yaqub, "Who are
more graceful, these two children of mine or Hasan and Husain (the sons
of Ali)?" Yaqub, due to the faith in his heart, retorted, "By God! Even
Qambar, who was a servant of Ali, is more graceful than these two sons
of yours!" Hearing this blunt reply, Mutawakkil ordered the executioner
to pull out the tongue of the scholar!

A Mujtahid is he who makes effort to find the decision or verdict of
religion. Please analyse for yourselves. In such times and
circumstances, was it at all possible to discuss the Holy Progeny? The
sun of the truth remained hidden behind the clouds of cruelty and
tyranny.

Let us cite another example of Mutawakkil's era.

After the tragic event of Karbala, Muslims used to visit the holy grave
of Hazrat Imam Husain (a.s.). With the passing of time, the respect for
the holy tomb increased and a big mausoleum was built there. When
Mutawakkil learnt of this, he ordered its demolition, considering it
incompatible with the Muslim ummah and the group that loved the Holy
Progeny!

Now, just ponder. All important affairs of Islam are in the control of
the caliph. When he indulges in such gestures, what should the people
do? In those days, the Mutazela were on a high. Among caliphs, Mamoon
and Mutasim favoured them. As soon as Mutawakkil came to power, he
dissuaded the people from accepting the creed of Etezaal. He became a
favourite of the Sunnah and was also embellished with the title of
"Muhyi al-Sunnah" (Reviver of the Sunnah)! Kindly try to understand what
types of anti-religious, unjust and despicable deeds, this establisher
of the Sunnah does. Does an establisher of the Sunnah demolishes the
holy shrine of Imam Husain (a.s.) and turns it into rubble? Can a just
caliph commit such atrocities merely on a doubt that someone is opposed
to his political ambitions and against his personal worldly interests?
Thus it has become clear that in that time facts and truth too had
remained behind tall obstructions. How strange! How did the caliphs and
amirs of Muslims and the judges of the courts tumble in such a deep
abyss?

For proving our point we felt it necessary to present some historical
evidences so that it may be known that the history of the Progeny of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has been neglected to a great extent. So much so
that even in the early days of Islam, their rights were not appreciated
with honour. Rather, they were treated worse than second class citizens.
Everyone knows that the third caliph expired; all the companions of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) insisted for the caliphate of Imam Ali (a.s.)
and accepted him as a popular caliph.

Finally, they all paid allegiance to him heartily. Great companions led
by Talha and Zubair along with the people of Hijaz came to Hazrat Amirul
Mu'minin Ali (a.s.) to pay perfect allegiance to him and to thank him
for accepting their popular demand. These things did not take place
secretly but in the presence of all the great companions and respectable
believers. And shortly thereafter, the tragic event of the battle of
Jamal happened. Talha and Zubair, who were considered among the ten
'Ashara-e-Mubas hsharah'2, ran after the desire to obtain caliphate,
broke their oath of allegiance and duped the people of Basra saying that
they were forced to pay allegiance to Ali (a.s.). My only intention by
mentioning this is to point out that the people of Basra, in order to
verify the accusation of Talha and Zubair that they were forced to give
allegiance to Ali The ten companions, who were informed of their place
in Paradise by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). (a.s.), sent a man to
Medina. After a journey of some weeks, the testifier arrived in the holy
city of Medina. By chance, it was a Friday and people had assembled in
the mosque of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) for Friday prayers. That
companion got up and addressed the gathering:

O companions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)! O the people of Badr and
Rizwan, O faithful people! Talha and Zubair are saying in Basra that,
"We gave allegiance to Ali (a.s.) under pressure" The people of Basra
have sent me to you to clarify the matter from you as you were present
at that time. Was the allegiance to Ali (a.s.) obtained perforce or the
people had given it voluntarily and happily?" In response to this
question, the entire audience kept mum and none considered himself
worthy of speaking the truth. Finally Usamah bin Zaid got up and said,
"Talha and Zubair had given the allegiance to Ali under threats of Malik
Ashtar!"

Astonishing indeed! What a state of affairs is this? What compelled
Usamah to act in this manner? What made him consider that such a degree
of opposition to Ali (a.s.) was proper? Why did the Companions of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) conceal such an obvious thing? Why did they sow
the seeds of hypocrisy and disunity among the pitiable ummah?

Let us assume that Ali (a.s.) was neither the son-in-law of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) nor was he the husband of Fatima Zahra (s.a.), but
that he was only an ordinary Muslim. Even then, does not a faithful
Muslim have any right on another Muslim? This incident makes it known to
what extent the rights of the Holy Progeny were being trampled upon. No
more proof is required to substantiate this fact. This incident itself
shows the state of affairs.

The examples and events so far mentioned show that in the early days of
Islam, ulamah have, as a result of some historical events, not given
even the slightest importance to the history of the Holy Prophet's
progeny (s.a.w.a.). Sufficient discussion of the lives of the members of
the Holy Progeny has never been undertaken.

Thus the claim of this humble creature has been proved.

By the Grace of the Lord Almighty, I have tried to research the history
of the Holy Progeny in this book. I hope I will be able to narrate
properly the events relating to the history and lives of the members of
the Holy Progeny and to state with accuracy going deep into the matter.
Maybe I can show how much oppression has been caused by the nation to
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and how many rights of his Holy Progeny have
been destroyed. While writing this book, I have kept prejudice and blind
following away. My only aim is to reveal the truth and the facts.

It is already known to the pitiable ummah that the Muslim community has
now been divided in two important groups: Shia and Sunni. The Shia has
concern for the history of the Holy Progeny but the Sunnis have gone
toward tafreet (excessiveness). Now when nothing except this difference
and disunity is visible, this humble creature has stood up between the
two dear and honourable brothers. I extend my hand toward both. I call
upon them to come to a point of concurrence and unity, so that they may
understand that there is no point of dispute between the two brothers.
And that if our unity is an obligation, then they should never fall in
dispute only concerning the Holy Progeny. Since the poor ummah has
differed in the matter of the Holy Progeny, it is also imperative that
the same Holy Progeny should be the point of unity. I hope the Muslim
brotherhood will study this history, leaving aside blind following and
prejudice and excessiveness with spiritual delight and will understand
the truth and fact and may Allah help us.

Now we shall begin the history of Aale Muhammad in a systematic manner.
By Aale Mohammad (Peace be upon him and his progeny), we mean Hazrat
Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.), the blessed daughter of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.)- Fatima Zahra (s.a.) and her two dear sons (a.s.). All of
them comprising the people of the cloak - and also the twelve Imams
(a.s.) were from this family.

The life history of these personalities, their usurped rights and the
difficulties befalling them would be discussed, analyzed and judged.
Therefore, we shall begin our discussion with Amirul Momineen (a.s.),
the first member of this family.


