Legatee of the Messenger of Allah(s.a.w.a.)
===========================================

As the Lord Almighty created man, He also guided them to the right path
through a guide from among themselves. All of these divine guides in
their respective periods were the bearers of authority and dispensers of
divine law among the people. Among these great messengers (a.s.) some
were higher than others, and some of them reached the status of Ulul
Azm. The best of these messengers was the seal of the Prophets, Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.). Also, according to common belief, reaching to the level of
certainty, Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) was the most respected and superior
personality in the eyes of the Holy Prophet (s.a.). None held this
position. This discussion, which is Sharii and religious, is related to
Islamic laws. Islamic law has some general principles for all issues,
which cannot be denied. Once these are promulgated and applied, both the
plaintiff and the dependant are obliged to respect it.

In Islam, the followers of different sects follow different variations
of the law but the general principles are non-changeable. Among these
principles, is the following: Whosoever desires to prove something
according to Islam law has to support his arguments with proofs and
evidences? No claim can be presented without proof and evidence.

In Islamic Shariah, two types of proofs are valid: Rational (Aqli) and
Traditional or Documentary (Naqli). The difference between the two is
that if there is no documentary evidence for a particular thing, it
cannot be proved with rational arguments alone. But if a particular
thing is proved by texts there is no need to justify it rationally. In
order to prove that Ali (a.s.) was the foremost and the most superior of
all the people of the Muslim Ummah, we are obliged to present both forms
of evidences, rational as well as traditional. Here we shall relate the
rational arguments and then present the traditional proofs in short.

Yes! Human wisdom is a witness that there are two important concepts in
the Universe, Existence and non-Existence. Indeed, wisdom is a witness
for the superiority and virtue of existence and not for non-existence.
Existence also is of two types, proper and common. Certainly, wisdom
will always give preference to a specific command. Specific command is
again of two kinds, perceptive and non-perceptive. Now, wisdom is aware
that perceptive is superior to non- perceptive. Perceptive is again of
two kinds, intellectual and non-intellectual. Intellectual is indeed the
superior-most. Intellectual is further divided into two types,
knowledgeable and non-knowledgeable. Certainly, wisdom considers
knowledgeable to be superior-most.

After this introduction of intellect and its kinds we would like to
state that after the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), Ali (a.s.) was the most
knowledgeable personality. There was none his equal among all the
people. In this way, Hazrat Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was the most superior
person in the Ummah.

One of the proofs of superiority is knowledge, which was present in the
personality of Ali (a.s.). Now let us discuss the other causes and signs
of superiority because superiority is a quality that is established by
its signs and causes. All these causes and signs are present in the
person himself. They are not superior to him in isolation. The foremost
quality is righteousness. Yes! Wisdom dictates that righteousness is
superior to injustice. Another quality is bravery. Certainly good
character is its primary advantage. According to wisdom, it is the most
superior quality. Thus, everyone will agree that there was no person
equal to Ali (a.s.) as regards bravery and a lofty character in his
time. Therefore, he was the most superior person. He was the most
deserving one according to wisdom. No doubt about it!

This was in brief, our rational argument to prove the superiority of
Ali (a.s.). Let us now prove it from traditional point of view. The
first category of textual proofs is the Holy Quran, and the second the
sayings of the holy Prophet (s.a.). There is no doubt concerning the
validity of these two proofs. As far as the sayings of the Prophet
(s.a.) are concerned, if their authenticity is established, the Muslims
consider them at par with the verses of the Holy Quran.

The only problem regarding traditions is that some of them are
authentic and some are not. Even though hundreds of important writings
and thousands of books have been written to interpret and study the
traditions we still find a large number of forged sayings among the
books of traditions. Some of them have created untold controversies and
problems among the Muslim nation. There is a marked difference between
the methods of Shia and Sunni scholars in evaluating the authenticity of
a hadith. Shias generally believe that it is necessary for a reporter of
hadith to be just (aadil). But according to the majority of Ahle Sunnat,
all the companions were just and thus all the traditions reported by
them are authentic and reliable. However, according to Shia scholars,
all the companions were not just that traditions reported by them
couldn't be accepted without scrutiny.

Yes! Even though the differences are minute, they are very important
because the traditions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) have reached us only
through the companions. Hence the justice of companions is an important
criterion for the correctness of the narrations.

The humble writer of this book was a common Sunni scholar. In spite of
this he always maintained that all the companions of the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) were not just.

This can be illustrated as follows:

The Ahle Sunnat accept the narrations of the companion Mughirah bin
Shu'bah and also consider him to be just. But it should be known that
justice has no existence outside a person. It is apparent through the
actions of that person. But if someone opposes the established commands
of Islam, whoever it may be, far from his being just, he would be
labeled a sinner and unjust person. This is established through the
opinions of well-known Ahle Sunnat scholars. Please note the factors
that show whether Mughirah was a sinner or a just person.

History chronicles that Mughirah was the governor of Basrah during the
Caliphate of second caliph. In this period, he committed fornication
with a woman named Umme Jamil of the Bani Aamir tribe. Four companions
witnessed this act. One was Abu Bakr and others were Nafe, Shabil and
Ziyad. In the beginning three of them testified. The fourth one gave a
false testimony and thus saved him from the punishment of stoning.

It is clear that Mughirah had committed fornication and became eligible
for a verdict of stoning from the Caliph. The complete incident is
recorded in various history books, especially the book, Fitratul Islam.
Ibne Abil Hadeed has also considered as insufficient the testimony of
people who committed greater sins and did not consider their hadith
reliable.

Mughirah was the ruler of Kufa when he saw Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
(God forbid) uttered a curse on him. So much so that the writer of
Fitratul Islam and Ibne Abil Hadeed, the Shafei scholar, says that
Mughirah bin Shu'bah cursed Ali (a.s.) and his pure descendants in the
presence of Saeed bin Zaid, the great companion. Many other companions
who left the Masjid in disgust also witnessed this.

Another book that has recorded these misdeeds is Aghani of Abul Faraj
Isfahani. Ibne Abil Hadeed in Sharh-o-Nahjil Balagha has also mentioned
this through a chain of narrators. Moreover, the writers of Fitratul
Islam records under the discussion of the martyrdom of Hujr bin Adi.
Appointed by Amir Mu'awiyah, Mughirah bin Shu'bah the ruler of Kufa was
always imprecating Hazrat Ali (a.s.) and his pure descendants. One day
while he was committing this vile act, Hujr bin Adi stood up and hit the
head of Mughirah with a stone. This incident became the very cause of
Mu'awiyah's oppression of Hujr that ultimately led to his martyrdom.

From the above narration, it becomes clear that Mughirah cursed Amirul
Momineen Ali (a.s.) even though the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had said,
"One who curses Ali, curses me and one, who curses me, curses Allah."
Hence, Shahabuddin Alusi writes in his Tafseer, "Anyone, who curses Ali
bin Abi Talib, whether in his life or after he passed away, would be an
infidel." Thus in the book Hayatul Haiwan, Allamah Damiri and in
Yanabiul Mawaddah of Khwaja Kalaan Qunduzi have also established this
fact. Thus, it is confirmed that by committing this deed, Mughirah had
become an infidel. Therefore any tradition related by him will not be
reliable. Such people are not capable of relating the traditions of the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

Abu Hurayrah, the Companion of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.)

Abu Hurayrah was a companion of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), who
embraced Islam in the year of the battle of Khaibar. Being unemployed
all the time, he always accompanied the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Also,
as he was aware of the real attitude of Abu Hurayrah the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) said, "O Abu Hurayrah! Visit me only occasionally, so that
your love for me increases." This shows that Abu Hurayrah did not love
the Prophet (s.a.w.a.). However, this matter is beyond the domain of our
discussion here. Yes! Abu Hurayrah is the greatest narrator of Ahle
Sunnat traditions and in their view his reports are reliable.

In spite of the fact that this humble writer himself was from the Ahle
Sunnat, he considers the errors of Abu Hurayrah opposed to justice. A
few examples are mentioned below:

According to a correct report the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said: "The
foremost transgressor of this nation will be a person from Bani
Umayyah." Abu Hurayrah witnessed the great transgression during the rule
of Mu'awiyah yet he supported all this injustice, while the truth and
righteousness were with Amirul Momineen (a.s.). Ultimately Mu'awiyah had
Ali (a.s.) martyred and Abu Hurayrah still kept quiet. It is obvious
that justice and injustice cannot be present at one place and it is not
possible to prove that Abu Hurayrah was just.

Another example:

When Mu'awiyah was taking the oath of allegiance for his son Yazeed,
some people opposed this, especially the people of Madinah. Mu'awiyah
sent the tyrant Busr bin Artat to terrorize the people of Madinah. Seven
thousand companions of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) were slain and more
than three hundred chaste women were arrested and paraded naked in the
market place to be sold as slaves.

If we refer to the books of great Ahle Sunnat scholars, namely, Aghani
of Abul Faraj, Iqdul Farid of Jawzi, Jahiz, the well-known historian
Ibne Khaldun, Ibne Kallikan, Tafsir Kabir of Tabari, Ibne Abil Hadid,
Allamah Damiri and the writer of Fitratul Islam, we shall see that this
tragic incident is recorded with all its details.

All the histories prove the co-operation of Abu Hurayrah and Busr bin
Artat. Finally after committing such atrocities, Busr appointed Abu
Hurayrah over the affairs of Madinah and himself set off to Yemen or
Makkah! It should be known that Abu Hurayrah, who was once a companion
of the holy Prophet (s.a.) had reached a stage when he became a stooge
of Mu'awiyah and Busr bin Artat, and actively participated in
terrorizing the people of Madinah. While the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has
said that "One who terrorizes the people of Madinah will be terrorized
by Allah and Allah will curse him and will not accept any of his
deeds."

Now I would like to state that since Abu Hurayrah helped and supported
Busr in oppressing and terrorizing the people of Madinah, he (Abu
Hurayrah) did not remain just (Adil) anymore. Therefore traditions
related by him are not reliable and correct. Secondly, Abu Hurayrah
said: "Although prayers behind Ali are best, the dining table of
Mu'awiyah is the richest." Abu Hurayrah himself confessed that truth was
with Hazrat Ali (a.s.) and Mu'awiyah was evil personified and his food
illegitimate. Yet, he followed the path of falsehood, which is against
the requirement of justice.

Yes! The aim of this discussion is that just being a companion does not
qualify one for reliability and authenticity. Rather, there were some
people who in spite of their being with companions had committed such
deeds that were absolutely opposed to justice and truth. We had
mentioned that the foremost among the traditional proofs is the Holy
Quran, followed by the traditions of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.). The verses
of the Holy Quran prove the superiority of Hazrat Ali (a.s.). Here we
present two examples:

First Verse

"Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House and to purify you a (thorough) purifying." (Surah Ahzaab:
33)

The Almighty Allah said the truth. The Muslim Ummah is unanimous that
the above verse was revealed to felicitate the five holy personages of
the cloak, foremost among them being Amirul Momineen (a.s.). Now we
shall examine how this verse imparts superiority to Hazrat Amirul
Momineen (a.s.). Infallibility is a virtue the like of which is not
found in the creatures. Infallibility of the angels is not of the same
rank because they were inculcated with it in consonance with their
creation. The infallibility of human beings belongs to the same type.
The verse clearly proves the infallibility of the people of the cloak,
and of course, Ali (a.s.) being amongst them. For, this verse has
removed all the uncleanness and sins from the people of the cloak, not
that after having committed wrongs they were purified from dirt.
Actually, they had not any basis of committing wrongs. Apart from these
personages none of the creatures are bestowed with such a quality and
neither shall anyone obtain it in future.

Please pay attention! Is there anyone among the people apart from the
people of the cloak, who could claim this merit? If anyone does so he
would be obliged to present the arguments to prove his claim.

Proofs, as mentioned above are of two types: Rational as well as
traditional. We have established by rational proofs that Amirul Momineen
Ali (a.s.) was the most superior among the Muslim people. Reason agrees
to this without any hesitation. We have also proved by traditional
proofs that after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the best of the people
and the possessors of immaculate purity were the Ahle Bait (a.s.),
comprising Ali (a.s.), Fatema (s.a.), Hasan and Husain (a.s.).

Second verse

"Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives." (Surah Shura 42:23) Muslim scholars are unanimous that the
Almighty Allah commands the Prophet (s.a.) in this verse, "Say: I do not
want any recompense for the service of prophethood except the love of my
near kin that is the most important duty of every Muslim."

There is also agreement that the near kin of Allah's prophet (s.a.) are
only Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain (a.s.). Now persons whose love and
affection is an obligatory religious duty must necessarily be the best
and superior of all the people. Also because love of anyone is not
obligatory on Ali (a.s.), rather his love and affection is wajib for all
Muslim people in the light of this verse. This proves that Ali (a.s.)
was the most superior to all the people. In the Holy Quran, there are
several clear verses that amply prove Ali (a.s.) was the best of the
Muslim nation but here we do not feel the necessity of quoting more of
such examples. We are content to mention only these two verses, as they
are sufficient to prove our point.

Let us consider the traditions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that
announce the superiority of Ali (a.s.) over all the people. All the
traditions that prove this will not be discussed because to bring all
such traditions would require volumes. We shall be content to quote only
some of these traditions.

However, the traditions that are quoted below are those traditions that
are reliable and acceptable to all the Muslims. They are not even in
need of any exposition or interpretation. Shia and Sunni scholars and
other Islamic sects also agree to their correctness and have faith in
them.

Hadith-e-Thaqlain: Tradition of Two Weighty Things Several companions
have narrated and especially the six authentic books of traditions
(Sihah-e-Sittah) including Bukhari and Muslim, Ahmad bin Hanbal and
Malik Ibne Anas have recorded this tradition and certified the
authenticity of this hadith. Here we mention the text of this hadith
omitting the chain of narrators.

The holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said:

"Certainly I leave among you two heavy things. If you attach yourself
to them, you will not go astray after me. One of them is greater than
the other. (One is) the book of Allah, (which is) a firm rope from the
heaven to the earth, and (secondly) my progeny, my Ahle Bait. They shall
not separate with each other until they reach me at the pool. Then be
careful how you deal with them."

The Muslim Ummah is unanimous that this hadith applies to the progeny
of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) who were bestowed with this trust. They denote
only Ali (a.s.), Fatima (s.a.) and Hasan and Husain (a.s.). The
narrator, Ibne Habban says: I went with Masruf and asked Zaid Ibne Arqam
regarding this and he said that they had asked the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) if
his pure wives were also included in the progeny? To this the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) replied, "No! They are not included in it. Don't you
see that the divorced woman is included in the progeny of her father?"

Now what is the effect of these traditions on the proofs of the
superiority of Ali (a.s.)? Yes! It is clear that a sane person when he
goes out on a journey etc. makes bequest regarding his important
affairs. Therefore the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), prior to his departure
from this world entrusted two important things to his Ummah - his
progeny and the book of Allah. Now let us consider whether this was
ordered by the Almighty or was it a personal decision of the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Verily, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) did not
say anything of his own accord (including this announcement). He was
only echoing the command of the Almighty. Did the Almighty and the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) bequeath great and honorable things or were they
petty and unimportant? Indeed the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) did not make a
bequest regarding unimportant things. In this case, there are only two
things: The words of Allah and the progeny of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.). And after the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), these two things are most
superior and respected over all things.

The tradition clearly indicates that these two trusts will not separate
from each other till Qiyamat. That is, wherever there is the word of
Allah, love and affection of Ahle Bait (a.s.) should also be there. And
wherever there is no love and affection for Ahle Bait (a.s.), there is
no respect for the words of Allah (Quran).

For example: When Mu'awiyah rebelled against Ali (a.s.) and committed
transgression, he gathered all the rebellious people like him and raised
a standard of revolt perpetrating heinous crimes. In the battle of
Siffeen, when they were about to be defeated, they raised the pages of
Holy Quran aloft the spears and announced to the army of Amirul Momineen
(a.s.), "We invite you for an arbitration by the Quran." Those wretched
people had forgotten that it was impossible to benefit from the Quran
while rejecting the progeny (Itrah) of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.). How could it to be when the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has said:
"The two will not separate from each other till they meet me on the day
of Qiyamat." But at Siffeen, they drew the swords against Ali, Hasan and
Husain (a.s.) while feigning reverence to the Quran!

The most surprising thing was that some scholars have tried to justify
the gross misdeeds and usurpation of Mu'awiyah and veiled the crimes and
irreligious acts of this renegade! Mu'awiyah committed all such
indecencies only to obtain worldly riches but the Mullahs have denied
the clear truth. Now what can be said of such an attitude?

Hadith-e-Ghadeer: Tradition of Ghadeer-e-Khumm

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said,

"Of whomsoever I am the Master; this Ali is his Master too. O Allah!
Love those who love him and be an enemy to those who are inimical to
him." There is unanimity of the whole community of the Shia and Sunni
scholars over the authenticity and correctness of this tradition. When
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) reached a place called Ghadeer Khum on
his return from the farewell Hajj (Hajjatul Widaa), he ordered the
caravan to be halted and commanded that a pulpit be made from camel
saddles. This was because he wanted to make an important announcement
and a mammoth crowd awaited some important proclamation. As soon as the
pulpit was ready, the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) ascended and announced the
above tradition verbatim. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) proclaimed, "Of
whomsoever I am the Master, this Ali is his Master too. O Allah! Love
those who love him and be an enemy to those who are inimical to him."

The following great companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) heard this
hadith from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and confessed to it:
Khuzaima bin Thabit, Sahl bin Sa'ad, Adi bin Hatim, Uqbah Amir, Abu
Ayyub Ansari, Abul Haitham bin Tayhan, Abdullah bin Thabit, Abu Ya'la
Ansari, Noman bin Ajlam al-Ansari, Thabit bin Wadiya Ansari, Abu
Faddalal Ansari, Abdul Rahman bin Abde Rab, Junaida bin Junda, Zaid bin
Arqam, Zaid bin Sharahil and others, Jabir bin Abdullah, Abdullah bin
Abbas, Abu Saeed Khudri, Abuzar, Jubair bin Matam, Huzaifa bin Yaman,
Huzaifa bin Aseed and Salman al-Farsi.

This tradition is reported by these great companions and recorded in
books like Tarikh of Ibne Athir page 307 and Usudul Ghaabah, volume
three. Also on page 321 of the same book volume three, page 308 of
volume one, page 283 of volume eight, page 274 volume three. Also refer
to Seerah-e-Halabi, volume three, page 40, Yanaabiul Mawaddah, Sawaaequl
Muhreqah. And this hadith has been recorded in all the Sihah and
accepted by their writers to be reliable. Specially Sahih Muslim,
Nisaai, Tirmidhi, Ibne Maajah, Ahmad bin Hanbal and others.

Let us now pay some attention to the explanation of this hadith: Did
the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) announce that of his own accord or was it
commanded by Allah? Indeed, the Messenger of Allah never said anything
of his own will, but that it was expressly commanded by Allah. Thus the
above command was as per the order of Allah. Now was this announcement
based on wisdom? Indeed all the divine commands are based on wisdom.
Thus this was also a wise and important command.

However it would not be correct if it is to be limited to the love and
affection to Ali (a.s.) because the verse of Mawaddah clearly orders the
love for all the members of Ahle Bait (a.s.). There are also numerous
prophetic traditions that support the verse of Mawaddat and openly
announce the necessity of loving the Ahle Bait (a.s.). This particular
hadith is an express command to the people. Yes! From the context and
matter of the hadith, it is known that in every matter whatsoever, the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) is a master; Ali (a.s.) is the master too.
For, at the outset of his speech, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had posed the
question,

"Do I not have more rights over you (the believers) than you have over
yourselves?"

And at the end of the hadith, he (s.a.w.a.) said, "One who considers me
as his master, Ali is his master too." Thus, it is clear that the aim of
holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in this hadith was to announce the Wilayat
(mastership) of Ali (a.s.) for all the people who considered the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) to be their master (wali). We shall again refer to this
hadith under the discussion of Caliphate.

Tradition of Position

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said:

"O Ali! You hold the same position with me as Haroon had with Moosa,
except that there is no prophet after me." This hadith is also famous
among the writings of Muslim scholars. Most of the narrators have
recorded this tradition without any hesitation or doubt. The
authenticity of this tradition is underlined by its mention in books
like Sahih Bukhari, Sahih Muslim, Tirmidhi, Hakim, Nisai, Ibne Maajah
particularly, and other writings of the Shia and Sunni jurists. The
tradition says, "O Ali! You are in relation to me in the same way as
Haroon was to Moosa. Whatever position Haroon was having with Moosa, you
have the same high position near me."

Undoubtedly, the proof of the superiority of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) is
clear by this hadith. For, just as in the case of Haroon, no one was his
equal in relation to Moosa (a.s.), similarly, no one was equal to Ali
(a.s.) as far as his relationship with the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was
concerned. Therefore it is not surprising that the Prophet (s.a.) had so
much regard and attachment for Ali (a.s.).


