Hadith-e-tayr: the Tradition of the Bird
========================================

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said,

"O Allah! Send me the one who loves You and loves me most from Your
creatures so that he may share with me this (roasted) bird." Then Ali
(a.s.) came and shared the meal with him.

This hadith is recorded in all the Sihah. The majority of Muslims have
accepted this hadith to be reliable. The full hadith is as follows: One
day a lady brought a roasted bird for the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.).
Before he could partake it, the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) prayed to the
Almighty: "O Allah! Send to me one who is most loved by You and who
loves me and You the most. So that he may accompany me in relishing this
roasted bird." In the due course, Ali (a.s.) came and shared the meal
(with the Prophet).

No Shia and Sunni scholar has omitted this hadith in his writings.
There is no doubt in the proof of the superiority of this hadith. For
the sake of clarity let us observe some important conclusion derived
from this: Did the Almighty answer the Prophet's prayer or did He reject
it? Indeed the Almighty Allah always fulfilled the wishes and prayers of
the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). In this case the Almighty sent the favorite
of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and Himself to share the roasted bird. This
person was none but Hazrat Ali ibne abi Talib (a.s.).

Nevertheless some skeptics ask, 'Is it necessary that the most beloved
of Allah and Prophet (s.a.w.a.), has to be the most superior?' Indeed,
leaving the superior one to prefer the inferior is not expected from
common people, so how could it be possible by Allah and the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.)? If one is the most beloved of the Almighty and the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), it is necessary that he be the best of all the people. In
this way Ali (a.s.) was the best of the creatures.

**Hadith-e-Muwakhaat: Tradition of Brotherhood**

This tradition has been recorded by Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal from Zaid bin
Awfa, the writer of Mishkat from Ibne Umar, by Tirmidhi from Ibn Abi
Awfa, Abdullah bin Ahmad Hanbal from Saeed bin Jubair, Ahmad from Abu
Huzaifah Yamani, Nawfal from Jabir bin Abdullah, Hamveeni from Ibne
Abbas, Akrama from Ibne Abbas and Zaid bin Arqam, Saeed bin Musayyib and
Abi Umamah from Jumee bin Umayr. All the Shia and Sunni scholars have
accepted the hadith of brotherhood. The writer of Mishkatul Anwaar and
others, like the great Shaykh Muhiyuddin Arabi has certified it in his
book Musamera. So much so that there hasn't been a single person to cast
aspersions on this matter. The meaning of the hadith is as follows: At
the time the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had established ties of brotherhood
between the companions, Ali (a.s.) was seated near him. Ali (a.s.) said:
O Messenger of Allah! You have made all the people brother of one or the
other but you have not specified any person for my brotherhood?" The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said:

"O Ali! You are my brother in this world and the hereafter." The
tradition is worded as follows: "O Ali! You are my brother in the world
and the hereafter. And you are my legatee and you are the one who would
fulfill my promise and the one who would repay my debts." Let us now
consider the effect of this hadith on the proof of the superiority of
Hazrat Ali (a.s.).

Did the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) announce this brotherhood from his own
side or was it a divine command? Obviously it was by Allah's command
because any announcement from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) is not
possible without Allah's permission."

"Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed." (Surah Najm: 3-4)

In the event of establishing brotherhood, does the person chosen for
the brotherhood of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has to be the most
superior of the Ummah or it could be some inferior one? Indeed anyone
chosen as the brother of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has to be the
best of the creatures because the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had announced
brotherhood among the companions, keeping in mind their compatibility
and matching status. In this way it was necessary that Ali (a.s.) had to
be the most superior of the Ummah.

Hadith Madinatul Ilm: Tradition of the City of Knowledge The Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said,

"I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its gate." None among the Ummah
has rejected this hadith because it is well known and reliable among all
Muslims and bears utmost importance in proving his superiority.

So, please note that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, "I am the
city of knowledge and Ali is its gate." What is the importance of this
prophetic saying? What was the aim of this lofty personality? Yes! It is
well known that whenever a person intends to enter a city, he has to
come through the door and any other alternative will be considered
illegal. Likewise, the followers of Islam are in need of the knowledge
and wisdom of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) for the good of their world
and the hereafter. And the key to this gate of mercy is Ali ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.). In this way, if anyone wishes to benefit from the
knowledge and wisdom of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), it is
necessary that he make Ali (a.s.) the channel, because to enter a great
town without going through the proper entrance is both difficult and
illogical. Similarly it is senseless to derive any gain from the
traditions of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) without the medium of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.). Yes! This is a general principle! Rationality and
traditions do not contradict each other in proving this principle.

Thus there remains no scope to deny that Muslims are in need of Ali's
knowledge and wisdom. Ali (a.s.) is the source of (explanation of) the
Shariah as well as Marefat (Divine Recognition). Hadith-e-Zarbat:
Tradition of the Sword-strike The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said:

"A sword strike of Ali (a.s.) on the battle of Khandaq (ditch) was
superior to the combined worship of men and jinns till the day of
Qiyamat." Thus it is clear that on the day of recompense, the reward of
the combined worship of all men and jinn will be one side and, leave
alone the total deeds, a single sword strike of Ali (a.s.) on Amr ibne
Abdawod will be more superior. If at all a little thought is given to
the correctness of this hadith, everything will be clear.

Let us try to understand this tradition. The day of Khandaq (ditch) is
referred in Quran as the day of the confederates (Ahzaab). All the
polytheistic tribes joined hands with the infidels of Quraysh to wage a
war against the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). The best warriors were gathered
for this purpose. The holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) found it difficult to
confront the great might and he ordered a ditch to be dug around
Madinah. Well-known warriors and fighters were present among the
infidels, the most famous being Amr ibne Abdawod.

Amr jumped into the ditch with his horse and challenged the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Ali ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) sought the permission of
the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) but he did not immediately permit; just for the
sake of testing his companions. Amr challenged again, tauntingly. The
companions remained silent! Once again Ali (a.s.) requested the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) to allow him to accept the challenge of Amr. The Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) again refused permission to check the reaction of other
companions. In the meantime, Amr began to recite the war poems (Rajaz)
in his own praise! After getting permission from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.), Ali (a.s.) wore the Prophet's turban, tied the Prophet's
sword to his waist and jumped in the battlefield in fury.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said, "Faith personified is facing
disbelief incarnate." Thus, faith and disbelief faced each other and the
Lion of God slew Amr. Faith triumphed over infidelity.

"A single sword strike of Ali (a.s.) on the day of ditch is superior to
the combined worship of Jinn and men till the day of Qiyamat." Yes! It
was possible that if Ali's sword hadn't been there, Amr ibn Abdawod
might have destroyed the foundation of nascent Islam. Of what use had
been the combined worship acts of men and jinn? Thus they are right who
give Ali (a.s.) the title, "The second founder of Islam."

But Alas! How sad! What happened in the Ummah was just the opposite.
And this controversial behavior resulted in great calamities.
Astonishing! Why did such a tragic situation develop? Apart from the
traditions quoted, there are thousands of authentic traditions that are
accepted by all Muslims and considered reliable by them. We do not see
any need to quote all such ahadith, reports and verses. Rather the
superiority of Ali (a.s.) is proved for all the Ummah. If at all we try
to present all the traditions and Quranic verses in favor of the
superiority of Ali (a.s.), even a book equal to the size of Qamoos
Al-Lughat or Qamoos al-A'laam will not suffice. Rather a book of the
size of Qamoos al-Uloom or a multi-volume book like Dairatul Ma'rif
would be required. The apt name of such a book would be Al-Behrul
Zakhair fi Khizril Jawahir. But the matter that we are discussing and
one which we consider important is as follows: Ahmad bin Abde Rabb, a
well-known and established scholar of Ahle-Sunnat, in the third volume
of his book, Iqdul Farid, under the heading of "Discussion of Mamoon
with the scholars of Baghdad regarding the superiority of Ali ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.)," mentions as to how Mamoon, the Abbasid caliph, debated
with the scholars of Baghdad regarding the superiority of Ali (a.s.).

Ibne Abde Rabb has recorded the complete debate in his book and this
humble writer presents the gist of the same. Ibne Abde Rabb relates that
Ishaq bin Ibrahim bin Ismail bin Hammad bin Zaid, who was among the
well-known scholars and jurists of Baghdad, said, "One day Yahya bin
Aksam, a judge of Haroon Rashid's time, came to my house and said, 'The
caliph has ordered that forty scholars of Baghdad be selected for a
debate and discussion on religious problems and Shariat. So could you
suggest some names that I can note down?" Ismail bin Hamad says that I
mentioned some names but Yahya only jotted down the scholars regarding
whose caliber he was certain. At last forty names were listed. Yahya
took their word to report at his house early the next morning. They
arrived at Yahya's place and recited their morning prayers there. In
reply to our question Yahya said, "The caliph has invited you forty
gentlemen to discuss and debate an important matter." In due course we
departed to the Caliph's palace and entered his presence and seated
ourselves by his permission. Mamoon was dressed in a resplendent garment
while the people wore black.

When we sat down, the caliph took off his turban and robe and ordered
us to do the same so that we are comfortable. He ordered many kinds of
luxuries to make us feel at ease. Thereafter, he asked us questions
regarding the rules of Shariah and we replied to the questions
accordingly. Finally, the caliph said, "The purpose of our calling you
all here was not this; we have invited you to prove an important matter
by discussion."

And he said, "I am Mamoon the Caliph, the follower of Islam and I
consider Hazrat Ali to be the most superior among all creatures and most
deserving of caliphate. I invite all of you to accept this belief and to
express your opinion here."

Ishaq bin Ibrahim says, "I said: Caliph! Please tell us why you
consider Ali (a.s.) most superior so that others may also know about
it." Acceding to the request, Mamoon said, "O Ishaq! What factors prove
superiority? In other words, what qualities are required to establish
the preeminence of a person over another?" "Good deeds are very much
necessary," replied Ishaq. "What was the best deed on the day the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) invited people to Islam?" the Caliph asked. Ishaq
said: "Sincerity in testimony is most superior for it had preference
over Islam."

"It is correct," said the Caliph, "Wasn't Ali bin Abi Talib the
foremost in accepting Islam?" Ishaq said, "Yes! But at that time he was
not mature (baligh). The first matured person to accept Islam was Abu
Bakr." Upon this, Mamoon said, "Did Ali accept Islam due to divine
inspiration (ilhaam) or on the Prophet's invitation?"

Ishaq says, 'I became immersed in deep thought.' Mamoon said, "O Ishaq.
You can't say that he accepted it by Ilham, because revelation had
descended only upon the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). You must say that
Ali (a.s.) entered the fold of Islam upon invitation of the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.)." The Caliph repeated, "Ishaq, did the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) not impose a duty on a young child who was not yet capable of
carrying it out?" Ishaq says: I again sunk into the ocean of thoughts
while the caliph said, "Allah has said: And I am not of the
Mutakallafeen. That is I do not impose duties on those who are incapable
of fulfilling them. So it is clear that Ali (a.s.) entered the fold of
Islam at an age when he was mature enough to bear responsibilities.
Ishaq said: The caliph repeated the question, "O Ishaq! Have your
scholars and jurists written and recorded traditions to prove the
superiority of anyone in the way they have written about Ali (a.s.)?"

Ishaq said, "Traditions indicating the superiority of Ali (a.s.) easily
outnumber others." Mamoon further said, "Are the traditions in support
of the superiority of Abu Bakr comparable to the reports indicating the
superiority of Ali (a.s.)?" Ishaq said, "No, they are not as much." The
caliph again asked, "Are all the traditions in praise of Abu Bakr, Umar
and Uthman put together equal to the merits of Ali (a.s.)?" "They are
not equal," they confessed. On this juncture the caliph asked, "Do you
read the Quran?"

"I do," said Ishaq. The caliph asked, "Have you not read Surah Hal Ataa
(also called as Surah Dahr)?" Ishaq said, "I began to recite the surah
till I reached, "And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and
the orphan and the captive." (Verse 8) The Caliph asked, "O, Ishaq,
regarding whom was this verse revealed?" Ishaq said, "For Ali ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.)." Mamoon said, "Do you know the hadith of those who were
given the glad tidings of Paradise?" "Yes, I know", he replied. Mamoon
said, "Wouldn't a person who doubts this hadith become a disbeliever?"
Ishaq said, "God forbid! He will not be a disbeliever because it is a
solitary report." He said, "O Ishaq! What would happen to a person who
doubts Surah Hal Ata?"

"He would become a disbeliever," Ishaq replied. Mamoon said, "Then how
do you give preference to solitary doubtful report in comparison to a
clear and manifest verse of the Holy Quran?" Ishaq says, 'I became
silent'. The caliph asked another question, "Are you familiar with the
Hadith-e-Tayr (Tradition of the roasted bird)?" He said, "Yes I know",
and recited the hadith. Caliph asked, "Is this hadith authentic?" "It is
authentic," they all replied in unison. He said, "O Ishaq, did the
Almighty accept the Prophet's prayer?" I said, "God forbid! He did not
reject it! He accepted it." Mamoon said, "In such an such event did the
Almighty answer the Prophet's prayers and sent His most beloved creature
to share the bird which was gifted to him? "Yes," replied Ishaq. Mamoon
said, "O Ishaq! Who was sent in response to the prayer of the Prophet
(s.a.w.s) to partake the roasted bird?" Ishaq said, "It was Ali (a.s.)."
Again Mamoon asked, "O Ishaq! Did the Almighty and the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) know who the most superior person of the Ummah was?" "Yes,
they were aware of it," replied Ishaq.

Mamoon asked, "In the event of the Almighty and the Prophet knowing the
most superior person of Ummah would they give him preference or not?"
Ishaq said, "They preferred the most superior one." Mamoon said, "In
this way Ali (a.s.) was the most superior of all creatures."

Ishaq said, "But Abu Bakr also possessed merits. Mamoon said, "He had
but here we intend to prove the most superior one! Nevertheless, tell me
what merit of Abu Bakr you intended?" Ishaq said, "The fortieth verse of
Surah Taubah says:

He being the second of the two, when they were both in the cave, when
he said to his companion: Grieve not, surely Allah is with us. (Surah
Taubah: 40) The caliph said, "Companionship does not prove superiority,
because it is possible that the two people have contrary beliefs. Have
you not seen the verse? "His companion said to him while disputing with
him." (Surah Kahf: 37) Ishaq said: This verse is important because it
says, "Do not grieve, indeed Allah is with us." The caliph said, "O
Ishaq! I thought you preferred truth and were free of all bias. But now
that you have come to rebellion and bias, tell me if the grief of Abu
Bakr was from Allah or from his own side? In case you say it was from
Allah, why did the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) told him to desist from
it? If you say it was of his own what was his merit?"

Ishaq said, "The verse, "Then Allah sent down peace" is revealed in the
Quran." The Caliph asked, "On who did the Almighty send peace, the
Prophet (s.a.) or Abu Bakr?" Ishaq said: I said, "Peace descended on the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)." Mamoon said, "In the 26th verse of Surah
Tauba the Almighty says: Allah sent down His tranquility upon His
Apostle and upon the believers. Do you know who were the recipients of
peace along with the Prophet (s.a.)?" Ishaq said, "O caliph! You tell
us." Mamoon said, "During the Battle of Hunain, all the companions were
routed due to their flight from the battlefield. Only seven persons from
Bani Hashim remained with the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Abbas bin Abdul
Muttalib was holding the rein holy Prophet's (s.a.w.a.) camel. And five
people surrounded the Prophet. Ali ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) was fighting
the infidels single handedly. If it is so, then peace descended only
upon the Messenger of Allah (s.a.) and on Ali ibn Ibne Talib (a.s.).

Ishaq said: "This has become clear to all of us and we accept your
argument." Mamoon again asked, "O Ishaq! After the sincere acceptance of
belief, the next great deed is Jihad. Do you know anyone equal to Ali
(a.s.) with regard to Jihad? Ishaq said, "I asked which battle you mean?
Let us consider Badr." Mamoon said, "How many infidels were killed at
Badr." "Sixty two," replied Ishaq.

The caliph asked, "Of these how many were slain at the hands of Ali
(a.s.)?" "Twenty of them were killed by Ali (a.s.) alone," replied
Ishaq, "And the rest were collectively killed by the companions." At
this juncture Mamoon asked, "Shall I give the example from the battle of
Hunain?" "Yes," replied Ishaq. The Caliph said, "The companions were
defeated in the battle of Hunain. Only seven people remained. It was
only Ali (a.s.) who faced the infidels. Where were the rest of the
companions?" Ishaq said, "At that time Abu Bakr was in conference with
the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)." Mamoon said, "Was the Prophet (s.a.) in
need of Abu Bakr's advice regarding that matter?" Ishaq said, "Whatever
the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) did was based on revelation and he was not
in need of anyone's advice." Now Mamoon said, "In case there was no
necessity of advice or interference of Abu Bakr and other companions,
what was the difference whether a person was a warrior or not?"

Ishaq said: I said, "Anyone who is present in a battle qualifies for
reward, whether he fights or not." Mamoon said, "Ishaq! Don't you see
that the Almighty says in Holy Quran: ".????ر?د َ???ِ????ا ?َ???
َ???ِ??????ا ُ?ا َ???َ? " Allah has made the strivers with their
property and their persons to excel the holders back a (high) degree..
(Surah Nisa: 95) Ishaq said, 'I could offer no reply'. But Mamoon
continued, "Are you familiar with Hadith-e-Mawaddah?" Ishaq said, "Yes,"
and related the text of the hadith exactly as it is. Mamoon said, "This
hadith clearly proves that while none has a right of Wilayat over Ali
(a.s.), the Wilayat of Ali (a.s.) will be obligatory forever upon all
the people including Abu Bakr and Umar. In this way how is it possible,
O Ishaq, what can make anyone excel Ali (a.s.)?" Ishaq said: Since I
could not reply to this objection I remained silent. Mamoon again said
by way of argument, "O Ishaq! Do you know about Hadith-e-Manzilah?"
"Yes," replied Ishaq.

Mamoon said, "Do you know that Haroon was the real and blood brother of
Hazrat Moosa (a.s.)?" "Yes, I know," replied Ishaq. Mamoon said, "And
you also know that brotherhood existed between Ali bin Abi Talib and the
holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)?" "Yes, I know," replied Ishaq. Mamoon said,
"What other position did Haroon have with Moosa?" Ishaq said, "The
position of legatee and vicegerency." Now Mamoon said, "The relation of
Ali (a.s.) with the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was not but of Vicegerency
and legatee."

Ishaq relates: We, the forty selected scholars of Baghdad had no way
but to agree to the absolute reality. We all accepted this inwardly and
outwardly. But Mamoon looked towards the sky and said, "O my God, be a
witness that I have proved the superiority and Wilayat (guardianship) of
Ali ibne Abi Talib and invited the people to the right path but only You
are the Guide."

The humble writer Qazi Bahjat says: The report of Allamah Ibne Abde
Rabb is famous among the jurists of Ahle Sunnat. It is mentioned in the
third volume of his book Iqdul Farid pg. 37 under the heading:
Discussion of Mamoon with the scholars of Baghdad.

But here it is necessary to clarify a few points. Firstly: Though
Mamoon proved the superiority of Ali (a.s.), at the same time, he
oppressed the eighth grandson of Ali (a.s.), Imam Reza (a.s.) to such an
extent that ultimately he caused the Muslim nation to mourn from the
great Imam (a.s.). Yes! How effective and lightning is the role of
history in depicting the evil deeds and crimes.

What Mamoon had said was correct: Allah is the only One to guide.
Secondly: According to the report of Ibne Abde Rabb, among the people
present in the assembly of Mamoon were forty accomplished scholars of
that time who witnessed the debate and discussion. Now we have a
question: In such clear matters, which are easily comprehended even by
the masses, how is it that the learned scholars of the centre of
learning (Baghdad) were in need of the debate of Mamoon to understand
it? Actually, if there is an important problem, it is the duty of the
religious scholars to solve it for the public. It was not the duty of
Mamoon because after all the scholars were the religious judges, and not
Mamoon, who was a military and dynastic ruler.

Pity! Indeed, a great pity! In order to conceal the obvious realities,
elaborate mazes have been constructed for the succeeding generations so
that even now people are confused and can't reach the truth. Yes! Many
accomplished scholars who were in cahoots with the ruler and caliphs of
their time in order to fulfill their desires issued numerous religious
decrees. In this the helpless ummah was continuously subjected to eat
the poisonous fruits of the evil trees.

Thirdly: The well-known book Aqaid Nasafi, after the mention of Caliphs
in a serial order says: "The superiority of Ali (a.s.) was according to
the order of the Caliphate." That is, the first Caliph was superior to
the second the second to the third and the third superior to the fourth.
According to Nasafi, the status and position in the eyes of Allah is
according to the choice of the people and according to the order of
Caliphate! Please note how illogical this statement is! It is nothing
but a rigid dogma thrust upon us. If it were true, the first caliph
would have been superior to the second one, and the second superior to
the third and third superior to Amirul Momineen Ali ibne Abi Talib
(a.s.)! This view is absolutely absurd and false!

This book, Aqaid Nasafi is the work of Allamah Nasafi a well-known
Sunni scholar. This humble writer was also a Sunni and had been a
religious judge of the Hanafi School of jurisprudence. He had studied
the book of Nasafi in detail many times and also regularly taught it to
students. In spite of this he refutes the views expressed therein and
hopes that the readers must not object to his opinion at first glance
and must not say that he is against the opinion of past senior scholars.
For, the sayings of senior scholars are not the ultimate proof for us
except if they are proved with or supported by authentic arguments and
reliable documentation.

Now this servant will disprove the statement that superiority is based
on the order of Caliphate. It is a statement without any proof and
foundation. Yes, Nasafi says, "Superiority is based on the order of
succession." Meaning that the merit and status of the caliphs was based
on the order in which they were made caliphs!

But yours truly demands proof for this statement. Blind following is
vulgar, and dogmatism an ignorant act! In order to prove any article of
Islamic act, it is necessary to support it with a concrete proof because
to prove a command without argument is first of all a useless pursuit.
Secondly it is preference without reason, and in this there are two
problems.

In order to establish a decree, two kinds of proofs may be given:
Rational and traditional. But a rational proof is not independent of a
traditional evidence, whereas the latter alone can establish an Islamic
law. We have thus proved through arguments based on reason that Ali
(a.s.) was the superior most person. Readers are requested to refer to
the preceding discussion. Secondly there are the traditional proofs
about which the Muslim nation has no doubt whatsoever and they are
accepted by all without exception: The first of these are the verses of
Holy Quran and secondly the prophetic traditions. Other sources of
Islamic laws like Qiyas, Ijtehad and Ijma are beyond the scope of our
discussion. The verses of holy Quran say:

Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives. …to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of the
House! And to purify you a (thorough) purifying. In this book we were
content to quote only two verses of the Holy Quran, one of which has
made it compulsory for the Muslims to love Ali (a.s.), his pure spouse
Fatima Zahra (s.a.) and their two sons (a.s.). It is not possible to
imagine anyone else possessing such a merit. The second verse has
certified the purity and infallibility of the 'Ahle Kisa' (people of the
cloak). They were five in all, Ali (a.s.) being one of them; that is, he
was next to the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Whatever merits were present in
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), the same should be expected to be
present in Ali (a.s.). Such as the virtues of infallibility and
inerrancy were parts of the personality of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).
It is such a merit that nothing greater is possible in human beings.

Now let us consider the traditions of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.):
Indeed one kind of the traditional proofs is the traditions of the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.). We have mentioned the traditions that prove the
superiority of Ali (a.s.) and are accepted by the Muslims. All the
scholars have accepted their authenticity. But since it is not possible
to quote all such traditions, we are content to quote only a few of
them; mainly those recorded in the books of Sahih Muslim and Sahih
Bukhari. These traditions conclusively prove that Ali (a.s.) was the
most superior personality of the Ummah. Also from the aspect of the art
of argumentation, it is confirmed that a proof is not higher to the
thing that it proves.

Apart from this we have delved further into our study and quoted the
discussion of Mamoon with the scholars of Baghdad. In this discussion,
Mamoon succeeded in proving the superiority of Ali (a.s.) to the
scholars present in the assembly. It was age of religious Scholars and
jurists of the Ahle Sunnat. Especially the period of Scholars like Abu
Yusuf Muhammad bin Hasan Shaibani, Rafar, Shafei, Ahmad bin Hanbal etc,
who were the religious judges of their time and jurisprudence was
developed by them.

Here, we would like to pose a query to rational and judicious people:
On what proof has Allamah Nasafi based his assertion? Any claim without
proof is nothing but dogmatism. What merit was not present in Ali (a.s.)
that was found in some other person and that could make him superior to
Ali (a.s.)? There was no such merit and reason and tradition both
testify to it.

The statement of Allamah Nasafi that superiority of the Caliphs is in
the order of succession is a claim without proof and a dictum without
evidence. Let us consider this in detail: Yes! We see that so and so is
a learned person and such and such is Caliph while another one is a
King. As these qualities are obvious and can been seen and heard, you
decide and pass a judgment on them. But to say that a certain person is
superior to another is a difficult claim because if superiority denotes
nearness to Allah and the reward of the hereafter, then only Allah is
aware of such a person. We human beings are not at all qualified to make
such announcements (as it is beyond the scope of our limited knowledge).
However if Allah and His Prophet (s.a.w.a.) have issued such statements
in favor of a certain person, we have to believe in it. For in this
case, it is the knowledge and assertion of Allah, and we are only acting
upon it.

If in case superiority implies the fulfillment of some deeds like
sincere testimony to the oneness of God, fighting jihad for the sake of
Allah and possessing extensive knowledge, piety and nearness to the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.), then from all these aspects, we have proved that Ali
(a.s.) was way ahead of the people of this Ummah. His good deeds were
much higher than those of other Muslims. Traditions that are accepted
and considered reliable by all scholars are presented by us for the
readers. The holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said, "A single sword strike of Ali
on the day of the ditch was superior to the combined worship acts of men
and jinn till the day of Qiyamat." We have quoted this hadith previously
to prove our point but here we consider it a necessary duty to mention
again.

Just as the Ahle Sunnat scholars read this treatise, they will raise
objections and cry foul, "Fie on him! He has opposed the early scholars
and refuted the Book of Aqaid (beliefs), falsified the statements of
scholars and Mujtahids! O people, you can see that this person has
become a 'Rafidi'. He has denied the virtues and status of the Caliphs
and not accepted their superiority." Such allegations will be piled on
me and accusations like, 'O people do not believe a word of what he says
because whatever the early scholars have stated must be accepted without
reservation', will fly fast and hard. It is obligatory on us to follow
the early scholars in toto. What they did not say, does not qualify to
be accepted by you because the door of Ijtehad is closed! And so on and
so forth." All the objections mentioned above shall be replied as
follows:

Firstly: At the outset, I plead to all the Muslim brothers to forgo
blind imitation and bias, and strive to analyze and research in a
judicious manner. Secondly: If they say, 'This person has opposed and
objected to the early scholars.' We reply, 'Statements of faith and
belief are brought to us by the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and he brought
them to us from the Almighty. No one could refute them. But what we have
objected to is not received from the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), as proved
by us many times. On the basis of this we have not dared to disprove
them.

Thirdly: If they say: He had rejected and refuted the Book of Aqaid. In
reply I say: The actual Islamic beliefs have been explained and
expounded by the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and no one can deny and refute them
because they were brought to us from the Creator of the Universe.
However, whatever we have refuted was not brought by the Holy Prophet
(s.a.). So our rejection does not amount to the rejection of Islamic
beliefs.

Fourthly: If our objecting is deemed to be 'Rafd' (turning away)3, we
reply as follows: All those who were even slightly inclined to Ahle Bait
(a.s.) were given the tag of 'Rafidi' by the cahoots of Bani Abbas and
Bani Umayyah. This ignorant practice continues to this day. Such
allegations were also heaped upon Imam Shafei, the well-known Sunni
scholar. Even if it is proved correct, far from being a crime, 'Rafd'
should be considered a great virtue. The following report is quoted
regarding Shafei:

Sharif Noorudddin Ali Samhoodi in the book Jawahirul Aqdain writes: (I
have quoted the text of the report and later quoted exactly the couplets
of Imam Shafei). The great Khwaja Sulayman Qandoozi has recorded on page
45 of Yanabinul Mawaddah the same. Baihaqi has quoted from Rabee Ibne
Sulaiman that he said, "I said to Imam Shafei, 'Some people could not
stand to hear the praise of Ahle Bait (a.s.), and when they see one of
us mention their virtues they say, "He is a Raafedi". In reply Shafei
recited the following couplets: If in a gathering is a mention of Ali,
his sons and Fatima. Some people start talking about other characters
instead.

Be sure that what they say is rubbish. When Ali and his sons are
remembered, these people mutter far-fetched reports. And they say,
"Beware these were the traditions of Raafedis." I dissociate myself from
such people who consider the love of Fatimah 'Raafediyat.' Praise of my
Lord on the progeny of the Prophet. A derogatory term used for Shiism.
(Raafedi for Shias). And his curse be on such ignorance.

Hafiz Jamaluddin has recorded the following couplets from Imam Shafei:
They said have you become a Raafedi and I said 'No.' Rafd is neither my
religion nor my belief. But I am devoted to the best of guides. If love
of the legatee of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) is Rafd, Then I am the greatest
of Raafedi.

Similarly Imam Fakhruddin Razi related from Imam Muzni that Imam Shafei
composed the following couplets: Always conceal that secret in such a
way That you are not helpless in replying to the objections. And I hide
my love with the purity of my devotion, So that my belief and I are safe
from them. In the same way scholars like Baihaqi and Sahal bin Muhammad
and Abde Rabb have related from Sulayman bin Qutaybah many other poems
from Imam Shafei.

Yes! This allegation is only due to hatred and bigotry of ignorance.
Muslims who do not regard the Caliphs highly, are labeled as Raafedi and
blamed for following an innovation (bida't), while these people have
never denied the genuine virtues of the Caliphs. These people consider
every person on the basis of his true worth.

On the other hand we have Mu'awiyah, who initiated the cursing of Ali
(a.s.) from the pulpit of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.). This practice
continued for seventy years. He himself cursed Ali (a.s.) and ordered
all the people to do the same. He cursed the grandsons of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) at the very tomb of their grandfather and this was witnessed
by thousands of the companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), who saw and
heard it with their own eyes. Seeing this vile act, the mother of the
faithful, Umme Salama left the holy mausoleum in disgust! In spite of
this, Mu'awiyah is not labeled as a Raafedi. Far from it! Mu'awiyah is
bestowed the honorific of 'Amirul Momineen'! He is remembered with
respect and reverence! People used to pray behind him! While the books
of history are replete with the misdeeds of this villainous character so
that the coming generations could see what sort of a person he was.

Yes! To believe in the superiority of Ali (a.s.), which is proved
beyond doubt, is not Rafd. No one could allege that following the truly
superior personality is Rafd and innovation. But it's a pity that this
terrible bigotry is perpetrated in consonance with the wishes of people
like Mu'awiyah and Marwan.

Fourthly: If they say: He has not accepted the virtues and status of
the Caliphs. I would reply as follows: No one can deny the virtues and
merits certified by the Almighty and His Prophet (s.a.w.a.). But,
whatever has not been certified by Allah and His Prophet (s.a.w.a.) can
be rejected and such rejection will not tantamount to be a folly. To
consider a myth as reality is against justice. Fifthly: If they say: He
has not accepted the superiority of the Caliphs. I reply: We are not the
first to do so because the first one to deny this was the Caliph
himself. Thus, the Ahle Sunnat report that during the tenure of Abu Bakr
ibne Qahafa, a few days after assuming the post of Caliphate he
announced from the pulpit:

"Excuse me from the responsibility of Caliphate. I am not the best of
you while Ali is amongst you."

Similarly on the day of Ghadeer, when Umar ibne Khattab heard the
tradition of mastership he said, "Congratulations O, Ali! You have
become my master and the master of all believing men and women."

If we study the corpus of traditions, we shall find numerous such
narrations. However, we must read them with an unprejudiced and unbiased
mind. Sixthly: If they say: Whatever has been uttered by the early
scholars must be accepted by the successive generations in toto. We
reply: This is not correct because if it were necessary for the
successive generations to accept the statements of their predecessors
without any change, then why did Abu Yusuf, the student of Abu Hanifah,
when he succeeded his teacher, issued his own decrees rejecting almost
half the decrees of Abu Hanifah? Similarly, when Muhammad bin Hasan
Shaibani came a little after Abu Yusuf, he rejected most of the rulings
of the latter. In the same way Abu Abdillah Shafei, who came fifty years
after Abu Hanifah, refuted most of the laws of Abu Hanifah. For example,
some scholars who came after him subsequently rejected Qiyas, which was
considered valid by Abu Hanifah. For, these laws regarding whom no
traditional proof existed were promulgated on the basis of conjecture.
And to accept them on the basis of conjecture is the prerogative of
another Mujtahid.

Seventhly: They will say: The door of Ijtehad is now closed. In reply
we say: a) our intention is not to refute Ijtehad because it is against
the rules of debate. That is, only we will refute a statement, which is
not proved by concrete arguments. As we are not capable to fully do
justice to Ijtehad and taqlid by this method we refrain from this.

b) The statement that the doors of Ijtehad are closed is not based on
proof and argument. Let us study this matter in more detail:

i) Let us clarify that to study this problem in a way deserved by it is
beyond our capacity. Still we shall try to unravel the facts in the
following paragraphs: 1) It is clear that every law in Islam must be
supported with concrete evidence. And such a law cannot be denied by
anyone. 2) It is also confirmed that two types of proofs frame an
Islamic decree, reason and tradition. But a rational proof by itself
cannot prove a law. But here we will study this argument with some
reasoning experience: Was Ijtehad necessary during the early period of
Islam? If it was not necessary, then why did they make it compulsory? If
it was necessary, then why after the first three centuries it began to
be considered unnecessary or even impossible? How could the latter view
be substantiated by proofs? If they say: In the early period it was
necessary to formulate the laws of Shariat through Ijtehad, but after
that there was no need of it. In reply I say: The laws of Islam were
complete in the life of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) as evident from the
verse,

"This day I have perfected for your religion." (Surah Maidah: 3)

Then how is it that Ijtehad was required to frame the Islamic laws? Now
let us understand that Ijtehad was not needed to frame the Islamic laws.
It was required for another purpose. Consider this statement: Laws that
are derived on the basis of conjecture and Ijtehad are mutable with the
passage of time. Yes, if the passage of forty or fifty years can subject
to change a law derived by Ijtehad, why couldn't laws formulated a
thousand years ago remain unmodified? It is but a natural thing!
However, we do not see the need to prove everything by logical proofs
and it is not our duty to do.

Let us now consider the traditional proofs:

Before the discussion on the traditional proofs, we quote some lines
from the well-known book of Ahle Sunnat, Daairatul Ma'arif (Religious
Encyclopaedia) to show that 'the door of Ijtehad is closed' is a claim
unsubstantiated by proof. Muhammad Wajdi, who had penned the 22 volumes
of Daairatul Ma'arif writes in the third volume thus: "Ijtehad denotes
the system of deriving the laws of Shariat according to the needs of a
particular age. Therefore, it is necessary to have a Mujtahid in every
period of time. In the early period of Islam, the scholars practiced
Ijtehad from the first to the third century. They used to derive laws
for every new problem that arose. In this venture, they did not heed the
conflicting views of their contemporaries. Later, however there
descended upon the people of the Ummah sloth and carelessness in this
regard. They failed to derive the laws of Shariat. Thus in order to
conceal their defect, they invented the excuse of the closing of the
door of Ijtehad and expressed their inability to do anything about it.
Although according to verses of Quran and traditions of the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) the door of Ijtehad is open till the day of Qiyamat."

It is thus evident that the verses of holy Quran and sayings of the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) authenticate Ijtehad, and the Islamic scholars have
always acted upon it. This continued till the third century A.H. when
the jurists and scholars, who were the stooges of tyrant rulers, saw in
themselves no capability to derive the laws of Shariat and consequently,
declared that the door of Ijtehad had closed. These people never opposed
the Caliphs for fear of their life or a threat of monetary loss. But
when the successive generations arrived, they began to consider this as
a religious command and did not oppose it. Though, extensive authentic
traditions prove to the contrary (that is, the door of Ijtehad has not
closed).

The bida't (innovation) of declaring the closure of the door of Ijtehad
was initiated at the behest of Mutawakkil. At that time, the wretched
Ummah has just heaved a sigh of relief from the oppression of Bani
Umayyah when the yoke of the slavery of Bani Abbas was thrust upon its
neck. They also had to bear atrocities of Haroon, Mamoon and Mutawakkil.
When Bani Abbas saw that Bani Umayyah were about to be finished and this
would create a vacuum, wherein it was likely that people may incline
toward the progeny of Fatimah (a.s.), they decided to seal the tongues
of the truthful people by announcing that the door of Ijtehad has
closed.

In these circumstances, the Shia scholars remained aloof or practiced
dissimulation to save themselves from this calamity, while some bold
Ahle Sunnat Scholars were subjected to untold tribulations. For example
Malik Ibne Anas was instrumental in the expulsion of Muhammad Ibne
Ibrahim, a descendant of Hasan al-Muthanna who was arrested and tortured
on the orders of Caliph Mansur.

Abu Hanifah was arrested and imprisoned at Anbar. He was tortured to
the extent that he finally died at the hands of Rabee', the personal
bodyguard of Mansur. Ahmad Ibne Hanbal was also imprisoned and tortured
by Motasim ibne Haroon.

However, many of the Ahle Sunnat scholars preferred the patronage of
tyrant rulers and to please their whims, issued religions decrees and
continued to manage their affairs as they wished.

Most of the Ahle Sunnat scholars quoted these materialist scholars and
refrained from quoting the Imams and guides (a.s.) who were the true
successors of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Gradually this became an
established practice and a time came when the Ahle Sunnat evolved into a
distinct sect. Now the factors of bias on the basis of partisanship came
into play. This led to untold controversies and finally resulted in the
disunity of the Muslim Ummah. Thus causing all sorts of problems leading
to ultimate decadence and destruction. However, Taqaiyyah is one of the
established principles of faith. It not only protected the lives and
property of Muslims, but alone was instrumental in preserving the laws
of Shariah.

Thus we have proved by traditional arguments that the door of Ijtehad
is still open. In the same way we shall be content to quote the verse of
holy Quran that says: "Then ask the people of remembrance if you do not
know." The Muslims have been ordered to ask the 'People of remembrance'
if they are unable to understand the law of Shariat. And this is an
express command. It will remain in force for the benefit of Muslim
Community till the day of Qiyamat. How is it possible that during the
early period of Islam anyone who was ignorant of Shariat has recourse to
the religious scholars, whereas the same person is now prohibited from
referring to the jurists?

Can anyone explain to us why this prohibition came into being? In the
event of Ijtehad being proved as a necessity according to Quran and
hadith people followed it and knew it well. Then after the third century
A.H. what Quranic verse or hadith came to nullify this law? It was
nothing but the arrival of tyrant rulers at the helm of Islamic
affairs!

We said that in case a person is unaware of the law of Shariat it is
incumbent on him to refer to an accomplished scholar. A scholar who is
the most learned of his time and capable of issuing religious decrees.
But as we have said before, we are not capable of solving the problem of
Ijtehad. We only request the people of this Ummah to ponder upon it for
a moment without bias so that they benefit by it.

Those who wish to study this topic in detail may refer the books, 'Al
Aqdul Jayyed fi Ahkam al-Ijtehad wa Taqleed' written by Allamah Dehlavi;
this book has referred to the book Al Insaaf fil Ijtehad Wal Khilaf by
Allamah Shah Waliullah, the well-known Indian scholar. By referring to
these books we can form an opinion about this matter.

In the course of our discussion we have only relied upon the writings
of Ahle Sunnat scholars and have been content with it. Because our only
aim here was to prove that Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) was the most
superior person in the whole of Ummah. As per the rules of logical
argumentation and debate, we have proved our claim with the help of
authentic proofs and also fulfilled all the other necessary conditions.
Firstly by logical reasoning we proved our claim and then we also
presented traditional proofs that alone are considered sufficient to
prove an Islamic matter. And from the traditional proofs, we quoted only
the most important ones and which were considered authentic by all
religious scholars and well known to the majority of the people. We were
content to quote only two verses of Quran and a few traditions that all
Muslims are obliged to have faith in.

Though hundreds of traditions are present on this topic, we have been
content to quote only some of them and refrained from presenting others.
As the saying goes, "A clue is sufficient for the wise." After having
proved conclusively that Ali (a.s.) was the most superior personality of
the Ummah, next only to the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), we turn our
discussion to the matter of Caliphate. It is such a serious problem that
it has divided the Ummah and is the root cause of all the afflictions
and controversies. We shall, to the best of our ability, examine this
important matter in such a way that it can be understood by all.


