Terrible Consequences
=====================

As is evident from our discussion, the superiority and caliphate of Ali
bin Abi Talib (a.s.) was an established matter - but it's a pity that
this issue caused adverse consequences. Thus, when the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) expired, while Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) was busy with the
funeral arrangements, the event of Saqifah Bani Saaedah occurred and
Caliphate was transferred to Abu Bakr, even though all the companions
were aware of its adverse effects in the future. Thus Imam Muhammad
Bukhari in Sahih Bukhari describes the events surrounding the last
illness of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) in the following words:

Ibn Abbas said, "Thursday! What (a great calamity) took place on
Thursday!" Then he started weeping till his tears moistened the gravels
of the ground. Then he said, "On Thursday the illness of Allah's Apostle
was aggravated and he said, "Fetch me a pen and ink so that I may write
something for you, after whom you will never go astray." The people
(present there) differed in this matter and people should not differ
before a prophet. They said, "Allah's Apostle is seriously sick." The
Prophet said, "Let me alone, as the state in which I am now, is better
than what you are calling me for."

No one can deny the hadith quoted above. Many of the Sunni and Shia
scholars have recorded this tradition and also commented upon it. The
greatest commentator of Bukhari, Allamah Aini and the Commentator of
Mishkat and Mirqat, Allamah Ali al-Qari, has written exegesis of this
tradition. But they have not dared to comment upon its after effects and
instead blindly followed their predecessors.

However we shall examine it in brief:

This incident had such disastrous effects on the world of Islam that
even today the minds of Muslims are not free from its impact. For if the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had indeed written a bequest specifying his
chosen successor, the Muslim nation would not have been torn apart into
sects till the day of Qiyamat. They would have been safe from deviation.
But Umar did not allow the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) to fulfill his wishes and
said, "The intensity of fever have overcome the Prophet (s.a.) and Quran
is sufficient for us."

Here we pose a question to Umar al-Khattab, "When Abu Bakr was writing
the will to appoint you as the Caliph, why did you not say, 'Quran is
sufficient for us, there is no need to write anything else'? But you
dared to say this to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)?"

The answer to this is clear: Umar was silent because Abu Bakr was going
to appoint him the caliph whereas the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) would have
written the name of Ali (a.s.)! But the courage of a scholar cannot bear
such tragedies. Just as when Abu Bakr was appointed as the Caliph and
Ali (a.s.) was informed of this, he rushed to the Mosque to prove his
own claim for the successorship of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) - all the
companions expressed great regret and said, "O Abul Hasan! If at all we
had been aware of this we would never have paid allegiance to anyone
else."

Hazrat Ali (a.s.) said, "Is it proper that leaving the purified mortal
remains of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), I rush for Caliphate? I had not
imagined that even a single person of the Ummah considered us
undeserving for caliphate." After this incident, Abu Bakr was regretful
for having accepted the Caliphate, but his coterie ensured that he does
not forgo the Caliphate. Ali (a.s.) did not pay allegiance to Abu Bakr
and returned home. Bani Hashim also gathered in the house of Ali (a.s.).
Thereafter, Umar bin Khattab came with a group of people at the door of
Ali (a.s.) to demand allegiance for Abu Bakr. The partisans of Ali
(a.s.) rejected his demands. Due to this Umar collected firewood. Hazrat
Fatima Zahra (s.a.) asked, "O Umar! Would you burn down my house?"
Zubair, a partisan of Ali (a.s.), attacked Umar and his companions with
a sword. Umar ordered that Zubair be subdued. Salmah rushed to Zubair
and snatched the sword from his hand. They dragged Ali (a.s.) to the
mosque to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr.

Here we shall only mention the most authentic narration of the Ahle
Sunnat. If we intend to relate all the narrations, any conscientious
scholar would require volcanic courage to defend it.

**The Second Tumult**

In this way, Abu Bakr occupied the Caliphate seat and at the time of
his death appointed Umar bin Khattab for the caliphate. Indeed Abu Bakr
was indebted to Umar for his support and thus wanted him to ascend the
caliphate. This was a sort of understanding between these two caliphs.
Umar, who had not felt the necessity for the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) to
write a bequest, accepted the written will of Abu Bakr with all
readiness! Abu Bakr died and Umar became the Caliph.

Allamah Ibne Abde Rabb writes in the third volume of his book Iqdul
Farid that at the time of his death the first caliph said, "I have
committed some acts that I wish I had not done and I left out some
actions that I wish I had performed them.

First: I did not ask the one who was deserving of Caliphate and
appointed by the Prophet (s.a.w.a). If I had but asked him!

Second and third: I had defended so and so person. I wish I hadn't.

Fourth: I accepted the caliphate. I should have refused it!

Fifth: I wish I hadn't sent people to Fatima's house to forcibly secure
Ali's allegiance.

Sixth: I should have given Fadak to Fatimah and not confiscated it."
The writer of this book Qadi Bahjat says, 'We also wish that he hadn't
performed any of these acts. But the verdict regarding this matter is
clear. Perhaps the Ahle Sunnat scholars and jurists are astonished at
these statements! But instead of being astonished by such confessions,
they should refer to the following important books for details: Sahih
Bukhari, Ibne Khaldun, Iqdul Farid, Aghani, Daaeratul Ma'arif, etc. Yes!
The matter will be clear if these books are studied carefully. Sincere
research will lead us to the correct path. (Historical research will
find its own way).

The Third Turmoil: The Six-Member Consultative Committee (Shura)

At the time of his death, the Second Caliph left the matter of
Caliphate between six persons. Yes! This had to happen because whenever
anyone strays away from his natural path, then it is necessary that
their conditions will change for the worse and they will fall into
trouble. But with reference to this Shura, we shall present some
explanation and derive conclusions from it. We shall prove that this was
absolutely in contravention to Quran, hadith and Ijma. Please note! I
request you to ponder deeply on this matter: It is very clear that the
Second Caliph appointed such persons to the Shura to ensure that Hazrat
Ali (a.s.) does not attain caliphate. Because Abdur Rahman bin Auf, for
his worldly gains, despaired of Ali (a.s.) and sided with Uthman.

Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqaas was his cousin and held the same views. Since
Talha bin Abdullah was from the Bani Tamim, he did not vote for Ali
(a.s.). Finally Uthman considered himself the most deserving for the
post!

Thus, from the members of Shura, Ali (a.s.) only had the support of
Zubair. This situation has been elucidated by Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in
Nahjul Balaghah using metaphors and similes. But we have heard the
oft-mentioned traditions that the Second Caliph said, "If Ali hadn't
been there, Umar would have perished." Notwithstanding his confession at
Ghadeer Khum, "Without Ali, Umar did not take a decision.
Congratulations to Abul Hasan! You have become my master and the master
of all believing men and women."

Astounding! Though he confesses that if Ali (a.s.) had not been
present, he would have perished and in the absence of that lofty
personality, Umar never took a decision, and even after accepting the
fact that Ali (a.s.) was the master of all believers, Umar acted in a
manner opposed to it. What type of a contradictory behavior is it and
how terrible consequences emerged from it?

There are such shameful pages of history that I am unable to quote
them. Yes! The result of this contradictory action was that Abdul Rehman
in a gesture of flattery, appointed Uthman bin Affan to Caliphate!

Masoor bin Mukhrema, the nephew (sister's son) of Abdur Rahman,
reports, "This time we had not imagined that anyone except Ali bin Abi
Talib will be the Caliph. We were sure that the next day we will see Ali
at the seat of Caliphate. But my uncle Abdur Rahman went from door to
door and mobilized the support of people like Amr-e-Aas and Mughirah bin
Shu'bah. At dawn, we heard that Uthman and not Ali (a.s.) had attained
the Caliphate!"

Inter alia, we can comment on the statement of Ghazzali that he said:
Justifying the deeds of the companions is necessary. But I say,
"Justification or no justification -each character is recorded in
history and we can simply refer to it. I don't consider the beliefs of
Ghazzali to be an obstacle in the fulfillment of my duty to justify or
run down someone's deeds because history is itself the judge of the
time.

**On the Seat of Caliphate**

After innumerable seditions and tragedies and through immense
persuasion, Hazrat Amirul Momineen (a.s.), accepted the seat of
Caliphate. But when one considers the importance of the Caliphate and
Imamat of Ali (a.s.), he sees that all the opposing parties had come
together to support the Caliphate of Ali (a.s.). One of the points
derived from the above discussion is that the persons who were the
ardent supporters of Ali (a.s.) for Caliphate were Talha and Zubair.
They had supported him with the hope that they shall be rewarded with
the governorships of Kufa and Basra. But eventually, when their hopes
dwindled, on the pretext of visiting Makkah, they left Madinah and came
to Ayesha. Ayesha had also harbored animosity against Ali (a.s.), and
thus these two succeeded to win her support, which culminated in the
battle of Jamal that was the first armed conflict among the Muslims.

**Battle of Jamal**

Every action of a person is based on his inner feelings. But the most
influential emotion is jealousy, a trait more dominant among women.
Ayesha was Fatima Zahra's (s.a.) stepmother and indeed, Ayesha did
behave like one. On this juncture we shall quote some portions from the
books, Sahih Bukhari, Muslim and Tirmidhi. In Sahih Bukhari and Muslim:
'I have not been jealous of anyone like I was of Khadijah (a.s.)-
Ayesha' In Bukhari and Muslim:

'I had not been jealous of any of the wives of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
except Khadijah (a.s.). And I had not seen her. But the Prophet praised
her often and I used to say to him, "It seems there is no one except
Khadijah (a.s.) in the world."- Ayesha"

The Sihah-e-Sittah (six books of Ahle Sunnat) have revealed the
following from Urwah and Zubair, the nephew of Ayesha, who said, "I did
not envy any woman like I envied Khadijah (a.s.)." "I did not feel
jealous of any of the wives of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) as much as I did
of Khadijah (a.s.) though I did not see her. But the Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
used to mention her very often, and whenever he slaughtered a sheep, he
would distribute a part of it among the friends of Khadijah (a.s.). I
sometimes said to him, "(You treat Khadijah (a.s.) in such a way) as if
there is no woman on earth except her."

The meaning of the hadith is clear. Ayesha confesses that the jealousy
and hatred she harboured for Khadijah (a.s.)h was not for other wives of
the Prophet (s.a.w.a.). This was because the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) never left the house without the mention of Khadijah (a.s.)'s
praise. In retaliation, Ayesha told the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), "Khadijah
(a.s.) was an aged woman, while Allah has bestowed you with better women
in her stead." This infuriated the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and he
retorted, "Allah has not given me better wives in lieu of Khadijah
(a.s.)."

If I quote all the hadith quoted in Jamiul Fawaid from Bukhari and
Muslim and Al-Isabah from Imam Nisaai, the matter will be clear but we
will be straying from our aim. Thus, a clue is sufficient for the wise.
The above matter mentioned was an example of the fact that the emotion
of jealousy and avarice, which is generally prevalent among women, was
the cause of enmity between Ali (a.s.) and Ayesha. Thus, the first cause
to instigate Ayesha for this undesirable event was her nephew Zubair.
But the second cause was even more serious. Zubair nursed a great
ambition for rule; therefore he instigated Ayesha to serve him as his
tool to fulfill his ambition and to establish another caliphate instead
of the Caliphate of Ali (a.s.).

When Ayesha heard the barking of the dogs at Hawwab, she became
penitent and wanted to retract her steps but Zubair persuaded her to
remain with them. He even told her that he would commit suicide if she
returned. He also swore falsely that the name of that village was not
Hawwab! Abdullah Ibne Zubair was so dominated his own father to such an
extent that he even used to lead him in prayers.

Yes, Talha and Zubair with Ayesha raised a standard of revolt against
Ali (a.s.) at Basra. They were supported by Marwan and Utbah. The
advices of Ali (a.s.) to refrain from confrontation fell on deaf ears.
After the completion of proof, he became busy in fighting the enemies.
And those who had sown the seed of dissension began to reap the fruits
of defeat. Talha and Zubair were killed at the hands of the supporters
of Ali (a.s.). The lady (Ayesha) was sent back to her quarters with
great regret after she had blatantly acted against the Quranic command
(to the wives of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.)) "And stay in your houses.
(Surah Ahzaab)" The incident will be presented in brief. But I consider
it necessary to say that the scholars (of the Ahle Sunnat) remember the
instigators of battle of Jamal with reverence. It seems that not only
that they in their historical life have given birth of insult and
degradation, but they have even taught that in spite of these great
evils, they do not consider them responsible for the crimes perpetrated
by them. But we say that being in a group of companions neither washes
his crimes nor erases his sins from his account of deeds. Rather, since
the companions were so near to the light of prophethood, they are more
responsible for their crimes and sins. And in the beginning of this book
we have mentioned this with many examples.

It is very clear that as soon as Ayesha and Talha heard that people
have revolted against Uthman and wanted to slay him, they began to
instigate them more. When a group of people killed Uthman, Ayesha was in
Makkah. She rushed to Madinah in joy. The moment she heard the news of
the Caliphate of Ali (a.s.) she turned back to Makkah and gathered all
the characters who harboured enmity against the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
like Ya'la bin Munnabah, Abdullah bin Aamir, Sa'ad bin Aas, etc. And it
is again clear that whatever these people do will indeed be greater
crimes.

It is also obvious that if the battle of Jamal had not occurred, it was
very likely that even the battles of Naharwan and Siffeen would not have
taken place. Thus, opening the door of mischief, sowing the seeds of
dissension in the Ummah, instigating and initiating controversies,
fighting the Imam of the Muslims, creating disunity in the United Jamat
(group), killing thousands of people, sending them to the gallows, etc.,
are all evil acts, regardless of the subject who has committed them.
They deserve curse and criticism and are inscribed in the pages of
history as unpardonable sins and shall remain so till the day of
Judgment. They shall always be condemned and castigated. Objection: The
perpetrators of the battle of Jamal had repented and later, sought
divine forgiveness.

Reply: It is only Allah who can bestow forgiveness. But the matter of
forgiveness is related to the day of judgment. What we are concerned
with is the sedition and insurrection that has actually occurred and
clearly recorded in history.

Objection: The people who caused the battle of Jamal were great
companions, who waged wars alongside the Prophet (s.a.w.a.). They have
been remembered with praise and satisfaction in the Quran!

Reply: The perpetrator of the battle of Naharwan, Harqoos bin Zuhair
and his followers had some of the great companions, who were also
present at the oath of Ridwan. Then why have they qualified for curse
and criticism? But we shall gradually come to the conclusion that there
was no difference whatsoever, between the perpetrators of the battles of
Jamal, Naharwan and Siffeen. They all are equally accountable. Now let
us move to the sequel of Battle of Jamal that is Siffeen.

**The Battle of Siffeen**

We do not intend to relate all the activities of Hazrat Ali (a.s.) and
other circumstances of Siffeen. Our aim is to expose the level at which
the perpetrator of this rebellion stooped. He was nobody but the son of
Abu Sufyan. And the obstacles and the difficulties they created for the
rightful Ali (a.s.) shall be judged from this. Let us elaborate.

In Ihyaul Uloom, Ghazzali says, "There is no controversy regarding the
Imamat of Mu'awiyah and whatever he had done was on the basis of Ijtehad
(jurisprudence); and a Mujtahid (jurist) is correct in all events." What
a tragedy! Something that is obvious to a layman was beyond the
understanding of the great scholar like Ghazzali. Possibly, he feigned
ignorance deliberately. Did not Mu'awiyah covet for Imamat and
Caliphate? If not, what else was it that he desired? Though he had,
prior to this, desired the blood of Uthman! But he could not achieve it
because Uthman did not die heirless. It was necessary that they would
turn to the caliph of that time - Ali (a.s.) to enforce their claim of
Uthman's revenge. Not only this, Mu'awiyah and Amr Aas had deceived the
Ummah, revolted against the Muslim Caliph and slaughtered thousands of
Muslims and started many innovations.

Ghazzali says: All the actions of Mu'awiyah were based on Ijtehad. I
say that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said: "O Ammar! You shall be killed
by a rebellious group." Mu'awiyah was aware of this tradition. He gave a
bag of gold each to two evil Syrians and ordered them to slay Ammar and
get his head and was finally pleased with it!

Does Ghazzali consider this act a result of Ijtehad? What a travesty of
truth! Secondly, Ghazzali also knew very well that Mu'awiyah utilized
ill-gotten wealth to instigate and persuade the people to curse Ali
(a.s.). So much so, that he came to Madinah ascended the pulpit of the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and cursed Ali (a.s.) and his progeny! This fact has
been recorded by all historians. Was this also Ijtehad? Ghazzali says:
Criticism of the deeds of Sahaba (companions) is 'Rafd'! We say: Was Ali
bin Abi Talib (a.s.) not a companion that Mu'awiyah cursed and
imprecated him? Why does Ghazzali not label Mu'awiyah as Raafedi instead
of conferring the title of Mujtahid on him! Ghazzali has contravened his
own principle!

Thirdly: Before coming to Siffeen in order to just test the Syrians and
to find if they were obedient to Quran or himself, he performed an
extremely despicable act. He led the Friday prayers on a Wednesday! No
one objected to any of his acts. Therefore he trusted the people of
Syria to obey him unconditionally and found himself powerful enough to
confront the Imam of the age! Was this based on Ijtehad?

Fourthly: He signed a peace treaty with Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.).
The first condition of the peace treaty was to make him the heir
apparent. But with utmost barbarity, he had Imam Hasan (a.s.) poisoned
through the Imam's wife Juda binte Ashath bin Qays. The liver of the
beloved son of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was shred into pieces and he
attained martyrdom. Juda claimed her reward from Mu'awiyah but Yazid
refused to take her as his wife. When the crime is such that it makes
one a disbeliever, how is it possible to forgive this act or to justify
it by saying that it was based on Ijtehad? We say: If at all Ghazzali
has accepted the Caliphate and Imamate of Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), he
must agree that Mu'awiyah was obliged to pay allegiance to Ali (a.s.)
unconditionally. If not, Ghazzali should admit that Mu'awiyah was a
renegade and a rebel! Undoubtedly, to believe in the Caliphate of Ali
(a.s.) and to accept the evil deeds of Mu'awiyah at one and the same
time, is like gathering white and black at one place. It is impossible!
Such conjecture does not befit a person of Ghazzali's stature.

Now let us come to our conclusion:

Mu'awiyah, with the cooperation of Amr Aas's cunning, gathered the
people of Syria and arrived at a desert-spot named Siffeen to confront
Hazrat Amirul Momineen (a.s.). Ali (a.s.) tried his best to placate the
people and prevent the tragedy and to ward off the circumstances that
had divided the Muslims but to no avail.

The mischief of Mu'awiyah did not desire to dispel the corruption from
the Muslims. The battle of Siffeen continued for a hundred days. It is
well-known that the great companions of Ali (a.s.) like Owais Qarni and
Ammar Yasir attained martyrdom in this battle. Its evil effects were
also evident in the fact that gradually the chiefs of the army of Ali
(a.s.) like Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr and Malik al-Ashtar also laid their
lives. In spite of this, Mu'awiyah was on the verge of defeat when with
the help of the deceit of Amr Aas, he raised the bogey of arbitration.
Ali (a.s.) had to accept this against his wishes because he was aware of
the results. On one hand he had to face the deception of Amr Aas and on
the other, bear the weakness of his own men. This put him in a nigh
impossible situation. The sloth of his companions was worst than the
attack of the enemies.

Yes! The result of the arbitration was dreadful and Ali (a.s.) began to
prepare for another confrontation. Some people of Ali's (a.s.) side had
strayed away from truth and Shariat. The details of these are given in
my book "Yuzgoon"

**Battle of Siffeen**

The chief of the Kharijis was Harqoos bin Zuhair and they had gathered
at Naharwan. Despite fighting so many battles prior to this one, Ali
(a.s.) managed to mobilize his forces and routed the Kharijis. It's a
real pity that the refuge of Imamat and the strong pillar of the world
of Islam found obstacles at every step. And these steps would have
surely led to the prosperity of the Muslims in this world as well as the
hereafter. Unfortunately, it could not produce the results it should
have. This is the reason that its bitter effects remain till date. A
tragedy indeed!

Martyrdom and Destruction:

Efforts to destroy this rebellious group became the cause of Imam's
martyrdom and a tragedy and destruction for the Muslim Ummah. A woman
named Qatama, who lived in Kufa helped a Kharjiite, Abdur Rahman bin
Muljim, who attacked Ali (a.s.) with a poisoned sword while he was
praying at the Kufa mosque. Ali (a.s.) succumbed to his injury after two
days and the Muslim nation was immersed in untold calamities. Although
we have already proved the superiority and caliphate of Ali (a.s.), here
we shall only mention two points:

After the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), Ali (a.s.) was the greatest leader
of the Muslims. At the time of his martyrdom he was 63 years old. During
the lifetime of Hazrat Fatima Zahra (s.a.), he did not have another
wife. Hasan, Husain, Mohsin (stillborn), Zainab and Umme Kulsoom were
born from her. After the demise of Hazrat Fatima (s.a.) Ali (a.s.)
married a few women. The first of them was Yamama, daughter of Zainab
bint Jahsh, daughter of Prophet (s.a.). Ali (a.s.) married her according
to the bequest of Fatima Zahra (s.a.). The second wife of Ali (a.s.) was
Asma binte Umais and third, Ummul Baneen the mother of Hazrat Abbas
(a.s.). The fourth one was a lady of Bani Hanifa who became the mother
of Muhammad Ibne Hanafiyya. Apart from the children of Fatima Zahra
(s.a.), Hazrat Abbas (a.s.) and Muhammad Ibne Hanafiyya became famous.
Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) was the father of Ummah because the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.a.) had said:

"O Ali I and you are the fathers of this Ummah."

Yes! Just as Ali (a.s.) is the father of the Ummah in the same way he
was the master of all rational and traditional sciences. Thus Ibne Abil
Hadeed says that if we see all the sciences and knowledge that are
extant in this blessed Ummah, we will realize that they have been shaped
and developed by Ali (a.s.). For example: The science of exegesis,
jurisprudence, principles of Islamic law, grammar, syntax, etymology,
poetry, algebra, geometry, etc. were available in the personality of Ali
(a.s.). Nahjul Balaghah is a prime witness to the eloquence of Ali
(a.s.) and the collection of his poetry indicates his excellence in
literature.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) possessed such knowledge that was not found in
anyone else - Ilme Jafr that was the sole prerogative of Ali (a.s.) and
his respected descendants (Imams). The books Durrul Maknoon by the doyen
of Sufis Shaykh Muhyuddin Arabi and Durrul Munazzam by Shaykh Kamaluddin
Shafei have mentioned that knowledge was specially reserved for the Aale
Muhammad and the heirs of Imamat till Hazrat Qaem (a.s.). It is not our
aim to discuss it over here. To obtain the treasure of sciences, it is
sufficient to say that Ali (a.s.) said:

"If I want, I can load 70 camels with the exegesis of Surah Fateha."
And also said: "Ask me! Before you lose me. " It is clear that if after
the passing away of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) if the political
conditions had favoured Ali (a.s.) and if there hadn't been such
terrible obstacles, the Muslim Ummah would have scaled heights of
righteousness and accomplishment.

Ali, the great, who had single-handedly slain half the enemies at Badr,
who alone did not flee in Uhud, on the day of ditch (Khandaq) who alone
released the Muslims from fear and dread of Amr ibne Abdawod, whose each
stroke was more valuable than the combined worship acts of men and jinn,
who uprooted the gate of the fort when there was a general feeling of
despair among Muslims at Khaiber, etc. The achievements of this noble
personality are so many that they cannot be enumerated. He bestowed
Islam with splendor and firmness. Is it proper that such a versatile
personality should be forced to sit in gloom and inactivity for a long
period of twenty-five years? How true was Ali's (a.s.) refrain,

"Every grudge that the Quraysh harboured against the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) was avenged from me and after me it will continue against my
progeny. What did I have against the Quraysh except that I killed them
on the command of Allah and His Messenger (s.a.w.a.)? Is it the reward
of obeying Allah and His Messenger (s.a.w.a.)?"

How nice it would be if people begin to think on these lines! Brief
Biographies of Janab Fatima Zahra (s.a.) and Her Eleven Descendants
(a.s.)

**FATIMA ZAHRA (s.a.)**

The holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) combated with the disbelievers of the Arabs
and polytheists of the tribe of Quraysh for 23 years and after
extraordinary difficulties and troubles had to migrate to Abyssinia.
Finally, at the end of all these calamities, which were beyond the
capacity of ordinary mortals, he had to bear separation from the near
and dear ones and to leave their place of residence. Gradually, the true
religion of Islam obtained influence and strength. The low Arabs became
wealthy, prosperous and honourable. The idol-worshippers and the slaves
of statues turned into the worshippers of ONLY ONE GOD, thanks to
Islam.

The holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had no attachment with anything. Only
Fatima Zahra (s.a.), the leader of all women, was extremely dear to him.
That is why it is essential that Fatima must be dearer than life for
every professing believer because the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has
said,

"Fatima is a part of me, whoever hurts her, hurts me."5 Once one of the
companions of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) asked Ayesha, 'Who, among all
the creatures, is the dearest to the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)'? She
replied, 'Fatima Zahra is the dearest for the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).'
The questioner inquired again, 'Who among men is dearest to the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.)? Ayesha responded, 'Ali (a.s.)'. There are so many
traditions and narrations praising and honoring Fatima Zahra (a.s.) that
if only one example from each one of them is included here, this volume
will not suffice. But, since it is our intention to explain and examine
the event of Fadak, we will express our view regarding this bitter and
retrograde happening.


