What Happened To Fadak?
=======================

"Fadak" was one of the properties, which belonged to the Jews who lived
around Madinah. After the conquest of Khaibar, as per the terms of
treaty, it went in the possession of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). As it
was not captured forcibly in a holy war, no one had any right or share
in it and thus it was an absolute property of the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.). All properties apart from Fadak were also similar.

There also were such other properties, which formerly belonged to "Bani
Quraizah" and were within Madinah. The holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) used to
spend the proceeds of these properties on both his holy wives and on his
poor and needy relatives, thus helping them. So he had, since long back,
gifted Fadak to his dearest daughter Fatima Zahra (s.a.). So it belonged
exclusively to her. Fatima (s.a.) too used to spend and donate the
profits of Fadak in the path of Allah. As soon as the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) passed away and when Fatima was still in a state of mourning,
she was informed that the officials of caliph Abu Bakr had cancelled
Fatima (a.s.)'s ownership of Fadak! Fatima (a.s.) was very much grieved
by this deed of greed. So she sent some one to the caliph to question
him about this cancellation of her right over Fadak. He replied, 'Fadak
is a part of Baitul Maal and hence Fatima has no right in it.'

Surely we are Allah's and to Him we shall surely return.6 Has such
irregularity ever taken place in the world? Before dealing with the
objection raised by Fatima (s.a.) we find it necessary to mention here
our impressions: Firstly: Had the caliph taken into consideration
benefits of both the worlds offered to him by the Prophet of God
(s.a.w.a.), he would have never indulged in such undue deeds.

Did the caliph not recollect that the locust-eating Arabs had become
the caliphs of the world? Did he not remember that when he and his like
were bowing before stones and worshipping idols, it was the father of
Fatima (s.a.) who pulled them out of humiliation and degradation and
guided them to grandeur, and brought them out from polytheism and made
them believers? Was it a reward of all this goodness that the dearest
daughter of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) should be grieved so much just
for the sake of a little piece of garden? And all this despite the right
of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had already been mentioned in the holy
Quran through the holy verse:

Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.7 And thus the friendship (affection) of the holy progeny has
been made obligatory for the entire community. Was it unbecoming on the
part of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) who had gifted so much to the caliph
to gift even a piece of garden to his beloved daughter?

Secondly: Fatima is one of the holy members of the honorable family
regarding whom the holy Quran says:

Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! And to purify you a (thorough) purifying8 indicating that
Allah the Almighty has made them pure from all uncleanness. Can such a
respectable Surah Baqarah 2:156 Surah Shura 42:23 8Surah Ahzab 33.33
personality ever make an unlawful or improper claim of ownership? No,
never. Each and every word and deed and movement and pause of Fatima
prove that it is true and that she is the righteous leader. Making a
false claim of Fadak is filth, which is impossibility in the case of
Fatima (s.a.).

Thirdly: Under what authority and proof can Fatima (s.a.) be prevented
from making her claim when she is an associate of Quran and a source of
reason? Fourthly: How can the claim of Fatima be baseless when the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) says, "Fatemah is a part of me"? Can Fatima who is a
part of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) ever make a false claim? No, never. (For
it will tantamount to accusing the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) of making a false
claim).

Fifthly: The holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said:

"I am at war with those who attack you."

This makes it clear that the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) too is an
associate in her claim. Yes, there is no doubt that the one who quarrels
with Fatima (a.s.) quarrels with the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), because
there is no disagreement about the validity and soundness of the
abovementioned hadith. Its goes as follows: One day the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) gathered Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain at one place and said:

"I am at war with the one who quarrels with you and I am at peace with
the one who is at peace with you." Sixthly: It is obvious that Fatima
(s.a.) who was denied her right had become sad, as is expected from any
human being. There is a hadith recorded in Sahih Bukhari from Ayesha
which runs as follows: Fatima went to my father Abu Bakr to inform him
about the usurpation of Fadak and said that her father, the Prophet of
God (s.a.w.a.), had gifted Fadak to her. Abu Bakr held back Fadak from
her. So Fatima returned disappointed and died while she was angry with
my father.

This hadith is found in all hadith books but I have quoted only
Bukhari. It shows that Fatima (s.a.) was unhappy with the caliph, while
the Prophet of God had said,

"Fatima is from me, whoever hurts her hurts me". This is an explicit
statement. No claim contrary to it is possible. Just as it is impossible
that denial of Fadak may not displease her, so it is impossible that the
displeasure of Fatima (s.a.) will not make the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
unhappy. Now we may revert to the argumentation of the original claim:
We quote below a narration made by Allamah Abu Abdillah Bukhari in the
part "Faraaiz-e-Sahih al- Bukhari", which says that Fatima (s.a.)
demanded, "O Abu Bakr! In case your father expires who is his heir?"

He replied, "I, his son, will be his heir."

Fatima asked, "Who is the heir of my late father?" Abu Bakr said, "You
who are his daughter." Fatima asked, "Then why do you take back Fadak
forcibly?" Abu Bakr replied that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said,
"We Prophets do not leave inheritance." Fatima shot back, "My father had
gifted me Fadak during his lifetime and currently it is in my use." Abu
Bakr argued, "You must produce witness."

Fatima brought Ali (a.s.) and Umme Aiman as witness. The caliph did not
accept. Fatima returned disheartened and disappointed. Here let us
examine some aspects of this claim: First: The tradition on which the
caliph based his decision is a one-person narration, and a one-man
narration cannot be relied upon against a clear Quranic commandment.

Second: Even if a narration is true, it does not pertain to the
inheritance of wealth. Rather, it indicates the inheritance of
Prophethood or messenger ship. For, at that time the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) had, in response to a claim made by the Jews and the
Christians, said that Prophethood is not based on race that I must
belong to Bani Israel. Had Prophethood been a part of heritage or
inheritance, then a Prophet must be from Bani Israel. That is why the
holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had defended his claim in these words.

Third: In case this hadith was about inheritance of wealth, then no
Prophet should have any inheritor. But we do see that the inheritors of
all the Prophets have shared the wealth left by those Prophets. The holy
Quran also supports our claim as God Almighty says in it while
mentioning the event of Prophet that Zakariya said,

Who should inherit from me and from the children of Yaqoub?9 Zakariya's
request for a child was because of his desire that his children should
inherit his wealth, and in his children were also those who were not
Prophets. Fourth: This tradition, in any case, does not relate to the
claim of Fatima because the possession of Fadak by Fatima was not by way
of inheritance but it was a gift and this hadith prevents inheritance,
not a gift. Fifth: Bringing forth of witnesses was not necessary for
Fatima (s.a.) because she was only defending what was in her possession
and witnesses are required when the possession of anything is demanded.
Fatima Zahra (s.a.) was holding a property, not demanding it.

Sixth: It is known that the second caliph had, during his caliphate,
returned Fadak to Ali (a.s.) but Ali rejected the offer saying: When an
established right of 9 Surah Maryam 19:6

one was denied to her and now when she is no more, I cannot accept
Fadak. All historians, even the author of Qaamoos al Aalaam has, under
the topic, FADAK explained this sentence of Ali (a.s.). Now, if the
argument of the first caliph was correct then why the second caliph did
disregard it and returned Fadak to its owner? And if the first caliph
was not right, then why was the dearest child of the holy Prophet
(s.a..w.a.) harassed?

Seventh: Umar bin Abdul Aziz, an Umayyad caliph, was known as a wiser
and more pious man than his predecessors. He was also more inclined
toward truth. He returned Fadak to the progeny of Fatima (s.a.) during
his caliphate. This also means that all Muslims had been convinced that
the confiscation of Fadak was oppressive and wrong. We conclude this
unpalatable investigation here. At the end of every court trial, some
rights are established. Yet we suffice with this much that the First
Caliph had expressed his remorse publicly in these three phrases:

First: Acceptance of caliphate,

Second: Sending his men to the house of Fatima to obtain allegiance.

Three: Confiscation of Fadak

We have nothing to do with the remorse or otherwise on the part of that
Caliph. But, alas, before taking such ugly actions, he should have done
something to prevent it. How much hardships and pains the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) had suffered for the welfare and prosperity and safety of
religion as well as their worldly lives. The kind Prophet, at the last
moment of his life, when the entire Muslim nation was under his
obligation, leaves as his memorial his beloved daughter. He also ordered
everybody to respect and honor her. Thus, anybody who opposes these
commands, whosoever he may be, cannot escape historic investigation and
its unpalatable consequences.

Fatima Zahra (s.a.), after the passing away of the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), suffered many oppressions and innumerable attacks on her
rights. Then she, under the painful effects of such excesses passed away
from this world. Fatima Zahra (s.a.) was the youngest child of the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.). She was born to lady Khadija (s.a.) and was the
youngest remembrance of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) left for the ummah.
Thereafter the memorials of Fatima Zahra are Hasan (a.s.), Husain
(a.s.), Zainab (a.s.) and Umme Kulsoom (a.s.). The Quranic verses and
hadiths describing the grace and nobility of Fatima Zahra (s.a.) are so
many that the brevity of this book does not suffice to accommodate all
of them.

As Fatima Zahra (a.s.) was buried secretly at night in the presence of
only Ali (a.s.), Hasan, Husain and a small selected group of Bani
Hashim, the actual location of her blessed grave of this dearest
daughter of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) is not known to common Muslims.
But it is likely that her holy grave is situated in one of the
mausoleums.

Imam Hasan Mujtaba (a.s.)

Imam Hasan Mujtaba was born to Fatima Zahra (s.a.) in the second year
of the Hijri. His kunniyat (agnomen) is Abu Muhammad. Amirul Momineen
Ali (a.s.) said that in his natural disposition, Hasan is very much like
his noble grandfather, the Prophet of God (s.a.w.a.). The holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) has repeatedly said, "These two sons of mine (viz. Hasan and
Husain) are the leaders of the youths of paradise."

But here we will not mention the holy verses or traditions showing the
grace and honor of Imam Hasan. How can we do so when nearly one-fourth
of the holy Quran shows the excellence and nobility of the holy family
of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.)? As has been stated repeatedly, our aim has
not been the enumeration of such virtues. Our only intention is to
examine the rights of the holy family of the great Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
who were the pillars of Prophethood. So, brevity is the need of the
hour. Yes, when Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was martyred, as per his will,
Imam Hasan and Imam Husain (a.s.) buried him (a.s.) secretly in a
particular place. Thereafter the Muslims paid allegiance to Imam Hasan
Mujtaba (a.s.) and accepted him as a caliph.

Here we feel it is necessary to mention the difference between Imamat
and Caliphate, which is indeed great. Imamat is different from the
apparent caliphate. Likewise the apparent caliphate is other than the
divine Imamate. The apparent caliphate was available to thousands of
persons but Imamat is a distinction confined only for the twelve
infallible persons, viz. Ali and his eleven holy descendants (a.s.).

Yes, the Muslims did pay allegiance to the Holy Book of God and to
tradition and way of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) with a vow to fight
against the enemies of Islam from the side of Imam Hasan (a.s.). But the
Imam was aware of the consequences. He also knew the non-resoluteness
and instability of the Muslims in his time and their retreating from the
battlefront in difficult situations. An army of forty thousand had
gathered for censuring Mu'awiyah, who was the enemy of truth and was out
to disobey Imam (a.s.). They advanced to reach "Madaaen", but then the
army became disorganized and the Imam (a.s.) was injured at the hands of
an evil opponent. The miserable conditions and the pitiable situation
that prevailed compelled the Imam (a.s.) to give up the apparent
caliphate. For, he knew that if they fight with the enemy with such a
disorganized unit, possessing no morality whatsoever, there was a danger
of the destruction of all the members of the holy family and their
supporters. So he left the apparent caliphate to the enemy.

Mu'awiyah did not comply with even one of the terms of the treaty that
he had signed with Imam Hasan (a.s.). The most important condition of
the said treaty was that after Mu'awiyah, the caliphate should return to
its original place.

That Mu'awiyah would not abide by this condition was obvious. Hence, on
Amr Aas's instigation, he invited Imam Hasan (a.s.) to the Masjid and
requested him to sit on the pulpit. The intent behind the deed was to
show Imam Hasan's (a.s.) concurrence to the caliphate of Mu'awiyah. But,
as expected, the Imam (a.s.) of the time would not speak such incorrect
things. Therefore, Imam Mujtaba (a.s.) accepted the de facto caliphate
of Mu'awiyah on the pulpit. He also declared that the caliphate and its
inheritance belong to the holy family and also explained his
helplessness, which led to the treaty with Mu'awiyah. He said that if he
fights with Mu'awiyah, all the members of the holy family would be
totally wiped out and that all of his supporters would also die. He
declared that Mu'awiyah is not worthy of caliphate. He is a usurper.
Hearing these words, Mu'awiyah and his supporters were enraged. They
pulled the Imam (a.s.) from the pulpit and felled him. His head collided
with a pillar and was injured. Ever since that day, Mu'awiyah decided to
finish this dear son of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

Ibne Aasaal Nasraani was the private physician of Mu'awiyah. He
prepared poison from diamond. Mu'awiyah sent him to Marwan Hakam and
ordered him to poison Imam Hasan (a.s.). Marwan beguiled the evil
Jo'dah, the wife of Imam Hasan (a.s.), gave her the gold and poison sent
by Mu'awiyah and assured her that she would be married with Yazid, as
promised by Mu'awiyah.

The depraved Jo'dah took that oppressive poison and gave it to the Imam
through his food. Consequently the Imam remained painfully ill for forty
days and ultimately passed away from this world.

This is the respect paid by the Ummat to the memorial of God's Prophet
(s.a.w.a.).

Imam was poisoned on a number of occasions but when it did not work,
the oppressors prevented him even to remain in his house. He was forced
to migrate from Madinah. He had to go to Mosul and Syria repeatedly but
Mu'awiyah and his helpers who were rebellious and mischief-makers sent
insurgents after him and finally poisoned him. Consequently, the poison
ripped apart the holy heart of the dear son of the holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.).

The curse of Allah is on the unjust.10

What is truly shocking is that some of the earlier Sunni scholars
support a tyrant like Mu'awiyah and fabricate pretexts for his evil and
ugly deeds. They also, through such infidelity, praise Yazid and absolve
Mu'awiyah. They failed to comprehend that they would not get any benefit
through such deeds either in this world or in the Hereafter. 10 Surah
A'raaf 7:44

We have mentioned, in our book Irshaad-e-Hamzavi our arguments and
conclusions regarding the nature of Mu'awiyah, his qualities, his
misdeeds, his movements, his innovations and inventions in religion,
etc. At the time of his demise Imam Hasan was 46. He expired in the 49th
year of the hijrah era. The children of Imam Hasan Mujtaba were as
follows: Hasan Muthanna, Qasim, Zaid, Al Husain and Umar. In his
posterity were the only sons of Hasan Muthanna Abdullah, Ibrahim and
Hasan Muthallath. Their mother was Fatima binte Imam Husain (a.s.).
Apart from them, from Umme Valad, he bore Ja'far and Dawood. Those who
had children are Zaid. Amr had no issues. Husain had a daughter whose
name is Fatima and the mother of Ismail, the son of the late Imam Ja'far
Sadiq (a.s.).

Imam Husain (a.s.)

It is enough to say that the world has never seen a father like Ali bin
Abi Talib (a.s.), a mother like Fatima and a graceful son like Husain
bin Ali (a.s.). We are unable to mention even a thousandth of the noble
and graceful features and high virtues of the great Imam in this book.
How can we enter this field of calamities and sorrows about which
thousands of writers have written volumes? History has offered a hundred
thousand volumes describing the events of this great guide for the
benefit of all.

Not only among Muslims, but there is not a single non-Muslim who has
not heard the name of Imam Husain (a.s.). This sweet name has become the
most beloved and popular name in every corner of the world in every
language of the masses. This name is also considered most graceful. The
entire world gives respect to the name of Imam Husain (a.s.). Judaism
and Christianity also value and appreciate this name. Many famous
writers have narrated the brave and self-sacrificing events of this son
of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in many books in Asia, Africa and also
America. Yes, with the passing of time, the blessed name of Husain
(a.s.) gains more and more fame. This name acquires renown not by the
era but by the year in the Islamic world.

There are four hundred million people in the world of Islam. Every
religion, every tribe and every group observes mourning on the tenth day
of the month of Muharram, the day of the martyrdom of Imam Husain
(a.s.). The learned, the common people, the citizen, the villager all
cry "O HUSAIN" on this day and consider it their religious duty and
obligation. Half a century ago, the Sunnis used to be indifferent in the
matter of the mourning of Husain (a.s.). But with the passage of time,
Islamic fervor has replaced ignorant prejudice and has made them
cooperate with their religious Shia brothers in the performance of this
duty. The circle of this agreement is enlarging continuously and will
keep doing so in the future.

In our view, participation in the mourning of this great martyr of
Islam is a must and an obligatory duty of all Muslims. We give below the
commanded and the logical arguments in support of this claim.

Firstly, for 23 years the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) endured terrible and
mind- boggling calamities for the welfare of the Muslim ummah, and
thereafter he had to fight a number of holy wars in defense of the noble
religion of Islam. He made all relevant verses of the holy Quran and his
traditions the basis of the Islamic constitution. He made it an
obligatory duty of all Muslims to protect the foundations of Islam and
then he departed from this world. Then, all of a sudden, the Hashimi
radiance was confronted by the Umayyad darkness and the Yazidian
ignorance rose to fight with the Muhammadi knowledge, thus crushing the
roots of religion and defying the orders of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).
It was in the abyss of this state that the greatest fighter and
self-sacrificing warrior of Islam rose up and, confronting forty
thousand armed soldiers of oppression, sacrificed the lives and
everything of all his near and dear ones all of whom totaled only 72.
All this was only for the spread of the light of Faith and the spirit of
Quran. Not only the Islamic world but all the human beings are by the
logic of mind and experience, duty-bound to honor such a true fighter in
the path of God.

Yes this self-sacrificing gentleman hero is he whose noble grand father
had stood up not only against the Arabs and the Quraysh, but also
against the entire world just for establishing truth and justice and who
never cared for his solitude and helplessness.

This great warrior for truth and justice is the one whose honorable
father never feared to fight with Amr bin Abdawod, who used to frighten
thousands of companions.

It is here that the Prophetic zeal and the awe of Ali (a.s.) was
manifested in the personality of Husain (a.s.) so as to release the
roots of Islam from the control of the Yazidi figure and he gave such
extraordinary sacrifices for this noble purpose. Yes, since such a
sacrifice was a necessity for the entire ummah of Islam, mourning for
Imam Husain (a.s.), which is a consequence of this sacrifice, also
becomes a duty of all Muslims. It is also essential that the day of
birth of this great devotee should be a day of rejoicing and the day of
his martyrdom a day of mourning for all as a tradition.

Just have a look at this civilized world of today. Do the people
celebrate not the birthday of a national hero, a scientific or
industrial inventor or a conqueror with pomp and grandeur? Yes, because
it is quite logical and rational. Secondly, we are convinced that the
origin of discord and disunity now prevalent among the Muslims is the
disrespect shown to the holy family of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and
not recognition of the value and rank of the holy family (a.s.).
Therefore it is essential that the disunity should again be changed into
unity around the holy center and the first sign of this holy intention
is unison around the mourning of Husain (a.s.). For, as till today, it
was a sign of difference it must now be a sign of coming together and of
agreement. There are innumerable narrations describing the extraordinary
calamities faced by the dearest son of Zahra (s.a.), which makes
mourning obligatory and unavoidable.

For example, Ibrahim Nakhaee, a great Taabe' (the one who saw the
companion of the Prophet) and a teacher of Abu Hanifa narrates that,
"One day I was with Amirul Momineen when Imam Husain came. Ali (a.s.)
said, "O my son! You will be killed after me and both the earth and the
sky will mourn for you."

The truth of this matter is quite obvious. Yes, the leader of the
martyrs (a.s.) had, in order to relieve Islam from the apostasy of
Yazid, responded to the call of the people of Kufa. He had sent, first,
his cousin Muslim bin Aqueel to Kufa and then he also along with the
members of his holy family and his relatives and close sympathizers
proceeded to Kufa. When Muslim arrived in Kufa, all the residents of
Kufa paid their allegiance to the Imam. In the mean time, Ubaydullah bin
Ziyad, who was appointed as the governor of Kufa by Yazid, arrived and
the treacherous and unstable Kufans, at the mere arrival of Ubaydullah,
broke their oath of allegiance! As a consequence of this disloyalty,
Muslim bin Aqueel was martyred along with his two young sons and his
holy body was hanged in public to frighten others (from rebelling
against Yazid and supporting Imam Husain (a.s.))!

During this period, Imam (a.s.) came near the bank of river Euphrates
near Kufa and halted in front of the vanguard of the army of Ibne
Ziyad.

At that time all those who were with the Imam were only eighteen of his
close blood relatives and also forty-four followers then began the
devastating battle. In the morning, forty-four lovers of the holy family
got martyred one by one - Surely we are Allah's and to Him we shall
surely return. In the mean time they prevented water of river Euphrates
for the Imam! The progeny of the Prophet had not tasted water for three
days. Then eighteen men of the holy family sacrificed their lives in the
battlefield before the eyes of Imam Husain (a.s.). At last, after the
martyrdom of all his companions, remained the only person alive in the
Harem with the womenfolk and the children.

The great hero of the field of Karbala, the standard bearer of the
Chief of the martyrs, Abul Fazl Abbas bin Amirul Momineen and Qasim bin
Hasan who was Imam's nephew, and Ali Akbar who was the elder son of the
Imam and other devotees, Ibrahim son of Ja'far Tayaar, all got martyred.
During this time, the young son of the Imam, who had become restless due
to thirst, asked his father for water. But the one who is to give the
water of paradise in the Hereafter from the stream of Kausar could not
give even a few drops of water from the nearby river to his
six-month-old son Ali Asgar. So he took his six-month-old child to the
bank of the river and uttering a few words (which the pen is unable to
write and the tongue unable to quote) asked for only a handful of water!
But, alas! The Ummah did not give even a drop of water to the little
child of the Imam. Rather they martyred the infant by shooting him with
a poisoned arrow!

Now the Imam who was the only person alive, after concluding his
arguments 'proceeded to the field of martyrdom. The group of infidels
killed the Imam, cut off his holy head and sent it to Yazid as a gift!
Then they put the tents of the holy harem to fire, devastated the honor
of the house of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). They lifted the head of the
holy Imam on top of a lance and made the members of the family ride on
the bare backs of camels and took them all to Yazid in Syria? Yes, this
is the honor that the Muslims gave to the light of the eyes of their
Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

And they who act unjustly shall know to what final place of turning
they shall turn back.11 In the caravan that had come from the field of
Karbala, the only male member was Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), who was
ill at that time. The others were the Imam's sister Zainab and Umme
Kulthum and her daughters Sakina and Fatima and the remaining
relatives.

Imam Husain (a.s.) had six sons: Ali Akbar, whose mother was Laila. His
is the greatest sacrifice in Karbala. Other was Ali Asgar who became a
child martyr with a thirsty throat in the arms of his father by an arrow
shot by the heartless enemy! The third Zainul Abedeen who remained
unhappy in Karbala (for being deprived of martyrdom along with his near
and dear ones) and he was to be the father of all the remaining Imams
(a.s.).

The holy grave of Imam (a.s.) is in Karbala-e-Moalla, which is the
second biggest place of pilgrimage for the world of Islam. Every year,
millions of devotees and lovers visit this holy shrine (May God multiply
its grace). Here we feel it essential to point out an important matter:
How much importance does the Ahle Sunnah give to visits to the holy
graves of saints (sheikhs) and how much reward do they expect from doing
so? It is well known that many Sunnis go to the tomb of Bahauddin
Naqshbandi in Bukhara or visit the grave of Shaikh Akbar in Egypt or to
the mausoleum of Jalaluddin Rumi in Quniyah. It is also seen very often
that our groups go to even Anatolia in big numbers to visit the graves
of many Saalehs and Shaikhs! Now, my question is, when we visit the
graves of sheikhs to earn divine reward, why do we not visit the tombs
of the holy Imams (a.s.)?

Surah Shuara 26:227

Whatever radiance and grace is there at the tombs of the sheikhs is the
same radiance and grace derived from Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and of Ali
(a.s.) because there is no light except the light of Muhammad (s.a.w.)
and no grace except that of Ali (a.s.). All sheikhs have accepted this
point. Why are visits to the places of grace and fountainheads of
radiance being put discouraged?

In my humble opinion, the trouble is not related to the people. It
pertains to the so-called Ulema and jurists (fuqaha), who are the heads
of the religion and soul of the people. Since these ulema do not
encourage people to take such noble steps, it results in sinister
prejudice, which is a deadly illness, hell bent on breaking Islamic
unity. I hope that unity between Muslims will increase gradually and our
roots will become strong and lasting. Thereafter, the common people will
begin to give respect to their holy Imams (a.s.) and will help each
other in the pilgrimages to the tombs of these noble personalities. We
are also fully convinced that this act will also save us all from the
harms of our earlier blunders.


