Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.)
==========================

Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) was born in 38 A.H. and was only two years
old when Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was martyred. His mother, Shaharbano,
was from the race of Nausherwan, the Iranian emperor. His name was Ali.
Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) then himself became the father of all other
Imams who followed him.

If we bring together all the troubles and calamities of the entire
world, and also all the sorrows and grief experienced by the whole
mankind, they would not equal to those of the messengers of God (peace
be on them all). Similarly if all the troubles faced by the holy
Prophets (a.s.) are put together, they would not come to the extent
suffered by the twelve Imams (a.s.). Then if all the pains of the twelve
Imams (a.s.) were totaled they would not equal those borne by Imam
Sajjad (a.s.). Troubles started raining on the head of Imam Sajjad
(a.s.) ever since he was only two and thereafter the series continued on
the holy family viz.

the martyrdom of Ali (a.s.), troubles faced by Imam Hasan (a.s.), the
disaster in Karbala, the events in Syria, the taunting in Kufa, the
despising by the enemy, all these hardships had gripped the life of this
true Imam (a.s.). One of the close companions of Imam Sajjad (a.s.)
narrates, "One day, I had become terribly restless on seeing the
constant weeping of Imam Sajjad (a.s.). So I said, 'O, Son of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.)! Kindly relax at least for a little while.' Looking at
me, the holy Imam asked, 'How many sons did Prophet Yaqoob (a.s.) have?'
I responded, 'He had twelve sons.' Then he asked, 'How many sons did he
lose?' I said, 'One.' Imam (a.s.) retorted, 'When the eyes of Prophet
Yaqoob (a.s.) had turned white due to excessive weeping for only one
missing son, how can I feel at rest when eighteen members of the family
of the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) have been martyred in one day, their
heads decapitated and their bodies left uncovered in dust and sand?"

Quoting this narration in Hayaatul Kaywaan, Allamah Damiri says, "One
day Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) was passing through the streets of
Madinah riding a swift camel. A Syrian looked at the fine clothing of
Imam (a.s.) and asked who he was. When he came to know that he was Imam
Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), he used indecent words for him. The holy Imam
responded to his indecency saying, "O gentleman! It seems you are a
stranger." The Syrian replied, "Yes, I am a stranger." The Imam (a.s.)
said, "Then please come to my house, eat when you feel hungry, if you
require clothes, take them. If you need a horse, ride one." Hearing this
reply the Syrian swooned and dropped down.

Abu Naeem al-Hafiz writes in his book, Hilyatul Awliyaa: "Zuhri, who
was one of the close companions of Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) said, "One
day, Abdul Malik bin Marwan imprisoned chained and confined Imam Zainul
Abedeen (a.s.) in Syria. I visited the holy Imam and said, 'I wish they
had arrested me instead of you.' He said, 'O Zuhri! If I want, I can
free myself from these chains.' At that moment, he freed his hands and
feet from the shackles and went out of the sight of the oppressors."
Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) possessed thousands of such miracles, which
we are unable to mention here. He expired in Madinah at the age of fifty
in 95 A.H. His holy grave is with that of Imam Hasan Mujtaba (a.s.) in
one mausoleum in Baqee. The graves of Imams Muhammad Baqir and Ja'far
Sadiq (a.s.) also are under one tomb12. How holy and radiant is the
piece of land where four generous Imams (a.s.) are resting - May God
increase its grace.

Imam Sajjad (a.s.) had twenty children, eleven sons and nine daughters.
Imamate continued through Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.).

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) was born in the year 55 AH. His mother was
the daughter of Imam Hasan (a.s.) - Umme Abdillah. Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) is the first Alavi, who was born of an Alavi couple. Besides
being the Imam of his time, he was also the centre of religious and
Quranic sciences. That is why he was addressed as Baqir Ilm al-Ilahi
(means the splitter of divine knowledge). But the cruel rulers of Bani
Umayyah stalled the spread of true and bright facts about this person.
Therefore, he was compelled to take to a corner and was deprived of an
opportunity whereby people would have benefited from his knowledge and
information. So the knowledge and religious pronouncements of this Imam
reached only to his family and close dependents.

"Apparently, this book was written before the destruction and
desecration of the holy graves of Jannat al- Baqee at the hands of the
tyrannical Wahhabi rulers. Hence, the mention of mausoleum and tombs."-
Translator. He expired at the age of 63 in the year 118 A.H. and is
buried in the graveyard of Baqee (Madinah). He had six sons and three
daughters. Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.) in his eldest son, others being
Abdullah, Ali, Zaid, Ubaidullah and Ibrahim. Imamat and successorship is
in Abu Abdullah Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.).

Imam Ja'far as Sadiq (a.s.)

The greatness and preciousness of this Imam is beyond the power of the
tongue and the pen to describe. His high rank of knowledge can be
imagined from the fact that Jabir Ibn Hayyan Sufi, who was one of his
brilliant students, has described his sciences both orally and with pen
extremely and written five hundred articles and treatises. Just see that
only one of the Imam's students is such a big scholar. Then what a big
collection it would become if the capabilities of all of companions and
followers are counted together: Ja'far Sadiq, besides being the Imam of
his time, was also an ocean of religious sciences and fountainhead of
Quranic knowledge. Abdullah bin Abbas said, "Knowledge has been divided
into ten parts and nine of them are exclusively with the Amirul
Mo-mineen (a.s.) and the remaining one part is divided among all the
other people." Now we say that the knowledge of Amirul Mo-mineen was
bequeathed to the successive Imams till it reached Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq
(a.s.) and by this time it had expanded greatly and all of it was in the
possession of Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.).

Shaikh Abu Abdur Rahman as Sullami says in Tabaqaat al Mashaayekh:
"Indeed Imam Ja'far as Sadiq (a.s.) surpassed all his contemporaries.
His religious knowledge was profound, his piety absolute, his control on
the sensual desires complete and his manners in wisdom perfect."

The leader of Sufis and the Shaykh of Tareeqat, Baayazeed Bastami
states, 'I have served ninety-nine teachers fully. Yet had I not seen
Imam Ja'far Sadiq, I would have died devoid of faith.' Just imagine the
rank of this Imam from this statement.

Allamah Dameeri mentions in Hayat al Haivaan, "Abu Hanifa Noman bin
Thabit says, 'Once I went with Rabee to Imam Ja'far. He asked me, 'Do
you follow conjecture (qiyaas)?' I replied, 'Yes'. Imam retorted, 'Do
not base your verdicts on conjecture because the first one to follow
conjecture was Iblees (the devil)." Abu Hanifa says, "The Imam asked me
some questions but I could not give reply to any of them. So he himself
explained the problems and said, 'in your head there are four kinds of
liquid; one in the mouth, second in nose, third in the ear and fourth in
the eye. Had conjecture been proper, the flavour of all the four should
have been one because all are from one matter and origin. But we see
that the flavour of each of these four liquids is different. For
example, the water in mouth is sweet, that in the eye is sour, that in
nose salty and one in the ear acrimonious." Noman bin Thabit Abu Hanifa
says, "Imam Ja'far (a.s.), through divine wisdom, examined each and
every one of the four liquids and explained their number and qualities.
I was surprised by the knowledge of the Imam (a.s.)."

Despite this wide expanse of knowledge and wisdom of this great Imam,
the tyrant rulers of the day came in the way of dispersion of the
radiance of his intelligence. Therefore the unlimited benefits of his
precious grace could not go beyond the circle of his progeny and close
dependents.

Bayzeed Bastami was one of the students of Imam Ja'far (a.s.), who was
the inheritor of the knowledge of Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s.). The saying
that Ja'far acquired knowledge of his maternal grandfather Qasim bin
Muhammad is not acceptable to intellect or to history. It is true that
Qasim was a very wise and learned man. But since Ja'far (a.s.) was the
inheritor of the knowledge of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), his being
taught by any one who is not an Imam is not in any way acceptable to
wisdom and intelligence.

Mansur Dawaniqi, who was the caliph in the time of Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq
(a.s.) was always threatening and harassing the Imam. On one hand, he
often imprisoned Imam (a.s.) in dark and narrow cells but on the other,
he was awarding generously jurists like Malik bin Anas in Madinah and
Abu Yusuf in Kufa. When Abu Hanifa refused to be a judicial officer in
the presence of the Imam of the time, Mansur arrested him and ordered
Rabee Hajib to give him one hundred lashes. Abu Hanifa died in jail
under the impact of this punishment. Whenever Mansur came to know that a
person had obtained a solution from Imam Ja'far (a.s.), he used to
punish that man. And he forcibly propagated 'al- Mawatta' of Malik bin
Anas, a jurisprudent of Madinah. The reason of this deed is obvious. The
existence of the Imam and the spreading of his light of knowledge were
deterrents to the lustful and unjust deeds of the greedy and cruel
self-worshippers.

It is indeed amazing that the Shias who were forced to practise
dissimulation (taqaiyyah), benefitted from the knowledge and wisdom of
the Imam (a.s.) and enriched their books and actions with the decrees of
the Imam. But unfortunately, the Ahle Sunnat, who were not forced to
practise dissimulation, attached themselves to the likes of Harun
Rashid, Mamoon, Mansur and Mutawakkil and could never do anything which
was against the desires of the cruel rulers. For, they feared that they
would meet with the same fate as Abu Hanifa Noman bin Thabit, who acted
against the opinion of Mansur, was punished and killed in jail. Mansur
asked Abu Hanifa to accept the post of judge. He rejected. When Abu
Yusuf, a student of Abu Hanifa asked the latter the cause of not
accepting Mansur's offer he replied, 'the religious commands like are
like a deep ocean.' Abu Yusuf said, 'A deep ocean can be crossed with in
a ship of exploration'. Abu Hanifa shot back, 'We are not the ships of
explorations. It is the scholars of holy family of the messenger of God
(s.a.w.a.) and its captain is Abu Ja'far Sadiq'.

Here, let me state a fact that really deserves a mention. The Ahle
Sunnah scholars have written innumerable books about religious sciences.
They have narrated a hundred thousand or even five hundred thousand
hadiths and mentioned millions of literary works. But no tradition of
narration of the holy Imams after Zainul Abideen (a.s.) has at all been
included in them and not the slightest suggestion of their names.

In the books of Fiqh too, at thousands of places, we find the names of
jurists (sic!) like Abu Yusuf Muhammad bin Hasan Shaibani and others but
not even once do we read the name of Kazim, Sadiq and Reza! Are they not
the members of the holy family of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)? There are
nine thousand traditions in Sahih Bukhari and eleven thousand in Sahih
Muslim we accept their correctness but from all these traditions not a
single one is narrated from the holy Imams and in all these reports the
names of Baqir, Kazim, Sadiq of the Aale Muhammad do not occur. Isn't it
a pity? Concluding this discussion here, we leave the details to
history. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had five male children; one of them Ismail,
died during the Imam's lifetime and is buried in Baqee. Another was
Abdullah. He and Ismail were from the same mother. Then there was
Muhammad Deebaaj and Moosa Kazim who, the legatee of Imam Sadiq
(a.s.).

Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.)

Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s) was the son of Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.). His
mother was Hameeda. How much was this Imam harassed by his contemporary
caliphs of Bani Abbas! It is a heart-rending story. It is truly said
that there is a Moosa for every Pharaoh and for every righteous man, a
devil.

Abbasi caliph Mahdi brought Imam Kazim (a.s.) from Madinah to Baghdad
and imprisoned him. After a time, Mahdi saw Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in a
dream and faced his anger. Next morning he released the Imam with a
heavy heart. This despotic ruler Mahdi was, on the one hand, helping
Ulama and the poor and protecting scholars but, on the other hand, he
was putting the Holy Imams, who were the inheritors of Imamat and
Prophethood, to various troubles. He made thousands of sycophants, who
waxed eulogies in his glorification. And hundreds of jurists, who gave
decrees as per his liking were busy in enjoying the royal wealth and
prosperity, while he put the bud of the garden of the Holy Prophet, Imam
Moosa Kazim (a.s.), in narrow and damp prison cells and fettered him
with heavy iron chains! And the Sunni Ulama sing the Caliph's praise!
They even refer to him as Amirul Momineen. These simpletons with short
memory forgot that at the end of the historical eras, such curtains of
hypocrisy and flattery will be torn and all the oppressors and despots
will be fetched to court to face the truth.

Once Harun Rashid went for Haj and took Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) with
him. At the tomb of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), Harun saluted in these
words: Assalaam Alaika Yaa Ibne Amm. (Peace be upon you, O my cousin).
At that very moment, Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) also entered uttering,
Assalaamu alaika Ya abata. (Peace be upon you, O my father). This made
Harun furious with envy.

Imam Reza (a.s.)

After Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) his elder son Imam Reza (a.s.) was the
Imam by the way of the will. His rank and greatness is so high that it
cannot be explained in this small book. He was born in Madinah in 153
A.H. His mother, Umme Valad, was the most brilliant and wise among the
women of her time and she was a non-Arab. Since Imam Reza (a.s.) had
inherited the knowledge of Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), calamities and
troubles also descended on him. As you can see every Imam had faced such
serious trials.

Imam Reza (a.s.) too, when his term came, bore all such hardships and
difficulties facing them squarely. Yes, when the turn of his Imamat
arrived, in the beginning, Mamoon was very respectful and generous to
Imam Reza (a.s.) to an unbelievable extent. But Imam Reza (a.s.) was
aware of the hidden secrets and he was aware of the intent behind these
apparent courtesies. Finally, Mamoon sent somebody to Madinah to bring
the Imam to Khurasan. The Imam rejected his demand. On Mamoon's
insistence, Imam was forced to proceed to Khorasan. When he faced
Mamoon, the ruler offered caliphate to the Imam, but as he was aware of
the secret behind the offer, he rejected the proposal. Ultimately, he
made an official offer to Imam (a.s.). Thereafter, Mamoon married his
daughter Umm Habibah to the Imam. In spite of all this, Mamoon could not
tolerate the spreading of the radiant knowledge of the Imam in public.
So finally he poisoned him to death. Through this treachery, Mamoon
demonstrated that oppression and justice, truth and falsehood, knowledge
and ignorance cannot live together in one place!

Abu Sult bin Saleh says, "When the Imam made up his mind for Khorasan,
I was with him. He moved from Nishapur riding a white mule. Among the
scholars of Khorasan, Ishaq bin Rabuya, Ahmad bin Harb, Yahya bin Yahya
attended respectfully the Imam and said, 'O son of the Prophet! Please
favour us by narrating to us anything you heard from your pious
predecessors.'

In response the Imam raised his head and said, "My father Moosa bin
Ja'far (a.s.) has related to me from his father Ja'far bin Muhammad
(a.s.) from his father Muhammad bin Ali (a.s.) from his father Ali bin
Husain (a.s.) from his father Husain bin Ali (a.s.) from Amirul Momineen
Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) from his brother and the son of his uncle
Muhammad the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) from Jibraeel from the
Almighty that He said,

"The Kalimah (phrase) there is no god except Allah is my fort, whoever
enters My fort is safe from my wrath." Then he (a.s.) added, "(But)
there are conditions attached to it and I am one of those conditions."
Imam Reza (a.s.) was martyred by mixing poison with pomegranate or
grapes at the age of 49 in the year 203 A.H. (Certainly we belong to
Allah and to Him we shall return).

The exalted tomb of Imam Reza (a.s.) is in the holy city of Mashhad. It
is one of the great places for pilgrimage of the world of Islam. Its
dome is golden with no parallel in the world - May God enhances its
grace. After him the Imamat went to his son and heir, Muhammad Taqi
(a.s.).

Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.)

Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) was born in the year 195 A.H. Abbasi caliph
Motasim was his contemporary. He called the Imam from Madinah to
Baghdad. Since he was, like all Imams, a picture of Imamate and
prophethood, it was impossible that he could continue his life in the
circle of oppression and injustice. His wife, who poisoned him and went
to the harem of the caliph, martyred him through vicious infidelity. "So
Allah's curse is on the unjust people."

His holy grave is in the graveyard of his great grandfather Imam Moosa
Kazim (a.s.) in Baghdad. After him Imamat passed on to his great son
Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.).

Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.)

Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) was born in Madinah in the year 214 A.H. and his
mother was a slave girl named Samaanah. Contemporary Abbasi caliph
Mutawakkil was very cruel and unjust. He was more evil than all other
Abbasi caliphs were and his ill will towards the progeny of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was greater than that of others. His envy and enmity
can be imagined from the fact that he razed to ground the great tomb
built on the holy grave of Imam Husain in Karbala.

Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) was forcibly brought from Madinah to Samarrah and
was kept under arrest for 21 years, during which he faced the worst
forms of oppression.

In one year Mutawakkil arranged a party of joy and pleasure and brought
the Imam there bound in chains and handcuffs and obliged him to sit in
that assembly of vice, brought a glass of wine to him and put pressure
on him to drink it. The Imam replied, "God Almighty has purified our
family of all uncleanness and filth." Then in his intoxication
Mutawakkil forced Imam (a.s.) to sing some song. But the memorial of the
Household of the Prophet also rejected that demand.

Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) passed away in 256 A.H. in Samarra at the age of
forty bearing all kinds of pains and trouble. He left two sons, Abu
Muhammad Hasan and Ja'far who is called Ja'far the liar for making a
false claim to Imamate because the true legatee of Imam Naqi (a.s.) was
Abu Muhammad Hasan.

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.)

Imam Hasan was given the title 'Askari' due to constant oppression
meted out to him by the caliphs of the Abbasi dynasty. He was forced to
remain in Saamarra, which was a military cantonment (askar). He was born
in 231 A.H. About the greatness of this holy Imam, it is enough to state
that Allah the Almighty granted to him a son who is awaited by all the
jinns and human beings in the earth and the heavens. Yes, Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.) is the father of that personality whose reappearance will
fill the entire world with justice and equity, as it would be fraught
with injustice and oppression. This is what the Prophet of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) said about him,

"His name is my name and his agnomen is my agnomen."

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) expired in 260 A.H. and he is buried in
Saamarra near his noble father. His only son is Wali-e-Asr-o-Zaman Al
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).

Imam-e-Zamana (a.s.)

Imam Abul Qasim Muhammad al-Mahdi was born in 255 A.H. on the fifteenth
of Sha'ban. The name of his mother was Umm Walad Narjis Khatoon. When he
was five years old, his father passed away. He had two occultations, the
first called Ghaibat-e-Sughra (Lesser occultation) and another
Ghaibat-e- Kubra (Greater occultation). The Imam (a.s.) is still living
and shall reappear to fill the earth with justice and equity, as and
when Allah so desires. Since the reappearance of the Imam (a.s.) is a
fact on which the entire Ummah has agreed, we need not explain its
arguments in this book. As a token we quote here a part of a long
article written by a great Sufi Shaykh Muhiyuddin Arabi about this
Imam-e-Hujjat (a.t.f.s.):

"Imam Mahdi Qaem Muntazar will appear and he is the Hujjat (proof) and
caliph of Allah. He is to appear in Makkah between Rukn and Maqam. Most
lucky are the people of Kufa because of their relation with him. He will
distribute wealth judiciously, will decide disputes, and enact justice
and fair play among people. He will rebel when religion will be
discarded. Whoever will defy him will be killed and whoever will compete
with him will be vanquished. Those who will pay allegiance to him will
be those who know Allah. His associates will spread his message and
assist him and they will be his ministers who will take up important
responsibilities. Their number will in one day reach to 313 and all of
them will be non-Arabs yet they will be speaking only Arabic." He says
in some couplets:

"He is the Caliph, who converses with animals. And men and jinn will
see his justice very soon." He also said, Do not equate any creature
with Ahle Bayt. Ahle Bayt are people of testimony. Hatred against them
is a great loss. And love for them is worship.

Yet another Sufi poet Shaykh Abdul Karim al Yamani has written these
Arabic couplets about the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.): "In the
bounty of that peace whose creatures are blessed Till the time they see
the advent of the light of guidance With the M of Majid from the progeny
of Haider And from the purified and lofty status of Aale Ahmad He is
that Mahdi with truth manifest He would rule on the sunnat of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) for the first time"

Shaykh Abdur Rahman al-Bustami, in his book Dairatul Maa'rif, writes
about Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.): "And M will emerge of Majd of Aale Ahmad
And Justice will be established for men for the first time As we have
seen in the time Ali Ar Reza It has become known in the knowledge of the
alphabets When he will appear after the Sheen of Shar (mischief?) From
Makkah near Ka'ba and by help he will reach to great heights This is the
true Mahdi who has appeared with truth Who will come from the Beneficent
for establishing truth, And fill the whole earth with justice by
becoming a mercy for all And destroy the darkness of polytheism and
tyranny first of all His authority for this rule is from Allah He is the
Caliph of the best of the Prophets from the high heavens Sadruddin
Qoonavi in his book Mashaaikhe Sufi writes about the holy Imam thus:

He will rise by the order of Allah openly In spite of the presence of
Shaitan he will destroy infidelity. He will support the Shariat of
Mustafa at that time. And he would be the last of the person from their
family. He is coming from meem and he knows fully about the Ahkam of
Shariat.

If we intend to write in detail about Imam Mahdi (a.s.), many more
books will be required besides this but we do not want to narrate all
the accounts of the holy family. Our aim is to put to scrutiny what has
been written in history books about this holy family and to call for the
judgement of reason and intellect. There is no disagreement among the
Muslims regarding the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) and hence it
requires no explanation. There is a tradition of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.),

"One who dies without recognising the Imam of his age dies the death of
ignorance." All the Shia and Sunni Ulama accept this tradition. Hence
there is no Muslim who does not believe in the existence of Mahdi (a.s.)
We believe that Imam Mahdi (a.s.), the Master of the age and time, is
alive and that ever since his father's demise in Saamarra, Imamat has
reached him. And that by divine will, his Imamat will safely continue
till the day of judgement because it is essential that after the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.), there should be twelve Imams (a.s.) and that the
number can neither increase nor decrease as authentically recorded in
Sahih Bukhari and Muslim, "After me there are twelve caliphs and all of
them are from Bani Hashim."

That is why God has kept Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) secretly safe from the
treacheries of enemies. His absence (occultation) is of two kinds:
first, short occultation wherein he had contacts with his close
dependents and followers and second, the long occultation, which will
extend till his re-appearance. Even in this absence some persons have
been able to approach him and will still approach in the future.
Currently he has his general viziers and naqeebs. When their number will
reach 313 the time of his Zuhoor or reappearance will arrive. He will
appear in Mecca at a place between Rukn and Muqaam. He will fill the
world with truth and justice, as it is replete with untruth and
injustice. He will invite the entire world to truth and righteousness
and will hear the voice of 'LABBAIK' (we accept) from all corners of the
world. In his finger will be the seal of Sulaiman (a.s.) and he will be
holding the staff of Moosa (a.s.) in his hand. He will move from Mecca
toward Madinah. He will remove all the innovations, which were
introduced in Islam after the demise of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).
Then he will arrive in Kufa and build the Masjid of Kufa. Prophet Isa
(a.s.) will come on earth and will pray behind him, and then he will
fill the whole world with the light of guidance.

Yes, we suffice with this much explanation and pray to God Almighty
that He may raise us along with those about whom the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) had said to Amirul Momineen, "O Ali! From the viewpoint of
Faith and trust the highest are those who will arrive in the world in
the last period and from whom the arguments and proofs will be hidden.
Those very persons will, by the Grace of Allah, will believe only
through pen and paper (i.e. by reading the books)." Yes, we are
earnestly waiting the appearance of the Qaem Aale Muhammad (a.t.f.s.). I
conclude this book here and submit it as an insignificant and humble
presentation at his holy feet. We hope our defective deeds and perfect
sincerity will be acceptable to the holy Imam.


Zangazuri Qazi Bohlool Bahjat


