Permissible Backbiting
======================

Be informed that mentioning one's wrongdoing is a sound objective
according to the *Sharī\`a* in order to achieve one's objective for the
removal of such wrongdoing. Thus, the sin of backbiting is voided, but
this is limited to ten situations:

**First:** One seeks redress. If someone mentions the name of a judge as
being unjust, treacherous and accepting bribes, he is one who backbites
while being a transgressor. As far as a judge is concerned, one can
complain about him to someone who he hopes can remove his injustice. He
will be attributing injustice to such a judge who is the only person who
can grant him what rightfully belongs to him.

The Messenger of Allāh (ص) has said, "One with a [usurped] right has the
right to complain about it" (*Ihyā Ulūm ad-Dīn*, Vol. 3, p. 144).

He (ص) has also said, "A rich person commits injustice if he looks down
at others" (*Al-\`Awāli*, Vol. 4, p. 45).

**Second:** One seeks help to correct a wrongdoing. One has the right to
seek help to correct a wrongdoing and bring an aggressor back to the
path of righteousness. In the achievement of this sound objective, the
matter is alright but is prohibitive otherwise.

**Third:** One seeks someone's opinion, such as you may say this to
someone: "My father—or brother—has been unfair to me; so, what is the
way out of it?" In this regard, it is safest if one refrains from
identifying the oppressor. For example, one may say, "What would you say
about a man whose father or brother has oppressed him?"

It has been narrated that Hind said to the Prophet (ص), "Abū Sufyān is a
miser man; he does not give me money to meet my needs and those of my
children. Should I take some of his money without his knowledge?" He
said, "Take only what suffices you and your children fairly" (*Ihyā Ulūm
ad-Dīn*, Vol. 3, p. 144). She complained about not having enough to
spend on herself and her children, so the Messenger of Allāh (ص) did not
rebuke her since her objective was to seek his opinion.

**Fourth:** One warns another Muslim against falling in danger, in evil,
and how one seeking counsel is to be advised. If you see someone
pretending to be a *faqīh* (jurist), pretending to be someone whom he is
not, you have to attract people's attention to his shortcoming and
inability to rightfully qualify himself. You must alert them about the
danger that may fall upon them if they obey him. Also, if you see a man
making too frequent visits to the house of a debauchee who is covering
up for him, and if you are concerned about this man falling down on
account of such companionship in a way which violates the *Sharī\`a*,
you have the right to attract his attention to this person being a
sinner no matter what motive you have, whether it may be concern about
the dissemination of an innovation in the creed or the spread of
corruption.

This may be prompted by conceit and Satan's foolhardiness, for your
motive may be envy of that man because of the status which he enjoys.
Satan will then confuse you when you pretend to have compassion for
people. Also, if you see a man buying a slave, and if you know that this
slave has defects, you can mention these defects to the buyer, for if
you remain silent, you will be harming the buyer. Your stating these
faults harms the slave, but the interest of the buyer ought first to be
taken into consideration.

And you have to mention only the defect which is relevant to the matter
and not mention anything relevant to anything else that may undermine
the partnership, the contract, or one's trip. Rather, you must mention
in each situation what is relevant to it and not go beyond it aiming at
advising rather than harming. If a man shies away from getting married
when you advise him that marriage will not be good for him, you will be
doing what you ought to be doing. But if one is not dissuaded except
when explicitly told about something, let it be so.

The Prophet (ص) has said, "Do you hesitate to name a corrupt person
before people find it out? Say that against which people ought to guard
themselves" (*Ihuyā Ulūm ad-Dīn*, Vol. 3, p. 144).

He (ص) has also said to Fātima daughter of Qays when she consulted him
about men seeking her for marriage, "As regarding Mu'āwiyah, he is a
penniless pauper. Regarding Abū Jahm, he never lets the [whipping] baton
descend from his shoulder" (*Al-\`Awāli*, Vol. 1, p. 155).

**Fifth:** Slandering and making amends for both an eyewitness and a
narrator: Scholars have written about narrators of traditions, dividing
them into "trustworthy" and "doubted", often mentioning the reasons
behind their being doubted. A sincere advice is shared in this
situation, as we have stated above, when it is meant to protect the
Muslims' wealth, control over what they say and protect them all from
telling lies.

And it is conditional upon one having neither animosity nor fanaticism
nor stating anything that violates his testimony and narrative, and he
does not stand hostile to others such as being a man of taunting or
casting doubts except, perhaps, when he openly commits transgression as
we will state later.

**Sixth:** The object of the statement must deserve it because he is a
pretender on its account such as a sinner who openly shows his sin, so
much so that he does not hesitate to talk about the sin which he
commits. He must be referred to with regard to what he admits and
nothing more.

The Messenger of Allāh (ص) has said, "One who puts down the covering of
modesty from his face, to backbite him is not a sin at all"
(*Al-\`Awāli*, Vol. 1, p. 105). From this, it is quite obvious that to
backbite him is permissible even if the sin is not mentioned. Regarding
the permission to absolutely backbite the debauchee, the possibility
stems from this statement of the Prophet (ص): "A debauchee is not
backbitten" (*Al-\`Awāli*, Vol. 1, p. 438, tradition No. 153).

It is stated that the tradition must be understood as applicable to a
particular debauchee or to [backbite him in order to] force him to stop
his committing sins. Such is better except when the matter is attached
to a religious objective and a sound goal which goes back to the
backbiter who hopes the individual will on its account stop committing
his sin. It will then enter the category of preventing a wrongdoing.

**Seventh:** One must be widely known by a name whereby his defect is
identified, such as "the lame" or "the blear-eyed", etc. There is no sin
if one identifies him by it. Scholars have done so due to the need for
identification and because it has become so common, the individual
himself no longer hates it, having come to know that he has become
famous on its account.

In fact, what the reliable scholars have indicated can be relied upon
with regard to their narrative.

As regarding identifying those who are still living, it is conditional
on the acceptance of the individual to whom it is attributed as a
general criterion for prohibition. In that case, it is not categorized
as backbiting. How can it be since when one can be identified by some
other way, it would have been better?

**Eighth:** If the number of individuals, according to whom a penalty is
to be exacted for a sin, are eyewitnesses to the committing of that sin,
it can be mentioned to the rulers as a testimony even in the presence of
the doer or in his absence. It must not be mentioned in any other
situation except if it meets other criteria.

**Ninth:** It has been said that if two persons witness a transgression
committed, and one of them stated it in the absence of that
transgressor, it is permissible because mentioning it has no impact on
the listener although he ought to protect himself and his tongue from
mentioning it for any other purpose especially with the possibility of
forgetting the statement or out of concern it will be disseminated
because of them.

**Tenth:** If someone listened to someone else backbiting another
without knowing the rights of the person being backbitten or whether
what is being said does not actually exist, the speaker cannot be
prevented from articulating it due to the possibility it could be true,
and the speaker may be accepted as factual unless he is known to be
otherwise.

Deterring him from such talk requires the violation of his own sanctity,
being one of the individuals involved. It is better to draw attention to
such a situation unless general evidences surface that have no room for
rebuttal. It is evident that the general will is to be cautious about
ignorant folks being tempted in its regard. If this is done to those
whom you know, the general evidences would not have surfaced, and they
would not have been taken into consideration with regard to the listener
due to the speaker perhaps knowing how to make his statement plausible,
and it undermines the principle of prohibiting backbiting.

This individual is held as exceptional with regard to hearing
backbiting, and it has already been stated that he is one of those who
take part in backbiting.

Generally speaking, a virtuous soul takes precaution against backbiting
although sometimes it is preferred that one tells what he knows so
others may take their own precaution against a particular individual or
action.

The testimony for its absolute prohibition, as has already been stated,
is this statement of the Prophet (ص): "Do you know what backbiting is?"
They said, "Allāh and His Messenger know best." He (ص) said, "It is
saying something about your brother which he does not like" (*Tanbīh
al-Khawātir*, Vol. 1, p. 118).

As regarding its permissibility, such as the response to innovations and
the shaming of the debauchees from among them, getting people to stay
away from them and taking precautions against following them, this is
described as obligatory: It is possible and is preferable, and it is
relied upon to achieve all these objectives. So, a vigilant person must
not overlook the objective and the reform it contains, and surely Allāh
is the One Who grants success.


