7. Shi’i Ahadith Misused About Mut’ah
=====================================

We have seen the Ahl al-Sunnah quoting certain *ahadith* from the Shi’i
books in desperate efforts to “prove” *mut’ah* wrong. We will be
examining these *riwayat* here, with the Grace and Help of Allah.
Meanwhile, we strongly advise our brothers and sisters from the Ahl
al-Sunnah wa al-Jama’ah and the Shi’ah Imamiyyah: whenever anyone –
whether Sunni, Shi’i or otherwise - claims to you that a certain
*hadith* exists in the Shi’i sources, demand adamantly that he must
produce (i) its full Arabic text with its chain of narration, (ii)
evidence of the reliability of its *sanad*, (iii) its primary source
with the full citation, (iv) a declaration that it does not originate
from a *ḍa’if* source book, (v) a declaration that it does not
contradict the Qur’an as interpreted in authentic Shi’i *ahadith*, and
(v) a declaration that it does not contradict superior Shi’i *ahadith*.
When you do this, you have already won 2/3 of the battle to defeat
deceit and trickery.

Hadith One
----------

Shaykh al-Ṭusi (d. 460 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأما ما رواه محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى عن أبي الجوزا عن الحسين بن علوان عن
عمرو بن خالد عن زيد بن علي عن آبائه عن علي عليهم السلام قال: حرم رسول
الله صلى الله عليه وآله لحوم الحمر الأهلية ونكاح المتعة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya – Abu al-Jawza – **al-Husayn b. ‘Alwan** –
**‘Amr b. Khalid** – Zayd b. ‘Ali – his fathers – ‘Ali, peace be upon
them:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his family, forbade the
meat of domestic donkey and the marriage of *mut’ah*.[^1]

He also documents in his *Tahdhib*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واما ما رواه محمد بن يحيى عن أبي جعفر عن أبي الجوزا عن الحسين بن علوان
عن عمرو بن خالد عن زيد بن علي عن آبائه عن علي عليهم السلام قال: حرم
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يوم خيبر لحوم الحمر الأهلية ونكاح المتعة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Abu Ja’far – Abu al-Jawza – **al-Husayn b. ‘Alwan**
– **‘Amr b. Khalid** – Zayd b. ‘Ali – his fathers – ‘Ali, peace be upon
them:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his family, forbade the
meat of domestic donkey and the marriage of *mut’ah* on the Day of
Khaybar.[^2]

Shaykh ‘Ali Al Muhsin comments on it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذه الرواية ضعيفة السند بعمرو بن خالد الواسطي، فإنه لم يوثَّق في كتب
الرجال، واختُلف في مذهبه، فقيل: إنه من أهل السنة .والمشهور أنه من
رؤساء الزيدية، وأغلب رواياته يرويها عن زيد بن علي، ومنها هذه الرواية .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن جملة رواة هذا الحديث الحسين بن علوان، وهو سُنِّي المذهب، وعبارة
النجاشي في ترجمته موهمة تحتمل عود التوثيق فيها إليه أو إلى أخيه الحسن،
ولا توثيق آخر له، ولهذا فنحن متوقفون فيه، وإن وثّقه بعض الأعلام،
وضعَّفه بعض آخر .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحاصل أن هذا الحديث اشتمل على راوٍ زيدي، وآخر سُني المذهب، وكلاهما
لم يثبت توثيقهما، وما قيل في توثيقهما ليس محلاً للاعتماد والوثوق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**This report has a** ***ḍa’if*** **chain**, due to ‘Amr b. Khalid
al-Wasiṭi, for there is no *tawthiq* (accreditation) for him in the
books of *al-rijal*. There is also dispute about his sect. It is said
that he was from the Ahl al-Sunnah. However, the widespread opinion is
that he was from the leaders of the Zaydiyyah, and he narrated most of
his reports from Zayd b. ‘Ali, including this report.

One of the narrators of this *hadith* is also al-Hasan b. ‘Alwan, and he
was a Sunni by sect. As for the statement of al-Najashi in his
*tarjamah*, it is inconclusive. It is possible that the *tawthiq* in it
refers to him or to his brother, al-Hasan; and there is no other
*tawthiq* for him. For this reason, we stop short about him, even those
some of the great *‘ulama* call him *thiqah* while others declare him
*ḍa’if*.

In conclusion, this *hadith* has a Zaydi reporter, and another who
belonged to the Sunni sect; and *tawthiq* is not established for both of
them. **As for the** ***tawthiq*** **that is said for them both, it is
neither reliable nor trustworthy**.[^3]

‘Allamah al-Majlisi (d. 1111 H) also declares about the *hadith* above:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضعيف أو موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ḍa’if* or *Muwaththaq*.[^4]

Apparently, the best that the chain of the *hadith* can be is
*muwaththaq*. However, in line with the Shi’i rijali *manhaj*, if a
*muwaththaq*-chained *hadith* contradicts a *sahih*-chained *hadith*,
the former becomes *munkar* (rejected) and therefore very *ḍa’if*.
Al-Ṭusi submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأما العدالة المراعاة في ترجيح أحد الخبرين على الاخر فهو: أن يكون
الراوي معتقدا للحق، مستبصرا ثقة في دينه، متحرجا من الكذب غير متهم فيما
يرويه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأما إذا كان مخالفا في الاعتقاد لأصل المذهب وروى مع ذلك عن الأئمة
عليهم السلام نظر فيما يرويه. فان كان هناك من طرق الموثوق بهم ما يخالفه
وجب اطراح خبره.
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for the *‘adalah* that is required in the preference of one of two
reports over another, it is: that the narrator should have the true
*‘aqidah*, enlightened, trustworthy in his religion, who avoids telling
lies, not accused in what he narrates.

But, if he deviates in *‘aqidah* from the root of the (Shi’i) sect, and
narrates nonetheless from the Imams, peace be upon them, what he
narrates is looked at. **If there is what contradicts it from the routes
of trusted narrators, it becomes obligatory to throw away his
report**.[^5]

As our esteemed reader can clearly see, the report of al-Husayn b.
‘Alwan and ‘Amr b. Khalid above contradicts – not one or two, but –
several *sahih* Shi’i *ahadith* that explicitly establish the unbroken
legitimacy of *mut’ah*! This makes it severely unreliable, *ḍa’if
jiddan*. Meanwhile, an additional argument against this *hadith* of
al-Husayn and ‘Amr is that it further contradicts the Qur’an –
specifically, the Verse of *al-Mut’ah* and several dual-purpose *ayahs*,
which have declared the purity of temporary marriage till the Last Hour.
This makes it *mawḍu’* (a fabrication) without a doubt. No wonder, after
mentioning that the chain of the *riwayah* of Husayn and ‘Amr is either
“*ḍa’if* or *muwaththaq*”, al-Majlisi immediately proceeds to proclaim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأظهر أنه من مفتريات الزيدية، كما يظهر من أكثر أخبارهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The most apparent is that it is from the FABRICATIONS of the
Zaydiyyah**, as obvious from most of their reports.[^6]

So, the *hadith* is *mawḍu’*.

Hadith Two
----------

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Ash’ari is also said to have documented:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال محمد بن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن سنان، قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه
السلام عن المتعة؟ فقال: لا تدنس نفسك بها
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Abi ‘Umayr – ‘Abd Allah b. Sinan:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about *mu’tah*. So, he said,
“**Do not desecrate yourself with it**.”[^7]

The first problem with this report is that it is from a *ḍa’if* book.
While it is true that Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa did write a *Nawadir*,
it has not reached us through authentic means, and there is not enough
evidence to establish that what we have today is a true copy of his
original book. Rather, ‘Allamah al-Muhsini declares about *al-Nawadir*
as we have it in our hands:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحق عدم إعتبار أحاديثها المنقولة في البحار و الوسائل و المستدرك وما
يوجد في النسخة المطبوعة منها
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The truth is the UNRELIABILITY of its** ***ahadith*** which are quoted
in *al-Bihar*, *al-Wasail* and *al-Mustadrak*, and whatever is found in
the published manuscript from it.[^8]

Whoever seeks the detailed arguments about the unreliability of the
book’s transmission to al-Majlisi (d. 1111 H), al-Hurr al-‘Amili (d.
1104 H)and to us is strongly referred to the academic research of
al-Muhsini on it[^9].

Mirza al-Nuri (d. 1320 H) also submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأما ثالثا: فقوله رحمه الله} : ولذا لم ينقل عنه الحر في الوسائل {فإن
فيه أنه من أين علم أن الكتاب كان عنده ولم يعتمد عليه ولذا لم ينقل عنه؟
بل المعلوم المتيقن أنه كغيره من الكتب المعتبرة لم يكن عنده، ولو كان
لنقل عنه قطعا، فإنه ينقل عن كتب هي دونه بمراتب من جهة المؤلف، أو لعدم
ثبوت النسبة إليه، أو ضعف الطريق إليه، كفضل الشيعة للصدوق، وتحف العقول،
وتفسير فرات، وإرشاد الديلمي، ونوادر أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، والاختصاص
للمفيد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And thirdly, as for his statement, may Allah be merciful to him {this is
why al-Hurr in *al-Wasail* did not quote from it}, what is there is: how
did he know that the book was with him and he did not rely upon it and
so did not quote from it? Rather, what is undoubtably certain is that
it, like other authentic books, was not with him. If it had been, he
would certainly have quoted from it, **because he quoted from books that
are inferior to it by degrees in terms of (the unreliability of) the
author, or due to the unreliability of its (i.e. the book’s) attribution
to him, or the weakness of the chain (of the book) to him**, like *Faḍl
al-Shi’ah* of al-Saduq, *Tuhaf al-‘Uqul*, *Tafsir al-Furat*, *Irshad* of
al-Daylami, ***Nawadir*** **of Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa**, and
*al-Ikhtisas* of al-Mufid.[^10]

He lists *al-Nawadir* among the *ḍa’if* books which al-Hurr al-‘Amili
relies upon in his *Wasail*. So, whatever is quoted from it – in
*al-Bihar*, *al-Wasail* or its published editions – is *ḍa’if* by
default.

Meanwhile, the *hadith* is equally *mawḍu’* on account of its opposition
to the Verse of *al-Mut’ah* and several *sahih ahadith*.

Hadith Three
------------

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Ash’ari is further said to have recorded:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ابن أبي عمير، عن هشام بن الحكم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام، قال: ما
تفعلها عندنا إلا الفواجر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – Hisham b. al-Hakam – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

None does it, in our view, except the unchaste.[^11]

It comes from a *ḍa’if* book. Therefore, it is *ḍa’if*. But then, it is
also obscure. What exactly is it that is done by the unchaste? It is not
mentioned. So, it is not known. However, if it is were a reference to
*mut’ah*, then the *hadith* would become *mawḍu’* due to its
contradiction with the Verse of *al-Mut’ah* and numerous *sahih
ahadith*.

Hadith Four
-----------

Shaykh al-Kulayni (d. 329 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدة من أصحابنا، عن سهل بن زياد، عن علي بن أسباط، ومحمد بن الحسين
جميعا، عن الحكم بن مسكين، عن عمار قال: قال أبو عبد الله عليه السلام لي
ولسليمان بن خالد: قد حرمت عليكما المتعة من قبلي ما دمتما بالمدينة
لأنكما تكثران الدخول علي فأخاف أن تؤخذا، فيقال: هؤلاء أصحاب جعفر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A number of our companions – **Sahl b. Ziyad** – ‘Ali b. Asbaṭ AND
Muhammad b. al-Husayn – **al-Hakam b. Miskin** – ‘Ammar:

Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, said to me and Sulayman bl Khalid,
“**I have made** ***mut’ah*** **(temporary marriage)** ***haram***
**upon you both as long as you are in** **al-Madinah**, because you
frequently visit me and **I fear that you might be arrested**, and it
would be said, ‘These are companions of Ja’far.’”[^12]

‘Allamah al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضعيف على المشهور
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ḍa’if* upon the mainstream (standards).[^13]

Al-Jawahiri also states about one of its narrators:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سهل بن زياد: أبو سعيد الآدمي، الرازي … ضعيف جزما أو لم تثبت وثاقته
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sahl b. Ziyad, Abu Sa’id al-Adami al-Razi ...: **decidedly** ***ḍa’if***
**or his trustworthiness is not established**.[^14]

About another narrator, he further declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحكم بن مسكين الثقفي : … مجهول
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Hakam b. Miskin al-Thaqafi ...: ***Majhul***.[^15]

So, it is genuinely *ḍa’if*.

Those who quote it seek to prove that *mut’ah* is *haram* through it.
However, it actually establishes the opposite of that! According to the
*ḍa’if hadith*, both ‘Ammar and Sulayman were forbidden to do temporary
marriage in Madinah but free to practise it elsewhere. Moreover, the
prohibition covered only both of them, and did not extend generally to
all Shi’is. Besides, it was done to protect both ‘Ammar and Sulayman
from arrest and possible persecution or even execution. The Ahl
al-Sunnah had declared *mut’ah* a form of *zina*. Therefore, the Sunni
government in al-Madinah could arrest the two Shi’is and accuse them of
fornication or adultery. They both could be stoned to death, or lashed,
depending on their marital status, as a result of their *mut’ah*; and
that could soil the name of Imam Ja’far – with whom they were known –
among the general Sunni public. From the look of it, in line with the
*ḍa’if* report, the Madinah governorate was stricter against temporary
marriage than other Sunni provinces.

In any case, the *hadith* is *ḍa’if*. Therefore, it is of no probative
value.

Hadith Five
-----------

Al-Kulayni documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن محمد، عن صالح بن أبي حماد، عن ابن سنان، عن المفضل بن عمر قال:
سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول في المتعة: دعوها أما يستحيي أحدكم
أن يرى في موضع العورة فيحمل ذلك على صالحي إخوانه وأصحابه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Muhammad – Salih b. Abi Hammad – Ibn Sinan – al-Mufaḍḍal b.
‘Umar:

I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, saying about *mut’ah*:
“Abandon it. Would any of you be ashamed to be seen at the place of
blemish, and that is placed upon his righteous brothers and
companions?”[^16]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضعيف
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ḍa’if*.[^17]

Then, he adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله عليه‌السلام : ) أن يرى في موضع العورة ( أي يراه الناس في موضع
يعيب من يجدونه فيه ، لكراهتهم للمتعة فيصير ذلك سببا للضرر عليه وعلى
إخوانه
  </p>
</blockquote>

His statement, peace be upon him (to be seen at the place of blemish)
meaning, the people see him at a place where whosoever they find there
is condemned, due to their abhorrence of *mut’ah*, hence that becomes a
cause of harm to him and to his brothers.[^18]

This seems to be a conditional ban imposed to curb the harm which
accrues to righteous Shi’is from ignorant Sunnis. Wherever the practice
of *mut’ah* would not put the Shee’ah in danger, then the prohibition
would not apply. In any case, the *hadith* is *ḍa’if*. Meanwhile, *if*
its texts does question the legitimacy of *mut’ah*, then it is in
contradiction to the Verse of *al-Mut’ah*, and therefore *mawḍu’*.

Hadith Six
----------

Al-Kulayni reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن بعض أصحابنا، عن زرارة، عن
أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قلت له: جعلت فداك الرجل يتزوج المتعة وينقضي
شرطها ثم يتزوجها رجل آخر حتى بانت منه ثم يتزوجها الأول حتى بانت منه
ثلاثا وتزوجت ثلاثة أزواج يحل للأول أن يتزوجها؟ قال: نعم كم شاء ليس هذه
مثل الحرة هذه مستأجرة وهي بمنزلة الإماء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – **one of our
companions** – Zurarah:

I said to Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, “May I be sacrificed for you.
The man marries in *mut’ah* and its term expires. Then, another man
marries her until she separates from him. Then, the first (man)
re-marries her until she separates from him three times; and she married
three husbands. Is it permissible for the first (man) to re-marry her
(again)?” He said, “Yes, any number of times he wishes. **This one is
not like the free woman. This one is rented, and she is of the status of
the slave woman**.”[^19]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن وعليه الأصحاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*, and upon it are the companions (i.e. the scholars).[^20]

However, it is actually *mursal* and therefore *ḍa’if*. Al-Majlisi
grades it *hasan*, apparently because he belongs to the camp of Shi’i
scholars who accept the *marasil* of Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – as in this case.
Our great leader, ‘Allamah al-Khui (d. 1411 H), traces the origin of
this practice:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أقول: الأصل في هذه الدعوى هو الشيخ - قدس سره -، فقد قال في أواخر بحثه
عن خبر الواحد في كتاب العدة …) : ولأجل ذلك سوت الطائفة بين ما يرويه
محمد بن أبي عمير، وصفوان بن يحيى، وأحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر، وغيرهم من
الثقات الذين عرفوا بأنهم لا يروون ولا يرسلون إلا عمن يوثق به، وبين ما
أسنده غيرهم(…
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: The root of this claim was Shaykh, may Allah sanctify his secret,
for he had said at the end of his research concerning the solitary
report in *Kitab al-‘Uddah*:

“... It is for this reason that the *ṭaifah* have equated the reports of
Muhammad b. Abi ‘Umayr, Safwan b. Yahya, and other *thiqah* narrators -
whom they know that they did not narrate or do *irsal* except from those
that were trusted - with what others narrated in *musnad* (fully
connected) manners....”[^21]

Then, he adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمن المطمأن به أن منشأ هذا الدعوى هو دعوى الكشي الاجماع على تصحيح ما
يصح عن هؤلاء. وقد زعم الشيخ أن منشأ الاجماع هو أن هؤلاء لا يروون إلا
عن ثقة، وقد مر قريبا بطلان ذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

From what is certain is that the origin of this claim (of Shaykh
al-Ṭusi) was the claim of al-Kashi that there was *ijma’* (consensus)
upon the authentication of whatsoever is authentically transmitted from
these people. The Shaykh had claimed that the origin of the *ijma’* was
that these people did not narrate except from *thiqah* narrators, and
the fallacy of that has just been mentioned.[^22]

So, there was a claim of *ijma’* by al-Kashi upon the acceptance of
whatsoever Ibn Abi ‘Umayr and a few other people narrated. From this
claim of al-Kashi, al-Ṭusi concluded that Ibn Abi ‘Umayr never narrated
except from *thiqah* narrators. His conclusion became accepted among
many *‘ulama*; and, as such, they accepted all his *ahadith*
indiscriminately, including even where he has not given the name of his
source. However, as al-Khui demonstrates, both the *‘ijma* itself and
the conclusion from it were made in error. He first declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولكن هذه الدعوى باطلة
  </p>
</blockquote>

But, this claim (i.e. that they narrated from *thiqah* narrators only)
is fallacious.[^23]

Then, with specific reference to Ibn Abi ‘Umayr, he debunks the myth
surrounding him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذا ابن أبي عمير، روى عن علي بن أبي حمزة البطائني كتابه، ذكره النجاشي
والشيخ، وروى محمد بن يعقوب بسند صحيح عن ابن أبي عمير عن علي بن أبي
حمزة وروى بسند صحيح عن ابن أبي عمير عن الحسين بن أحمد المنقري، والحسين
بن أحمد المنقري، ضعفه النجاشي والشيخ. وروى الشيخ بسند صحيح عن ابن أبي
عمير، عن علي بن حديد وعلي ابن حديد ضعفه الشيخ في موارد من كتابيه وبالغ
في تضعيفه. وتقدمت روايته عن يونس بن ظبيان آنفا. وأما روايته عن
المجاهيل غير المذكورين في الرجال فكثيرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

:And this is Ibn Abi ‘Umayr. He narrated from ‘Ali b. Abi Hamzah
al-Baṭaini his book. Al-Najashi and Shaykh mentioned it. Muhammad b.
Ya’qub also narrated with a *sahih* chain from Ibn Abi ‘Umayr from ‘Ali
b. Abi Hamzah; and he also narrated with a *sahih* chain from Ibn Abi
‘Umayr from al-Husayn b. Ahmad al-Munqiri, and al-Husayn b. Ahmad
al-Munqiri was declared *ḍa’if* by al-Najashi and Shaykh. Shaykh too
narrated with a *sahih* chain from Ibn Abi ‘Umayr from ‘Ali b. Hadid,
and ‘Ali b. Hadid was declared *ḍa’if* by Shaykh at many places in his
two books, and he was extremely emphatic in declaring him *ḍa’if*. His
report from Yunus b. Ẓabyan has been previously mentioned. As for his
reports from *majhul* narrators who are not mentioned in the *rijal*
books, then they are several.[^24]

Basically, Ibn Abi ‘Umayr used to narrate from *ḍa’if* narrators, and
even from al-Baṭaini who was a liar! There are *sahih* chains reaching
up to him confirming these crucial facts. As such, the basis for
accepting his narrations without question, including his *marasil*, is
defeated by this reality. Worse still, Ibn Abi ‘Umayr himself never
claimed that he narrated from reliable narrators only. It was just some
*‘ulama* who made the apparently erronoeous claim about him. Writing
about Ibn Abi ‘Umayr and his colleagues, and the claim that they never
narrated except from *thiqah* narrators, al-Khui further states:

**
**

ومن الظاهر أنه لم ينسب إلى أحد هؤلاء إخباره وتصريحه بذلك، وليس لنا طريق
آخر لكشفه


.

From what is apparent is that it is not attributed to any of these
people his information or declaration of that, and there is no other way
for us to discover it.[^25]

The bottomline then is that the *marasil* of Ibn Abi ‘Umayr are *ḍa’if*
like the other *marasil*. This is what al-Khui concludes as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تقدم عن النجاشي في أن الأصحاب سكنوا إلى مراسيل ابن أبي عمير، وذكر مثل
ذلك الشيخ في كتاب العدة، ولكنا قد تعرضنا في المقدمة، إلى أن هذا الكلام
لا أساس له، وأنه لا فرق بين مراسيله ومراسيل غيره من الثقات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We have earlier quoted al-Najashi saying that the companions (i.e.
scholars) relied upon the *marasil* of Ibn Abi ‘Umayr, and Shaykh
mentioned the like of that in *Kitab al-‘Uddah*. **However, we have
indicated in the Introduction that this** **statement has no basis, and
that there is no difference between his** ***marasil*** **and the**
***marasil*** **of other** ***thiqah*** **narrators**.[^26]

Therefore, the *hadith* of Zurarah above is *ḍa’if*, as it is a *mursal*
report of Ibn Abi ‘Umayr. Those who quote it seek to prove:

(i) the *mut’ah* wife is “rented” for sex in the marriage; and

(ii) she is like a slave woman.

Well, the comparison of the temporary wife to the slave woman is
strictly relative:

(a) a man may have as many slave women with whom he enjoys sexual
relations as he wants;

(b) in the same manner, the husband may have *mut’ah* relationships with
as many women as he wants at the same time;

(c) the master of a slave woman needs no *wali* or witnesses in order to
enjoy a concubinage with her;

(d) the husband of a temporary wife needs no *wali* (except in the case
of a virgin) and no witnesses (except where he voluntarily chooses to
have them) in order to formalize the *mut’ah* with her;

(e) the slave woman exits the concubinage without divorce;

(f) the temporary wife separates from the husband without a divorce.

These are the only areas of similarity between the *mut’ah* wife and the
slave concubine. In everything else, they are different. This *hasan* or
*sahih* *hadith* of al-Kulayni, which we have already quoted in full in
this book, testifies to this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ليس فيها وقت ولا عدد إنما هي بمنزلة الإماء يتزوج منهن كم شاء وصاحب
الأربع نسوة يتزوج منهن ما شاء بغير ولي ولا شهود فإذا انقضى الاجل بانت
منه بغير طلاق ويعطيها الشئ اليسير
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no specific length or any (maximum) number (of the wives) in
it. They are only of the status of slave women: he marries any number of
them as he wishes, and the husband of four women (also) marries from
them whatever he wishes, with no *wali* or witnesses. When the (agreed)
term expires, she separates from him without divorce, and he gives her
the small thing.

As for the claim that she is “rented” for sex in the *mut’ah*, we will
have more to say about this. But, first, let us examine the other
*ahadith* which also described her as “rented”. Al-Kulayni gives us the
second report, as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسين بن سعيد، ومحمد بن
خالد البرقي، عن القاسم بن عروة، عن عبد الحميد، عن محمد بن مسلم، عن أبي
جعفر عليه السلام في المتعة قال: ليست من الأربع لأنها لا تطلق ولا ترث
وإنما هي مستأجرة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa – al-Husayn b. Sa’id AND
Muhammad b. Khalid al-Barqi – **al-Qasim b. ‘Urwah** – ‘Abd al-Hamid –
Muhammad b. Muslim:

Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, said concerning *mut’ah*: “She is not
from the four (permanent wives), because she is not divorced and she
does not inherit. She is only a rented woman.”[^27]

Al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مجهول
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Majhul*.[^28]

And al-Jawahiri declares concerning one of its narrators:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القاسم بن عروة: أبو محمد مولى أبي أيوب الخوزي - مجهول
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Qasim b. ‘Urwah, Abu Muhammad, freed slave of Abu Ayyub al-Khawzi:
***Majhul***.[^29]

Meanwhile, al-Barqi is equally said to have documented this *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعنه، عن العباس بن معروف، عن القاسم بن عروة: عن عبد الحميد الطائي، عن
محمد بن مسلم، قال: قلت لأبي جعفر عليه السلام : لم لا تورث المرأة عمن
يتمتع بها؟ -قال: لأنها مستأجرة، وعدتها خمسة وأربعون يوما
  </p>
</blockquote>

And from him – al-‘Abbas b. Ma’ruf – **al-Qasim b. ‘Urwah** – ‘Abd
al-Hamid al-Ṭai – Muhammad b. Muslim:

I said to Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, “Why does the woman not inherit
the one who does *mut’ah* with her?” He said, “It is because she is a
rented woman, and her *‘iddah* is forty-five days.”[^30]

This is from al-Qasim b. ‘Urwah, the same *majhul* narrator, and it is
therefore also *ḍa’if*. Besides, *Kitab al-Mahasin* is also a *ḍa’if*
book, as it has not reached us through authentic means.[^31] That
compounds the unreliability of the *hadith*.

And, here is al-Kulayni with the final *hadith* on this matter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسين بن محمد، عن أحمد بن إسحاق، عن سعدان بن مسلم، عن عبيد بن زرارة،
عن أبيه، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: ذكرت له المتعة أهي من
الأربع؟ فقال: تزوج منهن ألفا فإنهن مستأجرات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Husayn b. Muhammad – Ahmad b. Ishaq – Sa’dan b. Muslim – ‘Ubayd b.
Zurarah – his father:

I mentioned *mut’ah* to him, “Is she from the four?” So, he said, “Marry
a thousand of them, for they are rented women.”[^32]

And, al-Majlisi submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مجهول
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Majhul*.[^33]

This basically establishes that there is NO authentic basis for
referring to *mut’ah* wives as rented women.

But then, let us assume, for the sake of argument, that she *is* rented.
Is it really for sex? There are two possibilities here:

(i) The woman is rented for sex in *mut’ah*. Therefore, there can be no
*mut’ah* without intercourse.

(ii) The woman is not rented for sex in *mut’ah*. As such, there can be
*mut’ah* without intercourse.

There is no third way to this. If *mut’ah* is only a “rental” of the
woman for sex, then any *mut’ah* without sex is no *mut’ah*. However, as
al-Kulayni has reported, *mut’ah* can be without sex, and still be
*mut’ah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد وعبد الله ابني محمد بن عيسى، عن علي بن الحكم، عن
زياد بن أبي الحلال قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه‌ السلام يقول: لا بأس
بأن يتمتع بالبكر ما لم يفض إليها مخافة كراهية العيب على أهلها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad and ‘Abd Allah, sons of Muhammad b. ‘Isa –
‘Ali b. al-Hakam – Ziyad b. Abi al-Hilal:

I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, saying: “**There is no
problem in** **doing** ***mut’ah*** **with the virgin as long as he does
not have sex with her**, for fear of the disgust of the blemish upon her
family.”[^34]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^35]

Even the locus classicus in this matter, the *mursal hadith* of Ibn Abi
‘Umayr, affirms the same truth. Al-Ṭusi documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى محمد بن يعقوب عن علي بن إبراهيم عن أبيه عن ابن أبي عمير عن بعض
أصحابنا عن زرارة عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: قلت له: جعلت فداك تتزوج
المتعة وينقضي شرطها ثم يتزوجها رجل آخر حين بانت منه ثم يتزوجها الرجل
الأول حين بانت منه ثلاثا وتزوجت ثلاثة أزواج يحل للأول ان يتزوجها؟ قال:
نعم كم شاء ليس هذه مثل الحرة هذه مستأجرة وهي بمنزلة الإماء. ومتى تزوج
الرجل امرأة متعة وشرطت عليه ان لا يطأها في فرجها فليس له إلا ما
اشترطت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ya’qub - ‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr –
**one of our companions** – Zurarah:

I said to Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, “May I be sacrificed for you.
*Mut’ah* was contracted and its term expires. Then, another man marries
her when she separates from him. Then, the first man re-marries her when
she separates from him, three times; and she married three husbands. Is
it permissible for the first (man) to re-marry her (again)?” He said,
“Yes, any number of times he wishes. This one is not like the free
woman. This one is rented, and she is of the status of the slave woman.
**And when the man marries a woman in** ***mut’ah*****, and she imposes
a condition upon him that he shall not have sexual intercourse with her,
then there is nothing for him except whatever is stipulated as a
condition**.”[^36]

So, then, how exactly is *mut’ah* a “rental” of the woman *for sex*?

Hadith Seven
------------

Shaykh al-Ṭusi records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واما ما رواه أحمد بن محمد عن أبي الحسن عن بعض أصحابنا يرفعه إلى أبي
عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لا تتمتع بالمؤمنة فتذلها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad – Abu al-Hasan – **one of our companions** – Abu ‘Abd
Allah, peace be upon him:

Do not do *mut’ah* with a *muminah* (believing woman), thereby
humiliating her.[^37]

Then, al-Ṭusi himself declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فهذا الخبر مقطوع الاسناد مرسل
  </p>
</blockquote>

This report has a disconnected chain, *mursal*.[^38]

So, it is *ḍa’if*; and that basically deals with it.

Hadith Eight
------------

Al-Ṭusi reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى عن أحمد بن محمد عن علي ابن حديد عن جميل عن
زرارة قال: سأل عمار وانا عنده عن الرجل يتزوج الفاجرة متعة قال: لا بأس
وإن كان التزويج الآخر فليحصن بابه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – **‘Ali b. Hadid** –
Jamil – Zurarah:

‘Ammar asked, while I was with him, about the man who marries the
prostitute in *mut’ah*. He said, “There is no problem. But, if it were
the other marriage, then he must fortify his door.”[^39]

And, in his *Istibsar*, he proclaims:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأما خبر زرارة فالطريق إليه علي بن حديد وهو ضعيف جدا لا يعول على ما
ينفرد بنقله
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for the report of Zurarah, **the route to him is ‘Ali b. Hadid and he
is** ***ḍa’if jiddan***. Whatever he alone narrates is not relied
upon.[^40]

Therefore, the report is *ḍa’if jiddan* in its *sanad*.

Al-Majlisi too says about the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضعيف
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ḍa’if*.[^41]

Meanwhile, it also directly contradicts this *ayah* of the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزاني لا ينكح إلا زانية أو مشركة والزانية لا ينكحها إلا زان أو مشرك
وحرم ذلك على المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

The fornicator shall not marry any but a fornicatress or an idolatress;
**and the fornicatress, none shall marry her but a fornicator or an
idolater: and that is made** ***haram*** **for the believers**.[^42]

On this account alone, the *hadith* is *mawḍu’*.

Hadith Nine
-----------

Al-Ṭusi documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عنه عن سعدان عن علي بن يقطين قال: قلت لأبي الحسن عليه السلام: نساء أهل
المدينة قال: فواسق قلت: فأتزوج منهن؟ قال: نعم. ومتى أراد الرجل تزويج
المتعة فليس عليه التفتيش عنها بل يصدقها في قولها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

From him (i.e. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya) – Sa’dan – ‘Ali b. Yaqṭin:

I said to Abu al-Hasan, peace be upon him, “The women of al-Madinah.” He
said, “Unchaste.” I said, “So, can I marry from them?” He said, “Yes.
And when the man intends to contract *mut’ah*, he does not have to do
investigation about her. Rather, he should trust her in her
statement.”[^43]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مجهول
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Majhul*.[^44]

As such, this *hadith* of ‘Ali b. Yaqṭin is *ḍa’if*. It also contradicts
the Book of Allah, and that makes it *mawḍu’*.

Hadith Ten
----------

Al-Ṭusi records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى عن علي بن السندي عن عثمان بن عيسى عن إسحاق بن
عمار عن فضل مولى محمد بن راشد عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قلت اني
تزوجت امرأة متعة فوقع في نفسي أن لها زوجا ففتشت عن ذلك فوجدت لها زوجا
قال: ولم فتشت؟!
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya – **‘Ali b. al-Sindi** – ‘Uthman b. ‘Isa –
Ishaq b. ‘Ammar – **Faḍl, freed slave of Muhammad b. Rashid**:

I said, “I married a woman in *mut’ah*. But, it occurred in my mind that
she had a husband. So, I investigated that and discovered that she had a
husband.” Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, said, “Why did you
investigate?!”[^45]

Al-Jawahiri says about one of the narrators:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن السندي: روى ٨٤ رواية، وروى بعنوان علي بن السندي القمي - لم تثبت
وثاقته
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. al-Sindi: he narrated 84 reports, and he also narrated under the
name ‘Ali b. al-Sanadi al-Qummi: **his trustworthiness is NOT
established**.[^46]

This makes him *majhul* and *ḍa’if*. Al-Jawahiri also states about
another narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الفضل مولى محمد بن راشد :مجهول
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Faḍl, freed slave of Muhammad b. Rashid: ***Majhul***.[^47]

Apparently, the report has a *ḍa’if* chain. It also contradicts this
authentic *hadith* of al-Kulayni:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن ابن محبوب، عن أبان، عن أبي مريم، عن
أبي جعفر عليه السلام أنه سئل عن المتعة فقال: إن المتعة اليوم ليس كما
كانت قبل اليوم إنهن كن يومئذ يؤمن واليوم لا يؤمن فاسألوا عنهن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – Ibn Mahbub – Aban – Abu Maryam:

Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, was asked about *mut’ah*. So, he said,
“Verily, *mut’ah* today is not as it used to be in the past. They (i.e.
the women) used to be faithful. But, today, they are not faithful.
**Therefore, investigate about them (i.e. the women)**.[^48]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق كالصحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq ka al-Sahih*[^49]

Therefore, the man must thoroughly investigate about the woman –
including concerning her marital status – before contracting *mut’ah*
with her. Besides, even during their marriage, he must still carry out
fresh investigations if he has any suspicions. The Imam, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, has not placed any time limitations on the obligation to
investigate.

Hadith Eleven
-------------

Al-Ṭusi reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعنه عن أيوب بن نوح عن مهران بن محمد عن بعض أصحابنا عن أبي عبد الله
عليه السلام قال: قيل له ان فلانا تزوج امرأة متعة فقيل له ان لها زوجا
فسألها فقال أبو عبد الله عليه السلام: ولم سألها؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

And from him (Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya) – Ayyub b. Nuh – **Mihran b.
Muhammad** – **one of our companions**:

It was said to Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, “So-and-so married a
woman in *mut’ah*. Then, he was informed that she had a husband.
Therefore, he asked her.” So, Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, said,
“And why did he ask her?”[^50]

Al-Jawahiri says about one of the narrators:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مهران بن محمد: مجهول
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mihran b. Muhammad: ***Majhul***.[^51]

As such, the *hadith* is *ḍa’if*. But, it is also *mursal*, as our
esteemed reader can see. Al-Majlisi too confirms this when he declares
concerning it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مرسل
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Mursal*.[^52]

Therefore, its suffers from compounded unreliability.

Hadith Twelve
-------------

Al-Ṭusi documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعنه عن الهيثم بن أبي مسروق النهدي عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر ومحمد بن
الحسن الأشعري عن محمد بن عبد الله الأشعري قال: قلت للرضا عليه السلام:
الرجل يتزوج بالمرأة فيقع في قلبه أن لها زوجا قال: ما عليه أرأيت لو
سألها البينة كان يجد من يشهد ان ليس لها زوج
  </p>
</blockquote>

And from him (i.e. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya) – al-Haytham b. Abi
Masruq al-Hindi – Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Abi Nasr AND Muhammad b. al-Hasan
al-Ash’ari – **Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ash’ari**:

I said to al-Riḍa, peace be upon him, “The man marries the woman. Then,
it occurs in his mind that she has a husband.” He said, “It is not upon
him. Have you seen: if he asks her for proof, there will be someone who
will testify that she has no husband?”[^53]

Al-Majlisi states about the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مجهول
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Majhul*.[^54]

Al-Jawahiri also submits about one of the narrators:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن عبد الله الأشعري: مجهول
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ash’ari: ***Majhul***.[^55]

Therefore, the *hadith* is *ḍa’if*.

Hadith Thirteen
---------------

Al-Ṭusi records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى عن العباس بن معروف عن سعدان بن مسلم عن رجل عن أبي
عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لا بأس بتزويج البكر إذا رضيت من غير اذن
أبويها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya – al-‘Abbas b. Ma’ruf – Sa’dan b. Muslim – a
man – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

There is no problem in marrying the virgin when she consents, without
the consent of her parents.[^56]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مجهول مرسل
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Majhul Mursal*.[^57]

Thus, it is very weak. It equally contradicts this authentic *hadith* of
the same al-Ṭusi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاما رواه أحمد بن محمد عن محمد بن إسماعيل عن أبى الحسن ظريف عن ابان عن
أبي مريم عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: العذراء التي لها أب لا تتزوج
متعة إلا باذن أبيها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad – Muhammad b. Isma’il – Abu al-Hasan Zarif – Aban –
Abu Maryam – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

The virgin who has a father cannot be married in *mut’ah* except with
the permission of her father.[^58]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق كالصحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq ka al-Sahih*[^59]

Al-Ruhani also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^60]

That then delivers the fatal blow to it.

Hadith Fourteen
---------------

Al-Ṭusi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعنه عن موسى بن عمر بن يزيد عن محمد بن سنان عن أبي سعيد القماط عمن
رواه قال: قلت لأبي عبد الله عليه السلام: جارية بكر بين أبويها تدعوني
إلى نفسها سرا من أبويها أفأفعل ذلك؟ قال: نعم واتق موضع الفرج قال: قلت
فان رضيت بذلك؟ قال: وان رضيت بذلك فإنه عار على الابكار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And from him from **Musa b. ‘Umar b. Yazid** – **Muhammad b. Sinan** –
Abu Sa’id al-Qimaṭ – **from the one who narrated it**:

I said to Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him: “A virgin girl who is still
with her parents invites me to herself secretly without the knowledge of
her parents. Should I do that?” He said, “Yes, and avoid the place of
the vulva.” I said, “So, if she consents to that?” He said, “Even if she
consents to that, for it is a shame upon the virgins.”[^61]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضعيف على المشهور
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ḍa’if ‘ala al-Mashhur*.[^62]

Al-Jawahiri too states about one of the narrators:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موسى بن عمر بن يزيد بن ذبيان: الصيقل - مجهول
  </p>
</blockquote>

Musa b. ‘Umar b. Yazid Dhibyan al-Sayqal: ***Majhul***.[^63]

And, about another narrator, Shaykh al-Najashi (d. 450 H) submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن سنان … هو رجل ضعيف جدا لا يعول عليه ولا يلتفت إلى ما تفرد به
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Sinan ... **he is a man who is** ***ḍa’if jiddan*** **(very
weak)**. He is not relied upon, and no attention is paid to whatever he
narrated without corroboration.[^64]

As such, the *hadith* is *ḍa’if jiddan*. Worse still, it is equally
*mursal*, as its main narrator is unknown.

With that same *ḍa’if jiddan* chain, al-Tusi proceeds with this further
*riwayah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبهذا الاسناد عن أبي سعيد قال: سئل أبو عبد الله عليه السلام عن التمتع
من الابكار اللواتي بين الأبوين فقال: لا بأس ولا أقول كما يقول هؤلاء
الأقشاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

And with this chain from Abu Sa’id:

Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, was asked about *mut’ah* with virgins
who are still with their parents. So, he said, “There is no problem
(with it), and I do not say as these scoundrels say.”[^65]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضعيف
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ḍa’if*.[^66]

We already know of the severe weakness of the *sanad*, anyway.

Then, al-Ṭusi proceeds to narrate one more *hadith* through that same
chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو سعيد عن الحلبي قال: سألته عن التمتع من البكر إذا كانت بين أبويها
بلا اذن أبويها قال: لا بأس ما لم يقتض ما هناك لتعف بذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Sa’id from al-Halabi:

I asked him about *mut’ah* with the virgin who is still with her parents
without the consent of her parents. He said, “There is no problem as
long as one does not consummate what is there, so that she could be
chaste by that.”[^67]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضعيف على المشهور
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ḍa’if ‘ala al-Mashhur*.[^68]

And it is actually *ḍa’if jiddan* due to Muhammad b. Sinan. Of course,
it equally contradicts the *sahih hadith* of Abu Maryam, quoted above –
a fact that makes its case even more hopeless.

Hadith Fifteen
--------------

Al-Tusi records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسن بن محبوب عن إسحاق بن جرير قال: قلت لأبي عبد الله عليه السلام ان
عندنا بالكوفة امرأة معروفة بالفجور أيحل ان أتزوجها متعة؟ قال فقال
:رفعت راية؟ قلت: لا لو رفعت راية اخذها السلطان قال فقال: نعم تزوجها
متعة قال: ثم إنه اصغي إلى بعض مواليه فاسر إليه شيئا، قال: فدخل قلبي من
ذلك شئ قال: فلقيت مولاه فقلت له: اي شئ قال لك أبو عبد الله عليه
السلام؟ قال: فقال لي: ليس هو شئ تكرهه فقلت: فأخبرني به قال فقال: إنما
قال لي: ولو رفعت راية ما كان عليه في تزويجها شئ إنما يخرجها من حرام
إلى حلال.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Hasan b. Mahbub – Ishaq b. Jarir:

I said to Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, “**With us in Kufah, there
is a woman who is famous for prostitution. Is it** ***halal*** **to
marry her in** ***mut’ah*****?**” He said, “Did she raise a flag (i.e.
openly practises prostitution)?” I said, “No. If she raised a flag, the
ruler would arrest her.” So, he said, “**Yes. Marry her in**
***mut’ah***.” Then, he listened to one of his slaves and confided
something to him. As a result, something entered my heart concerning
that. Therefore, I met his slave and said to him, “What did Abu ‘Abd
Allah, peace be upon him, say to you?” So, he said to me, “It is not
something you dislike.” Then I said, “In that case, inform me of it.”
Then he said, “He only said to me: even if she raised a flag, there
would not be anything against his marriage of her. He only takes her out
of a *haram* to a *halal*.”[^69]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^70]

Al-Ruhani agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^71]

The last part of the *hadith* is *mursal* and therefore *ḍa’if*, as it
is narrated to Ishaq by an unnamed, unknown slave. As for the first
part, it is *muwaththaq*.

A *muwaththaq hadith* is only conditionally authentic, and is inferior
to a *sahih hadith*. This is why, in the case of a conflict between a
*muwaththaq hadith* and a *sahih hadith*, the former becomes *shadh* and
*ḍa’if*. Meanwhile, al-Ṭusi himself gives some further information on
the *muwaththaq hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأما العدالة المراعاة في ترجيح أحد الخبرين على الاخر فهو: أن يكون
الراوي معتقدا للحق، مستبصرا ثقة في دينه، متحرجا من الكذب غير متهم فيما
يرويه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأما إذا كان مخالفا في الاعتقاد لأصل المذهب وروى مع ذلك عن الأئمة
عليهم السلام نظر فيما يرويه. فان كان هناك من طرق الموثوق بهم ما يخالفه
وجب اطراح خبره. وان لم يكن هناك ما يوجب اطراح خبره ويكون هناك ما
يوافقه وجب العمل به.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وان لم يكن من الفرقة المحقة خبر يوافق ذلك ولا يخالفه، ولا يعرف لهم قول
فيه، وجب أيضا العمل به
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for the *‘adalah* that is required in the preference of one of two
reports over another, it is: that the narrator should have the true
*‘aqidah*, enlightened, trustworthy in his religion, who avoids telling
lies, not accused in what he narrates.

But, if he deviates in *‘aqidah* from the root of the (Shi’i) sect, and
narrates nonetheless from the Imams, peace be upon them, what he
narrates is looked at. **If there is what contradicts it from the routes
of trusted narrators, it becomes obligatory to throw away his report**.
However, if there is nothing that necessitates throwing away his report,
and there is what agrees with it, it becomes obligatory to follow it.

Meanwhile, if there is no report from the saved sect (i.e. Shi’is) which
agrees with that, and no report which contradicts it, and no opinion is
known from them concerning it, it is equally obligatory to follow
it.[^72]

In other words, a *muwaththaq hadith* – which is what a non-Imami Muslim
narrates from the Ahl al-Bayt – is authentic only if there is nothing
*sahih* that contradicts it. Al-Ṭusi also adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وان كان ما رووه ليس هناك ما يخالفه ولا يعرف من الطائفة العمل بخلافه،
وجب أيضا العمل به إذا كان متحرجا في روايته موثوقا في أمانته، وان كان
مخطئا في أصل الاعتقاد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And if there is nothing that contradicts what he narrated, and the
*ṭaifah* (i.e. Shi’is) are not known to have acted contrary to it, it is
obligatory to follow it as well, if he is restrained (from telling lies)
in his report, trustworthy in his honesty, even if he deviates in the
root of *‘aqidah*.[^73]

So, what saves a *muwaththaq hadith* is the complete absence of any
*sahih* Shi’i *hadith* that contradicts it. If there is, the *muwaththaq
hadith* becomes *matruk* (rejected) and thrown away.

With that in mind, we ask: is there any *sahih* Shi’i *hadith* which
contradicts the *muwaththaq hadith* of Ishaq b. Jarir above?

First, it directly opposes this *ayah* of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزاني لا ينكح إلا زانية أو مشركة والزانية لا ينكحها إلا زان أو مشرك
وحرم ذلك على المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

The fornicator shall not marry any but a fornicatress or an idolatress;
**and the fornicatress, none shall marry her but a fornicator or an
idolater: and that is** **made** ***HARAM*** **for the believers**.[^74]

This explicitly forbids marriage with fornicators and fornicatresses.
The instruction is also general, and the Ahl al-Bayt have applied the
verse to both permanent marriage and *mut’ah*.

It also contradicts this *ayah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اليوم أحل لكم الطيبات وطعام الذين أوتوا الكتاب حل لكم وطعامكم حل لهم
والمحصنات من المؤمنات والمحصنات من الذين أوتوا الكتاب من قبلكم إذا
آتيتموهن أجورهن محصنين غير مسافحين ولا متخذي أخدان
  </p>
</blockquote>

Today, the good things are made *halal* to you; and the food of those
who were given the Book is *halal* for you, and your food is *halal* for
them; **and also (*****halal*** **to you are) the CHASTE ONES from the
believing women and the CHASTE ONES from those who were given the Book
before you**, when you have given them their dowries, taking (them) in
marriage, not fornicating (with them), nor taking them as
girlfriends.[^75]

Only chaste Muslim and Kitabi women are *halal* for marriage. All others
are therefore *haram*. Of course, there is absolutely no doubt that
fornicatresses and prostitutes are NOT chaste women. As such, *mut’ah*
with any unchaste woman – in particular, with a fornicatress or
prostitute – is *haram* in Islam, according to the Book of our Lord.

The third *ayah* which the *muwaththaq hadith* of Ishaq b. Jarir
contradicts is this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن لم يستطع منكم طولا أن ينكح المحصنات المؤمنات فمن ما ملكت أيمانكم
من فتياتكم المؤمنات والله أعلم بإيمانكم بعضكم من بعض فانكحوهن بإذن
أهلهن وآتوهن أجورهن بالمعروف محصنات غير مسافحات ولا متخذات أخدان
  </p>
</blockquote>

And whoever of you is not able to afford to marry free believing women,
let him marry from the believing girls from among those whom your right
hands possess, and Allah has full knowledge about your faith. You are
one from another. **Marry them with the consent of their masters and
give them their dowries justly: they being CHASTE, not fornicating, nor
taking boyfriends**.[^76]

So, even a slave girl must be chaste before she can qualify for marriage
– whether permanently or in *mut’ah*. *Alhamdulillah*, there are hardly
any slaves in the world today. Meanwhile, the significance of this verse
to our research is in the fact that Allah generally sets lower standards
for slaves and higher for free believers[^77]. Since chastity is
strictly required from slave girls before they can qualify for *nikah*,
then the standard is even higher for free Muslimahs! Apparently, the
average Muslim woman must indeed be *very* chaste in order to be
suitable for *mut’ah*.

Thus, what happens to the *muwaththaq hadith* of Ishaq b. Jarir which
opposes these verses? Al-Khui has a clear answer for this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد دلت الأخبار المتواترة على وجوب عرض الروايات على الكتاب والسنة وأن
ما خالف الكتاب منها يجب طرحه، وضربه على الجدار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The ***mutawatir*** **reports** have proved that it is obligatory to
compare reports with the Book and the *Sunnah*, and that **whatsoever
contradicts the Book from them must be thrown away and discarded**.[^78]

Shaykh al-Saduq (d. 381 H) too declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكل حديث لا يوافق كتاب الله فهو باطل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Every *hadith* that does not agree with the Book of Allah is a
fabrication.[^79]

Therefore, the *hadith* of Ishaq b. Jarir is *mawḍu’*, a fabrication.

Then, al-Saduq has this *hadith* too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى داود بن سرحان، عن زرارة عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سألته عن
قول الله عز وجل: الزاني لا ينكح إلا زانية أو مشركة والزانية لا ينكحها
إلا زان أو مشرك " قال: هن نساء مشهورات بالزنا، ورجال مشهورون بالزنا،
شهروا بالزنا وعرفوا به، والناس اليوم بتلك المنزلة من أقيم عليه حد
الزنا أو شهر بالزنا لم ينبغ لاحد أن يناكحه حتى يعرف منه توبة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Dawud b. Sarhan – Zurarah:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about the Statement of Allah,
the Almighty {**The fornicator shall not marry any but a fornicatress or
an idolatress; and the fornicatress, none shall marry her but a
fornicator or an idolater**}. He said, “They are women who are famous
for *zina*, and men who are famous for *zina*. They became famous for
*zina* and became known with it; and the people today are of that
status. **Whoever is judicially punished for** ***zina*** **or is famous
for it, it is NOT appropriate for anyone to marry them until repentance
is known from them**.”[^80]

The annotator, Prof. ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari, comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الطريق صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

The chain is *sahih*.[^81]

Al-Ruhani agrees with him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^82]

Al-Ṭusi also reports this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى عن أبي المعزا عن الحلبي قال قال: أبو عبد الله
عليه السلام لا تتزوج المرأة المعلنة بالزنا ولا تزوج الرجل المعلن
بالزنا إلا أن يعرف منهما التوبة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa – Abu al-Mua’za – al-Halabi – Abu ‘Abd Allah,
peace be upon him:

“Do NOT marry the woman who overtly commits *zina*, and do NOT marry the
man who overtly commits *zina*, **EXCEPT when repentance is known from
them both**.”[^83]

Al-Ruhani comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^84]

Al-Kulayni is not left out either:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن يونس، عن محمد بن الفضيل قال:سألت
أبا الحسن عليه السلام عن المرأة الحسناء الفاجرة هل يجوز للرجل أن يتمتع
منها يوما أو أكثر؟ فقال: إذا كانت مشهورة بالزنا فلا يتمتع منها ولا
ينكحها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – Muhammad b. ‘Isa – Yunus – Muhammad b. al-Fuḍayl:

I asked Abu al-Hasan, peace be upon him, about the beautiful woman who
is a prostitute: is it permissible for the man to do *mut’ah* with her
for a day or more?” He said: “**If she is famous for** ***zina*****,
then he must NOT do** ***mut’ah*** **with her and also must NOT marry
her (permanently)**.”[^85]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq* (Reliable)[^86]

Al-Ruhani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^87]

Then, al-Kulayni reports this too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حميد بن زياد، عن الحسن بن محمد بن سماعة، عن أحمد بن الحسن الميثمي، عن
أبان، عن حكم بن حكيم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام في قوله عز وجل:
والزانية لا ينكحها إلا زان أو مشرك قال: إنما ذلك في الجهر ثم قال: لو
أن إنسانا زنى ثم تاب تزوج حيث شاء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Humayd b. Ziyad – al-Hasan b. Muhammad b. Sama’ah – Ahmad b. al-Hasan
al-Maythami – Aban – Hakam b. Hakim – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him,
concerning His Statement, the Almighty {**and the fornicatress, none
shall marry her but a fornicator or an idolater**}:

“That is only in the publicity (of the fornication)”. Then, he (Abu ‘Abd
Allah) said, “**If a person commits** ***zina*****, and then repents,
they can marry wherever they wish (in the** ***halal***
**categories)**.”[^88]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^89]

And, of course, we must not forget this *hadith* of al-Ṭusi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى عن محمد بن إسماعيل بن بزيع قال: سأل رجل الرضا
عليه السلام وانا اسمع عن الرجل يتزوج المرأة متعة ويشترط عليها ان لا
يطلب ولدها فتأتي بعد ذلك بولد فينكر الولد فشدد في ذلك وقال يجحد؟ وكيف
يجحد اعظاما لذلك؟ قال الرجل فان اتهمها قال: لا ينبغي لك ان تتزوج إلا
مأمونة ان الله يقول: الزاني لا ينكح إلا زانية أو مشركة والزانية لا
ينكحها إلا زان أو مشرك وحرم ذلك على المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa – Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Bazi’:

A man asked al-Riḍa, peace be upon him, while I was listening, about
**the man who marries the woman in** ***mut’ah*** and he imposes a
condition upon her that he will not seek her child. But, she later comes
with a child and he severely denies the child. So, he (al-Riḍa) said,
“Does he deny? How can he deny primarily because of that?” Then, the man
said, “What if he accuses her (of fornication)?” **He (al-Riḍa) said,
“It is not appropriate for you to marry except a faithful woman**.
Verily, Allah the Almighty says: {The fornicator shall not marry any but
a fornicatress or an idolatress; **and the fornicatress, none shall
marry her but a fornicator or an idolater**: and that is made *haram*
for the believers}.[^90]

Al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^91]

Al-Ruhani concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^92]

Meanwhile, al-Kulayni still has more:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن حريز بن عبد الله، عن محمد
ابن مسلم، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: سألته عن الخبيثة أتزوجها؟ قال:
لا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Hammad b. ‘Isa – Hariz b. ‘Abd Allah –
Muhammad b. Muslim:

I asked Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, about the fornicatress, “**Can I
marry her?**” He said, “**No**.”[^93]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^94]

Let us then cap everything with this additional *hadith* of al-Kulayni:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن علي بن الحكم، عن العلاء بن رزين، عن
محمد بن مسلم قال: سألت أبا جعفر عليه السلام عن الخبيثة يتزوجها الرجل،
قال: لا، وقال: إن كان له أمة وطئها ولا يتخذها أم ولده.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – ‘Ali b. al-Hakam – al-‘Ala b.
Zarin – Muhammad b. Muslim:

I asked Abu Ja’far about the fornicatress, “**Can the man marry her?**”
He said, “**No.**” And he (further) said, “If he has a slave woman, he
should have intercourse with her (instead), and he should not take her
as the mother of his child.”[^95]

And, al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^96]

The bottom-line of all this is that the *hadith* of Ishaq b. Jarir fails
the full conditions of authenticity. It contradicts the Book of Allah as
well as several *sahih*, *muwaththaq* and *hasan* *ahadith*. As a
result, it is *mawḍu’*¸ thrown out and discarded.

Hadith Sixteen
--------------

Shaykh al-Mufid (d. 413 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعن الحسن بن جرير قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام في المرأة تزني
عليها أيتمتع بها؟ قال: أرأيت ذلك؟ قلت: لا، ولكنها ترمى به قال: نعم
يتمتع بها على أنك تغادر وتغلق بابك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Narrated al-Hasan b. Jarir:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about the woman upon whom
*zina* is committed. Can I do *mut’ah* with her?” He said, “Did you see
that?” I said, “No. But, she is accused of it.” He said, “Yes. Do
*mut’ah* with her, upon (the condition) that you leave and lock your
door.”[^97]

This one is *mursal* and therefore *ḍa’if*, as it has no chain of
narration. Moreover, its only narrator, al-Hasan b. Jarir, is *muhmal*
(untraceable). Therefore, the *hadith* is very weak.

Hadith Seventeen
----------------

Al-Himyari (d. 300 H), in the book attributed to him, has this *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال علي بن رئاب: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام عن المرأة الفاجرة
يتزوجها الرجل المسلم؟ قال :نعم، وما يمنعه؟ إذا فعل فليحصن بابه مخافة
الولد
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Riab said:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, concerning with the
prostitute: “Does the Muslim man marry her?” He said, “Yes. And what
prevents him? If he does, he must fortify his door, for fear of the
child.”[^98]

Ayatullah al-Muhsini declares it *ḍa’if*.[^99] In particular, it is from
*Qurb al-Isnad*, a *ḍa’if* book[^100], which has not reached us through
any reliable means; and there is also dispute over its exact authorship.

Moreover, the *hadith* is not about *mut’ah* specifically. Rather, it
addresses marriage generally. Meanwhile, despite that it is
intrinsically *ḍa’if*, it nonetheless also contradicts *sahih* and
*muwaththaq* reports. This significantly worsens its unreliability. Most
importantly, it opposes the Book of Allah, and that makes it *mawḍu’*.

[^1]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, al-Istibṣar (Tehran: Dar
al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi al-Khurasan],
vol. 3, p. 142, Ch. 92, \# 5 (511)

[^2]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam (Tehran:
Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 251, Ch. 24, \# 10 (1085)

[^3]: ‘Ali Al Muhsin, Lillah wa li al-Haqiqah (2nd edition, 1425 H),
vol. 1, p. 209

[^4]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 32,
\# 10

[^5]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, al-‘Uddah fi Uṣul al-Fiqh
(Qum: Muasassat al-Ba’thah; 1st edition, 1417 H) [annotator: Muhammad
Riḍa al-Anṣari al-Qummi], vol. 1, pp. 148-149

[^6]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 32,
\# 10

[^7]: Abu Ja’far Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Ash’ari al-Qummi, Kitab
al-Nawadir (Qum: Muasassat al-Imam al-Mahdi; 1st edition, 1408 H), p.
87, \# 198

[^8]: Muhammad Aṣif al-Muhsini, Buhuth fi ‘Ilm al-Rijal (Markaz
al-Muṣtafa al-‘Alami li Tarjamah wa al-Nashr), p. 422, \# 3

[^9]: Ibid, pp. 421-424, \# 3

[^10]: Mirza Husayn b. Muhammad Taqi al-Nuri al-Ṭabarsi, Khatimah
Mustadrak al-Wasail (Qum: Muasassat Al al-Bayt ‘Alaihim al-Salam li Ihya
al-Turath; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 1, pp. 30-31

[^11]: Abu Ja’far Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Ash’ari al-Qummi, Kitab
al-Nawadir (Qum: Muasassat al-Imam al-Mahdi; 1st edition, 1408 H), p.
87, \# 200

[^12]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 467, \# 10

[^13]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 226

[^14]: Muhammad al-Jawahiri, al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith
(Qum: Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H), p. 273, \#
5630

[^15]: Ibid, p. 191, \# 3879

[^16]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 453, \# 4

[^17]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 234

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 460, \# 1

[^20]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 247

[^21]: Abu al-Qasim al-Musawi al-Khui, Mu’jam Rijal al-Hadith wa Tafṣil
Ṭabaqat al-Ruwat (5th edition, 1413 H), vol. 1, p. 61

[^22]: Ibid

[^23]: Ibid

[^24]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 64

[^25]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 63

[^26]: Ibid, vol. 15, p. 297, \# 10043

[^27]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 451, \# 5

[^28]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 232

[^29]: Muhammad al-Jawahiri, al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith
(Qum: Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H), p. 464, \#
9521

[^30]: Abu Ja’far Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Khalid al-Barqi, Kitab al-Mahasin
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah; 1st edition), vol. 2, p. 330, \# 90

[^31]: See Muhammad Aṣif al-Muhsini, Buhuth fi ‘Ilm al-Rijal (Markaz
al-Muṣtafa al-‘Alami li Tarjamah wa al-Nashr), pp. 424-425, \# 4;
Muhammad Aṣif al-Muhsini, Mashra’ah Bihar al-Anwar (Beirut: Muasassat
al-‘Arif li al-Maṭbu’at; 2nd edition, 1426 H), vol. 1, p. 14

[^32]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 452, \# 7

[^33]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 233

[^34]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 462, \# 2

[^35]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 251

[^36]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 270, Ch. 24, \# 84 (1159)

[^37]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, al-Istibṣar (Tehran: Dar
al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi al-Khurasan],
vol. 3, p. 143, Ch. 93, \# 4 (515)

[^38]: Ibid

[^39]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 253, Ch. 24, \# 15 (1090)

[^40]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, al-Istibṣar (Tehran: Dar
al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi al-Khurasan],
vol. 3, p. 95, Ch. 62, \# 9 (325)

[^41]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 35,
\# 15

[^42]: Qur’an 24:3

[^43]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 253, Ch. 24, \# 16 (1091)

[^44]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 36,
\# 16

[^45]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 253, Ch. 24, \# 17 (1092)

[^46]: Muhammad al-Jawahiri, al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith
(Qum: Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H), p. 398, \#
8183

[^47]: Ibid, p. 458, \# 9403

[^48]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 453, \# 1

[^49]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 235

[^50]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 253, Ch. 24, \# 18 (1093)

[^51]: Muhammad al-Jawahiri, al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith
(Qum: Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H), p. 632, \#
12903

[^52]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 36,
\# 18

[^53]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, pp. 253-254, Ch. 24, \# 19 (1094)

[^54]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 37,
\# 19

[^55]: Muhammad al-Jawahiri, al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith
(Qum: Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H), p. 543, \#
11077

[^56]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 254, Ch.24, \# 20 (1095)

[^57]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 37,
\# 20

[^58]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 254-255, Ch. 24, \# 24 (1099)

[^59]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 39,
\# 24

[^60]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 155

[^61]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 254, Ch. 24, \# 21 (1096)

[^62]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 38,
\# 21

[^63]: Muhammad al-Jawahiri, al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith
(Qum: Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H), p. 628, \#
12817

[^64]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Ahmad b. al-‘Abbas al-Najashi
al-Asadi al-Kufi, Fihrist Asma Muṣannafay al-Shi’ah (Qum: Muasassat
al-Nashr al-Islami; 5th edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Sayyid Musa
al-Shubayri al-Zanjani], p. 328, \# 888

[^65]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 254, Ch. 24, \# 22 (1097)

[^66]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 39,
\# 22

[^67]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 254, Ch. 24, \# 23 (1098)

[^68]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 39,
\# 23

[^69]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 485, Ch. 41, \# 157 (1949)

[^70]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p.
507, \# 155

[^71]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 320

[^72]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, al-‘Uddah fi Uṣul
al-Fiqh (Qum: Muasassat al-Ba’thah; 1st edition, 1417 H) [annotator:
Muhammad Riḍa al-Anṣari al-Qummi], vol. 1, pp. 148-149

[^73]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 150

[^74]: Qur’an 24:3

[^75]: Qur’an 5:5

[^76]: Qur’an 4:25

[^77]: See for instance Qur’an 4:25, 2:178 and 16:75.

[^78]: Abu al-Qasim al-Musawi al-Khui, al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an
(Beirut: Dar al-Zahra li al-Ṭaba’ah wa al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 4th
edition, 1395 H), p. 231

[^79]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Husayn b. Babuyah al-Qummi,
al-I’tiqadat (Dar al-Mufid; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotator: ‘Iṣam ‘Abd
al-Sayyid], Ch. 1, p. 22

[^80]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. Babuyah al-Qummi, Man
La Yahduruh al-Faqih (Qum: Manshurat Jama’ah al-Mudarisin fi al-Hawzah
al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1404 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari],
vol. 3, pp. 405-406, \# 4417

[^81]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 406, \# 4417, footnote \# 1

[^82]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 319

[^83]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, al-Istibṣar (Tehran: Dar
al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi al-Khurasan],
vol. 3, p. 168, Ch. 109, \# 1 (613)

[^84]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 319

[^85]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 454, \# 6

[^86]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 237

[^87]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 320

[^88]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 355, \# 6

[^89]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 62

[^90]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 269, Ch. 24, \# 82 (1157)

[^91]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 69,
\# 81

[^92]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 43

[^93]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 353, \# 1

[^94]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 56

[^95]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 353, \# 4

[^96]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 57

[^97]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Muhammad b. al-Nu’man al-Ukbari
al-Baghdadi, Risalah al-Mut’ah (Beirut: Dar al-Mufid li al-Ṭaba’ah wa
al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd edition, 1414 H), p. 12, \# 29

[^98]: Abu al-‘Abbas ‘Abd Allah b. Ja’far al-Himyari, Qurb al-Isnad
(Qum: Muasassat Al al-Bayt ‘Alaihim al-Salam li Ihya al-Turath; 1st
edition, 1413 H), p. 166, \# 609

[^99]: Muhammad Aṣif al-Muhsini, Mashra’ah Bihar al-Anwar (Beirut:
Muasassat al-‘Arif li al-Maṭbu’at; 2nd edition, 1426 H), vol. 2, p. 487

[^100]: See Muhammad Aṣif al-Muhsini, Buhuth fi ‘Ilm al-Rijal (Markaz
al-Muṣtafa al-‘Alami li Tarjamah wa al-Nashr), pp. 427-428, \# 6;
Muhammad Aṣif al-Muhsini, Mashra’ah Bihar al-Anwar (Beirut: Muasassat
al-‘Arif li al-Maṭbu’at; 2nd edition, 1426 H), vol. 1, p. 14 and 405


