8. Sunni Athar Misused About Mut’ah
===================================

There are a few reports in the Sunni books, which some from the Ahl
al-Sunnah quote to “prove” that certain Sahabah and Tabi’in later
abandoned their positive views of *mut’ah*. Generally, the views of the
Sahabah and others are of zero value in determining the morality and
permissibility of anything in Islam.

What matters to a Muslim is only what his Lord says. Of course, Allah
has revealed the Verse of *al-Mut’ah* in His Book, and that *ayah* is
still unabrogated till this very moment. With this fact, nothing else
matters to us. Yet, we will look at the reports about the alleged
reversal of certain Sahabah and Tabi’in on *mut’ah*. This is primarily
to ensure that history is not distorted.

Athar One
---------

Imam Abu ‘Awanah (d. 316 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال يونس قال ابن شهاب وسمعت الربيع بن سبرة يحدث عمر بن عبد العزيز،]
وأنا جالس [أنه قال :ما مات ابن عباس حتى رجع عن هذا الفتيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yusuf – Ibn Shihab:

I heard al-Rabi’ b. Sabrah narrating to ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz [while I
was sitting]. He said: “**Ibn ‘Abbas did not die until he had withdrawn
from this** ***fatwa***.”[^1]

This report is *munqati’* (disconnected), and therefore *ḍa’if*.
Al-Rabi’ did not hear from Ibn ‘Abbas, even though they were
contemporaries; and he did not give the source of his information
either.

No wonder, ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وجملة القول: أن ابن عباس رضى الله عنه روى عنه فى المتعة ثلاثة أقوال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأول: الإباحة مطلقا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الثانى: الإباحة عند الضرورة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والآخر: التحريم مطلقا , وهذا مما لم يثبت عنه صراحة , بخلاف القولين
الأولين , فهما ثابتان عنه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The summary is: three opinions are narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allaah
be pleased with him, about *mut’ah*:

The one: he permitted it unconditionally.

The second: he permitted it in cases of necessity.

The last: he forbade it unconditionally, **but this is from what is NOT
authentically transmitted from him**, unlike the first two opinions
which are authentically transmitted from him.[^2]

Al-Hafiẓ too is not left out:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأما ابن عباس فروى عنه أنه أباحها وروى عنه أنه رجع عن ذلك قال ابن بطال
روى أهل مكة واليمن عن ابن عباس إباحة المتعة وروى عنه الرجوع بأسانيد
ضعيفة وإجازة المتعة عنه أصح وهو مذهب الشيعة
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for Ibn ‘Abbas, it is narrated concerning him that he permitted it,
and it is also narrated concerning him that he withdrew from that. Ibn
Baṭṭal said: The people of Makkah and Yemen narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas
permitted *mut’ah*, **and it is (also) narrated concerning him with**
***ḍa’if*** **chains that he withdrew**. That he permitted *mut’ah*
(till death) is more authentically transmitted, and it is the *madhhab*
of the Shi’ah.[^3]

Ibn ‘Abbas apparently permitted *mut’ah* till his last breath on the
earth.

Athar Two
---------

Imam al-Jasas (d. 370 H) submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومما يدل على رجوعه عن إباحتها ما روى عبد الله بن وهب قال: أخبرني عمرو
بن الحارث أن بكير بن الأشج حدثه: أن أبا إسحاق مولى بني هاشم حدثه: أن
رجلا سأل ابن عباس فقال: كنت في سفر ومعي جارية لي ولي أصحاب فأحللت
جاريتي لأصحابي يستمتعون منها؟ فقال: ذاك السفاح، فهذا أيضا يدل على
رجوعه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

From what proves his withdrawal from its permissibility is what ‘Abd
Allah b. Wahb narrated: ‘Amr b. al-Harith – Bukayr b. al-Ashja – **Abu
Ishaq, freed slave of Banu Hashim**:

A man asked Ibn ‘Abbas, and said, “I am on a journey, and there is with
me a slave-girl belonging to me, and I have companions. So, do I make my
slave-girl available to my companions so that they do *mut’ah* with
her?” He said, “That is fornication.”

And this too proves his withdrawal.[^4]

Al-Jasas’ conclusion from this *athar* reveals his deep ignorance about
*mut’ah*. Temporary marriage can be done only with a single man at a
time; and after its conclusion, if there was intercourse, the woman
observes her obligatory *‘iddah* period. What Abu Ishaq was asking about
was more like sex slavery or an orgy: the slave girl would be available
to his companions generally, and whichever of them wanted sex would just
go to her anytime he wanted. What then about the compulsion of *‘iddah*
which the woman must fulfil after each *mut’ah*?

Anyway, the *riwayah* is *ḍa’if*. This is what al-Hafiẓ (d. 852 H)
states about its main narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو إسحاق الدوسي مولى بني هاشم مقبول
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Ishaq al-Dawsi, freed slave of Banu Hashim: ***Maqbul***.[^5]

Uncorroborated reports of *maqbul* narrators are *ḍa’if*; as al-Hafiẓ
confirms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
" مقبول " حيث يتابع، وإلا فلين الحديث
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Maqbul* (accepted) where he is seconded (i.e. from the same Shaykh).
**Otherwise, he is weak in** ***hadith***.[^6]

Of course, this one by Abu Ishaq has no corroboration. As such, it is
*ḍa’if*.

Athar Three
-----------

Imam ‘Abd al-Razzaq (d. 211 H) documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الرزاق عن ابن عيينة عن إسماعيل عن قيس] عن عبد الله بن مسعود [قال:
كنا نغزو مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم فتطول عزبتنا فقلنا: ألا نختصي
يا رسول الله فنهانا، ثم رخص أن نتزوج المرأة إلى أجل بالشئ، ثم نهانا
عنها يوم خيبر، وعن لحوم الحمر الانسية
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzaq – **Ibn ‘Uyaynah** – Isma’il – Qays – [‘Abd Allah b.
Mas’ud]:

We were on an expedition with the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
and our celibacy had been prolonged. So, we said, “Should we castrate
ourselves?” But, he forbade us. **Then, he permitted that we should do**
***nikah*** **(marriage) with the** **woman for a specified period with
something. Then, he forbade us from it on the Day of Khaybar** and from
the flesh of domestic asses.[^7]

However, this same *hadith* has been recorded by al-Bukhari (d. 256 H)
with significant differences:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا قتيبة بن سعيد حدثنا جرير عن إسماعيل عن قيس قال : قال عبد الله
كنا نغزو مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم وليس لنا شيء فقلنا ألا
نستخصي ؟ فنهانا عن ذلك ثم رخصلنا أن ننكح المرأة بالثوب ثم قرأ علينا }
يا أيها الذين أمنوا لا تحرموا طيبات ما أحل الله لكم ولا تعتدوا أن الله
لا يحب المعتدين {
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qutaybah b. Sa’id – **Jarir** – Isma’il – Qays – ‘Abd Allah (b. Mas’ud):

We were on an expedition with the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
and we had nothing with us. So, we said, “Should we castrate ourselves?”
But, he forbade us to do that. Then, he permitted us to do *nikah*
(marriage) with the woman, giving her a garment (as the dowry). **Then,
he recited to us** {O you who believe! **Do not make** ***haram*** **the
good things which Allah has made** ***halal*** **for you**; and do not
exceed the limits; surely Allah does not love those who exceed the
limits}.[^8]

This version which Jarir transmitted from the same Isma’il mentions no
prohibition of *mut’ah* at Khaybar. Moreover, in it, Ibn Mas’ud quoted
Qur’an 5:87 to Qays to defend its permissibility. This apparently took
place *after* the death of the Messenger of Allah, *sallallahu ‘alaihi
wa alihi*.

This is also what yet another narrator transmitted from Isma’il. Imam
Ahmad (d. 241 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا وكيع عن بن أبي خالد عن قيس عن عبد الله
قال كنا مع النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم ونحن شباب فقلنا يا رسول الله ألا
نستخصي فنهانا ثم رخص لنا في ان ننكح المرأة بالثوب إلى الأجل ثم قرأ عبد
الله { لا تحرموا طيبات ما أحل الله لكم }
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – **Waki’** –
(Isma’il) Ibn Abi Khalid – Qays – ‘Abd Allah:

“We were with the Prophet, peace be upon him, and we were youths. So, we
said to the Messenger of Allah, “Should we castrate ourselves?” But, he
forbade us (to do that). **Then, he permitted us to do** ***nikah***
**(marriage) with the woman for a stipulated period**, giving her a
garment (as the dowry).” Then, ‘Abd Allah recited, {**Do not make**
***haram*** **the good things which Allah has made** ***halal*** **for
you**} [5:87].[^9]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs[^10]

Ahmad reports again:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا محمد بن عبيد ثنا إسماعيل عن قيس عن عبد
الله قال كنا نغزو مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم وليس لنا نساء فقلنا
يا رسول الله ألا نستخصي فنهانا عنه ثم رخص لنا بعد في أن نتزوج المرأة
بالثوب إلى أجل ثم قرأ عبد الله { يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تحرموا طيبات
ما أحل الله لكم ولا تعتدوا إن الله لا يحب المعتدين
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – **Muhammad b.
‘Ubayd** – Isma’il – Qays – ‘Abd Allah:

“We were with the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, and we had no
women. So, we said to the Messenger of Allah, “Should we castrate
ourselves?” But, he forbade us to do it. **Then, he permitted us later
to do** ***nikah*** **(marriage) with the woman for a stipulated
period**, giving her a garment (as the dowry).” Then, ‘Abd Allah
recited, {**Do not make** ***haram*** **the good things which Allah has
made** ***halal*** **for you**; and do not exceed the limits; surely
Allah does not love those who exceed the limits } [5:87].[^11]

Al-Arnauṭ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^12]

We see here that Ibn ‘Uyaynah has fundamentally contradicted three
*thiqah* narrator in his transmission from Isma’il b. Abi Khalid. This
makes his report *shadh* and *ḍa’if*.

Well, al-Hafiẓ is not going to give up that easily:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وظاهر استشهاد ابن مسعود بهذه الآية هنا يشعر بأنه كان يرى بجواز المتعة
فقال القرطبي لعله لم يكن حينئذ بلغه الناسخ ثم بلغه فرجع بعد قلت يؤيده
ما ذكره الإسماعيلي أنه وقع في رواية أبى معاوية عن إسماعيل بن أبي خالد
ففعله ثم ترك ذلك قال وفى رواية لابن عيينة عن إسماعيل ثم جاء تحريمها
بعد وفى رواية معمر عن إسماعيل ثم نسخ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Apparently, Ibn Mas’ud’s use of this verse here as evidence shows that
he considered *mut’ah* to be permissible. Thus, al-Qurṭubi said, “Maybe
news of the abrogation had not reached him at that time. Then, it
reached him, and he withdrew.” I (al-Hafiẓ) say: He is supported by what
al-Isma’ili (d. 371 H) mentioned that it occurred in the report of Abu
Mu’awiyah from Isma’il b. Abi Khalid: “So, he did it. Then, he abandoned
that.” He said: And in a report of Ibn ‘Uyaynah from Isma’il: “Then, its
prohibition came later.” And in the report of Ma’mar from Isma’il:
“Then, it was abrogated.”[^13]

Even al-Bayhaqi too makes some last-minute efforts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو عمرو الأديب أنبأ أبو بكر الإسماعيلي فذكر الحديث بإسناده عن
عبد الله بن مسعود في المتعة قال عقبة وروى أبو معاوية عن إسماعيل بن أبي
خالد عن قيس عن عبد الله هذا الحديث وقال في آخره ثم ترك ذاك قال وفي
حديث بن المصفى عن بن عيينة عن إسماعيل في آخره ثم جاء تحريمها بعد وفي
حديث عبد الرزاق عن معمر عن إسماعيل عن قيس بنسخ ذلك يعني المتعة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Amr al-Adib informed us: Abu Bakr al-Isma’ili (d. 371 H) informed
us and he mentioned the *hadith* with his chain from ‘Abd Allah b.
Mas’ud concerning *mut’ah*. He said at its end: and Abu Mu’awiyah
narrated this *hadith* from Isma’il b. Abi Khalid from Qays from ‘Abd
Allah and he said at its end, “Then he abandoned that.” He said, “And in
the *hadith* of al-Musaffa from Ibn ‘Uyaynah from Isma’il. At its end:
“Then, its prohibition came later.” And in the *hadith* of ‘Abd
al-Razzaq from Ma’mar from Isma’il from Qays, there is the abrogation of
that, that is *mut’ah*.[^14]

The first general problem with these new entries is their lack of
clearly defined chains of transmission. With that, it is impossible to
investigate their authenticity or make pronouncements on it. Meanwhile,
unless their authenticity is known, they remain invalid evidences.
Secondly, we see this phrase “So, he did it. Then, he abandoned that”
which, obviously, is an interpolation in the unverifiable *riwayah* of
Ibn Mas’ud. He could not have narrated about himself in such a manner.
Lastly, the other reports only mention that *mut’ah* was prohibited or
abrogated later, after Ibn Mas’ud had practised it.

But, we know from the more authentic *ahadith* that he continued to
defend the legitimacy, morality and permissibility of *mut’ah* after the
departure of the Messenger. If he had truly narrated about its
prohibition or abrogation, why would he do that?! The contradiction of
these unverifiable reports against the more authentic *athar* makes them
(i.e. the unverifiable reports) *munkar* and *ḍa’if* by default.

Meanwhile, Imam Abu Yusuf al-Ansari (d. 182 H) tables this new *hadith*
as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال حدثنا يوسف عن ابيه عن ابي حنيفة عن حماد عن إبراهيم عن عبدالله بن
مسعود رضى الله عنه انه قال شكونا العزوبة فأحلت لنا المتعة ثلاثا قط ثم
نسختها آية النكاح والعدة والميراث
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yusuf – his father – **Abu Hanifah** – Hammad – **Ibrahim** – ‘Abd Allah
b. Mas’ud, may Allah be pleased with him:

We complained of celibacy. So, *mut’ah* was made *halal* for us for
three days only. Then, the Verse of *al-Nikah*, and *al-‘Iddah* and
Inheritance abrogated it.[^15]

Concerning Abu Hanifah, Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H), despite his
notorious leniency, has this to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدث بمائة وثلاثين حديثا مسانيد ماله حديث في الدنيا غيرها أخطأ منها في
مائة وعشرين حديثا. إما أن يكون أقلب إسناده أو غير متنه من حيث لا يعلم
فلما غلب خطؤه على صوابه استحق ترك الاحتجاج به في الاخبار
  </p>
</blockquote>

He narrated 130 full-chained *ahadith*. He had no other *hadith* in this
world except them. He made mistakes in 120 of them. He either changed
its chain or altered its text, inadvertently. So, since his mistakes
were more than his correct transmissions, it is appropriate to
**forsake** taking his reports as *hujjah*.[^16]

As such, he was *matruk*; and that makes this *athar* severely weak.

Secondly, Ibrahim in the chain – and he was Ibrahim al-Nakh’ai – was
born in 46 H while Ibn Mas’ud died in 32 H. So, the already terribly
*ḍa’if* chain is also *munqati’* (disconnected)!

Apart from its general worthlessness, this *hadith* falsely attributes
deep ignorance of *mut’ah* to Ibn Mas’ud. Whoever forged the *riwayah*
apparently did not know that temporary marriage was a *nikah* in Islam,
and that there was *‘iddah* in it, and that there was inheritance in it
where both parties agreed on it! Worse still, it is possible to have a
valid marriage without inheritance between the two parties – such as one
between a Muslim and a non-Muslim. Did the forger know that? Clearly, he
did not. In fact, even Ibn Mas’ud himself used to refer to *mut’ah* as a
*nikah*! Yet, the forger obviously was not aware of that too!

Imam al-Bayhaqi (d. 458 H) then gives us further reports about Ibn
Mas’ud:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعن سفيان قال قال بعض أصحابنا عن الحكم بن عتيبة عن عبد الله بن مسعود
قال نسختها العدة والطلاق والميراث قال العدني يعني المتعة ورواه الحجاج
بن أرطأة عن الحكم عن أصحاب عبد الله عن عبد الله بن مسعود قال المتعة
منسوخة نسخها الطلاق والصداق والعدة والميراث
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sufyan – **one of our companions** – **al-Hakam b. ‘Utaybah** – ‘Abd
Allah b. Mas’ud: “It was abrogated by *‘iddah*, divorce and
inheritance.” Al-‘Adani said: “He meant *mut’ah*.”

**Al-Hajjaj b. Arṭat** – al-Hakam – **companions of ‘Abd Allah** – ‘Abd
Allah b. Mas’ud: “*Mut’ah* was abrogated, and its abrogation was by
divorce, dowry, *‘iddah*, and inheritance.”[^17]

The first one is *ḍa’if* by default. “One of our companions” in its
*sanad* is unknown. Moreover, al-Hakam b. ‘Utaybah was **born** in 47 H,
while Ibn Mas’ud **died** in 32 H! So, the chain is equally *munqati’*.

The second *athar* is *ḍa’if* by default, as well.. “Companions of ‘Abd
Allah” in its chain are unknown! In addition, this is what al-Hafiẓ
submits about al-Hajjaj:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حجاج بن أرطاة الفقيه الكوفي المشهور أخرج له مسلم مقرونا وصفه النسائي
وغيره بالتدليس عن الضعفاء وممن أطلق عليه التدليس بن المبارك ويحيى بن
القطان ويحيى بن معين وأحمد وقال أبو حاتم إذا قال حدثنا فهو صالح وليس
بالقوي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hajjaj b. Arṭat, the Kufan jurist, well-known. Muslim narrated from him
while attaching others with him, **and al-Nasai and others qualified him
with doing** ***tadlis*** **from** ***ḍa’if*** **narrators. Among those
who also described him with** ***tadlis*** **were Ibn al-Mubarak, Yahya
b. al-Qaṭṭan, Yahya b. Ma’in and Ahmad**. Abu Hatim said, “If he said,
‘he narrated to us’ then he is good. And he is not strong.”[^18]

Al-Hafiẓ has placed him in the fourth category of *mudalisun*.
Explaining what that means, he states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرابعة :من اتفق على أنه لا يحتج بشئ من حديثهم الا بما صرحوا فيه
بالسماع لكثرة تدليسهم على الضعفاء والمجاهيل كبقية بن الوليد
  </p>
</blockquote>

The fourth (category): those about whom there is consensus that they
cannot be relied upon as *hujjah* in anything of their *ahadith* except
what they explicitly declare to have heard, due to the frequency of
their *tadlis* from *ḍa’if* and *majhul* narrators, like Baqiyyah b.
al-Walid.[^19]

With al-Hajjaj being like that, it is very obvious that his *riwayah*
about Ibn Mas’ud above is *ḍa’if*, as he has narrated it in an *‘an-‘an*
manner.

Then, ‘Abd al-Razzaq closes this section with this final report on Ibn
Mas’ud:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الرزاق عن الثوري عن صاحب له عن الحكم قال: قال ابن مسعود: نسخها
الطلاق، والعدة، والميراث.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzaq – al-Thawri – **a friend of his** – **al-Hakam** – Ibn
Mas’ud:

It was abrogated by divorce, *‘iddah* and inheritance.[^20]

This one is indeed very easy. The friend of al-Thawri is unknown and
al-Hakam did not hear from Ibn Mas’ud. So, it is terribly *ḍa’if*.

Those who quote these *ḍa’if* reports seek to establish that Ibn Mas’ud
later changed his view about the legitimacy of *mut’ah*. However, they
have no reliable proof. As such, their effort is “dead on arrival”.
Meanwhile, according to the *tafsir* of the Messenger of Allah, as
narrated by Ibn Mas’ud (which he also personally adopted), *mut’ah* is
one of the good things mentioned in Qur’an 5:87. So, naturally, to
“prove” that *mut’ah* is abrogated, our opponents must prove that the
*ayah* has been abrogated. Well, no creature can do that, till the Hour!

Athar Four
----------

Imam al-Bayhaqi records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو عبد الله الحافظ أنبأ أبو محمد الحسن بن سليمان الكوفي ببغداد
ثنا محمد بن عبد الله الحضرمي ثنا إسماعيل بن إبراهيم ثنا الأشجعي عن
بسام الصيرفي قال سألت جعفر بن محمد عن المتعة فوصفتها فقال لي ذلك الزنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Hafiẓ – **Abu Muhammad al-Hasan b. Sulayman al-Kufi**
– Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Haḍrami – Isma’il b. Ibrahim – al-Ashja’i –
Bassam al-Sayrafi:

I asked Ja’far b. Muhammad concerning *mut’ah*, and I described it. So,
he said to me, “That is *zina*.”[^21]

This *athar* does not give the details of what Bassam al-Sayrafi
described as *mut’ah*, which Imam al-Sadiq, *alaihi al-salam*, allegedly
called “zina”. Perhaps, he had (given) a very wrong concept of temporary
marriage. Who knows? Anyway, Abu Muhammad al-Hasan b. Sulayman al-Kufi
in the *sanad* is *majhul*. So, the report is *ḍa’if*.

Athar Five
----------

Imam Abu ‘Awanah documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمد بن إسحاق الصغاني ويحيى بن أبي طالب قالا: ثنا عبد الوهاب بن
عطاء قال: أنبا عبد الملك بن جريج، عن عبد العزيز بن عمر، أن الربيع بن
سبرة، حدثه عن أبيه قال … : إذا كان يوم التروية قام النبي صلى الله عليه
وسلم بين الحجر والركن فقال: ألا إني كنت أمرتكم بهذه المتعة، وإن الله
قد حرمها إلى يوم القيامة، فمن كان استمتع من امرأة فلا يرجع إليها، وإن
كان بقي من أجله شيء فلا يأخذ منها مما أعطاها شيئا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابن جريج يومئذ: اشهدوا أني قد رجعت عنها بعد ثمانية عشر حديثاً أروي
فيها لا بأس بها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ishaq al-Saghani and Yahya b. Abi Ṭalib – **‘Abd al-Wahhab
b. ‘Aṭa** – ‘Abd al-Malik b. Jurayj – ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. ‘Umar – al-Rabi’
b. Sabrah – his father: ....

On the Day of *al-Tarwiyah*, the Prophet, peace be upon him, stood
between *al-Hijr* and *al-Rukn* and said, “I used to ORDER you to
perform this *mut’ah*. However, Allah has (now) made it *haram* till the
Day of *al-Qiyamah*. Therefore, whosoever is doing *mut’ah* with any
woman, he should not return to her. And even if his period still remains
something, he must not take back from her whatever he has given her.”

Ibn Jurayj said on that day, “**Testify that I have (now) withdrawn from
it after eighteen** ***ahadith*** **that I narrated concerning it that
there is no problem with it**.”[^22]

This *athar* is often vaunted by our brothers from the Ahl al-Sunnah as
evidence that Ibn Jurayj later abandoned *mut’ah*. However, the most
relevant part of it is actually *ḍa’if* ! Ibn Jurayj had “informed”
Wahhab b. ‘Aṭa of the *hadith* of ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. ‘Umar. However, the
last part of the entire *riwayah* is different from the main report, and
is not part of what Ibn Jurayj “informed” ‘Abd al-Wahhab from ‘Abd
al-‘Aziz. Rather, it was ‘Abd al-Wahhab himself who was personally
telling his student of what Ibn Jurayj allegedly declared. It is this
part that our Sunni brothers present to us; and it is this part that is
*ḍa’if* in its *sanad*.

Al-Hafiẓ states about ‘Abd al-Wahhab:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الوهاب بن عطاء الخفاف البصري صدوق معروف من طبقة أبي أسامة قال
البخاري كان يدلس عن ثور الحمصي وأقوام أحاديث مناكير
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Wahhab b. ‘Aṭa al-Khaffaf al-Basri: *Saduq* (very truthful),
well-known, from the *ṭabaqah* of Abu Usamah. **Al-Bukhari said, “He
used to do** ***tadlis*** **in** ***ahadith*** **of** ***manakir***
**(repugnancies) from Thawr al-Himsi and several people**.”[^23]

Interestingly, al-Hafiẓ has put him in the third category of
*mudalisun*. In the *Introduction* to his book, he has explained what
this means:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الثالثة :من أكثر من التدليس فلم يحتج الأئمة من أحاديثهم الا بما صرحوا
فيه بالسماع ومنهم من رد حديثهم مطلقا ومنهم من قبلهم كأبي الزبير المكي
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The third (category): those who did** ***tadlis*** **A LOT. As a
result, the Imams did not take their** ***ahadith*** **as** ***hujjah***
**except that which they explicitly stated to have heard**. Among them
(i.e. the Imams) were those who rejected their *ahadith*
unconditionally, and among them were those who accepted them, like Abu
al-Zubayr al-Makki.[^24]

Basically, the above *athar* is *ḍa’if*, because ‘Abd al-Wahhab did NOT
explicitly state that he “heard” that declaration from Ibn Jurayj.
Instead, he only stated: “Ibn Jurayj said”. Of course, both of these
statements are different:

(a) I heard Ibn Jurayj saying such-and-such; and

(b) Ibn Jurayj said such-and-such.

In the first one, there is no doubt that the speaker heard Ibn Jurayj.
However, in the second, there is no evidence of that. The speaker could
simply have heard a third person who claimed that Ibn Jurayj said
such-and-such. In these days of ours, we often see Muslim scholars who
proclaim on pulpits “the Prophet said such-and-such” and we know that
they never heard directly from him. In fact, on several occasions, such
*ahadith* turn out to be outright fabrications!

Another wonderous aspect of the declaration which ‘Abd al-Wahhab
attributed to Ibn Jurayj is his alleged confession that he knew eighteen
different *ahadith* on the permissibility of *mut’ah*, and yet would
disregard them all and turn against them! ‘Abd al-Wahhab would have us
believe that Ibn Jurayj was abandoning these eighteen *ahadith* in
favour of this single one he narrated from ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. ‘Umar?! What
do these really people take us for?

[^1]: Abu ‘Awanah Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Asfarani, Musnad Abi Awanah
(Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah; 1st edition, 1419 H) [annotator: Ayman b.
‘Arif al-Dimashqi], vol. 3, p. 23

[^2]: Muhammad Naṣir al-Din al-Albani, Irwa al-Ghalil fi Takhrij Ahadith
Manar al-Sabil (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1405 H), vol.
6, p. 319, \# 1903

[^3]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Ṣahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Ṭaba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 9, p. 150

[^4]: Abu Bakr Ahmad b. ‘Ali al-Razi al-Jasas, Ahkam al-Qur’an (Beirut:
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H) [annotator: ‘Abd
al-Salam Muhammad ‘Ali Shahin], vol. 2, p. 186

[^5]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Muṣtafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 2, p. 355, \# 7965

[^6]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 24

[^7]: Abu Bakr ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Ṣa’nani, al-Muṣannaf
[annotator: Habib al-Rahman al-A’ẓami], vol. 7, p. 506, \# 14048

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Ṣahih al-Mukhtaṣar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Muṣṭafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
5, p. 1953, \# 4787

[^9]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 1, p. 432, \#
4113

[^10]: Ibid

[^11]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 420, \# 3986

[^12]: Ibid

[^13]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Ṣahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Ṭaba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 9, p. 102

[^14]: Abu Bakr Ahmad b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Musa al-Bayhaqi, Sunan
al-Bayhaqi al-Kubra (Makkah al-Mukarramah: Maktabah Dar al-Baz; 1414 H)
[annotator: Muhammad ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 7, p. 207, \# 13958

[^15]: Abu Yusuf Ya’qub b. Ibrahim al-Anṣari, al-Athar (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah), p. 151, \# 698

[^16]: Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti, Kitab
al-Majruhin [annotator: Mahmud Ibrahim Zayad], vol. 3, p. 63

[^17]: Abu Bakr Ahmad b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Musa al-Bayhaqi, Sunan
al-Bayhaqi al-Kubra (Makkah al-Mukarramah: Maktabah Dar al-Baz; 1414 H)
[annotator: Muhammad ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 7, p. 207, \# 13957

[^18]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad, Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Ta’rif Ahl
al-Taqdis bi Maratib al-Mawṣifin bi al-Tadlis (Jordan: Maktabah
al-Manar; 1st edition) [annotator: Dr. Aṣim b. ‘Abd Allah al-Qaryuni],
p. 49, \# 118

[^19]: Ibid, p. 14

[^20]: Abu Bakr ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Ṣa’nani, al-Muṣannaf
[annotator: Habib al-Rahman al-A’ẓami], vol. 7, p. 505, \# 14044

[^21]: Abu Bakr Ahmad b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Musa al-Bayhaqi, Sunan
al-Bayhaqi al-Kubra (Makkah al-Mukarramah: Maktabah Dar al-Baz; 1414 H)
[annotator: Muhammad ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 7, p. 207, \# 13960

[^22]: Abu ‘Awanah Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Asfarani, Musnad Abi Awanah
(Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah; 1st edition, 1419 H) [annotator: Ayman b.
‘Arif al-Dimashqi], vol. 3, p. 31, \# 4087

[^23]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad, Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Ta’rif Ahl
al-Taqdis bi Maratib al-Mawṣifin bi al-Tadlis (Jordan: Maktabah
al-Manar; 1st edition) [annotator: Dr. Aṣim b. ‘Abd Allah al-Qaryuni],
p. 41, \# 85

[^24]: Ibid, p. 13


