Bibliography
============

1. ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Sana’ani, *Tafsir al-Qur’an* (Riyadh:
Maktabah al-Rushd; 1st edition, 1410 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Muslim
Muhammad]

2. ‘Ali Al Muhsin, *Lillah wa li al-Haqiqah* (2nd edition, 1425 H)

3. Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, *Musnad* (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut]

4. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
*al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa]

5. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Hazm al-Andalusi, *al-Nasikh wa al-Mansukh
fi al-Qur’an al-Karim* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition,
1406 H) [annotator: Dr. ‘Abd al-Ghaffar Sulayman al-Bundari]

6. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah al-Bukhari
al-Ju’fi, *al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar* (Beirut: Dar Ibn Kathir; 3rd
edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Musṭafa Dib al-Bagha]

7. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Muhammad b. al-Nu’man al-Ukbari
al-Baghdadi, *Risalah al-Mut’ah* (Beirut: Dar al-Mufid li al-Ṭaba’ah wa
al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd edition, 1414 H)

8. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Yazid b. Majah al-Qazwini, *al-Sunan*
(Damascus: Dar al-Risalah al-‘Alamiyyah; 1st edition, 1430 H)
[annotators: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ, Muhammad Kamil and Ahmad Barhum]

9. Abu ‘Awanah Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Asfarani, *Musnad Abi Awanah* (Beirut:
Dar al-Ma’rifah; 1st edition, 1419 H) [annotator: Ayman b. ‘Arif
al-Dimashqi]

10. Abu al-‘Abbas ‘Abd Allah b. Ja’far al-Himyari, *Qurb al-Isnad* (Qum:
Muasassat Al al-Bayt ‘Alaihim al-Salam li Ihya al-Turath; 1st edition,
1413 H)

11. Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
*Majmu’ al-Fatawa*

12. Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Ahmad b. al-‘Abbas al-Najashi
al-Asadi al-Kufi, *Fihrist Asma Musannafay al-Shi’ah* (Qum: Muasassat
al-Nashr al-Islami; 5th edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Sayyid Musa
al-Shubayri al-Zanjani]

13. Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, *Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi* (Beirut:
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H)

14. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurshi al-Dimashqi,
*Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Aẓim* (Dar al-Ṭaybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah]

15. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, *al-Bidayah wa
al-Nihayah* (Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri]

16. Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, *Sahih
Muslim* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi]

17. Abu al-Qasim al-Musawi al-Khui, *al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an*
(Beirut: Dar al-Zahra li al-Ṭaba’ah wa al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 4th
edition, 1395 H)

18. Abu al-Qasim al-Musawi al-Khui, *Mu’jam Rijal al-Hadith wa Tafsil
Ṭabaqat al-Ruwat* (5th edition, 1413 H)

19. Abu Bakr ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Sa’nani, *al-Musannaf*
[annotator: Habib al-Rahman al-A’ẓami]

20. Abu Bakr Ahmad b. ‘Ali al-Razi al-Jasas, *Ahkam al-Qur’an* (Beirut:
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H) [annotator: ‘Abd
al-Salam Muhammad ‘Ali Shahin]

21. Abu Bakr Ahmad b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Musa al-Bayhaqi, *Sunan
al-Bayhaqi al-Kubra* (Makkah al-Mukarramah: Maktabah Dar al-Baz; 1414 H)
[annotator: Muhammad ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa]

22. Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti, *Kitab
al-Majruhin* [annotator: Mahmud Ibrahim Zayad]

23. Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b. Ma’bad
al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, *Sahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn Balban*
(Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnaut]

24. Abu Ja’far Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Ash’ari al-Qummi, *Kitab
al-Nawadir* (Qum: Muasassat al-Imam al-Mahdi; 1st edition, 1408 H)

25. Abu Ja’far Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Khalid al-Barqi, *Kitab al-Mahasin*
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah; 1st edition)

26. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. Babuyah al-Qummi, *Man
La Yahduruh al-Faqih* (Qum: Manshurat Jama’ah al-Mudarisin fi al-Hawzah
al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1404 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari]

27. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Husayn b. Babuyah al-Qummi,
*al-I’tiqadat* (Dar al-Mufid; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotator: ‘Isam
‘Abd al-Sayyid]

28. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, *al-‘Uddah fi Usul al-Fiqh*
(Qum: Muasassat al-Ba’thah; 1st edition, 1417 H) [annotator: Muhammad
Riḍa al-Ansari al-Qummi]

29. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, *al-Istibsar* (Tehran: Dar
al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi al-Khurasan]

30. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, *Ikhtiyar Ma’rifat
al-Rijal* (Muasassat Al al-Bayt) [annotator: Sayyid Mahdi al-Rajai]

31. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, *Tahdhib al-Ahkam* (Tehran:
Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan]

32. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib al-Amuli
al-Ṭabari, *Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an* (Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: Sidqi Jamil al-‘Aṭṭar]

33. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi, *al-Furu’
min al-Kafi* (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar
al-Ghiffari]

34. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi, *al-Usul
min al-Kafi* (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar
al-Ghiffari]

35. Abu Muhammad ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Darimi, *Sunan*
(Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Husayn
Salim Asad]

36. Abu Muhammad ‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Qudamah, *al-Mughni*
(Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi)

37. Abu Muhammad ‘Ali b. Ahmad b. Sa’id b. Hazm al-Andalusi al-Qurṭubi
al-Ẓahiri, *al-Muhalla* (Dar al-Fikr li al-Ṭaba’ah wa al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’)

38. Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, *Musnad*
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad]

39. Abu Yusuf Ya’qub b. Ibrahim al-Ansari, *al-Athar* (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah)

40. Abu Zakariyyah Yahya b. Sharaf al-Nawawi, *Sahih Muslim bi Sharh
al-Nawawi* (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1407 H)

41. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Taqrib al-Tahdhib* (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa]

42. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad, Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Ta’rif Ahl
al-Taqdis bi Maratib al-Mawsifin bi al-Tadlis* (Jordan: Maktabah
al-Manar; 1st edition) [annotator: Dr. Asim b. ‘Abd Allah al-Qaryuni]

43. Hadi al-Najafi, *Mawsu’at Ahadith Ahl al-Bayt* (Beirut: Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1423 H)

44. Ja’far al-Subhani, *Kulliyat fi ‘Ilm al-Rijal* (Qum: Muasassat
al-Nashr al-Islami; 3rd edition, 1414 H)

45. Mirza Husayn b. Muhammad Taqi al-Nuri al-Ṭabarsi, *Khatimah
Mustadrak al-Wasail* (Qum: Muasassat Al al-Bayt ‘Alaihim al-Salam li
Ihya al-Turath; 1st edition, 1415 H)

46. Muhammad al-Jawahiri, *al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith* (Qum:
Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H)

47. Muhammad Asif al-Muhsini, *Buhuth fi ‘Ilm al-Rijal* (Markaz
al-Mustafa al-‘Alami li Tarjamah wa al-Nashr)

48. Muhammad Asif al-Muhsini, *Mashra’ah Bihar al-Anwar* (Beirut:
Muasassat al-‘Arif li al-Maṭbu’at; 2nd edition, 1426 H)

49. Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Hurr al-‘Amili, *Tafsil Wasail al-Shi’ah ila
Tahsil Masail al-Shari’ah* (Qum: Muasassat Al al-Bayt ‘Alaihim al-Salam
li Ihya al-Turath; 2nd edition, 1414 H)

50. Muhammad b. Idris al-Shafi’i, *Kitab Ikhtilaf al-Hadith*

51. Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, *Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar* (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H)

52. Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, *Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul* (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini]

53. Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, *Irwa al-Ghalil fi Takhrij Ahadith
Manar al-Sabil* (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1405 H)

54. Muhammad Sadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, *Fiqh al-Sadiq* (3rd edition,
1412 H)

55. Nasir Makarim al-Shirazi, *al-Amthal fi Tafsir Kitab Allah
al-Munzal*

56. Prof. ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari, *Dirasat fi ‘Ilm al-Dirayah Talkhis
Miqyas al-Hidayah* (Jami’at al-Imam al-Sadiq; 1st edition)

57. Prof. Dr. Hikmat b. Bashir b. Yasin, *Mawsu’at al-Sahih al-Masbur
min al-Tafsir bi al-Mathur* (Madinah: Dar al-Mathar li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’ wa al-Ṭaba’at; 1st edition, 1420 H)

58. Sayyid Sabiq, *Fiqh al-Sunnah* (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 3rd
edition, 1397 H)

59. Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala* (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 4th edition, 1406 H)

60. Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Tarikh
al-Islam wa Wafiyat al-Mashahir wa al-A’lam* (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab
al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. ‘Umar ‘Abd al-Salam
Tadmuri]

61. Shihab al-Din Abu al-Faḍl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani,
*Lisan al-Mizan* (Beirut: Manshurat Muasassat al-A’lami li al-Maṭbu’at;
2nd edition, 1390 H)

62. Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib* (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H)

63. Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari* (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Ṭaba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition)


