1. Mut’ah In The Qur’an
=======================

*Nikah al-Mut’ah*, or simply *mut’ah*, is marriage between two
consenting adults for a specified period of time. It is a form of
marriage, which is why it is called a *nikah*. Since its duration is
fixed, it is also often called “temporary marriage”. The woman, before
the *mut’ah*, must NOT be in a pending marriage with anyone else.
Moreover, both parties must be adult believers; and both *must* be
chaste. In exceptional, emergency cases, the man is permitted to enter
into a temporary marriage with a chaste Jewish or Christian woman.

However, the woman can only marry a chaste Muslim man – whether in
*mut’ah* or in a permanent marriage. In addition, both parties must
mutually agree on the dowry and the length of the union. In the case of
a woman who has never married, the consent of her father is obligatory
for the *mut’ah*. Also, the man cannot have sex with her (i.e. the woman
who has never married) throughout the agreed duration of their *nikah*.
After the expiration of the marriage, the woman enters into a period of
*‘iddah* in temporary unions that involved intercourse. The children of
such a marriage are legitimate, and belong to the husband; and they
inherit him.

The spouses in *mut’ah* too may also inherit each other if their
marriage contract explicitly provides for it. Meanwhile, unlike in
permanent marriages, there is no restriction to the number of temporary
marriages a man may contract, simultaneously or consecutively. Also,
*mut’ah* is available to single men and woman, as well as to married
men, including those who already have four permanent wives.

During the life of Prophet Muhammad, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*,
temporary marriage was legislated and practiced within the *Ummah*.
Allah Himself decreed it in His Book, in the Verse of *al-Mut’ah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فما استمتعتم به منهن فآتوهن أجورهن فريضة ولا جناح عليكم فيما تراضيتم
به من بعد الفريضة إن الله كان عليما حكيما
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Those of them with whom you contract** ***mut’ah*****, give them their
prescribed dowries**; and there is no blame on you about what you
mutually agree after what is prescribed. Verily, Allah is All-Knowing,
All-Wise.[^1]

This *ayah* was not revealed like this. Rather, its original version
included extra phrases that leave no doubt about its import. For
instance, Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو زكريا العنبري ثنا محمد بن عبد السلام ثنا إسحاق بن إبراهيم
أنبأ النضر بن شميل أنبأ شعبة ثنا أبو سلمة قال : سمعت أبا نضرة يقول
قرأت على ابن عباس رضي الله عنهما {فما استمتعتم به منهن فآتوهن أجورهن
فريضة} قال ابن عباس: فما استمعتم به منهن إلى أجل مسمى قال أبو نضرة :
فقلت ما نقرأها كذلك فقال ابن عباس : والله لأنزلها الله كذلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Zakariyyah al-‘Anbari – Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Salam – Ishaq b. Ibrahim
– al-Naḍr b. Shumayl – Shu’bah – Abu Salamah – Abu Naḍrah:

I read to Ibn ‘Abbas: {Those of them with whom you contract *mut’ah,*
give them their prescribed dowries} [4:24]. He said: “{**Those of them
with whom you contract** ***mut’ah*** **for a specified period**}”. Abu
Naḍrah said: I said, “We do not recite it like that!” Ibn ‘Abbas
replied, “**I swear by Allah, Allah certainly revealed it like
that**.”[^2]

Al-Hakim comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح على شرط مسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *sahih* upon the standard of (Imam) Muslim.[^3]

And Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على شرط مسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Upon the standard of (Imam) Muslim[^4]

Imam Ibn Jarir al-Ṭabari (d. 310 H) also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا ابن المثنى، قال: ثنا محمد بن جعفر، قال: ثنا شعبة، عن أبي سلمة،
عن أبي نضرة، قال :قرأت هذه الآية على ابن عباس} :فما استمتعتم به منهن
{قال ابن عباس} :إلى أجل مسمى{، قال قلت: ما أقرؤها كذلك !قال: والله
لأنزلها الله كذلك ثلاث مرات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn al-Muthanna – Muhammad b. Ja’far – Shu’bah – Abu Salamah – Abu
Naḍrah:

I read this verse to Ibn ‘Abbas: {Those of them with whom you contract
*mut’ah*} [4:24]. He said: “**{for a specified period}**”. I said, “We
do not recite it like that!” He replied, “**I swear by Allah, Allah
certainly revealed it like that**.” He said it three times.[^5]

Al-Hafiẓ (d. 852 H) says about its first narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن المثنى بن عبيد العنزي بفتح النون والزاي أبو موسى البصري ….ثقة
ثبت
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. al-Muthanna b. ‘Ubayd al-‘Unaza, Abu Musa al-Basri....
***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy),** ***thabt*** **(accurate)**.[^6]

He also states concerning the second narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن جعفر الهذلي البصري المعروف بغندر ثقة صحيح الكتاب إلا أن فيه
غفلة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ja’far al-Hazali al-Basri, better known as Ghandar:
***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**, *sahih al-kitab* (i.e. *ahadith* from
his books are *sahih*) except that there was some negligence in him.[^7]

Ghandar’s negligence, of course, did not affect his *riwayat* from
Shu’bah, as al-Hafiẓ quotes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال ابن أبي حاتم سألت أبي عن غندر فقال كان صدوقا وكان مؤدبا وفي حديث
شعبة ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Abi Hatim said: “I asked my father about Ghandar and he replied, ‘He
was *saduq* (very truthful), and was a teacher and **in the**
***hadith*** **of Shu’bah, he is** ***thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**.’”[^8]

So, apparently, this *sanad* is *sahih* too without any doubt.

Al-Ṭabari further records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو كريب قال ، حدثنا يحيى بن عيسى قال ، حدثنا نصير بن أبي الأشعث
قال ، حدثني ابن حبيب بن أبي ثابت ، عن أبيه قال : أعطاني ابن عباس
مصحفًا فقال : هذا على قراءة أبيّ قال أبو كريب قال يحيى : فرأيت المصحف
عند نصير، فيه : (فما استمتعتم به منهن إلى أجل مسمى) .
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Kurayb – Yahya b. ‘Isa – Nasir b. Abi al-Ash’ath – Ibn Habib b. Abi
Thabit – his father:

Ibn ‘Abbas gave me a *mushaf*. He said, “This is upon the *qiraat* of
Ubayy b. Ka’b”.

Abu Kurayb narrated that Yahya said: “**I saw the** ***mushaf*** **with
Nusayr. In it was** {**Those of them with whom you contract**
***mut’ah*** **for a specified period**}.[^9]

Commenting upon this same chain with another narration, Prof. Ibn Yasin
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورجاله ثقات إلا يحيى بن عيسى صدوق، وابن حبيب هو عبد الله، وسنده حسن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its narrators are *thiqah* (trustworthy), except that Yahya b. ‘Isa is
*saduq* (very truthful) as well as Ibn Habib – and he was ‘Abd Allah,
**and its chain is** ***hasan***.[^10]

Imam ‘Abd al-Razzaq (d. 211 H) too reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الرزاق عن ابن جريج قال: أخبرني عطاء أنه سمع ابن عباس يراها الان
حلالا، وأخبرني أنه كان يقرأ} فما استمتعتم] به [منهن إلى أجل فآتوهن
أجورهن{
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzaq – Ibn Jurayj – ‘Aṭa:

I heard Ibn ‘Abbas while he saw it as *halal*, and he used to recite
{**Those of them with whom you contract** ***mut’ah*** **for a period,**
**give them their prescribed dowries**}.[^11]

This *sanad* is *sahih*, as we have discussed in the Preface.

Meanwhile, al-Hafiẓ Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H) has some more relevant
information for us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكان ابن عباس ، وأبيّ بن كعب ، وسعيد بن جُبَيْر ، والسُّدِّي يقرءون :
"فما استمتعتم به منهن إلى أجل مسمى فآتوهن أجورهن فريضة".
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn ‘Abbas, Ubayy b. Ka’b, Sa’id b. Jubayr and al-Suddi used to recite:
{Those of them with whom you contract *mut’ah* **for a specified
period***,* give them their prescribed dowries}.[^12]

So, apparently, that extra phrase makes it impossible to apply to the
verse to the permanent marriage as lots of the Ahl al-Sunnah do. The
permanent marriage is never contracted “for a specified period”. As
such, the verse is explicit in its legislation of temporary marriage.

Ibn ‘Abbas, *raḍiyallahu ‘anhu*, also made this clear. Al-Ṭabari says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا حميد بن مسعدة، قال :ثنا بشر بن المفضل، قال :ثنا داود، عن أبي
نضرة، قال :سألت ابن عباس عن متعة النساء، قال :أما تقرأ سورة النساء؟
قال :قلت بلى. قال: فما تقرأ فيها :فما استمتعتم به منهن إلى أجل مسمى؟
قلت :لا، لو قرأتها هكذا ما سألتك !قال :فإنها كذا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hamid b. Mas’adah – Bashar b. al-Mufaḍḍal – Dawud – Abu Nadrah:

**I asked Ibn ‘Abbas concerning** ***mut’ah*** **with women**. He
replied, “Do you not read *Surah al-Nisa*?” I said, “I do.” He said,
“So, do you not read in it {**Those of them with whom you contract**
***mut’ah*** **for a specified period**} [4:24]?” I said, “No. If I had
recite it like that, I would not have asked you!” He said, “**Verily, it
is like that**.”[^13]

About the first narrator, al-Hafiẓ comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حميد بن مسعدة بن المبارك السامي بالمهملة أو الباهلي بصري صدوق
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hamid b. Mas’adah b. al-Mubarak al-Sami or al-Bahili, Basri: ***Saduq***
**(very truthful)**.[^14]

What of the second narrator? He has an even better verdict:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بشر بن المفضل بن لاحق الرقاشي بقاف ومعجمة أبو إسماعيل البصري ثقة ثبت
عابد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Bashar b. al-Mufaḍḍal b. Lahik al-Raqashi, Abu Isma’il al-Basri:
***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy),** ***thabt*** **(accurate)**, a devout
worshipper of Allah.[^15]

And al-Hafiẓ states about the third narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
داود بن أبي هند القشيري مولاهم أبو بكر أو أبو محمد البصري ثقة متقن كان
يهم بأخرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Dawud b. Abi Hind al-Qushayri, their freed slave, Abu Bakr or Abu
Muhammad al-Basri: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy), extremely precise**. He
used to hallucinate during the last part of his life.[^16]

Thus, this chain too is *hasan*. Hamid b. Mas’adah was *saduq* (very
truthful), and Dawud’s late-life hallucinations were not serious. Note,
in the *riwayah*, how Ibn ‘Abbas quoted the *ayah* as evidence of
*mut’ah*.

So, what is that extra phrase “for a specified period”? Was it an
interpolation by Ubayy, Ibn ‘Abbas and others like them? Or, is it only
a case of *tahrif*, in which some parts of the *Kitab* have been
expunged? To us, the best explanation of the status of the extra phrase
is in this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واذكروا نعمت الله عليكم وما أنزل عليكم من الكتاب والحكمة يعظكم به
  </p>
</blockquote>

And remember the Favours of Allah upon you, **and that which He has sent
down to you of the Book** **AND the** ***Hikmah***, whereby He instructs
you.[^17]

This *ayah* informs us that Allah has sent down two things to this
*Ummah*: the Qur’an and the *Hikmah*. The same thing is repeated
elsewhere:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأنزل الله عليك الكتاب والحكمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Allah sent down to you (O Muhammad) the Book **and the**
***Hikmah***.[^18]

It is often claimed that the “Hikmah” is the *Sunnah* of the Prophet.
However, it is apparently more than that. The *Hikmah* too used to be
“recited” like the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واذكرن ما يتلى في بيوتكن من آيات الله والحكمة إن الله كان لطيفا خبيرا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And remember that which is **recited** in your houses of the Verses of
Allah **and the** ***Hikmah***. Verily, Allah is Subtle, Aware.[^19]

So, we know that “for a specified period” was revealed by Allah too
within the Verse of *al-Mut’ah*, as testified by Ibn ‘Abbas. We also
know that some of the Sahabah and Tabi’in used to “recite” it. However,
we know as well that it is not part of the Qur’an nonetheless.
Therefore, that phrase naturally falls under the *Hikmah* category.
Allah revealed it to explain the *ayah*. It may be recited with the
verse, and it may be excluded from it. Some of the *Salaf* – such as Ibn
‘Abbas, Ubayy b. Ka’b, Sa’id b. Jubayr and al-Suddi - chose to recite it
with the *ayah*.

In the Shi’i books, the Verse of *al-Mut’ah* is also cited as evidence
of its divine legislation. Shaykh al-Kulayni (d. 329 H), for instance,
documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدة من أصحابنا، عن سهل بن زياد، وعلي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه جميعا، عن ابن
أبي نجران، عن عاصم بن حميد، عن أبي بصير قال: سألت أبا جعفر عليه السلام
عن المتعة، فقال: نزلت في القرآن } فما استمتعتم به منهن فآتوهن أجورهن
فريضة فلا جناح عليكم فيما تراضيتم به من بعد الفريضة {
  </p>
</blockquote>

A number of our companions – Sahl b. Ziyad AND ‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his
father – Ibn Abi Najran – ‘Asim b. Humayd – Abu Basir:

I asked Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, concerning *mut’ah*. So, he
replied, “It is revealed in the Qur’an {Those of them with whom you
contract *mut’ah*, give them their prescribed dowries; and there is no
blame on you about what you mutually agree after what is
prescribed}.[^20]

‘Allamah al-Majlisi (d. 1111 H) says about this *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن كالصحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan ka al-Sahih*.[^21]

So, this is a *hasan hadith* which is equal to a *sahih* *hadith*.

Al-Kulayni again records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن علي بن الحسن بن رباط، عن
حريز، عن عبد الرحمن بن أبي عبد الله قال: سمعت أبا حنيفة يسأل أبا عبد
الله عليه السلام عن المتعة فقال: أي المتعتين تسأل؟ قال: سألتك عن متعة
الحج فأنبئني عن متعة النساء أحق هي؟ فقال: سبحان الله أما قرأت كتاب
الله عز وجل } فما استمتعتم به منهن فآتوهن أجورهن فريضة { ؟ فقال أبو
حنيفة: والله فكأنها آية لم أقرأها قط.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b.
Rabaṭ – Hariz – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi ‘Abd Allah:

I heard Abu Hanifah asking Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about
*mut’ah*. So, he (Abu ‘Abd Allah) said, “Which of the two *mut’ahs* are
you asking about?” He (Abu Hanifah) replied, “I (already) asked you
about *mut’ah* of *Hajj*. So, inform me about *mut’ah* with women. Is it
correct?” He (Abu ‘Abd Allah) said, “*Subhan Allah*! Do you not read the
Book of Allah {Those of them with whom you contract *mut’ah*, give them
their prescribed dowries}?” Then, Abu Hanifah said, “I swear by Allah,
it is as though it is a verse I have never read”.[^22]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^23]

[^1]: Qur’an 4:24

[^2]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Muṣtafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 2, p.
334, \# 3192

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib al-Amuli
al-Ṭabari, Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an (Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: Ṣidqi Jamil al-‘Aṭṭar], vol. 5, p. 19

[^6]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Muṣtafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 2, p. 129, \# 6283

[^7]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 63, \# 5805

[^8]: Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H), vol. 9, p. 85, \# 129

[^9]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib al-Amuli
al-Ṭabari, Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an (Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: Ṣidqi Jamil al-‘Aṭṭar], vol. 5, p. 18

[^10]: Prof. Dr. Hikmat b. Bashir b. Yasin, Mawsu’at al-Ṣahih al-Masbur
min al-Tafsir bi al-Mathur (Madinah: Dar al-Mathar li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’ wa al-Ṭaba’at; 1st edition, 1420 H), vol. 3, p. 239

[^11]: Abu Bakr ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Ṣa’nani, al-Muṣannaf
[annotator: Habib al-Rahman al-A’ẓami], vol. 7, p. 498, \# 14022

[^12]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurshi al-Dimashqi,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Aẓim (Dar al-Ṭaybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah], vol. 2, p. 259

[^13]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib
al-Amuli al-Ṭabari, Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an (Dar al-Fikr; 1415
H) [annotator: Ṣidqi Jamil al-‘Aṭṭar], vol. 5, p. 18

[^14]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Muṣtafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 1, p. 246, \# 1564

[^15]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 130, \# 705

[^16]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 283, \# 1822

[^17]: Qur’an 2:231

[^18]: Qur’an 4:113

[^19]: Qur’an 33:34

[^20]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 448, \# 1

[^21]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 226

[^22]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, pp. 449-450, \# 6

[^23]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 230


