5. The Practice Of Mut’ah
=========================

NOTE: This chapter is only a general, concise explanation of *mut’ah*,
and does not substitute for expert clerical advice and guidance on it.

Mut’ah: A Tool Of Necessity
---------------------------

When a Shi’i Muslim intends to contract *mut’ah*, there are a number of
questions he faces directly. What is the purpose of the intended
marriage? What are its benefits? Is there any need for it? With whom
should he do the *mut’ah*, and for how long? What are its conditions and
limitations?

Generally, *mut’ah* is forbidden except in cases of necessity. Shaykh
al-Kulayni (d. 329 H) reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن علي بن يقطين قال: سألت
أبا الحسن موسى عليه السلام عن المتعة فقال: وما أنت وذاك فقد أغناك الله
عنها، قلت:إنما أردت أن أعلمها، فقال: هي في كتاب علي عليه السلام، فقلت:
نزيدها وتزداد؟ فقال: وهل يطيبه إلا ذاك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – ‘Ali b. Yaqṭin:

I asked Abu al-Hasan Musa, peace be upon him, concerning *mut’ah*, and
he said, “**What do you have to do with that, for Allah has already made
you needless of it**?” I said, “I only want to learn about it.” Then he
said, “It is in the Book of ‘Ali, peace be upon him.” So, I said, “Do we
increase it and is it multiplied?” He said, “Is there anything that
pleases him except that?”[^1]

Al-Majlisi (d. 1111 H) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^2]

This is quite clear and straightforward. If you are not in a state of
need – with regards to *mut’ah* – you have nothing to do with it. So,
the Shi’i asks himself if he is really in need of a temporary marriage.
If he is not, he abandons the whole idea, as the Imams, *‘alaihim
al-salam*, want.

The Suitable Mut’ah Wives
-------------------------

After deciding that he is genuinely in need of *mut’ah*, then he must
decide whom to marry temporarily. He is absolutely forbidden from
marrying any woman who falls in the forbidden categories[^3]. The Shi’i
man knows this. So, he is only searching *outside* the forbidden
categories. There are some crucial duties upon him, in his search,
however.

First and foremost, he must confirm the age of any woman he wishes to
marry. She must NOT be underage, as al-Kulayni documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن جميل بن دراج قال: سألت أبا عبد الله
عن الرجل يتمتع من الجارية البكر قال: لا بأس بذلك ما لم يستصغرها
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – Jamil b. Darraj:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah about the man who does *mut’ah* with the virgin
girl. He said, “There is no problem with that, **as long as he does not
find her to be underage**.”[^4]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^5]

Then, he adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله : ) ما لم يستصغرها ( أي لم يجدها صغيرة غير بالغة فلا يصح العقد
حينئذ
  </p>
</blockquote>

His statement: {as long as he does not find her to be underage},
meaning, he does not find her to be a child who has not reached the age
of maturity, in which case the union would be invalid.[^6]

Al-Kulayni also reports about the age of maturity, for girls, in Islam:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن رجل، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام
قال: قلت: الجارية ابنة كم لا تستصبي؟ ابنة ست أو سبع؟ فقال: لا ابنة تسع
لا تستصبي وأجمعوا كلهم على أن ابنة تسع لا تستصبي إلا أن يكون في عقلها
ضعف وإلا فهي إذا بلغت تسعا فقد بلغت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – **a man**:

I said, “When does the girl cease to be a child? At the age of six or
seven?” So, he said, “No. **She ceases to be a child at the age of
nine**; and they all unanimously agree that a girl of nine years is no
longer a child, except if there is weakness in her intelligence.
**Otherwise, when she reaches the age of nine, she has matured**.”[^7]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^8]

In reality, the *hadith* is *mursal*. However, there is a strengthening
*shahid* for it in this *hadith* of Shaykh al-Ṭusi (d. 460 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عنه عن ابن محبوب عن أبي أيوب عن يزيد الكناسي عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام
قال: الجارية إذا بلغت تسع سنين ذهب عنها اليتم وزوجت
  </p>
</blockquote>

And from him (i.e. Ahmad b. Muhammad) – Ibn Mahbub – Abu Ayub – Yazid
ak-Kunasi – Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him:

When the girl reaches the age of nine, her orphanhood ceases, and she is
married.[^9]

‘Allamah Al-Ruhani comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن أو صحيحه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan* or *Sahih*.[^10]

Al-Kulayni too has this further *shahid*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عنه، عن الحسن، عن جعفر بن سماعة، عن آدم بياع اللؤلؤ، عن عبد الله بن
سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: إذا بلغ الغلام ثلاث عشرة سنة
كتبت له الحسنة وكتبت عليه السيئة وعوقب، وإذا بلغت الجارية تسع سنين
فكذلك وذلك أنها تحيض لتسع سنين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

From him (i.e. Humayd) – al-Hasan – Ja’far b. Sama’ah – Adam – ‘Abd
Allah b.Sinan – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

When the boy reaches the age of thirteen, his good deeds are recorded
and his evil deeds are also recorded, and he is punished (for his sins
and crimes). **When the girl reaches the age of nine, she becomes like
that too**; and that is because she menstruates at the age of
nine.”[^11]

And al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^12]

Al-Ruhani too concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^13]

Al-Kulayni also documents one more *shahid*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، ومحمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد جميعا، عن ابن
أبي عمير، عن حماد، عن الحلبي عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قال: إذا
تزوج الرجل الجارية وهي صغيرة فلا يدخل بها حتى يأتي لها تسع سنين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father AND Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad –
Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – Hammad – al-Halabi – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

When a man marries a girl while she is still immature, **then he must
not have sexual intercourse with her until she reaches the age of
nine**.[^14]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^15]

Al-Ruhani too says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^16]

This *hadith* – which is about permanent marriages – nonetheless
establishes a universal principle: a girl theoretically becomes a woman,
capable of having sexual intercourse, at the age of nine. Therefore, the
Shi’i man seeking a *mut’ah* marriage must himself be at least thirteen
years old, while the girl must have reached the age of nine. Otherwise,
the *mut’ah* would be unlawful.

Our Shi’i man is above thirteen, *alhamdulillah*; and he has his eyes on
a particular Muslim woman who is above nine too. So, what must he do
next? In our modern, heavily Westernized world, the age of consent has
been statutorily fixed in most countries. This is why the Shi’i man must
be careful here. He does not have to get himself into trouble simply
because he wants to do *mut’ah*. Therefore, in fulfilment of the
obligations of *taqiyyah*, he must respect the statutory age of consent
in his country of residence. Usually, the man and the woman are
considered legally capable of consensual intercourse starting from the
age of 18 (eighteen). The Shi’i man, then, must obey that, as long as he
has no other trouble-free option. *Taqiyyah* is indeed a shield, and a
blessing, to the believers.

Now, our man lives in a Western(ized) country, and he has been able to
find a woman who is eighteen years old or above. In that case, he must
confirm the marital status of the woman he intends to do *mut’ah* with.
If she is married – whether in *mut’ah* or permanently, then she is
automatically and *absolutely* disqualified[^17]. Normally, the man
should be able to easily confirm the marital status of the woman through
her neighbours, friends or colleagues. In case that becomes difficult,
then if he is able to confirm directly from the woman, that is even
better. Whatever she says about herself is believed to be true.
Al-Kulayni says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدة من أصحابنا، عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن الحسين بن سعيد، عن فضالة،
عن ميسر قال: قلت لأبي عبد الله عليه السلام : ألقى المرأة بالفلاة التي
ليس فيها أحد فأقول لها:هل لك زوج؟ فتقول: لا، فأتزوجها؟ قال: نعم هي
المصدقة على نفسها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A number of our companions – Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa – al-Husayn b.
Sa’id – Faḍalah – Maysar:

I said to Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, “I met a woman in the
wilderness in which there was no one else. So I said to her, ‘Do you
have a husband?’ She said, ‘No.’ Do I marry her?” He said, “Yes. **She
is the trustworthy one concerning herself**.”[^18]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^19]

After determining that the woman has no husband – whether she is single,
divorced or widowed and is available for marriage – then, the Shi’i man
must establish that she is also *morally* eligible for *mut’ah*. The
Qur’an has forbidden certain categories of men and women for marriage –
whether permanently or temporarily:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزاني لا ينكح إلا زانية أو مشركة والزانية لا ينكحها إلا زان أو مشرك
وحرم ذلك على المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

The **fornicator** shall not marry any but a **fornicatress** or an
**idolatress**; and the fornicatress, none shall marry her but a
fornicator or an idolater: **and that is made** ***haram*** **for the
believers**.[^20]

Yes, it is *haram* for the Shi’i man to marry a fornicatress or an
idolatress. As such, he must investigate the moral uprightness and
*tawhid* of whoever he seeks to do *mut’ah* with. If the woman is a
Muslimah, but a fornicatress, marriage with her – permanently or
temporarily – is *haram*. Moreover, if she is morally upright but
associates others with Allah in His attributes, functions, roles, or in
worship of Him or *du’a* to Him, then *mut’ah* with her is still
forbidden. The same goes for the Muslim woman who wants to practise
temporary marriage as well. She must investigate the morality and
Islamic monotheism of her proposed husband. If he fails in either, he is
*haram* to her for *mut’ah* or permanent marriage.

Al-Ṭusi documents in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى عن محمد بن إسماعيل بن بزيع قال: سأل رجل الرضا
عليه السلام وانا اسمع عن الرجل يتزوج المرأة متعة ويشترط عليها ان لا
يطلب ولدها فتأتي بعد ذلك بولد فينكر الولد فشدد في ذلك وقال يجحد؟ وكيف
يجحد اعظاما لذلك؟ قال الرجل فان اتهمها قال: لا ينبغي لك ان تتزوج إلا
مأمونة ان الله يقول: الزاني لا ينكح إلا زانية أو مشركة والزانية لا
ينكحها إلا زان أو مشرك وحرم ذلك على المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa – Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Bazi’:

A man asked al-Riḍa, peace be upon him, while I was listening, about
**the man who marries the woman in** ***mut’ah*** and he imposes a
condition upon her that he will not seek her child. But, she later comes
with a child and he severely denies the child. So, he (al-Riḍa) said,
“Does he deny? How can he deny primarily because of that?” **Then, the
man said, “What if he accuses her (of fornication)?” He (al-Riḍa) said,
“It is not appropriate for you to marry except a faithful woman**.
Verily, Allah the Almighty says: {The fornicator shall not marry any but
a fornicatress or an idolatress; **and the fornicatress, none shall
marry her but a fornicator or an idolater**: and that is made *haram*
for the believers}.[^21]

Al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^22]

Al-Ruhani concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^23]

This is equally emphasized in this noble *ayah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اليوم أحل لكم الطيبات وطعام الذين أوتوا الكتاب حل لكم وطعامكم حل لهم
والمحصنات من المؤمنات والمحصنات من الذين أوتوا الكتاب من قبلكم إذا
آتيتموهن أجورهن محصنين غير مسافحين ولا متخذي أخدان
  </p>
</blockquote>

Today, the good things are made *halal* to you; and the food of those
who were given the Book is *halal* for you, and your food is *halal* for
them; **and also (*****halal*** **to you are) the CHASTE ONES from the
believing women** and the chaste ones from those who were given the Book
before you, when you have given them their dowries, taking (them) in
marriage, not fornicating (with them), nor taking them as
girlfriends.[^24]

So, *mut’ah* is allowed, as a general rule, only with faithful, chaste
believing or Muslim men and women, who are not fornicators, adulterers
or fornicatresses. Unchaste believing women are NOT *halal* to the Shi’i
man. As such, marriage – permanent or temporary - with any unchaste
woman or fornicatress is *haram*. Meanwhile, once a man or a woman has
repented from *zina*, he or she no longer falls in the forbidden
categories, as al-Kulayni confirms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حميد بن زياد، عن الحسن بن محمد بن سماعة، عن أحمد بن الحسن الميثمي، عن
أبان، عن حكم بن حكيم، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام في قوله عز وجل:
والزانية لا ينكحها إلا زان أو مشرك قال: إنما ذلك في الجهر ثم قال: لو
أن إنسانا زنى ثم تاب تزوج حيث شاء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Humayd b. Ziyad – al-Hasan b. Muhammad b. Sama’ah – Ahmad b. al-Hasan
al-Maythami – Aban – Hakam b. Hakim – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him,
concerning His Statement, the Almighty {**and the fornicatress, none
shall marry her but a fornicator or an idolater**}:

“That is only in the publicity (of the fornication)”. Then, he (Abu ‘Abd
Allah) said, “**If a person commits** ***zina*****, and then repents,
they can marry wherever they wish (in the** ***halal***
**categories)**.”[^25]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^26]

Also, to determine the moral and religious status of the Muslim woman,
obviously, the Shi’i man must carry out thorough investigations, as
al-Kulayni reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن ابن محبوب، عن أبان، عن أبي مريم، عن
أبي جعفر عليه السلام أنه سئل عن المتعة فقال: إن المتعة اليوم ليس كما
كانت قبل اليوم إنهن كن يومئذ يؤمن واليوم لا يؤمن فاسألوا عنهن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – Ibn Mahbub – Aban – Abu Maryam:

Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, was asked about *mut’ah*. So, he said,
“Verily, *mut’ah* today is not as it used to be in the past. They (i.e.
the women) used to be faithful. But, today, they are not faithful.
**Therefore, investigate about them (i.e. the women)**.[^27]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق كالصحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq ka al-Sahih*[^28]

If the investigations reveal that she is unchaste or a fornicatress,
then the Shi’i man must look for another woman. Interestingly, even
where the man is unable to personally get solid evidence of her
debauchery, but notices that people widely think of her as being
promiscuous, he must forget about her in that case too. Al-Kulayni
records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن يونس، عن محمد بن الفضيل قال:سألت
أبا الحسن عليه السلام عن المرأة الحسناء الفاجرة هل يجوز للرجل أن يتمتع
منها يوما أو أكثر؟ فقال: إذا كانت مشهورة بالزنا فلا يتمتع منها ولا
ينكحها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – Muhammad b. ‘Isa – Yunus – Muhammad b. al-Fuḍayl:

I asked Abu al-Hasan, peace be upon him, about the beautiful woman who
is a prostitute: is it permissible for the man to do *mut’ah* with her
for a day or more?” He said: “**If she is famous for** ***zina*****,
then he must NOT do** ***mut’ah*** **with her and also must NOT marry
her (permanently)**.”[^29]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq* (Reliable)[^30]

However, it may happen that the Shi’i man is unable to determine the
moral uprightness of the woman. Perhaps, her neighbours do not know much
about her, because she came into their community only recently. Or, the
Shi’i man is unable to approach her neighbours and colleagues for one
good reason or another. Or, she was once famous for *zina*; but, there
have been rumours of her total repentance. What does the Shi’i man do in
such a situation? Al-Kulayni has the answer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير رفعه، عن عبد الله بن أبي
يعفور، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سألته عن المرأة ولا أدري ما
حالها أيتزوجها الرجل متعة؟ قال: يتعرض لها فإن أجابته إلى الفجور فلا
يفعل
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – ‘Abd Allah b. Abi
Ya’fur:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about the woman whose state I
do not know, does the man marry her in *mut’ah*? He said, “**He presents
to her. If she responds to him in favour of unlawful sex, then, he must
NOT**.”[^31]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^32]

This is a last resort measure – where no other one is possible - to
identify the moral status of the woman. The man proposes a
boyfriend-girlfriend relationship, a cohabitation or a concubinage (all
of which are forms of *zina*) with her. If she accepts, then she is a
fornicatress. The Shi’i man must NOT contract *mut’ah* with her.
However, if she rejects pre-marital and extra-marital sex, then she is
clean for marriage.

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) presents the Sunni view on this, as
well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكذلك المرأة التى زنا بها الرجل فإنه لا يتزوج بها إلا بعد التوبة فى
اصح القولين كما دل عليه الكتاب والسنة والآثار لكن إذا أراد أن يمتحنها
هل هى صحيحة التوبة أم لا فقال عبدالله ابن عمر وهو المنصوص عن أحمد أنه
يراودها عن نفسها فإن أجابته لم تصح توبتها وإن لم تجبه فقد تابت
  </p>
</blockquote>

The woman who committed fornication with the man is like that too. He
cannot marry her except after repentance, according to the more correct
of the two opinions, as established by the Book, the *Sunnah* and the
*athar*. However, if he intends to test her, whether it is a genuine
repentance or not, **then ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar said – and this is also
what is reported from Ahmad (b. Hanbal) – that he should propose
fornication to her. If she responds positively to him, her repentance is
not genuine. But, if she does not respond positively to him, then she
has (genuinely) repented**.[^33]

Al-Kulayni continues further with the Shi’i position:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن محمد بن أحمد، عن أحمد بن الحسن، عن عمرو بن سعيد، عن
مصدق بن صدقة، عن عمار بن موسى، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سألته
عن الرجل يحل له أن يتزوج امرأة كان يفجر بها؟ فقال: إن آنس منها رشدا
فنعم وإلا فليراودنها على الحرام فإن تابعته فهي عليه حرام وإن أبت
فليتزوجها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Muhammad b. Ahmad – Ahmad b. al-Hasan – ‘Amr b.
Sa’id – Musaddiq b. Sadaqah – ‘Ammar b. Musa:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about the man, “Can he marry
a woman with whom he committed fornication?” So, he said, “**If he sees
right guidance in her, then yes. If not, he should propose the**
***haram*** **to her. If she follows him, then she is** ***haram*** **to
him. But, if she refuses, then he should marry her**.”[^34]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^35]

Al-Ruhani concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^36]

This one establishes a powerful principle in *mut’ah*, as well. If a
girl is willing to perform *zina* with the Shi’i man – such as casual
sex, boy-friend-girlfriend relationship, cohabitation and concubinage –
then, she is *haram* to him for marriage – permanent or temporary. It is
also a sign that she is one of those who have not repented from
fornication. Marriage to a woman is *halal* only if she is chaste or
after her genuine repentance.

So, the Muslim woman must be (a) unmarried and available for marriage,
(b) chaste and (c) not famous for *zina* among the people. With these
three conditions fulfilled, the stage is set for a valid *mut’ah*.

Meanwhile, something must be quickly mentioned here. There is a group
among Muslims who are known as the Nawasib. These are people who openly
express or manifest violence, ill-will, hatred, mockery or insult
against any of the Twelve Imams or Sayyidah Faṭimah, *‘alaihim
al-salam*. The *Sunnah* has forbidden *nikah* to such people too, in
addition to fornicators and idolaters. Al-Kulayni, for instance,
documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن ابن محبوب، عن جميل بن صالح، عن فضيل
ابن يسار، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لا يتزوج المؤمن الناصبة
المعروفة بذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – Ibn Mahbub – Jamil b. Salih –
Fuḍayl b. Yasar – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

The believer must not marry the Nasibi woman who is well-known with
that.[^37]

Al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^38]

Al-Ruhani agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^39]

Al-Kulayni also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن عبد الرحمن بن أبي نجران، عن عبد الله
بن سنان قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام عن الناصب الذي قد عرف نصبه
وعداوته هل نزوجه المؤمنة وهو قادر على رده وهو لا يعلم برده؟ قال: لا
يزوج المؤمن الناصبة ولا يتزوج الناصب المؤمنة ولا يتزوج المستضعف مؤمنه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Najran –
‘Abd Allah b. Sinan:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about the Nasibi man, whose
Nasibism and enmity (against any of the Twelve Imams or Sayyidah
Faṭimah) is well-known, “Can we marry a believing woman to him, while he
is capable of rejecting it but does not know of its rejection?” He said,
“**The believing man cannot marry the Nasibi woman, and the Nasibi man
cannot marry a believing woman**, and the *mustaḍ’af* man cannot marry
the believing woman.”[^40]

Al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^41]

And al-Ruhani concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^42]

As such, the Shi’i man, and the Shi’i woman, must confirm that their
prospective *mut’ah* partners are not from the Nawasib. Even if such
people are absolutely chaste, *nikah* to them is *haram* nonetheless.

The other people similarly disqualified are the Khawarij and the
Murjiah, according to this *hadith* of al-Kulayni:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو علي الأشعري، عن محمد بن عبد الجبار، عن صفوان بن يحيى، عن عبد الله
بن مسكان، عن يحيى الحلبي، عن عبد الحميد الطائي، عن زرارة بن أعين قال:
قلت لأبي عبد الله عليه السلام :أتزوج بمرجئة أو حرورية؟ قال: لا، عليك
بالبله من النساء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Ali al-Ash’ari – Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Jabbar – Safwan b. Yahya –
‘Abd Allah b. Miskan – Yahya b. al-Halabi – ‘Abd al-Hamid al-Ṭai –
Zurarah b. A’yan:

I said to Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, “**Can I marry a Murji or
Haruri (i.e. Khariji) woman?**” He said, “**No. You should marry the
innocent ones among the women**.”[^43]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^44]

Shaykh Hadi al-Najafi too says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرواية صحيحة الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

The report has a *sahih* chain[^45]

The Nawasib in our times include those who mock our Twelfth Imam,
*‘alaihi al-salam*, calling him “the dajjal” or a coward. Others are
those who label Imam al-Husayn, *‘alaihi al-salam*, “a rebel” for rising
against the illegitimate *khilafah* of Yazid, and those who attribute
ignorance to any of the Twelve Imams. Also, those who routinely rush to
reject authentic Sunni *ahadith*, which are in favour of the Twelve
Imams or any of them, without any genuine excuse, are among the Nasibis
as well. Nothing spurs them into doing that except their Nasibism. As
for the Khawarij, they include everyone who identifies the Shi’is
generally as *kuffar*, and everyone kills Shi’is on account of their
*madhhab*, and everyone is pleased with both misdeeds. The Murjiah, on
their part, include anyone who believes that whatsoever atrocities a
Sahabi is perfectly proved, through even the Sunni books, to have
committed, he was nonetheless a saint and will be in *Jannah*. Marriage
– temporary or permanent – is forbidden with these people and others
like them, no matter their level of chastity.

Mut’ah With Christian And Jewish Women
--------------------------------------

The above, of course, is the general rule. However, what happens when
the Shi’i man in need of *mut’ah* is unable to find a suitable Muslim
spouse? Well, the Book of Allah has made certain concessions in this
regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اليوم أحل لكم الطيبات وطعام الذين أوتوا الكتاب حل لكم وطعامكم حل لهم
والمحصنات من المؤمنات والمحصنات من الذين أوتوا الكتاب من قبلكم إذا
آتيتموهن أجورهن محصنين غير مسافحين ولا متخذي أخدان
  </p>
</blockquote>

Today, the good things are made *halal* to you; and the food of those
who were given the Book is *halal* for you, and your food is *halal* for
them; and also (*halal* to you are) the chaste ones from the believing
women **and the chaste ones from those who were given the Book before
you**, when you have given them their dowries, **taking (them) in
marriage, not fornicating (with them), nor taking them as
girlfriends**.[^46]

This verse is in the last revealed *Surah* of the Qur’an. As such, it is
the last law of Allah on the issue of marriage with non-Muslim women,
and therefore effectively modifies the previous rulings. So, while
*mut’ah* with non-Muslims is ordinarily *haram*, our Lord eventually
allowed us to marry those of them who follow a religion that once
adhered to a scripture from Him. These are primarily Jews and Christians
today. Therefore, the Shi’i man is allowed to wed a Jewess or a
Christian woman in *mut’ah*, as long as the following conditions are
fulfilled:

(a) she is unmarried and available for marriage;

(b) she is chaste;

(c) the purpose of the union is marriage and not fornication;

(d) she must not be taken as a girlfriend; and

(e) she must be paid her dowry.

However, a Muslim woman is absolutely forbidden from marrying absolutely
*any* non-Muslim man – whether temporarily or permanently[^47].

‘Allamah al-Hurr al-‘Amili (d. 1104 H) also records this *hadith* for
the Shi’i man:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن الحسن بإسناده عن أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن إسماعيل بن سعد
الأشعري قال: سألته عن الرجل يتمتع من اليهودية والنصرانية قال: لا أري
بذلك بأسا، قال: قلت: فالمجوسية؟ قال: أما المجوسية فلا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. al-Hasan with his *isnad* from Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa –
Isma’il b. Sa’d al-Ash’ari:

I asked him (i.e. the Imam) about the man who does *mut’ah* with a
Jewess or a Christian woman. He said, “I see no problem with that.” I
said, “What about a Zoroastrian woman?” He said, “As for a Zoroastrian
woman, then no.”[^48]

Ayatullah Sadiq al-Ruhani comments about the report:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq* (Reliable)[^49]

The *hadith* can indeed be found in *al-Tahdhib* of al-Ṭusi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعنه عن إسماعيل بن سعد الأشعري قال: سألته عن الرجل يتمتع من اليهودية
والنصرانية قال: لا أرى بذلك بأسا قال: قلت بالمجوسية؟ قال: واما
المجوسية فلا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And from him from Isma’il b. Sa’d al-Ash’ari:

I asked him (i.e. the Imam) about the man who does *mut’ah* with a
Jewess or a Christian woman. He said, “I see no problem with that.” I
said, “What about a Zoroastrian woman?” He said, “As for a Zoroastrian
woman, then no.”[^50]

Al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^51]

Meanwhile, if the Shi’i man is able to find a chaste Jewess or a
Christian woman who agrees to do *mut’ah* with him, there are still some
other conditions which she must consent to. Al-Ṭusi reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وروى محمد بن يعقوب عن محمد بن يحيى عن أحمد بن محمد عن الحسن بن محبوب
عن معاوية بن وهب وغيره عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام في الرجل المؤمن
يتزوج باليهودية والنصرانية قال: إذا أصاب المسلمة فما يصنع باليهودية
والنصرانية، فقلت له: يكون له فيها الهوى فقال: ان فعل فليمنعها من شرب
الخمر واكل لحم الخنزير، واعلم أن عليه في دينه في تزويجه إياها غضاضة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ya’qub – Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – al-Hasan b.
Mahbub – Mu’awiyah b. Wahb and others – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon
him, who said concerning a believing man who seeks to marry a Jewess or
a Christian woman:

“If he finds a Muslim woman, then what is he doing with the Jewess or
Christian woman?”

So, I (Mu’awiyah) said to him, “He loves her.”

Then, he said, “If he does, **then he must forbid her from drinking
alcohol and from eating pork**. And know that in his marriage to her,
there is a blemish upon him in his religion.”[^52]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^53]

And al-Ruhani concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^54]

Apparently, *mut’ah* with a Jewish or Christian woman is highly
discouraged where a Muslim woman is available, although not forbidden.
Moreover, such a marriage constitutes a blemish on the religion of the
man who performs it.

In any case, before a temporary marriage can proceed with a Jewess or
Christian woman, she must:

(i) be unmarried and available for marriage;

(ii) be chaste, and not a fornicatress;

(iii) agree to stop drinking alcohol or eating pork throughout the
duration of the marriage.

If she agrees, then the Shi’i man may contract the *mut’ah* with her.
Otherwise, he must avoid it altogether.

Let us say that the Shi’i man finds a willing, chaste, qualified Muslim
woman, or a chaste Jewess or Christian woman who agrees to avoid alcohol
and pork during the marriage. Then, what next?

The Case Of The Virgin Woman
----------------------------

In the case of a “virgin” woman, there are still further steps to take.
Note that a “virgin”, in principle, is any woman who has never married.
It does not matter whether she still has her hymen undamaged or not. As
long as she has never married, she is technically considered a “virgin”
by the *Shari’ah*. To “deflower” her is, then, to have penetrative sex
with her, whether her hymen is still intact or had been broken[^55].
Ayatullah al-Ruhani states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعن الشيخ في كتاب الفروع والحلي والمحقق والمصنف في جملة من كتبه وأكثر
المتأخرين: إن المراد بالبكر غير المحصن
  </p>
</blockquote>

And from Shaykh in *Kitab al-Furu’*, and al-Hilli, al-Muhaqqiq and the
author in part of his books, and the majority of the later scholars:
**what is meant by the “virgin” is the one who has never married**.[^56]

First and foremost, it is *makruh* (disliked) to do *mut’ah* with a
virgin, as al-Kulayni documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن حفص بن البختري، عن أبي
عبد الله عليه‌ السلام قال: في الرجل يتزوج البكر متعة، قال: يكره للعيب
على أهلها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – Hafs b. al-Bakhtari:

Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, said concerning the man who marries
the virgin in *mut’ah*: “**It is** ***makruh*** **due to the blemish
upon her family**.”[^57]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^58]

Then, he adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويدل على كراهة التمتع بالبكر مطلقا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it proves that *mut’ah* with a virgin is *makruh* in all
situations.[^59]

However, in our view – based upon the apparent text of the *hadith* –
the temporary marriage with the virgin is disliked only where it will
constitute a blemish on her family. Otherwise, it is encouraged. This
situation can occur where the virgin woman and her family reside within
a predominantly Sunni community, where ignorance about *mut’ah* is
severe. The Ahl al-Sunnah generally equate it with fornication, in
denial of the Qur’an and their own *sahih ahadith*. Nonetheless, even in
such a circumstance, *mut’ah* with the virgin woman is not *haram*
(prohibited). Therefore, the Shi’i man may still go ahead with it
anyway, if the woman and her family agree.

Al-Ṭusi too has the *hadith* through another *ṭariq*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى عن يعقوب بن يزيد عن محمد ابن أبي عمير عن حفص بن
البختري عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام في الرجل يتزوج البكر متعة قال:
يكره للعيب على أهلها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya – Ya’qub b. Yazid – Muhammad b. Abi ‘Umayr –
Hafs b. al-Bakhtari:

Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, said concerning the man who marries
the virgin in *mut’ah*: “**It is** ***makruh*** **due to the blemish
upon her family**.”[^60]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^61]

So, what if our man lives in a Shi’i society, where *mut’ah* is
well-respected? Well, even in such a case or in any other, he is still
subject to further restrictions, as long as his proposed temporary
spouse is a virgin. Al-Kulayni records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد وعبد الله ابني محمد بن عيسى، عن علي بن الحكم، عن
زياد بن أبي الحلال قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه‌ السلام يقول: لا بأس
بأن يتمتع بالبكر ما لم يفض إليها مخافة كراهية العيب على أهلها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad and ‘Abd Allah, sons of Muhammad b. ‘Isa –
‘Ali b. al-Hakam – Ziyad b. Abi al-Hilal:

I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, saying: “**There is no
problem in doing** ***mut’ah*** **with the virgin as long as he does not
have intercourse with her**, for fear of the disgust of the blemish upon
her family.”[^62]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^63]

Obviously, if sex is one of the aims of the Shi’i man in seeking a
*mut’ah*, he has to forgo the virgin women.

But, there is a quick issue here, on account of this *hadith* of
al-Kulayni:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن حماد، عن الحلبي، عن أبي
عبد الله عليه السلام في رجل دخل بامرأة قال: إذا التقى الختانان وجب
المهر والعدة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – Hammad – al-Halabi:

Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, said about a man who has sexual
intercourse with a woman: “**When the two circumcised parts meet, the
dowry and the** ***‘iddah*** **become compulsory**.”[^64]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^65]

This *hadith* is explicit. The payment of the dowry becomes “obligatory”
only after the *mut’ah* couple have had intercourse. Before that, it is
only voluntary. Does this then mean that the virgin girl receives no
dowry – or that the man is not under any obligation to give her – since
there is no sex in her *mut’ah*? Well, the above *hadith* apparently
refers to a marriage – permanent or temporary – where sex is not
explicitly ruled out. Therefore, where its exclusion is agreed between
the two *mut’ah* parties as part of their union, and it does not take
place, then neither the dowry nor the *‘iddah* period is obligatory.
However, if a Shi’i man commits to pay the dowry to a virgin without
having intercourse with her, then he must fulfil his commitment.
Al-Kulayni reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدة من أصحابنا، عن سهل بن زياد، وأحمد بن محمد جميعا، عن ابن محبوب، عن
عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سمعته يقول: من
اشترط شرطا مخالفا لكتاب الله فلا يجوز له ولا يجوز على الذي اشترط عليه
والمسلمون عند شروطهم فيما وافق كتاب الله عزو جل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A number of our companions – Sahl b. Ziyad AND Ahmad b. Muhammad – Ibn
Mahbub – ‘Abd Allah b. Sinan – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

Whosoever makes a commitment that is contrary to the Book of Allah the
Almighty, then it is not permissible for him, and it is not permissible
for the beneficiary of the commitment. **The Muslims are by their
commitments in whatever agrees with the Book of Allah the
Almighty**.[^66]

Al-Majlisi submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^67]

Al-Ruhani also concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^68]

Al-Ṭusi also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عنه عن الحسن بن موسى الخشاب عن غياث بن كلوب عن إسحاق بن عمار عن جعفر
عن أبيه عليه السلام ان علي بن أبي طالب عليه السلام كان يقول: من شرط
لامرأته شرطا فليف لها به، فان المسلمين عند شروطهم إلا شرط حرم حلالا أو
أحل حراما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

From him (al-Saffar) – al-Hasan b. Musa al-Khashshab – Ghiyath b. Kalub
– Ishaq b. ‘Ammar – Ja’far – his father, peace be upon him:

‘Ali b. Abi Ṭalib, peace be upon him, used to say: “**Whosoever makes a
commitment to his wife, he must fulfil it to her**, for the Muslims are
by their commitments except a commitment that prohibits an *halal* or
permits an *haram*.”[^69]

Al-Ruhani comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^70]

Therefore, if the *mut’ah* husband makes a commitment to the virgin to
give her the (full) dowry despite the absence of intercourse, he must
fulfil it. In fact, he would be wrong if he pegged its payment to sexual
relations with her.

Let us say: our man does not want sex in his temporary marriage. He only
seeks companionship. So, he is qualified to go into *mut’ah* with a
willing virgin woman. Moreover, he lives in a society where it is not
viewed as a blemish on the her family. Therefore, the stage is well set
for them. Then, what else does he do?

He must enquire about her parents. If she has a father, then the Shi’i
man must approach him for consent. Al-Kulayni documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى عن أحمد بن محمد، عن علي بن الحكم، عن علاء بن رزين، عن ابن
أبي يعفور، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لا تزوج ذوات الآباء من
الأبكار إلا بإذن آبائهن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – ‘Ali b. al-Hakam – ‘Ala b. Zarin
– Ibn Abi Ya’fur – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, said:

The virgins who have fathers cannot be married except with the
permission of their fathers.[^71]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^72]

Then, he concludes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويدل على عدم جواز تزويج البكر مطلقا بدون إذن الأب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it proves the impermissibility, in all situations, of marriage to
the virgin without the permission of the father.[^73]

Al-Ruhani declares as well about the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^74]

So, whether it is for permanent marriage or *mut’ah*, the consent of the
virgin woman’s father is obligatory. Al-Ṭusi records to this effect too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاما رواه أحمد بن محمد عن محمد بن إسماعيل عن أبى الحسن ظريف عن ابان عن
أبي مريم عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: العذراء التي لها أب لا تتزوج
متعة إلا باذن أبيها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad – Muhammad b. Isma’il – Abu al-Hasan Zarif – Aban –
Abu Maryam – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

The virgin who has a father cannot be married in *mut’ah* except with
the permission of her father.[^75]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق كالصحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq ka al-Sahih*[^76]

Al-Ruhani also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^77]

Meanwhile, there is a crucial point which al-Majlisi mentions here, that
must be taken note of:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومنع جماعة من الأصحاب عن التمتع بالبكر مطلقا إلا بإذن أبيها والجد هنا
كالأب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A group of the companions unconditionally forbade *mut’ah* with the
virgin except with the permission of her father; **and the grandfather
here is like the father**.[^78]

Therefore, where the father is no more, but the paternal grandfather is
still alive, his permission is obligatory too.

The Terms Of The Contract
-------------------------

Our Shi’i man is lucky. The father of the virgin woman is alive, and he
gives his permission for the *mut’ah*. Alternatively, the father is
dead, but the grandfather, who is alive, has allowed it. Or, neither the
father nor the grandfather is alive. So, the man needs no-one’s
permission. Or, the woman is not a virgin, and only her consent matters.
In any case, our Shi’i man now has the full go-ahead to contract the
temporary marriage with his prospective wife.

As a result, they both want to set the terms of their *mut’ah*. First,
they must agree on the dowry and the exact length of their union, as
al-Kulayni reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدة من أصحابنا، عن سهل بن زياد، ومحمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد جميعا،
عن ابن محبوب عن جميل بن صالح، عن زرارة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام
قال: لا تكون متعة إلا بأمرين أجل مسمى وأجر مسمى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A number of our companions – Sahl b. Ziyad AND Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad
b. Muhammad – Ibn Mahbub – Jamil b. Salih – Zurarah – Abu ‘Abd Allah,
peace be upon him, who said:

“*Mut’ah* does not exist except through two things: **a specified term
and a specified** **dowry**.”[^79]

‘Allamah al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^80]

Then, he adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويدل على اشتراط المهر وتعيين المدة في المنقطع كما هو المذهب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It proves that the dowry must be given and that the term must be
specified, in temporary marriage, which is the standard opinion.[^81]

Al-Ṭusi also records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى عن علي بن الحكم عن ابان عن إسماعيل بن الفضل
الهاشمي قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام عن المتعة فقال: مهر معلوم
إلى اجل معلوم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa – ‘Ali b. al-Hakam – Aban – Isma’il b. al-Faḍl
al-Hashimi:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about *mut’ah*. So, he said,
“**A specified dowry for a specified period**.”[^82]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق كالصحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq ka al-Sahih*[^83]

The dowry, for both permanent[^84] and temporary[^85] marriages, is
sometimes called a “wage” in the Qur’an and *Sunnah*.

Al-Kulayni also records about the exact format of the *mut’ah* contract:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن محمد بن الحسين، وعدة من أصحابنا، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن
عثمان بن عيسى، عن سماعة، عن أبي بصير قال: لابد من أن تقول في هذه
الشروط: أتزوجك متعة كذا وكذا يوما بكذا وكذا درهما نكاحا غير سفاح على
كتاب الله عز وجل وسنة نبيه صلى الله عليه وآله وعلى أن لا ترثيني ولا
أرثك وعلى أن تعتدي خمسة وأربعين يوما وقال: بعضهم حيضة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Muhammad b. al-Husayn AND a number of our companions
– Ahmad b. Muhammad – ‘Uthman b. ‘Isa – Sama’ah – Abu Basir:

You must say in these terms: “I marry you in *mut’ah* for such-and-such
days with such-and-such amount, **in marriage and NOT for fornication or
adultery, upon the Book of Allah the Almighty and the** ***Sunnah***
**of His Prophet, peace be upon him and his family**; and upon the
condition that you shall not inherit me and I shall not inherit you;
**and upon the condition that you do** ***‘iddah*** **for forty-five
days”** and some of them said, “a menstruation.”[^86]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^87]

Al-Kulayni again reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي نصر، عن ثعلبة قال: تقول: أتزوجك
متعة على كتاب الله وسنة نبيه صلى الله عليه وآله نكاحا غير سفاح وعلى أن
لا ترثيني ولا أرثك كذا وكذا يوما بكذا وكذا درهما وعلى أن عليك العدة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi Nasr – Tha’labah:

You should say: “I marry you in *mut’ah* upon the Book of Allah and the
*Sunnah* of His Prophet, peace be upon him and his family, **in marriage
and not for fornication or adultery**; and upon the condition that you
shall not inherit me and I shall not inherit you; for such-and-such days
and for such-and-such amount; **and** **upon the condition that you must
observe the** ***‘iddah***.”[^88]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن موقوف
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan Mawquf*.[^89]

Both *hadiths* are *mawquf*. However, they do inform us about how the
companions of our Imams understood and practised *mut’ah*. Also, the
fact that these two companions taught the same formula – almost
word-for-word - to others suggests that they did not invent it. Rather,
they must have learnt it from the Ahl al-Bayt. This supposition is
strengthened by the fact that both companions were teaching it as part
of the religion. They, being righteous traditionists, would never have
done that except if they had learnt the *sighah* from our Imams.

We understand from the two reports that:

(a) the exact number of days for the *mut’ah* must be explicitly spelt
out before both parties agree to it;

(b) the exact amount of the dowry must equally be mutually agreed upon
and explicitly stated;

(c) the fact that the marriage is being done in compliance with the
Qur’an and *Sunnah* must also be explicitly declared;

(d) the fact that the intention of the *mut’ah* is marriage and not
fornication or adultery must be stated explicitly as well;

(e) the condition that both parties shall not inherit each other may be
explicitly declared, depending on their intention, as we shall soon
explain; and

(f) the condition that the woman must observe the required *‘iddah*
period for their union must be explicitly stated.

As for the dowry, it can be any amount, as long as both parties are
satisfied with it. Al-Ṭusi documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسين بن سعيد عن النضر عن عاصم بن حميد عن محمد مسلم قال: سألت أبا عبد
الله عليه السلام كم المهر - يعني في المتعة -؟ فقال: ما تراضيا عليه إلى
ما شاء من الأجل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Husayn b. Sa’id – al-Naḍr – ‘Asim b. Humayd – Muhammad b. Muslim:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, “How much is the dowry, that
is in *mut’ah*?” So, he said, “**Whatsoever they both mutually agree
upon, up to** **whatsoever length of time he wishes**.”[^90]

Al-Majlisi proclaims:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^91]

Al-Ruhani also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^92]

Apparently, there is no minimum or maximum amount for the dowry. In the
same manner, there is no minimum or maximum time length for the
*mut’ah*.

On The Inheritance Rights Of The Spouses
----------------------------------------

With regards to the inheritance of the *mut’ah* wife specifically, it
occurs where both parties mutually stipulate it as a condition of their
*nikah*. Al-Kulayni documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر، عن أبي الحسن
الرضا عليه السلام قال :تزويج المتعة نكاح بميراث ونكاح بغير ميراث فإن
اشترطت كان وإن لم تشترط لم يكن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Abi Nasr – Abu
al-Hasan al-Riḍa, peace be upon him:

The marriage of *mut’ah* is marriage with inheritance and marriage
without inheritance. **If it is stipulated as a condition, then it
occurs. But, if it is not stipulated as a condition, it does not
occur**.”[^93]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^94]

Al-Ruhani also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^95]

This is also the *fatwa* of Shaykh al-Ṭusi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واما الميراث فإنه اشرط انها ترث ورثت وان لم يشترط فليس لها ولا له
ميراث وليس يحتاج إلى أن يشترط انها لا ترث لان من شروط المتعة اللازمة
ان لا يكون بينهما توارث
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for inheritance, it is to be stipulated as a condition that she shall
inherit and be inherited. If it is not stipulated as a condition, then
there is no inheritance for her or for him. There is no need to
stipulate that she shall not inherit because one of the default
conditions of *mut’ah* is that there is no inheritance between both of
them.[^96]

He too then documents this *shahid*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسين بن سعيد عن النضر عن عاصم بن حميد عن عن محمد مسلم قال: سألت أبا
عبد الله عليه السلام كم المهر - يعني في المتعة -؟ فقال: ما تراضيا عليه
إلى ما شاء من الأجل، قلت: أرأيت ان حملت فقال: هو ولده فان أراد ان
يستقبل أمرا جديدا فعل وليس عليها العدة منه وعليها من غيره خمسة وأربعون
ليلة وان اشترطت الميراث فهما على شرطهما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Husayn b. Sa’id – al-Naḍr – ‘Asim b. Humayd – Muhammad b. Muslim:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, “How much is the dowry, that
is in *mut’ah*?” So, he said, “Whatsoever they both mutually agree upon,
up to whatsoever length of time he wishes.”

I said, “Tell me: what if she gets pregnant?” He said, “It is his child.
And if he wishes to renew the union, he can do (that). In such a case,
she would not be required to observe the *‘iddah* in his case. However,
for anyone else, she must observe forty-five nights. **Meanwhile, if
inheritance is stipulated as a condition (of the** ***mut’ah*****), then
they both must comply with their condition**.”[^97]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^98]

Then, al-Ruhani also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^99]

There are however a few *ahadith* that confuse some of our people. Their
texts are obscure, most probably due to inadvertent deficiencies in the
transmission of the narrators. Nonetheless, these narrators were not
infallible, and are therefore excused. We know, of course, with total
certainty – based upon the Verse of *al-Taṭhir*, *Hadith al-Thaqalayn*
and several other *mutawatir* and *mu’tabar* reports in our sources -
that the Ahl al-Bayt as a whole were absolutely uniform and consistent
in their teachings. This is why their obscure *riwayat* are – as a
standard Shi’i practice - interpreted in line with their explicit,
authentic *ahadith*.

For instance, al-Kulayni says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن ابن فضال، عن ابن بكير، عن محمد بن
مسلم قال: سمعت أبا جعفر عليه السلام يقول في الرجل يتزوج المرأة متعة:
إنهما يتوارثان ما لم يشترطا وإنما الشرط بعد النكاح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – Ibn Faḍḍal – Ibn Bukayr –
Muhammad b. Muslim:

I heard Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, saying concerning the man who
marries the woman in *mut’ah*: “**Verily, both of them inherit each
other as long as they have not stipulated (a specified period as) a
condition**; and the condition is only after the marriage.”[^100]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^101]

Explaining it, al-Ṭusi submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فالمراد بهذا الخبر إذا لم يشترطا الأجل فإنهما يتوارثان دون أن يكون
المراد به شرط الميراث
  </p>
</blockquote>

What is meant in this report is “if they have not stipulated the
specified period as a condition”. In such a case, they both inherit each
other (by default). What is meant is not the stipulation of inheritance
as a condition.[^102]

Of course, where no specified period is specified as a condition, then
the *nikah* is not *mut’ah*. Rather, it is a permanent marriage; and
inheritance is automatic in it. But, when a specified period is
stipulated as a condition, then it becomes *mut’ah*; and in *mut’ah*,
inheritance is not automatic.

Another *hadith* that needs clarification is this one by al-Ṭusi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى عن أحمد بن محمد عن البرقي عن الحسن بن الجهم عن
الحسن بن موسى عن سعيد بن يسار عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: سألته
عن الرجل يتزوج المرأة متعة ولم يشترط الميراث قال: ليس بينهما ميراث
اشترط أولم يشترط.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – al-Barqi – al-Hasan b.
al-Jahm – al-Hasan b. Musa – Sa’id b. Yasar:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about the man who weds the
woman in *mut’ah*, and he does not stipulate inheritance as a condition.
He said, “**There is no inheritance between them, whether it (i.e. the
exclusion of inheritance) is stipulated as a condition or not**.”[^103]

Al-Ruhani comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^104]

And, al-Ṭusi explains:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا الخبر المراد به ما قدمناه من أنه سواء اشترط أو لم يشترط فإنها لا
ترث فإنه ليس لها ميراث، وإنما يحتاج ثبوته إلى شرط لا ارتفاعه
  </p>
</blockquote>

The meaning of this report is what we previously stated, that whether it
(i.e. the exclusion of inheritance) is stipulated as a condition or not,
she does not inherit (ordinarily), there is no inheritance for her. Its
existence needs a stipulated condition (affirming it), not its
exclusion.[^105]

Al-Majlisi, also commenting upon this submission of al-Ṭusi, elucidates
further:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله سواء اشترط أي :نفي الميراث
  </p>
</blockquote>

His statement “whether it is stipulated as a condition”, refers to the
exclusion of inheritance.[^106]

So, where the parties explicitly exclude inheritance from their *mut’ah*
or they keep completely silent about it, neither party inherits. If they
intend to inherit each other, they must clearly declare it in their
contract of *nikah*.

Mut’ah and its ‘Iddah Periods
-----------------------------

Theoretically, *mut’ah* can be for as short as one second, or as long as
one billion years or more. But, whatever the length, the woman may be
required to observe an *‘iddah* period immediately after the marital
union. If they had sexual intercourse during their *mut’ah*, or if their
private parts touch, *‘iddah* becomes obligatory upon the woman.
Al-Kulayni reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن حماد، عن الحلبي، عن أبي
عبد الله عليه السلام في رجل دخل بامرأة قال: إذا التقى الختانان وجب
المهر والعدة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – Hammad – al-Halabi:

Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, said about a man who has sexual
intercourse with a woman: “**When the two circumcised parts meet, the
dowry and the** ***‘iddah*** **become compulsory**.”[^107]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^108]

Al-Ruhani also declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^109]

Al-Kulayni further documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن حفص بن البختري، عن أبي عبد الله عليه
السلام قال: إذا التقي الختانان وجب المهر والعدة والغسل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – Hafs b. al-Bakhtari – Abu ‘Abd
Allah, peace be upon him:

When the two circumcised parts meet, the dowry, the *‘iddah* and the
bath become obligatory.[^110]

Al-Majlisi again states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^111]

And al-Ruhani once more submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^112]

So, basically, the *‘iddah* is not obligatory until when the private
parts of both spouses meet. Therefore, the question to ask is: did their
private parts meet? If the answer is a “yes”, then she must observe the
*‘iddah* period immediately after their separation.

There are, however, some exceptions. For instance, al-Kulayni records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حميد بن زياد، عن ابن سماعة، عن محمد بن زياد، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن
أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قضى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام في المتوفى
عنها زوجها ولم يمسها قال:لا تنكح حتى تعتد أربعة أشهر وعشرا، عدة
المتوفى عنها زوجها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Humayd b. Ziyad – Ibn Sama’ah – Muhammad b. Ziyad – ‘Abd Allah b. Sinan
– Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

Amir al-Muminin, peace be upon him, decided concerning the woman whose
husband died, leaving her, before ever having intercourse with her. He
said, “She cannot re-marry until after observing the *‘iddah* for four
months and ten days, the *‘iddah* of the woman whose husband
dies.”[^113]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^114]

Therefore, the widow must observe the *‘iddah*, whether her private
parts ever met that of her dead *mut’ah* husband, or not.

The other exceptions to the *‘iddah* rule are given in this *hadith* of
al-Kulayni:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو علي الأشعري، عن محمد بن عبد الجبار، والرزاز، عن أيوب بن نوح، وحميد
بن زياد، عن ابن سماعة جميعا، عن صفوان، عن محمد بن حكيم، عن محمد بن
مسلم، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: التي لا تحبل مثلها لا عدة عليها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Ali al-Ash’ari – Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Jabbar AND al-Razzaz – Ayyub
b. Nuh AND Humayd b. Ziyad – Ibn Sama’ah – Safwan – Muhammad b. Hakim –
Muhammad b. Muslim – Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him:

**The one whose likes cannot become pregnant**, there is no *‘iddah*
upon her.[^115]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^116]

Al-Ruhani agrees with him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^117]

This is an obvious reference to underage girls – technically, any female
below the age of nine - and women who have absolutely reached their
menopause. Normally, *mut’ah* with an underage girl is not allowed. But,
*if* it happens, then the girl is not required to observe any *‘iddah*,
even if the man had violated her. As for a woman who has reached her
menopause, temporary marriage with her is *halal*. However, she does not
count any *‘iddah* after her separation from her *mut’ah* husband,
whether he had intercourse with her or not.

Al-Ṭusi also records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى الحسين بن سعيد عن ابن أبي عمير عن حماد ابن عثمان قال: سألت أبا عبد
الله عليه السلام عن التي قد يئست من المحيض والتي لا تحيض مثلها قال:
ليس عليها عدة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Husayn b. Sa’id – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – Hammad b. ‘Uthman:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about **the one who has
despaired of menstruation and the one whose likes do not menstruate**.
He said, “**There is no** ***‘iddah*** **upon her**.”[^118]

Al-Ruhani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^119]

This reiterates the points in the *hadith* of Muhammad b. Muslim: the
underage girl and the woman who has reached menopause do not observe any
*‘iddah* after the *mut’ah* in any circumstance. As for the underage
girl, her *mut’ah* is also invalid, to begin with. Meanwhile, if a woman
has apparently reached her menopause, but there is still some doubt
about it, then she must observe the required *‘iddah* if her temporary
husband had intercourse with her.[^120]

In any case, most Shi’i men would never go into *mut’ah* with an
underage girl, due to its invalidity; and most of them would not want to
do it with women above menopause either. Therefore, a typical temporary
wife observes the *‘iddah* after it, if the union involved sexual
intercourse. If there was no consummation of the *nikah*, then the woman
is free to re-marry immediately after it without counting any *‘iddah* –
except, of course, where the *mut’ah* husband died during the marriage,
as we have already mentioned.

Let us now go into the various *‘iddah* counts for *mut’ah*. For women
whose temporary husbands die, their *‘iddah* period is stipulated in
this *ayah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والذين يتوفون منكم ويذرون أزواجا يتربصن بأنفسهن أربعة أشهر وعشرا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And those of you who die and leave wives behind them, **they (the wives)
shall wait** **for four months and ten days**.[^121]

The verse is universal, and applies equally to permanent and temporary
marriages. It is direct and explicit. The widow in a *mut’ah* must
observe *‘iddah* for four months and ten days. It also does not matter,
as discussed above, whether she had intercourse with her dead husband or
not. Let us bring back al-Kulayni’s *hadith* once again:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حميد بن زياد، عن ابن سماعة، عن محمد بن زياد، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن
أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: قضى أمير المؤمنين عليه السلام في المتوفى
عنها زوجها ولم يمسها قال:لا تنكح حتى تعتد أربعة أشهر وعشرا، عدة
المتوفى عنها زوجها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Humayd b. Ziyad – Ibn Sama’ah – Muhammad b. Ziyad – ‘Abd Allah b. Sinan
– Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

Amir al-Muminin, peace be upon him, decided concerning the woman
**whose** **husband died, leaving her, before ever having intercourse
with her**. He said, “**She cannot re-marry until after observing the**
***‘iddah*** **for four months and ten days**, the *‘iddah* of the woman
whose husband dies.”[^122]

Al-Majlisi rules:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^123]

Al-Ṭusi also records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روى محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى عن علي بن إسماعيل عن صفوان عن عبد الرحمن بن
الحجاج قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام عن المرأة يتزوجها الرجل متعة
ثم يتوفى عنها زوجها هل عليها العدة؟ فقال: تعتد أربعة أشهر وعشرا فإذا
انقضت أيامها وهو حي فحيضة ونصف مثل ما يجب على الأمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Yahya – ‘Ali b. Isma’il – Safwan – ‘Abd al-Rahman
b. al-Hajjaj:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, about the woman who is
married by her husband in ***mut’ah***, then her husband died and left
her: “Must she observe the *‘iddah*?” So, he said, “**She observes the**
***‘iddah*** **for four months and ten days**. But, if its days expire
and he is alive, then it is one and a half month, the like of that which
is obligatory upon the slave woman”[^124]

Al-Ruhani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^125]

Therefore, where the temporary husband dies, the wife observes an
*‘iddah* of four months and ten days. But, as the *hadith* also
indicates, where both parties are alive at the expiration of the
*mut’ah*, the woman only observes an *‘iddah* of one and a half month –
forty-five days. Al-Kulayni reports this further confirmation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن ابن فضال، عن ابن بكير، عن زرارة قال:
عدة المتعة خمسة وأربعون يوما كأني أنظر إلى أبي جعفر عليه السلام يعقد
بيده خمسة وأربعين فإذا جاز الاجل كانت فرقة بغير طلاق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Yahya – Ahmad b. Muhammad – Ibn Faḍḍal – Ibn Bukayr –
Zurarah:

**The** ***‘iddah*** **of** ***mut’ah*** **is forty-five days. It is as
though I am looking at Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, forming
“forty-five” with his hand**. When the term (of the *mut’ah*) expires,
there is separation (between the spouses) without divorce.[^126]

And al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^127]

However, there is some further explanation, which al-Ṭusi has recorded:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن يعقوب عن علي بن إبراهيم عن أبيه عن ابن أبي عمير عن ابن أذينة
عن زرارة عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام أنه قال: عدة المتعة ان كانت تحيض
فحيضة وإن كانت لا تحيض فشهر ونصف.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ya’qub – ‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – Ibn
Uzaynah – Zurarah – Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

**The** ***‘iddah*** **of** ***mut’ah*****, IF SHE MENSTRUATES, is one
menstruation**. But, if she does not menstruate, then it is one and a
half month.[^128]

Al-Ruhani comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^129]

The Sunni Imam, ‘Abd al-Razzaq (d. 211 H), has a similar *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الرزاق عن ابن جريج قال: أخبرني أبو الزبير قال: سمعت جابر بن عبد
الله يقول: استمتعنا أصحاب النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم، حتى نهي عمرو بن
حريث، قال: وقال جابر: إذا انقضى الأجل فبدا لهما أن يتعاودا، فليمهرها
مهرا آخر، قال: وسأله بعضنا كم تعتد؟ قال: حيضة واحدة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzaq – Ibn Jurayj – Abu al-Zubayr – Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah:

“**We, the Sahabah of the Prophet, peace be upon him, did** ***mut’ah***
**until ‘Amr b. Hurayth was forbidden**.”

Jabir also said, “When the time expires, and both (spouses) wish to
repeat (the *mut’ah*), then he must give her another dowry”. One of us
asked him, “**How long is her** ***‘iddah*****?**” He said, “**A single
menstruation**.”[^130]

This *riwayah* is *hasan*, as we have established in the Preface.

Thus, the *‘iddah* of forty-five days is only for women who do not
menstruate. This obviously refers to women whose likes menstruate, and
whose likes get pregnant. However, they do not menstruate, perhaps due
to certain medical conditions or situations. For a woman who
menstruates, her *‘iddah* lasts till the end of a menstrual period.

Then, there is this *hadith* of al-Kulayni:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن عمر بن أذينة، عن إسماعيل
ابن الفضل الهاشمي قال: سألت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام عن المتعة فقال:
الق عبد الملك بن جريج فسله عنها فإن عنده منها علما فلقيته فأملى علي
منها شيئا كثيرا في استحلالها فكان فيما روى لي ابن جريج قال: ليس فيها
وقت ولا عدد إنما هي بمنزلة الإماء يتزوج منهن كم شاء وصاحب الأربع نسوة
يتزوج منهن ما شاء بغير ولي ولا شهود فإذا انقضى الاجل بانت منه بغير
طلاق ويعطيها الشئ اليسير وعدتها حيضتان وإن كانت لا تحيض فخمسة وأربعون
يوما فأتيت بالكتاب أبا عبد الله عليه السلام فعرضت عليه فقال: صدق وأقر
به قال: ابن أذينة و كان زرارة بن أعين يقول هذا ويحلف أنه الحق إلا أنه
كان يقول: إن كانت تحيض فحيضة وإن كانت لا تحيض فشهر ونصف.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi ‘Umayr – ‘Umar b. Uzaynah –
Isma’il b. al-Faḍl al-Hashimi:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, concerning *mut’ah*, and he
said, “Meet ‘Abd al-Malik b. Jurayj and ask him about it, for he has
knowledge of it.” So, I met him, and he dictated to me of it a lot of
things concerning its legitimacy. And part of what Ibn Jurayj narrated
to me, he said: “There is no specific length or any (maximum) number (of
the wives) in it. They are only of the status of slave women: he marries
any number of them as he wishes, and the husband of four women (also)
marries from them whatever he wishes, with no *wali* or witnesses. When
the (agreed) term expires, she separates from him without divorce, and
he gives her the small thing; **and her** ***‘iddah*** **is two
menstruations, and if she does not menstruate, then forty-five days**.”

Then, I brought the document to Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, and I
presented to him. **So, he said, “He spoke the truth”, and he confirmed
it**.

Ibn Uzaynah said: Zurarah b. A’yan used to say, “This”, and he would
swear, “is the truth”, except that he used to say: “If she menstruates,
then it is a menstruation; and if she does not menstruate, then a month
and a half”.[^131]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^132]

Ayatullah al-Ruhani also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح أو حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih* or *Hasan*.[^133]

‘Abd al-Malik b. Jurayj (d. 150 H) was a giant Sunni scholar of that
era. He was apparently one of the few *Salaf* who still believed in
*mut’ah*. Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) documents about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أبو غسان زنيج: سمعت جريرا الضبي يقول: كان ابن جريج يرى المتعة،
تزوج بستين امرأة. وقيل: إنه عهد إلى أولاده في أسمائهن لئلا يغلط أحد
منهم ويتزوج واحدة مما نكح أبوه بالمتعة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Ghassan Zunayj said: I heard Jarir al-Ḍabi saying: “**Ibn Jurayj
believed in the legitimacy of** ***mut’ah*****. He married sixty
women**. And it is said that he informed his children of their names, in
case one of them made a mistake and married one of those whom his father
had married in *mut’ah*.”[^134]

He also records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال محمد بن عبد الله بن عبد الحكم، سمعت الشافعي يقول: استمتع ابن جريج
بتسعين امرأة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abd al-Hakam said: I heard al-Shafi’i saying:
“**Ibn Jurayj did** ***mut’ah*** **with ninety women**.”[^135]

The practice of Ibn Jurayj is interesting. *Mut’ah* is technically a
tool of necessity. But, was he really pushed by necessity into marrying
sixty or ninety women?! Or, was he only abusing it? Well, perhaps, one
may say that he was forced by the needs of *those women*, rather than
his own. He only wanted to help *them* – to keep *them* company,
privately discuss *their* problems with *them*, do his best to help
*them*, and maybe also satisfy *their* sexual needs. So, he would be
making a lot of personal sacrifices to help women of Islam (or those of
Judaism and Christianity) who had no one by their side.

Anyway, Ibn Jurayj stated that the *‘iddah* of a woman who menstruated
was two menstruations, and Imam al-Sadiq, *‘alaihi al-salam*, confirmed
his statement. This then establishes that the *‘iddah* for a woman in
*mut’ah* who menstruates is of two types: (i) a menstruation or (ii) two
menstruations. Both types are proved in the authentic *ahadith* of the
Ahl al-Bayt. It then depends upon the choice of the two parties,
whichever type they agreed upon in their *mut’ah* contract. Al-Majlisi
submits in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحمل الزائدة على الحيضة على الاستحباب لا يخلو من قوة
  </p>
</blockquote>

The classification of the addition upon the (single) menstruation as
*mustahab* (recommended) is not devoid of strength.[^136]

So, the two-menstruation type could be classified as the *mustahab*, and
the one-menstruation type as the standard. Nonetheless, what matters
most to our research is that both types are correct; and that either of
them is validly available to the *mut’ah* spouses. Meanwhile, if the
woman does not menstruate – and her likes do – then, her *‘iddah* is
immutably fixed at forty-five days. No options are given in such a case.

What then happens if the woman in a concluded *mut’ah* is pregnant from
it? How long is her *‘iddah*? Shaykh al-Kulayni reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حميد بن زياد، عن ابن سماعة، عن محمد بن زياد، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن
أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: الحبلى المتوفى عنها زوجها عدتها آخر
الأجلين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Humayd b. Ziyad – Ibn Sama’ah – Muhammad b. Ziyad – ‘Abd Allah b. Sinan
– Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

The pregnant wife whose husband dies and leaves her, **her**
***‘iddah*** **is the longer of the two periods**.[^137]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^138]

The two periods are her standard *‘iddah* - had she not been pregnant -
and her expected delivery date. For a widow, the *‘iddah* is four months
and ten days. If she is pregnant, however, and her expected delivery
date is more than four months and ten days, then her *‘iddah* shall be
until she delivers. However, if her expected delivery date is shorter
than four months and ten days, then the standard *‘iddah* of the widow
shall apply. In the same manner, if she prematurely delivers, or she has
a miscarriage, before four months and ten days, in that case, her
*‘iddah* shall be only four months and ten days.

Al-Kulayni also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدة من أصحابنا، عن أحمد بن محمد بن خالد، وعلي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن
عثمان بن عيسى، عن سماعة قال: قال: المتوفى عنها زوجها الحامل أجلها آخر
الأجلين إذا كانت حبلى فتمت لها أربعة أشهر وعشر ولم تضع فإن عدتها إلى
أن تضع وإن كانت تضع حملها قبل أن يتم لها أربعة أشهر وعشرا تعتد بعدما
تضع تمام أربعة أشهر و عشرا وذلك أبعد الأجلين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A number of our companions – Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Khalid AND ‘Ali b.
Ibrahim – his father – ‘Uthman b. ‘Isa – Sama’ah:

**The pregnant wife whose husband dies and leaves her, her period shall
be the longer of the two periods**. If she is pregnant, and four months
and ten days pass while she still has not delivered, then her *‘iddah*
shall be until she delivers. But, if she delivers her pregnancy before
the completion of four months and ten days, she observes the *‘iddah*
after her delivery until the completion of four months and ten days. And
that is the longer of the two periods.[^139]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق وعليه الفتوى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*, and upon it is the *fatwa*.[^140]

Al-Ruhani concurs too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq*.[^141]

This, however, is for a pregnant widow – whether in a permanent marriage
or in a *mut’ah*. What then about the temporary wife who is pregnant and
her husband is alive, at the time of their separation? The Qur’an gives
the answer very clearly:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأولات الأحمال أجلهن أن يضعن حملهن
  </p>
</blockquote>

And for those who are pregnant, their (waiting) period is until they
deliver their pregnancies.[^142]

Al-Kulayni also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي نجران، عن عاصم بن حميد، عن محمد
ابن قيس، عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام قال: الحامل أجلها أن تضع حملها وعليه
نفقتها بالمعروف حتى تضع حملها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Ibn Abi Najran – ‘Asim b. Humayd –
Muhammad b. Qays – Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him:

**The (waiting) period of the pregnant woman is until she delivers her
pregnancy**; and upon him (i.e. the husband) is her good maintenance
until she delivers her pregnancy.[^143]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^144]

And al-Ruhani also declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح أو حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih* or *Hasan*.[^145]

This obviously raises the possibility that the *‘iddah* of the *mut’ah*
wife could be as long as nine months.

Children Of Mut’ah
------------------

And, whatever pregnancy the woman has from *mut’ah* is legitimate, and
so are all children from it. Al-Ṭusi reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحمد بن محمد بن أبي نصر عن عاصم بن حميد عن محمد بن مسلم عن أبي عبد
الله عليه السلام قال قلت له: أرأيت إن حبلت؟ قال: هو ولده.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Abi Nasr – ‘Asim b. Humayd – Muhammad b. Muslim:

I said to Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, “Tell me: what if she gets
pregnant?” He said, “**It is** ***his*** **child**.”[^146]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^147]

Al-Ruhani agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^148]

Al-Ṭusi again records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسين بن سعيد عن النضر عن عاصم بن حميد عن عن محمد مسلم قال: سألت أبا
عبد الله عليه السلام كم المهر - يعني في المتعة -؟ فقال: ما تراضيا عليه
إلى ما شاء من الأجل، قلت: أرأيت ان حملت فقال: هو ولده فان أراد ان
يستقبل أمرا جديدا فعل وليس عليها العدة منه وعليها من غيره خمسة وأربعون
ليلة وان اشترطت الميراث فهما على شرطهما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Husayn b. Sa’id – al-Naḍr – ‘Asim b. Humayd – Muhammad b. Muslim:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, “How much is the dowry, that
is in *mut’ah*?” So, he said, “Whatsoever they both mutually agree upon,
up to whatsoever length of time he wishes.”

I said, “**Tell me: what if she gets pregnant?**” He said, “**It is**
***his*** **child**. And if he wishes to renew the union, he can do
(that). In such a case, she would not be required to observe the
*‘iddah* in his case. However, for anyone else, she must observe
forty-five nights. Meanwhile, if inheritance is stipulated as a
condition (of the *mut’ah*), then they both must comply with their
condition.”[^149]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^150]

Al-Ruhani also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^151]

Al-Ṭusi further documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى عن محمد بن إسماعيل بن بزيع قال: سأل رجل الرضا
عليه السلام وانا اسمع عن الرجل يتزوج المرأة متعة ويشترط عليها ان لا
يطلب ولدها فتأتي بعد ذلك بولد فينكر الولد فشدد في ذلك وقال يجحد؟ وكيف
يجحد اعظاما لذلك؟ قال الرجل فان اتهمها قال: لا ينبغي لك ان تتزوج إلا
مأمونة ان الله يقول: الزاني لا ينكح إلا زانية أو مشركة والزانية لا
ينكحها إلا زان أو مشرك وحرم ذلك على المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Isa – Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Bazi’:

A man asked al-Riḍa, peace be upon him, while I was listening, about
**the man who marries the woman in** ***mut’ah*** and he imposes a
condition upon her that he will not seek her child. But, she later comes
with a child and he severely denies the child. **So, he (al-Riḍa) said,
“Does he deny? How can he deny primarily because of that?” Then, the man
said, “What if he accuses her (of fornication)?” He (al-Riḍa) said, “It
is not appropriate for you to marry except a faithful woman**. Verily,
Allah the Almighty says: {The fornicator shall not marry any but a
fornicatress or an idolatress; and the fornicatress, none shall marry
her but a fornicator or an idolater: and that is made *HARAM* for the
believers}.[^152]

Al-Majlisi declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^153]

And al-Ruhani concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^154]

Then, he explains:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
)ويشترط عليها أن لا يطلب ولدها (أي يعزل عنها
  </p>
</blockquote>

(and he imposes a condition upon her that he will not seek her child)
meaning, **he will use (the contraceptive method of) coitus interruptus
with her**.[^155]

So, even if the man had always used coitus interruptus during the
temporary marriage, he is still unable to validly deny the paternity of
the child, if pregnancy occurs during their union. This, obviously, is
one of the reasons why *mut’ah* with promiscuous women is not allowed.
Note especially this part of the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الرجل فان اتهمها قال: لا ينبغي لك ان تتزوج إلا مأمونة ان الله
يقول: الزاني لا ينكح إلا زانية أو مشركة والزانية لا ينكحها إلا زان أو
مشرك وحرم ذلك على المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Then, the man said, “What if he accuses her (of fornication)?” He
(al-Riḍa) said, “It is not appropriate for you to marry except a
faithful woman**. Verily, Allah the Almighty says: {The fornicator shall
not marry any but a fornicatress or an idolatress; **and the
fornicatress, none shall marry her but a fornicator or an idolater: and
that is made** ***HARAM*** **for the believers**}.

Therefore, the temporary wife *must* be so completely chaste and
faithful that if she gets pregnant despite her husband’s regular use of
coitus interruptus, there will nonetheless be absolutely no doubt in his
mind that he is the genuine father of the child. It is highly
significant that the Imam did not endorse even the man’s accusation of
*zina* against the woman as a sufficient reason to deny his fatherhood
of the child. Instead, he warned that the Shi’i man must never marry in
*mut’ah* any woman with the slightest likelihood of committing adultery.
Otherwise, the Shi’i man could put himself at a great disadvantage, in
which he might be unable to free himself from the paternity of a child
that is not biologically his.

Every denial of paternity is a direct claim that the wife had
intercourse outside of wedlock. Therefore, the success or failure of the
denial by the temporary husband rests squarely on his ability to prove
this. Typically, he accuses the wife of adultery, and produces his
arguments and evidences or witnesses. If he wins, he frees himself from
the unwanted burden. However, the standard of proof in *zina* cases can
be truly *very* stringent[^156]. Therefore, the chances of success are
sometimes hopelessly low. Meanwhile, if he is unable to prove that his
wife committed adultery, then he also cannot deny the paternity of her
child. Even logically, a woman who has not committed *zina* cannot
possibly give birth to any illegitimate child - except, perhaps, in
cases of rape!

Worse still, the husband in a *mut’ah* has no access to *li’an*, which
is a relatively easier tool for successfully denying paternity or
*claiming* adultery against the wife, in a permanent marriage[^157].
Al-Kulayni reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد، عن أحمد، عن ابن محبوب، عن العلاء بن رزين، عن ابن أبي يعفور، عن
أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: لا يلاعن الرجل المرأة التي يتمتع بها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad – Ahmad – Ibn Mahbub – al-‘Ala b. Razin – Ibn Abi Ya’fur – Abu
‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him:

The man does not do *li’an* against the woman with whom he does
*mut’ah*.[^158]

Al-Majlisi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^159]

Al-Ruhani concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^160]

Apparently, the temporary husband does not have many good options. As
such, whoever intends to practise *mut’ah* must watch very carefully the
chastity, faithfulness and trustworthiness of the woman he seeks to
choose as his wife in it.

Renewal Of The Mut’ah
---------------------

Our Shi’i man contracts his *mut’ah* with a righteous Muslim, Jewish or
Christian woman for a certain period of time. However, as time passes,
he sees a lot of good virtues –spiritual or mundane – in her, and wishes
to extend their relationship. Al-Kulayni documents that he can do that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدة من أصحابنا، عن سهل بن زياد، وعلي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه جميعا، عن عبد
الرحمن بن أبي نجران، وأحمد بن أبي نصر، عن أبي بصير قال: لا بأس بأن
تزيدك وتزيدها إذا انقطع الاجل فيما بينكما تقول: استحللتك بأجل آخر برضا
منها ولا يحل ذلك لغيرك حتى تنقضي عدتها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A number of our companions – Sahl b. Ziyad AND ‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his
father – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Najran AND Ahmad b. Abi Nasr – Abu Basir:

**There is no problem if you renew your union when the period (mutually
agreed) between both of you expires**. You say, “I seek to marry you for
another term”, subject to her consent. That is not permissible for
anyone apart from you until she completes her *‘iddah*.[^161]

Al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن كالصحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan ka al-Sahih*.[^162]

And referring to the same *hadith*, al-Ruhani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح أبي بصير عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام في المتعة
  </p>
</blockquote>

The *sahih* report of Abu Basir from Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, on
*mut’ah*.[^163]

So, it is *marfu’* - and not *mawquf* as it appears to be - and it is
*sahih*. It does establish directly, of course, that the renewal can
only be done after the end of the ongoing *mut’ah*.

Al-Ṭusi also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسين بن سعيد عن النضر عن عاصم بن حميد عن عن محمد مسلم قال: سألت أبا
عبد الله عليه السلام كم المهر - يعني في المتعة -؟ فقال: ما تراضيا عليه
إلى ما شاء من الأجل، قلت: أرأيت ان حملت فقال: هو ولده فان أراد ان
يستقبل أمرا جديدا فعل وليس عليها العدة منه وعليها من غيره خمسة وأربعون
ليلة وان اشترطت الميراث فهما على شرطهما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Husayn b. Sa’id – al-Naḍr – ‘Asim b. Humayd – Muhammad b. Muslim:

I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, “How much is the dowry, that
is in *mut’ah*?” So, he said, “Whatsoever they both mutually agree upon,
up to whatsoever length of time he wishes.”

I said, “Tell me: what if she gets pregnant?” He said, “It is his child.
**And if he wishes to renew the union, he can do (that). In such a case,
she would not be required to observe the** ***‘iddah*** **in his case**.
However, for anyone else, she must observe forty-five nights. Meanwhile,
if inheritance is stipulated as a condition (of the *mut’ah*), then they
both must comply with their condition.”[^164]

Al-Majlisi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^165]

Al-Ruhani, on his own, submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^166]

Imam ‘Abd al-Razzaq of the Ahl al-Sunnah is not left out either:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الرزاق عن ابن جريج قال: أخبرني أبو الزبير قال: سمعت جابر بن عبد
الله يقول: استمتعنا أصحاب النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم، حتى نهي عمرو بن
حريث، قال: وقال جابر: إذا انقضى الأجل فبدا لهما أن يتعاودا، فليمهرها
مهرا آخر، قال: وسأله بعضنا كم تعتد؟ قال: حيضة واحدة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzaq – Ibn Jurayj – Abu al-Zubayr – Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah:

“**We, the Sahabah of the Prophet, peace be upon him, did** ***mut’ah***
**until ‘Amr b. Hurayth was forbidden**.”

Jabir also said, “**When the time expires, and both (spouses) wish to
repeat (the** ***mut’ah*****), then he must give her another dowry**”.
One of us asked him, “How long is her *‘iddah*?” He said, “A single
menstruation.”[^167]

This chain is *hasan*, as we have repeatedly mentioned.

The Shi’i man, therefore, can validly negotiate and start a new
temporary marriage with the same woman, even during her *‘iddah*.
Meanwhile, the new marriage with the same man lawfully overturns and
cancels the waiting period. The ability to propose a new *mut’ah* to
her, or to re-marry her, during her *‘iddah* is strictly restricted to
her fresh ex-husband. Once her waiting period completes, the man loses
his monopoly of that right, and she becomes legally available for
marriage to every qualified Muslim man. Of course, the success of the
renewal attempts depends upon the consent of the woman.

[^1]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 452, \# 1

[^2]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 233

[^3]: See Qur’an 4:23-25

[^4]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 463, \# 4

[^5]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 252

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 463, \# 5

[^8]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 252

[^9]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam (Tehran:
Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 10, p. 38, Ch. 1, \# 133 (133)

[^10]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 20, p. 106

[^11]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 7, pp. 68-69, \# 6

[^12]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 23, p. 110

[^13]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (3rd edition,
1412 H), vol. 2, p. 16

[^14]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 398, \# 2

[^15]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 138

[^16]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 88

[^17]: See Qur’an 4:24

[^18]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 462, \# 2

[^19]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 251

[^20]: Qur’an 24:3

[^21]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 269, Ch. 24, \# 82 (1157)

[^22]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 69,
\# 81

[^23]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 43

[^24]: Qur’an 5:5

[^25]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 355, \# 6

[^26]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 62

[^27]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 453, \# 1

[^28]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 235

[^29]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 454, \# 6

[^30]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 237

[^31]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 454, \# 4

[^32]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 237

[^33]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Majmu’ al-Fatawa, vol. 15, p. 328

[^34]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, pp. 355-356, \# 1

[^35]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 62

[^36]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 314

[^37]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 348, \# 3

[^38]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 51

[^39]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 476

[^40]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 349, \# 8

[^41]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 51

[^42]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 476

[^43]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 348, \# 2

[^44]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 50

[^45]: Hadi al-Najafi, Mawsu’at Ahadith Ahl al-Bayt (Beirut: Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1423 H), vol. 2, p. 87, \# 1353

[^46]: Qur’an 5:5

[^47]: Qur’an 2:221

[^48]: Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Hurr al-‘Amili, Tafṣil Wasail al-Shi’ah
ila Tahṣil Masail al-Shari’ah (Qum: Muasassat Al al-Bayt ‘Alaihim
al-Salam li Ihya al-Turath; 2nd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 37, Ch.
13, \# 1 (26465)

[^49]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 439

[^50]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 256, Ch. 24, \# 30 (1105)

[^51]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 42,
\# 30

[^52]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 298, Ch. 26, \# 6 (1248)

[^53]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p.
117, \# 6

[^54]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 438

[^55]: The hymen can be broken on account of consensual sex,
masturbation, rape, disease, accident, injury, medical examination,
physical exercise, cycling, the use of a tampon during menstruation, and
so on. By contrast, there are women whose hymen still remains intact
even after having had penetrative sex.

[^56]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 25, pp. 420-421

[^57]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 462, \# 1

[^58]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 251

[^59]: Ibid

[^60]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 255, Ch. 24, \# 27 (1102)

[^61]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 41,
\# 27

[^62]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 462, \# 2

[^63]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 251

[^64]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 6, p. 109, \# 1

[^65]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 21, p. 185

[^66]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 169, \# 1

[^67]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 19, p. 165

[^68]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 190

[^69]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 467, Ch. 41, \# 80 (1870)

[^70]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 190

[^71]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 393, \# 1

[^72]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 129

[^73]: Ibid

[^74]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 154

[^75]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 254-255, Ch. 24, \# 24 (1099)

[^76]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 39,
\# 24

[^77]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 21, p. 155

[^78]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 251

[^79]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 455, \# 1

[^80]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 238

[^81]: Ibid

[^82]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, pp. 262-263, Ch. 24, \# 60 (1135)

[^83]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 54,
\# 59

[^84]: See Qur’an 4:25, 5:5, 33:50, and 60:10

[^85]: See Qur’an 4:24

[^86]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 455, \# 2

[^87]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 238

[^88]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 455, \# 4

[^89]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 239

[^90]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 264, Ch. 24, \# 66 (1141)

[^91]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 58,
\# 65

[^92]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 36

[^93]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 465, \# 2

[^94]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 255

[^95]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, pp. 48-49

[^96]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 264, Ch. 24

[^97]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 264, Ch. 24, \# 66 (1141)

[^98]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 58,
\# 65

[^99]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 36

[^100]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 465, \# 1

[^101]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 255

[^102]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 265, Ch. 24, \# 69 (1144)

[^103]: Ibid, vol. 7, pp. 264-265, Ch. 24, \# 67 (1141)

[^104]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 48

[^105]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 265, Ch. 24

[^106]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 59,
\# 66

[^107]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 6, p. 109, \# 1

[^108]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 21, p. 185

[^109]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 23, p. 15

[^110]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 6, p. 109, \# 2

[^111]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 21, p. 185

[^112]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 23, p. 15

[^113]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 6, p. 119, \# 8

[^114]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 21, p. 204

[^115]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 6, p. 85, \# 3

[^116]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 21, p. 145

[^117]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 23, p. 11

[^118]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 8, p. 66, Ch. 3, \# 137 (218)

[^119]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 23, p. 10

[^120]: See Qur’an 65:4

[^121]: Qur’an 2:234

[^122]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 6, p. 119, \# 8

[^123]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 21, p. 204

[^124]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 8, p. 157, Ch. 6, \# 143 (544)

[^125]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 52

[^126]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 458, \# 3

[^127]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 244

[^128]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 8, p. 165, Ch. 6, \# 172 (573)

[^129]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 52

[^130]: Abu Bakr ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Ṣa’nani, al-Muṣannaf
[annotator: Habib al-Rahman al-A’ẓami], vol. 7, p. 499, \# 14025

[^131]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 451, \# 6

[^132]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 232

[^133]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 51

[^134]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar
A’lam al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 9th edition, 1413 H)
[annotators of the sixth volume: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ and Husayn al-Asad],
vol. 6, p. 331, \# 138

[^135]: Ibid, vol. 6, p. 333, \# 138

[^136]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 243

[^137]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 6, p. 114, \# 6

[^138]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 21, p. 196

[^139]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 6, pp. 113-114, \# 1

[^140]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 21, p. 195

[^141]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 56

[^142]: Qur’an 65:4

[^143]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 6, p. 103, \# 1

[^144]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 21, p. 173

[^145]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 332

[^146]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, al-Istibṣar (Tehran:
Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 3, p. 152, Ch. 100, \# 1 (557)

[^147]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 67,
\# 78

[^148]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 43

[^149]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 264, Ch. 24, \# 66 (1141)

[^150]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 58,
\# 65

[^151]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 36

[^152]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 269, Ch. 24, \# 82 (1157)

[^153]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 69,
\# 81

[^154]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 43

[^155]: Ibid

[^156]: See, for instance, Qur’an 4:15 and 24:4

[^157]: See Qur’an 24:6-9

[^158]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 6, p. 166, \# 17

[^159]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 21, p. 276

[^160]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 44

[^161]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Furu’ min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator:
‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 5, p. 458, \# 1

[^162]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 20, p. 244

[^163]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 57

[^164]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Ṭusi, Tahdhib al-Ahkam
(Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi
al-Khurasan], vol. 7, p. 264, Ch. 24, \# 66 (1141)

[^165]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Maladh al-Akhyar fi Fahm Tahdhib
al-Akhbar (Qum: Maktabah Ayatullah al-Mar’ashi; 1407 H), vol. 12, p. 58,
\# 65

[^166]: Muhammad Ṣadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Ṣadiq (Qum:
Muasassat Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1414 H), vol. 22, p. 36

[^167]: Abu Bakr ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Ṣa’nani, al-Muṣannaf
[annotator: Habib al-Rahman al-A’ẓami], vol. 7, p. 499, \# 14025


