The Excellence of the Holy Month of Ramadhan
============================================

Shaikh Saduq relates from an authentic source that Imam Raza (A.S.)
related from his ancestors, who related it from Ameerul Momineen Ali bin
Abi Talib (A.S.) that latter said that one day, the Prophet of Allah
delivered the following sermon to them:

'O' People! the Month of Allah (Ramazan has approached you with His
mercies and blessings.

This is the month that is the best of all the month in the estimation
of Allah. Its days are best among the days; its nights are best among
the nights. Its hours are best among the hours.

This is a month in which you have been invited by Him. You have been,
in this month, selected as the recipients of the honours from Allah, the
Merciful.

In this holy month, when you breathe, it has the thawab (heavenly
reward) of Tasbeeh) (The praise of Allah on rosary beads), and your
sleep has the thawab of worship.

Your good deeds are accepted, in this month. So are your invocations.
Therefore, you must invoke your Lord in right earnest, with hearts that
are free from sins and evils, that Allah may bless you observe fast, in
this month, and to recite the Holy Quran.

Verily I the person, who may not receive the mercy and benevolence of
Allah in this month must be very very unfortunate having the end as bad
(in the Hereafter), While fasting, remember the hunger and thirst of
tomorrow in Qiyamat. Give alms to the poor and the needy, Pay respects
to your elders. Have pity on your youngers and be kind towards your
relatives and kinsmen. Guard your tongues against unworthy words, and
your eyes from such scenes that are not worth seeing (forbidden) and
your ears from such sounds that should no heard by you.

Be kind to orphans so that when your children become orphans they also
be treated with kindness. Do invoke that Allah may forgive your sins. Do
raise your hands at the time of Namaz (Prayers) as it is the best time
for asking His mercy. When we invoke at such times, we are answered by
Him, when we call Him, He responds, and when we' ask for anything it is
accepted by Him.

O' People! you have made your conscience the slave of your desires,
make it free, by invoking Him for forgiveness Your back is breaking
under the heavy load of your sins, so prostrate before Him for long
intervals and make it lighter.

Do understand it fully well that Allah has promised in the name of His
Majesty and Honour that He will not take to task such people who offer
Namaz in this month, and perform 'sajda' (prostration) and will guard
their bodies against the Fire of Hell, on the Day of Judgment.

O' People! if anybody amongst you arranges for the' Iftar' (food for
ending of fast at sunset) of any believer, then, Allah will give him the
reward as if he has set free a slave. He will forgive his minor sins.

Then the companions of the Prophet (S.A.) submitted:

" But everybody amongst us did not have the means to do so." The
Prophet told them:

"Keep yourself away from the fire of Hell, by inviting for if tar,
though it may consist of only half a date or simply with water if you
have nothing else. O' People! anybody who may cultivate good manners, in
this month will walk over the 'Sirat' (Bridge) in 'Qiyamat', though his
feet may be shaking.

Anybody who make take light work from his servants. (Male or female),
in this month Allah will make easy his accounting on the Day of
Judgment. Anybody who does not tease others, in this month, Allah will
keep him safe from His wrath in Qiyamat. Anybody, who respects and
treats an orphan with kindness in this month, Allah shall look at him
with dignity in Oiyamat. Anybody who treats well his kinsmen, in this
month, Allah will bestow His mercy on him in Qiyamat while anybody who
maltreats his kinsmen, in this month. Allah will keep him away from His
Mercy, in Qiyamat.

Whoever offers Sunnat (Recommended) prayers in this month Allah will
give him a certificate of freedom from Hell. Whosoever, offers one
'Wajib' Namaz in this month, for him the Angels will write the rewards
of 70 such prayers, that were offered by him in any other month.

Whosoever recites repeatedly 'Salaat-o-salaam' on me, Allah will keep
the scales of his deeds heavy, when in Qiyamat the scales of others will
be tending towards lightness, Whosoever recites, in this month, only one
'ayat' (verse of the Holy Quran) he will be rewarded in a manner as if
he had recited the full Quran, in other months.

O' People! the Gates of Paradise remain opened in this month. Do invoke
that the gates may not be closed on you; while the Gates of the Hell are
closed, do invoke Allah that these gates may never be opened.

The Commander of the Faithful [ALl (A.S.)] said that he got up and
said, "O' the Prophet of Allah (S.A.) What is the best deed in this
month?" He (S.A.) replied," O' Abul Hasan! abstaining from the matters
forbidden by Allah, the Majestic, the Glorified, is the best deed in
this month. "Then he (the Prophet) (S.A.) wept.

Ali (A.S.) asked, "O' the Messenger of Allah! What makes you weep?" He
(S.A.) replied, "O' Ali (A.S.) I weep for what they will do with you in
this month. As if I am with you, and you are offering prayers to your
Lord, when the worst of the foregone, and those who are yet to come, a
brother of the person who slew the camel of Samood has come and gives
you a (sword) blow on your head, which reddens your beard." The
Commander of the Faithful said.

Ali (A.S.) asked "O' the Prophet of Allah, will that be for the safety
of my Faith" He (S.A.) replied, "Yes, it will be with the safety of your
Faith O' Ali (A.S.) whoever kills you has killed me; whoever bears
enmity to you is my enemy; whoever abuses you has abused me; because,
indeed you are to me like my own self; your soul is from my soul;

your nature is from my nature; Indeed Allah the Holiest and the
Greatest, created me and you too; He chose me and you too; He selected
me for Prophethood and selected you for Imamat; whoever denies your
Imamat, has denied my Prophethood. O' Ali (A.S.) you are my successor,
father of my children, my son-in-Iaw, and my Khalifa over my (Ummat)
people, both during my life and after my death. Your order is my order,
your 'No is my No.'

I swear by Him who made me the Prophet and made me the best of the
people, indeed you are the Proof of Allah for His creatures, His Trustee
of His Secrets, and the guardian of His slaves.


