The Philosophy of Fasting in the Month of Ramadan
=================================================

**Why Muslims follow a purely lunar calendar for fasting?**

Normally the fast should not affect the daily avocations, and it should
not be a pretext for neglecting normal duties. Islam never approves,
much less demands, of keeping vigil during the whole night and passing
the following day in sleep and indolence. Fast means a greater effort to
perform all the usual duties and something else, more prayers and more
charity, and all this in the absence of food and drink.

**THE REASON WHY MUSLIMS FOLLOW A PURELY LUNAR CALENDAR IN THE MATTER
OF FASTING**

Jews, Christians and Hindus have a solar year, either directly or a
lunar year with intercalation, so that the time of fasting always falls
in the same season. Muslims follow a purely lunar calendar, and
consequently their month of fasting. Ramazan. Rotates gradually in all
the seasons of the year.


**Sense Of Fasting (Spiritual aspects)**

Experience shows that a blind man has generally a stronger memory, and
certain of his senses are more developed them those of an ordinary man
who has sight. In other words, if certain faculties are not utilized.
They may strengthen some other faculties. Similar is the relation
between the body and the soul. In weakening the body there is
strengthening of the soul (spirit), even as the pruning of the branches
of a tree procures more flowers and more fruit.

When an individual fasts, his conscience pricks him in the face of evil
deeds, and he is more able to resist temptations. Further, the fast
makes him think of God more, develops his inclination for charity, makes
him taste the sweetness of obedience to the Lord.

**MATERIAL ASPECTS**

Students learn for several months continuously, then they get a summer
vacation. Employees work for six days of the week, the seventh day being
a holiday for leisure and rest. Men expend mental and physical energy
the whole day, whereafter the repose of sleep renovates their faculties
for the next day.

Even machines and tools require relaxation, and we observe this for
motor cars, aeroplanes, locomotives, etc, is it, therefore, not
reasonable to think that the stomach and the digestive organs also
require rest? In fact modern medicine has also reached the same
conclusion, and a large number of doctors in Switzerland, Germany, etc.,
prescribe, for various chronic diseases, forced hunger and thirst for
longer or shorter periods according to the exigencies of the sickness
and the physical capacities of the sick person.

They have also found that various glands secrete certain acids in the
stomach on account of hunger and thirst and that these acids kill many a
germ which produce different diseases. Statistics have also shown that
several digestive and other diseases are less abundant among people who
have the habit of fasting every year.

We know that man requires a change of climate, air and water from time
to time, Patients recovering from illness are sent away for
convalescence to a place other than their habitual living place. The
more fortunate among the Westerners pass a month of summer vacation
outside their home. In other words, it is necessary to change the normal
habits from time to time. This is also a kind of rest.

We see, for instance that cultivators use their fields alternately and
give 'rest' to the soil. Continuity being harmful, Islam has forbidden
fasting during the whole year, even for those who want spiritual
benefits thereby. Experience has also shown that if one fasts forever,
it becomes a habit, and a second nature, and does not profit by it as
does he who fasts with intervals. In fact, if one fasts more than 40
days consecutively, it becomes a habit; and if one fasts for less than a
month it has not much effect.

To terminate this discussion, those who fast on medical prescription or
even under compulsion as a discipline, do get the material benefits
inherent in fasting; but there being no intention of a spiritual search,
they do not benefit thereby spiritually. Muslims fast with the intention
of complying with the command of Allah. They therefore have its reward
for their piety, while not losing the physical and materials benefits of
the fasting.

In short, from whichever point of view one may study the Muslim way of
fasting, it compares favourably with its counterparts in other
civilizations. In fact, if it is day in Switzerland it will be night in
America, and vice-versa. Every 1,000 miles East or West makes the
difference of about one hour.

The Prophet is reported to have said at breaking the fast: "0' Allah
for You have I fasted, in you have I believed, and with You nourishment
do I break the fast. Accept it from me O' Lord!"

**THE FAST**

Those people who have not a deep insight into human nature and do not
look at both the spiritual and material aspect often have the morbid
mental state to object to the injunctions of Religion. Among them are
those who pass taunting remarks against fasting. They say what sort of
worship is this to starve from morning till evening.

If we think over the philosophy of worship and understand in the light
of the Quranic verse that our existence is meant for worship and
existence is based on eating and drinking, therefore it also has a
bearing on worship.

Then we shall realize that just as sometimes talking is worship and
some time keeping silence, in the same way some times eating will be
worship and some times abstaining from it. Both these aspects are some
times prescribed by the physical physician and some times by the
spiritual one, Accordingly Allah sent this message to us through the
spiritual Physician [Prophet Mohammad (S.A.).

Fasting has been ordained to you as it was ordained to those before you
so that you guard yourself (against evil). In this holy verse:

(i) 'has been ordained' shows 'Fasting is incumbent'.

(ii) 'As it was ordained on those before you' indicates 'Fasting dates
back to the beginning of mankind'.

(iii) 'So that you may guard yourself against evil' means fasting will
make you pious. Now if we consider over the different phases of piety,
the advantages of fasting will be clear. Man has three instincts:

(i) Quwwate Shahwania (Faculty of Lust) By this instinct a man
nourishes his body and produces children. If it exceeds its limit
concerning diet, it makes him greedy and gluttonous. It may make the
blood impure or a man may fall a permanent prey to dyspepsia and so on.
The excess of this very instinct in sexual sphere causes many internal
and external diseases which can not be enumerated here.

(ii) Quwwate Ghazabania (Faculty of a version and acquirement): By this
a man seeks his advantages and wards off his disadvantages. If this
instinct is not kept within proper bounds, a man either becomes a coward
or quarrelsome. All these aspects are against 'piety' and to end the
obligation of fast with piety shows that the observer of fast becomes
pious, the natural conclusion of which is that his instincts are
moderate. Neither he is gluttonous nor quarrelsome. Accordingly the Holy
Prophet (S.A.) and the Infallible Imams (A.S.) have mentioned these
attributes of fasting.


**The Holy Prophet (Mohammad) (S.A.)**

The Commander of the Faithful [ALI (A.S.)] says that a party of the
Jews came to the Prophet (S.A.) The most learned among them put a few
questions, one of which was: 'What is the good to your people in that
Allah has enjoined fast on them and that, too only for thirty days
(excluding nights) whereas the other people had to fast for more than
thirty days?'

The Prophet (S.A.) replied: "When Adam ate of that tree the fruit
remained ill his stomach for thirty days. So Allah enjoined upon his
progeny to remain hungry and thirsty for that period, and the permission
to eat in the night is Allah's grace. Adam also had to fast for so many
days and Allah enjoined those fasts upon my people."

Then the Prophet (S.A.) recited this verse: Fasting has been ordained
to you as it was ordained to those before you so that you may guard
yourself against evil (and that too) for counted days'.

The Jew savant said, Mohammad, You are right. Now tell me what is the
reward for a person who observes those fasts." The Prophet replied: "
Allah will characterize the believer who keeps the fasts in Ramazan to
please Allah, with seven traits:

(i) If he has partaken of the forbidden food, it will be excreted after
being digested.

(ii) He will not be deprived of the mercy of Allah.

(iii) He will share the compensation of his father's (Adam) fault,

(iv) Allah will grant him relief in his agony of death.

(v) The observer of fast will not feel hungry and thirsty On the Day of
Judgment.

(vi) Allah will grant him deliverance from Hell fire on the day of
Resurrection.

(vii) He will satisfy him with the sacred diet of Paradise.

The Jew said:

"Mohammad, you are right."


