Commander of the Faithful (ali) (a.s.)
======================================

There is a sermon in Nahjul Balagha, in which the Commander of the
Faithful has stated a few symbols of the obligations of the Religion of
the Prophet (S.A.) Among them is this reason of the obligation of
fasting:

"Fasting was enjoined so that the sincerity of the righteous may come
to light."

It is known that the righteous believes:

(i) Allah is our Creator and Lord.

(ii) He is Just and Wise.

(iii) He governs both our body and soul.

(iv) Any worship prescribed by Him for the two (body and soul) will be
justified.

It is evident that if there were no physical worship the four aforesaid
articles of Faith would remain concealed and the righteous and the evil
doer would not be differentiated. Allah has provided an opportunity for
the manifestation of these beliefs by enjoining the bodily worship.
Therefore those who observe fast and offer prayers thereby demonstrate
their beliefs which are inner states and invisible.

Fasting thoroughly tries the righteous and shows that the observer of
fast is humble. It reminds him of the hunger and thirst of the destitute
and he deals with them according to the Religion of Mohammad (S.A.)

If his soul is more purified, his vision reaches upto Day of
Resurrection and is imbued with the idea of hunger and thirst on that
day Fasting, therefore, is all the more sweet to him because the
'Sharey' (exponent of the religion) has said that to be hungry and
thirsty here, by the Order of Allah will save a person from the hunger
and thirst on the Day of Judgment.


**Imam Ja'far Sadiq (A.S.) The Truthful**

When asked by Hisham, son of Hakam, about the philosophy of fasting he
replied that Allah enjoined Fasting so that the rich and the poor may be
equal. The rich never experience hunger that they may show mercy to the
poor. The rich provide everything for themselves because of their
wealth. Allah desired that His servants may be equal on this occasion
and the rich may also feel hunger and suffer pain. He, therefore,
enjoined fasting that the rich may be kind to the destitute and merciful
to the hungry.

**IMAM RAZA {A.S.)**

Mohammad, son of Senan, narrates that Imam Raza {A.S.) gave this reason
for fasting that the observer of fast may feel the pain {pangs) of
hunger and thirst, and prove himself meek, humble, worthy of reward,
hopeful and patient before Allah, and this trouble here may remind him
of the hardships of the Hereafter. By getting rid of the evil desires a
man's self learns a lesson in this world and expects the blessing of the
Hereafter.

The observer of fast sees through the circumstances of the needy and
the destitute in this world as well as in the Hereafter. (The people who
starve during (fast) will be rich in the Hereafter and those who do not
observe fast and enjoy riches in the world, will face poverty in the
Hereafter. The observer of fast finds out this subtle point.

These sayings of the Ma'soomeen (the Infallible) elucidate that the
evil desires are crushed in fasting. The temper becomes moderate. It
makes the rich attend to the poor for whom the Fasting Month (Ramazan)
and the other months make no difference in starvation. The rich become
humane and extend their helping hands towards the needy and the
destitute.

In view of these sayings how ridiculous is the conduct of an observer
of fast to pick up a quarrel with anyone during fasting. In the heart of
his hearts he is angry with Allah that He ordered him to be hungry and
thirsty, But being helpless before Him he is ready to avenge on His
slaves.

Fasting, however, cures the stomach. All the ancient and modern
physicians hold that most diseases are caused by the upset stomach which
is cured by starvation. The religion of Allah has fixed one month in a
year for fasting if a man fasts regularly, his stomach becomes healthy
for the whole year. If so much starvation does not suffice for some
stomachs, mustahabbi (desirable) fasts have been suggested at different
times in the whole year.

The very fact that fasting is incumbent during Ramazan indicates that
the conduct of men during this month should be different from that in
the rest of the year. During the eleven months a man is free to eat and
drink whenever he likes, whereas in the month of Ramzan he is forbidden
to do so in the day time. People tell lies, back-bite, gamble and do
similar things.

Religion forbids those things but they do not nullify any worship. But
if these sins are committed, during the day of Ramazan, to the extent
prohibited in fasting, the fast will be null. Similarly people quarrel
all the year round, but it is strictly forbidden in fasting and
sometimes this conduct nullifies the fast.

In view of these things it is evident that the observer of fast is to
be pious and is to abstain from these things strictly while fasting
because they are against piety, and if piety is nullified the fast will
be null and void.

In the light of the Quranic verse and the aforesaid savings of the
Masoomeen (A.S.) (the Infallibles)"a Muslim as the opportunity to mend
his character, purify his soul, eradicate the defects of his temperament
and attain the temperance which is desired by Islam and which is
responsible for both the spiritual and physical health of mankind.

The moderation of the Quwwa-e Shahwania and Quwwa-e Ghazabania effect
the spiritual power: Reason controls these powers and makes them to do
those things which please Allah and which the Quranic Verse 'so that you
may guard yourself against evil, implies.

A lot can be written on this topic but a thinking person can clearly
grasp the ways and means mentioned in this article. As thinking is a
human characteristic and it is treated as worship, so the other aspects
of this topic are left to the readers so that they may reap the benefit
of the worship of thinking as well.


