Fasting For Fitness
===================

Well-being: Aside from the spiritual value of fasting, there are
Physical rewards that come to you by your not eating for a short time.
These rewards are reaped not only by the over plump person, but by
anyone who fasts.

The general well-being of a person on a fast has been noted by
physicians. Many a doctor advises fasting for a patient tussling with
gout, heart disease, skin disorder, general intemperance to food and
drink, or excessive smoking.

Brain Benefit: Fasting is good for mental discipline, and it effects
spiritual uplift. The brain benefits greatly. If you are doing heavy
study, preparing for a speech, or otherwise engaging in deep
concentration, you do well to fast, Fasting sharpens your mind and makes
you alert and sensitive to mental effort. You concentrate more readily
if your stomach is empty and not drawing blood from the brain to digest
food.

Many a public speaker knows well that eating before speaking reduces
mental acuity and cuts down on the force of speech. They fast before an
important speech and eat later. They know the brain benefits by a
fast.

Digestive Distress Relieved: Other organs that are relieved by a fast
are the digestive organs. The stomach, liver pancreas, and intestines
often are overworked. When the digestion is given a vacation, eating
becomes a greater joy.

Rejuvenator and Skin Freshener: Fasting has been called a great
restorer of youth and prolonger of like. This idea stems from the fact
that people who fast acquire a clearer skin, a rosier tint to their
cheeks, and a more youthful complexion than they had before.

People troubled with skin disorders such as psoriasis, acne, or
recurrent skin infection are often advised by their physicians to
eliminate sweets and fats from their diet. How much better to eliminate
all foods for a time periodically, and let the skin pores have a chance
to cleans themselves and be free from the effects of too many sweets and
fats.

Boon to Smokers: For anyone trying to stop smoking or drinking, a fast
can be a boon to the body. By stopping tobacco, alcohol, and food intake
for a time, a person helps the body return to normal.

Once the body is "Scrubbed clean" inside, the smoker and drinker feels
so alive and alert that he does not have any desire to return to his
unwise habits.

A more nearly normal appetite follows a fast, and simple foods are
enjoyed with greater relish. Heavy use of candiments-pepper, spices
mustard, and catsup, is no longer needed to make. Food appetizing.

Rests Hearts: If you are a heart patient you will find that a fast
takes a load off your heart and your circulation. If you have been short
of breath, a fast improves your breathing and, by elimination of salt
and water from the body, reduces tissue edema. This condition may make
it Possible for you to sleep easier and with fewer pillows.

Side Effects: Some minor discomforts are noted at time during fasting.
The person who fast may be subject to headaches; if so, he needs the
fast. Other side effects of fasting, such as a feeling of weakness,
palpitation of the heart, and drowsiness late in the afternoon, usually
minor, disappear with a little rest.

If the person who wants to improve his diet by cutting out meat, highly
seasoned gravy, rich cake, and sugary preserves goes on a fast, he
hurries the process of changing. After eating heavily of these foods for
some time he cannot immediately enjoy a plain, wholesome diet. His taste
is so perverted that he cannot enjoy good fruit, whole-grain bread, and
vegetables.

Such a fast proves of more benefit than medicine, for the abused
stomach finds the rest it has long needed. Genuine hunger can be
satisfied with a plain, nutritious diet.

For spiritual uplift, try a fast. You will find that it draws you
closer to Allah in prayer. It makes you character stronger by the self
discipline and humble experience of denying yourself food. The double
benefit is your feeling of well-being, with a clearer eye. sharper
brain, springier step. and greater efficiency for your work. It has
often been said.

"The man eager for success has the lean, hungry look". A bit of
starvation can give you that eagerness in a hurry.


**Try a fast for spiritual and physical fitness**


**Sighting of the Moon**

It is obligatory to see the first night moon of the holy month of
Ramadhan. After seeing the first night moon turn towards Qiblah, raise
your hands and recite:

<p dir="rtl">
رَبِّى وَ رَبُّكَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ اللَّهُمَّ أَهِلَّهُ
عَلَيْنَا بِالْأَمْنِ وَ الْإِيمَانِ وَ السَّلامَةِ وَ الْإِسْلامِ وَ
الْمُسَارَعَةِ إِلَى مَا تُحِبُّ وَ تَرْضَى اللَّهُمَّ بَارِكْ لَنَا فِى
شَهْرِنَا هَذَا وَ ارْزُقْنَا خَيْرَهُ وَ عَوْنَهُ وَ اصْرِفْ عَنَّا
ضُرَّهُ وَ شَرَّهُ وَ بَلاءَهُ وَ فِتْنَتَهُ
</p>

Translation: My Lord and your Lord is Allah, the Lord of the worlds. O
Allah for us let this month be a period of peace, faith, safety and
total submission to Thy will; make us walk apace swiftly to that which
Thou likes and approves. O Allah pour out much blessings on us in this
month, make available for us its generous good and assistance, and keep
us safe from the harm, evil, misfortune and mischief that may try to
trap us in this month.


