(before Day Break)sahari (recommended Acts and Supplications)
=============================================================

(1) The Holy Prophet had advised the faithful to get up in the early
morning, before daybreak, and eat something prior to the time the fast
begins.

(2) It is highly desirable to make the following "Niyyat" say, or pass
it through his mind: "? keep fast, which is obligatory, to seek nearness
to Allah".

(3) Recite Sourah Al-Qadr.

(4) Imam Muhammad bin Ali Al-Baqir used to recite the following du? at
Sahari. This Dua has been narrated by Imam Reza (a.s.). Having finished
reciting this Du? ask God for whatever wishes you have.

It is mentioned in "Misbah", on the authority of Abu Hamza Thamaalee,
that Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen bin Husain bin Ali used to recite the
following Du'a on the night at the time of Sahari:

Also, Shaikh Tusi says that the following Dua (supplication) can be
recited at Sahari time:

The following Short Du? mentioned in "Iqbal" is also for recitation at
Sahari time.

And know that the theologians have said that if niyyat (intention) for
fast is made after Sahari, it is better. However, one can do niyyat from
the beginning of night until the end. A person's mere knowledge that he
will observe fast tomorrow and shall stay from things that invalidate
fast would be sufficient.

And know also that Namaz Tahajjud (night prayer) is highly
recommended.


**Iftar (Breaking of Fast) Prayers and Supplications**

Iftar (breaking of fast) can be done preferably with water, milk or
dates.

At the time of Iftaar:

(1) Recite the following Dua:

(i) {O my Allah, for Thee, I fast, and with the food Thou gives me I
break the fast, and I rely on thee.}

(2) Amirul Momeneen Ali Iba Abi Talib (a.s.) used to recite the
following du''''a before Iftaar.

(ii) {In the name of Allah, O Allah, for Thee we fast, and with the
food Thou give us we break the fast, an obligation we fulfill, and Thou
art Hearer, Knower.}

(iii) While taking the first mouthful recite:

{In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful, O He whose
indulgence is boundless, forgive me.}

(2) Recite Sura-e Al-Qadr.

(3) Give alms in the name of Allah.

Every night do the following A''''amaal

(I) It is desirable to recite Sura-e Alqadr 1000 times.

(II) Recite Soorah al Dukhaan 100 times.

(III) Recite:

{O Allah, the Lord, (this is) the month of Ramadhan, in it Thou,
revealed the Holy Quran, and in it made obligatory "fasting" upon Thy
servants, send blessings on Muhammad and on the children of Muhammad,
and provide us with the means to go to Thy Sacred House for "Hajj this
year and every year; and in this month forgive my grave sins, verily,
other than Thee, no one can liberate (me) from its consequences, O
Beneficent O Omniscient.} (IV) Recite Du''''a-e Iftitah on every night
of the month of Ramadhan:

It is reported from authentic Sources that Imam-e-Asr (A.S.) wrote to
his Shias to recite this Du? in this month, as angels listen to this Doa
recited in this month and seek forgiveness for the reciter. This
Excellent Du''''a is as under:


**Translation of the above Dua**

O Allah, I begin the glorification with praise of Thee; Thou, from Thy
bounties, gives out freely the truth and salvation; I know for certain
that Thou art the most merciful in disposition of forgiveness and mercy,
[but] very exacting at the time of giving exemplary punishment and
chastisement to wrongdoers, the Omnipotent in the domain of absolute
power and might.

O Allah, Thou has given me permission to invoke Thee and beseech Thee,
so listen, O Hearer, to my words of praise, and give a favourable reply
to my supplication, and minimize my falling into misery, O the
often-forgiving.

O my Allah, many a trouble Thou hath removed; many a sorrow hath Thou
dispelled; many a misery hath Thou mitigated; and at all times Thou
spreadeth out mercy, and cutteth short the tightening circles of
misfortunes.

All praise be to Allah, Who has not taken unto Himself a wife, nor a
son, and Who has no partner in sovereignty, nor any protecting friend
through dependence. Magnify Him with all magnificence.

All praise be to Allah, with full gratitude for all his bounties.

All praise be to Allah, Who has no opposition to His rule, nor any
challenge to His commands.

All praise be to Allah, Who has no counsel to meddle with His operation
of creation, nor is there anything similar to Him in His greatness.

All praise be to Allah, Whose commandments operate in Creation; His
glory is evident through love and kindness.

His distinct overflowing generosity is freely available through His
unlimited bestowals which do not exhaust His resources, and He does not
swell the numerous benefits except because of generosity and kindness.
Verily He is mighty, generous.

O Allah, I ask for some from much, in the midst of my very many needs
for which I entirely depend on Thee, and, since eternity, Thou art able
to do without it but for me it is a titanic effort and for Thee is very
easy and simple.

O Allah, truly, when Thou pardon my sins, overlook my mistakes, take a
lenient view of my disorderly conduct, cover up my foul actions, show
consideration in spite of my many transgressions committed willfully or
negligently, I am tempted to ask for that which I do not deserve, from
Thee Who, through Thy mercy, gives me the daily bread provides me with
that which is suitable for me, through Thy control; and distinguishes me
with a favourable reply to my requests.

So I persist in calling out, believing in Thee, and I invoke Thee,
talking familiarly, not afraid, nor shy, but assured of Thy love and
kindness whenever I turn to Thee A temporary setback, and I, out of
ignorance, begin to despair, although perhaps slowing down may be a
blessing in disguise. because Thou alone knows [all] the consequences. I
know no generous master who is more accommodating to dissatisfied
servants that Thou art to me.

O Lord, Thou giveth an invitation but I turn it down. Thou becometh
familiar with me but I do not care for Thee. Thou loveth me but I do not
correspond to Thee as if Thou are overreaching me. Yet Thou doth not
abstain from bestowing favours and blessings on me from Thy mercy and
generosity so have mercy on Thy ignorant servant Verily Thou art
generous and kind.

Praise be To Allah the owner of sovereignty, Who sets the course of the
skies and the stars controls the winds, causes the daybreak, and
administers authority, the Lord of the worlds.

Praise be to Allah for His indulgence in the wake of His
all-awareness.

Praise be to Allah for His amnesty ensuing from His omnipotence.

Praise be To Allah for the respite He allows In spite of provocation.

He is able to do what He wills.

Praise be to Allah, the creator of all the created beings, Who makes
sustenance freely available, starts the day, the owner of glory, might,
favours, and bounties, Who is far away, invisible, and nearest, so near
that He is fully aware of the whispered secrets, the Blessed, the
Praised. Praise be to Allah, Who has no equal to challenge Him, nor is
there an image comparable to Him, nor a helper to assist Him.

He tames the powerful by His force, and disgraced are the terrible
before His greatness; so He, through His power, fulfils that which He
wills.

Praise be to Allah, Who gives answer to me whenever I call Him; covers
up my shortcomings yet I disobey Him; gives me the largest part of the
bounties yet I want more. Many favours He has sanctioned; many terrible
dangers He has averted; and many blossoming joys he has made available
for me. Therefore, I sing His praises and recite His glorifications.

Praise be to Allah. None can disclose anything hidden by Him; none can
shut the doors kept open by Him; no one who makes a request is sent away
disappointed by Him; and no one who looks long and attentively is
deluded in his hopes.

Praise be to Allah, Who gives protection to the frightened; comes to
the help of the upright; promotes the cause of the weak and the
enslaved; annihilates the autocrats; destroys rulers and appoints the
''''awaited savours'''' in their place.

Praise be to Allah, Who breaks everything belonging to the oppressors;
puts an end to the tyrants; watches over the fugitives; brings
assistance to those who cry out for help; meets and clears up the
demands of the needy beseechers; supports the faithful.

Praise be to Allah. In his awe-inspiring fear the heavens and its
dwellers tremble and shiver; the earth and its inhabitants shake and
quiver; the oceans and all that floats and swims in its waters flow
together in excitement and tumult.

Praise be to Allah, Who has guided us to this. We could not truly have
been led aright if Allah had not guided us.

Praise be to Allah, Who creates but is not created; gives subsistence
but needs no provisions; gives food to eat but takes no nourishment;
makes the living dead and brings the dead to life; and He is the
everliving, there is no death for Him; in His hands is all the good.

And He is able to do all things. O Allah, send blessings on Muhammad,
Thy servant, Messenger, confidant, friend, beloved intimate, mercy unto
all the created beings, bearer of Thy sacraments, quotient of Thy
messengers, the most superior, the exquisite, the most handsome, the
most perfect, the upright, the more prospering, the more pleasant, the
thoroughly purified, the sublime; who has more and better blessings,
advantages, mercies, affections and salutations than Thou made available
to any one of Thy servants, prophets, messengers, friends, and those
honoured by Thee from among Thy created being.

O Allah send blessings on ''''Ali the Leader of the Faithful, the
successor to the Messenger of the Lord of the worlds, Thy servant, Thy
beloved representative, brother of Thy Messenger, Thy decisive argument
over mankind, Thy most important sign, the great news from Thee.

O Allah, send blessings on the truthful pure Fatima, the chosen leader
of the women of the worlds.

O Allah, send blessings on the sons of ''''the mercy unto the
worlds'''', the leaders and guides, the Imams al-Hasan and al-Husayn,
the leaders of the dwellers of Paradise.

O Allah, send blessings on the Leaders of the Muslims, Ali ibn
al-Husayn, Muhammad ibn Ali, Jafar ibn Muhammad, Musa ibn Jafar, Ali ibn
Musa, Muhammad ibn''''Ali, ''''Ali ibn Muhammad, al-Hasan ibn''''Ali,
and his son, the rightly guided Guide, Thy decisive argument over Thy
servants, Thy trustworthy confidant on Thy earth; blessings, numerous,
and for ever.

O Allah, send blessings on the Custodian of thy commandments, the
vigilant Guardian, the reliable Patron, the awaited Justice, surrounded
by Thy favourite angels, assisted by the Holy Spirit.

O Lord of the worlds. O Allah, send him to call the people unto Thy
Book for establishing Thy religion, and make him succeed in the earth,
as Thou caused those who were before him to succeed, and establish for
him his faith which Thou has approved for him, and give him in exchange
safety after fear. He serves Thee.

He ascribes nothing as partner unto Thee.

O Allah, give him power and authority, and through him strengthen the
people. Give him the necessary assistance, and through him support the
people, and make him prevail over allya final decisive victory, and
delegate him Thy controlling authority.

O Allah, give currency to Thy religion, and the way of life of Thy
Prophet, through him till nothing which is just and genuine is kept
concealed from any human being.

O Allah, we ardently desire that in [his] kind, just, and fair era,
Thou should reactivate Islam and stimulate its followers, and humble and
humiliate the imposters and their double-dealing, and include us among
those who invite people unto Thy obedience, and lead them to Thy
approved path, and give us the good of this world and the world to
come.

O Allah, let us bear out and hold up that which Thou maketh known to us
as the truth, and let us be fully aware of that which we fall short of
doing.

O Allah, through him, set in order our disorder; gather and unite our
flock; stitch together our sundered separation; turn our want and
poverty into sufficiency; lift us up from our degradation; free us from
our misery; pull us out from our debts; help us to get out from the
ditch of cares and sorrows; fill the gap created by confusion among us;
let our difficulties be easy to deal with; refine our substance and
style; untie our ropes and straps;

let our efforts succeed well and secure success; make us fulfill our
promises; give answers to our prayers; listen to our requests; cause us
to obtain the good of this world and the hereafter; give us much and
more than our expectations, O the best of givers and bestowers; and
cleanse our hearts, unburden our emotions from hate and anger, and, in
the event of dispute in the matter of truth, show us the right path.

Verily, Thou guides whoever Thou will to the right path. Let us,
through him, get the better of Thy enemies and our opponents, O True
God. Be it so. O Allah, we feel uneasy about and are disturbed by the
departure of our Prophet, Thy blessings be on him and on his family, the
absence of our guardian-friend, too many enemies, our numerical
scarcity, widespread disorder, and the vicissitudes of time.

So send blessings on Muhammad and on his family, and help us to
overcome this state of affairs at once.

Disperse the ominous clouds hanging over our heads; lend a helping hand
to achieve success; bring in the rule of justice and fair play; make us
bright, free from grief; and take care of us. Through Thy mercy, O most
Merciful.

The following du? has also been recommended to be recited on every
night.

Imam Jaa'far Al-Saadiq (a.s.) advised the faithfuls to recite the
following du'a every night.

It is mentioned in "Anees al-Saaleheen" that the following du''''a may
be recited every night.

Shaikh Kaf''''ami says in his book "Baladul Amin" that it is mustahab
to pray two Rak''''at prayers every night. In every Rak''''at after the
recitation of Surah al-Fatihah recite surah al-Ikhlas 3 times. After the
Salaam say:

Thereafter recite 7 times:

Say ten times:

In every optional prayer prayed in the night always recite Surah
Al-Fatihah.


