Q 90: Muslim Husband, Christian Wife
====================================

What is the proper way to divorce a wife who is a Christian? The
marriage was performed according to Christian rites when both husband
and wife were Christian. Now the husband has become Muslim but the wife
does not want to follow him into the fold of Islam.
(Asked by an American Shi'a)

A. According to Shi'a Shari'ah if a Jew or Christian is married to a
wife of the same faith, and the husband becomes a Muslim but the wife
does not convert to his religion and retains her religion, then the
marriage continues; there is no need for divorce. Of course, he should
bring up the children in Islamic faith and should not leave them to
become Jew or Christian. Also, he should make the wife abstain from
liquor and pork.

I hope this explanation solves your problem.

Of course, in the opposite case when the wife becomes Muslin and the
husband remains Christian or Jew, the wife will separate from the
husband at once, and start an 'Iddah of 3 months.

If within this period the husband becomes converted to Islam the couple
may rejoin and the previous marriage remains valid.If he does not become
a Muslim in this period then the wife, at the expiry of these 3 months,
may marry another man.

**Q91. ON BIRTH CONTROL**

According to "fatwa" of our late Mujtahid, Mohsin Al-Hakiim
contraception (birth control) is allowed on three conditions, viz. If
both partners agree, if it does no harm to eitner, and if it does not
affect the child (if it is born). Recently, Rabetat al-Alam al-lslami
(Muslim World League), put out a "Fatwa" that birth control is forbidden
in Islam.

This view is also held by Abul A'la Maududi: the Muslim scholar of
Pakistan (see his book 'Birth Control' published by Islamic Publication
Ltd. Lahore); also S. V. Meer Ahmed Ali in the translation of the Holy
Qur'an states that birth control is forbidden in Islam. I should be
grateful if you could please provide me from Ahadith and Qur'an, to
support the view that birth control is allowed in Islam.

A. Birth control, as a principle is well-accepted in Islamic
jurisprudence since the very beginning. Arabs used to prevent unwanted
pregnancies by withdrawing the organ at the time of ejaculation. It is
called 'Azl in Arabic, which in medical parlance termed Citus
interruptes and it is allowed in Islam. There are traditions by at least
10 companions that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) allowed it or did not object
to it.

These traditions are in Sunni books. Of course, there are some
traditions (also in Sunni books) which show that it was "not liked" by
some companions of the Holy Prophet. Also, there is a tradition which
shows displeasure of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w). But that tradition has a
weak "Rawi" (narrator) in it and as mentioned above there are at least
10 traditions against it.

So far as the Sunnis are concerned, they are not clear on this subject.
Some years ago a large body of world Sunni scholars, gathered at
Jakarta, decided this question in almost the same way as Agha-e-Hakim
had done.

And that was considered a verdict based on consensus. Our Sunni
brethren some times fail to distinguish between "undesirable" and
"unlawful". Also, they some times fail to differentiate between legal
and ethical concepts. And that is the root-cause of this controversy in
Sunni circles.

Agha-e-Khoui has given his ruling in a more clear term. He has
written:-"Mas'ala 1378: The woman may use what prevents pregnancy if
there is not much harm in it, even if husband does not agree to it.

"Mas'ala 1379: Abortion (even when it is in the stage of "Nufta only)
is forbidden......... " I think it clarifies your question that you
"Know of no contraceptive which does no harm."

**Q92: A CHILD BORN OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION**

In Bombay they have started a new scheme. If a couple does not produce,
and after medical checkup it is found that the fault is with the man,
then they insert the sperm in woman by instrument. The couple is not
told whose sperm is that. Is the child bom Haram or Halal? Is this type
of production allowed? The sperms are inserted only after the he himself
consents. It is the husband's wish. He is ready for that.

A. It is Haram; and the child will not be affiliated to the husband of
its mother although it will be affiliated to the mother only. Of course,
if the semen is that of the husband himself, then it is all right is all
right.

**Q.93: IS BREAST-FEEDING WAJIB?**

Is it wajib for a mother to feed her infant child from breast? If the
answer is Yes', then, if the mother gets trouble healthwise etc what
should she do? If the answer is 'No', then I came across a book which
says that if a mother doesn't feed her child with her breast then on the
Day of Judgement the child would refuse to recognise its mother, saying
that the mother never fed him from her breast.

A. The mother is not obliged to breast-feed her child. In fact, she may
demand remuneration from her husband for breast-feeding his
off-spring.

Of course, as now everybody knows, breast-feeding is very beneficial
both to the mother and the child. It helps in bringing the uterus to its
normal size and acts as a sort of natural birth-control. And the love
and sense of protection which is thus generated and transmitted from the
mother to the child can never be obtained by any other means.

This is quite apart from the fact that the mother's milk is the best
food for the child. Even medicated cows' milk can not reach the standard
of perfect harmony with the child's body-system.

It is for these reasons that Islam puts great emphasis on
breastfeeding. But if the woman is not able for any reason to do so,
there is no sin at all. I have not yet come across any hadith saying
that a child would refuse to recognise its mother on the Day of
Judgement if she did not give it her milk from her breast. Even
supposing that there is any hadith to that effect, it would be treated
as a mere exhortation and not as a law.

**Q.94: HOW CAN A WOMAN GET HER MARRIAGE DISSOLVED?**

If a husband refuses to give talaq to his wife, what course is open to
the woman, under Islam. And on what grounds can she get her nikah
nullified?

A

(a) She can ask the husband to give her Khula' in lieu of some payment
(which is usually the amount of the mahr)

(b) If the husband has disappeared without leaving any trace or is
neglecting to maintain her, or is cruel then she can refer her case to
Mujtahid, who has the authority to give her talaq.

(c) In case of the insanity of the husband (whether it was before
marriage or occurring after marriage) she has the right to break off the
marriage without any need to refer the case to a Mujtahid

(d) If the husband was impotent from before the marriage then she will
refer the case to the Mujtahid. The Mujtahid will give the husband a
grace period of one year for treatment. If at the expiry of that time,
he still remains impotent, the wife may nullify the marriage herself.

**Q 95:ADULTERY OF EYES?**

Islam says that 'a person has already committed adultery if he looks at
a girl with lustful eyes'. Then what is wrong committing adultery
physically?

A. Islam also says: "nor backbite each other would any of like to eat
the flesh of his dead brother; ye lothe it". (Qur'an 49:12)

Well, if you have already indulged in backbiting against someone then
what is wrong if you eat his flesh after he is dead and buried? And for
your information, the full "hadith" is as follows:-

"The Prophet (saw) said: Every organ of a human being has a share in
fornication : the fornication of eye is "looking at';and fornication of
tongue is 'talk'; and fornication of ears is 'listening' and fornication
of hands is 'assault', and fornication of feet is 'going to'; and it is
the genital which either confirms all the above or cancels it."

I think there is no need to explain further the above hadith

**Q96: USING HAIR-DYE**

I have heard that there is great thawab (reward) in dyeing hair; and
that it is beneficial to eyesight and gums there are many hair-dyes in
market nowadays, but many of which cause more harm than benefit to the
hair and the gums.So, how is that?

A. Using the hair-dye (Khidab) is Sunnah. Its actual benefit is to
improve the appearance of man; he looks younger because his hair becomes
black. And this benefit is obtained from any dye or colour. Other
benefits depend upon the ingredient used in that dye.

In old times, henna was mostly used for colouring the hair; also some
black dye was used, but it was made of herbs and non-poisonous
ingredients. Nowadays, the dyes are made of powerful chemicals, and if
it is poisonous then those additional benefits will not necessarily be
found in them.

**Q 97: LIMIT OF THE BEARD**

Is it sufficient to have the beard on the chin only, instead of keeping
the full beard from ears to the chin?

A.

Yes; it is sufficient.

**Q 98: IS INTEREST A COMPENSATION OF INFLATION**

It is said that receiving interest is haram. If it is so, in these days
of inflation one loses the value of his money as the inflation
increases. Then doesn't interest compensate it (though not fully)? Does
it seem logical to say that Islam does not approve interest?

A. I am enclosing two past issues of "Light", in which you will find an
article "Why Interest Is Forbidden?" If you ask some really
knowledgeable economist, he will tell you that it is the banking system
which is to be blamed to a great extent for the recurring cycles of
depression and inflation. So, what you consider as the' remedy is
actually the disease.

**Q. 99: INTEREST AND NON-MUSLIMS**

Is interest allowed from a non-Muslim institution?

A. There are two categories of 'Kafirs': Dhimmi and Harbi. Dhimmi means
those Jews and Christians who are under the protection of an Islamic
state. All others are called Harbi. According to Agha-e-Khui, a Muslim
cannot take interest from a Dhimmi kafir; and it is Ahwat-e-Wujubi not
to take it even from a Harbi.

But in both cases, if there has been an agreement that the kafir will
give the interest, then the amount may be accepted not as interest but
with other intentions: in the case of Dhimmi, because he has made
himself liable to it and is giving it with his own free will; and in the
case of Harbi,because his property is not under the protection of
Islam.


