Q 50: Oily Skin
===============

My face produces a lot of oil. Should I make sure that all that oil is
removed before making wudu or Ghusl. ?

A. That liquid is not oil, and there is no need to remove it from the
face before Wudu, unless it sets like a film on your skin.

**Q 51 PLASTIC SURGERY AND WUDU**

Can we do Wudu if we have done plastic surgery on the face or hand? A.
Yes. There is nothing to worry once the grafted part becomes a part of
the face or the hand.

**Q 52: WUDHU ON NAIL POLISH**

Can a woman do Wudu for prayer while wearing nail polish?

A. If someone does Wudu while wearing nail polish, that Wudu will be
invalid, as the polish does not allow water to reach the nails.

**Q53.BOYS KEEPING LONG HAIR**

In U.K., our boys are keeping long hair like girls.Can they pray in
that condition? A. If they keep their hair in such a way that the
"Masah" of head is done on the skin of the front area of the head then
it does not affect the validity of prayer. If a man keeps long hair he
is required by Sheria to keep it clean, comb it very often and trim it
in such a way that it does not look dirty.

**Q 54: HOW TO CALCULATE TIMES OF PRAYERS?**

How can we calculate the prayer time in U.K., because here we do not
see the sun very often?

A. Sunrise and Sunset may be ascertained from Meteorological Department
announcements (which are often published in newspapers). Thus you can
know the time of 'Subh' and Maghrib prayers. The time of Subh prayer in
your part of the world may start about one hour before sunrise. Maghrib
time will start about 9 minutes after the announced sunset.

Zohr. Calculate the exact middle of the sunrise and the sunset, as
announced in the newspapers; you may safely start Zohr prayer a few
minutes after that calculated time. Asr: This prayer should be offered
after Zohr, and 'Isha after Maghrib.

**Q 55: HOW TO FIND DIRECTION OF QIBLA?**

I am not exactly sure about Qibla in Peterborough, U.K. But we were
told by Sunni Muslims that we should take the North as on 26 and then
take N.E. as our Qibla, Also, during Ziyarat which way should we turn?

A. Here is a relatively simple method of finding the direction of
Qibla. Draw a straight line on the map from your place to Mecca and
another straight line from North Pole to your place. Then look at the
angle and notice how many degrees it is from North. Then you may turn
the some number of degrees from North to face Qibla.

If you find this complicated then you may act as the Sunnis do; because
they have been there longer than you and they must have come to that
conclusion after having done some calculation.

As for Ziyarat: Every Ziyarat may be recited facing the Qibla.
Alternatively, you may resort to calculations (as described in the case
of Qibla) by drawing lines to Karbala and Mashhad.

**Q56: QIBLA ON MOON?**

Suppose I were to fly to the Moon. Whilst on the Moon or on the way to
it, which direction will be my Qibla for prayers? A. According to
"Fatwas" of some Mujtahids, the Qibla of a space-traveller is the Earth.
You will face the Earth during your prayer

**Q 57: WHY USE OF GOLD IS FORBIDDEN FOR MAN?**

Why is gold not allowed for men? And why is gold permitted for women?

A. It is not possible to know definitely the reason as to why a certain
rule has been given to us by Allah and/or His Prophet. Once we accept
that Allah is our Creator and is a Wise Creator and that the Prophet
Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.) was His true Prophet, then we must accept that
whatever order was given by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) must have been
based on some sound reason. At the same time, however, it is not
necessary that that reason be known to us.

So, if reason of any rule has been explained by the Holy Prophet (saw.)
or Imams, well and good. We must be thankful to them for that
explanation. But if it has not been explained, then we must obey them
without any 'ifs' 'buts' or 'whys'.

It is for this reason that our shari'ah says that you have all the
liberty to argue and discuss concerning matters of 'Usul-e-Deen till you
are fully convinced of their truth. But you have no liberty in
'Furu-e-Deen'. You must obey them faithfully, because after accepting
the truth of the divine office of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and the
Imams (a.s.) there is no ground for you to ignore their orders.

This is the general principle governing your two questions.

Still, so far as these particular questions are concerned, our thoughts
may give us the following reason (which may or may not be the actual
reason). Islam wants men to be hardy, brave and tough in order that they
may boldly enlist for 'Jihad'.

It does not like men to be soft and meek because such men cannot stand
the rigour of military discipline. And this discipline is a MUST for
every male Muslim, because he must always be ready to fight in the way
of Allah as soon as our 12th Imam (as.) re-appears.

**Q. 58: IS IQAMAH WAJIB?**

Is iqamah wajib before prayer?

A. It is Sunnah Mu'akkadah (emphasized Sunnah).

**Q 59. PRAYER IN FRONT OF A PHOTOGRAPH**

Can one pray Salah facing a wall on which a photo of Ka'bah, or some
du'a is displayed. A. It is Makruh to pray before a photograph or a
statue of a thing, except when it is hidden by a curtain or a cover. It
is Makruh to pray in a room which has any photograph. Therefore if one
prays facing a wall on which a photograph of the Ka'bah is hung, it will
be Makruh. - i.e., the thawab of Salah will be less than usual.


