Q.60: Why Ka'bah Is Called the House of Allah?
==============================================

Allah is Omnipresent. He doesn't need any house or place to dwell.Then
why Ka'bah is called Allah's House?

A. When Allah pleases to show importance and prestige to a person or a
thing. He declares it as belonging to Himself; the fact every thing
belongs to Him.

For example, every soul belongs to him; but He called the soul of Adam
(a.s.) as (My soul); and it showed the importance of that soul. Everyone
is a 'slave' of Allah, but He referred to our Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) as
(His Slave); and it showed the prophet's high prestige with Allah.
Likewise, every place belongs to Him; but He specifically named Ka'bah
as (My House) to show its distinction and sanctity.

**Q. 61: PROSTRATION BEFORE OTHER THAN ALLAH**

If anybody knowingly prostrates before other than Allah, what is his
judgement according to the Sheri'ah? Is he a Muslim or Kafir?

A. If he does not know that Sajdah before anything or person, other
than Allah, is Haram in the Sheriah of Muhammad Mustafa (saw), then he
will have committed only a major sin (Gunah-e-Kabira).lf however he
knows the law and still does Sajdah before anything or person, then he
is a Mushrik (an idolator).

**Q. 62: READING QUR'AN WITHOUT UNDERSTANDING**

Is it necessary for a Shi'a to continue to recite Qur'an although he
does not know what he is reading?

A.It is of great "thawab" to recite Qur'an (even if you do not know its
meaning). For one thing, it will bind you strongly with the religion and
the Book of Allah. For another, by regularly reciting it, you will one
day feel that you should also know its meaning.

**Q 63: SEVEN TAKBIRS**

Are there six takbirs before Takbiratul-lhram? A. Yes, It is Sunnah
Mu'akkadah (emphasized Sunnah) to say seven Takbirs after Niyat, one of
which should be "Takbiratul-lhram" (any one, depending on your
intention), and the remaining six, Sunnah.

**Q.64: POSITION OF HANDS DURING QIYAM FOR WOMAN**

Should ladies put their hands on the chest while praying?

A. Yes. It is Sunnah to put the right hand on the right breast and the
left hand on the left breast, when she is in a standing position
(Qiyam).

**Q 65: "ADIL IMAM NOT EASILY AVAILABLE**

Wise, honest and just Imams are not easily available these days. So,
Congregational prayers are usually avoided. Could we have a relaxation
in these restrictions? A. No relaxation whatsoever. Being an Adil is a
condition not only for the Imam of prayers; every Mu'min must be an Adil
If he is not, it shows the weakness of his Iman (Faith).

**Q.66: HOW TO ORGANIZE A JAMA'AT WITHOUT A QUALIFIED IMAM?**

We are a group of a former American Sunni Muslims who have recently
converted to Shi'a Ithna-'asheri faith. What are we to do concerning
electing a leader and establishing an organized Ummah, when we are told
by Shias that only the 12th Imam, or a Mujtahid, or one with proper
written Islamic credentials can lead a community and act as Imam of all
congregational prayers?

We have read all the Qur'anic verse and sayings of our Holy Prophet
commanding us to follow the leadership of Ahlul-Bait (12 Imams) for
proper spiritual guidance and success, but none of the Imams
(Ahlul-Bait) are here to give us guidance, to lead us, to direct us,
because they have all died except Imam Mahdi.

And even Imam Mahdi (a.s.) can't give us guidance because we cannot
see, hear or bodily feel him since he is in seclusion. Furthermore, we
don't have access to the traditions of the 12 Imams so when it is said
that the correct interpretation of the Holy Qur'an can be had only
through the Ahlul-Bait "one of the 2 weighty things", "The ark of
salvation", what meaning or relevant does this saying have to us in the
U.S.A.?

There are no Mujtahids in this country. There is no one who has
credentials to be Imam in any respect according to the belief of Shias.
So, please kindly tell me what the 6 non-Arabic speaking recent converts
are supposed to do as an 'ummah' to maintain a muslim Jamaat and
establish a mosque under the aforementioned difficulties.

Should we just give up the hope of starting an 'ummah' ourselves for
religious matter? And, lastly, should we discontinue our congregational
prayers even when the Holy Prophet has emphasized the importance of, and
greater blessings to be received from, prayers in Jama'at and making
regular Jum'ah prayers on Friday?

A. The position of our newly-converted Shi'a brethren in U.S.A. is like
that of those Muslims of Mecca who, after the Hijra of our beloved
Prophet (saw.) and before the conquest of Mecca, had to suffer the
atrocities of the pagans of Mecca and could not get any help from the
Prophet (saw.). The community will have to remain steadfast in the way
of Allah and pray to him to give them "Tawfeeq" (help) and strength to
succeed in this test with full honour.

Organizing the community for social, religious and educational purposes
should be started at once and one of you may be elected the leader of
the community to keep them together and to help them solve their social
and other problems.

So far as the question of an "Imam" of 'Jama'at' prayers is concerned,
you must follow the tenets of the Sheri'ah. There is no need for any
credential from a Mujtahid. If someone fulfils all the necessary
conditions, he is entitled to lead the Prayers. These conditions and
qualifications are given below and you will see that they are not so
very difficult to fulfil:- He must be

1. Baligh (adult),
2. Sane
3. Shi'a Ithna-ashari,
4. Legitimately born,
5. Knowing necessary Rulings of Sheri'ah.
6. 'Adil',
7. Man, if those who are praying behind are males,
8. Not praying in sitting position (because of sickness etc.), if those
who are praying behind are doing so in standing position.

'Adil means a person who does not commit major sins even
unintentionally; and if he, inadvertently, commits a minor sin, he
repents at once and does not repeat it. Now, I do not know whether you
know Arabic.

If you know the language, I will send some relevant books which will
help you to understand the necessary Rules and Laws of Sheri'ah,
(Prayers, Fast, Zakah, Khumus, Marriage, Divorce, Inheritance etc.). If
you do not know the language then I will send you some books in English,
but they do not contain minor details.

From the contents of your letter, I have a feeling that you earnestly
wish to lead your life according to the commandments of Allah and His
Representatives. In this situation, it will not be very difficult for
you to abstain from all "Kaba'ir (Major Sins). When you acquire the
power (which in Islam is called 'Adalah') then you may lawfully lead
your fellow Shi'as in prayers and other religious affairs.

And until that stage is reached, you may make temporary arrangements in
this way: All of you should gather at prayer time at an appointed place.
One of you may stand slightly forward, and all of you pray together
without the Niyyah (intention) of Jama'at prayer.

Everyone will say his own prayer but it will look like a congregational
prayer. It will provide a chance to interested persons to deliver
religious sermons and lectures, to discuss matters of common welfare and
communal interest; and, in short, almost all the benefits of
congregational prayer will be achieved.

When Allah gives you more success and a sufficient number have accepted
our faith, then, perhaps, you may even enlist the services of someone
from Iran as your Imam, or send someone from your group to Iran to
acquire the necessary knowledge.

**Q67: CAN PRAYER BE LED BY TAPERECORDER?**

Can Jamaat prayer be led by a tape-recorded Prayer?

A. No, please.

**Q 68: MINIMUM NUMBER FOR JUM'A PRAYER**

Is it necessary to have certain number of people to conduct Jum'a
Prayers? If so, how many people should be there? Here, in certain
mosques, they conduct the Zuhr prayer if the attendance for Jum'a prayer
is less than 40.

A. According to our Shi'a Shari'ah, there must at least be 5 persons.

**Q 69: ARE WOMEN EXEMPTED FROM JUM'A PRAYER?**

Why women do not attend the Jum'a prayer? Are they exempted?

A. Yes. They are exempted.


