Introduction
============

Populism is unsettling the powers of the world and John Dewey can add to
the agitation. The term, populist, is most often used to describe
leaders who champion “the people” and rail against establishments. In
the 1980s, Reagan was called a populist for his calls to “return power
to the people,” away from “big government.” The 2006 US elections were
interpreted as resurgent populism on the Democratic side. “Incoming
Democrats Put Populism Before Ideology,” read the headline in the*New
York Times* .[^1]

Politicians play a role but populism is more than the rhetoric of
politicians. It is the “different kind of politics” described in my 2002
Dewey lecture, a democratic, citizen-centered politics for the 21st
century that is emerging in many different settings. There is evidence
that such a politics is especially attractive to the “Millennial
Generation,” born after 1982.[^2] I thank the Ginsberg Center for the
chance to develop these arguments.

Political knowledge is importantly social and experiential, as Lawrence
Goodwyn has put it. My first encounter with deeper meanings of populism
came in an unforgettable experience when I was nineteen, working as a
field secretary for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
in St. Augustine, Florida in 1964.

One day I was caught by five men and a woman who were members of the Klu
Klux Klan. They accused me of being a “communist and a Yankee.” I
replied, “I’m no Yankee - my family has been in the South since before
the Revolution. And I’m not a communist. I’m a populist. I believe that
blacks and poor whites should make joint to do something about the big
shots who keep us divided and held down.” For a few minutes we talked
about what such a movement might look like. Then they let me go. When he
learned of the incident, Martin Luther King, head of SCLC, told me he
identified with the populist tradition and assigned me to organize poor
whites. Experiences organizing poor whites taught me the enormous and
wide impact of the new*collective power* of historically marginalized
African Americans. Poor whites I worked with constantly remarked that
blacks “had really got their act together; we should do the same thing.”
For white southern students in the movement, its examples of power
offered the possibility of redemption not only for blacks but also for
ourselves and our families.

As a democratic movement and philosophy, populism has three elements. It
is a movement building popular power to break up unjust concentrations
of wealth and power. It is a culture-making movement, sustaining and
advancing values of community, liberty, and equality. And it is a civic
learning movement, developing people’s civic identities, imaginations,
and skills.  The freedom movement had strong populist aspects, in ways
that are neglected. Thus, SCLC sponsored citizenship schools across the
South, directed by Dorothy Cotton, in which people learned skills of
community organizing. Andrew Young once called these “the invisible
foundation of the whole movement.”

The silence about populism’s meaning indicates a larger crisis. Populism
highlights the feelings of pervasive*powerlessness* that today feed the
disengagement of citizens from public life and isolation from each
other.

Powerlessness generates hopelessness and the substitution of personal
solutions for public approaches.  Powerlessness, with its cynicism and
fatalism, is a problem behind the problems of our age. Feelings of
powerlessness are widespread not only on “the Arab street” but also in
suburbs, inner cities, and the University of Michigan. Redressing
powerlessness is essential to meet other challenges facing humanity,
from global warming and sectarian warfare to growing divisions between
rich and poor, from pandemics like AIDS to erosion of communities.

Populism’s focus on culture-change and culture-making -- wedding popular
power with egalitarian communal values and civic development -- makes it
the alternative to the political projects that shape the world:
state-centered democracy, on the one hand, and market-oriented
politics -- the “Washington consensus” or “neo-liberalism” - on the
other.[^3]   It also highlights their core similarity: a deracinated
view of the human person, whether “new man” or*homo economicus.* [^4]

Populism as a tradition and political philosophy can ground today’s
civic ferment in the US. Putting populism and John Dewey in conversation
illuminates this potential. John Dewey, a pivotal figure in educational
reform and pragmatic scientific inquiry, is a foundational theorist for
today’s civic engagement movement in higher education and elsewhere.
Dewey sought to counteract trends that remove the human being from
living communities. He had a decidedly populist bent. But Dewey also
embodied what might be called the democratic*aspirations* of
intellectuals - wish without much power.  A major flaw in today’s civic
ferment is an insufficient understanding of the power dynamics involved
in culture-making.

In the following I begin with connections between civic engagement
efforts and populism, drawing attention to the capacity- building
operations of power at the heart of democratic populist movements. Such
a concept of power answers the main objection raised by progressives to
populism: what about its “dark side,” the way populist-sounding
movements can be reactionary or vehicles for demagogues? I then explore
the work of Dewey in relation to themes of civic development and power.
Dewey had rich insights about civic learning, but a weak theory of
power.  I conclude by suggesting how populism, challenging domination by
experts outside civic life, can recast the way we think about the period
from now until the 2008 election and the meaning of that election.


