Populism and Civic Engagement
=============================

* “We are the ones we’ve been waiting for; nobody else is gonna rescue
us.”*

*Civil rights song by Dorothy Cotton, Director of SCLC Citizenship
Education Program, inspired by “Poem for South African Women” by June
Jordan*

* “The world is flooded with laws and policies, councils and committees.
It is tragic that most of these deal with the structures of society,
rather than the heart of society - the people. But the eternal truth of
the democratic faith is that the solution always lies with the people.”*

*Marie Ström, Citizens at the Centre, IDASA HIV/AIDS training manual,
adapted from Saul Alinsky, Reveille for Radicals*

Signs of a shift from structure to civic agency are multiplying across
the world, in many scholarly disciplines and fields of practice. The
awarding of the 2006 Nobel Peace prize to Mohammed Yunus for his
pioneering work in micro-lending in Bangladesh and elsewhere is a case
in point. Micro-lending is based on a deep respect for the capacities of
poor people, especially poor women, to become agents of their own
development and co-creators of their communities.  In 2006 in South
Africa and Lesotho, the Institute for Democracy in South Africa (IDASA),
a leading democracy group across Africa, trained local government
officials and HIV/AIDS workers to think of themselves as “organizers not
bureaucrats,” to conceive of “citizens at the centre,” co-creators of
community solutions to the AIDS pandemic, and to see democracy mainly as
a society, not a state.[^5]

In the United States, scholars of civic initiatives such as Peter
Levine, Cynthia Gibson, Carmen Sirianni, and Lew Friedland*,* among
others, have chronicled multiple signs of civic ferment with a sense of
co-creative civic agency.  In higher education these include strands of
the service learning movement represented by the Ginsberg Center and
efforts to strengthen public engagement such as Imagining America, the
Diverse Democracy efforts of AAC&U and the American Democracy Project of
AASCU. Broad based organizing efforts - cross partisan civic
organizations affiliated with the Industrial Areas Foundation, Gamaliel
Foundation, PICO and DART - include more than 180 groups, several
thousand congregations, and several million families. They often use the
language of the citizen as “co-creator.” Many forms of “deliberative
democracy” with a strong view of civic agency have developed in efforts
associated with Public Agenda, the National Issues Forums, and the Study
Circle Resource Center. There are large civic environmental initiatives
like the National Wildlife Federation’s organizing of a community rooted
conservation movement. We have found that Public Achievement, the youth
civic education and engagement initiative whose central philosophical
conception of citizenship is based on SCLC’s song, “We are the ones
we’ve been waiting for,” has broad resonance in many societies, from
Northern Ireland and Scotland to many Balkan countries, Palestine,
Israel and South Africa. Public Achievement’s growth suggests the
potential global appeal of democratic populism.

All these express populist themes of civic power, culture change, and
civic learning. Populism is emerging in electoral politics in the US. As
Peter

Levine has noted, “It appears that the 2008 presidential campaign will
offer several strong but contrasting flavors of populism.” Republican
Sam Brownback and Democrats John Edwards and Barack Obama all voice
versions of populism. For instance, Obama argues that “We are going to
re-engage in our democracy in a way that we haven't done for some time.”
He says his campaign is “not just to hold an office, but to gather with
you to transform a nation…It must be about us. It must be about what we
can do together.”[^6]

The question is, how can all this ferment begin to come together in a
movement?

In the last century and a half, there have been three broad democratic
populist movements in the United States, with counterparts elsewhere in
the world. The first emerged in the late nineteenth century among small
farmers.  Populism resurfaced as a broad movement during the 1930s to
defend democracy and to mobilize civic energies to meet the challenges
of the Great Depression and fascism. The “people,” seen by intellectuals
in the 1920s as the repository of crass materialism and parochialism,
were rediscovered as a source of strength and hope. Many key architects
of the third populist upsurge, the black freedom movement, had roots in
the 1930s and 1940s’ movement.

I believe that we are on the threshold of a fourth great populist
movement. Each movement builds on earlier ones and also takes a
character reflecting the challenges and resources of an age. Today’s
best democratic understanding of populism weds civic life to organizing
for people’s power. It is a movement with a cooperative, egalitarian,
pluralistic ethos and civic learning features, strengthening communities
in an age when local communities are everywhere endangered.  It can be
called “civic populism.”  To make the case, it is necessary to analyze
the legacy.

*The Historical Meaning of Populism:* [^7] Academic and left-wing
critics commonly have charged that populism’s idea of who makes change -
“the people” -- is a loose and ill-defined compared to the rigor of
class-based or interest group politics. Many on the left also charge
that populism is*reformist* , focused on practical ends, with only vague
long term goals like “breaking up concentrations of wealth and
power.”[^8]

If one is skeptical about sweeping blueprints for the future or precise
definitions of who should lead the process of change, these features are
strengths. Thus, the porousness of the concept of “the people” allows
inclusive understandings when movements seek allies and when organizers
have a democratic orientation. Similarly, populism’s practicality - a
“politics of getting things done,” as Stephanie DeWitt has put it -
comes from its grounding in the gritty concerns and everyday problems of
living communities.[^9]

Populism’s themes reflect a different way of looking at the world than
structures and blueprints, as Marie Ström conveys in her quote above, a
language of what Mary Dietz calls “roots.” Sheldon Wolin argued that
populism is the “culture of democracy” itself:

*Historically [populism] has stood for the efforts of ordinary citizens
and would-be citizens to survive in a society dominated by those whose
control*

*over the main concentrations of wealth and power has enabled them to
command the forms of technical knowledge and skilled labor that have
steadily become the hallmark of so-called modernizing societies. A
culture of survival is very different from a… market-culture littered by
the disposable remains of yesterday and shaped by manipulation of
attitudes and desires…*

*A culture of survival is conditioned by the experiences of hard times
in a changing world...of drought, depressed markets, high railroad and
grain storage rates, and manipulated currencies… Its practices issued
from taking care of living beings and mundane artifacts, from keeping
them in the world by use and memory. To sustain the institutions of
family, community, church, school and local economy demanded innovation
as well as conservation…*

*The reason why democracy should be grounded in a populist culture is
not because those who live it are pure, unprejudiced, and unfailingly
altruistic. Rather, it is because it is a culture that has not been
defined by the urge to dominate and that has learned that existence is a
cooperative venture over time.* [^10]

The values of community and equality that Wolin notes are central to
populism are not unique to groups struggling for survival. They can also
be sustained by the anchoring institutions of civic life in middle class
communities, such as family, congregation, cultural groups, schools, or
local businesses with community roots. And these values can be
articulated at every level of society, as in the case of the cultural
workers of the Great Depression, later discussed. But Wolin is right in
the intuition that egalitarian communal values often find sustenance in
communities “struggling for survival,” like nineteenth century farming
communities, or African American communities that resisted the
brutalities of segregation by forming networks of self-help and mutual
aid, or today’s new immigrant communities trying to preserve some sense
of heritage in the cultural maelstrom of a degraded, hyper-competitive,
consumerist and individualist society.  The insights from cultures of
survival sharply challenge the condescension of elites, and, as I will
argue, recast conventional discussions of racism and identity politics.

“To-day is election day,” John Dewey wrote from Ann Arbor, Michigan, to
his wife, Alice, traveling in Paris in 1894.  “I should like to have
voted for a few Populists…but the atmosphere [around here] looks very
republican.” Through his life, Dewey referred positively to the Populist
Party, formed in 1892. Thus he favorably quoted Fred E. Haynes - whom he
described as “one of the most careful and thorough of the historians of
American political life” -- as saying “with great justice” that whatever
limits there might have been in features of their platforms, the leaders
of the Populist Party were “Fundamentally sound in their opposition to
the growing power of wealth…”[^11]

Populism included the electoral party to which Dewey referred that went
by the name of Populist, or People’s Party, formed in 1892 from the
merger of farmers cooperatives, the Knights of Labor, and other groups.
But it was a broader movement and philosophy than a party. “People’s
politics” has

roots that reach back to Greek and Roman popular revolts. Populism drew
specifically from eighteenth and nineteenth century traditions such as
Jeffersonian democracy and, in Europe, Romanticism and Scandinavian folk
schools. As a modern politics by the name, populism took shape in both
Russia and the United States in late nineteenth century agrarian
movements. These blended forward looking themes with traditions of “the
commons,” cooperative rural practices of deliberation and public work,
and working class mutual aid traditions.[^12]

Historian Gianna Pomata has detailed how Russian populism crystallized
Romantic themes in European intellectual life which held that “a way
into the future could be found that would not destroy the ancient
folkways but rather give them new value and meaning…The Populists
advocated the defense of the Russian agrarian tradition and of Russian
village life, with its spirit of equality and solidarity.” In the
twentieth century, populism gained renewed support after the October
revolution of 1917 as a potent alternative to Stalinism in the Soviet
Union. In the mid-thirties it was ruthlessly suppressed by Stalin, who
saw populists as his chief enemies. The Stalinist doctrine advanced the
necessity “to annihilate the influence of Populism as the worst of the
enemies of Marxism and of the whole cause of the proletariat.” As Pomata
noted, “An impenetrable silence fell on populism” that affected
subsequent European intellectual and political life as well as Soviet
historiography.[^13]

The memory of populism was radically attenuated, but Pomata also
observed similarities in Russian students of the 1870s and activist
students like herself in Milan, Paris, and Berlin who “returned to the
people” a hundred years later. The parallel, as she said, was the desire
to find “...a more authentic culture and the belief that this culture
was to be found among ‘the people,’ in the heritage of memory,
experience, and struggle…”[^14]

In the US in the nineteenth century, the Populist Party grew from two
decades of movement building in the rural South and Midwest that began
after the Civil War, in 1866, with the National Grange of the Patrons of
Husbandry, continuing with a huge network of cooperatives in the 1880s
across the South and Midwest in the farmers’ alliances, black and white.
The alliances shared with the Grange a strong emphasis on civic
development, organizing neighborhood gatherings, newspapers, lecture
circuits, and reading circles. Alliance economic efforts aimed at
freeing farmers from the domination of banks and railroads through
cooperative purchasing and marketing and produced policy ideas like
progressive income taxes and easier credit.  Organizing generated what
the Lawrence Goodwyn has called a “movement culture,” based on an ethos
of respect, cooperation, self-help and a vision of a “cooperative
commonwealth” to replace the dog eat dog capitalism of the late 19th
century. The farmers’ movement included tentative interracial alliances,
always in tension with the ancient legacy of racial bigotry that was a
defining element of southern culture.[^15]   The black historian Manning
Marable recounts his family’s oral history about his great-grandfather:

*During the 1880s, many black and white farmers in Alabama joined the
Alliance, a radical agrarian movement against the conservative business
and planter elite. Morris was attracted to the movement because of its
racial egalitarianism. Throughout Georgia and Alabama, black and white
Populist Party members held joint picnics, rallies, and speeches.
Populist candidate Reuben F. Kalb actually won the state gubernatorial
contest in 1894 [though electoral fraud prevented his taking office]. On
the periphery of this activity, in his small rural town, Morris Marable
became sheriff with the support of blacks and whites. He was intensely
proud of his office, and completed his duties with special
dispatch…Morris carried a small Bible in one coat pocket at all times
and a revolver under his coat. In either case, he always planned to be
prepared.* [^16]

Populism has many ripples. Thus, for instance, David Mathews, a
formative voice in the Kettering Foundation for which he serves as
president and the broader deliberative democracy movement, proudly
traces his family’s political lineage to the same movement as Marable.
His ancestors were leaders in the Alabama and Texas branches of the
Populist Party. In the 1898-1899 session of the Alabama legislature, his
grandfather's father, James Waldrum Mathews, opposed the
planter-sponsored constitution that effectively disenfranchised poor
black and white farmers.[^17]

At the core of democratic populist movements is a philosophy of civic
independence that distinguishes populism from either socialism or
unbridled market capitalism. As Eric Foner has observed, the relative
absence of a strong socialist or labor party did not signal a void, but
rather the presence of something else. “Precapitalist culture…was the
incubator of resistance to capitalist development in the United States,”
wrote Foner:

*“The world of the artisan and small farmer persisted in some parts of
the United States into the twentieth century, and powerfully influenced
American radical movements…These movements inherited an older republican
tradition hostile to large accumulation of property, but viewing small
property as the foundation of economic and civic autonomy…Not the
absence of non-liberal ideas but the persistence of a radical vision
resting on small property inhibited the rise of socialist
ideologies.[^18]*

Themes of civic liberty have run through every democratic movement in
America, from labor organizing of the 19th century to the women movement
of the 1960s and 1970s.

America, like Europe, has also experienced amnesia about populism as a
serious political and intellectual project. Elite condescension toward
“the plain people” has been a significant factor. As Goodwyn described
in*The Democratic Promise,* progressive historians by the 1960s had
reduced “populism” to a caricature of backward-looking nativism and
parochialism, a portrayal with virtually no relation to the actual
movement.

Populist movements also speak a different language than modern,
“scientifically minded” elites. They are culturally based more than
structurally based. Their agent, “the people,” is not historically
indeterminate, but it is a different kind of category than “class” or
“interest groups,” a different idiom than charts and statistics of
modern social science, a different politics than political campaigns
with their focus groups

and poll-tested sound bytes. Populism challenges the culturally
uprooted, individualized thinking characteristic of professional elites
and systems, left and right. Populist movements are narrative. They grow
from the sense that an elite is endangering the values, identities, and
practices of a culturally constituted group of people, its memories,
origins, common territory and ways of life.  “People” is understood
through language, stories, symbols, oral traditions, foods, music, ways
of remembering. A people may have a moment of birth, sacred texts,
foundational spaces. A people can also have dual identities, as conveyed
in W.E.B. Du Bois’ great work,*The Two Souls of Black Folks.*

The cultural themes of populism always are contested. But in democratic
populism, as people defend their ways of life they develop in democratic
ways. They become more conscious of other groups’ interests, more
inclusive in their understandings of “the people,” and more expansive in
their vision of future possibilities. Anyone involved in broad
organizing or movements like the sixties’ freedom struggle has seen
this.

If attended to, such cultural discontents provide immense resources for
democratic change in an era like ours, when egalitarian and community
values are under assault by marketplace dynamics and cultural forces
around the world fueled by growing disparities of wealth and power. How
populism develops depends on who organizes its discontents. The
questions of which elites threaten the people, what strategies are
available, who the people include, all are dynamic and open. A populist
perspective helps to make sense of the “culture wars.” It also shows the
need for a populist alternative to the “populism” on the right that
purports to champion rooted culture but leaves marketplace dynamics
untouched, and “populism” on the left, which challenges marketplace
triumphalism but reproduces*homo economicus* in its theory of the “new
man and woman.”

*Culture theory on the right: Buffers against modernity.* The last
generation’s conservative politics in America has been associated with
the theory that “culture,” what conservatives understand to be ways of
life that teach responsibility, loyalty, connection, initiative, and
self-reliance, are under siege in the modern world.  Cultural values and
their foundations are especially endangered by government and by
professions that turn people into clients or consumers of services.
Such views grow from a long tradition of conservative thought. Dating
from writers like as Alexis de Tocqueville and Edmund Burke, the English
conservative who championed “little platoons” of communal life against
the modern age, conservatives in this vein have seen community-rooted
settings as the bulwark of liberty and tradition against the winds of
modernity. Robert Nisbet, a pivotal figure for cultural conservatives,
argued that Nazi Germany was the culminating fusion of state power and
modernist culture, destroying autonomous local structures:

*“All autonomous organizations were destroyed and made illegal:
professions, service clubs, voluntary mutual aid groups, fraternal
associations, even philatelist and musical societies. Such groups were
regarded, and correctly, by the totalitarian government as potential
sources of future resistance.[^19]*

Nisbet also emphasized dangers of the capitalist marketplace. In his
view, the market celebrates an acquisitive individualism that erodes the
authority of the church, the family, and the neighborhood. It corrupts
civic character, public honor, accountability, and respect for others.
Capitalism alone produces a "sand heap of disconnected particles of
humanity," he said. But he had scant ideas about how to counter
marketplace dynamics. Like his conservative followers, he overwhelmingly
focused on “big government.”[^20]

By the beginning of the 1980s, conservatives such as Peter Berger and
Richard Neuhaus, co-directors of the Mediating Structures Project of the
American Enterprise Institute, were giving practical application to the
idea of the colonizing, destructive power of government. To Berger and
Neuhaus, big government “aspires to an all-comprehending jurisdiction.”
Acting out of its bureaucratic imperatives, justified by ideologies of
equality, justice, and the public good, the state tends inevitably to
expand its power, scope, and authority at the expense of such
small-scale “structures of daily life” as families, churches,
neighborhoods, and cultural and voluntary groups. Stripped of any
attachment to particularity of background - religion, race, or group
identity - the state is the ideal expression of professional culture and
the “general will.” But there is terrible cost: “A growing trend toward
legally enforced symbolic sterility in public space” that denies the
authority of communities to make public their traditions and values; the
weakening of family and small-group bonds and the widening intrusions of
experts and professionals into the most private realms of life; and,
accompanying such processes, the erosion of those buffers that protect
the individual against what they called “the mega-structures” of modern
society.[^21] They also despaired, that nothing could change the
mega-structures. Peter Berger voiced such pessimism, writing with
Brigitte Berger:

**“*We are quite capable of imagining forms of Gemeinshaft that we would
find more appealing than the American class system. Unfortunately these
are not realistic options…the realistic question is the extent to which
the totalitarian tendencies of [government] may still be curbed.”*
[^22]**

In their perspective, mediating structures are defensive buffers against
the modern world.  Intellectuals with a conservative cultural bent such
as David Brooks, Michael Joyce, Bill Schambra, Bob Woodson, and Mary Ann
Glendon have developed these themes. In their view, mediating structures
of family, religious congregation, cultural and ethnic group, and
neighborhood are threatened by social engineering and by liberalism that
defines freedom as escape from communal restraint.

It is impossible to understand the “culture wars” without taking into
account these cultural arguments, the anxieties and discontents they
address, if often defensively, and the lack of progressive response. The
pseudo-populist argument of Thomas Frank that working class whites,
befuddled by cultural appeals, ignored their “self-interests,” defined
economically, in voting for Republicans reduces culture to false
consciousness. His book,*What’s Wrong with Kansas?,* was a hit with
Democrats after the 2004 elections. But its popularity on the left shows
the problem.

Republicans have been making hay out of Democratic obliviousness to
cultural discontents and their hidden power dynamics for a generation by
speaking in populist accents - the reason for the journalistic equation
of “populism” with Republicans like Reagan and Bush. Thus, in the 1980
election, Reagan declared that, “Thousands of towns and neighborhoods
have seen their peace disturbed by bureaucrats and social planners
through busing, questionable educational programs, and attacks on
family.” In his words, it was a time for “an end to giantism” and “a
return of power to the people.”  Similar views were voiced by Michael
Joyce in the fall of 1992.  Joyce said that “Americans are sick and
tired of being told they’re incompetent to run their own affairs.
They’re sick and tired of being treated as passive clients by arrogant,
paternalistic social scientists, therapists, professionals and
bureaucrats.”[^23]

“Populists” on the right in the US, Europe and elsewhere have put
progressives on the defensive. To understand why requires a look at
cultural theory on the left.

*Culture on the left: Brake on critical, cosmopolitan consciousness.* In
recent decades in the US, left oriented citizen action has often invoked
“populism,” reflected in Frank’s approach and many issue groups’
self-description. But its approach has also been highly economistic. Put
differently, in recent years left populism has had scant connection to
cultural wellsprings of American democracy or discontents about
disruption of communal ties. As Dana Fisher shows in*Activism, Inc.,* a
disconnection from community cultures on the issue-based left and
election campaigns is embodied in techniques like the door to door
canvass.  It flows from a cultural stance: progressive activism, however
named, has reflected an anti-traditionalist cultural theory descended
from the Enlightenment, with new expressions in the culturally uprooted
activism of the late sixties.

From Enlightenment theorists of the 18th century onward, the tendency on
the left was to see the sundering of people’s communal, particular, and
historical identities - their “roots,” in the words of the French
philosopher Simone Weil[^24] - as an indispensable, if perhaps tragic,
prerequisite of cosmopolitan consciousness. Left intellectuals proposed,
in place of community weakened or lost, community based on “new
relationships.”[^25] While they were eloquent about human dislocations,
the dominant trend in the views of both Karl Marx and Frederich Engels
was to see workers’ break with rooted, communal traditions as necessary
for progress. Marx called for a “radical rupture” with particular
identities such as religion, place, and ethnicity. For Engels,
“tradition is the great retarding force…but being merely passive is sure
to be broken down.”[^26]

Gianna Pomata described the differences between populist and socialist
intellectual currents in Europe. “The Populists called into question one
of the most basic tenets of European political thought - the belief in
progress…Populism and Marxism thus came to represent two contrasting
positions.” This difference included differing conceptions of the future
and also of agency. The peasant class which Marx argued “represents
barbarism inside civilization” was for Populists “the leadership in the
struggle for a better future.”[^27]

If such views simply reflected notions of nineteenth century theorists
they would make little difference now. But they have continued to shape
the progressive imagination. On the socialist left, the view of
cosmopolitan consciousness as a process of breaking with local,
particular, national, and traditional identities has been the pattern,
with exceptions like William Morris or Martin Buber here and there. It
informed Michael Harrington’s view of a “rational humanist moral code,”
which he saw replacing “traditional moral values.” T he socialist view
was succinctly summarized by Stanley Aronowitz in his essay entitled,
appropriately enough, “The Working Class: A Break with the Past.”
According to Aronowitz, all particular identities of “race and
nationality and sex and skill and industry” are obstacles to the
development of cosmopolitan and oppositional consciousness.

Such sentiments also infused liberal thought. The cultural stance of
liberalism has held that enlightenment comes from intellectuals at the
center, not the backwaters. Garry Wills expressed such a view in his
critique of proposals for decentralized power. “The smaller the locale,
the stricter the code; and this code…has always been at odds with the
social openness, the chances for initiative, praised by liberals.” In
his reading, “What our history actually reveals at the community level
is local conformity, rigid mores, religious and other prejudice,
aristocracy and control.”[^28]

In the 1960s, these views became intertwined with generational
experiences to produce a sweeping alienation from mainstream America,
its groups, symbols, stories, and traditions. Alienation found
expression in the slogan, “Don’t trust anyone over thirty!”, or the
sophisticated but disastrous generational statement by Paul Cowan of
1968,*The Making of an UnAmerican.* After the 1960s, a new generation of
young activists worked to get beyond disdain for Americans. But their
issue-focused approaches which came to characterize most progressive
activism had little cultural rootedness.[^29]

Cultural estrangement hides power and sustains technocracy. Technocratic
politics - domination by experts removed from a common civic life -- has
spread throughout contemporary society like a silent disease. It is a
politics without a name, presenting itself as an objective set of
truths, practices, and procedures and, on the left, informed by values
such as social and economic justice, equal opportunity, and human
rights.  However well intentioned, technocratic politics turns groups of
people into abstract categories. It decontextualizes “problems” from the
life of communities. It privatizes the world and creates cultures based
on scarcity. It erodes the experience of equal respect. All these
features can be seen in modern political campaigns, with their
“outsider” flavor, as if candidates are marketing to voters as customers
choosing among different brands of toothpaste and posing themselves as
something of a combination between super-hero and American Idol, whose
election will solve all our problems.[^30]

There are also many democratic stirrings that do not fit the
conventional left-right spectrum, as civic scholars have described. The
question is, how can such stirrings generate a larger, self-conscious
movement? I believe a deeper theory of culture and power is an essential
element.

*Toward a Populist Theory of Culture and Power:* Alternative voices in
recent years offer material for moving beyond static views of culture
and for developing a populist theory of culture and power based on
appreciation of the immense resources within communities and societies.
In contrast with progressive theories of community cultures as brakes on
cosmopolitan consciousness, a new generation of social historians
concerned with the actual development of popular movements - how it is
that ordinary people, steeped in experiences of subordination, develop
the courage, spirit, and confidence to assert themselves -- has produced
a rendering of the roots of movements with far more nuance.[^31] Social
history draws attention to the contradictory quality of community
settings and cultural traditions, full of oppositional currents,
democratic elements, and insurgent themes as well as hierarchical and
repressive ones. Social historians have described the ways in which
powerless groups draw inspiration from cultural elements that many write
off as simply oppressive.

Sara Evans and I, drawing on such social history as well as our
experiences as southerners in the civil rights movement - white
southerners in the movement, in my experience, had to come to terms with
the ironies of culture in a way that many northerners could avoid -
conceptualized the democratic potentials of culture with the idea of
free spaces.[^32] The concept aims to show how powerless groups draw on
and transform inherited resources as they develop public skills, public
identities, and power.

We defined free spaces as places in the life of communities with public
qualities, in which powerless groups have capacity for
self-organization, for engagement with alternative ideas, for
development of public skills and identities. These entail new
self-confidence, self-respect and concern for the commonwealth. In free
spaces, people create culture. They draw confidence from inherited
traditions and rework symbols, ideas, and values to challenge ruling
ideas. Free spaces highlight what can be called the prophetic
imagination as an alternative to outside critic. The prophetic stance
finds in a society’s cultural repertoire many treasures for developing
new visions of the future and for reconstructing the story of who “the
people” are and how they came to be.[^33]

Thus, for instance, the historian E.P. Thompson in his work,*The Making
of the English Working Class* , described places such as taverns and
sectarian churches in which working people found space for intellectual
life and democratic self organizations, separate from the gentry and the
crown*.* [^34]   Women in 19th century conservative but publicly active
women’s organizations defined by domestic roles developed the confidence
and power that laid groundwork for 20th century suffrage. In the long
history of the African American freedom movement, blacks forged spaces
for culture making even in overwhelmingly oppressive settings, such as
the slave system.  Christianity was taught to slaves by slave owners in
an effort to break their ties with African roots and socialize them into
passive, docile roles. Yet Christianity provided rich materials to use
in fashioning strategies and language for everyday resistance (for
instance work songs and Gospel music) as well as far ranging radical
insurgent visions of a transformed racial and political order (such as
the Exodus narrative). Ideals of freedom

and equality from the Declaration of Independence were also appropriated
by a long line of black leaders.[^35]

A dynamic theory of culture that can be called populist is now appearing
in anthropological and development literature. Thus, Vijayendra Rao and
Michael Walton, editors of*Culture and Public Action,* a splendid recent
book from UN and World Bank experiences in development work across the
world, emphasize the cultural dynamism that we sought to convey with the
idea of free spaces.  It challenges individualist, economistic, and
technocratic frameworks that dominated the development literature.  Rao
and Walton define culture as “about relationality - the relationships
among individuals within groups, among groups, and between ideas and
perspectives.”  This definition draws attention to locally rooted
cultures and to their foundations in families, cultural groups,
congregations and the like, and also to larger cultural patterns in
societies developing over long periods of time. As they put it “Culture
is concerned with identity, aspiration, symbolic exchange, coordination,
and structures, and practices that serve relational ends such as
ethnicity, ritual, heritage, norms, meanings and beliefs.”[^36]

They build on James Scott’s*Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to
Improve the Human Condition Have Failed. * Scott shows how “high
modernism,” infused with egalitarian ideals and combined with state
power and weak civil society, has devastated local cultures, mores, and
relationships all over the world. The irony is that this process has
been carried out by progressives with the best of liberal, egalitarian
intentions.[^37]

In*Culture and Public Action,* the authors argue that development
workers, to be successful, must shift from “one size fits all”
technocratic interventions and instead recognize and tap the ingenuity
and cultural resources of ordinary people in communities. Amartya Sen
and Arjun Appadurai in particular also stress the dynamic,
future-oriented qualities of culture, understood as meaning systems at
multiple levels.

Thus, Arjun Appadurai argues that, “It is in culture that ideas of the
future, as much as of those about the past, are embedded and nurtured.”
Combining insights drawn from recent cultural theory with deeply
appreciative participatory action research conducted with an affiliate
of Shack Dwellers International, a poor people’s housing organization,
in Mumbai, India, Appadurai develops the concept of the “capacity to
aspire” on the part of the poor. He proposes that, “in strengthening the
capacity to aspire, conceived as a cultural capacity especially among
the poor…the poor could find the resources required to contest and alter
their conditions of their own poverty.” Emphasizing the elements of
future orientation in culture challenges conventional theory. As
Appadurai puts it, “For more than a century, culture has been viewed as
a matter of one or another kind of pastness—the key words here are
habit, custom, heritage, or tradition.” Thus economists have had
franchise over “development,” over the future. “Culture is opposed to
development, as tradition is opposed to newness and habit to
calculation.”

In contrast to the tendency to see culture in static and past-oriented
terms, Appadurai stresses culture’s open, interactive, fluid, dynamic,
and created

qualities. People’s capacity to aspire is tied to “voice,” the
development of power and recognition that people gain through sustained
organizing. “Voice must be expressed in terms of actions and
performances which have local cultural force.” The development of voice
also means learning how to negotiate larger contexts. Such a process, in
turn, can “change the terms of [their] recognition, indeed the cultural
framework itself.”  To organize for voice and recognition requires
cultural action and savvy strategic maneuvering. “There is no shortcut
to empowerment. It has to take some local cultural form to have
resonance, mobilize adherents, and capture the public space of
debate.”[^38]

A dynamic theory of culture suggests a capacity-oriented, relational
theory of power.

*Power as relational and generative* : In the free spaces of populist
movements, people have an experience of power that confounds
conventional views. Most power theories are based on models of power as
one way; the term “power” is largely synonymous with force, control, and
rule. Power theory is drawn from scarce resource systems like land or
money (or the hyper-competitive scramble for prestige and position in
universities).  Such a view is present, for instance, in Steven Lukes’
classic work,*Power: A Radical View.* Lukes takes what he calls a
“three -dimensional view of power, illuminating not only power to get
others to act and power to prevent action but also power to shape
language which makes certain issues relevant and suppresses others.[^39]


Here, power is one directional. Even power theories that are more
relational usually conceive power as imposed*on* people. More recent
theory in critical studies has described the ways in which dominating
power relationships are “encoded” in languages, practices, and
identities. Michel Foucault is especially influential in this school of
thought. Such power theory is rich with insight, but it pays little
attention to how human beings deepen democratic agency, the capacity to
act to shape their worlds.[^40]   Academic theories rarely see power as
what people*do* in reciprocal interactions to get things done. More,
there is no conception of the potential democratic power embedded in
community life or in the motifs, stories, symbols and narratives of the
larger society. Today’s critical theorists focus on critique and neglect
power as cultural resources that can be drawn upon and developed to
challenge and transform dominant powers and relations.

It would be naïve to ignore either extreme concentrations of power or
power’s sometimes brutalizing operations in the modern world.[^41] Here,
the most effective local organizing of recent years offers considerable
insights. Leaders in broad based organizing such as Ed Chambers, Gerald
Taylor, Mike Gecan, Sister Christine Stephens, Ernesto Cortes, Rev.
Johnnie Ray Youngblood, and Marian Dixon, as well as democratic
theorists such as Benjamin Barber, Rom Coles, and Alison Kadlec, have
sought to develop relational theories of power and politics. Organizers
go back to the root of the word, power (from*poder,* meaning to be
able). They point out the sharp limits of academic theories of power
because of their lack of attention to relationality. They argue that if
one thinks about power as the capacity to act, not as what is done to
someone else, power is always best conceived as

“two-way,” even in situations of considerable inequality. As Ed Chambers
put it in*Roots of Radicals,* a compilation of insights from such
organizing, “People who can understand the concerns of others and mix
those concerns with their own agenda have access to a power source
denied to those who can push only their own interests…There can be no
creative power without some acknowledgement of the other’s interests,
just as there can be no healthy love if the self is wholly lost in
concern for the other.”[^42] For poor and working class people,
organizing for power in these terms means changing power dynamics to be
more interactive and relational with positional leaders in politics and
business, full of tension but also productive results. It also involves
developing the public capacities of relational leaders, often women, at
the center of community life.[^43]

A populist theory of power creates a larger context than does
broad-based organizing because its goal is building a movement, not
simply organizations. Populist theory perforce must analyze cultural
dynamics in the larger society, as well as interpersonal and local
dynamics of particular organizations. Cultural power, like information
power, highlights power’s generative, open qualities. Such power cannot
be conceived adequately as a zero-sum force, power*over.* Cultural power
is power*to create* -- identities, narratives, practices. It can involve
innovation or restoration.  At the Center for Democracy and Citizenship,
we have expressed the generative dimensions of power through the concept
of citizenship as*public work* , highlighting the productive, not simply
distributive, qualities of politics.[^44]   A view of the generative
qualities of power also explains the potential catalytic power dynamics
in government and professions, where power is also a nonfinite
relationship. In such systems of cultural and information-constituted
authority, power can be dramatically increased as knowledge is pooled
and cultural identities and relationships are valued and brought into a
public mix.

A dynamic, capacity-oriented, and culturally rooted approach to power
offers possibilities for moving beyond dead end debates. For instance,
the Black Consciousness Movement (BCM) in South Africa, read as a
dynamic, culture-creating populist movement, offers an alternative to
the wars surrounding identity politics. The BCM tied the development of
pride in African traditions and cultures to community organizing and
political activism. Xolela Mangcu, the main intellectual heir to Black
Consciousness Movement founder Steven Biko, argues that the BCM was not
“essentialist.”  It did not believe in the unique virtues of blacks.
Biko’s key allies included the radical Afrikaaner theologian Beyers
Naudé. Rather, Biko and others stressed communal and egalitarian values
in African cultures as resources for challenging not only apartheid but
also the dominant Western culture of materialism, individualism, and
domination broadly. Their arguments closely paralleled Sheldon
Wolin’s.[^45]

This approach creates a populist alternative both to the identity
politics widespread across the globe, and also to the posture of
“objectivity” found among technocratic elites, left and right. It
appreciates democratic and communal resources to be found in “cultures
of survival” with which to mount challenges to the throwaway, isolating
cultural currents of our time,

without claiming these cultures’ unique virtue. Our colleague Atum
Azzahir, an outstanding public intellectual, founder of the
Powderhorn/Phillips Cultural Wellness Center, begins with African themes
and also makes much the same point about “indigenous cultures,”
including European.[^46]   The Cultural Wellness Center takes a sharply
different approach than conventional “service delivery” efforts that
focus on poor people’s deficits, needs and deficiencies. It emphasizes
health as a civic and cultural question, not simply an individual
question. Its philosophy of health is based on a deep appreciation for
ordinary people’s capacities, the resiliency and resources to be found
in communities, and the health-generating dimensions of cultural
identities. The Center, like other Minnesota efforts such as William
Doherty’s Families and Democracy Partnerships and the Neighborhood
Learning Community, both later described, radically rethink professional
work in civic terms that emphasize cultural grounding for public action
and also the now untapped abundance of energies and civic talents in a
sense frozen by one-way, technocratic patterns of service delivery. Such
approaches open immense new strategic possibilities for crossing the
conservative liberal divide in areas such as childhood development,
health, education and other human service fields.[^47]

They also suggest both the strengths and the limits of the work of John
Dewey.


