John Dewey’s “Modernizing Populism”
===================================

John Dewey’s biographer Alan Ryan locates Dewey’s views and
identifications in the broader populist strand of American political and
cultural history:

*Although Dewey was not in the Marxist sense an enthusiast for class
warfare, he had the old populist inclination to divide the world into
the privileged and the people… the upholders of the partial interests of
particular social groups and the upholders of the interests of ‘the
people.’ He did not espouse a backward-looking populism or hanker after
agrarian radicalism…he was a forward-looking, modernizing populist.”*
[^48]

Dewey’s philosophy, pragmatism, and his commitments to “democracy as a
way of life” advanced themes in the populist tradition, especially civic
learning. At the same time, since democratic populism, based on a
dynamic sense of cultural resources, dissolves sharp distinctions
between “backward-looking,” on the one hand, and “forward-looking” and
“modernizing,” on the other, Ryan’s characterization of Dewey’s populism
in these terms also hints at a key limit of Dewey’s theory.

*Dewey and civic development.* Dewey saw Americans as a people forged
from democratic diversity, and America’s democratic traditions as
experimental, open, practical, and based in values of universal
importance. One of the least plausible charges against him is that his
philosophy was about*means* with no concern for*ends* . “I make no
apology for linking what is said in this chapter with the name of Thomas
Jefferson,” Dewey began “Democracy and America,” the conclusion
of*Freedom and Culture,* defending active democracy against both Marxist
and conservative alternatives.

Dewey championed the country’s founding ideals. “[Jefferson] wrote
‘these truths are self-evident: that all men are created equal; that
they are endowed by their Creator with inherent and unalienable rights;
that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.’”
Dewey said, “His fundamental beliefs remain unchanged in substance if we
forget all special associations with the word*Nature* and speak instead
of ideal aims and values to be realized - aims which, although ideal…are
backed by something deep and indestructible in the needs and demands of
humankind.”[^49]

Populism is based on faith in the intelligence and talents of common men
and women everywhere. Respect for the unrealized democratic
potentialities in human beings is a powerful, admirable theme that runs
through the core of Dewey’s philosophy.  Human development was at the
center of his first serious statement on democracy, his essay “The
Ethics of Democracy,” written in 1888. Democracy, according to Dewey,
involves an ethical ideal, not simply a government. Its aim should be
the development of the potentials of each individual. “Democracy means
the*personality* is the first and final reality,” Dewey wrote. “It
admits that the chief stimuli and encouragement to the realization of
personality come from society; but it holds, nonetheless, to the fact
that personality cannot be procured for any one, however degraded and
feeble, by anyone else, however wise and strong.”[^50]

Dewey here introduced a focus on the importance of*work* as a source of
development and democracy, extremely unusual among political theorists,
along with a sharp criticism of most people’s degraded experiences of
work. “Democracy is not in reality what it is in name until it is
industrial as well as civil and political…”[^51]

Dewey was proudly, though far from uncritically, “American,” but he
extended his emphasis on human democratic development across the world.
Indeed, he had strong appreciation for the insights and contributions of
many other societies and cultures. For instance, his descriptions of the
integration of esthetic experiences with life in earlier societies are
replete with praise. “We do not have to travel to the ends of the earth
nor return many millennia in time to find peoples for whom everything
that intensifies the sense of immediate living is an object of intense
admiration,” Dewey wrote in*Art as Experience.* “Bodily scarification,
waving feathers, gaudy robes, shining ornaments of gold and silver, of
emerald and jade, formed the contents of esthetic arts and, presumably,
without the vulgarity of class exhibitionism that attends their
analogues today.” Thus, “domestic utensils, furnishings of tent and
house, rugs, mats, jars, pots, bows, spears were wrought with such
delighted care that today we hunt them out and give them places of honor
in our art museums.”  Dewey developed a critique of the detached “museum
art” of modern life and the accompanying penchant for artists to
“exaggerate their separateness to the point of eccentricity.” In his
view capitalism produced both an international market that detached art
from context and also a*nouveaux riches* who sought to evidence his
“good standing in the realm of higher culture…as his stocks and bonds
certify to his standing in the economic world.”[^52]

Real understanding required attention to context. “It is a commonplace
that we cannot direct, save accidentally, the growth and flowering of
plants, however lovely and enjoyed, without understanding their causal
conditions,” Dewey wrote. “It should be just a commonplace that esthetic
understanding - as distinct from sheer personal enjoyment - must start
with the soil, air, and light out of which things esthetically admirable
arise.”[^53]

Dewey envisioned a variety of ways to reintegrate art into contexts and,
more broadly, a democratic way of life, from the buildings and spaces of
the modern world and the educational experiences of young people to the
productive activities of workers.  Thus, his ideal of democratic
development was tied the work of the craftsman as much as the efforts of
the self-conscious artist. Indeed, Dewey saw artists, as he saw
professionals in other disciplines, as essentially practicing crafts,
with problem-oriented and relational patterns of learning, deeply
attentive to context.

Forty years after he had introduced the idea of human development
through work in the “Ethics of Democracy,” he argued in*Art as
Experience* that “the intelligent mechanic engaged in his job,
interested in doing well and finding satisfaction in his handiwork,
caring for his materials and tools with genuine affection, is
artistically engaged.” He decried the rarity of such experiences in the
modern worksite. “The labor and employment problem of which we are so
acutely aware cannot be solved by mere changes in wages, hours of work,
and sanitary conditions. No permanent solution is possible

save in a radical social alteration, which affects the degree and kind
of participation the worker has in the production and social
distribution of the wares he produces…this modification of the nature of
experience is the finally determining element in the esthetic quality of
the experience of things produced.”[^54] Though he would have resisted
the comparison, in such passages Dewey sounded like the late Pope John
Paul II, whose 1981 Encyclical “On Human Labor” was an eloquent call to
make the “subjective experience” of work the touchstone of modern
economies.

John Dewey’s philosophy led him into fierce debates about the role of
citizens.

According to progressive intellectuals, changes of the late nineteenth
and early twentieth century - technological developments, urbanization,
the growth of scientific knowledge and the like - meant that theories of
citizen involvement needed radical revision. The modern world, wrote
Walter Lippmann, “had upset the old life on the prairies, made new
demands upon democracy, introduced specialization and science…and
created the impersonal relationships of the modern world.”[^55] Lippmann
and other progressives in the*New Republic* - Dewey’s political home
from its founding until 1937 - argued that new forms of participation
must replace face to face ties. Editor Herbert Croly said that “the
responsibility and loyalty which the citizens of a democratic nation
must feel one towards another is comprehensive and unmitigable,” but the
connections of small town communities needed to be replaced by “the
loyal realization of a comprehensive democratic social idea.” New
technologies created opportunities to replace face to face
communications. Citizens, in Croly’s view, no longer need “assemble
after the manner of a New England town-meeting” since there existed
“abundant opportunities of communication and consultation without any
meeting…the active citizenship of the country meets every morning and
evening and discusses the affairs of the nation with the newspaper as an
impersonal interlocutor.”[^56]

The detachment of democratic participation from place evolved into an
attack on the ideal of active democracy. By the late 1920s, a growing
consensus among social scientists advanced the “democratic realist”
position that held most people to be in the grip of blind instincts and
in need of guidance. Thus in 1934, Walter Shepherd, in his presidential
address to the American Political Science Association, declared “the
dogma of universal suffrage must give way to a system of educational and
other tests which will exclude the ignorant, the uninformed, and the
anti-social elements.” Shepherd argued that “government demands the best
thought, the highest character, the most unselfish service that is
available” and called for “an aristocracy of intellect and character.”
To make certain his audience understood whom he had in mind, he
concluded by calling for academics to lead the nation, for “men of
brains” to “seize the torch.”[^57]

Dewey’s colleague at the*New Republic,* Walter Lippmann, a formative
voice in public debate, developed a more sophisticated argument but one
that was even more challenging to Dewey’s belief in democracy as a way
of life. The problem with active democracy in the modern world was that
most people possessed very limited information, according to Lippmann.
Thei

vision of the “real world” was distorted by “artificial censorship, the
limitations of social contact, the comparatively meager time available
in each day for paying attention to public affairs, the distortion
arising because events have to be compressed into very short messages,
the difficulty of making a small vocabulary express a complicated world,
and finally the fear of facing those facts which would seem to threaten
the established routine…” People’s minds processed information through
stereotypes - what social psychologists have more recently called
“frames” - that they have learned. The consequence is that people are
passive and manipulated.[^58]   Though his logic was different,
Lippmann’s solution was like other social scientists: There must be
“some form of expertness between the private citizen and the vast
environment in which he is entangled.” Citizens’ role was minimal: “To
support the Ins when things are going well; to support the Outs when
they seem to be going badly.” The premise of active self-governing
democracy was mistaken, he said. The test of government was not citizen
involvement, but rather whether it delivered the goods.[^59]

Dewey addressed these technocratic critics of participatory democracy in
several ways, with varying success. In response to the pretensions of
credentialed intellectuals and academics, Dewey made action, not
detached thought, the foundational experience of human beings who make
meaning in the world. As Ryan put it, “One reason why Dewey was never
able to accept the orthodox argument of stimulus-response was the fact
that it made the organism whose behavior was supposed to be built up out
of endless stimulus-response circuits too passive, too spectatorial, and
too much a creature of the environment.” Rather, the person “makes
sense*of* the world for the sake of acting productively*on* the world.”
This focus led Dewey to a critique of detached intellectuals who imagine
the primacy of their own thought. “The depreciation of action, of doing
and making, has been cultivated by philosophers,” Dewey wrote in*The
Quest for Certainty* , his attack on the idea that inquiry can be
separated from social contexts. Dewey observed the aura of infallibility
which those armed with “expertise” could assume. “The dogma worked out
practically so as to strengthen dependence upon authority,” he wrote.
“Just as belief that a magical ceremony will regulate the growth of
seeds to full harvest stifles the tendency to investigate…so acceptance
of dogmatic rules as bases of conduct in education, morals, and social
matters lessens the impetus to find out about the conditions which are
involved in forming intelligent plans.”[^60]

In response to social scientists’ arguments that most people are in the
grip of raw instincts, Dewey’s book,*Human Nature and Conduct,* proposed
that “habits,” not “instincts,” shape most of human behavior. Here he
anticipated by decades the work of social theorists such as Pierre
Bourdieu. Habit, for Dewey, was “human activity which is influenced by
prior activity and in that sense acquired; which contains within itself
a certain ordering or systematization of minor elements of action; which
is projective, dynamic in quality, ready for overt manifestation; and
which is operative in some subdued subordinate form even when not
obviously dominating activity.”[^61]

Habits are not blind repetitions but are learned patterns that create
predispositions for action in unexpected circumstances. Habits can be

changed and developed through “intelligent action.” This has proven a
fertile theory for educational innovation. Thus, Deborah Meier, the
great democratic educator, founder of the Central Park East schools in
East Harlem and Mission Hill School in Boston, has demonstrated the
fruitfulness of the concept of habits to education for democracy. “The
real crisis we face is not a threat to America’s economic or military
dominance but the ebbing strength of our democratic and egalitarian
culture.” Meier recalls the “traditional public function of schools: to
pass on the skills, aptitudes, and habits needed for a democratic way of
life,” observing that these “are hard to come by; they are not natural
to the species. They are as hard to teach as relativity. Democratic
culture needs citizens with very strong habits.”[^62]

Dewey’s direct responses to the arguments about the practical
impossibility of active democracy showed his populist inclinations. But
they were much less successful.

*The “Dewey Problem.”* The gap between Dewey’s vision of participatory
democracy and the means to realize it is often noted by biographers.
“Dewey never actually developed, let alone implemented, a comprehensive
strategy capable of realizing his general theory in real world
practice,” write Lee Benson, Ira Harkavy, and John Puckett in their
lively “Deweyan” manifesto,*Dewey’s Dream* . “What we mean by the Dewey
Problem is, what*specifically is to be done beyond theoretical advocacy
to transform American society and developed societies into participatory
democracies…?* [italics in original]”[^63]

This “Dewey problem” is illustrated by the weaknesses of his reply to
critics of citizen democracy,*The Public and Its Problems,* published in
1927. He agreed with the “realists” that citizens were bewildered by
modern conditions. Public transactions are those which have significant
indirect consequences for those not directly involved. But this creates
an enormous challenge. “The machine age has so enormously expanded,
multiplied, intensified, and complicated the scope of indirect
consequences, has formed such immense and consolidated unions in action,
on an impersonal rather than a community basis, that the resultant
public cannot distinguish itself.” Yet such a discovery is the
foundation of action. Thus, publics are inchoate and disorganized and
“The outstanding problem of the Public is discovery and identification
of itself…”[^64]

Dewey affirmed that society needs organized intelligence and that social
scientists play a key role (though he had in mind public intellectuals
like Henry George, not detached academics). But he said newspapers were
potentially better sources of knowledge than critics acknowledged, when
combined with good social science, effective reporting, and engaging
presentation. Democracy, he argued, “will have its consummation when
free social inquiry is indissolubly wedded to the art of full and moving
communication.”[^65]

He held that in order to organize themselves and deal with indirect
consequences, publics formed “states” to serve their common interests.
He acknowledged that inherited forms of government were inadequate to
the tasks. “The ‘new age of human relationships’ has no political
agencies

worthy of it.” Americans had inherited “local town-meeting practices and
ideas. But we live and act and have our being in a continental
nation-state.”[^66] Thus, democracy needed to take an open-ended
approach to state-making. “By its very nature, a state is ever something
to be scrutinized, investigated, searched for. Almost as soon as its
form is stabilized, it needs to be re-made.”

Finally, Dewey called for recovery of local community. “Evils which are
uncritically and indiscriminately laid at the door of industrialism and
democracy might, with greater intelligence, be referred to the
dislocation and unsettlement of local communities,” he wrote. He argued
that “Vital and thorough attachments are bred only in the intimacy of an
intercourse which is of necessity restricted in range…Democracy must
begin at home and its home is the neighborly community.”[^67]

Even his enthusiastic biographer Robert Westbrook, who sees Dewey as the
key theorist for modern participatory democracy, levels a devastating
critique at the weaknesses of this book. Westbrook observes that Dewey
gave no clue as to how an increasingly distanced group of social
scientists might become re-engaged. He neglected to mention ideas on how
the state might become more participatory. “Dewey’s political theory and
ethics pointed to a government that would include, indeed maximize,
agencies of direct democracy…yet despite the implications of his own
argument, he appeared to have given little thought to the problems and
possibilities of participatory government.” Nor did he develop any
strategic idea for the rebirth of local democracy. “It was unclear how a
public that was the product of a social transformation showing no
respect for place could remain strongly attached to local settings,”
Westbrook observes.  Westbrook concludes by using Dewey’s own arguments.
“He was himself constantly railing against those who were guilty of
wishful thinking because of an inattentiveness to means…Dewey’s failure
to constitute participatory democracy as a compelling ‘working end’ as
well as the demanding conditions he set for its realization, made*The
Public and Its Problems* a less than effective counter to democratic
realism.”[^68]

Alan Ryan explains the fact that Dewey’s philosophy often had a
“magical” quality, “never…fully seized of the nastiness of political
dilemmas,” by factors external to his philosophy: during his formative
years, before moving to Chicago, Dewey lived in small communities and
had small audiences.[^69]   I believe that there was a deeper problem.

*Dewey and Power:* Dewey, who emphasized the importance of conscious
attention for full understanding of anything, gave little explicit
attention to the concept of power.  As a result, his political arguments
and prescriptions often have an idealized, almost wistful tone.  Just as
he relocated politics in the state, in the dynamic I described in my
first Dewey lecture, he also thought about power in the conventional
terms of force. “Not only have we separated the church from the state,
but we have separated language, cultural traditions, all that is called
race, from the state - that is, from problems of political organization
and power,” he argued in his essay, “America in the World,” an idealized
defense of World War I whose enthusiasm he came to regret but which is
suggestive for its underlying

definitions. “To us language, literature, creed, group ways, national
culture, are social rather than political, human rather than national
interests. Let this idea fly abroad.”[^70]   Even in sober moments, Ryan
argues, Dewey equated “power” with “force.” Force meant getting people
to do things they wouldn’t otherwise do.[^71]

Dewey’s treatment of power tended to assume that power is a
one-directional operation, power*over* others, not power*to act* in
relationship with others. “Power” understood differently, as the
relational capacity to act, entails closer attention to power and public
agency, the dynamics of communal solidarity, and social movements that
are crucial for change. To use Deweyan language it makes “problems” out
of what he took for granted.

*Public Agency:* [^72]  John Dewey translated his conception of the
human person as*problem-solver* into the view that the ideal human agent
is the citizen scientist.* * For instance, this is a strong emphasis
throughout*Culture and Freedom* . He argued “the future of democracy is
allied with the spread of the scientific attitude. It is the sole
guarantee against wholesale misleading by propaganda. More important
still, it is the only assurance of the possibility of a public opinion
intelligent enough to meet present social problems.”[^73]   The habits
Dewey cites as part of the scientific attitude -- willingness to suspend
belief, to look at evidence and go where it leads, to hold ideas as
provisional hypotheses, to enjoy new problems - are important attributes
of the democratic citizen. But they are also strikingly*cognitive*
habits, continuing his life long penchant to place the emphasis on ideas
in direct contravention of his deeper theory of action. This tendency
was present early on. At Michigan, for instance, he enthusiastically
signed up to be editor of the hair-brained scheme of Franklin Ford in
1892 to launch a newspaper,*Thought News,* dedicated to thought, until
public derision caused him to pull out.

There was a contradiction throughout Dewey’s career between his deepest
concept of the person - that the organism “makes sense*of* the world for
the sake of acting productively*on* the world” - and his tendency to
prioritize thought over action. This is evident, for instance, in his
approach to micro-cultures such as schools, communities, and workplaces.
Dewey was eloquent about normative civic dimensions of such settings.
For a brief period, in the Chicago Lab School, he developed a practical
site for working through his ideas. But as Benson, Harkavy and Puckett
detail in*Dewey’s Dream,* his inattention to the institutional politics
of the school’s relationship to the University of Chicago soon caused
the severance of his relationship. An adequate theory of agency poses
places like the Lab School and their relationships*themselves* as a
focus for action --*how to organize* for democratic change.  There are a
number of habits and traits that are not on Dewey’s list but that are
crucial for organizing and sustaining a democratic site like the Lab
School. An organizing citizen needs to be relational, appreciative of
the resources of settings and also able to imagine alternatives
(possessing the “capacity to aspire”), astute in reading power and
interests, skilled in listening and communication, strategic, and able
to see connections between particular problems, the contexts in which
they operate, and larger systems.

Our own experiences in the partnerships of the Center for Democracy and
Citizenship have repeatedly brought home how easy it is for
professionals to lose any sense of context when they focus on “the
problem.” Dewey at his best conveys a richer concept of the human person
than “problem solver.”[^74] Though Dewey sought to resist uprooted
thought by regularly invoking context, in fact a concept of agency that
puts the emphasis on problem solving tends to detach activity from
context, especially in the hands of culturally uprooted professionals.
“Problem-solvers” lose the awareness that discrete “problems” have
different meanings in different settings. They forget the ties of
particular problems to webs of other problems. They neglect the holistic
qualities of environments in which a person acts. And they assume long
range ends as “givens,” focusing on efficiency of means.
Decontextualized problem solving is the trait of technocracy. Given
Dewey’s championing of common people, it is unfair to charge him with
being a technocrat, as Christopher Lasch among others, has done. But it
is easy to see the reason for the charge: “problem solving” suggests a
technocratic frame of mind.[^75]

The concept of the person as a “co-creator” of her environments, a maker
of contexts and communities, is more adequate to the democratic task. It
suggests a shift from person “in herself” to a democratic citizen “for
herself,” the transformations needed for  democracy to become a “way of
life.” Such conceptual language is intimated by experimental psychology
that emphasizes humans as unique, relational agents of their development
even in early childhood. Infants create ideas drawing from diverse
sources, as they learn to negotiate and shape their environments. This
science points toward a political, open, and dynamic concept of contexts
and of the humans who make them.

T he late Esther Thelen pioneered in this science, moving toward a
“grand unifying theory” of the field of early childhood development.
Thelen’s science was based on a relational, interactive, emergent
understanding of complex systems and how to theorize them. She
acknowledged a debt to Dewey but a stronger debt to William James, who
emphasized more than Dewey the idiosyncratic qualities of each person
and the gritty, turbulent, ironic and heterogeneous qualities of
experiences (Ryan also observes this contrast between James and
Dewey).[^76] Thelen’s theory challenged views of infants as passing
through pre-determined “stages” of development. She argued instead that
infants are experimental, self-realizing agents, profoundly relational
and interactive with their contexts. A group of former students and
co-researchers described the embodied quality of thought in the 2005
Presidential Session of the Society for Research on Child Development.
Drawing on many of her experiments, they concluded that infants are
constantly assembling holistic patterns, such as reaching or walking,
out of many elements, including testing, perceiving, feedback, and
experimenting with ideas. “[An] integration of body and mind is a
fundamental characteristic of all goal-directed activities…Thought is
always grounded in perception and action.” [^77]

Thelen not only challenged stage theories of development and disembodied
thinking. She also differed from conventional views about

scientists and science. She saw the scientist as part of the equation;
she certainly would have added the capacity to build relationships to
Dewey’s list. In Esther Thelen’s view, theory grows not only from use of
the scientific method but also from a rich and interactive set of plural
relationships, with “amateurs,” parents and families, as well as with
other scientists. In democratic terms, Thelen’s science suggests a
conception of the person not simply as a problem solver, but more
broadly as a co-creator of the contexts in which problem-solving takes
place.

In a different context, research over the last generation has shown that
organizing which develops people’s co-creative agency generates profound
changes in the sense of self, skills, behaviors and values, what the
organizer and public intellectual Ernesto Cortes calls “*metanoia,* a
theological concept meaning transformation in being. These changes are
visible in what are called “broad based citizen organizations”
affiliated with networks like the Gamaliel Foundation, Industrial Areas
Foundation, and PICO. Such groups often use the concept of citizens as
co-creators. In a splendid treatment of these themes*,* Rom Coles
described how such organizing, drawing on diverse traditions, “inflects
these traditions in light of a radical democratic ethos that accents
inclusion, dialogue, receptivity, equality, difference, a taste for
ambiguity, patient discernment, and an affirmation that political
relationships centrally involve ongoing tension, some compromise, and
humility in the face of disagreement.”[^78]

Our work at the Humphrey Institute’s Center for Democracy and
Citizenship began in 1987 with a populist, everyday politics in which
citizens are co-creators.[^79] Drawing from experiences of broad based
organizing, as well as the citizenship schools of the civil rights
movement, our goal has been to develop concepts and practical methods
that can feed broader movement building. With partners, we translated
citizen-centered politics to varying settings, from a nursing home and
the College of St. Catherine, to the Metropolitan Council and Minnesota
Extension Service. Our sustained work has included partnerships with new
immigrants and the West Side of St. Paul in the Jane Addams School for
Democracy and the Neighborhood Learning Community,[^80] and also the
youth civic learning initiative of the Center for Democracy and
Citizenship called Public Achievement.[^81] Key colleagues have included
Bill Doherty, whose Families and Democracy partnerships use a public
work approach. These have pioneered models of the “citizen professional”
and organizing to change the cultural forces undermining family life.

Across all the CDC collaborations, the idea of the citizen as co-creator
has been at the center. In the Jane Addams School, for instance,
everyone is a “learner” and a “teacher”; students learn they are not
doing “service,” but are participants and colleagues in public work. In
the Families and Democracy partnerships, citizens and families possess
the primary knowledge, responsibility, and capacity to address
challenges - professionals are citizen professionals.  In Public
Achievement, the conception of the citizen as a co-creator of
communities and democracy through public work means that young people
are citizens now, not citizen in preparation. Public work involves a
diverse mix of people creating public

wealth, things of lasting civic benefit, whose value is determined
through continuing conversation, and in Public Achievement young people
choose issues they want to address and are coached by older people.
Such concepts and practices pose every setting as open to change and
re-creation. They teach methods like “power mapping,” one on one
interviews, and strategic thinking, that illuminate the politicality of
every setting.  The CDC web site is full of stories of transformations
that take place in identity and outlook as people learn the everyday
politics needed to make changes.[^82]

In another context, Jennifer O’Donoghue’s pioneering research
illuminates micro-processes of transformations in identity and sense of
agency among poor and working class young people, mostly of minority
backgrounds, active in inner city community organizations in northern
California. The groups’ focus on young people’s power and learning.
Their commitments and practices have much the same effects as Public
Achievement at its best. Drawing on research that shows low income and
minority young people to be less civically engaged and more marginalized
in community life, posing community groups as potentially alternatives
to those who look simply to schools for remedy, O’Donoghue undertook a
qualitative research project that explored public learning opportunities
in community based youth organizations (CBYOs). These, she hypothesized,
were likely to have more “free spaces” for youth than schools.

O’Donoghue found dramatic and positive changes in identity, behavior,
attitudes and hopes among these young people, most of whom had struggled
or failed in school and felt marginalized by the larger culture, and who
sometimes came from families of abuse, violence, and neglect.
“Participating here and doing things here helps me feel like I’ve
accomplished something. My experience here has given me a little piece
of pride I never had,” said one young woman.  In contrast to prior
experience, many reported learning more openness, trust, and connection.
“My mom used to say, you can’t trust anybody,” said another. “But I feel
I can really trust these people.”  Another element was “coming out” to
be seen. As one put it, “I’m starting to open myself up more and show
who I really am and where I’m coming from.” Said another, “I was one of
those youth who was always in the background… When I started speaking my
mind, it was a hard to explain feeling because I’ve never actually
spoken my mind...”

Young people learned to see others in different ways. “I used to have
the same attitude as some adults, that some youth just mess it up,” said
one. “But now I look at them like, what have they gone through in their
life for them to be like this?” Another reflected, “I used to look at
people and make judgments right away. I don’t do that anymore, or not
nearly as much as I used to. I’m friends with all sorts of different
people now.” Finally, many reported a new sense of civic identity. This
meant being involved in the community “to affect it in a drastic change
toward positivity,” as one put it.[^83] O’Donoghue summarized features
of the micro-cultures that generate such changes:

*“In explaining what they valued about their CBYO experience, young
people emphasized an organizational culture characterized by a
commitment to youth power and learning. They conveyed their
organization,*

*at its best, as ‘just like all about youth empowerment.’ Supporting
youth power, for these young people involved believing that all young
people were capable of making change, opening space for young people to
create or build things in the world, and challenging them to do it. The
idea of creating something real and lasting was extremely powerful for
these youth. Being committed to youth meant also being flexible and
responsible to the people who make up the organization and to the
broader community around them…”* [^84]

Like the conception of the person as an active agent and the
micro-cultures in which they develop a new sense of self, the larger
communities in which young people and others develop civic skills and
identities can also be understood not simply as things to be espoused
but as contexts to be consciously repaired, sustained and re-created.

*Communities:* John Dewey invoked community as the ground for democratic
values, anticipating critics of technocracy like James Scott.
“Fraternity, liberty and equality isolated from communal life are
hopeless abstractions,” he wrote in*The Public and Its Problems.* “Their
separate assertion leads to mushy sentimentalism or else to extravagant
and fanatical violence which in the end defeats its own aims.”[^85] But
Dewey’s community, like his concept of agency, was abstract. He
neglected the gritty, power-laden, and culturally rooted work needed to
retrieve, sustain, and generate democratic values in a world that
assaults them. The most insightful leaders of people’s organizing have a
profound sense of this work. “We are not a grassroots organization,”
said the Reverend Johnny Ray Youngblood, a leader in East Brooklyn
Churches, a model for organizing over a generation. “Grassroots are
shallow roots.*Our* roots are deep roots. Our roots have fought for
existence in the shattered glass of East New York.”[^86]

When he turned to strategies and concrete examples, Dewey had a*liberal*
idea of community in mind, with little sense of potentials of more
conservative traditions, with their often fierce defense of roots.
During World War I, he sought to get the federal government to intervene
in the politics of the Polish community on the side of liberal groups
against conservative and Catholic ones. He championed public schools,
and opposed parochial ones. He became embroiled in a polemic with the
Catholic Church. As Ryan says, “The Catholic church still struck Dewey
as a threat to human intelligence and social reform, and he still
complained that its emphasis on supernaturalism was a threat to science,
and its emphasis on authority a threat to individual liberty. The
church’s leaders and rank-and-file Catholic intellectuals returned his
distaste.”[^87]

In recent years, broad based citizen organizing has sought to ground
organizing in multi-dimensional connections with community institutions
and diverse traditions. This meant taking seriously the real religious
beliefs of participants, first in local churches of Catholic and
Protestant orientation, later in synagogues and mosques as well. It also
meant changing the very definition of “leadership.” Leaders in low
income and minority community organizing were traditionally the visible
public actors and activists, typically male. In the new organizing, key
figures became the more invisible “relational leaders,” most frequently
women, who worked behind the scenes

to keep school PTAs going, ran day to day activities in churches, and
were the people neighbors turned to for support and advice. Sister
Christine Stephens, a key figure in this shift, described the
innovations of the Mexican American group Communities Organized for
Public Service (COPS) in San Antonio.  “COPS built on the basis of PTA
leaders, parish council members, stalwarts of the church guilds,” she
described. “Not the politicos, the people who have wheeled and dealed.”
Stephens described this as a key shift in the social bases of
organizing. “The approach builds around the people who have sustained
the community,” against enormous pressures. “For example, these are
women whose lives by and large have been wrapped up in their parishes
and their children. What COPS has been able to do is to give them a
public life and a public visibility, to educate, to provide the tools
whereby they can participate.” Politics also became redefined to put
citizens back at the center and to reintegrate politics into the
horizontal relations of daily life.[^88]

In another example, sustained alliance-building in the geographic area
of the West Side in St. Paul, a historically rich immigrant
neighborhood, led leaders in the Jane Addams School to help create a
neighborhood-wide coalition, the Neighborhood Learning Community, NLC.
The NCL aims to develop a “culture of learning” across the area.
Traditional professional strategies do not work to create such culture
change. The informational approaches common in professional settings,
where parents and educators are given research findings, have little
potential to engage families’ interests, develop families’ power, or to
create substantial relationships between schools and their surrounding
communities. Traditional social service approaches deliver educational
enrichment experiences to students conceived as customers, not as
creative agents who have potentially rich cultural and other resources
to bring. As democratic educational theorist Nick Longo points out,
“Developing a neighborhood culture of learning counters prevailing
trends and invites non-experts to participate in education reform.” It
is a “citizen centered model…that asks experts to…be on tap not on top.”
The challenge is that “this constitutes several paradigm shifts: seeing
ordinary people as producers, not consumers; actors, not spectators; and
teachers, not students.” Jerry Stein, an educational scholar and
activist, says it amounts to a “Copernican Revolution,” understanding
that schools need to orbit communities and families.[^89]

Dewey believed that living, active communities and publics would someday
be created through richly diverse communicative action. As he put it,
“Communication alone can create the Great Community.”[^90] But
communities, like Copernican Revolutions, are built on a large scale in
the modern world through popular movements. In such movements,
communication is one dimension of a larger process of building
collective power.

*Dewey and the people’s movement of the Great Depression:* The populist
movements of the 1930s and Dewey’s relationship to them are helpful to
look at in this regard. His efforts to articulate a populist conception
of democracy as a way of life differed from left wing conceptions of
agency and Marxist visions of the future, in ways that have continuing
relevance to

movement building. Yet left wing organizing has at times also had a
populist character that is full of important lessons. This was
dramatically true after the Seventh Congress of the Communist
International shifted in 1935 from a rhetoric of class struggle to a
populist rhetoric of “the people.” This shift unleashed an amazing array
of creative democratic efforts and generated a vital social movement in
the US and elsewhere. At the heart of the movement was a profound
irony - the turn in the communist movement toward populist organizing
came at the same time Stalin undertook a ferocious assault on populism
as a distinctive intellectual and political project. Dewey could see
sharply the flaws in Stalinist ideas. But he seemed at best only dimly
aware of the teeming populist practices underneath them, and all around
him.

A full treatment of Dewey’s populist concepts, the left’s populist
organizing, and the relationship between them in the 1930s and 1940s is
beyond the limits of this lecture, but I can sketch the bare outlines.
Throughout, Dewey remained a critic of Roosevelt’s New Deal. He believed
that capitalism had failed and needed replacement by a different
economic system. He saw the New Deal as a half way measure. The National
Recovery Administration, for instance, a key element of Roosevelt’s
response, “loaded the dice in favor of the existing system of control of
industry, with a few sops thrown to labor.” In his view, “there is no
way out for America except to recognize that labor has prior claims upon
production, which take precedence of current return upon property.”[^91]

Dewey’s emphasis on “labor’s priority” was more in the tradition of
Abraham Lincoln than Karl Marx. Dewey was sympathetic to working people
and to trade unions. Indeed, he was a zealous advocate of school
teachers’ organizing. But he resisted class struggle language. He argued
that the failure of public education was due to elite control. Thus in
strikingly populist accents, he said that a teachers union allied with
other trade unions was necessary to combat “the state of servility…”
that characterized education.[^92]

His populism was also evident in the way he thought about efforts
through the 1930s to create a third party (if not in his actual quixotic
efforts themselves). His concept envisioned an alliance of farmers, blue
and white collar workers, small business and professionals. He saw labor
support as critical. But winning the middle class was the key. To
achieve this, the party’s approach must be non-statist and respectful of
small property. “The first appeal of a new party must be to what is
called the ‘middle class’: to professional people, including, of course,
teachers, the average retail merchant, the fairly well-to-do
householder, the struggling white collar worker including his feminine
counterpart, and the farmer.”[^93]   Socialist theory dismisses such
populist programs as at best temporary expedients on the way to class
politics. But Dewey’s view articulated a democratic alternative both to
privatized culture and statism: people need small property to be
self-governing, independent, productive citizens of the
commonwealth.[^94]

Finally, Dewey also played an extremely important role in criticizing
the duplicity and self-delusion affecting many intellectuals in the
1930s who

turned a blind eye to the totalitarian tendencies of the Soviet Union.
In 1937, he served as chairman of the Commission of Inquiry into the
Charges Made Against Leon Trotsky in the Moscow Trials, generally
referred to as the Dewey Commission, because he believed in his “right
to a public trial.” He also served as honorary chair of the Committee
for Cultural Freedom, formed in 1939, which warned of “the tide of
totalitarianism…rising throughout the world…washing away cultural and
creative freedom” in Russia and fascist regimes.[^95]

In all these cases, Dewey’s advanced democratic*populist ideas,* not a
vision of “classless society” or socialized production or the modern
“mass” man and woman (populism is the antithesis of the whole
constellation of terms associated with “mass”).  Dewey saw democracy as
a work in progress; the core problem was bringing concentrated power and
wealth under control. But he had much weaker*populist practice* . Thus
he had little feeling for how the Roosevelt administration, precisely
because of its pragmatic responsiveness to changing conditions and
popular moods, helped to catalyze democratic organizing. He also did not
perceive that below the surface of formal leftwing politics, its
organizing was generating democratic energies.

Thus he saw Popular Fronters as simply communist dupes defined entirely
by their ideas about Russia. In fact, as a wealth of scholarship
suggests, the tone of the nation’s collective response to the Great
Depression was set by a populist-style movement called the Popular
Front. It mobilized civic and democratic energies well beyond formal
politics as well as through elections. It addressed domestic challenges
of poverty, racism, hunger, workers’ powerlessness in the face of large
employers and many other questions. The historian Eric Foner notes the
ironies: the Communist Party, its leaders slavishly loyal to the Soviet
Union, helped to greatly “expand freedom” in America.[^96]

All over the world the shift from class struggle to popular fronts
generated democratic energies as left wingers shifted focus from an
abstract internationalism and the language of socialism to mining of
democratic resources within specific societies and cultures. In colonies
of the Global South, this shift helped to launch “national liberation
struggles” that fueled independence. It also generated creative social
changes of many kinds.  Thus, in the Indian state of Kerala, communist
organizing of landless peasants, continuing for decades, producing
enormous transformations. As Peter Evans observed, “Decades of social
battles [around land reform] changed people’s cultural images of
themselves and their society. Humiliated lower-case peons were given
scripts in which they were heroic rather than despised, in which they
were supposed to exercise agency rather than hoping for charity, and in
which their neighbors were comrades in collective endeavors rather than
competitors for scarce resources.”[^97] Amartya Sen draws intensively on
the movements of Kerala in his theory of “development as freedom.”

The Communist Party in the US experienced the tensions of such a change
in practice. As Gary Gerstle found in a study of the textile town of
Woonsocket, Rhode Island,

*Many party members and sympathizers, especially those long committed to
Leninist doctrine, found this change [from class struggle to Popular
Front] wrenching. Some, however, genuinely embraced the Popular Front
precisely because it seemed…an opportunity to overcome their isolation
from American workers and their marginality in American politics. They
enthusiastically set about constructing a new radical language, one that
was respectful of American political traditions and consonant with
cherished American notions of freedom, independence, justice, and
equality.* [^98]

The “struggle for socialism” of the early 1930s had created ferocious
fights between radicals and moderates. After 1935, the call*to defend
democracy* meant broad alliances replaced demands to choose “which side
are you on?” America’s democratic heritage came to be understood as a
treasure trove of resources. The struggle to defend democracy became not
simply defensive; at its best, it became a movement to deepen democracy.
Even the Communist Party claimed “Jefferson, Paine, and Lincoln.”

Dewey’s abstract bent produced its own ironies. Thus Dewey envisioned
vital communities that would someday combine face to face relations with
intellectual life. If community “be re-established, it will manifest a
fullness, variety, and freedom of possession and enjoyment of meanings
and goods unknown to the contiguous associations of the past,” he wrote.
“It will be alive and flexible as well as stable, responsive to the
complex and world-wide scene in which it is enmeshed.”[^99] Yet as part
of the populist movement, such community cultures were appearing right
next door.

Thus, Harlem was the scene of a remarkable public culture, vividly
rendered by Barbara Ransby in her biography of the civil rights leader
Ella Baker.  From the 1920s through the 1930s, the Harlem Renaissance
nourished wider democratic changes, the combination of life and
flexibility and stability Dewey longed for.  Activists of every stripe -
from anarchists to communists, mingled with day laborers and a range of
professionals -- artists and poets, labor organizers, teachers,
ministers and musicians, in an explosion of political, literary,
artistic, and intellectual creativity. As Ransby described, “The streets
of Harlem provided a cultural and political immersion like no
other…infused as it was with the exciting intellectual rhythms of the
black diaspora. The serious exchange of ideas, cultural performances and
political debates flowed out of classrooms, private homes, meeting
halls, and bars onto the neighborhood thoroughfare of Lenox Ave.”[^100]
In Harlem, free spaces ranged from jazz spots like the Cotton Club to
churches, labor study groups, local businesses, unions, the Harlem
library, schools, labor education groups, and theater projects. These
settings mingled to create a vibrant public culture. People learned
skills of dealing with others who are different. They knew that what
happened in Harlem mattered to “American civilization.” A whole
generation of intellectual and cultural and activist leaders - Zora
Neale Hurston, Langston Hughes, Jacob Lawrence, Adam Clayton Power, and
many others - were schooled in this milieu. Key architects of SCLC’s
approach were also formed in Harlem.

The thirties and forties’ movement also had strong trans-local
dimensions.  Historians such as Lary May in*The Big Tomorrow,* a
treatment of the transformations of “the American dream” presented in
movies,

Lisbeth Cohen, in*Making a New Deal,* showing the agency of blue collar
workers in using mass cultural forms like radio to forge a larger sense
of collective identity, and Michael Denning in*Cultural Front,* an
analysis of the cultural politics of the Popular Front, have richly
detailed the populist organizing among “cultural workers” of many
kinds - from journalists, screenwriters and artists to scholars and
educators and union organizers. Denning effectively disputes the idea
that intellectuals in the Popular Front were dupes of the communists. He
uses the idea of an “historic bloc” of variegated forces of diverse
interests and motivations united around certain overarching goals
(defeat of fascism, defense of democracy, and pursuit of economic and
racial justice). The overall result was that the content of the American
dream in the popular culture shifted from the individualist,
WASP-oriented, consumerist ideal of the 1920s to a far more cooperative,
racially pluralist and egalitarian vision of democracy in the New Deal.
In the process, cultural workers developed a consciousness of their own
potential roles in the battle of ideas and conceptions of the good
society, as allies of industrial workers, blacks, farmers, small
businesses and other groups, and also fighting for themselves and their
own interests.   Theorists of this cultural politics like Lewis Corey
saw the struggle as about professionals’ own interests for socially
relevant work. As Denning puts it, a “craft vision of professionals,
intellectuals, and artists was a crucial element of the depression
left.”[^101]   Public meanings of work also gave a strong civic cast to
New Deal programs like the Civilian Conservation Corps.[^102]

The Popular Front generated a democratic aesthetic illustrated by Martha
Graham’s 1938 dance masterpiece,*American Document* . It emphasized
American folk traditions, multi-ethnic heritages, and ideals of the
Declaration of Independence and the Gettysburg Address. “What is an
American?” she asked. She answered, not only Anglo-Saxons but also
blacks, immigrants, and workers. All were needed for democracy. The
appeal of Earl Robinson’s great song on the same theme and with the same
message, “Ballad for Americans,” showed the reach of this democratic
aesthetic. Made famous by Paul Robeson, it was sung at both Republican
and Communist Party 1940 conventions.

Today’s broad-based organizing is rooted in this tradition. The
contribution of Saul Alinsky, its founder, was not “inventing community
organizing,” as is imagined. Rather Alinsky codified organizing lessons
of the Popular Front. His 1946 book,*Reveille for Radicals,* was in fact
a call to revive the movement without socialist baggage - Alinsky
identified himself as a populist. The populist movement for the 21st
century needs to draw on this heritage. Finally, populism challenges
technocracy.


