Populism Versus Technocracy in the 2008 election season
=======================================================

A new triumphalism in technocracy is evident in many settings, recalling
today Walter Shepherd’s call from 1934 for “men to brains [to] seize the
torch.” For instance, it is expressed in the zeal of many scientists to
roll back the purported delusions afflicting people of faith. Thus the
Fiftieth Anniversary issue of the leading British science journal,*The
New Scientist,* in 2006 began with description of a large California
conference of scientists that had all the flavor of an old fashioned
camp meeting - in this case going on the offensive against religious
belief. In 2006, the evolutionary biologist Robert Dawkins’ book,*The
God Delusion,* a best seller on the*New York Times* list, launched a
ferocious attack on religious conviction of all varieties and also on
the “Neville Chamberlain School” of scientists lacking what he thought
was requisite zeal for the anti-religious crusade. As H. Allen Orr
observed in the*New York Review of Books,* Dawkins demonstrated a
“mission to convert,” that was intolerant, refused ambiguity or doubt,
lacked engagement with any of the sophisticated views of adversaries,
showed a cavalier attitude toward historical evidence, and demonstrated
a strikingly Manichean bent of mind. Dawkins embodies the rectitude of
ideological zealots of any variety.[^103]

In high level politics, the technocratic bent is also pervasive. As one
policy leader in Washington told me during our New Citizenship effort
with the White House Domestic Policy Council from 1993-95, “the contempt
in the Washington beltway toward the American people is often
breathtaking,” a pattern Joan Didion detailed in her campaign coverage
from 1988 through 2000 for the*New York Review of Books.*   Technocratic
trends culminate in high level presidential campaigns, now based on
treating citizens as customers and candidates as rock stars and
superheroes.[^104]

Yet under the surface of degrading and elitist trends, a manipulative
culture “littered by disposable remains,” there are also signs of a new
movement. Here, I conclude by looking at how a populist perspective can
reframe the coming election.

Many descendants of John Dewey’s emphasis on communication and
“socialized intelligence” describe it as an emerging world wide movement
for “deliberative democracy.” Others, such as Lee Benson, Ira Harkavy,
and John Puckett in their book,*Dewey’s Dream,* see it as a movement for
democratic education reform. They propose that a movement for
“university-assisted community schools constitute[s] the best practical
means to help realize Dewey’s general theory of participatory
democracy.”[^105]

I have much respect for these practices, sites, and those who make these
arguments. Deliberation at its inclusive best, in ways urged by authors
such as David Mathews, Daniel Yankelovitch, Hal Saunders, Nöelle McAfee,
Alison Kadlec, Matt Leiningher and others, challenges the stranglehold
that technocrats have gained over policy making. Kadlec, following
Dewey, observes insightfully that deliberation can disclose public
problems, injustices and power inequalities.[^106] Deliberative
democrats help bring back a respect for the intelligence of ordinary
citizens. And, like Dewey, they

emphasize democratic “habits,” such as the capacities to engage people
of other views and interests. Because deliberative democracy is so
clearly related to Dewey’s focus on communication while it also provides
part of the missing answer to the “democratic realists,” it is not
surprising that he has become a foundational theorist in this movement.
But the democratic movement needs to put deliberation in a larger
context of practices. Public work that solves public problems and
creates public wealth involves a continuing conversation about the
meaning of its products. It also points toward a thicker conception of
civic agency than the deliberative citizen.  A populist conception of
agency highlights not only citizen judgments about problems and what
government might do about them. This was Dewey’s view, reflected in*The
Public and Its Problems* , in which citizens, when they recognize public
problems, become a public as they form a state to act on them*.* Dewey’s
perspective is the common approach taken in most deliberative efforts -
people deliberate mainly about government’s proper course of action. In
a populist perspective, by contrast, the question is not “what can
government do?” but “what can we all do?,” posing “problems” or “issues”
as parts of larger cultural dynamics. Publics form as they do public
work. They are not formed, as Dewey proposed, through government.
Government is a resource of the people, but not the only one. Public
work illuminates a broader range of citizen talents, whether teens who
told Jennifer O’Donoghue how important it was to create things of
lasting value or IDASA’s approach that teaches local officials to shift
focus from what*government and health workers* should do about HIV/AIDS
to what*the citizenry in communities* do.

Another of Dewey’s contributions was his sustained focus on schools and
educative processes in general. Benson, Harkavy, and Puckett add
practicality to his concerns, with an inspiring track record of “making
real” Dewey’s idea of schools as centers of community life, connected to
community problems. Yet many settings, not simply schools, need to be
conceived as civic learning environments - families, cultural groups,
libraries, congregations and small businesses, neighborhood
organizations and art projects, to mention a few. Moreover, while
academics have much to contribute, they have more to learn from groups
outside of higher education.  Finally, to transform the cultural
dynamics and concentrations of wealth and power that threaten communal
and democratic values will require civic learning and populist
organizing in a myriad of locations, beyond schools - religious
denominations and unions, professional associations and shop floors,
courtrooms and jailhouses, dot com companies and farming communities,
environmental groups and government agencies, legislatures and Congress.
Higher education has interactive ties to all of these and more.

A populist movement integrates democratic practices and sites with a
conception of public agency that sees the citizen as co-creator, “We are
the one’s we’ve been waiting for.” This is the “citizen at the center”
stance, the title of Ström’s and Gibson’s pieces.

Higher education takes on many roles in a populist movement. Our
institutions are potentially key “agents and architects” of democracy,
as Elizabeth Hollander and I put it in*The Wingspread Declaration* on
the civic

mission of research universities. They are not simply its researchers,
critics, service providers, or the educators of its future leaders.
Scholars’ work is not only to analyze and critique but also to stimulate
conversations, to expand the sense of the possible, and to help activate
civic and political energies.  Redefining higher education’s role in
these terms is crucial in the early 21st century. Higher education is
the premier knowledge institution in an era of exploding knowledge and
knowledge technologies. It generates and diffuses conceptual frameworks
that structure practices of all sorts, from global finance to parent
education. It trains and socializes professionals. Higher education is
thus a theater for significant strategic action if it takes up a robust
democracy-building mission and identity.

But a populist movement challenges us to place ourselves as a strand of
a larger movement, not see ourselves as tutoring the larger society in
the skills and values and habits of democracy.  All this requires a
shift from critic, service provider, and outsider to what I would call a
relational intellectual, embodying the craft nature of the professions.
Craft is relational, contextual, and unique in its products, a far
different view of professional and academic work than decontextualized
expertise. Thus, looking at the experiences and practices of those such
as Bill Doherty, or the scholars doing public work profiled by Scott
Peters highlight the deeply contextual, relational and craft nature of
“scholarship.” But these roles are different than the roles of “service”
or “critique” that define the main paradigm of higher education public
engagement today. In all these cases of interactive, collaborative
public work, scholars help people*identify* and sometimes*organize on*
communal values,*authorize* these values, and*amplify* their stories and
experiences, connecting these to other contexts.[^107]

We need to “return to the source,” in the phrase of the great African
activist intellectual Amical Cabral, the people themselves.  In this
process, not only communities struggling for survival in the United
States but also areas of the world such as Africa, viewed with
condescension in the West, hold potential for global leadership.[^108]
We have a challenge to reconnect with the living networks, histories,
cultures and stories of communities, with the democratic currents of
American culture, and with populist democracy movements around the
world. At a deep level, we need to recover awareness that we  are not
outsiders, prime movers or Archimedean points. We are fellow citizens.

This view has direct relevance for the 2008 election. We need to join
with others to challenge the focus on which candidate will rescue us.
The better question is, Which candidate do we want to work with the day
after the election to create a flourishing democratic society? We need
to build a November 5 Alliance to answer it.

The Kettering Foundation helped support the research for this lecture.
Again, I am deeply appreciative of their material support and also of
the intellectual community they create for engaging, debating, and
exploring these ideas. I thank Marie Ström for our many conversations
throughout, Xolela Mangcu for his column in*Business Day,* February 15,
2007, developing these themes, Omano Edigheji for helpful conversations
about populism in Africa, and Lawrence Goodwyn, Alison Kadlec, Cherrie
Strachan, and Nikki Kohly for extensive commentary. I also thank Rom
Coles, James Farr, Deborah Meier, Lary May, Nöelle McAfee, Benjamin
Barber, Michael Edwards, Helen Ström, Anu Idicula, Ira Harkavy, Matt
Leighninger, and Christopher Beem. I also thank Eric Fretz for arranging
a first public conversation about these themes, at Denver University on
January 18, and Susan Sterett for her insightful reflections.
