Foreword
========

The urgent need of Islamic literature is felt throughout the world. Many
young Muslims by birth, when asked which religion they adhere to their
answer comes hesitatingly Muslims. Many others deny or hide their
identity and claim to be progressive \`atheists,' since it is the
fashion now! It is needless to say that this shameful situation has
resulted from ignorance. It is the dreadful ignorance about Islamic
ideals, concepts, and philosophy.

Anyone is shocked at comparing the magnificent role played by Muslims in
history, and seeing today's Muslims. It is acknowledged that Muslims had
performed remarkable achievements in every field such as, astronomy,
algebra, geometry, chemistry, optics, and medicine. The human and
organisational fields received their full share also, where the form of
government is formulated, wealth is evenly and justly distributed,
rights are protected.

The topic of this booklet is the economic system in Islam. This might
cause astonishment among Muslims who received Western style education.
They are taught that religion is a mere relation between God and man.
They are told that religion has nothing to do with society, its welfare
and organisation. This world is Caesar's Kingdom, while God's Kingdom is
the next world. Islam firmly rejects these foreign ideas, and dictates
that both worlds are belonging to God alone, and it is the Heavenly
light which truly guides towards prosperity.

The Muslim Youth Association, which came into existence last year, is
striving to perform the required Islamic duties. This series of booklets
is a humble work, which we seek through it discharging the big
responsibility resting on our shoulders. It is a small contribution
towards the awakening of Muslims, and aid them in retaining their
identity in this wild struggle of ideologies. It is the right of Islam
to be known, before being judged, whether by Muslims or non-Muslims.

This series of booklets will cover some popular Islamic topics, in a
short and lucid style, in order to meet the need of young Muslims who
want to know the basic Islamic concepts. The writers of these short
surveys are young people, who understand very well present trends, and
convinced that Muslim youth have been neglected and wronged.

They feel that young Muslims were kept aloof from the sources of Islamic
knowledge, either by their fathers' ignorance or by receiving distorted
information from non-Islamic sources. We sincerely believe that if the
Muslim youth have the opportunity to have a glimpse of the realities of
Islam, they would stick to it, and never part from it, as was the case
with us.

May God accept our work for His sake, and let it be a good reward in the
next world.

Muslim Youth Association


