Economic Problems
=================

It is considered by Capitalism, that the cause of economic problems is
the scarcity of natural resources. As time goes by, claims Capitalism,
"man's needs will increase, and since the natural resources are limited;
then it is clear that nature will be unable to supply mankind with his
needs".

Socialism has a different view. It claims that the economic problems
arise from the theft which the Capitalists make out of the workers'
efforts. Work, Socialism claims, creates the value of goods, therefore,
the goods must be possessed by the workers. Profits are taken by
Capitalists, that is a contradiction which has lead to the economic
problem. Islam differs from both by considering the reason of the
economic problems to be man himself. This attitude is given by the
Qur'anic verse.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ دَائِبَيْنِ ۖ وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ
اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ وَآتَاكُمْ مِنْ كُلِّ مَا سَأَلْتُمُوهُ ۚ
وَإِنْ تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ لَا تُحْصُوهَا ۗ إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ
لَظَلُومٌ كَفَّارٌ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And He has made subject to you the sun and the moon, both diligently
pursuing their courses, and the Night and the Day has He (also) made
subject to you. And He gives you of all that you ask f or; and if you
count the favours of God, you will not be able to number them; Verily
man is very unjust, very ungrateful". (Qur'an, 14:33-34)***

Hence we can conclude the following:

1. There exists, sometimes, unjust people who do not comply with the
principles of social justice which creates differences between classes.

2. Man is liable to be (kafir) for it seems that man always tend to try
the easy path. It is man who does not work to utilise the natural
resources. Islam considers that the root of the problem are in man, if
man is cured, then there is no more problems.

Now we should discuss the Capital interest, and its bearings on the
society. Capitalism views profits of production as to be shared by all
the contributing factors of production (that is natural resources,
Capital, management, labour and machines), in the form of (rents,
interests, wages, etc.). They are all governed by the laws of supply and
demand.

Socialism forwards the following rule:

"From each according to his ability, to each according to his effort."

Socialism believes that work creates the value of goods, and hence
workers must possess their work.

In Islam, the following rule is applied: "Work is the excuse for
possession, but it does not alone create the value of goods."

Means of Possession in Islam
----------------------------

1. The basic concept that possession cannot be achieved without work.

2. Work is not the only contributor to the value of goods, because goods
have an intrinsic value. Hence the phenomena of persistence of
possession appears. Workers are to own their work. For instance, mines
should be owned by the workers, and not by the Capitalists. Natural
resources are not possessed by any person.

But anyone who provides the raw materials is considered as the owner of
it after production, according to the second half of the rule (that is
the phenomena of persistence of possession). This point is very
important in distinguishing the Islamic Economic system from Capitalism
and Communism.


