Ja‘far Tayyār, the Youth of Eloquence
=====================================

Ja‘far, the son of Abū Tālib was one the Noble Prophet’s (S) loyal
Companions and faithful Helpers. Ja‘far ibn Abī Tālib (*‘a*) was also a
highly esteemed brother of ‘Alī ibn Abī Tālib (*‘a*). He was ten years
older than Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*). Ja‘far Tayyār was one of the earliest
people to respond affirmatively to the divine call of the Noble Prophet
(S) and convert to Islam. It was for this reason that the Noble Prophet
stated, “O Ja‘far! You are similar to me with respect to natural
disposition and moral qualities.”[^1]

When the first group of the Muslim emigrants [*muhājirīn*] went to
Ethiopia [Habashah] in the month of Rajab, in the fifth year of the
prophetic mission, their leader was ‘Uthmān ibn Maz‘ūn. But the leader
of the second group of emigrants that went to Ethiopia was Ja‘far
Tayyār, a youth of twenty five. His young wife called “Asmā’ bint
‘Umays”, too, emigrated with him.

Notwithstanding that there were a lot of highly respected people among
the emigrants and other worthy, capable youths among them, no one got
more attention and favors than J‘afar from the Noble Prophet (S). When
the emigrants arrived in Habashah (present Ethiopia), Ja‘far was elected
to be the spokesman for the emigrants. He performed his duties, as a
spokesman, with excellence. We will now recount what has been recorded
in history concerning this:

After the polytheists of Mecca became aware of the emigration of the
Muslims from Mecca to Ethiopia, they sent a mission under the leadership
of ‘Amru ibn ‘Ās, an idol-worshipping youth, who was very eloquent in
speech to the court of Negus, the King of Ethiopia, with lots of
presents. They requested Negus, the King of Ethiopia, to return the
Muslims back to Mecca so that they may face their punishment.

Before meeting the King at his court, the idol-worshippers from Mecca
distributed a lot of presents and gifts to the courtiers in order to
attract their attention and buy their support. The courtiers promised to
cooperate with the polytheists of Mecca in the best possible manner, and
arranged a meeting of the polytheists and the King in his court.

When the representatives of the infidels of the Quraysh met the King at
his court, they fell on their knees and addressed the King of Ethiopia,
“O King! A group of ignorant youths has emigrated from Mecca to your
country. They have renounced the beliefs and religion of their
forefathers and do not recognize the right of Christianity either; on
the contrary, they have invented a new religion which neither you nor we
have ever heard about.

Their fathers, uncles, families and households have sent us as
representatives so that we may persuade you to entrust these Muslims to
us. When you have entrusted these Muslims to us, we will return them to
their country because their near ones are duty bound to watch over them
and control their activities. The Muslims themselves know very well what
kind of disgrace and discredit they have caused their families.”

The King got very offended and annoyed by the words of ‘Amru ibn ‘Ās and
angrily said, “I swear by Allah that I will not be moved by your words
and will not surrender the Muslims to you; on the contrary, I will call
the Muslims so that they may explain for themselves why they sought
asylum in my country and preferred my protection to the protection of
other kings. I will ask the Muslims themselves to tell me the reality of
the matter. I will not surrender and hand them over to you if what they
say is logical and contrary to your words. On the contrary, they will
find an increase in my favors and attention!” It was in this way that
Negus, the King of Ethiopia, summoned the Muslims so that they may
inform him more about their beliefs and religion.

The Muslims held a meeting and consulted one another about what they
ought to do. They decided to explain the reality of Islam and the laws
and orders of the Noble Prophet (S) even though the result would not be
in their favor. With this intention, they entered the court of Negus,
the King of Ethiopia.

The meeting room was well decorated. The high priests of Ethiopia sat
around the King with bibles open in front of them. After the emigrants
had occupied the place that had been reserved for them, the King faced
them and asked, “What religion is this that you follow and adhere to; a
religion which is neither that of your fellow tribesmen nor that of
mine, nor that of any other people on earth?”

Ja‘far ibn Abī Tālib (*‘a*), who was a very eloquent youth, stood up to
represent the emigrants. He said, “O King! We were once an ignorant and
idol-worshipping people; we used to eat the flesh of dead animals, to
commit ugly sins and shameful deeds, to withhold our help from our near
ones and behave badly with our neighbors, and the strong among us used
to oppress the weak and downtrodden.

Indeed, we continued to live like this until Allah raised a prophet from
among ourselves; a person whose parentage and genealogy we know, a
trustworthy man, whose chastity is confirmed and acknowledged by all of
us. This Noble Prophet (S) invited us to the worship of One God.

He ordered us to stop worshiping stone idols and that which our
ancestors used to worship, and ordered us to tell the truth, be
trustworthy, observe the bonds of relationship, be kind and good to our
neighbors. He prevented us from performing unlawful [*harām*] acts,
committing obscene acts, making illogical remarks or unreasonable
demands, bullying, devouring the property of the orphans or adding it as
an addition to our own property and falsely accusing women of faith.

He also ordered us to worship One God and not to associate anyone or
anything with Him, to enjoin and perform the prayers, to give *zakāt*
(Islamic tax for the poor and the needy), and to fast.

We confirmed and acknowledged his prophetic mission and accepted what
was revealed to him from Allah in the form of revelation. Therefore, we
the Muslims worship One God and do not recognize anyone or anything to
be His equal. We consider as unlawful [*harām*] whatever He has ordered
to be [*harām*] and consider as lawful [*halāl*] whatever He has ordered
to be *halāl*.

But our tribes opposed Allah’s Prophet (S) and tortured us brutally for
following his divine guidance. When we faced harsh treatment, severity,
compulsion, coercion, and oppression, and realized that they were
becoming a hindrance to our practicing our religious duties, we migrated
to your country. We preferred you to all the other kings of the world
and sought asylum in your justice. We hope that in the vicinity of your
justice and fairness, no one will be permitted to commit any sort of
injustice.”

After this brilliant discourse, Ja‘far did not say anything anymore.
Negus, the King of Ethiopia, asked, “Do you know anything or have you
memorized anything concerning that which was inspired and revealed to
the former prophets?”

Ja‘far answered, “Yes.” Negus said, “Recite it.” Ja‘far, who knew that
the King and his associates were devout Christians and were loyal to
their religion, and that they believed in ‘Īsā ibn Maryam (Jesus the
Christ), recited the opening verses of *Sūrat Maryam* of the Glorious
Qur’an in an extremely touching manner. When he started reciting the
verses which recount the birth of Jesus Christ, (and recited the story
of Jesus’ birth according to the account and description given in the
glorious Qur’an, Negus, the King of Ethiopia, could not control the
tears which ran down his cheeks. The King’s associates, who were all
bishops, episcopates and high priests, also cried so much that all the
bibles in front of them became wet with tears.

Then, Negus, the just King of Ethiopia, said, “There is no doubt that
these words and that which was revealed to Jesus Christ come from the
same source. Do not worry and do not lose your peace or tranquility, I
swear by Allah that I will not surrender you to these two people at all.
Then, he addressed the representatives of the Quraysh and said, ‘Return
to where you have come from; under no circumstances will I surrender the
Muslims to you’.”

Then, he told his associates, “Return all the presents and gifts that
these two people have distributed among you because we do not need their
gifts at all. Allah did not receive bribes to offer me the sultanate;
therefore, I too will not receive any bribes in Allah’s way.” It was in
this way that the representatives of the Quraysh faced humiliation and
returned, defeated, to Mecca. They returned the gifts (bribes) that they
had brought from the Quraysh.[^2]

Ja‘far ibn Abī Tālib (*‘a*) and the other Muslims stayed in Habashah
(Ethiopia) up to 7 AH and returned to Medina after twelve years of
residing in Africa. When they arrived in Medina, the Noble Prophet (S)
had just returned victoriously from the Battle of Khaybar.

When he heard that Ja‘far had returned from Ethiopia, Allah’s Prophet
(S) went to see him and welcome him back. When he met Ja‘far, the Noble
Prophet (S) embraced him and kissed him on the forehead. The Noble
Prophet (S) was doing this while tears of joy were flowing down his
cheeks. Then he said, “I do not know for what I should be happier; the
return of Ja‘far or the conquest of Khaybar.”[^3]

The end of Ja‘far ibn Abī Tālib
-------------------------------

One year after returning to Medina, Ja‘far ibn Abī Tālib was appointed
as commander of an army that was dispatched for Jordan. Ja‘far Tayyār
was entrusted with an army of three thousand soldiers and was sent to
fight the Romans.

Allah’s Prophet (S) escorted the soldiers and bade them farewell before
returning to Medina. While bidding them farewell, he said, “In the event
that Ja‘far gets martyred, the next commander should be Zayd ibn
Hārithah, and after him the next commander should be ‘Abd Allāh ibn
Rawāhah. In case he too should get martyred, the Muslims should choose
whomever they wish to be their commander.”

The Muslim soldiers encountered the Romans at a place called “Mu’tah” in
Jordan. A tiny army of three thousand Muslim soldiers was confronted by
a huge army of one hundred thousand Roman soldiers. Ja‘far Tayyār
displayed a lot of courage and devotion in this war until he finally
attained martyrdom. All the commanders of the Muslim army attained
martyrdom one after another until Khālid ibn Walīd freed the Muslims
from the siege (or blockade) of their infidel enemies and they returned
to Medina.

When news was brought to the Noble Prophet (S) that Ja‘far had been
martyred, first he cried and then said, “We ought to cry for the likes
of Ja‘far, Allah has replaced his two hands, that were cut during the
war, with two wings so that he may fly with the angels in heaven.”

That is why he has been called Ja‘far Tayyār[^4], meaning ‘Ja‘far who
flies’. Ja‘far attained martyrdom at the age of thirty three. He was
buried in Jordan in the same place where he had attained his
martyrdom.[^5]

Ja‘far was one of those people who, even before the advent of Islam,
enjoyed a good reputation among the people. During the ascent of Islam,
he became one of the most outstanding faces in the Muslim World because
of the purity of his natural disposition and abundant mental alertness.

Imām al-Sādiq (*‘a*) stated, “Allah revealed to His Prophet (S) four
qualities of Ja‘far that He had accepted.” The Noble Prophet (S) asked
Ja‘far what those four qualities were. Ja‘far answered, “O Prophet of
Allah! If Allah had not revealed my qualities, I would not have told
you. The four qualities are: I have never consumed alcohol, because I
have always known that taking alcohol would reduce my intellect; I have
never lied, because lying reduces the manliness and humanity of man. I
have never committed adultery or fornication, owing to the fact that I
always knew that if I committed adultery or fornication with another
woman, someone else will commit adultery or fornication with my wife. I
have never worshipped an idol, in view of the fact that I knew that the
benefit and harm of idol-worshipping cannot be trusted.”[^6]

[^1]: Safīnah al-Bihār, vol. 1, p. 158.

[^2]: Ibn Hishām, Al-Sīrah al-Nabawiyyah, vol. 1, p. 223; Tārīkh-e
Payāmbar-e Islām, p. p. 129; Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 1, p. 203; Ibn
Athīr, Al-Kāmil, vol. 2, p. 51; Amtā‘ al-Asmā‘, vol. 1, p. 20; Usd
al-Ghābah, vol. 3, p. 376; Tārīkh-e Tabarī, vol. 2, p. 69; Bihār
al-Anwār, vol. 18, p. 422; A‘lām al-Warā, p. 53; Tārīkh-e Ya‘qūbī, vol.
2, p. 385.

[^3]: Al-Istī‘āb, vol. 1, p. 212; Khisāl, p. 107.

[^4]: Tayyār is an Arabic word that means flying. [trans.]

[^5]: Zarkulī, Al-A‘lām, vol. 2, p. 125; Al-Isābah, vol. 1, p. 237;
Sifat al-Safwah, vol. 1, p. 205; Maqātil al-Tālibiyyīn, p. 3; Hilyah
al-Awliyā’, vol. 1, p. 114; Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 4, p. 22; Mu‘jam
al-Buldān, the word Mu’tah; A‘lām al-Warā, p. 64; Ibn Hishām, Al-Sīrah
al-Nabawiyyah, vol. 4, p. 22; Sīrah al-Nabī, vol. 3, p. 434; Amtā‘
al-Asmā‘, vol. 1, p. 246.

[^6]: Sadūq, Al-Amālī, p. 74.


