The Youth who Achieved Certainty
================================

Ishāq ibn ‘Ammār says, “One morning, Allah’s Prophet (S) had finished
praying, along with a number of his companions, when he turned around
and looked at a youth who was dosing in the Mosque with his head bent on
his chest as though he was in deep thought.

The Noble Prophet (S) addressed him, ‘O young man! How did you sleep
last night and how did you wake up this morning?’ The youth answered, ‘I
stayed awake all night and saw it turn into morning while I was in a
state of certainty.’

The Noble Prophet (S) was amazed by the youth’s answer because it was
full of deep meaning. He enquired, ‘There is a sign for every certainty.
What is the sign of your certainty?’ The youth answered, ‘O Prophet of
Allah, It is because of this certainty that I have become sorrowful and
my nights have become sleepless. It is as a result of this certainty
that I bear hunger and thirst with fortitude during the heat of the day
as I fast, and my soul has become detached from the world and all that
is in it. It seems as if I can see the Throne of Allah and the Day of
Resurrection with all the people raised to receive their reward and
punishment, I being one of them.

I see the dwellers of paradise reclining therein, and enjoying the
blessings therein, and courteously conversing with each other, reclining
on soft cushions.

I see the dwellers of hell being tortured therein, and hear their loud
screams. And, I hear the clamor of the fire of hell ringing in my ears.’

Allah’s Prophet (S) turned and addressed his companions, ‘This youth is
one of Allah’s slaves. Allah has enlightened his heart with the light of
faith.’ Then, he told the youth, ‘Continue to believe what you now
believe.’ The youth said, ‘Make a prayer for me so that I may get
martyred while beside you.’ The Noble Prophet (S) made the supplication
for him. Soon after this incident he participated in one of the wars.
After nine Muslim soldiers, he was the tenth to get martyred.”

While explaining this tradition [*hadīth*], the late ‘Allāmah Majlisī
writes, “There are dark and opaque curtains in the inner souls of
people. These dark and opaque curtains do not allow the light of reality
and truth to shine therein. When they abstain from idle or nonsensical
talk, excessive sleep, food and water, and practice continuous
self-control, these curtains get ripped apart and the light of truth
appears in them.”[^1]

[^1]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 92; Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 70, p. 159,
hadīth 17.


