The Youths of Medina and the Idol of ‘Amru ibn Jumūh
====================================================

Ibn Hishām writes, “The people who paid allegiance to the Noble Prophet
(S) at ‘Aqabah were mainly youths. Most of the elderly people of the
tribes of Arabia continued to worship idols. There was a man among the
elderly people of the tribe of Banī Salmah named “‘Amru ibn Jumūh” who,
like everyone else, had bought an idol for himself. The name of his idol
was “Manāt”.

He had placed this idol in a special place inside his house. One of the
youths who had newly converted to Islam was “Ma‘ādh”, the son of ‘Amru
ibn Jumūh. Ma‘ādh had just returned from Mecca and paid his allegiance
to the Noble Prophet (S). He conspired with the other youths (his
friends) from the tribe of Banī Salmah to dislodge ‘Amru ibn Jumūh’s
idol and throw it in a pile of rubbish.

They were successful in their courageous act, and they managed to throw
Manāt (the idol) into a pile of rubbish. Every morning, ‘Amru ibn Jumūh
would set out searching and looking for his lost idol. Upon finding it,
he would wash it and place it in its usual special place. He used to
say, ‘I swear by Allah that if I ever find out who is showing this
disrespect to my idol, I will punish him severely.’

When he noticed that this action was continuing nonstop on a daily
basis, he got a sword and placed it on the idol’s neck and said, ‘I do
not know who comes and acts in this disrespectful and insolent manner
with you. I, therefore, hang this sword around your neck so that you may
defend yourself with it, if there is any power in you.’

That night, the youths of Banī Salmah came to carry out their daily
duty. They carried the idol Manāt together with the sword that was hung
in his neck. When they reached the usual pile of rubbish where they had
always dropped him, they removed the sword that was hung around his neck
and instead, placed a clay puppy dog in its place. The puppy dog was
placed in the same way that the sword had been hung. Finally, they
dropped the idol in the rubbish pit as done on the previous days.

‘Amru ibn Jumūh went looking for his idol in the rubbish pit. He was
taken aback by what he saw and sank down in deep thought. Some of the
youths from the tribe of Banī Salmah pretended to loiter around walked
lazily by. Their actual intention was to see how ‘Amru ibn Jumūh would
react upon finding his idol in its humiliating condition, and whether it
was going to wake ‘Amru ibn Jumūh from his deep sleep of ignorance and
make him accept the truth.

When ‘Amru ibn Jumūh saw the state in which the idol had been in the
pile of rubbish, he was extremely disappointed. He came near it and
tried to make it move wondering how it could help him when it couldn’t
help itself. The youth of Banī Salmah approached him after some time and
invited him to accept the divine truth.

The words of the youth had such a deep effect on him that, finally, he
converted to Islam. Afterwards, he composed and recited poems
reproaching and castigating the idol-worshipers and thanking Allah for
the great gift of Islam. He remained a Muslim up to the end of his life
and attained martyrdom in the Battle of Uhud and was buried right there
in that holy place.”[^1]

[^1]: Ibn Hishām, Al-Sīrah al-Nabawiyyah, vol. 1, p. 245; Zendegānī-ye
Hadrat-e Muhammad (The Life of Prophet Muhammad), vol. 1, p. 242.


