Hanzalah Ibn Ubayy ‘Āmir
========================

Hanzalah was a youth, with a determination of steel, who changed his
bridal chamber into the lap of martyrdom. He was considered one of the
Helpers [*Ansār*] of Medina, even though his father, Abū ‘Āmir, was one
of Islam’s most hostile enemies and remained an infidel [*kāfar*] up to
the end of his life.

Hanzalah married Jamīlah, the daughter ‘Abd Allāh ibn Ubayy, one of the
leaders of the hypocrites of Medina. Hanzalah’s wedding night coincided
with the day when the Muslims were busy preparing for the Battle of
Uhud. For this reason, Hanzalah went to see the Noble Prophet (S) and
seek his advice whether to go to the battle front or marry that night?
The Noble Prophet (S) advised and permitted Hanzalah to stay in Medina
and marry that night.

Therefore, Hanzalah stayed in Medina that night and married. The
following day, because of the faith and love that he had for the holy
*jihād*, his supreme and great leader, the Noble Prophet (S), Hanzalah
left Medina and set out towards Uhud in the early hours of the morning.

When Hanzalah was setting out towards Uhud, his wife, Jamīlah bint
Ubayy, came forward and tried to prevent him from leaving. When he
refused, she held him by the hand and took him to four witnesses, and
said to Hanzalah, “Testify in the presence of these people that you
married me last night.” Hanzalah testified and left for Uhud.

When Hanzalah had left for the battlefield, the witnesses asked his
wife, “Why did you do this?” She answered, “Last night in my dreams I
saw the sky opening and Hanzalah entering the heavens. After he had
entered, the gates of heaven closed. I understood and deduced from this
dream that Hanzalah was going to get martyred at Uhud. Therefore, I
wanted you to stand witness to the fact that he married me last night,
so that I may not be the object of slander or exposed to false
accusation.”

The fruit of this marriage was a son named ‘Abd Allāh ibn Hanzalah, who
later led an uprising in Medina after the martyrdom of Imām al-Husayn
(*‘a*) on 28th Dhū al-Hijjah in 63 AH. He mobilized the people of Medina
against Yazīd and finally after three days of fighting and resilient
resistance, he got martyred, together with his companions, in an event
that is well known in the history of Islam as the Event of “Harrah”.

We have narrated this event in detail in a different book called “*The
Effects of the Revolution of ‘Āshūrā*”. Those interested in reading more
about this event can refer to this book.

When Hanzalah set out towards the battlefield, he was worried about how
and where to find water in order to perform his ritual ablution
[*ghusl*]. Hanzalah was also sad because of his father, who was one of
the most obstinate enemies of Islam and one of the hostile foes of the
Noble Prophet (S) of Allah.

Hanzalah ibn Āmir displayed a lot of courage and bravery on the
battlefield. He drove deep into the enemy ground and managed to find Abū
Sufyān. He tracked and followed Abū Sufyān’s horse. Hanzalah ibn Āmir
was very close to killing him when Abū Sufyān called out to the
polytheists to come to his help and save him from perdition. The
polytheists responded to his call and hurried up to save their master.

One of the infidels by the name of Shaddād ibn Aws intercepted Hanzalah
and confronted him. Abū Sufyān found the chance to throw a spear at
Hanzalah from behind. The spear struck Hanzalah in the back. He turned
with the intention of going forward to kill Abū Sufyān, but the spear
had already taken its toll and done its job. Hanzalah fell on the ground
and joined the other honorable martyrs of this war such as Hamzah, the
Noble Prophet’s (S) uncle, ‘Abd Allāh ibn Hazām and the others.

When the war of Uhud came to an end, the Noble Prophet (S) stated in
very beautiful sentences, ‘“I saw the angels washing Hanzalah and
performing the ritual ablution [*ghusl*] on him in clean and pure
water.”

It was after this statement that Hanzalah, the prolific youth of Islam,
acquired the title, “Hanzalah Ghasīl al-Malā’ikah” (Hanzalah the one who
was washed by the angels).[^1]

This prolific youth from the household of Abū Āmir Rāhib, preferred
fighting in the way of Allah to remaining next to his wife. He freed
himself from the momentary pleasures of this world and even though he
did not find water for the ritual ablution [*ghusl*], it is a cause of
great pride for him that the angels performed the ritual ablution
[*ghusl*] on him with the pure and eternal water of paradise.

[^1]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 20, p. 55; Al-Isābah, vol. 1, p. 360; Usd
al-Ghābah, vol. 3, p. 147; Ibn Hishām, Al-Sīrah al-Nabawiyyah [Trans.],
vol. 2, p. 101; Tārīkh-e Payāmbar-e Islām, p. 328.


