Author’s Preface
================

In the global arena, we have witnessed sagacious and distinguished
personalities, endowed with inexhaustible determination, dedication and
steadfastness, which reformed the cultures of the societies in which
they lived and influenced the lives of people all over the world. They
were not different from the rest of mankind as regards their physical
appearance, but possessed hearts and souls of a caliber much higher than
their fellowmen.

These people enlightened the world with their wisdom and piety. They
waged war against folly, ignorance, and transgression from the path of
righteousness. They executed original social welfare plans and improved
the texture of their societies. Thus, they laid down the structures of
modern civilization and became immortal in the annals of history.

Muslims, especially the Shī*‘a*hs, pay great respect to these eminent
personalities. However, due to political reasons, they have been
intentionally ignored by a large percentage of historians of the Muslim
world. It is our sacred duty to introduce and inform all the people of
the extraordinary services rendered to Islam by them, by identifying
them and studying their lives carefully.

Psychological surveys carried out on a large number of the present
generation show that eminent figures of the past are being observed,
studied and emulated as role models by this generation, especially the
youth.

One of the ways of evolving, intellectually and spiritually, is by
studying the lives of the great reformers of history, the Divine
Prophets (*‘a*)[^1], Allah’s saints, and the torchbearers of knowledge,
culture and politics.

It is essential at this stage to guide our youth by providing them with
a healthy and beneficial code of ethics based on the principles of Islam
which was practiced by these exemplary youths. It is for this reason,
that the decision to introduce illustrious role models for the youth was
taken so that it might serve to help them develop into morally correct,
intelligent and creative individuals.

In this way, no matter how little or insignificant the effort might be,
we can still redress and undo the harm that the enemies of Allah have
inflicted on Islam and the Islamic Revolution by belittling and
humiliating Islamic personalities with the intention of annihilating
Islam and spreading their own perverted cultures around the world. By
introducing and reviving Islamic ‘role models’, we can nullify the evil
intentions of the enemies of Allah.

We all know that the enemies use different methods to pacify the hearts
of the Muslims in order to loot their material and spiritual capital.
Initially, they try to destroy the self confidence of the Muslims.
Having done that, they introduce their own imaginary supermen to serve
as role models and symbols of emulation for the Muslims in order to
replace Islamic personalities.

For this reason, it is incumbent to have a detailed and accurate
knowledge of personalities that were instructed in Islamic values and
trained by the Noble Prophet (S)[^2] and the Shī‘ite Imāms (*‘a*)
because they actually form the pillars of real Islam.

At the end, I find it binding upon myself to thank all those who helped
me prepare this work.

The Islamic Seminary of the Holy City of Mashhad,

Muhammad ‘Alī Chanārānī

[^1]: The abbreviation, “‘a” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
‘alayhi’s-salām, ‘alayhim’us-salām, or ‘alayhā’s-salām [may peace be
upon him/them/her], which is mentioned after the names of the prophets,
angels, Imāms from the Prophet’s progeny, and saints (‘a). [Trans.]

[^2]: The abbreviation, “s”, stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa ālihī wa sallam [may God’s blessings and peace be
upon him and his progeny], which is mentioned after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S). [Trans.]


