The Distinctive Features of the Prophet’s (S) Companions
========================================================

The lives of the Prophet’s (S) companions [*sahābah*] are the finest
examples available to the Muslims. When Allah’s Prophet (S) began
propagating the divine message and instructing individuals in Islamic
precepts, the first outcome and fruit of his undertakings was that a
group of men and women with conviction and devotion believed in him.

It is these early believers who, during and after the lifetime of the
Noble Prophet (S), made strenuous efforts to spread and disseminate the
divine message of Islam. They sacrificed their lives and properties for
the sacred goals of Allah’s Prophet (S).

The Noble Qur’an states about them,

***“Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah, and those with him are firm of
heart against the disbelievers, compassionate among themselves; you will
see them bowing down, prostrating themselves, seeking grace and pleasure
from Allah; their marks are in their faces because of the effect of
prostration; that is their description in the Tawrāt and their
description in the Injīl; like a seed-produce that puts forth its
sprout, then strengthens it, so it becomes stout and stands firmly on
its stem, delighting the sowers that He may enrage the unbelievers on
account of them; Allah has promised those among them who believe and do
good, forgiveness and a great reward.”***[^1]

In another verse, it states,

***“Of the believers are men who are true to the covenant which they
made with Allah.”***[^2]

Whenever these people heard the Prophet (S) inviting them to Islam, they
readily declared, *“Labbayk yā Rasūlullāh”* (Here I am, O Prophet of
Allah!) and consistently said,

***“Our Lord! Surely we have heard a preacher calling to the faith,
saying: Believe in your Lord, so*** ***we did believe; Our Lord! Forgive
us therefore our faults, and conceal our evil deeds and make*** ***us
die with the righteous.”***[^3]

The Prophet’s (S) companions and comrades are the first people in whose
hearts the tree of faith was initially planted. This tree soon matured
and after a short period of time, bore very diverse, nutritious and
palatable fruit. In the circumstances of their lives, moral attainments
and human virtues thrived, until a group among them became living
symbols of piety, virtue, self-sacrifice, devotion, patience, endurance,
love, affection, high ambition and motivation.

This group of companions possessed an intense longing to meet Allah. The
adornment of their hearts was a ‘rejection of attachment to this
transient world’. The world was enlightened with their radiant light.

However, we can not overlook the fact that not all of the Prophet’s (S)
companions were endowed with the same fine human attributes in the
course of their lives. According to the testimony of the Noble Qur’an,
there were double-tongued hypocrites amongst them who were inclined to
polytheism and had weak faith.

Therefore, merely being one of the Prophet’s (S) companions can never be
a sign or proof of attainment of lofty moral values; of being a just
person or having a high social status among the Muslims.

We cannot accept everyone’s words, nor approve of their actions just
because they happen to be one of the Prophet’s (S) companions. If these
people had internalized the training given to them by such a great
teacher as Allah’s Prophet (S), they would not have dared be disobedient
or commit any unjust act. People who received spiritual instruction
possessed high moral values and valuable attributes.

However, we cannot disregard the destructive effects of the carnal or
sensual desires because they strongly neutralize the effects of
spiritual training and take man back to the Age of Ignorance
[*Jāhiliyyah*]. It is for this reason that we cannot pass the same
verdict on all of the Prophet’s (S) companions [*sahābah*]. On the
contrary, careful attention has to be paid to their words and deeds.
Only then can we judge them fairly.

[^1]: Sūrat al-Fath 48:29.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Ahzāb 33:23.

[^3]: Sūrat Āl ‘Imrān 3:193.


