The Sagacious Youth, Abān ibn ‘Ās
=================================

Abān, the son of Sa‘īd ibn ‘Ās, came from the tribe of Banī Umayyah.
Although the enmity and hostility of Banī Umayyah towards the tribe of
Banī Hāshim is not hidden from anyone, there were still individuals
coming from this family who converted to Islam and struggled in the way
of religion.

One of these people is Abān. Abān had fallen under the influence of his
father’s beliefs and was scared of him. He could not gather enough
courage to study the newly-established religion of Islam. But one event
took place that transformed him and opened new avenues in his life.

On one of his business trips to Syria, Abān met a Christian monk who had
read books about the former prophets, and was well-versed in the
prophecies therein. Abān told the Christian monk, “A person has arisen
from among the Quraysh claiming to be a Prophet of Allah. He says that
he is a prophet of Allah just like Moses (*‘a*) and Jesus (*‘a*) were
Allah’s prophets (S).” The monk asked Abān, “What is this man’s name?”
Abān answered, “His name is Muhammad (S).” The monk said, “I will
mention and cite for you the attributes and signs of the last prophet of
Allah. If this man has any one of these signs, then know with certainty
that he, indeed, is that same prophet about whom good tidings have been
given regarding his coming.” After that, the monk mentioned all the
signs of the last prophet of Allah. Abān said, “All the signs and
attributes you have mentioned are found in him.” The monk said, “He will
be triumphant over all the Arabs. His religion will spread all over the
world.” Then, the Christian Monk added, “Convey my greetings to that
blessed man when you return to Mecca.”[^1]

A soul and spirit that is ready for transformation will need just one
spark to set the fire of revolution alight within him. That is why, no
matter how insignificant this meeting might appear, it produced profound
effects in Aban’s soul. From thence onwards, Abān was never the same
youth that he had been before. On the contrary, he started feeling in
himself a mysterious pull towards the forerunner of monotheism, the
Noble Prophet Muhammad (S).

His father, the only obstacle in his way, passed away at a place called
Zarībah, one of the regions of Tā’if. Abān, now free to do as he wished,
immediately stopped vilifying Allah’s Prophet (S) and the Muslims in the
poems that he used to compose, and the words that he used to utter.

His brothers named Khālid and ‘Amr, who were among the Muslims that had
migrated to Ethiopia, returned to Medina in 6 AH. When they were
informed about Abān’s spiritual revolution, they invited him to convert
to Islam by means of a letter that they wrote to him. Abān joyously
responded to their invitation. He migrated to Medina and managed to join
the Muslims before the battle of Khaybar.[^2]

Some historians have recorded the year of his conversion to Islam to be
7 AH.[^3]

Abān, a soldier and a scholar
-----------------------------

After converting to Islam, Abān soon displayed his vast natural
abilities by accepting important responsibilities. When the Noble
Prophet (S) was informed about Abān’s tremendous talents, he sent Abān
to go and crush a group of people that had settled at a place called
Najd and had raised flags that carried detrimental messages against
Islam.[^4]

Abān was not only a man of war, but was endowed with intelligence and
great sagacity as well. He was gifted with many different talents and
abilities; abilities which very few of the Prophet’s (S) companions
[*sahābah*] possessed.

One of Abān’s invaluable talents was the ability to read and write.
Literacy was rare and considered very precious in those days. When
Allah’s Prophet (S) was raised to the prophetic mission in Mecca, the
number of literate people was not more than seventeen. One of them was
Abān.[^5]

After conversion to Islam, he became one of the Noble Prophet’s (S)
writers of the revelation and the scribes of the Holy Qur’an.[^6] This
mark of distinction added to Abān’s social standing and greatness.[^7]

The Governorship of Bahrain
---------------------------

When Islam was flourishing and spreading fast, the Noble Prophet (S)
used to send governors to different cities after careful selection. He
used to appoint individuals of good character and conduct according to
the divine precepts of Islam, so that they may become examples and
models for newly-converted Muslims. It is for this reason that a minor
transgression from these individuals could not be overlooked and
forgiven.

The Prophet had appointed ‘Alā ibn Hadramī to the governorship of
Bahrain, an area that had fallen under the fold of Islam. However, after
a short duration the Noble Prophet (S) relieved ‘Alā ibn Hadramī of his
duties and dispatched Abān to replace him. Abān stayed in the governor’s
office up to the time of the Prophet’s (S) departure from this world.

After the Prophet’s (S) death, he left Bahrain without being recalled by
the central government and returned to Medina. In spite of the Caliph’s
insistence that he should continue in his post as governor of Bahrain,
Abān refused to take orders from anyone the Holy Prophet (S) had not
appointed, just for the sake of material benefits.[^8]

Yes, Abān was truly a liberated Muslim who had accepted this post when
he was appointed by the Noble Prophet (S), because he considered it a
service to the Islamic community, and, therefore, a moral and religious
duty. He refused to accept any responsibility in a government he
considered illegitimate, and did not pay allegiance to them. On the
contrary, he publicly and explicitly opposed the usurpers. He looked
with hope towards the Banī Hāshim for leadership, and followed their
guidance.

Along with his brother Khālid, Abān used to go to the house of Banī
Hāshim and say, “You, the Banī Hāshim, are the fertile garden of
revelation and the high tree of the prophetic mission; a tree that
yields pure fruit on its branches. We will obey your orders and follow
your leadership, and consider as best whoever you consider being the
best and pledge to follow whomever you prefer.”[^9]

A year after the sad demise of Allah’s Prophet (S), Abān continued as an
indefatigable struggler [*mujāhid*] until he passed away in the month of
Rajab in 12 AH after being given poisoned juice at a place called
Yarmūk, one of the regions of Syria. He was buried right there.[^10]

[^1]: Usd al-Ghābah, vol. 1, p. 46.

[^2]: Al-Isābah, vol. 1, p. 13; Zarkulī, Al-A‘lām, vol. 1, p. 27.

[^3]: Dhahabī, Tārīkh al-Islām, vol. 2, p. 382.

[^4]: Al-Isābah, vol. 1, p. 14; Usd al-Ghābah, vol. 1, p. 46.

[^5]: Futūh al-Buldān, p. 459.

[^6]: Ibn Athīr, Al-Kāmil, vol. 2, p. 313.

[^7]: Usd al-Ghābah, vol. 1, p. 48.

[^8]: Usd al-Ghābah, vol. 1, p. 46.

[^9]: Usd al-Ghābah, vol. 3, p. 476.

[^10]: Usd al-Ghābah, vol. 1, p. 47; Zarkulī, Al-A‘lām, vol. 1, p. 27;
Ibn ‘Asākir, Mukhtasar Tārīkh Damishq, vol. 2, p. 124.


