Bilāl Habashī, the Role Model of Islamic Resistance
===================================================

The pseudonym of Bilāl ibn Ribāh, the Ethiopian [Habashī[^1]], is Abū
‘Abd Allāh. He was one of the slaves who lived in Mecca at the time of
Prophet Muhammad’s (S) commencement of the prophetic mission. His
mother’s name was Hamāmah and he used to live in the village of the
tribe of Banī Jumh.

Bilāl, who had responded affirmatively to the divine call of Islam, used
to resist the tortures of the infidels of Mecca resiliently and
withstand the torments of the polytheists with constancy. According to
popular belief, Bilāl, who was Umayyah ibn Khalaf’s slave, came from
that same tribe and used to live in Umayyah’s house.

Umayyah used to bring Bilāl out during the afternoon on very hot days
and make him lie down on the hot pebbles of Mecca. After that, he would
put a big hot stone on Bilāl’s chest. Then, he would say, “I swear by
God that you will stay in this state until you die, unless you renounce
the God of Muhammad (S) and worship the idols Lot and ‘Uzzā.” But
whenever this ‘model’ of resistance and perseverance was under this kind
of torture, he always used to defiantly shout out, ‘One! One!’ He
implied that his God, Allah, is one, the One and Only God.

One day, Warqah ibn Nawfil, the cousin of Khadījah (the Noble Prophet’s
(S) honorable wife), was passing by and saw Bilāl undergoing this same
kind of torture. Bilāl was defiantly shouting out as usual, ‘One! One!’
Warqah also said, ‘One! One!’ Then, he turned towards Umayyah and the
others around him and said, “I swear upon Allah that if Bilāl dies while
undergoing this inhuman torture, I will be one of those who will
consider his grave a holy place of pilgrimage and I will start seeking
divine gifts and graces therefrom.”

Some historians have narrated that the man who used to torture Bilāl was
Abū Jahl. Bilāl continued to live under these unbearably difficult and
hard conditions, until the Noble Prophet (S) bought him and then set him
free from servitude for the sake and pleasure of Allah!

They say that one day the Noble Prophet (S) said to Abū Bakr, “If I had
something with which to buy Bilāl, I would do so.” Upon hearing this,
Abū Bakr went to ‘Abbās ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib and recounted the Prophet’s
(S) words to him. ‘Abbās, the Prophet’s (S) uncle, prepared the ground
for Bilāl’s freedom by buying him from his owner, the woman belonging to
the tribe of Banī Jumh.

Bilāl was the Prophet’s (S) Caller of *Adhān* [*mu’adhdhin*]. That is
why after the Prophet’s (S) sad demise, he always held Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*)
in high esteem and never paid allegiance to any one else save ‘Alī ibn
Abī Tālib (*‘a*). He said, “I will never pay allegiance to anyone who
was not named or suggested by Allah’s Prophet (S). Up to the day of
resurrection, I will always owe my allegiance to only him who was
introduced by Allah’s Prophet.” ‘Umar told him, “Then, you do not have
any right to stay in these territories.” Upon hearing these words, Bilāl
and a group of other people left Medina and went to Syria where he died
in 20 AH.

Bilāl was a prolific youth who patiently bore all the hardships that
came his way but did not surrender his faith. He endured all trials and
resisted all oppression up to the last moments of his life.

Bilāl was one of the Noble Prophet’s (S) loyal and faithful companions
[*sahābah*] who participated in all the wars that Allah’s Prophet (S)
fought.[^2]

[^1]: Habashah is the ancient name of Ethiopia. Anyone who originates
from Ethiopia is called Habashī, like Bilāl Habashī [Bilāl, the
Ethiopian]. [trans.]

[^2]: Al-Isābah, vol. 1, p. 165; A‘yān al-Shī‘ah, vol. 3, p 601; Ibn
Sa‘d, Tabaqāt, vol. 3, p. 174; Sifat al-Safwah, vol. 1, p. 171. Hilyat
al-Awliyā’, vol. 1, p. 147; Tārīkh al-Khamīs, vol. 2, p. 245; Al-Sahīh
min Sīrat al-Nabī al-A‘zam, vol. 2, p. 34; Tārīkh Ya‘qūbī, vol. 2, p.
42; Ibn Kathīr, Al-Sīrat al-Nabawiyyah, vol. 2, p. 336; Hayāt
al-Sahābah, vol. 2, p. 132; Ibn Hishām, Al-Sīrat al-Nabawiyyah, vol. 1,
p. 339; Usd al-Ghābah, vol. 1, p. 206; Safīnah al-Bihār, vol. 1, p. 104;
Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 22, p. 264; Wafā’ al-Wafā, vol. 2, p. 477; Ibn Abī
al-Hadīd, Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah, vol. 17, p. 283.


