Preface
=======

**In The Name of Allah, The Compassionate, The Merciful**

Just as the human body needs food, clothing and a shelter, so does his
soul need ethics and education. A person who is ignorant of the facts of
creation, who is not nurtured with moral conducts, and is not void of
obnoxious traits is only superficially a human being; he is in fact far
away from humanity. Regarding this, Sa'di from Shiraz (the famous poet)
says:

What makes a human body honorable is his soul; beautiful garment does
not make a man;  
 If eyes, tongues, ears and noses made a man;  
 Then what would the difference be between a man and a painting on the
wall;  
 Be truly a man, or else you would be  
 A bird talking human language;  
 If you could eliminate your fierce nature you would live a human life
all life-long.

For this very reason the significant portions of the agenda of the
Prophets and divine Messengers include education and the enhancement of
ethical considerations and well-adjusted conduct.  
 These dignitaries, in accordance with the prevailing situations, have
made use of either practical means and suitable behavior, or sermons and
maxims, or treatises.[^1]

Among these treasures is the Treatise of Amir al-Mu'minin (pbnh), which
is the subject of the present translation. It is appropriate here to
draw your attention to the following points:

What Is Ethics?
---------------

According to the Islamic scholars,[^2] ethics includes all human traits
which are brought about either by heredity or environment and which make
up one’s personality influencing one’s deeds, conducts thoughts and
speech.

Raghib in his Mufradat al-Qur’an says that the two terms "*Khalq*"
(creation) and "*Khulq*" (human traits) are, in fact, identical; but the
former refers to superficial configurations which are observable with
naked eyes, whereas the latter refers to the internal powers and innate
goodness which are only observable with the hearts.[^3]

Regarding this, Imam ‘Ali (as) has said: "*Khulq* refers to the soul,
whereas *khalq* refers to the body".[^4]

As the bodies are different among people; some are beautiful, and some
are ugly, the souls are different as well; some are nice, others are
inhuman. In the final analysis, the structure of human body relies on
the rules of creation, which are beyond humans to tamper with; whereas
sour behaviors and traits are for the most part learned and are formed
through hardships.

Ibn Miskawayh in his book *Taharat al-A'raq* writes," *Khulq* is one of
the traits of human self which entices man to carry out his daily
affairs without thinking. It is of two types:

Some part of it is natural and rests on the human nature. An example is
when a man becomes furious over minor things or fears insignificant
events or becomes happy or depressed.

The other part of it relies on our customs and practices. This part at
first rested, no doubt, on thought but later, due to practice and
repetition takes on a habitual status; then it works with no thought at
all."[^5]

Thus, our physical traits are not considered as our ethical traits
unless they have become constant. For instance, a person does not
acquire the trait of generosity by random acts of generosity; neither is
he termed brave by just randomly engaging in brave actions.

Thus traits take on the status of *khulq* only when they manifest
themselves as constant, occurring without thought or consideration.[^6]

But this does not contradict the optional nature of these traits since
man is capable of either carrying them out or avoiding them as a
whole,[^7] although it is hard to stop doing habitual things.[^8]  
 Furthermore, as it is proven elsewhere, since from the beginning he
could either form habits or abandon them, thus he has been free from the
beginning to make the choices he likes.[^9]

The Need For Ethics In Life
---------------------------

In order for a man to enjoy all his instincts and wishes to a logical
degree, to live at peace with others and to attain prosperity both here
and in the hereafter, he has to observe ethical standards.

The advancements and degenerations of human societies do not depend
solely on sciences and material progress. Rather, it is the observation
of these ethical standards which bring about either prosperity or fall
of such societies. The poet says:

Ethics keeps the human race alive; a tribe of humanity which lacks
ethics is doomed to die.

At times, the lack of observation of one of the ethical standards might
create a human disaster such as the world wars[^10] or affect the good
desires of a good-doer. On the contrary, observing such standards saves
a man who is going to fall, or covers his faults.

Thus, ethics is a requirement for both statesmen and the Messengers of
Allah. That is why, the magnificent Qur’an, after eleven oaths,
emphasizes that: he who attains salvation is one who purifies his soul
of ethical corruptions and the wretched is one who corrupts his soul:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"قَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَنْ زَكَّاهَا وَقَدْ خَابَ مَنْ دَسَّاهَا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He will indeed be successful who purifies it (the soul) and he will
indeed fail who corrupts it”.***[^11]  
 The Prophet (S) was appreciated by God for holding the highest degree
of ethical codes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"و إنّك لعَلى خُلُقٍ عَظِيم"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most surely you conform (yourself) to sublime morality.”***[^12]

And the secret for his appointment to the prophetic mission was his
attainment of highest degree of sublime morality.  
 But unfortunately, the present world, especially the West, has turned
into robots lacking souls and morality codes.

Alexis Carrel, the renowned French scholar, writes in this regard, "As
soon as we renounced the precepts of the Gospel, we renounced all
interior discipline. The new generation is not even aware that such a
discipline ever existed. Temperance, honor, truthfulness,
responsibility, purity, self-mastery, love of one's neighbor, heroism
are outworn expressions; meaningless words which provoke nothing but a
contemptuous smile from the young”.

""For modern man, the only rule of conduct is his own good pleasure.
Everyone is enclosed in his own egoism like the crab in its shell and,
again like the crab, seeks to devour his neighbor.  
 "Elementary social relations have changed profoundly; everywhere,
division reigns. Marriage has ceased to be a permanent bond between man
and woman.

"Both the material and the psychological conditions of modern existence
have created a propitious climate for the breaking up of family life.
Children are now considered a nuisance, if not a calamity.  
 "This is the final result of having abandoned those rules which, in the
past, Western man had the courage and wisdom to impose on his individual
and social conduct”"[^13]

Good Actions And Noble Moral Traits
-----------------------------------

In the ethical guide-lines of Islam, praiseworthy temperaments have two
aspects: good actions and noble moral traits.

Among the good actions are the following:  
 The cleanliness of body and dress, good humor and smile, respect for
others, politeness of speech, visiting the sick, avoidance of
haughtiness, and suspicion.

But those human traits, such as magnanimity, justice, keeping promises,
trustworthiness, and manhood, which are considered as true human traits,
are among noble moral traits. The important point is that attaining good
moral actions is more or less possible for nearly everybody: every body
can do so by doing the right things such as treating people justly and
politely and visiting the sick and avoiding haughtiness.

But the attainment of the noble moral traits and superb human traits is
extremely difficult. Not everybody can attain them. Only those
individuals can attain such a status, who possess high souls and are in
control of their selves, and who are in the habit of respecting human
principles and obeying God.

The great Messengers of God, by using the sublime Islamic education,
have attempted to encourage people to engage in ethical affairs. The
Great Messenger of Islam (S) has said

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"افضلُ النّاسِ ايماناً احسَنُهم خُلقاً"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"The most excellent of people in faith are those who are the best in
moral traits.”*[^14]

On the other hand, the Great Messenger of Allah has mentioned that the
reason of his prophetic mission was to perfect the ethical training.  
 Imam ‘Ali has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ذَللوا اخلاقَكُم بالمحاسِن وقُودُوها اِلى المكارِم"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Subdue your natures with beautiful actions and lead them toward noble
moral traits”*.[^15]

The narrator says: I asked Imam Sadiq (as) what the limit of good humor
was. He answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"تُلَيّنْ جانِبَكَ وتُطَيِّب كَلامَكَ و تَلقى اَخاكَ بِبِشْرٍ حَسَن"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"You should be gentle, speak pleasantly and meet your brethren with a
cheerful face".*[^16]  
 A man came to Imam Sadiq (as) and said: “O son of God's Messenger, let
me know what the noble moral traits are”. Imam as-Sadiq (as) replied to
him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"العَفُو عَمَّن ظَلَمَكَ وصِِلَةُ مَنْ قَطَعَكَ وإعْطَاءُ مَنْ
حَرَمَكَ وقَولَ الحقِّ ولَو على نَفْسِك"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Forgiving one who has wronged you, establishing ties with one who has
severed relations with you, giving one who has deprived you, and
speaking the truth even if it is against yourself.”*[^17]

In his *Sahifah al-Sajjadiyah*, in the supplication Makarim Al-Akhlaq,
"The noble moral traits," Imam ‘Ali Ibn al-Husayn (as) invokes God by
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اللّهُم صَلِّ على محمد وآله وسَدّدني لأن اُعارِضَ مَنْ غَشَّني
بِالنُصْحِ واَجْزِي مَنْ هَجَرَني بِالبِر واُثِيبَ مَنْ حَرَمَني
بِالبَذْلِ واُكافِئ مَنْ قَطَعَني بِالصِِلَةِ واُخالِفَ مَنِ
اِغْتابَني اِلى حُسْن الذِكرِ واَن اَشْكُرَ الحَسَنَةَ واُغْضِي عَنِ
السَيّئةِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"O God, send your blessings to Muhammad and his offspring, and guide me
so that I may counter with good advice whoever acts dishonestly towards
me, so that I may make amends with whoever parts company with me, so
that I may reward with generosity whoever deprives me, so that I may
recompense with union whoever cuts himself off from me, so that I may
oppose with excellent mention whoever slanders me, so that I may give
thanks for good, and so that I may shut my eyes to evil.*"[^18]

The Great Messenger (S), who had been badly hurt by the Quraysh, forgave
them when he conquered Mecca.  
 He allowed Abu Sufyan’s house to be a shelter for people.  
 In the Siffin war, when Mu’awiya had so inhumanly denied Imam ‘Ali’s
army the water of the Euphrates, someone asked Imam ‘Ali to do the same
to Mu'awiya’s army. But he answered, "We will not retaliate for a wrong;
we will not deny them the use of water."

When an impolite shopkeeper poured trash over the head of malik
al-Ashtar, an important officer in Imam ‘Ali’s army, Malik went to the
mosque and prayed for him and forgave him.  
 When Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (as) was insulted by a relative, he went to
his house telling him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فِان كُنْتَ قَدْ قُلْتَ ما فيَّ فانا استغفرُ اللهَ مِنْهُ وان كُنْتَ
قُلْتَ ما لَيسَ فيَّ فغَفَرَ اللهُ لَكَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"If what you say is true, I ask God to forgive me. But if what you say
is not true, then I ask God to forgive you."*

The above-mentioned cases and similar events which are recorded from the
Prophet and the Imams of Islam in their diaries are among the noble
moral traits.  
 Thus, there are differences between good actions and noble moral
traits.  
 Good actions are usually a means for material welfare, but noble moral
traits are a way to the attainment of spiritual advancement. The former
provides our lives with discipline; whereas the latter satisfies human
sublime tendencies.  
 The former are in harmony with personal desires and legitimate self
interest, but the latter deal with interest in others.

All Messengers and Imams of Islam completely enjoyed noble moral traits.
But among their students there are few who are in possession of these
assets. Anybody who possesses these assets should be thankful to God.
Those who lack them should try to acquire them. In this regard Imam
Sadiq (as) has said."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّوجَلَّ خَصَّ رُسُلَهُ بِمَكارِمِ الاخْلاق
فامْتَحِنُوا اَنْفُسَكُم فان كانت فيكُم فاحمَدوا الله واعلموا اَنَّ
ذلك مِن خَير واِن لا تَكُنْ فاسْئَلُوا اللهَ وارغبوا الَيهِ فِيها"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God distinguished His Messengers with noble moral traits. Thus,
examine yourselves, if you possess them, be thankful to God for these
precious assets and know that it is from good; if you lack them, then
ask God and supplicate Him for them."*[^19]

A person who possesses noble moral traits has an exalted soul and
therefore performs good deeds not out of his material interest but
rather for God.

Imam ‘Ali (as) says: *"I am amazed when a Muslim goes to another Muslim
for some help, but he is turned down.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فَلَو كان لا يَرجُو ثَواباً و لا يَخشى عِقابا لقد كان يَنبَغي لَهُ ان
يُسارِعَ الى مَكارِمِ الاخلاقِ فانها ممّا تَدُلُ على سَبيلِ النجاة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"*Even if he did not expect reward and did not fear the punishment, it
would have been proper for him to hasten towards noble moral traits for
they are of those things that lead toward the path of
salvation.*"[^20]  
 A man from desert came up to the Messenger of God asking him, "O
Messenger of God, sometimes a man fights for booty, sometimes for fame
and sometimes for the recognition of his bravery; which one of these
ways is right?"  
 The Prophet (S) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَنْ قاتَلَ لِتَكُونَ كَلِمَةُ اللهِ هِيَ العُليا فَهُو في سَبيل
الله"
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The one who fights so that ***‘..the word of God is the highest..’,
(9:40)*** – he is on the path of God.”[^21]

This type of prayers is called "the prayers of free men" by Imam ‘Ali
(as).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنَّ قَوماً عَبَدُوا الله رَغبَةً فتِلكَ عِبادةُ التُجّار واِنَّ
قَوماً عَبَدُوا الله رَهْبَةً فتِلكَ عِبادَةُ العَبِيد واِنَّ قَوماً
عَبَدُوه شُكراً (حُباً) فَتِلكَ عِبادَةُ الأحرار"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Some people worship God out of desire (for reward); that is the
worship of traders. Some worship God out of fear (of punishment); that
is the worship of slaves. But others worship God in gratitude (out of
love for Him); that is the worship of free men”*.[^22]

In some Islamic traditions the cases of noble moral traits are
enumerated. For instance, in Ibn Bekir's tradition from Imam as-Sadiq
(as) it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"قُلْتُ جُعِلتُ فِداكَ وما هِيَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: هُنَّ الورَع والقَناعَة والصَبر والشُكر والحلم والحَياء والسَخاء
والشَجاعَة والغَيرة والبِر وصِدق الحَدِيث واَداء الأمانة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I asked Imam as-Sadiq (as) what the noble moral traits were. He
answered, "They are self–control, contentment, patience, thanking God,
forbearance, modesty, generosity, bravery, possessing a sense of honor
for what is sacred, righteousness, truthfulness, fulfilling the
trust."*[^23]

The Role Of Education
---------------------

The term (*Ta'leem*), which is derived from ‘*ilm* (knowledge) means to
teach, and the term "*tarbiyah*" is derived from "*rabw*" meaning
nurture.

Animals, when born, know their duties and plans of life through their
instincts. They would need no instructors.  
 The young fish, after being hatched, know how to swim, breathe, feed,
protect themselves against enemies, and how to reproduce. They do not
need to be taught.

‍The Anopheles mosquito is vegetarian but because the new-born insects
should feed on worms, the mother hunts a special worm, stings it so that
it is paralysed. In this way, the mother provides its new-born with
fresh meat. The mother does it through her instinct; not through
training.  
 The bee sucks the sweet nectar, turns it into honey, makes symmetrical
shelters and divides the affairs of the hive among individual bees all
because of divine inspiration and natural instincts.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"واَوحَى رَبُّكَ الى النَحلِ اَنْ اتَّخِذِي مِنَ الجِبَالِ بُيُوتاً
ومِنَ الشَجَرِ ومِمَّا يَعْرِشُونَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And your Lord revealed to the bee saying: Make hives in the
mountains and in the trees and in what they build.”***[^24]

This is the fact which is brought about by Prophet Moses (as) and his
brother when they introduced their God to Pharaoh:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"قالَ فَمَن ربُّكما يا موسى قال ربُّنا الذي اعطى كلَّ شئ خَلقَه ثُمَّ
هَدى"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Pharaoh said: And who is your Lord, O Musa? He said: Our Lord is He
Who gave to everything its creation, then guided it (to its
goal).***[^25]

The Giver who provided the flower with nectar and the clay with soul;  
 Gave each one what He deemed necessary.  
 But man, in carrying out his daily duties and arriving at perfection
needs more than instincts and innate inspiration: besides being equipped
with wisdom, he needs instructors.  
 He would perhaps walk like animals if he were not helped. He would most
probably be dumb if words were not put in his mouth. Mawlawi says:

A deaf person cannot speak; the speaker is the one who has heard from
the mother.  
 Thus, in order to recognize facts of the world and to appreciate the
secrets of creation, man needs a teacher. Without an instructor, man is
unable to grasp such secrets.

Man needs an instructor to nourish his physical and spiritual
capabilities and to arrive at his ideals and to prune the wicked parts
of his character, If God's Messengers had not risen to correct man, he
would, no doubt, have had a much worse life than the Middle Ages. In
this regard the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لقد مَنَّ اللهُ على المؤمنين اِذ بَعَثَ فِيهِم رَسُولاً مِنَ
اَنْفُسِهِم يَتْلُوا علَيهِم آياتِهِ ويُزَكِيهم ويُعَلِّمَهُمُ
الكِتابَ والحِكْمَةَ واِن كانوا مِن قَبلُ لَفِي ضَلالٍ مُبين"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly Allah conferred a benefit upon the believers when He
raised among them an Apostle from among themselves, reciting to them His
communications and purifying them, and teaching them the Book and the
wisdom, although before that they were surely in manifest
error.”***[^26]

As you will observe the appointment of a Messenger among the corrupted
people to guide them was one of God's blessings.

Still in another verse, God considers the Messengers’ teachings as true
life, those not receiving it are considered as dead:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يا ايُّها الَّذِينَ آمَنوا اِستجيبوا للهِ وللرسولِ اِذا دَعاكُم لما
يُحييكُم"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Answer the call of Allah and His Apostle when he
calls you to that which gives you life”.***[^27]

Education Is the Bringing Up Of Capabilities
--------------------------------------------

Sometimes we make a thing out of something without any internal
attraction inside that "something". For instance we make furniture out
of a piece of wood by working on it. Thus, a character or feature is
created.

But some other time, a thing has got internal impetus for change and
becomes something else. In this case guidance is necessary and in many
others lack of guidance may mislead the object. An example is the child
who has the innate capacity for sucking its mother's breast and
acquiring knowledge. However, if it is not directed to the right way, it
may either die from hunger or stay ignorant or might suck some dangerous
objects in place of its mother's breast or might learn some pernicious
knowledge which might harm it. This change of the innate capacity into
practical acts is called education.

Thus, education is not industry; rather the subject of education should
be an organism which has innate capacity for development.

Since man has some innate capacities such as truth-finding, ethical
conscience, love for beauty, love for freedom, self-interest, and love
for life he needs an instructor who will bring out these capacities and
lead them in the right direction.

Quanttime, the famous French psychologist believes that man's soul has
four dimensions at the time of birth, i.e. man has the following four
capacities at the time of his coming into this world:

### 1. The Scientific And Rational Capacity Or The Fact-Finding Capacity:

The advancement of science, the discovery of the secrets of creation,
the human perseverance in finding facts all stem from this dynamic
capacity.

### 2. Ethical Conscience:

Man is created in such a way that he enjoys doing good deeds, justice,
showing piety, discipline, self-control, bravery, sacrifice, and
truthfulness.

On the other hand he abhors injustice and lies, uncleanliness and
debauchery, untidiness and indecision, meanness and indifference, and
the like.

### 3. Love For Beauty:

Man cares for the beauties in nature such as the blue starry sky,
magnificent flowers and sceneries, limpid water with fish swimming in
it, beautiful birds, deer in the desert, pleasant songs, elegant
paintings, poems, and chirographies and gracious statures. This very
capacity has made man create art and enrich life as a whole.

### 4.The Capacity For Worshiping:

Man believes in God from the bottom of his heart. He has worshiped God
throughout the history and has consecrated this worship. To keep this
consecration and holiness, he has endured lots of hardships.[^28]

With regard to the above issues a good instructor is the one who guides
all man's innate capabilities in the right direction and does not let
these abilities go astray.

For instance, man has sexual drive but he should guide it in the right
way. Its suppression does not solve any problem. Man loves arts and
beauty and must make use of them in the proper way. He should not
deprive himself of these assets. Educating and nourishing man's skills
is in harmony with the innate characteristic of religion. In this regard
the Holy Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فاقِم وجهَكَ لِلدِينِ حَنيفاً فِطرَتَ اللهِ التي فَطَرَ الناسَ
عَلَيها لا تَبديلَ لِخَلقِ اللهِ ذلك الدِّينُ القيِّمُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then set your face upright for religion in the right state - the
nature made by Allah in which He has made men; there is no altering of
Allah's creation; that is the right religion.”***[^29]

Animals Have Limited Potential For Education:
---------------------------------------------

Animals know their ways of life by instinct. These innate inspirations,
which manifest themselves as instincts, drive them toward a limited
state of perfection. However, some animals such as dogs, horses,
elephants, monkeys, dolphins, foxes and bears possess a higher status of
intelligence. They could be trained to protect the herds, the police,
and to purchase commodities, and to perform circus performances. We have
all seen such extraordinary performances in the films and elsewhere.

But, it is to be noted that the sphere of animal performances is highly
restricted because their capabilities are narrower than those of man.
For this reason, however hard we try to train them, they will never be
able to solve mathematical problems, analyze the inside of the atom,
make space-ships to be sent to the Mars or to the Jupiter, to discover
medical remedies for hard-to-cure diseases, to cure TB and cancer
sufferers and finally to carry on surgical operations on hearts, brains
and kidneys.

This is only man who can, through right education, discover everywhere
and solve problems and manifest his capabilities and make himself "God's
vicegerent on the earth".

Education Versus Training
-------------------------

As we saw before animals naturally recognize their good and evil, their
food sources, and their ways of life. In this way, their capabilities
manifest themselves. On the contrary, man knows neither his pains nor
their remedies, neither his friends nor his foes, and possesses neither
instruments nor his defense mechanisms. He has obtained all these
through education and experience:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"واللهُ اخرَجَكُم مِن بُطُونِ اُمَّهاتِكُم لا تَعلَمُونَ شَيئاً
وجَعَلَ لَكُم السَمْعَ والابصارَ والافئدةَ لعلكم تَشْكُرونَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah has brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers – you
did not know anything – and He gave you hearing and sight and hearts
that you may give thanks.”***[^30]  
 In order for man's skills and capabilities to flourish in diverse
dimensions such as talking, having high morals, walking, living
honestly, and loving justice, he needs instructors. Thus, education
helps him improve his knowledge and culture; whereas training is
employed to direct his innate capabilities and his spiritual
dispositions. An educator teaches him the things he does not know,
whereas a trainer guides his innate abilities in the right direction.

Ethics Versus Education
-----------------------

In the past Education was a branch of ethics. It dealt with the
educating children and bringing forth their skills. In books written on
education the encouragement for learning science and the ways of
learning useful sciences were emphasized.[^31] But because of its
significance in the lives of people, education raised itself from an
inferior position to a completely independent branch of science, now
there are numerous valuable books and resources written on it."

Since Imam ‘Ali (as) in his erudite letter has emphasized numerous
issues in education and has provided us with great samples of the
advantages and favors of ethics we have called his article "the first
treatise of Ethics and Islamic Education".

The Wrong-Doer Wisdom Needs An Infallible Instructor:
-----------------------------------------------------

As we saw above, wisdom of man does the functions of instincts of
animals. However these two are different in many respects:

**a)** An instinct, works without the consent of its holder. It does not
go astray. Bees have always built their hives hexagonal and ants have
always halved the wheat seeds in two halves in order to stop their
growth in their under-ground shelters. But being equipped with
free-will, man does not have to function in accordance with wisdom's
guidelines. Animals have recognized their development through the
guidelines of genesis and have to go forward without their approval.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ما مِنْ دابَّةٍ اِلا هو آخذٌ بناصِيتِها اِنَّ رَبِّي على صِراطٍ
مُستقيم"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is no living creature but He holds it by its forelock; surely
my Lord is on the right path.”***[^32]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنّا هَديناهُ السَبيلَ اِمّا شاكراً واِما كَفُورا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely we have shown him the way: he may be thankful or
unthankful.”***[^33]

**b)** An instinct performs an action without any error, but the wisdom
makes mistakes when arriving at conclusions from the premises. The
environment, lack of sufficient knowledge, wrong education, out-of-place
prejudice, lust and anger, and the like, all have their fatal
consequences on our wisdom. In this way man is prone to commit mistakes.
Thus, he will need an infallible instructor. It is for this reason that
God has sent Messengers and Imams to guide people. Imam Musa Ibn Ja’far
(as) in his famous treatise tells Hisham.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنَّ لله على الناسِ حُجَّتَينِ حُجَّةٌ ظاهَِرةٌ وحُجَّةٌ باطِنة
فامّا الظاهرة فالرُسُل والأنبياء والائمة وامّا الباطنة فالعُقُول"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Allah has provided man with two proofs: the overt proof and the covert
proof. The overt proofs are the Messengers and Imams and the covert
proofs are the intellects.”*[^34]

Messengers and Imams are superb human beings who directly receive
religious facts from God who knows all facts in depth. They are
infallible beings. Therefore, an education which is based on such a
resource will completely rely on truthfulness.

But this does not imply that we will not believe in rational good and
bad, and like al-Asha’irah only believe in religious good and bad.
Definitely this is not the case. Our wisdom determines the goodness and
badness of some acts independent of religion and other factors such as
the observation that justice is considered as good and injustice is
deemed unfair.[^35] However if Messengers and Imams did not rise to lead
and guide our rational judgments and did not try to evaluate our acts,
man could not personally perceive the good and bad nature of such acts.
This is because, on the one hand, his knowledge is limited, and on the
other hand, factors such as environment, faulty education, unfounded
prejudice and the like may influence his judgments.[^36]  
 We will find this out in the discussion of the philosophy of ethics.

Education Or Training, Which One Should Precede?
------------------------------------------------

As we have already seen, man is born at birth with a tabula rasa i.e. a
blank tablet or a mind not influenced by outside experiences. Our overt
senses are canals through which we come in contact with nature and
acquire our knowledge. Regarding this, Aristotle has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَن فَقَدَ حِسَّاً فَقَدَ عِلماً"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“He who is deprived of one of the faculties of sense will suffer the
deprivation of the related knowledge.”*

In this way, we notice that those born deaf are deprived of speech. This
is because they have not received the speech signals from others to be
able to use them. Concerning this Mawlawi has said,  
 “One born deaf is definitely dumb.  
 A speaker is the one who heard the words from his mother.”  
 Elsewhere Mawlawi says, "Man is made more capable through his ears".
This is why those born blind can not perceive colors.

Thus, the first things which relate a man to his environment are his
senses, or in the terminology employed in the Qur’an, they are the ears,
eyes and hearts.[^37] Then comes the growth of our capabilities and the
purification of our self (soul).

But the thing to remember is that science is a means for the control of
nature and for the unveiling of the secrets of the creation; whereas
purification is a means for the control of our vicious, unyielding self
(soul) and for shaping our personalities.

No doubt, if our souls are not controlled, then science will be used for
the destruction of the world.  
 It would be better to leave a drunkard with a sword than let an
ill-intentioned person have science at his disposal. There is a maxim
which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِذا فَسَدَ العالِمُ فَسَدَ العالَم"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"When a scholar becomes corrupt, the whole world becomes corrupt."  
 As we saw in the three verses of the Holy Qur’an which dealt with
purification and education, purification was stated prior to the term
"education".

Only in one verse is the term "education" used prior to the word
purification and that is because of the natural priority which the
mechanism of education has for us.

The Four Qur’anic Verses
------------------------

> (1)"كما اَرسلنا فيكم رَسُولا مِنْكُم يَتْلُوا عليكم آياتِنا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويُزَكِيكُم ويُعَلِمَكُم الكتابَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحِكمَةَ ويُعَلمَكُم ما لم تَكُونُوا تَعْلَمُون"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Even as we have sent among you an Apostle from among you who recites
to you Our communications and purifies you and teaches you the Book and
the wisdom and teaches you that which you did not know”.***[^38]

> (2)"لقد مَنَّ الله على المؤمنين اِذ بَعَثَ فِيهِم رَسُولاً مِنْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انفُسِهِم يَتْلوا عَلَيهِم آياتِه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويُزَكِّيهم ويُعَلِّمهُم الكِتابَ والحِكمَةَ واِن كانوا مِن قَبْلُ
لَفِي ضَلالٍ مُبِين"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly Allah conferred a benefit upon the believers when He
raised among them an Apostle from among themselves, reciting to them His
communications and purifying them, and teaching them the Book and the
wisdom, although before that they were surely in manifest
error.”***[^39]

> (3)"هُو الَّذي بَعَثَ في الأمِّيينَ رَسُولاً مِنهُم يَتْلُوا عَلَيهِم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آياتِه ويُزَكِيهِم ويُعَلِّمَهُمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الكِتابَ والحِكْمَةَ واِن كانُوا مِنْ قَبْلُ لَفِي ضَلالٍ مُبِين"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He it is who raised among the illiterate an Apostle from among
themselves who recites to them His communications and purifies them, and
teaches them the Book and the wisdom, a though they were before
certainly in clear error”.***[^40]

**(4)** One verse mentions Ibrahim's prayers in which he asks God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"رَبَّنا وابعَثْ فِيهِم رَسُولاً مِنهُم يَتْلُوا عَلَيهِم آياتِكَ
ويُعَلِّمَهُمُ الكِتابَ والحِكمِةِ ويُزَكِيهِم اِنَّكَ اَنتَ العَزيز
الحَكِيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord! And raise up in them an Apostle from among them who shall
recite to them Thy communications and teach them the Book and the
wisdom, and purify them; surely Thou art the Mighty, the Wise”.***[^41]

As you notice, in the first three verses purifying precedes educating,
but in the last verse the order has changed. As we see purifying
precedes educating and this is shown in the first three verses. But
naturally education precedes purification and this is shown in the last
verse.[^42]

But some have assumed that since the fourth verse is among Ibrahim's
prayers and the Qur'an is just narrating it, therefore, it is man's talk
and for this reason may not be a criterion. They continue to assume that
because the other three verses are truly God's speech and since
purification has preceded education, therefore, it is true. Thus,
training and purification should precede education.  
 But this statement is improper in that a Messenger like Ibrahim would
not perform a prayer without considering the right method used by other
Messengers. He would not act immaturely. He is one of the prominent
Messengers whose statements are verified by God. Leveling such
accusations against them would be an insult to them. This is especially
true when we observe that the narrated words are in the Qur'an.
Therefore, what is said does not include any contradiction.

The arrangement of words therefore, is definitely based on some
philosophical considerations.  
 Thus, in answer to the question: which one should precede: training
(purification) or education? We should answer "education" naturally
precedes training, but education is higher than training in rank. That
is why the above-mentioned verses have used one prior to the other.

The Bases And Philosophy Of Ethics.
-----------------------------------

Why are some deeds such as sacrifice, forgiveness and chastity
considered proper and others such as injustice, lying, megalomania, and
treason condemned? What are the criteria behind these judgments?
Scholars have differing concepts toward these issues. Each one has a
specific view on these questions depending on their world-views. Some of
these conceptualizations follow:

### 1-The School Of Personal Sensuality:

Both in the past and at the present there have been philosophers who
believe in nothing except pleasures of life. They say, "The future is
uncertain; death might arrive at any moment and may destroy our life.
Therefore, we should make best out of our time."

The forerunner of this school was Socrates’ student named Aristocles.  
 According to this school, any action which satisfies man's temporary
pleasures is considered an ethical action albeit in its satisfaction
some other people get hurt.

But this approach to life degenerates man to the status of an animal and
disregards the Hereafter. Too much involvement in the mundane enjoyments
does away with security in life and the poor will suffer the most.

Since material pleasures can not satisfy man's spirit, and their
satisfaction is neither possible nor beneficial, therefore to found
ethical deeds over transitory desires is one step toward nihilism and
avoidance of ethics.

### 2- Epicurism Or Personal Expedience

Epicure, the Greek philosopher (270-341 BC), too, put personal interests
as the foundation of ethics. He did not mean temporary or transitory
pleasures, however. He is after a pleasure which either lacks later
suffering or involves little amount of suffering. He believes man should
shun a suffering which does not contain pleasure either now or later.

Epicure has divided pleasures into three groups:  
**a)** Natural and necessary pleasures, such as eating, drinking and
sleep;  
**b)** Unnatural but unnecessary pleasures, such as sexual drive;  
**c)** Natural but unnecessary pleasures, such as desire for fame and
money.

Epicure, then, goes on to say that the first type of pleasures should  
 be fulfilled to a rational degree. The means to these ends should also
be employed.  
 But, according to Epicure, the second type of pleasures should also be
satisfied normally. Going to extremes in this regard will lead to
troubles.

But, the third type of pleasures which are neither natural nor necessary
should be avoided altogether.  
 As you will see, the last hypothesis is more moderate, well-founded and
wise than the previous one. However, it suffers from the following
defects:  
**a)** In this notion all aims are directed toward personal worldly
interests. Whereas, according to the premises of the notion of the
abstractness of self, the avoidance of the integument into material
desires in this world may lend a better and flowery chance in the other
world. This fact is not included in this notion, however.

**b)** This notion, like the previous one, reduces man's status to that
of animal's in that it is concerned only with personal interests and not
with collective interests and has shunned man's heavenly status
altogether and has emphasized beastly stomach – filling, anger and
lusts. Man, on the other hand, could, through training his skills, soar
into the heavens and make the impossible seem attainable.

**c)** In this notion, the ethical goodness is defined only in the
fulfillment of personal interests ignoring common interests as a
whole.  
 The unnaturalness of this view is clear when we observe that others
have a right to live like ourselves, too. How is it feasible to enjoy
one's interests by destroying other people's rights?

**d)** A person's interests vary greatly according to one's status. They
vary as well with individuals. Therefore, man's interests could not get
regularized. On the contrary, ethical orders are highly systematic and
well – organized, or else they would bring out chaos.[^43]

### 3- The Powermonger School Of Nietzsche

Aristocles and Epicure both believed an ethical act to be in the
direction of the attaining of one's instincts and worldly desires.
Nietzsche, the German philosopher (1844-1900 AD) had the same view
believing that the lust for power is the law of life and should be
followed by everybody, even if this might lead to tyranny or deceit. Any
thing contrary to this view is doomed from the outset however pious and
rightful it might be.

Nietzsche contends that the thought about God and life for human beings
should be thrown away altogether, and forgiveness and the like all stem
from weakness. He believed the nature is based on the survival of the
rich and on the annihilation of the poor. This is, in his view, a sample
of ethical act.

This school suffers from a series of serious defects, among which are
the following:  
**a)** If the notion of God and the world Hereafter is put aside, then
what does ethical act mean? Then who would guarantee the fulfillment of
moral and individual obligations?

**b)** We should accept that the principle of power-loving, like other
sensations such as care for humanity and generosity and sacrifice, also
has its root in the human nature. Therefore, the same way that we make
use of the instincts of self – interest, sexuality, possession and the
like to an acceptable degree, we should use the instinct of power-loving
wisely.

**c)** The acceptance of such a view is to consider one dimension of man
and to ignore man's other heavenly dimensions. Such an acceptance
entails man's fall into the world of beasts. In such a world there is no
trace of man's finer feelings. They say even Nietzsche was not
inconsiderate towards humanity to such a degree because he is said to
have lost his life in order to save a horse's life.

Thus, critics believe Nietzsche has stated such extremist views out of
his anger towards some people whom he hated. In a letter to his sister
towards the end of his life, he writes, "The older I become, the harder
life becomes to me. In the previous years when I suffered a lot I did
not feel as depressed as I do now, What has happened? I have lost my
confidence in people. But now we see that we have made a mistake. O my
God! How lonely I feel how. There is nobody with whom I could laugh or
by whose side I could drink a cup of tea. There is no body who can show
me affection."[^44]

### 4- Affection Towards Others

In contrast to the previous views and what we will see later, the
affection view is based on the premise that an ethical act relies
heavily on doing good to other people.  
 This view, which is known as the Indian-Eastern school, considers an
act as ethical only when it is employed to do affection towards others.
If, however, we perform our duties daily, such actions are not termed
ethical. Thus, we will consider an act as ethical if it is rooted in
feelings more sublime than individual feelings. The end of an ethical
act is to make others benefit from it, and not just the individual.

This view, however, is significant and is contained in most religions.
Two points should not be neglected, however.  
**a)** Not every ethical act is in the interest of everybody. There
exist many ethical principles which provide for the individual's
exultation. They do not of necessity lead to the interests of others.
Examples are patience, stamina, self-control and the acceptance of death
instead of the acceptance of injustice.

**b)** There should be a limit to the advancement of affection towards
others. Some are peace lovers and consider it an honor to direct their
kindness to men such as Chengiz, Hajjaj, Yazid, Atilla, and Nero,
whereas kindness to such people is like showing mercy towards a leopard.
In Islam the criterion is: "الحُبُّ في الله والبُغْضُ في الله"[^45]

“Love for God’s sake and hate for God's sake”.

### 5- The Provision Of Prosperity From The View-Point Of Wisdom

Most philosophers, both ancient and contemporary, from Socrates and
Aristotle to Spinoza believe some acts of human beings are at variance
with man's prosperity; whereas some other acts are the signs of his
magnanimity, prosperity, and his perfection in soul. For instance, man
is intolerant with treason, injustice, humiliation, fear and ignorance.
But he considers truth worthiness, sacrifice, chastity, bravery,
perseverance, wisdom, justice and the like among the signs of his
spiritual perfection.

The significant notion in this school is that the criterion for the
ethical acts is our wisdom, which is an asset for man and distinguishes
man from the beasts. Wisdom functions for man in the same way as
instincts do for the beasts.[^46] Those who believe that it is our
wisdom which recognizes ethical acts are of the opinion that an ethical
act should be defined in the following manner: An ethical act is a
balance between excess and dissipation in our affairs, which both
provide for man's prosperity and enjoy an eternal beauty. Examples are
wisdom, which stands halfway between ignorance and fallacious reasoning,
bravery, which stands between fear and imagination, chastity, which
stands between voluptuousness and lack of interest, and family justice,
which stands between performing oppression and accepting it.[^47]

Although most philosophers and Islamic scholars like Avicenna, Khaje
Nasir, al-Ghazali, Ibn Miskawayh, al-Naraqi and others have accepted
this school when they defined the ethical acts, this school, however,
suffers from the following defects:

**a)** Not in every ethical act can we distinguish a medial point. If
such a point existed, it would not mean that it could alone lead to
prosperity and not the extreme point, such as science.

**b)** As we have repeatedly observed the domain of wisdom is extremely
limited. Wisdom lacks the power to distinguish all ethical acts. This is
for two reasons: on the one hand, wisdom is limited by nature:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"قُل الرُّوحُ مِنْ أمرِ رَبِّي وما أوتيتم مِنَ العِلْمِِ إلاّ قَليلا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: The soul is one of the commands of my Lord, and you are not
given aught of knowledge but a little”.***[^48]

And on the other hand, wisdom might lose its impartiality due to wrong
education, the explosion of instincts and unfounded prejudices and might
not be trusted in finding out the medial point. Thus, wisdom needs the
Shari’ah for its protection.

**c)** Most of the perfection aspects which are the result of being
obedient to God and His commands are accounted for in this
calculation.[^49]

### 6- Ethical Conscience:

Some scholars from the East or West, including Kant, contend that man is
created in such a way as to come across with good ethical acts or bad
ones through the guidance of his innate powers; and in practice he finds
himself in a position as to either carry them out or stop doing them
altogether.  
 The criterion for judgments of this sort is referred to as "ethical
conscience."

Kant, the German philosopher, who died in 1804, accounts for this in the
following way:  
 Speculative intelligence, i.e., the agent inside the mechanism is not
of high value; but the practical intelligence, i.e., the agent for
carrying out the practical affairs, which is also referred to as
"ethical conscience" has a definite practicality and its commands are
binding.

Kant believes that man, in accordance with ethical conscience,
recognizes the nature of good and evil deeds and finds himself
responsible to carry out the commands issued by it. An act is considered
to be ethical when it has the following characteristics:

**a)** It is voluntary. An act which is carried out compulsorily can not
be ethical.  
**b)** The carrying out of the act should only be for the sake of duty
and nothing else. For instance, a person's act is not considered ethical
if he carries it out for a friend, for social acceptance, for material
benefits, or for the world hereafter. He has to carry it out only for
its own sake. An act may be good but unethical;  
**c)** It should be all-inclusive so that it may include the acts of all
of those who want to carry out such acts;  
**d)** The ultimate goal for that act should be man himself, not other
minor objectives;  
**e)** It should include man's prosperity although not for his
delight.  
 Of course, this hypothesis has the following positive aspects:  
**a)** There exists in man an agent which, with the help of heavenly
inspiration, can distinguish good deeds;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فالهَمَها فُجُورَها وتَقوَاها"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then He inspired it to understand what is right and wrong for
it”.***[^50]

And when man opposes it, he is tortured by the scourge of rebuke,
driving him crazy:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لا اُقْسِمُ بِيَومِ القِيامَةِ ولا اُقْسِمُ بالنَفْسِ اللوّامَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! I swear by the day of resurrection, nay! I swear by the
self-accusing soul”.***[^51]

**b)** Man knows, through his conscience, that he is not forced to do an
act.  
 Mawlawi says:  
 When you say should I do this or that;  
 My friend, this shows you are free.  
**c)** The best sort of prayers is to carry out a task as thanks to
God.  
**d)** Man's status and his magnanimity are higher than for him to fall
prey to other desires. Every thing is created for his use. Nothing
equals him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَنْ كَرُمَت عَلَيهِ نَفسُهُ هَانَت عَلَيهِ الدُّنيا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The world is of little importance to one who regards his soul to be
noble.”***[^52]

**e)** All human beings are equal and are therefore, equal in front of
human rights.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اَحبِب لِغَيرِكَ ما تُحِبُّ لِنَفسِكَ واكره له ما تَكرَهُ لها"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Love for others what you love for yourself, and dislike for others
what you dislike for yourself.”***[^53]

Kant's hypothesis suffers from the following defects, however:  
**a)** Our conscience is not strong enough for its recognition to be
flawless.  
 As the speculative intelligence needs guidance and protection,
practical intelligence too should be guided and protected. The latter,
too, might be unable to distinguish facts, or due to practice and
repetition of wrong deeds, might lose its sensitivity.

As we know, the nomadic Arabs used to bury their daughters alive and the
people of Fiji Island had a ceremony of burying their parents alive and
this gave them a lot of delight.[^54] Sometimes the professional
murderers enjoy carrying out murders; For instance, Nero made a song
when he set Rome on fire and the murderers of Karbala, upon the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (as) and his followers, in the presence of
‘Ubaydullah bin Ziyad, boasted with honor. They even shamelessly asked
for prizes for their wicked deeds

**b)** It is true that in some cases, the conscience orders us to do
good and commands us to stop doing evil, but its commands are not always
absolute, nor are they universal. Rather, conscience orders differ in
accordance with the degree of the perfection status of people. Some do
good things in order to do their duties. Some others do this to enjoy
benefits and to avoid losses.

An example will make the point clear: suppose a ill-intentioned person,
having a knife in his hand, asks a person for another person's location.
If the former tells the truth, then the latter's life will be in
definite danger, Is the command of conscience absolute here as Kant puts
it, or is it better to tell an expedient lie?[^55]

**c)** If the carrying out of one's duties equals man's perfection in
spirit, then this will lead to his prosperity as well. Separating these
two is not right unless we translate prosperity as sensual
pleasure.[^56]

**d)** Kant considers goodness subordinate to duty.  
 But the reverse is true when we see that Allah orders the doing of
justice and the doing of good and forbids evil:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنَّ الله يامرُ بالعَدلِ والإحسانِ واِيتاءِ ذي القُربى ويَنهى عَن
الفَحشَاءِ والمُنكَرِِ والبَغي"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good (to
others) and the giving to the kindred, and He forbids indecency and evil
and rebellion.***[^57]

In other cases Allah commands people to do good things:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَاَوحَينا اِلَيهِم فِعْلَ الخَيراتِ واِقامَ الصَلواتِ وإِيتاءِ
الزَّكاة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We revealed to them the doing of good and the keeping up of prayer
and the giving of the alms.”***[^58]

As Allama Tabataba’i in his Tafsir al-Mizan and Allama Mutahhari have
said the prior to duty justice, sacrifice and evil and the nasty nature
of being evil and the good aspect of doing good have been revealed by
God.[^59]

For further defects of Kant's view we refer you to other works in the
literature.

### 7- Keeping One's interests with regards to keeping others' interests

Most materialists such as Russell are of the view that man has cunningly
discovered that if he behaves kindly towards others, he will be treated
in the same way by others. If he steals the neighbor's cow, for
instance, his cows might get stolen later; and if he tells lies, he will
hear lies ten times over. Thus, in order to protect himself, man decided
to do good to others and to avoid doing harmful deeds. That is why man
learned to obey rules.[^60] Thus, the criterion for ethical acts,
according to this view, is the keeping of one's interests besides the
keeping of others' interests. In other words, it means to bring man's
selfish desires under the control of education.[^61]

This notion, however, entails many defects among which are the
following:  
**a)** It takes away the ethics from its innate sacredness and surrounds
it with individual's interests.  
 But as we have seen before, the spiritual characteristics are beyond
this kind of considerations.

**b)** According to this view, if a person had such a power as to be
safe from the ethical harm of wrong–doers, there would not exist any
agent to control his bad–temper and his far–reaching wisdom would not
create any impediment to his bad–temper. Only when the two sides have
equal power can the wisdom entice them to do good. Regarding this,
Mutahhari writes, "If Nixon is sitting in front of Brezhenev, both of
whom have equal powers, they could be considered ethical individuals.

One thinks why he should throw bomb on the other when the latter has got
the same power. But if Nixon is confronted with Viet Kongs, who are weak
and vulnerable, there will be no force to stop him from attacking
them.[^62]

**c)** In the present hypothesis, the eternal nature of self (soul) and
the life hereafter is not included.

**d)** What is the criterion for the ethical act which satisfies the
interests of both individual and the community? Neither is wisdom to
recognize the ethical act, nor conscience can do this job.  
 In this view, then, the ethical act does not have any reliable
criterion.

### 8- The philosophy of Ethics in the viewpoint of Freud:

Contrary to the belief of the Islamic and non- Islamic scholars who
contend that man is born with innate capacity to evaluate good from bad
and in this process the innate inspiration helps him out of hardships,
Freud rejects these innate capacities believing that social environment
alone is responsible for the establishments of these sensations,
perceptions and human character. He writes, "The child imitates the
parents' ethical criteria, such as the dichotomy of bad/ good and piety/
wrong–doing.

The superego[^63] is the result of this absorption.  
 It represents values, tribal beliefs and social ideals which the child
has received from its parents. Other social factors which influence the
superego include teachers, priests, police or whoever stands above the
child in the society. These factors, however, influence the child much
less then the parents.[^64]

In many people, ethics might manifest itself in the form of the
superego. That is to say, it might severely control the individual. But
this is not the result of innate–ethical conscience.

Rather, it is the result of educational–ethical conscience, which
reflects the prohibitive reactions of our great–grand fathers. This
superego is greatly under the influence of one factor, which is the
child's need for parental love. The child assumes that if it disobeys
the parents, it will be deprived of this badly–needed affection."[^65]

In this regard, Freud firmly states: "The ethical conscience is nothing
else than a social spur. Ethical conscience does not represent an innate
act of man's inner – being; rather, it is a simple introspection of
social prohibition."[^66]

In Freud's view, neither in man's history nor in the individual's
history has there been the primitive concept of good or bad. These
concepts stem soly from outside of man, i.e., in his social context."  
 The important criticism, which can be leveled at Freud's ideas, is that
the good actions and noble moral traits are not based on a reliable and
sacred principle. How is a child expected to do right when it is offered
unfounded and improper education?

If the good and bad acts did not stem from man's spirit, how could we
persuade people in the right direction and inhibit them from doing
wrong?

Freud believes that this is done by man's wisdom. Since the Divine
Shari’ah, in Freud's ideas, does not protect man's wisdom and since
education is different in individuals and since "the superego" results
from this differing education, how can man attain the supreme moral
conducts and shun nasty behaviors?

### 9- The communist View on the Philosophy of Ethics.

In the eyes of communists, ethics as well as sciences, philosophy, arts
and law and other influential social factors depend heavily on economics
and production means.

The slavery, feudalism and capitalism each had its specific
characteristics which were doomed to failure in subsequent periods. At
the rule of communists, there is a special ethics dominating the
society. For instance, extortion, hegemony, theft, confiscation and
hurting people all belong to the era of agriculture, feudalism and
capitalism. All these are done away with at the time of proletariat and
communism, Then it is claimed that these are substituted for by justice,
equality and freedom.  
 However, in the communist system, an act is considered ethical if it
can boost the development of the society and can advance the society
from the agricultural, feudalistic and capitalistic stage towards the
communist state.

Thus, if providing the hungry people with food and supplying the naked
men with clothing and the curing of the sick all cause the communist
revolution to halt, then these acts are unethical. On the other hand, if
not stopping tyranny and not bridging the gaps between people make the
revolution successful, then these acts are considered ethical and
appropriate!

The communists believe that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الغايات تُبَرر المباديء"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The objective justifies the means"

Since communism relies on principles such as the following:  
**a)** The principles of dialectic materialism.  
**b)** Historical materialism.  
**c)** Historical determinism.  
**d)** Economics as the underlying structure.  
**e)** The notion that all revolutions are heading toward socialism.  
**f)** The idea that the society is the base and everything should be
sacrificed.  
**g)** The notion that everything is dependant upon the production means
even beliefs and moral affairs.

And since each one of the above principles has been found wrong, there
is no room left for an act to be ethical, especially if it is of
compulsory nature.[^67] The disintegration of the communistic society
and the misery that such a system has forced on millions of people are
clear clues to the unfounded nature of the communist system.

Thus, the claim that the criterion for an ethical act should be its
impetus to make the process of communism smooth and easy is completely
unfounded and ridiculous. This is clearly shown by the disintegration of
the communist states of our time.[^68]

### 10.1- The Relativity of Ethics in Hegel's view

Hegel, like communists, is of the opinion that society is always in
progress and evolving. He assigns some features to each epoch and
believes these features are revealed through the spirit of time.

However, some features and temperaments, such as chastity and restricted
relations of men and women could be considered good at a specific era of
time, such as at the agricultural age, but may be considered improper at
another age, such as the age of automation.

Of course, this notion suffers from other drawbacks as well:  
**a)** Is every society heading towards perfection? Societies, like
vegetation, sometimes progress and at times deteriorate.  
**b)** What is meant by "the spirit of time"? Who has discovered it? How
do we know that these changing features are caused by the spirit of
time?  
**c)** Who has said that chastity was good at one time but bad now?  
**d)** Who can consider some human traits such as justice, sacrifice and
generosity good at one time but bad at other time?[^69]

Thus, how is it feasible that, on the basis of an imaginary item called
"the spirit of time", we should consider ethics a relative thing when we
are aware that it has a deep root in man's innate – being?

### 10.2- Sartre's View

Sartre, who evaluates everything on the basis of personal option, says:
there is no criterion for the ethical nature of an act outside man's
existence. He, as well, believes in the relativity of ethics. He states:
anybody who chooses an act assumes that his choice is good. And if
another person chooses another act as good, then he has the right
choice, Thus, an ethical act differs in the opinion of different people.
Therefore, in this view, the criterion for an ethical act is the one who
chooses and nothing else.

This view is wrong, however, since the one who chooses has selected an
act because he has preferred it over other acts But do other people also
believe that his choice was the best?  
 A murderer, a thief and a tormenter have, in fact, some rationale for
their actions.  
 But having these preferences will not justify their wrong-doings.[^70]

A Summary of the 10 views: A conclusion:
----------------------------------------

Each one of the views on the philosophy of ethics mentioned above, dealt
with some facts, but ignored others. A survey of these views shows that
if ethics were not based on the guidance of Prophets and Imams, it would
definitely lead to people’s misery instead of their prosperity. How
could schools whose criteria for ethical acts are "instant pleasure",
"personal interests", "the spirit of time", "personal selection" and
"economics and social evolution" lead man towards prosperity, sacrifice,
honesty, philosophy and chastity?

Nowadays we witness an increase in wrong-doings, homicides, suicides and
corruption in the world, especially in the west; sexual assault to
children by close relatives is increasing and 95 percent of people are
suffering from tensions.

The statesmen in these communities complain about the situation. Man has
been placed in this plight because of the lack of right criteria of
ethics.

Some time ago Reagan, the previous president of the United States, in a
conference, talked about the horrible increase in murders in the United
States: he said the number of victims of murder is beyond 23,000 a
year.  
 Reagan added crimes hurt one third of the families in the United States
and the loss in money is about eight billion and eight million
dollars.  
 Reagan confessed that in the United States one person is killed every
30 minutes and nine women are sexually assaulted.  
 In the same amount of time 67 persons fall prey to theft, 97 persons
are subject to assault and 389 houses are prone to the armed robbery.  
 He said: syndicated crimes done by corrupt statesmen are scandalous for
the United States.[^71]

More recently, the newspaper France ce soir in Paris has reported the
number of crimes in France during the year 1989 as four million, 297
thousand and 123, which shows an increase of 7 percent over the previous
year (1988).  
 The same newspaper reports the number of crimes during the first
quarter of 1989 has been more than 580,000.

Now more than one billion of the world populations suffer from poverty
and malnutrition and shortage of medicines. There are, however, billions
of dollars spent for military purposes.  
 These are just small samples of disorders which are inflicted upon
those layers of the world population who are exposed to corrupt schools
of thought either in ethics, or in education, or in politics, or in
economics or in other social affairs. For a complete picture of the
disasters we should refer to relevant books and sources.[^72]

The Bases and Principles of Ethics and Education In Islam
---------------------------------------------------------

Against the different schools which have dealt with the philosophy of
ethics and education, Islam, too, has offered specific principles and
bases. To study these principles one is referred to the Qur’an,
tradition, and books on ethics and Hadith. However, a summary of these
principles will suffice here:

Man possesses a specific ability for material and spiritual growth. The
flourishing of this growth in all phases is possible only in the
worshiping God and asking for His help.

However, the Islamic ethics and education are based on monotheism,
resurrection, the existence of spirit and its ever-lasting status after
death and a preference for spiritual pleasures over material ones. The
Islamic ethics and education will emphasize on any action which will
help man attain his exultance (which is to have sacred beliefs and
proper behavior) and manifest all his spiritual and material abilities
and all his personal and social capabilities. In contrast, any act which
hinders his growth is prohibited by the Islamic ethical education.

One of the characteristics of the Islamic ethics and education is that
they have root in human innate nature. Islam invites people to
monotheism, to resurrection, to justice, to piety and to worship. This
is because all of these traits stem from his nature. And Ibn al-Athir in
al-Nihayah defines "*fitrah*" or nature as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنَّهُ يُولَدُ على نَوعٍ مِنَ الجِبلَةِ والطَبعِ المُتهيئ لِقَبولِ
الدِّينِ فلو تُرِكَ عَلَيها لاستَمَرَّ على لُزُومِها ولمَ يُفارِقها
اِلى غَيرِها واِنَّما يَعدِلُ عَنهُ مَن يَعدِلُ لآفة مِن آفاتِ
البَشَرِ والتقليد"
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Man is created according to a natural disposition and nature that is
inclined to accept religion. If he is left on it, he will continue in
accordance with its requirements, and will not separate from it to other
than it. One who turns away from it only does so because of an evil in
mankind and blind imitation.”[^73]

The famous hadith which Ibn al-Athir delves on is the following:

> "كُلُّ مَولُودٍ يُولَدُ على الفِطرَةِ حتى يَكُونَ اَبَواهُ
> يُهَوِدَانِهِ ويُنَصِّرانِهِ"74

*“Every child is born according to the original nature until his parents
make him a Jew or a Christian.”*

The following sacred verse, too, emphasizes the same thing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا فِطْرَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لَا تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ الدِّينُ
الْقَيِّمُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Then set your face upright for religion in the right state-the
nature made by Allah in which He has made men; there is no altering of
Allah's creation; that is the right religion."***[^74]

One of the characteristics of Islamic ethics and education is that they
are based on science, wisdom and logic and not on ignorance,
superstition and following by imitation.

The objective of the Islamic ethics and education is to purify man's
soul and spirit so that he can make use of all the means that he has at
his disposal and in this way could reach the title "God's vicegerent on
the earth" and "To meet God".

And since the justification of these principles, traits and aims is only
possible in the light or Qur’an, Tradition and all-pervasive researches
in the life- giving school of Islam, therefore the details can only be
reached by referring to the above–mentioned sources.[^75] I have
selected the treatise of Imam ‘Ali (as) which is written for his son as
a good example.

A historic and life-giving letter from a unique father for his progressing son:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Although many individuals have written historic letters to their
children at specific times and for the education of their beloved
ones,[^76] so far as I can tell no letter ever has been so inclusive and
so erudite as that written by Imam ‘Ali (as) to his son Hasan (as) at a
location called Hazirin and after giving up Siffin.[^77] In this journey
Hasan (as) was with Imam ‘Ali(as).

This historic letter, which is reported by both Shi’ah and Sunni
scholars, among whom is Sharif al-Radi who has reported it in letter 31
of Nahj al-Balaghah with a little change in details, is accepted with
such a level of admiration that the famous Sunni scholar Abu Ahmad Hasan
Ibn Abdullah Ibn Askari, Shaykh Saduq's teacher, has reported it in its
entirety in his book called Al Zawajir wa al-Mawa’iz and says about it,
"If you can find a piece of practical philosophy which should by written
in gold, it is this erudite treatise written by Imam ‘Ali(as) in which
all chapters of this science and the ways to attain this science, and
the ways to arrive at the benefits of ethics and the methods to attain
prosperity and the ways to escape pitfalls and how to arrive at the
highest degree of exultance are expressed by employing the best kinds of
phrases and words."[^78]

The interesting point is that Allama Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr in his erudite
book called Ta'sis al-Shi’ah writes, "The first person who has written
on Islamic ethics and education is Imam ‘Ali (as), who wrote this
treatise on the return from Siffin. He wrote it for his son Imam Hasan
(as). Our scholars have narrated it through different media. Among these
scholars are Kulayni, who has reported it in his book called Al-Rasa’il
and Sharif al-Radi, who has reported it in his book Nahj
al-Balaghah".[^79]  
 For this reason we have called the present book "The first treatise on
Islamic Ethics and Education" and have selected it as the best Islamic
principle on education and the best source for Islamic ethics.  
 As it is understood from the text and will be clear in the subsequent
chapters, Imam ‘Ali (as) does not only have his son in view, but he
considers the parents' duties as a whole and a man's duties at different
walks of life.[^80]

Therefore, this treatise could be the best guide for ethical issues and
a good guideline for life. For this reason, I have chosen it as the axis
of my discussions. I will report the Islamic ethics and education as
Imam ‘Ali (as) has in mind.

The principles and issues of this treatise:
-------------------------------------------

Since this treatise includes the factors of man's progress and
development, either from the moral aspect or from the viewpoints of
politico-social phase, it cannot be studied only from one angle. The
principles included in this treatise are:

**1)** Only man has the ability to acquire complete education; beasts
have this ability to a limited degree.  
**2)** The best time for education is the childhood.  
**3)** The father's responsibility in educating the children is more
than anybody else.  
**4)** There are clear reasons which prove monotheism and God's power.  
**5)** Life does not depend on this world alone; the hereafter exists
and we should prepare provisions for that day.  
**6)** Islam is based on the interests and losses of the society and is
the most inclusive religion.  
**7)** The best capital is piety and carrying on the ways of the pious
ancestors, i.e., the Prophets and Imams.  
**8)** The best shelter in the ups and downs of life is Allah.  
**9)** Saying prayers and being penitent are significant.  
**10)** Man is created free; he is not allowed to make a slave out of
himself; he should keep his magnanimity at all times.  
**11)** Not every wish can be granted; thus, we should engage ourselves
with the noblest ones.  
**12)** One of the factors which build up a man's personality is the
study of good and bad fates of nations of the past.  
**13)** A man should make his soul (self) a criterion between he himself
and others; what he considers improper he should not consider proper for
others.  
**14)** The relation of man with his family, government, and his
responsibilities and tasks bestowed upon him.  
**15)** The ways of self-construction.  
**16)** The principles of friendship and its limits.  
**17)** In order to guide the society and to stop deviations, a man
should make use of giving advice.  
**18)** Women's rights and status, without going to extremes.  
**19)** Accepting responsibilities and observing the principle of
management.  
**20)** This world is the home of pain and torment.  
**21)** Thinking in religion and making use of useful knowledge.  
**22)** Experiencing and making use of the good experiences.  
**23)** Being kind to friends and tolerating foes.  
**24)** More than one hundred other useful pieces of advice.

Documents for this treatise
---------------------------

Many Islamic scholars, prior to Seyyid ar-Radi, have reported this
treatise in their books.  
 Among these books are the following:  
**1.** Muhammad Ibn Ya'qub al-Kulayni in his book al-Rasa'il (died 328
AH).  
**2.** Hasan Ibn Abdullah Ibn Sa'eed al-Askari, the teacher of Shaykh
as-Saduq, in the book Al-Zawajir wa’l-Mawa’iz (died in 3rd century
AH).  
**3.** Ibn Abd Rabbih in the book al-‘Iqd al-Farid, vol. 3, pp.155-156
(d.328 AH).  
**4.** Shaykh al-Saduq in the book called Man la yahdaruhu’l faqih, vol.
3, p.362, vol. 4, p.275 (d. 380 AH).  
**5.** Ibn Shu'bah al-Harrani in the book called Tuhaf al-‘Uqul,
pp.52-96 (d. 380 AH).  
**6.** Allama al-Barqi in the book al-Mahasin (d. 274 AH).  
**7.** Ibn Maskawayh in the book Al-Hikmah al-Khalidah (d. 421 AH).  
**8.** Shaykh al-Mufid in the book al-Amali and al-Irshad (d. 413 AH).  
 After Sayyid al-Radi, many scholars have reported either the treatise
in its entirety or parts of it in their books.

Among these scholars are:  
**1.** Sayyid Ibn Tawus, in the book Kashf al-Mahajjah (d. 664 AH).  
**2.** Mada’ini in the book Majma’ al-Amthal, Vol.1 (d. 518 AH).  
**3.** Mohammad Ibn Yusuf az-Zarandi in the book Durar al-Simtayn (d.750
AH).  
**4.** Qazi Qaza'i in the book Dastur Ma'alim al-Hikam (d.454 AH).  
**5.** Mulla Muhsin Fayz in the book Wafi, vol..1 (d.1091 AH).  
**6.** Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 8.  
**7.** Shaykh Hurr al-Amili in al-Wasa’il, vol. 8, (d.1104 AH).  
**8.** Sheikh Warram in Tanbih al-Khawatir (d.605 AH).  
**9.** Al-Karajiki in Kanz al-Fawa’id (d.449 AH).  
**10.** Al-Aamidi in Ghurar al-Hikam (d.588 AH).  
**11.** Al-Majlisi in Bihar al-Anwar vol.74 pp.1- 4.[^81]

Translations and commentaries Used in this Book
-----------------------------------------------

As we know, scholars have reported a lot of translations and
commentaries for Nahj al-Balaghah.  
 The number varies from 100 to 200 books which refer specifically to
this letter.[^82]  
 I have made the best use out of the following translations and
commentaries:  
**1.** Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Maytham;  
**2.** Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi al-Hadid;  
**3.** Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Muhammad Abduh;  
**4.** Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by al-Rawandi.  
**5.** Masadir Nahj al-Balaghah by Sayyid Abd al-Zahra Husayni.  
**6.** Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Mirza Muhammad Baqir Nawab Lahiji.  
**7.** Nahj al-Balaghah by Dr. Subhi al-Salih.  
**8.** The Translation and Commentary of Nahj al-Balaghah by Muhammad
Ja'far Imami and Mohammad Rida Ashtyani, supervised by Ayatullah Makarim
Shirazi.  
**9.** The Translation and Commentary of Nahj al-Balaghah by Sayyid ‘Ali
Naqi, Fayz al-Islam.  
**10.** The translation of Nahj al-Balaghah by Dr. Sayyid Ja'far
Shahidi.  
**11.** A Complementizer of Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Allama al-Khu'i,
written by Allama Kamar'ee.

How the Present Book was Published:
-----------------------------------

As we know, the Islamic Revolution of Iran was based on the intelligence
of our nation. Through the guidelines of Imam Khomeini, and the sessions
on the exposition of Qur’an and Nahj al-Balaghah, and religious sermons,
our nation had reached such a stage of knowledge that they cannot accept
any type of government except the Islamic state based on Wilayat
al-Faqeeh. In order to implement this government, our nation suffered a
lot.

But after the revolution, our scholars became involved in the
administrative activities and our revolutionary children were engaged in
the struggle against our internal and external enemies and could not
carry on their main tasks, which were cultural activities.  
 However, our enemies spread corruption and this led to the worries of
our leader, Ayatollah Khamenei. He continuously warned people against
these dormant dangers.

This writer, who has been busy carrying out cultural activities, such as
the expository classes for Qur’an and Nahj al-Balaghah, once again felt
that it was better for him to go back to the publication of religious
books. I decided to lessen the amount of administrative activities.
Thus, when the second Majlis term was ended, I did not want to be a
representative for Majlis any more. I decided to let that place be
occupied by those who want it - and they are many - and spend my time on
cultural affairs in which there are not many experts.

On the one hand, I started writing book such as ‘Ilm-e Hadith, which was
published in 3 and a half years, and on the other hand I got involved in
teaching position in the university. One of these latter activities was
the teaching of Nahj al-Balaghah which is still going on. Up to now more
than 170 lessons of it have been broadcast from Gilan province Radio (on
Thursday nights) and has got many listeners, One of these listeners was
a pilot who was a prisoner in an Iraqi prison, when he came back to Iran
together with a huge group of freed soldiers, he said, "there were 80 of
us in a prisoner-of-war camp. We used to listen to your lessons on Nahj
al-Balaghah. We enjoyed listening to those lessons. By reproducing them,
we enriched the camp greatly."

Among those lessons, was the present historic letter by Imam ‘Ali (as)
to his son Imam Hasan (as), one portion of which was published in the
magazine "The growth of the teaching of Islamic knowledge" and other
publications. Then it was edited and became the present book.  
 I hope it will be satisfactory to Amir al-Mu'minin Imam ‘Ali (as) and
through his blessings it will be an asset for me in the Hereafter,
Amen.  
 Farwardin 1371, Lahijan – Zeinolabedin Ghorbani

[^1]: On the letters and treatises of the great Imams, peace be upon
them, see the book Mada’in al-Hikmah fi Makatib al-A’immah, peace be
upon them, by Muhammad Ibn al-Muhsin al-Kashani, son of Fayz al-Kashani,
published by Vaziei publications in 2 volumes.

[^2]: . In our future disscusions we will see that the basics for ethics
are different in the views of the western scholars. What we say here are
the beliefs of the Islamic scholars.

[^3]: Raghib's al-Mufradat, under the term khulq p.158.

[^4]: .Ghurar wa Durar, vol. 7, p.95, vol.3, p,382.

[^5]: .Taharat al-A’raq is juxtaposed to Mulla Sadra's Mabda' wa Ma’ad.
p.385.

[^6]: .But as we will later see some consider one's deeds and daings as
ethics taking no account of the constant khulq. They think these
constant traits are not among good deeds since they are done by habit.

[^7]: . It is true that those temperaments which have taken habitual
form usually act without thinking, But it is not the case that they
cannot exercise their choice. A man can stop performing such deeds when
he decides to. Thus Amir al-Mu'minin (as) has emphasized on the one hand
the abandonment of bad habits saying, "Control yourself by abandoning
habits; struggle with your desires", and has considered this abandonment
as a sort of prayer, on the other hand.

[^8]: . The eleventh Imam, al-Askari (as) has said, “Training an
ignorant person and making a person habituated to an act abandon his
habit, is like a miracle." (Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p 489).

[^9]: . Refer to Determinism and Free will written by the present
author, and Haj Mulla Hadi Sabzvari's Manzumah, p.174.

[^10]: . Napoleon entered the conference at Paris earlier than the
others to be saluted by them. The king of Russia did not salute him.
This action led to the destruction of Russia. The French army died of
cold there, too. Later Napoleon was banished to the Island of Saint
Helena. He had to stay there for six years, dying there because of
stomach ulcer and for his longing for his family (Qible Islam).

[^11]: . Qur’an 91:9.

[^12]: . Qur’an 68:4.

[^13]: . Reflections on life, pp. 6-7.

[^14]: . Bihar. vol.71, p.383.

[^15]: . Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.224.

[^16]: . Ma’ani al-Akhbar, p.253.

[^17]: . Bihar, vol. 64, p.368.

[^18]: .Sahifah al-Sajjadiyah, supplication no.20, Makarim al-Akhlaq.,
trans. W. Chittick.

[^19]: . Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 56.

[^20]: . Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda, vol. 4, p.121.

[^21]: . Dastur al-Akhlaq fi al-Qur’an, p.566, taken from the erudite
book called “Philosophical discourse- ethics from the viewpoints of
co-existence and human values” this issue is important and we have made
best of it.

[^22]: . Bihar, vol. 78, p 69.

[^23]: .Usul al-Kafi, vol 2, p.56.

[^24]: . Qur’an 16: 68.

[^25]: . Qur’an 20:49-50.

[^26]: . Qur’an, 3: 164.

[^27]: . Qur’an 8:24.

[^28]: . In this regard, refer to the following sources: The religious
sense or the fourth dimension of the human soul; Farhangname, vol.8,
p.738; Ayatollah Mutahhari's "Book on Education and Innateness."

[^29]: . Qur’an, 30:30.

[^30]: . Qur'an 16:78.

[^31]: . The principles and methods of Education in Islam, p.30.

[^32]: .Qur'an 11:56.

[^33]: . Qur'an 76:3.

[^34]: . Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.386.

[^35]: . Regarding the rational or religious nature of some acts, refer
to The basis of faith by Mulla Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji, pp.59-62 and the
book Husn wa Qubh ‘Aqli (Rational soundness and unsoundness), lectures
given by Ja’far Subhani.

[^36]: . Regarding this refer to Islam and human Rights, pp.13-35.

[^37]: .Qur’an 16:78, And Allah has brought you forth from the wombs of
your mothers – you did not know anything – and He gave you hearing and
sight and hearts that you may give thanks.

[^38]: . Qur'an 2:151.

[^39]: .Qur’an 3:164.

[^40]: . Qur'an 62:2.

[^41]: . Qur’an 2:128.

[^42]: . Tafsir Namunah, vol.1, p.334.

[^43]: The Bases of philosophy (Mabani-e Falsafe) p 374. The philosophy
of ethics, pp 62-68. Husn wa Qubh ‘Aqli (Rational soundness and
unsoundness) p 125.

[^44]: Sayr-e-Hikmah dar Urubba, vol. 3, p.131.

[^45]: . Philosophy of Ethics, pp.40-46. Lessons of the Philosophy of
Ethics, pp.70-73; The Bases of philosophy, pp.380-382.

[^46]: . The Bases of philosophy, p.385.

[^47]: . Refer to al-Naraqi's Jami’ al-Sa'adat, vol.1, p.66; Akhlaq
Naseri chapters 3-8; Sayr Hikmah dar Urubba, vol. 1.

[^48]: . Qur'an 17:85.

[^49]: .Lectures in Ethical philosophy, p.116.

[^50]: . Qur'an, 91:8.

[^51]: . Qur’an, 75:2.

[^52]: . Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p.278.

[^53]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 31.

[^54]: . Refer to the book called Islam and Human Rights written by me,
p.20.

[^55]: . Ustad Mutahhari, The philosophy of ethics, p.82. Lectures on
the philosophy of ethics, p.92.

[^56]: . The philosophy of Ethics, pp.45-52. Education in Islam,
pp.3-72.

[^57]: . Qur’an, 16:90.

[^58]: .Qur’an, 21:73.

[^59]: . Tafsir Al-Mizan, vol.4, p.305; The philosophy of Ethics, p.55.

[^60]: . Education in Islam, p.74.

[^61]: . The Bases of philosophy, p.377, Lectures of the philosophy of
Ethics, pp.8-70.

[^62]: . Education in Islam, p.76.

[^63]: . Freud assigns three characteristics to man: "Id" which is
related to organic pleasures; "Ego" which controls "Id"; and the
“superego”, which is a person's ethical chastity.

[^64]: . Freud's psychology, p.46.

[^65]: . Freud's psychology, p.46.

[^66]: . Freud's Ideas.

[^67]: . In this regard refer to the Philosophy of Ethics; Lectures on
the philosophy of Ethics; The pseudo–philosophers; The Marxsist
dialectic methods; Lessons on Marxism; The government of justice after
communism; Communism and Democracy; An Evaluation of marxism; Going
Astray; An Analysis on marx; society and History from the viewpoint of
Qur’an; A critic on Marxism; History and society; The Gorbachev USSR.

[^68]: . Return to p.16

[^69]: . Education in Islam, pp.96-97.

[^70]: . Regarding this refer to Ustadh Mutahhari's Existentialism and
the philosophy of Ethics, pp.99-100.

[^71]: . Jomhuri Islami, Newspaper 8/7/1360.

[^72]: . See The biggest disease of the twentieth century; Social
calamities of our time; The time of Automation; The phase of western
civilization.

[^73]: . Al-Nihayah, vol.3, p.475.

[^74]: . Qur’an 30:30.

[^75]: . Refer to the following: Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda, Ihya’ al-‘ulum,
Jami’ al-Sa'adat, Bihar, Wasa’il, Wafi, The Educational principles in
Islam, The principles and philosophy of education, Islamic Education,
Ethics from the view of human values and co-existence, A second glimpse
at the Islamic Education.

[^76]: . Among them is Sayyid Ibn Tawus' Kashf al-Mahajjah li Thamarat
il-Muhjah. He wrote it to his son. Also Allama Hilli wrote a will to his
son Fakhr al-Muhaqqiqin; this will is at the end of volume 4 of Idah
al-Fawa’id. Also there are other examples in the tenth chapter of Sayyid
Ibn Tawus's book. In our time, one such example is Imam Khomeini's
political and religious will written to his beloved son.

[^77]: . Siffin is located to the west of Euphrates. In Safar 37 AH
there was a battle here between Imam ‘Ali's army and the army of
Mu’awiya. Seventy thousand men were killed from both sides. Among them
were Ammar b. Yasir and Uways (Mu'jam al-Buldan, vol. 4, p.414).

[^78]: . Kashf al-Mahajjah li Thamarat al-Muhjah, p.157; Ta'sis
al-Shi’ah, p.404.

[^79]: . Loc Cit.

[^80]: . Some think he has written it for his son Ibn Hanifiyah, but
most scholars do not accept this.

[^81]: . On the documents of this treatise refer to Masadir Nahj
al-Balaghah by Sayyid Abduzzahra, vol. 3, pp.307-312; Research methods
in the documents of Nahj al-Balaghah by Muhammad Dashti, vol. 4,
pp.218-320.

[^82]: . Refer to Al-Ghadir, vol. 4; Alzory'a vol. 14, Masadir Nahj
al-Balaghah, vol.1; Recognition of Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 2.


