17. Bid Others to do Good and Reject Evil
=========================================

**17. Bid others to do good and you will be one of them; reject evil
with your hand and your tongue, and do your utmost to separate from one
who does evil. ‘Strive in the way of God as is His due’ (ref.22:78) and
do not let the reproach of any reproacher have any influence on you in
the path of God. Plunge into hardships for the sake of truth, wherever
it may be.**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"و أمر بالمعروف تكن من اهله وانكر المنكر بيدك ولسانك وباين من فعله
بجهدك وجاهد في الله حق جهاده ولا تأخذك في الله لومة لائم وخض الغمرات
بالحق حيث كان"
  </p>
</blockquote>

In this paragraph, Imam ‘Ali (as) emphasizes several issues:

A. Enjoining The Good And Forbidding The Evil
---------------------------------------------

To encourage people to do the right things is termed "enjoining the
good" and prohibiting them from doing wrong is called "forbidding the
evil."

The employment of this principle is a public duty which is carried out
in form of *wajib kifa’i* which means it is an obligation on all Muslims
but it suffices when performed by some of them. This principle makes the
foundation of all Divine commandments strong. Imam Baqir (as) says in
this connection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِِنَّ الاَمرَ بِالمَعرُوفِ وَالنَهيَ عَنِ المُنكَرِ سَبِيلُ
الأنبِياءِ وَمِنهَاجُ العُلمَاءِ فَرِيضَةٌ عَظِيمَةٌ بِها تُقَامُ
الفَرائِضُ وَتَأمَنُ المَذَاهِبُ وَتَحِلُّ المَكاسِبُ وَتُرَدُ
المَظَالِمُ وَتُعمَرُ الاَرْضُ ويُنتَصَفُ مِنَ الاَعْدَاءِ
وَيَستَقِيمُ الأَمْرُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"The principle of enjoining the good and forbidding the evil is the way
of the Prophets and path of the scholars. It is a tremendous obligation
through which (other) obligatory tasks are undertaken, religious creeds
are safeguarded, earnings are made lawful, restitution is made for
wrongs, the earth is in a flourishing state, justice is exacted from
enemies, and affairs are in order."*[^1]

Islam considers that the prosperity of societies is fulfilled through
the implementation of this sacred principle. Islam thinks that the
miseries and the deprivation of some societies of divine blessings and
also their destruction and their annihilation are due to the fact that
this principle is not carried out properly in those nations.[^2] Imam
‘Ali (as), regarding this, in a sermon emphasizes that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنَّمَا هَلَكَ مَن كَانَ قَبلَكُم حَيثُ مَا عَمِلُوا مِنَ المَعاصِي
وَلَم يَنهَهُم الرَبَّانِيُونَ وَالاحبَارُ عَن ذَلِكَ وَاِنَّهُم
لَمَّا تَمَادَوا في المَعاصِي وَلَم يَنهَهُم الرَبَّانِيُونَ
وَالاَحبَارُ عَن ذَلِكَ نَزَلَت بِهِم العُقُوبَات"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"The nations before you were only destroyed because of the sins they
committed, and the priests and rabbis did not stop them from that. When
they persevered in sinning and the priests and rabbis did not stop them,
punishments descended on them”.*[^3]

Since the implementation of this principle makes firm the foundations of
Divine commandments and erases the vestiges of wrong belief, injustice
and corruption, Islam considers the abandonment of this principle as war
against God.[^4] Imam ‘Ali (as), in his last will, considers this issue:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لا تَتْرُكُوا الأَمرَ بِالمَعرُوفِ وَالنَهيَ عَنِ المُنكَرِ فَيُولّى
عَلَيكُم اَشْرارُكُم ثُمَّ تَدعُونَ فَلا يُستَجَابُ لَكُم"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Do not abandon the principle of enjoining the good and forbidding the
evil, or else the the evil among you will have authority over you. Then
you will pray but your prayers will not be answered."*[^5]

B. The Degrees Of The Principle Of Enjoining The Good And Forbidding The Evil
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This principle has degrees, some of which apply to all individuals of a
community without having related to the government; some other degrees
apply to those individuals who are given some social tasks. These
degrees include:

**i.** Those who are happy by nature to do good and unhappy to perform
the evil.  
**ii.** Those who verbally enjoin the good and forbid the evil.  
**iii.** Those who by force implement the principle of enjoing the good
and forbidding the evil; these may use punishments if felt necessary.

Regarding these, let us observe the following traditions:  
 Imam ‘Ali (as) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنَّمَا يَجمَعُ النّاسُ الرِّضا وَالسَخَطَ، فَمَن رَضِيَ اَمراً
فَقَد دَخَلَ فِيهِ وَمَن سَخِطَهُ فَقَد خَرَجَ مِنهُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Only two things gather people together: pleasure and anger. Therefore,
one who is pleased with a matter has entered into it; and one who is
displeased with it has left it."*[^6]

Imam ‘Ali (as) has also stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الرَّاضِي بِفِعلِ قَومٍ كَالدّاخِلِ مَعَهُم فِيهِ وَعلى كُلِّ دَاخِلٍ
في بَاطِلٍ إِثمَانِ: إِثمُ العَمَلِ بِهِ وَاِثْمُ الرِّضَا بِهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"One who is satisfied with the actions of a people is like one who has
participated with them in it. Every one who participates in wrong-doing
has two sins: the sin of committing it and the sin of being pleased with
it."*[^7]

Imam ‘Ali (as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"العَامِلُ بِالظُّلمِ وَالرَّاضِي بِهِ وَالمُعِينُ عَلَيهِ شُرَكَاءُ
ثَلاثَةٌ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"The one who does injustice, the one who is content with the injustice,
and the one who helps carry out the injustice are three partners in the
act."*[^8]

Imam Baqir (as), concerning the principle of enjoining the good and
forbidding the evil, in a tradition, has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فَانْكِِرُوا بِقُلُوبِكُم وَالفَظُوا بِالسِنَتِكُم وَصُكُّوا بِهَا
جِبَاهَهُم وَلا تَخَافُوا في الله لَومَةَ لائِمٍ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Then deny it with your hearts, and reject it with your tongues and
slap it on their foreheads and do not fear, in the way of God, the
reproach of any reproacher."*[^9]

Ibn Jarir narrates in his history book from Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Layla,
that when Imam ‘Ali (as) was facing Mu'awiya's army he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ايُّها المُؤمِنُونَ اِنَّه مَن رَأى عُدوَاناً يُعمَلُ بِهِ وَمُنكَراً
يُدعَى اِلَيهِ فَانْكَرهُ بِقَلبِهِ فَقَد سَلِِمَ وَبَرِئ وَمَن
اَنْكَرَهُ بِلِسَانِهِ فَقَد اُجِِرَ وَهُو اَفضَلُ مِن صَاحِبِه، وَمَن
اَنْكَرَهُ بِالسَّيفِ لِتَكُونَ كَلِمَةُ الله العُليا وَكَلِمَةُ
الظَّالِمِينَ السُّفلَى فَذَلِكَ الَّذِي اَصَابَ سَبِيلَ الهُدَى
وَقَامَ على الطَّرِيقِ وَنوَّرَ في قَلبَهُ اليَقِينُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"O believers! Whoever sees an act of aggression taking place or an evil
act being called to, and rejects it with his heart, he is secure and
free of responsibility. Whoever rejects it with his tongue will be
rewarded, and he is better than his companion. Whoever rejects it with
his sword so that the word of God may be uppermost and the word of the
wrongdoers lowermost, such a one has attained the path of guidance and
become established on the (right) way and certainty has illuminated his
heart.”"*[^10]

Of course, the degrees of the principle of enjoining the good and
forbidding the evil are determined by the capacity of the individual. A
person, if capable, should use his hand, tongue, and heart to implement
the principle. If he is not capable, he may use his tongue and heart. In
the third case, a person should announce his lack of consent through his
heart, at least. Imam ‘Ali (as), regarding this, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فَمِهُم المُنْكِر بِقَلبِهِ وَلِسَانِهِ وَيَدِهِ فَذلِكَ
المُستَكْمِلُ لِخِصَالِ الخَيرِ وَمِنهُمُ المُنْكِرُ بِلِسَانِهِ
وَقَلبِهِ التَارِكُ بِيَدِهِ فَذَلِكَ مُستَمسِكٌ بِخِصلَتَينِ مِن
خِصَالِ الخَيرِ وَمُضَيِّعٌ خِصْلَةً وَمِنهُم المُنْكِرُ بِقَلبِهِ
وَالتَارِكُ بِيَدِهِ وَلِسَانِهِ فَذَلِكَ الَّذي ضَيَّعَ أشْرِفَ
الخِصْلَتَينِ مِنَ الثَلاثِ وَتَمَسَّكَ بِوَاحِدَةٍ وَمِنهُم تَارِكٌ
لاِنْكارِ المُنْكَرِ بِلِسَانِهِ وَقَلبِهِ وَيَدِهِ فَذلِكَ مَيِّتُ
الاَحيَاءِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Among them is one who rejects the evil action with his tongue, his
hand and his heart. Such a person has perfected (the attainment of) good
traits. Among them is one who rejects the evil with his tongue and his
heart, but not his hand. Such a person has taken hold of two good traits
and neglected one trait. Among them is one who rejects the evil with his
heart, not with his hand and tongue. Such a person has neglected the two
noblest traits of the three and held on to (only) one. Among them is one
who neither rejects the evil deed with his tongue nor with his heart nor
with his hand. Such a person is a dead person among the living”.*[^11]

Regarding this issue, the Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَن رَأى مِنْكُم مُنكَراً فَليُغيِّرهُ بِيَدِهِ فَاِنْ لَم يَستَطِع
فَبِلِسَانِهِ فَاِنْ لَم يَستَطِع فَبِقَلبِهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Whosoever of you sees an evil act being committed, let him alter it
(rectify) it with his hand, and if he is unable (to do so), then with
his tongue; and if he is unable (to do that) then with his heart”.*[^12]

Imam ‘Ali (as) has said, regarding this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اَمَرَنا رَسُولُ الله صَلَّى الله عَلَيهِ وَآلِهِ اَن نَلقَى اَهلَ
المَعاصِي بِوجُوهٍ مُكفَهِّرَة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Prophet (S) commanded us to confront sinners with stern
faces”.*[^13]

### The Highest Degree Of The Principle Of Enjoining The Good And Forbidding The Evil

The highest degree of the principle of enjoining the good and forbidding
the evil should be implemented when the very foundations of Islam are
endangered through the wrong-doings of an obstinate ruler. In such cases
the world is sold for the hereafter. The believers will defend the above
principle wholeheartedly in such a way that they, like Abu Dharr, may
fall prey to others' anger, or like Husayn (as) and his followers get
martyred. Regarding this, Imam ‘Ali (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَافْضَلُ مِن ذلِكَ كَلِمَةُ عَدْلٍ عِندَ اِمَامٍ جَائِرٍ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"The highest degree of the principle of enjoining the good and
forbidding the evil is speaking a just word before an unjust
leader."*[^14]

When Uthman feared Abu Dharr’s disclosure of the former's wrong-doings,
he told him: It is none of your business to interefere with political
affairs. Abu Dharr answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"والله مَا وَجَدْتُ لي عُذْراً اِلا الأمرَ بِالمَعرُوفِ وَالنَهيَ عَن
المُنكَرِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"I swear by God I do not have any excuse not to implement the principle
of enjoining the good and forbidding the evil. I have to do it"[^15]

When Imam Husayn (as) was in front of the enemy army and his sincere
advisers were advising him not to confront with the foes, he explained
the philosophy of uprising in the following manner: “O people! The
Prophet (S) has said: ‘Anybody who witnesses an obstinate ruler who
considers allowable those things which are forbidden by God, who breaks
God's contract, defies the Prophet's tradition and acts with injustice
towards the people, but does not rise up against such a tyrannical
ruler, he will receive from God the same punishment which the aggressor
receives’.

Be aware: these people (the Umayyads) have accepted Satan's commandments
and have rejected God's worship, have indulged in corruption, have
stopped carrying out God's commands, have robbed Muslims of their
treasures, have made allowable God's forbidden affairs and have
forbidden God's lawful affairs. I deserve the most to prevent this
corruption."[^16]

When he was leaving Medina, Husayn (as) in a will described the
philosophy behind his uprising in the following manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنّي لَم اَخرُج اَشِراً ولا بَطِراً وَلا ظَالمِاً وَلا مُفسِداً
اِنّما خَرَجتُ لِلاِصلاحِ في اُمَّةِ جَدِّي محمد (ص) واَن آمُرَ
بِالمَعرُوفِ وَانهى عَن المُنكَرِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I have not come forth in insolence or self-conceit or wrongfully or to
create mischief. Rather I have only come forth for the reformation of
the Ummah of my grandfather, Muhammad (as), and so that I may enjoin the
good and forbid the evil."*[^17]

But under the present lack of equilibrium where the results are
unpredictable, should all people carry out this task, or is it the
responsibility of a select group to carry out this principle? Is this
task compulsory or optional? These are issues which are beyond our scope
and will be found in books on jurisprudence.[^18]

C. The Types Of Struggle In The Way Of Allah
--------------------------------------------

To struggle in the way of Allah means carrying out anything that is
wanted by God. To fulfill such an aim, we should try our best, either
financially or verbally. Imam ‘Ali (as) in his will has emphasized:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"والله الله في الجِهادِ بِأموالِكُم وَاَنفُسِكُم وَاَلسِنَتِكُم في
سَبِيلِ الله"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Fear Allah, and remember Him in striving with your wealth, your selves
and your tongues in the way of Allah."*[^19]

Therefore, struggle against our very selves is also among struggles in
the way of Allah. Upon the return of soldiers from the holy wars, the
Prophet (S) told them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَرحَباً بِقَومٍ قَضَوا الجِهَادَ الاَصغَر وَبَقِيَ الجِهادُ الاكبَر،
قِيلَ يَا رَسُولَ الله وَما الجِهادُ الاكبَرُ؟ قال: جِهَادُ النَّفسِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Welcome to a people who have performed the lesser jihad in the way of
Allah, but their greater jihad is still ahead”. It was said: “Messenger
of Allah, what is the greater jihad?” The Prophet (S) replied: “The
struggle against your self."*[^20]

> Imam ‘Ali (as) has said in his will:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَاخُذكَ في الله لَومَةُ لائمٍ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

In all types of struggle for God, we should strive for God only and we
should not pay attention to the reproach of those who blame us. We
should do everything for God because He is above everything and His
worship and obedience is compulsory at all times.

D. How Does This Principle Cause Man To Become Righteous?
---------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an considers enjoining the good to be among the traits of
believers, inhabitants of paradise, pious men and the best of the
nation.[^21] Therefore, anybody who indulges in this principle should be
pious himself or else:  
 From a physician with a yellow countenance,  
 Do not ask for a rose-colored cheek.  
 Furthermore, such a person uses the approach of self-denial which is
among great sins.  
 Thus, as Imam ‘Ali (as) has said, a person who carries out the
principle of enjoining the good should be among the pious ones, or else
such a person is like a physician who cures people but he himself is
sick.

[^1]: . Al-Kafi, vol.5, p.56; Wasa'il al-Shia'h, vol.7, p.395.

[^2]: . “Those who disbelieved from among the children of Israel were
cursed by the tongue of Dawood and Isa, son of Mariam; this was because
they disobeyed and used to exceed their limit. They used not to forbid
each other the hateful things which they did; certainly evil was that
which they did” [Qur’an 5:78-79].

[^3]: . Al-Kafi, vol.5, p.57.

[^4]: . Al-Kafi, vol.5, p.59.

[^5]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, letter no 23.

[^6]: . Wasa'il al-Shi’ah, vol.11, p.411.

[^7]: . Op.cit.

[^8]: . Op. cit p.410.

[^9]: . Al-Kafi, vol.5, p.56.

[^10]: . Wasa'il, vol.11, p.405; Nahj al-Balaghah, Hikmah 373.

[^11]: . Wasa'il vol.11, p.406; Nahj al-Balaghah, Hikmah 374.

[^12]: . Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, vol.2, p.361; Ihya’ al-‘Ulum, vol.2,
p.309.

[^13]: . Al-Kafi, vol.5, p.54.

[^14]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Hikmah 374.

[^15]: . Al-Ghadir, vol.8, p.306.

[^16]: . Tabari History, vol.7, p.300.

[^17]: . Nafs al-Mahmum, p.34.

[^18]: . Concerning this refer to Fiqh al-Wilayah, Muntazari, vol. 2 and
to Al-Qawa'id al-faqih, Makarem, vol. 3.

[^19]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Letter No 47.

[^20]: . Bihar, vol.19, p.182.

[^21]: . Ghurar al-Hikam.


