21. Be sincere in your asking from your Lord, for in His hand is the bestowal and refusal, and ask God frequently for the best.
===============================================================================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"و اخلص في المسألة لربّك فانّ بيده العطاء والحرمان واكثر الاستخارة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

There are significant points in this statement, two of which will be
dealt with here:

I. Being Sincere in Supplication
--------------------------------

"Sincerity in prayer" means that a believer should ask God only for his
needs and in carrying the prayer out a believer should not be in doubt,
neither should he employ hypocrisy.

Regarding this, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَادعُوهُ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"…and call on Him, being sincere to Him in obedience".***[^1]

In this regard, Imam Rida (as) narrates from Imam ‘Ali (as), his saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"طُوبَى لِمَن اَخلَصَ لله العِبَادَةَ وَالدُّعَاء وَلَم يَشْغَل
قَلبَهُ بِمَا تَرى عَينَاهُ وَلَم يَنسَ ذِكرَ الله بِمَا تَسمَعُ
اُذُنَاهُ وَلَم يَحزَن صَدرُهُ بِمَا اَعطَى غَيرَهُ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Blessed is he who is sincere to God in his worship and supplication,
and does not occupy his heart with what his eyes see, nor forgets God’s
remembrance through what his ears hear, and does not become sorrowful at
what others have been given".*[^2]

Then Imam ‘Ali (as) shows the reasons of the philosophy of sincerity in
the following manner: since bestowal and withholding is in the hands of
God, it is absurd for man to ask or supplicate anybody else or to
worship anybody else or assume any partner for God.[^3]

II. Asking God For Abundant Goodness
------------------------------------

"*Istikhara*" means to ask for good or to weigh the importance of an
option and to select the best one.[^4] It also means to ask God to give
him the best.[^5]

But in the language of Shari’ah (or religion) it means to ask God for
the best. We read in supplication 33 of Sahifah al-Sajjadiyah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الَّلهُمَّ اِنِّي اَستَخِيرُكَ بِعِلمِكَ فَصَلِّ على مُحَمَّدٍ
وَآلِهِ وَاقْضِ لِي بِالخَيرَةِ وَاَلهِمنَا مَعْرِفَةَ الاِختِيَارِ،
وَاجْعَل ذَلِكَ ذَرِيعَةً اِلى الرِّضَا بِمَا قَضَيتَ لَنَا
وَالتَسْلِيمَ مِمَّا حَكَمْتَ فَأزِح عَنَّا رَيبَ الاِرْتِيابِ
وَاَيِّدنَا بِيَقِينِ المُخْلِصِينَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"O God! I ask of You the best in Your knowledge, therefore bless
Muhammad and his Household, and decree for me the best. Inspire us with
knowledge to choose the best and make that a means to being pleased with
what You have decreed for us and submitting to what You have decided.
Banish from us the doubt of misgiving and confirm us with the certainty
of the sincere”.*[^6]

And in Zurarah's tradition narrated from Imam Baqir (as) we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"قُلْتُ لاَبِي جَعْفَرٍ عليه السلام: اِذَا اَرَدْتُ اَمْراً وَاَرَدتُ
الاِستِخَارَةَ كَيفَ اَقُولُ؟ فَقَالَ: اِذَا اَرَدتَ ذَلِكَ فَصُم
الثَلاثَاءَ وَالاَربِعَاءِ وَالخَمِيسَ ثُمَّ صَلِّ يَومَ الجُمُعَةَ في
مَكانٍ نَظِيفٍ رَكعَتَينِ، فَتَشَهَّد ثُمَّ قُل وَاَنتَ تَنظُر اِلى
السَّمَاءِ: (الَّلهُمَّ اِنِّي اَسألُكَ بِانَّكَ عَالِمُ الغَيبِ
وَالشَّهَادَةِ الرَّحْمَنُ الرَّحِيم اَنْتَ عَالِمُ الغَيبِ، اِن كَانَ
هَذا الاَمْرُ خَيراً فِيمَا اَحاطَ بِهِ عِلمُكَ فَيَسِّرهُ لِي
وَبَارِك لِي فِيهِ، وَافتَح لِي بِهِ، وَاِن كَانَ ذَلِكَ لِي شَرّاً
فِيمَا اَحاطَ بِهِ عِلمُكَ فَاصرِف عَنّي بِمَا تَعلَمُ فَاِنَّكَ
تَعلَمُ وَلا اَعلَمُ، وَتَقدِرُ وَلا اَقدِرُ، وَتَقضِي وَلا اَقْضِي
وَانتَ عَلاّمُ الغُيوبِ)، تقولها مئة مرّة".
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Zurarah said: ‘I asked Imam Baqir (as): “If I intend to do something
and wish to perform Istikharah, what should I do”? He said: “If you wish
to do that, then fast on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday; then on Friday
perform a two rak'ah (a unit of salat) prayer in a clean place; after
performing the tashhahud, look at the sky and say: ‘O Allah, I ask You,
for You are the Knower of the Unseen and the witnessed, the
All-merciful, the All-compassionate – You are the Knower of the Unseen -
if this matter is good in what Your Knowledge encompasses of it, then
make it easy for me, bless me in it, and open it for me.*

 *If it is bad in what Your Knowledge encompasses of it, then turn it
away from me with what You know, for You know and do not, You determine
and I do not, and You decree and I do not, and You are the Knower of the
Unseen’. Repeat that a hundred times.”*[^7]

Of course, there are other kinds of *Istikhara*: *Istikhara* with the
Qur’an, with writing on a piece of paper, and *Istikhara* with the
rosary (*tasbih*). It is written in the books on Prayers and traditions
that a person resorts to *Istikhara* when he is caught between two
seemingly good options, but he is unable to choose one option. He does
not know whether it is good or evil. When he starts to carry out
*Istikhara*, his doubts are eliminated and he will have faith in the
option he selects.[^8]

Which one is better? Your worthless idols or the One Who fulfills your
needs when you are left with nothing except depression?"[^9] And God
will help him if He thinks it proper.  
 They tell us to pray (use supplication: *du'a*) abundantly, because
when we knock on a door, there is hope that it will open;[^10] However,
this work should be continuous, depending on the intention of the
performer of the supplication.[^11]

[^1]: . Qur’an 7:29.

[^2]: . Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, p.16.

[^3]: . Shirk, or associating partners with God, is of the following
types: Shirk in the essence of God, shirk in attributes, shirk in
actions, shirk in worship. A believer should avoid all of these and
should not appoint any partner for God. He should obey only the Unique
God and should ask Him for help.

[^4]: . Abduh's commentary on Nahj al-Balaghah, vol.3, p.45.

[^5]: . Ibn Maytham's Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol.5, p.11.

[^6]: . Sahifah al-Sajjadiyah, supplication 33.

[^7]: . Wasa'il, vol.5, p.207.

[^8]: . For further information concerning Istikhara and its kinds refer
to the following: Bihar, vol.19, pp.222-288; Wasa'il, vol.5, pp.204-221,
vol.4, p.875; Sahifah al-Sajjadiyah, (tr.) Fayz al-Islam, and (tr.)
Sayyid ‘Ali Khan; and Allamah Kalbasi's al-Istikhara.

[^9]: . For this, see Imam Khumayni's Kashf al-Asrar, pp.89-97.

[^10]: . Bihar, vol.93, p.298.

[^11]: . In traditions, it is said the supplication could be recited
once or one hundred times depending on the importance of the topic at
hand.


