24) Contemplation of Past Nations and Their Actions
===================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اَي بُنَي اِنِّي وَاِن لَم اَكُن عَمَّرتُ عُمْرَ مَن كَانَ قَبْلِي
فَقَد نَظَرتُ فِي اَعمَالِهِم وَفَكَّرتُ فِي اَخبَارِهِم وَسِرْتُ فِي
آثَارِهِم حَتّى عُدْتُ كَاحَدِهِم بَل كَانِّي بِمَا انتَهى اِليَّ مِن
اُمُورِهِم قَد عَمَّرتُ مَعَ اوَّلِهِم اِلى آخِرِهِم فَعَرَفتُ صَفوَ
ذَلِكَ مِن كَدَرِهِ وَنفْعِهِ مِن ضَرَرِهِ فَاسْتَخْلَصتُ لَكَ مِن
كُلِّ اَمرٍ نَخِيلَهُ (جَلِيلَهُ) وَتَوَخَّيتُ لُكَ جَمِيلَهُ،
وَصَرَفتُ عَنْكَ مَجْهُولَهُ وَرَأيتُ حَيثُ عَنانِي مِن اَمْرِكَ مَا
يَعنِي الوَالِدَ الشَفِيقَ وَاجمَعتُ عَلَيهِ مِن اَدَبِكَ اَن يَكُونَ
ذَلِكَ وَانتَ مُقْبِلُ العُمرِ وَمُقْتَبِلُ الدَّهْرِ ذُو نِيَّةٍ
سَلِيمَةٍ وَنَفْسٍ صَافِيَةٍ وَاَن اَبتَدِأَكَ بِتَعْلِيمِ كِتَابِ
الله وَتَأوِيلِهِ وَشَرائِعَ الاِسْلامِ وَاحْكَامَهُ وَحَلالَهُ
وَحَرامَهُ وَلا اُجَاوِزَ ذَلِكَ بِكَ اِلى غَيْرِهِ ثُمَّ اَشْفَقتُ
اَن يَلْتَبِسَ عَلَيكَ مَا اَختَلَفَ النّاسُ فِيهِ مِن اَهوائِهِم
وَآرائِهِم مِثْلُ الَّذِي اِلتَبَسَ عَلَيهِم فَكَانَ اِحكَامُ ذَلِكَ
عَلى مَا كَرِهْتُ مِن تَنْبِيهِكَ لَهُ اَحَبُّ اِليَّ مِن اِسْلامِكَ
اِلى اَمرٍ لا آمَنُ عَلَيكَ بِهِ الهَلَكَةَ وَرَجَوتُ اَن يُوفِّقَكَ
الله فِيهِ لِرُشْدِكَ وَاَن يَهدِيَكَ لِقَصدِكَ فَعَهَدْتُ اِلَيكَ
وَصِيَّتِي هَذِهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“My son! Although I have not lived the long life of my predecessors, I
have looked at their actions, contemplated the reports about them, and
journeyed among their ruins until (it was as if) I had become like one
of them. In fact, because of the reports that have reached me of their
affairs, it is as if I had lived with the first of them to the last of
them. Thus I have distinguished their pure from their impure, and their
benefit from their harm. I have extracted for you from every matter the
purest of it, and exclusively aimed at presenting you its beautiful
aspects and turned away from you its unknown things.*

*Since I am concerned about your affair with the concern of a
compassionate father, and I have resolved on bestowing on you good
discipline, I considered (it appropriate) that it should be while you
are in your youth and in the prime of your life, possessing sound
intention and a pure soul. I considered that I should begin by teaching
you the Book of Allah and its interpretation, the laws and commandments
of Islam and its lawful and unlawful matters, and that I should not take
you beyond that to anything else.*

*Then I feared that matters in which people had conflicting desires and
opinions would confuse you just as it had confused them. Thus, despite
my dislike of cautioning you, it was preferable to me to firmly
establish that, than to leave you to a matter in which I am not free of
the fear of your destruction. I hoped that God would give you success in
it through your right direction and guide you to your objective, so I
entrust this will of mine to you”.*

Commentary
----------

There are several worthy points in this section of Imam ‘Ali’s letter:

1. Mentioning The History Of The Past Nations
---------------------------------------------

As we have often noticed before in the same way that the creation is
governed by laws and is based on a series of causes and effects, and not
a single action occurs without these factors of cause and effect, the
fate of nations and human communities depend on a series of causes and
effects. No nation becomes prosperous or miserable, progressive or
backward, strong or weak, steady or destroyed without valid reasons.
There are factors which influence them greatly.

Therefore, a survey of the history of the past nations and the factors
which contributed to their prosperity or misery may help us find our way
in a troubled world in which we now are. This is because the same
factors which were at work shaping the life of the people in the past
are still active.

It is for this reason that Imam ‘Ali (as) in his letter to Harith
al-Hamdani emphasizes that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وِاعتِبِر بِمَا مَضَى مِنَ الدُّنيا لِمَا بَقِيَ مِنهَا فَاِنَّ
بَعضَها يُشْبِهُ بَعضاً"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Learn lessons from past events for future events, because they are
similar to one another."*[^1]  
 It is exactly for this reason that one third of the Qur’an consists of
the stories and histories of past nations and according to the Qur’an,
this survey of the past will help everybody since

***"..in their histories there is certainly a lesson for men of
understanding" [Qur’an 12:111].*** Then in the Holy Qur’an, Allah orders
the Prophet (S) ***"therefore relate the narrative that they may
reflect." [Qur’an 7:176].***

In his Qasi’ah sermon, where he talks on the issues of the prosperity
and misery of nations and Muslims and the factors responsible for them,
Imam ‘Ali (as) talks about the similarity among the fates of the nations
and the identical factors of their successes and failures,  
 He says: Avoid facing the punishments which were inflicted upon the
past nations. Remember their attitudes in hardships. Try not to be like
them.

After comparing their behavior when they were prosperous and at the time
of their misery and depression, then adopt those actions of theirs which
brought about their prosperity and providence, which made their foes
flee from them, which put assets at their disposal, which made strong
their social bonds, which made them avoid discord and disunity, which
made their harmony feasible, and which enticed them to shun those
actions which weaken their power, i.e., deceptive action and jealousy.

"Think about the conditions of the believers of the past, how they were
tested by God. Did they not have to face a lot of hardships?

"But when God, the Almighty, observed their perseverance and patience in
the face of obstacles for His sake, He changed their misery into
prosperity, and their fear into security. God made them governors,
statesmen and leaders. They received such favors from God they had not
even hoped for.  
 "Observe how they were moderate, their hands were in the service of one
another, their swords helped each other, their eyes were piercing, and
their intentions and aims were united. Did they not become leaders of
the entire earth?

Then observe the end of their lives. When they became disunited their
unity was fractured, and there were disagreements among them; they
divided, and started to quarrel. At this time, God changed their
strength into weakness and deprived them of their assets. What remained
of them is their sad stories for you today to behold and for you to take
lessons.  
 Then Imam ‘Ali (as) adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فَما اَشَدَّ اعتِدَالَ الاَحوَالِ وَاقرَبَ اشتِبَاهَ الاَمثَالِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"You see how nations are similar in their states and traits."*[^2]  
 This very principle of similarity in states and traits among nations,
which depicts their fates, is of crucial significance for Imam ‘Ali (as)
in his sermon. That is why he emphasizes a survey of the lives of people
of the past.

2. Every Father Should Try Educating His Child
----------------------------------------------

Among the factors which build up man's personality are the family
environment and parental guidance. The latter factor is of crucial
importance in child's life, especially in his life manners and
etiquette.

Since in Islam "*adab*" or "good manners" are used to evaluate one's
amount of education and are recognized as the best indicator of one's
personality, therefore, training one's children in this aspect is given
great gravity in Islam.

In his treatise on law, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (as) says concerning this
issue:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَامّا حَقُّ وَلَدِكَ فاَن تَعلَمَ انَّهُ مِنكَ ومُضافٌ اِلَيكَ في
عَاجِلِ الدُّنيا بِخَيرِهِ وَشَرِّهِ وَانَّكَ مَسؤولٌ عَمَّا وَلَّيتَه
بِهِ مِن حُسنِ الاَدَبِ وَالدَلالَةِ عَلى رَبِّه عَزَّ وجَلَّ
وَالمَعُونَةَ لَهُ على طَاعَتِهِ فَاعمَل في اَمرِهِ عَمَلَ مَن يَعلَم
اَنَّهُ مُثابٌ على الاِحسَانِ اِلَيهِ، مُعاقَبٌ على الاِساءَةِ
اِلَيهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is your child's right on you that you should know that he is from
you and will be ascribed to you through both his good and his evil in
the immediate affairs of this world. You are responsible for what has
been entrusted to you, such as educating him in good conduct, guiding
him towards the path of his Lord, the Almighty, and helping him to obey
Him. So act toward him with the action of one who knows that he will be
rewarded for good doing toward him, and punished for doing evil to
him."*[^3]

In accordance with our religion leaders, other children's rights are:
selecting good names for them, reading Qur’an, swimming, shooting,
providing them with jobs and spouses, feeding them rightfully and
housing them appropriately.[^4]

As we have seen before at the adulthood, like at the time of childhood,
man's spirit is malleable. Whatever changes the child is exposed to is
eternal. Regarding this, Imam Musa ibn Ja'far al-Kadhim (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَن تَعلَّمَ في شَبابِهِ كَانَ بِمَنزِلَةِ الرَّسمِ في الحَجَرِ وَمَن
تَعَلَّمَ وَهُوَ كَبِيرٌ كَانَ بِمَنزِلَةِ الكِتابِ على وَجْهِ المَاء"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Learning in one’s youth is like writing on stone. But learning in old
age is like writing on the surface of water".*[^5]

3. The War among 72 Nations
---------------------------

In the book "The reasons behind the rise of Islam and the fall of the
Muslims," one of the reasons for this fall is said to be sectarianism.
Two other factors are responsible for these differences, however:

**a)** Lack of the recognition of the truth. Hafiz, the Persian poet,
says in this regard:  
 The quarrel among the seventy–two nations is not valid.  
 For, not seeing the truth, they resorted to fantasy.  
**b)** Selfishness and self-conceit.  
 We have already said if we wish to get rid of the sectarian differences
among people, we should use reasoning in the light of the Book and the
Prophet's kinfolks, and avoid being indoctrinated by poisoning ideas of
some.

We should also avoid being carried away by selfishness and self-conceit
in the recognition of facts and truth in different sects.  
 Imam ‘Ali (as) in his letter asks his child not to be carried away by
these two factors: selfishness and self-conceit.

4. Why Is Imam ‘Ali Unwilling To Teach Any Book On Religion But The Qur’an And The Shari’ah?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As we saw before, Imam ‘Ali (as), as a kind father, decided to teach his
son, Imam Hassan (as), the Qur’an and the sacred "Shari’ah", which are
the sources of all human knowledge. He decided not to teach him anything
else. But he practically saw that people, due to their selfishness,
started having different sects. Thus, he decided, along with Qur’an and
Shari’ah, to teach other issues to his son as well: topics such as:
monotheism, Prophethood, resurrection philosophy, history, education,
ethical points, the recognition of the factors of corruption… and the
like.

But Imam ‘Ali (as) is innately dissatisfied to enter into this game
because entering this scene does not have any profit whatsoever. This is
because the Book of God and its interpretation is the essence of all
knowledge and sciences and will make it needless for people to study
other things. But consider the condition of Islam in those dark days
when people separated themselves from the Prophet's kinfolk. This
separation from the guidance of the Prophet's kinfolk caused people to
have different understandings of the facts and truth. In this way,
different sects came into being. Under such conditions, Imam saw it
feasible to start giving Imam Hasan (as) new insights about religion.  
 Furthermore, this section of Imam ‘Ali's letter neither involves
unwillingness towards religious discussions, nor, does it indicate, as
some have erroneously assumed, that the Qur’anic sciences and religious
commandments are of lower importance. Each one of these has its special
value.[^6]

[^1]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Letter No 69.

[^2]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 192.

[^3]: . Shaykh Saduq's Khisal, vol.. 2, p.350.

[^4]: . Kanz al-‘Ummal, Hadith 35340; Hikmah's Nahj al-Balaghah, Hikmah
no.399; Bihar, vol.74, p.80; Bihar, vol.74, p.85; Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol.16
Hadith 45409 – 45411.

[^5]: . Safinah al-Bihar, vol.1, p.680, item "Shabab" (Youth).

[^6]: . Concerning Imam ‘Ali's unwillingness, the translators and
interpreters of Nahj al-Balaghah have said nothing. Some refer the
unwillingness to Imam Hasan (as) without mentioning the cause for it.
There are some hints to Imam ‘Ali's unwillingness, however, in Ibn Abi
Al-Hadid's commentary, vol.16, pp.63-69, and Ibn Maytham's commentary,
vol.5, p.18.


