25) God Wariness And Knowledge
==============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَاعلَم يَا بُنَيَّ اَنَّ اَحبَّ مَا انْتَ آخِذٌ بِهِ اِليَّ مِن
وَصِيَّتِي تَقوَى الله وَالاِقتِصَار على مَا فَرَضَهُ الله عَلَيكَ،
وَالاَخْذَ بِمَا مَضَى عَلَيهِ الاَوّلُونَ مِن آبَائِكَ وَالصَالِحُونَ
مِن اَهلِ بَيتِكَ، فَاِنَّهُم لَم يَدَعُوا اَن نَظَروا لاَنفُسِهِم
كَمَا اَنتَ نَاظِرٌ، وَفَكَّرُوا كَمَا اَنتَ مُفَكِّرٌ ثُمَّ رَدَّهُم
آخِرُ ذلِكَ اِلى الاَخْذِ بِمَا عَرَفُوا، وَالاِمسَاكِ عَمَّالَم
يُكَلَّفُوا، فَاِن أبَت نَفسُكَ اَن تَقبَلَ ذَلِكَ دُونَ اَن تَعلَمَ
كَمَا عَلِمُوا، فَليَكُن طَلَبُكَ ذَلِكَ بِتَفَهُّمٍ وَتَعلُّمٍ لا
بِتَورّط الشُّبُهاتِ وعُلَقِ (عُلُوِّ) الخُصُومَاتِ، وَابَدَأ قَبْلَ
نَظَرِكَ فِي ذَلِكَ بِالاِسْتِعَانَةَ بِالَهِكَ، وَالرَّغْبَةَ اِلَيهِ
فِي تَوفِيقِكَ وَتَرْكِ كُلِّ شَائِبَةٍ اَولَجَتْكَ فِي شُبْهَةٍ اَو
اَسلَمَتكَ اِلى ضَلالَةٍ فَاِذَا اَيقَنْتَ اَن قَدْ صَفا قَلبُكَ
فَخَشَعَ وَتَمَّ رَأيُكَ فَاجْتَمَعَ وَكَانَ هَمُّكَ فِي ذَلِكَ هَمّاً
وَاحِداً، فَانْظُر فِيمَا فَسَّرتُ لَكَ، وَاِن اَنتَ لَم يَجْتَمِع
لَكَ مَا تُحِبُّ مِن نَفْسِكَ وَفَراغِ نَظَرِكَ وَفِكْرِكَ فَاعْلَم
اَنَّكَ اِنَّمَا تُخْبِطُ العَشْوَاءَ وَتَتَوَرَّطُ الظَّلمَاءَ
وَلَيسَ طَالِبُ الدِّينِ مَنْ خَبَطَ اَوْ خَلَطَ وَالاِمْسَاكُ عَنْ
ذَلِكَ اَمْثَلُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Know, my son, that what I would like the most for you to take from my
will is God-wariness, restricting yourself to what God has imposed on
you, and adhering to the practice of your forefathers and the righteous
among the people of your household. They did not cease to examine
themselves just as you examine yourself, and to contemplate their
affairs just as you do. That led them to act on what they knew and to
hold back from what they were not required to do.*

*If your soul refuses to accept that without ascertaining it (for
yourself) as they ascertained it, then let your search for that be with
understanding and study, not through becoming entangled in doubts and
ensnared in arguments. Before looking into that, begin by seeking help
from your God, asking Him for your success, and abandoning the least
thing that involves you in doubt or exposes you to misguidance.*

*Thus when you are certain that your heart has become pure and
submissive, and your opinions have become perfected and gathered
together, and you have a single thought on the matter, then look into
what I have explained to you. But if you have not gathered yourself
together as you wish and focused your sights and thoughts exclusively on
the matter, then know that you will be proceeding at random and be
confounded in the darkness, whereas a seeker of religion is not one who
proceeds at random or is confused, in which case it is better to hold
back from that”.*

Commentary
----------

In this section of the letter, Imam ‘Ali (as) refers to the new
principles of education which include the approaches of acquiring
knowledge and the implementation of the pious old generations and the
avoidance of blind imitations and full comprehension of the conditions
of the time and finally the avoidance of getting involved in dubious
cases of thought.

The Approaches To The Acquisition Of Knowledge
----------------------------------------------

As we know, man's knowledge, compared with what is unknown to him, is
like a drop of water in the sea. If man wants to capture this drop of
knowledge, he has to select the proper method of approach so as not to
get drowned in the immense sea of what is unknown.
In his letter, Imam ‘Ali (as) provides us with three such approaches:

### 1. Inspiration

As God is the Creator of existence, and is aware of every detail,
definitely His book of religion is based on the facts of His book of
creation. No deceit or lies appear there. Thus, a resort to God's Book
and to the Prophet's tradition, which is identical with divine
inspiration, can help us find our right path[^1] and block our
deviation. For this reason, Imam (as) has emphasized: “What I would like
the most for you to take from my will is God-wariness, restricting
yourself to what God has imposed on you”.

As we know, one of man's most important ways for the progress of
knowledge and culture and man's civilization, has been following the
guides offered by the Prophets and the Imams (as). We have dealt with
this in the book called "The History of the Islamic culture and
civilization."

### 2. The Ways Of The Pious Ancestors

It is a fact that the older generations of a community, especially if
they have had the guidance of Divine Prophets, through experience and
inspiration, have amassed huge reservoirs of knowledge, which could be a
valuable treasure for the next generations. Thus, reliance of this
worthy treasure could help us attain the right knowledge. That is why in
this letter, Imam ‘Ali (as) orders his son to follow what his
forefathers have done.

Since we know that the Prophet and the Imams are descended from sacred
origins and are not afflicted with impurities of unbelief and have
always followed the right religion,[^2] therefore, their ways are
felicitous and their knowledge is based on rights and facts.

Do his ‘forefathers’ mean the Prophet (S), Abu Talib, Abd al-Muttalib,
Hashim…? And do the ‘righteous among the people of your household’ refer
to Hamza, Ja’far, Abbas, etc?[^3]
Of course, this adherence to the practice of the pious ancestors does
not clash with blind imitation, which we will study later. This kind of
adherence is the reference of an ignorant person to a scholar. This is
because these pious scholars are righteous people and will not misguide
us. Secondly, as it is in the text of the letter, they contemplate their
daily affairs and do not get into matters they know nothing about.

### 3. Logic And Reasoning

The third way to get to truth and knowledge is through reasoning and
logic. The Holy Qur’an says regarding this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَلَا تَقْفُ مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ
وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُوْلَئِكَ كَانَ عَنْهُ مَسْئُولًا "
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And follow not that of which you have not the knowledge; surely the
hearing and the sight and the heart, all of these, shall be questioned
about that" [Qur’an 17:36]***

Contrary to other religions which contend that in the matters of belief
and practice, worship itself is enough, Islam is of the opinion that
each idea or practice is acceptable only if it is based on logic.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَقَالُوا لَنْ يَدْخُلَ الْجَنَّةَ إِلَّا مَنْ كَانَ هُودًا أَوْ
نَصَارَى تِلْكَ أَمَانِيُّهُمْ قُلْ هَاتُوا بُرْهَانَكُمْ إِنْ كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And they say: None shall enter the garden (of paradise) except he
who is a Jew or a Christian. These are their vain desires. Say: Bring
your proof if you are truthful." [Qur’an 2:111]***

On the basis of this, Imam ‘Ali (as) mentions: if you do not wish to use
the first and second approach, and if you want to use the third way, you
should use good understanding and reasoning, not baseless assumptions.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فاِن اَبَت نَفسُكَ اَن تَقبَلَ ذَلِكَ دُونَ اَن تَعلَمَ كَمَا
عَلِمُوا فَليَكُن طَلبُكَ ذَلِكَ بِتَفَهُّمٍ وَتَعلُّم ..."
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If your soul refuses to accept that without ascertaining it (for
yourself) as they ascertained it, then let your search for that be with
understanding and study,*

The conditions for the use of this third method include the following:
**a)** Asking God for assistance.
**b)** The intention should be the clarification of the truth, and not
quarrel or the defeat of the foe.
**c)** Drawing away the prejudice of defending one specific religion,
the intention being only the clarification of the truth, or else it
would be of the other type, which leads to misleading.
**d(** Driving away those factors which make man doubtful, such as:
megalomania, desire for fame, too much interest in one’s possessions.
**e)** Having a pure heart, away from any kind of doubt and depression
(such as hunger, too much eating, aggressive lust, anger…) or else he
would be like an unfettered camel that walks in the dark; he would not
be immune to falling.

#### The Hazards Of The Blind Imitation And Selection With No Reason

Although Islam agrees with logical imitation, i.e., the reference of the
ignorant person to the scholar, on which the order of society relies,
such as one’s reference to physicians, engineers, tailors, carpenters,
and jurisprudents knowledgeable in the science of religion. It however,
will not agree with blind imitation, i.e., the reference of the ignorant
person to another ignorant one. Islam completely rejects this kind of
imitation. Because this act does not, firstly, lead to the right way;
and secondly, it exemplifies the axiom which says: a blind person leads
the way to another blind person. In Islam, this kind of imitation is
rejected. Mawlawi, the Persian poet says: May two hundred curses be
leveled at this kind of imitation. The Holy Qur’an, regarding this
issue, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ اتَّبِعُوا مَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ قَالُوا بَلْ
نَتَّبِعُ مَا أَلْفَيْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَاءَنَا أَوَلَوْ كَانَ آبَاؤُهُمْ
لَا يَعْقِلُونَ شَيْئًا وَلَا يَهْتَدُونَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And when it is said to them, follow what Allah has revealed, they
say: Nay! We follow what we found our fathers upon. What! And though
their fathers had no sense at all, nor did they follow the right
way."***[^4]

The Prophet of Islam struggled against all unfavorable habits and
unfounded imitations which had fastened man's feet and hands like
chains. He tried to break these shackles, freeing man.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَيَضَعُ عَنْهُمْ إِصْرَهُمْ وَالْأَغْلَالَ الَّتِي كَانَتْ
عَلَيْهِمْ "
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And removes from them their burden and the shackles which were upon
them"***[^5]

The Prophet (S), elsewhere, has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"كُلُّ مَأثِرَةٍ فِي الجَاهِلِيَةِ تَحتَ قَدَمِي"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"I will trample all the superstitious ideas and remnants of the
pre-Islamic pagans."[^6]
Thus, anybody who wishes to find out the truth about religion should
find the right methods or at least refrain from accepting the wrong
ways. He should not resort to the blind imitation which is by itself a
factor for being misled. He should not carry on with his doubts, either.

[^1]: . “Alif lam Mim Ra. These are the verses of the book; and that
which is revealed to you from your lord is truth” [Surah al-Ra’d v.1].

[^2]: . Refer to Bihar, vol.15, p.117.

[^3]: . Ibn Abi al-Hadid’s commentary on Nahj al-Balaghah, vol.16, p.71.

[^4]: . Qur’an 2:170.

[^5]: . Qur’an 7:157.

[^6]: . Ibn Hisham's Sirah, vol.3, p.412. See Islam and Human Rights for
the hazards of blind imitation and Islam's struggle against it.


