27) Take the Prophet as your Guide and Islam as your Religion
=============================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَاعلَم يَا بُنَيَّ أنَّ اَحَداً لَم يُنَبِّئ عَنِ الله كَمَا اَنبَأ
عَنهُ الرَّسُولُ صَلّى الله عَلَيهِ وَآلهِ، فَارضَ بِهِ رَائِداً
وَاِلى النَجَاة قَائِداً فَانّي لَم اَلُكَ نَصِيحَةً وَاِنَّكَ لَن
تَبلُغَ في النَّظَرِ لِنَفسِكَ وَاِن اِجتَهَدتَ مَبلَغَ نَظَرِي لَكَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Know, my son, that no one has told us of Allah like the Prophet (S)
has. Thus, be content with him as a leader and as a guide to salvation.
Indeed, I have not fallen short in advice to you, and, however much you
may strive, you will never attain that degree of concern for your
welfare that I have for you”.*

Commentary
----------

In this part of the letter, Imam ‘Ali (as) emphasizes two points:

### 1. Muhammad's Religion Is The Best In The World

As we know that the prophets have been sent to people at different times
and under different conditions. The more backward the people, the
simpler was the prophets' training and educating people. Their schedules
were like those of present-day schools where in elementary schools
simpler books and methods are used whereas in the high schools we have
more complicated programs.  
 Since the more ancient Prophets were sent to people who had not
progressed enough, their methods of educating people were more
elementary, but since the Prophet of Islam was the last of the
Prophets,[^1] and his religion is eternally the way of life for all
men,[^2] there it is better to be said that "nobody has told us of Allah
like the Prophet (S) has", and his religion is the most comprehensive of
all religions.[^3] Anybody adopting another way of life is rejected.[^4]
It is also right to say: Only he is to be chosen as the leader[^5] since
his religion is the most comprehensive, his leadership the most perfect
and his commandments the most beneficial.

### 2. An Old One Sees In The Mud Brick What The Young One Can See In The Mirror

Every father wishes well for his child. He will not spare any advice in
building his personality. He is usually more decisive, determined and
experienced than the young one who usually possesses less experience. It
is an old saying that an old one sees in the mud brick what the young
one can see in the mirror.

Concerning the value of the ideas and thoughts of the aged, Imam
as-Sadiq (as) has said**:** "The existence of an elderly one in his
family is like the Prophet among his people".[^6]

And this is a fact. On the one hand, there is a father like Imam ‘Ali
(as), who is the gate of knowledge for the Prophet (S), and who is
well-experienced, and on the other hand, there is a child from the
Prophet's Household, who is going to guide the Islamic world in the near
future, and be the substitute for his father in the guidance of the
Muslim world. Therefore, for these valid reasons it is necessary that,
firstly, sufficient amount of advice be given him, and secondly, it was
suitable for Imam ‘Ali (as) to employ his own experiences in the
education of his son.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَاعْلَم يَا بُنَيَّ اِنَّه لَو كَانَ لِرَبِّكَ شَرِيكٌ لاَتَتكَ
رُسُلُه وَلَرَأيتَ آثَارَ مُلكِهِ وَسُلطَانِهِ وَلَعَرَفتَ اَفعَالَهُ
وَصِفَاتَه وَلكِنَّهُ اِلهٌ وَاحِدٌ كَمَا وَصَفَ نَفسَهُ لا يُضَادُهُ
في مُلكِهِ اَحَدٌ وَلا يَزُولُ اَبداً وَلَم يَزَل اَوَّلٌ قَبلَ
الاَشيَاءِ بِلا اَوَّلِيةٍ وَآخِرٌ بَعدَ الاَشْياَء بِلا نِهَايَة
عَظُمَ عَن اَن تَثْبُتَ رُبُوبِيَتِه بِاحَاطَةِ قَلبٍ اَو بَصَرٍ
فَاِذَا عَرَفتَ ذَلِكَ فَافعَل كَمَا يَنبَغِي لِمثلِكَ اَن يَفعَلَهُ
في صِغَرِ خَطَرِهِ وَقِلَّةِ مَقدِرَتِهِ وَكَثْرَةِ عَجْزِهِ وَعِظَمِ
حَاجَتِهِ اِلى رَبِّهِ في طَلَبِ طَاعَتِهِ وَالخَشْيَةِ مِن
عُقُوبَتِهِ وَالشَفَقَةَ مِن سَخَطِهِ فَاِنَّهُ لَم يَامُركَ اِلا
بِحُسْنٍ وَلَم يَنْهَكَ اِلا عَن قَبِيحٍ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Know, my son! If there were an associate for your Lord, his Prophets
would have come to you and you would have observed the signs of his
dominion and his rule and you would have recognized his acts and
attributes. But He is One, as He has described Himself. None opposes Him
in His sovereignty. He never ceases to be and He is eternal. He is the
First before all things, without any beginning, and the Last after all
things, without any end. He is far greater than that His Divinity be
proved through the comprehension of the heart or the eye. When you
realize that, then act as it befits one such as you to act – one with
his insignificance, his weakness, his incapacity and his tremendous need
of his Lord in seeking His obedience, dreading His chastisement and
fearing His anger, for He does not command you anything but good, and
does not forbid you from anything but evil”.*

[^1]: . “Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the
Apostle of Allah and the last of the Prophets” [Qur’an 30:40].

[^2]: . “And we have not sent you but to all the men as a bearer of good
news and as a warner”. [Qur’an 34:28]

[^3]: . “Surely this Qur’an guides to that which is most upright”
[Qur’an 17:9].

[^4]: . “And whoever desires a religion other than Islam, it shall not
be accepted from him, and in the hereafter he shall be one of the
losers”. [Qur’an 3:85]

[^5]: . Ra'id is the one who walks in front of the crowd to collect
information. Qa'id is the leader of the crowd. Sa'iq is the one who
walks at the back of the crowd guiding them in the right path.

[^6]: . La'‘Ali al-Akhbar, p.181.


