33) The Delicate Tasks of a Man towards His Friend
==================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"احمِل نَفسَكَ مِن اَخِيكَ عِندَ صَرْمِهِ على الصِّلَة وعِندَ صُدودِهِ
على الّلطفِ والمُقارَبَةِ وعِندَ جُمُودِهِ على البَذْلِ وعِندَ
تَباعُدِهِ على الدنُوِّ وعِندَ شِدَّتِهِ على الّلين وعِندَ جُرمِهِ على
العُذرِ حَتّى كأنّكَ لَهُ عَبدٌ وكأنّهُ ذو نِعمَةٍ عَلَيكَ واِيّاكَ ان
تَضَعَ ذلِكَ في غَيرِ مَوضِعِهِ او اَن تَفعَلَه بِغَيرِ اهلِهِ لا
تِتَّخِذَنَّ عَدُوَّ صَدِيقِكَ صَدِيقاً فَتُعادِيَ صَدِيقَكَ وامحِض
اَخاكَ النَصِيحَةِ حَسَنةً او قَبِيحَةً وتَجَرَّع الغَيظَ فانِي لمَ
ارَ جُرعَةً اَحلَى مِنها عَاقِبةً وَلا اَلَذَّ مَغبَّةً وَلِن لِمَن
غَالَظَكَ فإنّه يُوشَكُ أن يَلِينَ لَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وخُذ على عَدوِّكَ بالفَضلِ فإنّهُ احلى الظَفَرَين واِن ارَدتَ
قَطِيعَةَ اَخِيكَ فاستَبْقِ لَهُ مِن نَفسِكَ بَقِيّةً يَرجِعُ اِلَيها
اِن بَدا لَهُ ذَلِكَ يَوماً مَا. وَمَن ظَنَّ بِكَ خَيراً فصَدِّق
ظَنَّه وَلا تُضِيعَنَّ حَقَّ اَخِيكَ اتِّكالاً على مَا بَينَكَ وبَينَه
فإنّهُ لَيسَ لَكَ بأخٍ مَن اَضعتَ حَقَّه. وَلا يَكُن اَهلُكَ اَشقَى
الخَلقِ بِكَ وَلا تَرغَبَنَّ فِيمَن زَهِدَ عَنكَ وَلا يَكونَنَّ
اَخُوكَ عَلى قَطِيعَتِكَ اَقوى مِنكَ عَلى صِلَتِه وَلا يَكُونَنَّ على
الإسَاءَةِ اقوى مِنكَ على الإحسَانِ وَلا يَكبُرَنَّ عَليكَ ظُلْمُ مَن
ظَلمَكَ فإنَّهُ يَسْعى في مَضَرّتِه ونَفعِكَ ولَيسَ جَزاءُ مَن سَرَّكَ
ان تَسُوءَه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Against the unfriendly behavior of your brother, do the following:
when he severs his relationship with you, you (continue to) establish
relations with him. When he turns away from you, you show kindness and
draw close to him. When he is stingy, be generous towards him; when he
moves away, you come near to him. When he is harsh, you be gentle
towards him. When he commits an offense, forgive him. Treat him so until
it is as if you are his slave and he is your benefactor. But take care
not to do this where it is inappropriate or to one who is not worthy of
it. Never take the enemy of your friend as your friend, for in this way
you will incur the hostility of your friend. Be sincere in your advice
to your brother whether this advice is good or ugly (in his opinion).
Swallow your anger, for I have not seen a draught sweeter in outcome
than it, or with a more pleasant result. Be gentle to one who treats you
harshly: he will soon be gentle towards you.*

*Treat your enemy with favours, because it is the sweeter of the two
victories (i.e. revenge or the bestowal of favours). If you wish to
sever relations with your brother, leave some room for him to return to
your friendship if he wishes to someday. If one has a good opinion of
you, confirm his opinion of you. Never neglect your brother’s right by
relying on the friendship that is between you and him, because one whose
rights you neglect is not your brother. Do not let your family be the
most wretched of people because of you. Do not desire (the friendship
of) one who shuns you.*  
*Your brother should not be more powerful in severing relations with you
than you are in establishing relations with him, and he should not be
stronger in ill-treatment of you than you are in doing good to him. Do
not consider as great the wrong-doing of one who wrongs you because he
is harming himself and benefiting you. The reward of one who makes you
happy is not that you should offend him”*.

Commentary
----------

Imam ‘Ali (as), in this letter, mentions some of the delicate tasks of a
man towards his friend. We will refer to some of these points below:

The Role Of Friendship And The Tasks Imposed By It
--------------------------------------------------

Although some of these points have already been dealt with sporadically
in this book, a compact summary of them is in order here.

As we know, a man needs a genuine friend and companion for the following
reasons:  
**1.** Man is a sociable creature by nature. He may not carry on living
without a companion.  
 Thus, Raghib, under the item "insan" (man) writes:  
 "Man is called (man) because he is created in such a way that he can
not continue his life without others. Thus, it is said that man is
sociable by nature. This is because he may not solve his problems
without others’ cooperation"[^1]  
**2.** One of the ways a man’s personality takes form is his association
with his fellow-creatures. This is because, due to his trait of forming
habits, he learns from others. It is said,

> "المَرءُ عَلى دِينِ خَلِيله وقَرِينه"702

*"A person follows the religion of his intimate friend and companion”.*

**3.** A man has needs which he can not satisfy single-handedly. A
friend can help him out of his difficulties. Imam ‘Ali (as) has said in
this respect:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"عَلَيكُم بالاخوانِ فاِنَّهُم عُدَّةٌ في الدّنيا وَالآخِرَةِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Do not forget to have brethren and good friends; they are a provision
(for you) in this world and in the Hereafter."*[^2]

However, firstly in selecting friends we should take care. The person
might tarn out to be a thief.  
 Imam ‘Ali (as) has said in this respect:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لا تَصحَبِ الشرِّيرَ فإنَّ طَبعَكَ يَسرِق مِن طَبعِهِ شرّاً وانتَ لا
تَعلَم"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Do not take a bad person as your friend because your nature steals
evil from his nature while you are unaware."*

In another occasion, Imam ‘Ali (as) has said:

> "مَن اتّخذَ أخاً مِن غَيرِ اختبار ألجأهُ الإضطرار إلى مُرافَقَة
> الأشرار"704

*"A person who takes a brother (as a friend) without putting him to the
test, will be compelled to be friends with evil people."*

Secondly, when we purposefully select a person as a friend, we will know
the limits of friendship. Finding a friend is easy, keeping him is much
harder.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أعجَزُ النّاسِ مَن عَجِزَ عن اكتِسابِ الاخوان، وأعجَزُ مِنهُ مَن
ضَيَّعَ مَن ظَفَرَ بِهِ مِنهُم"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"The weakest person is the one who cannot find a friend and still
weaker than such a person is the one who loses his friend."*[^3]

The Rights And Limits Of Friendship In Imam ‘Ali’s Words
--------------------------------------------------------

In books on ethics there are discussion on the rights and limits of
friendship in detail. There are even some books written on this
issue.[^4] But in the following section we will describe these rights as
Imam ‘Ali (as) perceives them.

### 1. Protecting The Bond Of Friendship

One of the rights of friendship is the protection of the bond of
friendship. Imam ‘Ali (as) in this respect says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مِن كَرَمِ المَرءِ بُكاؤُهُ على ما مَضَى مِن زَمانِهِ وحَنِينه الى
أوطانِهِ وحِفظُ قَدِيمِ اِخوانِه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Among the nobilities of man is his weeping over the days of his life
(that he has passed negligently), his yearning for his homeland and
keeping his old friends".*[^5]

Imam ‘Ali (as) reports from the Prophet (S) that he considered thirty
rights for a Muslim's bond of friendship.[^6]

Now what should one do if his partner sold this valuable item for
nothing? Should he stay indifferent towards the other person's
indignation, or should he do his best to establish his friendship once
again?  
 In books of traditions there are many cases on friendship. We will
discuss two of them here:

**a)** The great Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أيُما مُسلِمَينِ تَهاجَرا فَمَكثا ثَلاثاً لا يَصطَلِحانِ إلاّ كانا
خَارجَينِ مِن الإسلام ولَم يَكُن بَينَهُما وِلايَةٌ فأيُهما سَبَقَ إلى
كَلامِ أخِيه كانَ السابِقَ إلى الجَنَّة يَومَ الحِسابِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"If two Muslims cut off relations with each other and remain so for
three days without reconciliation, they are both out of Islam and there
is no friendship between them. Whichever of them precedes in speaking to
his brother will precede him in entering Paradise on the Day of
Reckoning”.*[^7]

**b)** Imam Sadiq (as) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لا يَفتَرِقُ رَجُلانِ على الهِجرانِ إلاّ استَوجَبَ احَدُهُما
البَراءَةَ والّلعنَةَ ورُبَما استَحَقَّ ذلِكَ كِلاهُما فقالَ لَهُ
مُعتب: جَعَلَني الله فِداكَ هذا الظَالِم فَما بَالُ المَظلُوم؟ قالَ
لإنَّه لا يَدعُو أخاهُ إلى صِلَتِه ولا يَتغامَسُ لَه عَن كَلامِهِ،
سَمِعتُ ابي يقول: إذا تَنازَعَ اثنان فعازَّ احدُهُمَا الآخرَ فَليَرجِع
المَظلُومُ إلى صَاحِبِه حتّى يَقولَ لِصاحِبِهِ: أي أخي أنَا الظَالِمُ
حَتّى يَقطَعَ الهِجرانَ بَينَه وبَينَ صاحِبه فإنَّ الله تبارَكَ وتعالى
حَكَمُ عدلٍ يأخُذُ لِلمَظلُومِ مِنَ الظالمِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Two people do not separate and cut off relations with each other
except that one of them, and perhaps both, deserves Allah's
chastisement”. Mu’tab, one of Imam's companions asked him: “The one who
is tyrant deserves this punishment. What about the oppressed one; what
is his fault”? Imam (as) answered: “He is guilty because he did not
invite his friend to establish the friendship bond once again and he did
not ignore his speech. I heard from my father who said: If two persons
quarrel and one is victorious, the defeated one should go to the other
and tell him: "Brother, I am the oppressor". In this way, they can make
peace. Allah is the just Judge. He will punish the oppressor"*[^8]

It is because of this point that Imam ‘Ali (as), in his erudite letter,
commands us to:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"احمِل نَفسَكَ مِن أخِيكَ عِندَ صَرَمِه على الصِّلَةِ وعِندَ صُدُودِه
على الُّلطفِ والمُقَارَبَة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When your brother severs his relationship with you, you make yourself
establish relations with him. When he turns away from you, you show
kindness and draw near to him”.*

### 2. Be Generous Although He Is A Miser

One of the factors which weaken our friendship is being parsimonious and
stingy. On the contrary, generosity causes people to gather around the
generous person. As it is emphasized in the Islamic traditions, one of
the duties of people is to show generosity towards their friend.

In order for this objective to materialize, Islam orders the belivers to
engage in doing good and be benevolent; some examples of these orders
are presented below:

Imam ‘Ali (as) at his death gave this recommendation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"عَلَيكُم بالتَواصُلِ والتَباذُلِ وإيَّاكُم والتَدابُرِ والتَقاطُع"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Strengthen the bonds of friendship and give generously to each other.
Avoid turning your back and severing relations (with your
brothers)."*[^9]

Somebody asked Imam Sadiq (as) about a believer's tasks towards other
believers. Imam Sadiq (as) enumerated seven rights:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اَيسَرُ حَقٍّ مِنهَا اَن تُحِبَّ لَهُ مَا تُحِبُّ لِنَفسِكَ وَتَكرَه
لَه مَا تَكرَهُ لِنَفسِكَ والحَقُّ الثَانِي اَن تَمشِي في حَاجَتِهِ
وتَبغِي رِضاهُ وَلا تُخالِفَ قَولَهُ وَالحَقُّ الثَالِثُ اَن تَصِلَه
بِنَفسِكَ ومَالِكَ ويَدِكَ ورِجلِكَ ولِسَانِكَ..."
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The simplest right is to love for him what you love for yourself and
to dislike for him what you dislike for yourself. The second right is to
provide him with his needs, to seek to satisfy him and not contradict
him. The third right is to strengthen your bond with him through
yourself, your wealth, your hand, your foot and your tongue..”.*

Imam Sadiq (as) reports the Prophet (S) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لِلمُؤمِن على المُؤمِنِ سَبعَةُ حُقُوقٍ وَاجِبَةٍ مِنَ الله
عَزَّوجَلَّ عَليهِ: الإجلالُ لَهُ في عَينهِ والوِدّ لَهُ في صَدرِه
والمُواساةُ لَه في مَالِه وان يُحرِّمَ غَيبَتَه وَاَن يَعُودَه في
مَرَضِه وَاَن يُشَيِّعَ جَنازَتَه وَاَن لا يَقُولَ فِيهِ بَعدَ مَوتِهِ
إلا خَيراً"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"A believer has seven duties made incumbent on him by God towards
another believer: To respect him in his presence; to love him in his
heart; to help him with his possessions; to forbid speaking ill of him
in his absence; to visit him when he is sick; to take part in his
funeral service; and to speak only good about him after his
death."*[^10]

Among the advice the Prophet (S) gave Imam ‘Ali (as) on his death was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ثَلاثٌ لا تُطِيقُها هَذِهِ الأمّة: المُواسَاةُ للأخِ في مَالِه
واِنصَافُ النّاسِ مِن نَفسِهِ وذِكْرُ الله على كُلِّ حالٍ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"There are three things which this Ummah is unable to carry out:
helping one’s brother in faith with his wealth; doing justice to people;
and remembering God in every condition."*[^11]

With regards to the above issues what should a man do when friendship is
not observed by some, when others are parsimonious, when they remain
miser? Should he retaliate and do the same thing or should he go to the
other extreme and do benevolence?

To solve this dilemma, Imam ‘Ali (as) emphasizes that we should confront
such cases with benevolence and generosity:

*When he is stingy, be generous towards him:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَعِندَ جُمُودِه على البَذلِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

Concerning this issue, Imam ‘Ali (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"عَوِّدُوا بِالفَضلِ على مَن حَرَمَكُم"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Habituate yourself to be bountiful to those who have deprived
you".*[^12]

### 3. When He Moves Away From You, Come Near To Him

Sometimes there are some factors which make a man offended and he tries
to stay away from the offender. In such cases the oppressed one should
use kindness and generosity towards the offender and alleviate the
situation.

In the Islamic traditions, the following technical terms are used to
explain the situations: "Tazaver" meaning the increase of kindness,
"birr", doing good things to others; "Silah", the establishment of
relations, "ta’attuf", showing emotions and care for others; "Tawaddud",
showing friendship. Through these techniques we can easily bridge the
differences. We will refer to some of these issues here:

Kulayb al-Asadi says: I heard Imam Husayn (as) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"سَمِعتُ أبَا عبدالله عليه السلام يقول: تَواصَلُوا وَتَبارُّوا
وَتَراحَمُوا وَكُونُوا إخوَةً بَرَرةً كمَا امَرَكُم الله"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Establish relations with each other, do good to each other, have mercy
on each other and be righteous brothers, as Allah has commanded
you."*[^13]

Shu’ayb Aqarqui says: I heard Imam Sadiq (as) telling his followers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اتَّقُوا الله وَكُونُوا إخوَةً بَرَرَةً مُتحَابِّينَ في الله
مُتَواصِلِينَ مُتَراحِمِينَ تَزاوَروا وتَلاقَوا وتَذاكَرُوا أمرَنا
واَحيُوه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Fear Allah and be righteous brothers who love one another for the sake
of Allah, establish relations with one other and have mercy on one
another. Visit and meet one another and remind each other of our affair
and revive it."*[^14]

The great Prophet (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الزِيَارَة تُنبِتُ المَودَّة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Visiting each other causes love to grow."*[^15]

Imam Sadiq (as), enumerating the rights of others on a genuine believer,
emphasizes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فَإِن كَانَ عَلَيكَ عاتِباً فَلا تُفارِقهُ حَتّى تَسألَ سَمِيحَتَه
(تَسِلَّ سَخِيمَتَه)"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"If he is annoyed with you, do not part from him until you apologize to
him (gently remove his rancor)"*[^16]

It is for this reason that Imam ‘Ali (as) writes in his letter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وعِندَ تَباعُدِهِ على الدُنو"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"When he moves away, you come near to him.”*

### 4. When He Is Harsh, You Be Gentle Towards Him

Some people are severe by nature and some show harsh treatment when
placed under certain conditions. In both cases, the most fundamental
principle to observe is a mild and easy-going attitude, especially if
the other person is a friend.

The Holy Qur’an in commission to call people to God's religion, orders
Moses and his brother to talk calmly and use kind techniques and
behaviors since this method is more effective than severe and harsh
methods and will not force the listener to adopt the escape mechanism.
The listener might refer to his own nature and be influenced by the
preacher:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اذْهَبَا إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ إِنَّهُ طَغَى فَقُولَا لَهُ قَوْلًا
لَيِّنًا لَعَلَّهُ يَتَذَكَّرُ أَوْ يَخْشَى"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Go both to Fir’awn, surely he has become inordinate; then speak to
him a gentle word; haply he may mind or fear".***[^17]

Imam ‘Ali (as) both in this letter and in Nahj al-Balaghah emphasize on
this moral principle. In other Hikam of Nahj al-Balaghah where he
enumerates the specific traits of the believers, he continues:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"سَهلُ الخَلِيقَةِ لَيّنُ العَرِيكَةِ، نَفسُهُ اصلَبُ مِنَ الصَلدِ
وَهُوَ اذَلُّ مِنَ العَبْدِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"(A believer is of) easy disposition, gentle in temperament; he is
stronger than stone, but more humble than a slave."*[^18]

In the sermon about the qualities of the God-fearing ones addressed to
his companion Hammam, Imam ‘Ali (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وحَزماً في لِينٍ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"A believer is both prudent and lenient".*[^19]

Elsewhere he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ليّناً قُولُه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"A believer's speech is gentle."*[^20]

In this letter, Imam ‘Ali (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وعِندَ شِدَّتِهِ على الّلِينِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"*When he is harsh, you be gentle towards him”.*

Still in another occasion he invites people to be soft, telling them the
philosophy of being cool and quiet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ولِن لِمَن غَالَظَكَ فَإنَّه يُوشَكُ ان يَلِينَ لَكَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Be gentle to one who treats you harshly: he will soon be gentle
towards you.”*

Of course, according to the first principle, treating severity with
temperate manners, is ethical. However, such pacific manners are
criticized by some harsh and impolite individuals. This causes their
haughtiness to swell, they say. In such cases we have to perform the
same harsh manners. The Great Qur’an describes the manners of believers
towards infidels in the following manner,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مُحَمَّدٌ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ أَشِدَّاءُ عَلَى
الْكُفَّارِ رُحَمَاءُ بَيْنَهُمْ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah, and those with him are firm of
heart against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves."***[^21]

### 5. When He Commits Sins And Offenses, Accept His Excuses

Due to his different instincts, and because of the freedoms and free
choices that man has, he will go astray if God's blessings do not assist
him.

After committing sins, man may become aware of the nasty nature of what
he has done and may want to apologize to God and to people. Now if his
excuses are not accepted, he might get exasperated and bold and get
himself involved in more crimes. Or he may get disappointed and
hopeless. Thus, in Islam, Allah both accepts apologies and considers the
despair from asking for pardons a great sin and orders people to follow
suit.

The great Prophet (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَن اقالَ مُسلِماً عَثرَتَه اقالَ الله عَثرَتَهُ يَومَ القِيامَةِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Guidelines Of The Leaders Of Religion In This Respect
---------------------------------------------------------

Imam Sadiq (as) has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الغَضَبُ مِفتَاحُ كُلِّ شَرٍّ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

How To Control And Cure Anger
-----------------------------

It was said that anger is necessary for the defense of one's life, wife,
personal and social rights. But control and cure, especially when it
goes beyond the rational limits, have always been the focus of the
attention of the Islamic religion and faith. The techniques these
scholars have suggested are:

**a)** Change your body posture: If you are standing, sit down; if you
are sitting, lie down, splash water on your face; eat something; discuss
on a new topic and the like. The great Prophet (S) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنَّ الغَضَبَ جَمْرَةٌ تَتَوقَّدُ في القَلبِ اَلَم تَرَ الى انتِفاخِ
اودَاجِهِ وحُمرَةِ عَينِهِ فَاِذا وَجَدَ احَدُكُم مِن ذَلِكَ شَيئاً
فَاِن كانَ قائِماً فَليَجلِس وَاِن كانَ جَالِساً فَليَنَم فَاِن لَم
يَزل ذَلِكَ فَليَتَوضّأ بِالماءِ البَارِدِ وَلِيَغتَسِل فانَّ النّارَ
لا يُطفِيها إلاّ الماءُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Anger is a piece of fire which is kindled in man's heart. Can't you
see how your veins are swollen and your eyes are red? If one of you
experiences something of that, then sit down if you are standing, or lie
down if you are sitting. If you are still angry, then wash your face or
carry out ablution with cold water, and bathe, for fire is only
extinguished with water."*[^22]

**b)** Restrain your anger. The Holy Qur’an mentions the restraint of
anger, pardoning people and spending benevolently as the traits of the
believers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَالْكَاظِمِينَ الْغَيْظَ وَالْعَافِينَ عَنْ النَّاسِ وَاللَّهُ
يُحِبُّ الْمُحْسِنِينَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"[Those who spend benevolently in ease as well as in straitness], and
those who restrain their anger and pardon men; and Allah loves the doers
of good to others"***[^23]

As you notice, the Holy Qur’an first orders us to restrain our anger,
secondly, to wash our hearts through pardoning and thirdly to engage in
spending benevolently.

Imam ‘Ali (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"احتَرِسُوا مِن سُورَةِ الغَضَبِ واعِدّوا لَهُ ما تُجاهِدونَهُ بِه
مِنَ الكَظمِ والحِلمِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Guard yourselves against the outburst of anger. Prepare restraint and
forbearance for it by which you struggle against it”.*[^24]

Imam ‘Ali (as) has also said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"رَدُّ الغَضَبِ بالحِلمِ ثَمَرةُ العِلمِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Repelling anger through forbearance is the fruit of knowledge."*[^25]

The Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَا مِن جُرعَةٍ احَبُّ الى الله تَعالى مِن جُرعَةِ غَيظٍ يَكظِمُها
عَبدٌ ومَا كَظَمَها عَبدٌ إلاّ مَلأ الله جَوفَهُ إيماناً"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"There is no draught more loved by God than the draught of anger which
the servant swallows. A servant does not restrain his anger but that
Allah fills him with faith."*[^26]

Imam Baqir (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَن كَظَمَ غَيظاً وَهُوَ يَقدِرُ على امضَائِهِ حَشا الله قَلبَهُ
أمناً وايماناً يَومَ القِيامَةِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"On the Day of Judgment, God will fill with faith and tranquility the
heart of one who restrains his anger although he is able to express
it."*[^27]

It is for this reason that Imam (as) in his letter commands us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وتَجَرَّعِ الغَيظَ فإنى لمَ اَرَ جُرعَةً احلى مِنها عَاقِبَةً ولا
الذَّ مَغَبَّةً"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"*Swallow your anger, for I have not seen a draught sweeter in outcome
than it, or with a more pleasant result."*

### 10. Do Good To Your Enemy

Since doing good connects two individuals and the receiver of
beneficence feels in debt to the doer of good as Imam ‘Ali (as) mentions

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الإنسانُ عَبدُ الاحسَانِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Man is a slave to benevolence"*[^28]

Therefore, in Islam, doing good and beneficence is emphasized as a
general principle:

> "إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالإِحْسَانِ"731

***"Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good to
others".***

Even in case of divorce, when all emotional relations break, God orders
the husband to pay all the alimony to her.

> "وَلَا تَنسَوْا الْفَضْلَ بَيْنَكُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
> بَصِيرٌ"732

***"And do not neglect the giving of free gifts between you; surely
Allah sees what you do."***

The principle of beneficence is emphasized in Islam for both friends and
foes alike. Imam ‘Ali (as) says in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الاحسَانُ الى المُسِيئ احسَنُ الفَضلِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Doing good to evildoers is the best kind of benevolence."*[^29]

Imam ‘Ali (as) has also said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الاحسَانُ الى المُسِيئِ لَيُصلِحُ المُسيء حتى لو كان عَدُوّاً "
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Doing good to an evildoer makes him good even if he is your
enemy."*[^30]

He has also stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"احسِن الى المُسِيئِ تَملِكُه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Do good to one who has done wrong, and you will dominate him."*[^31]

It is for this reason that Imam ‘Ali (as), in his letter, emphasizes
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"خُذْ على عَدوّكَ بِالفَضلِ فإنَّه احلَى الظَفَرَينِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"*Treat your enemy favourably, because it is the sweeter of the two
victories (i.e. revenge or the bestowal of favours)*

It is obvious that we could dominate our enemy through force. But this
kind of victory lacks the sweetness gained through doing benevolence to
our enemy."[^32] There is an old maxim "There exists a pleasantness in
pardoning which does not exist in taking revenge."

### 11. If You Wish To Dissociate From A Friend, Do Not Destroy All The Bridges

As the ocean water is always in fluctuation, sometimes calm and
sometimes turbulent, friendship is at times warm and sometimes cool.
Sometimes relations exits and at other times they are cut. We should not
go to extremes either at establishing relations telling our friend all
our secrets or at the time of disconnection, destroying all bridges.

Imam Reza (as) narrates from Imam ‘Ali (as) that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"احبِب حَبِيبَكَ هَوناً ما فَعَسَى ان يَكُونَ بَغِيضكَ يَوماً مَا
وابغِض بَغِيضَكَ هَوناً مَا فَعَسَى ان يَكُونَ حَبِيبَكَ يَوماً مَا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Love your friend moderately since he might someday be your enemy. And
show moderate animosity towards your enemy since one day he might turn
out to be your friend"*[^33]

Imam Sadiq (as) told some of his followers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لا تُطلِع صَدِيقَكَ مِن سِرِّكَ الا عَلى مَا لَو اطَّلَعَ عَلَيهِ
عَدوكَ لَم يَضُرّكَ فانَّ الصَدِيقَ قَد يَكُونُ عَدُوّكَ يَوماً مَا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Do not tell your friend all your secrets except for those secrets
which if your enemy knew, would not harm you, for your friend may
someday be your enemy."*[^34]

Imam ‘Ali (as) emphasizes in this letter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَاِن اَرَدتَ قَطِيعَةَ اَخِيكَ فاستَبْقِ لَهُ مِن نَفسِكَ بَقيّةً
يَرجِعُ الَيها اِن بَدا لَهُ ذَلِكَ يَوماً مَا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If you wish to sever relations with your brother, leave some room for
him to return to your friendship if he wishes to someday.”*

Sa’di, the Persian writer and poet, writes in the eighth chapter of his
book Gulistan: "Do not let your friend know all your secrets because you
are not aware that he might one day turn into an enemy. Do not exert any
blow you can upon your enemy since he might become your friend someday."

### 12. Confirm People’s Good Opinion Of You

If rightfulness dominates a community and crimes are not experienced in
such a society, it is necessary for people to have a good opinion of
each another. Imam ‘Ali (as) says regarding this issue:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ضَع امرَ اخِيكَ على احسَنِه حَتّى يَأتِيكَ ما يَغلِبُكَ مِنهُ ولا
تَظُنَنَّ بِكَلِمَةٍ خَرَجَت مِن اَخِيكَ سُوءاً وَاَنتَ تَجِدُ لَها في
الخَيرِ مَحْمَلاً"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Regard your brother’s affair in the most favorable way until you hear
of something that overcomes your good opinion of him. Never think evil
of any word uttered by your brother when you can take it as good."*[^35]
  
 But if corruption reigns in a community and individuals commit sins and
wrong-doing, a bad opinion of others would be inevitable. Thus, Imam
‘Ali (as) in his Nahj al-Balaghah, considers optimism in such conditions
as self-deception:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِذَا استَولى الصَلاحُ على الزَمَانِ واهلِهِ ثُمَّ اسَاءَ رَجُلٌ
الظَنَّ بِرَجُلٍ لَم تَظهَر مِنهُ حَوبَةٌ فَقَد ظَلَمَ واِذا استَولى
الفَسادُ على الزَّمانِ واهلِهِ واحسَنَ رَجلٌ الظَنَّ بِرَجُلٍ فَقَد
غَرَّرَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"If, at a time when goodness is prevalent among people, a person has an
evil opinion of one from whom no sin has been seen, he has wronged him.
And if, at a time when corruption is prevalent among people, a person
has a good opinion of another, he has deluded himself."*[^36]

Thus, we should avoid performing any act which causes people to become
suspicious of us: acts such as keeping company with ill-educated people;
frequenting places where accusing people prevails, and doing actions
which arise people’s suspicion. In this respect the great Prophet (S)
has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اتَّقُوا مَواضِعَ التُهَم"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Avoid frequenting places that are suspect."*[^37]

Imam ‘Ali (as) has also said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَن عَرَّضَ نَفسَهُ لِلتُهمَةِ فَلا يَلومَنَّ مَن اسَاءَ بِهِ
الظَنَّ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"One who exposes himself to suspicion should not blame others for
having a bad opinion of him"*[^38]

The Emphasis Of Leaders Of Religion
-----------------------------------

In our Islamic traditions, fortunately all the above issues are dealt
with:  
 The great Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اولَى النّاسِ بِالتُهمَةِ مَن جَالَسَ اهلَ التُهمَةِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"The one most deserving of being an object of suspicion is one who sits
in the company of people who are suspect."*[^39]

Imam ‘Ali (as) has said in this respect:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَن وَقَفَ نَفسَه مَوقِفَ التُهمَةِ فَلا يَلومَنَّ مَن اسَاءَ بِهِ
الظَنَّ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"He who places himself in a position that is suspect should not blame
one who has a bad opinion of him."*[^40]

Imam ‘Ali (as) has said as well,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ومَن دَخلَ مَداخِلَ السُوءِ اتُّهِمَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"One who enters places of ill-repute will be suspect."*[^41]

The great Prophet (S) one day was talking with his wife Safiyah when one
of his companions passed by that place. The Prophet (S) called him
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يَا فُلانُ هَذِهِ زَوجَتِي صَفِيَّة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"*O man, this is my wife, Safiyah".*

The man said, "O Messenger of Allah, do we have to think otherwise?" The
Prophet (S) replied, "Satan flows in man’s body like blood. I feared it
might get into your mind."[^42]

Imam as-Sadiq (as) has stated his opinion regarding this issue:

> "اتّقُوا مَواضِعَ الرَّيبِ ولا يَقِفَنَّ احَدُكُم مَعَ اُمِّهِ في
> الطَّرِيق فاِنَّه لَيسَ كُلُّ احَدٍ يَعرِفُها"747

*"Avoid situations of doubt. Never stop on a way with your mother when
people do not know you are her son."*

The reason why Imam Zayn al-Abidin (as) in the prayer called Makarim
al-Akhlaq asks God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ومِن ظَنَّةِ اهَلِ الصَلاحِ الثِقَةَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"(Replace for me) the suspicion of the people of righteousnesss with
trust."*[^43]

The reason for this worship was that at the time of this Imam (as)
suspicion and lack of confidence reigned the time because of the
prevalent corruption. At such a time it is prudent to consider the
actions of others as acts of corruption unless the opposite is found to
be true. Therefore Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (as) invokes God to help others
to find out the truth about him.[^44]

But Imam ‘Ali (as) writes in his letter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ومَن ظَنَّ بِكَ خَيراً فصَدِّق ظَنَّه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"*If one has a good opinion of you, confirm his opinion of you”.*

This statement of Imam ‘Ali’s applies to that case when man lives in
conditions where people think of him as good and he has to act in such a
way not to betray them. He has, then, to continue to receive that good
opinion from them. For instance, if people think he is a generous man,
he should act accordingly.[^45]

### 13. A Close Friendship Should Not Result In The Deprivation Of Rights Of The Friend

A close friendship should not result in a person depriving his friend of
his rights. He should not lose his respect. For instance, a close friend
of ours enters a gathering and everyone, except us, stands up in
respect. Another example, a close friend introduces everyone to a
dignitary but does not care to use the right words to introduce his
friend. This act of his will leave a negative impression in his friend’s
mind. He will either cut his relations with him or become hostile to
him. There is a maxim which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِضاعَةُ الحُقُوقِ دَاعِيَةُ العُقوقِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Neglecting rights causes the severance of relationships."[^46]

It is for this reason that Imam ‘Ali (as) writes in his letter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ولا تُضِيعَنَّ حَقَّ اخِيكَ اتِكالاً عَلى ما بَينَكَ وبَينَه فانَّه
لَيسَ بِأخٍ مَن اضَعْتَ حَقَّه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Never neglect your brother’s right by relying on the friendship that
is between you and him, because one whose rights you neglect is not your
brother.”*

### 14. Do Favors To Your Household And Tribe

Sometimes due to too much engagements, or because of his confidence in
family relations, or because he has got a social status, a man might
think that he no longer needs his family or relatives and might forget
their rights. This act of his is hazardous both here and in the
hereafter.  
 On the disadvantages of this breaking off ties of relationship there
are some traditions to the effect that those who break off ties are
deprived of paradise:

The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ثَلاثَةٌ لا يَدخُلُونَ الجَنَّة: مُدمِنُ خَمرٍ ومُؤمِنُ سِحرٍ وقاطِعُ
رَحِمٍ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"There are three groups who will not enter paradise: A chronic
wine-drinker, a believer in witchcraft and one who severs the ties of
kinship."*[^47]  
 The Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اخبَرَني جَبرئِيلُ انَّ رِيحَ الجَنَّةِ تُوجَدُ مِن مَسِيرَةِ الفِ
عامٍ مَا يَجدُها عَاقٌّ ولا قاطِعُ رَحِمٍ ولا شَيخٌ زَانٍ ..."
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Gabriel has informed me that the fragrance of paradise can be
experienced from the distance of a thousand years, but a person whose
parents are not satisfied with him or one who breaks off ties of
relationship or an old man who indulges in adultery will not experience
it…."*[^48]

Ala’ Ibn Fadl says he heard Imam Sadiq (as) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الرَحِمُ مُعَلَّقةٌ بِالعَرشِ تَقُول الّلهُمَّ صِل مَن وَصَلَنِي
واقطَع مَن قَطَعَنِي وهِيَ رَحِمُ آلُ مُحمَّد ورَحِمُ كُلُّ مٌؤمِنٍ
وهو قولُ الله (وَالَّذِينَ يَصِلُونَ مَا أَمَرَ اللَّهُ بِهِ أَنْ
يُوصَلَ وَيَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ وَيَخَافُونَ سُوءَ الْحِسَابِ) "
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘The womb (i.e.ties of relationship) is fastened to the Divine Throne
(in the Highest Heaven). It says: O God, establish relations with one
who establishes relations with me, and sever relations with one who
severs relations with me. This is the tie of relationship belonging to
Aal Muhammad [Muhammad's Household] and that of every believer. It is
the statement of Allah:* ***"And those who join that which Allah has
forbidden to be joined and have awe of their Lord and fear the evil
reckoning***”.[^49]’

Its worldly disadvantage is that the breaking off ties of relationship
shortens one's life and might end in sudden death and deprives a person
of his relative's help in time of distress.  
 It is for this reason that Imam ‘Ali (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“يا ايُّها النّاسُ انَّه لا يَستَغنِي الرَجُلُ وَاِن كانَ ذَا مَالٍ
عَن عِترَتِه ودِفاعِهِم عَنهُ بايدِيهِم واَلسِنَتِهم وَهُم اَعظَمُ
النّاسِ حِيطَةً مِن وَرائِهِ وأَلَمَّهُم لِشَعَثِه واعطَفَهِم عَلَيهِ
عِندَ نَازِلَةٍ اذا نَزَلَت بِه ولِسَانُ الصِدقِ يَجعَلُهُ الله
لِلمَرءِ في النّاسِ خَيرٌ لَهُ مِنَ المالِ يَرِثُه غَيرُه، اَلا لا
يَعدِلَنَّ احدُكُم عَن القَرابَة يَرى بِها الخَصَاصَةَ ان يَسُدَّها
بِالّذِي لا يَزِيدُه اِن امسَكَهُ ولا يَنقُصُه اِن اهلَكَهُ ومَن
يَقبِضُ يَدَه عَن عَشِيرَتِه فانَّما تَقبِضُ مِنهُ عَنهُم يَدٌ
وَاحِدَة وتَقبِضُ مِنهُم عَنهُ ايدٍ كَثِيرَةٍ ومَن تَلِن حَاشِيَتُه
يَستَدِم مِن قَومِه المَوَدَّة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"O people! No man, however rich he may be, is free of need of his
relatives and their defence of him with their hands and tongues. They
are the greatest of people in protection behind him, the best ones to
consolidate his affairs, and the kindest to him in any trial that
befalls him.*  
*A good name which God gives a person among people is better for him
than (his) wealth which someone else will inherit.*

*Indeed, none of you should turn away from meeting the needs of
relatives whom you see in poverty with that which will neither increase
if you withhold it nor decrease if you spend it (on them). He who
refrains from giving his relatives has withheld only one (helping) hand
from them, while (their)* *many hands have been withheld from him. He
who is gentle to his dependants will continually receive the love of his
people”.*[^50]

It is for this reason that Imam ‘Ali (as) writes in this letter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ولا يَكُن اهلُكَ اشقَى الخَلقَ بِكَ ..."
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not let your family be the most wretched of people because of
you”.*

You should not deprive your family of your generosity and kindness since
at critical times they will come to your help. If you spare them just a
little help, they will in difficult times give you much assistance since
you are one, but they are many.

Imam ‘Ali (as) at the end of his letter writes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“وَأكرِم عَشِيرَتَكَ فانَّهُم جَناحَكَ الّذِي بِهِ تَطِيرُ وأصلَكَ
الّذي اِلَيهِ تَصِير ويَدَكَ الّتي بِها تَصُول"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Love your kinsfolk since they are your wings with which you fly, your
root to which you will return, and your hand with which you assault”.*

### 15. Do Not Show Affection To One Who Does Not Wish To Be Your Friend

Friendship, as we know, depends on mutual relations. Thus, it does not
exist if one of the partners is unwilling to associate. Rather, it is
humiliation on the part of the one who is eager to have a relationship
with the other. Imam ‘Ali (as), in Nahj al-Balaghah, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"زُهدُكَ في رَاغِبٍ فِيكَ نُقصَانُ حَظٍ ورَغبَتُكَ في زَاهِدٍ فِيكَ
ذُلُّ نَفسٍ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Your shunning one who inclines towards you is a decrease in your
share, and your inclining towards one who shuns you is a cause of your
humiliation."*[^51]

It is for this reason that Imam ‘Ali (as) has ordered us in his letter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ولا تَرغَبَنَّ فِيمَن زَهِدَ عَنكَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Do not desire (the friendship of) one who shuns you”.*

A poet says in this connection:  
 It is good for love to be mutual,  
 Or else affection is a heck on the neck.  
 Of course this is when the relationship has not yet been created.
Otherwise, we have to establish our relations with our relatives and
friends. Imam ‘Ali (as) said he had seen the following on one of the
swords of the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"صِلْ مَن قَطَعَكَ وقُل الحَقَّ ولَو على نَفسِكَ واحسِن الى مَن اسَاءَ
اِلَيكَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Establish relations with one who has cut off his relation with you,
tell the truth even if it is against yourself, and do good to one who
has done you wrong."*[^52]

### 16. Be Stronger In Establishing Relations And Doing Good Than Others Are In Cutting Relations And Doing Wrong

In keeping the ties of relation and doing favors to those friends who do
not care for friendship, Imam ‘Ali (as) emphasizes the following points:
If others, due to their mental status, cut off with you and even hurt
you, you should avoid retaliating. You should show that you are stronger
in keeping relations than them in cutting off relations. This is because
their cutting off relations is based on non-divine stimuli and this can
easily be done by any non-aligned individual. But keeping up ties of
relation with those who have hurt us is only done by God's sincerely
obedient believers. These people both have good manners and are obedient
to God. They have also controlled their self that incites to evil and
desire to please God. You should also tread the same path as the true
believers. The great Prophet (S), in the face of Quraysh's animosity
uttered the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لا تَثرِيبَ عَلَيكُم اليَومَ فاذهَبُوا انتُمُ الطُلَقاءُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are not blamed, today. Go! You are free” and he forgave them. He
even adopted Abu Sufyan's house as a "secure place". In the distribution
of booties in the holy war of Hawazin, Imam ‘Ali (as) gave preference to
newly-converted Muslims over Muhajirin and Ansar.[^53] You, too, in
establishing ties of friendship, should be stronger than them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَلا يَكُونَنَّ اَخُوكَ على مُقَاطَعَتِكَ اقوَى مِنكَ على صِلَتِه
وَلا يَكُونَنَّ على الإساءَةِ اَقوى مِنكَ على الإحسَان"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Your brother should not be more powerful in severing relations with
you than you are in establishing relations with him, and he should not
be stronger in ill-treatment of you than you are in doing good to him”.*

Abdullah Ibn Talha says: I heard from Imam Sadiq (as) who said: A man
came up to the Prophet (S) and said: I have some relatives who do me
wrong even if I am kind to them. I have decided to cut off relations
with them. The Prophet (S) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اذَن يَرفُضكُم الله جَمِيعاً قال وكَيفَ اصنَعُ؟ قال: تُعطِي مَن
حَرَمَكَ وتَصِلُ مَن قَطَعَكَ وتَعفُوَ عَمَّن ظَلَمَكَ فَاِذا فَعَلتَ
ذَلِكَ كانَ الله عَزَّوجَلَّ لَكَ عَلَيهِم ظَهِيراً"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Then Allah will forsake all of you”. He said: “What should I do”? The
Prophet (S) said: “Give the one who has deprived you; establish
relations with the one who has cut off ties with you and forgive the one
who has wronged you. If you do so, God will be your aid against
them."*[^54]

### 17. An Unjust Person Does Himself Wrong

A person who has been subject to injustice is naturally unhappy because
of the injustice inflicted upon him. But if he looks at the issue with
the Islamic world-view, he will find that the oppressed one is more
successful[^55] than the oppressor; the oppressor is the loser because
at the God's court: firstly; God is after oppressors and watches their
activities and will not leave unpunished their behavior;[^56] Secondly,
one of the ways to punish the oppressors is to calculate their good acts
in favor of the oppressed. Furthermore the sins of the oppressed ones
will be on the list of the sins of the oppressed.[^57] Furthermore,
patience in the face of an injustice which is unavoidable for the
oppressed ones will bring them rewards.

Thus, although the oppressors are superficially triumphant, it is in
fact the oppressed ones who are the true winners. This is because the
unjust ones will both suffer the punishments for what they have done
wrong and give their good deeds to these sufferers. The oppressed ones,
moreover, will be of a higher rank in the eyes of the Divine. Thus, the
fate of an oppressor is worse than that of the oppressed.

On the basis of this issue, Imam ‘Ali (as) writes in his letter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَلا يَكبُرَنَّ عَلَيكَ ظُلمُ مَن ظَلَمَكَ فاِنَّه يَسعَى في
مَضَرّتِهِ ونَفعِكَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"*Do not consider as great the wrong-doing of one who wrongs you because
he is harming himself and benefiting you.”*

It is also on the basis of such observations that Imam ‘Ali (as) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ايّاكَ والظُلمِ فانَّه يَزُولُ عَمَّن تَظلِمُه وَيَبقَى عَلَيكَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Beware of injustice, because it will pass away from the one whom you
have wronged, but its consequences will remain with you.”*[^58]

### 18. You Should Not Mistreat One Who Has Made You Happy

One general principle observed among all human communities is: "Goodness
is the reward for being good." We should not answer the goodness of
others with evil-doing. Regarding this, the Holy Qur’an asks:

> "هَلْ جَزَاءُ الْإِحْسَانِ إِلَّا الْإِحْسَانُ"764

***"Is the reward of goodness aught but goodness?"***

The Holy Qur’an asks the clean nature and faultless conscience of human
beings for an answer. The answer is definitely negative. Naturally, the
reward of evil is evil. The Holy Qur’an, in Surah Yunus, says:

> "وَالَّذِينَ كَسَبُوا السَّيِّئَاتِ جَزَاءُ سَيِّئَةٍ بِمِثْلِهَا "765

***"And as for those who have earned evil, the punishment of an evil is
the like of it."***

It is also emphasized in Surah al-Shura:

> "وَجَزَاءُ سَيِّئَةٍ سَيِّئَةٌ مِثْلُهَا"766

***"And the recompense of evil is punishment like it."***

Thus the reward of goodness is goodness and the punishment of badness is
definitely badness. Except for those cases when, due to the principle of
manhood, the reward of goodness is more goodness or the case where
badness is forgiven as a whole.

Imam Sadiq (as) in this regard says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"آيَةٌ في كِتابِ الله مُسْجَلَةٌ، قُلتُ وما هِيَ؟ قال قَولُ الله
عَزَّوجلَّ: "هَلْ جَزَاءُ الْإِحْسَانِ إِلَّا الْإِحْسَانُ" جَرَت في
الكَافِرِ والمُؤمِن والبَرِّ والفَاجِرِ، ومَن صُنِعَ اِلَيهِ مَعرُوفٌ
فَعَلَيهِ اَن يُكَافِئ بِهِ ولَيسَ المُكافَاةُ اَن تَصنَعَ كَما صَنَعَ
حَتّى تَربى فاِن صَنَعتَ كَما صَنَعَ كَانَ لَهُ الفَضلُ بِالابتِداء"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘There is a verse which is applicable to all’. I asked which verse is
was. He answered: ‘It is God's statement:* ***“Is the reward of goodness
aught but goodness”?*** *It is valid for the unbeliever and the
believer, the good-doer and the evil-doer. Anybody who receives kindness
should recompense it; and recompense is not to be done equal to it but
rather in an increased measure; because if you do as he has done to you,
then he has the superiority since he initiated it."*[^59]

The Holy Qur’an commands the reward for badness to be badness,
especially in the issue of retaliation, but it emphasizes that
forgiveness is better:

> "فَمَنْ عُفِيَ لَهُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ شَيْءٌ فَاتِّبَاعٌ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
> وَأَدَاءٌ إِلَيْهِ بِإِحْسَانٍ"768

***"But if any remission is made to any one by his aggrieved brother,
then prosecution for the bloodwit should be made according to usage, and
payment should be made to him in a good manner."***

Thus, Imam ‘Ali (as) in his letter refers to this general principle of
"Goodness is the reward for goodness" when he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ولَيسَ جَزاءُ مَن سَرَّكَ ان تَسُوءَه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: . Raghib’s Mufradat, the item of “one”.

[^2]: . Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol.2, p.62.

[^3]: . Bihar, vol.74, p.278.

[^4]: . An example is the book called Masadiq al-Ikhwan by Sheikh Saduq.

[^5]: . Bihar, vol.74, p.264.

[^6]: . Bihar, vol.74, p.264.

[^7]: . Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2 PP 344-345 Bab al-Hijra.

[^8]: . Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2 PP 344-345 Bab al-Hijra.

[^9]: . Nahj al-Balaghah.

[^10]: . Bihar, vol.74, p.222.

[^11]: . Bihar, vol.72, p.395.

[^12]: . Bihar, vol.74, p.411.

[^13]: . Bihar, vol.74, p.399.

[^14]: . Op. cit, p.401.

[^15]: . Op. cit, p.355.

[^16]: . Al-Kafi, vol 2, p.170.

[^17]: . Qur’an 20:43.

[^18]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Hikmah 333.

[^19]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 193.

[^20]: . Op. cit.

[^21]: . Qur’an 48:29.

[^22]: . Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda’, vol.5, p.307.

[^23]: . Qur’an 3:134.

[^24]: . Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^25]: . Op. cit.

[^26]: . Al-Mahajjah al-Bayda’, vol.5, pp.301-309.

[^27]: . Op. cit.

[^28]: . Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^29]: . Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^30]: . Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^31]: . Op.cit.

[^32]: . Ibn Maytham's Commentary on Nahj al-Balaghah, vol.5, p.55.

[^33]: . Bihar, vol.74, p.177.

[^34]: . Op. cit.

[^35]: . Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, p.362.

[^36]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Hikmah 114.

[^37]: . Jami’ al-Sa’adat, vol.1, p.283.

[^38]: . Jami’ al-Sa’adat, vol.1, p.283.

[^39]: . Bihar, vol.75, p.90.

[^40]: . Op. cit.

[^41]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Hikmah 249.

[^42]: . Jami’ al-Sa’adat, vol.1, p.383.

[^43]: . Al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyah, supplication 20: Makarim al-Akhlaq.

[^44]: . Refer to Seyyid Alikhan’s commentary on Al-Sahifah
al-Sajjadiyah, vol.1, pp.320-322.

[^45]: . Ibn Maytham’s commentary on Nahj al-Balaghah, vol.5, p.56.

[^46]: . Ibn Abi al-Hadid’s commentary on Nahj al-Balaghah, vol.16,
p.110.

[^47]: . Bihar, vol.74, pp.90-96-98.

[^48]: . Op. cit.

[^49]: . Qur’an 13:21.

[^50]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 23. Similar to this statement can be
seen from Imam ‘Ali (as) in the book Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, p.154.

[^51]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Hikmah 451.

[^52]: . Bihar, vol. 74 P 157.

[^53]: . Islam's histories related to the eighth year of Islamic Era.

[^54]: . Bihar, vol.74, p.100.

[^55]: . Bihar, vol.74, p.100.

[^56]: . Nahj al-Balaghah Letter 53; Nahj al-Balaghah Hikmah 176.

[^57]: . Nihayah Ibn Athir, vol.2, p.55

[^58]: . Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^59]: . Nur al-Thaqalayn, vol.5, p.199 – Tafsir Namunah, vol.23, p.171.


