35) Beware of who you consult with
==================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَاِيَاكَ وَمُشاوَرَةَ النِساءِ فَاِنَّ رَأيَهُنَّ اِلى اَفْنٍ
وعَزْمُهُنَّ اِلى وَهْنٍ واكْفُفْ عَلَيهِنَّ مِن اَبصَارِهِنَّ
بِحِجَابِكَ اِيّاهُنَّ فَاِنَّ شِدَّةَ الحِجَابِ اَبْقَى عَلَيهِنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولَيسَ خُرُوجُهُنَّ بِاَشَدَّ مِن اِدخَالِكَ مَن لا يُوثَقُ بٍهِ
عَلَيْهِنَّ وَاِن اسْتَطَعْتَ اَلا يَعرِفْنَ غَيرَكَ فَافْعَل، وَلا
تُمَلِّكَ المَرأَةَ مِن اَمرِهَا مَا جَاوَزَ نَفسَهَا، فَاِنَّ
المَرأَةَ رَيْحانَةٌ ولَيسَتْ بِقَهْرَمَانَةٍ، وَلا تَعْدُ
بِكَرامَتِها نَفسَهَا، وَلا تُطمِعْها في اَن تَشفَعَ لِغَيرِهَا،
واِيّاكَ والتَّغايُرَ في غَيرِ مَوضِعِ غَيرَةٍ، فَاِنَّ ذَلِكَ يَدْعُو
الصَّحِيحَةَ اِلى السُّقمِ وَالبَريئَةَ اِلى الرَّيبِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Beware of consulting women, for their opinions* *are deficient and
their resolve is feeble. Restrain their gazes by veiling them, for the
severity of veiling is more protective for them. Their going out (of
their houses) is not worse than your allowing the entry of one who
cannot be trusted into their presence. If you can do so, then let them
not know anyone other than you.*

*Do not put a woman in charge of affairs beyond what concerns herself,
for a woman is a fragrant flower and not an administrator. Do not exceed
the bounds in honoring her and do not give her hopes of interceding for
others. Beware of jealousy where there is no cause for it, for that will
lead a woman who is sound (in honor) to unsoundness, and a pure woman to
disquieting thoughts (about committing the sin)”.*

.

Commentary
----------

Imam ‘Ali (as), in this letter, refers to one of the most disturbing
issues. If you look at this issue only superficially, then you would see
that the enemies of Islam use it as a club over the head of Muslims and
would consider it as a weak point of Islam. On the other hand, if this
issue is interpreted in the light of other Qur’anic verses and Islamic
traditions, it would be a point of strength and honor for Islam. So let
us first hear the explanations on this issue and then judge who is
right.

The First Explanation:
----------------------

Some superficial individuals still savagely assume that women are
defective and are only good for reproduction and breast-feeding children
and for serving men and are not allowed to take part in political and
social tasks!

To reason for their views, these individuals resort to some weak
traditions or to some traditions which are presented under certain
conditions or to some ambiguous traditions. One of these traditions is
this part of Imam ‘Ali's letter and the sermon 80 of Nahj al-Balaghah
which he offered at the end of al-Jamal war to reproach women.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَعاشِرَ النّاسِ، اِنَّ النِسَاءَ نَواقِصُ الاِيمانِ، نَواقِصُ
الحُظُوظِ، نَواقِصُ العُقُولِ، فَامَّا نُقصَانُ اِيمانِهِنَّ
فَقُعُودُهُنَّ عَنِ الصَّلاةِ وَالصِيامِ في اَيَّامِ حَيضِهِنَّ
وَامَّا نُقصَانُ عُقُولِهِنَّ فَشَهادَةُ اِمرأتَينِ كَشَهَادَةِ
الرَّجُلِ الواحِدِ واَمَّا نُقصَانُ حُظُوظِهِنَّ فَمَوارِيثُهُنَّ عَلى
الأنصَافِ مِن مَوارِيثِ الرِجَالِ فاتَّقُوا شِرارَ النِسَاءِ وَكُونُوا
مِن خِيَارِهِنَّ عَلى حَذَرٍ ولا تُطِيعُوهُنَّ في المَعرُوفِ حَتّى لا
يَطمَعنَ في المُنكَرِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O people! Women are deficient in faith, deficient in (their) shares
and deficient in intellect. The deficiency in their faith is their
refraining from prayer and fasting in the days of their menstruation.
The deficiency in their intellect is that the testimony of two women
equals the testimony of one man. The deficiency in their shares is their
inheritance which is half that of men. Fear evil women and be on guard
against the good ones, and do not obey them in what is good so that they
may not tempt you to what is reprehensible."*

These individuals also base their reasonings on the axioms which Imam
‘Ali (as) has used in Hikmah Nahj al-Balaghah No 238:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"المَرأةُ شَرٌّ كُلُّها وَشَرُّ مَا فِيهَا اَنَّها لابُدَّ مِنهَا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"A woman is evil, all of her; and worse than it is that she is
indispensable.”*

These individuals, to verify their positions, resort to historical
examples. They say as well:  
 Adam was humiliated in paradise because of a woman,  
 Phoenix got refuge in the Qaf Mount because of a woman,  
 Joseph got into the prison in the well because of a woman,  
 The killing of Aal Imran was because of a woman.[^1]

The Second Explanation:
-----------------------

Certain scholars contend that due to a series of events which occur at a
specific juncture of time, place, individuals, conditions, and their
causes become the subject of either admiration or reproach. These
admiration or reproach are not innate to those events, rather they
depend on the sweet or bitter events in which they occur.

The sentences which, either in this letter or sermons 13, 14 of Nahj
al-Balaghah concerning the reproach of women or concerning Basrah and
its people issued by Imam ‘Ali (as) are based on this basis.

When A’isha (the Prophet’s wife), in contrast to God's commandment:

**  
**

"

**  
**
وَقَرْنَ فِي بُيُوتِكُنَّ

**  
**
"

[^2]
"And stay in your houses", and disregarding the Prophet's prohibition
for the vengeance for bloodshed of Uthman, with the cooperation of
Talha, Zubayr and others, went to Basrah and created the war of al-Jamal
and caused the death of many thousands of Muslims and Siffeen and
Nahrawan were its natural offshoots, Imam ‘Ali (as) blamed women, Basrah
and its people.

Neither women are defective or mean, nor is Basrah a filthy environment,
nor are its population away from God's benevolence.

It was that bitter event of al-Jamal war which caused all this reproach.
By passing that juncture, all these blames were forgotten since there
were great women, like Khadijah, az-Zahra’, Zaynab and Sakinah bint
al-Husayn and more than three thousand pious and God believing women
whose names appear in the book "A'lam al-Nisa’’". In our own time, too,
history will never forget the martyr Bint al-Huda as-Sadr.[^3]

Thus, Imam ‘Ali (as) does not wish to condemn consulting with women;
neither does he want women to stay at home. He does not consider all
women lacking in faith and wisdom. Rather, because of al-Jamal war, Imam
‘Ali (as) blames any woman who goes beyond her limits and becomes a
puppet in the hands of the others for their dirty objectives. As it is
proven somewhere, except for certain managerial key-positions, other
jobs are good for women. Consulting with learned women is not forbidden
by Imam ‘Ali (as).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِيَّاكَ وَمُشَاوَرَةَ النِّساءِ اِلاّ مَن جُرِّبَت بِكَمَالِ عَقْلٍ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Avoid consulting with women, except with a woman whose wisdom is
proved"*[^4]

The Third Explanation:
----------------------

Men and women are different in their bodily make-up both physically and
mentally. They are created for two different sets of tasks and
responsibilities.

Dignity, firmness, strength, pride and wisdom have prepared men for
struggle against nature and for providing the family with their needs
and their guidance. On the contrary, women's delicacy, and emotions have
prepared them for being spouses for pregnancy, breast feeding, nurturing
children and managing the house, and the like.

On the basis of this philosophy, Islam considers men and women of the
same kind and genre and of equal rights, but would not consider both of
them to have identical rights.[^5]

It is because of these characteristics that some tasks are on the men's
shoulders and jobs such as judgment, society leadership and military
commanding are not suggested for women. There are some tasks, however,
which are women's responsibilities such as the guardianship of male
children up to two years and that of female children up to seven years,
the permission to use gold and silk as ornaments, becoming religiously
responsible (*mukallaf* i.e. one who has reached the age of maturity) in
the ninth year of age; whereas men reach this stage at sixteen years of
age.[^6]

Based on such issues women are not supposed to partake in holy wars,
their expenditures are the responsibility of men; their share of
inheritance is half of that of men's, the witness of two of them equals
to one man's. Among the moral recommendations given by Imam ‘Ali (as)
both in this letter and elsewhere are for women to stay home, to
implement the Islamic dress code (*hijab*), not to accept women's
interference and not to obey them.

Murtada Mutahhari, the great Islamic scholar, talking about women's
observance of hijab and their not mingling with men, writes: Imam ‘Ali
(as) suggests to his son, Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (as) in the following
manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"واَكفُف عَلَيهِنَّ مِن اَبصَارِهِنَّ بِحِجَابِكَ اِيَّاهُنَّ فَاِنَّ
شِدَّةَ الحِجَابِ اَبْقَى عَلَيهِنَّ وَلَيسَ خُرُوجُهُنَّ بِاَشَدَّ
مِن اِدخَالِكَ عَلَيهِنَّ مَن لا يُوثَقُ بِهِ عَلَيهِنَّ وَاِن
استَطَعتَ اَن لا يَعرِفْنَ غَيرَكَ فَافعَل"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Restrain their gazes by veiling them, for the severity of veiling is
more protective for them. Their going out (of their houses) is not worse
than your allowing the entry of one who cannot be trusted into their
presence. If you can do so, then let them not know anyone other than
you”.*

This is just a moral and ethical recommendation, however.  
 The Islamic scholars look at it just as an ethical suggestion. If it
were for the scholars we would interpret this suggestion as the
confinement of women to their homes. However, the reason why the
jurisprudents have not issued any fatwa or Islamic verdict on this topic
is because of other precise reasoning found in the Qur’anic verses,
traditions and the behaviors of the Infallible. These sentences, thus,
have ethical values, and not jurisprudential significance.

What the jurisprudents understand from such sentences is that these
sentences take care of spiritual and mental truth behind the relation of
men and women. Undoubtedly these sentences disclose a truth that the
relation of a woman and a stranger is a dangerous one. What Islam
recommends is that so far as possible, the assembly of men and women
should not be mixed. Our society today witnesses the hazards of this
mixing of men and women. Why should women carry out their activities
shoulder by shoulder with men? The effect of this association is that
one ignores the work and concentrates on the partner and sometimes the
result of this shoulder by shoulder job is an arm-in-arm relation.[^7]

The Last Explanation And The Conclusion:
----------------------------------------

As the Holy Qur’an teaches us:

***"O people! Be Careful of your duty to your Lord, who created you from
a single being and created its mate of the same kind"***. [Qur’an 4:1]

***"O you men! Surely We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the
most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful of
his duty”*** [Qur’an 49:13].

***“Whoever does good whether male or female and he is a believer, We
will most certainly make him live a happy life and we will most
certainly give them their reward for the best of what they did.”***
[Qur’an 16:97]

Thus, neither is the nature of a woman evil nor is a man's nature
honorable. Both share divine assets; and both have the capacity to be
good. It is up to them to them either to do their best in perfecting
belief and action or to be the lowest of low and more astray than the
beasts![^8]

The wives of Noah and Lut betrayed them, Zuleikha sent Yusuf to prison
and Ghottam helped Ibn Muljim assassinate Imam ‘Ali (as). Compared to
these crimes, the crimes of Nimrud, Pharaoh, Abi Lahab, Abu Jahl,
Chengiz, Nero, Attila, Hajjaj, Saddam and the like were the most vicious
ones in the world, more than that of women.

Thus, the first interpretation stems from the era of ignorance and is in
contrast with the explicit teachings of the Qur’an and Hadith.[^9]

The undoubted fact, however, is this: As it was already said, men and
women enjoy their specific body build-up, both physically and mentally.
This variation of creation separates them in carrying out their duties:
strength, determination, judgement, leadership, descisiveness are of
men; while, family guardianship, lactation, house management and child
education are that of women. In this division of tasks priority is given
to neither side. This is in harmony with the axiom that we expect lions
to attack and the deer to run.

The rationale behind some of the interpretations of Imam ‘Ali's and
other infallible Imams' words is that women are deprived of some
material rights compared with men; some of them are agents for
temptation. The philosophy behind these interpretations is this: due to
her delicate nature, a woman is more deceived than a man; she can
express her beliefs less than men.

Because of her charm, heart-stealing nature, she may cause the
corruption of her physical and mental differences with men, she has not
been able to have similar rights with men: one has become the house
keeper, the other one has become the family superviser; one receives the
marriage-portion, the other one becomes the payer of the
marriage-portion; one has become the initiator of divorce, the other one
lacks such a power.

These factors which led to the disastrous events in the Jamal war forced
Imam ‘Ali (as) to emphasize these weak points already referred to and
warned both men and women that if these factors and philosophies are not
used properly, the repetition of the events of Jamal is inevitable.
Therefore, care should be taken to properly use these differences
between the men's and women's physical and emotional states.

Women should not be used against their creational philosophy. People
should be alert not to be slaves in the hands of the coquettishness of
certain women. She is created as a sweet-smelling herb, not as a hero
for political, military or social struggles.

This explanation can be a synopsis of all the views offered above. If
there were not such physical and emotional differences between men and
women, then Imam ‘Ali (as) would never, only because of the misbehavior
of certain women, initiate emphasizing on their differences with men
concerning matters such as women's lesser share in wisdom or faith or
their lack of capacity in becoming heroes or that their biting is as
sweet as spider's biting[^10] or that women are the greatest
conspirators, or that they should not be consulted because of their lack
of capacity, and their weakness in their decision-making, or that they
should remain within the home. Rather, it is clear that[^11] Imam ‘Ali
(as) is not among those individuals who revenge just because of the
disloyalty of one woman (namely, A’isha).

What he does is to warn women not to be puppets in the hands of others.
And what he intends is to warn women not to exceed their limits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَلا تُمَلِّكِ المَرأةَ مِن اَمرِهَا مَا جَاوَزَ نَفسَهَا فَاِنَّ
المَرأةَ رَيحَانَةٌ وَلَيسَت بِقَهْرَمَانَة وَلا تَعْدُ بِكَرامَتِهَا
نَفْسَهَا وَلا تُطْمِعَها في اَن تَشْفَعَ لِغَيرِهَا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not put a woman in charge of affairs beyond what concerns herself,
for a woman is a fragrant flower and not an administrator. Do not exceed
the bounds in honoring her and do not give her hopes of interceding for
others”.*

In that case, firstly, you have ruined her magnanimity and her
hereafter; secondly, everybody is to suffer and corruption and darkness
would be widespread.[^12]

Avoid Being Suspicious Towards Women:
-------------------------------------

One of the factors leading to family feuds is the improper jealousy of
men towards their wives. Due to their extreme love towards their wives,
some men sometimes will not let their wives leave their homes; they want
to imprison their wives; not to have relations even with the relatives.
These men are too critical in their wives' ornamentation, clothing, and
behavior.

This kind of suspicion makes women rebel. They would erroneously assume
that since they are suspects of corruption, in spite of the fact that
they are innocent, it is better for them to go astray: this will lead to
the disintegration of the family.

That is why Imam ‘Ali (as) says:

*“Beware of jealousy where there is no cause for it, for that will lead
a woman who is sound (in honor) to unsoundness, and a pure woman to
disquieting thoughts (about committing the sin)”.*

[^1]: . Al-e-Tayyib's commentary on ‘‘Ali's will, p.136; Ibn Abi
al-Hadid's commentary, vol.16, pp.125-126.

[^2]: . Qur’an 33:33.

[^3]: . See, in this connection, Jawadi Amuli's book called Zann dar
A’ineh Jalal wa Jamal, pp.339-426.

[^4]: . Bihar, vol. 103 P 253.

[^5]: . When a father allocated his possessions equally among all his
children, giving a business firm to one child who has interest in trade,
and supplying the second one who has interest in agriculture with a
farmland and giving a library or publication tasks to the third child
who has cultural inclinations, there is equality in his action but no
identity (The System of women's rights in Islam, p.112).

[^6]: . Refer to the system of “Women's Rights in Islam” and “Women and
Elections”.

[^7]: . “The Issue of Hijab,” pp.219-221.

[^8]: . “Certainly we created man in the best make” [Surah al-Tin, v.4];
“They are as cattle, nay, they are in worse error” [7:197]

[^9]: . Some traditions consider Eve's tempting Adam to go astray. But
this is in contrast with the Holy Qur’an which says: “But the Shaitan
made an evil suggestion” [Qur’an 7:20]. For this matter, see “The system
of women's rights in Islam” pp.114-120.

[^10]: Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^11]: . For the differences between men’s and women's human values, and
political and social rights see Women's Rights in Islam by Mutahhari and
Jawadi Amuli's Zann dar A’ineh Jalal wa Jamal.

[^12]: . For the differences between men's and women's human values, and
political and social rights see Women's Rights in Islam by Mutahhari and
Jawadi Amuli's Zann dar A’ineh Jalal wa Jamal. .


