1) My Son, I recommend you to God-wariness
==========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فإني اوصيك بتقوى الله"
  </p>
</blockquote>

The word "*taqwa*" or "God-wariness" and its derivatives have been used
in the Qur’an, Nahj al-Balaghah and other books on tradition, and have a
special place in the sermons delivered by the Great Prophet (S) and the
Infallible Ones (as) and other men of God.

This word stems from an internal power based on God’s purest belief. If
anybody wishes to go God’s genuine ways and if he opposes showing
animosity towards these principles, he should possess this worthy
attribute.

Furthermore, this power is both an impetus for performing one’s duties
and a protection against wrong-doing. Of course, factors such as
education, conscience, criminal laws, and social modesty may stop a
person from doing wrong things, but these are neither general, nor
reliable. The Imam (as) elsewhere has said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اِنَّ مَن فَارَقَ التَقوى أُغرِيَ بِالّلذّاتِ وَالشَهواتِ وَوَقَعَ في
تَيهِ السَّيئَاتِ وَلَزِمَه كَثِيرُ التَبِعاتِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Indeed, a person who abandons God-wariness becomes desirous of
pleasures and lusts, and enters into the wilderness of evil deeds, and
will suffer many evil consequences of his actions”.*[^1]

Among the leaders of religion, perhaps Imam ‘Ali (as) has spoken on
God-wariness and its role more than any other leaders. In sermon 188 in
Nahj al-Balaghah, Imam has enumerated more than 100 attributes for the
godwary. At the end of the sermon, Hammam, who was among the listeners,
lamented severely, becoming unconscious and passing away immediately.

The Imam (as) at one place calls God-wariness a fortified tower[^2], at
another occasion he has called it the best treasure of prosperity[^3]
and at another point calls it the best provision for the Hereafter[^4]
and at another occasion he calls it a panacea for every defect of the
body[^5].

Besides these, God-wariness has two other important effects:
**i)** Anybody possessing God-wariness will have a sort of insight by
which he will understand the secrets behind the creation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"إِنْ تَتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ فُرْقَانًا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"If you are God-wary, God will grant you the power of
distinction"***[^6]

It is also mentioned in a tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَن اَخلَصَ لله اَربَعِينَ صَباحاً ظَهَرَت يَنابِيعُ الحِكمَةِ مِن
قَلبِهِ عَلى لِسَانِهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"He who is sincere to God for forty days, springs of wisdom will arise
from his heart onto his tongue."*[^7]

It is also narrated in al-Kafi from Imam al-Baqir (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مَا اَخلَصَ العَبدُ الاِيمانَ بِالله عَزّ وجَلَّ اَربَعِينَ يَوماً.
اَو قَالَ مَا اَجمَلَ عَبدٌ ذِكْرَ الله عَزَّوَجَلَّ اَربَعِينَ يَوماً
ـ اِلا زَهّدَهُ الله عَزَّوَجَلَّ في الدُّنيا وَبَصَّرَه دَاءها
وَدَواءَهَا فَاثبَتَ الحِكمَةَ في قَلبِهِ وَانطَقَ بِها لِسَانَه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A servant does not make his faith sincere for God for forty days”, or
he said: “A servant does not render beautiful the mention of God for
forty days, except that God will make him undesirous of the world and
give him insight into its diseases and its remedies. He will establish
wisdom in his heart and make his tongue speak it”.*[^8]

**ii)** With the attainment of the precious capital of virtue, problems
and hardships will be solved.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجًا وَيَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ
حَيْثُ لَا يَحْتَسِبُ .... وَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مِنْ
أَمْرِهِ يُسْرًا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And whoever is careful of (his duty to) Allah, He will make for him
an outlet, and give him sustenance from whence he thinks not..”***
***“..And whoever is careful of (his duty to) Allah He will make easy
for him his affair".***[^9]

Regarding all these points, it is the important role of God-wariness
which Imam ‘Ali (as) puts in front of the agenda of his son's life.
Of course, as it is repeatedly stated, this emphasis is not only for
Imam ‘Ali’s son, but for all the believers who wish to possess human
life and enjoy God-given insight and resolve the problems.

[^1]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, al-Amidi, vol.2. p.597.

[^2]: . Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^3]: . Bihar, vol.77, p.374.

[^4]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 221.

[^5]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 198.

[^6]: . Qur’an 8:29.

[^7]: . Awsaf al-Ashraf, Khwaja Nasir al-Din Tusi, p.15; Refer to the
Treatise of Bahr al-‘Ulum's Sayr wa Suluk, pp. 22-23.

[^8]: . Usul al-Kafi, vol.2, p.16.

[^9]: . Qur’an 65:2-3; Qur’an 65:5.


