3) Inhabit your Heart with God's Remembrance
============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"عمارة قلبك بذكره"
  </p>
</blockquote>

Remembering God is emphasized both in the Holy Qur’an and Islamic
traditions[^1] to the degree that it is considered more important than
the prayer[^2] itself. It is considered the most favorable act.[^3]

In the Qur’an and tradition a lot of benefits are enumerated for God's
remembrance. Among them are the following:

**(i)** God's remembrance is a comfort for hearts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَتَطْمَئِنُّ قُلُوبُهُمْ بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ أَلَا
بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ تَطْمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Those who believe and whose hearts are set at rest by the
remembrance of Allah; now surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts
set at rest."***[^4]

**(ii)** Allah's remembrance takes away any mental disturbances and
forces one to perform good deeds both in the private and in public and
keeps him from evil-doing and sins.

**(iii)** Allah's remembrance keeps man away from disunion and Satan's
temptations. "God's remembrance is a believer's capital and its benefit
is protection against the Satan."

On the other hand, stopping God's remembrance and forgetting Him entails
the following consequences:
**i.** Turning away from God's remembrance results in one's life
becoming straitened:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَمَنْ أَعْرَضَ عَنْ ذِكْرِي فَإِنَّ لَهُ مَعِيشَةً ضَنكًا
وَنَحْشُرُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَعْمَى"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever turns away from my remembrance, his shall surely be a
straitened life, and We will raise him on the day of resurrection,
blind”.***[^5]

**ii.** Anybody who forgets God's remembrance will be the Satan's
companion.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَمَنْ يَعْشُ عَنْ ذِكْرِ الرَّحْمَانِ نُقَيِّضْ لَهُ شَيْطَانًا
فَهُوَ لَهُ قَرِينٌ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of the
Beneficent God, We appoint for him a Shaitan, so he becomes his
associate”.***[^6]

**iii.** Anybody who forgets Allah's remembrance shall be subjected to
forgetting his own identity. Such a person will definitely go against
man's perfection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَأَنْسَاهُمْ
أَنْفُسَهُمْ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And be not like those who forsook Allah's so He made them forsake
their own souls”.***[^7]

And in Sura al-Tawbah Allah has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَنَسِيَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They have forsaken Allah, so He has forsaken them.”***[^8]

Factors For And Against God's Remembrance
-----------------------------------------

In the Holy Qur’an and Islamic Tradition there are mention of those
factors which either make God's remembrance easy or make it difficult:

**a.** There are some God-wary persons whose appearances make one
remember God. Regarding this, the Great Prophet has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"خِيَارُكُم مَن ذَكَّرَكُم بِالله رُؤيتُه وَزَادَ عِلمَكُم مَنطِقُه
وَرَغَّبَكُم في الآخِرَةِ عَمَلُه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The best of you are those looking at whom reminds you of God, whose
speech increases your knowledge and whose actions make you desire the
Hereafter”.*[^9]

**b.** The Holy Qur’an and its constructive verses is a good factor to
remember God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"إِنَّ هَذِهِ تَذْكِرَةٌ فَمَنْ شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَى رَبِّهِ سَبِيلًا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely this is a reminder, then let him who will, take the way to
his Lord”.***[^10]

**c.** The Prophets, too, are good reminders of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فَذَكِّرْ إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُذَكِّرٌ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Therefore do remind, for you are only a reminder."***[^11]

**d.** A Survey of the lives of the great men in the past, too, is a
factor to remember Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُمْ مِنْ قَرْنٍ هُمْ أَشَدُّ مِنْهُمْ
بَطْشًا فَنَقَّبُوا فِي الْبِلَادِ هَلْ مِنْ مَحِيصٍ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ
لَذِكْرَى لِمَنْ كَانَ لَهُ قَلْبٌ أَوْ أَلْقَى السَّمْعَ وَهُوَ
شَهِيدٌ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And how many a generation did we destroy before them who were
mightier in prowess than they, so they went about and about in the
lands. Is there a place of refuge? Most surely there is a reminder in
this for him who has a heart or he gives ear and is a witness.***[^12]

**e.** God's prayer is also a factor to remember God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"َأَقِمْ الصَّلَاةَ لِذِكْرِي"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Keep up prayer for My remembrance"***[^13]

But there are factors which hinder Allah's remembrance: Among them are
the following:

**a.** A liking for the transitory appearances of the world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لَا تُلْهِكُمْ أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُكُمْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Let not your wealth or your children divert you from the remembrance
of Allah”.***[^14]

**b.** Far-fetched and unattainable hopes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَيُلْهِهِمْ الْأَمَلُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"That hope may beguile them".***[^15]

**c.** Shaitan (Satan) is also one of the factors which make us forget
God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اسْتَحْوَذَ عَلَيْهِمْ الشَّيْطَانُ فَأَنسَاهُمْ ذِكْرَ اللَّهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Shaitan has gained mastery over them, so he has made them forget the
remembrance of Allah".***[^16]

**d.** Committing sins and following one's desires are also among the
factors that make us forget God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لَيسَ في المَعاصِي اَشَدُّ مِن اتِّبَاعِ الشَهوَةِ وَلا تُطِيعُوهَا
فَتَشغَلَكُم عَن ذِكرِ اللهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Among sins, there is no sin worse than following one's desires.
Therefore, do not obey them since they will divert you from the
remembrance of God."*[^17]

The Great Prophet, regarding this, has stated: "A person who obeys God
definitely remembers God, although his prayers and fasting and his
reading of Qur’an might be little. Anybody who commits sins has
definitely forgotten God although his prayers and fasting and his
reciting of the Qur’an might be a lot.[^18]

### The Reality Behind God's Remembrance

At the end of this discussion, it is necessary to mention the following
fact: should God's remembrance, which has so many benefits and whose
negligence entails so many evil consequences, including the one which
the Imam has emphasized: "My son, I recommend that you inhabit your
heart with remembrance of God," be taken superficially or is there some
other reality behind it?

No doubt, the mere repetition of expressions such as “Glory be to Allah,
praise be to Allah, there is no god but Allah and Allah is great”
**سُبحَانَ الله وَالحَمدُ لله وَلا اِلهَ اِلا الله وَالله اَكبَر**
cannot have all those benefits we have mentioned. The purpose behind
remembering God should be the realization that God is present at every
location and knows every good and evil action of ours.

Man should not be negligent of God. Obviously such remembrance of God
forces man to carry out his tasks and makes him avoid indulging in
disobedience.

Fortunately, in our Islamic traditions, there is a lot of emphasis on
this point: Some of these will follow:

**a)** The Great Prophet, in his will to Imam ‘Ali (as), stated:
"O ‘Ali, a person cannot do justice in three things:
In sharing his possessions with his brother in faith, in carrying out
justice towards others, and in remembering God at all times. God’s
remembrance does not only include saying “glory be to Allah, praise be
to Allah, there is no god but Allah and Allah is great”. Rather, it
simply means: “when you want to commit a sin, be afraid and stop doing
it."[^19]

**b)** Imam as-Sadiq (as) has said, "Anybody who really remembers Allah,
is obedient to Him and anybody who is negligent of such remembrance is
sinful. Thus, obedience towards God is a sign of being on the right path
and sin is a sign of being misguided. Both of these stem from either
God's remembrance or negligence of His remembrance."[^20]

**c)** Imam ‘Ali (as) has said, "Don’t remember God only at leisure
time, neither forget Him when you are busy.

Remember Him when your tongue and your heart are in harmony. You will
remember Him truly only when you forget yourself entirely”.[^21]
Clearly, this kind of remembrance of God will stop man from commiting
sins and will force him to carry out prayers. Such remembrance will
enlighten and construct your hearts.

[^1]: . O you believe! Remember Allah, remembering frequently, And
glorify Him morning and evening [Qur’an 33:41-42].

[^2]: . And certainly the remembrance of Allah is the greatest [Qur’an
29:45].

[^3]: . Kanz al-Ummal.

[^4]: . Qur’an 13:28.

[^5]: . Qur’an 20:124.

[^6]: . Qur’an 43:36.

[^7]: . Qur’an 59:19.

[^8]: . Qur’an 9:67.

[^9]: . Mizan al-Hikmah, vol.3, p.429.

[^10]: . Qur’an 73:19.

[^11]: . Qur’an 88:5.

[^12]: . Qur’an 50:36-37.

[^13]: . Qur’an 20:14.

[^14]: . Qur’an 63:9.

[^15]: . Qur’an 15:3.

[^16]: . Qur’an 58:19.

[^17]: . Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^18]: . Mizan al-Hikmah, vol. 3, p.425.

[^19]: . Safinah al-Bihar, vol.1, p.484.

[^20]: . Bihar, vol. 93, p.158.

[^21]: . Ghurar al-Hikam.


