4) Adherence to His Cord
========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الاعتصام بحبله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Man in his life is constantly under the pressure of love for this world,
love for possessions, love for positions and love for wife, children and
other desires; these factors may make him go astray. He would never have
reached man's perfection if God had not prepared for him some mechanisms
to protect him. God has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِحَبْلِ اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا وَلَا تَفَرَّقُوا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And hold fast by the covenant of Allah altogether and be not
disunited”***[^1]

The question which is raised here is: What is meant by "The covenant of
Allah"? Is it Islam, or Qur’an, or the Prophet's kinfolks?

The fact is that by "the covenant of Allah" is meant any means which
leads him to the Divine aims. On the other hand, "The covenant of
Shaitan" leads him astray.[^2]

Thus, the Qur’an, Islam and the Prophet's family could be used as
covenants, as it is written in traditions.[^3]  
 The tradition of Abi Sa'eed al-Khudri narrated from the Prophet
confirms this fact: The Prophet said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ايُّها النّاسُ اِنِّي قَد تَرَكْتُ فِيكُم حَبلَينِ، اِن اتَّخَذتُم
بِهِمَا لَن تَضِلُّوا بَعدِي، اَحَدُهُمَا اَكبَر مِنَ الآخَرِ: كِتابَ
الله حَبلٌ مَمدُودٌ مِنَ السَّماءِ اِلى الارْضِ وَعِترَتِي اَهلَ
بَيتِي اِنَّهُما لَن يَفتَرِقا حَتّى يَرِدَا عَليَّ الحَوضَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"O people! I have left among you two cords (covenants). If you grasp
them both, you will not go astray after me. One is greater than the
other: the Book of God (the Qur’an), is a cord that extends from the
heavens to the earth; and my near relations, the people of my house. The
two will never part until they join me at the (Kawthar) pool."*[^4]

As you will notice, the Prophet of Islam negates separation on condition
that we grasp those two cords. Or else, it will be useless because a
sick man will not cure himself if he has the prescription and the drug
without acting upon them. Islam, Qur’an and Prophet's family can not
cure our spiritual and mental disturbances unless we obey God's command
as issued in the Qur’an and stated by the Prophet's family members.

It is for this reason that Imam ‘Ali recommends that his son – and all
his spiritual sons as well – connect themselves with God's rope. He has
emphasized that there is no bond and covenant stronger than that between
God and mankind. This is on condition that one should act as he is
ordered.

[^1]: . Qur’an 3:103.

[^2]: . In some traditions woman, gold and wealth are described as
Satan’s mountains.

[^3]: . Tafsir al-Safi, vol. 1, p.285; Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 3,
pp.378-379.

[^4]: . Safinah al-Bihar, vol.1, p.207.


