[Main Debate]
=============

It is often forgotten that before man began to view his relation to
nature only from the aspect of change and impermanence, he had become
himself inwardly detached from the immutable principle of the Intellect,
the nous, which along with revelation is the only factor that can act as
the permanent and immutable axis for the machinations of human reason.
With the weakening of gnostic elements in Christianity the rational
faculty of Western man became gradually estranged from the twin sources
of immutability, stability and permanence: namely, revelation and
intellectual intuition.[^1] The result was on the one hand the
nominalist trend, which destroyed philosophical certainty, and on the
other this reduction of man to the purely human cut off from any
transcendental elements, the man of Renaissance humanism. Such a concept
of man itself implied sheer change and becoming—which are apparent even
outwardly during that period in those rapid transformations of Western
society which have given the Renaissance its transitional character. But
even then man's concept of the Universe had not as yet changed. His
science of nature was still essentially medieval, comprised of Hermetic
and Scholastic elements. It is only his conception of himself that had
changed, leading in turn to a change in his concept of the Universe and
his own place in it.

It is always essential to bear in mind the time-lag between the
religious and metaphysical revolt at the end of the Middle Ages
expressing an attempt on the part of Western man to cut himself away
from his celestial and immutable archetype and to become purely
terrestrial and human, and the scientific revolution which carried this
secularized vision of man to its logical conclusion by creating a purely
secular science, Man, once he came to consider himself a predominantly
secular being, developed a science that considers the changing aspect of
things alone, a science that is concerned solely with becoming rather
than being, and this is a most logical happening if we remember that
even etymologically secular is derived from the Latin secularis one of
whose meanings is change and temporality. The destruction of the sacred
vision of man and the Universe is equivalent to the destruction of the
immutable aspect of both man and the Universe. A secular science could
not have come into existence without being wholly concerned with change
and becoming.

If we keep in mind the historical factors that brought into being a
world-view in the West based solely on the changing aspect of things, it
should be possible for us to reconstruct and bring back to light
permanent elements in the vision of modern man without appearing to
speak of absurdities; but this can only happen if there is an
understanding of traditional metaphysics and the language of symbolism
through which the metaphysical truths have always been revealed.[^2]
Metaphysics, or the science of the permanent, can be ignored or
forgotten; but it cannot be refuted precisely because it is not
concerned with change qua change. That which deals with permanence
cannot become "out of date," because it is not concerned with any date
as such. The permanent elements in the relation between man and the
Universe remain as valid now as ever. Only they must become known once
again after the long period during which the West did not search for
permanent

elements in change and even sought to reduce permanence itself to change
and historical process.

<p dir="rtl">
\*          \*          \*
</p>

From the point of view of traditional metaphysical and cosmological
doctrines there are several elements of permanence in the relationship
between man and nature and in man's own situation in the Universe. The
first and most basic element is the fact that the cosmic environment
that surrounds man is not ultimate reality but possesses the character
of relativity and even illusion. If one understands what is meant by the
Absolute then by the same token one understands the relative and comes
to realize that all that is not Absolute must of necessity be relative.
The aspect of the world as mâyâ, to use the Hindu term or samsâra in the
Buddhist sense, is itself a permanent element of the cosmos and man's
relation to it. The Universe, in its cosmic aspect, was always mâyâ and
will always be mâyâ. The Absolute is always the Absolute and the
relative the relative, and no amount of historical process and change
can turn one into the other. Historical process can cause a people or
even a civilization to forget for a while the distinction between the
Absolute and relative and therefore to take the relative for the
Absolute as modern science seems to have done. But wherever and whenever
metaphysical discernment appears, the distinction becomes clear and the
world becomes known for what it is, namely mâyâ. The changing element of
the world which the concept of mâyâ implies is itself a permanent
feature of the world. It is in the nature of the world to be changing,
to undergo generation and corruption, to experience life and death. But
the meaning of this change can only be understood in terms of the
permanent. To have understood that the world is mâyâ is to have
understood the meaning of Atmân or Brahmân that transcends mâyâ. To know
that the world is impermanent or samsâric in nature is to know by
extension the presence of the nirvânic state beyond it.[^3] The changing
character of the world reveals metaphysically the permanent reality that
transcends it. To realize the relativity of things is to know, by
extension of the same knowledge, about the Absolute and the Permanent.
Throughout history, in all periods of human culture, this metaphysical
distinction has existed. It lies in the nature of things and so is there
for all to see, provided they turn their vision towards it. Only, in
certain periods such as ours the relative has come to be idolized as the
Absolute. Today, one often hears the claim that all is relative. But the
same people who make such a claim often bestow an absolute character on
the domain of the relative itself. Without always being fully aware of
it they have mistaken both Brahmân and mâyâ, due to a lack of
discernment and true knowledge, an ignorance which itself stems from
mâyâ. But when there is metaphysical knowledge there is also awareness
of the relativity of things in the light of the Absolute, and this
fundamental truth is a permanent element in man's situation in the
Universe, and concerns his destiny as a being who is called upon to seek
to transcend the cosmic crypt into which he has fallen and to return
from the domain of the relative to the Absolute.[^4]

Another element of permanence in the relation of man to the Universe is
the manifestation of the Absolute in the relative in the form of symbols

understood in the traditional sense of the word.[^5] A symbol is not
based on man made conventions. It is an aspect of the ontological
reality of things and is as such independent of man's perception of
it.[^6]   The symbol is the revelation of a higher order of reality in a
lower order through which man can be led back to the higher sphere. To
understand symbols is to accept the hierarchic structure of the Universe
and the multiple states of being.

During phases of the historical process symbols which are given special
significance and power in a revealed religion through the revelation
itself can gradually lose their efficacy either partially or completely,
as a result of the weakening of the spiritual basis of that religion as
can be seen in the case of the de-mythologizers of our day.
Nevertheless, the symbols of nature are permanent and immutable. What
the sky signifies symbolically, as for example the dimension of
transcendence and the Divine throne, (‘arsh) to use the Islamic image,
is as permanent as the sky itself. The sun symbolizes the Universal
Intellect as long as it goes on shining and the tree with its extended
branches is a symbol of the multiple states of being as long as trees
grow on the surface of the earth. That is why one may speak of a
cosmologia perennis, of a qualitative science of nature which is always
valid and which reveals an aspect of nature which is, to say the least,
no less real than the changing aspect studied by modern science.[^7] The
main difference between the traditional and modern sciences of nature
lies in the fact that modern science studies change with respect to
change, whereas traditional science studies change in the light of
permanence through the study of symbols which are nothing but the
reflection of permanence in change.

A civilization may develop a science which turns its back upon the
qualitative aspect of things revealed through symbols to concentrate
upon the changes which can be measured quantitatively; but it cannot
destroy the symbolic reality of things any more than can a qualitative
and symbolic study of natural phenomena destroy their weight or size.
Today through the destruction of the "symbolist spirit",[^8] men in the
West have lost the sense of penetrating into the inner meaning of
phenomena which symbols alone reveal. But this impotence does not mean
that natural symbols have ceased to exist. The symbolic significance of
the homocentric spheres of Ptolemaic astronomy, which the immediate
appearance of the heavens reveals, remains valid, whether in the
theoretical Newtonian absolute space or in the curved space of
relativity the earth moves around the sun or the sun around the earth.
The homocentric spheres symbolize states of being above the terrestrial
sphere in which man is presently placed. The states of being remain true
whether we understand and accept the natural symbolism which the heavens
themselves reveal to us in our immediate and direct contact with them,
or whether we destroy this immediate appearance and the symbol in the
name of other theoretical considerations.

In fact even new scientific theories, if they conform to any reality at
all, possess their own symbolic meaning. To correspond to reality means
to be symbolic. If the Ptolemaic spheres symbolize man's position with
respect to higher states of being, the galactic space of modern
astronomy itself symbolizes the indefinitude of the relative, the
vastness of the ocean of samsâra. It is itself proof of the fact that
man's intelligence was created to

know the Infinite rather than the indefinite. But in a more direct
sense, the symbolic meaning of the phenomena of nature, not to speak of
scientific theories based upon them, represents a permanent aspect of
things and of man's relation to the cosmos. It is upon this permanent
character of the symbolic content of the phenomena of nature that one
can construct a symbolic science of nature, a traditional cosmology
which remains of perennial value and permanent importance, and which is
of particular significance today when the purely quantitative sciences
of nature and their manifold applications threaten the existence of both
man and nature.[^9]

Yet another permanent feature of the relation between man and the
Universe, at least according to a certain aspect of the situation, is
the way that nature presents itself to man. Today man seeks to change
all his social, political and even religious institutions with the
excuse that nature itself is always changing and therefore man must
change likewise. In fact just the reverse holds true. It is because
man's mentality has lost its anchor in the permanent and become itself a
fleeting river of ever changing ideas and images that man sees only
change in nature. If modern man has read evolution into nature, he had
begun to believe in evolution in his mind before observing it in nature
itself. Evolution is primarily not the product of natural observation
but of a secularized mentality cut off from every avenue of access to
the immutable, which then began to see its own fleeting nature in
outward nature. Man always sees in nature the reflection of his own
being and his conception of what he himself is.

If we study the world about us we see that in fact the terrestrial
environment in which men saw permanence for millenia has not changed in
its general features. The sun still rises and sets the same way now as
it did for ancient and medieval man, who looked upon it as the symbol of
the Divine Intellect. The natural forms still reproduce them-selves with
the same regularity and through the same processes as in older
historical periods. Neither the petals of the rose nor its scent have
changed since Dante and Shakespeare wrote about them. Nor in fact has
man himself evolved biologically since there has been a recorded or even
unrecorded human history. Today's man is biologically the same as the
men of old who believed in permanence and transcendence. If modern men
have ceased to so believe they had better find some other excuse than
their own biological or natural evolution.

In this question of the permanence of natural phenomena as they appear
to man there is a diametrical opposition between the traditional and
that modern point of view which is its direct inversion. Today all
things are considered to be changing, yet the hypothesis of
uniformitarianism is used with such certainty in geology, paleontology
and even anthropology that one would think it was a proven law. On the
one hand it is said that laws have been uniform and so we speak of
events having taken place millions and billions of years ago without
considering precisely what it is that we mean by a "million years." On
the other hand we say that nature changes all the time, without
considering the possibility that what appears as a "law of nature" today
may itself have changed over the ages or under particular circumstances
and conditions. If we cannot walk on water, there is no

logical reason why such and such a medieval saint could never have done
so.

The traditional view of nature reverses this situation completely. In
place of change it substitutes permanence and in place of uniformity and
immutability of natural conditions, qualitative change. The changing
processes of nature are viewed as permanent patterns which through
repetition integrate time and process into the image of eternity.[^10]
The apparent uniformity of nature is in turn modified by the theory of
cycles, the yugas of Hinduism or adwâr and akwâr of certain schools of
Islamic thought, which do not mean mere repetition of the same patterns
but rather bring out the qualitative difference between different epochs
both in the cosmos and in human history. The modern inversion of these
two realities has destroyed the vision of permanence in nature as well
as the realization of the qualitative differences in the various cycles.
In fact this inversion is itself proof of the reality of the cosmic
cycles and only confirms what all authentic traditions teach about
them.[^11]

For this reason alone older works of natural history and mythology have
become closed books and at best are interpreted in a purely
psychological manner, whereas they can be understood in the light of the
fact that there is a qualitative difference between the cosmic milieu of
the ancient natural environment and our own. There was not the same
crystallization and condensation, the same separation of matter from
spirit. The water of Thales was still full of the animating spirit of
nature and in fact symbolized the psycho-physical substratum of things.
It was very far removed from the post-Cartesian dead matter with which
Lavoisier was experimenting twenty-four centuries later.

Yet, between this change and that permanence and across this inversion
of views there remains one immutable element: that is, the way in which
the phenomena of nature appear to man. The sky, the sea, the mountains,
the seasonal cycles, these realities manifest themselves now as in the
millenia before, except for certain qualitative differences involved,
and they are the majestic testament of the Immutable manifested in the
process of becoming. Men who love nature are essentially in quest of the
permanent, and nature in fact itself gives the lie to those who want to
limit all reality to change and becoming. Such philosophies never arose
among people who lived close to nature but have always been the products
of sedentary environments where an artificial atmosphere has enabled men
to forget both nature and the permanent elements which she reveals to
man, elements which evoke in man those factors that are permanent and
anchored in the immutable strata of man's own being.

As far as the present sciences of nature are concerned, much though they
differ from the various traditional cosmologies, even here there is an
element of permanence if one takes modern science for what it really is.
Of course by the very fact that modern science has consciously turned
its back upon the metaphysical and symbolic aspect of things, it is cut
off from the traditional view of nature through its own point of view
and must ignore any metaphysical significance that its own discoveries
may possess. Yet, these discoveries, to the extent that they have a
connection with the reality of

things, do possess a symbolic significance. For example the fact that
order repeats itself in all planes of material reality from the galaxy
to the atom, or the fact that with whatever unit science deals with,
whether it be the biological cell or the atom, there is a harmony of
parts within a whole, represent permanent features of any science of
nature whether one bothers to take these facts into consideration or
not.

Even in a more evident manner, one sees the repetition of certain
patterns and problems throughout the history of science, a fact which
more than any other has attracted many modern scientists to its study.
No matter how much science changes, the encounter of man's mind with
nature seems to produce certain permanent features. Take for example the
problem of continuity and discontinuity of bodies, which had occupied
Aristotle and the Greek atomists, the Muslim Peripatetics and
theologians as well as the modern physicists; or the relation of the One
to the manifold, or between order and disorder or between chance and
determinism; these are all problems that recur perennially in all forms
of science. Many scientists turn today to the history of science to find
inspiration for new methodologies in order to face problems of
contemporary physics or biology which are basically related to the
problems of the ancient and medieval sciences. The recurrence of these
patterns and problems is yet another element of permanence in a domain
that is the most changing and fluid of all fields, just because men have
turned their backs upon Unity to view multiplicity, to study the
contingent without considering the Principle.

But perhaps the most important permanent element in man's relation to
the Universe is his "existential" situation in the hierarchy of
universal existence. Traditional man knew with certainty where he came
from, why he lived and where he was going. Modern man, however, for the
most part knows neither where he comes from nor what his end will be and
therefore, most important of all, why he is living. Nevertheless, like
the traditional man he faces the two points which determine the
beginning and end of his terrestrial life. He is born and he dies. This
fact has not changed one iota nor will it do so through the cheap form
of would-be immortality that modern man seeks, if unconsciously, through
such artificial means as heart transplantations. The only difference is
that what was once certainty has become today doubt and fear. But the
reality of birth and death remains, and no amount of modern science can
unravel the mysteries of these two "eternities" between which stands the
flickering moment of earthly life.[^12]

It is these two "infinities" which determine the character and meaning
of the finitude that stands between them. With respect to these two
"infinities" the situation of man has not changed at all even if the
destruction of the medieval cosmologies has destroyed for most men the
metaphysical doctrine of the states of being which that cosmology
symbolized so beautifully. Man is still a finite being with an
intelligence made to understand the Infinite and the Absolute and not
merely the indefinite and the relative, whereof the total grasp lies
forever beyond the ken of any human science. With respect to the
Absolute and all the states of being which comprise the Universe man is
what he has always been and will always be, an image of the Absolute in
the relative, cast into the stream of

becoming in order to return this becoming itself to Being. Today there
is so much talk of change that men are hypnotized by their own phrases
and forget that just beneath the surface of these ever moving waves of
change lies the immutable and permanent sea of man's real nature. The
situation of this permanent nature which man carries within himself
wherever he comes face to face with the Real, in its metaphysical sense,
has never changed nor can it ever alter. The ontological situation of
man in the total scheme of things is forever the same; it is, more than
all the other elements of cosmology and the sciences that relate man to
the Universe, a situation of permanence midst apparent change.

NOTES
-----

[^1] See S. H. Nasr, The Encounter of Man and Nature, the Spiritual
Crisis of Modern Man, London, 1968, pp. 63 ff.

[^2] See F. Schuon, The Transcendent Unity of Religions, trans. by P.
Townsend, London , 1953, pp. 9 ff., and R. Guénon, La métaphysique
orientale, Paris , [^1951]:

[^3] See. F Schuon, In the Tracks of Buddhism, trans. by M. Pallis,
London, 1968, where the relation between nirvana and samsâra is
discussed in all its amplitude and depth

[^4] Concerning this theme in its Islamic setting, see S. H. Nasr, An
Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines, Cambridge (U.S.A.),
1964, chapter XV.

[^5] The meaning of traditional symbols cannot be treated here. This
question has been amply dealt with in the writings of F. Schuon, R.
Guénon, T. Burckhardt, and A. K. Coomaraswamy as well as H. Zimmer and
M. Eliade.

[^6] "The science of symbols—not simply a knowledge of traditional
symbols—proceeds from the qualitative significances of substances,
forms,..., we are not dealing here with subjective appreciations, for
the cosmic qualities are ordered both in relation to Being and according
to a hierarchy which is more real than the individual..." F. Schuon,
Gnosis, Divine Wisdom, trans. G. E. H. Palmer, London, 1959, p. [^110]:

[^7] On the cosmologia perennis, see T. Burckhardt, Scienza moderna e
saggezza traditionale, Torino, 1968; see also his Alchemie, Sinn and
Weltbild, Olten, 1960, which deals with permanent values of Hermetic
cosmology.

[^8] Concerning the "symbolist spirit" see F. Schuon, "The Symbolist
Outlook", Studies in Comparative Religion, Winter, 1966, pp. 50 ff.

[^9] The author has dealt fully with this question in his Encounter of
Man and Nature.

[^10] On the relation between linear and cyclic time as it effects both
history and cosmology, see M. Eliade, The Myth of the Eternal Return,
trans. by W. Trask, New York, 1954; see also, A. K. Coomaraswamy, Time
and Eternity, Ascona, 1947, where the metaphysical relationship between
time and eternity in different traditions is elucidated.

[^11] The downward tendency of the Kali Yuga or Dark Age which itself
obliterates the vision of qualitative time for most men is admirably
treated by R. Guénon in many of his writings, especially The Reign of
Quantity and the Signs of the Times, trans. by Lord Northbourne, London,
[^1951]:

[^12] "Modern Science, which is rationalist as to its subject and
materialist as to its object, can describe our situation physically and
approximately, but it can tell us nothing about our extra-spatial
situation in the total and real Universe". F. Schuon, Light on the
Ancient Worlds, trans. by Lord Northbourne, London, 1965, p. [^111]:
