Part I - Introduction
=====================

This is the first part of Martyr Mutahhari's book Sayri dar Nahj
al-balaghah, and consists of the introduction and the first section of
the book. The introduction, which the author, presumably wrote before
giving the book to the publishers is dated Muharram 3, 1995 (January 15,
1975).

**INTRODUCTION:**

Perhaps it may have happened to you, and if not, you may still
visualize it: someone lives on your street or in your neighbourhood for
years; you see him at least once every day and habitually nod to him and
pass by. Years pass in this manner, until, one day, accidentally, you
get an opportunity to sit down with him and to become familiar with his
ideas, views and feelings, his likes and dislikes. You are amazed at
what you have come to know about him. You never imagined or guessed that
he might be as you found him, and never thought that he was what you
later discovered him to be.

After that, whenever you see him, his face, somehow, appears to be
different. Not only this, your entire attitude towards him is altered.
His personality assumes a new meaning, a new depth and respect in your
heart, as if he were some person other than the one you thought you knew
for years. You feel as if you have discovered a new world.

My experience was similar in regard to the Nahj al-balaghah. From my
childhood years I was familiar with the name of this book, and I could
distinguish it from other books on the shelves in my father's library.
Years later, during my studies, first at the theological school of
Mashhad, and later at Qum, when I was finishing the last stages of the
preliminary education in theology called "sutuh", during all those days
the name of the Nahj al-balaghah was heard more often than that of any
other book after the Quran. Some of its sermons on piety I had heard so
many times that I almost remembered them by heart.

Nevertheless, I must admit, like all of my colleagues at the theology
school (Hawzah 'ilmiyyah), I was quite ignorant of the world of the Nahj
al-balaghah. We had met as strangers and passed by each other in the
manner of strangers. This continued until the summer of 1325 (1946) when
in order to escape the heat of Qum, I went to Isfahan. A trifling
accident brought me into contact with a person who took my hand and led
me somewhat into the world of the Nahj al-balaghah.

When this happened, I realized that I knew little about this book until
that time. Later I wished that I would also find someone who would
introduce me into the world of the Quran. Since then, the countenance of
the Nahj al-balaghah was transformed in my eyes. I became fond of it,
and gradually my fondness grew into love. It was now a different book
from the one I had known until that moment. I felt as if I had
discovered an entirely new world. Shaykh Muhammad 'Abduh, the former
mufti of Egypt, who edited and published the Nahj al-balaghah with a
brief commentary, and for the first time introduced this book to the
Egyptians, says that he had no knowledge of this book until he undertook
its study far from home in a distant land.

He was struck with wonder and felt as if he had discovered a precious
treasure trove. Thereupon, he immediately decided to publish it and
introduce it to the Arab public. The unfamiliarity of a Sunni scholar
with the Nahj al-balaghah is not surprising; what is amazing is that the
Nahj al-balaghah should be a stranger and alien in its own homeland and
among the Shi'ah of 'Ali ('a) and that too in the Shi'i theological
schools in the same way as 'Ali himself has remained isolated and a
stranger. Evidently, if the content and ideas of a book or the feelings
and emotions of a person do not harmonize with the mentality of a
people, that book or person practically remains isolated as a stranger
in an alien world, even though the name of such a person or book may be
mentioned with great respect and admiration.

We, the theology students, must confess our estrangement from the Nahj
al-balaghah. We have built a mental world of our own which is alien to
the world of the Nahj al-balaghah. As I write this preface, I cannot
abstain from recalling with sorrow the memory of that great man who
introduced me for the first time into the world of the Nahj al-balaghah,
and whose acquaintance I treasure as one of the most precious
experiences of my life, which I would not exchange for anything. No day
or night passes without my remembering him or mentioning him with
feelings of gratitude.

I dare say that he was a divine scholar ('alim-e rabbani) in the true
sense of the word, though I dare not claim that I was "a learner of the
path of deliverance" (muta'allim 'ala sabil al-najat). [^1] I remember
that in my meetings with him, I was always reminded of the following
verse of Sa'di:

The devout, the ascetic, and the Subi, All are toddlers on the path;

If there is any mature man,

It is none other than the 'alim-e rabbani.

He was a faqih (jurisprudent)

[^2] , a philosopher, a man of letters and a physician, all at once. He
was well versed in fiqh (jurisprudence), philosophy, the Arabic and
Persian literature and the traditional medicine, and was considered a
specialist of the first order in some of these fields. He was a masterly
teacher of Bu 'Ali's al-Qanun, the treatise of Ibn Sina in medicine,
which does not find a teacher these days, and many scholars of the
theology school attended his lessons. However, it was not possible for
him to confine himself to one field and his spirit revolted against any
kind of restrictions.

Of his lectures the most that interested him were those on the Nahj
al-balaghah, which threw him into ecstasies. It seemed as if the Nahj
al-balaghah had opened its wings and he, having mounted on its wings,
was taken on a journey through strange worlds which were beyond our
reach.

It was evident that he lived by the Nahj al-balaghah; he lived with it
and breathed with it. His spirit was united with that book; his pulse
throbbed and his heart beat in harmony with the Nahj al-balaghah. Its
sentences were always on his lips and their meanings had been engraved
upon his heart.

When he quoted its passages, tears would flow from his eyes and soak
his white beard. During lessons, his encounter with and involvement in
the Nahj al-balaghah would make him totally oblivious of his
surroundings. It was a very educative as well as an attractive
spectacle. Listening to the language of the heart from someone whose
great heart is full of love and wisdom has altogether a different affect
and attraction. He was a living example of the saints of the bygone
days. The words of 'Ali fully apply to him:

Had it not been that the Providence had decreed the years of their life
the passionate earning for Divine reward and fear of chastisement would
not have permitted their souls to remain in their bodies even for a
moment. Their realization of the greatness of the creator has made
everything besides Him insignificant in their eyes. [^3]

This refined man of letters, the speculative philosopher, the great
faqih, the adept man of medicine and the excellent master of theology
was the late Hajj Mirza 'Ali Aqa al-Shirazi al-'Isfahani, sanctified by
God, a man of truth and wisdom, who had attained deliverance from the
finite self and selfhood and had merged with the Infinite Truth.

In spite of his high scholarly status and eminent social standing, his
sense of commitment to society and his burning love for al-Imam
al-Husayn ('a) had impelled him to deliver sermons from the minbar.

His sermons, since they came from the heart, had a deep effect on the
hearts. Whenever he visited Qum, the scholars of the first rank would
persuade him to deliver sermons from the minbar.

[^4] His sermons were charged with a passionate purity and sincerity
that made them profoundly effective. They were not just words to be
heard, but a spiritual state to be experienced.

However, he abstained from leading prayers. One year, during the holy
month of Ramadan, after much persuasion, he accepted to lead prayers at
the Madraseh-ye Sadr for that month. In spite of the fact that he did
not come regularly and refused to stick to any regular schedule,
unprecedented crowds of people would come to attend the prayers led by
him. I heard that strength declined in the jama'at in the neighbourhood
mosques and he, too, did not continue.

As far as I know, the people of Isfahan generally knew him in person
and liked him. He was also loved at the theology school of Qum. The
'ulama' of Qum would go forth eagerly to see him at the news of his
arrival in the city. Like all other restrictions, he also refused to be
bound by the conditions set for having murids and followers. May Allah
shower His infinite mercy upon him and raise him with His awliya' on the
Day of Resurrection.

With all his merits, it is not my claim that he was familiar with all
the worlds that the Nahj al-balaghah embraces and had set his foot in
all the domains encompassed by it. He had explored only a portion of its
realms and that part of the Nahj al-balaghah had been incarnated in his
person.

The universe of the Nahj al-balaghah includes numerous worlds: the
world of zuhd (abstinence, piety) and taqwa (God-fearing), the world of
'ibadah (worship, devotion) and 'irfan (mystic knowledge), the world of
hikmah (wisdom) and philosophy, the world of moral preaching and
guidance, the world of eschatology (malahim) and mysteries
(mughayyabat), the world of politics and social responsibilities, the
world of heroism and bravery ...; too many worlds to be conquered by any
individual. Hajj Mirza 'Ali Aqa al-Shirazi had explored only a part of
this great ocean and knew it well.

**Nahj al-balaghah and the Present-Day Islamic Society:
**
The alienation from the Nahj al-balaghah was not confined to me or
others like me, but pervaded through the Islamic society. Those who
understood this book, their knowledge did not go beyond the translation
of its words and explanatory notes on its sentences. The spirit and the
content of the book were hidden from the eyes of all. Only lately, it
may be said, the Islamic world has begun to explore the Nahj
al-balaghah, or in other words, the Nahj al-balaghah has started its
conquest of the Muslim world.

What is surprising is that a part of the contents of the Nahj
al-balaghah, both in Shi'ite Iran and Arab countries, was first
discovered either by atheists or non-Muslim theists, who revealed the
greatness of the book to the Muslims. Of course, the purpose of most or
all of them was to utilize the Nahj al-balaghah of 'Ali ('a) for
justifying and confirming their own social views; but the outcome was
exactly opposite of what they desired.

Because, for the first time the Muslims realized that the views
expressed grandiloquently by others had nothing new to offer and that
they cannot surpass what is said in the Nahj al-balaghah of 'Ali ('a),
or translated into action through the character (sirah) of 'Ali and his
disciples like Salman al-Farsi, Abu Dharr, and 'Ammar. The result of it
was that instead of supporting the pretentious views of those who wished
to exploit the Nahj al-balaghah, 'Ali and his book defeated their
purpose.

Nevertheless, it must be accepted that before this occurred, most of us
had little knowledge of the Nahj al-balaghah and it hardly went beyond
appreciation of few sermons about virtues of piety and abstinence.
Nobody had yet recognized the significance of the valuable epistle of
Mawla 'Ali to Malik al-'Ashtar al-Nakh'i; nobody had paid attention to
it.

As mentioned in the first and second chapters of this book, the Nahj
al-balaghah is a collection of sermons, precepts, prayers, epistles and
aphorisms of 'Ali ('a) compiled by al-Sayyid al-Sharif al-Radi about one
thousand years ago. However, neither the recorded words of Mawla 'Ali
are confined to those collected by al-Sayyid al-Radi, nor was he the
only man to compile the sayings of Amir al-Muminin. Al-Masudi, who lived
a hundred years before al-Sayyid al-Radi, in the second volume of his
work Muruj al-dhahab, writes: "At present there are over 480 sermons of
'Ali in the hands of the people," whereas the total number of sermons
included by al-Sayyid al-Radi in his collection is 239 only.

There are, at present, two kinds of work that must be accomplished with
respect to the Nahj al-balaghah, so that 'Ali's thought and his views on
various important issues expressed in the Nahj al-balaghah, which are
still relevant and are direly needed by the present-day Islamic society,
may be brought to light. The second kind of work required in relation to
the Nahj al-balaghah is research on the sources (asnad) and the
documents related to its contents. Fortunately, we hear that Muslim
scholars in various parts of the Islamic world are devoting themselves
to both of these important tasks.

This book is a collection of a series of articles that originally
appeared in the journal Maktab e Islam during 1351-52 (1972-73), now
presented to the learned readers in the form of the present book.
Formerly, I had delivered five lectures on this topic at the Husayniyyah
Irshad. [^5] Later, I took up with the idea of writing a series of
articles to deal with the subject in greater detail.

From the outset, when I chose to call it "Sayri dar Nahj al-balaghah"
('A journey into the Nahj al-balaghah'), I was aware that my attempt
does not deserve to be called more than a journey, or a short trip. This
work, by no means, can deserve to be called a research study.

I neither had the time and opportunity for a research study, nor did I
consider myself fit for this task. Moreover, a profound and
comprehensive research study of the contents of the Nahj al-balaghah,
exploration of the thought of 'Ali, and, besides it, research about
documentation of its contents, is the job of a group and not of a single
individual. But as it is said, that which cannot be attained in entirety
is not to be abandoned in entirety

[^6]. And since humble attempts open the way for great tasks, I started
on my trip. Unfortunately, even this journey was not completed. The
project that I had prepared for, and which the reader shall find
mentioned in the third chapter, remained unaccomplished on account of
many preoccupations. I do not know whether will ever get the opportunity
to continue my journey through the Nahj al-balaghah. But it is my great
desire to be able to do so.

**1. A LITERARY MARVEL**

The Nahj al-balaghah is a magnificent collection of the inimitable
sermons, invocations (du'a), wills or advices, epistles and aphorisms of
Amir al-mu'minin, Imam 'Ali ibn Abi Talib ('a), compiled by al-Sayyid al
Sharif al-Radi (may God be pleased with him) about one thousand years
ago. Time and years have not only failed to diminish the impressive
freshness of this work, but have added constantly to its value as new
concepts and ideas have emerged.

'Ali ('a) was undoubtedly a man of eloquence and delivered a large
number of speeches that became famous. Likewise, numerous sayings
containing philosophic wisdom were heard from him. He wrote many
letters, especially during the days of his caliphate, which his admirers
recorded and preserved with remarkable interest and zeal. Al-Mas'udi (d.
346/955-6), who lived almost a hundred years before al-Sayyid al-Radi
(d. 406/1115), in the second volume of his Muruj al-dhahab, under the
heading "Fi dhikr luma' min kalamihi, wa akhbarihi, wa zuhdih, says:

That which has been preserved by people of 'Ali's sermons, delivered on
various occasions, exceeds 480 in number. 'Ali ('a) used to deliver his
sermons extempore without any previous preparation. The people recorded
[^7] his words and practically derived benefit from them.

[^8]

The testimony of an informed researcher and scholar like al-Mas'udi
bears out the large number of 'Ali's speeches that were extant during
his time. Only 239 of these have been handed down to us in the Nahj
al-balaghah, whereas their number, as mentioned by al-Mas'udi, was more
than 480.

Moreover, al-Mas'udi informs us about the extraordinary dedication and
ardour of various groups of people in recording and preserving 'Ali's
words.

Al-Sayyid al-Radi and the Nahj al-balaghah:

Al-Sayyid al-Sharif al-Radi, or al-Sayyid al-Radi, as he is commonly
called, was an ardent admirer of 'Ali's speeches. He was a scholar, a
poet and a man of cultivated taste. Al-Tha'alibi, his contemporary, says
of him:

He is the most remarkable man among his contemporary and the noblest
amongst the sayyids of Iraq. Family and descent aside, he is fully
adorned and endowed with literary excellence. He is the most remarkable
poet among the descendants of Abu Talib, though there are many
distinguished poets among them. To say that of all the Quraysh no poet
could ever surpass him would not be an exaggeration. [^9]

It was on account of al-Sayyid al-Radi's earnest love of literature in
general, and admiration for 'Ali's discourses in particular, that his
interest was mainly literary in compiling 'Ali's words. Consequently, he
gave greater attention to those passages which were more prominent from
the literary point of view. This was the reason why he named his
anthology "Nahj al-balaghah",

[^10] which means the "path of eloquence" giving little importance to
mentioning his sources, a point rarely ignored by compilers of hadith
(traditions). Only at times does he casually mention the name of a
certain book from which a particular sermon or epistle has been taken.
In a book of history or hadith, it is of primary importance that the
sources be precisely specified; otherwise, little credence can be given
to it.

The value of a literary masterpiece, however, lies in its intrinsic
beauty, subtlety, elegance and depth. Meanwhile, it is not possible to
assert that al-Sayyid al-Radi was entirely oblivious of the historical
value and other dimensions of this sacred work, or that his attention
was exclusively absorbed by its literary qualities.

Fortunately, after al-Sayyid al-Radi, others took up the task of
collecting the asnad of the Nahj al-balaghah. Perhaps the most
comprehensive book in this regard is the Nahj al-sa'adah fi mustadrak
Nahj al-balaghah by Muhammad Baqir al-Mahmudi, a distinguished Shi'ah
scholar of Iraq. In this valuable book, all of 'Ali's extant speeches,
sermons, decrees, epistles, prayers, and sayings have been collected. It
includes the Nahj al-balaghah and other discourses which were not
incorporated by al-Sayyid al-Radi or were not available to him.
Apparently, except for some of the aphorisms, the original sources of
all the contents of the Nahj al-balaghah have been determined. [^11]

It should be mentioned that al-Sayyid al-Radi was not the only man to
compile a collection of 'Ali's utterances; others, too, have compiled
various books with different titles in this field. The most famous of
them is Ghurar al-hikam wa durar al-kalim by al-Amudi, on which Muhaqqiq
Jamal al-Din al-Khunsari has written a commentary in Persian and which
has been recently printed by the University of Tehran through the
efforts of the eminent scholar Mir Jalal al-Din al-Muhaddith
al-'Urumawi.

'Ali al Jundi, the dean of the faculty of sciences at the Cairo
University, in the introduction to the book 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, shi'ruhu
wa hikamuh cites a number of these collections some of which have not
yet appeared in print and exist as manuscripts. These are:

1. Dustur ma'alim al-hikam by al-Quda'i, the author of the al-Khutat;
2. Nathr al-la 'ali'; this book has been translated and published by a
Russian Orientalist in one bulky volume.
3. Hikam sayyidina 'Ali. A manuscript of this book exists in the
Egyptian library, Dar al-Kutub al-Misriyyah.

**Two Distinctive Characteristics:**

From the earliest times, two distinct merits have been recognized as
characterizing 'Ali's discourses: firstly, literary elegance (fasahah)
and eloquence (balaghah); secondly, their characteristic
multi-dimensional nature. Any of these two qualities is sufficient for
estimating 'Ali's words as valuable, but the combination of these two
qualities (i.e. matchless eloquence, literary elegance, and their
multi-dimensional nature-in that they deal with diverse and occasionally
incompatible spheres of life) has made it almost miraculous. For this
reason, 'Ali's speech occupies a position in between the speech of the
human being and the Word of God. Indeed, it has been said of it that '
it is above the speech of creatures and below the Word of the Creator."
[^12]

**Literary Beauty and Elegance:**

This aspect of the Nahj al-balaghah requires no introduction for a
reader of cultivated literary taste capable of appreciating the elegance
and charm of language. Basically, beauty is a thing to be perceived and
experienced and not to be described or defined. The Nahj al-balaghah,
even after nearly fourteen centuries, has retained the same
attractiveness, freshness, charm, and beauty for the present-day
audience that it possessed for the people of earlier days. Here we do
not intend to give an elaborate proof of this claim.

Nevertheless, as a part of our discourse, we shall briefly describe the
marvellous power of 'Ali's words in moving hearts and infusing them with
the feeling of wonder. We shall start with 'Ali's own times and follow
the effect of his discourses through the changes and variations in
tastes, outlooks, and modes of thought during different successive ages
up to the present day.

The companions of 'Ali ('a), particularly those who had a taste for
language and literary grace, greatly admired him as an orator. 'Abd
Allah ibn al-'Abbas is one of them, who himself, as al Jahiz points out
in his al-Bayan wa al-tabyin, [^13] was a powerful orator He did not
conceal his passion for listening to 'Ali speak or the enjoyment he
derived from it. Once, when 'Ali was delivering his famous sermon called
al-Shiqshiqiyyah,

[^14] Ibn al-'Abbas was also present. While 'Ali ('a) was speaking, an
ordinary man of Kufah handed him a paper containing some questions, thus
causing 'Ali to discontinue his speech. 'Ali, after reading the letter,
did not continue his speech in spite of Ibn al-'Abbas 'urging him to
continue. Ibn al-'Abbas later expressed the deep regret he felt on that
occasion, saying, "Never in life was I ever so sorry for interruption of
a speech as I was for the interruption of this sermon."

[^15]

Referring to a certain letter that 'Ali had written to Ibn al-'Abbas,
he used to say: "Except the speech of the Holy Prophet, I did not derive
so much benefit from any utterance as from this one."

[^16]

Mu'awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan, 'Ali's most contumacious enemy, also
acknowledges his extraordinary eloquence. When Muhqin ibn Abi Muhqin
forsook 'Ali and joined Mu'awiyah, in order to please Mu'awiyah, whose
heart surged with ill-will and bitterness towards 'Ali, he told him, "I
have left the dumbest of men and come to you." The flagrancy of this
kind of flattery was so obvious that Mu'awiyah himself reproached him,
saying: "Woe to you! You call 'Ali the dumbest of men? The Quraysh knew
nothing about eloquence before him. It was he who taught them the art of
eloquence."

**Influence of 'Ali's Oratory:**

Those who heard 'Ali speaking from the minbar were very much affected
by his words. His sermons made hearts tremble and drew tears from the
eyes. Even today, who can hear or read 'Ali's sermons without a tremor
passing through his heart? Al-Sayyid al-Radi, after narrating 'Ali's
famous sermon al-Gharra', [^17] says:

As 'Ali delivered his sermon, tears flowed from the eyes of the
listeners and hearts quivered with emotion.

Hammam ibn Shurayh, one of 'Ali's companions, was a man with a heart
full of God's love and a soul burning with spiritual fire. At one time,
he requested 'Ali to describe the qualities of pious and God-fearing
men. 'Ali, on the one hand, did not want to turn down his request, and
on the other, he was afraid that Hammam might not be able to bear what
'Ali would say.

Therefore, he eludes this request giving only a perfunctory description
of piety and the pious. Hammam is not only unsatisfied with this, but
also his eagerness is heightened and he beseeches 'Ali to speak with
greater elaboration. 'Ali commences his famous sermon and begins to
describe the characteristics of the truly pious. He enumerates about one
hundred and five [^18] qualities of such human beings and goes on to
describe more. But as 'Ali's words flow in fiery sequence, Hammam is
carried to the very extreme of ecstasy. His heart throbs terribly and
his spirit is driven to the furthest limits of emotion.

It advances in eagerness like a restless bird trying to break out of
its cage. Suddenly, there is a terrible cry and the audience turn around
to find that it came from no other man than Hammam himself. Approaching,
they find that his soul has left its earthly mould to embrace
everlasting life. When this happened, 'Ali's remark, which carries both
eulogy and regret, was: "I feared this would happen. Strange, yet this
is how effective admonition affects sensitive hearts."

[^19] This is an example of the kind of influence 'Ali's sermons had
over the minds and hearts of his contemporaries.

The Opinions of Ancient and Modern Scholars:

After the Holy Prophet (S), 'Ali ('a) alone has the distinction of
being one whose speeches and sayings were recorded and preserved by the
people with particular care.

Ibn Abi al-Hadid quotes 'Abd al-Hamid al-Katib, the great master of
Arabic prose [^20] who lived during the early part of the second century
of the Hijrah, as saying, "I learnt by heart seventy sermons of 'Ali,
and from that time onwards my mind always overflowed [ with inspiration
]."

'Ali al Jundi also relates that when 'Abd al-Hamid was asked about what
had helped him most in attaining literary excellence, he replied,
"Memorizing of the discourses of the 'bald one'."

[^21]

In the Islamic period of history the name of 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Nubatah
is proverbial for oratory among Arabs. He acknowledges that his
intellectual and artistic attainments are indebted to 'Ali. Ibn Abi
al-Hadid quotes him as saying:

I committed to memory about a hundred discourses of 'Ali; since then
this has served me as an inexhaustible treasure [of inspiration].

Al Jahiz was a celebrated literary genius of the early third century of
the Hijrah, and his book Al-Bayan wa al-tabyin is regarded as one of the
four main classics of Arabic literature [^22]. Often, in his book, he
expresses his great wonder and immense admiration for 'Ali's discourses.
From his remarks it is evident that a large number of 'Ali's sermons
were commonly known to the people of his day. In the first volume of his
Al-Bayan wa al-tabyin,

[^23] after mentioning that some people praise precision in talk or
rather prefer silence and disapprove profusion in speech, al-Jahiz
writes:

The profuseness of speech that has been regarded with disapproval is
futile talk not that which is fruitful and illuminating. Otherwise, 'Ali
ibn Abi Talib and 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas were men of prolific
speech.

In the same volume of his work, he quotes this famous sentence of 'Ali
('a):

[^24]

The worth of a man lies in what he has mastered.

[^25]

Al Jahiz then devotes half a page to expressing his admiration for this
sentence, and writes further:

If our book did not contain anything but this sentence, it would
suffice it. The best speech is one little of which makes you dispense
with much of it and in which the meanings are not concealed within words
but are made manifest.

Then he remarks:

It appears as if Allah the Almighty has enveloped it with His glory,
and covered it with the light of wisdom proportionate to the piety and
taqwa of its speaker.

Al Jahiz, in the same work, where he discusses the oratory of Sasa'ah
ibn Suhan al-'Abdi [^26], says that:

No greater proof of his excellence as an orator is required than the
fact that 'Ali occasionally came to him and asked him to deliver a
speech.

Al-Sayyid al-Radi's following remarks in appreciation and praise of the
speech of Imam 'Ali ('a) are famous:

Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali ('a) was the reservoir and fountainhead of
eloquence which derived its principles from his speeches and revealed
its secrets through him. Every orator of mark tried to imitate him and
every preacher learned from him the art of eloquence. Nevertheless, they
lagged far behind him while he excelled them all. His speech (alone)
bears the imprint of Divine Wisdom and the fragrance of the Prophet's
eloquence.

Ibn Abi al-Hadid is a Mu'tazilite scholar of the 7th/13th century. He
was a masterly writer and an adept poet, and, as we know, was an adorer
of 'Ali's discourses. Accordingly, he expresses his profound admiration
for 'Ali recurringly throughout his book. In the introduction to his
famous commentary on the Nahj al-balaghah, he writes:

Rightly has 'Ali's discourse been regarded as being only inferior to
that of the Creator and superior to that of all creatures. All people
have learnt the arts of oration and writing from him. It suffices to say
that the people have not recorded even one-tenth of one-twentieth from
any other Companion of the Prophet (S) of what they recorded and
preserved of 'Ali's discourses, although there were many eloquent
persons among them. Again, it is sufficient that such a man as al Jahiz
is all praise for 'Ali in his book al-Bayan wa al-tabyin.

Ibn Abi al-Hadid, in the fourth volume of his commentary, commenting on
Imam 'Ali's letter to 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas (written after the fall
of Egypt to Mu'awiyah's forces and the martyrdom of Muhammad ibn Abi
Bakr, in which 'Ali ('a) breaks the news of this disaster to 'Abd Allah,
who was at Basrah) writes:

[^27]

Look how eloquence has given its reins into the hands of this man and
is docile to his every signal. Observe the wonderful order of the words
coming one after the other to bow in his presence, or gushing like a
spring that flows effortlessly out of the ground. Subhan Allah! An Arab
youth grows up in a town like Mecca, has never met any sage or
philosopher, yet his discourses have surpassed those of Plato and
Aristotle in eloquence and profundity. He has no intercourse with men of
wisdom, but has surpassed Socrates.

He has not grown up among warriors and heroes but amongst traders and
merchants for the people of Mecca were not a warrior nation but traders,
yet he emerges as the greatest warrior of supreme courage to have walked
upon the earth. Khalil ibn Ahmad was asked: Of 'Ali, Bistam, and
'Anbasah, who was the more courageous? Replied he, "Bistam and 'Anbasah
should be compared with other men; 'Ali was something superior to human
beings." He came from the Quraysh, who were not the foremost in
eloquence, for, the most eloquent among Arabs were Banu Jurhum, though
they were not famous for wisdom or wit, yet 'Ali surpassed even Sahban
ibn Wa'il and Qays ibn Sa'dah in eloquence.


