The World' in the Quran and the Nahj Al-balaghah
================================================

In the last chapter we said that that which is execrable from the
viewpoint of Islam in regard to man's relation with the world is that it
should grow to the extent of becoming a malady and an affliction of the
human soul. It is the bondage and the enslaving attachment to the world
against which Islam has waged an unrelenting struggle considering it as
undesirable, not the mere relation and attachment with it. It is the
life of captivity that is condemnable, not the life of freedom. The
world is rejected as a goal and objective and not as a way or a means.

If the relation of man to the world develops into his servitude and
subjugation, it leads to the negation and obliteration of all higher
human values; man's worth lies in the greatness of his pursued ends and
objectives. Obviously, if, for instance, his ultimate objectives do not
go beyond filling his belly to satisfaction, and if all his efforts and
aspirations were to revolve around his stomach, his worth will not
surpass that of his stomach. That is why 'Ali (A) says: "The worth of a
man whose only aim is to stuff his belly is equal to that which is
excreted from it."

The question is what kind of relation is appropriate between the human
being and the world and what form should it have. In one kind of
relation, his personality is effaced and sacrificed to things, and since
the worth of anyone in pursuit of an objective is lower than the
objective itself, he is, to use a Quranic expression, bound to sink to
the level of 'the lowest of the low' (asfal al-safilin), becoming
thereby the most abject, degenerate and the most contemptible creature
in the world. He, then, loses not only his higher values but also his
human identity. In the other kind of relation the world and worldly
things are sacrificed at the altar of his humanity and are used to serve
man while he reclaims his higher ideals. That is why it has been said in
a hadith-e qudsi:

O son of Adam! I have created everything for thy sake, but I have
created thee for My Own Self.

We have already cited two passages from the Nahj al-balaghah indicating
its position in denouncing the degenerate and distorted kind of
relationship between man and the world of nature that leads to man's
servitude and bondage. Here we shall quote a few verses from the Quran
to endorse this viewpoint, and return to the Nahj al-balaghah for
further relevant references.

The Quranic verses relating to man and the world are of two kinds: the
first group of verses is of an introductory nature; that is, it lays the
ground for the second group of verses. In truth, the first group can be
regarded as representing the major and the minor premises of a syllogism
of which the second group constitutes the conclusion.

The first set of verses consists of those which emphasize the
changeability, the inconstancy and the ephemeral nature of this world.
In these verses the reality of material objects is depicted as being
changeable, fleeting, and transitory. For instance, the world is
compared to the vegetation that sprouts from the ground. In the
beginning it is green and flourishing but little by little turns yellow,
shrivels, and ultimately dries up. Then the elements break it into bits
and scatter it into the wind. Such is life in the present world.

Obviously, whether man should like it or not his physical life is not
much more durable than that of the reed, and is subject to a similar
fate. If man must base his outlook on reality and not on fancy and if it
is only through the discovery of truth and not by flight of imagination
and hallucinations that he can hope to attain felicity and true
happiness, then he should not forget this truth.

This set of verses constitutes a kind of a background argument for
denying the importance of material things as ultimate ideals worthy of
man's adoration. These verses are followed immediately by the reminder
that man should know that there exists another world which is eternal
and everlasting. Don't imagine that the present life is everything that
there is; and since it is not worthy of man, do not conclude that life
is futile and meaningless, they remind.

The second set of verses illuminates the solution to the problem of
man's relation to the world. It can be clearly seen from these verses
that the execrable form of relation is one that grows to the extent of
becoming a bondage, requiring man's submission, willing surrender and
servitude to the transitory things of the world. It is in these verses
that the crux of the Quran's logic comes to light:

1. Wealth and sons are the adornment of the worldly life; but the
abiding things, the deeds of righteousness (which survive one's death
and continue to benefit other people), are better with God in reward and
better in hope. (18:46)

This verse, as can be seen, speaks of the ultimate aspiration of man.
His ultimate aspiration is the thing for which he lives and without
which life has no meaning in his eyes.

2. Surely those who look not to encounter Us and are well-pleased with
the present life and are at rest in it, and those who are heedless of
Our signs, those-their refuge is the Fire, for that they have been
earning. (10:7-8)

In this verse, that which is considered execrable is the absence of
hope in the next life and the satisfaction and contentment with material
things. 3. So turn thou from him who turns away from Our remembrance,
and desires only the present life. That is their attainment of knowledge
...

(53:29-30) 4. And they rejoice in this world's life; and this world's
life is nothing compared with the Hereafter but a temporary enjoyment.
(13:26)

5. They know an outward part of the present life, but of the Hereafter
they are heedless. (30:7)

There are many other verses which have a similar meaning. In all of
them the same theme recurs, that is the negation of the world as the
goal and ideal of man's highest aspirations and the ultimate object of
his desire, and the only source of his happiness and delight. It is held
that this form of relation between man and the world, instead of putting
the world at man's disposal, sacrifices man to it and dispossesses him
of his humanity.

In the Nahj al-balaghah as in the Quran we encounter a similar twofold
argument. In the first set of statements the transitory nature of the
world is depicted in profound, forceful metaphors, allegories and
parables put in precise and elegant phrases which follow one another in
an absorbing rhythm. In the second category, conclusions are drawn which
are exactly the same as those derived by the Quran.

In Khutbah 32, people are at first divided into two categories: the
worldly and the otherworldly. The worldly people are again divided into
four groups.

In the first group are put those who are meek and tractable like sheep.
They are the most innocuous of creatures, never seen to commit any overt
injustice or aggression, or covert deceit or subversion. Not that they
detest such things but because they lack the power and daring to carry
them out.

To the second category belong those who possess both the power and the
daring to carry out such ambitions. They muster their will to amass
money and wealth, to acquire power and authority, or to occupy important
posts and offices and do not stop short of any degree of perverseness.

Those belonging to the third group are wolves in the skins of sheep.
They are slaves of the world in the garb of the otherworldly and the
pious. They, sanctimoniously, hang their heads in affected humility,
walk with the slow steps of a sage and dress like the devout. Through
their hypocrisy they win the confidence of the people and become their
most confident trustees.

To the fourth group belong those whose hearts burn regretfully with the
fire of ambition but their feeling of inferiority has forced them to
retire to seclusion. They put on the dress of piety and zuhd in order to
conceal their deep sense of inferiority and dejection.

All the four kinds of people, regardless of the diverse degrees of
their success and failure, are regarded by 'Ali ( A) to constitute,
spiritually, a single class on account of their commonly shared
attitude: worldliness. Why? Because all of them have one common
characteristic: they are like the unfortunate birds whom the world has
made its prey one way or another. Captured, they enjoy no longer the
freedom of flight. They are slaves and prisoners of the world.

In the same sermon, 'Ali (A) describes the qualities of the
other-worldly, the opposite group, and says:

Evil is the barter of those who purchase this world at the cost of
their souls.

In the eyes of 'Ali (A) the whole world with everything in it is too
inferior to be the price of a man's humanity; hence it ends in the great
loss of one who exchanges it for his human identity. Nasir Khusrow has
the same theme in mind, when he says:

Never shall I fall an easy prey to the world,
For no more do its woes burden my heart.
In fact, I am the hunter and the world my prey,
Though once it did pursue me on its hunt.
Though many a man has fallen pierced by its arrows,
The world could not make me a target.
My soul flies over the world's tides,
And no more do I worry about its waves and tides.

This theme that one should never sacrifice one's humanity for anything
in the world is a theme that recurs a lot in the sayings of the leaders
of the Islamic faith. Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali (A) in his famous will to
al-'Imam al-Hasan (A) which is included in the section of Kutub
(letters) in the Nahj al-balaghah, says:

Keep your self above every contemptible thing, because, whatever it
should be, it is not worth the compromise of your self.

In the account of his life given in the Bihar al-'anwar, al-'Imam
Ja'far al Sadiq (A) is reported to have said:

The price of my soul is (the good-pleasure of) its Lord The whole of
creation doesn 't equal its worth.

In the Tuhaf al-'uqul, the following tradition is recorded:

Al-'Imam al-Sajjad (A) was asked, 'Who is the most important among
people?' He replied, 'The one who does not regard the whole world to be
equal to his worth.'

There are many traditions which deal with a similar theme, but we shall
abstain from quoting more for the sake of brevity.

A close study of the Quran, the Nahj al-balaghah, and the sayings of
other religious leaders, will reveal that Islam has not depreciated the
world; rather it has elevated the station and worth of the human being
as compared to it. For Islam, the world is for the sake of man and not
the other way round. It aims to revive human values, not to disparage
the world.

**Freedom and Bondage:**

Our discussion about the meaning of 'worldliness' in the Nahj
al-balaghah has become somewhat drawn out. However, one issue, which
cannot be omitted, remains unanswered. We raised it earlier in the form
of a question which we had promised to answer later. The question was
this: If attachment and bondage to anything is a kind of unhealthy
condition that leads to abandonment of human values and cause
stagnation, inertness, and inertia of the human personality, what
difference does it make whether that thing is something material or
spiritual, this worldly or otherworldly, or, as goes the saying, 'the
Lord or the apple'?

It may be said that if the aim of Islam by prohibiting attachment and
warning against bondage to temporal things is to safeguard the human
being's identity and to rescue him from servitude and to protect him
from stagnating and vegetating in life, it should have encouraged man to
acquire absolute freedom and to consider every thing that compromises
and confines it as kufr; for such is the standpoint of some modern
schools of philosophy which consider freedom to be the essence of man's
human identity.

These schools of thought equate man's human identity with his capacity
to rebel and disobey every form of servitude and to assert his absolute
freedom. Accordingly, every manner of bondage, confinement, and
submission is, according to them, inconsistent with man's real identity
and leads to self alienation.

They say that man realizes his true humanity only by refusing to submit
and surrender. It is characteristic of attachment that the object of
love absorbs man's attention and compromises his self-awareness. This
results in his forgetting his own self and, subsequently, this aware and
free being called man, whose identity is summarized in his awareness and
freedom, becomes a slavish creature devoid of freedom and
self-awareness.

In forgetting his own identity, man also becomes oblivious of his human
values. In this state of bondage and servitude he ceases to progress and
edify his self and becomes stagnant and frozen at some point. If Islam's
philosophy of struggle against worldliness aims at the resurrection of
human identity and personality,

it should oppose every form of servitude and liberate man from every
form of bondage. This, however, is not the case, for Islam, undeniably,
advocates liberation from material for the sake of spiritual servitude.
Freedom from the world is acquired for the sake of the fetters of the
Hereafter and the apple is renounced for the sake of the Lord.

The 'urafa' who advise absolute freedom from attachments, however, do
allow an exception. Hafiz says:

I am the slave of the magnanimity of him
Who is free of the taint of attachment to anything under the blue sky
Except the love of the moon-cheeked one,
The joy of whose love redeems all sorrows and woes.
Openly do I declare, and am delighted to proclaim,
I am the slave of Love and free from both the worlds.
Except for the Beloved 's Name inscribed on the slate of my heart,
The teacher did not teach me another word.

From the viewpoint of 'irfan, one must be free of both the worlds but
should surrender totally to love. As Hafiz says, the tablet of the heart
must be clean of every name except that of the Beloved. The heart should
be cleansed of every attachment except the love of 'the moon-cheeked
one', that is God, whose love brings redemption from all sorrows and
woes.

However, from the viewpoint of the so-called humanistic philosophy
freedom of the 'arif, being only relative, does not take us anywhere,
because it is freedom from everything for total surrender and servitude
to one being, whatever that may be. Servitude is after all servitude and
bondage is bondage, regardless of the agent towards which it is
directed.

This is the objection raised by the followers of modern humanistic
philosophies. In order that the issues involved may be further
illuminated, we are compelled to refer to certain philosophical
issues.

First of all, one may point out that to assume that there exists a kind
of human selfhood and identity and to insist that this identity should
be safeguarded, in itself amounts to the negation of movement, progress
and development of this selfhood, because, motion and change necessarily
result in alienation from this selfhood. This is because movement means
becoming: that is, becoming something one is not; it implies continuous
transcendence of selfhood and embracing of otherness. Obviously, if we
accept this view, it is only by the means of immobility and stagnation
that one can preserve his identity; for development necessitates
self-alienation. For this reason, some ancient philosophers defined
motion in terms of otherness and self-estrangement.

Accordingly, to assume that there exists a certain kind of human 'self'
and to insist that this self should be safeguarded and protected from
becoming 'non-self', and to speak of movement, progress, and evolution
in the same breath, involves an unresolvable contradiction Some, in
order to free themselves from this contradiction, have said that man's
identity lies in being devoid of any kind of 'self' whatsoever. Man,
they say, is a creature absolutely undefined in his essence and free
from any kind of limit, form, or essence. His essence lies in his being
without any defined essence. Man is a creature devoid of a fixed nature
and essential necessity. Any attempt to define, limit and confine him
amounts to depriving him of his real self and identity.

Such a view may be aptly considered poetry and flight of imagination
rather than a philosophy. The absolute absence of a fixed form and
essence is possible in one of the two cases: Firstly, such a being
should possess infinite perfection and pure and unlimited actuality;
that is, it should be a being unlimited and unconfined, encompassing all
times and places and predominant over all existents, such as the Being
of the Creator. For such a being, movement and growth are impossible;
because motion and development involve overcoming of defects and
imperfections, whereas such a being cannot possibly be supposed to
possess any imperfection.

Secondly, it may apply to a being devoid of every kind of actuality and
merit. That is, it should be pure possibility and sheer potentiality, a
neighbour of nothingness, existing only on the remotest frontiers of
existence. It should be devoid of any innate reality and essence though
capable of assuming any form or essence Such a being, which itself
absolutely undefined, is always associated with a definite being; though
shapeless and colourless in itself, it exists in the protective shadow
of a being possessing form, shape and colour. Such a being is what the
philosophers call 'the primal matter'.

It occupies the lowest status in the hierarchy of existence and stands
on the extremity of being, even as the Divine Essence, being absolute
perfection, stands on the other extremity of existence-with the
difference that the extremity occupied by the Divine Essence
circumscribes all the contents of being. Man, like all other creatures,
is situated somewhere between these two extremes and so cannot possibly
lack any defined essence. Admittedly, he is different from other
creatures, but, unlike them, there is no limit to his movement towards
perfection. Whereas other creatures remain confined to certain definite
limits which they cannot transcend, there is no end to the possibilities
of human development.

Man possesses a special kind of being. But contrary to the view of the
philosophers who believe in the precedence of essence and reduce the
being of every thing to its quiddity, and who deny the possibility of
transcendence and essential change as being self-contradictory, and
consider all changes to occur at the level of accidents, the existential
nature of man, like that of any other material thing, is fluid, with the
difference that its movement and fluidity know no final limits.

Some commentators of the Quran, in their explanations of the verse: "O
people of Yathrib, there is no abiding here for you" (33:13), have
generalized it to cover all humanity. They hold that man is a creature
which does not move to a certain and definite stage or halt; the further
he moves the greater are the possibilities open to him. Here we do not
wish to indulge in discussing the legitimacy of imposing such
interpretations on Quranic verses; we only intend to show that Muslim
scholars have thought about man in such terms.

In the hadith about the Prophet's Ascension (al-mi'raj), Gabriel who
accompanies the Prophet (S), at a certain point, gives up his journey
declaring: "I will get burnt if I move an inch further", while the
Prophet (S) leaves him behind and moves further. This is an allusion to
the truth mentioned above.

Also, as we know, there is a debate among Muslim scholars about the
salawat (Benedictions) upon the Holy Prophet (S) and the Ahl al-Bayt,
which we make as a prayer to God to shower greater blessings upon them.
Now the debate is whether the salawat is of any benefit to the Holy
Prophet (S), who is the most perfect man. In other words, is there any
possibility of ascension in the Prophet's station? Or does the salawat
benefit only the person who pronounces it and beseeches God to bless the
Prophet (S), a favour that has already been granted?

The late Sayyid 'Ali Khan opened this debate in his commentary on
al-Sahifat al-kamilah. A group of theologians believe that the Holy
Prophet (S) is always ascending and climbing higher in his station, and
this movement is never halted.

Yes, such is the station of man. That which makes man such is not the
absolute absence of a defined essence but a certain kind of essence
which is ordinarily referred to as 'human nature' and other similar
expressions.

Man does not have any ultimate limits but he has a path. The Quran lays
great emphasis on what it calls the Straight Path, which is an
unambiguous path before man. Man is not constrained by stages so as to
be forced to stop at every stage in his journey. Instead there is an
orbit in which he should move. This is the orbit of human perfection
which is different from those of the animals. This means the movement in
a specified orbit, a movement which is orderly not haphazard.

**The Existentialist Viewpoint:**

Existentialism has been rightly criticized for its refusal to
acknowledge any kind of determination or definition of the human nature,
for its considering every determination (even in the form of path or
orbit) as contrary to his humanity, and for its emphasis on his absolute
freedom and capacity for rebellion; for this philosophy necessarily
leads to the breakdown of social morality and the negation of the
individual's commitments and responsibilities.

**Does Evolution Involve Self-Alienation?**

Now returning to what we said earlier, does movement and evolution
necessitate alienation from one's self? Should every being, in order to
remain itself, abstain from change and evolution? Does it mean that
either man should retain his human identity or, if he chooses an
evolutionary course, become something alien to his essence?

The answer is that the true evolution of anything is a movement towards
the perfect state which conforms to its nature. In other words, the
transformations during movement on the straight path of nature by no
means necessitate any loss of specific identity.

That which constitutes the real self of a being is its existence, not
its essence. Accordingly, any change in essence does not imply mutation
of the 'self' into a 'non-self'. Mulla Sadra, who is the champion of
this philosophy, holds that man does not have any definite essence;
rather every developing being passing through the stages of its
evolution is not a single species but a plurality of species. The
relation of an imperfect being with its ultimate stage of perfection is
not a relation of otherness; rather it is a relation of the thing to
itself.

It is the relation of an imperfect self to the perfect self. A thing
while evolving toward its perfect state is in movement from its self to
its self. In a sense, it can be said to be in movement from the non-self
towards its true self. A seed that breaks the ground and sprouts leaves,
and sends out branches and flowers, does not move from the self to the
non-self. If it were aware of itself and aware of its ultimate
evolution, it would not feel self alienated.

That is why the love of true perfection is the love of a higher self,
and a praiseworthy love is in itself a desirable and praiseworthy
egotism or self-love. Shaykh al-'Ishraq Shihab al-Din al-Suhrawardi has
an elegant ruba'i on this subject:

Beware lest you lose the wisdom 's thread,
And lose your self for the sake of water and bread.
You are the traveller, the way, the destination,
Beware lest you lose the path from the self to the self.

On the basis of what has been said it can be surmised that there is a
great difference between desiring God, the movement towards God, the
love of God, the attachment and the servitude to God and submission to
Him, and the love, the submission, and the servitude to other things.
The servitude to God is freedom itself. It is the only relation and tie
which does not stagnate the human personality or make it inert and
immobile. It is the only kind of worship which does not imply
self-forgetfulness and self-alienation. Why? Because He is the Absolute
Perfection and the Ultimate Goal and the Destination of all existents:
'And unto thy Lord will be the end of all things' (53:42).

Now we have reached a point from where we can proceed to explain the
position of the Quran that forgetting God is forgetting one's own self
and the separation from God is absolute annihilation.

**Forgetting and Losing the Self:**

I remember that about eighteen years ago while discussing the exegesis
of certain verses of the Holy Quran in a private gathering, for the
first time the point struck me that the Quran very often employs typical
expressions about a certain group of human beings, such as those who
'lose', 'forget', or 'sell' their selves. For instance, it says:

They have indeed lost their selves, and that which they were forging
has gone astray from them. (7:53) Say: 'Surely the losers are they who
lose their selves and their families on the Day of Resurrection' (39:15)
Be not as those who forgot God, and so He caused them to forget their
selves; those-they are the ungodly. (59:19)

The question might occur to a mind with a philosophic bent. Is it
possible for a man to lose his self? The loss of anything necessitates
two things: the loser and the thing lost. Now how is it possible for a
human being to lose its self? Is it not self-contradictory?

Likewise, is it possible for a man to forget himself? A living human
being is always immersed in itself and perceives everything as something
other and additional to its own self; its attention is, before
everything else, focussed on itself. Then what is meant by forgetting
one's self?

Later I realized that this matter occupies a significant place in
Islamic teachings, especially in the prayers and some traditions as well
as in the writings of Muslim 'urafa'. It shows that often man mistakes
'non-self' as his self, regards that non-self as his real self. Then
imagining the non-self to be his self, he treats the non-self and takes
care of it as he would have treated and cared for his true self. The
true self, as a result, falls into neglect and oblivion, and
occasionally under goes a metamorphosis.

For instance, when man imagines his body to represent his total entity,
all his endeavour revolves about his body, it means that he has
forgotten his self conceiving the non-self to be his real self. Such a
man, in the words of Rumi, is like the one who owns a piece of land
somewhere; he carries building materials and hires masons and workers to
build a house for him; after much toil,

the house is made ready for living; the doors and windows are painted,
the floor is carpeted, curtains are hung and the house is furnished
beautifully in every way; however, one day when he prepares to move into
the new house, all of a sudden he realizes his mistake; to his dismay,
he notes that instead of erecting the house on his own land, he has
constructed it on a land that belongs to somebody else, while his own
plot lies abandoned elsewhere:

Don 't build your house on the land of another,
Work for your own self and toil not for the stranger.
Who is the stranger except your own earthen frame?
On whose account are all your sorrows and woes?
So long as you nurse and pamper your body,
The soul would not prosper, nor would it become sturdy.

At another place Rumi says:

You, who have lost your self in a losing encounter,
Distinguishing not the other from your own true self;
At every shadow you are quick to exclaim,
"Ah! This is me!" By God it is not you!
Isolate yourself for a while from the crowd,
And immerse yourself to the neck in thought.
Indeed you shall find that you are one with the One,
Beautiful, serene, and blessed is your self.

Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali (A) has a saying in this regard which is as
profound as it is elegant:

I wonder at the man who searches for his lost things but doesn't care
to recover his lost self.

[^8]

Losing oneself and forgetting oneself is not confined to man's error in
recognizing his true identity and essence-such as the ordinary man's
self-identification with the body, or the 'arif's occasional
identification of himself with his barzakhi body. We have said in the
last chapter that actually every being in the natural course of its
development moves from the self to the self; that is, it moves from a
lower, weaker self to a self which is powerful and higher.

Accordingly, the deviation of every existent from the path of its
perfection and development is deviation from the self towards the
non-self. Man, more than any other creature, being endowed with a free
will and freedom of choice, is subject to this deviation. By choosing a
deviant objective as ultimate for himself, in reality he replaces his
true self with the non-self, mistaking the non-self to be the self. It
is on this basis that the human being's total immersion in material
aspects of life has been regarded as condemnable.

Therefore, the adoption of devious goals and ends is one of the factors
of self-alienation that leads man to forget his true self and finally to
lose it.

Devious goals and objectives not only result in the disease of self
loss; they lead ultimately to the metamorphosis of man's human essence,
a metamorphosis that is determined by that particular devious goal. A
significant part of Islamic teachings is devoted to drive home the point
that on the Day of Resurrection every human being shall be raised with
the object of his love. Our traditions declare unequivocally:

Everyone, on the Day of Judgement shall be raised in the company of his
object of love, whatever that should be, even if it is a stone.

[^9]

With attention to the indubitable and unequivocal Islamic teaching that
on the Day of Judgement man would be raised in the form of what he
acquired in this world, it becomes clear that the reason for a person's
resurrection together with the objects of his love is that the love and
attachment for that object make it the ultimate goal of the path of his
becoming. However devious that objective may be, it causes the soul and
the inner reality of a person to transform into that object.

This subject has been given great attention by Muslim sages and
philosophers, who have made great many interesting observations in this
regard. For brevity's sake, we shall quote only one ruba'i on this
topic: The seeker of a mine of diamonds is himself a mine; The seeker of
the spirit is himself the spirit; I will divulge the secret of this
matter: You are whatever you seek, you are the object of your quest.


