Part Ii- Theology and Metaphysics
=================================

One of the fundamental issues dealt with in the Nahj al-balaghah
relates to theological and metaphysical problems. In all, there are
about forty places in the sermons, letters, and aphorisms where these
matters are discussed. Some of these pertain to the aphorisms, but more
often the discussion is longer, covering sometimes several pages.

The passages on tawhid (Divine Unity) in the Nahj al-balaghah can
perhaps be considered to be the most wonderful discussions of the book.
Without any exaggeration, when we take into account the conditions in
which they were delivered, they can almost be said to be miraculous.

The discussions on this theme in the Nahj al-balaghah are of a varied
nature. Some of them constitute studies of the scheme of creation
bearing witness to Divine creativity and wisdom. Here, 'Ali speaks about
the whole system of the heaven and the earth, or occasionally discusses
the wonderful features of some specific creature like the bat, the
peacock or the ant, and the role of Divine design and purpose in their
creation. To give an example of this kind of discussion, we may quote a
passage regarding the ant:

Have you observed the tiny creatures that He has created? How He has
made them strong and perfected their constitution and shaped their
organs of hearing and sight, and how He has styled their bones and skin?
Observe the ant with its tiny body and delicate form. It is so small
that its features can hardly be discerned by the eye and so
insignificant that it does not enter our thoughts. See how it roams
about upon the ground and arduously collects its livelihood. It carries
the grain to its hole and deposits it in its store.

It collects during the summer for the winter and, when winter arrives,
it foresees the time to reemerge. Its livelihood is guaranteed and
designed according to its built. The Benefactor and the Provider does
not forget or forsake it. He does not deprive it, even though it should
be in hard and dry stones and rocks. You will be amazed at the delicate
intricacy of its wonderful constitution if you investigate the structure
of its alimentary canals, its belly, and its eyes and ears which are in
its head ... (Sermon 185)

However, most of the discussions about tawhid in the Nahj al-balaghah
are rational and philosophical. The rare sublimity of the Nahj
al-balaghah becomes manifest in these discourses. In these philosophical
and rational discourses of the Nahj al-balaghah on tawhid what
constitutes the focus of all arguments is the infinite, absolute and
self-sufficing nature of the Divine Essence. In these passages, 'Ali
('a) attains to the heights of eloquence, and none, neither before him
nor after him, has approached him in this aspect.

Another issue dealt with is that of the absolute simplicity
(al-basatatal-mutlaqah) of the Divine Essence and negation of every kind
of multiplicity, divisibility in the Godhead and refutation of
separability of the Divine Attributes from the Divine Essence. This
theme occurs repeatedly in the Nahj al-balaghah.

Also discussed is a series of other profound problems which had never
been touched before him. They are: God being the First while also being
the Last; His being simultaneously the Manifest and the Hidden; His
priority over time and number, i.e. His pre-eternity is not temporal and
His Unity is not numerical; His Supremacy, Authority, and
Self-sufficiency; His Creativeness; that attendance to one affair does
not prevent Him from attending to other affairs; the identity of Divine
Word and Act; the limited capacity of human reason to comprehend His
reality; that gnosis (ma'rifah) is a kind of manifestation (tajalli) of
Him upon the intellects, which is different from conception or cognition
by the mind;

the negation of such categories and qualities as corporeality, motion,
rest, change, place, time, similarity, opposition, partnership,
possession of organs or instruments, limitation and number; and a series
of other issues which we shall, God willing, mention later and give
examples of every one of these. Even a thinker well-versed in the
beliefs and views of ancient and modern philosophers would be struck
with wonder to see the wide range and scope of the problems propounded
in that wonderful book.

An elaborate discussion of the issues raised and dealt with in the Nahj
al-balaghah would itself require a voluminous book and cannot be covered
in one or two articles. Unavoidably, we shall be brief; but before we
commence our brief survey, we are compelled to mention certain points as
an introduction to our discussion.

**A Bitter Fact:**

We, the Shi'ah Muslims, must confess that we have been unjust in regard
to our duty with respect to the man whom we, more than others, take
pride in following; or, at the very least, we must admit falling short
in our duty towards him. In substance, any kind of failure in fulfilling
our responsibility is an act of injustice on our part. We did not want
to realize the significance of 'Ali ('a), or we had been unable to. All
our energy and labour were devoted to proclaiming the Prophet's
statements about 'Ali and to denouncing those who ignored them, but we
failed to pay attention to the intellectual side of Imam 'Ali's
personality.

Sadi says:

The reality of musk lies in its scent, Not in the perfumer's advice.

Applying Sa'di's words to our attitude regarding Imam 'Ali's
personality, we did not realize that this musk, recommended by the
Divine Perfumer, itself carried its pleasant aroma, and before
everything else we should have tried to know its scent and become
familiar with it.

That is, we should have familiarized ourselves and others with its
inner fragrance. The counsel of the Divine Perfumer was meant to
acquaint the people with its pleasant redolence, not for the purpose
that they may believe that it is musk and then devote all their energies
trying to convince others by arguing with them, without bothering to
acquaint themselves with its real fragrance.

Had the Nahj al-balaghah belonged to some other people, would they have
treated it in the way we treated this great book? The country of Iran is
the centre of Shi'ism and the language of its people is Persian. You
have only to examine the translations and commentaries on the Nahj
al-balaghah to make a judgement about what our accomplishment amounts
to.

To take a more general case, the Shi'i sources of hadith (tradition)
and texts of du'a' (prayers) are incomparable to the texts of the
non-Shi'i works in the same field. This is also true of Divine teachings
and other subjects. The problems and issues discussed in works like
al-Kulayni's al-Kafi, or al-Shaykh al-Saduq's al-Tawhid, or al-'Ihtijaj
of al-Tabarsi are nowhere to be found among the works of the
non-Shi'is.

It can be said that if occasionally similar issues are dealt with in
the non-Shi'i books, the material is unmistakably spurious, for it is
not only opposed to the prophetic teachings but is also contradictory to
the Quranic fundamentals. There is a strong smell of anthropomorphism
which hangs around them. Recently, Hashim Ma'ruf al-Hasani, in his book
Dirasat fi al-Kafi li al-Kulayni wa al-Sahih li al-Bukhari, which is an
original but a brief comparative study of al-Sahih of al-Bukhari and
al-Kulayni's al-Kafi, has dealt with the traditions related to the
problems of theology.

**Shi'i Rationalism:**

The discussion of theological problems and their analysis by the Shi'i
Imams, of which the Nahj al-balaghah is the earliest example, was the
main cause of the emergence of rationalistic approach and philosophic
outlook in the Shi'i intellectual world from the earliest days of Islam.
This cannot be labelled as an innovation in Islam; rather, its basis was
laid down by the Quran itself. It was in accordance with the approach of
the Quran and for the purpose of its interpretation that the Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt ('a) expounded such issues. If anybody can be reproached
in this matter, it is those who did not adopt this method and abandoned
the means to follow it.

History shows that from the earliest Islamic era, the Shiah, more than
any other sect, were interested in these problems. Amongst the Ahl
al-Sunnah, the Mu'tazilites, who were nearer to the Shi'ah, did possess
similar inclinations. But, as we know, the general view predominant
among the Ahl al-Sunnah did not welcome it, and as a result the
Mu'tazilite sect became extinct about the end of the 3rd/9th century .

Ahmad Amin, the Egyptian writer, confirms this view in the first volume
of his Zuhr al-'Islam. After discussing the philosophic movement in
Egypt during the reign of the Fatimids, who were a Shi'ah sect, he
writes:

Philosophy is more akin to Shi'ism than it is to the Sunni Islam, and
we witness the truth of this in the era of the Fatimid rule [in Egypt]
and in that of the Buyids [in Iran]. Even during the later ages Iran,
which is a Shi'ite country, has paid more attention to philosophy than
any other Islamic country. In our own times, Sayyid Jamal al-Din al
Asadabadi, who had Shi'ite inclinations and had studied philosophy in
Iran, created a philosophic movement in Egypt when he arrived here.

Curiously, Ahmad Amin in his explanation of why the Shi'ah showed more
inclination towards philosophy, commits an error, willfully or
otherwise. According to him, "the reason for greater inclination on the
part of the Shi'ah towards rational and philosophical discussions is to
be found in their esotericism and their flair for ta'wil.

[^1] They were compelled to seek the assistance of philosophy for
defence of their esotericism. That is why the Fatimid Egypt and Buyid
Persia, and Iran during the Safawid and Qajar periods, were more
disposed towards philosophy than the rest of the Islamic world."

This is sheer nonsense on the part of Ahmad Amin. It was the Imams ('a)
of the Shi'ah who for the first time introduced philosophical approach,
and it was they who introduced the most profound and intricate concepts
with regard to theological problems in their arguments, polemics,
sermons, ahadith, and prayers, of which the Nahj al-balaghah is one
example.

Even with regard to the prophetic traditions, the Shi'ah sources are
far more sublime and profound than the traditions contained in the
non-Shi'i sources. This characteristic is not confined to philosophy
only, but is also true of kalam, fiqh, and usul al-fiqh, in which the
Shi'ah enjoy a position of distinction. All this owes its origin to one
and same source: stress on rationalism.

Some others have tried to trace the origin of this difference [between
the Shi'i and the Sunni intellects] in the concept of "the Shi'ite
nation". According to them, since the Persians are Shi'ite and the
Shi'ah are Persian, and as the Persians are a people with a
philosophical temperament, fond of the intricacies of speculation and
pure thought, with the help of their rich and strong philosophical
tradition, they succeeded in raising the level of Shi'a thought and gave
it an Islamic colour.

Bertrand Russell, in A History of Western Philosophy, expresses a
similar view based on the above-mentioned argument. With his habitual or
inherent impoliteness he puts forth this opinion. However, Russell lacks
the capacity of vindicating his claim, since he was totally unfamiliar
with Islamic philosophy and basically knew nothing about it. He was not
qualified to express any informed opinion about the origins of Shi'ah
thought and its sources.

Our rejoinder to the upholders of this view is: first of all, not all
Shi'ah were Iranian, nor all Iranians were Shi'ah. Were Muhammad ibn
Ya'qub al-Kulayni, Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Babawayh al-
Qummi and Muhammad ibn Abi Talib al-Mazandarani Persian, but not
Muhammad ibn Isma'il al-Bukhari, Abu Dawud al-Sijistani and Muslim ibn
Hajjaj al-Nishaburi?

Was al-Sayyid al-Radi, the compiler of the Nahj al-balaghah, of Persian
origin? Were the Fatimids of Egypt of Persian descent?

Why was philosophic thought revived in Egypt with the inception of
Fatimid rule and why did it decline with their fall? And why was it
revived later, after a long interval, only through the influence of an
Iranian Shi'ah?

The truth is that the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt ('a) were the only real
dynamic force behind this mode of thinking and this kind of approach.
All scholars of the Ahl al-Sunnah admit that among the Prophet's
Companions only 'Ali ('a) was a man of philosophic wisdom, who had an
altogether distinct rational approach. Abu 'Ali ibn Sina is quoted as
having remarked:

'Ali's position among the Companions of Muhammad (S), was that of the
"rational" in the midst of the "corporeal."

Obviously, the intellectual approach of the followers of such an Imam
as 'Ali ('a) should be expected to be radically different from that of
those who followed others. Moreover, Ahmad Amin and others have been
susceptible to another similar misunderstanding. They express doubts
with regard to the authenticity of ascription of such philosophic
statements [as exist in the Nahj al-balaghah ] to 'Ali ('a).

They say that the Arabs were not familiar with such kind of issues and
such arguments and elaborate analyses as are found in the Nahj
al-balaghah before their acquaintance with Greek philosophy, and
evidently, according to them, these discourses should have been composed
by some later scholars familiar with Greek philosophy, and were
attributed to Imam 'Ali ibn Abi Talib ('a).

We also accept that the Arabs were not familiar with such ideas and
notions. Not only the Arabs, the non-Arabs, too, were not acquainted
with them, nor were those notions familiar to the Greeks and Greek
philosophy. Ahmad Amin first brings down 'Ali ('a) to the level of such
Arabs like Abu Jahl and Abu Sufyan and then he postulates his minor and
major premises and bases his conclusion on them: The Arabs were
unfamiliar with philosophical notions; 'Ali was an Arab:

therefore 'Ali was also unfamiliar with philosophical notions. One
should ask him whether the Arabs of the Jahiliyyah were familiar with
the ideas and concepts that were propounded in the Quran. Had not 'Ali
('a) been brought up and trained by the Messenger of Allah himself?
Didn't the Prophet (S) introduce 'Ali ('a) to his Companions as the most
learned and knowledgeable amongst them? Why should we deny the high
spiritual status of someone who enriched his inner self by drawing on
the bounteous wealth of Islam in order to protect the prestige of some
of the Prophet's Companions who could never rise above the ordinary
level?

Ahmad Amin says that before acquaintance with Greek philosophy the
people of Arabia were not familiar with the ideas and concepts found in
the Nahj al-balaghah. The answer to this is that the Arabs did not
become acquainted with the ideas and notions propounded in the Nahj
al-balaghah even after centuries of familiarity with Greek philosophy.

Not only the Arabs, even the non-Arab Muslims were not acquainted with
these ideas, for the simple reason that there is no trace of them in
Greek philosophy itself! These ideas are exclusively special to Islamic
philosophy. The Islamic philosophers gradually picked these ideas up
from the basic Islamic sources and incorporated them in their thought
under the guidance of revelation.

**Philosophical Notions Concerning Metaphysics**

As mentioned before, the Nahj al-balaghah adopts two kinds of approach
to the problems of theology. The first kind of approach calls attention
to the sensible world and its phenomena as a mirror reflecting the
Knowledge and Perfection of the Creator. The second approach involves
purely rationalistic and philosophical reflections. The latter approach
accounts for the greater part of the theological discussions of the Nahj
al-balaghah. Moreover, it is the only approach adopted in regard to the
discussion about the Divine Essence and Attributes.

As we know, the value of such discussions and the legitimacy of such
reflections have been always questioned by those who consider them
improper from the viewpoint of reason or canon, or both. In our own
times, a certain group claims that this kind of analysis and inference
does not agree with the spirit of Islam and that the Muslims were
initiated into such kind of speculations under the influence of Greek
philosophy and not as a result of any inspiration or guidance effused
from the Quran. They say that if the Muslims had adhered closely to the
Quranic teachings they would not have entangled themselves with these
tortuous clebates. For the same reason, they view with suspicion the
authenticity of such speculations found in the Nahj al-balaghah and
their ascription to Imam 'Ali ('a).

In the second and third centuries a group of people opposed such kind
of discussions and questioned their legitimacy, raising doctrinal
objections. They insisted that it is obligatory for Muslims to be
satisfied with the literal and commonly understood meaning of the words
of the Quran, and regarded every kind of inquiry into the meaning of the
Quran as an innovation (bid'ah) in religion. For instance, if someone
inquired about the meaning of the Quranic verse "The All-compassionate
sat Himself upon the Throne " [20:5], he was confronted by the
displeasure of those who regarded such questions as not only improper
but distasteful. He would be told: "The exact meaning is unknown and
questioning is heresy".

[^2]

During the 3rd/9th century, this group, which later came to be called
Ash'arites, overwhelmed the Mu'tazilites, who considered such
speculations to be within the bounds of legitimacy. This victory of the
Asharites delivered a severe blow to the intellectual life of Islam. The
Akhbaris, who were a Shi'i school which flourished during the period
between the 10th/16th and the 14th/20th centuries-and particularly
during the 10th/16th and 11th/17th centuries-followed the Asha'irah in
their ideas and beliefs. They raised doctrinal objections against
ratiocination. Now we shall proceed to discuss the objections raised
from a rationalist point of view.

As a result of the triumph of the empirical and experimental method
over the deductive approach in Europe, especially in the physical
sciences, the view began to prevail that rational speculation was
unreliable not only in the physical sciences but also in all scientific
disciplines and that the only reliable method was that of empirical
philosophy. The result of it was that tne problems of theology were
viewed with doubt and suspicion, because they lay beyond the domain of
experimental and empirical observation.

The past victories of the Ash'arites, on the one hand, and the amazing
triumphs of the empirical method, which followed one another in quick
succession, on the other hand, drove some non-Shi'ite Muslim writers to
the extremes of excitement. The outcome was the eclectic opinion that
from the religious (Shar'i) as well as the rational point of view the
use of deductive method even in problems of theology should be
discarded. From the Shar'i viewpoint, they made the claim that according
to the outlook of the Quran the only approach valid in theology was the
empirical and experimental method and the study of the natural phenomena
and the system of creation;

the rest, they declared, is no more than an exercise in futility. They
pointed out that in scores of its verses, the Quran in most unequivocal
terms has invited human beings to study the phenomena of nature; it
considers the keys to the secrets of the origin and workings of the
universe to be concealed within nature itself. In this way they echoed,
in their writings and speeches, the ideas expressed by the European
proponents of empirical philosophy .

Farid al-Wajdi in his book 'Ala atlal al-madhhab al-maddi (On the Ruins
of Materialism), and Sayyid Abu al-Hasan al-Nadawi, in his Madha khasira
al-'alam bi-inhitat al-Muslimin ("What the World Lost Through the
Decline of Muslims") and the writers belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood
(Ikhwan al-Muslimin) such as Sayyid Qutb and others, have supported this
view, vehemently attacking the opposite viewpoint.

Al-Nadawi, in his above-mentioned book, says:

The prophets informed men about the existence of God and His Attributes
and informed them about the origin and beginning of the world and the
ultimate destiny of man, putting this free information at his disposal.
They relieved him of the need to understand and discuss these problems
the basics of which lie beyond our reach (because these problems belong
to the sphere of the supra-sensible and our knowledge and experience is
limited to the physical and the sensible). But men did not value this
blessing and entangled themselves in debates and speculations about
these problems, and strode into the dark regions of the hidden and the
unknowable.

[^3]

The same author, in another chapter of the same book, where he
discusses the causes of the decline of Muslims, under the heading "The
Neglect of Useful Sciences," criticizes the muslim 'ulama' in these
words:

The Muslim scholars and thinkers did not give as much importance to
practical and experimental sciences as they gave to debating about
metaphysics, which they had learnt from Greek philosophy. The Greek
metaphysics and theology is nothing more than Greek's polytheistic
mythology presented in a philosophical outfit, and is no more than a
series of meaningless conjectures expressed in an absurd jargon. God has
exempted Muslims from debate, speculation and analysis in these matters,
which are not much different from the analytic pursuits of the
Alchemists. But out of ingratitude for this great blessing, the Muslims
wasted their energy and genius in problems of this sort.

[^4]

Without doubt, the views of the like of Farid al-Wajd; and al-Nadawi
should be regarded as a kind of return to Ash'arism, though dressed in
contemporary style akin to the language of empirical philosophy.

Here, we cannot enter into a philosophic discussion about the value of
philosophic reflection. In the chapters entitled "The Value of
Information" and "Origin of Multiplicity in Perception" of the book The
Principles and Method of Realism, we have discussed the matter in
sufficient detail. Here, we shall confine ourselves to the Quranic
aspect of this problem, and investigate whether the Holy Quran considers
the study of nature to be the only valid method of inquiry into
theological problems, or whether it allows for another approach besides
the above-mentioned.

However, it is essential to point out that the disagreement between the
Ash'arites and the non-Ash'arites is not about the legitimacy of the use
of the Book and the Sunnah as sources in the problems of theology;
rather, the disagreement concerns the manner of their utilization.
According to the Ash'arites, their application should not exceed mute
acceptance.

According to them, we assign the various Attributes like Unity,
Omniscience, Omnipotence and the rest to God because they have been
ascribed to Him by the Shar'iah, otherwise we would not know whether God
is such or not, because the basic principles and essentials dealing with
God are beyond our reach. Therefore, according to them, we are forced to
accept God as such, but we cannot know or understand that God is such.
The role of the religious texts is that they prescribe for us the way we
ought to think and believe so that we may follow it in our thought and
beliefs.

According to the contestants of this view, these issues are amenable to
human understanding, like any other rational concept or idea. That is,
there exist certain principles and essentials which if known properly
enable man to understand them. The role of the religious texts lies in
their capacity to inspire, motivate, and guide human reason by putting
understandable principles and essentials at its disposal. Basically
servitude in intellectual matters is absurd. It is like ordering one to
think in a certain fashion, and asking him to derive certain prescribed
conclusions. It is like ordering someone to see a thing in a certain
fashion and then asking him, "How do you see it? Is it big or small?
black or white?" Servitude in thinking does not mean anything other than
absence of thinking and acceptance without reflection.

In short, the question is not whether it is possible for man to go
beyond the teachings of the Revelation. God be our refuge, there is
nothing that lies beyond them; because that which has reached us through
Revelation and the Household of the Revelation (i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt
[A]) is the utmost limit of perfection concerning knowledge of the
Divine. Here our debate centres upon the capacity of human thought and
reason, whether it can, when supplied with the basic principles and
essentials, undertake an intellectual journey through the world of
theological problems [^5] or not.

As to the invitation of the Quran to study and inquiry about the
phenomena of creation, and its emphasis on nature as a means for
attaining the knowledge of God and the supra-natural, it should be said
that it is, indubitably, a basic principle of the Quranic teachings. It
is with extraordinary insistence that the Quran asks human beings to
inquire into the nature of the earth, the sky, the plants and animals,
and man himself, and urges them to study them scientifically.

It is also indubitable that the Muslims did not take enough worthy
steps in this direction. Perhaps the real reason behind it was Greek
philosophy, which was deductive and based on pure speculation, and they
used this approach even in the field of the physical sciences.
Nevertheless, as the history of science bears testimony, the muslim
scientists did not altogether abandon the experimental method in their
studies like the Greeks. The Muslims were the pioneers of the
experimental method, not the Europeans, as is commonly thought, who
followed on the tracks first laid by the Muslims.

**The Value of Study of the Natural Phenomena:**

Aside from all of this, the question worthy of consideration is whether
the Quran, besides its emphasis on the study of the creatures of earth,
water, and air, allows other ways of approaching the issue, or if it
closes all other doors. The question is whether the Quran, even as it
invites people to study the signs of God (ayat), also welcomes other
modes of intellectual endeavour. Basically, what is the value of inquiry
into the works of creation (an inquiry which the Quran urges us,
explicitly or implicitly, to undertake), from the viewpoint of
initiating us into the awareness and consciousness which this heavenly
Book aims to cultivate?

The truth is that the measure of assistance provided by the study of
the works of the creation in understanding the problems explicitly
pointed out by the Holy Quran is quite restricted. The Quran has
propounded certain problems of theology which are by no means
understandable through the study of the created world or nature. The
value of study of the system of creation is limited only to the extent
to which it proves that the world is governed by a Power which knows,
designs, plans, and administers it. The world is a mirror, open to
empirical experiment, only to the extent that it points towards
something that lies beyond nature and discloses the existence of a
Mighty Hand which runs nature's cosmic wheels.

But the Quran is not content that man should only know that a Mighty,
Knowing, and Wise Power administers this universe. This may perhaps be
true of other heavenly scriptures, but is by no means true of the Holy
Quran, which is the final and ultimate heavenly message and has a great
deal to say about God and the reality transcending nature.

**Purely Rationalistic Problems:**

The most basic problem to which the mere study of the world of creation
fails to provide an answer is the necessity of existence and
uncreatedness of the Power which transcends nature. The world is a
mirror in the sense that it indicates the existence of a Mighty Hand and
a Wise Power, but it does not tell us anything more about Its nature.

It does not tell us whether that Power is subservient to something else
or not, or if it is self-subsisting. And if it is subject to something
else, what is that? The objective of the Quran is not only that we
should know that a Mighty Hand administers the world, but that we may
know that that Administrator is "Allah" and that "Allah" is the
indefinable: (There is nothing like Him), whose Essence encompasses all
perfection, or in other words, that "Allah" signifies Absolute
Perfection and is the referent of, (His is the loftiest likeness). How
can the study of nature give us an understanding of such notions and
concepts?

The second problem is that of the Unity of God. The Quran has stated
this issue in a logical form and used a syllogistic argument to explain
it. The method of argument it has employed in this regard is what is
called 'exclusive syllogism' or 'reductio ad impossible' (burhan
al-tamanu'). On occasion it eliminates the possibility of multiplicity
in the efficient cause as in the following verse:

[^6]

If there had been (multiple) gods in them (i.e. the earth and the
heaven) other than God, they would surely go to ruin ... (21:22)

At other times it argues by eliminating the possibility of multiplicity
in the final cause:

God has not taken to Himself any son, nor is there any god besides Him;
for then each god would have taken off that he created and some of them
would have risen up over others ... (23:91)

The Quran never suggests that the study of the system of creation can
lead us to the knowledge of the Unity of the Godhead so as to imply that
the essential knowledge of the transcendental Creator be considered
attainable from that source. Moreover, such a suggestion would not have
been correct.

The Quran alludes to various problems as indicated by the following
examples:

No thing is like Him ... (42:11) And God's is the loftiest likeness ...
(16:60) To Him belong the Names most Beautiful. (20:8) And His is the
loftiest likeness in the heavens and the earth ... (30:27) He is God,
there is no god but He. He is the King, the All-holy, the All-peaceable.
the All-faithful, the All-preserver, the All-mighty, the All-compeller,
the All-sublime ... (59:23) And to God belong the East and the West;
whither so ever you turn, there is the Face of God ... (2:115) And He is
God in the heavens and the earth; He knows your secrets, and what you
publish ...

(6:3) He is the First and the Last, the Outward and the Inward; He has
knowledge of everything. (57:3) He is the Living, the Everlasting ...
(2:255) God, is the Everlasting, [Who] has not begotten, and has not
been begotten and equal to Him is not any one. (112:2-4)

Why does the Quran raise such issues? Is it for the sake of propounding
mysterious matters incomprehensible to man, who, according to al-Nadawi,
lacks the knowledge of its essential principles, and then asking him to
accept them without comprehending their meaning? Or, the Quran actually
does want him to know God through the attributes and descriptions that
have come in it? And, if this is true, what reliable approach does it
recommend? How is it possible to acquire this knowledge through the
study of the natural phenomena? The study of the creation teaches us
that God has knowledge of the things; that is, the things that He has
made were created knowingly and wisely. But the Quran expects us not
only to know this, but also stresses that:

Indeed God has the knowledge of everything. (2:231) And not so much as
the weight of an atom in earth or heaven escapes from thy Lord, neither
is aught smaller than that, or greater, but in a Manifest Book. (10:61)
Say: "If the sea were ink for the Words of my Lord, the sea would be
spent before the Words of my Lord are spent, though We brought
replenishment the like of it. " (18:109)

This means that God's knowledge is infinite and so is His power. How
and wherefore is it possible through perception and observation of the
world of creation to reach the conclusion that the Creator's Knowledge
and Power are infinite? The Quran, similarly, propounds numerous other
problems of the kind. For instance, it mentions al-lawh al-mahfuz (the
Protected Tablet), lawh al-mahw wa al-'ithbat (The Tablet of Expunction
and Affirmation), jabr and ikhtiyar (determinism and free will), wahy
(revelation) and ilham (intuition), etc.; none of which are susceptible
to inquiry through the empirical study of the world of creation.

It must be admitted that the Quran, definitely, has raised these
problems in the form of a series of lessons and has emphasized their
importance through advice and exhortation. The following verses of the
Quran may be quoted in this connection:

What, do they not meditate in the Quran? Or is it that there are locks
upon their hearts? .... (47:24) (This is) a Scripture that We have
revealed unto thee, full of blessing, that they may ponder its
revelations, and that men of understanding may reflect. (38:29)

Inevitably, we are forced to accept that the Quran assumes the
existence of a reliable method for understanding the meaning of these
truths, which have not been revealed as a series of obscure
incomprehensibles which lie beyond the reach of the human mind.

The scope of problems propounded by the Quran in the sphere of
metaphysics is far greater than what can be resolved or be answered
through the study of physical creation. This is the reason why the
Muslims have pursued these problems, at times through spiritual and
gnostic efforts, and at other times through speculative and rational
approach.

I wonder whether those who claim that the Quran considers the study of
nature as the sole, sufficient means for the solution of metaphysical
problems, can give a satisfying answer in regard to the multifarious
problems propounded by it, a characteristic which is special to this
great heavenly Book.

'Ali's sole source of inspiration in his exposition of the problems
mentioned in the previous chapters is the Holy Quran, and the sole
motive behind his discourses is exegetical. Perhaps, had it not been for
'Ali ('a) the rationalistic and speculative aspects of the Quran would
have forever remained uninterpreted.

After these brief introductory remarks on the value of these issues, we
shall go on to cite some relevant examples from the Nahj al-balaghah.


