The Divine Essence and Attributes
=================================

In this section we shall cite some examples of the Nahj al-balaghah's
treatment of the problems of theology related with Divine Essence and
Attributes. Later we shall make a brief comparative study of the issue
in various schools and conclude our discussion on this aspect of the
Nahj al-balaghah.

However, before proceeding further, I ask for the reader's pardon that
the discussion in the last three sections became a bit technical and
philosophical, which is not very welcome for those not used to it. But
what is the remedy? Discussion on a book such as the Nahj al-balaghah
does entail such ups and downs. For this reason, we shall limit
ourselves to giving only a few examples from the book on this subject,
and refrain from any elaborate discussion. Because, if we were to
comment on every sentence of the Nahj al-balaghah, the result will be,
as is said: My mathnawi requires seventy maunds of paper.

**The Divine Essence:**

Does the Nahj al-balaghah have anything to say about the Divine Essence
and how to define it? The answer is, Yes, and a lot. However, much of
the discussion revolves around the point that the Divine Essence is
Absolute and Infinite Being, without a quiddity. His Essence accepts no
limits and boundaries like other beings, static or changeable, which are
limited and finite. A changeable being is one which constantly
transcends its former limits and assumes new ones. But such is not the
Divine Essence.

Quiddity, which may qualify and confine Him within limits of finitude,
is not applicable to Him. None of the aspects of being are devoid of His
Presence, and no kind of imperfection is appllicable to Him, except
absence of any imperfection whatsoever: the only thing amiss in Him is
absence of defect or inadequacy of any kind. The sole kind of negation
applicable to Him is the negation of all negations. The only kind of
non-being attributable to Him is the negation of any kind of
imperfection in relation to Him.

He is free from all shades of non-being which characterize the
creatures and effects. He is free from finitude, multiplicity,
divisibility, and need. The only territory that He does not enter is
that of nothingness and non-being. He is with every thing, but not in
any thing, and nothing is with Him. He is not within things, though not
out of them. He is over and above every kind of condition, state,
similarity, and likeness. For, these qualities relate to limited and
determinate beings characterized by quiddity:

He is with everything but not in the sense of [physical] nearness. He
is different from every thing but not in the sense of separation.
(Sermon 1 )

He is not inside things in the sense of physical [pervasion or]
penetration, and is not outside them in the sense of [physical]
exclusion [for exclusion entails a kind of finitude]. (Sermon 186)

He is distinct from things because He overpowers them, and the things
are distinct from Him because of their subjection to Him. (Sermon 152)

That is, His distinctness from things lies in the fact that He has
authority and control over them. However, His power, authority and
sovereignty, unlike that of the creatures, is not accompanied with
simultaneous weakness, subjugation, and subjection. His distinction and
separateness from things lies in the fact that things are totally
subject to His power and authority, and that which is subject and
subordinated can never be like the one who subjugates and commands
control over it. His separateness from things does not lie in physical
separation but is on account of the distinction which lies between the
Provider and the provided, the Perfect and the imperfect, the Powerful
and the weak.

These kind of ideas are replete in 'Ali's discourses. All the problems
which shall be discussed later are based on the principle that Divine
Essence is Absolute and Infinite, and the concepts of limit, form and
condition do not apply to it.

Divine Unity an Ontological, not a Numerical Concept:

Another feature of tawhid (monotheism) as propounded by the Nahj
al-balaghah is that Divine Unity is not numerical, but something else.
Numerical unity means the oneness of something which has possibility of
recurrence. It is always possible to imagine that the quiddity and form
of an existent is realizable in another individual being. In such cases,
the unity of an individual possessing that quiddity is numerical oneness
and stands in opposition to duplicity or multiplicity.

'It is one,' means that there is not another like it, and inevitably
this kind of unity entails the quality of being restricted in number,
which is a defect; because one is lesser in number as compared to two or
more of its kind. But, if a being be such that assumption of recurrence
with regard to it is impossible, since it is infinite and unlimited, and
if we assume another like it to exist, it will follow that it is the
same as the first being or that it is something which is not similar to
it and therefore cannot be called a second instance of it. In such a
case, unity is not numerical. That is, this kind of unity is not one
opposed to duplicity or multiplicity, and when it is said 'It is one,'
it does not mean that 'there are not two, three or more of its kind,'
but it means that a second to it is unconceivable.

This notion can further be clarified through an example. We know that
the astronomers and physicists are not in agreement about the dimensions
of the universe, whether it is limited in size or infinite. Some
scientists have favoured the idea of an unlimited and infinite universe;
others claim that the universe is limited in dimensions so that if we
travel in any direction, we shall reach a point beyond which there is no
space. The other issue is whether the universe in which we live is the
only universe in existence, or if there are other universes existing
besides it.

Evidently, the assumption of another physical world beyond our own is a
corollary to the assumption that our universe is not infinite. Only in
this case it is possible to assume the existence of, say, two physical
universes each of which is limited and has finite dimensions. But if we
assume that our universe is infinite, it is not possible to entertain
the assumption of another universe existing beyond it. For, whatever we
were to assume would be identical with this universe or a part of it.

The assumption of another being similar to the Being of the One
God-like the assumption of another physical universe besides an infinite
material universe-amounts to assuming the impossible, for the Being of
God is absolute: Absolute Selfhood and Absolute Reality.

The notion that Divine Unity is not a numerical concept, and that
qualifying it by a number is synonymous with imposing limits on the
Divine Essence, is repeatedly discussed by the Nahj al-balaghah:

He is the One, but not in a numerical sense. (Sermon 152)

He is not confined by limits nor counted by numbers. (Sermon 186)

He who points to Him, admits for Him limitations; and he who admits
limitations for Him has numbered Him. (Sermon 1)

He who qualifies Him limits Him. He who limits Him numbers Him. He who
numbers Him denies His pre-eternity. (Sermon 152)

Everything associated with unity is deficient except Him. (Sermon 65)

How beautiful, profound, and full of meaning is the last sentence. It
states that everything except the Divine Essence is limited if it is
one. That is, every thing for which another of its kind is conceivable
is a limited being and an addition of another individual would increase
its number. But this is not true of the Unity of the Divine Essence; for
God's Unity lies in His greatness and infinity, for which a like, a
second, an equal or a match is not conceivable.

This concept that Divine Unity is not a numerical notion is exclusively
an Islamic concept, original and profound, and unprecedented in any
other school of thought. Even the Muslim philosophers only gradually
realized its profundity through contemplating the spirit of the original
Islamic texts and in particular the discourses of 'Ali ('a), and
ultimately formally incorporated it in the Islamic metaphysical
philosophy. There is no trace of this profound concept in the writings
of the early Islamic philosophers like al Farabi and Ibn Sina. Only the
later philosophers ushered this concept into their philosophic thinking
calling it "Really True Unity," in their terminology.

God, The First and the Last; the Manifest and the Hidden:

Of the many issues discussed by the Nahj al-balaghah is the notion that
God is the First and the Last, the Hidden and the Manifest. Of course
this, too, like other notions, has been deduced from the Holy Quran;
though here we are not going to quote the verses from the Quran. God is
the First, but His precedence is not temporal so as to be in
contradiction with His being the Last. He is the Manifest, but not in
the sense of being physically visible or perceptible to the senses; His
Manifestness does not contradict His Hiddenness. In fact His Firstness
is identical with His Lastness and similarly His Manifestness and
Hiddenness are identical; they are not two different things:

Praise be to Allah, for whom one condition does not precede another, so
that He may he the First before being the Last or may be Manifest before
being Hidden ... (Sermon 65)

Time is not His accomplice, nor does He need the assistance of tools
and agents His Being transcends time. His Existence transcends
nothingness and His pre-eternity transcends all beginning. (Sermon
186)

The Divine Essence's transcendence over time, nothingness, beginning,
and end is one of the most profound concepts of al-hikmah philosophy.
God's pre-eternity does not mean that God has always existed. Certainly
God has always existed but Divine pre-eternity (azaliyyah) is something
greater in meaning than 'existence at all times'; because, 'existing at
all times' assumes existence in time; but God's Being has not only been
at all times, It precedes time itself. This is the meaning of Divine
pre-eternity. This shows that His precedence is something other than
temporal precedence.

Praise be to God, whose creation bears testimony to His Existence;
temporality (huduth) of whose creation is the evidence of His preternity
the similarity and likeness amongst whose creation proves that He is
unique. The senses do not perceive Him and nothing can conceal Him.
(Sermon 152)

That is, God is both Hidden and Manifest. By Himself He is Manifest but
is Hidden from the human senses. His Hiddenness from the senses is due
to man's own limitations and not on account of Him.

It needs no proof that existence is synonymous with manifestation; the
more powerful the existence of a being, the more manifest it would be.
Conversely, the weaker its being is and the more intermingled it is with
non-being, the less manifest it is to itself and others.

For everything, there are two modes of being: its being-in-itself
(wujud fi nagsih), and its being-for-others. The being of every thing
for us depends upon the structure of our senses and certain special
conditions. Accordingly, the manifestation of a thing is also of two
kinds: its manifestation-in-itself (zuhur fi nafsih) and its
manifestation-for-others.

Our senses, on account of their limitations, are able to perceive only
a limited number of finite objects possessing the characteristics of
similarity and opposition. The senses can perceive colours, shapes,
sounds, etc., which are limited temporally and spacially; that is, their
existence is confined within a particular time and place. Now if there
existed a uniform light, always and everywhere, it would not be
perceptible. A continuous monotonous sound heard always and everywhere
would not be audible.

The Being of God, which is absolute being and absolute reality, is not
confined to any particular time and place, and is hidden from our
senses. But God in Himself is absolutely manifest; the perfection of His
manifestness, which follows from the perfection of His Being, is itself
the cause of His hiddenness from our senses. The two aspects of His
manifestness and hiddenness are one and the same in His Essence. He is
hidden because He is perfectly manifest, and this perfect manifestness
conceals Him.

Thou, who art hidden on account of Thy perfect brilliance, Thou Art the
Manifest, hidden in Thy manifestness.

The veil on Thy face is also Thy face,

So manifest Thou art,

Thy manifestness conceals Thee from the world's eyes.

**An Appraisal**

An appraisal however brief of the approach of the Nahj al-balaghah and
its comparison with that of other schools of thought is essential for
discovering the true worth of its views on the problems of theology. We
shall confine ourselves to the brief, though not quite sufficient,
examples quoted in the foregoing pages and proceed to evaluate them.

The subject of the Divine Essence and Attributes is one which has been
discussed a lot by the ancient and modern philosophers, mystics and
Sufis of the East and the West. But in general their method and approach
is totally different from that of the Nahj al-balaghah, whose approach
is highly original and unprecedented. Only in the Holy Quran can be
found a precedent for the Nahj al-balaghah. Apart from the Holy Quran,
we do not find any other source that provides some ground for the
discourses of the Nahj al-balaghah.

As pointed out earlier, some scholars, because of their failure to
trace back to some earlier source the notions elaborated in the Nahj
al-balaghah, have questioned the authenticity of ascription of these
discourses to 'Ali ('a). They have supposed that these discourses
appeared in a later period, after the appearance of the Mu'tazilites and
assimilation of Greek thought, heedless of the saying:

The mean earth with the sublime heaven does not compare!

What ignorance to compare the Mu'tazilite and Greek ideas with the
teachings of the Nahj al-balaghah !

The Nahj al-balaghah and the Notions of Kalam:

The Nahj al-balaghah, while it ascribes all the Attributes of
perfection to God, the Exalted, negates any separation of these
Attributes from His Essence and does not consider them as an appendage
of Divine Essence. On the other hand, the Ash'arites, as we know,
consider the Divine Attributes to be additional to Essence and the
Mu'tazilites negate all Attributes.

The Ash'arite believes in Separation [of the Attributes from the
Essence]

The Mu'tazilite speaks of subservience [of the Attributes to the
Essence].

This has led some to imagine that the discourses found in the Nahj
al-balaghah on this topic are fabrications of a later period under the
influence of Mu'tazilite views; whereas, anyone with some insight can
readily perceive that the Attributes negated by the Nahj al-balaghah
with respect to Divine Essence are qualities of imperfection and
limitation; for the Divine Essence, being infinite and limitless,
necessitates identity of the Attributes with the Essence, not negation
of the Attributes as professed by the Mu'tazilites. Had the Mu'tazilites
reached such a notion they would never have negated the Divine
Attributes considering them subservient to the Essence.

The same is true of the views on the createdness or temporality
(huduth) of the Quran in the sermon 184. One may, possibly, imagine that
these passages of the Nahj al-balaghah relate to the latter heated
controversies among the Islamic theologians (mutakallimun) regarding the
eternity (qidam) or temporality (huduth) of the Holy Quran, and which
might have been added to the Nahj al-balaghah during the latter
centuries. However, a little reflection will reveal that the discourses
of the Nahj al-balaghah related to this issue have nothing to do with
the debate on the Quran being either created or uncreated, which was a
meaningless controversy, but relates to the creative command (amr
takwini), and Will of the Almighty.

'Ali ('a) says that God's Will and His command represent Divine Acts
and, therefore, are hadith and posterior to the Essence; for if the
command and Will were co-eternal and identical with His Essence, they
will have, necessarily, to be considered His associates and equals. 'Ali
('a) says:

When He decrees the creation of a thing, He says to it, "Be", and it
assumes existence; but not through an audible voice which strikes the
ear or a cry that can be heard. Indeed the speech of God, glory be to
Him, is but His created Act, which did not exist before [it came into
existence]. Had it (Divine speech) been itself eternal, it would be
another god besides Him. (Sermon 186)

In addition, there are other musnad traditions on this subject related
from 'Ali ('a), only some of which have been collected in the Nahj
al-balaghah, and can be traced back to his time. On this basis, there is
no room for doubting their genuineness. If any superficial resemblance
is observed between the statements made by 'Ali ('a) and some views held
by the Mu'tazilah, the probability to be allowed in this connection is
that some of his ideas were adopted by the Mu'tazilah.

The controversies of the Muslim theologians (mutakallimun), both the
Shi'ah and the Sunni, the Asha'irah as well as the Mu'tazilah, generally
revolved around the doctrine of rational basis of ethical judgement
concerning good and evil (al-husn wa al-qubh al-'aqliyyan). This
doctrine which is not other than a practical principle operating in
human society, is considered by the mutakallimun to be also applicable
to the Divine sphere and govern the laws of creation; but we find no
trace of it in the Nahj al-balaghah, similarly there is no sign of it in
the Quran. Had the ideas and beliefs of the mutakallimun found their way
into the Nahj al-balaghah, first of all the traces of this doctrine
should have been found in that book.

**The Nahj al-balaghah and Philosophical Concepts:**

Some others, on coming across certain words such as 'existence'
(wujud), 'non-existence' ('adam), 'temporality' (huduth) and
'pre-eternity' (qidam), and so on in the Nahj al-balaghah, have been led
to assume that these terms entered the Muslim intellectual world under
the influence of Greek philosophy and were inserted, unintentionally or
intentionally, into the discourses of 'Ali ('a).

If those who advocate this view had gone deeper into the meanings of
these words, they would not have paid heed to such a hypothesis. The
method and approach adopted in the arguments of the Nahj al-balaghah is
completely different from that of the philosophers who lived before
al-Sayyid al- Radi or during his time, or even those born many centuries
after the compilation of the Nahj al-balalghah .

Presently, we shall not discuss the metaphysics of Greek or Alexandrian
(Neo-Platonic) philosophy, but shall confine ourselves to the
metaphysical views propounded by al-Farabi, Ibn Sina and Khwajah Nasir
al-Din al-Tusi. Undoubtedly Muslim philosophers brought new problems
into philosophy under the influence of Islamic teachings which did not
exist before, and in addition to them, introduced radically original
ways of demonstration and inference to explain and argue their point
with regard to some other problems. Nevertheless, what we learn from the
Nahj al-balaghah is obviously different from this approach. My teacher,
'Allamah Tabataba'i, in the preface to his discourse on the traditions
of Islamic scholarship, writes:

These statements help in resolving a number of problems in the
theological philosophy. Apart from the fact that Muslims were not
acquainted with these notions and they were incomprehensible to the
Arabs, basically there is no trace of them in the writings and
statements of pre-Islamic philosophers whose books were translated into
Arabic, and, similarly, they do not appear in the works of Muslim
philosophers, Arab or Persian. These problems remained obscure and
unintelligible, and every commentator discussed them according to his
own conjecture, until the eleventh century of the Hijrah (17th century
A.D.).

Only then they were properly understood for the first time- namely, the
problem of the True Unity (al-wahdat al-haqqah) of the Necessary Being
(wajib al-wujud) (a non-numerical unity); the problem that the proof of
the existence of the Necessary Being is identical with the proof of His
Unity (since the Necessary Being is Absolute Existence, Him Being
implies His Unity); the problem that the Necessary Existent is the
known-in-His-Essence (ma'lum bil dhat); that the Necessary Being is
known directly without the need of an intermediary, and that the reality
of every thing else is known through the Necessary Being, not vice versa
...

[^7]

The arguments of the early Muslim philosophers like al-Farabi, Ibn Sina
and Khwajah Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, such as the discussions on the Divine
Essence and Attributes, such as Unity, Simplicity (basatah),
Self-Sufficiency, Knowledge, Power, Will, Providence, and so on, revolve
around the conception of the necessity of existence (wujub al-wujud),
from which all of them are derived, and the necessity of existence
itself is deduced indirectly. In this fashion it is demonstrated that
the existence of all possible existents (mumkinat) cannot be explained
without assuming the existence of the Necessary Being.

Although the argument used for proving the truth of this cannot be
called demonstration per impossible (burhan khulf) in view of its
indirect mode of inference, it resembles burhan khulf and hence it fails
to provide completely satisfactory demonstration, for it does not
explain the necessity of existence of the Necessary Being. Ibn Sina in
his al-'Isharat claims that he has succeeded in discovering "the Why?"
(lima) of it and hence chooses to call his argument "burhan al-siddiqin"
(burhan limmi, i.e. causal proof). However, the latter philosophers
considered his exposition of "the Why?" (lima) as insufficient.

In the Nahj al-balaghah, necessity of existence is never used to
explain the existence of the possible beings (mumkinat). That on which
this book relies for this purpose is the real criterion of the necessity
of existence, that is, the absolute reality and pure being of the Divine
Essence.

'Allamah Tabataba'i, in the above-mentioned work, while explaining a
hadith of 'Ali ('a) found in al-Tawhid of al-Shaykh al-Saduq, says:

The basis of our discussion rests upon the principle that Divine Being
is a reality that does not accept any limits or restrictions whatsoever.
Because, God, the Most Exalted, is Absolute Reality from Whom is derived
the existence of all other beings within the ontological limits and
characteristics peculiar to themselves, and their existence depends on
that of the Absolute Being.

[^8]

In the Nahj al-balaghah the very basis of all discussions on Divine
Essence rests on the position that God is Absolute and Infinite Being,
which transcends all limits and finitude. No point of space or time, nor
any thing is devoid of Him. He is with everything, yet no thing is with
Him. Since He is the Absolute, and the Infinite, He transcends all time,
number, limit and proximity (all kinds of quiddities). That is, time and
space, number and limit are applicable to a lower stage i.e. stage of
Divine Acts and creation. Everything is from Him and returns unto Him.
He is the First of the first and the Last of the last. He precedes
everything and succeeds everything.

This is the idea that forms the axis of all discourses of the Nahj
al-balaghah, and of which there is no trace in the works of al-Farabi,
Ibn Sina, Ibn Rushd, al-Ghazali, and Khwajah Nasir al-Din al-Tusi.

As pointed out by 'Allamah Tabataba'i, these profound discussions of
theology proper (ilahiyyat bil-ma'na al-'akhass) are based on a series
of inter-related problems which have been posited in metaphysics
(al-'umur al-'ammah).

[^9] An elaborate discussion of those theological problems and their
relevant issues mentioned above is outside the scope of our present
discussion.

There are two reasons for rejecting the claims that the theological
discussions of the Nahj al-balaghah were inventions of later writers
familiar with philosophical notions. Firstly, the kind of problems
discussed in the Nahj al-balaghah were not at all raised by any
philosopher till the time of al-Sayyid al-Radi, the compiler of the Nahj
al-balaghah. That the Unity of the Necessary Being is not of the
numerical kind and that Divine Essence precedes number; that the
existence of the Necessary Being implies Its Unity; the simple reality
of the Necessary Being; His immanence and other such notions were not
known to philosophy during or before al-Sayyid al-Radi's times.
Secondly, the axes of arguments presented in this book are altogether
different from the axes of philosophical discussions which have been
prevalent throughout history until the present day.

The Nahj al-balaghah and Western Philosophic Thought:

The Nahj al-balaghah has played a great role in the history of Eastern
Philosophy. Mulla Sadra, who brought a revolution in theological thought
(al-hikmat al-'ilahiyyah), was under profound influence of 'Ali's
discourses. His method of argument with regard to the problems of tawhid
is the method of inferring the Essence from the Essence, and also
deducing the Attributes and Acts from the Essence, and all these
arguments are based on the belief that there exists the Necessary Being
only. These arguments are based on radically different general
principles, which are elaborated in his system of metaphysics.

Eastern theological thought (al-hikmat al-'ilahiyyah) attained fruition
and strength from the sources of Islamic teachings and was firmly
established on unviolable foundations. However, theological philosophy
in the West remained deprived of such source of inspiration. The
widespread philosophical malaise of inclination towards materialism in
the West has many causes whose discussion is outside the scope of our
discourse. But we believe that the major cause of this phenomenon is the
weakness and insufficiency of theological conceptions of Western
religious thought.

[^10] Anyone interested in making a comparative study of the approaches
pointed out in these chapters, should first study the arguments advanced
by Western philosophers such as Anselm, Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz,
Kant and others for proving the existence of God and their discussions
about acceptance or rejection of various arguments, then he should
compare them with the burhan al-siddiqin argument advanced by Mulla
Sadra under the inspiration of 'Ali's words. He would see for himself
the wide chasm that separates the one from the other.

**Notes:**

[^1] The term ta'wil has been defined variously, but generally when used
in the opposition to tafsir (which is applied to the explanation of the
literal and explicit meanings of the Quranic texts) it is applied to
interpretation of the Quranic verses which goes beyond their literal
meaning. According to Imamiyyah Shi'ah, no one except the Prophet (S)
and the twelve Imams (A) is entitled to draw tawil of the Quranic
verses. To illustrate what is meant by ta'wil consider these examples:

(1) According to Shi'ah hadith, the verse 2:158, Where ever you maybe,
God will bring you all together', pertains to the 313 companions of al
Imam al Mahdi (A) whom God will gather in a certain place from various
parts of the earth in a single night. (2) According to another hadith
the verse 67:30, 'Say: What think you? If your water (in wells) should
have vanished into the earth, then who would bring you running water?'
pertains to the ghaybah (occultation) of al Imam al Mahdi (A). Such
interpretations, which obviously go beyond the apparent meaning of the
Quranic verses, are called ta'wil.

[^2] Allamah S.M.H Tabatabai, Usul e falsafah wa rawish e riyalism (The
Principles and Method of Philosophy of Realism), Introduction to vol.
I

[^3] Muhammad Sulayman Nadawi, Madha khasara al alam bi inhitat al
Muslimin, vol. IV, p. 97

[^4] Ibid., p. 135

[^5] Allamah Tabatabai, op. Cit

[^6] Ibid, vol. V

[^7] Maktab e tashayyu, No. 2 p. 120

[^8] Ibid, p. 126

[^9] Ibid, p. 157

[^10] See Murtada Mutahhari, Ilal e garayesh beh maddigari (The causes
of inclination towards Materialism), under the chapter: Naresa iha ye
mafahi me falsafiI (The inadequacies of [Western] Philosophical Ideas)


