Part Iv - Government and Justice
================================

**The Nahj al-balaghah on State:**

One of the frequently discussed issues in the Nahj al-balaghah is that
of government and justice. To anyone who goes through the book, it is
evident to what extent 'Ali ('a) is sensitive to the issues related to
government and justice. He considers them to be of paramount importance.
For those who lack an understanding of Islam but have knowledge of the
teachings of other religions, it is astonishing why a religious
personage should devote himself to this sort of problems. Don't such
problems relate to the world and worldly life'! Shouldn't a sage keep
aloof from the matters of the world and society? They wonder.

On the other hand, such a thing is not at all surprising for one
acquainted with the teachings of Islam and the details of 'Ali's life;
that 'Ali was brought up from childhood by the Holy Prophet of Islam,
that the Prophet ('s), having taken him from his father as a child, had
reared him in his home under his own care, that the Prophet ('s) had
trained 'Ali ('a) and instructed him in his own characteristic way,
teaching him the secrets of Islam. 'Ali's spirit had assimilated within
itself the doctrines of Islam and the code of its laws. Therefore, it is
not strange that 'Ali should have been such; rather it would have been
astonishing if he wasn't such as we find him to be. Doesn't the Quran
declare:

Indeed, We sent Our messengers with the clear signs, and We sent down
with them the Book and the Balance so that men might uphold justice ...
(57:25)

In this verse, establishment of justice has been declared as being the
objective of the mission of all the prophets. The sanctity of justice is
so stressed that it is considered the aim of all prophetic missions.
Hence, how were it possible that someone like 'Ali ('a), whose duty was
to expound the teachings of the Quran and explain the doctrines and laws
of Islam, might have ignored this issue or, at least, accorded it a
secondary importance?

Those who neglect these issues in their teachings, or imagine that
these problems are only of marginal significance and that the central
issues are those of ritual purity and impurity (taharah and najasah), it
is essential that they should re-examine their own beliefs and views.

**The Importance of Politics:**

The first thing which must be examined is the significance and value
attached to the issue of government and justice by the Nahj al-balaghah.
Indeed, what is essentially the importance of these problems in Islam? A
thorough discussion of this question is obviously outside the scope of
this book, but a passing reference, however, seems inevitable. The Holy
Quran, in the verse where it commands the Prophet ('s) to inform the
people that 'Ali ('a) would succeed him as the leader of the Muslims and
the Prophet's khalifah, declares with extraordinary insistence O
Messenger communicate that which has been sent down to thee from thy
Lord; for if thou dost not, thou will not have delivered His Message !
(5:67)

Is there any other issue in Islam to which this much importance was
attached? What other issue is of such significance that if not
communicated to the people should amount to the failure of the prophetic
mission itself?

During the battle of Uhud, when the Muslims were defeated and the
rumour spread that the Holy Prophet ('s) had been killed, a group of the
Muslims fled from the battlefield. Referring to this incident, the Quran
says:

Muhammad is naught but a Messenger; Messengers have passed away before
him. Why, if he should die or is slain, will you turn about on your
heels? (3:144) '

Allamah Tabataba'i, in an article entitled Wilayat wa-hakumat, derives
the following conclusion from the above verse: 'If the Messenger ('s) is
killed in battle, it should not in any way stall, even temporarily, your
struggle. Immediately afterwards, you should place yourselves under the
banner of the successor to the Prophet ('s), and continue your
endeavour. In other words, if, supposedly, the Prophet ('s) is killed or
if he dies, the social system and military organization of the Muslims
should not disintegrate.'

There is a hadith, according to which the Prophet ('s) said: "If (as
few as) three persons go on a journey, they must appoint one out of
themselves as their leader." From this one may infer to what extent the
Prophet regarded as harmful the disorder and absence of an authority
that could resolve social conflicts and serve as a unifying bond among
individuals.

The Nahj al-balaghah deals with numerous problems concerning the State
and social justice, a few of which, God willing, we shall discuss
here.

The first problem to be discussed here is that of the necessity and
value of a State. 'Ali ('a) has repeatedly stressed the need for a
powerful government, and, in his own time, battled against the views
propagated by the Khawarij, who, in the beginning, denied the need for a
State, considering the Quran as sufficient. The slogan of the Khawarij
as is known was "The right of judgement (or authority to rule) is
exclusively God's" (la hukm illa li-Allah), a phrase adopted from the
holy Quran.

Its Quranic meaning is that the prerogative of legislation belongs to
God or those whom God has permitted to legislate. But the Khawarij
interpreted it differently. According to 'Ali ('a), they had imparted a
false sense to a true statement. The essence of their view was that no
human being possesses any right to rule others; sovereignty belongs
exclusively to God. 'Ali's argument was:

Yes, I also say la hukm illa li-Allah, in the sense that the right of
legislation belongs solely to God. But their claim that the prerogative
to govern and lead also belongs to God is not reasonable. After all, the
laws of God need to be implemented by human beings. Men cannot do
without a ruler, good or evil.[^1] It is under the protection of a State
that the believers strive for God's sake, and the unbelievers derive
material benefit from their worldly endeavours, and men attain the
fruits of their labours.

It is through the authority of State that taxes are collected,
aggressors are repelled, the security of highways is maintained, and the
weak reclaim their rights (through courts of law) from the strong. (This
process continues) until the good citizens are happy and secure from the
evils of miscreants. (Nahj al-balaghah, Khutab 40)

'Ali ('a), like other godly men and spiritual leaders, despises
temporal power and political office for being lowly and degrading when
an instrument of gratification of lust for power and political ambition.
He looks down upon it with extreme contempt when it is desired as an
end-in-itself and aspired as an ideal of life.

He considers such kind of power to be devoid of any value and considers
it to be more detestable than 'a pig's bone in a leper's hand.' But the
same power and leadership if used as a means for the establishment and
execution of social justice and service to society is regarded by him as
a thing of paramount sanctity, for which he is willing to fight any
opportunist and political adventurer seeking to grab power and
illegitimate wealth. In its defence, he does not hesitate to draw his
sword against plunderers and usurpers.

During the days of 'Ali's caliphate, 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas once came
to him. He found 'Ali mending his old shoes with his own hand. Turning
to Ibn al-'Abbas, 'Ali asked him, "How much do you think is this shoe
worth?" "Nothing," replied Ibn al-'Abbas. 'Ali said, "But the same shoe
is of more worth to me than authority over you if it were not to me a
means for establishing justice, recovering the rights of the deprived,
and wiping out evil practices." (Khutab 33)

In the sermon 216, we come across a general discussion about human
rights and duties. Here, 'Ali states that every right always involves
two parties. Of the various Divine duties the ones which God has
ordained are duties of people towards people; they are framed in such a
way that each right necessitates a duty towards others; each right which
benefits an individual or a group, holds the individual or group
responsible to fulfil some duty towards others. Every duty becomes
binding when the other party also fulfils his duty. He says further
regarding this issue:

But the most important of the reciprocal rights that God has made
obligatory is the right of the ruler over the subjects and the rights of
the subjects over the ruler. It is a mutual and reciprocal obligation
decreed by God for them. He has made it the basis of the strength of
their society and their religion. Consequently, the subjects cannot
prosper unless the rulers are righteous. The rulers cannot be righteous
unless the subjects are firm and steadfast. If the subjects fulfil their
duties toward the ruler and the ruler his duty to them, then
righteousness prevails amongst them. Only then the objectives of the
religion are realized, the pillars of justice become stable and
wholesome traditions become established. In this way, better conditions
of life and social environment emerge. The people become eager to
safeguard the integrity of the State, and thus frustrate the plots of
its enemies. (Khutab 126)

**Justice, a Supreme Value:**

The first consequence of the sacred teachings of Islam was the
influence exercised on the minds and ideas of its adherents. Not only
did Islam introduce new teachings regarding the world, man, and his
society, but also changed the ways of thinking. The importance of the
latter achievement is not less than the former.

Every teacher imparts new knowledge to his pupils and every school of
thought furnishes new information to its adherents. But the teachers and
schools of thought who furnish their followers with a new logic and
revolutionize their ways of thinking altogether, are few.

But how do the ways of thinking change and one logic replaces another?
This requires some elucidation.

Man by virtue of being a rational creature thinks rationally on
scientific and social issues. His arguments, intentionally or
unintentionally, are based on certain principles and axioms. All his
conclusions are drawn and judgements are based on them. The difference
in ways of thinking originates precisely in these first principles or
axioms, used as the ground of inferences and conclusions. Here it is
crucial what premises and axioms form the foundation for inference, and
here lies the cause of all disparity in inferences and conclusions.

In every age there is a close similarity between the ways of thinking
of those familiar with the intellectual spirit of the age on scientific
issues. However, the difference is conspicuous between the intellectual
spirits of different ages. But in regard to social problems, such a
similarity and consensus is not found even among persons who are
contemporaries. There is a secret behind this, to expound which would
take us outside the scope of the present discussion.

Man, in his confrontation with social and moral problems, is inevitably
led to adopt some sort of value-orientation. In his estimations he
arrives at a certain hierarchy of values in which he arranges all the
issues. This order or hierarchy of values plays a significant role in
the adoption of the kind of basic premises and axioms he utilizes. It
makes him think differently from others who have differently evaluated
the issues and have arrived at a different hierarchy of values.

This is what leads to disparity among ways of thinking. Take for
example the question of feminine chastity, which is a matter of social
significance. Do all people prescribe a similar system of evaluation
with regard to this issue? Certainly not. There is a great amount of
disparity between views. For some its significance is near zero and it
plays no part in their thinking. For some the matter is of utmost value.
Such persons regard life as worthless in an environment where feminine
chastity is regarded as unimportant.

When we say that Islam revolutionized the ways of thinking, what is
meant is that it drastically altered their system and hierarchy of
values. It elevated values like taqwa (God-fearing), which had no value
at all in the past, to a very high status and attached an unprecedented
importance to it. On the other hand, it deflated the value of such
factors as blood, race and the like, which in the pre-Islamic days were
of predominant significance, bringing their worth to zero.

Justice is one of the values revived by Islam and given an
extraordinary status. It is true that Islam recommended justice and
stressed its implementation, but what is very significant is that it
elevated its value in society. It is better to leave the elaboration of
this point to 'Ali ('a) himself, and see what the Nahj al-balaghah says.
A man of intelligence and understanding puts the following question to
Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali ('a):

Which is superior, justice or generosity? (Hikam 437)

Here the question is about two human qualities. Man has always detested
oppression and injustice and has also held in high regard acts of
kindliness and benevolence performed without the hope of reward or
return. Apparently the answer to the above question seems both obvious
and easy: generosity is superior to justice, for what is justice except
observance of the rights of others and avoiding violating them; but a
generous man willingly foregoes his own right in favour of another
person. The just man does not transgress the rights of others or he
safeguards their rights from being violated. But the generous man
sacrifices his own right for another's sake. Therefore, generosity must
be superior to justice.

In truth, the above reasoning appears to be quite valid when we
estimate their worth from the viewpoint of individual morality, and
generosity, more than justice, seems to be the sign of human perfection
and the nobleness of the human soul. But 'Ali's reply is contrary to the
above answer. 'Ali ('a) gives two reasons for superiority of justice
over generosity. Firstly he says:

Justice puts things in their proper place and generosity diverts them
from their (natural) direction.

For, the meaning of justice is that the natural deservedness of
everybody must be taken into consideration; everyone should be given his
due according to his work, ability and qualifications. Society is
comparable to a machine whose every part has a proper place and
function.

It is true that generosity is a quality of great worth from the point
of view that the generous man donates to another what legitimately
belongs to himself, but we must note that it is an unnatural occurrence.
It may be compared to a body one of whose organs is malfunctioning, and
its other healthy organs and members temporarily redirect their activity
to the recovery of the suffering organ.

From the point of view of society, it would be far more preferable if
the society did not possess such sick members at all, so that the
healthy organs and members may completely devote their activities and
energies to the general growth and perfection of society, instead of
being absorbed with helping and assisting of some particular member.

To return to 'Ali's reply, the other reason he gives for preferring
justice to generosity is this:

Justice is the general caretaker, whereas generosity is a particular
reliever.

That is, justice is like a general law which is applicable to the
management of all the affairs of society. Its benefit is universal and
all-embracing; it is the highway which serves all and everyone. But
generosity is something exceptional and limited, which cannot be always
relied upon. Basically, if generosity were to become a general rule, it
would no longer be regarded as such. Deriving his conclusion, Ali ('a)
says:

Consequently, justice is the nobler of the two and possesses the
greater merit. This way of thinking about man and human problems is one
based on a specific value system rooted in the idea of the fundamental
importance of society. In this system of values, social principles and
criteria precede the norms of individual morality. The former is a
principle, whereas the latter is only a ramification. The former is a
trunk, while the latter is a branch of it. The former is the foundation
of the structure, whereas the latter is an embellishment.

From 'Ali's viewpoint, it is the principle of justice that is of
crucial significance in preserving the balance of society, and winning
goodwill of the public. Its practice can ensure the health of society
and bring peace to its soul. Oppression, injustice and discrimination
cannot bring peace and happiness-even to the tyrant or the one in whose
interest the injustice is perpetrated. Justice is like a public highway
which has room for all and through which everyone may pass without
impediment. But injustice and oppression constitute a blind alley which
does not lead even the oppressor to his desired destination.

As is known, during his caliphate, 'Uthman ibn 'Affan put a portion of
the public property of the Muslims at the disposal of his kinsmen and
friends. After the death of 'Uthman, 'Ali ('a) assumed power. 'Ali ('a)
was advised by some to overlook whatever injustices had occurred in the
past and to do nothing about them, confining his efforts to what would
befall from then on during his own caliphate. But to this his reply was:
A long standing right does not become invalid!

Then he exclaimed: "By God, even if I find that by such misappropriated
money women have been married or slave-maids have been bought, I would
reclaim it and have it returned to the public treasury, because:

There is a wide scope and room in the dispensation of justice. [Justice
is vast enough to include and envelop everyone;] he who [being of a
diseased temperament] finds restriction and hardship in justic should
know that the path of injustice and oppression is harder and even more
restricted. (Khutab 15)

Justice, according to this conception, is a barrier and limit to be
observed, respected, and believed in by every person. All should be
content to remain within its limits. But if its limits are broken and
violated, and the belief in it and respect for it are lost, human greed
and lust, being insatiable by nature, would not stop at any limit; the
further man advances on this interminable journey of greed and lust, the
greater becomes his dissatisfaction.

**Indifference to Injustice**

'Ali ('a) regards justice to be a duty and a Divine trust; rather, to
him it is a Divine sanctity. He does not expect a Muslim who is aware
and informed about the teachings of Islam to be an idle spectator at the
scenes of injustice and discrimination.

In the sermon called 'al-Shiqshiqiyyah', after relating the pathetic
political episodes of the past, 'Ali ('a) proceeds to advance his
reasons for accepting the caliphate. He mentions how, after the
assassination of 'Uthman, the people thronged around him urging him to
accept the leadership of Muslims. But 'Ali ('a), after the unfortunate
events of the past and being aware of the extent of deterioration in the
prevailing situation, was not disposed to accept that grave
responsibility.

Neverthe less, he saw that should he reject the caliphate, the face of
truth would become still more clouded, and it might be alleged that he
was not interested in this matter from the very beginning, and that he
gave no importance to such affairs. Moreover, in view of the fact that
Islam does not consider it permissible for anyone to remain an idle
spectator in a society divided into two classes of the oppressed and the
oppressor, one suffering the pangs of hunger and the other well-fed and
uneasy with the discomforts of over-eating, there was no alternative for
'Ali ('a) but to shoulder this heavy responsibility. He himself explains
this in the aforementioned sermon:

(By Him who split the grain and created living things,) had it not been
for the presence of the pressing crowd, were it not for the
establishment of (God's) testimony upon me through the existence of
supporters, and had it not been for the pledge of God with the learned,
to the effect that they should not connive with the gluttony of the
oppressor and the hunger of the oppressed, I would have cast the reins
of [the camel of] the caliphate on its own shoulders and would have made
the last one drink from the same cup that I made the first one to drink
(i.e. I would have taken the same stance towards the caliphate as at the
time of the first caliph). (Then you would have seen that in my view the
world of yours is not worth more than a goat's sneeze.) (Khutab 3)

**Justice Should not be Compromised:**

Favouritism, nepotism, partiality and shutting up of mouths by big
morsels, have always been the essential tools of politicians. Now a man
had assumed power and captained the ship of the caliphate who profoundly
detested these things. In fact his main objective was to struggle and
fight against this kind of politics. Naturally, with the very inception
of 'Ali's reign, the politicians with their hopes and expectations were
disappointed. Their disappointment soon grew into subversive
conspiracies against 'Ali's government, creating for him many a
headache.

Well-meaning friends, with sincere goodwill, advised 'Ali ('a) to adopt
greater flexibility in his policies for the sake of higher interests.
Their advice was: "Extricate yourself from the ruses of these
demagogues, as is said, 'sewing the dog's mouth with a big morsel'.
These are influential persons, some of whom are from the elite of the
early days of Islam. Presently, your real enemy is Mu'awiyah, who is in
control of a rich and fertile province like Syria. The wisdom lies in
setting aside, for the time being, the matter of equality and justice.
What harm there is in it?"

**'Ali ('a) replied to them:**

Do you ask me to seek support through injustice [to my subjects and to
saerifice justiee for the sake of political advantage]? By God! I will
not do it as long as the world lasts and one star follows another in the
sky [i.e. I will not do it as long as the order of the universe exists].
Even if it were my own property I would distribute it with justice, and
why not when it is the property of God and when I am His trustee?
(Khutab 126)

This is an example of how highly 'Ali valued justice and what status it
held in his opinion.

**The Rights of the People:**

The needs of a human being are not summarized in the phrase 'food,
clothing, and housing.' It may be possible to keep an animal happy by
satisfying all its bodily needs; but in the case of man, spiritual and
psychological factors are as important as the physical ones. Different
governments following a similar course in providing for the material
welfare of the public might achieve differing results, because one of
them fulfils the psychological needs of society while the other
doesn't.

One of the pivotal factors which contribute to the securing of the
goodwill of the masses is the way a government views them, if it regards
them as its slaves or as its masters and guardians, if it considers the
people as possessing legitimate rights and itself only as their trustee,
agent, and representative. In the first case, whatever service a
government may perform for the people is not more than a kind of the
master's care of his beast. In the second case, every service performed
is equivalent to discharging of duty by a right trustee.

A State's acknowledgement of the authentic rights of the people and
avoidance of any kind of action that implies negation of their right of
sovereignty, are the primary conditions for securing their confidence
and goodwill.


