The Church and the Right of Sovereignty
=======================================

At the dawn of the modern age there was a movement against religion in
Europe, which also affected more or less other regions outside the
Christendom. This movement was inclined towards materialism. When we
examine the causes and roots of this movement, we discover that one of
them was the inadequacy of the teachings of the Church from the
viewpoint of political rights.The Church authorities, and some European
philosophers, developed an artificial relationship and association
between belief in God on the one hand and stripping the people of their
political rights by despotic regimes on the other.

Naturally, this led to the assumption of some necessary relation
between democracy on the one hand and atheism on the other. It came to
be believed that either we should choose the belief in God and accept
the right of sovereignty bestowed by Him upon certain individuals who
have otherwise no superiority over others, or deny the existence of God
so as to establish our right as masters of our own political destinies.
From the point of view of religious psychology, one of the causes of the
decline of the influence of religion was the contradiction between
religion and a natural social need, contrived by religious authorities,
especially at a time when that need expressed itself strongly at the
level of public consciousness.

Right at a time when despotism and repression had reached their peak in
European political life and the people were thirstily cherishing the
ideas of liberty and people's sovereignty, the Church and its supporters
made an assertion that the people had only duties and responsibilities
towards the State and had no rights. This was sufficient to turn the
lovers of liberty and democracy against religion and God in general and
the Church in particular.

This mode of thought, in the West as well as in the East, was deeply
rooted from ancient times. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in The Social
Contract, writes:

We are told by Philo, the Emperor Caligula argued, concluding,
reasonably enough on this same analogy, that kings were gods or
alternately that the people were animals.

During the Middle Ages,this out look was revived again; since it
assumed the status of religious faith, it induced a revolt against
religion itself. Rousseau, in the same book, writes:

Grotius denies that all human government is established for the benefit
of the governed, and he cites the example of slavery. His characteristic
method of reasoning is always to offer fact as a proof of right. It is
possible to imagine a more logical method, but not one more favourable
to tyrants. According to Grotius, therefore, it is doubtful whether
humanity belongs to a hundred men, or whether these hundred men belong
to humanity, though he seems throughout his book to lean to the first of
these views, which is also that of Hobbes. These authors show us the
human race divided into herds of cattle, each with a master who presents
it only in order to devour its members.

[^2]

Rousseau, who calls such a right 'the right of might' (right=force),
replies to this logic in this fashion:

'Obey those in power.' If this means 'yield to force' the precept is
sound, but superfluous; it has never, I suggest, been violated. All
power comes from God, I agree; but so does every disease, and no one
forbids us to summon a physician. If I am held up by a robber at the
edge of a wood, force compels me to hand over my purse. But if I could
somehow contrive to keep the purse from him, would I still be obliged in
conscience to surrender it? After all, the pistol in the robber's hand
is undoubtedly a power.

[^3]

Hobbes, whose views have been referred to above, although he does not
incline to God in his totalitarian logic, the basis of his philosophic
position regarding political rights is that the sovereign represents and
personifies the will of the people and he actually translates the will
of the people itself into his actions. However, when we closely examine
his reasoning, we find that he has been influenced by the ideas of the
Church. Hobbes claims that individual liberty is not contrary to
unlimited power of the sovereign. He writes:

Nevertheless we are not to understand that by such liberty the
sovereign power of life and death is either abolished or limited. For it
has been already shown that nothing the sovereign representative can do
to a subject, on what pretence soever, can properly be called injustice
or injury, because every subject is the author of every act the
sovereign does, so that he never wants right to anything otherwise than
as he himself is the subject of God and bound thereby to obscene the
laws of nature.

And therefore it may and does often happen in commonwealths that a
subject may be put to death by the command of the sovereign power and
yet neither do the other wrong-as when Jephtha caused his daughter to be
sacrificed; in which, and the like cases, he that so dies, had the
liberty to do the action for which he is nevertheless without injury put
to death. And the same hold also in a sovereign prince that puts to
death an innocent subject. For though the action be against the law of
nature as being contrary to equity, as was the killing of Uriah by
David, yet it was not an injury to Uriah but to God.

[^4]

As can be noticed, in this philosophy the responsibility to God is
assumed to negate the responsibility toward the people. Acknowledgement
of duty to God is considered sufficient in order that the people may
have no rights. Justice, here, is what the sovereign does and oppression
and injustice have no meaning. In other words, duty to (God is assumed
to annul the duty to man, and the right of God to override the rights of
men.

Indubitably, Hobbes, though apparently a free thinker independent of
the ideology of the Church, had ecclesiastical ideas not penetrated into
his mind, would not have developed such a theory. Precisely that which
is totally absent from such philosophies is the idea that faith and
belief in God should be considered conducive to establishment of justice
and realization of human rights.

The truth is that, firstly, the belief in God is the foundation of the
idea of justice and inalienable human rights; it is only through
acceptance of the existence of God that it is possible to affirm innate
human rights and uphold true justice as two realities independent of any
premise and convention; secondly, it is the best guarantee for their
execution in practice.

**The approach of the Nahj al-balaghah:**

The approach of the Nahj al-balaghah to justice and human rights rests
on the above-mentioned foundations. In sermon 216, from which we have
quoted before, 'Ali ('a) says:

Allah has, by encharging me with your affairs, given me a right over
you and awarded you a similar right over me. The issue of rights, as a
subject of discourse, is inexhaustible, but is the most restricted of
things when it comes to practice. A right does not accrue in favour of
any person unless it accrues against him also, and it does not accrue
against him unless that it also accrues in his favour.

As can be noticed from the above passage, God is central to 'Ali's
statement about justice, rights, and duties. But 'Ali's stand is opposed
to the aforementioned view according to which God has bestowed rights on
only a handful of individuals solely responsible to Him, and has
deprived the rest of people of these rights, making them responsible not
only to Him but also to those who have been granted by Him the unlimited
privilege to rule others. As a result, the ideas of justice and
injustice in regard to the relationship between the ruler and the ruled
become meaningless.

**In the same sermon 'Ali ('a) says:**

No individual, however eminent and high his station in religion, is not
above needing cooperation of the people in discharging his obligations
and the responsibilities placed upon him by God. Again, no man, however
humble and insignificant in the eyes of others, is not too low to be
ignored for the purpose of his cooperation and providing assistance.

In the same sermon, 'Ali ('a) asks the people not to address him in the
way despots are addressed:

Do not address me in the manner despots are addressed [i.e. Do not
address me by titles that are used to flatter despots and tyrants]. In
your attitude towards me do not entertain the kind of considerations
that are adopted in the presence of unpredictable tyrants. Do not treat
me with affected and obsequious manners. Do not imagine that your
candour would displease me or that I expect you to treat me with
veneration. One who finds it disagreeable to face truth and just
criticism, would find it more detestable to act upon them. Therefore, do
not deny me a word of truth or a just advice.

**The Rulers are the People's Trustees Not Their Lords:**

In the last chapter, we said that a dangerous and misleading view
became current in the thought of some modern European thinkers
interlinking in an unnatural fashion the belief in God on the one hand
and negation of peoples rights on the other. This correlation played a
significant role in inducing a group to incline towards materialism.
Duty and responsibility to God was assumed to necessarily negate the
duty and responsibility to the people. Divine obligations completely
displaced human obligations.

The belief and faith in God (Who, according to the Islamic teachings,
created the universe on the principles of truth and justice) was
considered to conflict with and contradict the belief in innate and
natural human rights, instead of being regarded as their basis.
Naturally, belief in the right of people's sovereignty was equated with
atheism.

From Islamic point of view the case is actually the reverse. In the
Nahj al-balaghah, which is the subject of our discussion, the main
topics are tawhid and 'irfan; throughout the talk is about God, whose
Name occurs repeatedly everywhere in its pages. Nevertheless, it not
only does not neglect to discuss the rights of the people and their
privileges vis-a-vis the ruler, in fact regarding the ruler as the
trustee and protector of their rights, but also lays great emphasis on
this point.

According to the logic of this noble book, the imam and the ruler is
the protector and trustee of the rights of the people and responsible to
them. If one is asked as to which of them exists for the other, it is
the ruler' who exists for the people and not vice versa. Sa'di has a
similar idea in his mind when he says:

It's not the sheep who are to serve the shepherd, But it is the
shepherd who is for their service.

The word ra'iyyah (lit. herd), despite that it gradually acquired an
abominable meaning in the Persian language, has an original meaning
which is essentially good and humanitarian. The word ra'i for the ruler
and ra'iyyah for the masses first appears in the speech of the Prophet
('s) and is literally used thereafter by 'Ali ('a).

This word is derived from the root ra'a, which carries the sense of
'protection' and 'safeguarding'. The word ra'iyyah is applied to the
people for the reason that the ruler is responsible for protecting their
lives, property, rights, and liberties.

A tradition related from the Holy Prophet ('s) throws full light on the
meaning of this word:

Truly, everyone of you is a raii responsible for his rai'yyah. The
ruler is the ra'i of his people and responsible for them; the woman is
the ra'i of her husband's house and responsible for it; the slave is the
ra'i of his master's property and responsible for it; indeed all of you
are ra'i and responsible [for those under your charge].

[^5]

In the preceding pages we cited some examples from the Nahj al-balaghah
which illustrated 'Ali's outlook regarding the rights of the people.
Here we shall give sample quotes from other sources, beginning with the
following verse of the Holy Quran:

God commands you to deliver trusts back to their owners; and that when
you judge between the people, judge with justice ... (4:58)

Al-Tabarsi, in his exegesis Majma' al-bayan, commenting upon this
verse, remarks:

There are several opinions regarding the meaning of this verse;
firstly, that it is about trusts in general, including the Divine and
the non Divine, the material and the non-material trusts; secondly, that
it is addressed to the rulers, and that God, by making the returning of
the trusts an obligation, is commanding them to observe the rights of
the people.

Then he further adds:

This is corroborated by the verse immediately following it: O
believers, obey God, and obey the Messenger and those in authority among
you ... (4:59)

According to this verse the people are bound to obey the commands of
God, His Messenger and those in authority (wulat al-'amr). While the
preceding verse mentions the rights of the people, this one reiterates
the complementary rights of those in authority. It has been related from
the Imams ('a) that 'one of these two verses is ours (i.e. it
establishes our rights in relation to you), and the other is yours (i.e.
it outlines your rights in relation to us)' ...

Al-Imam al-Baqir ('a) said that the performanee of salat, zakat, sawm,
and Hajj are some of the trusts (mentioned in 4:58). One of the trusts
(amanat) is that the wulat al-'amr have been commanded to justly
distribute the ghana'im, sadaqat, and whatever is a part of the rights
of the people, among them.

In the exegesis al-Mizan, in the part of the commentary upon this verse
which deals with tradition, the author relates a tradition from al-Durr
al-manthur from 'Ali ('a) that he said:

It is incumbent on the imam to rule according to the decrees revealed
by God, and to discharge the trusts that he has been charged with. When
he does that, it is incumbent upon the people to pay attention to the
Divine command (about obeying the wali al-'amr), to obey him and respond
to his call.

As noticed earlier, the Holy Quran considers the ruler and the head of
the State as a trustee and a guardian; it regards just government as a
fulfillment of a trust entrusted to the ruler. The approach of the
Imams('a), in particular that of Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali ('a), corresponds
with the view which can be inferred from the Holy Quran.

Now that we know the Quran's view of this matter, we may go on to
examine the statements of the Nahj al-balaghah on this issue. More than
anything else, we must study 'Ali's letters to his governors, especially
those which were meant to be official circulars. It is in these letters
that we would find glimpses of the teachings of Islam regarding the
functions of the ruler and his duties towards the people as well as
their rights. Ali ('a), in his letter to the governor of Adharba'ijan,
reminds him of his duties towards the people in these words:

Beware lest you consider this assignment as a bait [for acquiring
personal gain]; rather, it is a trust lying on your neck. You have been
charged with caretaking [of the people] by your superior. It is not for
you to betray your duties with respect to the people (ra'iyyah). (Kutub
5)

In another letter written as a circular to tax collectors, after a few
words of advice and admonition, 'Ali ('a) says:

Fulfill the demands of justice in your relationship with the people and
be patient in matters regarding their needs; because you are treasurers
of the people (ra'iyyah), representatives of the community (Ummah), and
envoys of your imams. Kutub 51

In the famous epistle to Malik al-'Ashtar, which contains elaborate
instructions about various aspects of government, he writes:

Awaken your heart to kindness and mercy for the people (ra'iyyah) and
love and tenderness for them. Never, never act with them like a
predatory beast which seeks to be satiated by devouring them, for the
people fall into two categories: they are either your brethren in faith
or your kindred in creation ... Do not ever say, 'I have been given
authority' or 'My command should be obeyed.' Because it corrupts the
heart, consumes one's faith, and invites calamities.

In another letter sent as a circular to army commanders, he says:

It is an obligation that an official should not behave differently with
the people (ra'iyyah) on account of a distinction he receives or
material advantage that he may achieve. Instead these favours from Allah
should bring him nearer to God's creatures and increase his compassion
towards his brethren. Kutub 50

'Ali ('a) shows an amazing sensitivity to justice and compassion
towards the people and a great respect for them and their rights, which,
as reflected in his letters, is an exemplary and unique attitude towards
this issue.

There is another letter in the Nahj al-balaghah consisting of
instructions to the collectors of zakat, and is entitled: 'To the
officials assigned to the job of collecting zakat'. The title indicates
that it was not addressed to any particular official but sent either as
a general instruction in writing or delivered as a routine oral
instruction. Al-Sayyid al-Radi has included it in the section of kutub,
or letters, with the clarification that he is placing this letter here
to show to what extent 'Ali was meticulous in matters pertaining to
justice and rights of the people, being attentive not only to main
points but also to minute details. Here are 'Ali's instructions:

Set out with the fear of God, Who is One and has no partner. Do not
intimidate any Muslim. Do not tresspass upon his land so as to displease
him. Do not take from him more than Allah's share in his property. When
you approach a tribe, at first come down at their watering place, stay
there instead of entering their houses. Approach them with calm dignity
and salute them when you stand amongst them, grudge not a proper
greeting to them. Then say to them "O servants of God, the Wali and
Khalifah of God has sent me to you to collect from you Allah's share in
your property. Is there anything of His share in your property? If there
is, return it to His Wali.

" If someone says 'No', then do not repeat the demand. If someone
answers in the affirmative, then go with him without frightening,
threatening, or compelling him. Take whatever gold and silver he gives
you. If he has cattle or camels, do not approach them save with his
permission, because the major part belongs to him. When you arrive (into
the cattle enclosure), do not enter upon them in a bossy and rude manner
... Kutub 25, also see 26, 27 and 46

The passages quoted above are sufficient to throw light on 'Ali's
attitude as a ruler toward the people under his rule.

**Notes:**

[^1] That is, in the absence of a righteous government, an unjust
government, at least preserves law and order in society, which is, of
course, better than chaos and rule of jungle.

[^2] Jean Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract (trns. by Maurice
Granston Penguin Books, 1978, p. 51

[^3] (Ibid p. 53)

[^4] Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, The Liberal Arts Press, New York, 1958,
p. 173

[^5] Bukhari, Kitab al Nikah, vol. VIII


