Part V -moral Lectures and Aphorisms
====================================

**Inimitable Moral Teaching:**

Moral and spiritual teachings constitute the greater part of the Nahj
al-balaghah making up almost half of the book. More than anything else
the fame of the Nahj al-balaghah is due to the sermons, exhortations,
and aphorisms on ethical and moral subjects.

Aside from the moral teachings of the Quran and a number of the sermons
and sayings of the Holy Prophet ('s), which are to be considered the
source and antecedent of the Nahj al-balaghah, the teachings of the Nahj
al-balaghah are without a match in the Arabic and Persian languages. For
more than a thousand years these sermons have played an influential role
serving as a matchless source of inspiration, and yet retained their
original power to quicken the heart, to sublimate emotions, and to bring
tears to the eyes. It seems that as long as there remains any trace of
humanity in the world, these sermons shall continue to exercise their
original power and influence.

**A Comparison:**

The literature of Arabic and Persian is replete with works containing
spiritual and moral teachings of highest sublimity and elegance though
mainly in the form of poetry. There is, for example, the famous qasidah
by Abu al-Fath al-Busti (360-400/971-1010), which begins with the verse:
Worldly profit and achievement is loss, And the gain unmarked by the
seal of pure goodness.

There is also the elegiacal qasidah of Abu al-Hasan al-Tihami, which he
wrote on the early death of his youthful son. It begins with these
lines: The law of fate governs the destiny of creation, And this world
is not a place to settle in.

Every one of these works is an everlasting masterpiece of its kind and
shines like a star on the horizons of the Arabic literature of Islamic
era, never to lose its freshness and charm.

In Persian, the Gulistan and the Bustan of Sa'di and his qasaid serve
as an unusually attractive and effective means of moral advice and are
masterpieces of their own kind. To give some examples, there are those
famous verses of the Gulistan which start with the verse: Every breath
is a fraction of life gone, And when I see, not much has remained of
it.

Or in his qasa'id where he says:

O people, the world is not a place for leisure and repose;

To the wise man, the world is not worth the effort of acquiring it. Or
at another place where he says:

The world on water and life on wind do rest;

Salutes to the brave who do not tie their hearts to them.

And where he says:

Time and fortune are subject to endless change; The wise man doesn't
attach his heart to the world.

Sa'di's Bustan is full of profound and glowing spiritual advices, and,
perhaps, is at its best in the ninth chapter on "Penitence and the Right
Way". The same is true of some portions of the Mathnawi of Rumi and
works of all other Persian poets, from whom we shall not further quote
any examples.

In Islamic literature, including the Arabic and the Persian, there
exist excellent examples of spiritual counsels and aphorisms. This
Islamic literary genre is not confined to these two languages, but is
also found in Turkish, Urdu, and other languages, and a characteristic
spirit pervades all of them.

Anyone familiar with the Holy Quran, the sayings of the Holy Prophet
('s), Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali ('a), the other Imams ('a), and Muslim
saints of the first rank, can observe a characteristic spirit pervading
all Persian literature containing spiritual counsel, which represents
the spirit of Islam embodied in the Persian language and embellished
with its charm and sweetness.

If an expert or a group of experts in Arabic and Persian literature
acquainted with the works in all other languages that reflect the spirit
of Islam, were to collect the masterpieces in the field of spiritual
counsel, the extraordinary richness and maturity of the Islamic culture
in lhis field will be revealed.

It is strange that so far as the works on spiritual counsel are
concerned the Persian genius has mostly expressed itself in poetry;
there is no such work of eminence in prose. All that exists of it in
prose is in the form of short sayings, like the prose writings of the
Gulistan-a part of which consists of spiritual counsels and is in itself
a masterpiece-or the sayings ascribed to Khwajah 'Abd Allah
al-'Ansari.

Of course, my own knowledge is inadequate, but as far as I know there
does not exist in Persian prose any remarkable work, except for short
sayings-not even a passage which is long enough to be counted as a short
discourse, especially a discourse which was originally delivered
extempore and later collected and recorded in writing.

There are discourses which have been related from Rumi or Sa'di, meant
as oral moral advice to their followers; they also by no means possess
the brilliance and charm of the poetic works of those masters, and
definitely are not worth considering for a comparison with the
discourses of the Nahj al-balaghah.

The same can be said about the writings which have reached us in the
form of a treatise or letter, such as the Nasihat al-muluk by Abu Hamid
Muhammad al-Ghazali, the Taziyaneh-ye suluk by Ahmad al-Ghazali, the
latter being an elaborate epistle addressed to his follower and pupil
'Ayn al-Qudat al-Hamadan

**Spiritual Counsel and Wisdom:**

Moral counsel, according to the Quran, is one of the three ways of
invitation towards God (hikmah, maw'izah, al jidal al-hasan, i.e.
wisdom, good admonition, and honourable debate, as mentioned in 16:
125).

The difference between hikmah (wisdom, philosophy) and maw'izah
(spiritual and moral advice and admonition) lies in this that hikmah is
for instruction and imparting knowledge, while maw'izah is meant for
reminding. Hikmah is struggle against ignorance and maw'izah is struggle
against negligence and indifference. Hikmah deals with the intellect and
maw'izah appeals to the heart. Hikmah educates, while maw'izah prepares
the intellect for employment of its reserves. Hikmah is a lamp and
maw'izah is an eye-opener.

Hikmah is for ratiocination, while maw'izah is for self-awakening.
Hikmah is the language of the intellect, while maw'izah is the message
for the spirit. Accordingly, the personality of the speaker plays an
essential role in maw'izah, which is not the case with hikmah. In
hikmah, two minds communicate in an impersonal manner But in maw'izah
the situation is like the passage of an electric charge that flows from
the speaker, who is at a higher potential, to the listener.

For this reason, it has been said of maw'izah that:

If it comes forth from the soul, then it necessarily alights upon the
heart.

Otherwise it does not go beyond the listener's ears. It is about the
quality of maw'izah that it is said:

The speeeh which originates from the heart enters another heart, and
the words which originate from the tongue do not go beyond the ears.

It is true that the words that come from the heart, being the message
of the soul, invade other hearts; but if they do not convey the message
of the soul, are no more than empty literary devices, which do not go
beyond the listener's ear-drum.

**Maw'izah and Khitabah (Exhortation and Oratory):**

Maw'izah also differs from khitabah (oratory, rhetoric). Although
oratory also deals with emotions, but it seeks to stir and agitate them.
Maw'izah on the other hand is intended to pacify emotions and it seeks
to bring them under control. Oratory is effective when emotions are
inert and stagnant; maw'izah is required when lusts and passions become
unmanageable. Oratory stirs the passion for power and glory, the
feelings of honour, heroism, chivalry, manliness, patriotism, nobility,
righteousness, virtue, and service; it is followed by movement and
excitement.

But maw'izah checks inappropriate passion and excitement. Rhetoric and
oratory snatch control from the hands of calculating reason, handing it
over to tempestuous passions. But maw'izah appeases the tempests of
passions and prepares the ground for calculation and foresight. Oratory
draws one to the outside, and maw'izah makes him turn to his inner
self.

Rhetoric and counsel are both necessary and essential, and the Nahj
al-balaghah makes use of both of them. The main thing is to judge the
right time for the use of each of them. The impassioned speeches of Amir
al-Mu'minin ('a) were delivered at a time when it was necessary to stir
up passions and to build up a tempest to destroy an unjust and
oppressive structure, such as at the time of the Battle of Siffin when
'Ali ('a) delivered a fiery speech before the engagement with
Mu'awiyah's forces.

Mu'awiyah's forces, arriving ahead of 'Ali's army, had taken control of
the river bank and stopped the supply of water to 'Ali's camp. At first
'Ali ('a) strived to abstain from resorting to force, desiring the
problem to be solved through negotiation. But Mu'awiyah, who had some
other designs, considering occupation of the river bank a victory for
himself, refused every offer of negotiation. When things became
difficult for 'Ali's men, it was time when he should stir the emotions
of his soldiers through a fiery speech, creating a tempest that would
rout the enemy. This is how 'Ali ('a) addressed his companions:

They are eager that you should make them taste the flavour of battle.
So you have two alternatives before you: either submit to disgrace and
ignominy, or quench your swords in their blood and appease your thirst
with water. It is' death to survive through defeat and true life is to
die for the sake of victory. Muawiyah is leading a handful of deluded
insurgents and has deceived them by keeping them in the dark about the
truth, with the result that their throats are the targets of your deadly
arrows.

[^1]

These words flared their emotions, provoked their sense of honour, and
made the blood surge in their veins. It was not yet sunset when 'Ali's
companions seized the river bank and threw back Mu'awiyah's forces.

However, 'Ali's mawaiz were delivered in different conditions. During
the days of the first three caliphs, and particularly during 'Uthman's
rule, immeasurable amounts of wealth and booty won through consecutive
victories flowed into Muslim hands. Due to the absence of any careful
programmes for correct utilization of that wealth, particularly due to
the aristocratic, or rather tribal, rule during the reign of 'Uthman,
moral corruption, worldliness, and love of comfort and luxury found
their way into the Muslim society. Tribal rivalries were revived, and
racial prejudice between Arabs and non-Arabs was added to it.

In that clamour for worldliness and mounting prejudices, rivalries, and
greed for greater share of the war booty, the only cry of protest
charged with spiritual exhortation was that of 'Ali ('a).

God willing, we shall discuss in coming chapters the various themes
dealt with in 'Ali's mawa'iz, such as taqwa (God-fearing), worldliness,
zuhd (abstinence), desires, the dread of death, the dreads of the Day of
Judgement, the need to take lesson from the history of past nations and
peoples, etc.

**The Nahj al-balaghah's Recurring Themes:**

Out of the 241 fragments collected under the title 'Khutab' by
al-Sayyid al-Radi (though not all of them are Khutab or sermons) about
86 can be classed as mawa'iz or at least contain a series of spiritual
advices. Some of them, however, are elaborate and lengthy, like the
khutbah 176, which opens with the sentence (Avail of the Divine
expositions), the khutbah named 'al-Qasi'ah; (which is the longest of
the sermons of the Nahj al-balaghah), and the khutbah 93 (called khutbat
al-muttaqin, the 'Sermon of the Pious').

Out of some seventy-nine passages that are classed as 'kutub' letters,
(which not all of them are) about twenty-five, either completely or
partially, consist of spiritual and moral teachings. Some of them are
quite lengthy and elaborate-like letter 31, which constitutes 'Ali's
advice to his son al-Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba ('a), and the lengthiest
of all, except the famous directive sent to Malik al-'Ashtar. Another
one is letter 45, the well-known epistle of 'Ali ('a) to Uthman ibn
Hunayf, his governor in Basrah.

**The Themes in Spiritual Advices:**

Various themes are found in the spiritual advices of the Nahj
al-balaghah: taqwa (God-fearing); tawakkul (trust in God); sabr
(patience, Fortitude); zuhd (abstinence); the renunciation of worldly
pleasures and luxuries, the renunciation of inordinate desires and
far-fetched hopes; the condemnation of injustice and prejudice, emphasis
on mercy, love, helping of the oppressed and sympathy toward the weak;
emphasis on the qualities of fortitude, courage, and strength; emphasis
on unity and solidarity and condemnation of disunity;

the invitation to take lesson from history; the invitation to thought,
meditation, remembrance, and self-criticism; the reminders about the
brevity of life and the swiftness of its pace; the remembrance of death;
the hardships of death-throes; experiences of the life after death; the
reminders of the dreadful events of the Day of Judgement, and so on.
These are some of the frequent themes of the spiritual advices of the
Nahj al-balaghah.

**Ali's Logic:**

In order to understand this aspect of the Nahj al-balaghah, or, in
other words, to understand 'Ali ('a) when he speaks as a moral and
spiritual counsellor and to understand his didactic outlook, so as to
draw benefit from that everflowing source, it is not enough to enumerate
the various themes and topics dealt with by 'Ali ('a) in his
discourses.

It is not sufficient merely to remark that 'Ali ('a) has spoken about
taqwa, tawakkul or zuhd; rather, we must see what significance did he
attribute to these words. We must uncover his didactic philosophy
regarding the development of the human character and his perception of
the human aspiration for piety, purity, freedom, and deliverance from
spiritual servitude and thraldom.

As we know, these are words employed by all-in particular those who are
wont to play the role of a moralist; but all individuals do not mean the
same kind of things by these terms. Sometimes, the meanings one person
attributes to these words are quite contrary to those meant by another,
and naturally lead to conclusions which are quite opposite.

Consequently, it is essential to elaborate somewhat the specific
meanings of these terms in 'Ali's vocabulary, starting with taqwa.

**Taqwa:**

Taqwa is one of the most frequent motifs of the Nahj al-balaghah. In
fact it would be hard to find another book which emphasizes this
spiritual term to the extent of this book. Even in the Nahj al-balaghah,
no other term or concept receives so much attention and stress as taqwa.
What is taqwa?

Often it is thought that taqwa means piety and abstinence and so
implies a negative attitude. In other words, it is maintained that the
greater the amount of abstinence, withdrawal, and self-denial, the more
perfect is one's taqwa. According to this interpretation, taqwa is a
concept divorced from active life; secondly it is a negative attitude;
thirdly, it means that the more severely this negative attitude is
exercised, the greater one's taqwa would be. Accordingly, the
sanctimonious professors of taqwa, in order to avoid its being tainted
and to protect it from any blemish, withdraw from the bustle of life,
keeping themselves away from involvement in any matter or affair of the
world.

Undeniably, abstinence and caution exercised with discretion is an
essential principle of wholesome living. For, in order to lead a healthy
life, man is forced to negate and affirm, deny and posit, renounce and
accept, avoid and welcome different things. It is through denial and
negation that the positive in life can be realized. It is through
renunciation and avoidance that concentration is given to action.

The principle of tawhid contained in the dictum la ilaha illa Allah is
at the same time a negation as well as an affirmation. Without negation
of everything other than God it is not possible to arrive at tawhid.
That is why rebellion and surrender, kufr (unbelief) and iman (belief),
go together; that is, every surrender requires a rebellion and every
faith (iman) calls for a denial and rejection (kufr), and every
affirmation implies a negation. The Quran says:

So whoever disbelieves in taghut and believes in God, has laid hold of
the most firm bond .... (2:256)

However, firstly, every denial, negation, rejection, and rebellion
operates between the limits of two opposites; the negation of one thing
implies movement towards its opposite; the rejection of the one marks
the beginning of the acceptance of the other. Accordingly, every healthy
denial and rejection has both a direction and a goal, and is confined
within certain definite limits. Therefore, a blind practice and
purposeless attitude, which has neither direction nor a goal, nor is
confined within any limits, is neither defensible nor of any spiritual
worth.

Secondly, the meaning of taqwa in the Nahj al-balaghah is not
synonymous with that of 'abstinence', even in its logically accepted
sense discussed above. Taqwa, on the other hand, according to the Nahj
al-balaghah, is a spiritual faculty which appears as a result of
continued exercise and practice. The healthy and rational forms of
abstinence are, firstly, the preparatory causes for the emergence of
that spiritual faculty; secondly, they are also its effects and
outcome.

This faculty strengthens and vitalizes the soul, giving it a kind of
immunity. A person who is devoid of this faculty, if he wants to keep
himself free from sins, it is unavoidable for him to keep away from the
causes of sin. Since society is never without these causes, inevitably
he has to go into seclusion and isolate himself. It follows from this
argument that one should either remain pious by isolating himself from
one's environment, or he should enter society and bid farewell to taqwa.
Moreover, according to this logic, the more isolated and secluded a
person's life is and the more he abstains from mixing with other people,
the greater is his piety and taqwa in the eyes of the common people.

However, if the faculty of taqwa is cultivated inside a person's soul,
it is no longer necessary for him to seclude himself from his
environment. He can keep himself clean and uncorrupted without severing
his relations with society.

The former kind of persons are like those who take refuge in mountains
for fear of some plague or epidemic. The second kind resemble those who
acquire immunity and resistance through vaccination and so do not deem
it necessary to leave the city and avoid contact with their townsfolk.
On the other hand, they hasten to the aid of the suffering sick in order
to save them. Sa'di is alluding to the first kind of pious in his
Gulistan, when he says:

Saw I a sage in the mountains,

Happy in a cave, far from the world's tide.
Said I, "Why not to the city return,
And lighten your heart of this burden?"

He said, "The city abounds in tempting beauties,
And even elephants slip where mud is thick."

The Nahj al-balaghah speaks of taqwa as a spiritual faculty acquired
through exercise and assiduity, which on its emergence produces certain
characteristic effects, one of which is the ability to abstain from sins
with ease.

I guarantee the truth of my words and I am responsible for what I say.
If similar events and experiences of the past serve as a lesson for a
person, then taqwa prevents him from plunging recklessly into doubts
...

[^2]

Beware that sins are like unruly horses whose reins have been taken way
and which plunge with their riders into hell-fire. But taqwa is like a
trained steed whose reins are in the hands of its rider and enters with
its rider into Paradise.

[^3]

In this sermon taqwa is described as a spiritual condition which
results in control and command over one's self. It explains that the
result of subjugation to desires and lusts and being devoid of taqwa
degrades one's personality making it vulnerable to the cravings of the
carnal self. In such a state, man is like a helpless rider without any
power and control, whom his mount takes wherever it desires. The essence
of taqwa lies in possessing a spiritual personality endowed with
will-power, and possessing mastery over the domain of one's self. A man
with taqwa is like an expert horseman riding a well-trained horse and
who with complete mastery and control drives his tractable steed in the
direction of his choice.

Certainly the taqwa of God assists His awliya (friends) in abstaining
from unlawful deeds and instils His fear into their hearts. As a result,
their nights are passed in wakefulness and their days in thirst [on
account of fasting].[^4]

Here 'Ali ('a) makes it clear that taqwa is something which
automatically leads to abstention from unlawful actions and to the fear
of God, which are its necessary effects. Therefore, according to this
view, taqwa is neither itself abstinence nor fear of God; rather, it is
a sacred spiritual faculty of which these two are only consequences:

For indeed, today taqwa is a shield and a safeguard, and tomorrow (i.e.
in the Hereafter) it shall be the path to Paradise.

[^5]

In khutbah 157, taqwa is compared to an invincible fortress built on
heights which the enemy has no power to infiltrate. Throughout, the
emphasis of the Imam ('a) lies on the spiritual and psychological aspect
of taqwa and its effects upon human spirit involving the emergence of a
dislike for sin and corruption and an inclination towards piety, purity,
and virtue.

Further illustrations of this view can be cited from the Nahj
al-balaghah, but it seems that the above quotations are sufficient.


