Taqwa Is Immunity Not Restraint
===============================

We have already mentioned some of the various elements found in the
spiritual advices (mawa'iz) of the Nahj al-balaghah. We began with taqwa
and saw that taqwa, from the viewpoint of the Nahj al-balaghah, is a
sublime spiritual faculty which is the cause of certain attractions and
repulsions; i.e. attraction towards edifying spiritual values and
repulsion towards degrading materialistic vices. The Nahj al-balaghah
considers taqwa as a spiritual state that gives strength to human
personality and makes man the master of his own self.

**Taqwa as Immunity:**

The Nahj al-balaghah stresses that taqwa is for man a shield and a
shelter, not a chain or a prison. There are many who do not distinguish
between immunity and restraint, between security and confinement, and
promptly advocate the destruction of the sanctuary of taqwa in the name
of freedom and liberation from bonds and restraint.

That which is common between a sanctuary and a prison is the existence
of a barrier. Whereas the walls of a sanctuary avert dangers, the walls
of a prison hinder the inmates from realizing their inner capacities and
from benefiting from the bounties of life. 'Ali ('a) clarifies the
difference between the two, where he says:

Let it be known to you, O servants of God, that taqwa is a formidable
fortress, whereas impiety and corruption is a weak and indefensible
enclosure that does not safeguard its people, and does not offer any
protection to those who take refuge in it. Indeed, it is only with taqwa
that the tentacles of sins and misdeeds can be severed.

[^6]

'Ali ('a), in this sublime advice, compares sins and evil deeds which
are afflictions of the human soul to poisonous insects and reptiles, and
suggests that the faculty of taqwa is an effective defence against them.
In some of his discourses, he makes it clear that taqwa not only does
not entail restraint and restriction or is an impediment to freedom, but
on the other hand it is the source and fountainhead of all true
freedoms. In khutbah 230, he says:

Taqwa is the key to guidance, the provision for the next world, the
freedom from every kind of slavery, and the deliverance from every form
of destruction.

The message is clear. Taqwa gives man spiritual freedom and liberates
him from the chains of slavery and servitude to lusts and passions. It
releases him from the bonds of envy, lust, and anger, and this
expurgates society from all kinds of social bondages and servitudes. Men
who are not slaves of comfort, money, power, and glory, never surrender
to the various forms of bondage which plague the human society.

The Nahj al-balaghah deals with the theme of taqwa and its various
effects in many of its passages; but we don't consider it necessary to
discuss all of them here. Our main objective here is to discover the
meaning of taqwa from the point of view of the Nahj al-balaghah, so as
to unearth the reason for so much emphasis that this book places on this
concept.

Of the many effects of taqwa that have been pointed out, two are more
important than the rest: firstly, the development of insight and clarity
of vision; secondly, the capacity to solve problems and to weather
difficulties and crises. We have discussed this in detail elsewhere.[^7]
Moreover, a discussion of these effects of taqwa here will take us
beyond our present aim which is to clarify the true meaning of taqwa. It
will not be out of place to call attention to certain profound remarks
of the Nahj al-balaghah about the reciprocal relationship between the
human being and taqwa.

**A Reciprocal Commitment:**

In spite of the great emphasis laid by the Nahj al-balaghah on taqwa as
a kind of guarantee and immunity against sin and temptation, it should
be noticed that one must never neglect to safeguard and protect taqwa
itself. Taqwa guards man, and man must safeguard his taqwa. This, as we
shall presently explain, is not a vicious circle.

This reciprocal guarding of the one by the other is comparable to the
one between a person and his clothes. A man takes care of his clothes
and protects them from being spoiled or stolen, while the clothes in
turn guard him against heat or cold. In fact the Holy Quran speaks of
taqwa as a garment:

And the garment of taqwa -that is better. (7:26)

'Ali ('a), speaking about this relationship of mutual protection
between a person and his tawqa', says:

Turn your sleep into wakefulness by the means of taqwa and spend your
days in its company. Keep its consciousness alive in your hearts. With
it wash away your sins and cure your ailments... Beware, guard your
taqwa and place your self under its guard. [^8]

At another place in the same sermon, 'Ali ('a) says:

O God's servants, I advise you to cultivate the taqwa of God. Indeed it
is a right that God has over you and it is through it that you can have
any right over God. You should beseech God's help for guarding it and
seek its aid for [fulfilling your duty to] God.

[^9]

**Zuhd and Piety:**

Another spiritual motif conspicuous in the teachings of the Nahj
al-balaghah is zuhd, which after taqwa is the most recurring theme of
the book. 'Zuhd' means renunciation of the 'world', and very often we
encounter denunciation of the 'world', and invitation and exhortation to
renounce it. It appears to me that it forms one of the important themes
of the Nahj al-balaghah, which needs to be elucidated and explained in
the light of various aspects of 'Ali's approach.

We shall begin our discussion with the word 'zuhd' The words 'zuhd' and
'raghbah' (attraction, desire), if mentioned without reference to their
objects, are opposite to each other. 'Zuhd' means indifference and
avoidance, and 'raghbah ' means attraction, inclination, and desire.

Indifference can be of two kinds: involuntary and cultivated. A person
is involuntarily indifferent towards a certain thing when by nature he
does not have any desire for it, as in the case of a sick person who
shows no desire either for food, or fruits, or anything else. Obviously,
this kind of indifference and abstinence has nothing to do with the
particular sense implied in 'zuhd '.

Another kind of indifference or abstinence is spiritual or
intellectual; that is, things which are natural objects of desire are
not considered the goal and objective by a human being in the course of
his struggle for perfection and felicity. The ultimate objective and
goal may be something above mundane aims and sensual pleasures; either
it may be to attain the sensuous pleasures of the Hereafter, or it may
not belong to this kind of things. It may be some high ethical and moral
ideal, like honour, dignity, nobility, liberty, or it may belong to the
spiritual sphere, like the remembrance of God, the love of God, and the
desire to acquire nearness to Him.

Accordingly the zahid (i.e. one who practises zuhd) is someone whose
interest transcends the sphere of material existence, and whose object
of aspiration lies beyond the kind of things we have mentioned above.
The indifference of a zahid originates in the sphere of his ideas,
ideals, and hopes, not in his physiological makeup.

There are two places where we come across the definition of 'zuhd' in
the Nahj al-balaghah. Both of them confirm the above interpretation of
zuhd. 'Ali ('a), in khutba 81, says:

O people! zuhd means curtailing of hopes, thanking God for His
blessings and bounties, and abstaining from that which He has
forbidden.

In hikmah 439, he says:

All zuhd is summarized in two sentences of the Quran: God, the Most
Exalted, says, ... So that you may not grieve for what escapes you, nor
rejoice in what has come to you. [57:23] Whoever does not grieve over
what he has lost and does not rejoice over what comes to him has
acquired zuhd in both of its aspects.

Obviously when something does not occupy a significant position amongst
one's objectives and ideals, or rather is not at all significant in the
scheme of things which matter to him, its gain and loss do not make the
slightest difference to him.

However, there are some points that need clarification. Is zuhd, or
detachment from the world, on which the Nahj al-balaghah, following the
Quranic teachings, puts so much emphasis, to be taken solely in an
ethical and spiritual sense? In other words, is zuhd purely a spiritual
state, or does it possess practical implications also? That is, is zuhd
spiritual abstinence only or is it accompanied by an abstinence in
practical life also? Assuming that zuhd is to be applied in practice, is
it limited to abstinence from unlawful things (muharramat), as pointed
out in khutba 81, or does it include something more, as exemplified by
the life of 'Ali ('a) and before him bythe life of the Holy Prophet
('s)?

Proceeding on the assumption that zuhd is not limited to-muharramat
only and that it covers permissible things (mubahat) as well, one may
ask: what is its underlying rationale and philosophy? What is the use of
an ascetic life that limits and confines life, rejecting its blessings
and bounties? Is zuhd to be practised at all times or only under certain
particular conditions? Is zuhd-in the sense of abstinence from even
permissible things-basically in agreement with other Islamic
teachings?

Apart from this, the basis of zuhd and renunciation of the world is the
pursuit of supra-material objectives and ideals. What are they from the
point of view of Islam? In particular, how does the Nahj al-balaghah
describe them?

All these questions regarding zuhd, renunciation, and curtailing of
hopes-themes which have so often been discussed in the Nahj
al-balaghah-need to be clarified. We shall discuss these questions in
the following pages and try to answer them.

**Islamic Zuhd and Christian Asceticism:**

In the last section we said that zuhd, as defined by the Nahj
al-balaghah, is a spiritual state that makes the zahid, on account of
his spiritual and other worldly aspirations, indifferent towards the
manifestations of material existence. This indifference is not confined
to his heart, intellect, and feelings and is not limited to his
conscience.

It also manifests itself on the practical level of life in the form of
simplicity, contentment, and obstention from hedonistic urges and love
of luxuries. A life of zuhd not only implies that a man should be free
from attachment to the material aspects of life, but he should also
practically abstain from indulgence in pleasures. The zuhhad are those
who in life are satisfied with the barest material necessities. 'Ali
('a) was a zahid, who was not only emotionally detached from the world
but also indifferent to its pleasures and enjoyments. In other words, he
had 'renounced' the 'world'.

**Two Questions:**

Here, inevitably, two questions shall arise in the reader's mind.
Firstly, as we know, Islam has opposed monasticism considering it to be
an innovation of Christian priests and monks.[^10] The Prophet ('s) has
stated in unequivocal terms that:

There is no monasticism (rahbaniyyah) in Islam.

Once when the Prophet ('s) was informed that some of his Companions had
retired into seclusion renouncing everything and devoting all their time
to worship and prayer in seclusion, he became very indignant. He told
them: "I, who am your prophet, am not such". In this way, the Prophet
('s) made them to understand that Islam is a religion of life and
society, not a monastic faith. Moreover, the comprehensive and
multifaceted teachings of Islam in social, economic, political and moral
spheres are based on reverence for life, not on its renunciation.

Apart from this, monasticism and renunciation of life are incompatible
with the world-view of Islam and its optimistic outlook about the
universe and creation. Unlike some other philosophies and creeds, Islam
does not view the world and life in society with pessimism. It does not
divide all creation into ugly and beautiful, black and white, good and
evil, proper and improper, right and wrong. Now the second question may
be stated in these words: "Aside from the fact that asceticism is the
same as monasticism-which are both incompatible with the Islamic
spirit-what is the philosophy underlying zuhd ?

Moreover, why should men be urged to practise zuhd? Why should man,
seeing the limitless bounties of God and good things of life around him,
be called upon to pass by the side of this delightful stream
indifferently and without so much as wetting his feet? Are the ascetic
teachings found in Islam, on this basis, later innovations (bid'ah)
introduced into Islam from other creeds like Christianity and Buddhism?
And if this is correct, how are we to explain and interpret the
teachings of the Nahj al-balaghah? How can we explain the indubitable
details known about the Prophet's life and that of 'Ali ('a)?

The answer is that Islamic zuhd is different from Christian asceticism
or monasticism. Asceticism is retreat from people and society and
seclusion for the purpose of worship. According to it, the life and
works of the world are separate from the works of the Here-after and the
one is alien to the other. One should, of necessity, choose either one
of the two. One should either devote oneself to worship of God which
shall bear fruits in the Hereafter, or take up the life of the world and
benefit from its immediate pleasures. Accordingly, monasticism is
opposed to life and social relationships. It requires with-drawal from
people and negation of responsibility and commitment towards them.

On the other hand, zuhd in Islam, though it requires a simple and
unaffected life-style and is based on abstention from luxuries and love
of comforts and pleasures, operates in the very midst of life and social
relations and is sociable. It draws inspiration, and proceeds, from the
goal of better fulfilment of social responsibilities and duties.

The conception of zuhd in Islam is not something that would lead to
asceticism, because a sharp distinction between this world and the next
is nowhere drawn. From the viewpoint of Islam, this world and the next
are not separable, not alien to each other. The relation of this world
to the other is similar to that between the inward and outward sides of
a single reality. They are like the warp and woof of a single fabric.
They are to each other as the soul to the body. Their relation-ship can
be assumed to be something midway between unity and duality. The works
of this world and those of the next are interrelated similarly.

Their difference is that of quality, without being essential.
Accordingly, that which is harmful for the other world is also to one's
detriment in the present world, and everything which is beneficial for
the summum bonum of life in this world is also beneficial for life in
the next world.

Therefore, if a certain work which is in accordance with the higher
interests of life in this world is performed with motives that are
devoid of the higher, supra-material, and transcendental elements, that
work would be considered totally this-worldly and would not, as the
Quran tells us, elevate man in his ascent towards God. However, if a
work or action is motivated by sublime aims and intentions and is
executed with a higher vision that transcends the narrow limits of
worldly life, the same work and action is considered 'other-worldly.'

The Islamic zuhd, as we said, is grounded in the very context and
stream of life and gives a peculiar quality to living by emphasizing
certain values in life. As affirmed by the Islamic texts, zuhd in Islam
is based on three essential principles of the Islamic world-outlook.

**The Three Essential Principles:**

1. Enjoyments derived from the physical, material, and natural means of
life are not sufficient for man's happiness and felicity. A series of
spiritual needs are inbuilt in the human nature, without whose
satisfaction the enjoyment provided by material means of life is not
enough to make man truly happy.

2. The individual's felicity and happiness is not separable from that
of society. Since man is emotionally bound to his society, and carries
within him a sense of responsibility towards it, his individual
happiness cannot be independent of the prosperity and peace of his
fellow men.

3. The soul, despite its fusion and a kind of unity with the body, has
a reality of its own. It is a principle in addition to the body which
constitutes another principle in itself. The soul is an independent
source of pleasure and pain. Like the body, or rather even more than it,
it stands in need of nourishment, training, growth, and development. The
soul, however, cannot dispense with the health and vigour of the body.

At the same time, it is undeniable that total indulgence in physical
pleasures and complete immersion into the delights of sensual
experiences does not leave any opportunity for realizing the soul's
unlimited possibilities. Therefore, there exists a kind of
incompatibility between physical enjoyment and spiritual satisfaction.
This is especially true if the attention and attachment to physical
needs were carried to the very extreme of total immersion and
absorption.

It is not true that all sorrow and grief are related to the soul and
that all pleasures are derived from the body. In fact, the spiritual
pleasures are much profounder, purer, and lasting than bodily pleasures.
To sum up, one-sided attention to physical pleasures and material
enjoyments finally results in compromising the total human happiness.
Therefore, if we want to make our lives happy, rich, pure, majestic,
attractive, and beautiful, we cannot afford to ignore the spiritual
aspects of our being.

With due attention to these principles, the meaning of zuhd in Islam
becomes clear. The knowledge of these principles allows us to understand
why Islam rejects monasticism but welcomes a form of asceticism which is
rooted in the very heart of life and in the context of social existence.
We shall explain the meaning of zuhd in Islamic texts on the basis of
these three principles.

**The Zahid and the Monk:**

We said that Islam encourages zuhd but condemns monasticism. Both the
zahid and the ascetic monk seek abstinence from pleasures and
enjoyments. But the monk evades life in society and the
respon-sibilities and the duties it entails, regarding them as the low
and mean facets of worldly existence, and takes refuge in mountains or
monasteries. On the other hand, the zahid accepts society with its
norms, ideals, duties, and commitments. Both the zahid and the monk are
otherworldly,

but the zahid is a social otherworldly. Also their attitudes to
abstinence from pleasures are not identical; the monk disdains hygiene
and cleanliness and derides married life and procreation. The zahid, on
the contrary, considers hygiene and cleanliness, matrimony and
parenthood to be a part of his duties. Both the zahid and the monk are
ascetics, but whereas the 'world' renounced by the zahid is indulgence
and immersion in pleasures, luxuries, and comforts (he rejects the
attitude which considers them to be life's ultimate goal and
objective),

the 'world' renounced by the monk includes life's work and activity,
and the duty and responsibility which go with social life. That is why
the zahid's zuhd operates in the midst of social life, and is,
therefore, not only compatible with social responsibility and commitment
but is moreover a very effective means of discharging them.

The difference between the zahid and the monk arises from two different
world-outlooks. From the viewpoint of the monk, this world and the next
are two different spheres, separate from and unrelated to each other. To
him, happiness in this world is not only independent of happiness in the
next but is incompatible with it.

He considers the two forms of happiness as irreconcilable
contradictories. Naturally, that which leads to felicity and happiness
in this world is considered different from the works and deeds which
lead to success in the Hereafter. In other words, the means of acquiring
happiness in this world and the next are regarded as being incompatible
and contradictory. It is imagined that a single work and action cannot
simultaneously be a means for acquiring happiness in both the worlds.

But in the world-view of the zahid, the world and the Hereafter are
interconnected. The world is a preamble to the Hereafter. It is a farm
of which the Hereafter is the harvest. From the zahid's viewpoint, that
which gives order, security, uprightness, prosperity, and flourish to
life is application of other-worldly criteria to the life of this
world.

The essence of felicity and happiness in the other world lies in
successful accomplishment of commitments and responsibilities of this
world, performed with faith, piety, purity, and taqwa.

In truth, the zahid's concept of zuhd and the monk's rationale for his
asceticism are incompatible and contradictory to each other. Basically,
monasticism is a deviation introduced by men into the teachings of
prophets, due to ignorance or vested interests. Now we shall explain the
philosophy of zuhd in the light of the teachings of the Islamic texts.

**Zuhd and Altruism:**

One of the ingredients of zuhd is altruism. Ithar (altruism) and
atharah (egoism) are derived from the same root. Atharah means giving
precedence to one's interests over those of others. In other words it
implies monopolizing everything for oneself and depriving others. But
Ithar means preferring others over oneself and bearing hardship for the
comfort and good of others.

The zahid, by virtue of his simple, humble, and content living, is hard
upon himself so that others may live in ease. He sacrifices for the sake
of the needy because with his sensitive heart which feels the pains of
others he can relish the world's bounties only when there does not exist
a single man oppressed by need. He derives greater satisfaction by
feeding and clothing others and working for their ease than if he did
those things for himself. He endures deprivation, hunger, and pain, so
that others may be well fed and live without hardships.

Ithar represents the most magestic and sublime manifestation of human
greatness, and only very great human beings climb to its noble
heights.

The Holy Quran refers to the episode of the self-sacrifice of 'Ali ('a)
and his honoured family in the glorious verses of the Surat Hal ata.
'Ali, Fatimah, and their sons once gave away whatever they had-which was
no more than a few loaves of bread-to the poor for the sake of God, and
despite their own distress. That is why this story circulated among the
angels and a verse of the Quran was revealed in the praise of their
act.

Once when the Holy Prophet ('s) came to visit Hadrat al-Zahra' ('s),
observing that his daughter had put on a silver bracelet and hung a new
curtain on the door, signs of unease appeared upon his face. Al-Zahra'
('a) was quick to discern the cause of her father's reaction. When the
Prophet ('s) left, without losing time, she took out her bracelet and
removing the curtain from the door, sent them to be carried to the
Prophet ('s) so that he might give them to the needy. When al-Zahra's
messenger brought them to the Prophet ('s) he looked at them with
amazement. He was glad that his daughter had taken the hint and foregone
her simplest luxuries for the benefit of others.

'The neighbours first', was the maxim in the household of 'Ali ('a) and
Fatimah ('a). In khutbah 193, which describes the qualities of the
pious, 'Ali ('a) says:

The man of [taqwa] subjects his own self to hardships so that the
people may live in comfort.

The Holy Quran describes the Ansar (the Helpers), who in spite of their
poverty welcomed the Muhajirun (the Emigrants) as their own brethren,
giving them preference over their own selves, in these words:

They love whosoever has migrated to them, not finiding in their breasts
any need for what they have been given, and prefer others above
themselves, even though poverty be their lot ... (59:9)

Obviously, the altruistic ingredient of zuhd comes into play only under
certain conditions. In an affluent society, altruism is less frequently
required. But in conditions where poverty and deprivation are
prevalent-as in the society of al-Madinah during the Prophet's time-its
need is greater. This is one of the secrets of the apparent difference
of the life-styles of 'Ali ('a) and the Holy Prophet ('s) with the rest
of the Imams ('a).

In any case, zuhd with its underlying altruistic motives has nothing in
common with monasticism and escape from society; instead it is a product
of man's gregarious instincts and a manifestation of his noblest
feelings, which reinforce the social bonds between fellow human
beings.

**Sympathy and Kindness:**

The sympathy and the willingness to share the suffering of the needy
and the deprived is another ingredient of zuhd. When the destitute
witness the luxuries and comforts of the richer classes, their anguish
is multiplied. To the hardships of poverty and destitution is added the
stinging feeling of deprivation and backwardness in relation to
others.

Man, by nature, cannot tolerate to remain a silent spectator while
others who have no merit over him eat, drink, enjoy and relish freely at
the cost of his deprivation. When society is divided into haves and
have-nots, the man of God considers himself responsible. In the first
place, as Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) says, he should strive to change the
situation which permits the gluttony of the rich oppressor and the
hunger of the oppressed, in accordance with the covenant of God with the
learned men of the Ummah.

[^11] In the second place, he strives to ameliorate the state of affairs
through altruism and self-sacrifice, by sharing whatever he possesses
with the needy and the deprived. But when he sees that the situation has
deteriorated beyond reparation and it is practically impossible to
alleviate the misery of the poor through sympathy, he practically shares
their deprivation and tries to soothe their wounded hearts by adopting a
life-style similar to that of the poor.

Sympathy with others and sharing their suffering is of essential
importance especially in the case of the leaders of the Ummah on whom
all eyes are fixed. 'Ali ('a), more than at any other time, lived a
severely ascetic life during the days of his caliphate. He used to
say:

Indeed God has made it obligatory for just leaders that they should
maintain themselves at the level of the poor class so that they do not
despair of their distress.[^12]

Should I be content with being called 'Amir al-Mu'minin' while refusing
to share the adversities of the times with the people? Or should I be an
example to them in the distress of life?[^13]

In the same letter (to 'Uthman ibn Hunayf) he says:

It is absolutely out of question that my desires should overpower me
and my greed should lead me to relish choicest foods while in the Hijaz
and Yamamah there may be some people who despair of even a single loaf
of bread and who do not get a full meal. Shall I lie with a satiated
belly while around me are those whose stomachs are hungry and whose
livers are burning?

[^14]

At the same time, 'Ali ('a) would reproach anyone else for practising
the same kind of asceticism in life. When faced with their objection as
to why he himself practised it, he would reply, "I am not like you. The
leaders have a different duty." This approach of 'Ali ('a) can be
observed in the conversation with 'Asim ibn Ziyad al-Harith.

[^15]

In volume IX of the Bihar al-'anwar, it has been related from al-Kafi
that Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) said:

God has appointed me the leader of the people and made it my duty to
adopt a way of living, in food and clothing, on a par with the poorest
classes of society, so that, on the one hand, it may soothe the distress
of the poor and, on the other, restrain the rich from revolting.

[^16]

An incident is related from the life of the great faqih Wahid
Behbahani, may God be pleased with him. One day he observed one of his
daughters-in-law wearing a garment made of a fabric usually worn by
women of rich families of those days. He reproached his son (the late
Aqa Muhammad Isma'il, the lady's husband) in that regard. The son
recited this verse of the Quran in reply to his father's remarks:

Say: 'Who has forbidden the ornament of God which He has brought forth
for His servants, and the good things of His providing? (7:32)

The father said: "I don't say that putting on good dress, eating good
food, and making use of God's bounties is forbidden. Not at all. Such
restrictions do not exist in Islam. However, there is one thing to be
remembered. We are a family charged with the duty of the religious
leadership of Muslims and have special responsibilities. When the people
of poor families see the rich live luxuriously, their frustration is
aggravated. Their only consolation is that at least the 'Aqa's family'
lives like they do. Now if we too adopt the life-styles of the rich,
that will deprive them of their only consolation. However, we cannot
practically change the present social condition, but let us not grudge
at least this much of sympathy."

As can be clearly seen, zuhd, which derives motivation from sympathy
and readiness to share the sufferings of others, has nothing common with
monastic asceticism. It is not based on escapism from society. The
Islamic conception of zuhd is a means of alleviating the sufferings of
society.


