Zuhd and Freedom
================

Another ingredient of zuhd is love of freedom and independence. The
union between zuhd and freedom is as primordial as it is indissoluble.

The dictates of need and exigency are the criteria of opportunists,
whereas independence from want is characteristic of free men. The
deepest aspiration of the free men unattached to the world is
unencumbrance, buoyancy, absence of hindrance, and freedom of
movement.

As a result they adopt zuhd and contentment so as to reduce their wants
to a minimum, liberating their selves from the bondage of need, of
things and persons.

The life of a human being, like that of any other animal, requires a
series of natural and indispensable necessities, like air, shelter,
bread, water, and clothing. Man cannot free himself entirely from
attachment to such needs and other things such as light and heat so as
to make himself, in philosophical terminology, "self-sustaining"
(muktafi bidhatih).

However, there are a series of other wants which are not necessary and
natural, but are imposed upon one in the course of one's life either by
oneself, or by social and historical factors beyond his control, which
nevertheless set limits upon his freedom. Such constraints are not very
dangerous as long as they are not transformed into inner needs, such as
certain political constraints and compulsions. The most dangerous of
compulsions are those which emerge as inner needs from within one's own
self and shackle him.

The mechanism of these needs, which lead to inner weakness, impotence,
and defeat, operates in such a way that when one turns to luxuries and
comforts in order to add charm, delight, and glamour to one's life so as
to feel more secure and strong in order to derive greater gratification
from life, one is impelled to possess more and more things. In the
course of time one gets gradually accustomed to and engrossed in the
means of one's comfort, luxury, and power.

These habits gradually result in deeper attachment to and love for
those things, and he is bound to them with invisible bonds, thus
becoming helpless and impotent in front of them. That is, the same thing
which had once added charm and delight to his life later deprives his
personality of its vigour, and the same thing which once made him feel
powerful against nature now turns him into a helpless slave without a
will of his own.

Man's inclination towards zuhd is rooted in his love of freedom. By
nature he is disposed toward possession of things and their
exploitation; but when he realizes that the things, to the very extent
they make him outwardly powerful and successful, inwardly transform him
into a weakling without will-power and a slave, he rebels against this
slavery. This rebellion of man is what we call zuhd.

Our poets and sages have spoken a lot about freedom and liberation.
Hafiz calls himself 'the slave of the magnanimity of him who is free of
everything under the blue sky that carries any taint of attachment.'
Among the trees, he admires the cypress which to him seems 'free of all
woes.' What those great men meant by 'freedom' is freedom from
attachment, freedom from being possessed, bewitched, and captivated by
anything.

But freedom implies something greater than being devoid of attachments.
The ties which make a man weak, helpless, dependent, and impotent are
not only those which originate in the heart or emotional attachments; to
these must be added the various bodily, physical and psychological
conditionings and artificial appendages that are first acquired for
adding charm and glory to life and for satisfaction of the lust for
power and strength, later growing into a form of addiction or rather
becoming a second nature. These, while they may not involve one's
emotional attachments, or may even be regarded by one as reprehensible,
should be counted as even stronger means of human servitude and which
may bring greater even degradation than emotional attachments.

Take the example of an enlightened 'arif with a heart free of worldly
attachments, for whom, nevertheless, addiction to tea, tobacco or opium
has become a second nature, or for whom abstention from foods to which
he is accustomed may endanger his life. Can such a man lead a free
existence?

Liberty from attachments is a necessary condition of freedom, but it is
not sufficient in itself. Accustoming oneself to a minimum of the
niceties of life and abstention from affluent living is another
condition of freedom.

The first thing to strike Abu Sa'id al-Khudri, one of the honoured
Companions, when describing the station of the Holy Prophet ('s), is:

The Prophet of God, may peace be upon him and his Household, could
manage with the minimum necessities of life.

Is it a merit to be able to do with a minimum of means? If we take only
the economic aspect into view, we should say that the Prophet's level of
consumption was quite low. In this respect, therefore, the answer would
be: "No, not at all; it is not a significant merit." But if viewed from
a spiritual viewpoint, that is when examined by the criterion of freedom
from worldly bondages, we have to admit that it is a great merit indeed.
Because it is only by acquisition of this merit that a human being can
live with any measure of unfettered freedom and unimpeded mobility, and
participate in the incessant struggle of life with agility and vigour.

This matter is not restricted to habits involving the individual;
binding oneself to social habits and customs, to modes and manners of
dealing with people, the mesh of social connections and gatherings,
adherence to styles and fashions in dress and demeanour-these and the
like of these encumber life and deprive it of dynamism Freedom of
movement in the arena of life is like swimming; lesser the interference
and incumbrance for the swimmer, the greater is his ability to move
around in water. Too many attachments will not only deprive him of his
mobility but bring the danger of drowning.

Athir al-Din Akhsikati (d. 577 or 579/1181 or 1183) says:

To cross the river of life, shed your robes;
Nakedness is a condition of keeping afloat.

Farrukhi Yazdi says:

Of nakedness the sage does not complain,
A sword of good steel would not rust without a sheath.

Baba Tahir has a ruba'i which though intended for some other purpose is
nevertheless relevant here:

O heart, thy path is better when covered with thorns;
Thy track is better when stretched on heavens high;
Nay, if thou can strip the skin off thine flesh,
Do it, for the lighter thy burden the better it be.

Sa'di, too, relates a relevant fable in the chapter 7 of his Gulistan,
although it also aims at some other purpose:

I saw a rich mans son squatting by the side of his father's grave, and
bragging thus before a darwish's son: 'My father's tomb is constructed
of rare stones. Inside, it is paved with marble with enlaid turquois.
And look at the one of your father's! An unbaked brick or two was
fetched, on which a handful of earth was thrown.'

The sage's son heard these remarks and replied: 'Yet before your father
is able to budge under the pile of those stones, my father would have
reached the paradise itself.'

These are allegories underlining the significance of lightness and
freedom from bondages, which is the essential condition for dynamism,
nobility, and nimbleness. Leaps, movements, and struggles were achieved
by individuals who were practically freer of bondages and attachments;
that is, in some sense they were zahids.

Gandhi, with his ascetic mode of life, brought the British imperialism
to its knees. Ya'qub Layth Saffar, in his own words, 'did not set aside
his diet of bread and onions until he became a terror for the caliph.'
In our own times, the Vietcongs were such an example. Their surprising
power of resistance was drawn from what in Islamic idiom has been called
'lightness of provisions'. A Vietcong could sustain for days in his
shelter with a handful of rice and continue his battle with the enemy.

Which leader, religious or political, living in luxury and comfort has
brought about drastic upheavals in world history? Which monarch who
founded a dynasty, having transferred power from another family to his
own, has been a lover of luxuries and comforts?

'Ali ibn Abi Talib, may peace be upon him, was the freest of the
world's free men. He was a free man in the complete sense of the word,
because he was a zahid in the profoundest sense of the word. 'Ali ('a),
in the Nahj al-balaghah, lays great emphasis on renunciation of worldly
pleasures and comforts as a means of liberation. In one of the hikam
(aphorisms), he says:

Greed is everlasting slavery.

[^17]

In a sermon he describes the zuhd of Jesus ('a), the son of Mary, in
these words:

He was free of any abasing greed.

[^18]

At another place he says:

The world is a place of transit, not a place to abide. Its people fall
into two categories: those who sell away their souls into slavery, and
those who ransom their souls and liberate them.

[^19]

In a letter to 'Uthman ibn Hunayf, 'Ali ('a) is more explicit than
elsewhere. Towards the end of the letter, addressing the world and its
pleasures, he reveals to us the philosophy of zuhd and the secrets of
renunciation:

O world! Get away from me! I have thrown thy reins on thy shoulders,
have freed myself from thy claws, and released myself from thy snares
.... Go, get thee away! By God, I shall not surrender to thee so that
thou should abase me! I shall not follow thee tractably that thou may
control me and lead me wherever thou willeth.

Yes. 'Ali's zuhd is a rebellion against abasement and indignity on
account of pleasures. It is a rebellion against human weakness and
impotence before the tyranny of desires. It is a defiance of servitude
to the world and obsequiousness before its charms.

**Zuhd And Spirituality:

Zuhd, Love, and Worship:**

Another fountainhead of zuhd and renunciation of hedonism is the
aspiration to avail of spiritual bounties. Presently we do not intend to
undertake any argument to the effect that man and the universe possess
an undeniable spiritual aspect. It is another story by itself. It is
evident that from a materialistic outlook of the world, the rejection of
hedonism, materialism, and love of money and wealth as a prerequisite
for acquisition of spiritual virtues is devoid of any meaning.

We have, here, nothing to say about the followers of materialism as a
school of thought. At present, we address only those who have
experienced the aroma of spirituality. For, anybody who has smelled its
fragrance knows that as long as one does not liberate oneself from the
bondage of desire, as long as the infant soul is not weaned away from
the breasts of nature, and as long as the material aspects of life are
seen as not being the ultimate end of life and are seen as means, the
domain of the heart is not ready for the emergence of chaste emotions,
majestic thoughts, and angelic feelings. That is why, it is said, that
zuhd is the essential condition for exuberance of gnosis and is
inalienably linked with it.

The worship of God, in its real sense, that is, ardour of love and zeal
of devotion and service in the way of God, His constant presence in
thoughts and His remembrance, the sense of delight and ecstasy in His
adoration and worship-it is not at all compatible with self-adoration,
hedonist attitude, and being captured by the glamour and charm of
material things.

The need of zuhd is not characteristic solely of the worship of God;
rather, every kind of love and adoration, whether it pertains to one's
country, creed, conviction, or something else, calls for some kind of
zuhd and indifference towards material aspects of life.

It is characteristic of love and adoration, as opposed to knowledge,
science or philosophy, that they have to deal with the heart and as such
do not tolerate any rivals. Nothing prevents a scientist or a
philosopher who is enslaved to money and wealth from devoting and
concentrating his intellectual powers, when necessary, on the study of
the problems of philosophy, logic, physics, or mathematics.

But it is not possible, at the same time, that his heart should be full
to the brim with love, especially love of a spiritual nature, such as
for humanity, or his religion and creed. Certainly, it cannot burn with
the light of Divine love nor can it receive an enlightenment or
inspiration of a Divine sort. Consequently, the essential condition for
reception of spiritual grace and realization of authentic humanhood is
purging the temple of the heart from every trace of materialistic
attachments and exterminating from the Ka'bah of the heart all the idols
of gold and silver and destroying them.

As we have said before, we should not be led to misinterpret freedom
from the bondage of gold and silver, and indifference towards what these
metals can be exchanged for, as monastic asceticism which is an attempt
to evade responsibility and commitment. Instead, it is only in the light
of such zuhd that responsibility and commitment reacquire their real
significance and are no longer empty words without content and hollow
claims. The personality of 'Ali, upon whom be peace, is a glorious
example of it. In him zuhd and commitment were combined together. While
he was a zahid who had renounced the world, at the same time, he had a
heart that was most sensitive to the demands of social responsibility.
On the one hand he used to say:

What has 'Ali to do with perishable niceties and short-lived
pleasures.

[^20]

On the other hand, a small injustice or the sight of someone in
distress was enough to snatch sleep from his eyes at nights. He was
ready to go to bed with an empty stomach lest someone in his dominion
might have remained hungry:

Shall I stuff my belly with delicious foods while in the Hijaz and
Yamamah there may be people who have no hope of getting a loaf of bread
or a full meal?

[^21]

There was a direct relation between that zuhd of his and this
sensitiveness. Since 'Ali ('a) was a zahid, indifferent to the world and
unselfish, with a heart that overflowed with the exuberance of the love
of God, he looked at the world, from the minutest particle to the
greatest star, as a unit entrusted with responsibility and duty. That is
why he was so sensitive towards the matters of social rights. Had he
been a hedonist devoted to his own interests, he would never have been
the responsible and committed person that he was.

The Islamic traditions are eloquent in regard to this philosophy of
zuhd and the Nahj al-balaghah lays particular emphasis upon it. In a
hadith, it is related from al-Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq ('a) that he said:

All hearts that harbour doubt or entertain shirk shall be inauthentic;
that is why they adopted zuhd so that hearts may be emptied and made
ready for the Hereafter. [^23]

As can be seen from this tradition, every kind of hedonism and
attachment to pleasures is considered shirk and contrary to the worship
of the One God. Mawlana (Rumi) describes the zuhd of the 'arif in these
words:

Zuhd means taking pains while sowing; Mystic knowledge (ma'rifah) is
(care during) its cultivation; The 'arif is the soul of the Law and the
spirit of taqwa; For mystic knowledge is the fruit of the labours of
zuhd.

Abu 'Ali Ibn Sina, in the ninth namat of his al-'Isharat, which he
devotes to the description of various stations of the mystics (maqamat
al-'arifin), differentiates between the zuhd of the 'arif and that of
the non-'arif. He writes:

The zahids who have no knowledge of the philosophy of zuhd, make a
certain deal in their imagination: they barter the goods of the world
for the goods of the Hereafter. They forego the enjoyments of the world
in order that they may enjoy the pleasures of the Hereafter. In other
words, they abstain here in order to indulge there. But an aware zahid,
acquainted with the philosophy of zuhd, practises it because of his
unwillingness to engage his inner self with anything other than God.
Such a man, out of his self-respect, regards anything other than God to
be unworthy of attention and servitude.

In another section of the same book where he discusses spiritual
discipline, Ibn Sina says:

This training has three ends in view. First, removal of impediments
from the path towards God; second, subjugation of the earnal self
(al-nafs al-'ammarah) to the contented self (al-nafs al-mutma'innah),
third, refinement of the inward (batin).

Then he proceeds to mention the effective means of realization of these
three ends. He tells us that true zuhd helps in achieving the first of
these objectives, that is, removal of impediments, the non-God, from the
way.

The Contradiction Between the World and the Hereafter:

The problem of the conflict between the world and the Hereafter and the
contradiction between them as two opposite poles, such as the north and
the south, which are such that proximity to the one means remoteness
from the other-is related to the world of human heart, conscience, human
attachment, love and worship. God has not given two hearts to man:

God has not assigned to any man two hearts within his breast. (33:4)

With one heart one cannot choose two beloveds. That is why once when
questioned about his old and worn-out clothes, 'Ali ('a) replied:

These make the heart humble, subdue the self, and induce the believers
to follow it as an example.

[^23]

That is, those who have no new clothes to wear are not ashamed to put
on old and worn-out dress. They no longer feel humiliation on their
account for they see that their leader himself hasn't put on any better.
Then 'Ali ('a) goes on to add that the world and the Hereafter are like
two irreconcilable enemies. They are two divergent paths. Anyone who
loves the world and chooses its bondage is, by nature, led to loathe the
Hereafter and detest everything that is related to it. The world and the
Hereafter are like the east and the west, the north and the south.
Anyone who approaches the one gets farther from the other. They are like
two wives.

In one of his epistles, he writes:

I swear by God that, God willing, I shall so discipline my own self
that it would rejoice to have a single loaf of bread for eating and be
content with only salt to season it. (In prayer) I shall empty my eyes
of tears until they become like dried up springs. The cattle fill their
stomachs on the pasture and lie down to repose. The goats graze, devour
green herbs, and enter their enclosures. Should 'Ali in a similar manner
swallow whatever he ean lay his hands on and lie down to doze'?
Congratulations! For, if he does that' after long years he has chosen to
follow the wild grazing animals and the cattle led out to pasture.

[^24]

Then he goes on to add:

Happy is the man who fulfils his duties to God and overcomes hardships
like a mill grinding the grain, who allows himself no sleep at nights
and when it overpowers him lies down on the ground with his hand for a
pillow. He is accompanied by those who keep their eyes awake in fear of
the Day of Judgement, whose bodies are ever away from their beds, whose
lips constantly hum in the Lord's remembrance, whose sins have been
erased by prolonged supplications for forgiveness. They are the party of
Allah; why surely Allah's party-they are the prosperers. (58:22)

[^25]

The two passages quoted above completely illustrate the relation-ship
between zuhd and spirituality. To sum up, one has to choose one of the
two paths; either to drink, eat, browse and hanker after sensual
pleasures in utter indifference to the secrets of the spirit, to avoid
the agonies of love and its tears, to speak not of enlightenment and
progress, not to take a step beyond the threshold of bestiality; or to
resolve on a journey into the valley of authentic humanhood, towards the
effulgence and-exuberance of Divine grace which descends upon chaste
hearts and enlightened souls.

Zuhd: Minimum of Intake for Maximum Output:

Some days ago I was in Isfahan on a visit for a few days. During it, in
a gathering of the learned, a discussion started about zuhd. The various
aspects of it were scrutinized in the light of the multifaceted
teachings of Islam. Everyone wanted to find a comprehensive and
articulate definition of zuhd. Among them a learned high school teacher,
[^27] who (I later came to know, that he was writing a treatise on the
subject, the manuscript of which he showed me later) suggested a
wonderfully eloquent definition of zuhd. He said:

Islamic zuhd is minimizing the intake and maximizing the output.

This definition fascinated me and I saw that it was in conformity with
my own earlier understanding and the conclusions that I have drawn in
the foregoing chapters. Here I, with the permission of that learned man,
making a little amendment in his definition, would say:

Zuhd in Islam means drawing a minimum of intake for the sake of
maximizing the output.

That is, there exists a relation between drawing as little as possible
of material benefits of life on the one hand and aiming at maximizing
one's output on the other. Human 'outputs', whether in the sphere of the
actualization of one's potentialities, whether on the level of emotion
and morality, or from the point of view of individuals role in social
co-operation and mutual help, or from the aspect of realizing spiritual
edification and refinement, all in all have a converse relationship to
his intake of material benefits.

It is a human characteristic that the greater one's enjoyment of
material benefits and indulgence in such things as pleasures, luxuries,
and affluence, the greater is one's weakness, indignity, impotence,
sterility, and impoverishment. Conversely, abstinence from indulgent and
extravagant enjoyment of nature-of course, within definite
limits-refines and purifies human nature and invigorates and strengthens
two of the highest of all human powers: thought and will .

It is true only of animals that greater benefit from the possibilities
provided by nature contributes to their animal development and
perfection. Even in animals it is not applicable when we consider what
is called the 'merit' desirable in a beast. For example, sheep and
cattle which are reared for obtaining greater amount of meat, milk, or
fleece should be given greater attention and care and fed well.

However, this is not true of a race horse. It is impossible for a
common stable horse to show any good performance in a race. The horse
which has to run and win races is given days or rather months of
training with a controlled diet until its body becomes lean and nimble,
shedding all its excessive fat so that it can acquire the desirable
agility and speed or the 'excellence' of which it is capable.

Zuhd is also an exercise and discipline for man. But it is the exercise
of the soul. Through zuhd the soul is disciplined; shedding all
excessive appendages, and becoming, as a result, light, agile, and
nimble, it takes an easy flight into the skies of spiritual merits.

Incidentally, 'Ali ('a) also describes taqwa and zuhd as 'exercise' and
practice. The word riyadah originally meant exercising horses intended
for racing. Physical exercise is also called riyadah. 'Ali ('a) says:

Indeed, as to my self, I shall exercise it and discipline it through
taqwa.

[^27]

What about plant life? Like animals that which may be, loosely
speaking, called the merit of a tree or shrub is its capacity to thrive
with a minimum amount of nourishment from nature. 'Ali ('a), also, makes
an allusion to this point in one of his letters to his governors. In
that letter, after describing his own ascetic life-style, characterized
by a minimum of consumption, 'Ali ('a) encourages him to emulate it. He
says:

I can already anticipate your criticism. Someone might say that if this
is what the son of Abu Talib eats then weakness should have made him
unfit for an encounter with the enemy's warriors. Remember the untended
tree that thrives in the harsh conditions of the desert-its wood is firm
and tough; even the fire lit from it is more enduring and fierce.

This law, which applies to all living things, is more effective in the
case of man because of the various characteristics special to him which
are summed up under the term 'human personality'.

[^28]

The word 'zuhd', despite its sublime human meaning, has suffered an
evil fate, and is fiercely denounced particularly in our own times.
Sometimes, the term is advertently or otherwise misinterpreted;
some-times it is equated with sanctimoniousness and show of piety; at
other times, it is considered equivalent to monasticism and ascetic
seclusion.

Everybody is free to coin terms of his own with any meaning of his own
choice. But no one has the right to condemn any concept or term by
imparting to it a wrong and misconceived meaning and sense. In its
system of ethics and education, Islam has used a certain term, zuhd. The
Nahj al-balaghah and the Islamic tradition are replete with it. Before
we make any judgement about zuhd in Islam, first, before everything, we
must understand its Islamic connotation. The meaning of zuhd in Islam is
what we have tried to explain, and the philosophy behind it is what we
have discussed in the light of Islamic texts. If anyone finds any fault
with this meaning and philosophy, let him inform me so that I too might
be benefited.

What school of thought and what kind of logic can justify monasticism?
What school of thought can recommend and justify the worship of money,
consumerism, love of goods, lust for position, or-to use an expression
which includes them all-worldliness? Is it possible for man to be the
slave and prisoner of material things-or in the words of Amir
al-Mu'minin 'Ali ('a), 'the slave of the world and the slave of him who
exercises control over it'-and yet speak of 'human personality'?

Here, it would not be out of place to cite the views of a Marxist
writer about the relation between love of money and human personality.
In a useful and concise book regarding capitalist and Marxist economies,
he points out the moral consequences of the power of money for society.
He writes:

The extraordinary power of 'gold' over our contemporary society is
something deeply detested by men of sensitive nature. Men in search of
truth have always expressed their strong aversion towards this filthy
metal, and consider it to be the main cause of corruption in
contemporary society. However, those little round pieces of a shining
yellow metal called 'gold' are really not to be blamed.

The power and domination of money as a general manifestation of power
and authority of things over man is the essential characteristic of a
disorderly economy based on barter and exchange. In the same way as the
uncivilized man of ancient times adored and worshipped idols made by his
own hands, the contemporary man also worships the product of his own
labour, and his life is overwhelmed by the power of things he has made
with his own hands. In order that the worship of consumer goods and the
worship of money, which is the filthiest form evolved of idolatry,

may be completely eradicated, the social causes which brought them into
existence should be eliminated and the society should be so organized
that the power and authority of the little coins of this yellow
brilliant metal would be thoroughly obliterated. In such an organization
of society, things will no more wield their present power over human
beings. On the other hand, man's power and predominance over things
shall be absolute and according to a preconceived scheme. Then worship
of money and things shall give their place to honour and reverence for
the human personality.

We agree with the author that the power of things over man, and in
particular the authority of money, is opposed to the demands of human
dignity and nobility, and is as condemnable as idolatry. However, we do
not agree with his suggested exclusive prescription for solution of this
problem.

Here we are not concerned with the question whether collective
ownership is preferable from a social or economic point of view.
Nevertheless, morally speaking, this suggestion, instead of redeeming
society's spirit of honesty, eliminates right away the very object of
honesty!

Man can reclaim his identity only by liberating himself from the power
of money and by bringing money under his own control. True human
personality can emerge when the danger of money and goods remains
possible without overcoming man, who is not ruled by them but rules
them. This kind of personality is what Islam calls zuhd.

In the educational system of Islam, man regains his personality without
the need to obliterate the right of property. Those who are trained in
the school of Islamic teachings are equipped with the power of zuhd.
They strip money and goods of their power and subjugate them to their
own authority.

**Notes:**

[^1] Nahj al-balaghah, Khutab, No. 51 pp. 88-89
[^2] Ibid., Khutab 16
[^3] Ibid.
[^4] Ibid., Khutab 114
[^5] Ibid., Khutab 191
[^6] Ibid., Khutab 157
[^7] See Guftar e mah, vol. I, the second speech
[^8] Ibid., Khutab 191
[^9] Ibid.,
[^10] Bihar al Anwar, vol. XV Bab al nahy an al rahbaniyyah wa al
siyahah. Rumi in the sixth part of his Mathnawi, refers to this
tradition in the story of the bird and the hunter.
[^11] This is a reference to to Khutab No. 3 p. 50
[^12] Ibid,. Khutab 209
[^13]Ibid., Khutab 45
[^14] Ibid.,
[^15] Ibid., Khutab 209
[^16] Bihar al-anwar (Tabriz)(Vol IX. p. 758)
[^17] Nahj al-balaghah, Hikam,No. 103
[^18] Ibid, Khutab, No. 160
[^19] Ibid, Khutab, No. 133
[^20] Ibid, Khutab, No. 224
[^21] Ibid, Kutub, No. 45
[^22] al Kulayni, al Kafi, vol. III p 194-5
[^23] Nahj al-balaghah, Hikam, No. 103
[^24] Ibid., Kutub, No. 45
[^25] Ibid., 420
[^26] The person referred here is Akbar Parwarish
[^27] Ibid., Kutub 45
[^28] Usul e Iqtisad e Nuhsin, "Shakl e arzish e pul".


