Introduction
============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُونَ لَوْلَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْهِ آيَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِ فَقُلْ
إِنَّمَا الْغَيْبُ لِلَّهِ فَانْتَظِرُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ مِنَ
الْمُنْتَظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: The unseen is only for Allah; therefore wait – surely I too,
with you am of those who wait.” (20:Surah Yunus 10)***

Almost twelve centuries have now passed from the sorrowful occultation
of the Imam of the age (a.t.f.s.). Undoubtedly, this prolonged period
shall continue until his advent. As certified by Imam Ridha (a.s.), the
story of reappearance is like the story of the Day of Judgement since
nobody save Allah is aware of its timing.[^1]

Besides, it’s an onerous affair for the inhabitants of the earth and
heavens that would not occur but all at once. Thus, inquiring into the
timing of Imam’s advent is a futile task while awaiting his advent is
our duty. Imam Javad (a.s.) says:

*“Verily, the Qaem from us is the very Mahdi; that which is obligatory
during his occultation is to await his coming and during his advent to
obey his commands.”*[^2]

Awaiting (Entezar) means to have hope and expectation by heart of Imam’s
advent, which springs from recognition and faith in his advent. Such an
act carries numerous spiritual rewards and values.[^3] Like other forms
of worship, awaiting (Entezar) enjoys practical qualitative dimensions
such that our divine leaders have laid great emphasis and reckoned its
observance as a duty and responsibility for the people during the period
of occultation.

The writings that you have at hand are a selection of those very divine
duties and responsibilities, which we have compiled for recalling and
reminding ourselves about them. Of course, numerous scholars and
researchers have expressed this matter very beautifully and eloquently,
thus leaving behind invaluable effects to their credit.

We hope every one of us ponders upon the duties that we have before the
Imam of the age (a.s.) and by acting upon them we attract his holy grace
and favour and have a share, though a little, in preparing the ground
for Imam’s advent.

**Ali Akbar Thalafi,**  
**28 Jamadi al-Thani 1417**

[^1]: Kamaluddin; 2/373

[^2]: Kamaluddin; 2/377

[^3]: Refer to Kamaluddin 2/644-647 & Nur-al Absar Fi
Fazilat-ul-Entezar/15-23.


