Questions for Evaluation
========================

1- Complete these phrases:

Imam............ (A.S) said: "The case of appearance of Imam Mahdi
(A.T.F.S.) is similar to the case of ……....... This is because except
for the Almighty God, nobody knows its time.

A) Imam Baqir (A.S), The Return

B) Imam Baqir (A.S), The resurrection

C) Imam Reza (A.S), The Return

D) Imam Reza (A.S), The Resurrection

2- According to Imam Javad (A.S) to wait for the appearance of Imam
Mahdi (A.S) is:

A) Very recommended

B) Recommended

C) Indispensable

D) It is enough just to remember Imam Mahdi (A.S)

3- The context of waiting for Imam az-Zaman (A.S) is derived from:

A) Duty and obligation

B) Knowledge and Belief in appearance of Imam Mahdi (A.S)  
 C) Our frequent problems

D) A request for solving problems

4- Which of the following books are written by H.E. Ali Akbar
Hamadani?  
 A) Responsibility of people during the time of Absence of Imam az-Zaman
(A.S)  
 B) Spiritual connection with the sacred threshold of Imam Mahdi (A.S)  
 C) Obligations of people during the time of Absence of Imam az-Zaman
(A.S)  
 D) Both items B and C

5- To which one of his followers did Imam Hasan Askari (A.S.) say that
the one who fails to recognize his son, then his death would be a death
of ignorance?  
 A) Hosein ibn Rouh  
 B) Mohammad Ibn Uthman  
 C) Uthman Ibn Said Amri  
 D) None

6- According to the witness of which one of the Immaculate Imams, Death
of ignorance, is the same as death in state of deviation?  
 A) Imam Sadiq (A.S)  
 B) Imam Hasan Askari (A.S)  
 C) The Prophet (S.A)  
 D) Imam Zaman (A.S)

7- Recognition of Imam az-Zaman (A.S) is important from two aspects.
These two aspects are:  
 A) Religion and beliefs.  
 B) Religion and practical  
 C) Genealogical and beliefs  
 D) Genealogical and descent

8- One of the important aspects of waiting for Imam az-Zaman is:  
 A) To act according to custom and rules  
 B) Believe in the appearance of Imam az-Zaman (A.S)  
 C) To Trust in Imam az-Zaman  
 D) To be a faithful Shia

9- According to Imam Sadeq (A.S), how should the people behave during
the time of occultation of Imam Zaman (A.S)?  
 A) Belief in Imam az-Zaman (A.S)  
 B) Faith in re-appearance of Imam az-Zaman (A.S.) and belief in God.  
 C) Faith in God and Belief in Resurrection  
 D) Belief in God and remaining steadfast in religion.

10- What is the responsibility of those who know the Imam az-Zaman (A.S)
righteously?  
 A) Full Trust  
 B) To introduce Him to other people  
 C) Real Awaiting  
 D) Try to see the Imam az-Zaman (A.S)

11- As told by Mirza Mahdi Esfahani to one of his students, what is the
first duty of the theologians (Ulama)?  
 A) To remember Imam az-Zaman (A.S)  
 B) To take action for the appearance of Imam az-Zaman (A.S)  
 C) To open the spiritual door of house of Ahl- ul- Bait toward the Shia
people  
 D) Giving shelter to the Shia people in the house

12- According to Imam Sadie (A.S), to serve Imam Mahdi (A.S) is
…………and…………....  
 A) Fast and Pray  
 B) The best pray and the most favorable obedience  
 C) The best Pray and Fast  
 D) The best worship, and most favorable obedience

13- About the verse "O you who believe! Be patient and excel in patience
and remain steadfast, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, that you
may be successful. (Aale-Imran (3)/200)", Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said that we
should have connection with:  
 A) Allah (S.W.T)  
 B) Imam Mahdi (A.S)  
 C) Imam Ali (A.S)  
 D) Prophet (S.A)

14- Imam Sadiq (A.S) said, “Every one of you, should prepare something
for the Emergence of our Qa'em (A.T.F.S.); even if it be  
 A) An arrow  
 B) A horse  
 C) Prayers  
 D) Fast

15- Which one of the Immaculate Imam has commanded us to pray for
hastening the appearance of Imam Mahdi (A.S)?  
 A) Amir al Momenin , Ali (A.S)  
 B) Imam Husain (A.S)  
 C) Imam Asr (A.S)  
 D) Imam Reza (A.S)

16- What has been the proposed solution of the Immaculate Imams for
solving our problems?  
 A) Resurrection  
 B) The return of Imams  
 C) Appearance of Imam Mahdi  
 D) To pray for acceleration of Appearance

17- According to Mirza Hossein Nouri, one of the obligations of the Shia
(followers of Ahl- ul- Bait) people is:  
 A) To wait for Appearance  
 B) To wait and pray for safety of Imam Mahdi (A.S)  
 C) Donation  
 D) None

18- What is the idea and evaluation of Sayed Mohammad Taqi Moussavi
about praying for Imam Zaman (A.T.F.S.)?  
 A) A part of kindness and Friendship  
 B) Duty  
 C) Obligation  
 D) Compulsory act

19- What is the result of increasing our kindness toward our Imam?  
 A) Appearance of Imam (A.T.F.Sh)  
 B) Performing our duty  
 C) Endeavouring for more praying  
 D) More attraction toward Imam

20- According to Prophet (S.A) whose life is more important and beloved
to all other Muslims?  
 A) Imam az-Zaman (A.S)  
 B) The Prophet, himself  
 C) Ali ibn Abu Talib ( A.S)  
 D) Hazrat Zahra (A.S)

21- According to the Prophet (S.A) who should be more respected than
even one's own family?  
 A) Family (Ahi- ul- Bait) of the Prophet  
 B) Hasan and Husain (A.S)  
 C) Imam Asr (A.S)  
 D) Hazrat Zahra (S.A)

22- How is the feeling of the true awaiting people during the time of
Absence, till the time of His Appearance?  
 A) Angry for taking revenge  
 B) Happy and smiling  
 C) Sad and sorrowful  
 D) Indifferent till the time of Appearance

23- H.E. Mr Hamadani has recommended recitation of which invocation to
express one's sadness in the time of Absence of Imam Mahdi (A.S)?  
 A) Pray of Promise ( Dua -y- Ahd )  
 B) Ziyarat - e- Yasin  
 C) The pray of Imam az-Zaman, to be read on Friday  
 D) Dua- e- Nudbah (Pray of mourning) on the morning of Friday

24- According to Sayed - al- Shohada Imam Husain (A.S), how will the
Almighty God revive the Earth?

A) By Apperance of Imam az-Zaman (A.S)  
 B) By Resurrection  
 C) By returning some dead men to this life (Rajat)  
 D) None

25- As Abi- Abdullah Imam Husain (A.S) stated, one who bears patience
against the denial of the enemies of Imam Mahdi (A.S) at the time of his
occultation, is like:  
 A) Martyrs of Ohud war  
 B) Martyrs of Karbala  
 C) One who supports the Prophet (S.A) in a Crusade with the sword.  
 D) One who supports Amir al Mumenin Ali (A.S) in a crusade with the
sword

26- One of the causes and reasons of Absence of Imam az-Zaman (A.S)
is:  
 A) Ease and welfare of Imam (A.S)  
 B) Ease and welfare of the people  
 C) Willing of Imam (A.S)  
 D) Shortcomings of the people

27- Who has stated this expression: "His (Imam az-Zaman's) existence is
a grace, and his occupancy yet another grace, and his occultation is due
to us."  
 A) Khaja Nasiruddin Tousi  
 B) Sheikh Saduq  
 C) Allamah Majlesi  
 D) Imam az-Zaman (A.S)

28- Has there been any Absence for the previous Prophets in the last
nations? Has the Almighty God responded to the requests of the people
and nations during the period of absence of such prophets?  
 A) No- No  
 B) Yes- Yes  
 C) No- Yes  
 D) Yes- No

29- Who has taught us to pray for acceleration of Appearance of Imam
Zaman(A.S)?  
 A) The Prophet (A.S)  
 B) Imam az-Zaman (A.S)  
 C) Hazarat Ali (A.S)  
 D) The Almighty God

30- Imam Mahdi (A.S) in his letter to whom, had mentioned that the
unpleasant deeds of the Shias were the cause of barrier from meeting
their Imam?  
 A) Sheikh Tousi  
 B) Sheikh Saduq  
 C) Sheikh Mufid  
 D) Allamah Majlesi

31- Why during the time of occultation of Imam Mahdi, the aggression of
enemies of Islam has reached to its highest level?  
 A) Absence of powerful leadership  
 B) Carelessness and shortcoming  
 C) Sinful acts of people  
 D) Appearance of Imam Mahdi (A.S) which will remove injustices from the
world

32- What is the responsibility of the true awaiting people against the
enemies ofImam az-Zaman (A.S)?  
 A) Silence and Resistance  
 B) Instigating people to rebel.  
 C) Defending Imam's principles.  
 D) To rest indifferent

33- According to Amir Al Mumenin Ali (A.S) in his preaches in Kufa, what
is the true base for practice of people during the time of Absence?  
 A) Belief  
 B) Knowledge and Practice of Imam az-Zaman  
 C) Remembrance of God  
 D) Knowledge about invisible world

34- According to the expression of Imam Sadiq (A.S), “Whoever likes to
be a friend of our Mahdi (A.S) , should .....  
 A) Wait for him and refrain from sins  
 B) Trust in God  
 C) Observe morality  
 D) Both items A.&C

35- How many centuries have passed from the start of Imam's
Occultation?  
 A) 10  
 B) 12  
 C) 7  
 D) 13

36- Which one of the Immaculate Imams has said, “If I see him (Imam
az-Zaman), I would serve him the whole part of my life??”  
 A) Imam Sadiq (A.S)  
 B) Imam Baqir (A.S)  
 C) Imam Husain (A,S)  
 D) Imam Hasan Askari (A.S)

37- In which school (Religion /faith) it is certain and definite that
“The Earth will never remain empty from the Immaculate Imam and
leader"  
 A) Imam and Leader  
 B) School of Christianity  
 C) School of Shia  
 D) Religion of Hazrat Abraham

38- Which are the books prepared by Sayed Mohamamd Taqi Mousavi
Isfahani?  
 A) Mikyal al-Makarem, fi Favayed Dua Lelqaem (measures of virtues
regarding benefits of prayers for living Imam)  
 B) Takalif \_ ul\_ Anam Fi Ghibat \_ el\_ Imam (obligations of people
during the time of Absence of Imam)  
 C) Vazaifat - ul- Anam Fi Ghabat - el\_ Imam (obligation of people
during the time of Absence of Imam)  
 D) Items A. &C

39- Uthaman Ibn Saeed Amri was appointed as deputy by Imams:  
 A) Imam Hadi, Imam Javad, and Imam Askari (A.S)  
 B) Imam Hadi, Imam Askari, and Imam az-Zaman (A.S)  
 C) Imam Hadi, and Imam Askari (A.S)  
 D) Imam Javad and Imam Hadi (A.S)

40- Due to our ..........., our most favorite person in the world of
creation should be Imam Zaman (A.S)  
 A) Life  
 B) Finance  
 C) Worldly matters  
 D) Faith

Please reply the following questions after reading the book
-----------------------------------------------------------

1. In what manner does Imam’s advent (reappearance) resembles the event
of Qiyamat(resurrection)?

2. What is the concept of Entezar (awaiting)?

3. Which verse from the holy Quran gives command for preparing oneself
for assisting the Imam of the age (a.t.f.s)?

4. According to Khwaja Nasiruddin Tusi, what is the reason for Imam’s
occulation?

5. From the viewpoint of Imam Sadiq (a.s), what are the characteristics
of the followers of Imam az-Zaman(a.t.f.s)?

6. Which Imam wished and longed to serve the Qaem?

7. How Imam Askari (a.s) did introduce the Imam succeeding him?


