Sorrow and Grief for Imam of the Age
====================================

Among the signs of love and affection for something or someone is that
after missing or losing that thing or person, a person is overtaken by
grief and sorrow and farther up, tears roll down his cheek.

If we reflect nicely, we shall perceive that from the viewpoint of
faith, Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the most beloved personality to be
loved and his absence a great calamity.

Didn’t the holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) say:

*“A slave (of Allah) has no faith unless his love for me is more than
himself and his love for my Ahl al-bayt is more than his family
members.”*[^1]

Sayyed-ibn-Taoos says to his son, Sayyed Muhammad: “O my son, Muhammad!
I advise you, your brother and anyone who reads this book to deal
correctly with the Almighty Allah and His Messenger (s.a.w.a.) and to
follow their recommendations and glad tidings about the advent of our
master, Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). For, I have witnessed a plenty the words and
deeds of numerous people in opposition to what Allah and His messenger
wish so.

For instance, if he loses someone, a horse, a dirham or dinar, his
thought will at once focus on them and he will earnestly strive to find
them. But I have not found anyone so engrossed over the matter of delay
in Imam’s advent as they are over such petty issues. Besides, they are
not disturbed by Imam’s absence as they are by losing such petty things.
So, how can such a person claim that he has recognized the right of the
Almighty Allah and His messenger (s.a.w.a.) and that he believes in the
Imamat of Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)?”[^2]

Those who sincerely await Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and are in grief and
sorrow until his reappearance should manifest their grief by heart and
shed tears of blood for his separation.

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says:

*“Know that he would remain in concealment for a while and he would be
un- remembered (by the people) until they would say: he has died! He has
been killed! To which valley he has gone?! And O the eyes of believers,
shed tears for him.”*[^3]

In this connection, Agha Hamadani recommends recitation of Dua al-Nudba.
He says:

*“It is recommended that every Friday, the friends of Hazrat, men and
women gather in a mosque* *or other holy place and recite this dua with
utmost grief and sorrow and lament for the occultation of this radiant
sun and separation of this dearest soul on earth.”*[^4]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar; 17/13. Also, refer to same; 27/86 & 112.

[^2]: Kashf al-Muhajah / 206, chapter 150.

[^3]: Ghaibah-Nu’mani /152 & 153.

[^4]: Takaleef al-Anaam/189.


