Chapter 1: Judge Whether This Is the Right Path
===============================================

**Dear Reader:**

In a world where veils of human ignorance are being removed one by one
and day by day and a new realm of dazzling truth is emerging to mankind;
in an epoch when the light of science guides us ever closer to
intellectual solidarity, providing us with evidence of the Oneness of
the Creator,

thus revealing to us a world full of wonders; in a world where the dark
days of colonialism have come to a destined end, leaving colonialists
with an eternal stain of disgrace in human history and where the
freedom-fighters and liberated people are not only no longer ready to
submit themselves to colonialist exploitations, but also engaged in
abolishing their plundering expeditions; in such a context, Church has
belatedly begun to cherish the resumption of colonial activities.

Offering the concept of the Trinity, it intends to lead people back
into medieval obscurantism, so that once again the tragedy of the
Spanish Inquisition may be repeated. In Andalusia (Spain), on one night
thousands of innocent God-fearing Muslims were beheaded. Neither women
nor children were spared and their sacred shrines were razed to the
ground.

Now, after years of hypocrisy, the Church has started again to reveal
its true nature to the Muslim World. Church authorities, which have
hidden themselves behind the scenes, have devised ominous and
destructive plans against Islam and Muslims.

According to the church, all of African and Asian nations to convert to
Christianity! Every night, they dream of the departure of Islam from
these countries to be replaced by his decadent concept of the Trinity.
They see that it will not be long before the God-fearing people of the
Asian and African countries will accept the son, mother and other
relatives of God! They actually imagine that God is the head of such a
large family! But in reality, for more than twenty centuries,
Christianity has failed to account for the Trinity sue, which is in fact
an illusory and pagan belief and yet the cornerstone of St. Paul's (not
Jesus') religion.

The Church still dreams of uprooting Islam and Muslims id consolidating
in its place the perverted and deviant Christianity.


**Supporters of the Trinity Concept**

Some supporters of the Trinity concept draw the following triangle in
order to prove their aims. They say: "Even though a triangle has three
sides, it is still a union just as the Trinity a union". Even a child
can perceive the baseless ness of such claim, for a triangle is composed
of three sides, each independent of the other. If each side were to
become exactly like the others, a triangle would no longer exist; thus
this "triangle Theory" is erroneous.

This entity is composed of three sides, known collectively as a
"triangle", and no sane person would consider it a real union.

In principle, to compare God, who is devoid of form, to a triangle
(which has a definite structure) is wrong. Structure or composition is
peculiar to creation and the pure essence of God can in no way be
imagined in such terms. God; in this case, would only mean a mere
creature, depending upon another power to control His existence.

At the same time, these Trinity supporters claim that just as water
takes up various forms such as liquid, gas or solid state, it is not
wrong to think that God also change forms, becoming Father, Son and the
Holy Spirit. They ignore the fact that water itself is made up of
various composition, which in different situations and under certain
conditions, take on different forms.

This example is not compatible with the concept of God's uniqueness.
Moreover, the inevitable result of such a statement and similitude is
that the sacred presence of God will also be affected through change or
other courses of events.

The notion of the Trinity is so groundless that whenever one wishes to
discuss the issue with a Christian, the only answer he receives is that
this subject is one of the great secret of the Church! No one, they say,
can understand the truth behind it, not even those greater than
ourselves.

Indeed it is very strange that such an issue, which should be more
commonly understood and clear-cut than everything else, has reached a
point where the use of mathematical and geometrical shapes must be
resorted. Even then, when no concrete conclusion is reached, the matter
is laid to rest through the use of deceptively sophisticated
reasoning.

Is God such an entity that is divisible and at the same time a
changeable material phenomenon, and yet is to be worshipped blindly?
What kind of faith is it that its most basic and most essential issues
are incapable of being explained? It has failed to clarify how the three
gods are incorporated and yet have managed to preserve their
divisibility as well as their unity.

Is it correct to believe in these unfounded and fictitious claims just
because they have been written in the Four Gospels, or should one take
these statements as a valid proof to the invalidity of the existing
Gospels? For a true book of revelation would never make such assertions.
By making such assertions concerning the Trinity issue, Christianity has
in fact shown its true self. This faith has been founded upon
misunderstanding and ignorance and continues to undergo alterations and
subversions in the hands of ignorant persons.

One should feel deep regret that these people, misguided to such an
extent in mind and religion, should tell Muslims to renounce the truth
substantiated even by science! They expect Muslims to blindly follow
them, urging people to conceive of partners for God, divide Him into
parts and fill their hearts with love of the Son of God! How can a
Muslim who believes that every living being echoes the words "God is but
One and there is no partner unto Him" possibly accept this?

They promulgate their false notions by various means now in the form of
publications including leaflets, again in the form of fictitious books
full of myths and superstitions, and recently through radio broadcasts
once a week in the guise of educational and moral programs.

Let us applaud you benefactors of humanity who have closed your eyes to
your voluminous dark record in Africa, shed crocodile tears for these
ignorant people and act under a religious mask in order to perform your
ominous colonialist designs.

We know that these "gifts" are brought to Muslim countries by
"democratic" and "freedom-seeking" western governments, for it is only
the Muslim countries that are filled with sins and sinners who await the
grace and mercy of their Lord, Jesus Christ!

We have had enough of your ignorance! Come to your senses, O Muslim
brothers! Stop imagining that the dazzling technological progress of
Europe has been due to the religion of Trinity. Rather, as long as
people followed these childish ideas, they always were in the dark abyss
of ignorance. But as soon as they tore away from the intricate web woven
by the Church and relied instead upon the light of Islamic knowledge,
they were able to take big steps towards the benefit of mankind.

This is indeed a fact, which has been proved throughout history.
Nevertheless, there is much to discuss regarding the notion of the
Trinity and, God willing, in the following chapters, we shall help
reveal many of the countless hidden existing truths.

We boldly request of Church officials and of the Vatican in particular,
that if they are sincerely seeking the truth, they should prepare
themselves for a scientific debate to be held in a calm, brotherly
atmosphere. In this way, the Truth will uncover itself to all.


**Chapter 2: A letter to the church**

The silence of the magnificent court chamber was broken by the voice of
the priest who began to read the verdict articulately His stately black
robe with its long sleeves and the glint of his spectacles had so much
attracted the audience that one would have thought that after Jesus, he
was the second, undisputed "Son of God".

The old man, who stood complaisantly before the court panel, suddenly
paled upon hearing the verdict. He turned immediately to face a statue
of Jesus, which occupied a corner of the chamber, and kneeling before
the statue, he begged to be forgiven of his sins.

His crime was so grave that nothing but gallows could atone for it. He
had maintained that the earth rotated round the sun, thus denying the
decision of the churchmen whom held that the earth was in a fixed
position. Perhaps you have already recognized this man who was accused
of heresy. He was none other than Galileo.1

The holy fathers stifled every voice of truth, which opposed the myths
of the Holy Bible. Giordano Bruno was burnt at the stake in the main
square of Campo de Fiori on February 19, 1600 AD, because of his denial
of such concepts as the Incarnation and the Trinity. As the flames and a
thick cloud of smoke billowed and faded into the sky, the Pope's minions
sang religious hymns.2

Is it not disgraceful that Church officials should have committed such
unforgivable crimes against knowledge and science? Yet they continue to
hold their heads high before the progressive and culture-loving
generations of the world, expressing their sympathies to humanity!

In a world where the gates to true knowledge are already open to man,
where mankind becomes inebriated at the fountain of science enabling it
to explore new and exciting realms of knowledge, is it not ridiculous
that the Church still refuses to abandon its myths and illusions?
Throughout history, hundreds of scientists and great thinkers of the
world have revolted against the delusions of the Gospels. But the
Christian clerics have remained unmoved and continue to impose these
misconceptions one way or another on people.

If one wishes to become familiar with present Christian doctrines, he
should carefully study the following four sections, for each section
alone is sufficient to refute the present-day Gospels and Christianity.
Thousands of people have until now written letters to the Church,
requesting its response to the following four issues. However, no
perfect response has yet been given, and it is much deplorable that the
Christian missionaries are unable to cope with questions dealing with
simple logic and reasoning posed by the uninformed youth.

1-History of civilization; pages 637-649.
2-History of civilization; pages 653 - 661.


**Chapter 3: Whet is the Holy Bible?**

The Old Testament and the New Testament The scope of the efforts of the
holy fathers has progressed to the point where they have distributed
Bibles, free of charges, in all countries and particularly among Muslim
people and the young generation.

Here we are not concerned with how the holy fathers and Christian
evangelists have been allowed to carry out their activities so freely.
Nor are we concerned with how much was allocated to them by certain
Western colonialist governments, or what authorities support their
freedom of action.

These are subjects, which require lengthy discussion and will not be
dealt with here. Here we shall merely examine several points concerning
the Christian Holy scriptures. It is hoped that the holy fathers abstain
from distributing the Bible among Muslims, so that we may not be forced
to expose their true nature as well as their books.

The Bible comprises the Old Testament and the New Testament. The Old
Testament includes the Torah (Hebrew for Law) and books of the prophets.
The New Testament which opens with the words "The New Testament of our
Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ", consists of 27 Sections: 4 Gospels
according to Matthew, Mark, Luke and John and 21 epistles attributed to
Paul the Apostle and others. With the "Acts of the Apostles" and "The
Revelation of St. John" (Apocalypse), the New Testament contains a total
of 27 parts.

**The Old Testament**

Spinoza, the famous Jewish philosopher, has written extensively on the
Old Testament. A summary of some of his observations is as follows:

Everyone presumes that it was Moses who wrote the first five books of
the Torah. The Pharisees3 place much emphasis on this presumption and
consider anyone who opposes this belief a heretic. It was for this very
reason that Ibn Azra4, who was to some extent free thinker and the first
to discover this error, never dared to talk about the subject openly.

"But", Spinoza writes; "I have no fear of explaining this particular
issue." He then relates some of the evidences given by Ibn Azra along
with some of his own observations, which conclude that the original
writer of the five books of Torah lived several centuries after the time
of Moses.

He also investigates the remaining books of the Old Testament and
refuses to accept that they are actually written by those whose names
are attributed to them. Noting their inconsistencies, errors and con-
tradictions, he considers them unjustifiable. Commentators of the Holy
Scriptures, he says, have tried very hard to justify these obvious
contradictions, 3-A Sect of Hebrew race, always in the Majority.

'Pharisee' means "Seclusion".

4-Ibrahim Ibn Azm, Astrologer, physician, mathematician and a Jewish
religious scholar bore in 513 A.D. anity Dar Rahe Haq Board of Writers
but are unaware that through such efforts, they have actually ridiculed
the authors of the Old Testament.5 The New Testament

The Gospels and books, which have been attributed to Jesus and his
disciples, are neither credible nor historically reliable, nor complete.
Owing to historical events, additions and misapplications in the texts,
the New Testament has not remained free from alteration. Also, the style
and the phraseology of the New Testament clearly differ from those of
the prophets.

Spinoza wrote that he believed that Paul's profound and lengthy
arguments in his "Epistle to the Romans" were not founded upon divine
revelation, but were merely based on the normal power of reasoning.
Also, the style of the disciples and their way of using words evident in
the books clearly argues against their coming from divine revelation or
the Grace of God. Rather, they contain the personal logic and opinions
of their writers.6

Moreover, there are various versions of the Gospels and other
scriptures, which have been rejected by the Church. Basically, it is not
certain whether these versions are the same as those traditionally
accepted by the Church as "divine revelations."

Encyclopedia Britannica lists the names of tens of such Gospels and
epistles.7 The writer of Exhumes has listed the scriptures that the
ancient Christians attributed to Christ himself, his disciples, or other
followers:

7 epistles to Jesus
8 epistles to Mary
11 "" Peter the Apostle
9"" John
2"" Andrew
2"" Matthew
2"" Philip the Apostle,
1 epistle to Bartholomen the Apostle.
5 epistles to Thomas the Apostle.
3"" Jacob the Apostle,
3"" Mathias
3"" Mark
2"" Barnabas
1 epistle to Theodos
15 epistles to Paul

5-Risalate-e-fil-lahut-uas-siyassah; p. 265-326 Printed in Egypt.
6-Risalate-e-fill-lahut-uas-siyassah; p. 330.
7- The introduction of the "Barnabas" Gospel; P.47, Persian language.

Having mentioned the features of these 74 epistles, the writer poses
this question: How can one know if the Divine Scriptures are the same
scriptures accepted by the Protestants?8

**Is the Holy Bible a Divine and heavenly Book?**

On the whole, the book, which at present is accepted by the Christians
as a sacred work is a baseless fabrication. Evidence pointing to the
fabrication of this book is abundant. The following examples would be
mentioned:

1-There are contradictions between the Old Testament and the New
Testament or among their epistles, a sample of which, apart from the one
talked about previously, is given in the fifteenth chapter of this
book.

2-The superstitions and ambiguities existing throughout the Holy Bible,
such as attributing wine drinking to prophets, Jacob's wrestling with
God, etc. 3-Holy Bible's shortcomings and imperfection from the
viewpoint of divine teachings, etc., When we read it carefully, we find
in its various chapters that God walks; God shows repentance; God's
knowledge is limited, finite and so on.

4-Historical and non-historical discrepancies, an example of which you
has already read in the second chapter of this book.

Certainly, evidences such as these convince any sane person that the
Christian's present holy books have no foundation and cannot be divine.
It is for these reasons that at the end of his argument, Felicien Chalet
concludes:

"At any rate, these are man's creation and so it is impossible to
consider them the Words of God."9

8-Izher-ul-Hag vol. 1 .Pages 285-288

9-A concise history of the greet religions of the world; TEHRAN
university press Page 441.


