Chapter 4: Jesus From the Viewpoint of Islam and the Church
===========================================================

"Two sects succumbed to their wrong deeds concerning Jesus: The first
were Jews who turned against him until they made a false accusation
against him. The second were Christians who glorified him as a deity"10
(The Holy Prophet of Islam)

**Church Teaching Concerning Christ**

Jesus is God! "And [Saul] said, who art thou, O Lord? And Lord
answered, I am Jesus..." (Acts 9:5) Jesus is the begotten Son of God!
"But when the time was ripe, God sent forth his son, born of a woman…"
(Galatians 4:4)

Devil and Son of God "At once after His baptism, Jesus came up from the
water, and beheld, the heavens were opened and he saw the spirit of God
descending like a dove, and lighting upon him. And a voice from heaven
said: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Matt.
3:16-17)

"Then was Jesus led by the spirit into the desert to be tempted by
Devil. After fasting forty days and nights, he was hungry. The Tempter
[Devil] approached him and said: "If thou be the Son of God, command
these stones to turn into bread…"

The Devil then conducted him to the holy city... saying to him, "If
thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down... Jesus said unto him,
"Furthermore, it is written: Thou shalt not test the Lord thy God."
(Matt. 4:1-7)

Next the Devil took him to a very high mountain and showed to him all
the kingdoms of the world and their splendor, saying to him: All these
will I give thee, if thou wilt kneel and worship me. Then Jesus said to
him: Be gone, Satan! For it is written: Thou shalt worship the Lord thy
God and Him only shalt thou serve." (Matt. 4:8-10)

**God in the Nicene Creed**

In 325 AD, a council was formed by the Byzantine Emperor in the city of
Nicaea near Constantinople to settle the argument between Ahrius and
Alexander.

The Council was inaugurated by raising this issue, and finally the
ideas of Ahrius and his followers were rejected. They were condemned,
being accused of their realism and unorthodoxy, and were exiled by the
Emperor's command. The majority decision was submitted before the
Council and was signed by all members thereof in form of a letter of
faith.

10-Beher, vol. 35, p.322

"We believe in God, the Father, the Almighty, in Jesus Christ, his only
Son, our Lord, Son of the Father, the only offspring who is from the
essence of Father, God from God, light from light, true God who is born
from true God and not created by Him, having the same essence with the
Father through Whom all that abide in the heavens and earth come into
being. It is for us human beings to be redeemed that He descended from
heaven, incarnated in human image.

He toiled and on the third day he ascended to the heavens and would
come to judge the living and the dead... Curse be upon those who say
that he did not exist, or that he had not existed before he came into
existence or that he was made out of nothing.

Curse be upon those who profess that He is of another essence and
temperament or that He was created as the Son of God and liable to
change." The concord was later extended and what the Christians today
call Nicene Creed is the same thing.11 From what has been quoted from
the Bible and the above - mentioned concord, it becomes evident that
Christianity has been plagued with two superstitious and false
concepts.

1-it has presented God as a composite and compound being; otherwise, it
would have been impossible that one part should be detached from Him and
become His son.

It goes without saying that God is indivisible and free from any
composition or compound natures, for as the theological scholars and
philosophers have stated, a composite would require components and an
outside agent putting them together, and such a thing would be,
generally speaking, inconsistent with an omnipotent God, whose
omnipotence has set Him above all creatures.

2-Jesus, who often wandered about hungry and thirsty, Who was affected
by hardships and difficulties, who asked for help from the true One God
and who was a restricted and finite creature, has been considered to be
God and, as a result, infinite. The fallacy of such a concept is most
obvious, for to consider Christ God is tantamount to saying that the
limited is unlimited or the finite is infinite.

Lately, some Christian writers have written: "What Christians believe
is that God is able to make Himself appear in the image of man."12

These writers ignore the fact that such a statement is on the whole
inconsistent with the infinity of God. Furthermore, it also implies that
God, too, like all other beings, is changeable and liable to
transformation.

More ridiculously, they write: "Just as it is possible to take a
bucketful of water from the Pacific Ocean and call it the water of
ocean, there is also nothing wrong in saying that in this world Jesus
was filled as much as possible with the Spirit of God."13 It is obvious
that God is not composite and it is wrong to compare His entity with an
ocean. He is not divisible and thus a part of Him 11-history of the role
of old church in the Iranian and Roman empire; p. 241-244. 12-The
incarnated God; Noor-e- Jihan publications; p. 20-24.

13-The same source; p. 25.

could not fill the vessel that was Christ. All these are mere
superstitions that have come to afflict the Christian writers.


**Chapter 5: Islamic Teachings Concerning God and Jesus Christ**

"Say: He, Allah, is the single one. Allah is He whom all depends. He
begets not, nor is He begotten; and none is like Him."(Holy Qur'an 105:
1 - 4) Therefore, any form of polytheism, idolatry, birth incarnation
and corpularity has been rejected in Islam and the Lord is stripped of
any of these embellishments.

"And Jews say: Ezna is the Son of Allah. And Christians say: Messiah is
the Son of Allah. These are the words of their mouths, which correspond
with each other. They imitate the saying of those who disbelieved
before..." (Holy Qur'an 9:30).

Some contemporary investigators have compared the Old and New
Testaments with beliefs of the Buddhists and others. The similarity is
such that there would remain no doubt for a knowledgeable person that
the superstitious beliefs observed in Christianity have been adopted
from others.

"They indeed disbelieve who say: Surely, Allah - He is the Messiah, Son
of Mary. Say: Who then could control anything against Allah, when He
wished to destroy Messiah, Son of Mary, and his mother and all those on
the earth?" (Holy Qur'an 5:17)

"Praise be to Allah! Who revealed the Book to His servant, and allowed
not therein any crookedness, rightly directing, to give warning of
severe punishment from Him and to give good news to the believers who do
good that theirs is a good reward, staying in it for ever. And to warn
those who say:

Allah has taken to himself a son. They have no knowledge of it, nor had
their fathers. Grievous is the word that comes out of their mouths. They
speak nothing but a lie. Then maybe you will kill yourself with grief,
sorrowing after them, if they believe not in this announcement." (Holy
Qur'an 18:1-6).

The Holy Qur'an tells the prophet of Islam: "And say: Praise is to
Allah! Who has not taken to Himself a son, and who has not a partner in
the kingdom..."

These are examples characteristic to the teachings found in the Gospels
and officially accepted Christianity. We leave it to you to judge for
yourselves these two kinds of teachings.

A youth, who had been participating for some time in the Christian
Church religious services at the invitation of the Church, once said: "I
am still in the dark about what was Jesus Christ. Was he God, Son of
God, the Good Shepherd or the Lamb of God?"14

"It is Funny", he added, "that in a world where living manifestations
of science have dazzled the eyes and where human beings are curious to
understand and know everything just as it is, the Christian fathers and
14-Jonah's Gospel calls Jesus, the Lamb of God.

missionaries are calling people towards believing in superstitions and
fairy tales. They ask unguided people to give Jesus a place in their
hearts! For Jesus suffered to redeem people of their sins and was
nothing but God himself who appeared in the image of man and later died
on the Cross so as to as to as to absolve our sins! Nevertheless, had he
been God Himself, could he not have absolved our sins or guided us
without taking a human form?"

He said: "It is ridiculous that the scientists, who often undertake
years of exhaustive investigation concerning a certain scientific issue
in order to understand and accept something logically, are told by the
Holy Fathers to accept that the earth is fixed, because the Holy Bible
says so. They are told to come to believe in a God who is but One and at
the same time Three! However, I personally have never met a Christian
who could understand the Trinity or explain its meaning."

"Since the issue of the Trinity consisting of God being composed of
Father, Son and the Holy Spirit is the basis of the present Christian
faith, I have tried hard to understand it, but whoever I have asked
about it, has replied: It is a secret you would not come to grasp unless
you will have become a Christian. How preposterous!"

"Each great Holy Father has compiled a book or a treatise as he has
pleased and included it among the Scriptures and Gospels which
constitute the so-called "Holy Bible". These Holy Scriptures are not
few, but many. A number of letters are also considered Holy whose
authors are essentially unknown!"

"Among Christ's disciples, only Barnabas had spoken the truth and had
therefore become the target of attacks by other Christians, for he had
refused to become a tool of the profit-minded Holy Fathers and openly
said: "Those who give you the prophecy that Christ is the Son of God,
have been deceived and Paul is among them, too."15

"The Gospel of Barnabas had in effect come to be rejected and hated by
"highly venerated" Popes and missionaries, since it had opposed the
beliefs of others and promised the arrival of the Prophet of Islam.
Hence the poor Christians are forbidden by papal edict from reading the
Gospel of Barnabas and most of them are basically ignorant of its
existence."

This youth then talked at length about the colonialist role played by
Holy Fathers in African and Asian countries and, referring once again to
the content of the Gospels and Christ, "the Son of God", he said: "What
sort of God is this that, by the claim of the Gospels written several
centuries ago, was born from Mary, the wife of Joseph,

the carpenter; who after eating, drinking, praying, fasting and
sometimes drinking wine, was finally caught, killed and buried by
scoundrel people"; who remained in the grave for three days before
rising from it to the heavens and being honored to sit on the right-hand
side of the first God, 15-The Gospel of Barnabas. (222: 3.387)

i.e. his Father; and who would one day return to earth to pass
judgment. Truly he is a strange God who failed to deal with his Jewish
servants who finally buried him, albeit he came out of the grave three
days later and rose to the Heavens."

"I have closely studied the Bible and burst into laughter. If you have
a Bible with you, open it to Genesis, Chapter 32, Section 24, and read
it to the end. See how the Lord God wrestles with Jacob, but fails to
overpower him and finally since the day-break is drawing near and people
have already started to move around, the Lord takes hold of Jacob's
thigh and says: "Let your hand go of me, for the day breaketh and he
[Jacob] says: I will not. Let thee go, unless thou blessest me."

This is an example of what the Christian God did.

The youth then went on: "Well, this was about God. Now let's observe
what these books have said about other prophets of God. In Genesis (19:
30-38) one reads that Lot drank wine, slept with his two daughters and
impregnated them." In II Samuel the following shameful account is given
about David the Prophet:

"And it came to pass m an evening that David arose from his bed and
walked upon the roof of the King's house; and from the roof he saw a
woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful to look upon."

"And David sent messengers who took her; and she came unto him, and he
lay with her, for she was purified from her uncleanliness and she
returned unto her house. And the woman conceived and told David and
said: I am with a child.

"And David sent to Joab, saying: Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab
sent Uriah to David."

And when Uriah was come into him, David demanded of him how Joab did,
and how the people did and were prospered. "David said to Uriah: Go down
to thy house, and wash thy feet. And Uriah departed out of the King's
house, and there followed him a mess of meat from the king."

"But Uriah slept at the door of the King's house with all the servants
of his lord, and went not down unto his house." (II Samuel 11: 2-10)

"And it came to pass m the morning that David wrote a letter to Joab
and sent it by the hand of Uriah." "And he wrote in the letter saying:
Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from
him that he may be smitten and die." (II Samuel 11:14-15)

Joab who commanded David's army did as he was told and as a result,
"there fell some of the people of the servants of David, and Uriah the
Hittite died also" (II Samuel 11:17) "And when the wife of Uriah heard
that Uriah her husband was dead, she mourned for her husband."

"And when the mourning was past, David sent and fetched her to his
house, and she became his wife and bore him a son, but the thing that
David had done, displeased the Lord." (II Samuel 11: 26-27).

Is it not ridiculous that the holy fathers print and distribute such
Gospels and books, and even have them translated into a thousand
languages?

The youth continued: "I cannot see why the holy fathers had come to
make a genealogy for Jesus Christ. For God and the Son of God do not
need such a thing in the first place? Secondly, the Holy Bible says that
Jesus descends from no one, only that his mother is Mary.

But having no work to do as usual, the holy fathers have pompously
furnished two genealogies for him, one mentioned in Matthew's Gospel and
the other in Luke's. If Jesus had no father, then why is there a need
for a genealogy? Why do they relate him to Joseph the Carpenter? Joseph
did not lay with Mary. Just as we read in the beginning of Gospel of
Luke, the womb of Mary was filled with the Holy Spirit,

whereas Mary was a virgin! "Maybe the holy fathers wanted to connect
Jesus to David, Solomon and Jacob through these genealogies, but the
problem remains in the very fact that had Jesus been from their
life-line, he would also have been bound to be a descendant of David,
and since David had committed adultery, he must be subject to damnation
by the law of Torah!"

This young man had many other things to say which cannot be described
in detail within the limited space of this chapter.


**Chapter 6: The History of the New Testament**

Christian scholars believe that Jesus Christ has not left behind any
divine book; rather, it was his disciples who, some time after his
death, decided to do this job. At last they wrote treatises concerning
the deeds and words of Christ. But unfortunately from the very beginning
these writings became for a period of 100 years subject to alterations,
omissions and additions by the blood-thirsty Roman emperors, who had no
other aim but destroy the very foundations of Christianity and encourage
superstition and idolatry.

During the long period, the policy of the emperors left a deep
impression on the foundations of real Christianity:

Religious leaders were either killed or detained; religious books were
burned; heretics infiltrated into seminaries beginning to spread false
teachings in the Church of that time; religious societies were
disbanded; cloisters and convents were destroyed and razed to the
ground.

Through their activities during that long 300-year period, the emperors
had in effect ruined the basic foundations of Christianity, inflicting
irreparable damages upon it. As a result, considering these events, no
one can trustfully be optimistic towards the Bible including the
Gospels.

To make our point more clear, we shall presently offer the case
histories of some these emperors; Trajanus After he came to power in 98
AD, his policy dictated him to remove Christianity in a systematic
program. He fabricated and instituted some regulations concerning
Christianity. These laws were in force for a long time.

The judge generally tried to encourage Christians to deny Jesus Christ
and worship non-Christian gods. Had Christians remained faithful to
their belief, they would be killed.

The situation reached a point when in 155 A.D Polycarpe, who was one of
the most famous founding members of the Church, was burnt at the stake
in the city of Izmir.16 Marcus Aurelius He decided to exterminate
Christianity by inflicting cruelty and violence. To this end, he killed
many Christians in Africa and in many other provinces of the Empire.
Tempest, plague, famine, foreign invasion and other calamities, which
came to afflict the people during the reign of this emperor, instigated
them more and more against Christians.

Each day a group of Christians were arrested. As a result, the best
people of 16-History of the church; p 152-157. the churches of Lyon and
Vienna and other church founders were arrested. Metellus, son of
Attalos, who was in fact a great champion in the theological affairs and
reinforcing aspects of the Church, was subjected to torture and
persecution and finally died a tragic death.17

**Decius**

According to Miller, the Christian scholar, the measures taken by
Decius to destroy the Christian Church was more effective than those
carried out by previous Roman Emperors. Since he launched his cruel and
aggressive campaign quite unexpectedly, many Christians who were caught
by surprise, generally disowned their faith.18

**Valerianus**

After he succeeded Decius as the emperor, he threatened to kill all the
archbishops who did not agree with him. He beheaded the archbishop of
Carthage, Cyprian. During the second year of his rule, he ordered that
all priests to be killed, Christian nobles to be dispossessed of their
properties and positions and be killed if they persisted in their
faith.19

**Deuclocian**

When he came to throne, paganism had been revived. Pagan writers had
roused the general public against the Christians. Galerius who had
nearly come to succeed the emperor, encouraged Deuclocian to issue an
order to remove any trace of the Church. To this effect, all cloisters
were destroyed, Christian books were set afire, and all those Christians
who did not offer sacrificial tokens to the emperor were either tortured
or killed.

Although this oppression did not last l9ng on the Western part of the
Empire, it continued for nine years in the Eastern Empire, and was the
severest persecution and harassment that the Christians had so far
suffered from.20 Considering these disasters, how could one believe that
the New Testament had not been destroyed or subject to alterations
during those epochs?

**Constantine the Wicked**

Following all these crimes and aggressions committed against the very
basis of Christianity, in 312 AD, Constantine became the Emperor of
Rome. He put an end to the Roman persecution and oppression, but through
his constant 17-History of the church; p.166.177.
18-History of the church; p. 179-180.
19-History of the church; p. 181.
20-History of the church; p. 182-183.

interference into religious affairs, adoption of the title of the head
of the Church, and establishment of the Oecumenical Council of Nicea, he
dealt a mortal blow at the already injured Christianity.21

Apart from being a wicked man and committing a number of abhorrent and
disgraceful acts, he did not totally sever ties with polytheism and even
forced Christians to conform to him in both thought and practice. He did
not pay any attention to objections and criticism of archbishops who had
gathered in Oecumenical Council of Nicea from all parts of the Roman
Empire (an item of their criticism has likely been the problem of the
New Testament textual confusions). Instead of studying them, he ordered
to burn their notes of criticism.22

Did the rule and supervision of such a wicked man, whose faith was a
matter of doubt, help to settle the problems of Christianity or had
otherwise landed more credence to the arguments and evidence pointing to
the lack of credit of what has remained?

In order to achieve his political objective, Constantine would force
the Christians into a compulsory unity and prevent them from expressing
their thoughts and opinions.

He was emphatic on whatever he had in mind. Thus it is unclear what he
had done to the New Testament including the Gospels.

Did this wicked man of dubious faith, who had no goal other than
furthering his own ambitions, instituted the heresies and alterations of
the Roman polytheists or destroyed them? There is no room for doubt that
as far as his relation with polytheism was concerned, he could not have
kept Christianity unsoiled by them. At any rate,

all current versions of the New Testament available to Christians
belong to the early or middle fourth century (325-350 AD) and there is
no trace of the complete manuscripts belonging to the pre- Constantine
era. Nor is it clear what has occurred to them through various upheavals
and political games.23

Considering this situation, could the veracity of the Gospels and
tenets of Christianity be trusted and should what is known currently as
the Holy Bible be recognized as the original works of the Disciples or
should their veracity and authenticity be doubted by any fair-minded
person?

A living witness to the fact that whatever is known today as the New
Testament is not trustworthy and authentic is that portions of the
discovered manuscripts belonging to the early days of Christianity are
wholly different from some of present Gospels. Dr. John Alder, the
famous American missionary in Iran, has written in his book called
"Archaeology of the Holy Scripture": "In the ruins of Exir Hincus, two
papyrus scrolls have been discovered consisting of words attributed to
Jesus

21-History of the church; p. 232-245.
22-History of the church; ps. 233,242,248.
23-Archaeology of the Holy Scripture-John Alder.

Christ, but most of them differ from what we read in the New
Testament." The discovery of the scrolls containing Gospels' old text
clearly demonstrates that the present Gospels are altered and have taken
the present forms later in the hands of the Popes and a number of holy
fathers.

In short, it must be said that the New Testament that has been
constantly at the mercy of events and mysterious manipulations is in no
way reliable and trustworthy and could not be considered the work of the
Disciples of Jesus.


