Chapter 7: the Prophecies of the Gospels
========================================

There may be few people who could imagine that there are sentences in
the Holy Scripture of the Christians that is the New Testament, which
clearly and expressly prophesy the advent of the Holy Prophet of Islam,
Muhammad (P.B.U.H).24 Although the holy fathers had made their best to
either omit or revise the sentences dealing with the prophet of Islam,
yet in the pages of the present Gospels one can come across sentences
whose implicit meanings clearly attest to the coming of the great
prophet of Islam.

Here are but few examples of such prophecies:

Prophet of Islam, the Comforter The Gospel of John says: "And I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you forever." (John 14:16) "But when the Comforter is come,
whom I will send to you from the Father, even the spirit of truth, which
proceeded from the Father, he shall testify for me." (John 15:26)

"Nevertheless I tell you the Truth. It is expedient for you that I go
away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if
I depart, I will send him unto you." (John 16:7)

**The Comforter is not the Holy Spirit**

Should it be said that by the Comforter it is meant the Holy Spirit'
one must say that there are evidences contrary to this notion, some of
which are briefly outlined here.

The sections quoted above give the prophecy of the advent of an
individual after Christ and state that his coming depends on the
departure of Jesus. His great spiritual personality is so much superior
to that of Jesus that Christ's departure in order to make possible the
coming of that glaring sun is a very great advantage to humanity.

These descriptions do not fit the Holy Spirit, for he is an angel
carrying the divine revelation to the prophets. He used to come to
prophets during their divine appointment inspiring them with heavenly
messages and verses and his coming down did not depend on Christ's
departure. Furthermore, the existence of the Holy Spirit is no more
beneficial to humanity than that of Jesus and his going away is more
beneficial.

In the "Presentation of Truth", there is a quotation made from the
"Quintessence of Histories" written by a Christian. It says: At the time
of Muhammad, both Jews and Christians were awaiting the promised
messenger. This favorable background was of great advantage to Muhammad
to claim that 24-(P.B.U.H) Stands for (Peace be upon him) and is used
after the names of the Prophets as a sign of reverence. he is the
promised messenger."25 Of course the declaration of the prophet of Islam
was thoroughly based on facts, for the signs given both in Torah and the
Gospels describing the last of prophets, Muhammad, completely fitted him
and hence a large number of fair and truth-seeking Jews and Christians
come to profess faith in Muhammad.

Nejashi, the Abyssinian King, upon receiving the letter of the prophet
of Islam, said: "By God, he is the same prophet whom the followers of
the Book are awaiting."

All of what have been noted so far is based upon the Persian version of
the Gospel, but studying the various Gospel translations and comparing
them with the Hebrew version of the Bible make the fact clear that the
Persian and the Arabic versions of the Gospel were not translated from
the original text. The Hebrew version of Elz Evir Gospel had been
translated from the Latin version belonging to 1624 AD,

wherein it had used Pericles meaning Ahmad - the Illustrious or
Praiseworthy instead of Paraclete which means the comforter. The
Christian priests and holy fathers made alterations in the Greek version
and changed Pericles into Paraclete, which in turn has been translated
as the Comforter in the Arabic and Persian versions, 50 that the people
would not find out that this promise is about the great prophet of
Islam.

But truth shall always prevail at the end, and it would eventually
become known that the one who, was promised by Jesus, to come, was
Ahmad - the most praiseworthy -that is, the prophet of Islam. The Holy
Qur'an says: "And then Jesus, son of Mary, said: O Children of Israel,
surely I am the messenger of Allah to you, verifying that which is
before me of Torah and giving good news of a messenger who will come
after me, his name being Ahmad." (The Holy Qur'an 61:6)

**The Prophet of Islam is the Spirit of Truth**

The Gospel of John says: "I have got many things to say unto you, but
you cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of Truth, is come,
he will guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you
things to come." (John 16:12-13)

The "Spirit of Truth" is an epithet given to him, which indicates to
the Comforter, who, as we have already come to know, is the prophet of
Islam, Muhammad. Another point learnt from the quoted section, is the
incompleteness of the religion of Jesus, for he says: "Howbeit when he,
the Spirit of Truth, is come, he will guide you to all truth..."

25-Presentation of truth. Vol. 2; p.281.

This show that Jesus had not brought all the truth and had left the
task to the Prophet, who would succeed him and whose Holy Religion is
complete and all laws therein conform to the requirements of mankind.

**Who is the Prince of the World?**

"Hereafter I will not talk much with you, for the prince of this world
cometh, and has nothing in me." (John 14:30)

The Prince of the world is the prophet who comes after Jesus, for the
humanity is religiously and spiritually led by great divine prophets,
who are God's appointed guardians and representatives upon earth.
Moreover, the prince of the world is not Lord himself, for in the
afore-mentioned quotation Jesus prophesies that the prince of the world
will come later.

Priest Fender, a German clergyman, who has failed to identify the term
"Prince of the World" with the Holy Spirit or even Christ himself, has
succumbed to idle talk saying: "The Gospel commentators (that is, those
who have altered the original Gospel) unanimously say that the Prince of
the world is the Devil, who is the Prince of the Sinners and the
Misguided."

One does not need to think long to conclude that this very justified is
the work of Satan himself who through the narrow - mindedness of the
Gospel commentators has called himself the prince of the world and made
the pretence of being the Periclete promised by the Gospel. The fact is
that the Prince of the world is a divine agent. The verse 8, chapter 16
of the Gospel according to John has called him a divine agent who would
force the world towards righteousness and judgment.

From what has been said so far we would clearly understand that the
prophecies of the Bible deal with a Prophet whose status is higher than
that of Christ and who would complete his religious law, hold the
spiritual and eternal leadership over humanity and would bring majesty
and greatness to Christ. That person is none other than Muhammad
(P.B.U.H.), the Prophet of Islam.


**Chapter 8: What the holy fathers have done**

A youth who is in touch with Christians and constantly reads their
missionary books, has made some points on Christianity, some of which
you have already read in Chapter 5. Now, here are the rest of his
observations:

"It is convenient here to point out to the abhorrent acts of a group of
holy fathers who have toyed with the destiny of many scientists, so that
all those who have never had the opportunity to read about the details
of those crimes, may know what sort of crimes these holy fathers have
committed in the name of Jesus Christ, the innocent prophet of God."

"Yes! It was these holy fathers who killed Ramus the Philosopher. It
was the holy fathers who first cut off the tongue of the Italian
philosopher, Vanini, then choked him to death and later burned his body
at the stake."26

"Were the perpetrators of these inhuman tragic crimes other than the
holy fathers, these shepherds and sheep of God? It was they who sold
forgiveness in order to squeeze money out of people, who in return for
money would forgive all the sins of a person and give him, a signed deed
of ownership over a section of paradise. In your opinion, what could
these acts be termed except demagogy?"

"Even if someone raised his voice in protest, he would immediately be
executed. Even those who way of thinking was in opposition to this
ominous method were tortured under Inquisition and after making
confessions were sentenced to severest punishments. It is impossible for
me to understand why these churchmen who have committed such crimes
still insist on introducing themselves as patrons of science and
humanitarians.

"In 'Two Faiths' written by Marcel Cauchon we read:

During this period, five million people were either hanged or kept in
dark and damp dungeons because of freethinking and violation of Papal
order. Only between 1481 and 1499, i.e. a period of 18 years, 10220
people were burned at the stake; 6810 were slaughtered and 97023 died
under torture upon the orders of the Inquisition."

"Were these the result of Jesus Christ's teachings or the whim of the
holy fathers who under the disguise of faith and in order to achieve
both power and wealth had committed all these murders, and who
nonetheless are offering sympathy towards or shedding crocodile tears
for the people in Africa and Asia?"

"The clergy and holy fathers prescribe celibacy, and apparently
practice it themselves. But they are unaware that this is not right and
that it would have grave consequences. The facts show the tragic effects
of their shameful sexual relations."

26-History of civilization; ps. 376,661,662.

"A typical description of these practices is to be found in
Boccaccio's' "Decameron" or in Jean Jacques Rousseau's "Confessions".
Nothing is wrong with satisfying sexual desires in a natural and
legitimate way enjoined by Islam. Then what has made these people
deviate from it and commit these obscene Epicurean sexual acts?"

The young man continued: "Let us leave this subject and return to the
subject "God" presented by the clergy. Well, is it not ridiculous in the
space - age and the epoch of science and knowledge that their
transformed Bible should declare that God is composed of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit and that God sent 'His only Son' to live among
us? In the Gospel of John we read: "In the beginning was the word, and
the word was with God, and the word was God...

And the word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us. And we beheld his
glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Fathers! (John 1:1 -
14). 'For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son...'
(John 3:16)."

"These holy fathers," continued the young man, "have gone so far as to
make everyday new revisions in the Gospels to suit their own desires or
the expediencies of the time. Nevertheless, through Western governments,
they charge people with 'Church tax' to translate and print these
Gospels into every language without pausing for a moment to think about
the consequences thereof or at least make a revision in the concept of
the Trinity."

"I have recently read in a periodical that new manuscripts have been
discovered which somewhat differ from the existing texts of the Bible,
but that the holy fathers have ignored them."

"According to a London Times report from Tel Aviv: "Researchers at
Hebrew University in Jerusalem have asked for a new scientific review
and reassessment to be carried out concerning the advent of Christianity
in. the light of new written scrolls, belonging to a Christian sect,

dating from 1500 years ago. This sect believed that they were the
successors of the very Disciples of Christ. These scrolls show the
life - style of the early Christians who lived in Jerusalem, who
considered Jesus the messenger (and not the Son) of God and who were
strict in observing the injunctions of Torah…"

"These manuscripts have inconsistencies with the New Testament and
according to Times' report, they would seriously confirm that Judas of
Iscariot may have carefully selected someone to be crucified in place of
Jesus.'27 The young man also said: "It is not clear why the Christian
authorities did not act in accordance with the advice of Hebrew
University and refused to carry out a review of the Christian teachings
in the light of these newly - discovered manuscripts."

"However, whether or not the Christian authorities and holy fathers
accept to scrutinize the newly - discovered manuscripts, one thing has
become clear for 27-Taken from young Pakistan' Newspaper.

the researches: the teachings of Jesus Christ have been altered by his
followers and we could never be confident of the authenticity of the
present Bible and the teachings thereof, since the numerous Bible
versions available along with the inconsistencies therein prevent us
from gaining any such confidence at all." In conclusion the youth added:
"O great Lord! Guide the misguided wherever and whoever they are. Show
them the correct and right path, so that they, too, may find
salvation."


**Chapter 9: Forgiving of Sins & Heaven sold off!?**

All divine religions and faiths try to prevent their followers from
committing sins. But unfortunately, the religious teachings and books of
the Christians, which are the inventions of the Church, unlike those of
other religions, draw people towards committing sins.

The reason for the departure of Christianity from the rest of the
divine religions in this respect is that Christian bishops and
cardinals, though apparently associated with Jesus Christ, in effect
bear no such relationship whatsoever,

and are not aware of his behavior and deeds, having thus
miscomprehended his real goal. Christ had but One God; his so-called
followers have "created" three gods to worship. Jesus forbade people
from evil deeds; these persons encourage people to commit them through
their letters of forgiveness and forgive committed sins in exchange for
money!28 Judging from history it becomes obvious that the root of all
these deviations and fallacies could be traced back to a certain man
called "Paul."

Formerly a Jew, Paul was instrumental in altering the truth of the
original Gospel revealed to Jesus by God, replacing it by the
superstition and delusions of the Roman and Greek polytheists.

Paul's writings are available today under the name "The Epistles of
Paul the Apostle" and are considered one of the religious books of the
Christians. Paul has written in his Epistles: "Jesus is the Son of God
and has inherited the Divinity from His Father! And the Son was ordered
by His Father to come upon the earth to live among people and know the
human condition.

But later the Jewish servants rose against the Son of God and crucified
him in the worst manner. The Lord, because of the hardship and
sufferings inflicted upon and occurred to His Son, showed mercy and
forgave the sins of all His servants and abolished all the obligations
of His servants, and people were only obliged to have faith in Jesus,
the Son of God, and love him, for whoever loveth Jesus with his whole
heart would have all his sins forgiven." (1)

Where did the thoughts of Paul originate from? The idea that a person
could wash away the guilt's of his people through his death or by his
blood is an ancient belief existing since the time immemorial. The
peoples of Egypt, Asia Minor and Greece believed for a long time in gods
such as Osiris, Athena and Dionysos, who came in human shape down to the
earth to save humanity and who died in order to have the sins of people
forgiven.29

A group of Buddhists believe the same thing about Buddha. In their
opinion, God descended upon the earth for the ninth time and took the
guise of Buddha to save mankind from errors and sins.30

28-History of civilization; vol.18; ps. 36 - 41
29-The Manifestation of Jesus Christ; p 69.
30-Farid Vejdi encyclopedia; vol. 2. p.391

Adopting the ideas of Roman and Greek polytheists, Paul transformed the
monotheism of Jesus and Moses into polytheism and introduced God as the
Father, and Jesus, who was simply a Prophet of God, as the one borne out
of the Essence of God. The people of that time, who were already
familiar with polytheistic ideas, accepted these superstitious concepts
and really came to believe in Jesus as the Son of God and as the one who
had been crucified in order to absolve the sins of people.

In fact one should say that following the Crucifixion of God's only
begotten Son, there is no need to observe the Divine precepts mentioned
in Torah, for a Christian is absolved of all responsibilities since the
blood of Christ is the ransom paid for the sins of Christians!

All of us, however, know that God never had a son, for having a son is
confined to those who are finite and possess physical bodies, so that a
part of their bodies may be detached from them to grow into a child. On
the other hand, the infinite Lord, who is free and pure from any
restriction and incarnation, could never be imagined to have a son. Thus
the Holy Qur'an considers God a truth not born and not likely to bear a
child: "He begets none, nor is He begotten".

Christians and their followers had never given a moment of thought that
if God had wanted to forgive His servants, He would not have needed to
resort to such an absurd act of putting an immaculate person into
trouble or on the Cross for a few days as a sacrificial ransom for
recompensing the human sins.

Instead, out of His boundless mercy, He would have ignored the wrong-
doings of some evil4oers and forgiven them, and would, owing to an act
of justice, have punished others since their sins would afflict their
very own selves.31

**The Buying and selling of Paradise and the Letters of Forgiveness**

The paying of ransom for crimes committed, while being a relevantly
simple and straightforward issue during Paul's time, later on gained a
new aspect under the Church authorities and Holy Fathers.

In Paul's creed, only the Father and the Son were recognized. The Holy
Fathers, however, added yet another god -Holy Spirit- and thus made them
three. Also according to Paul, with Jesus being crucified, all sins of
mankind were automatically forgiven, but the Holy Fathers fabricated new
rules governing the absolution from sins. According to these rules, it
was necessary for a sinner to first confess to his sins to the priest,
then offer some cash or credit to His Holiness the Pope so as to have
his sins forgiven. It was thought that when the priest utters the words:
"I forgive thee", God will have no alternative but forgive and
absolve.32

31-The Holy Qur'an (chapter An'am; V:164)
32-History of church Reformations; p. 62.

Some church authorities have not insisted on penance, confession and
supplication and left the purchaser free to interpret the letter of
forgiveness as the certificate of exemption from anything -penance,
confession, forgiveness and paying ransom for sins- and let them
consider it related merely to the amount of money he pays.

About 1450, the Dean of Oxford University, Thomas Gascagne complained:
"Today the sinners say: 'I have no fear of God on the account of sins
and misdeeds I commit, for I would be absolved of all guilt's and sins
when confessing and asking forgiveness from the priest and buying papal
letter of forgiveness'…"33

We read in the book "Exposition of Christian Teachings": "Only the
Catholic Church has the power to forgive sins and no outside means of
absolution from sins could be found beyond this power." It adds: "It is
necessary for us sinners to confess to all our sins before the priest,

for one who withholds even one Sin from the priest will not be cleared
from other sins, because he has also committed a great sin of hypocrisy.
It is also incumbent upon us to confess to the number of sins committed
and say, for instance, that we have committed such and such a sin ten
times."34

By fabricating such superstitions, Christianity has prevented many
people from achieving moral perfection and spiritual virtues and caused
them to plunge into crimes and backwardness. However, based upon nature,
the Holy Qur'an forbids mankind from committing evil deeds and calls
them towards spiritual perfection. Without resorting to superstition, it
encourages the wrongdoers to repent, and thus gives them the hope that
whoever "does evil or wrongs his soul, and then asks forgiveness of
Allah, he will find Allah forgiving and merciful" (Holy Qur'an,
5:110).

The Qur'an considers the forgiveness of sins the sole right of the
Almighty Lord: "To Allah belongs the kingdom of the Heavens and the
Earth. He forgives whom He pleases and cherishes whom He pleases. And
Allah is forgiving and merciful." (Holy Qur'an 48:17).

33-History of civilization Vol.18. p 37.
34-Pages 188 & 34-36; 2nd edition.


