Chapter 10: the Authors of the New Testament
============================================

**Why should we know The Authors?**

Everyday you are confronted with various reports and hear various news.
But among them, you only find one that is reliable and noteworthy, one,
which has been said by a reliable and virtuous person. For, if the
announcer or the writer is not correct and truthful, his words will not
be convincing and trustworthy. Thus whenever we ask for correct news, we
must call on truthful speakers or authors to inform us of the real
conducts and attitudes of people who have lived before us.

In order to find out about the attitude and pleasing words of Jesus
Christ, who lived many centuries before us, any interested person is
inevitably forced to consider the reliability of the authors of the New
Testament, in order to see whether or not they were qualified for such a
thing, for one cannot blindly accept anything written or said as being
the attitude and words of Christ himself.

Unfortunately when we embark on a sound, scientific investigation to
know the writers of the Scriptures, we discover that they were either
unknown or unbelieving, deviant and sinful elements, who could not
generally be trusted. For more explanation and in order to see what has
just been stated is an irrefutable truth, let us quote a few words about
the writers of the New Testament from their very own writings which are
currently available.

The biography of the Authors of the New Testament The New Testament is
made up of twenty-seven books by eight writers: Peter, John, Matthew,
Judas (who were apostles of Christ), Mark, Luke, Jacob and Paul.

**Peter**

He is the author of two books in the New Testament, who furnishes a
source for the Gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke. According to the Bible
Dictionary, it is highly suspected that in writing his own Gospel, Mark
has relied on information furnished by Peter. Matthew and Luke have
referred to Gospel of Mark and some other texts as their information
source.35

Peter is the same person to whom Jesus had expressed his dislike. As we
read in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter 16, when Jesus was prophesying
his own death to his disciples, Peter, taking hold of him, began to
reproach him, saying:

"Be it far from thee, lord. This shall not be unto thee." Turning to
Peter, Jesus said: "Get thee behind me, Satan. Thou art an offence unto
me. For thou 35-Apocrypha 112.

savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men."
(Matt. 16:21- 23). Thus is it possible to say that Peter has deserved to
be followed by Matthew, Mark and Luke and that his words should
constitute an information source for these writers?

**The Disobedience of Peter and John**

The evening on which Jesus was succumbing to exceeding sorrow, and was
betrayed to his enemies, he told his disciples:

"Tarry ye here, and watch with me." But the disciples, instead of
taking care of Christ in such a time, abandoned him and went to bed.
When Jesus saw them sleeping, he admonished them and said to Peter:
"What, could you not watch with me one hour?" He went the second time
and prayed, saying unto the disciples to be with him. But again he found
them in sleep, obviously having placed their own comfort above obeying
his command. (Extracts from Matt. 26, and Mark 14).

Would the people who did not attach any importance to Jesus' simple
request in those critical hours, have respected and valued his
injunctions in other times? As a result, how could one rely and trust
the Gospel, Revelations, books of John or other writings belonging to
Peter or to others influenced by him?

How the Disciples Abandoned Jesus and Fled?

The night on which Jesus was to be captured by his enemies, he told his
disciples: "All of you shall be offended because of me this night." All
his disciples expressed their dislikes of this offence and Peter said:
"Although all shall be offended, yet will not I.

" Suddenly Judas, one of the twelve ones, appeared and with him a great
multitude carrying swords and sticks. They had been sent by chief Jewish
priests and elders. Coming forward they put hands on Jesus and took him
away. It was then that all his disciples forsook him and fled.36 What
saddened Jesus more than their escape was the arrival of Peter among the
enemies!

As Miller, the famous Christian missionary, writes: "How distressed and
sad Jesus must have been upon looking at the crowd, seeing Peter warming
himself beside fire with other people! Such a negligence and lapse on
the part of his most outstanding disciple must have been upsetting.37
Were such irresolute persons firm in face of the bitter events of the
early Christian era and the whim of the Roman emperors?

**Author's Lack of Faith**

Although during his lifetime Jesus had told his disciples that he would
"… be
36-Matt. 26:31-57.
37-Commentary of John's Gospel; p 384.

killed, and be raised again the third day",38 whoever told the
disciples on that day that 'Jesus has risen', they would not believe
him, until Jesus himself appeared to them and upbraided them with their
unbelief and hardness of heart."39 When the disciples of Jesus act like
this, what is to be expected from the writers who had followed them?

**Mark**

Mark was Barnabas' cousin40 and was a friend to Paul, Barnabas and
Peter. Quite possibly he had been taught Christian beliefs by Peter; for
Peter addresses him as his son. His association with and devotion to
Paul and Peter who were both dishonest is a living witness that he was
misled; for in order to know people, the best means is to know their
masters and friends. Furthermore, Floyd Philson writes:

"Peter imagined that Mark was not firm in serving Jesus."41 Hence it
becomes clear that Mark was not even trusted by Peter.

**Luke**

He is an unknown man who was in the same footing with misled and
misguided Paul. The Persian Bible Dictionary writes: "His personal
history, before and after meeting Paul, is either unknown or based upon
ambiguous unidentifiable stories."

**Jacob, the Brother of Jesus**

He was the same person who in response to the people's inclination
hatched a conspiracy aimed at instilling the necessity of rejecting the
Mosaic Law and openly declared: "…My sentence is that we should trouble
not them, which from among the Gentiles are turned to God." By this
statement, he trampled all but few of the Torah's injunctions. Although
Jesus had said, "Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the
prophets; I am not come to destroy but fulfill. For verily I say unto
you, till heavens and earth pass, one jot or one tottle shall in no wise
pass from the law, till all be fulfilled." (Matt. 5:17-18)

**Paul**

There is no evidence available for knowing him except the writings of
his friend and colleague, Mark. Moreover, he has committed certain acts
each of which is enough by itself as an adequate proof and concrete
evidence of his deviations, such as the conspiracy he staged for
abolishing the need of observing the Torah; for Paul

38-Matt. 16:21.
39-Mark. 16:12.
40-Paul's epistle. 4:10.
41-The key to New Testament; p. 25.

was one of the supporters of such action and a member of that Cabal.
What has been said so far clearly demonstrates that should we ignore the
events that had taken place in the early Christian era, we still cannot
be optimistic about the New Testament and consider it as being reliable,
for the authors thereof had not been qualified and trustworthy.

More startling is the fact that despite their contradictory and
superstitious statements, the Christians introduce these authors as
inspired by the divine revelation and the Holy Spirit, even though they
have no proof supporting this idea except the assertions of these pretty
unknown or notorious authors themselves.

Let us hope for the day when the Christian intellectuals would turn
back against all these superstitious beliefs, and become unanimous with
us so that together, and under the prospering standard of Islam, we
would achieve real truths. Amen!


**Chapter 11: What is The Eucharist?**

Fighting for its very own survival, and since it lacks correct and
encompassing teachings that would attract intellectuals, Christianity
tries to keep for itself, through "False" rituals, the gullible and
fanatic people, whose number, unfortunately, is not few. The thought and
deeds which the holy fathers teach for this purpose are generally
unsubstantiated and the product of their own delusions.

Unconscious of this fact, the church followers do not ask for proof and
blindly follow the fathers. Now the holy fathers discuss the concept of
The Trinity, then they stage a Eucharist ceremony, imagining that thus
they create a thrill of excitement in the hearts of Christians. They are
unaware that these rites would deliver yet another blow to the
foundations of Christianity. They (the holy fathers) say that it would
be good to kill two birds with one stone, by mixing fun and revelry,
with a so-called religious action.

Presently we would explain the fact behind this "holy deed" to you,
dear reader:

The Eucharist, or the Wine and Breed Ritual On Christmas Eve, the
Christians make the following ceremony in the churches:

The Archbishop orders his acolytes to make dough from good flour, bake
a loaf of unlived bread and bring it to him. Then the Holy Father takes
the loaf of bread and wine to the church and after tolling the bell,
prepares the Christians for performing the great ceremony. They all file
in one rank and the priest pours the wine into a silver bowl and wraps
the bread in a beautiful kerchief. Then he passes the rank of Christians
and faces the East, reciting incantations and prayers while holding the
loaf of bread. Following the supplication, he prostrates before the
bread, then all those present would do the same for they believe that
after the supplication, the dough of the bread transforms into the flesh
of Jesus.42

**The Wine Grail**

The Holy Father then holds the cup of wine and addresses the
congregation saying: "Our (lord and savior) Jesus, before death took the
Grail of wine and gave it to his disciples saying: "this is my blood."
(Mark 14:24) Having said this, the priest himself bows before the cup
and those in attendance must also follow suit.

Then, while saying prayers, he breaks the bread and holds it in his
hand, while another priest brings the Grail of wine. Then one by one,
those present 42-John Alder writes test during ninth century, the
seminarians claimed that the douhg would turn into the flesh and the
wine would turn into the blood of ... gradually this opinion found
general acceptance until it became in- corporated Into the Christian
faith by 1215 AD.

come forward; and the holy father still reciting prayers places in
their mouths a piece of that bread which they swallow immediately
without biting into it, for if they bite into it the flesh of Jesus
would be harmed. One must ask why the flesh of Jesus, i.e. the unlived
bread, is not harmed when they tear it to pieces. Then all take a sip of
wine, and by eating bread and drinking wine, all of them become the
Father and the Son. And all their sins are forgiven. Whoever wants to
repent must do this, and this is currently the standard practice in all
Roman Catholic Churches.

This is but a sample of the ideas and deeds of Christianity, a faith
whose practitioners believe that beatitude solely lies in the light of
its teachings. Moreover, as a part of the ceremony, all unanimously call
Jesus the Lord, the only Son of God and begotten by The Father; and
confess that he is not a creature but sharing the same essence with the
Father.

**Unlivened Bread and the Flesh of Jesus**

Now in order to better explain this decadent idea and this act, take
note of the following:

1) How then Jesus, who according to these gentlemen had been crucified
about two millennia ago, can be turn to pieces in thousands of churches,
and up in the bellies of millions of Christians and thereby make them
all Gods? What sort of scientific discipline proves that this bread and
this wine are transformed into the flesh and blood of Jesus and what
sort of connection exists between Christ and this physical food?

2) If each of those pieces of bread that a Christian eats were a whole
Jesus, then it would be necessary for the Lord to create each year
several million Jesus in the form of unlivened bread so as to feed the
Christians. Moreover, during his lifetime, each Christian, depending
upon his age must have eaten 50, 60, 80 or even 100 whole Jesus... Is
such a statement believable?

And if they say that they tear Jesus to pieces and eat him, no doubt
the crime of the holy fathers would be no less severe than that of Judas
Iscariot who betrayed Jesus to the Jews, for they tear Jesus to pieces
every year.

**Strange Statement**

By saying the unlivened bread is digested, the Christians have made a
great insult to Jesus, for they are forced to say that it goes through
the same stages as other foods, but if they say that it is not digested
and absorbed then one must say that every Christian, who has lived for
hundred years, must harbor hundred Jesus in his stomach. Truly how much
space is there in one's stomach to take in hundred Jesus with earthly
bodies?

The superstitious nature of The Eucharist became such a widely spoken
topic among Europeans and other people, that in 1551 AD the Roman
Catholic Church was forced to make a revision in it but still it could
not thoroughly abandon the Eucharist superstitions.

By what stated so far, the superstitious nature of The Eucharist comes
into light, for it does not conform to any laws of natural or rational
sciences; rather it directly opposes them. In this ritual, drinking of
wine, which by the assertion of medical scientists and The Holy Bible
itself, is a dangerous fluid that disrupts both mind and body, has been
incorporated into the Christian faith as a sacred act by which the
Christians become both the Father and the Son.

More specifically, if it is said that unlivened bread is not digested
and remains in body forever, this foolish statement make not only the
natural scientist, but also even any child, to laugh at it. Furthermore,
the present gospels do not approve this act. John Alder, a Christian
scholar writes:

"Protestants dispute with Catholics about two subjects:

I-That the Eucharist and other sacred rites have been taught by Jesus,
for there are many arguments against it, but none to support it. II-That
these holy rituals are means and modes of salvation, Whereas the New
Testament strongly emphasizes that we are saved through faith "and not
by performing rituals. (Therefore there is no salvation in the acts,
rites and ceremonies of the Eucharist). May God guide all of us to the
right path?"


**Chapter 12: Does Christ Suffer For Our Sins?**

"And no bearer of burden can bear the burden of another..." (The Holy
Qur'an 17:15) One thing that is becoming increasingly dear with the
rapid progress of science is the need to observe divine precepts.
Although man has greatly benefited from the thoughts of scientists and
wise men in the past, he acknowledges that he cannot fully unveil the
mysteries of creation with the help of his finite mind and offer and
express comprehensive, useful and unchangeable considerations regarding
the problems of life.

He realizes that many laws and theories that are postulated around the
globe would, after a time, display their flaws, so that the legislators
and theorists are forced to abandon them.

Fortunately, some scientists have confessed that divine laws
originating from the Creator of the universe, i.e. the Omniscient God,
form the only program that can lead humanity towards absolute prosperity
and perfection. Therefore, prophets have tried to introduce people to
this progressive program and have always seriously fought with the
belief that another person will be punished or sacrificed instead of the
guilty party, and have openly declared that everyone is responsible for
his own deeds.

In the Book of Ezekiel one can still read: "The soul that sinneth, it
shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither
shall the father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be
upon him" (Ezek. 18:20).

Belief in suffering punishment and paying ransom instead of somebody
else would have made a great number of people refuse abiding by divine
precepts, for, in their opinion, another person would receive punishment
in their stead. Thus apart from being prevented to develop themselves
towards perfection, they would have also dealt an irreparable blow to
the interest of the society.

Jesus Christ, as soon as he received his divine mission, followed the
same rule and drove people towards religious obligations and stressed:
"Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets. I am not
come to destroy but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, till heavens
and earth pass, one jot or one brittle shall in no wise pass from the
law, till all be fulfilled."

"Whoever, therefore, shall break one of these last commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven, but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called
great in the kingdom of heaven." (Matt. 5:17-19)

But in the tide of the events, and harmful publicity launched by the
Roman emperors in the early days of Christianity, the Christians, like
Buddhists and Hindus, following the example of St. Paul, said: "The only
Son of God, or the Lord Himself descended upon earth to expunge people
from sin by dying on The Cross." They stated: "Jesus Christ was put on
the Cross in order to shoulder the burden of our sins. He thus took the
curse, so as to deliver us from the curse of the canon and the holy laws
that we deserve."

In his epistle to Galatians, Paul writes: "Christ hath redeemed us from
the curse of law, being made a curse for us; for it is written cursed is
every one that hangeth on a tree" (Galatians 3:13).

Furthermore, in the same chapter he adds: "Before faith came, we were
kept under the law, shut up unto the faith, which should afterwards be
revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is
come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children
of God by faith in Christ Jesus." (Gal. 3:23 - 26).

In brief, they had thus fulfilled their last wish and said: "Having
abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments
contained in ordinances" (Ephesians 2:15)

Obviously, they had nothing else in their minds than achieving their
evil desires and irresponsibility!

Sometimes, in order to avoid any scandal, Christians base their
arguments on parts of unreliable old books. For instance, they say:
"When they put Christ on The Cross, he drank vinegar, just as David had
foretold in Psalms, 69. So it is clear that the story of the putting
Christ on The Cross in order to redeem us from our sins is based on
reality."

Studying David's Psalms, Chapter 69, we notice that the verses therein
do not deal with Jesus Christ at all, but with David himself. The verses
are: "God save me... Thou hast known my reproach, and my shame, and my
dishonor. Mine adversaries are all before thee. Reproach hath broken my
heart and I am full of heaviness; and I looked for some to take pity,
but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none. They gave me
also gall for my meat; and in my thirst, they gave me vinegar to
drink."

You will notice that the above passage has nothing to do with Christ's
Crucifixion to save the Christians from the restraints imposed by the
canon. But since there is a mention of vinegar, and since in their
belief, Christ, too, had drunken vinegar in the last hours of his life,
Christians have taken them as forecasting Crucifixion and atonement.
Truly, are such inferences not ridiculous?

From what has been said so far, it becomes evident that observance of
divine commandments is among the most important and necessary issues;
belief in shouldering someone else's sins is the greatest superstition
and it is never correct to accept it just because it has been mentioned
m the New Testament. Rather, one must say that the New Testament is not
compatible with the Old Testament and the conduct of the prophets and
Jesus Christ. This incompatibility is yet another proof of its
erroneousness.

As a German author, named Ernest Die Bunsen writes:

"The Crucifixion and atonement for sins are but mere fabrications made
by St. Paul and his disciples who had never seen Jesus Christ with their
own eyes. Therefore one cannot maintain them as the fundaments of true
Christianity." Furthermore, Barnabas flatly denies The Crucifixion of
Jesus in his Gospel and states: "Judas of Iscariot, mistakenly taken for
Christ, was crucified." \* \* \* Now if you ask: "How could one discover
the comprehensive divine laws that could guide human beings to happiness
and prosperity?" our answer is: "by studying The Holy Qur'an, along with
the words of the Holy Prophet of Islam and the impeccable leaders who
succeeded him. These words and maxims are available in authoritative
Shi'ite books.

The Qur'an is the only book that has addressed the basic issues and
problems of life, so that it never grows out-dated and obsolete and
fulfills the needs of its followers thereof. In this respect, The Qur'an
is unlike the present Old and New Testaments which, apart from being
distorted and containing many mistakes and superstitious passages, are
short of providing precepts and would never be able to fulfill all the
needs of human beings and be considered the sources of guidance and rule
for life.

Briefly, what has been mentioned so far makes it clear that the subject
of Christ's atonement and suffering for our sins would prevent man from
his individual and social development. Inasmuch as man moves forward, he
would become aware of the superstitious nature of this belief.


