Chapter 13: Christmas!
======================

Every year when the Christian New Year begins, Christians hold a
celebration which is called Christmas. On Christmas, they go to
nightclubs and spend a night of debauchery.

The motive behind this celebration is plausibly to mark the anniversary
of the birth of Christ and to glorify that great divine man, but in
reality the Christians hold the celebration in order to quench their
sensual thirsts. Thus they take to actions which Christ himself detests
very much.

On the Christmas evening, the Christians spare no pleasure and avoid no
obscene actions including dancing, singing, drinking, sex etc. Obviously
these actions have nothing to do with the glorification of the memory of
Christ, the divine man. Now we can see what is Christmas Day and how it
is celebrated.

After the death of Christ, his divine system became subject to
alterations by profit-making Church officials who hid the real face of
Jesus Christ behind the veil of obscurantism myths and superstition such
as the concept of "The Father and The Son" and Christ's "Divinity".
Certain traditions were established by the Holy Fathers, which resulted
in nothing but shame for the Christians. Christmas, too, is one of these
artificial traditions carried out in such a way.

All prophets of God, including Jesus Christ himself have banned
drunkenness, debaucheries and orgies. Even in the altered Bibles there
are phrases which ban such obscene actions.

The book of Isaiah, 5:11-12, says: "Woe unto them that rise up early in
the morning, that they may follow strong drink; that continue until
night, till wine inflame them! And the harp, and the viol, the tablet,
and pipe, and wine are in their feasts."

But, unfortunately, with such an explicit ban, the Christians bring
wine and music into their religious services, consecrating Christ in
such a way. Although we have faced some facts in above lines and
realized a truth, we do not intend to prevent the Christians from evil
acts and disillusion them.

The intellectual Christians themselves have long abandoned the
superstitious aspect of their religion and discarded it. Their leaders,
however, have not stopped their desperate efforts...

Now it should be asked what name we are going to give to these acts. Is
such a vain feast held in order to gain a national honor? Is it a step
made towards social progress? The answers to these questions will
undoubtedly be negative.

These extravaganzas at the end of the Christian year are a submission
to frivolities and wantonness and a confession to a kind of defeat by
unjust sensual desires. These are reactionary and incorrect imitations,
the repetition of which is painful and shameful in the eyes of the
far-sighted Muslims. In other words, these actions are the most vulgar
"Western-orientedness" with grave consequences, exposing all our
religious authorities and tradition to utter destruction and permanent
extermination.

It is worthwhile explaining about the nature of Western-mindedness or
Western-intoxication. It is something like being afflicted with a
malady, which rots the Organism from within. You can imagine a butterfly
whose shell and wings have remained intact but whose interior body is
worn away.

Yes, Western-mindedness or Western-orientation is a dangerous disease
the grave consequence of which is deadlier than cholera. One must
attempt to avoid it because it has unfortunately spread among many
people. Under the banner of Westernization, we are succumbed to
estrangement from our traditional clothes, houses,

foods, and literature, press and, more dangerously of all, from our
culture. We bring up Western-minded people, think Western-mindedly and
look for a solution for our problems in a Westernized manner.

So every far-sighted Muslim, who has preserved his Islamic personality
and mind, knows well that his participation in such feasts only results
in disaster for the Muslim community.

Do our Islamic conscience and sentiment and our brotherly love allow us
to cooperate with a Christianity which for centuries has been the great
enemy of the Muslims, killed millions of our brothers and still
continues to do so? Should we still take part in their luxurious
feasts?

Finally we ask our Muslim brothers and sisters to avoid holding
Christmas celebrations and any actions which are dominated by
Western-mindedness and superstition and preserve their Islamic
personality and purify themselves from the shameful Western-
intoxication.

Imam Ali, peace is upon him, said: "He, who prevails over his sensual
desires, will have preserved his real personality."


**Chapter 14: Wine-making, The First Miracle of Christ**

Scientific discoveries explicitly show the countless harm of alcoholic
drinks. Before these discoveries, however, the divine religions,
inspired with the eternal source of knowledge, that is, God the
Omnipotent and the Omniscient, warned their followers against alcoholic
drinks and enumerated their evils and harms.

Unfortunately, during long period of time, the Christian Holy Fathers,
for various unspecified reasons (!), not only have actually prescribed
the use of alcoholic drinks, but have also, by altering some passages of
the Bible, fabricated verses concerning the drinking of the old
prophets, which makes ashamed every wise and faithful person.

Regretfully, winemaking and wine drinking are already not only allowed
and practiced among the Christians, but also have entered their rituals
and religious services.

As described in Chapter 11, The Eucharist (Holy Communion), being a
religious and sacred service to the church authorities, is celebrated
with the taking of bread and wine and the world Christians drink in
their greatest religious service millions of liters of wine for the love
of Jesus, the innocent prophet of God.

**The Wine and the Miracle**

Worst of all, the Christians' Holy Bible considers winemaking the first
miracle of Christ. The Gospel according to John, chapter 2, verses 1-11,
says: "And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and
the mother of Jesus was there:

And both Jesus was called, and his disciples, to the marriage.

And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They
have no wine.

Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine hour is
not yet come.

His mother saith unto the servants, whatsoever he saith unto you, do
it. And there were sent there six water pots of stone, after the manner
of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.
Jesus saith unto them; fill the water pots with water. And they filled
them up to the brim.

And he saith unto them, Draw out now, and bear into the governor of the
feast. And they bare it.

When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine,
and knew not whence it was: (but the servants, which drew the water,
knew ;) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom,

And saith unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good
wine; and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse; but thou
hast kept the good wine until now.


This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested
forth his glory; and his disciples believed in him."

We read in the Old Testament, Genesis, and the following lines about
Noah: "And Noah began to be a husbandman, and he planted a vineyard: And
he drank of the wine and was drunk; and he was uncovered within his
tent. And Ham the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and
told his two brethren without.

And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their
shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father;
and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's
nakedness. And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son
had done unto him."

Again the Old Testament says about Lot whom his two daughters made
drink wine. When he was drunk, he lay down with his daughters and
conceived them who bore him two sons.

**Contradictory Sentences**

This is the way the Bible of the Christians introduce the divine
prophets who, in reality, were the guiding lights of humanity and thus
had to be pure of any corruption and evil.

Of course we do not expect more than this from these fabricated books,
but what is surprising is that in these very books we come across
phrases which forbid the drinking of wine. In Leviticus, Chapter 10,
verses 8 and 9, we read:

"And the Lord spoke into Aaron, saying: Do not drink wine nor strong
drink, thou, or the sons with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of
the congregation, lest thee die: it shall be a statute for ever
throughout your generations." The book of Isaiah, chapter 5, verse 11,
says:

"Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow
strong drink; that continue till night, till wine inflames them!" In the
same book, chapter 28, verses 7 and 8, we also read: "But they also have
erred through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way; the
priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink, they are
swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink; they
err in vision, they stumble in judgment. Tables become full of vomit and
filthiness; so that no place will be left clean."

With these explicit sentences being written in the Old Testament,
forbidding alcoholic drinks, it is not clear why the Gospels represent
the Prophets of God as wine-makers and wine drinkers.

**As for Islam**

Now the world prostrates itself before the Holy Qur'an, for this Divine
Book has forbidden the alcoholic drinks and devoted a special campaign
against them: "O ye who believe! Strong drink and games of chance and
idols and diving arrows are only an infamy of Satan's handiwork. Leave
it aside in order that ye may succeed. Satan seeketh only to cast among
you enmity and hatred by means of strong drink and games of chance, and
to turn you from remembrance of Allah and from His worship. Will ye then
have done?43"

Now it is worthwhile giving a summary of the medical theories of the
twentieth century on the dangers of alcoholic drinks and then examining
world religions to see which of them guarantees the happiness of
mankind. Is it a religion which prohibits alcoholic drinks or a religion
the precepts of which have undergone many alterations and in which
winemaking is considered one of its miracles and even a religious
ritual;

According to the reports made by medical and health centers and the
experiences of the researchers especially the physiological and
biological experts, when the alcohol enters the body, only a small
portion of it dissolves and disappears and the bulk of it enters the
blood circulation which sends it to all organs.

Since alcohol is a poisonous substance and, unlike nutritious elements,
is extraneous to the body, it harms every body organ and attacks them in
various harmful ways. Because of its evil effects especially because it
coagulates albuminoid substances, it reduces perceptibly the sensitivity
and activities of the cells and tissues of the body organs, corrupting
as a whole the kidneys, the stomach, the liver the mouth, the gullet and
the intestines.

The digestive canal and its mucous membrane are most damaged. Alcohol
deprives the user's offspring from good health. It has also bad effects
on respiratory organs and blood circulation, especially on the heart and
the veins.

It indiscriminately results in arterio-sclerosis (which is the main
cause of heart attacks and brain damages) and hardens and spoils the
liver tissues. The stomach pain and intestinal pain occur in alcoholics
(even those who drink beer much more than in non-alcoholic people. The
nerve center, being most sensitive to alcohol, is worst damaged.

In brief, alcohol and all kinds of liquor are effective narcotic drugs,
which cause nervous insensibility, destroy health, and kill the sense of
honor and galantry. As a result, a person addicted to alcohol gives in
to every state of humiliation and is ready to do every evil act and ends
in wretchedness and misery.

It is quite right to say that the alcoholic drink is one of the major
causes which have annihilated the independence, freedom, natural wealth
and resources of the nations, because it diminishes the mental power and
the sense of understanding of the addicted people who are led to sell
their precious resources and their national and spiritual wealth and
honor to a cup of wine.

43-The Holy Qur'an, Sura "The Table Spread", verses 90-91. These verses
make it quite clear that drinking, no matter how much, is Forbidden by
the Holy Qur'an, according to which the quantity of drink has nothing to
do with its illegitimacy.


There is abundant evidence to this fact, which cannot be mentioned in
this book because of limited space. It was this deadly poison, which
brought to an end the glory of the Spanish Muslim community.


