Part Two : Alterations of the Prophecies
========================================

Now we are going to explain the alterations made in these prophecies by
the people of Scriptures (Jews and Christians) and uncover the truth in
accordance with available documents.

These alterations have been made in order to prevent the Muslims from
proving the fact that Muhammad is a true Prophet by referring to the
prophecies included in the Old Testament. The Christians and the Jews
saw that the Muslims used these prophecies to their own advantage.
Therefore, instead of giving a clear answer to the Muslims -if they had
such an answer at all- they began to make alterations in the Bible.

Deuteronomy (18:15-22) says: "Jahova, thy Lord, will raise up unto thee
a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto
him ye shall hearken". In the verse 18 of the same chapter God is quoted
as saying: "I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren,
like unto thee..." In the verse 15 there appears the words "midst of
thee".

In the repetition of this statement in the verse 18, this phrase is
omitted. The phrase "From the midst of thee" together with the words "of
thy brethren" make the reader notice that an alteration has been made in
these phrases, especially because other Hebrew versions of the Old
Testament (the sources of our translation) are full of errors persisting
to this day through centuries.

In the footnotes added to the Hebrew Bible some of these errors are
indicated. The picture of a page from the Hebrew version of the Bible is
printed here in which there are ten mistakes and are corrected in the
footnotes. Significantly, each page of the Hebrew Bible contains several
enormous errors.

It seems that the original phrase must have been "from the midst of
their brethren",45 that is, in the form appearing in the verse 18, or
"from the midst of thy relatives, thy brethren"46.

In the Latin version of the Bible, translated by St. Jerome in the
fourth Century from the Hebrew and Greek texts, the phrase "from the
midst of thy nation" is used instead of "from the midst of thee." In the
English translation made by Knox from Latin the passage is as follows.
"The Lord thy God will raise up for thee a prophet like myself, of thy
own race, a brother of thy own.

It is to him thou must listen." This English translation which is made
from the Latin version of St. Jerome substitutes the phrase "from the
midst of thee" with "of thy own race", followed by the explanatory
phrase "a brother of thy own", which suits the sentence quite
beautifully and confirms our guess about the Hebrew phrase. As it is
seen, this translation omits "from the midst."

This shows that the phrase "from the midst" was not recorded in the
Hebrew and Greek versions of the time of St. Jerome in the Christian
fourth Century. Only in the unauthorized versions of that time this
phrase could be seen. We can 45-If the two phrases have really been
so,

then the Prophet in question is bound to be the Prophet of Islam, for
Muhammad, peace be upon him, was among the brethren of the children of
Isreal, that is, a descendent of Samel, who was the brother of Isaac,
the ancestor of the Israelites. As a result, the phrases do not apply to
Joshua and Jesus Christ, who were among the children of Israel.

46-If the two phrases have really been so, then the Prophet in question
is bound to be the Prophet of Islam, for Muhammad, peace be upon him,
was among the brethren of the children of Isreal, that is, a descendent
of Samel, who was the brother of Isaac, the ancestor of the Israelites.
As a result, the phrases do not apply to Joshua and Jesus Christ, who
were among the children of Israel.

realize the fact that the prophecy appearing in Deuteronomy, chapter
18, does not apply to Jesus Christ as we refer to the phrase in Gospel
of John, Chapter 1:19-22, and the foot-note annexed to it. There, three
persons have been named: Christ, Elias and "the Prophet."

The footnote indicates that "that Prophet" is the same Prophet whose
advent has been predicted by Moses in Deuteronomy (18:15-19). Thus it
becomes clear that the Prophet referred to in Deuteronomy is not Jesus
Christ.

In the section dealing with the "Third Prophecy", we quoted from the
dream of Isaiah the Prophet the following sentence: "He saw ... a couple
of riders, one on a donkey, and the other on a camel."

As we said, by the "one on a donkey" it is meant Jesus who rode on an
ass, and by the "other on a camel" it is meant the Prophet of Islam who
rode on a camel, as the Arabian Desert life required it. However, in
various Bible versions, this sentence has been altered into:

"â€¦He saw a chariot with a couple of horsemen, a chariot of asses, and a
chariot of camels."

In the translation of Walim Glen, which is known as Fazel Khani
version, the phrase is "An ass load and a camel load."

Those who know Hebrew notice that these are wrong translations and the
true translation is the one noted before. The early versions of the
Bible are, of course, free from this error. For example an Arabic
version published in Rome in 1671 has rendered it as "one riding on an
ass, one riding on a camel."

Another Arabic version of the Old Testament, published in Mosul in 1875
is free from such an alteration. This translation, too, has it as "One
riding on an ass, one riding on a camel."

The Latin version of St. Jerome has rendered the phrases correctly: "A
chariot he saw, with two out-riders, one that rode on an ass, and one
that rode on a camel; looked long at them, watching them eagerly."

As for the motive behind these alterations, the fact is that for years,
Muslim theologists have been referring to this dream as one of the
proofs of Muhammad being raised up as a Prophet of God. Late at the
second century of Hejira Imam Reza, peace be upon him, argued for the
first time in favor of this prophecy in a debate attended by Ma'amoun,

the Abbasid Caliph, who had arranged it for the Imam to discuss with
various religious sects. At any rate, since this phrase of Old Testament
has more than one thousand years been referred to by the Muslims, and
since the Hebrew version has been repeatedly published for many years,
the people of the Scriptures are unable to do anything at the moment
except make hypocritical changes in current translations.

It is up to our dear reader to make his own judgment. If these
translators believe that the book of Isaiah is a divine book, then why
do they not fear God when they translate it incorrectly?
Not only in this case, but also in hundreds of other cases, they have
been sticking, in respect of their own "Holy Bible", to an unfounded
prejudice, the discussion about which would take a long chapter. Are the
errors in the original texts not enough to prevent them from making
further alterations in their translations?


