Chapter 18: the Trinity Or the Worship of Three Gods
====================================================

There is an inherent need in human nature, which drives him towards
theology. Such a need and natural inclination existing in human beings
and other creatures are, in themselves, the clearest proof to the fact
of the existence of a perfect and peerless God who has to be free from
any deficiency and need.

Otherwise, it is essential that God, too, should be in need of and
dependant on another God and is considered among the creatures. For this
reason, the theologists declare God free from any property, which
introduces Him as a dependent being.

For instance, they say that God is not a compound being, because every
compound matter such as sun-light, which is composed of heat, light and
chemical process, is dependent on its ingredients and on a factor which
has mixed these ingredients in certain proportions and this is in
disagreement with the real meaning of God who has to be independent of
everything.47

They also say that God has to be only one, because if we imagine two or
three Gods, this makes it essential to believe in "composition" as
regards the divine being, because each God needs a different thing to be
mixed with Him in order to be distinguished from another God, and
composition, as we have just said, is in disagreement with
needlessness.

Therefore, God is absolute and principally thinking in terms of
polytheism and the worship of three beings (The Trinity) do not agree
with belief in real God, the Creator of the universe.48 Despite this,
unfortunately before the birth of Christ, a group of people began to
believe in the concept of the trinity and polytheism.

Because of their narrow- mindedness and because of a series of
manifestations of the power of God, these beliefs found adherents in
India, Rome, Egypt and other regions.

The Influence of the Concept of the Trinity among the followers of
Christ Jesus, the son of Mary, like other prophets persistently
prohibited the people from believing in polytheism and atheism and
warned: "O children of Israel, worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord. Lo!
Whose ascribeth partners unto Allah hath been forbidden paradise. His
abode is the fire. For evildoers there will be no helpers." (The Holy
Qur'an, verse72).

When the Christ's lifetime came to an end, there followed a series of
bitter events in the early centuries of Christianity. As a result many
of the pagan beliefs and traditions found their way into the Christian
religion. Many followers of Christianity came to believe them as an
integral part of their religion.

47-this shows teat God should not be compared with an ocean and it
should not be mid that Christ was filled with it as much as it was
possible. For it is necessary that God should be a physical being, so
that a portion of its body might be separated from it and transingrated
into the another's body.

Evidently, the matter is composed of ingredients and this fact does not
correspond with the nature of God who is not a composite being. 48-It is
worthwhile mentioning that the argument for monotheism is not confined
to the method mentioned above. There are more other reasoning given in
books of philosophy and logic.

Dr. Gustave Le Bon, the well-known French sociologist, writes: "During
the first five hundred years of its life, Christianity continued to
evolve, assimilating the philosophical and religious aspects of Greek
and Oriental culture,

and be- came a mixture of Oriental beliefs especially Egyptian and
Persian beliefs which had spread about the first Christian century in
the former pagan regions of Europe ... The people substituted the new
concept of the Trinity (The Father, The Son and The Holy Spirit) for the
old system of the trinity (Jupiter, Juno and Minerva) and continued
their traditional rituals. The Christian saints replaced the old minor
gods."

William James Durant, the author of "The Story of Civilization", after
describing John, his book of Revelations and the Gospel of John, writes:
"Christianity has not abolished Polytheism, but has adopted it.

The moribund Hellenic spirit was revived by the traditions and
theological principles of the Churchâ€¦ The doctrines of God's trinity...
and the survival of the individual to be rewarded or punished came from
Egypt. Christianity has been the last great creation of the ancient
pagan world."

The followers of the Trinity constantly change their reasoning
according to time and place in order not to be defeated by other
doctrines.

Sometimes they say: "By the Trinity we do not mean that three different
Gods exist, which contradicts with monotheism. But we mean that God,
like the ray of sun which is composed of heat, light and chemical
process, is composed of three essences: the Father, the Son and the Holy
Spirit."

The people with such a concept, however, do not realize that, with this
way of thinking and reasoning, they categorize God among material
mixtures such as plant and animal genera which are always dependant on
their components and extraneous factors.

Sometimes they admit that God is absolute, indivisible and not
composite, but when the question of the Trinity is raised, they keep
silent, because they see that if they say that there exist three Gods
they will contradict monotheism and if they say that there is only one
God, this contradicts their own view that God is composed of three
elements.

Instead, they say: "This is a mystery which no one can understand by
his human intelligence. In other words, this is a Church secret and
nobody can understand it in near future..." They have heard that human
beings, with their imperfect minds, cannot discover the truth of divine
nature,

but they have not wanted to realize that everybody knows that the
proposition "A is at one composite and not composite, and is at one
solitary and not solitary" is contradictory in itself and one part of it
negates the other part.

Recently, however, when the Christians have happened to debate face to
face with some young intellectual Muslims they have often denied the
idea of the Trinity and said:

"The statements 'Jesus is God' and 'Jesus is the Son of God' should not
be taken at their face-values. These sentences only serve to respect and
glorify the superb, heavenly personality of Jesus Christ. The fact is
that He is only a great creature of God." By saying that, they reject on
the surface the resolution of the Council of Nicea, which introduces
Jesus Christ as an uncreated being. They also pretend not to have heard
of such a resolution.

In any case, the Trinity is a superstitious belief, which Christianity
has had to abandon in the course of several centuries. A day will come
when Christianity will accept what the Holy Qur'an says on this subject:
"They indeed have disbelieved who say: Lo! Allah is the Messiah, son of
Mary.

Say: Who then can do aught against Allah, if He had willed to destroy
the Messiah, son of Mary, and his mother and everyone on earth? Allah's
is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is between
them. He createth what He will. And Allah is able to do all things"
(Sura: "The Table spread", verse 17).

"The Messiah, son of Mary, was no other than a messenger, messengers
(the like of whom) had passed away before him. And his mother was a
saintly woman. And they both used to eat (earthly) food." (Sura "The
Table spread", verse 75).

Then how is it possible for a human being that, like other ordinary
people, needs food and other requisites of everyday life, to be God? The
Holy Qur'an addresses the Christians as follows: "O people of the
Scriptures! Do not exaggerate in your religion nor utter aught
concerning Allah save the truth.

The Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, was only a messenger of Allah, and His
word, which He conveyed unto Mary, and a spirit from Him. So believe in
Allah and His messengers, and say not "Three" -Cease! (It is) better for
you!- Allah is only One God. Far is it removed from His Transcendent
Majesty that He should have a son His is all that is in the heavens and
all that is in the earth..." (Sura "Women", verse 171).

From what we have said in this section it becomes quite clear that the
idea of God being composed of three elements (the Trinity) has no
heavenly basis and does not consort with the belief in real One God.
This concept is among the fabrications of the "holy Fathers."

We pray to Almighty God to guide all the Christians to the path of
truth seeking and honesty.


