Preface
=======

When I was a student at a Catholic high school in Queens, New York, I
was taught that although philosophy is the mother of the sciences, she
is also the handmaid of theology. Sometimes the dialogue between
philosophy and theology may have seemed to have taken the form of orders
given by the theological mistress to her erudite but obedient maid, but
that was a long time ago, if ever it was at all.

The idea that philosophy should be in service to theology has been
rejected in the West by most philosophers, and many theologians, at
least since the Enlightenment period of European thought. But instead of
bringing about the emancipation of philosophy, the result has been to
place philosophy at the service of her own children, the natural and
human sciences.

Scientific realists would determine being itself by the ultimate
dictates of science. So, where does this leave the relationship between
philosophy and theology? Many see it as forever broken off, and many
Christian theologians think that this is to the advantage of theology.
As they see it, philosophy was never a very good servant, for it was
always raising more problems than it solved.

Of course, this attitude is not unknown to Muslin scholars. It is easy
to find Muslims who are suspicious of philosophy; especially Islamic
philosophy; there are even those, like Ghazali, who would accuse
philosophy of blasphemy. Others would be satisfied if philosophy would
mind its own business and stay out of the way of theological doctrine.

Philosophy, however, refuses to be ignored. It has a way of making
itself noticed even by those theologians who wish it would just go away.
Philosophy accuses those who neglect her of lacking reason, and since it
proclaims that reason is the difference between man and the other
animals, this accusation amounts to the charge that those who neglect
her are subhuman.

So, after the rise and fall of positivism, after philosophy had been
declared to be a servant of the natural sciences, assigned to clean up
left over questions, philosophy arrives in the new dress of philosophy
of religion, coyly proffering her own questions for the theologian. On
the surface, most or many of the questions are those which have been
familiar to theologians for centuries: How can the existence of God be
proved?

How can God know what free humans will do? Can God make a stone so large
that He Himself cannot lift it? How can the eternal God know the
temporal material world? And so forth. While on the surface, these
appear to be the same questions familiar to theologians since reason was
first applied to religion, once one becomes familiar with the
contemporary discussions of these questions it becomes obvious that the
philosophy of religion is not as innocent as she may seem.

Her questions are not those of a naive girl seeking to understand her
faith as best she can. Philosophy has served the sciences for years, and
its servitude to the sciences has required countless compromises with
humanism, materialism, physicalism, naturalism, and other ideologies
antagonistic to religion.

When it raises its questions for the theologians, the arguments of all
these ideologies are ready and waiting for whatever response the
theologians may offer. If the theologian responds by rehearsing the
standard discussions to be found in traditional texts, whether Christian
or Islamic, he will be accused of ignorance and irrelevance to
contemporary concerns.

The philosophy of religion is by no means merely another name for
rational theology as traditionally understood, for the very standards of
reason which are applied to theological issues have changed. If the
theologian is not to be caught off guard, he must be prepared to
question these standards, and thus, to adopt an unfamiliar hypercritical
stance toward the cannons of reason themselves.

The dialogue between philosophy and theology today is not simply an
affair between the questioning mind of the philosopher and the pious
spirit of the theologian. Every question comes with unspoken
expectations of what sort of answer will be considered suitable. Every
search for a reason presupposes a standard of explanation. The
expectations and presuppositions which inform the philosophy of religion
are deeply coloured by the entire history of recent Western thought.

Since many of those who write and publish in the area of philosophy of
religion have been trained in analytic philosophy, the standards of
analytic philosophy, which are influenced to a great degree by
positivism, pragmatism, and the thinking of natural scientists, play an
important but subtle role in this field.

The situation is complicated by the fact that many philosophers -of
religion, and even more Christian theologians, are influenced more by
what is often called "continental philosophy" than by analytic
philosophy. Most of the important continental philosophers have been
from France or Germany, while the majority of analytic philosophers have
taught at American or British universities.

While philosophy in the U.S. has been dominated by analytic thought
throughout, most of the twentieth century, over the last ten or fifteen
years, continental thought has come to play a prominent role in American
philosophy. What is emerging is a "world philosophy," but one from which
the Islamic world is largely excluded.

The reason for this exclusion is not because of some conspiracy to
suppress Islamic thought, but because we Muslims have not seriously
attempted to enter the discussion. If we are to enter the discussion, we
must beware that it takes place in what is often hostile territory, in
the context of expectations, presuppositions, and standards of reasoning
many of which are quite foreign to those found in the Islamic sciences.


