Supplement 1
============

These issues must be kept in mind before the Muslim scholar attempts to
survey the questions contemporary philosophy of religion poses for
theology, where here, and in what follows, theology is to be understood
as including not merely kalam, but*\`irfan nazari* (theoretical gnosis),
religious ethics, and even some discussions of fiqh and usul. What
appears to be a dialogue between a philosopher who relies on pure reason
alone and a theologian is in reality a complex discussion about
philosophy, the sciences, theology and the various ideologies which have
influenced these broad areas of intellectual endeavor.

Perhaps the attitude of the Muslim scholar to the complexity of the
situation will be one of dismissal: The philosophy of religion is the
product of Western intellectual attitudes toward science and religion
and does not apply to the Islamic world. The conversation between
philosophy and theology is really a conversation between a Western
philosopher and a Christian theologian. However, we ignore the
philosophy of religion at our own peril.

The ideas and attitudes that inform the philosophy of religion are not
confined within the walls of a few universities in distant foreign
lands. They are part of the Western cultural atmosphere whose volume is
so large that it will find itself invading the Islamic world, or rather
has already started invading, whether anyone wants it to or not. The
international commerce in ideas-mostly Western ideas--cannot be slowed,
let alone stopped.

Faced with a trade imbalance, attempts may be made to preserve local
markets, but ultimately the only successful policy will be one in which
locally manufactured products of export quality are made widely
available. Since there are so many different kinds of Western
intellectual products on the market, we Muslims cannot hope to gain our
market share in all fields any time soon.

However, we can hope to compete aggressively in those areas in which
Islamic thought has demonstrated its strength in the past, and build on
this to expand into other areas. In order to compete in the
international market of ideas, Islamic thought must not only answer the
doubts raised by various Western thinkers, it must do so in a way that
is distinctively Islamic.

We cannot simply look at the answers Christians have given and then
search for an appropriate, hadith to make them seem Islamic. Serious
full time work has to be done to begin to formulate contemporary Islamic
theologies which are in harmony with the tradition of Islamic sciences,
especially*kalam* ,*falsafah* , and*\`irfan* .

With these points in mind, we can turn to some examples of the sorts of
questions raised by the philosophy of religion for the theologian.

One of the deepest areas to be surveyed is that of epistemology. This is
also an area to which medieval thinkers devoted less attention than our
contemporaries. How do we know that God exists? The traditional answer
given by Christians as well as Muslims was that we can formulate sound
deductive proofs whose premises are self-evident and whose conclusions
state the existence of God. The problem with this answer is that many of
the

premises which seemed self-evident enough in the past have now come to
be questioned.

Consider, for example, the role of the principle that an actual infinity
of causes is impossible. A number of Western philosophers, physicists
and mathematicians have come to doubt this principle. In defense of the
principle, an important book has been written in which some of the ideas
of Muslim philosophers are given attention: William Lane Craig's*The
Kalam Cosmological Argument* (New York: Harper & Row, 1979).

This is one of the rare cases in which ideas from the Islamic tradition
(particularly those of Abu Humid Ghazali) have been the subject of
discussion in the contemporary philosophy of religion. The continued
discussion of this work in scholarly journals sixteen years after the
publication of the book is testimony to its significance.

The important point is that what has seemed for centuries to be a
self-evident principle is now the topic of vigorous debate. At first
glance it seems that what we have here is a case of a principle of
reason defended in Islamic philosophy and theology pitted against the
modem skeptics of the West.

If we look closer, however, we find that the principle has undergone its
own evolution within the tradition of Islamic philosophy. By the time we
get to Sadr al-Muta'allihin the principle is limited to series of actual
causes of existence occurring simultaneously. The question that needs to
be addressed here is how the unqualified principle came to be qualified
in Islamic philosophy, for the unqualified principle was also taken by
some (such as Ghazali) to be a self-evident principle of reason, and the
version of the principle stilt defended by Craig is not subject to the
qualification of simultaneity!

In any case, what we find here is rather typical of the philosophy of
religion. Philosophers impressed with the principles employed in the
natural sciences or mathematics raise doubts about what had been
considered to be self-evident or nearly self-evident principles which
had been used as premises of proofs for the existence of God.

The result is an epistemological problem. What was once claimed to be
known is now doubted. The doubts raised are not unanswerable, but the
formulation of answers requires a fair degree of sophistication,
including a certain amount of familiarity with current physics and
mathematics. The debate about the cosmological argument and the new
physics is taken up by William Lane Craig and Quentin Smith in a more
recent book:*Theism, Atheism and Big Bang Cosmology* (New York: Oxford,
1993).

Debates about the traditional proofs for the existence of God have led
some to question whether proofs are really necessary at all for
rational, religious belief. Alvin Plantinga has become famous among
philosophers of religion for his defense of what he calls "*reformed
epistemology* ."[^1] Plantinga claims that for the devout Christian,
belief in the existence of God is properly basic, that is, it doesn't
need to be proved.

He claims that the founder of the Reformed Church, John Calvin, held a
similar view[^2] Calvin was skeptical about the abilities of sinful man
to reason his way to the existence of God, but Catholic philosophers,
who have more faith in human reason, have also been impressed with
Plantinga's position.

The Catholic response to Plantinga is especially interesting because in
the Shi'i tradition there has been a similar respect for the powers of
reason. I suspect that in the long run, the responses of Catholic and
Muslim philosophers and theologians will be similar in being
diverse.[^3] Some of the Catholic thinkers who have researched the issue
have defended a foundationalist epistemology, but the majority have
sought to find some common ground with the sort of view defended by
Plantinga.

Another major figure who has defended the rationality of religious
belief without reliance on the traditional proofs for the existence of
God is William Alston[^4] . Alston turns modem skepticism against
atheism, claiming that we have no more reason to trust sense experience
than we have to trust our religious intuitions.

Since the beliefs based on sense experience are considered to be
rational, the same must be granted of religious beliefs. Alston's work,
like Plantinga's, has generated volumes of criticism and responses, most
of which focus on such epistemological questions as the nature of
knowledge and rationality, faith and belief, or evidence and
justification.

Other defenders of the Christian faith have argued that the doubts
raised by Hume (1711-1776) and Kant (1724-1804) about the rationality of
religious belief can be answered through an examination of the standards
of reasoning employed in the natural sciences today, which are far from
what Hume and Kant imagined.[^5] In these discussions it is the
philosophy of science to which theologians must turn in order to
demonstrate to those who have faith in science but not in religion that
their bias is not dictated by their fidelity to the rational standards
of the empirical sciences.

In many of the discussions of the rationality of religious faith, the
concept of religious experience plays a pivotal role. This is especially
true of the writings of reformed epistemologists and of William Alston,
but of many others as well, including Gary Gutting,[^6] Richard
Swinbume[^7] and Jolu1 Hick.[^8] The concept of religious experience is
one which is especially foreign to Islamic thought, for it emerged
inEurope and theUnited States in the writings of Friedrich
Schleiermacher and William fames as a result of the pressure religious
thinkers felt exerted by the legacies of Hume and Kant, romanticism and
empiricism. Even the very term "*religious experience* " is difficult to
translate into Farsi or Arabic.

The most commonly accepted translation seems to be tajrobeh ye dini, but
tajrobeh has the odour of the laboratory and a sense of repetition which
is absent from the Western concept. Other terms which might be suggested
each have their own problems, for example, idrak, shenakht, and marifat
each are appropriate only when some reality is successfully apprehended,
while the term "religious experience" is supposed to be neutral as to
whether it is illusory or veridical.

It is to be understood on analogy with scientific data, and just as the
scientist uses reason to judge which of competing hypotheses can best
explain the available empirical data, Gary Gutting and Richard Swinbume

hold that the hypothesis of God's existence can best explain the data of
one's inner religious feelings and intuitions.

Alston and Plantinga, on the other hand, claim that for the believer,
the proposition that God exists is more analogous to the scientist's
presumption that there is a physical world to be investigated and about
which empirical data convey information. They hold that religious
feeling and intuitions, including mystical visions, provide data which
convey information about God and His relation to the believer,
information which presupposes the existence of God.

To say that according to Alston and Plantings religious experience
presupposes the existence of God sloes not mean that for these
philosophers God's existence is a mere assumption, for they hold that
the assumption is warranted, and that its warrant can be demonstrated
through a rational examination of the relation between the assumption
and the sorts of religious experiences that are important to Christian
life.


