Supplement 2
============

The focus on religious experience has led some philosophers, such as
William Proudfoot,[^9] Steven Katz[^10] and Nelson Pike,[^11] to an
epistemological examination of the reports of the mystics.

They ask such questions as whether a meaningful distinction can be made
between what appears in the heart of the mystic and how he interprets
this appearance, whether mystical appearances must be analogous to
sensory appearances, whether mystics of various traditions all have the
same sorts of experiences, whether training determines the sort of
experience the mystic will have and whether the mystics themselves take
these experiences to have epistemological significance.

Here we find a number of issues about which the philosopher and the
theologian can be of mutual service. The theologian provides the
philosopher with the doctrinal setting in terms of which reports of
mystical experiences are understood, and the philosopher provides a
critical analysis of both doctrine and report in order to place mystical
experiences within the framework of a broader epistemological theory.

It is not only epistemology that serves as a source of the problems
posed in the philosophy of religion for theology, virtually all the
branches of philosophy have some bearing on the philosophy of religion,
anti raise questions about theological doctrine.

One of the most distinguished areas of philosophy is metaphysics, and
metaphysics has long had an intimate relation to theology, especially to
Islamic theosophy (hikmat). Muslim, Christian and Jewish theologians
have often utilized metaphysical systems based on ancient Greek thought
in order to explain theological doctrines. Many religious philosophers
have come to prefer other systems of metaphysics; as a result, they find
themselves engaged in an attempt to restate religious doctrine in a way
that does not use the language of the older metaphysics.

Sometimes, however, doctrine becomes so intertwined with the older
metaphysics that they are difficult to separate. For example, the
Christian doctrine of the Trinity was stated in terms of a metaphysics
of substances, modes, persons and attributes drawn from Roman as well as
Greek philosophy. Many contemporary Christian thinkers are now willing
to concede that the traditional statements of the doctrine of the
Trinity in these terms have not been successful.

But rather than reject the claim that God is to be understood as the
Holy Trinity, they have claimed that the doctrine is better explained
without the claim that God is three persons but one substance, or with
an interpretation of this claim that would have been unthinkable in past
centuries.

Robert Cummings Neville, the Dean of the Boston Theological Seminary,
completely dismisses the claim, and defends the Trinity as three ways or
aspects of divinity understood with reference to the creation. God is
the source of creation; He is the end or telos of creation, and He is
the very activity of creation itself, according to Neville. Aside from
this, there is little left of the traditional doctrine of the Trinity in
Neville's theology.[^12]

A more traditional defense of the Trinity is to be found in the work of
a philosopher who teaches atNotre DameUniversity in Indiana, Thomas V

Morris. Morris uses the methods developed by analytic philosophers to
defend a version of Social Trinitarianism from the heretical claim made
by some process theologians that God is in need of the world. Process
theology itself developed as a reaction against a metaphysics of
substances inspired by Whitehead and Hartshome's idea that the world
consists of essentially interrelated events.[^13]

Another contemporary metaphysical idea which has had an impact on
discussions of the doctrine of the Trinity is the theory of relative
identity. According to this idea the identity relation is always
governed by the category of its terms. Defenders of the Trinity such as
Peter Geach and Peter van Inwagen have used the theory of relative
identity to defend the proposition that while the persons of the Trinity
may be different persons, they may at the same time be the same
God.[^14]

Other areas to which philosophers of religion have applied ideas drawn
from contemporary logic and metaphysics include discussions of Anselm's
ontological argument for the existence of God, the many problems
pertaining to the divine attributes, the nature of divine activity,
God's foreknowledge and human responsibility, the nature of creation ex
nihilo and the problem of evil.

Older than epistemology and at least as ancient as metaphysics is
ethics. Philosophical reflections on good and evil, right and wrong and
virtue and vice have always mingled with religious thought, and today,
as well, philosophers whose primary concern is the nature of value and
morality are raising important questions for theologians to ponder.

All of the religions systematize moral thought to a certain extent, for
all religions issue imperatives disobedience to which is considered
morally as well as religiously wrong. Must moral theory conform to the
moral concepts embodied in religion? Can there be altruistic ideals that
go beyond the moral ideals of religion? Can religion issue orders which
nullify moral imperatives? Can a person be morally reprehensible without
violating any religious law?

Can a rational ethics put constraints on an acceptable interpretation of
religion? How could God, who is perfectly good, order Abraham to kill
his son? This last question was forcefully raised by Soren Kierkegaard
(1813-1885), and it is still a problem frequently discussed among
Christian philosophers and theologians.

Kierkegaard's answer, of course, was that religion issues orders with a
force beyond anything found in morality, orders which from the point of
view of reason would be considered wrong. Philosophers and theologians
who are not satisfied with this fideist approach to religious commands
must find a plausible reconciliation between reason and moral intuition,
on the one hand, and religious rulings and actions of those considered
faultless, on the other.

The question of the relation between divine commands and moral
imperatives has become the focus of considerable debate among
contemporary philosophers of religion largely as a result of the work of
Robert M. Adams.[^15] In his articles on divine command theories of
morality, Adams has sought to reconcile the idea that actions are wrong
or

right because they are forbidden or commanded by God with the idea that
God's commands are not arbitrary.

Adams is no Ash'arite, and will not accept the claim that if God were to
command cruelty and infidelity then torture and treason would be morally
praiseworthy. God's commands have moral force, according toAdams, only
because God is perfectly good, just and benevolent; but without God's
commands, Adams contends there would be no moral imperatives at all.

Other recent publications in which the relation between religion and
morality are discussed include J. L. Mackie's The Miracle of Theism[^16]
and many of the writings of Alasdair MacIntyre.[^17] Mackie argues as an
admitted atheist that the only ways to make sense of the relation
between fact and value is either through Hume's moral philosophy or
through a religious theory.

He even confesses that if no variation on Hume's theory is ultimately
defensible, we should be forced to seek a religious explanation to the
manner in which values seem to supervene on natural properties.
MacIntyre is also interested in the fact/value dichotomy, and he
explicitly seeks to refute Hume's approach to the problem, and to refute
most other modem theorists as well.

But MacIntyre is not satisfied with the notion that facts are related to
values by divine decree; instead he seeks to revive a version of an
Aristotelian teleological ethics, but one in which perfection is to be
understood by means of attention to the movement of tradition and
historical narrative, rather than through biology (as Aristotle
sometimes seemed to suggest).

Religion becomes paramount in MacIntyre's thinking because it is only
religion which is able to support the sorts of traditions and historical
narratives which can provide a firm basis for the moral life.

No discussion of the way religious narratives can contribute to our
understanding of who we are and where we are headed would be complete
without some attention to the issue of religious language, and this
brings us to another area in which the philosopher may be seen as posing
questions for the theologian.

One of the areas of most intense activity in twentieth century Western
philosophy is that of the philosophy of language. The German
mathematician, logician and philosopher Gottlob Frege (1848-1925)
initiated a research program in the philosophy.

of language concerned with such problems as sense and reference, the
failure of substitution of co-referential terms in various 'intensional'
contexts (for example, it, may be true that S believes that a is F and
true that a= b, although S fails to believe that b is F), and the
logical analysis of various sorts of semantic functions commonly
performed in ordinary language by demonstratives, proper names, definite
descriptions, and other kinds of terms and expressions.

Frege's programme was carried on by Russell (1872-1970), Wittgenstein
(1889-1951), Camap (1891-1970), Quine (1908-) and Kripke (1940-), to
mention just a few of those whose ideas about the logical analysis of
language have provoked extended debate. The program of logical analysis

was soon extended to theological statements. Philosophers of religion
began to ask questions about the logical analysis of such claims as "God
is eternal"[^18] and "God is omnipotent,"[^19] and the ways in which we
may succeed in referring to God.[^20]

Although these discussions may be fruitfully compared to medieval
.discussions of related issues in Islamic as well as Christian theology
and philosophy, many contemporary Christian theologians find the
attention to logical detail a bit boring, and irrelevant to their
primary concerns.

Many of these theologians have been more favourably impressed by
Wittgenstein's later writings, and his suggestion that religious
language may be compared to a game or a form of life significantly
different from scientific language to prevent the possibility of any
conflict between religion and science.[^21]


