Supplement 3
============

Wittgenstein's doctrine of language games also has attracted theologians
who sought a response to the positivists' charge that religious claims
were meaningless. Although the verificationist theory of meaning
advocated by the positivists has been generally rejected, the
Wittgensteinian slogan, "meaning is use," provided theologians with a
basis in the philosophy of language for turning their attention to
functionalist theories of religious language which seemed to dovetail
rather neatly with the anti-reductionism popular in Protestant
theological circles.

These theologians felt that any attempt to base religious claims on
theoretical reason (as in the traditional proofs for the existence of
God, called natural theology), or on practical reason (as in Kant's
theology), ought to be rejected as reductions of religious claims to
metaphysics or ethics, reductions which failed to appreciate the
fundamental originality of the religious view, what Schleiennacher
(1768-1834) called the religious moment of experience.

These tendencies among many (although by no means all) of those who have
been attracted to functionalist explanations of religious language are
largely anti-philosophical tendencies, even when they turn to the
philosophy of the later Wittgenstein for support. Although there are
many disagreements among those who find themselves supporting some
variety of fideism, there is agreement among the fideists that religion
does not need any philosophical explanation or justification.

So, after our tour through the philosophical territories bordering on
theology, we find ourselves back where we started, at epistemology and
the question of the rationality of religious belief, for functionalist
approaches to religious language, including theories according to which
religious language serves to express attitudes rather than to describe
reality, are often attempts to escape rational criticism of religious
beliefs.

No justification is needed, the fideist proclaims, because the language
of religion is independent of and irrelevant to the language of
justification.

Here the reformed epistemology of Alvin Plantinga, or the related ideas
of William Alston may be seen as a sort of compromise between those who
would justify religious claims by rational proof and those who deny that
any such justification is needed or desirable. What Plantinga and Alston
offer is a philosophical argument as to why religious belief may be
considered warranted and rational, even in the absence of direct
evidential support.

Today's Christian theologians, however, are often unimpressed by the
works of Christian philosophers such as those mentioned above. These
philosophers are primarily concerned with the issues of rationality and
the justification or warrant that can or cannot be provided for
assertions of the truth of various- religious claims.

The theologians, on the other hand, often seem to be more interested in
the effects in the lives of believers which are associated with adhering
to various beliefs and participating in the Church. Religion is not a
collection of truths about God, they insist, but a way to salvation.
Religious symbols are important for many contemporary Christian
theologians not as they serve to disclose religious truths which might
not be expressible in non

symbolic language, but rather because they present a framework within
which meaning for human life is to be found.[^22]

Another reason Christian theologians have given for their antipathy
toward philosophy is related to the problem of religious pluralism. In
the past, Christian theologians claimed that the doctrines of
Christianity were true, and that all those doctrines inconsistent with
Christian dogma were false. Among the dogmas of traditional Christianity
is the claim that there is only one way to salvation for Catholics, the
Church, and for Protestants, participation in Christ's redemption of sin
by faith.

In short, traditional Christianity would exclude Jews, Muslims, Hindus
and Buddhists from salvation and eternal felicity unless they would
accept Christianity on learning of its gospel. As Christians are
becoming increasingly aware that there are good people, even saintly
people, who follow a path other than that of Christianity although they
are familiar with the gospel, they are finding it difficult to accept
the traditional dogma that would bar the non-Christian from paradise.

A number of Christian theologians are even beginning to take the view
that Christian theology has been too preoccupied with the truth of dogma
altogether. In reaction to the exclusivism of traditional Christianity,
according to which the acceptance of certain truth-claims is a necessary
condition for salvation, some have gone to the extreme of thinking that
the truth of religious doctrines is insignificant, and attempts to
justify religious beliefs or show them to be rational are irrelevant to
the issue of salvation.

Instead of occupying themselves with the central questions of
traditional theology, constructing proofs to support doctrines,
analyzing the logical structure of various religious concepts, and
defending their interpretation of doctrines against rivals, many if not
most contemporary Christian theologians have turned their attention to
questions about how religious concepts develop and change, how they
function in religious communities, how religious ideas inform religious
experience, and how Christian symbols, practices and institutions have
been used and abused by Christian communities in various historical and
social contexts.

When these theologians turn their attention to questions of ethics, they
are concerned about how to prevent the future abuse of Christian
symbols, practices and institutions and how to encourage what they
consider to be the positive and morally responsible development of the
various elements of Christian life, although there is often a lack of
critical reflection on the philosophical perspective which informs their
own moral standards.

Many believe that claims to have religious knowledge or certainty
reflect a sinful desire to gain intellectual control over what must
remain ultimately a mystery.

Today's Christian theologians are much more interested in postmodernist
thought than the work- of Christian philosophers trained in the analytic
tradition. Postmodernism is a movement which has emerged from the ideas
of certain contemporary French writers such as Jean-Francois
Lyotard,[^23] Jacques Derrida,[^24] Georges Bataille,[^25] and Michel
Foucault.[^26]

What these writers have in common is a generally cynical outlook,
skepticism about the transcendental claims characteristic of the modem

period of European philosophy from Descartes (1596-1650) through Kant
(1724-1804), the suspicion that rational argument is a screen hiding
desires for power, the idea that we cannot escape the cultural
presuppositions which largely determine our world view, and an
irreverent style. Many of the postmodernists look to Nietzsche
(1844-1900) for inspiration.

Contemporary Christian theologians who are reluctant to defend or try to
justify Christian doctrine, some of whom even admit agnosticism, find
common cause with the postmodernists.[^27] Postmodernist writings do not
really offer the theologian a set of philosophical questions of
relevance to theology as we found with the philosophy of religion.
Instead, the postmodernist offers consolation to the fideist theologian
for his reluctance to attempt to show that his beliefs are reasonable
and excuses for not engaging in the reasoned defense of the truth of his
beliefs.

Postmodernism is not a philosophy, but an intellectual movement against
philosophy as traditionally understood. Traditionally, the term
philosophy functions as an encomium-it is not merely descriptive, but
has a strong evaluative sense. To imply that postmodernist thought is
not philosophy, but anti-philosophy, is to express allegiance to the
traditional ideal of philosophy as love of sophia, as a quest for the
truth which the postmodernists find somewhat preposterous. In
castigating postmodernism as anti-philosophy; however; I do not mean to
be dismissive.

Postmodernism is a very important trend which has had a profound
influence on many Christian theologians.[^28] The philosophy of religion
as practiced by Christian philosophers with training in analytic
philosophy may be understood as a movement which to a large extent is
diametrically opposed to postmodernism.

To the postmodernists, the Christian philosophers seem a bit naive-still
arguing about how to defend the rationality of asserting the truth of
various religious doctrines. To the philosopher, however, what room
remains for religion in the confines of postmodernism is little more
than a sentimental attachment to the symbols and rituals of religion
shorn of the metaphysical or transcendent significance which gives them
their power and is responsible for the strong emotional response they
provoke in the first place.


