Lesson 30 : Islamic Economic System (1)
=======================================

**1. The Middle Path**

Islam is a complete way of life. It is not only concerned with the
spiritual upliftment of human beings, it is equally concerned about
their material and physical wellbeing. Islam guides its followers in
financial and economic matters, in social and political affairs, and
also in moral and personal spheres of human life.

In this lesson, I will briefly describe the economic system. However,
one must always remember that the Islamic economic system is not in
itself complete; it is a part of the overall system of life.

Islam is a compact system of life in which all its aspects (religious,
ideological, social, political and ethical) are well synchronized.
Muslims will succeed only if they put the whole system into work, and
not just choose and pick from it according to their likes and
dislikes.

Anyhow, for this lesson, the simplest way to describe the Islamic
economic system is by highlighting its differences with capitalism and
communism.

Capitalism is an economic doctrine based on the idea of private
ownership of the means of production and distribution. It is a system in
which the capitalist is given a free hand; and government does not
regulate anything for the benefit of the workers. For example, there is
no minimum or fair wage.

Everything is left on the principle of supply and demand. The rich get
richer and the poor get poorer. Poverty is equated to idleness; personal
shortcomings are considered the chief cause of poverty.

Hence, in its ideal system, capitalism has no room for compassion and
benevolence towards the poor and the needy.11

A similar mentality also existed among some aristocrats of Mecca. The
Qur’an says, “When it is said to them, ‘Give charity from what God has
given to you,’ the unbelievers say to the believers, ‘Should we feed the
person whom God, if He wished, could feed?’” (36:47)

It was to remedy this situation that some thinkers of the West promoted
the ideas of communism. The economic doctrine of communism is based on
the idea of centralized public ownership of the means of production and
distribution.

The communists went to the other extreme and completely denied the
concept of private ownership. Communism was a reaction to the vices of
capitalism; but a reaction which tried to completely supress a concept
ingrained in us by nature, that is, private ownership.

Naturally, as soon as the masses were given political freedom, they
rebelled against communism. The collapse of this system in Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe is a living testamony to this fact.

Although communism has failed, it had quite an impact on the economic
policies of many countries. Quite a few Western capitalist countries, to
prevent the spread of communism, modified their economic system and
created what is now known as welfare states. A welfare state allowes
provisions to prevent exploitation of the workers and to provide for the
basic needs of each citizen.

Islam is “a straight path;” and naturally, its economic system is based
on very balanced standards. Islam, in contrary to communism, recognises
the concept of private ownership.

But, in contrary to capitalism, Islam has limited the means of
acquiring wealth to prevent the excessive accumulation of wealth in a
minor quarter of the society.

11 A prominent example in our time of such thinking was U. S. President
Ronald Reagan. Patti Davis, Reagan’s daughter, blamed her father’s
policies for fostering homelessness in the United States; she ridiculed
her father’s anecdotes about “welfare cheats” and his view that people
are “homeless by choice.” (See Globe & Mail, September 21, 1990.)

The Islamic economic system is based upon the belief that only Allah is
the real and actual owner of everything. But God has also implanted the
concept of ownership in our nature; and thus, we are allowed to “own”
the wealth of this world. The Qur’an says, Whatever is in the heavens
and the earth belongs to Allah.” (2:284) Allah is the owner of the whole
universe.

It is in this capacity that He has allowed us to own the blessings of
this world by saying, “He has created for you whatever that is in the
earth” (2:29)

However, Islam also wants to prevent the excessive accumulation of
wealth in the hands of a few people so the society may not fall into two
classes: one is overstuffing, while the other is starving. The chance of
such a situation is very real.

A look at one of the richest nation in the world, the United States of
America, and its problem of the poor, hungry and homeless people will
bear us out. The Qur’an justifies the concept of tax by saying, “...so
that (the wealth) may not become a monopoly of the rich among you.”
(59:7)

In the early period of the Islamic history, such a situation actually
occured. When ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan became caliph, he handled the public
wealth in such a manner that within a short time, his tribe, the
Umayyads, became the richest people in the Muslim empire.

Imam ‘Ali bin Abi Talib, in a famous sermon, explains the reasons why
he was reluctant to accept the caliphate after “Uthman’s murder.

The Imam says, “Had it not been for the pledge of Allah with the
learned people that they should not be indifferent to the gluttony of
the oppressor and the hunger of the oppressed, I would have cast the
rein of caliphate on its shoulders...”12 Top in the list of priorites of
Imam ‘Ali’s caliphate was the re-establishment of social justice in the
Muslim community.

And it was this same agenda which created strong opposition to ‘Ali
among those who were used to special privileges during the previous
caliphate.

Islam does not only teach equality of the Muslims in the eyes of Allah,
but it also promotes equality in economic sphere. 12 Sayyid ar-Razi,
Nahju ‘l-Baldghah, sermon No. 3. However, “equality” in Islam does not
mean “similarity”. Islam aims to elevate all its followers to the level
of ghina—being free from want. It is this equality which Islam strives
for in its economic system.

**2. The Economic Equality**

To bring about this equality in the economic condition of the people,
Islam has introduced various methods. An important method is the
transferring of the excess wealth from the fortunate sector of the
society to its less fortunate members. This is done on two different
levels: on an individual level and on a collective level.

On Individual Level:

Economic equality is pursued through the moral and ethical teachings of
charity. In Arabic, this is known as sadaqa and infaq. There are many
verses in the Qur’an which command the Muslims to help others
voluntarily.

There are more verses dealing with voluntary charity than the
obligatory dues. Every one is morally obliged to help others according
to his or her own means and resources. First level of charity:

They ask you (O Muhammad) as to what they should spend (in way of
charity). Say, “Whatever can be spared (from your wealth after your own
expenses).” (2:219)

Second level of charity:

...The pious (are) those who...spend (in charity) from whatever We have
given to them. (2:3)

Third level of charity:

The pious people (are) those who spend (benevolently) in good and bad
days. (3:134)

In all these levels, one must remember to follow the path of
moderation: neither keep your hand shackled to your neck (out of greed),
nor outspread it completely open—otherwise you will sit reproached and
denuded. (17:29)

Someone asked Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq about a group of people who are
prosperous while their Muslim brothers are in severe need.

Is it right for the rich people to eat and drink satisfactorily while
their brothers are hungry, especially during the difficult days? The
Imam said, “Surely a Muslim is brother of a Muslim; he does not oppress
his brother, neither abandons him nor deprives him. The Muslims are
obliged to work hard for their brother, to relate to him, to help him,
and to be charitable towards the needy people.”13 On Collective Level:

Economic equality is guaranteed through the obligatory taxes on the
excess wealth of every Muslim. In an ideal Islamic society, the Islamic
government is responsible for enforcing the laws of Islamic taxes like
khums, zakat, fitrah, khiraj, etc.

For example, while explaining the role of an Imam in his capacity as a
leader, Imam Musa al-Kazim says, “The Imam is the heir of a person who
has no heir, and he is the provider of a person who has no
provider.”14

This economic security is to be extended to all the subjects of an
Islamic state, even if they are non-Muslims. Once Imam ‘Ali passed by an
old man who was begging on the side of the road.

The Imam asked, “What is this?” The people said, “O Amiru ‘1- mu’minin,
he is a Christian.” The Imam said, “You have used him until he became
old and is unable (to work any longer), and then you have deprived him
(of his basic needs)!! Provide for him from the public treasury.”15

In short, Islam aims at eliminating the “need” (hajat), and elevating
the needy people to the level of being “free from want” (ghani).


