Lesson 32 : Islamic Economic System (3)
=======================================

**1. Khums in the Qur’an & History**

“Khums” literally means “one-fifth or 20%”. In Islamic legal
terminology, it means “one-fifth of certain items which a person
acquires as wealth, and which must be paid as an Islamic tax”. The
Qur’an mentions it in the following verse:

Know that whatever of a thing you acquire, a fifth of it is for Allah,
for the Messenger, for the near relative, and the orphans, the needy,
and the way-fare r...(8:41)

In this verse, the word “ghanimtum” has been used which has been
translated as “you acquire”. As explained above, it means “certain items
which a person acquires as wealth.” What are these certain items?

According to the ahadith of the Imams of Ahlu ‘l-bayt, the items which
are eligible for khums are seven:

I. the profit or the surplus of the income.

2. the legitimate wealth which is mixed with some illegitimate
wealth.

3. mines and minerals.

4. the precious stones obtained from sea by diving.

5. treasures.

6. the land which a dhimmi kafir buys from a Muslim.


7. the spoils of war.

However, there are some people who interpret the word “ghanimtum”. as
“whatever of a thing you acquire as spoils of war,” thus confining the
obligation of khums to the spoils of war only.

This interpreation is based on ignorance of the Arabic language, the
history of khums, the Islamic laws and of the interpretation of the
Qur’an.

To make this point crystal clear, I would like to quote the following
arguments from my father, ‘Allamah Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi. In reading
the following paragraphs, remember that the word ghanimtum has been
derived from al-ghanimah.

**(A) THE MEANING OF “GHANIMTUM”**

“The famous Arabic dictionary of al-Munjid (by Father Louis Mal-f of
Beirut) says, ‘al-ghanim and al-ghanimah means: (a) What is taken from
the fighting enemies by force, (b) All earnings generally...Furthermore,
the saying al-ghunm bi ‘l-ghurm means that the profit stands against
expenses, i.e., as the owner is the sole proprietor of the profit and
nobody shares it with him, therefore only he bears all the expenses and
risk.’16 This implies that in Arabic language al-ghanimah has two
meanings: one the spoils of war, and the other ‘profit’.

The above quoted proverb also proves that ‘profit’ is not the uncommon
meaning. When a word in the Qur’an can be interpreted in more than one
way, it is incumbent upon the Muslims to seek guidance from the Prophet
and the Ahlu 1-bayt. Otherwise, they would be guilty of tafsir bi
‘r-ra’iy (interpreting the Qur’an according to one’s own personal
views); and this is a sin which pushes the sinner into jahannam.

**(B) THE HISTORY OF KHUMS**

“Khums is one of those things which was introduced by ^Abdu
‘1-Muttalib, the grandfather of the Prophet, and continued in Islam.
Acting upon a command of God given to him in dream, when “Abdu
‘1-Muttalib rediscovered the well of Zamzam, he found in it many
valuable things which were buried in it in the very remote past by the
Ismailites when they feared that their enemies would usurp them.

When ‘Abdu ‘1-Muttalib found that buried treasure, he gave away
one-fifth (literally, khums) in the way of God and kept the remaining
four-fifths to himself. Then it became a custom in his family; and after
the hijrah of the Prophet, the same system was incorporated in Islam.

Thus the first khums was not given 16 See the entry under G-N-M; in the
28th edition of al-Munjid (Beirut: Dar el- Machreq, 1986) it is on p.
561. Also see other famous dictionaries like Lisan al- ’Arab and
al-Qamus.

from the ‘spoils of war’, but from a buried treasure (which is one of
the seven items eligible for khums.)

**(C) THE ISLAMIC LAWS**

“Not a single sect of Islam confines the meaning of ghanimah to the
‘spoils of war’. In addition to the “spoils of war1 the following items
are subject to khums: (a) Minerals: eligible for khums in Shi’ah and
Hanafi sects, (b) Buried treasure: eligible for khums in all Muslim
sects (that is, Shi’ah, Hanafi, Maliki, Hanbali and Shaf’iy).

**(D) THE INTERPRETATION OF THE QUR’AN**

“As mentioned earlier, the interpretation of the Qur’an must be based
on the teachings of the Ahlu ‘1-bayt. The word ghanimah in the verse
under discussion has clearly been interpreted as ‘alfa’idatu
‘l-muktasabah — the earned profit’ by our Imams.

“To conclude, we can say that the word ghanimah was never treated as
being confined to the ‘spoils of war’ by any sect of Islam; and as far
as our Imams are concerend, it meant many things besides the spoils of
war right from the day of Imam ‘Ali (peace be upon him), as the
authentic traditions show.”17 What has been quoted above can also be
substantiated from the practice of the Prophet of Islam himself.

For example, when the Prophet sent “Amr bin Hazm to Yemen, he wrote
instructions for him in which, among other things, he says, “...to
gather the khums of Allah from the gains [of Yemenis).”18 And when the
tribe of Bani Kilal of Yemen sent its khums to the Prophet,

the latter acknowledged it by saying, “Your messenger has returned and
you have paid the khums of Allah from the gains (al-ghana’im).”19 It is
17 Rizvi, S.S.A., Your Questions Answered, vol. 1 (Dar-es-salaam: Bilal
Muslim Mission, 1973) p. 44-46.

18 Ibn Khaldun, Ta’rikh, vol. 2, part II (Beirut: al-A’lami, 1971) p.
54; Ibn Kalhir, al-Bidayah wa ‘n-Nihayah, vol. 5 (Beirut: al-Ma’arif,
1966) pp. 76-77: Ibn Hisham, Sirah, vol. 4 (Beirut: Dani 1-Jayl, 1975)
p. 179.

19 Abu ‘Ubayd, al-Amwal (Beirut: Mu’assah Nasir, 1981) p. 13; al-Hakim,
Mustadrak, vol. 1 (Hyderabad:, ‘Uthmaniyyya Press, 1340 AH) p. 395. For
interesting to note that the Bani Kilal obeyed the Prophet’s order and
sent the khums of its gains to him while no war had taken place between
the Muslims of Yemen and the unbelievers. This is a clear indication
that khums was not restricted by the Prophet to the spoils of war.

The importance given by the Prophet to the issue of khums can also be
seen in his advice to the delegation of Bani ‘Abdu ‘1-Qays. It seems
that Bani ‘Abdu ‘1-Qays (which was a branch of Rabi’ah) was not a very
strong tribe.

Moreover, in order to travel to Medina, they had to cross an area
inhabited by the Muzar tribe which was against the Muslims.
Consequently, the Bani ‘Abdu ‘1-Qays could not travel safely to Medina
except during the months in which warfare was forbidden according to the
Arab custom.

Once a delegation from Bani ‘Abdu ‘1-Qays came to Medina and said to
the Prophet, “We cannot come to you except in the haram months [when
warfare is forbidden], and there are between us and you the unbelievers
of Muzar. Therefore, please give us some advice that we may give to
those whom we have left behind and that we may enter the Paradise [by
acting on it ourselves].”

The Prophet advised them to believe in One God, establish prayer, pay
zakat, fast in the month of Ramadhan, and “to pay khums (one-fifth) of
whatever you gain.”20

The circumstances of the Bani “Abdu ‘1-Qays —they were weak and small
in number, and were thus prevented from travelling safely to Medina—
leaves no room for interpreting the application of khums in the above
hadith on spoils of war exclusively.


