Lesson 23 : Ijtihad, Taqlid & Ihtiyat
=====================================

**1. Introduction**

As mentioned in the previous lessons, a Muslim must follow the shari’a
in every aspect of his or her life. If Islam is a religion which is to
stay till the end of time, then there must always be some people who can
guide the Muslims in the changing circumstances of time and of place.

After the Prophet of Islam, the most ideal persons to guide the Muslims
were the Imams of Ahlu 1-bayt.

However, the Present Imam, Muhammad al-Mahdi (a.s.) has gone into the
Occulation and will re-appear when Allah wishes him to appear. So what
is to be done in the meantime? Are the Shi’as to suspend the shari’a?
No, of course not! Islam is the religion for all times and places.

**2. Ijtihad**

The Imams of Ahlu 1-bayt had foreseen the time of the Occulation and
had prepared their followers for the situation in which they will not be
in direct contact with their Imam.

This preparation was done by training the Shi’as in the science of
Islamic laws, or in other words, in ijtihad. (Ijtihad means “the process
of deriving the laws of the shari’a from its sources.”) Ijtihad is an
essential phenomenon for the survival of the Islamic shari’a during the
Occultation of the Imam (a.s.).

Without the system of ijtihad, we would not be able to apply Islamic
laws in the rapidly changing circumstances of human society.

Ijtihad is not only permissible, but essential from the Islamic point
of view. It is an obligation in Islam to study everything that is
necessary for the spiritual development and material wellbeing of the
Muslim community.

However, this obligation is of the category which is known as wajib
kifa’i.4 In the present instance, for example, Islamic society needs
experts in the medical sciences,

in 4 An obligation which is on even’ member of the community as long as
it is unfulfilled; but as soon as some person or persons has fulfilled
it; it is no longer an obligation on those who have not fulfilled it.

physics and chemistry, in engineering, education; and as long as there
is a lack of expertise in these areas, it is an obligation on the
community as a whole to acquire it. This means that a group of Muslims
must devote themselves to research so as to benefit the Muslim
community.

Similarly, an Islamic society without experts in the shari’a cannot
properly consider itself Islamic, and so it is an obligation for a group
of persons from this society to devote themselves to the study of the
religious sciences to provide proper guidance to all Muslims.

This is such an important obligation that Allah has exempted those who
go to seek religious knowledge from the duty of jihad. He says:

“It is not (right) for the believers to go forth all together (for
Jihad). So why should not a party from every section of them (i.e., the
believers) go forth to become learned in the religion, and to ivarn
their people when they return to them—so that haply they may beware.”
(9:122)

It is clear from many narrations that the Imams of Ahlu ‘1-bayt (a.s.)
used to be pleased whenever any of their companions taught religion or
gave legal rulings (fatwa) to others. There are several documented cases
of Shi’as who lived far from Medina asking the Imam of their time to
appoint someone in their area to adjudicate between them in religious
problems:

Zakariyyah ibn Adam al- Qummi and Yunus bin ‘Abdu ‘r-Rahman, for
example, were named by Imam ‘Ali ar-Riza, to solve disputes in their own
districts.

In a famous hadlth, ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah asked Imam Ja’far as- Sadiq
(a.s.) about the legality of two Shi’as seeking a verdict from an
illegitimate ruler in a dispute over a debt or a legacy. The Imam’s
answer was that it was absolutely forbidden to do so.

Then Ibn Hanzalah asked what the two should do, and the Imam replied:

“They must seek out one of your own who narrates our traditions, who is
versed in what is permissible and what is forbidden, who is
well-acquainted with our laws and ordinances, and accept him as judge
and arbiter, for I appoint him as judge over you...”

Besides these ahadith, we have quite a few sayings of the Imams that
tell us what to do if we come across two ahadith which are contradictory
or semi-contradictory—and solving the contradictory ahadith is one of
the functions of ijtihad.

These types of ahadith are known as al-akhbdr al-’ilajiyyah, the
ahadith which solve the problems in the studying of the hadith.

In conclusion, we can say that one way of following the shari’a is to
study the science of shari’a, learn the process of ijtihad and become a
mujtahid.

**3. Taqlid**

Although we have mentioned ijtihad as the first of the possible ways of
following the shari’a, it is not something which every person can do.

To become a mujtahid means spending the major part of your life in
studying the Islamic sciences in general and the Islamic legal system in
particular. A person must, first of all, study the Arabic language
(especially classical Arabic) since all the sources of the sharifa are
in classical Arabic.

Then he must study and gain expertise in Usulu ‘1-Fiqh (the Principles
of Jurisprudence) which involves the methodology of defining and using
the sources of the shari’a.

One also has to study the Qur’anic verses on laws, the hadith
literature, and also the conclusions reached by the past mujtahids. In
studying the hadith literature, one has to also study ‘ilmu ‘r-rijal
which deals with the narrators of hadith— otherwise he will not be able
to distinguish the authentic hadith from the inauthentic ones. In short,
ijtihad is not everyone’s cup of tea.

The social life of human beings is based on mutual cooperation: each
one of us takes the duty of fulfilling one of the needs of the society,
and, in return, each one of us expects to benefit from the expertise of
the others.

Just as not everyone can become his or her own doctor, in an Islamic
society, not everyone can become a mujtahid. Those who are not mujtahid
will follow the shari’a by doing taqlid—following the opinions of a
highranking and pious mujtahid.

**(A) Is Taqlid Reasonable?**

First of all, taqlid is not “blind following,” it is based on an
informed decision taken by the individual Shi’a man or woman. Before you
start following the opinions of a mujtahid in the shari’a laws, you have
to ascertain that he has the required expertise and that he is of
upright character.

Secondly, it is not always unreasonable to follow others and to hold
uncritical faith in them. We can logically distinguish four possible
forms of imitation:

1. an ignorant person imitating another ignorant person;

2. a more learned person imitating a less learned person;

3. a less learned person imitating an ignorant person;

4. a less learned person imitating a more learned person.

It is quite clear that the first three forms of imitations are
unreasonable and can serve no purpose. However, the fourth kind of
imitation is obviously not only reasonable, but also necessary and a
matter of common sense;

in our everyday life we follow and imitate others in many things; we
like to take the advice of experts in matters outside our own
knowledge.

Someone who wishes to build a house, explains the basic idea of what he
wants to the builder and then submits to his advice as to how he should
go about the actual construction.

The patient follows the treatment advised by the doctor; a litigant
consults a lawyer when drawing up his case for a court. The examples are
abundant;

in most cases the advice is taken voluntarily, but sometimes the
citizen may be required by law to seek expert advice and act upon it,
before, for example, he is allowed to take some particularly dangerous
drug. The clearest example is obviously a case of a legal dispute
between two parties, when they are required to take their grievances
before a judge and abide by his decision if they cannot settle their
dispute amicably.

The practice of taqlid is an example of the same kind: the person who
is not an expert in Islamic jurisprudence is legally required to follow
the instructions of the expert, that is, the mujtahid.

**(B) Support from the Qur’an & Sunnah:**

This sensible practice of following the mujtahid in shari’a laws has
been endorsed by Islam.

As mentioned in a verse quoted earlier, the Qur’an strongly exhorts at
least a group of Muslims to devote their time and energy in studying
religion.

This obligation is of such importance that Allah has exempted such
persons from the duty of jihad. More interesting is the reason and
purpose of their knowledge: “...to warn their people...” (9:122) This
verse divides the people into two groups: those who are learned in
religious sciences and those who are not.

It is the duty of the learned to “warn” (a broad term which implies
advice and guidance) the common people, and it is expected of the common
people to “beware” (take heed of the learned persons’ advice and
follow).

In shari’a matters, this process of guiding the common people is
technically known as “ijtihad,” and the process of following the
guidance by the common people is technically known as “taqlid”.

The Imams of Ahlu ‘1-bayt (a.s.) have endorsed this system in theory as
well as in practice:

In Theory: In a famous hadith quoted earlier, ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah asked
Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) about the legality of two Shi’as seeking a
judgment from an illegitimate ruler or a judge appointed by such a ruler
in a dispute over a debt or inheritance.

The Imam’s answer was that it was absolutely forbidden to do so; and
then he read the following verse: “...(Yet in a dispute) they desire to
summon one another to the judgment of the tdghut though they were
commanded to reject and disbelieve in him.” (4:60)

Then ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah asked, “What should the two (Shi’as) do then?”
The Imam replied, “They must seek out one of your own who narrates our
traditions, who is versed in what is permissible and what is forbidden,
who is well-acquainted with our laws and ordinances, and accept him as
judge and arbiter,

for I appoint him as judge over you. If the ruling which he based on
our laws is rejected, then this rejection will be tantamount to ignoring
the order of Allah and rejecting us, and rejecting us is the same as
rejecting Allah, and this is the same as polytheism.”

In another hadith, Abi Khadijah relates that Imam Ja’far as- Sadiq
(a.s.) sent him to his companions with the following message: “If a
dispute or a difference occurs among you about a property,

then take care not to seek judgment from those illegitimate [judges];
instead, you must seek a person who knows what is permissible and what,
is forbidden by us, for I appoint him as a judge over you. And take care
that you do not seek judgment against one another with an unjust
ruler.”

The least that these two narrations prove is that Shi’as are not
allowed to refer to unauthorized jurists for solutions to their
problems,

instead they are advised to seek the guidance of those who are
well-versed in the teachings of the Ahlu 1-bayt. In these ahadith, the
practice of seeking the advice of experts in shari’a laws is taken for
granted.

In Practice: There are several documented cases of Shi’as who asked the
Imams of their time to appoint someone to adjudicate between them in
religious problems. Such questions were raised by those who lived far
from Medina or those who could not gain access to their Imam in Medina
itself.

**4.1htiyat**

If a person is not a mujtahid and does not even want to do taqlid of
any mujtahid, then according to the laws of shari’a he must do
ihtiydt.

Doing ihtiydt means taking precaution. In the context of our present
discussion, it means that one must adopt a line of precautionary action
by which he or she can be sure of fulfilling the requirements of God’s
commandment.

In practical terms, ihtiydt means that a person, in each and every
problem, will have to study the views of mujtahids on that issue and act
on the most precautionary of all views.

For example, if one mujtahid says that “it is disliked to smoke” and
another says that “it is haram to smoke,” then one has to follow the
second view. Or if one mujtahid says that “you must shave your head
during the first pilgrimage to Mecca” while another says “you have a
choice between shaving or just cutting a little of your hair,” then one
has to follow the first view. This has to be done in each and every
issue.

In short, during the Occultation (ghaybat) of the Present Imam (a.s.),
there are three ways of following the shari’a: ijtihad, taqlid and
ihtiyat.


