Preface
=======

**Aim of this survey and discussion**

The period in which Mu'awiyah ruled as compared with other eras and
centuries in the life of Islam, has possessed a special distinction from
the viewpoint of an overall interpolation brought about in the basic
principles of Islam.

For, the Umayyad government used all its massive power for the
fabrication of traditions and forging of narrations, and started the
large factory of tradition-making with the aid of its hirelings
including some companions of the Prophet and its own agents.

The number of false traditions produced in this period is so great that
they almost cover every subject of the all-inclusive religion of Islam
and have found their way into the Islamic books, including official
Islam, and the Islamic school of the caliphs and the powerful.

This has left a deep and lasting influence on the intellectual and
ideological as well as practical aspect of the school of Islam to the
extent of replacing the basic pillars of thought in this school with the
passage of time.

For this reason we are obliged to adopt an analytical method of survey
in studying this period and its distinguished rulers and personalities
in order to pave the way for the correct evaluation of the traditions
fabricated in this period, and perhaps be able to discern the
collaborative role of 'A'ishah in the production of these
interpolations.

We begin the discussion with an investigation about Mu'awiyah; his
lineage and a brief account of the life history of his family. Then the
discussion is drawn to the period of his rule and caliphate and many
other matters which are connected with it. It is then that we will be
able to distinguish the bond which exists between 'A'ishah, Mu'awiyah
and other rulers of the time.

Finally we will make a careful survey of the life of 'A'ishah which
ends in this same period. It should be mentioned that in this course we
were forced to speak of the disgraceful and impure deeds which have
occurred in Mu'awiyah's lineage, thus making his character clearer to
us. For an understanding of the psychic complexes of Mu'awiyah which
incited him towards enmity with the good and virtuous and roused him to
combat with their reputation of purity, there was no other way but a
survey of those events Indeed with an understanding of the character of
Mu'awiyah and his motives and complexes,

one can trace the traditions which were fabricated during his time for
the satisfaction of his personal motives, and in this way the thick and
dark screens which he hung, by means of those false traditions,

over the brilliant visage of Islam and Muslims, may be drawn aside to
reveal Islam and Muslims as they really were.

Consequently, we unwillingly accepted this necessity of introducing
Mu'awiyah and his lineage as they were, and bring this discussion to an
end for God's satisfaction and with the motive of propagation of
knowledge.


Sayyid Murtada 'Askari


