Part Four : 'a'ishah and Mu'awiyah
==================================

**The factors of friendship between 'A'ishah and the Umayyads**

O 'A'ishah! To combat with the Prophet's household, one day you ride a
mule and the next day a camel!

We have already seen to what extent Mu'awiyah went in his hostility to
Imam 'Ali so that during the rule of the Imam be fought him in every
possible way. After the Imam was martyred in the mosque of Kufah
Mu'awiyah's combat took the form of cold war and he never ceased in his
propagation against the Imam and his abuse and curse to him. We saw also
that 'A'ishah, fought the Imam with her utmost ability during her life,
and when he was killed by Ibn Muljam and departed this world, on being
informed of his death, she was so overjoyed that she prostrated herself
in thankfulness to God,(239) and began singing the following lines:

"Alt has died and there is no return for him. With his death lain as
overjoyed as the family Of a dear traveler returning from his journey!
'Ali's death illuminated my eyes!"

'A'ishah's flame of enmity with the Alawite house was so strong, that
she even veiled herself from his two sons who were her husband's
grandsons, and abstained from meeting them.(240) When we read what
al-Ya'qubi and Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani have narrated about the events
of those days, we will see that her intense hostility continued so long
that it could be regarded as a reason for the attachment between her and
the Umayyads in general, and with Mu'awiyah in particular.

a1-Ya'qubi writes: Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba had reached the last
painful moments of his life, and wished to announce his will to his dear
brother Imam al-Husayn. He said: "When I die, bury me by the side of my
exalted grandfather the holy Prophet; for, no one deserves more than me
to be buried by his side, unless they prevent this burial and do not let
my last wish to be fulfilled. If this happens, then of course do your
best in preventing even the smallest bloodshed."

When the Imam departed this mortal life and reached eternity,
preparations were made for his burial. His body was carried by his
relatives towards the tomb of the holy Prophet.

According to Maqatil at-Talibiyin, 'A'ishah, as a so-called kind mother
of all believers, rode a mule in the company of the Umayyads, having the
guilt of rousing them on her neck, and came in front of the procession
and prevented them from proceeding to the Prophet's tomb. The following
lines have been composed for her unworthy act on that occasion:

"One day your ride a mule, And the next day a camel!'(241)

al-Ya'qubi writes: Marwan ibn al-Hakam and Sa'id ibn al-'As rode on and
prevented the burial of the Prophet's grandson by his tomb. 'A'ishah
too, riding a mule, shouted in front of the mourners: "This is my house,
and I allow no one to be buried here!" al-Qasim, grandson of Abu Baker,
came forward and said: "O aunt! We have not yet washed off our heads the
blood of the day of the battle of al-Jamal. Do you intend that in future
they call this day the day of mule?"

The Alawite supporters did not, naturally, remain passive. A number
gathered round Imam al- Husayn and said: "Allow us to deal with those
men. By God! They are no more than a bite for us!"

The Imam said: "My brother has willed that at his burial not even one
drop of blood be shed." Then the body of Imam al-Hasan was taken to the
al-Baqj' cemetery and buried by the side of his grandmother, Fatimah,
daughter of Asad and mother of Imam 'Ali.(242) These activities of
'A'ishah, which showed her old-standing rancor and hostility towards the
Prophet's household, had created a close and firm friendship between
'A'ishah and Umayyads, especially with Mu'awiyah, for which reason they
showed a great respect to her and offered her many gifts.

**Gifts of Mu'awiyah**

Once Mu'awiyah sent 'A'ishah one hundred thousand drachmas.

**Historians**

When a critical scholar searches reliable historical texts, he finds
strange signs of 'A'ishah's attachment to the government of the
Umayyads. These two, despite their past differences and their combats in
the assassination of 'Uthman, now found it expedient to sit alongside
each other and form a single front.

The financial considerations of the Umayyad government towards 'A'ishah
are a clear evidence of the said attachment. Again and again many gifts
and sums of money were sent for her by Mu'awiyah and other Umayyad
rulers. Here we cite some examples of this treatment, which we have
collected from reliable historical texts. Abu Nu'aym al-Isfahani,
well-known writer of Hilyat al-awliya', quoting 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn al-
Qasim, says that once Mu' awiyah sent some gifts for 'A'ishah which
included money, clothes and precious objects.(243)

He also quotes 'Urwah ibn az-Zubayr, saying that on another occasion
Mu'awiyah sent 'A'ishah one hundred thousand drachmas.(244)

Ibn Kathir, the famous historian of the 8th century, quotes 'Ata',
saying that Mu'awiyah sent a valuable necklace for 'A'ishah in Mecca,
the price of which was about one hundred thousand drachmas, and she
accepted it.(245)

The reliable book of Tabaqat al-kubra reports that Munkadir ibn 'Abd
Allah visited 'A'ishah and after some preliminary talks, she asked him:
"Have you an offspring?" He said: "No!" 'A'ishah said: "If I had ten
thousand drachmas, I would give it to you to buy a slave-girl and have
an offspring by her." This meeting came to end, and on the same day
Mu'awiyah sent 'A'ishah a huge sum of money. 'A'ishah said: "How soon we
are entangled!" and then sent Munkadir ten thousand dinars, with which
he bought a slave-girl.(246)

Ibn Kathir quotes another incident from Sa'd ibn al-'Aziz, saying that
Mu'awiyah once repaid a debt of 'A'ishah for a sum of eighteen thousand
drachmas. These debts were incurred by her owing to the gifts of money
given by her to the people.(247)

These were some examples of the financial considerations of Mu'awiyah
for 'A'ishah. Such a treatment was not confined to Mu'awiyah. Other
Umayyad rulers, too, acted in a similar manner, and from time to time
they sent her various gifts. One of these men was 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amir,
governor of Basra, who once sent her money and clothes.(248)

Despite the time that separates us from 'A'ishah and the Umayyad
period, we see that the instances and evidence of such financial
considerations by the Umayyad government towards 'A'ishah are so
numerous that we are compelled to conclude that the actual instances are
much more numerous than what have reached us, and that history has
buried most of them within itself.

In view of this point, we can realize the degree of the respect shown
to 'A'ishah by the Umayyad rulers on account of their own worldly
considerations and expediency as well as the reciprocal consideration
and expediency that 'A'ishah felt towards them, and thus we discover the
extent of the connection and attachment of those two strong fronts of
the time. Thus we can henceforth have a better and clearer understanding
of the evil results of the close connection of these two poles for the
Muslims and Islam.


**The influence of 'A'ishah in the rule of the Umayyads**

Ziyad ibn Abihi said proudly: This is the letter of 'A'ishah Umm
al-Mu-minin to me! If the reader has paid sufficient attention to what
has already been said about the life of 'A'ishah and her political and
social activities, he will have distinguished the extraordinary
political genius of this woman. From the viewpoint of social and
political understanding, and the power of imposing her views and many
other qualities, which are necessary for a politician, she has an
evident superiority over most men and women of her own time. This point
will be illustrated in many ways in the forthcoming pages.

One aspect of this woman's genius is the influence of her words. We
read in the book of Tabaqfit al-kubra: Murrah ibn Abi 'Uthman was the
freed slave of 'Abd ar-Rahman son of Abu Bakr. One day he went to 'Abd
ar-Rahman and requested him to write a letter to Ziyad, asking him to
meet his need. 'Abd arRahman wrote the letter but addressed Ziyad as the
son of his real father 'Ubayd, not as Abu Sufyan's son. Murrah ibn Abu
'Uthman said: "I won't take such a letter to Ziyad, for instead of
securing a benefit, I shall receive some harm."

Then he went to 'A'ishah and repeated the same request. 'A'ishah wrote:
"This is a letter from 'A'ishah Umm al-Mu'minin to Ziyad, son of Abu
Sufyan." The man took the letter to Ziyad who said to him after reading
it: "Go now and come back to me to-morrow so that I fulfill your wish."
Next day when he went to Ziyad while he was surrounded by people, Ziyad
told him to read the letter. He read this sentence which was written in
it and nothing more: "This is a Letter from 'A'ishah Umm al-Mu'minin to
Ziyad, son of Abu Sufyan." Then Ziyad complied with the man's
request.(249)

Yaqut al-Hamawi narrates this story in the section on "Nahr Murrah" of
his geographical encyclopedia, and writes: Ziyad was very pleased with
'A'ishah's letter and treated the man very kindly, and then turned to
the people and said proudly: "This is a letter of Umm al- Mu'minin to
me!"

Then he ordered to give Murrah one hundred acres of land by the river
al-Ubulah as his fief, and dig a special canal to irrigate his land, and
this river is thus called "Nahr Murrah".(250) What is interesting in
this incident is the use made by Ziyad of the effect of 'A'ishah's
written words for his own benefit. He felt so pleased at being addressed
by 'A'ishah as Abu Sufyan's son,

and being accepted by her as such. So he wished that the so-called
letter be read publicly, so that the people would see that his noble
lineage is recognized by 'A'ishah the great personality of the time,
considering him as the son of Abu Sufyan former chief of the Quraysh,
and brother of the present caliph!

Another time 'A'ishah wrote a letter to Ziyad in which he recommended a
man. Ziyad wrote at the bottom of the letter: 'He lives with his
parents', meaning that Ziyad will treat the man so well that he will
feel as if he lives with his parents.(251)


**'A'ishah and Mu'awiyah in reciprocal contention**

I swear to God that Hujr and his friends were the leaders and selected
ones of the Arabs. 'A'ishah Although the hostility with Imam 'Ali had
produced a deep friendship between 'A'ishah and Mu'awiyah, yet later .on
a number of factor caused a break in this relationship, and it led to
coolness and enmity.

We will deal with these factors in several different sections.
Mu'awiyah's constant efforts enabled him to seize the rein of all
affairs, but he was not content with this and wished to make his rule
hereditary. What is significant is that at first even some groups of his
friends did not approve of this project, and at this time the son of Abu
Sufyan revealed the savage and violent, and cruel side of his character.
It was then that 'A'ishah joined the group of his opponents, and severed
her last bond of connection with Mu'awiyah. The first disagreement which
arose between 'A'ishah and Mu'awiyah, appeared in the unpleasant event
of the death of Hujr ibn 'Adi, the brave warrior of Kufah and chaste
Shi'ah follower of Imam 'Ali.

Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani writes: 'A'ishah sent an envoy named 'Abd
ar-Rahman ibn al-Harath to ash-Sham to intercede on her behalf to
Mu'awiyah for Hujr and his friends. This man reached Damascus at a time
when Mu'awiyah had already killed them. 'A'ishah's envoy returned in
disappointment and reported the event to her.

'A'ishah said in vexation: "If it had not been for the fact that
whenever we start a revolt and change the conditions, the situation
becomes more complicated, and unpleasant events occur, we would have
started another revolt, and would not have left Hujr's death without
vengeance, since I swear to God that he was a true Muslim and striver in
the way of God."(252) What 'A'ishah meant by her statement about revolt
was that the popular movement started by her against 'Uthman, had
produced many difficulties as a result of which Imam 'Ali had assumed
the position of caliph. This matter was so insupportable for 'A'ishah
that she longed and prayed for the annihilation of the heaven and earth
and its people if the caliphate became a definitely established fact for
the Imam.

But her hopes were in vain since Imam 'Ali assumed that position as a
fact. Therefore, she used all her efforts to change the course of
events, and deprive the Imam of his position as caliph, and thus she
started the battle of al-Jamal which caused so much bloodshed and
massacre(253), but without any avail, except that her cousin Talhah her
son Muhammad and her sister's husband lost their lives, and she was
brought much pain and suffering! Now she was afraid that if she started
a revolt against Mu'awiyah, a step which was possible for her owing to
her social power and influence, more bitter and unpleasant events would
ensue which might affect her future, and conditions would become
worse.

Therefore, she was compelled to suppress her anger, and try to forget
this failure which damaged her social prestige. Thus she controlled her
rage and remained silent against Mu'awiyah's action. Another point is
mentioned in historical texts concerning the execution of Hujr, which
shows 'A'ishah's deep political understanding. She had declared: "By
God, if Mu'awiyah had recognized the heroic spirit, zeal and power of
the people of Kufah, he would never have dared to arrest and kill Hujr
and his friends. But the son of the liver-eater woman(254) knows that
fervent men of the Arabs no longer exist in this world-; I swear to God
that Hujr and his friends possessed a high rank in their
clear-sightedness, heroism and courage. The poet Lubayd has finely
composed the following lines about this matter:

"Those under whose auspices one could live,
Have departed this life, and lam left alone,
Amidst those who are as worthless as leprous skins!
They afford neither a benefit,
Nor is there any hope of their charity,
Their spokesman is cavilled at,
Even if he has caused no mischief." (255)
The death of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr
O Mu'awiyah! Did you not fear God in killing Hujr and his friends?


**'A'ishah**

The second factor of 'A'ishah's disagreement with Mu'awiyah, was the
tragic event of the killing of her brother, Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr. Ibn
'Abd al-Barr and Ibn al-Athir narrate: In the year that Mu'awiyah had
gone on a pilgrimage to Mecca, he went to Medina presumably to visit the
tomb of the Prophet of God. During his stay in Medina, one day he went
to visit 'A'ishah. Her first words with him were related to the
execution of Hujr, about which she said many things. The last answer of
Mu'awiyah was: "Leave Hujr and me alone to meet at the threshold of our
God "(256)

Some historians give greater details about this story and say: After
Mu'awiyah was permitted by 'A'ishah to enter her house and sit down, she
said to him: "Mu'awiyah! How could you so confidently enter my house
without fearing my retaliation for the death of my brother Muhammad?"

Mu'awiyah said: "Because I have entered this asylum." 'A'ishah said "O
Mu'awiyah! Did you not fear God in killing Hujr and his friends?"
Mu'awiyah said: "They were in fact killed by those who have given
testimony about them."(257) Ahmad ibn Hanbal writes in his book of
Musnad that Mu'awiyah gave the following answer to 'A'ishah's
questions:

"You would never commit such an act since I am in this asylum, and I
have heard the Prophet say that a faith in God checks the act of killing
a person." Then he asked her: 'What do you think of my treatment of you
and meeting your needs?" 'A'ishah said: "It is excellent." Then
Mu'awiyah said: "In that case leave us to others until we meet at the
threshold of our God."(258)

As history was reported, Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, 'A'ishah's brother was
killed in the year 37 of the Hijrah, and Hujr ibn 'Adi in the year 50.
Therefore the question arises as to why and how 'A'ishah remained silent
all those years without saying a word about avenging her brother's blood
until Hujr and his friends were killed, and then she remembered her
brother's death? We believe that the reason for these changes were the
events that took place at the beginning.

We have already seen that 'A'ishah sent an envoy named 'Abd ar-Rahman
ibn al-Harath from Medina to ash-Sham to intercede for Hujr and his
friends. The report of this mission spread to all parts of the Islamic
realm, and the people who were aware of 'A'ishah's history and influence
with the caliph's government, sincerely hoped that her request would be
complied with, and Mu'awiyah would not disappoint her. But not more than
a few days later her envoy returned in disappointment and for the first
time announced 'A'ishah's failure.

Such a thing had been almost unprecedented in the past. 'A'ishah had
somehow or other secured a great influence in the time of the caliphs,
and the government organization with the exception of the Alawite
government had respectfully accepted her views,(259) and this was the
first time that her demand was not agreed to.

With the spirit that we know of 'A'ishah, it was very hard for her to
bear this failure, and it created a deep rage and rancor in her. Was it
not this same factor that caused her to speak harshly with Mu'awiyah
after so many years of friendship and attachment for him and despite all
his material considerations and kindness to her, and remind him of his
wrong deeds, and bring up the subject of the unjust death of her brother
after fifteen years?

Sly and states manlike Mu'awiyah preferred to show calmness and
moderation against 'A'ishah's rage and dissatisfactions and remind her
of his past friendship and his gifts and his generosity towards her.

Of course 'A'ishah as a strong woman that we have got to know in the
pages of this book, would not so easily calm down from her state of
boiling rage, and would not quickly forget her rancor and enmity,
especially as Mu'awiyah had at that time inflicted another fresh. wound
upon her, namely by putting to death another brother of hers in the
question of the allegiance to Yazid. Naturally the disagreement between
'A'ishah and Mu'awiyah became more intensified at the sudden death of
her own brother, 'Abd ar-Rahman and she was filled with boiling rage.


**'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr is poisoned**

Marwan is a piece of God's damnation.

**'A'ishah**

The third factor of the disagreement between 'A'ishah and Mu'awiyah was
the question of the mysterious death of her brother, 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn
Abi Bakr. We have already seen that at the time when Mu'awiyah was
preparing the Muslim people to show allegiance to Yazid, Marwan ibn
al-Hakam governed Medina. One day during his sermon he spoke of Yazid
and of his nomination as caliph to succeed his father. 'Abd ar-Rahman
rose and spoke in opposition to Marwan, and Marwan ordered to arrest
him.

But 'Abd ar-Rahman fled out of the mosque and went to the house of
'A'ishah, and Marwan's men had no power to seize him. At this time
Marwan said in reproach and scorn of him: "This is the man about whom
the Qur'an has said: 'And he who says to his parents: Fie on you! Do you
threaten me?' "(260)

At this time 'A'ishah cried out from behind the screen: "God has not
descended any verse about our house except where He declares my
innocence in the incident of lfk "(261) Ibn al-Athir, the famous
historian, narrates this story as follows: In the question of allegiance
for Yazid, Mu'awiyah wrote a letter to his governor, Marwan and on
receiving this letter, Marwan rose and declared: "Amir al-Mu'minin
Mu'awiyah has nominated a successor to the caliphate for you, and has
shown good-will in this matter by choosing his son Yazid for this
position."

'Abd ar-Rahman rose and said: "Both you and Mu'awiyah have lied! You
have not taken into consideration people's interest and welfare. Your
intention is to transform the caliphate into an empire and adopt the
ways of Kasras and Caesars, so that when an emperor dies, another
emperor takes his place!"

Marwan addressed the people and said: "This is the man about whom the
Qur'an says: 'He who says to his parents: Fie on you! Do you threaten
me?' " 'A'ishah, hearing his words from behind the screen, stood up and
shouted: "O Marwan! O Marwan!"

The people became silent, and Marwan turned his face in that direction.
'A'ishah said after a brief pause: "'Are you the man who said to 'Abd
ar-Rahman that a verse has descended in the Qur'an reproaching him? You
are Lying! I swear to God that he is not the man about whom the verse
has descended, it must be another person, but you are a piece of God's
damnation!"(262) According to another narration, she said: "He is lying.
By God, 'Abd ar-Rahman is not the man he spoke of. But God damned the
father of Marwan when Marwan was still in his loins; so Marwan is a
piece of God's damnation!"

Thus Marwan found no-chance to secure allegiance for Yazid. Therefore
this important task was left for Mu'awiyah himself to accomplish. After
sometime u'awiyah travelled to Hejaz, seemingly for pilgrimage to Mecca,
and then visited Medina. We have already described some of the
incidents, which occurred in Medina, and now we will narrate some
others.

Ibn 'Abd al-Barr writes in his book of al-Isti'ab: Mu'awiyah sat on the
pulpit of the Prophet's mosque and called upon the people to show
allegiance to Yazid. But Imam al-Husayn, 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr and
'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abu Bakr protested against it, and many angry words
were exchanged. The son of Abu Bakr said: "O Mu'awiyah! Has the
caliphate been transformed into an empire so that if an emperor died,
another emperor would take his place without taking people's approval
and allegiance into consideration? We can never agree to this matter."

That night Mu'awiyah sent him one hundred thousand drachmas to win his
approval for the allegiance. But 'Abd ar-Rahnaan refused to accept the
bribe and said: "Do you suppose that I would sell my religion for the
world? Never!" Then he departed from Medina and went to Mecca. But soon
afterwards he died before the allegiance for Yazid was accomplished and
accepted generally.(263)

Ibn 'Abd al-Barr adds: 'Abd ar-Rahman died of a sudden death in the
vicinity of Mecca. The spot where he died was called al-Hubshi within
ten miles of Mecca, and he was buried in the same place. It is said that
he died in his sleep. When the news of his death was reported to
'A'ishah, she hastily left Medina for Mecca, and after arriving there,
she stood for some time by his grave and wept for the loss of her own
brother, and recited the following lamentation for him:

"For a long tune we two were
Like two companions of Judhaymah, king of Hira,
Who were so attached to each other
Like two inseparable companions,
So that it was said that they would never be apart.
But when we separated with the death of my brother; Malik,
It seemed as if we had not even spent one night

Together; despite all those attachments and companionships." (264)(265)
Then she added with poignant grief: "I swear to God that if I were
present at your death, I would have buried you in the spot where you
died, and would not have shed tears for you in that condition."

Thus the disagreement between 'A'ishah and the Umayyads became more
intensified and its flame soared higher. 'A'ishah had unexpectedly lost
her brother who had died suddenly and mysteriously. But there was really
no mystery, and a close scrutiny will reveal its cause, since he died of
poisoning on the way to Mecca in the same way that Malik al-Ashtar died
on his way to Egypt.(266)

Undoubtedly his death like the deaths of 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Khalid,
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqgas and Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba could not have been
without a sinister cause., All these great men of the time were killed
in order to open the way for securing allegiance for Yazid.

Thus the fire of dispute and division between 'A'ishah and the Umayyads
rose high after she lost her dear brother, but now there was no one to
help her to start a combat with the Umayyads, since now neither
az-Zubàyr nor Talhah were alive, nor 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr, nor
anyone else on whom she could rely. Thus she recited the following lines
which eloquently expressed her present condition:

"Those under whose protection I could live,
Have gona and left me alone now
Amidst those who are as worthless
As leprous skins, who offer no benefit,
Nor is there any hope for their goodness.".

Besides, 'A'ishah's age was now such that she could not sit on a mount
and cover deserts and mountains and start a war with the Umayyads.
Therefore, she showed her rancor and hostility in a different way, and
as we saw the Umayyad emir of Medina became the target of her revenge,
and 'A'ishah quoted the words of the Prophet concerning his reproach and
damnation of him and his father and said that he was a piece of God's
damnation.

Thenceforth that was the way she chose for future. We think that in
this period she did not confine her activity only to quoting the
traditions which were related to the reproach of the Umayyads, but she
also quoted what she had heard the Prophet state concerning the virtue
of his household and of Imam 'Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn.

For, in those times nothing was harder for the Umayyads to tolerate
than hearing words of praise about the Prophet's household. It meant
condemning and humiliating the Umayyads, and made Imam al-Husayn who was
the last member of that house and the noblest Muslim of that day, most
loved by the people. Therefore the traditions which are found in books
of tradition in which the names of Imam 'All, Siddiqah (Fatimah) and her
noble mother Khadijah are mentioned, must have belonged to this period
even though their number is not great.

We think it probable that her expressions of penitence about the battle
of al-Jamal, too, have their beginning in this period and have continued
to the end of her life. Now we deal with this subject at length in the
next section.


