'a'ishah's Monopoly of Verdicts On Sucking Period
=================================================

'A'ishah ordered her brother's sister or daughters to suck the man that
she wished to visit her house, so that they may be considered
religiously legitimate intimates.

**al-Muwatta' of Malik**

We have already seen that 'A'ishah was considered a great authority in
religious matters from the time of her father's caliphate until the
period of Mu'awiyah, with the exception of the period of the Alawite
rule. She was frequently consulted by the caliphs and was asked to issue
verdicts on various questions. Consequently she was treated with a great
respect, and inquirers crowded at the door of her house. Among the
Prophet's wives she was the only one who took part in the great
political events of his life, and also, as we saw, she caused so much
bloodshed, whereas the other consorts of the Prophet did not interfere
in such affairs.

It was probably due to this reason that she quoted the Prophet's
tradition concerning the sucking period, while the other wives of the
Prophet contradicted her in this matter.

According to Musnad of Ahmad 'A'ishah says about this tradition:
Sahlah, daughter of Suhayl ibn 'Amr and wife of Abu Hudhayfah, came to
the Prophet and said: Salem, the freed slave of Abu Hudhayfah enters our
house while we are not fully dressed and not properly covered. We used
to call him our son, since Abu Hudhayfah had adopted him as his son, in
the same way that the Prophet had adopted Zayd as his son.

The following verse of the Qur'an descended about this matter: "Assert
their relationship to their fathers; this is more equitable with Allah."
(3O7)

The Prophet said to Sahlah: "You may suckle your freed slave and
adopted son five times; than he may be regarded as your foster son and
thereby become a religiously legitimate relation." By relying on this
tradition the narrator of which was herself, she ordered her sisters and
nieces to give suck five times to the men that she wished to visit her,
even though they were full- grown adults, so that thereby they could be
considered as religiously legitimate intimates and be allowed to enter
house without any inconvenience.

But the other wives of the Prophet abstained from this action and did
not allow an adult man to visit them by means of sucking their sister's
milk, and treat them like an intimate relation. They regarded sucking as
something solely related to babyhood. They said to 'A'ishah: "We do not
know. Maybe the verdict of the Prophet has been given only in the case
of Salem, the slave-girl of Abu\_Hudhayfah and his adopted son, and it
is not applicable to others."(308) This incident has been narrated in
Sahih of Muslim within six traditions, the last of which in his own
words is as follows:

They said to 'A'ishah: "By God! We consider the matter of Salim as a
leave given by the Prophet to him only. Therefore we cannot in that way
allow anyone to become intimately related to us. (309)

Salim ibn 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar was one of those who, in adulthood, was
allowed by means of suckling to visit 'A'ishah. The author of Tabaqat
writes: 'A'ishah sent Salem to her sister Umm Kulthum, wife of 'Abd
Allah ibn Rabi' ah to be given suck, so that he would legitimately be
allowed to visit her and listen to some tradition.(310)

The next tradition, which is narrated by Muslim in his Sahih, confirms
the opinion of Umm Salamah and other wives of the Prophet in the
question of suckling. 'A'ishah says: One say the Prophet came in and saw
a man sitting before me. He was annoyed and I could observe signs of
anger on his face. I told him that the man was my foster brother. He
made a remark (311) which is explained as follow by an-Nawawi, a famous
interpreter of tradition in Sahih of Muslim:

It means: You must reflect to see whether this sucking has been
effected in accordance with the required condition and laws of Islam or
not. For, sucking is due to hunger, and the legitimacy of the glance is
due to the face that the child is so young that his hunger is satisfied
through sucking without needing any other food, whereas in the case of
grown-ups milk alone would not serve as an adequate food, and they
required some other food, too. Therefore, not every person who suckles
the milk of a mother maybe regarded as her foster offspring, or a foster
brother of her children. Thus the above legitimate intimacy can be
obtained only by giving suck to a small baby.

In at-Tirmidhi's tradition there is a sentence which means:

Only that kind of sucking creates legitimacy of intimacy as a relative
and bans marriage when the milk serves as the only food for the baby.
Therefore its period is confined to the normal period of sucking in a
baby. an-Nawawi adds that this is a well-known point in religious
jurisprudence, about which there is, of course,

a different of opinion.(812)(313) The above tradition which we
mentioned as a quotation of an-Nawawi in the book of Sahih of Muslim,
has been quoted in the book of Tradition of at-Tirmidhi from Umm Salamah
which makes this relationship more conditional, namely: "The state of
sucking create sanctity and close relationship and prohibits marriage
only if milk is offered as a substitute to food and the infant's bones
are still soft (and not become hard) "(314) Then Abu 'Isa at-Tirmidhi,
the famous author of the 'book writes: This is a correct tradition,
which is acted upon by most scholar friends of the Prophet and others on
the basis of the above remark of the Prophet. According to the verdict
of the Prophet in reference to this tradition, they believe that if the
suckling occurs in the first two years of a baby's life, it created a
legitimate intimacy, but after two full years, no intimacy is
possible.

These traditions were contrary to 'A'ishah's views. The words which,
she quoted from the Prophet could not hold out against all the
traditions of others, especially as her opponents were all the wives of
the Prophet. To remove this obstacle, the best way for her was to invent
a Quranic verse to prove that it is possible to produce legitimate
intimacy in adults with oneself through sucking.

To attain this goal, again 'A'ishah narrates that a verse had descended
about stoning to death and also about the sucking of adults in which it
was said that ten suckings would be enough for obtaining legitimate
intimacy. She claimed that this verse was written on a piece of paper,
placed under her bed, she said:

"When the Prophet was ill in bed and we were looking after him in his
last hours of life, a domestic animal entered the room and ate the
paper, and thus the said verse was lost."(315)(316)

In other narrations quoted from 'A'ishah by Muslim in his Sahih
'A'ishah says: In the Qur'an which had been descended to the Prophet,
there existed the following verse: "Ten times of clear and known
suckings provide legitimate intimacy." Then this verse was abrogated by
the phrase 'five known times', but as this verse was being recited from
the Qur'an, the Prophet passed away.

an-Nawawi, great Sunni scholar and interpreter of Muslim's book of
Sahih says: The narration means that the abrogation of 'ten times' for
'five times of known suckings' has taken place at the end of the
Prophet's life, and some people recited the phrase 'ten times' without
knowing that it was abrogated. Then an-Nawawi describes the difference
of views of the Shafi'ite and Malikite Jurisprudents, and adds on behalf
of the Malikites that Quranic words are proved by the statement of one
person. Then in explaining the sucking of adult men and the manner of
it, he quoted Judge 'Ayyad that the manner of sucking took this form
that the milk offering woman milked herself in a pot, and the man drank
out of it, and not by sucking her breast.

In this way 'A'ishah answered the criticism levelled at her by the
other wives of the Prophet, and acted upon his own monopoly of
verdicts.


**Anecdotes in the life of 'A'ishah**


May God bless 'Ali who was always with God.

**'A'ishah**

Although 'A'ishah was in her life always involved with various events
and difficulties, yet she was not heedless of wit and humor in view of
her delicate mind and subtlety. Some incidents are narrated about her in
this connection in books of history.


Ibn 'Abd Rabbih writes in his famous book of al-'Iqd al-farid:

One day Imam al-Hasan ibn 'Ali visited Mu'awiyah when 'Abd Allah ibn
az-Zubayr and Abu Sa'id, son of 'Aqil, were present there. When Imam
al-Hasan sat down, Mu'awiyah asked: "Abu Muhammad! Which of them was
senior, 'Ali or az-Zubayr?" The Imam said: "They were both almost of the
same age, but 'Ali was regarded as az-Zubayr's senior."

'Abd Allah, son of az-Zubayr, began to speak and said: "And May God
bless az-Zubayr!"(317) Imam al-Hasan only smiled, since he was above
such superficialities and was aware of Mu'awiyah's mischievous
intention. But Abu Sa'id, son of 'Aqjl, could not control his anger, and
said: "Stop speaking about 'Ali and az-Zubayr. 'Ali invited the people
to something in which he was a leader and Imam, whereas az-Zubayr
invited the people to something the leadership of which was held by a
woman! Then the two sides faced each other and the flame of war of
kindled, and both groups prepared themselves for combat. But az-Zubayr
took to his heels and fled from the field of battle before the victory
of right and before his submission to right and before wrong was
vanquished and before he could abandon it. Then a man seized him, who
was much shorter than az-Zubayr, and cut off his head and carries away
his clothes, and brought his severed head to the Imam as a souvenir.

But Imam 'Ali as usual served under the Prophet of God and was the
vanguard of the army on that day. Therefore, may God bless 'Mi, not
az-Zubayr!"

'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr said: "By God! If anyone else but you had
uttered such words, I would have known what to do with him!"

The son of 'Aqil said: "The person towards whom you committed this
insolence, nobly turned away from you and your words, and thus I was
compelled to speak for him." This incident was reported to 'A'ishah. One
day when Abu Sa'id was passing by her house, she shouted to him and
said:

"You squint-eyed devil! Are you the man who spoke their biting words to
my sister's son?" Abu Sa'id looked round and saw no one. So he shouted:
"The devil sees you, but you cannot see him." 'A'ishah laughed on
hearing these words and said: "May God bless your father! How sharp and
biting your tongue is!"(318)

The above incident shows that Mu'awiyah's intention was to produce a
clash between Imam al- Hasan and 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr and cause
hostility, this was a policy he constantly adopted towards the Quraysh
chiefs, and roused one group against another.

In the above incident 'Abd Allah was unconsciously caught in the webs
of Mu'awiyah cunning and followed the course envisaged by Mu'awiyah,
while Imam al-Hasan, who was acquainted well with the character of
Mu'awiyah, safely escaped from his trap. The role of 'A'ishah, too, in
this incident was in accordance with what she did all her life, namely
to support her kith and kin, and oppose their enemies.

Another anecdote in her life is a story narrated by Ahmad ibn Hanbal in
his book of Musnad. He writes: 'Ammar ibn Yasir accompanied by Malik
al-Ashtar went to 'A'ishah's house and asked for admission. When they
entered, 'Ammar said: "O mother!" 'A'ishah said: "But I am not your
mother!" 'Ammar said: "But you are, even though you dislike it."(319)
'A'ishah asked: "Who is the man with you?"

'Ammar said: "al-Ashtar." 'A'ishah turned to him and said: "Was it you
who wanted to kill my sister's son?" al-Ashtar said:

"Yes, he wanted to kill me, and so I desired his death."

'A'ishah said: "If you had killed him you would never have received
salvation; for, I have heard the Prophet say: 'Killing a Muslim is not
permissible except in one of the three following cases: if he has killed
someone, and he is killed, or a married man who commits adultery, or a
man becomes an apostate after embracing Islam."(320)

Here 'A'ishah should have been asked: "O mother of the faithful! Why
did you not remind your sister's son, 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr, of the
Prophet's words? Was he not eager to kill such a Muslim as al-Ashtar?

Was the consideration about the death of a Muslim confined only to the
person of 'Abd Allah, and was the verdict not applicable to thousands of
Muslims who had innocently been killed in that fearful battle in the way
of whim and fancy? Had their blood no worth in the eye of God and
Islam?"

Another anecdote mentioned in history about 'A'ishah's life, is a story
narrated by Ibn 'Abd Rabbih in al-'Iqd al-farid. He says: After the
battle of al-Jamal, one day Umm Ufa al-'Abdiyah of the 'Abd al-Qays
tribe many hundred famous men of which such as Hakim ibn Jabalah had
been killed by 'A'ishah's army, visited 'A'ishah and said to her: "O
mother of the faithful! What do you say about a mother who kills her
small offspring?" 'A'ishah said: "She must receive the fire of hell."
Umm Ufa asked: "What do say about a mother who kills twenty thousand
grown-up sons of hers?" 'A'ishah shouted: "Throw out this enemy of
God!"(321)

How hard was this reproach for 'A'ishah to hear! The event of the
battle of al-Jamal and its greatness and fearfulness weighed like a
heavy mountain on her mind, and during the rest of her life it had not
lost its effect.

We have already mentioned her deep regret and penitence about
participating in that war, and our subsequent reference to this matter
may depict the same kind of repentance. Ibn 'Abd Rabbih quotes a remark
of 'A'ishah about this matter in his book of al-'Iqd al-farid. She has
said: "A spindle in the hand of women is better and nobler than a spear
in the hand of fighters in the way of God."(322) The effect of the
battle of al-Jamal on the mind and spirit of 'A'ishah was as painful as
it was exhilarating for the Umayyad party, so that they spoke of it
every day and gloried in mentioning its details.

Ibn 'Abd Rabbih writes: "Yazid ibn Munyah went to Mu'awiyah from Basra
to ash-Sham. He was a brother of Ya'la ibn Munayh, a chief of Basra and
a commander in the battle of al-Jamal, and the original owner of
'A'ishah's camel. She rode it and directed the combat from there. Ya'la
also had some kinship with Mu'awiyah, for his daughter was the wife of
'Utbah ibn Abi Sufyan, brother of Mu'awiyah.

When Yazid ibn Munayh set by Mu'awiyah, he began complaining of his
debts, and requested Mu'awiyah to help him out of his difficulties.
Mu'awiyah said to Ka'b: "Give him thirty thousand dinars!" When he rose
to go out, Mu'awiyah said again: "Add to it another thirty thousand for
the sake of the day of al-Jamal."(323)

One day 'Amr Thn al-'As in his conversation with 'A'ishah said: "I wish
you were killed on the day of al-Jamal?" 'A'ishah said: "Why, you old
villain?" 'Amr ibn al-'As answered: "Then you would have died fittingly
and gone to heaven, and we could have used your death as the best excuse
for pounding the Alawite front."(324)

Books of history narrate another encounter of 'Amr ibn al-'As with
'A'ishah, namely that, one day in 'A'ishah's presence the talk led to
the death of Dhu ath-Thadiyah at the hand of Imam 'Ali. The narrator
says: 'A'ishah said to me: "If you visit Kufah bring me a letter of
testimony from the people who have witnessed this scene."

I went to Kufah and I chose ten people from each group and collected
their testimony in a letter and took it to Medina for 'A'ishah. When she
saw it, she said: "May God damn 'Amr ibn al-'As! He claimed that I have
killed Dhu ath- Thadjyah in Egypt."(825)

After narrating this story, Ibn Kathir adds: Then 'A'ishah bent her
head and wept bitterly. After she stopped crying and calmed down, she
said: "May God bless 'Ali! He was always with God. What occurred between
me and him, was what often occurs between women and their husbands'
family."(326)

But as to why 'Amr ibn al-'As had made such a false claim and intended
to attribute the death of Dhu ath-Thadiyah to himself, a reference to
the narrations of the Prophet clarifies the matter: Writers of tradition
and historians have quoted narrations from the Prophet in reproach of
Dhu ath-Thadiyah and in praise of his killer. In this way 'Amr ibn
al-'As intended to show the conformity of his own praise with that of
the Prophet.

Here the survey of 'A'ishah's life comes to an end, and we return to
the life of Mu'awiyah in order to discover the motives for and factors
of the fabrication of traditions and narrations of that period, and find
out the great role of 'A'ishah in this process. For, all our discussions
and efforts are intended to recognize the traditions, which are falsely
attributed to the Prophet in order to invert Islam. Therefore, without
such an analysis those lies cannot be distinguished and criticized.


**Part Six : Fabrication of tradition and tradition-makers**


**A brief glance at the life of Mu'awiyah
A summary of previous discussions**

In pagan times the Umayyads showed envy to the Banu Hashim During the
pagan times Umayyah and his descendants were deeply envious of the
greatness and headship of Hashim and his descendants, and this jealousy
produced many unpleasant results. But before the advent of Islam the
opposition and hostility of the Uniayyads were not so hard and acute.
Time passed and the grandson of 'Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hashim brought
Islam, the great religion of God, as souvenir to the world of humanity.
It was at this time that Abu Sufyan, grandson of Umayyah assumed the
leadership of Quraysh combat against Islam, and directed most of the
anti-Islamic combats of the Meccan infidels. During the whole time of
the apparent weakness of Islam, Abu Sufyan imposed severe and deadly
tortures upon the weak and impotent followers of this new religion and
did his worst to molest them.

Naturally the conditions could not remain such forever, and eventually
God Almighty helped His prophet and opened the gates of Mecca for him
and Muslim combatants and brought them success and victory. Thenceforth
the Quraysh no longer dominated Arab tribes, and they were given the
epithet of "freed ones" and a stain of disgrace on their character.

Abu Sufyan was vanquished in the same way that Arab idols had been
smashed and destroyed, and those same weak and rejected individuals of
pagan times such as 'Ammar, Abu Dharr and Bilal were now greatly
respected and had rightfully become the heirs of all the political and
social power of the time. Abu Sufyan passed by them and they said
regretfully: "The swords of God did not cut the head of this enemy of
God in the way he deserved."

Abu Sufyan lived long enough to see the caliphate of Abu Bakr. At this
time one day the caliph treated him so harshly that Quhafah, Abu Bakr's
father, was worried. Abu Bakr gave the following explanation to his
father: "God has granted greatness and glory to your house for the sake
of Islam, and lowered his house from the height of mastery."

Abu Sufyan also lived long enough to be compelled by 'Umar one day to
carry stones on his back in Mecca, the seat of his former domination.
Another day, too, he dealt Abu Sufyan strokes of the lash His wife,
Hind, who was greatly vexed at this incident, spoke sharply to 'Umar and
said: "By God! There was a time that if you dared to beat him, the land
of Mecca would have trembled under your feet!" 'Umar answered: "You are
right, but God has elevated some and abased others for the sake of
Islam!"

Time passed and 'Uthman became caliph, and once more the Umayyads
assumed power, and like children who pass a ball to one another, the
Umayyads transferred ranks and positions to each other. In each province
one member of the Umayyad house assumed the seat of governorship and was
greatly proud of his position. It was at this period that the darlings
of the Prophet's time, namely the chaste devouts, had become inferiors
and weakened individuals like 'Ammar who were harshly treated, or like
Abu Dharr and Malik al-Ashtar who were exiled to arid deserts!

Now the Qurayshis had once more regained their former pride and
haughtiness, and one of the Umayyads exclaimed:

"The green lands of Iraq are one of the garden of the Quraysh." All
this conceit, haughtiness and injustice led the Islamic realm towards a
revolt, and this revolt and riot were so wide and deep that they
culminated in the assassination of the caliph, and even then in his own
house! After this bitter experience, the Muslims joined hands, and
despite the Umayyads' wish, they brought the camel of caliphate to the
door of the Banu Hashim. Now began the just rule of the Alawites and
once more in Medina the Umayyads lost their power and glory,

and the Quraysh guardians of paganism were humbled. But they could not
keep quiet, and every day they opposed the Alawite government in one way
or another, since they cherished in their hearts the hope of recovering
domination and rule from the time of Uthman onward. Gradually they paved
the way for a war against the Imam's rule, which caused much bloodshed
in Basra, but they gained no profit from it.

During the whole of this period Mu'awiyah had governed ash-Sham since
the time of 'Umar, and now he wanted to make the foundation of his rule
stronger at every opportunity. Consequently he wrote to the Imam
demanding the governorship of Egypt and ash-Sham, but as the Imam
refused to comply with his demand, he gathered together thousands of
supporters in Siffin in the name of avenging 'Uthman's blood, and
started a cruel and bloody battle!

But the battle did not settle the question, and the matter of
arbitration was brought up, and Mu'awiyah returned to ash-Sham after
consolidating his position. Then he began dispatching successive groups
of plunderers to the Islamic lands of Iraq and Hejaz to seize innocent
Muslim women as captives and kill the young and old, burn, massacre,
pillage and demolish. The result of the wicked raids of one group of
plunderers was the death of thirty thousand Muslims who were caught
innocently in the clutches of the unjust and bloodthirsty raiders of
Mu'awiyah. After the martyrdom of Imam 'Ali, Mu'awiyah again refused to
show allegiance to Imam al- Hasan al-Mujtaba, and with a large army
invaded Iraq.

At the same time Mu'awiyah tried to buy off the guards and companions
of Imam al-Hasan with money and position in order to kill the Imam. As
the Imam did not succeed in persuading his supporters to engage in war
with Mu'awiyah and was also badly wounded, he concluded a truce with
him, and stipulated heavy conditions in this pact, none of which was
fulfilled by Mu'awiyah.

After his arrival in Kufah, Mu'awiyah declared: "I swear to God that I
have not fought you for the sake of fast and prayer. You can please
yourselves in performing these acts. My only reason for this combat has
been to rule you, and so I trample upon every condition that I have made
in my pact with al-Hasan."

In his first days and years of his rule, Mu'awiyah was compelled to
follow a policy of caution and moderation. He made peace with the
emperor of Rome, and even paid tributes to him.

He sent bags of money from Damascus to all parts of the country. He
deceived the chiefs and dignitaries of tribes and crafty Arabs with
money, position and ties of kinship until his rule was consolidated on
the basis of materialism and tyranny. It was then that he revealed his
real visage and nature. He revived the customs of the tyrannical
emperors of the world.

Gold and silver from one side, and property, gardens and springs from
another side were brought under his bloody hands from all parts of the
great Islamic realm. He issued the order, like Iranian kings, that on
the new year and Mehrgan festivals gifts should be offered to him, an
act which was the heritage of the two great neighboring empires, namely
Iran and Rome.


