Tradition Making and Its Motives in the Time of Mu'awiyah
=========================================================

Many loads of wine were carried for Mu 'awiyah.

**Historians**

With the commencement of the rule of Mu'awiyah, the friends and
companions of the Prophet who had gathered round Imam 'Ali during the
Alawite rule, were scattered in different parts of the Islamic realm.
After the truce of Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba with Mu'awiyah, as this
group had lost their strong support and were now a weakened party, they
were dispersed in various lands of Islam.

If we have used the phrase 'the friends round the Imam' it is because
reliable historians have spoken of a large group of the Prophet's
companions as supporters of Imam 'Ali in the battles of al-Jamal and
Siffin, whereas they mention the names of only three companions in
Mu'awiyah's army who had the honour of association with the Prophet.

adh-Dhahabi writes in his book of "History of Islam": On the day of the
battle of al-Jamal there were present in 'Ali's army eight hundred of
the Ansar and seven hundred of those who had participated in the
ar-Ridwan allegiance and also one hundred and thirty of the men who had
fought in the battle of Badr under the Prophet.(327)

Ibn Khayyat writes in his history: "Eight hundred of those who had
shown allegiance until death with the Prophet at ar-Ridwan,(328)
accompanied Imam 'Ali in the battle of Siffin."(329) Nasr ibn Muzahim
writes in his book of the event of Siffin:

Qays ibn Sa'd ibn 'Ubadah the valiant and devoted friend of the Imam in
the event of Siffin one day said to an-Nu'man ibn Bashir who accompanied
Mu'awiyah together with Muslamah ibn Mukhallad: "O an-Nu'man! Do you see
anyone with Mu'awiyah but a freed-slave or an ignorant desert Arab or a
deceived Yemeni? Look carefully! Where are the Emigrants and Ansar and
devout followers with whom God is satisfied?

Then look again! Who else is with Mu'awiyah but you and your two
friends, whereas you are neither among the combatants of Badr, nor among
the allegiants of 'Aqabah, nor among the warriors of the battle of Uhud,
nor have you a record in Islam and religion, nor has a verse of the
Qur'an descended in your praise? Upon my life, if you are fighting us
and causing mischief to day, your father, too, had acted in the same way
in the past!"(330)

What Qays meant by the allies of 'Aqabah were men of Ansar who
concluded a pact with the Prophet at 'Aqabah(331) and embraced Islam,
and what he meant by the opposition and combat of an-Nu'man's father,
was his taking the lead in as-Saqjfah for allegiance to Abu Bakr. This
action of an-Nu'man's father helped to consolidate the caliphate of Abu
Bakr.

In the statements that we have quoted from old and reliable historians,
you have noted that the devout and true supporters of the Prophet who
were trained by Islam, served under the banner of the Alawite
government, whereas Mu'awiyah had only two of the Prophet's companions
with him neither of whom had a record in Islam, nor had they shown any
self- sacrifice, nor did they possess a good reputation.

Now after the martyrdom of Imam 'Ali ibn Abi Talib all those friends
were scattered in various lands of Islam. Of course wherever these men
went, loyal Muslims gathered around them, and heard and sometimes wrote
down the traditions that these companions quoted from the Prophet, and
thus they became familiar with the teachings of their faith.

It can, of course, be easily imagined that the hot topics of those days
were related to the battles of Siffin and al-Jamal, the revolt of
'Uthman's time and such events, in all of which reference was made to
the defects, treason's and black deeds of the Umayyads. Sometimes, too,
they talked of the time of the first two caliphs and the victories
gained in that period when no virtue or excellence could be attributed
to the Umayyad house.

Similarly there was an occasional talk of the Prophet's time and the
wars and battles of that period, and of the tortures inflicted upon
devout Muslims by the Quraysh, impressing the hearts with the greatness
and glory of the time, and rousing a feeling of humility in the
listeners. Obviously in these conversations there was always a mention
of the virtue and fine qualities of the Banu Hashim, and the reproach
and berating the conduct and deeds of the Umayyads.

They narrated the story of Badr for interested Muslims and showed how
Mu'awiyah's grandfather, uncle, brother and other members of his house
were killed, and how seventy or more of the Quraysh and kins and friends
of the Umayyads were taken captive. They narrated the story of the
battle of Uhud when Abu Sufyan, father of Mu'awiyah, directed the
combat, and his liver eater mother, Hind, ripped open the body of
Hamzah, the Prophet's noble and valiant uncle, and bit his liver with
her teeth. They narrated how on that day Abu Sufyan cried out:

'Long live Hubal!' (the idol), and then how the men recited a poem of
al-Hasan composed in reproach of Hind in which reference was made to the
illegitimate birth of Mu'awiyah! One day they talked of the capture of
Mecca and the apparent conversion of Abu Sufyan and his off springs to
Islam, and explained why Abu Sufyan had no sincerity towards Islam and
took nothing into consideration but the expediency of the time.

Then they narrated how the holy Prophet sent Mu'awiyah and his Sons
much of the spoils of war as a consolation and softening of their hearts
towards Islam, but the efforts of the Prophet to win them over truly to
Islam proved to be of no avail. After embracing Islam Abu Sufyan had
declared: "I wish I could mobilize warlike groups against this man!" On
the day of battle when in the first hours of combat the Muslims
retreated, Abu Sufyan said to his friends: "The rout and flight of these
men will continue as far as the shores of the Red Sea!" On the day of
the battle of al-Yarmuk after the Prophet's decease, when he observed
the retreat of the Muslims, he cried out: "Long live the Romans!" and
when the Romans retreated, he cried out:

"Woe upon you!" and at the same time here regretfully recited these
lines:

"Of the noble Romans and emperors of Rome No single member seems to
have remained."

All these talks went on during the tyrannical rule of Mu'awiyah,
whereas for the Arabs of the Arabian peninsula nothing was so worthy and
noble as the memory of their fathers and ancestors and the story of
their glory, greatness and courageous deeds. Arabs loved this, and did
their utmost for its sake. Despite all the combats of true Islam against
this attitude, it had not lost its force and had not been vanquished.
The number of those, who truly followed Islamic verdicts and injunctions
and had forgotten those pagan and superstitious ideas and customs, was
very small.

It is quite clear that Mu'awiyah belonged to this group of notorious
Muslims. During the short period of his association with the Prophet and
his stay among the Muslims in Medina, no change of attitude had taken
place in him. We discover this fact well from his conduct during his
rule in ash-Sham he engaged in usury, and stored skins full of wine in
his house; he gave away Muslims' public fund for his own whims and
fancies as if they were his own property.

The orators of the city sang his praises to his face. He arranged
parties similar to those of pagan times for a narration of futile and
imaginary stories of pride and greatness, and proudly and pompously said
to those present: "All the Quraysh know that Abu Sufyan is the greatest
man of them and the son of the noblest of them, of course, with the
exception of the Prophet who was chosen and exalted by God. In my
opinion, if all people were to be considered the descendants of Abu
Sufyan, they would all have been farsighted and discerning
individuals."(332)

Is there any self-conceit greater than this claim of Mu'awiyah that if
his father had been the father of all human beings, then no one but wise
and discerning creatures would have existed in the world? He imagined
that his father was the noblest man of the Quraysh, with the exception
of the Prophet. Could anyone make a higher claim in that time than
speaking of himself? Well, during his rule Mu'awiyah showed this degree
conceit and haughtiness to others! Freed persons and the caliphate or
the judgment of the great about Mu'awiyah and his house Mu'awiyah and
his father were leaders of the wars against Islam.

During his caliphate Mu'awiyah became more conceited, pompous and
haughty than ever. On these days he did not think only of the glory and
greatness of his tribe and of its propagation, but his mind was also
occupied with another important matter. He was constantly endeavoring to
consolidate the basis of his rule as an emperor, and how he could
accomplish this purpose. Among the Muslims Sa'sa'ah ibn Sawhan, the
loyal friend of the Imam, speaks of it bravely to Mu'awiyah's face and
says:

"You and your father belonged to that group of fighters who went to
combat the Prophet of God, and you are the freed son of another freed
man who were indebted to the Prophet for granting you your freedom. How
could the caliphate be right for a freed captive?" (333)

Similarly 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Ghanam al-Ash'ari said to Abu Hurayrah and
Abu ad-Darda' at the time they were sent to the Imam on a mission by
Mu'awiyah: "How can after all Mu'awiyah enter the caliphate's council
while he is one of those who is not qualified to be elected caliph? He
and his father have been among the leaders of the groups fighting
against How could the caliphate be consolidated for him when 'Umar had
said during his own rule: "In the question of caliphate there is no
share for a freed captive or the son of a freed captive or for other
Muslims of Mecca after its capture'? Such persons are not allowed to
assume that position."(335)

The people also remembered the declaration of Imam 'Ali who had said:
"Mu'awiyah is a man for whom God has prescribed no precedence in
religion, and he has no backing of chastity and honesty this faith. He
is the freed son of another freed captive who has taken part in all the
wars against Islam. He and his father have always been hostile to God,
His Prophet and Islam, so much so that they unwillingly embraced Islam
and abstained from proclaiming it." (336) Another time the Imam said to
Mu'awiyah: "Remember that you are one of those freed captives who are
never allowed to become caliph, and do not merit the crown of
allegiance, and have not the right of entry into the Muslims'
council."(337) (338)

'Abd Allah ibn Badil, a commander of the Alawite army in the battle of
Siffin said about Mu'awiyah: "Mu'awiyah is claiming something which does
not belong to him, and combats someone to whom the caliphate belongs and
has no similarity to Mu'awiyah. Fight this oppressive group who are
combating a person who has the merit of being caliph, while they
themselves have no merit for it. I have fought them in the company of
the Prophet, and today they are the same creatures who are no better nor
chaster individuals than those days.

(Meaning in fighting the Imam they are no better than the days when
they fought the Prophet). They are the enemy of God and you. Rise up and
may God bless you!"(339)

'Ammar ibn Yasir a true Muslim and a devoted supporter of the Imam,
cried out in the battle of Siffin about Mu'awiyah: "O Muslims! Do you
wish to have a look at the enemy of God and His prophet, and a man
fighting them and oppressor of Muslims and an accomplice of infidels?

A man who came to the Prophet embraced Islam when God Almighty willed
that His religion hereditary for his descendants, while he was judged in
the above manner by the worthy Leaders and influential men of Islamic
society, whereas there existed in that community such personalities as
Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn, who were the heirs of all the glory
and greatness of the Banu Hashim and descendants of the holy Prophet,
and loved so deeply by the Muslims?

Therefore, in order to preserve his position as a ruler and consolidate
its foundation on the one hand, and to make it hereditary in his house
on the other hand, Mu'awiyah was compelled to disperse the people by
every possible means from around the Prophet's and 'Ali's household, and
turn their hearts away from them, in order to attract them towards
himself and his own house! For this reason he started such a war against
that household and their devoted followers that children were aged with
fear, and the whole land was colored with Muslim blood, and Muslim women
were sold in the slave markets!

To this end Mu'awiyah employed everything which was at his disposal,
such as money, power, plot, cunning and political genius. Moreover, as
he possessed a very black record in the history of Islam, he resorted to
every pretext in the attainment of his goal, to capture the simple
hearts of the people and dominate their immature minds, such as the
claims for avenging the blood of 'Uthman whom he called an innocent and
martyred caliph!


**Tradition making or a cover for Inferiority complexes**

Mu'awiyah had no scruple about lying and calumny. Mu'awiyah used two
pillars for his evil propaganda: On the one hand he tried to steal
genuine things by means of brain washing and rob the primary cultures
and fundamental beliefs of the Muslims from them, and on the other hand
replace those beliefs by his own ideas which had their source in the
Arab pagan culture and Christian culture of ash-Sham and fill the vacant
minds of the Muslims with them.

In this discussion we shall see how Mu'awiyah employs ever possible
means in order to carry out his wicked purpose of blemishing the
household of the Prophet, the Qur'an and the guardians of Islam,
especially the most outstanding of them, namely Imam 'Ali all of whom
had conquered people's hearts with their peerless chastity and virtue.
He did his utmost to misrepresent their fine qualities and brilliance,
and influence people with the propagation of misinterpreted ideas and
topics, and take control of the minds of simple-minded people in such a
way as to make it impossible for them to return to the clear spring of
Islam and the Qur'an, and unable to find the true path of the Qur'an and
Islam by reference to the Prophet's descendants. He could then succeed
in infusing those altered ideas as a constant element in people's
minds.

at-Tabari writes: Mu'awiyah appointed al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah as
governor of Kufah, but before the latter departed for that destination,
he summoned him and said to him: "I intended to make several
recommendations to you which I desist from, because of your great
intelligence and discernment. I leave it all to your intelligence to
carry out, but there is one thing that I must not forget to point out to
you. As a first recommendation never cease to reproach and speak ill of
'Ali, and also to beg God's favour and salvation for 'Uthman.(345) In
the second place never abstain from finding fault with 'Ali's friends
and companions and being strict to them, but at the same time bringing
'Uthman's supporters close to you and showing kindness to them."

al-Mughayrah said: "I have already been tried, and have gained much
experience. I have also rendered many services for others before your
time, and no one has reproached me! You, too, will test me, and see
whether you approve and praise my deeds or consider them unworthy and
reproach me."

Mu'awiyah said: "No, with God's Will, I shall praise you."(346)
al-Mada'ini writes in his book of "al-Ahdath": After he became caliph,
he wrote a decree to all his governors and officials to the effect that
whoever speaks of the excellence and virtue of Abu Turab (ALI) and his
family, it will mean his having no respect for his own life and
property, and will lose his blood!

Meanwhile the people of Kufah, who loved the Alawite house, suffered
more than others. Once again Mu'awiyah wrote to his agents in all parts
of the realm, not to accept the testimony of the Shi'ites of 'Ali and
his household, and to find out those who were attached to 'Uthman and
those who spoke of his fine qualities in the land under their
administration, in order to show them favors and a greater respect. Then
these agents were ordered to write down for him the words of such givers
of praise together with their names and their parents' names.

This order was carried out to such an extent and so many traditions
were forged by the self- sold and worldly individuals for the sake of
worldly profits, that 'Uthman's virtues were given no bounds. For this
purpose Mu'awiyah offered money, robes of honour, property and
everything else under his control. Every unknown and worthless fellow
who found his way to Mu'awiyah to offer a word or tradition in praise of
'Uthman was shown much favour, and his name was recorded and he was
granted a position in the governmental organization!

After some time another decree was issued by Mu'awiyah to his agents,
stating: "As the narrations about 'Uthman's excellence have become
plentiful and are heard in every city, on the receipt of my letter
invite the people to recite the virtues of the Prophet's companions and
early caliphs, without any mention of Abu Turab's qualities except
something to his detriment. This will be preferable for me and will
please me more, since this is a better means of refuting the arguments
of Abu Turab and his Shi'ites, and more smashing and harder to digest
for them than the traditions cited about the excellence of 'Uthman."

The decree of Mu'awiyah was proclaimed to the people, and immediately
false narrations about the virtues of the companions became very
abundant without having a trace of truth. Simple people heartily
accepted these traditions, and they spread so quickly that they were
quoted on every pulpit, and were distributed among teachers to instruct
children according to them. Young people became so accustomed to them,
that parallel with the Qur'an, they memorized these false traditions.
Then they penetrated the circles of full-grown adult men, and reached
the instruction sessions of women where teachers were engaged in
teaching them to women and girls. These traditions were also propagated
among servants and slaves.

In this way the Islamic society spent many long years of its life, and
thus many false and forged traditions remained for future generations,
and they were learnt by Jurisprudents, judges, men of learning,
governors etc. and also believed in. (347)

Ibn 'Arafah Nafyah, who is a great scholar in the field of tradition,
mentions certain points in his history which are in agreement with the
statements of al-Mada'ini. He writes: Most of the false traditions
concerning the qualities of the companions, have been fabricated in the
time of the Umayyads, so That their forgers may find their way into the
caliph's organization and be favored by the Umayyads, thereby
humiliating the Banu Hashim.(348)

It was not, of course, only in this period that Mu'awiyah had resorted
to forging traditions. He had long been engaged in this task before this
time, too. at-Tabari writes: when Mu'awiyah met with disappointment at
the refusal of Qays ibn Sa'd, the valiant and wise governor of the Imam
in Egypt, to collaborate with and assist him, he was worried about this
matter and was seeking a solution. At last he resorted to a cunning
plan, namely to spread the rumor that Qays had agreed to co-operate with
him5 and Mu'awiyah asked the people to pray for Qays. Then he read a
false letter on behalf of Qays to the people, which said:

"In the Name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is a letter to
Emir Mu'awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan from Qays ibn Sa'd. Greetings to you. The
assassination of 'Uthman has been a very great event in Islam. I looked
at myself and considered my religion. I realised that I could not
cooperate with a group who have killed their chaste Imam and their
beneficent Muslim leader! There fore we beg God forgiveness for our sins
and wish Him to preserve our religion.

Remember that I am at peace with you, and also I declare my readiness
to assist you in the war with the assassins of 'Uthman who was the Imam
of guidance and was killed innocently. Therefore inform me of the amount
of money and number of soldiers that you need, so that I provide and
dispatch them to you at once. Greetings to the Emir, with God's blessing
and favors."(349)

This was Mu'awiyah! He never abstained from lies and forgery and used
all such means to promote his policy. But when his dominion became
extensive enough to include the whole of the Islamic realm, he was in a
greater need of falsehood and fabrication, and was thus compelled to
seek the help of villains.

This war was a cold war of propaganda, which took the form of a contest
in forging traditions in the interest of one group and to the loss of
another group. Meanwhile, a group of so-called companions, too,
responded positively to the ill-omened and faith-destroying call of
Mu'awiyah. Such people were al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah, 'Amr ibn al-'As
Samara ibn Jundab and Abu Hurayrah who were enamoured of money and
position, and had no worth at all from the viewpoint of religion and
personality.

Ibn Abi al-Hadid, famous Sunni Mu'tazilite scholar, quotes his teacher
Abu Ja'far al-Iskafi as follows:

Mu'awiyah employed a number of the companions and their pupils to
fabricate reports against 'Ali in order to blemish the Imam's character,
and thus make others shun association with him. Obviously much money was
earmarked for these tradition forgers to entice them to take up their
task eagerly and seriously. These creatures wholly performed what was
expected of them. Among this group were some companions such as Abu
Hurayrah, 'Amr ibn al-'As, al- Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah and their pupils
such as 'Urwah ibn az-Zubayr.

az-Zuhri narrates that 'Urwah ibn az-Zubayr quoted a tradition from
'A'ishah in which she says: "I was with the Prophet of God when 'Ali and
al-'Abbas arrived and came towards us. The Prophet said: '0 'A'ishah!
These two will depart this world remote from my nation and my
religion.'"

'Abd ar-Razzaq quotes Mu'ammar, saying that az-Zuhri had two
traditions, which had been quoted from 'A'ishah by 'Urwah. These two
traditions were about Imam 'Ali. Mu'ammar says: One day I asked az-Zuhra
about those two ('Urwah and 'A'ishah). He answered: "What is your
business with those two and their tradition? God knows them better. They
are accused by me of falsehood about the Banu Hashim."

The first of these two traditions was the one quoted above, and in the
second one quoted by 'Urwah 'A'ishah says: "I was with the holy Prophet
when 'Ali and 'Abbas arrived. The Prophet said: 'O 'A'ishah! if you wish
to look upon two men of fire, look at these two who are coming towards
us.' I looked up and saw 'All and al-'Abbas."(350)

Among the traditions fabricated by 'Amr ibn al-'As is a tradition,
which is quoted from him by al-Bukhari in his book of Muslim. He says:
"I heard the Prophet say aloud: Abi Talib's descendants are not among my
friends. My friends are God, and benevolent and honest
believers."(351)

In another tradition al-Bukhari makes an addition to the above
tradition and says: The Prophet continued to say: "But they have a
kinship with me and I observe bonds of kinship with them." Among the
traditions invented by Abu Hurayrah by the order of Mu'awiyah, there is
one quoted from him by al-A'm ash, as follows: When after the truce of
Imam al-Hasan with Mu'awiyah Abu Hurayrah accompanied Mu'awiyah on his
journey to Iraq and entered the mosque of Kufah, seeing the large number
of welcomers, he sat down on his knees and after slapping his own face
and head several times,

he said: "O people of Iraq, do you suppose that I attribute a falsehood
to God and His prophet and burn myself in the fire of hell? I swear to
God that I heard the Prophet say: 'For every prophet there is a
sanctity, and my sanctity is between the mountains of 'Ayr and
Thawr,(352) and he who causes unpleasant events to occur in this
sanctity, may the curse of God, angels and all people descend upon
him!'" Then he added: "I take God to witness that 'Ali has caused
mischief in this sacred land."

The news of his speech and quoting this tradition reached Mu'awiyah who
in return for this great service showed Abu Hurayrah much favour and
appointed him governor of Medina. As for the story of Samara ibn Jundab,
Abu Ja'far al-Iskafi teacher of Ibn Abi al-Hadid says: Mu'awiyah gave
Samara one hundred thousand drachmas to cite the following narration for
the people in the name of the Prophet: "The verses 'And among men is he
whose speech about the life of this world causes you to wonder, and he
calls on Allah to witness as to what is in his heart, yet he is the most
violent of adversaries. And when he turns back, he runs along in the
land that he may cause mischief in it and destroy the tilth and the
stock, and Allah does not love mischief-making.' (353) are descended
about 'Ali and the verse:

'Among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah' (354)
is descended about Ibn Muljam, the killer of 'Ali."

Samara refused the proposal, and so Mu'awiyah sent him two hundred
thousand drachmas, and again Samara refused. The offered sum was raised
to four hundred thousand, and this time Samara agreed to cite for the
people the above false narration as a quotation from the Prophet.(355)


**The fate of the noble persons who refused to co-operate with
Mu'awiyah
Chain him heavily and throw him into prison.
Muawiyah**

It was a fearful turmoil, and the foundation of faith had been
destroyed by the whirlwind of that turmoil. A group of companions and
their followers had responded favorably to the call of Mu'awiyah, and
supplied themselves with the provisions of his wide and long realm in
proportion to their appetites. Gold and silver of the Muslim public fund
and government over Islamic lands were offered to buy off necessary
individuals, and these filled their bags or ascended the high seats of
their positions.

There was also a small group who refused to co-operate with Mu'awiyah.
They loved their honour and religion more. Consequently they were
involved with torture, banishment and death, and lost their life and
property for the sake of guarding divine heroism's and Islamic
virtues.

The consequence of this terrible battle was on the one hand thousands
of false traditions which the Islamic society inherited from that dark
period with the result that the recognition of true and proper Islam
became extremely difficult, and on the other hand thousands of devout
and loyal Muslims lost their lives under the most terrible conditions.

As we have already said, Samara ibn Jundab was one of those who agreed
to co-operate with Mu'awiyah and carry out his order. His reward was the
deputyship of the governor of Basra. In addition to his wicked deeds in
the past, he started a terrible massacre in that city. at-Tabari writes:
Ibn Sirin, well-known scholar, was asked: "Did Samara ibn-Jundab kill
anyone at all?" He answered:

"Could those who were killed by him be counted at all? Once Ziyad on
going to Kufah, chose Samara and his deputy, and when he returned after
six months, Samara had killed eight thousand innocent people! It is said
that one morning he killed forty-seven men all of whom were memorizes of
the Qur'an."(356)

at-Tabari adds that when Ziyad died, Samara was acting as his deputy in
Basra. Mu'awiyah allowed him to govern that city for some months and
then dismissed him. For that reason Samara had said: "May God damn
Mu'awiyah! By God! If I had obeyed my God in the way I obeyed Mu'awiyah,
I would never have been punished by Him."(357)

Another of those self-sold creatures was al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah. He
governed Kufah for seven years and a few months, and never ceased his
insult and reproach towards the Imam and his devout followers and
caviling at the killers of 'Uthman, and praying for 'Uthman and
presenting his supporters and companions as virtuous individuals. Of
course al-Mughayrah, owing to his political understanding, adopted a
relatively lenient and moderate method with occasional strictness,
at-Tabari says: One day al-Mughayrah addressed Sa'sa'ah ibn Sawhan,

devout friend of the Imam and said: "Take care and let me not hear one
day that you have criticized 'Uthman. Similarly you must abstain from a
public declaration of 'Ali's virtues. For, I am more aware of everything
than you about this matter, but what can I do? The Umayyad ruler is in
control of the affairs and we have been charged with the task of
reproaching 'Ali.

Naturally in many eases we desist from it unless we are compelled to do
so, in which case we say a few things for our own protection. If you
wish to speak of 'Ali's good qualities, you could do so privately with
your relatives and close friends and in your houses and secret
gatherings. But public and open declarations in a mosque is a matter
which is neither tolerated by the caliph, nor does he forgive us for
it."(358)

Then there was Ziyad ibn Abihi who was more strict and persevering than
other was governors in the execution of Mu'awiyah's order. We are
already familiar with his cruel conduct towards Hujr and his noble
friends. One such an incident is what took place between him and Sayfi
ibn Fusayl. One day this man was brought to Ziyad's presence by his
order. Ziyad said to him: "O enemy of God! What do you say about Abu
Turab?"

Sayfj said: "I know of no one called Aim Turab!" Ziyad said: "Oh, no!
You know him very well." Sayfj said: "But I don't."

Ziyad aid: "Don't you know 'Ali ibn Abi\_Talib?"

Sayfi aid: "Yes, I do." Ziyad aid: "He is Abu Turab."

This conversation went on, and then Ziyad ordered to bring him a stick,
and turning to this man of Kufah, he said: "What do you say about 'All,
now?" He said: "I can say the best words that one can utter about a
servant of God!"

Ziyad ordered to beat him on the neck with the stick until he was
knocked down. The order was carried out, and then he told them to stop,
and again asked Sayfi "What was your view about 'Ali?" He answered: "I
swear by God that if you tear me to pieces with your knives and swords,
you will hear nothing but what I said!"

Ziyad said: "You must either curse him or I will behead you!" Sayfj
said: "Even if you behead me, you shall not hear from my tongue what you
want. And if you kill me, I shall attain happiness and you will receive
misery and adversity!" Ziyad ordered to chain him heavily and throw him
into prison. Eventually this courageous and loyal man was martyred
together with fiujr and his friends.(359)

On another occasion Ziyad sent two men of Hadhramaut(360) with a letter
to Mu' awiyah, writing that they follow 'Ali's religion. Mu'awiyah
answered in a letter: "Kill every person who is a follower of 'Ali's
faith and idea, and cut up his body after death." That tyrannical
governor carried out the order and hanged them by the doors of their
houses.(361) In another letter Mu'awiyah ordered him to bury alive a
Khath'ami man who had praised 'Mi to Mu'awiyah's face and had criticized
'Uthman. Thus this man, too, was buried alive so that no one else would
dare to speak of the excellence of 'Ali.(362)

Historians have described the end of Ziyad's life as a great scene of
villainy. Ibn 'Asakir writes: One day he ordered to assemble all the
people of Kufah, and a big crowd filled the mosque and governor s
palace. He intended to speak in this gathering about immunity from
'Ali.(363) al-Mas'udi writes: Ziyad assembled all the people of Kufah at
the gate of his palace, and then ordered everyone to curse 'Ali, and if
anyone refused to do so, he should be put to the sword. Fortunately
before the order was executed, he was struck down by plague and died
soon after, and the people were delivered from his molestation.(364)

'Amr ibn al-Himaq al-Khuza'i a chaste and devoted man, was one of those
who was involved with a tragic death during Ziyad's rule. In order to
avoid carrying out that intolerable order, namely taking immunity irom
the Imam, he fled to the desert, but the functionaries of the governor
of Kufah searched every spot for him, and at last they found him in a
cave in the hot desert of Iraq.

As he had never bowed to tyrants, he met with a tragic death. They cut
off his head and carried it to Mu'awiyah who ordered to hang it in the
market as a lesson to others. After a few days they sent the head to his
wife in prison where she had been kept on a similar charge, and threw it
on her lap. The bereaved woman said sorrowfully: "You had kept him away
from me for such a long time, and now you have brought me his severed
head as a gift! What a worthy and precious gift!"(365)


