Mu'awiyah and 'uthman
=====================

They brought wine for us and Mu'awiyah kept on drinking it
heedlessly.

**'Abd Allah ibn Buraydah - a companion of the Prophet**

Mu'awiyah's position in the time of 'Uthman was different from his
state in the time of the first two caliphs. In 'Uthman's time was given
a free hand which enabled him to loosen all the ties of law and
morality, and his power and wealth had made him wholly oblivious of all
Islamic and human matters, and dragged him to the point of
winebibbing.

Ibn 'Asakir and adh-Dhahabj, two greater historians, narrate: One day
'Ubadah ibn as-Samit was walking along one of the streets of Damascus.
He noticed a caravan of camels carrying loads. He asked: "What is the
load? Is it olive oil?" Someone said: "No, it is wine; they take it to
Mu'awiyah who has ordered them." 'Ubadah at once found a knife and
ripped open all the skins of wine.

Abu Hurayrah Lived in ash-Sham at this time. During the Prophet's time
he was not considered of any account, but after him, owing to the favour
shown to him by the caliphate, he was greatly respected. So Mu'awiyah
sent someone to him with this message: "Why don't you check your brother
in his deeds? He goes to the market every morning and hinders
tributaries from their transactions, and sits in the mosque at doing
nothing but blemishing our honour and prestige At Mu'awiyah's request
Abu Hurayrah went to 'Ubadah and said to him: "What is your business
with Mu'awiyah? Leave him alone and do not molest him."

'Ubadah said: "Abu Hurayrah! You were not with us on the day we made a
pact with the Prophet of God to obey his orders to the effect to do our
best in enjoining good and forbidding evil, and have no fear of any
reproach, for the sake of Allah."

Abu Hurayrah had no answer to give but to remain silent. So Mu'awiyah
wrote to 'Uthman: " 'Ubadah has ruined and corrupted ash-Sham and its
inhabitants. Summon him and either prevent him from such deeds, or allow
me to hand over ash-Sham to him." 'Uthman wrote in answer: "Expel
'Ubadah from the city and send him back to his house in Medina."

Historians write: "When 'Ubadah returned to Medina, he went to see
'Uthman. 'Uthman was sitting in his house and on looking up, he saw
'Ubadah in front of him. So he said: "What is your business with us? Why
do you interfere in our affairs?"

'Ubadah arose from amidst the people said: "I heard the Prophet state:
After me such people govern you who accustom you to forbidden things and
pollution's with their actions, and at the same time they will criticize
the good deeds with which you are familiar. Therefore it is not right to
obey the rebellious. Take care not to be diverted from the way of your
God." According to Ibn 'Asakir, 'Ubadah continued by saying: "I swear in
the Name of Him in Whose Capable Hand lies the life of 'Ubadah that
Mu'awiyah belongs to this group of people. 'Uthman said nothing in
answer and did not protest at all."(103)

The story of Mu'awiyah's excess in drinking and his involvement's and
attitude towards the remaining friends of the Prophet is not the only
incident related to him and 'Ubadah. Historians have written that Abd
ar-Rahm an, son of Sahl ibn Zayd al-Ansari, had during 'Uthman's time
gone to ash-Sham and Damascus to take part in the frontier's holy war,
and as we know, at this time Mu'awiyah was governor of ash-Sham.

One day on passing in the street he noticed several skins of wine being
carried. He had a spear in his hand and rushed upon them and ripped them
open. The servants who were in charge of the skins fell upon him. When
the matter was reported to Mu'awiyah he told his men to leave him alone
since he had gone crazy. Mu'awiyah's remark was reported to 'Abd
ar-Rahman who said: "By God! I have not gone crazy, but the Prophet had
ordered us never to bring wine into our houses, and I swear that if I
stay in this land and notice Mu'awiyah doing what the Prophet has
forbidden, I will either rip his belly or lose my life for it "(104)

Ahmad ibn Hanbal writes in his book of Musnad quoting 'Abd Allah ibn
Buraydah, narrating: I went to see Mu'awiyah with my father. He told us
to sit down on the floor covered with carpets and ordered to bring us
food. We partook of it. Then they brought wine. He drank some then
offered my father a cupful. My father refused it, saying: "Since the day
the Prophet has forbidden wine, I have abstained from it."(105)

Other stories, too, have been told about Mu'awiyah's excesses in
drinking wine, and Ibn 'Asakir (106) mentions them in his history books.
Those who are interested can refer to that reliable source.

**Abu Dharr facing Mu'awiyah**

The blue sky has never thrown its shadow over anyone more honest than
Abu Dharr!

**The Prophet**

In 'Uthman's time, Mu'awiyah had some violent encounters with Abu
Dharr, the well-known companion of the Prophet and the great upright
Muslim, an account of which is too lengthy, so we will describe them
briefly here. Historians say: Abu Dharr, that devout Muslim and true
believer of Islam, believed in God even in pagan times, and was wholly
averse towards the worship of idols.(107) When he heard the news of the
rise of a prophet in Mecca, he traveled to that city, and was the fourth
or fifth person to embrace Islam.(108)

The day after embracing Islam he went to the mosque of al-Haram and
loudly declared his faith amidst Qurayshi infidels. They rushed upon him
from every side and beat him so badly that his whole body was covered
with blood, and as a result he fell down unconscious. Had not al- 'Abbas
the Prophet's uncle come to his aid, he might have died under the cruel
assaults of the Quraysh. An hour later, he rose with a stiff and injured
body and went to a corner to wash his wounds and rest his battered
body.

Next day he went to the mosque again and loudly exclaimed:

"There is no god but Allah, and Muhammad is His Prophet." For, he was
never afraid of anything in the way of truth. Once more the people
rushed upon him and beat him almost to death, leaving him unconscious
again.

The following day he emigrated from Mecca to his tribe by the order of
the Prophet to invite them to Islam, and stay with them until they were
converted. Abu Dharr returned to his tribe of Ghifar, and made many
efforts to convert them to Islam. Many years passed until he heard the
news of the Prophet's arrival in Medina and his rise to power and glory.
So he set off from his home to stay with his beloved Prophet and feel at
peace in his association with him. His emigration to Medina took place
after the battle of al-Khandaq. Thenceforth he never left the Prophet's
side, and benefited greatly from his infinite store of knowledge and
spirituality, and showed great loyalty and self-sacrifice, and engaged
in so many religious acts of devotion and reflection that he became one
of the dearest friends of the Prophet.

He has been praised greatly in many genuine traditions by the Prophet.
Such as the following:

1-"The blue sky has never thrown its shadow over anyone more honest
than Abu Dharr."(109) 2-In the battle of Tabuk, when his old and weak
camel could not keep pace with others Abu Dharr was left behind. He had
to abandon the camel. Then he carried his load on his own back and
proceeded to march towards the Prophet's army. The hot desert and
scorching sands made this march very difficult, but his true faith made
it easy to bear all the hardships. He made a great effort until he
finally reached the army. When the Prophet noticed the lonely figure of
him approaching the warriors of Islam, he said: "May God bless Abu
Dharr- he walks alone, dies alone and will be resurrected alone."
(110)

From the time 'Uthman became caliph until the days he made innovations
for the enhancing the influence of his kith and kin, several years
passed. Therefore at the beginning of his caliphate when he followed the
ways of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, the Quraysh chiefs were satisfied with him.
But when some of the Umayyads began to influence him, and other Quraysh
leaders such as Talhah az-Zubayr, 'A'ishah 'Amr ibn al-'As and their
supporters were treated with indifference, displeasure and difference
arose.

He offered an enormous gift to his son-in-law, Marwan namely the taxes
of a large region like Africa;(111) three hundred thousand drachmas to
his cousin, al-Harith ibn al-Hakam; one hundred thousand drachmas to his
supporter, Zayd ibn Thabit al-Ansari.

When Abu Dharr saw that Muslims' public fund was being squandered and
the Islamic government, as Abu Sufyan said, was changed into a pagan
one, he felt it his duty to revive the forgotten injunctions of the
Qur'an and deliver the Muslims from their negligence towards the Qur'an
and Prophet's household. It was owing to this feeling that Abu Dharr
adopted this smashing verse of the Qur'an as his slogan:

"Those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend in Allah's way,
warn them of a painful chastisement."(112)

This verse was addressed to the Umayyads who regarded other people's
property and public funds as their own and easily made use of them. They
gave them away, built palaces, and spent them extravagantly.
Consequently the caliph's administrators took umbrage at Abu Dharr's
words, and sharp altercations between Abu Dharr and 'Uthman took
place.

'Uthman was aware that no compromise was possible with that true and
God-fearing warrior of Islam, and Abu Dharr showed no mercy with the
pagan customs, which were being revived under the cover of Islam, and he
did not allow them a formal recognition. So 'Uthman ordered him to go to
ash- Sham and to the border where the Muslims were fighting the Romans,
hoping that Abu Dharr would be involved with these wars, and Leave the
caliph's organization alone.

But who was governing ash-Shim except the Mu'awiyah a man of the
Umayyads, and an heir of black paganism, and a hypocrite in the garb of
Islam? Therefore in ash-Sham, too Abu Dharr could not abandon his duty
of enjoining good and forbidding evil. As we have already stated,
Mu'awiyah acted as a great pillar of paganism which with the aid of
'Uthman was now governing the wide realm of Islam. Consequently there
occurred clashes since Abu Dharr reminded Mu'awiyah of his deeds which
lacked the hue of Islam and were nothing but infidelity and selfishness,
and forbade him from engaging in them.

One day Mu'awiyah sent him three hundred dinars. When Abu Dharr saw
Mu'awiyah's messenger and the gold dinars, he said: "If this money is my
annual salary from the public fund of which you deprived me last year, I
will accept it, but if it is meant to be a gift, I have no need of
it."

When Mu'awiyah began the construction of his palace, a big palace of
green stones which was unrivaled in the world at that time and was a
symbol of paganism and sensuality in the land of Islam, Abu Dharr
protested loudly to Mu'awiyah: "If you are building this palace with
public funds and God's property, your action is treachery, since such
funds should be spent on the amelioration of the conditions of the
Muslims and Islam and they do not belong to any particular person. But
if it is built out of your own wealth, then it would be a sign of
extravagance; for, how many things does a single person need for his
daily life?"

Mu'awiyah had nothing to say, and Abu Dharr as usual emerged victorious
in this argument with his power of reasoning. Abu Dharr had often said
to him: "I swear to God, you have committed such acts the examples of
which we do not remember in our Islamic customs, and know nothing like
them. By God! Such deeds are mentioned neither in the Book of God, nor
in the ways and traditions of His prophet. I am witnessing the right
being suppressed and the wrong coming into surface. Truth is negated,
and the incompetent and unabstemious are exalted, and a noble and pious
person like Imam 'Ali is forced to retire to his house."(113)

The people gathered round this old man who was full of love for God and
sympathy for people, to hear the sincere words which he uttered in
defense of Unity, truth and Islam. But unfortunately the pestilential
organization of Mu'awiyah would not tolerate him, and his soldiers
shouted: "O people! No one should associate with Abu Dharr!"(114) He was
one of the few true Muslims who still lived in that land, and as Islam
could not tolerate paganism, paganism, too, could not tolerate Islam.

A historian writes: One night Mu'awiyah sent Abu Dharr one thousand
dinars, and he in turn immediately divided that money among the needy
people since Islamic training and ascetic spirit had no liking for
collecting worldly treasures. In the morning when Mu'awiyah came for
prayer, he summoned the previous night's messenger and told him to go to
Abu Dharr and say to him: "Save me from Mu'awiyah's punishment. The
money, which I brought to you, was a mistake. Please give it back to me
to deliver it to its original place, and be thus immune from Mu'awiyah's
punishment."

When the messenger delivered his message, Abu Dharr said to him: "My
son, tell Mu'awiyah that Abu Dharr says: I swear to God that at this
dawn not a single dinar remains with me. Give me three days' respite to
take the money back from the needy."

Mu'awiyah realized that Abu Dharr is not merely a man of talk, but
engages in action at the first opportunity, and thus he proves his
words. So Mu'awiyah felt apprehensive of him, and an old man like Abu
Dharr with his Islamic belief and deeds posed a threat to him making his
backspin shiver with fear. At this time he took refuge with his master,
'Uthman and wrote to him: "If you have authority over ash-Sham and its
people, summon Abu Dharr since he fills people's minds with
rancor."(115)

According to al-Baladhuri 'Uthman wrote to Mu'awiyah in answer: "Make
Abu Dharr mount a rough and uneasy ride and send him back to Medina."
Consequently they made him ride an unruly camel and proceed non-stop to
Medina. It was a long and exhausting journey in a dry and sandy desert,
led by cruel and inhuman guards.(116)

al-Ya'qubi gives further details and says: 'Uthman wrote to Mu'awiyah:
"Put him on a saddleless camel and send him to us." 'Uthman's strict
order was carried out about this man of God, and as a result when he
reached Medina he had lost much of the flesh of his legs.(117)
al-Mas'udi says: They made him mount a camel, which had only a dry niece
of wood on its back, and he was guarded by five coarse men of
as-Saqalabah (118) who forced him to move swiftly. This went on until
they reached Medina. His thighs were badly sore and showed raw flesh. In
short, during those few days he had suffered so much that he was almost
on the point of death.(119)

But this brave and valiant man was not so weak as to be vanquished by
such treatments, nor had he forgotten his duties towards the Qur'an and
the Prophet's household as to come to terms with 'Uthman. He was like a
steadfast mountain that could not be moved by any event. Consequently
the moment he reached Medina, he cried out vigorously and rose once more
to fight the 'Uthmanic paganism. He said protestingly: "They appoint
children as administrators and arrange fiefs and feuds for themselves.
They raise and exalt the offsprings of the men freed after the capture
of Mecca and bestow on them rank and dignity."

It was the reward and lot of this godly man to be exiled to
ar-Rabadhah, a very dry and waterless desert in which Abu Dharr had
stayed before Islam and which he disliked immensely. Thenceforth the
rest of Abu Dharr's life was spent in ar Rabadhah, that terribly dry and
lifeless desert It was in the same place, too, that he lost his wife and
children, and he himself died of hunger and illness. Only one of his
daughters stayed alive to live.

According to historians Abu Dharr spent one year in ash-Sham where he
had been exiled in the year 29 of the Hijrah. In the year 30 Mu'awiyah
complained of him to 'Uthman, following which he was summoned to Medina
in the sorry conditions described before. Then in the same year he was
exiled to ar-Rabadhah, where he died in the year 31 or 32 of the
Hijrah.

**A fable in the history of Islam**

Many things have been said about the reason for Aba Dharr's exile which
I feel disgusted to mention.

**at-Tabari**

What we have described in the proceeding pages concerning Abu Dharr's
life, and his exiles from Medina to ash-Sham, from ash-Sham to Medina
and from Medina to ar-Rabadhah, was only a brief account derived from
the reliable researches of historians. But what has been narrated about
this subject by at Tabari and his followers, namely Ibn al-Athir, Ibn
Kathir, Ibn Khaldun and Abu al-Fida' are a series of lies and forgeries
all of which were originally fabricated by Sayf ibn 'Umar, the great
Kufi interpolator and forger of history.

at-Tabari and succeeding historians have adopted the historical events
of those years from the fables invented in the imagination of Sayf and
have thus filled their books and history of Islam with these lies and
fables. at-Tabari writes in his history: In this year, namely the year
30 of the Hijrah, the incident of Abu Dharr has taken place, namely his
expulsion from ash-Sham to Medina by Mu'awiyah.

Narrators have said much about this hideous exile which I have no
inclination to quote. But those who offer an excuse for Mu'awiyah in
this incident, have quoted a story narrated by Sayf from Yazid
al-Faq'asi. He says: When Ibn as-Sawda' arrived in ash-Sham, he met Abu
Dharr and said to him: Abu Dharr, are you not surprised at Mu'awiyah who
says: 'Wealth belongs to God', whereas everything belongs to God? Then
he adds: Mu'awiyah intends to swallow the whole of the public funds and
revenue, and deprive the Muslims of it."(120)

Here at-Tabari is quoting the story of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', the
fabulous hero of the history of Islam, with the title of Ibn asSawda'
and we have shown in the book of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', two volumes of
which have been published, that it is full of lies and fables, and
interested readers can refer to them.

All the historians who have succeeded at-Tabari have more or less
followed his example in quoting the said story. For example, Ibn
al-Athir, the great historian of the 7th century, writes in his history
book: 'In that year (30th of the Hijrah) the incident of Abu Dharr's
exile from ash- Sham to Medina by Mu'awiyah took place. Many things have
been said about the motive and cause of this matter including
Mu'awiyah's abuses and threats to Abu Dharr and his expulsion on a bare
camel, his exile to Medina in that tragic state, which should be left,
unsaid.

If it is true, it would be fitting to offer an excuse for 'Uthman about
this matter such as the claim that a ruler and imam can chastise his
subject and so on, and not make use of such incidents as a basis of
irony and criticism towards 'Uthman. These narrations contain matters,
which I do not like to quote. But Mu'awiyah's apologists have offered
some excuses in this connection. They write… "(121)

Then he narrates the story of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', the imaginary and
untrue hero of the stories of Sayf ibn 'Umar from at-Tabari, and this is
exactly what Ibn Kathir, Ibn Khaldun and others have done. But when we
refer to at-Tabari's words, we see that he does not disregard the
numerous calamities, which have befallen Abu Dharr owing to their being
false and forged, but he merely does not like to quote them, since he
does not wish to blemish such Prophet's companions as 'Uthman and
Mu'awiyah.

Then he speaks of apologists and excuse-makers and fills his great book
with their false and fabulous reports, such reports which he himself
calls "fibs". Thus he closes the door of truth seeking upon future
investigators, and throws the chaste visage of such a great man as Abu
Dharr into the depth of obscurity.

The conduct of Ibn al-Athir, the great historian of the middle
centuries of the history of Islam, is similar. He, too, collaborates
with at-Tabari in this great crime and truth-destroying history, and
after referring to a number of issues, despite the fact that the sources
do not weaken his statements, he avoids going into details, since he
thinks that such matters should not be described fully for, such a
description would be detrimental to the powerful Umayyads and caliphs.

But to-day we neither intend to cavil anyone, nor to find baseless
excuses for him. We are only trying to find the truth of historical
events for the sake of doing service to the sacred field of knowledge.
We will not, of course, forgive these great scholars for their
connivance at the facts of the history of Islam; for, their purpose has
been nothing but to please the powerful and the ruling caliphs by their
works.

\*\*\*

As we saw, at-Tabari quotes the story of Abu Dharr from Sayf, and other
historians have either borrowed it directly from Sayf or through
at-Tabari. This story is part of the fable of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba',
which is fabricated by Sayf ibn 'Umar. We have dealt with it in the
second volume of this book in connection with the fable of 'Abd Allah
ibn Saba' and its origin and source. Here we add that the story of Abu
Dharr and most of the fables of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' have been quoted
solely by Sayf from a person named Yazid al-Faq'asi.

Now we should see who this Yazid al-Faq'asi is and what his narration
is to discover the identity of this man, we have referred to all the
available sources about personalities, traditions, history, biography,
genealogy and Islamic and Arab literature, and have not found the
slightest trace of his name or mention of him, except in the narrations
quoted from Sayf by at-Tabari and adh-Dhahabi. Such narrations are no
more than in number, five of which are seen in at- Tabari, and one in
adh-Dhahabi's "History of Islam".(122)

In these narrations Sayf has quoted the story of 'Abd Allah Saba' from
Yazid al-Faq'asi, and one of them is related to the story of Abu Dharr.
In this one Sayf has lowered Abu Dharr, that great companion and
secret-keeper of the Prophet, to a point where he, under the influence
of an unknown Jew, namely 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', engages in riot and
uprising against Mu'awiyah and other Umayyad rulers, and thus causes
mischief in an Islamic environment. This narration concludes that in all
these riots the Umayyads, namely 'Uthman Mu'awiyah and others have not
been guilty at all and that their son-in-law been a perfectly virtuous
man!

After a long and careful investigation about the source of the story of
Abu Dharr and 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', we came to the conclusion that all
these fables are borrowed from Sayf ibn 'Umar by all writers of history,
and Sayf, the forger and fabricator of events, in order to give validity
to a story and narration, invents a narrator named Yazid al-Faq'asi, and
this fictitious narrator is artificially related to the house of
al-Faq'asi which is a branch of the Asad tribe.(123) But in none of
these narrations does Sayf mention him, as if he considered him to be
fatherless! In fact the real father of this narrator and all those
fabricated companions and narrators who are the heroes of Sayfs stories,
and the father of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', the greatest hero of his fables,
is Sayf ibn 'Umar at-Tamimi himself who is the first producer of all
these lies, and no one else has been his partner.

Unfortunately most great writers of history such as 4-Tabarj, Ibn
al-Athir, Ibn 'Asakir, Ibn Khaldun Ibn 'Abd al-Barr, Ibn Hajar and many
others have filled their books with the fabrications of that great liar
and atheistic forger named Sayf ibn 'Umar. Consequently the views of
most Muslims bout he friends of the Prophet are based to day on those
fables, and they tend to know Islam through them.

Will they allow us after twelve centuries to pull these fables out .of
the traditions and history of Islam and throw them away in order to open
the way for a true understanding of Islam for all people?


