The Quranic Memorizers and Interpreters of Kufah in Ash-sham
============================================================

Mu'awiyah was deeply averse to the stay of the Prophet's great
companions in ash-Sham. The clashes of Mu'awiyah were not confined to
such men as Abu Dharr. This ungodly man Mu'awiyah, who was the heir of
paganism with all its peculiarities came into conflict with anyone who
had even slightly discovered the truth of Islam. Consequently he
quarreled violently with the Kufah memorizers and interpreters of the
Qur'an, who had been exiled to Sham.

al-BaLadhurj, the great historian, writes in his reliable book of Ansab
al-ashraf: When 'Uthman dismissed al-Walid from the governorship of
Kufah and replaced him by Sa'id ibn al-'As, he ordered the latter to
treat the people of that city leniently and try not to confront them as
al- Walid had done. So Sa'id kept the company of the dignitaries and
Quranic interpreters of the city and they got together every night, and
discussed various matters.(124)

One day in this gathering the talk led to the subject of Sawad and
al-Jabal (125). Those present preferred the flourishing state and
greenness of Sawad to Jabal, and claimed that in the fields and gardens
of Sawad all kinds of crops could be found, in addition to date palms.
The city's chief of police said: "I wish these lands belonged to the
Emir so that you could own better fields and gardens."

Malik al-Ashtar answered: "If your wish is for the Emir, wish him to
obtain better fields and gardens than ours. Do not wish him to obtain
property. Let us keep ours!" That man said: "What harm does that wish do
to you that has angered you? By God, if he decided and wanted it, he
could take possession of all these fields and gardens!" al-Ashtar
answered: "I swear to God that even if he decides to take possession of
them, he is not capable of it."

Sa'id ibn al-'As became angry at these words and said to those present:
"The fields and gardens of Sawad under any circumstances belong to the
Quraysh." (Meaning the Umayyads and such tribes as Taym and 'Adi who
were in Mecca, and not to the Ansar who were originally from Yemen, to
which group Malik al-Ashtar and most inhabitants of Rufah belonged.)

al-Ashtar answered sharply: "Do you wish to make for yourself and your
relatives a fief of the fruits of our wars and what God has granted us?
I swear to God that if anyone covets the lands and fields of that
region, we will pound him so heavily as to be a lesson to him "(126)
Then al-Ashtar rushed upon the chief of the police, but he was checked
by those present. Sa'id ibn al-'As wrote an account of this incident to
'Uthman and stated: "So long as al-Ashtar and his friends, who are
called the Qaris of Kufah and are nothing but ignorant and stupid
people, remain in this city, I cannot keep contro1 of anything."

'Uthman wrote back: "Send them to ash-Sham.' Thus these Kufah Qaris,
namely these Quranic interpreters who had quarreled with Sa'id, left
Kufah and settled in Damascus in ash-Sham. Mu'awiyah with his particular
cunningness Considered it necessary at first to show a welcome to these
exiled Qaris, and thus he treated them kindly and respectfully.

But this treatment could not last long, since al-Ashtar and his friends
were valiant, honest and devout individuals who could not sincerely
associate with such a cunning, hypocritical and ungodly man as
Mu'awiyah. At last what was expected to happen, took place and a violent
altercation occurred between Mu'awiyah and al-Ashtar, and a severe
quarrel ensued al-Ashtar was seized and imprisoned for quite a long
time. After he was set free, conditions assumed a different form.

Now al-Ashtar and his friends, who stayed away from the ruler of
ash-Sham, chose to associate with the people of the streets and markets
of Damascus. Mu'awiyah reported this matter to 'Uthman and stated: "You
have sent to me such individuals who have corrupted their own city and
caused a riot there. I am not secure from the danger of there corrupting
my entourage and the people of Damascus, too, and teach them things,
which they had not known so far. Thus the people of ash-Sham will be as
corrupt as the Kufans and will lose their mental health and equilibrium
'Uthman thought of a way, namely to send al-Ashtar and his friends to a
remote and insignificant town where they could not do much harm. So he
ordered to deport them to the town of Hims, and this order was carried
out.(127)

al-Mada'ini the famous historian of the early centuries of Islam,
narrates that they had some gatherings with Mu'awiyah in ash-Sham where
they had heated arguments with each other. For instance, one day
Mu'awiyah said to them: "All the Qurayshis know that Abu Sufyan was the
noblest and most exalted member of them, with the exception of the
Prophet who was chosen by God and respected by all. If Abu Sufyan had
been the father of everyone, all of them would have been great, docile
and forbearing men.

Sa'sa'ah ibn Sawhan retorted at once: "You are lying Mu'awiyah! Human
beings are produced by someone (meaning Adam) who had definitely been
better than Abu Sufyan, by a man whom God created with His own hand and
by His own power, and into whom He breathed His own spirit, and ordered
the angels to prostrate themselves before him. Nevertheless among his
offsprings there appeared good and wicked ones, intelligent and stupid
ones, and they were not all the same in character."(128)

As we saw, Mu'awiyah was displeased with the stay in ash-Sham of the
Prophet's true friends and companions and of such individuals as Abu
Dharr and 'Ubadah. Similarly he had no desire that the interpreters and
followers of the Qur'an and honest and devout persons should reside in
that city. This matter vexed him so much that these individuals would
divulge to the people certain truths, which had been hidden from them,
and inform them of divine injunctions, in which case Mu'awiyah could no
longer carry on his selfish life in the manner of the tyrants of the
time, like Caesars and Kasras.


**Mu'awiyah after 'Uthman**

God forbid that I should lake the perverse as my aids.

**'Ali ibn Abi\_Talib**

As we have already seen (129) owing to the greed and crimes of the
relatives of 'Uthman who had the ruling power behind them, riots and
rebellions spread over big Islamic cities, and dissatisfied Muslims
placed 'Uthman in straitened circumstances in Medina. This third caliph
wrote to Mu'awiyah in the same way that he had written to other
governors, asking for help. He said in his letter: "The people of Medina
have resorted to infidelity and disobedience and have violated their
allegiance. Let the warriors of ash-Sham mount any kind of animal, and
dispatch them to my aid."

Mu'awiyah received the letter. He was well aware of the chaotic
conditions, and was probably waiting for the death of 'Uthman and his
removal as a powerful rival, in order to get one step nearer to the seat
of caliphate. Therefore, despite all his debt to 'Uthman he showed no
haste in sending help, and accounted for his negligence by declaring: "I
have no wish to oppose all the friends and companions of the Prophet."
What a deception and cunningness he displayed!

When he took so long in giving a positive response to the caliph's
letter, 'Uthman wrote to the people of ash-Sham themselves, asking them
to leave their city and hasten to his aid.(130) al-Baladhuri writes:
When 'Uthman wrote to Mu'awiyah asking for his help, Mu'awiyah sent
Yazid ibn Asad al-Qasri with a group of soldiers towards Medina, but
ordered that on-their arrival at Dhu Khushub (131) they should set up a
camp there and proceed no further.

With such an order, the commander and his army proceeded towards
Medina, and when they reached the zone of Dhu Khushub, they halted and
lingered there so long until 'Uthman was killed in the hands of the
people. When all the riot and tumult subsided, Mu'awiyah recalled Yazid
ibn Asad, and the army returned to ash-Sham without having taken a
positive step.

al-Baladhuri the reliable historian of the third century of Hijrah,
believes that Mu'awiyah's action was not without a plan and motive. He
wished that 'Uthman would be killed during the events so that he could
claim the caliphate as 'Uthman's cousin.(132)

But, as we know, events took a different course; the people gathered
round Imam 'Ali and chose him as caliph. When public allegiance was
shown to lmam 'Ali, Mu'awiyah regretted his own negligence towards
'Uthman; for, he saw that the caliphate was now out of his reach.
Therefore, he thought of a new plan and a fresh trick. He secretly wrote
to Talhah and az- Zubayr and tried to rouse their desire for the
position of caliph.

These two were sensual men who loved money, and had tasted the
sweetness of being wealthy in 'Uthman's time. Therefore they easily
accepted Mu'awiyah's wicked offer.(133) His plan was to persuade those
two, who possessed uch nfluence and credit in those days, to fight with
the Imam, using the pretext of claiming vengeance for the blood of
'Uthman as an innocent caliph.

Talhah and az-Zubayr were deceived by Mu'awiyah's trick and started the
battle of al-Jamal, and, as we have already seen (134) Talhah was killed
at the beginning of the battle, and az- Zubayr, who had retired from
fighting, was unchivalrously killed by a man of the Tamim tribe.(135)
Thus two of the greatest rivals of Mu'awiyah for the caliphate departed
from the scene, since the death of rivals from each front would bring
Mu'awiyah one step nearer to his assumption of that position.

After Imam 'Ali became caliph, he sent a messenger by name of Jarir to
Mu'awiyah to get allegiance. Mu'awiyah said to Jarir:

"Tell your friend I am willing to submit to him and show allegiance on
two conditions: Firstly to make ash-Sham and Egypt my fief and let
tributes of these lands be mine, and secondly not to impose on me the
allegiance to anyone after his own death!"

These declarations clearly showed Mu'awiyah's intense desire for the
caliphate. He knew well that he could not compete with Imam 'Ali since
he lacked all the virtues and merits by which Imam 'Ali was known, and
of which he was aware, and did not yet dare to rise in rebellion against
the new caliph. He thought it more expedients to let others such as
'A'ishah, Talhah and az-Zubayr pave the way for him. Therefore he
considered it wiser to come to terms with the Imam, and by gaining the
governorship of Egypt (Muslim part of Africa) he could add another
extensive province to his dominion, so that after the death of the Imam
he could more easily secure the position of the caliphate.

Jarir responded: "You may write to him whatever you like, and I shall
write my report." Mu'awiyah wrote his proposals to the Imam, and the
Imam sent the following answer to Jarir: "Mu'awiyah seems definitely
resolved not to vow allegiance to me, and to do as he likes.

He intends to detain and delay you so long as to secure the control of
public opinion on his arrival. When I was in Medina, al-Mughayrah
ibn-Shu'bah suggested that I should let Mu'awiyah remain in ash-Sham. I
rejected this suggestion since I had no wish to let God see me desiring
the aid of such perverse and wicked men as Mu'awiyah. If he agrees to
show allegiance to me, all is well, otherwise you may return
soon."(136)

Ibn Kathir, the historian of the 8th century, writes in his history
book of al-Bidayah wa an- nihayah: 'Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'aya wrote a letter
to Mu'awiyah reproaching him severely for writing to Imam 'Ali and
demanding the governorship of ash-Sham and Egypt, and included the
following poetical lines in his letter:

'Muawiyah! Do not lose ash-Sham, for it is your land, Take care not to
let enemies enter it who are as dangerous as vipers. 'Ali is waiting to
see what you answer; Take a war as souvenir for him that whitens the
black hair of the young.

Defend your ash-Sham with swords and spears. Otherwise give way to
submission in which lies security for him who desires no war. O son of
Harb! That letters which you wrote out of cupidity, Will bring you many
great calamities.

In that letter you have demanded things which you can never secure.
Even if you secure what you have asked, it won't last more than one
night.
You will wait so long for the fulfillment of your desire,
That you will eventually secure what is going to destroy you.
Therefore, do not heap up so many fancies in your head.
You can never deceive a man like 'Ali with your cunning!
You have tested him sufficiently in the past
And seen that he built up what you demolished.
If his clutches penetrate you even once,
He will skin you. You who skinned others." (137)
Siffin, the battlefield of right and wrong
In Mu'awiyah's army five hundred Qur 'ans were placed on spearheads.

**al-Mas'udi**

We saw how Mu'awiyah, despite all his indebtedness to 'Uthman cunningly
abstained from helping him, and delayed help to 'Uthman so long that
dissatisfied Muslims finally killed 'Uthman. Maybe he intended thereby
to remove a great obstacle in the way of his own aspirations to become
the caliph. But following 'Uthman's assassination, and Contrary to
Mu'awiyah's expectations, Imam 'Ali was chosen as caliph by the people
and it was him who took charge of the affairs and with his usual
determination demanded allegiance and submission from him.

But Mu'awiyah had made an evil and ruinous plan. He wished to fight the
Imam under the pretext of the innocence of 'Uthman and claiming revenge
for his blood, an excuse, which had been brought up first in the battle
of al-Jamal.

He hoped that in this way he would fulfill the great desire of his own
and the will of his father Abu Sufyan, and seize control of the whole
wide realm of Islam. Consequently he hung the bloody garment of 'Uthman
by the pulpit of the mosque of Damascus, and commissioned a number of
white-bearded and affectedly meek old men to gather round it and weep.

Then in his sermon he declared 'Uthman to be an innocent guardian of
the people who was killed unjustly and those who had murdered him must
suffer vengeance for his blood. The people of ash-Sham were easily
deceived by this scene making. Was it not true that they had been made
to embrace Islam by his brother, Yazid, and had been governed by
Mu'awiyah for twenty years? Therefore their simple-mindedness and their
conduct which had been shaped by the Umayyads as well as their being
accustomed to a life under them, had prepared them to accept the ideas
and plans of Mu'awiyah. Therefore, all the people of ash-Sham showed
allegiance and obedience to him.(138)

The ash-Shamis wanted to fight the Imam and were led to mistakenly
believe that the assassins of 'Uthman were enjoying his protection. So
they decided to seize the culprits and kill them in revenge for
'Uthman's blood. Allegiance was made with Mu'awiyah and the people of
ash-Sham prepared themselves to accompany him in a war against Imam
'Ali. The two armies faced each other at Siffin in the lunar month of
Rabi' al-Awwal (Rab'' I) in the year 36 of the Hijrah.(139) The two
armies remained in the wide plain of Siffin on the bank of the river
Euphrates long.

Imam 'Ali was in the habit of not making the first move in any of the
wars, since this was the way of Islam and its counsel. He was always
ready to defend. During the beginning days Mu'awiyah ordered his army to
take control of the way to the river and blocked the way of access to
water for Imam 'Ali's army. Although 'Amr ibn al-'As the cunning
counselor of Mu'awiyah, had advised him against it, arguing that Imam
'Ali would never let his army remain thirsty, Mu'awiyah did not abstain
from that wicked move.

But al-Ashtar, the brave commander of 'Ails army, with his unceasing
efforts captured the route of access to water from Mu'awiyah army, and
then the Imam in a manner fitting his noble and generous position as a
religious leader, sent the following message to Mu'awiyah:

"We do not retaliate your mean action by a wrong deed. You and we are
on an equal footing in the access to water. You may use and benefit from
it, since water is for everybody's use."(140) The trickery of Mu'awiyah
Place the Qur'ans on spearheads.

**Mu'awiyah**

This was the first encounter of the two armies. A relative calmness
reigned over the battlefield for a long time, since Imam 'Mi was doing
his utmost not to impose his views by means of force and war. But the
ash-Shamis spoke of nothing but avenging "Uthman's blood".

In the month of Dhu al-Hijjah, some minor clashes took place between
the two armies without producing any decisive result, and owing to the
commencement of the month of Muharram (in which fighting is forbidden)
both sides desisted from combat. But after the end of Muharram, the
fight was resumed. During this time Mu'awiyah tried hard to gain the
Imam's writ granting him the governorship of ash-Sham and thus put an
end to the war. But the Imam could not at any cost accept the
co-operation of such a man as Mu'awiyah.

In a fierce clash and owing to the valor and steadfastness of the army
of the Imam, the right wing of his forces succeeded in advancing as far
as the tent of Mu'awiyah, while the left wing retreated before the
onslaught of the army of ash-Sham. It was then that the Imam himself
entered the field and organized the retreating wing.

Then he invited Mu'awiyah to a man-to- man combat so that with the
death of one of the two an end would be put to the differences between
the two sides, and all the bloodshed which was undesirable in his
opinion, would cease. But Mu'awiyah refused the challenge for fear of
his life, since he felt sure that he could not escape the powerful
clutches of the Imam.

Fighting continued into the night, and by dawn the final defeat of
ash-Sham's army became evident. Malik al-Ashtar, the valiant man of
Kufah, on the right wing and the Imam himself in the center made severe
onslaughts on the enemy. The columns of the Kufah army had also
penetrated deeply into the ash-Sham's front.

Mu'awiyah was preparing to flee, for his defeat was close at hand, and
this great pillar of paganism and infidelity was about to topple over,
and the rule of 'Ali was to be established over the whole realm of
Islam. Suddenly 'Amr ibn al- 'As the cunning adviser of Mu'awiyah,
thought of a devilish plan, and by his suggestion and Mu'awiyah's order
the soldiers of ash-Sham placed copies of the Qur'an on their spearheads
and shouted the slogan "We will submit to the verdict of the Qur'an".

Five hundred copies of the Qur'an went up on spearheads.(141)Those men
of the Imam's army who had not really understood Islam were deceived by
this great trick, and with the exception of steadfast warriors, no one
could escape from its effect, especially on the hirelings of Mu'awiyah
and hypocrites of the Kufah army such as al-Ash'ath ibn Qays were
meanwhile doing their worst to create mischief and sedition.(142)

Despite the advises of the Imam and some wise men of his army to the
effect that this act of Mu'awiyah was nothing but trickery and
deceitfulness and despite the fact that they had been called to follow
the Qur'an, they had shown no inclination, and the simple-minded rebels
of Imam's army headed by al-Ash'ath refused to accept reason. As we have
said, there was also some treason at work and Mu'awiyah's agents were
trying in every possible way to prevent unity and unanimity.

At this time on the one hand Malik al-Ashtar had smashed the army of
Mu'awiyah and was on the point of ending the battle in favour of the
army of Iraq, and on the other hand al-Ash'ath and his supporters were
putting a great pressure on the Imam to order al-Ashtar to return. The
Imam ordered Malik to return, but Malik said: "Tell the Imam this not a
suitable moment to recall me from the front. I am relying on God to
grant me a speedy victory."

The messenger returned and reported Malik's answer. At the same moment
a terrible dust rose and the shouts of the warriors filled the whole
space, displaying the victory of the Iraqi army and defeat of ash-Sham's
forces. Those who had surrounded the Imam cried out: "Have you ordered
al-Ashtar to fan up the flame of war?" The Imam said: "Woe upon you! Did
I send my messenger with a secret message? Did I not give him
instruction in a loud voice within your hearing?" They said:

"Send another message to al-Ashtar to return, otherwise we will leave
you!"

The Imam sent the message telling al-Ashtar to return since a riot and
sedition had started. al- Ashtar asked: "Why? Do they make this riot
only because the enemies have placed their Qur'ans on spearheads?" The
messenger said: "Yes!" al-Ashtar said: "By God! I fear that this matter
will produce a division amongst us. It is an action suggested by the son
of Nabighah(143) in order to produce a deadlock for us. Don't you see
that God has granted us victory? Would it be right for me to withdraw
from the battle at such a moment?"

The messenger said: "Do you wish to get victory in the battlefield
while they kill the Imam or surrender him to the enemy? They have said
to the Imam: 'Either make al-Ashtar return, or we will kill you with our
swords in the same way that we killed 'Uthman, or we hand you over to
your enemy as a captive.'"

al-Ashtar said: "By God! I don't desire such a victory," and withdrew
at once from the battlefield and went, to the Imam's presence, and then
turned to those who had surrounded the Imam and said sharply to them: "O
base weaklings! At a time when you have gained victory over the enemy,
and have caught him who has trampled upon the Book of God and the
Prophet's tradition, you tremble at his trickery, and surrender to his
cunning invitation to the Qur'an? At least be wise enough to give me one
hour's respite to end this war."

They said: "No!" He said: "All right give me time at least for one
gallop of a horse!" They replied: "Then we will become your accomplice
in sin!" al-Ashtar said: "Tell me, were you in the right in those days
when you were fighting and your good men like 'Ammar ibn Yasir got
killed, or are you in the right now that your wicked ones are left and
your desire peace? If you are in the right now, then your good men who
were killed and whose chastity you cannot deny, are your burning in the
fire of hell."

They answered: "al-Ashtar! Leave us alone, for, we won't follow you.
Keep away from us!" al-Ashtar said: "I Swear to God that you have been
deceived. We regarded your prayer as a sign of your love for God and
your submission to Him. Now it is quite evident that you fear death and
wish to flee, and are eager to stay in this world! After today you will
never find honour and dignity. Stay away in the same way that the
tyrants have gone away!"(144)

The rioters, who were unable to find an answer, began to abuse him and
whipped his horse.

The dispute became more violent and al-Ashtar used sharp words. Then
Imam ordered him to be quiet. They became silent. al-Ashtar turned to
the Imam and said: "Give me to leave to attack them and vanquish all of
them!" Those present protested, and Imam 'Ali at last agreed to
arbitration in accordance with the verdict of the Qur'an.

al-Ashtar said: "If he agrees to this, I, too, am satisfied."

The clamor rose from every side: "the commander of the faithful has
agreed! He has agreed!" Imam had retreated in deeper ponder remained
silent, not uttering a word.(145)


