Khums
=====

One of the economic responsibilities of the Muslims is to pay the Khums;
which means that on certain items, 1/5 or 20% (of the value of that
item) must be paid to a Mujtahid, which will be used for specific
purposes.

Issue 384: Khums is Wajib on seven things:

• Profit or gains from earnings

• Minerals

• Treasures

• Spoils of war

• Gems that have been obtained from the sea by diving.

• The Halal wealth which is mixed with Haram wealth.

• The land which a Kafir Dhimmi[^1] (A non-Muslim living under the
protection of the Islamic Government) purchases from a Muslim.

Issue 385: Just like Salat and Fasting, the paying of Khums is one of
the Wajibat, and anyone who possesses one of the seven things listed
above, must act according to that which will follow (in relation to the
paying of Khums).

One of the instances of Khums that include most people in the society is
giving Khums on that which exceeds a person and his families’ yearly
expenses (benefit/profit from working).

Islam respects a person working and earning, and thus places preference
over securing one’s needs over that of paying the Khums. Therefore, one
who can secure his (financial) needs from his earnings, if after
securing his (financial) needs nothing remains at the end of the year,
then Khums will not be obligatory on him.

But, if after calculating all the normal expenses for his life (and the
maintenance of his family) according to his (social) status and needs,
and without being extravagant or miserly, if something remains at the
end of the year, then 1/5 (or 20%) of that which remains must go towards
the specified expense (of Khums), and 4/5 (80%) of the amount that is
left can be put into one’s savings.

The Rules of Khums
------------------

Issue 386: Until Khums has been given on one’s property, one is not
allowed to spend from that property, meaning, one is not allowed to eat
that food on which Khums has not been taken out on. Similarly, one is
not allowed buy things from that money on which Khums has not been taken
out on.

Issue 387: If at the end of one year, the provisions or foods such as
rice, oil, or tea, that had been purchased from one’s wealth for use
during the year remain in excess, then Khums must be paid on them (the
excess).

Issue 388: If a Non-Baligh child has some money, and from that money
receives a profit, and if this money remains until he becomes Baligh,
then after becoming Baligh, he must give the Khums (on that money).

The Spending of Khums
---------------------

Issue 389: The Khums is to be divided into two portions - half of which
is called *Sahm Imam az-Zaman (‘a)* and must be given to the Mujtahid
who is *Jam’ al-Sharait* or his representative - and the other half must
be given to poor Sayyids, Sayyids who are orphaned or a Sayyid who has
been stranded on a journey *(referred to as Sahm as- Sadat)*.

[^1]: The Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians that have made a contract
with the Islamic ruler that they will pay a certain amount of money in
tax, and that they will accept the specific conditions (that are listed
in the detailed books of fiqh), are referred to as Kafir Dhimmi, and
their lives and properties are protected (in exchange for paying the tax
and accepting the conditions).


