The Rules of Buying and Selling
===============================

Issue 396: It is Wajib that a person learns the rules of buying and
selling that he will commonly have a need for.

Issue 397: It is Haram to sell and rent a house or other things that
will be used for Haram.

Issue 398: Buying and selling, keeping, writing, and reading newspapers,
magazines and books that can lead people astray is Haram, and the same
applies for teaching from such books. (A person can sell such things if)
he knows that the person who will buy them is a person who is sound in
his beliefs, and (who is buying them) for a good reason like to answer
questions raised in these items.

Issue 399: It is Haram to sell a product which has been mixed with
something else such that it is not clear what the product is, or if the
seller of the product does not inform the purchaser. For example, milk
that has been mixed with water. (Such an action is called *Ghash*).

Issue 400: In transactions, the exact product that is being bought and
sold must be specified, but it is not necessary to mention the
specifics - such that if stated or not would not have an affect on the
desire or inclination of the people in relation to that product.

Issue 401: In the buying and selling of two things which are of the same
type and which are sold by weight or quantity, if more is sold, it is
called Riba (Interest) and is Haram; for example, one gives one tone of
wheat, and in return, takes 1.2 tones.

Issue 402: It is Mustahab that the person selling does not differentiate
in the price between the people buying from him. In addition, one should
not be firm in one’s price, and if the buyer or seller wishes to cancel
the transaction, then the other person should agree to it.

Issue 403: It is Haram to take an oath during transactions if that which
is said is a lie, and if what is said is true, then it is Makruh.

Cancelling a Transaction
------------------------

Issue 404: In some instances, the seller or buyer is allowed to cancel
the transaction. Some of these instances include:

• The buyer or the seller has been cheated.

• If at the time of the transaction, it had been specified that for a
specific period, either parties, or even one of the two parties is
allowed to cancel the transaction. For example, at the time of buying
and selling it is stated that if either person has some sort of doubt
(about the transaction), then he has three days (once the deal is made)
to break the contract.

• The seller and the buyer have not separated from each other. For
example, a person purchases something from a store, then before he
leaves the store, he is allowed to cancel the transaction.

• The object that had been bought was defective, and after the
transaction, it was noticed.

• The seller explained the item to the person buying the product, who
himself did not see the product’s specialties, and later it was noticed
that it was not as the seller had explained it to be. For example, one
was told that a notebook has 200 pages, and later it was found to have
less than this amount.

Issue 405: If after a transaction, one notices a defect in the product
and right away does not cancel the transaction, then later on, one does
not have the right to break the transaction.


