Looking at Others
=================

One of the gifts from Allah to makind is the gift of sight. We must use
this great blessing in the path towards perfection and to improve
others, and ourselves and thus we must prevent ourselves from looking at
those people whom we are not permitted to look at. Looking at the
natural and apparent parts, as long as it is does not intrude on the
rights of others is not a problem. Protecting others and ourselves from
looking at others, to whom one is a Non-Mahram has specifics, and some
of these will be explained in this chapter.

Mahram and Non-Mahram
---------------------

Issue 443: A Mahram is that person who one is allowed to look at - to a
certain extent - more than others, and with whom marriage is Haram.

Issue 444: The following people are Mahram for boys and men:

• Mother and Grandmother

• Daughter and Granddaughter

• Sister

• Niece - Daughter of one's sister

• Niece - Daughter of one's brother

• Aunt (Father’s sister) - One's own aunt, his father’s aunt and his
mother’s aunt

• Aunt (Mother’s sister) - One's own aunt, his father’s aunt and his
mother’s aunt

The above group of people, by blood relations are Mahram; and there is
another group which are also Mahram by means of marriage for the boy or
man and these include:

• Wife

• Wife's Mother (Mother-in-Law) and the wife’s Grandmothers

• Wife of her father (Stepmother)

• Wife of her son (Daughter-in-Law)

• The wife of one’s brother and the sister of one’s wife are
Non-Mahrams.

Issue 445: These people are Mahram to a girl and woman:

• Father and Grandfather

• Son and the son of her child (Grandson)

• Brother

• Nephew - Son of one's sister

• Nephew - Son of one's brother

• Uncle (Father’s brother) - One's own uncle, her mother’s uncle and
father’s uncle

• Uncle (Mother’s brother) - One's own uncle, her mother’s uncle and
father’s uncle

The above group of people, by their own blood relations are Mahram, and
another group is also Mahram by marriage on the girl or woman. These
include:

• Husband

• Husband's Father (Father-in-Law) and the husband’s Grandfathers

• Husband of one's daughter (Son-in-Law)

• The husband of her sister and the brother of her husband are
Non-Mahrams.

With the exception of those who have been listed, it is possible that
others - by the way of marriage and with certain conditions - may also
become Mahram of each other, and these instances are mentioned in the
detailed books of Fiqh.

Issue 446: If a woman breast feeds a child according to the specific
conditions that are mentioned in the books of Fiqh, then that child will
become a Mahram for that woman and certain others. For a better
understanding of this rule, please refer to the “Islamic Laws” rule
number 2483.

Looking at Others
-----------------

Issue 447: With the exception of the husband and wife, it is Haram to
look at any other person with the intention of deriving pleasure or
lustfully, even if that person is of the same sex. For example, a man
looking at another man; or someone of the opposite sex, for example, a
man looking at a woman, whether or not he/she is a Mahram or a
Non-Mahram, and this rule applies for looking at any part of the body.

Issue 448: Boys and men may look at the complete body with the exception
of the private parts, of a woman who is their Mahram as long as it is
without lust or the intention of deriving pleasure.

Issue 449: Boys and men are not allowed to look at the body or hair of a
Non-Mahram woman, but to look at the hands up to the wrist, and the
face, in that amount that must be washed in Wudhu - without the
intention of pleasure or lust, is no problem.

Issue 450: Girls and women are allowed to look at the head, face, hands
and feet of Non-Mahram men, in that amount which is normally uncovered,
as long as it is not done with the intention of deriving pleasure.


