The Rules of the Qur’an
=======================

Issue 464: The Qur’an must always be kept clean and tidy and it is Haram
to make the writing or the pages of the Qur’an Najis, and if it becomes
Najis, then it must be made tahir immediately with water.

Issue 465: If the cover of the Qur’an is made Najis, and it is
considered as disrespect to the Qur’an, then it must be made tahir with
water.

Touching the Script of the Qur’an
---------------------------------

Issue 466: It is Haram to touch the Qur’an with any part of the body,
for someone who does not have Wudhu.

Issue 467: In touching the writings of the Qur’an, there is no
difference between the Ayat and words, rather even the letters or the
vowel points on the letters.

Issue 468: There is no difference as to what the Qur’an is written on,
be it paper, ground, the wall or a cloth.

Issue 469: There is no difference as to how the Qur’an is written,
whether it is with a pen, computer printer, chalk or with anything else.

Issue 470: Even if the writings of the Qur’an are not in the Qur’an
itself, it is still Haram to touch it. Therefore, if an Ayat of the
Qur’an is written in a book, rather if even one word is found on a piece
of paper, or even half a word from a page of the Qur’an or another book
is ripped out, then touching this without Wudhu is also Haram.

Issue 471: The following instances do not constitute touching the script
of the Qur’an, and thus are not Haram (to touch):

• Touching the script of the Qur’an covered by glass or plastic.

• Touching the pages of the Qur’an, the cover or the margins - although
it is Makruh.

• Touching the translation of the Qur’an that is in any language, except
the name of Allah. For one who does not have Wudhu, touching the name of
Allah in any language is Haram, for example the Persian word خدا.

Issue 472: Words that are common between the Qur’an and books other than
the Qur’an, like the words “مُؤْمِنٌ” or “ اَلَّذِيْنَ”if they are
written with the intention of being from the Qur’an, then touching them
without Wudhu is Haram (otherwise it is not a problem).

Issue 473: Touching the script of the Qur’an for one who is Junub, is
Haram.

Issue 474: It is not permitted for a Junub to recite one of the 4 Ayats
that contain a Wajib Sajdah (as was explained in Rule 120).


