Taharat
=======

Taharat (cleanliness) and keeping a clean body and surroundings are very
important in Islam. Everyone must refrain from eating and drinking those
things which are Najis; and (as for) the clothing that one wears in
Salat - which is the best of actions in worshipping Allah - they must be
clean, and it is best that they are the most pure of clothing. Because
of this, it is necessary to know what things are Najis and the way to
make them Tahir.

Issue 12: Everything that exists is Tahir except for eleven things, and
those things that come into contact with them, also become Najis.

Issue 13: The things that are Najis, are the following:

1. Urine

1. Stool

1. Semen

1. Corpse

1. Blood

1. Dog

1. Pig

1. Alcohol

1. Beer

1. Non-Muslim (*Kafir*)

1. The sweat of a Najis eating animal

Issue 14: The urine and stool of humans and all animals whose meat is
Haram (to eat) and whose blood gushes out, is Najis.

Issue 15: The urine and stool of animals whose meat is Halal, like the
cow and sheep, and animals whose blood does not gush out, like the snake
and fish, are Tahir.

Issue 16: The urine and stool of animals whose meat is Makruh to eat,
like the horse and donkey, is Tahir.

Issue 17: The urine and droppings of birds whose meat is Haram (to eat),
like the eagle, are Tahir, but it is better to stay away from such
things.

The Rules of the Corpse
-----------------------

Issue 18: An animal that has not been slaughtered according to the rules
of Islam is called a corpse.[^1]

Issue 19: Animals are divided into two categories: some have blood that
gushes out; meaning that if their neck is cut, the blood comes out with
force. Other animals have blood that does not gush out; meaning that if
their neck is cut, the blood does not come out with force.

Issue 20: The corpse of an animal whose blood does not gush out; like
the fish, is Tahir, even if it dies in water.

Issue 21: (As for) the corpse of an animal whose blood gushes out; the
parts that contain no life - like the hair and the horns, are Tahir; and
the parts that contain life - like the flesh and skin, are Najis.

Issue 22: All parts of the body of the dog and pig - whether living or
dead - are Najis.

Issue 23: The complete body of a person who has passed away, no matter
how recently he has died, and if his body has not yet gone cold (with
the exception of those parts which contain no life, like the nails,
hair, teeth, etc.) is Najis.

Issue 24: Once the dead body has been given a Ghusl, the body is Tahir.

Issue 25: The body of a person who fights in the way of Allah to protect
Islam and is killed on the war front, is tahir and it is not necessary
to give the body a Ghusl or a Kafan.

The Rules of Blood
------------------

Issue 26: The blood of people and all animals, whose blood gushes out,
like the chicken and goat, is Najis.

Issue 27: The blood of animals, whose blood does not gush out, like the
fish and mosquito, is Tahir.

Issue 28: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, one must avoid eggs that have even
a small drop of blood in them. However, if the blood is in the yolk of
the egg, and the covering around the yolk has not broken, then the
eggwhite is tahir.

Issue 29: The blood that comes out from around the teeth (gums) and that
mixes with saliva is tahir when it comes out of the mouth. In the event
(that the blood is mixed with saliva), it is permissible to spit it out,
although it is better not to spit it out.

How does something become Najis?
--------------------------------

Issue 30: If something Tahir comes into contact with something Najis,
and one of these two things is wetter than the other and the wetness of
one reaches the other, then that Tahir thing will become Najis.

Issue 31: If a person does not know if something Tahir has become Najis
or not, then it should be considered as being Tahir, and research and
investigation is not necessary, even if one is able to ascertain if the
thing is Tahir or Najis.

Issue 32: Eating and drinking things, which are Najis, is Haram.

[^1]: For a better understanding on the method of slaughtering according
to Islamic Law, see Issue 438.


