Ghusl
=====

Sometimes for Salat and other acts that require Wudhu, a Ghusl too
becomes Wajib.

The method of performing Ghusl
------------------------------

Issue 105: To perform Ghusl, the complete body, including the head and
the neck must be washed. Sometimes a Ghusl becomes Wajib, for example in
the case of Janabat; and sometimes it is Mustahab, such as the Ghusl on
Friday (Jumu'ah).

In reality, there is no difference in the way the various Ghusls are
performed; the only difference lies in the Niyyat (Intention).

Issue 106: Ghusl can be performed in two ways:

Tartibi (Sequential) or Irtimasi (At one time).

• In *Ghusl Tartibi*, one starts by washing the head and the neck, and
then the right half of the body is washed, followed by the left half of
the body.

• In *Ghusl Irtimasi*, the complete body is placed under water at one
time. Therefore, for Ghusl Irtimasi, the amount of water must be much so
that the person is able to submerge his complete body (under the water.)

Conditions necessary for the Ghusl to be correct
------------------------------------------------

Issue 107: All the conditions that were necessary for Wudhu[^1] to be
correct are also necessary for Ghusl, except for Muwalat (not leaving a
gap between the actions) - and also, it is not necessary that the body
be washed from top to bottom.

Issue 108: If many Ghusls become Wajib on a person, it is allowed to
perform all of them in one Ghusl, but one has to specify a Niyyat for
each one.

Issue 109: One who has performed Ghusl Janabat must not perform Wudhu
for Salat. However, one can not offer the Salat without also performing
Wudhu if any other Ghusl was done.

Issue 110: In Ghusl Irtimasi, the complete body must be Tahir. However,
for Ghusl Tartibi, it is not necessary that the complete body be Tahir.
Therefore, if before each part of the body is given a Ghusl, that area
is washed, then it will be sufficient.

Issue 111: Ghusl Jabirah is performed just as Wudhu Jabirah.[^2]

Issue 112: If someone is performing a Wajib fast, then he is not allowed
to perform Ghusl Irtimasi, since that person fasting is not permitted to
place his complete head under water. However, if due to forgetfulness,
one performs Ghusl Irtimasi, his Ghusl will be correct.

Issue 113: It is not necessary that the complete body be washed with the
hands during the Ghusl, therefore, in the event that with the Niyyat of
performing a Ghusl, the water reaches to all parts of the body, this
will be sufficient.

Wajib Ghusls
------------

Issue 114: There are seven Wajib Ghusls:

• Janabat

• Mayyit

• Mass-e- Mayyit (Touching of the dead body)

• Haidh

• Istihadha

• Nifas

• The Ghusl made Wajib by a Nadhr (promise)

### Ghusl Janabat

Issue 115: If semen comes out of a person, either while asleep or due to
sexual intercourse, he becomes Junub, and must perform Ghusl Janabat for
Salat and other acts which require taharat.

Issue 116: If one feels the movement of semen within the body, but it
does not come out, then one will not be considered as Junub.

Issue 117: If someone knows that semen has come out of the body or one
knows that that which has come out is semen, one will be considered as
Junub and must perform Ghusl.

Issue 118: If a liquid comes out of a person’s body but one does not
know if it is urine, semen or something else, then in the event that it
comes out with passion, and after it is discharged, the body becomes
relaxed, then that wetness will be considered as semen. However, if all
of these signs, or even some of them are not present, then that wetness
will not be considered as semen. Nevertheless, as for those who are
sick, even the one sign, meaning the wetness coming out in a state of
passion, is enough.

Issue 119: It is Mustahab that a person urinates after semen has come
out, and if one does not urinate and after the Ghusl a liquid comes out
which one does not know whtehter it is semen or something else, then it
will be considered as being semen.

### Actions Haram for a Junub

Issue 120: From the time a person becomes Junub until the Ghusl is
performed or if one is not able to perform Ghusl and instead performs
Tayammum, the following acts are Haram:

Touching the Qur’an with any part of the body, and the names of Allah,
and according to Ihtiyat Wajib, touching the names of the Prophets (a.s)
and the A’immah (a.s).

Going into Masjid al-Haram and Masjid an-Nabi (a.s) - even if one just
goes in from one door and exits through another door.

Staying in a Masjid and in the Haram (Sanctuary) of the A’immah (a.s),
but if one only intends to enter from one door and exit through another
door, or to take something, then it is not a problem.

Reciting any of the Surahs from the Qur’an that contain a Wajib Sajdah,
even if it is only one letter from these Surahs. (The ayats of Sajdah
are the following):

1. Surah Sajdah  32:15

1. Surah Fusilat  41:37

1. Surah Najm  53:62

1. Surah ‘Alaq  96:19

Issue 121: If a person has a specific room for Salat in his house, or
like those found in most organizations and clubs, it does not have the
ruling of a Masjid.

Issue 122: There is no harm in staying in the harams of the descendents
of the A’immah (‘a) in a state of janabat, but staying in the masajid
that are usually built adjacent to the harams, is forbidden.

### Ghusl Mayyit

Issue 123: Anytime a Muslim passes away, his body must be given a Ghusl
and kafan and Salat must be prayed over the body, and then he must be
buried.[^3]

### Ghusl Mass Mayyit

Issue 124: If somebody touches any part of the body of a dead person or
any part of their body comes into contact with the Mayyit, whose body
has gone cold and has not been given a Ghusl, he must perform a Ghusl
Mass Mayyit.

### The Ghusls related to Girls and Women

Issue 125: From all of the Wajib Ghusls, three, meaning the Ghusl of
Haidh, Istihadha, and Nifas are Wajib only for girls and women. The
reason for these Ghusls is in relation to the blood that is discharged
from the womb of the woman and each of these has their own specific
rulings.

### Ghusl of Haidh (Menstruation)

Issue 126: When the discharge of blood from the menstrual period stops,
the woman must perform Ghusl in order to perform Salat and other actions
for which Taharat is necessary.

Issue 127: The blood of menstruation does not occur before the age of
Bulugh (9 years), and therefore if a girl sees blood before this, then
it does not have the ruling of Haidh.

Issue 128: The duration of Haidh can not be less than three days,
therefore if the blood that is discharged stops before three days, then
it will not be considered as Haidh.

Issue 129: The duration of Haidh can not continue for more than ten
days, therefore if a woman sees blood for more than ten days, then the
period after ten days will not have the same ruling as Haidh.

Issue 130: The blood of Haidh is usually thick, warm, and dark in
colour, and is discharged with pressure and a bit of burning.

Issue 131: During the period of Haidh, the following actions are Haram
for a woman:

• Salat and Tawaf of the Ka’bah

• All the actions that are Haram for a Junub (such as staying in a
Masjid[^4])

Issue 132: During the period of menstruation, performing Salat and
fasting are not Wajib. As for the Salat that were missed, they do not
have to be made up, however the fasts that were not kept, one must keep
up the Qadha of them.

Issue 133: The Ghusl of Haidh is no different than the Ghusl of Janabat,
except for the intention.

Issue 134: A woman can not perform Salat simply by performing the Ghusl
of Haidh, rather, along with the Ghusl, she must also perform Wudhu as
well.

### Ghusl of Istihada

Issue 135: One of the other types of blood that is discharged by girls
and women for a certain period of time from the womb, is called
Istihada.

Issue 136: The blood of Istihada is usually yellow in colour, cold, and
comes out without force or burning, and is not thick; but it is possible
that sometimes it may possess a dark colour, warm, is thick, and comes
out with force.

Issue 137: The blood of Istihada in relation to the quantity that comes
out, is divided broken up into three categories. If it is very little in
quantity, Ghusl is not needed, but it does make the Wudhu void; and if
it is not a little quantity, Ghusl becomes Wajib. For a better
understanding of the rules of each of these categories, women can refer
to the Tawdihul Masa’il.

### Ghusl of Nifas

Issue 138: The Ghusl of Nifas is related to childbirth and does not
occur in any other instance. This Ghusl must be performed after the
blood that comes out following delivery is seen. (The explanation of
this Ghusl is given in the Tawdihul Masa’il, Rule \#514)

[^1]: The conditions for Wudhu were mentioned in Rule 70.

[^2]: The rules related to Wudhu Jabirah were mentioned in Rule 50.

[^3]: For a better understanding of the rules related to a dead Muslim,
one can refer to Rule 527 in the Tawzihul Masa’il. For easy access, we
have included the method of praying Salatul Mayyit on page 126. (TR.)

[^4]: There are also other actions that are Haram, and if one would like
to be better acquainted with them, one can refer to the Tawzihul Masa’il
under Rule 456. Those actions which are haram for a Junub, were
mentioned in Rule 120.


