Short Selection from the book lthbatu 'r-Raj'ah
===============================================

This is a short selection from the book, lthbatu 'r-Raj'ah, of the
Shaykh of the sect and reliable authority of the group, Abu Muhammad
al-Fadl ibn Shadhan ibn al-Khalil an-Nishapuri, may Allah cover him with
His forgiveness and give him spacious (place) in His gardens; and may
Allah give us the opportunity to collect all that is in this (book) and
get enlightenment from its brilliant jewels and priceless pearls; surely
He is Nigh, Answering the prayers.

Hadith 1
--------

Al-Fadl ibn Shadhan, may Allah provide rest to his noble spirit and
bestow on him His exalted benevolence, said:

**1. Narrated to us Muhammad ibn Isma'il ibn Bazi' (may Allah be pleased
with him):** He said, narrated to us I:Iammad ibn 'Isa: He said,
narrated to us Ibrahim ibn 'Umar al-Yamani: He said, narrated to us Aban
ibn Abi 'Ayyash: He said, narrated to us Sulaym ibn Qays al-Hilali who
said:

I said to Amiru '1-Mu'minin (peace be on him): "I have heard from Salman
and al-Miqdad and Abu Dharr things concerning the exegesis of the Qur'an
and ahadith of the Prophet (blessings and peace from Allah be on him and
his progeny), different from what the people have; then I heard from you
verification of what I had heard from them (i.e. from Salman, al-Miqdad
and Abu Dharr).

I have also seen with the people many things related to the exegesis of
the Qur'an and ahadith of the Prophet (blessings and peace from Allah be
on him and his progeny) which you oppose and say that all that is
untrue. So, do you think that the people intentionally tell lies against
Allah and His Messenger, and interpret the Qur'an according to their own
views?"

Sulaym said: Then 'Ali (peace be on him) said:

"You have asked, so understand the reply. Certainly, what the people
have is (a collection of) right and wrong, true and false, repealing and
repealed, general and particular, firm and ambiguous, exact and
surmised. Even during the days of the Messenger of Allah (blessings and
peace from Allah be on him and his progeny) false sayings were
attributed to him, so much so that he stood up to deliver a sermon and
had to say: 'O People! Attribution of false sayings to me has increased,
so whoever attributes a falsehood to me intentionally should make his
abode in the Fire.' Then after him falsities were attributed to him much
more than was being done in his time.

"And the hadith has come to you through four (types of people) only;
there is no fifth.

"[First]: A hypocrite, who adopts the appearance of Islam, and makes a
show of faith; he does not hesitate in sinning and does not restrain
himself from willfully attributing false things against the Messenger of
Allah (blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his progeny). If
people knew that he was a hypocrite and a liar, they would not accept
anything from him and would not confirm what he says. But they say: '
This is a companion of the Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace from
Allah be on him and his progeny), he has seen him and heard (his
sayings) from him.' They therefore accept what he says, because they do
not know his reality.

Allah had indeed informed (the people) regarding the hypocrites clearly,
and fully described them. He, the Mighty, the Great, has said: ***And
when you see them, their bodies will please you, and if they speak, you
will be captivated by their speech; (they are) as if they were propped
up timbers. (al-Munafiqun 63 :4)*** After (the Prophet), they sought
positions with the leaders of misguidance and the callers towards the
Fire, through falsehoods and slanderings.

So they put them in (high) posts and imposed them on the people, and
they devoured the world (i.e. wealth) through them. And people are
always with the rulers and after this world, except those to whom Allah
affords protection. This is the first of the four (categories).

"[Second]: Then there is the individual who heard (something), from the
Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his
progeny), but did not memorise it as it was, and surmised it; he does
not knowingly attribute the falsehood to the Prophet; that (imaginary
saying) is in his hand, he acts upon it and narrates it and claims 'I
have heard it from the Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace of Allah
be on him and his progeny). ' If the Muslims come to know that he has
committed a mistake in it, they will not accept it from him, and if he
himself knew that he was on the wrong, he would give it up.

"[Third]: The third man is he who heard the Messenger of Allah
(blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his progeny) ordering to
do a thing, and later the Prophet forbade doing it (but this man did not
know it); or, he heard the Prophet forbidding a thing and later he
allowed it, but this man did not know it. In this way he retained in his
mind the repealed order and did not know the repealing tradition. If he
knew that it had been repealed he would reject it; and if the Muslims
knew, when they heard it from him, that it had been repealed, they would
reject it.

"[Fourth]: The fourth is the man who does not speak a lie against the
Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his
progeny); he hates falsehood for fear of Allah and respect for the
Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his
progeny). He does not forget, but retains (in his mind) exactly what he
heard (from the Prophet), and he narrates it as he heard it without
adding anything or omitting anything. He knows the abrogating
(tradition) and the abrogated; so he acts upon the abrogating
(tradition) and leaves the abrogated.

He knows that the orders of the Prophet (blessings and peace from Allah
be on him and his progeny) are like the orders of the Qur'an, and like
the Qur'an it contains the abrogating and the abrogated, the general and
the particular, and the firm and the ambiguous. And some times the
sayings of the Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace from Allah be on
him and his progeny) had two connotations: the general and the
particular, as the Qur'an has.

Allah, the Glorified, the High, says in his Book: ***'And whatever the
Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever he forbids you, keep
back. â€˜(al-Hashr 59:7).*** Thus the connotation became obscure for him
who did not know or understand what was its meaning intended by Allah
and His Messenger (blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his
progeny).

"Not all the companions of the Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace
from Allah be on him and his progeny) were in the habit of asking him
about a thing; and not all those who asked could understand (the reply);
and not all those who understood could retain it in memory. Indeed there
were among them many who never asked him about anything; and they always
wished that some bedouin or stranger might come, and ask the Messenger
of Allah (blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his progeny)
something, so that they would also listen.

"I used to go to him once in day time and once at night, and he used to
receive me all alone; he replied to my questions, and I turned with him
wherever he turned to. The companions of the Messenger of Allah
(blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his progeny) knew that he
never did so with anyone else. May be the Messenger of Allah (blessings
and peace from Allah be on him and his progeny) came to (see) me in my
house more often than (we met) at his house.

When I went to (see) him in any of his houses, he met me alone, telling
his wives to go out (of the room), so that no one other than me remained
there; but when he came to my house for private (talks) with me, neither
Fatimah (Peace be on her) nor any of my children went out. When I asked
him (questions), he replied to me, and when I became silent and
exhausted my questions, he started (teaching me) on his own.

Thus not a verse of the Qur'an was revealed to the Messenger of Allah
(blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his progeny) but he taught
and dictated it to me and I wrote it in my hand-writing; he taught me
its interpretation and exegesis, its abrogating and abrogated, its firm
and ambiguous, its particular and general, its esoratic (meaning) and
exoratic.

He prayed to Allah to bestow on me its understanding and that I should
retain it in my memory; and since the time he prayed for me I never
forgot any verse from the Book of Allah, nor any knowledge which he had
dictated to me and I had written down. And all

that Allah had taught him, halal or haram, order or prohibition,
obedience or disobedience, or anything which was (in past) or will be
(in future), or any book which was revealed on anyone before him-he did
not leave anything but taught it all to me, and I have retained it in my
memory without forgetting a single letter from it.

"When the Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace from Allah be on him
and his progeny) was teaching it to me, he prayed to Allah, putting his
hand on my chest, to fill my heart with knowledge, understanding, wisdom
and light; and he used to say: 'O Allah! Bestow on him knowledge and
retention in memory, and do not let him forget anything that I have
informed and taught him. '

"One day I said to him: 'May my father and mother be your ransom, O
Messenger of Allah! Since the time you have prayed for me as you did, I
have not forgotten a single thing that you have taught me, nor have I
missed any of your teachings. Then [why should] I write what you are
teaching me? Are you afraid that I would forget (something)?'

"He said: 'O my brother! I have no fear about you of forgetfulness or
ignorance. I love to pray for you; and Allah, the High, has informed me
that He has appointed you and your partners as my successors [who will
come after you, and you are writing all this for them]; they are those
whose obedience Allah has joined with His own obedience and my
obedience, and has said about them: ***O you who believe! Obey Allah and
obey the Messenger and those (vested) with authority from among you.
â€˜(An-Nisa 4:59)***

"I said: 'Who are they? O Messenger of Allah!'

"He said: 'Those who are my successors after me; those to whom the
desertion of the deserters will do no harm; they are with the Qur'an and
the Qur'an is with them, they will not separate from it nor it will
separate from them, until they come to me at the Hawd (Kawthar); because
of them my ummah will be helped; and because of them they will get rain,
their misfortunes will be removed and their prayers will be answered.â€™

"I said: 'Tell me their names, O Messenger of Allah!'

"He said: 'You, O 'Ali! Are the first of them; then my this son
-and he put his hand on the head of al-Hasan- then my this son -and put
his hand on the head of al-Husayn- then your namesake 'Ali (al-Husayn's)
son, Zaynu 'l-'Abidin, and he will be born in your time, O my brother!
So give him my salam; then his son, Muhammad al-Baqir, the opener of my
knowledge and the treasurer of the revelation of Allah, the High; then
his son, Ja'far as-Sadiq; then his son, Musa al-Kim; then his son, 'Ali
ar-Rida; then his son, Muhammad at-Taqi; then his son, 'Ali an-Naqi;
then his son, al-Hasan az-Zaki; then his son, al-Hujjat al-Qa'im, the
last of my successors and caliphs, who will take revenge from my
enemies, and will fill the earth with equity and justice as it would be
full of injustice and oppression."'

Then the Leader of the Faithful (peace be on him) said: "By Allah! I
certainly know all those who will pledge their allegiance to him between
ar-Rukn (al-Yamani) and Maqam (Ibrahim); and I know the names and tribes
of his helpers."

Muhammad ibn Isma'il said: Then I:Iammad ibn 'Isa said: I described this
hadith to my Master, Abu 'Abdullah [Ja'far as-Sadiq] (peace be on him),
and he wept and said: "Sulaym has narrated truthfully; for his ahdith
was narrated to me by my father, from his father 'Ali ibn al-Husayn,
from his father al-Husayn ibn 'Ali who said: 'I heard this hadith from
Amiru '1-Mu'minin (peace be on him) when Sulaym ibn Qays had put that
question to him. '

Hadith 2
--------

2. **Narrated to us Muhammad ibn Abi 'Umayr from Muhammad ibn 'Isa, from
Abu Shu'bah al-Halabi, from Abu â€˜Abdillah [Ja'far as-Sadiq], from his
father Muhammad ibn â€˜Ali, from his father â€˜Ali ibn al-Husayn, from his
uncle al-Hasan ibn â€˜Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be on them all) that he
said:**

I asked my grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (may Allah bless him and
his progeny) about the Imams after him.

He (blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his progeny) said: "The
Imams after me are twelve, corresponding to the number of the naqibs
(leaders) of the children of Isra'il. Allah has given them (i.e. will
give them) my knowledge and understanding; and you are among them, O
Hasan!"

I said: "O Messenger of Allah! When will come out the Qa'im of us, Ahlu
'l-Bayt?"

He said. "O Hasan! His likeness is like the Hour (of Resurrection).
Allah has kept its knowledge hidden from the people of the heavens and
the earth; it will not come but all of a sudden."

As-Shaykh al-Hurr al-'Amili, the first copyist of this tract has written
here: "I say, the correct name (of the second narrator in the above
isnad) is Hammad ibn 'Uthman.

Hadith 3
--------

3. **Narrated to us 'Abdu 'r-Ragman ibn Abi Najran, from â€˜Aim ibn
Humayd, from Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali, from Abu Ja'far [Muhammad al-Baqir]
(peace be on him) that he said:**

The Messenger of Allah (blessings and pace from Allah be on him and his
progeny) said to the Leader of the Faithful (peace be on him): "O 'Ali!
Certainly the Quraysh will soon show against you (the enmity) which they
have kept hidden (so far); and they will join their forces to oppress
and overpower you. So if you get (enough) supporters, fight against
them; but if you do not find supporters, then restrain your hands and
save your blood, because martyrdom is (to come to you) later on. And
know that my son will take revenge in this world from your oppressors,
and from those who will do injustice to your children, and Allah will
punish them in the hereafter a hard punishment."

Salman al-Farsi said: "Who is he? O Messenger of Allah!"

He said: "The ninth from the progeny of my son, al-Husayn; who will
re-appear after his long occultation, and will then announce the order
of Allah, and bring the divine religion to light, and take revenge from
the enemies of Allah, and fill the earth with equity and justice as it
would be filled with inequity and injustice."

He (Salman) asked: "When will he appear? O Messenger of Allah!"

He said: "No one knows it other than Allah. But there are some signs for
it: An announcement from the sky, a landslide in the East, and another
in the West, and a third at the desert."

Hadith 4
--------

4. **Narrated to us afwan ibn Yahya; He said,** narrated to us Abu Ayyub
Ibrahim ibn Ziyad al-Khazzaz; He said, narrated to us Abu Hamzah
ath-Thumali from Abu Khalid al-Kabuli that he said:

I went to see my Master 'Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace
be on them all), and I saw in his hand a paper he was looking at and
crying bitterly. I said: "My father and mother be your ransom! O Son of
the Messenger of Allah! What paper is this?"

He said: "This is the copy of the tablet which Allah the High, had sent
to the Messenger of Allah (blessings of Allah be on him and his
progeny). It contains the names of Allah, the High, and His Messenger,
and the Leader of the Faithful, and my uncle al-Hasan ibn 'Ali, and my
father (peace be on them all); also (it has) my name, and names of my
son Muhammad al-Baqir, and his son Ja'far as-Sadiq, and his son Musa
al-Kazim, and his son 'Ali ar-Rida (peace be on them all); then (there
are) names of his son Muhammad at-Taqi, and his son 'Ali an-Naqi, and
his son al-Hasan az-Zaki and his son al-Hujjat, who will stand by order
of Allah and take revenge from enemies of Allah, who will disappear in a
long occultation and then will appear and fill the earth with equity and
justice as it will be filled with injustice and oppression."

Hadith 5
--------

5. **Narrated to us Fadalah ibn Ayyub (may Allah be pleased with him).
He said: Narrated to us Aban ibn 'Uthman. He said: Narrated to us
Muhammad ibn Muslim who said that Abu Ja'far [Muhammad al-Baqir] (peace
be on him) said:**

The Messenger of Allah (blessings of Allah be on him and his progeny)
said to 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be on him): "I have more authority on
the believers than their own selves; then you, O 'Ali! have more
authority on the believers than their own selves; then al-Hasan has more
authority on the believers than their own selves; then al-Husayn has
more authority on the believers than their own selves; then Muhammad ibn
'Ali has more authority on the believers than their own selves; then
Ja'far ibn Muhammad has more authority on the believers than their own
selves; then Musa ibn Ja'far has more authority on the believers than
their own selves; then 'Ali ibn Musa has more authority on the believers
than their own selves; then Muhammad ibn 'Ali has more authority on the
believers than their own selves; then 'Ali ibn Muhammad has more
authority on the believers than their own selves; then al-Hasan ibn 'Ali
has more authority on the believers than their own selves; then [is]
al-Hujjat ibn al-Hasan with whom the caliphate and successorship will
come to end; and he will remain hidden for a long period of time, then
will reappear and fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be
full of oppression and injustice."

Hadith 6
--------

**6. Narrated to us Muhammad ibn Abi 'Umayr (may Allah be pleased with
him), from Ghiyath ibn Ibrahim from Abuâ€™ Abdillah [Ja'far as-Sadiq]
(peace be on him) that he said:**

Amiru 'l-Mu'minin (peace be on him) was asked about the meaning of the
saying of the Messenger of Allah (may Allah bless him and his progeny),
"I leave among you two weighty (precious) things, the Book of Allah and
my progeny," as to who are the progeny. He said:

"I, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and nine Imams from the children of al-Husayn;
ninth of them is their al-Mahdi; they will not separate from the Book of
Allah, the Mighty, the Great, nor will it separate from them, until they
come to the Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace from Allah be on him
and his progeny) at his Hawd (Kawthar)."

Hadith 7
--------

**7. Narrated to us al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, from Malik ibn â€˜Atiyyah, from
Abu Hamzah [ath-Thumali] Thabit ibn Abi afiyyah Dinar, from Abu Ja'far
[Muhammad al-Baqir] (peace be on him) that he said:**

Al-Husayn ibn 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be on them) said to his
companions one night before he was martyred:

"Verily, the Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace of Allah be on him
and his progeny) had said (to me): 'O my little son! You will certainly
be driven to Iraq; you will come down in a land called 'Amura' and
Karbala, and there you will be martyred, and a group will be martyred
with you."

"Now what the Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace of Allah be on him
and his progeny) had informed me has arrived, and certainly I am going
to him tomorrow. Therefore, whoever among you would like to go away,
should do so this night, for I do allow him and give him the liberty [to
leave me]."

And he greatly emphasized what he had said. But they did not agree and
declared: "By Allah! We shall never leave you [alone] until we too reach
the destination you are going to."

When he saw this [determination], he said: "Then rejoice (with the good
news of) the Garden. By Allah! We shall abide, after what is to befall
us, as long as Allah wishes; then Allah will resurrect us and you when
our Qa'im will appear. He will take revenge from the oppressors, and you
and I will see them, [and they will be] wearing chains and shackles and
[undergoing] various types of chastisement and punishment."

He was asked: "Who is your Qa'im? O son of the Messenger of Allah!"

He said: "The seventh from the children of my son Muhammad ibn 'Ali
al-Baqir; and he is al-Hujjat ibn al-Hasan ibn 'Ali ibn Muhammad ibn
'Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja'far ibn Muhammad, the son of my son 'Ali. And it is
he who will remain hidden for a long period, then will appear and fill
the earth with equity and justice as it would be full of oppression and
injustice."

Hadith 8
--------

**8. Narrated to us Safwan ibn Yahya (may Allah be pleased with him): He
said, Narrated to us Ibrahim ibn Ziyad from Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali from
Abu Khalid al-Kabuli that he said:**

I went to see my Master 'Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace
be on them) and said: "O son of the Messenger of Allah! tell me about
those (persons) whose obedience and love Allah has made incumbent and
has enjoined His servants to follow them after the Messenger of Allah
(may Allah bless him and his progeny)."

He said: "O Kabuli! The persons (vested) with authority whom Allah, the
Mighty, the Great, has appointed as the Imams of the people and has
enjoined their obedience on them are the Leader of the Faithful 'Ali ibn
Abi Talib (peace be on him), then my uncle al-Hasan, they my father
al-Husayn, then the authority has come to us." Then he became silent.

I said: "O my Master! It has been reported to us from the Leader of the
Faithful (peace be on him) that the earth will never remain without a
hujjat (Proof) from the High, Allah on His servants. So, who is the
hujjat and Imam after you?"

He said: "My son, Muhammad; and his name in the ancients' books is given
as Baqir (one who opens up the earth), he will disclose the knowledge
(hitherto not explained); and he is hujjat and Imam after me. After
Muhammad (is) his son Ja'far, and his name in the people of the heaven
is as-Sadiq (Truthful)."

I said: "O my Master! How is it that he [alone] is given the name,
as-Sadiq, when all of you are Truthful?"

He said: "Narrated to me my father from his father from the Messenger of
Allah (may Allah bless him and his progeny) that he said: 'When my son,
Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn 'Ali ibn Abi Talib is
born, name him as-Sadiq, because the fifth from his children who also
will have the same name, Ja'far, will claim to be Imam making bold
against Allah of Sublime Glory, and telling lie against Him; thus he, in
Allah's view, is Ja'far al-Kadhdhab (Ja 'far the Liar ), the slanderer
against Allah, the High; the pretender of what he is not fit for, the
transgressor against his father and envious of his brother. It is he who
will crave to throw open the curtain of Allah at the time of occultation
of the Wali of Allah."

Then 'Ali ibn al-Husayn (peace be on him) wept very bitterly, and said:
"It is as though I am looking at Ja'far al-Kadhdhab and he has
instigated the oppressor of his time to thoroughly search the affairs of
the Wali of Allah, and to depute [midwives] on the spouses of his
father; in ignorance of his status [before Allah], endeavoring to get
him killed if he is found, coveting the inheritance of his brother, so
that he may take it without any right."

Abu Khalid said: "And is this to happen? O Son of the Messenger of
Allah!"

He said: "Certainly, by my Lord! Verily it is recorded in a book which
we have and which describes all the sufferings which are to afflict us
after the Messenger of Allah (may Allah bless him and his progeny)."

Abu Khalid said: "Then what is to happen? O Son of the Messenger of
Allah!"

He said: "Then there will be a prolonged occultation of the Wali of
Allah, the twelfth of the successors of the Messenger of Allah and [the
twelfth] of the Imams after him.

"O Abu Khalid! The people (living) m the period of his occultation,
believing in his Imamate and awaiting his reappearance will be superior
to the people of all times, for surely Allah, the Glorified, the High,
will give them the wisdom, understanding and cognition through which the
occultation would become for them equal to vision; and [He] in those
days will put them in the ranks of the fighters with sword in presence
of the Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace of Allah be on him and
his progeny). They are the truly pure hearted ones, our genuine Shi'as
and the callers to the religion of Allah, the Mighty, the Great,
secretly and openly."

And He (peace be on him) said: "To wait for release [from suffering] is
the greatest release."

Hadith 9
--------

**9. Narrated to us Muhammad ibn 'Abdu '1-Jabbar saying:**

I said to my Master, al-Hasan ibn 'Ali [al-'Askari]: "May Allah make me
your sacrifice, 0 Son of the Messenger of Allah! I love to know who is
the Imam and the Hujjat of Allah on His servants, after you."

He (peace be on him) said: "Verily the Imam and the Hujjat after me is
my son, the namesake of the Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace of
Allah be on him and his progeny) and who has the same kunya (agnomen) as
he (the Prophet); and who is the last hujjat and Khalifa of Allah."

[Muhammad ibn 'Abdu 'l-Jabbar] said: "From whom will he be [born]? O Son
of the Messenger of Allah!"

He (peace be on him) said: "From the grand-daughter of Ceasar, the
Byzantine emperor. He will certainly be born, but he will disappear from
the people in a long occultation; then he will reappear and kill the
Dajjal; and he will fill the earth with equity and justice as it would
be filled with oppression and injustice. So, no one is allowed to
mention him by his name or describe him by his kunya before his
appearance-blessings of Allah be on him."

Hadith 10
---------

**10. Narrated to us Ahmad ibn Ishaq ibn 'Abdullah al-Ash'ari, saying:**
I heard Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn 'Ali al-'Askari (peace from Allah be
on him) saying:

"All praise is due to Allah who did not take me out of the world until
He showed me my successor; most resembling the Messenger of Allah
(blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his progeny) in features
and character. Allah will keep him safe during his occultation, then He
will make him reappear; and He will fill the Earth with equity and
justice as it would be filled with injustice and oppression."

Hadith 11
---------

**11. Narrated to us Muhammad ibn â€˜Ali ibn Hamzah ibn al-Hasan ibn
'Ubaydullah ibn al-'Abbas ibn â€˜Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be on him)
saying:** I heard Abu Muhammad [al-Hasan al-'Askari] (peace be on him)
saying:

"Now has been born the Wali of Allah and His hujjat on His servants, and
my successor after me, circumcised, on the eve of 151h Sha'ban [in] the
year two hundred and fifty-five, near the dawn-break. The first to give
him bath was Ridwan, the Superintendent of the Garden in a company of
the Near Angels, with the water of al-Kawthar and al-Salsabil, then
bathed him my aunt Hakimah bint Muhammad ibn 'Ali ar-Rida (peace be on
them)."

Then Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn Hamzah was asked about his mother (peace be
on him). He said: His mother is Malikah, who sometimes is called Susan
and sometimes Rayhanah. (*Also Sayqal and Narjis were among her names*.)
[^1]

Hadith 12
---------

**12. Narrated to us Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Faris an-Nishapuri,
saying:**

'Amr ibn 'Awf, the governor, intended to kill me; and he hated the Ahlu
'l-Bayt very much and was passionately fond of killing the Shi'as. I was
informed of his plan and was overwhelmed with great fear. I took leave
of my family and friends, and proceeded to the house of Abu Muhammad
[al-'Askari] (peace be on him) to take his leave. I had decided to flee
[from the governor's domain]. When I entered, I saw a child sitting at
the Imam's side; his face was shining like the full moon; I was
astonished to see his light and brightness to the point that I almost
forgot my troubles.

Then (the child) said: "O Ibrahim! Do not flee away, because certainly
Allah, the Glorified, the High, will soon save you from his evil."

At this my astonishment increased further, and I said to Abu Muhammad
(peace be on him): O my Master! May Allah make me your ransom! Who is
he, and he has just told me about what was in my mind?

(The Imam) said: "He is my son and my successor after me. It is He who
will disappear in a long occultation, and will reappear after the Earth
will become full of oppression and injustice, then he will fill it with
justice and equity."

So I asked him about his name, and he said: "He is the namesake of the
Messenger of Allah (blessings and peace of Allah be on him and his
progeny) and of the same kunya (agnomen); but it is not allowed for
anyone to mention him by his name or kunya until Allah establishes his
power and government. So keep secret, O Ibrahim! what you have seen and
heard from us today- except from the deserving people."

Then I prayed for them (both) and their forefathers, and came out
seeking help from Allah's grace, with confidence in what I had heard
from as-Sahib (peace be on him). [On arriving at home], my uncle, 'Ali
ibn Faris gave me the good news that [the Caliph] al-Mu'tamid sent his
brother, Abu Ahmad with an order to kill 'Amr ibn 'Awf. Ahmad caught him
the same day and dismembered him limb by limb. And all praise is due to
Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

Hadith 13
---------

**13. Narrated to us 'Abdullah ibn al-Husayn ibn Sa'd al-Katib (may
Allah be pleased with** **him), saying: Abu Muhammad [al-Hasan
al-'Askari] (peace be on him) said:**

"The Umayyads and the Abbasids kept us under their sword for two
reasons:

"First: They knew very well that they had no right to the caliphate; so
they were afraid that we would lay claim on it and [consequently] it
would settle down in its [true] centre.

"Second: They had known from mutawatir ahadith that the end of the rule
of oppressors and tyrants will be at the hand of our Qa'im and they had
no doubt that they were oppressors and tyrants. Therefore, they
endeavored to kill the Ahlu '1-Bayt of the Messenger of Allah (blessings
and peace from Allah be on him and his progeny), and to annihilate his
progeny -hoping in this way to prevent the birth of al-Qa'im (peace be
on him) or to kill him. But Allah, the High, refused to disclose his
affairs to any of them; rather He [decided] to complete His light,
although the polytheists may be averse to it."

Hadith 14
---------

**14. Narrated to us Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Na r (may Allah be
pleased with him), who said: Narrated to us Hammad ibn 'Isa who said:
Narrated to us 'Abdullah ibn Abi Ya'fur saying: Abu 'Abdillah Ja'far ibn
Muhammad (peace be on them) said:**

"There is not a single miracle among the miracles of the Prophets and
[their] successors but that Allah the Glorified, the High, will show its
like on the hand of our Qa'im, for completing the proof against the
enemies."

Hadith 15
---------

**15. Narrated to us al-Hasan ibn â€˜Ali ibn Faddal, from Hammad ibn 'Isa
from al-Husayn ibn al-Mukhtar, from Abu Nasr** [^2]**from 'Amir ibn
Wathilah from 'Amiru '1-Mu'minin (blessings of Allah be on him) that he
said: the Messenger of Allah (may Allah bless him and his progeny) who
said:**

"Ten [signs] must surely appear before the Hour [of Resurrection]: The
Sufyani, the Dajjal, the Smoke, the Walker [on the earth], appearance of
al-Qa'im, rising of the Sun from its setting place, coming down of 'Isa
(peace be on him), a landslide in the East, a landslide in Arabian
Peninsula and a fire which will erupt from the depth of Aden leading the
people to (their) gathering place."

Hadith 16
---------

**16. Also [al-Hasan ibn â€˜Ali ibn Faddal] has narrated it with the same
wordings from al-Hasan ibn Mahbub (may Allah be pleased with him). He
said:**

Narrated to us 'Ali ibn Ri'ab, who said: Narrated to us Abu Hamzah
ath-Thumali, who said: Narrated to us Sa'id ibn Jubayr, who said:
Narrated to us 'Abdullah ibn al-'Abbas who said: the Messenger of Allah
(blessings and peace from Allah be on him and his progeny) said:

"Surely there are some signs for the Hour [of Resurrection]: The
Sufyani... (Then he mentioned the same signs as above, except that he
omitted the Walker, and added: a landslide in the West).

Hadith 17
---------

**17. Narrated to us Muhammad ibn Abi 'Umayr (may Allah be pleased with
him). He said: Narrated to us** Jamil ibn Darraj, who said: Narrated to
us Zurarah ibn A'yan from Abu 'Abdillah [Ja'far as-Sadiq] (peace be on
him), that he said:

"Seek refuge with Allah from the evil of the Sufyani and Dajjal and
other people of fitnahs [temptations, deceptions, mischief]."

He was asked: "O son of the Messenger of Allah! (blessings and peace
from Allah be on him and his progeny): As for the Dajjal, we know him,
and his state of affairs has become clear from your traditions. But who
are the Sufyani and the other people of fitnahs? And what will they do?"

He (peace be on him) said: "The first to appear from this group will be
a man, called Ashab ibn Qays; he will rise from the Arabian Peninsula;
he will commit much outrage and great tyranny among the people.

"Then will appear the Jurhumi from Syria, and the Qahtani from Yemen.
Each of them will gain great power in his domain, and the people will be
overwhelmed with oppression and fitnah. While they will be in this
state, as-Samarqandi will rise against them from Khurasan with black
flags.

"And the Sufyani (will rise) from a dry valley of Syria; he will be from
the descendant of 'Utbah ibn Abi Sufyan. This cursed one, before his
rising, would be showing asceticism and abstemiousness, and will be
content with barley bread and coarsely-ground salt; by distributing
wealth among the people, he will attract the hearts of the ignorant and
vile people. Then he will claim the caliphate, and people will do his
bay 'ah (i.e. pledge their allegiance to him), they will be followed by
those scholars who hide the truth and propagate the falsehood, and they
will say, he certainly is the best of the people of the earth.

His rising and that of al-Yamani from Yemen with white flags will
coincide on the same day, same month and same year.

"The first to fight against the Sufyani will be the Qahtani who will be
defeated and will run away to Yemen where al-Yamani will kill him. Then
Ashab and the Jurhumi, after many battles with the Sufyani, will take to
their heels; he will chase and over-power them. And [in the same way] he
will defeat all those who will oppose and fight against him-except
al-Yamani.

"Then the Sufyani will send his armies all around and conquer a lot of
towns. He will exceed all limits in murder and wickedness. He will go to
Rome to repulse the Khurasani ruler, and will come back as a Christian,
wearing a cross in his neck.

"Then he will proceed to al-Yamani; and al-Yamani will stand up to
repulse his danger. The Sufyani will be defeated after many battles and
fierce fighting; al-Yamani will pursue him, and after many encounters
(the Sufyani) will be (completely) routed. Al-Yamani will find him with
his son among the prisoners at the river al-Law, and he will cut them to
pieces.

After that, al-Yamani will live in his kingdom, unhampered by enemies,
for thirty years. Then he will hand over the kingdom to his son,
as-Sa'id, and himself repair to Mecca, awaiting the appearance of our
Qa'im (peace be on him) till his death. His son will continue, after his
father's death in his kingdom and government for about forty years. Both
of them will return to (this) world by prayer of our Qa'im (peace be on
him)."

Zurarah said: "I asked him about the duration of the Sufyani's rule." He
(peace be on him) said: "It will extend to twenty years."

Hadith 18
---------

**18. It** **was narrated (to us) by him (Muhammad ibn Abi 'Umayr), from
Sayf ibn â€˜Amirah from Bakr bin Muhammad al-Azadi, from Abu â€˜Abdillah
[Ja'far asÂ­Sadiq] (peace be on him) that he said:**

"The risings of the Khurasani, Sufyani and Yamani will be in the same
day, same month and the same year. There will be no flag among them
better than the Yamani's, it will lead to the right (path)."

Hadith 19
---------

**19. Narrated to us Afwan ibn Yahya (may Allah be pleased with him)
saying: Narrated to us Muhammad ibn Humran, who said:** as-Sadiq Ja'far
ibn Muhammad (peace be on him) said:

"Verily, our Qa'im will be helped by fear, supported by (divine) help;
the Earth will be folded up for him, and all the treasures will appear
for him. Through him, Allah will make His religion victorious over all
religions even if the polytheists may be averse to it. His rule will
extend to the (furthest limits of the) East and the West. There will
remain no ruin on the Earth but it will be built (again). Ruhullah 'Isa
ibn Maryam (peace be on him) will come down and pray behind him."

Ibn Humran said: "He was asked: 'When will appear your Qa'im? O son of
the Messenger of Allah! '"

He said: "When men will resemble women, and women will resemble men; and
men will satisfy their lust with men, and women with women; and women
will ride saddles; and false testimony will be accepted and true
evidence rejected; and people will take murder lightly; fornication,
eating interest and bribery [will become a norm]; evil people will
dominate the virtuous ones; the Sufyani will rise from Syria, and
al-Yamani from Yemen; there will be land-slide in the desert; and a
youth from the progeny of Muhammad (blessings and peace from Allah be on
him and his progeny) will be killed between ar-Rukn and al-Maqam, whose
name will be Muhammad ibn al-Hasan[^3] and whose title will be 'the
Purified Soul'; and a cry will come from the heaven that the right is
with 'Ali and his Shi'as. At that time will come out our Qa'im (peace be
on him).

"When he appears, he will recline his back against the Ka'bah, and three
hundred and thirteen men will gather around him. The first thing he will
speak, will be this verse: ***What is preserved by Allah is better for
you if you are believers. (Hud 11:86).*** Then he will say: 'I am the
one preserved by Allah in His Earth, and His proof and khalifah over
you.' So whenever a greeter will greet him, he will only say: 'Peace be
on you, O the One Preserved by Allah!' When the assembly -and it is four
thousand menÂ­ will gather with him, he will come out of Mecca. Then
there will remain in the Earth none that was worshipped other than
Allah, the Mighty, the Great, be it an idol or other things, but a fire
will fall on it and it will burn out. And all that will be after a long
occultation."

Hadith 20
---------

**20. A similar Hadith has been narrated (to us) by Muhammad ibn Isma'il
ibn Bazi' from Muhammad ibn Muslim athÂ­ Thaqafi from Abu Ja'far
[Muhammad al-Baqir] (peace be on him).**

Hadith 21
---------

**21. Narrated to us 'Abdu 'r-Rahman ibn Abi Najran (may Allah be
pleased with him) from â€˜Abdullah ibn Sanan from Abu â€˜Abdillah [Ja'far
as-Sadiq] (peace be on him) that he said:**

"Those who will disappear from their beds are three hundred and thirteen
men -the number of the people of Badr- they will be at Mecca in the
morning; and this is (the interpretation of) the words of Allah, the
Mighty, the Great: ***'Wherever you will be, Allah will bring you all
together. ' (al-Baqarah 2: 148)*** and they are the companions of
al-Qa'im (peace be on him)."

Hadith 22
---------

**22. Narrated to us Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr (may Allah be
pleased with him), who said: Narrated to us â€˜Asim ibn Humayd: He said:**
Narrated to us Muhammad ibn Muslim who said: A man asked Abu 'Abdillah
[Ja'far asSadiq] (peace be on him): "When will your Qa'im appear?"

He said: "When misguidance will increase, and guidance will decrease;
oppression and mischief will increase, and righteousness and goodness
will decrease; men will satisfy their lust with men and women with
women; the 'ulama' will incline towards the world, and majority of the
people to poems and poets; a group of heretic people will be transformed
turning into monkeys and pigs; the Sufyani will be killed and the Dajjal
will appear, doing his utmost in misleading and misguiding; at that time
the name of the Qa'im (peace be on him) will be announced on the eve of
twenty-third of the month of Ramadhan. He will rise on the day of
'Ashura'. It is as though I am looking at him standing between the Rukn
and the Maqam, and Jibra'il (peace be on him) will be announcing before
him: '(Make) bay'ah for Allah;' and his Shi'as will proceed to him (to
do so)."

Note by ash-Shaykh Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Hurr al-'Amili
----------------------------------------------------------

This is what we found copied from the book lthbatu 'r-Raj'ah of al-Fadl
ibn Shadhan in the handwriting of some learned traditionists; and it was
checked with its original. Written by Muhammad al-Hurr.

Note by Muhammad Husayn ibn Zaynu 'l-'Abidin al-'Urmawi
-------------------------------------------------------

This is the end of what was in the manuscript from which this copy has
been made; and it belonged to the author of al-Wasaâ€™il [Shaykh al-Hurr
al-'Amili] (may Allah's mercy be on him); and the above wordings, "This
is what we found ....", was in his own noble and blessed handwriting;
and on the back of the copy was written in his own hand: "Its owner by
grace of Allah is the Faqir (the poverty stricken) Muhammad al-Hurr."

I completed (this copying) on twenty-second Dhu 'l-Qa'dah, in the one
thousand three hundred and fiftieth year of the hijrah of the Prophet,
in the mausoleum of 'Ali; and I am the humble Muhammad Husayn al-'Urmawi
ibn Zaynu '1-'Abidin, may Allah forgive both of them.

Note by the humble servant of Allah, Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi
--------------------------------------------------------------

I started translation of this booklet on Thursday 29th Dhu '1-Qa'dah
1416 AH, corresponding to 18th April 1996, and completed it on Sunday,
2nd Dhu '1-Hijjah 1416 AH, corresponding to 21st April 1996 at 11.00
p.m. at Dar es Salaam.

[^1]: The style of this sentence indicates that it might have been added
by a scribe;that it why I have put it in brackets

[^2]: In the manuscript, it is "Abu Basir." Basim al-Musawi has changed
it to Abu Nasr because Abu Basir is not among those who have narrated
hadith from 'Amir ibn Wathilah.

[^3]: In the manuscript it is "ibn Muhammad"; Basim al-Musawi has
corrected it from ash-Shaykh a-Saduq's Ikmalu 'd-Din.


