On the Path of Responsibility
=============================

The Responsibilities are Knowledge: Know the details of the
responsibilities in order to know what your duty is, and, also, know its
importance so that you will react with it and strive towards achieving
it.

"Be engaged in the thing that you will be responsible for ", so,
whoever becomes busy with something of less importance, wastes the most
important…there is not enough time in life for marginal matters that are
not of great importance. Monotony and dullness kills the spirit of
responsibility…try and change the method of your relationship with
responsibilities, and not to be a standstill in a certain condition.
Because being at a standstill and blind imitation will turn
responsibilities into a heavy load that a middle age man cannot carry.

Do not delay your responsibilities because they will accumulate and at
last will become difficult to discharge. It is reported in a hadith:
"Beware of stalling, because it is a river where people sink". Deal with
responsibility with an open spirit, as if you are the one who drags it
to yourself in order to be able to discharge it as expected. Loving
responsibility makes your product improve.

Responsibility has an effect on man's personality; the more time that
is spent on discharging a particular responsibility, the more mature
your intellect will be, and, likewise, so your power of resistance,
experience and knowledge.

Laziness and weariness are enemies of discharging responsibility:
"Beware of laziness and weariness, because a lazy person cannot fight
for right and a bored man cannot seek his rights." Laziness,
inactiveness and lukewarmness in discharging duties is a great block in
discharging responsibility.

The collective spirit in discharging responsibility helps in reducing
its burden; helps in inventing, as well as feeling the responsibilty in
achieving common missions which bring far goals closer. Reading the Holy
Qur'an and authentic hadith encourages one in discharging his
responsibility. But what are they? How can we deal with them? How can we
accept them with an open heart? How can we understand the present and
future outcomes? Thus, it is necessary for young Muslims boys and girls
to depend on these two sources in order to know their
responsibilities.


**Outcomes of being Adhered to Responsibility**

Discharging any responsibility in the best way may result in one or
more of the following outcomes:

Holding the principle of responsibility opens the door to freedom
without any darkness. Subsequently, it is the necessity of
responsibility to close doors of deviation, disorder and anarchy.

One of the natures of Islamic responsibility is that it opens a wider
field of goodness; there is no limit to the increment of good in all
responsibilities.

Responsibility directs man's activities and makes it valuable, i.e., it
will turn a responsible man, who is carrying responsibility, to a man of
aim and goals who cannot move without having intended goals.

As responsibility tries to create an understanding between opinions and
actions, and the views of a Muslim youth, girls and boys, concerning any
responsibility on their shoulder, likewise, it encourages them to
discharge their duties. Islamic responsibility is out of any
geographical boundary; its distance is the whole world. It is true that
close relatives are worthier of goodness, but we are responsible for
reforming the whole world. But, if this responsibility stands only on
the borderline, we will not have seen the kind of propagation of Islam
that occurred in every part of the world.

Responsibility with its spirit of commitment, decreases and limits the
circles of deviation, crimes, treason and other forms of downfall and
all kinds of failure, laziness and dependence. A responsible man
respects the requirements of his role in life.

Responsibility in Islam creates a condition of harmony and conformity
between Allah's will and that of His servant (a Muslim). They are not
two wills, rather it is a single will…Allah requests and man obeys and
discharges, i.e., he practices the will of Allah and commits it into
practice on earth "The response of the believers, when they are invited
to Allah and His Apostle that he may judge between them, is only to say:
We hear and we obey; and these it is that we are the successful." (Holy
Qur'an: 24:51).

Positive examples who shouls undertake their responbibilities in the
best way and be provocative tools in order to be followed by those who
tarry or disown from its burdens. And as long as the other young man or
woman has the acapability of performing this or that responsibility, I,
also, have the capability of performing this or that misson.

A set of Islamic responsibilities maintain the reformation of life and
changing the deviated views and feelings, and they cannot be achieved
unless through a responsible person and a responsible society. The
degree of enduring the heaviness of responsibility, in the world
justifies the degree of reward or punishment in the hereafter. It is
similar to the annual hardworking of a student in school, a chance that
will give an increment in reward for anyone who wants increment.


**Conclusion**

When the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: "All of you are shepherds and all
of you are responsible for his subjects", he made every Muslim
responsible whatever his position in the society is, so that nobody can
say: 'I am not assigned this work…it is the duty of others.'"

From here, the condition of despair, pessimism and frustration that are
seen in most Muslim communities requires a youth who is well versed in
what is going on, to work hard in order to remove this block from
people's way, as well as, working in order to put the spirit of action
and hope in them. We should always remember that (So verily, with every
difficulty, there is relief. Verily, with every difficulty there is
relief). (Holy Qur'an: Inshirah: 5-6).

Opening the door of dialogue based on the basis of respecting others'
views, even if they are against ours, is a responsibility of a youth at
this time where all doors are opened. This is because the process of
knowing each other, as requested by the Almighty Allah, for nations
starts with respecting those who have a different view from us.

There is, also, the responsibility of developing feelings of criticism
of any opinion and view by tabling it for discussion, even though it is
not just a matter of disorder rather it needs planning (I only desire
(you) betterment to the best of my ability) (Holy Qur'an: 11: 88). All
Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.


