Preface
=======

<span style="font-size: 14pt">Bismillah-Ar-Rahman-Ar-Raheem  
 In the name of God the Beneficent the Merciful  
 All thanks be to God and to Him be all praise.</span>

The light of Islam is attracting many who are wandering lonely in the
darkness. Amidst this world of vain desires and materialism there is an
ever-increasing number who are searching for a true purpose to this life
that goes beyond our earthly existence. Many hearts are drawn to the
complete way of life described within Islam, the truth of the Divine
message that touches the inner being and the sense of satisfaction
having found what they have been longing for.  
 The journeys to Islam are many and varied, and from these stories we
can see the Mercy of Allah (swt) at work. InshaAllah these stories will
offer hope and encouragement to those navigating the path in search of
truth, and will motivate us to work harder for the sake of Allah (swt).
Even as Muslims our journeys towards the pleasure of Allah (swt), and
multiplying our devotion to Him, are everlasting.

The stories in this collection have been sent in from all over the
world, and as far as we can attain are all truthful accounts. As this
book consists of personal testimonies we cannot be held responsible for
the accuracy of information given as factual within the content. Each
story remains in the original wording

 of the writer, we have only corrected obvious spelling and grammatical
errors, as a result each story has its own unique appeal. We hope you
enjoy our collection.

Qualities of the God-fearing and the pious  
 He (the believer) kept his mind alive and killed (the desires of) his
heart till his body became thin, his bulk turned light and an effulgence
of extreme brightness shone for him. It lighted the way for him and took
him on the (right) path. Different doors led him to the door of safety
and the place of (his permanent) stay. His feet, balancing his body
became fixed in the position of safety and comfort, because he kept his
heart (in good acts) and pleased his Allah.

**Nahjul Balagha  
 Imam Ali (as)**

InshaAllah we would like to start another collection of stories to be
published in the future. If you are a new brother or sister to Islam and
would like to tell your own story then please email it to
Stories786@aol.com. Please write your story into the email itself,
rather than send an attachment. Please also state within the email what
name you wish to be included in any future book, or if you would prefer
to remain anonymous.

A Blind Woman Sees The Light
============================

The name I am called by my Christian parents is Bobbie Evans, but the
name I am known by in the Muslim community is Khadija Evans. This is the
story of how my husband and I came to embrace Islam.

I can remember standing in the kitchen of the house I lived in when I
was just seven or eight years old and looking towards the door that went
outside. I prayed to a god whom I wasnt sure existed and I begged Him to
show himself to me if He was really there. Nothing happened.

I can remember being nine or ten years old and writing a letter to God
and hiding it in the heat register in my bedroom, thinking God, if He
existed, would come and retrieve it and answer my prayers. But the next
day, the letter was still there.

I had always had a hard time accepting the existence of God, and of
understanding the beliefs taught in Christian churches. Even though my
parents werent very religious, and rarely went to church, they thought
it was best that my two brothers and I go. We were allowed to choose our
religion when we very young. I think I was about six or seven, and my
brothers were one and two years older then I. I chose a Methodist church
for no other reason then it was a few blocks away from our house, and my
brothers chose a Lutheran church because it was also close, and I hadnt
chosen it.

I went to the church until I was thirteen years old. I was

baptized and confirmed there when I was 11. I went along with the
baptism and confirmation because all children who were 11 received
confirmation, and if they hadnt already been baptized, that was done at
the same time. Even then I knew that doubts about God and Christian
teachings were things best kept to myself.

When I was 13 my family moved to another town with no churches within
walking distance, and my parents werent eager to get up early and drive
us kids to church, and so our religious training stopped until I was 15
and my mom suddenly found religion. She began attending an Assembly of
God church, occasionally dragging my dad along. I went willingly. I had
already begun a search for God that wouldnt end until I was 42 years
old.  
 I remember being born again. Caught up in the fervor of the hell and
damnation that the minister preached at the Assembly of God church. I
became high on religion thinking I had finally found Him. Little did I
know, but the high would be short lived, as I again began to have doubts
and unanswered questions.  
 When I was 17 I met the daughter of an assistant Baptist minister and
began going to their church. I had been sexually abused by my dad from
the time I was at least six years old and I told the assistant minister
about it. He arranged with my parents to let me live with him and his
family in a type of private foster care. My dad paid him $100 a week. My
parents also attended the church for a brief time, until the minister
announced on the pulpit that my dad was a child molester. Before that
though, my mom, dad and I were each baptized at the church.

One day after spending the day with my parents I returned to my foster
home only to find the house empty. Cleaned out. Not

 a stick of furniture. We found out that the minister had been caught
embezzling from the church and he and his family had left town in a
hurry. I returned to my parents home and the abuse.

As a result of that incident what little faith I had in God was totally
lost and I became an atheist. For the next 25 years I would fluctuate
between believing, wanting to believe, and Agnosticism, and Atheism.

When I was twenty-six, I went to three months of Rights of Initiation
for Catholic Adults and then was baptized and confirmed in the Roman
Catholic Church. I had been allowed to by-pass the full year of classes
because I hadnt called the church to inquire about converting until
three months before the Easter Vigil Mass when confirmation for adults
was held.

I had entered the Catholic religion with the same philosophy that I had
once heard Alcoholics Anonymous has, Bring your body, your mind will
follow. I didnt really believe in God, or in the core teachings of the
Catholic Church, but I wanted so badly to believe in a power higher then
myself, that I went faithfully to mass seven days a week, hoping that
somehow I would start to believe. But after several months, I began to
realize that it wasnt going to happen, and my mass attendance became a
once a week thing, then once a month, until when I was thirteen and met
the man who today is my husband and who wasnt Catholic, I stopped
attending mass altogether.

I had never told anyone, before my husband, that I didnt believe in God.
I dont think he took me seriously at first. I dont think he had ever
known an Atheist.

My husband is 29 years older then me. Weve had a wonderful marriage for
these last 10 years. When we first met, I still desperately wanted to
believe, and kept making him promise me that When you get to Heaven he
would ask God to give me

the strength to believe, and he if at all possible, he would give me a
sign, one that I couldnt chalk up to my imagination, so I would know
there really was a god. He always promised me he would.  
 We were living in rural Alabama when I was 32 years old. I developed
ulcerations on both corneas and when they healed, I was legally blind.
Because of damage from infection that had been done to the tissue that
donated corneas would have to adhere to, I couldnt find an eye surgeon
who believed that transplanted corneas wouldnt be rejected.

I was still searching for God. I was searching for hope of something
better then what this world had to offer. Some kind of evidence of the
chance for existence after death. Some way to achieve it. I listened to
Christian programs on the Trinity Broadcasting Network, even though I
couldnt find any ministers on the station whos opinion I trusted. I
watched anyway, hoping that one would say something that would click in
my mind, and I would finally know, that Yes, there really is a god. None
of them ever said anything that caused that connection to happen, though
many said things that confused me even more.

During the first 10 years after I became legally blind, I tried
attending different churches, Baptist again, Assembly of God again,
non-Denominational, Church of God, Mormon, and even studied up on Wicca.
But I always lost interest after just a few months. Things the religions
taught just didnt add up. There were just too many things left to faith.
Things that had no proof other then ones faith. I couldnt believe
something when the only proof were some words in a book that in large
part didnt make sense.

I remember one night when I was about 35 years old, lying in bed and
praying to God, whom I still wasnt sure existed, and

asking Him that if He did exist to lead me to someone who could help me
to believe. But I found no one.

At age 36 I acquired a braille Bible and started reading it, once again
hoping to find proof of Gods existence. But with the Bible being so hard
to understand, with so much of it not really being explainable, I lost
interest after reading just a few of its books.

At about that time, though still wanting to find God, I gave up my
search. I had become completely disillusioned with religion.

On September 11, 2001 I was sitting at my computer. It was before 9 a.m.
and as usual the television, which was sitting to my right, was turned
on for background noise. I heard the sound that is made to notify
viewers of an important news announcement. I stopped and turned towards
the TV. A reporter began talking and one of the towers of the World
Trade Center showed in the background. He said an accident had happened.
A small plane had hit one of the towers of the World Trade Center. Im
legally blind, but I could see well enough to know that it wasnt a small
plane that had hit the tower. The hole was massive. And I didnt think it
was possible to accidentally hit something so big.

As I watched, another plane flew into the other tower. I couldnt see the
plane itself, it was too small for me to see, but I saw the fireball
that exploded away from the building.

I jumped up and ran into the bedroom and told my husband to hurry and
get up because terrorists were flying planes into the World Trade Center
buildings! He immediately got out of bed and came in to the living room
and sat in his recliner and began to watch. It was about 9 a.m.

As time went by it was announced that a plane had been flown into the
Pentagon and another hijacked plane had crashed in Pennsylvania. I
wondered when it would end? And what in the

world was going on??? The reporter said it looked like debris was
falling from the building. My husband said it was people jumping.
Something he has never been able to forget. I was grateful that my
vision was to bad for me to be able to make out what even looked like
debris. The reporter said a part of the first tower had fallen away from
the building. He spoke in a kind of hesitant voice. Now I wonder if he
was unsure of what he was seeing. Because we later found out that a part
of the building hadnt fallen away. The building had completely
collapsed.

A female reporter was crying and a male reporter hugged her. I was
crying too. And my husband hugged me.

For weeks afterward I would start crying for no apparent reason. Id be
riding on the bus and have to turn my head towards the window and
pretend I was looking out so that others wouldnt see the tears escaping
my eyes.

When we were in a restaurant, Id have to use my napkin to dab the tears
welling up in my eyes before the other diners noticed and wondered if I
was some kind of a nut.

I was Christian then and I cared. And I was devastated. I couldnt
understand how a religion could promote such violence, as the media was
saying Islam did. It made no sense to me. So I decided to find out for
myself. One way or another I wanted to know the truth. Because of my
partial blindness I was limited to information from the internet.
Finding braille books about Islam in braille or ink print that was large
enough for me to read was impossible. I was able to use a computer
because I had magnification software installed so I could enlarge the
font on the screen to a size that I could read.

I did searches and I began to read about Islam. I went to web sites that
taught the basics of Islam, and I joined Muslim womens e-groups where I
was able to ask and get answers that

I confirmed through further research.

Ive always been a sceptic. Its always been hard for me to believe
something that I didnt understand. I was never one to believe something
simply because someone said it was so. I had to know it in my mind as
well as in my heart.

While studying Islam I learned that the god Muslims worship is the same
god as that of Christians and Jews. The god of Abraham and Moses. I
found that Islam doesnt promote or condone hatred of non-Muslims, nor
does it condone the killing of innocent people.

By studying Islam I found the answers that the media wasnt telling us
and I came to know that Islam is the True Religion. I read a lot of
convincing evidence, but the things that proved to me that there is a
god, and that Islam is the True Religion and that that the Quran is the
Word of God, were those in the Quran itself. The things that are of a
scientific nature. Things that have only been discovered by scientists
in the last 100 years. The only one who could have known those things
1400 years ago was God.

For example, One day I was at a web site that was about some of the
scientific proofs in the Quran. One of the verses in the Quran tells
about the death of our own solar system. Al-Rahman 37-38

When the sky is torn apart, so it was (like) a red rose like ointment.
Then which of the favors of your lord will you deny? There was a link
that went to the NASA web site. When I clicked the link I had no idea
what was going to be on the next page, but what I saw took my breath
away. Tears came to my eyes. I knew - if I had had any doubts left - I
knew at the moment, that Islam was the True Religion of God.

The page the link took me to showed what looked like a rose. It

was the Cats Eye Nebula. Which was an exploding star 3000 light years
away. It had been photographed with the Hubble Space Telescope.
Scientists say that it is the same fate that awaits our own solar
system. Muslims refer to it as the Rose Nebula. It had been described in
the Quran 1400 years ago. People back then had no way of knowing about
it. Only God could have known.

After accepting in my mind as well as in my heart that Islam is the True
Religion, I knew that I was already a Muslim and the only thing left was
to profess my faith.

I looked in an internet directory for mosques in my community. I called
the one in the next town and told the person who answered the phone that
I wanted to convert to Islam, and asked him when I could make my
Shahada. He told me to be there at 4 p.m. on Saturday when the imam
would also be there. I told him that I ride the bus everywhere and it
wouldnt be running late enough for me to be able to get back home and so
could I come earlier? He said not to worry, someone would give me a ride
home. I arrived as scheduled, and as God had scheduled, so began my new
life. I have since come to realize that on that day, the greatest event
of my life occurred. I had always thought that the most wonderful thing
to ever happen to me was the day that I married my husband. But I now
know it wasnt. The most important day of my life was the day I made my
Shahada and accepted Islam as the way of life God intended me to live.
It was the day I acknowledged that Islam is the way to salvation, to
Heaven, and I made a choice to practice it.

I cant say my husband was thrilled by my reverting to Islam. He believed
what the media was saying about Muslims and the religion. He didnt like
it that I went to the mosque several evenings a week and left him home
alone to be bored. One night after he was finished complaining about me
going again I sat down a few feet away from him and I calmly told him, I
will

never ask you to practice a religion you dont believe in. I love you too
much to try and force that on you. But I do want you to learn about
Islam so that you will at least understand what it is I believe. I then
stood up and went into the bedroom and finished dressing to go to the
mosque. I kissed him goodbye and I left.

When I returned home I found his whole attitude had changed. He was
bright and cheerful. That night, before going to bed, he began to learn
about Islam.

My husband began going to the mosque with me. While I studied with the
sisters, he would talk with a brother and ask him questions. At home he
read things on the internet, and books that he had borrowed from the
mosque. We would discuss different things he was learning, and I would
point things out to him.

When the day came and he told me about how some aspect of Islam was to
be practiced, in a know it all tone of voice, as if it were a fact,
something that I myself didnt know, I asked him to tell me How do you
know that?? and he replied, Because its in the Quran! I was stunned! He
believed! He knew that Islam was True! If it was in the Quran, as far as
he was concerned it was true! Thirty-six days after I publicly professed
my faith in God and His messenger, prophet Muhammad, my husband
professed his. We had an Islamic marriage ceremony the same evening. I
cried when my husband made his Shahada. I knew we would be in Eternity
together!

A month before, a brother had asked me what I thought the chances of my
husband converting were. I told him, Zero. I said, I cant imagine
someone so dramatically changing their beliefs after having believed
something else for 70 years. But 14 days before his 71st birthday he
embraced Islam as his religion and his way of life. In the Muslim
community we have found another family. We have found

 friendship, love and acceptance that was taught in the Christian
religions we practiced at different points in my life, but that we felt
never actually existed among most of the members of the churches we went
to.

Many of the Muslims in our area are immigrants, but we have found no
intolerance of Americans whether they are Muslim or not. We were both
welcomed into the family of Islam the very first time each of us went to
the mosque. Weve always felt welcome and accepted.

Since embracing Islam We have found direction and purpose for our lives.
We have found the meaning for our existence. We have come to realize
that we really are here only for a short time and that what comes
afterwards is far better then the fleeting pleasures that this world has
to offer us.

I have found a sense of security concerning life after death that I had
never known before. We have both come to see the problems that we once
saw as being major as actually being opportunities to grow. We thank God
for what we do have, as well for what we dont. Today we are Muslim. We
still care about 9/11. I still cry when I think a little too much about
the events of that day. My husband still remembers the people jumping
from the buildings. We wish all we could say about that day was where we
had been when we heard that the WTC had been attacked. But we did see it
happen, and it was the most devastating thing to ever happen in our
lives. But from tragedy came victory. From death has come the knowledge
that we will have life after our death. And it will be spent together.

**Holy Quran 3:138  
 *This is a clear statement for men, and guidance and an admonition to
those who guard against evil.***
