Sister Jan Jackson
==================

**This is the story of my conversion to Islam.**

Before I begin, let me say that I dont believe my story is particularly
special, in that there are many stories like it. However, as I believe
that God wrought a miracle in my life (as He has in many others) then of
course it IS special.

I guess there are two ways to tell my story. You could say: I met a man
who introduced me to Islam. I converted, and we married. But that is a
gross simplification.

You could also say it this way

I am a 48 year old Australian. I was raised a Catholic and am still
grateful for the religious upbringing my parents gave me. They were
practising Catholics who imparted their faith to me and I attended a
Catholic school. From this education I did gain a version of God and a
kind of spiritual sense, but these were both so vague and inaccessible
as to never touch my heart. The doctrine of Christianity never really
sat comfortably with me. It was like a coat that doesnt fit. I wore it
but it never felt right and by the time I was about 20, I was happier
taking the coat off. Sadly, I didnt wear a coat at all for the next 25
years.

During that time I lived a comfortable, privileged life, in the western
lifestyle sense financially secure, educated and trained, healthy, with
no major crises in my life. I married. I worked. I travelled. I indulged
myself. Food, wine,

entertainment, weekends away, fancy hotels, overseas trips. Eat, drink
and be merry. Having no children, I had no real responsibilities. I
sought mainly to entertain myself, and have a good time.

From where I am standing now, that period just seems like a life without
purpose, and its truly painful for me to look back and see 25 years of a
Godless life.

Then, about five years ago, God gave me the opportunity to reassess my
life, ***alhamdulillah***. My personal circumstances changed
drastically. My beloved father died tragically, my marriage broke up
painfully, my income was significantly reduced and I was living alone. I
was forced to take stock, reflect and reassess my life. And I found
myself in a thoroughly meaningless void.

Around this time I began to read all kinds of material on all kinds of
religions. I tried to revive my Catholicism, but it was useless. It did
not feel real or sincere. I felt no sense of connection.

At this time I met, and had a very important conversation with, a Muslim
brother, my neighbour who later became my husband. At this time I knew
absolutely nothing about Islam. All my reading (on Christianity,
Judaism, Buddhism, Sikhism, etc) seemed to have taken me down every path
EXCEPT Islam. So when I asked him about HIS religion he said: It is a
beautiful religion, a simple religion, part of life. His quiet,
composed, assured conviction struck me. Here was someone who was so
quietly certain about his religion that it needed nothing more than
these simple few words to provide an answer, an answer that seemed whole
and complete. And here was someone who described his religion as
beautiful. I had never encountered this before. Religion had always been
a duty, or an institution,

something to be learned or endured, something burdensome and complicated
and problematic not something beautiful. It struck my heart in a way I
do not really understand. But I have to say that it was one of those
defining moments of ones life something irreversible happened.

So then it began. I decided to try and learn about Islam. I asked
around, tentatively at first I bought books and read, I browsed
websites, and I started to scan my environment for anything Islamic not
difficult living in Brunswick, Melbourne. I went to an information day
at Preston mosque. I obtained a copy of the Quran from a book sale at
the Islamic Council of Victoria. The more I read the Quran the more I
became convinced of the truth of the Quranic revelations. I read books
on the life of the Prophet (Peace be upon him) and became convinced that
he was the last in a line of prophets before him, and a true messenger
of Allah. I tried fasting in Ramadan and saw it as a real test of
whether or not I meant business. But the experience strengthened my
intent. I discovered for myself the benefits, and I felt one with the
brotherhood and sisterhood of all fasting Muslims around the world.

But the most powerful experience for me at this time was discovering the
act of prayer. I bought a book which taught me how to pray.. and I have
to say that from the moment I first bowed in prayer in the Muslim way, I
felt connected to my Creator, for the first time in my life, and I wept
with joy.

Ive heard many new Muslims say what Im about to say but it was so true
for me. From the time I opened my mind to the possibility of becoming a
Muslim, I kept encountering things that spurred me on. And it was as if
they were put there especially for me. And one thing would lead to
another. A newspaper article might lead to a website. A chance encounter

to a bookshop. A book to another book. A website to a conversation. This
information gathering was such an important time. Because when I look
back it was critical what I read and who I spoke to. I did not rely on
my future husband to provide information. Quite the opposite. I was
determined to separate my pursuit of Islam from him. I needed to be
clear about my intentions - that I wasnt pursuing Islam to please him or
gain his approval. So I sought out other Muslims. One day I went to
Friday prayer at Preston mosque. I was terrified. It took every bit of
effort to get myself in that door. And there I met two sisters who were
like angels planted there for me, who took me under their wings. I owe a
great deal to them, and to every other Muslim I have met in the few
years because all of them have inspired and supported me in the warmest
and gentlest and most generous of ways.

I said my *shahada* in Ramadan in December 1999, just before the new
millennium ticked over.

Around this time I was introduced to the Revert Support Group, operating
in Melbourne, which has been a great help and support to me, as a source
of information and a sharing of knowledge and experience, and a way of
meeting other new Muslims.

Increasingly I learned the value of prayer. I learned that to worship
God regularly strengthens ones commitment and sense of connection. It
helps to set up an ongoing dialogue with God, a consciousness of God
that starts to become more frequent, more natural, a remembering or
mindfulness of God throughout your day. Prayer acts as a reminder that
you are a part of Gods creation, and only a tiny part at that. You are
reminded of your place in time and the universe. You cannot pray without
feeling humility. It is impossible. I also learned that the frequency of

prayer forces you to monitor your actions more closely, makes you more
vigilant of your behaviour, and helps you to keep the concerns and
preoccupations of everyday routine in perspective.

So why Islam over Christianity? (as my Christian friends ask)

Throughout my Christian upbringing, despite the emphasis on Jesus
Christ, I never really conceptualised him as God. I thought of him as an
historical figure only, not a divine being. And I had great difficulty
with the concept of the Holy Trinity. This concept for me obscured the
path to God. On the other hand the concept of Tawheed in Islam, the
oneness of God, is a concept that I can fully embrace.

For me Islam is a beautiful religion because it is simple and clear, and
woven into the fabric of everyday life. For me, it is not bogged down in
the doctrines and dogmas of other religious traditions. I was so
impressed by the fact that to actually become a Muslim you need only
believe it in your heart and make the declaration of faith no
instructions, no indoctrinations, no sacraments, no initiations, no
tests.

Islam is full of ritual as we know but I love the fact that the ritual
is incorporated into simple acts of everyday life in eating, washing,
speaking, praying (not high pomp and ceremony ritual). When I first
started mixing with Muslims I loved to keep hearing the word Allah on
everyones lips, and with no self-consciousness. You can go weeks,
months, even years in a Christian community and never hear the word God
mentioned! Heres a story that illustrates that. Around the time I first
started to explore Islam I went with my mother to a Catholic function.
It was an informal forum with speakers and discussion, entitled God in
our society. I listened for three hours and not once was the word God
actually spoken! except when a nun got up at the conclusion of the night
to say thank

you to our speakers and thanks be to God. This was the only time I heard
the word and the evening was over. As everyone clapped, I wanted to
shout Wait. Arent you missing something here?!

Another aspect of Islam that draws me to it is that Islam is a bigger
ask, more demanding. By that I dont just mean that it is more demanding
in its discipline and its ritual, in its prayer and fasting and dietary
requirements (abstinence from alcohol, etc). Rather I mean it is larger
and more demanding in its focus, its vision, its scope.

Personally speaking, I find the Christian message of love one another to
be something of a given. It goes without saying that we should love one
another. Whilst I would not wish to offend any Christian readers, or
make a generalisation, but in my own experience I have found the
Christian way of life today (increasingly) to be simply a kind of
humanitarianism which allows the person to customize or tailorize their
religion to suit themselves love one another, dont hurt anyone and do
your own thing and it seems to concentrate on this life, narrow its
focus to this earth and this existence. For me the Islamic message has
quite a different emphasis, and is something way beyond this it is
attention to God love your fellow man, of course, live as well as you
can, of course but use every bit of your limited capability to try and
understand, comprehend, love and know and serve God. Islam demands that
we focus on more than this life, and beyond this life.

I found this bigger ask in the Quran as well. For me the beauty of the
Quran is the scope that it encompasses. It insists that we try and
contemplate time and beyond, the universe and beyond, creation and
beyond. It asks us to reflect on creation, the prophetic revelations,
destiny, the beginning of life, the end

of life and the day of judgement. In so doing, we try to grasp the
hugeness of everything beyond ourselves, the magnificence of God.

I feel so happy and so blessed to have had my life transformed. In
committing to the Islamic way I have found meaning and significance in
everyday life, and a consequent peace that follows from this. And I feel
I have experienced the miracle of seeing myself as part of creation and
time and Gods plan, and the consequent joy that follows from this. I
thank God. ***Alhamdulillah***. And I praise Allah Subhanallah.

 <span style="font-weight: 700">Holy Quran 56:95*  
 Most surely this is a certain truth.*</span>
