Sister Hayam
============

I was Christian orthodox just 4 years. I became Christian not because I
believed in Jesus but because everybody was Christian around me. After I
had gone to Italy where most of the people are Christian catholic I had
big problem there and gone to die. When I was near death I prayed to
Allah (swt) one month to safe my life and promised Allah (swt) that if
he safe my life I will spend the rest of my life just for him. To
worship him, to accept his will always and follow his way, to help
people, and live just for him. That I wont have my own desires and wants
and my desires and wants will be his will. I never prayed to Jesus when
I was Christian. I prayed to God. After that Allah (swt) saved my life
and little by little I became better Alhamdolillah. I began to search
for the truth in religion, and I didnt find that truth in Christianity
orthodox. After I studied Christianity catholic and didnt find the truth
here also. After that I thought I will be always alone and will follow
my own way different than the others. I searched for the truth and rules
of Allah (swt) in my own life. I analysed every situation and tried to
get knowledge. Tried to feel what Allah (swt) wants from me and tried to
follow his will. This period Allah (swt) gave me many tests and
difficult situations, which I passed just because I listened to Allah
(swt). I dont know if u will understand what I mean by listen. Its not
voice but its feeling. It comes like knowledge without words and makes
me understand what I have to do and where to go. It is this feeling that
makes me understand the truth from lie and if I am right or wrong, also
I looked for signs in my life to show if my feeling is right or wrong.

And ***alhamdolillah*** there were many signs that showed me my feeling
is right and after that I saw I was really right. I found most of the
rules in Islam by just analysing my life and listening to Allah (swt)
and looking for his signs. First I found if something is wrong and after
I found why its wrong. I mean first was feeling and after was the
explanation. After that by chance I met Muslim man online who wanted to
marry me. I tried to go to him but everything happened to stop me, so I
was sure he is not the right man for me. (By the way it was funny that
all men wanted to marry me and tried to come to me always had something
to stop them till I found my husband. He was the only one met me and I
was sure he is the right man for me alhamdolilllah). But this made me
interested from Muslims and Islam, I began to talk to many Muslims. One
night I gone to die again, this time the phone rang and it was my close
friend from Saudia. I havent power to talk and when he felt I feel very
bad he told me to listen to him, I havent choice anyway I havent power
to talk, so he began recite something in Arabic, as he told me after it
was Quran. When he finished I felt so good and I asked him what were
that words who saved my life. He said it was Quran. I got strange
feeling when he recited, like yellow light came in my heart and made me
feel strong and calm. Its made me interested to read Quran, I found
Bulgarian translation of Quran (because I am Bulgarian by the way) and
began to read. I was more than shocked when I found the same rules I
already knew of God and much more I still didnt know. When I tested the
text with my heart if its truth I found this is 100% truth.

Before always when I read something I found there is truth but there are
much not true things too. I never read or heard before 100% truth. I
thought there is not book or religion which is 100% true, but
***alhamdolillah*** I found Islam is that religion and Quran is that
book. So I decided to convert.

Began reading online sites about Islam and found many good brothers and
sisters helped me so much ***alhamdolillah***. After I met my husband
who is Muslim too. It was the last sign from Allah (swt) showed me I
have to convert. So 3 days before I married I gone with my husband to
convert in Cairo. When I walked to the place to convert I felt like my
power finished, like I will fall down and prayed in my mind to Allah
(swt) if he wants me to be Muslim to give me power to go to convert.
After I gone there and said ***shahada*** in front of the Sheikh, my
husband and his brother, I saw something dark gone from me, was like
black clothes, it wasnt material but I could see like black smoke gone
out from me. After that I felt like light is coming out of me, it was
incredible. For just one minute I changed so much ***alhamdolillah***.
My husband told me that Allah (swt) forgave all my sins and I am clean
like baby, when he said that I understood that the smoke I saw gone out
from me were my sins.(I didnt know I have so much sins) So then I began
to live like Muslim and learn as much as I can about Islam.

My life became better ***alhamdolillah***.

**Holy Quran 61:9*****  
 He it is Who sent His Apostle with the guidance and the true religion,
that He may make it overcome the religions, all of them, though the
polytheists may be averse.***
