Yusuf Abdullah [joseph Zammit]
==============================

Since childhood I was gifted with the sincere love for God and I was
very sensitive to spiritual/religious things. I used to re-tell the
stories about the saints to my mother while she was doing the housework.
I spent my time reading the life stories of saints and the prophets in
the Old Testament, as well I was highly fascinated with Jesus (Peace be
on him). In my late teens, about 17 years old, this childhood
fascination took a drastic turn when a priest gave me a copy of the
Plain Truth magazine. Immediately curious, I embarked on a
correspondence course in Bible study.

Slowly but surely I was becoming aware of something beautiful in the
Bible which was missing.

I could not accept the teachings of the church anymore as they did not
inspire me at all. I couldnt understand how and why our society is so
anti-Christian in its values. Religion was for inside the church only!
On the other hand, I wanted to seek the inner, true teachings of the
prophets and of Jesus (Peace on them all) in particular. I started using
the Psalms as my daily prayers and for the first time I got satisfaction
and power from prayers so much that tears would flow down my cheeks.

As my thirst and hunger increased, I started studying various mystical
paths, as well as psychology. I started reading Tibetan Buddhism, as
well as the Sufis who made a very good impression on me, but I brushed
them aside as being Muslims. I studied the Hindu mystics, the
Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita,

then on to the Theosophists, Buddhism, Zen and Tao yoga. During these
years I used to correspond with initiates in these religions in the UK.

Simultaneously, I started studying Gnosticism, and this reverted me back
to the Bible studies. I studied a lot of good books by Jewish scholars
as well as international Bible scholars about many contradictions in the
Bible. Next thing was that I contacted various Rosicrucian Orders and
being a member in a couple of them. The Rosicrucians claim to be gnostic
and freemasons and they promise the initiate to receive Cosmic Power
etc. I was still going back, every now and then, to Sufi philosophy and
mysticism and still was impressed and attracted by their simplicity and
inner love for Allah. The Sufis touched my heart as nothing else did. In
1986 I decided to cut off my name and membership in the Catholic Church.
I did this officially through the legal methods available. This was one
of the most challenging things I did, ***alhamdulillah***.

In 1989 I made contact with an Indian Master of high standing and was
initiated. This Path is purely mystical and within the folds of the Sikh
religion. At last, I said this is it. I was initiated into it for 11
whole years when I started to see similarities in the teachings to Sufi
teachings, which I kept interested in. This was very interesting and I
started investigating further the issue. I found out, to my amazement
and satisfaction, that the Path was influenced, way back in the
16<sup>th</sup> century, by Sufi teachings and mysticism. Interest again
flared up within me regarding the Sufis and so decided to go back to the
roots of it, therefore studying more deeply the Sufi Way, which more and
more was influencing me. The great obstacle was that real Sufis were
Muslimsor worked within the Islamic religion. I found many so called
International sufi orders which were neutral to religion but these I
wasnt attracted to. I kept on asking why do I have to be a Muslim in
order to be a sufi? To become a Muslim is

considered as a big treason in a Catholic country like Malta. At this
period in my life, I increased my prayers fervently and the yearning
within me exploded. To my amazement and bewilderment, I found myself
reading the Quran, the Holy scripture that is obviously so close to what
Jesus taught, as well as the Old testament Prophets, that I laughed at
myself for having missed it (or bypassed it) in my studies.

Reading the Holy Quran was the pivot in my life. I started exploring the
Pillars of Islam and by the help and mercy of Allah I gathered strength
enough to embrace Islam on Laylat-u-l-Qadr in year 2000. My studies of
Sufis became deeper and I made contact with a couple of Tariqas,
employing their daily wasifas and dhikr.

<span style="font-style: normal">AFTERTHOUGHT</span>
----------------------------------------------------

Here I must emphasise the real cause behind my whole life. Since
childhood I wanted God and God alone. Whatever Prophet, Guru, Master I
met with, it was only for the glory of God. God was and still is my aim,
my life, my breath. Since childhood, I always thought about death. Being
rich, having a nice family, being healthy, having a beautiful wife etc
etcso what? I have to die, then? Therefore, I was sincere and took life
seriously. I used to pray and pray and cry Oh Allah! If I succeed in
finding You just before I die, my whole life would have been a success!
Going through life, in all its materialistic attractions and deviations,
still my heart pointed towards God.

Having arrived at the stage where I was a candidate student in one of
the oldest Sufi Schools, I thought now this is really it. But Allah
knows best. This year [2002], one week before embarking for the Hajj,
casually I met a Muslim couple from UK at the local masjid. I had a very
good conversation with them and in the night they gave me some books to
read. I realised they were from the shia. I was so fascinated by one of
the books they gave

me that I made it a point to contact them at the Hotel next morning, but
alas! They had flown back home. I went to the Hajj fully convinced that
the shia are the true Muslims. So, I advise anyone to keep
himself/herself open and let God do the work. We must have yearning,
longing and be sincere in our prayers, then Allah does it all.

**Your brother in Islam**

**Holy Quran 2:97*  
 Say: Whoever is the enemy of Jibreel-- for surely he revealed it to
your heart by Allahs command, verifying that which is before it and
guidance and good news for the believers.***
