Abdul-lateef Abdullah (steven Krauss)
=====================================

My journey to Islam - How Malay martial arts led a theologically
dissatisfied American Protestant to Islam.

My experience in Islam began as a graduate student in New York City in
1998. Up to that point in my life, for 25 years, I had been a Protestant
Christian, but had not been practicing my religion for quite some time.
I was more interested in spirituality and looking for anything that
didnt have to do with organized religion. To me, Christianity was out of
touch and not relevant to the times. It was hard for me to find anything
in it that I could apply to my everyday life. This disillusion with
Christianity led me to shun everything that claimed to be organized
religion, due to my assumption that they were all pretty much the same,
or at least in terms of their lack of relevance and usefulness.

Much of my frustration with Christianity stemmed from its lack of
knowledge and guidance around the nature of God, and the individuals
relationship to Him. To me, the Christian philosophy depends on this
rather bizarre intermediary relationship that we are supposed to have
with Jesus, who on one hand was a man, but was also divine. For me, this
difficult and very vague relationship with our Creator left me searching
for something that could provide me with a better understanding of God,
and our relationship to Him. Why couldnt I just pray directly to God?
Why did I have to begin

and end every prayer with in the name of Jesus Christ? How can an
eternal, omnipotent Creator and Sustainer also take the form of a man?
Why would He need to? These were just a few of the questions that I
could not resolve and come to terms with. Thus, I was hungry for a more
straightforward and lucid approach to religion that could provide my
life with true guidance, not just dogma that was void of knowledge based
in reason.

While in graduate school I had a Jewish roommate who was a student of
the martial arts. While I was living with him he was studying an art
called silat, a traditional Malaysian martial art that is based on the
teachings of Islam. When my roommate would come home from his silat
classes he would tell me all about the uniqueness of silat and its rich
spiritual dimension. As I was quite interested in learning martial arts
at the time, I was intrigued by what I had heard, and decided to
accompany my roommate to class one Saturday morning. Although I did not
realize it at the time, my experience in Islam was beginning that
morning at my first silat class in New York City back on February 28th,
1998. There I met my teacher, Cikgu (which means teacher in Malay)
Sulaiman, the man who would first orient me to the religion of Islam.
Although I thought I was beginning a career as a martial artist, that
day back in 1998 actually represented my first step toward becoming
Muslim.

From the very beginning I was intrigued by silat and Islam and began
spending as much time as possible with my teacher. As my roommate and I
were equally passionate about silat, we would go to my teachers house
and soak up as much knowledge as we could from him. In fact, upon our
completing graduate school in the spring of 1998, upon his invitation,
we spent the entire summer living with him and his wife. As my learning
in silat increased, so did my learning about Islam, a religion that I
had hardly any knowledge of prior to my

experience in silat.

What made my orientation to Islam so powerful was that as I was learning
about it, I was also living it. Because I studied at the home of my
teacher, being in the presence of devout Muslims allowed me to be
constantly surrounded by the sounds, sights and practices of Islam. For
as Islam is an entire lifestyle, when you are in an Islamic environment,
you cannot separate it out from everyday life. Unlike Christianity,
which lends toward a separation between daily life and religion, Islam
requires its followers to integrate worship of Allah into everything we
do. Thus, in living with my teacher, I was immersed in the Islamic deen
(lifestyle) and experiencing first-hand how it can shape ones entire way
of life.

In the beginning Islam was very different and powerful to me. It was
also very foreign in many ways and the amount of discipline it requires
was difficult to understand. At the time I was liberal in many ways, and
was used to shunning anything dogmatic or imposed, regardless of where
it came from! As time went on, however, and my understanding of Islam
grew, I began to slowly see that what seemed to be religious dogma was
really a lifestyle put forth to us by our Creator. This lifestyle, I
would later learn, is the straight path to true contentment, not just
the sensual and superficial way of life that my society and culture
promote. I realized that the question is quite simple actually. Who
could possibly know better what the best way of life is for human beings
than the all-wise Creator?

From that first silat class in New York City to the day I took my
shahadda, July 30, 1999, I had undergone a thorough self-examination
that was comprised of two major processes. One was to question the
culture of the society I was brought up in, and the second was to
question the role I wanted religion to play in my everyday life. As for
my culture, this one was not as difficult as most people would think.

American culture is highly influential on how we see life because it
constantly bombards us with sensual gratification aimed at appealing to
our worldly desires. In America happiness is defined by what we have and
consume, thus, the entire culture is geared toward the marketplace.
Unless we are removed from this type of environment it is difficult to
see its drawbacks, which are based on worshipping and putting faith in
everything but God, the only One that can provide us with real, lasting
contentment in our lives.

Being a social scientist by trade, much of my professional time is spent
trying to address the social ills of our society. As I learned more
about Islam, I came to the conclusion that many societal ills are based
on unhealthy social behaviour. Since Islam is a lifestyle focused
totally on the most healthy, positive way of conducting our lives in
every setting, then it is, and will always be, the only real answer to
any of societys social dilemmas. With this realization, not only did I
decide that Islam was relevant to my everyday life, but I began to
understand why it is so different from other religions. Only Islam
provides knowledge and guidance for every aspect of life. Only Islam
provides a way to achieve health and happiness in every dimension of
life physical, spiritual, mental, financial, etc. Only Islam provides us
with a clear life goal and purpose. And only Islam shows us the proper
way to live in and contribute to a community. Islam is what everyone
needs, and what so many who have not found it yet, are searching for. It
is the path to purpose, meaning, health and happiness. This is because
it is the straight path to the source of truth and real power Allah.

It was only until I actually became Muslim that I realized just how
encompassing the Islamic lifestyle is. Literally everything we do has
one underlying purpose to remember Allah. The lifestyle provides us with
the way not just the understanding but an actual method of constantly
remembering our Creator in

as simple an act as greeting someone, or getting dressed in the morning,
or waking up from sleep. Islam shows us that by remembering Allah,
everything we do becomes focused on Him, and thus becomes an act of
worship. From this, our energy, our thoughts, and our actions all become
redirected away from unhealthy and useless causes, and focused on the
source of all goodness. Thus, we are continuously tapping into His
divine strength, mercy and grace. So, by remembering Allah constantly,
we become stronger and healthier in every aspect of our lives and not
distracted by self-defeating thoughts and behaviours.

There still remain some minor aspects of Islam that have proven to be
somewhat difficult adjustments for me. Nevertheless, I thank Allah
everyday for the ease to which he has allowed me to make the necessary
changes in my life so that I can continue to live in America and still
be, ***Insha-Allah*,** a good Muslim. As a white, middle-class American,
many cultural aspects of Islam are quite different from the way in which
I grew up. In fact, when I finally broke the news to my family that I
had become Muslim, almost all of their questions and concerns were
related to cultural differences marriage, social life, family, etc. They
were much less concerned about my general beliefs about God and
religious practice. For my family, friends, and co-workers, becoming
Muslim was not seen necessarily as a negative change, but it has
required a great deal of education about Islam.

Because acquiring knowledge is a critical component to a Muslims
development, having a teacher who has taught me how to apply Islam in
everyday life has made all the difference in managing whatever
difficulties I have experienced from my reversion. Having someone
knowledgeable you can turn to whenever you have questions is a wonderful
support that every new shahada should go out of their way to find. Islam
is not a religion that can be rationalized, in the way that Christianity
and Judaism are. It is a clear path that must be followed just as

Allah has laid out for us through the Quran and the lives of our beloved
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), his companions, and the saints of Islam.

In this day and age, in this society, discerning the path can often be
difficult, especially when we are constantly faced with questions and
doubts from people who on the surface may not be hostile to Islam, but
whose general lack of faith can have a harmful effect on someone who
bases everything they do on their love for Allah. It is also not easy
being in an environment where we are constantly bombarded with sensual
temptations that are seen as ordinary, common aspects of everyday life.
But when we have the support of a knowledgeable, experienced teacher,
who is able to apply the universal teachings of Islam to his life, then
the truth becomes clear from error, exactly how Allah (SWT) describes in
the Quran. From this, we are able to understand how to apply Islam
correctly to our own lives, and ***Insha-Allah*** receive Allahs many
blessings. The ultimate test, however, of anyone who claims to have true
and right knowledge, is to look at how they apply it in their own lives.
If their actions support their teachings, then and only then should we
look to them for guidance.

My journey to Islam has been a life-altering experience. It is one that
with every passing day, makes me more and more appreciative and thankful
to Almighty Allah. The extent of His mercy can only fully be understood
from the perspective of a Muslim one who prostrates regularly and
submits their will to that of the Creator.

I look back at my life prior to Islam and reflect on the different ways
I sought guidance. I think back to all the different ideas I once had of
who God really is, and how we can become close to Him. I look back now
with a smile and perhaps even a tear because now I know the truth.
Through Islam, I know why so many people who do not believe have so much
fear inside them.

Life can be very scary without God. I know, because I once harboured
that same level of fear. Now, however, I have the ultimate self-help
program. Its the self-help program without the self. Its the path that
puts everything is in its proper place. Now, life makes sense. Now, life
is order. Now, I know why I am here, where I want to go, what I want my
life to be, how I want to live, and what is most important not just to
me, but to everyone. I only hope and pray that others who have not found
the path yet, can feel the same that I do. ***Ya arhama rahimeen wal
hamdulillahi rabbil aylameen***

**Holy Quran 3:96*  
 Most surely the first house appointed for men is the one at Bekka,
blessed and a guidance for the nations.***
