Sister Mardiyyah
================

I am a forty seven year old wife, mother of three and grandmother of
one. I was born & brought up as a Methodist Christian. As a child I was
Christened and sent to Sunday school, even becoming a Sunday school
teacher. Both at Sunday school & day school I always came top in
religious instruction exams. Even then though, I remember thinking that
I wished I could really believe and accept Christianity wholeheartedly,
but I always felt that something was wrong or something missing. Why if
there was only one God did we worship Jesus? How if God was not human
could he have a Son? Why did we refer to God as three- the Holy Trinity?
As far as I was concerned God was God, on his own Full Stop! My fathers
family were not practising Christians but my mothers were. My great
grandfather had even been responsible for the setting up of the
Methodist Chapel in his village. This was the same chapel I attended and
where my family were very well known and always treated with the utmost
respect.

After I met my future husband, who told me he was an atheist, I stopped
attending Chapel and teaching at the Sunday school. Over the next few
years my husband & I had three children and like a lot of people I
followed the traditions of my family and had them christened and sent
them to Sunday school. I may not have agreed wholeheartedly with
Christianity but I had nothing better to offer them. I attended
weddings, christenings & burials and some Easter & Christmas Services
and Chapel Anniversary

Services, always thinking that I really wanted to believe more than I
did and always feeling something was missing.

Having three children my life was always busy and I didnt really give
much thought to religion on a day to day basis but then about fifteen
years ago I became involved in local politics. Attending a party
political conference, one of my fellow delegates was a Doctor, a
Bangladeshi Muslim. We struck up a friendship and would talk, not just
about Politics but many other things including religion. I had for some
time admired things like Islamic buildings and art, I also liked the
clothing that Indian women (not necessarily Muslim wore Salwar Kameez,
particularly the printed fabrics and scarves). From the few things I had
learnt about Islam and Muslims from newspapers etc. I could see that my
colleague was a pretty poor Muslim. I found out that he only prayed once
a day, didnt fast, and hadnt been on Hajj, but this somehow got to me
and I started reading anything and everything I could find about Islam.

Over the next ten or twelve years I had periods when I would read
extensively and periods when I wouldnt give it a thought. I quickly
began to admire the ethics of Muslim families, the way children were
taught respect for their elders, the way they all spoke up for each
other. I also began to feel the need to speak up for them, it always
appeared they were the ones to be persecuted.

About three years ago I realised that I was spending more and more time
thinking about Islam and that without realising it I would steer
conversations with friends around to this subject. I also noted that I
was very slowly changing my own habits, dressing more discreetly, not
drinking, praying (not as a Muslim), something I had not done for a very
long time. I then

found myself saying this is ridiculous I am not a Muslim I am a
Christian and I would go out of my way to convince myself of this. I
changed my job and went to work in London for the first time and made
sure that I always went out with colleagues to bars and restaurants
after work, I bought more showy clothes, I am sorry to say that I
neglected my family duties, I was too tired to do housework and cooking.
My husband & sons (my daughter had by now gone to University and set up
home on her own) had to fend for themselves. My Muslim friend asked why
I was doing this to my family and I told him about my feelings for
Islam, I guess he wasnt all bad as his response was to buy me an English
translation of the Quran. I was hooked!

January 2001 I made one last attempt to convince myself that I was not a
Muslim, I changed my job again. This time to work for a West End theatre
producer, even more partying. But it didnt work and I quickly realised
that I was making myself physically sick. I developed several different
illnesses all with symptoms brought about (according to my doctor) by
stress. I was taking several types of medication. One day at the
beginning of September 2001 I was reading the Quran when without
realising what I was doing I said the ***Shahadah*** to myself and felt
the most wonderful sense of completeness and a serenity I had never felt
before. I made the decision there and then that I would find somewhere
to really learn how to become a Muslim and to say ***Shahadah*** again,
but this time in front of witnesses. My only worry was how I would find
the courage and words to tell my family of my decision. I had been
married for twenty-eight years by now but still didnt really know what
my husbands beliefs were or how any of my family would react.

Imagine my horror therefore and I am sorry to say the anger I felt when
I came back from lunch on 11<sup>th</sup> September to be confronted
with pictures on the Internet of the planes flying into

the world trade centre. Over the next few days and weeks I would hear
people say that all Muslims were alike and that they should all be
thrown out of the country etc, etc. I found myself defending them saying
not all Muslims were terrorists any more than all Roman Catholics
supported the IRA and were we going to throw out all Irish people. I
soon realised however that now was not the time to break my news. I
decided to keep it to myself. Ramadam came and I remembered that I had
just a couple of months earlier imagined I would be fasting. I spent
Christmas with my family as I have always done, this year cooking for
twenty people. I travelled to Scotland two days before New Year only to
spend new years eve travelling back to England, as I was unwell. We
arrived home with fifteen minutes to spare before midnight and I made a
resolution that I would give up my job in London and work part time
locally so that I would have time to learn Arabic and really make the
effort to become a good Muslim.

I decided to write to two local Mosques. I desperately wanted to learn
how to pray as a Muslim but knew that I couldnt just walk into a Mosque.
I was terrified I would do something wrong and really offend someone or
that they would be really un-welcoming. I got no response from either of
my letters. One day however I found a book with a rough outline of a
prayer in I think the book was meant for school children- but anyhow I
followed the instructions and prayed. I knew then I had made the right
decision. I also knew I had to find the courage to tell my family, but
how? It was at this time that I sent two emails which were to be the
most important of my life. One was to a site for new converts and one
was to an Islamic Centre in a nearby town. To my amazement they were
both answered. Within two weeks of this I was to meet two amazing groups
of people who welcomed me into their midst. Within a month I had

said ***Shahadah*** in front of witnesses as I had hoped for.

I was now a Muslim and somehow I had to find a way of telling my family.
I now had a son in law and a grandson as well as my own children. A
Jewish son in law in fact albeit non-practising. One evening when I was
reading the Quran, before I had had a chance to tell my husband he asked
when I was going to change my faith. He was very shocked to begin with
but we talked and I told him how happy I felt and that I hoped he would
try to understand and to find out why I had come to this decision. I
think he has coped amazingly well especially as I had felt a need to
wear Hijab almost immediately, probably because it has taken me so many
years to get this far.

My children seem to have accepted the changes I have made, although like
their father they find the wearing of Hijab rather strange but they are
persevering and have actually commented on how much happier and relaxed
I seem.

My son in law has actually been the one who has so far shown the most
interest, asking questions about various aspects, and although he has
reservations about explaining to my grandson why I wear a scarf and his
own mother doesnt, he is trying hard to be accepting. Unfortunately it
has been my daughter who is most against it. Unfortunately some years
ago she had a relationship of her own with a Muslim guy who didnt treat
her very well and I feel this has coloured her judgement.

As for my husband we have now talked and I have found that his own
beliefs are not that dissimilar to my own, but he just believes that
religion should be private and that in this modern age we should keep
our beliefs to ourselves and not go out of our way to make our beliefs
obvious to others i.e. wearing Hijab.

Slowly our lives are changing, there are those who say I should

move quicker and cant do this or that any more, but I know my family and
if I want them to accept Islam for themselves I know I have to be
patient.

**Holy Quran 42:23*****  
 That is of which Allah gives the good news to His servants, (to) those
who believe and do good deeds. Say: I do not ask of you any reward for
it but love for my near relatives; and whoever earns good, We give him
more of good therein; surely Allah is Forgiving, Grateful.***
