Khayreyah Bint Tom Sawyer
=========================

Peace and Blessings

Whoever works righteousness, man or woman, and has Faith, verily, to him
will We give a new Life, a life that is good and pure and We will bestow
on such their reward according to the best of their actions. 16:97

As a young child I wasnt really into religion. I didnt believe that
Jesus could be God and be the son of God. It didnt make any sense to me.
So for just about all of my childhood I was non-religious. I believed
that there was a God deep down in my heart, I just hadnt found the Truth
yet. But when I was in 10th grade I took a class called Religion and
Human Culture. I still wasnt much in to religion but the culture part
caught my eye. Well, I took the class and my teacher said he didnt know
much about other religions (he was Christian) but he would try to get us
some basic info. We had a book filled with info from other religions,
Islam was one of those religions. I found all of the religions
interesting but Islam really stuck in my mind. I ended up not passing
the class due to too many absences. So, I retook the class in 11th
grade. It was a little different because a different teacher taught it
but I still loved it. Islam went even deeper into my heart even though I
really didnt know that at the time. I started going to the school
library reading about Islam. But when I got into 12th grade for some
reason I stopped researching. Maybe it was the excitement of it being my
last year, who knows? But Islam was still there in my heart. After

high school was out, that summer I met my husband. We met at a wedding
reception that neither of us had planned on going to. I had twisted my
ankle that day and he had just got back from New York. But we both went
anyway. I saw him and thought he was fine :o) We kept looking at each
other off and on. He came over to ask my friend to dance, she declined.
He asked me and I declined too... I thought he was interested in my
friend. Anyways, he did come back over again and ask me to dance, I
accepted. After we danced we sat down and started talking. He asked me
what religion I was, I said I didnt have one but I was interested in
Islam and had been studying. He said he was doing the same! From that
day on we have been together, over 9 years! I was 18 when we met.
Anyways. We ended up moving to Michigan because he got transferred there
from his job. It was there in Michigan that we got married and took
*shahada* together, both in the same day. It was overwhelming for me. I
knew Islam was right but I wasnt really ready to accept it yet. I was
happy to be married and to be a Muslim, I just wasnt quite ready to be a
Muslim. I took my *shahada* more for my husband than for myself. I made
mistakes, we all do. I just didnt feel right being a Muslim and having
these mistakes hanging over my head. So, finally on August 17th 2001 I
decided that I had to retake my *shahada*, I had to be a Muslim, this
time in my heart, mind and soul. So on August 19th, 2001 I retook
*shahada* and let me tell you! The feelings wow! When Magda (the
beautiful Sister who took me through *shahada*) said, Ok, youre a Muslim
now, I cried! I had never felt so deeply about Islam until then. I had
embraced Islam totally and completely and I had never felt so good in my
life until that day. That day my whole world changed and I thank Allah
so much for giving me the chance to come back to Islam! Through it all
He has guided me more than I will ever know. He has given me amazing
gifts, my children and step daughter. He has given me a wonderful
husband, a wonderful family of Brothers and Sisters mashaallah. I will

never be able to thank Him enough for all that He has given to me... I
would like to end this with a poem...

Dearest Allah,

I wish to thank You for the life You have given me,

Dearest Allah,

I wish to thank You for giving me the opportunity to see,

Dearest Allah,

I wish to thank You for the family that Youve given me,

Dearest Allah,

I wish to thank You for setting me free,

Dearest Allah,

I wish to thank You for blessing me with Your presence,

Dearest Allah,

I wish to thank You for helping me to see Your very essence,

Dearest Allah,

I wish to thank You for showing me the Way,

Dearest Allah,

I wish to thank You for all of my days,

Dearest Allah,

I wish to thank You for Your guidance and love,

Dearest Allah,

I wish to meet You and be with You in the Heavens above.

**Holy Quran 7:52*****  
 nd certainly We have brought them a Book which We have made clear with
knowledge, a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe.***
