Faizah Jauharah
===============

My journey to Islam, or as I call it my adulthood 17 year journey
through the wilderness of darkness - really began in childhood.

For as long as I can remember, Ive had a great thirst for knowledge, and
knowing about other religions was no exception. I grew up the only
daughter of divorced parents - a Christian mother and, as I later
learned, a Muslim father. As I got a little older I began to feel some
dissatisfaction with our denomination of choice, but as a dutiful child
I did as my mother told me.

The teachings of that denomination and finally Christianity itself just
didnt seem logical; and the more I read the more convinced I became that
something wasnt right. I tried asking questions of my family and of the
pastors, but instead of getting answers I was dismissed as just a mere
child. Somehow, the phrase And the little child shall lead them or
Suffer the little children to come unto me just didnt apply to me. Yet I
just had to know. I mean I was smart, so how anyone could say that Jesus
died on a Friday and rose on the third day and then tell me that the
third day was a Sunday, mathematically was impossible. Or even something
as simple as God created the heavens and the earth and all that was upon
it is six days and rested on the seventh, yet we went to church on
Sunday - the day the calendar says is the first day. In my mind, these
were simple questions and all I wanted were simple answers. I admit some
of my questions were a bit more complicated. For example, how come

some denominations allowed women to be spiritual leaders, but not the
Catholic Church?

As I grew into a teenager, my questions became much deeper. I couldnt
understand, for example, how the preacher could say that we should not
be concerned with material things but rely upon God to provide; yet he
was always dressed in the best clothing, drove a fancy car and lived in
a great house, often at church expense, while many in the congregation
didnt have much. Then lets not even talk about tithing - Im supposed to
give 10% of my gross income, something I never actually see (okay so I
didnt have a job at the time, but still it was the principle) to God,
but I was taught that God had no need of money.

Although my father wasnt around much as I was growing up, in retrospect
I realize that his influence was ever-present. I was raised in a way
that was very Islamically based. I had to dress in a lady-like fashion,
I couldnt hang out with boys or in the streets with my friends and I
needed to account for my whereabouts at all times. I would get into lots
of trouble if a boy who lived near me walked with me home from school.
This was problematic when I was the manager of the boys track team in
high school because several of the boys lived near my house and the
coach insisted that they make sure I arrived home safely, otherwise they
would be in trouble with him. We came up with a creative solution, but I
didnt like the idea of being sneaky and neither did they. After all, we
werent doing anything wrong, just walking home after practice; but we
did what we could to make sure that my family and our coach were happy.

Also during this time, my mother advised me or should I say ordered me,
not to get involved with a Muslim man - ever. Her reason was that Muslim
men oppress women. Women werent allowed to work, were forced to live in
poverty, had to completely cover up themselves, couldnt do anything
without

her husbands permission and the biggy - might have to share her husband
with several wives.

She often recounted the numerous times when before their divorce, how my
father would give all his money to the mosque even if it meant I went
without shoes. What she didnt tell me was that he was not following pure
Islam at the time, but was following the teachings of Elijah Muhammad
and Malcolm X of the Nation of Islam, which was very popular especially
during the 1960s.

As a dutiful child I stayed away from obtaining any knowledge about
Islam, because I trusted my mommy and knew she wouldnt tell me anything
false.

Finally, the time came for me to go away to college. It was during this
time that my adulthood journey through the wilderness of darkness began.
I tried to be like my peers and wear short, fashionable skirts and go to
parties and the like. I wasnt accepted with this crowd. I was told I was
too serious - I was too focused on getting an education. Yet despite
this, I got in trouble and mommy made the decision to get me out of it.
That made me lose it as is often said. I started to fight and disobey my
mother. I even met a Muslim man on campus. He was nothing like my mother
said. He treated me like a queen and never made me feel unintelligent or
childlike despite the difference in our ages. I felt that I could trust
him and he wanted to marry me and take care of me. Unfortunately we got
into a fight; one caused because I simply lacked knowledge of Islam and
therefore didnt understand certain terminology. I was too ashamed of how
I reacted to apologize to him, so instead I found myself agreeing with
my mothers assessment of Muslim men and so I left college, and began my
journey.

I thought my life would be better, but the only blessings I received
were my children - and even with them Ive had to

struggle, mostly because I was a single mother. The father of my
daughters lived with me for many years but because he was so busy
building his empire as he called it, I was still a single mother doing
everything for my children and working and going back to college.
Finally, I found out what he was doing - he was involved in drugs and
was sleeping with other women, so we parted company.

I fell apart, but then, looking into my childrens faces, I knew I had to
pull myself together - if only for them. Even in the face of immediate
homelessness, I pressed on. I turned to the church for comfort, guidance
and assistance, as it was the only place I knew. I was blessed to be
able to buy a home and give a future to my daughters. All was going
along fine, but then I felt that I needed someone to ease my burden. So
I met someone and got married. We had a son and things should have been
wonderful, but they werent. The father of my daughters took me to court
and lied not only on me, but also on our oldest daughter and stole my
youngest with the courts permission in 1999. Im still trying to get her
home - she is in danger with him and his new wife - the woman he was
sleeping around with. My marriage fell apart, because my husband
insisted that he heard the voice of god and was told that I was
disobedient so he didnt have to take care of us, even to the point of
denying us groceries. I know now I was in an abusive marriage, yet all
of my intelligence didnt show me that at the time. Allah, tried to show
me, but I ignored Him, but Allah did not leave me even then. I was so
blessed but didnt even know it.

All throughout this time, I was still struggling to find a church where
I fit in. I couldnt. The unanswered questions and the treatment of women
in several denominations was just too real to be dismissed; so I stopped
going but continued as best I could to keep my faith strong. So to hear
my husband say that God told him that it was okay to mistreat me and the
children just

made me angry and more confused, because it felt like I was being
punished for doubting what the church leaders told me. He finally left
and I thought God had left me too.

Then one day in June 2001, I met a wonderful Muslim man. I thought he
was decreed to be my new husband. He was not - but rather he was the
catalyst that led me to finally opening my heart to the life I should
have been leading all along - Islam. So I read everything I could find,
trying to understand just what the status of women was and what was a
mans responsibility to a woman. Not only was I surprised to find that my
mother was incorrect but I was also pleased to find answers to the
questions I had asked for so long. My life had new meaning and purpose.
I immediately and without hesitation made ***shahada*** and felt a great
weight lifted from me. My journey through the wilderness of darkness -
the darkness of misinformation, wrong guidance and ignorance was over.

Knowing how my mother felt about Muslim men, I was afraid to tell her;
then I realized that perhaps her feelings were deeply personal and as a
loving mother she wanted to shield me from similar hurts through the
benefit of her experience. I loved my mother even more at that moment of
realization - but I was still afraid to tell her. Finally, after much
prayer I picked up the phone and in a round about way, told her how my
life had changed. I explained that for so long I had felt uncertain
about Christianity and what was said, taught and written; the
half-truths and untruths and the changes that had been made over the
years to suit mans needs. I further explained to her that I had found
what I was seeking - peace and unaltered truth -- in Islam. I expected
her to start a lecture on why I shouldnt get involved in an Islamic
lifestyle and certainly not Muslim men; instead, she quietly and calmly
confirmed what I had identified as the real issue - my fathers treatment
of her in his days of wrong guidance. Mothers never cease to amaze; just
when you

think you have them figured out, they go and do something like this. I
lost my dear Mother recently, so this is now one of her last and
precious gifts to me -- the gift of understanding. I had some precious
last moments with her and although she was very tired, I believe that
she repeated ***shahada*** while I held her hand and recited it. I love
my Mother and miss her already.

During our talk, I reminded my mother of how tired and discouraged I had
become with working and how I would be perfectly content to stay at
home, even though she had always taught me to be independent and have my
own money. Once again, my mother surprised me. She said that she knew
thats how I felt and that she respects me for it and knows that I would
indeed be happy as long as I could fill my days with what is important
to me. The more I read, the more I understand that the role of single
mother is not what Allah describes in the Quran. I long for the life
that I know I can have by pleasing Allah and doing as he says in the
perfect guidebook for life. I know that when Allah decrees it, it shall
be.

I have much yet to do to break out of ways that have become commonplace
for me because of circumstances, so while my journey through the
wilderness of darkness is over, my journey along the right and straight
path and finally to Jennah continues. This is a journey that I can make
and know that I will not be alone - although we all make the journey by
ourselves to please Allah.

All I can say is All praise to Allah. I was never alone even as I
wandered through that wilderness of darkness.

**Holy Quran 16:64*****  
 And We have not revealed to you the Book except that you may make clear
to them that about which they differ, and (as) a guidance and a mercy
for a people who believe.***
