James Jihad Farrell
===================

I do not intend to bore you with preaching or beg for sympathy with this
story. My intention is simple: To inform Muslims as well as non-Muslims
that there is a greater realm of Islam other than that what you witness
by some misguided Muslims and what you see from the television. I also
do not intend to ruin the reputation of anyone mentioned in this story.

It seems like yesterday when I was a little boy growing up in the inner
city of Chicago. Mom and Dad would both work full-time jobs trying to
support a family of ten. Things just didnt work out the way they
planned. Dad began drinking heavily and soon took up a habit of gambling
and abuse. Whenever dad was around he was either drunk or on his way to
jail; dad would frequent the Chicago jails many times a month. In my
opinion my father had been arrested about 200-300 times in his lifetime.
Whenever mom and dad were together in the same house there would always
be a fight and one of the two would need medical attention. There were a
few incidents that I recall when dad pushed mom and mom split dads head
open with a hammerand yet another incident when mom slammed an iron in
dads facethen another time she broke a beer bottle over dads head. Maybe
he deserved it; I do not know. When the fighting between mom and dad
would end, the children got the end results. My brother and I have been
whipped with hangers, wires, poles, glass, pots and pans, sticks,
bottles, cables. Whatever they could get their hands on we were hit with
it. One time my mother had caught my brother and I playing with

matches. I told the truth and she only slapped me, my brother lied and
had his hand stuck in an open flame on the stove until his skin boiled.
The level of stress in our household was so extreme my mother had
suffered from two maybe three miscarriages; one of the miscarriages she
had reached passed six months of her pregnancy when the fetus exploded
in her stomach dad was in jail. My parents had gone through a lot. There
were times when there was practically nothing to eat. Many nights mom
would only have eggs and bread to prepare for dinner. I remember she
would prepare our dinner and whatever we didnt eat that was her meal, if
we ate our entire share she would go to bed hungry. This happened for
many years. Before I reached the age of 10 I began feeling the need to
commit suicide. With everything happening around me I felt as if there
was no reason to live at all.

Although my parents had sent us to weekly Catholic school and frequent
the Church, my heart didnt feel alive. I would simply feel the need to
go in order to get away from what went on at home. In school I wasnt the
brightest child. As a 6<sup>th</sup> grader I had a reading level of a
1<sup>st</sup> grader. Every year throughout elementary school I was
ordered to take summer school in order to pass to the next grade. I had
failed the 2<sup>nd</sup> grade and hardly made through the remaining
next 6. It was in the elementary school when I learned how to steal. It
would become a constant habit. Whenever I had the chance I would steal
anything and everything I could get my hands on. Sooner than later my
brother had joined me. We went to Gas Stations and stole candy, then to
Department stores and stole toys. There was one time when mom gave us a
few dollars to buy dad a Fathers Day gift. My brother and I decided to
spend the money on popcorn and nachos and stole his giftEvidently we
were caught and were about to be arrested; Mom came to our rescue.

A few years later my brother had went in his direction and I

went my own way. I gave up on stealing and began writing music/poetry
and playing guitar. I eventually joined a band and would use the jam
sessions as a scapegoat to get away from my problems. In High School my
brother had befriended many drug addicts and soon he began doing drugs.
I am not saying he was a drug addict but he did drugs like the rest of
them.

When I was about 12 maybe 13 I began working as an electrician helper
with my uncle. I held that job until I was about 16, then I began
working on my own doing electrical, carpentry and painting contract
jobs. This helped me move out of my parents home and move into my first
apartment. Around this time I had met a girl who would become my fianc
within a matter of months. I was the extremely shy type. As matter of
fact she had asked me out on a date instead of the other way around.
Needless to say, we were together and wanted to get married. About a
year or 2 into our relationship she began practicing Islam. She was born
into a family where her father was Muslim and her mother was Catholic.
My fianc was jammed in the middle; simply confused. She began informing
me of the Muslim religion and I was completely turned off by the whole
idea. The more she spoke of it the more I pushed her away. There was a
period of time where I didnt want to have anything to do with her simply
because she was practicing a foreign thing. The reason of my hate toward
the Muslims is due to my upbringing, the actions of the majority of
Muslims and the news media. Every Arab/Muslim that I had ever met was no
different than me, if they were different they were worse. I knew
Muslims who did drugs, attempted murder, fornication, lesbians, etc.

At this period in time I was in a prime time of arrogance and didnt even
know it. I felt as if I was a living piece of God and nothing could
destroy me. I felt as though I were better than everyone else.
Nevertheless, I was a lonely person who needed someone by his side. My
fianc had given me a Quran as a gift

for my 18th birthday. As I received the gift I cringed and felt like
throwing it away. However, I simply stored it away in my closet not
feeling the need to disrespect her. A few years earlier I got the urge
to read. Once I began reading I couldnt stop. My father had once told
meWhen you were a younger we couldnt get a book in your hands for
anything in the world, now we cant get a book out of your hands. Now at
this point of my life I had read numerous books and I was feeling that
my philosophy of me being a part of God was a little shaky. While the
Quran was accumulating dust in my closet I had prayed to God that He
would send me a book or a sign with a key to all of the answers in the
world. May I remind you that I knew nothing what the Quran was and never
before have I even touched a Quran let alone hear about it.

One night, after I had cleaned the house, I stood in the kitchen looking
onward toward the living room. The house looked beautiful. The round
glass table to my right; the soft tender gray carpeting below my feet;
the smooth arch dividing the dining area from the living area; then
finally a comfortable dim light illuminated the setting. I suddenly had
an urge to pick up the Quran and read it. I sat in my favorite tan
colored recliner next to the end table. With the Quran in my hands I
began to read the introduction of Abdullah Yusuf Ali. Before I knew it
tears had flowed from my eyes. I wanted to beat myself senseless from
how stubborn I was not to read this earlier. I read the same thing I
believed all my life with a fine-tooth comb laying it all out straight.
My heart overfilled with satisfaction and pain at the same time.
Immediately I had called my fianc and apologized for being an imbecile.
We then agreed that our lives would indeed change and we would have to
either get married or separate for good.

I was starving to learn more about Islam. Now that I had read the entire
Quran I wanted to learn how to pray. I then began

reading books about prayer and basically taught myself how to pray. For
a person who felt that they were a piece of God and now bowing down to
God this was probably the hardest thing I could do. I was embarrassed
toward myself for praying to a thing that wasnt even there. I then found
books with English transliteration (followed along with the audio) and
taught myself how to recite Quran. It was at this point where I wanted
to go to the Mosque. I was given directions and hesitated many times. I
would drive up to the Mosque, circle around a few times and turn back
home. Then I started having dreams. May I point out that I had never
seen a Mosque before this, nor have I ever been inside one. I didnt even
know what a Mosque was. Needless to say, I began having dreams that
would twist my soul yet wake me with passion. I had a dream the night
after I circled the Mosque. My dream beganI was walking in a
well-lighted, flat levelled building. The carpet was soft and green and
there were pillars/columns throughout this structure. Inside this
building were friends from school and relatives that made my brief stay
welcoming. The next morning I woke and went to the Mosque. And just like
inside my dream I saw the very same setting; Green carpet,
pillars/columns and people that made me feel at home. Some time later I
had yet another dream of myself running through a field of grass. An
army was behind me chasing me and chanting Kill him, Kill him! I then
came to a safe ground and prayed to God that I would be safe. I was then
given 9 men to help me defeat this army of thousands. Each man was given
a stick for battle except me; I held a double-sided axe. As the opposing
army grew nearer I closed my eyes and swung. When my eyes opened the
opposing army was defeated. My army hadnt a single scratch on them. I
then appeared all alone in a Mosque contemplating on the victory. As I
sat on a bench at the backside of the Mosque with my head down I felt a
sudden presence. A hand touched my thigh. His perfect voice said
Victory. I replied, yes, with ten men. He commented by

adding, With God you were limitless. I then picked up my head and saw
the most beautiful man I could ever imagine. His skin was the most
perfect tone, his voice was gentle and soft but manly, and his presence
was clear and comforting. He was clean from head to toe. His teeth
shinned gleaming white and his beard covered his cheeks with style. ---
I would have many dreams like this one for about 2 years.

In the summer of 1998 I had went to a Mosque on the North side of
Chicago called the Muslim Community Center (M.C.C.) for a conference. At
the conference I had publicly declared that I was Muslim. The man who
had walked me through the testimony of faith was Jamal Badawi, whom I
had no idea who he was. I knew that I just put a huge responsibility on
my shoulders and my entire life would completely change.

By the spring of 1999 there was a Mosque being built from a tavern about
3-4 miles away from my home. The only problem, it was in a neighborhood
I didnt belong. The fact of the matter is I lived in an all white
neighborhood and the Mosque was in an all black neighborhood. The whites
and blacks are not allowed to walk through each others neighborhoods
unless its for drugs, prostitution, or briefly passing through by car. I
was the type that didnt care. I walked the 3-4 miles to help the Muslims
refurbish the Mosque. Throughout the whole summer of 1999 I walked back
and forth at least twice a week. During this period I was harassed, spit
at, rocks were thrown at me, children cursed at meone of the many times
I was harassed it was by the Police. I had just left the Mosque from the
Friday prayer and I didnt reach 2 blocks and an unmarked Police car
pulled up next to me, and 2 uniformed men began shouting at me. Turn
around and put your hands on the car, now! I slowly turned and placed my
hands on the car. As one officer stuck his hands in my mouth and
searched my entire body the other officer asked, What are doing in this
neighborhood boy? I

said, It is my Sabbath day. I came to pray. He replied, Youre not
suppose to be in this neighborhood. Now go back to your neighborhood and
I dont wanna see you back here. I then walked home and returned back the
following week. I continued to do this until the winter of 1999. This is
the winter that changed my family forever. Up until this point I hadnt
been completely open with my family about my conversion. I knew that
they would take it hard and probably beat me and throw me out so I felt
that taking it step by step would be the best ideait wasnt. One night my
father came home from work with snow all over his body and shoes. He
didnt bother brushing it off. He charged through the door like a madman
and darted after me yelling and threatening my life. I just sat on the
couch gripping the cushions hoping he wouldnt smash my head into the
wall. With his fist locked he brought it up to my face with extreme
torment. Something held him back from knocking my head off. I know if it
were a few years earlier Id be in the hospital. My father just doesnt
stop when he reaches his boiling point. After he yelled and said hed
kill me I was no longer welcome in his home, my mother felt the same. I
had nowhere to go. I began sleeping in my car and spending most of my
time in libraries. It was very hard for me to get around because that
winter Chicago had endured the worst blizzard since the 1970s. Many
nights I thought I was going to die due to the cold and hunger. I
finally went back to the original Mosque I had dreamed about and slept
there for one night; thats all they allowed. Soon after that a friend
had made a deal with me. I would build a prayer area in the
2<sup>nd</sup> level of his muffler shop and in return he would let me
live there until I found a place of my own. As I built the prayer area I
found a job and paid my way through college and eventually joined the
Muslim Student Association (M.S.A.). By January 2000 a friend of mine
asked me if I wanted to share an apartment paying 1/3 of the rent. I
agreed. By the next month I was on my way to Saudi Arabia to

make my pilgrimage. There is no other way to explain my experience other
thanmaking the pilgrimage is like reliving and witnessing the history of
Islam replay all over again. Youll look at the mountains and catch a
glimpse of the companions of the Prophet Muhammad journeying into the
night; youll look at the Kaba and witness the destruction of the idols
by the Prophet Abraham; youll stand on the mountain of Arafat and hear
the final sermon of the Prophet MuhammadWhen I left Saudi Arabia my
heart cried to go back.

A few months after my return to the United States I was engaged for the
second time. The engagement lasted about 5 months. At the ending of 2000
I was engaged for the 3<sup>rd</sup> time. This time there was more
chemistry between the two of us and our level of understanding life was
mutual. We had scheduled our wedding to be in the spring of 2001. Early
February my fianc had called me to inform me that she had cancer and was
calling of the wedding and our relationship. More than anything I was
hurt for her, not by her, but for her. She was a new convert, like
myself and her family wasnt supporting her at all. I knew what she was
feeling and I knew the loneliness she was feeling. That was the end
between us. It seemed as if every time I tried to plan out my life and
make the decision it never worked out. I just gave up on trying to get
married and left it all up to God.

March 2001, I had just returned from a week vacation in Florida and went
to my favorite pizza restaurant. I developed a relationship with the
owner from going there almost daily for about a year. Her and her
husband had asked me if I wanted to get married and I told them, no. I
said that I gave up on it. They told me to go home, take a shower and
come back because they had some one for me to meet. Again, I left it all
up to God. I went home prayed to God and did what they asked me to do.
It was March 8<sup>th</sup> 2001 at 9 p.m. when I arrived at her house.
I was

engaged 3 times before and on each engagement I was nervous, but not
this time. I was as calm as I would be if I were to hang out with my
friends. I entered into the house with my two friends (later to find out
they were the girls aunt and uncle) and I met a man who greeted me at
the door, Asalamu Alaykum. I replied, Wa Alaykum Salam. I sat down and
chatted with this man for a few moments and out came his daughter. We
spoke for a few hours and I found myself beginning to wonder how I got
where I was. Not so much the place and time but about a year prior to
this I was homeless, living in my car. Needless to say, this woman that
I had just met had became my wife. We were married July 8<sup>th</sup>
2001.

In the early weeks of November 2001 our lives had changed. Due to the
actions of a few delusional people smashing into the world trade center
building two months prior, the United States government went out on a
full fledge war on Islam. The FBI paid many Islamic charity
organizations a visit and shut them down; the Global Relief Foundation
was one of them, I worked there since 1999. When the FBI raided the
foundation they just didnt shut down the organization under false
pretences they ruined our reputation. They took everything from our
organization including extension cords, hairbrushes, hair spray and
moose, computers that were never used, fax machines, copy machines, cell
phones, poems, personal files, etc. They took my house and car keys and
refused to give them back. They drained our personal checking accounts
from every last penny. They left us with nothing. And after they did
that they raided our homes and invaded our privacy. Still to this day
they have not found one penny used in the wrong way or used in any way
other than that of supporting humanitarian aid. Their case is bogus. My
wife and I were only married 4 months when all of this took place. The
FBI had left us with only $30, thats what was in my pocket. We had bills
that needed to be paid, rent was due; almost no

food in the house and Eid Al Fitr was in a day or so. But like always
Allah was there to help.

I worked two jobs, sometimes 3 to get back where we needed to be. At the
same time I had reunited with my mother and sisters after a few years of
silence. On November 6<sup>th</sup> 2002, the first day of Ramadan, my
son Amir James Farrell was born. My heart melted the first time I held
him. I was there throughout the entire delivery and helped every step of
the way. I cut the umbilical cord the first chance I got I kissed the
person whom Allah has allowed me to raise, my son. Amir is my pride and
joy and Laila (my wife) is my strength and comfort. Many people do not
realize the importance a woman has in Islam. To conclude on this, I came
to respect my mother so much more due to Islam and the birth of my son.

Early February 2003 I had reunited with my father. The last time I had
seen or spoke to him was when he had threatened my lifeI was happy to
see him again.

There is so much more I can write and so many details I had left out but
I did not want to bore anyone. My wife always tell me, When you are
feeling down just pick up a pen and write all the things you are
grateful for

This brief story is a sample of just that.

  
 **Holy Quran 6:88*  
 This is the guidance of Allah(swt), He guides thereby whom he pleases
of His servants; and if they had set up others (with Him), certainly
what they did would have become ineffectual for them.***
