Jannah
======

Embracing the Truth
-------------------

Born and raised by righteous parents who still strongly hold onto their
identity through religion, it would seem striking that their sole
daughter and oldest would depart from their teachings and embrace Islam.
From early childhood, I excelled in academics but struggled through
religious studies since I was unable to find any logic behind the
structure of the Christian doctrines. It would have been easy to deviate
from Christianity and explore other beliefs if it had not been for my
familys coercion and of course my young age. Most parents are faced with
their children not behaving in their academic courses with other
classmates or authority, but I was the child who asked more questions
than desired and an over achiever. For a mathematic teacher, an
inquisitive student is delightful, but in the realm of religion,
especially Catholicism, such deviations from the norm were considered
blasphemy. So at the tender age of ten my brother and I took
conformation, and then again at eighteen, I accepted the final
conformation vows as a Catholic. Why? A question I so often asked
myself. Was it to make my parents happy or was it a result of my
acceptance and submission to God through the authority of the Catholic
Church? So for my parents, I continued to follow what they believed
contrary to my own beliefs. This meant that I would have to search for
the answers to my questions elsewhere.

Freedom was bestowed upon me as I gathered my belongings

and moved to the University dormitory. Of course, this happened to be in
the same city where my traditional Puerto Rican family lived but it was
enough space to explore and confirm my beliefs. I became fixated with
courses in the social sciences but my familys powerful influence
overwhelmed me to the point that my degree would be in science, as they
preferred. I needed a nourishing environment, a location where
enlightened people would surround me.

Convincing my parents that studying abroad in England would help expand
my technique and knowledge of the chemical sciences, I left for six
months overseas. To the best of their knowledge at the time, this was an
opportunity for me to experience what they felt they were deprived.
Today, they think this was their error as parents.

While studying in England, I became acquainted and later best of friends
with Muslim girls from Brunei in my dormitory. I had read about other
religions and countries but never had the pleasure of actually knowing
such people. Unexpectedly, I decided to travel and explore Europe during
the University spring break, 4 weeks to be precise, while my friends
went to visit their families. During this period, I had the opportunity
of visiting my first non-Christian environment in Morocco. I stayed in
small towns away from tourists and immersed myself into the Moroccan
culture. In addition, I saw the vast number of Muslims in Amsterdam and
Germany. This led me to deeply question my Muslim friends about their
clothing attire, religious differences, food preparation and most of all
their own personal beliefs about being a Muslim.

Curiosity now consumed me. My priority was to examine Christianity and
prove that my religious beliefs were not irrational even if it meant
being considered a heretic by my family and in the eyes of the Catholic
Church. I explored the historical roots of the trinity and the bible
only to validate my

theory that the Christian bible was written to appease the hierarchy of
the church and politically strengthen their position of authority. As A.
Osman states from his book Out of Egypt: The Roots of Christianity
Revealed,

The Roman fathers of the early Church, combating what they regarded as
heresy, began to place this theology in a historical setting, providing
locations and dates for the life of Jesus. These doctrines were enforced
by the authorities from the second half of the 4<sup>th</sup> century
AD, when Rome adopted Christianity, causing it to spread throughout the
world. It was when Rome, then the center of civilization, adopted
Christianity that old books were burned to destroy the memory of the
past, and history was rewritten to confirm new interpretations of past
events.

Arriving in the USA, I was prepared to use my knowledge acquired from my
studies and experiences to openly discuss the problems with Christianity
and this new religion I had encountered, Islam. I had not yet considered
converting, since conversion had never been an idea I thought plausible
with my family. It was Allahs mercy that my mom who had been separated
from my father now for three years allowed my father to divorce her and
break away from Catholicism. She joined a Pentecost congregation and
openly discussed the problems with being a Catholic rather than the
concept of being Christian. I felt abandoned, empty and confused. I
believed in one God but what were the correct ways to worship, submit
and follow. How could I be righteous when I was blind to the correct
path of Allah.

I continued course work in religious studies. I became aware of the
diversity of religions and their sects of the Caribbean, Middle East and
Asia. It was when I touched on Islam that my heart and mind were
satisfied. It finally all made sense. Islam was inspiring and rational.
For the first time, I felt content.

My decision to convert now came without hesitation and with strength to
be steadfast since I had embarked on a lifetime journey and battle with
non-believers. That meant accepting that my worst enemy would not be my
neighbor or friend but my own family.

My first two years were the hardest. I faced my family only to engage in
a debate over religion that would develop into a harsh argument about my
ungratefulness and misuse of an education. I began to cover my hair
August 4<sup>th</sup>, 2002 a month prior to the 9-11 attacks. It was
this adversity as well as the constant struggle with my family that I
found my self truly and entirely submitting to Allah. Today, my family
accepts my beliefs and accommodates our differences. I remind them, we
dont see through our soul or spirit, but the mind that is between the
two. With time and guidance from Allah, they too will embrace Islam.

**Holy Quran 18:13*****  
 We relate to you their story with the truth; surely they were youths
who believed in their Lord and We increased them in guidance.***
