Latifah Abdullah
================

***Assalam alaikum rahmatullah barakatuh***

My name is Latifah Abdullah and I am 29 years old. Ive been muslimah for
almost three years now.

I began to investigate Islam in high school. I was writing a paper on
the differences between Islam and the nation of Islam. I didnt know that
there was such a profound difference. Then I read the message to the
black man by Elijah Muhammad. This book made me a better Christian for a
few more years. Then I met my sons father and husband, and got a renewed
interest in Islam. By this time I was twenty-five, pregnant, and
wondering what kind of values I would give to my unborn child. I bought
myself a Quran and a book on the deen of Islam. I read the Quran out
loud to my stomach everyday. I found that the beauty of the message was
too beautiful and I didnt know if Id ever be able to live up to the
ideals that Allah (swt) has set out for us. I was struck by how easy and
beautiful the deen is. The language of it held me. I decided to raise my
child as a Muslim/Muslimah. I had my baby, a son, and still had not
converted. I still read the Quran to him everyday, he was colicky, and
the Quran would calm him and put him to sleep. Then on December 26,
1999, I had a dream of being dressed in white on a lush green hillside.
My husband was trying to talk to me about one of his friends insulting
us because of our beliefs. I told his friend that it was the truth and
to be quiet and listen to what the thousands of us were listening to.
All of his questions

would be answered. It was the Quran being recited in Arabic that was the
music in my dream. As I looked to the right, I saw my own personal
Quran, shining with a pure light. The more the recitation went on the
brighter my Quran glowed. I took this to be my time to come to Islam. I
converted (reverted) January 16, 2000. The journey has not always been
easy and coming up against traditional attitudes, I have often wanted to
rip off my khimar (head covering) and just scream. That never lasts long
because I know that Allah (swt) is where all of the answers are. I know
that Allah (swt) guided me to the right path and that it is through His
Grace that all is possible. I try to answer all questions put to me
since 9/11 in a respectful manner, befitting a Muslimah, Islam is a
mystery still to those in this country. I would not change a single
thing that has happened in my life because all of it brought me to Allah
(swt). I just wish we had a larger community here in my town.

**Masalam**

**Holy Quran 20:10*****  
 When he saw fire, he said to his family: Stop, for surely I see a fire,
haply I may bring to you therefrom a live coal or find a guidance.***
