Abdullah J. Armada
==================

Life. The very word conjures up images of events past and present, an
infinite phantasmagoria of experiences, memories, and mental
predictions, which we all go through. What exactly is this experience of
life? A dare? A quest? A random mix of experiences ending in inevitable,
impersonal annihilation? Why does it seem that no matter how hard weve
tried over the ages, man cant seem to answer the questions as to where
we are from, why we are here, and where we are going? The truth is that
humankind has made numerous attempts throughout history to answer these
questions and many attempts have come close while others have failed all
together. The answer that man has formulated to these questions is
religion. Religion and philosophy are attempts to answer these questions
in the eyes of humankind. The world today is full of religions and
different philosophies, some as old as Hinduism and some as young as
Neo-Paganism, and this variety can be confusing to the elite few of my
generation who seek the Truth. In an analytical sense, if one were to
strip down all the major world religions to their essential core
teachings, if one were to eliminate all the superfluous years and
centuries of doctrine, dogma, corruption, innovation, etc. one would be
left with one pure, pristine answer to the questions posed above. That
answer, which everyone seeks, is God. Where are we from? God. Why are we
here? God. Where are we going? God. Later, however, there comes another
question. Namely, how do we attain the peace and love we are all
searching for? Well, if the answer to the prior questions is God than it
follows logically that in order to achieve the peace

and love that God provides one must worship Him correctly. But again we
are confronted with the same seemingly unsolvable conundrum, with so
many religions around, how do we know which one is correct? There is
only one answer, one system that has miraculously remained free of the
corruption of human hands: Islam. Now, I could of course further
elaborate and prove the existence of God, the legitimacy of Islam, etc.
but I will opt to leave that for another writing, perhaps, and I will
now describe my journey to Islam. I was born and raised as a Roman
Catholic and I have attended Catholic schools all of my life, in fact, I
still do. By the time I got to eighth grade I decided that the whole
Christianity thing wasnt working for mecall it my pacifistic adaptation
of the usual angst-ridden teen rebellion. Essentially, I figured that I
had been raised a Christian all my life and thus, in a sense, I had been
indoctrinated into Christianity. So, I decided to try something elsesome
other way of viewing life. In summary, I tried many religions and each
one lasted about one year. I was metaphorically caught in the eternal
interplay of the spiritual tennis court of life. Most recently, I was
Buddhist, and contrary to what most people believe, Buddhists do not
worship the Buddhain fact they have no god. Well, technically the Buddha
never said you couldnt believe in a god he just said it wasnt required
to attain enlightenment. Well, rather than go off on a tangent I will
ask the reader to keep the last point in mind. What basically happened
was that I started considering the existence of God. After all, it made
logical sense to me, though rather than discuss that now, Ill save it
for a later time. Anyway, as I considered God I began to consider Islam
because I had always had an incipient interest in Islam. I remember
watching a video at school on world religions and I remember being so
intrigued by the movements in the prayer, especially sujoodit was
beautiful. I remember fighting that feeling inside of myself trying to
convince myself that I was happy with the belief

system I had. I remember looking at my compass, finding the direction of
Mecca, and going through the little parts of the prayer movements that I
knew always thinking, If I were Muslim, this is what Id do to pray. I
remember sounding out the *shahada* italicised in my world religions
book thinking, This would be what Id say to become a Muslim. I couldnt
explain why, but I was drawn to Islam and at the same time I fought that
feeling because of fear. After September 11<sup>th</sup>, my interest
was resurrected and with the money I saved I purchased The Complete
Idiots Guide to Understanding Islam by Yahiya J. Emerick. The book was
amazing as it outlined everything in a comprehensive manner and made me
realize that there were many misconceptions about Islam. Later, I
purchased The Meaning of the Holy Quran by Abdullah Yusuf Ali. All this
time, my interest in Islam grew and I was drawn even closer to it.
Eventually, I called the 1877-WHY ISLAM information line, which I had
called many times before. Originally, I was calling to ask a question
about a verse I had read but I ended up telling the sister I was
speaking to about my interest in Islam and the fear I felt because of my
family. In summary, this sister gave me the push I needed to overcome my
fear and convert (revert). I am eternally grateful to Allah for having
put her in my life to help guide me to Islam. At this point, I can
respond with confidence that the search, which I undertook to find the
Truth has ended in success because the whole Truth, the whole
culmination of my search can be summed up in one statement: Ashahadu an
la ilaha illa Allah wa Ashahadu anna Muhammadun abduhu wa rasulu. I
testify that there is no god but ALLAH and I also testify that Muhammad
is His slave and messenger.

**Holy Quran 27:2*****  
 A guidance and good news for the believers***
