How Simple... and Simply Beautiful
==================================

***<span style="font-size: 14pt">Bismillah Walhamdulillah Was Salaatu
Was Salaam ala Rasulillah; As-Salaam Alaikum Wa-Rahmatullahi
Wa-Barakatuhu</span>***

Who believe in the Unknown, and fulfil their devotional obligations, and
spend in charity of what We have given them; Who believe in what has
been revealed to you and what was revealed to those before you, and are
certain of the Hereafter. They have found the guidance of their Lord and
will be successful. As for those who deny, it is all the same if you
warn them or not, they will not believe. Allah has sealed their hearts
and ears, and veiled their eyes. For them is great deprivation [2: 3-7
Al-Quran translation by Ahmed Ali].

Although there are far more interesting stories of people becoming
Muslim during the times of the Prophet (SWA), I feel that it is critical
to recount to other Muslimahs and non-Muslimahs a story that can be easy
to relate to given our current times and circumstances. Let me first
give a comprehensive history of who I am, where I came from and who I
was before Allah showed me the right path.

I was born in 1975 to an upper middle class Christian family living in
the farmlands of Eastern Washington. I lead a very happy carefree
childhood full of swimming in the lake during the hot desert summers,
ice-skating and snow-mobiling in the winters and many boat and horseback
rides in between. My life was full of more leisure than worship, as I
barely remember

going to Church. Except for a few Easters spent looking for money in
haystacks at the Golf and Country Club and ripping through piles of
presents stacked around the Christmas tree, my understanding of God was
limited to such experiences. It was not until many years later that I
even realized what the religious reasoning was behind such holidays.

In 1982, my reality became abruptly severed due to the divorce of my
parents. The world that I had known became a thing of the past, and I
spent a lot more of my time crying and feeling angry than I did
frolicking with friends as I had done before. It felt as if my parents
had deceived me, and I started to become very unsure about life. New
town, new schoolmates, new neighborhood, and new stepfather! Change is
an inevitable way of this life, but it was still very foreign to my
young mind.

During my first few years on the Island, I was fortunate enough to live
in the neighborhood where the only Muslim family lived. Since Mariam was
my age and her younger brother, Adam, was my sisters age, we spent many
afternoons after school playing in the woods and digging for sea life on
the rocky beaches of the north end. I even remember Mariam showing me
her Quran and explaining to me what it meant to be Muslim. Even at the
young age of 10, I found it fascinating, as I have always been very
intrigued by other cultures and religions. She also told me cool stories
about her dads life as a Sonics basketball player. All in all, I enjoyed
spending time with them.

Not too long after that we moved to another part of the island, my close
friendship with Mariam and her family dwindled. I became friends with a
different group of kids and our lives started to separate. Even though I
was not spending time with her, I still considered her a friend and
would often defend her when immature kids would make rude comments about
her hijab and other Islamic customs. I almost prided myself on
understanding her belief, although not at all extensively.

Living in such a small town as I did, made it easy for me to begin
associating myself with people and activities that were less than
wholesome. Entertainment being scarce, most kids turned to drinking,
smoking, sex and experimental drug use. Although I was not as quick to
follow the crowd and have always considered myself a leader, I soon
followed suit. I was never too wrapped up in the groups mischievous
behaviour, but as my father always said, Birds of a feather, flock
together. It became hard to disassociate myself from the group. I even
remember walking out of school in 1990 when we declared war against Iraq
during Desert Storm. I knew nothing of the politics of the war and
demonstrated in the streets in protest against our involvement in it. I
knew nothing of the heinous crimes committed against the Kuwaiti people.
I was merely going along with the crowd. God was always in the back of
my mind, but I lost myself in my own selfishness and bottled-up hurt
from my parents break-up. My relationship with my mother worsened as my
days in high school continued, until she finally kicked me out at age
17. My father whisked me away to Bellingham that summer before senior
year to set me straight in school and life in general. HemdAllah (thank
God) that he was there to support me and heal some of those emotional
wounds.

That fall, I started at Whatcom Community College fulltime. One of my
classes that quarter was Middle Eastern History. I wrote a lengthy
research paper on Ancient Egyptian Civilization and learned the truth
about many stereotypes and falsehoods relating to Islam and Muslims. The
idea behind men as the head of the household and women being modest to
avoid the strong sexual desires of men really made sense to me. I also
learned from an American Muslim man that lectured the class that Muslims
believed in Jesus and did not say that he was the Son of God as
Christians do. The fact that Muslims believe that Allah is above the
mortal qualities of having children really

clicked with me.

From that point in late 1992 until early 1998, I had little if any other
encounters with Islam, Muslims or the Middle East in general. During a
break-up with a boyfriend of mine at that time, I met a Kuwaiti guy at
the gym I had been going to. It was fairly innocent, as my personal
trainer introduced him to me. I thought he was handsome and friendly,
but he seemed too good to be true and I automatically labelled him as a
player. When I found out he was Muslim, I became even more turned off.
Even though I had more knowledge about Islam at that time than most
Americans, I was still blinded by my prejudices.

After a little coercion, I finally agreed to eat falafels with him at a
local Arabic grocery store granted it was a friendly meeting and not a
romantic one. I thought he was nice, but he was not GQ enough for my
liking. My shallowness inhibited me from seeing his truly caring,
unselfish and respectful attitude. We slowly became friends over a few
months period and he found his way into my heart. He was always there
for me emotionally and spiritually while I coped with my financial
difficulties and rocky relationship with my mother and sister. His
number one interest was always making my life easier and not
complicating it with frivolous temptations and desires.

He slowly introduced me to the concepts of Islam and stories of Prophet
Muhammad (SWA). He even prayed in front of me until I felt comfortable
to talk openly about my misconceptions of Islam, especially the role of
women. Everything that he related to me, I saw in the actions of him,
his brothers and their friends. I began to realize that all the time I
spent worried about partying, drinking and hanging out with my supposed
guy friends was all a waste. None of these things were going to get me
any closer to feeling truly happy about myself and about life as a
whole. ...As for the life of this world, it is nothing but a merchandise
of vanity [Al-Quran 3:185].

It might be very difficult for non-believers to accept that I chose
Islam and was not forced to or persuaded to by man from Kuwait. My
acceptance of Islam was not a prerequisite of our relationships
potential future, as some have thought. I did not automatically adhere
to anything or believe everything I heard or read. It was a slow process
of learning and man from Kuwait was perfect about telling me the right
thing at the right time. He never started out by telling me what was
haram (forbidden) and the punishments for that on Judgement Day. On the
contrary, he first explained to me why he did what he did. What was the
spiritual significance of Hajj, praying at certain times, refraining
from the consumption of pork, etc? Every tradition in Islam (submission
to God) prescribed by Allah has significance; it is not mere cultural
customs passed down from generation to generation.

Some of the hardest things for me to accept included Islamic attire for
men and women, Polygamy, prohibition of alcohol, etc. Not to mention I
wanted proof...logical proof and reasoning to understand why man from
Kuwait felt obligated to pray, fast, abstain from drinking and sex, etc.
At first I saw it as so many donts and so few dos. Some of these topics
required a lot of in-depth discussion, so man from Kuwait turned me to
Ahmed Deedat to pick up where he left off. The acceptance of Islam, the
belief in Al-Quran and Allah as Creator of everything was a natural
concept and Deedat reasoned this to death in my mind. I tried to
logically refute these ideas internally, but I couldnt. It was simply
not possible!

My hardest internal struggle was revealing these ideas to my parents and
family. What would they think? Would they disinherit me? How could I
tell them? Well, the truth of the matter is that I am in the process of
this right now. The stronger my faith becomes, the less worried I am
about what non-believers think. The number one idea I have to rid my
family of

is the incorrect belief that women have a subservient role to men in
Islam. From an American perspective, these ideas are easily confused
with reality, especially since many Muslim countries have gone astray in
inhibiting women an education or right to work.

I always relate the story of the Prophets first wife, Khadija. She was a
rich woman who not only owned her own business, but also successfully
raised her children. So many seem to skip over this fact, and Muslims
alike. People also forget or misunderstand the acceptance of polygamy.
This is not a preferred way of life according to Allahs word, but an
option. Al-Quran reiterates this, by stating that it is impossible to
treat multiple wives equally, so unless you can, then just marry one
woman. Before I understood Islam, I always assumed that multiple wives
was the suggested way of life according to the teachings of Islam, and
relying on media influence made me blind to the truth. What really hit
it home for me was that the Prophet (SWA) was married to a much older
woman for 25 years, and it wasnt until after she died that he
re-married. He was allowed more than four wives in order to teach people
how to treat different wives, whether much older, much younger, Jewish
or Christian. He showed us that marrying women of other heavenly
religions was accepted and that marrying women of other ethnicities or
ages was good in the eyes of God. Far too many people today, refuse to
marry women of different colors and cultures. Prophet Muhammad (SWA)
showed us that these prejudices should be avoided. Furthermore, he
married a couple of these women because their husbands had died in war,
and he wanted to provide means and a father figure for their children.
It was not based on sexual desires. In fact, Islam prohibited the
conduct of many men (Christian and Jewish) of that time who had hundreds
of wives and concubines, thus the max Islam allows is four and that
having relations with someone other than

your wife is considered adultery. I have even read in history books
(written by non-Muslims) that the reason the Catholic Church outlawed
multiple wives, was because men did not want to be legally responsible
financially for providing for more than one. This allowed more free
conduct on the part of men to gallivant with women outside of the
marriage and not be tied down buy so many legitimate children.

Differentiating between the true faith of Islam and the wrong doings of
people, whose actions do not reflect Islam, can prove difficult,
especially to non-believers. Many people throughout time whether
Christian, Jewish or Muslim have tried to base their anti-religious
actions on the supposed teachings of that faith. This factor in
accepting Islam influenced me in taking more time to believe. Every time
I heard or read about some questionable act that a Muslim had committed,
I immediately ran to my Muslim friends for proof explaining or denying
the correctness of that action. man from Kuwait always shows me Quranic
proof for such actions or against them.

I still remember all the times people have said, Havent you seen the
movie Not Without My Daughter? How ignorant for someone to base his or
her beliefs of another culture or religion on an American made movie.
This is precisely why so many non-Muslims have negative stereotypes
about Islam. When I first introduced my parents to man from Kuwait,
there was a lot of turmoil in the family. I remember all the questions:
is man from Kuwait going to have a harem of wives, what if he steals
your children, what if you move to Kuwait and they hold you captive,
etc? It took so much explaining to even justify why I was interested in
a Muslim man, let alone explaining to them why I have become Muslim.
InshaAllah (God willing) Islam will bring me closer to my family as I
have seen it helping me mend my friendship with my sister. She has been
Christian for years, and now that I believe in one God, Allah, we many
times

have religious and spiritual discussions about God. It seems we have
more in common now, then ever before.

After about a year of knowing each other, I really started to believe
all that I heard and read about this great deen (religion). Even though
I had not uttered the words, Esheduana la illaha ilallah, I believed
that there was no other deity except for Allah, and without a doubt that
Prophet Muhammad (SWA) was the messenger of Allah (Esheduana Muhammadan
rasool Allah). It was not until about six months later that I finished
reading Volume one of The Choice: Islam and Christianity by Ahmed
Deedat. I had never read anything more convincing that was directed
toward an American point of view. I immediately asked man from Kuwait
how I actually could become Muslim. Was there a ceremony or did I have
to make a blood oath? I was surprised that all I had to do was utter
those words and truly believe it in my heart that there is no other
deity except Allah and that Prophet Muhammad was the messenger of Allah.
How simple...and simply beautiful.

Sometimes, I have small insignificant doubts, but they quickly pass. I
just remember that it is probably the Shetan (devil) trying to influence
me, like when your mind wonders during prayer. I still believe, and I
have never thought that I chose Islam because of my interest in man from
Kuwait. I told my mother that even if he disappears tomorrow, I will
remain Muslimah - InshaAllah until I die.

My friends and co-workers have been extremely supportive and respect my
choice not to drink, eat pork, etc. I have even taught Islam to some of
my co-workers. Many of my friends usually ask my opinion on their life
controversies and hardships. I always give them Islamic advice, and they
appreciate that. My roommate is not Muslim, yet she respects my beliefs
and does not drink around me or try to force me to go bar hopping with
her and her friends. What my friends think never influences me

to change my opinions or beliefs. I listen to other peoples
perspectives, but I am Muslimah and InshaAllah that will not change.

Becoming Muslim was the best choice that I ever made and I thank Allah
everyday that he gave me the openness in my heart to accept it and love
it. I have read and learned from various people so much about this deen
and it seems that I just cannot learn enough. I continually search for
more proof of Islam and take every opportunity to teach others about it.

I have faith in the Hereafter and realize that no matter what others say
or think their blindness will not hinder nor help me on the Day of
Judgement. Allah does not accept excuses like I did not know any better
or I do not believe in Islam because my parents were Christian. If these
excuses worked than the people of Mecca would have gone on worshipping
idols like their forefathers had and not have embraced Islam with the
Prophet (SWA). Do the unbelievers think they can make My own creatures
their protectors against Me? [Al-Quran 18:102].

InshaAllah one day, Allah will let the light of Islam into the hearts of
my parents and sister. It is true thou wilt not be able to guide every
one, whom thou lovest; but Allah guides those whom He will and He knows
best those who receive guidance [Al-Quran 28:56]. Everyday, I think
about the blazing fire that awaits those that do not believe and my eyes
fill with tears of horror for those close to me who do not understand
the signs that Allah has made clear for all of us. I never question that
which He has made nor the reasons why He has lead me to Islam and not my
family. I just pray that Allah will lead them as well. Creation of the
heavens and the earth, alternation of night and day, and sailing of
ships across the ocean with what is useful to man, and the rain that
Allah sends from the sky enlivening the earth that was dead, and the
scattering of beasts of all kinds upon it, and the changing of the
winds, and the

clouds which remain obedient between earth and sky, are surely signs for
the wise. And yet there are men who take others as compeers of Allah,
and bestow on them love due to Allah; but the love of the faithful for
Allah is more intense. If only the wicked could see now the agony that
they will behold (on the Day of Resurrection), they will know that to
Allah belongs the power entirely! And the punishment of Allah is severe
[Al-Quran 2:164-165].

**Holy Quran 28:37*****  
 And Musa said: My Lord knows best who comes with guidance from Him, and
whose shall be the good end of the abode; surely the unjust shall not be
successful.***


