Karima
======

Eight years ago I met my former husband in North Africa. We fell in love
and decided to live together in Holland. He is Muslim but I did not
really see him practising anything except for Ramadan. I wanted to marry
him and have children together. I understand Muslims want to bring up
their children in an Islamic way so I started to read about Islam. I
found it important to know much about this religion so I also did
Ramadan together with my husband. In this time I also took some Arabic
lessons, the teacher had a lot of knowledge about Islam so I could ask
him a lot of questions.

I still was afraid about Islam, Dutch people believe Islam is a violent
religion. But the more I read about it the more I felt good about it. I
was brought up Catholic, go to church at least one time every week and
do a lot of things inside of the church. However the last years I have
not felt at my place in the Catholic religion, it seemed old fashioned
and far away from my normal life. In Islam I found answers to the
questions of my daily life. For me it is a more practical and modern
religion.

When my husband finally wanted to marry (this was more because otherwise
we couldnt stay in a hotel in his country together than for something
else) I also decided to do the Shahada.

I didnt know before they would ask me some questions and I was surprised
by the question: Do you think Jesus is the son of God? Of course not, I
never believed that this is symbolic, it

means you are close to God because you are a prophet. I never see this
literally.

After three years our marriage ended and there I was a Dutch Muslim
woman alone. How I can be a good Muslim with only a few Muslim
girlfriends around? How I can find a good Muslim husband? Why I decided
to become Muslim? Why I not just marry a nice Dutch man, Muslim or not
Muslim?

This was a very difficult time in which I prayed a lot. And I feel I get
support from God, I feel I decided for myself to become Muslim not for
my husband. Now I see this time as a test of my religion, I am very
happy, I search for support in praying to God because he gives me
answers.

Not long after this I found a new husband. A man who is very serious
about Islam. Who, like me, still needs to learn a lot but who also can
help and support me and live with me in an Islamic way. He gives me new
energy to study more about Islam.

I always say religion is something in which you believe, you shouldnt
need to ask for proof because then it is not religion but a fact. But
God is everywhere and he support me in my life, I had some difficult
times but he never gave me more then I can handle. I have one other very
strong example in which God directly communicated with me:

After five months of pregnancy our baby died, the doctors couldnt hear
any heartbeat and they sent me home to come back two days later for the
delivery. I didnt want to loose our baby, I thought it was better he
stayed inside me, dead or alive, this is our baby nobody can touch him.
I talk about him because I was sure it was a boy, I never see myself
with a baby daughter. In these difficult days I prayed a lot, in one of
these prayers I suddenly saw a girl about 4 years old playing on a green
hill (like in the Teletubbies) and I am sure this is our daughter. She

was very beautiful and happily playing. Then I heard or understand there
is somebody behind the hill, an old man, I did not see but feel this.
This man told me I shouldnt worry he would take care of our daughter.
After this I was not stressed anymore for the delivery, already our
daughter was with God. It makes me feel quiet. After the delivery I was
not surprised our baby was a girl, already I was sure for this.

In this relatively short time I am a practising Muslim I have three
moments in which God directly helped me. Although my daily life can be
very busy and stressful I know I can give everything in the hands of
God, Islam.

**Holy Quran 31:3*****  
 A guidance and a mercy for the doers of goodness.***
