Shezreen Mubarak
================

What moved me to embrace Islam
------------------------------

My family are Roman Catholic but my mother doesnt practise as she felt
oppressed by it as a child in school. So she never got me christened but
she planned to get me christened as a Protestant... I believed in God
and I had a go at reading the Bible and listened to the stories at
school (I went to a mixed school; not one of those strict Catholic ones
with the statues etc like my mum went to) but I was never settled and I
always wanted to be something else. In school I wasnt accepted by the
popular group and I always tried to be individual and different, on the
whole I felt confused and I hated myself. We had religious education
lessons in school but we were never taught the truth, we were taught
that Islam was a religion for Asian people and the Bible is our book and
the Quran is theirs. Still I enjoyed the Islamic parts more than the
others. Then when I was only thirteen, I started a pen friendship with a
boy in Pakistan, he was nineteen and Muslim and my mother wasnt to keen
on the idea as I was very young at the time and she was worried that
because he was Muslim, he might be pushy about his religion in the same
way the people were in her school. But I saw that he was so different
and so polite, he showed me that Islam wasnt just a religion for Asian
and Black people (like they said in school), it was a religion for
everybody, and slowly I started changing my ways (eating, dressing etc)
and ***Alhamdulillah*** when I was sixteen she gave us permission to

get married, I did the Shahada then too and now Im happy with my life, I
dont feel sad and confused anymore and I dont hate myself now. When I
reverted, I didnt know much about Islam, and even though I learned more
afterwards, I never came across anything that Im not happy with or not
sure about. Islam is the perfect way of life. Once a man who reverted to
Islam was on TV and he said that when you become Muslim, you get a
feeling that you have come home, and I really agree with that. Now my
mother is happy about me becoming a Muslim, she was against it at first
but after we went to Pakistan and met his family she started getting
used to it. She didnt become a Muslim though, Insha Allah one day.

**Holy Quran 40:54  
 *A guidance and a reminder to the men of understanding.***
