Maryam
======

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!

My Journey to Allah
-------------------

I always feel somewhat tongue-tied whenever anyone asks me why or how I
ended up embracing the religion of Islam. How do you fit a life-time of
seeking God into a few sentences? The most truthful answer I can give is
that I believe God has called me to Him and asked me to follow His
Messenger Muhammad, may the peace and blessings of God be upon him.

I was born in Melbourne and raised in a Bahai family; my parents both
converts to a religion which originally began as a breakaway Islamic
revival sect before evolving into an independent religious movement. I
grew up believing in God and wanting to make the world a better place.
This was the beginning of my Muslim journey, even if I didnt know it
back then.

Conversion, I once read, is not a single event: its a lifetime process.
It has peaks and troughs, leaps forward and steps backward. There may
have been a moment when I first became conscious of my duty to submit to
God and follow His Messenger, but my first tender steps towards my
Beloved Creator began way before my adulthood.

As a teenager I was an active Bahai, I prayed and fasted regularly and
kept to a fairly strict code of personal morality. I was a normal
teenager, of course, and enjoyed going to the

movies and gossiping on the phone with my girlfriends. But I also did
volunteer work within the religious organisation, and it was during my
youth year of service that I experienced a brief lifting of the veil in
what seemed like an amazing burst of other-worldly love. During an
intense prayer session in which I had devoted my life to God, He grasped
my soul and gently flooded me with His tender loving mercy.

I developed an intense urge to study Arabic and enrolled in a course the
next year. This brought me into contact with Muslims and I quickly
became interested in the religion behind the language. As a Bahai I
believed that the Prophet Muhammad was sent by God, and that the Quran
was His Word, but now I began to learn what Muslims themselves had to
say about their religion. Instead of Islam being a legalistic religion
encrusted with outdated rules and regulations, I began to see it as a
living faith with the ability to spiritually enrich the lives of those
who truly sought to implement it. One of my teachers had a quiet
humility for which I longed. Through him, by the will of the
All-Merciful, I began to see Islam as a peaceful, beautiful and gentle
religion. My inner world was thrown into turmoil as I began to
contemplate leaving the religion of my parents and heeding the inner
call of God.

It took me a number of years to finally come to terms with the reality
that I wanted to be a Muslim, during which I developed a mental
depression which brought me to the edge of the abyss. A great Muslim
called al-Ghazali once wrote that depression is one method that the
Beloved chooses to bring His servants to Him, and for me this was true.
Becoming conscious of my calling to Islam meant alienating myself from
my perplexed family, struggling with the collective sins of a
less-than-perfect Muslim community, and finding my spiritual feet like a
new baby. It was a humbling experience: I went from being a
knowledgeable Bahai, active in the religions organisational structure,
to being

shown how to wash myself and pray. More than once I faltered in my new
baby steps and fled to the safety of the comfortable old world that I
knew. I even rejoined the Bahai organisation, after quitting it for a
year, but could not make myself feel happy there.

Finally, three years ago, I surrendered myself to God and accepted Islam
as my religion. I took the scarf as a symbol of my Muslim identity and
from that point on began to implement the teachings of the Quran and my
beloved Prophet Muhammad in my life. In answer to a half-spoken prayer,
God filled my life with wonderful sisters and brothers who help me walk
along this path: He is the Generous! I still struggle with the trials of
life, but feel I have found my spiritual home and a Muslim community
which provides me with the opportunity to give a little of myself.

All praise be to God, the Lord of all the worlds!

**Holy Quran 47:17*****  
 Â And (as for) those who follow the right direction, He increases them
in guidance and gives them their guarding (against evil).***
