Ibrahim
=======

A time comes in everyones life, or at least I hope it comes, when they
realize that they have to not only believe what they believe in,
whatever it may be, but get out there and proclaim it to the world.
Luckily, that time came early for me. I am 17, and Islam is the belief
that Im proclaiming.

I was raised Catholic. Not internally as much as externally. I went to
Catholic Sunday school, called CCD, but the Catholic view of God never
played a major roll in my childhood. It was a Sunday thing. Anyhow, I
started to enjoy Mass around 7th grade. It made me feel good to do the
right thing. I was always a rather moral person, but I never really
studied the fundamentals of Catholicism. I just knew that I felt good
worshipping my creator.

I really liked Catholicism, but I always saw it as us (the Catholics)
with Jesus worshipping God, not us worshipping God and Jesus as one. I
saw Jesus (peace be upon him) as my example on how to be a good follower
of and submitter to Gods will, but not as God himself.

Before I was confirmed in 8th grade, in the fall of 1999, I learned a
lot about what Catholicism was. The Catholicism of the Church had a lot
on viewing Jesus as God in it. Nothing like my undivided God being
worshipped by me with Jesus as an example train of thought. It was like
they just opened up a can of cold, illogical confusion and tried to feed
it to me. It didnt feel right.

I continued with the Catholic church, and kept on worshipping. But I
talked to many in the church about my feelings that Jesus wasnt God but
more of a Prophet, an example. They told me that I had to accept him as
God and as a sacrifice, and so on. I just wasnt buying it. I tried to
buy it but I guess God withhold the sale for my own benefit. There was a
better car out there for me. I continued at the church.

Sometime in mid-December of 1999, for no reason that I can recall I
started reading up on Islam in encyclopedias. I remember making a list
of bolded words in the entry for Islam in an old 1964 Grolier World Book
that I found in my closet, and studying them. For some reason I was
amazed by this faith and that it was all about God and that it was
everything that I believed all my life - right here. Previously, I had
accepted that there was no faith like I felt inside of me. But I was
amazed that I had found this faith. I found out that my faith had a
name, and millions of other adherents!

Without ever reading a Quran or talking to another Muslim, I said
*shahada* (declaring your belief in no god but God) on 31 December 1999.
As the months passed, I learned more. I went through many periods of
confusion, happiness, doubt and amazement. Islam took me on an
enlightening tour of me, everyone else, and God.

The transition was slow. I was still attending Mass five months into my
change of faith. Each time I went, I felt more and more distant from the
congregation, but closer and closer to Prophet Jesus and God.

During Ramadan 2001, the second time I fasted (the first year, I
converted during Ramadan and did not fast), I went to the library during
lunch period. It was better than sitting at a table with my friends,
because I got work done in the library. I swear my grades went up. I
started talking to the only other Muslim at

my school, John. We talked about Islam a little more each day. Hes an
awesome brother and he took me to the mosque on the last Friday of
Ramadan. Going was one of the best decisions I ever made in my life. God
really answered my prayers this time. I thought I would be nervous, but
I wasnt at all. It was the most natural thing I ever did in my life. I
felt home. I realized something before leaving. As I sat there on the
floor, praying to God, I realized that the room was full of others but
it was OK. See, at home when someone asks me what I am doing, I never
say I am praying. I never admit it to anyone. It is too awkward. But
there, at the masjid, I was praying to God in front of a score of other
Muslims and I felt perfectly fine. Better than fine! I felt natural and
safe. It was the most liberating thing since I accepted God into my
heart that cold New Years Eve almost two years ago.

I never told my parents right out. In fact, I dont plan to. The most
significant clue that I gave came around 1:00 AM on 16 December 2001,
when I finally told my dad I was going to the mosque in the morning with
a friend when he asked me why I was setting my alarm. He chewed me out,
to say the least. I never told them straight out because I figured it
was best to test the waters by revealing clues bit by bit; I didnt want
to send a shockwave through the family. I can only imagine what my dad
would do if he knew I was actually a practicing Muslim. I understand
that my dad is a depressed man, so I dont really hold this all against
him. I mean, it is his fault for thinking himself so smart that he
doesnt need God. That thought is what got him so depressed. But I dont
think he realized how hard ones heart can be when you deny your human
need for a relationship with your Creator. So I dont hold it all against
him. He didnt know what he was getting into. My mom doesnt know that I
am a Muslim, but at least she hasnt shown her anger over me going to the
mosque. As God commands, Ill

continue to try my best to be nice to my parents as long as they dont
attempt to take away my Islam. The best thing that I can do for them is
to be a good example so that maybe one day, inshallah, they can see that
there is a better way of living than living in the dark world of
God-denial.

Ive never been to the Mid-East, but I am studying Islam every day. I
read books from every point of view. Sufi, Shia, Sunni, books on the
Quran alone... The Muslims view sects as haram, so no matter what you
believe you are always a Muslim and nothing extra. You may have
completely different views than another Muslim, but as long as you both
believe that there is no god but God, you are both Muslims and thats
that. I read a lot on-line, and discuss a lot with other Muslims on-line
and on the phone. Ive met some really great people on-line who have
taught me a lot about life, Islam and God.

Right now, I am 100% a Muslim and that will never change, inshallah. I
thank God that Ive gone through so many periods of doubt. When I look
back I see that it was not God leaving me but God telling me that it was
time that I asked myself how much I loved God, and what I was willing to
go through to understand my faith. A week of crying, depression, prayer,
reading to the extreme, and ignoring most other things in life sounds
harsh...but the reward - knowing so much more about yourself, God, and
the relationship between you (Islam) - is worth more than any material
things. Through my interrogation of Islam I gained Gods most precious
gift - Islam, or surrender to the peace. Ive heard Christians say that
with Christianity you know God on a personal level. In Islam, your
relationship with God is so much deeper than that. God is with me every
moment, guiding me, teaching me, loving me, protecting me, liberating
me, enlightening me, comforting me... Alhamdulilah for Islam!

Islam has done a lot for me. More than I could have ever guessed. And
every day, it just gets better. At first it was like Allah was turning
on lights where it was dark. Now, He is shining light into places that I
never KNEW were dark! It is just total enlightenment and consolation at
the same time I feel like Im getting the warmest, truest hug. I went
from living my life on a trial-and-error basis to embracing guidance,
and now knowing what the best choices are for me to make. From seeking
who I am and spending a life in confusion, I am being guided. I cant
find the words to say what its like, but Ill try again: God reveals to
me what life is. I dont have to guess anymore.

Sura 93, The Morning Hours

By the morning hours

By the night when it is still

Your lord has not abandoned you

and does not hate you

What is after will be better

than what came before

To you the lord will be giving

You will be content

Did he not find you orphaned and give you shelter

Find you lost and guide you

Find you in hunger and provide for you

As for the orphan, do not oppress him

And one who asks, do not turn him away

And the grace of your lord -- proclaim

That is what I went through, what God did for me - what I am. So here is
my proclamation to the world. Islam is more than you think it is, in
fact more liberal than most would wish it to be. But do not only listen.
Study all views for yourself...and come to your own conclusion. God says
let there be no compulsion in religion because faith in God is a choice
made by the heart, and it cant be forced.

**Holy Quran 2:185*****  
 The month of Ramazan is that in which the Quran was revealed, a
guidance to men and clear proofs of the guidance and the distinction***
