From Ignorance To Islam
=======================

My upbringing did not really include anything about God. I was
christened, although I am not sure why, I would guess that this happened
as it was the done thing in my family. In addition I have vague memories
of going to Sunday school, and of course the religious education later
at school, which could be re-named Christian education as no other
religions ever got a look in.

Without any firm religious values, I lived my life according to my own
set of moral values. Basically I just used to drift from one point of
view to the next, and do my best to fit in with whichever group of
people I was with. I did have a belief in God, although I have to admit
that I did not do a lot about it.

Then I met a Muslim. This opened new channels of discussions, and
re-kindled the flame of my belief in God. Many a conversation took place
on all sorts of topics, the existence of God, Heaven and Hell, other
religions, the Holy Prophet and his Family PBUT, even topics such as
what was the point of dinosaurs, and aliens. Everything was a muddle in
my mind, question after question I asked, and to each question there was
an answer that satisfied it. I was confused though, if this religion was
so correct, why hadnt I heard about it already? What about all the kind
people I had met that were not Muslims, surely their good deeds would
count? Why do you have to become a Muslim if you live your life
properly, i.e. do not steal, commit adultery etc. etc.?

As time passed I soon realised that I was just searching for

excuses. I knew that Islam was correct, but I needed to dig deep to find
the courage to change. No longer could I hide behind a wall of questions
and what ifs, it was time to stand up and be part of something that I
believed in.

I was very nervous, every few minutes my stomach churned, rushes of
adrenal waves through my body. It was the night that I would declare
myself a Muslim and change the rest of my life. I was sure about my
decision to revert, but scared at the prospect at the same time,
conflicting emotions and feelings taking it in turns to pop into my
head, but all along I knew that Truth would win.

The time had come, we gathered in a group. I repeated everything that
the Imam said to me, I hung onto every syllable and repeated as best I
could, I was afraid that if I didnt pronounce the Arabic words properly
then my declaration would not count, and it had to count. I went into a
kind of dream world, feeling as if this wasnt really me, I was watching
someone else. The emotions started to rise, I looked around and realised
that I was not alone with my tears. My declaration was touching the
hearts of those around me. The Imam then said a number of prayers for me
and also for my family, I felt somehow indebted to him, I felt the need
to repay him in some way for what he had enabled me to become.

Tears continued to roll as this pious Imam asked me to pray for him that
night. How could one of my prayers be worth anything when compared to
his? We shared a cup of water, I was allowed to drink first, followed by
all my good friends, and I was now part of what they stood for. I had
been accepted.

From that point onwards I was a Muslim, not only had this been witnessed
by those around me, but also by all the Prophets PBUT, who I was told
grace every declaration with their presence. I felt so honoured that I
could hardly believe it.

The final part of the transformation was to wash. I needed to purify
myself and all my sins would now be forgiven, as if they had been washed
down the plughole with the soapy water. It was as if I had just been
born; from now on it would be up to me.

The world now appeared differently to me. I noticed aspects of people
that I had missed before, I was much more aware of good and evil around
me. I could look back at my past and it really felt as if that wasnt me
at all, I had a feeling that I had been given a whole new life, and I
had been detached from my previous actions. This carried with it a
responsibility, a desire not to blemish my new clean record. I had so
much to learn, so much to read and take in. I had to be different
towards people at work and even my own family, I had to get rid of
clothes, books and pictures, now that I had been purified I had to make
an attempt to purify my surroundings.

With the help I have had from Allah SWT, I have now found the true path,
and take the Holy Prophet and his Family PBUT as my examples to follow,
I must try and remember them with my every thought. My only wish now is
that they may remember me on the Day of Judgement.

[www.ConvertsToIslam.com](http://www.convertstoislam.com/)

**Holy Quran 2:38*****  
 We Said: Go forth from this (state) all; So surely there will come to
you guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, no fear shall
come upon them, nor shall they grieve.***
