Heather Olmstead
================

My Journey to Allah
-------------------

I am a new Muslimah. I took *shahada* on August 15, 2002. I am so glad I
did. Life is much better with Islam. I had been searching all my life
for a way to Allah. I was raised Christian. I explored many different
faiths looking for Truth and guidance. Now I have found it.

First of all, a bit of background about me. I was born and mostly raised
in Wisconsin in the United States. When I was born, my parents belonged
to the Quakers. So that was my first experience with religion. The
Quakers are very open-minded, so I was exposed to many different people
and faiths. I was raised with very few prejudices. My parents divorced
when I was 9 years old. I think due to the divorce, my parents both
began going through some sort of spiritual crisis. Every weekend my
brother and I alternated which parent we were with. Due to their
searching, we went to many different churches, all Protestant Christian.

My mother brought us to a group of Pentecostals, where they spoke in
tongues (an angelic language believed to be sent through them by God)
and healed people by praying. I remember having to stand on the chairs
to see over all the people to catch the action.

My father brought us to a Congregational church (the exact opposite of
the Pentecostals), a Dutch Reformed (where my new

step-mother went), and a group of divorced Christians that met for
worship.

Eventually my mother worked her way back to the church of her childhood.
The Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. For any of you that know
anything about Lutherans, these guys are the strictest. They arent
allowed to pray with anyone besides other Wisconsin Synod Lutherans,
even other Christians, because they do not believe the same. I
personally believe they are near cult status (though I would never say
that in front of my grandmother!)

In that church I went through Catechism classes (where you are taught,
once a week after school for three years, what the Church teaches) and
was confirmed (graduation). But it all never added up for me. I was
still searching.

In high school I made friends with other Christians who actually
observed their faith (where I am from, everyone is Christian, they just
dont necessarily practice it). We met for Bible study and on weekends
visited various churches. I studied every denomination I could looking
for the Truth. Baptist, Pentecostal, Assembly of God, Unitarian,
Methodist, Non-denominational, Snake handlers, World Wide Church of God,
Shakers, Amish, Presbyterian, United Church of Christ. And the list goes
on. I have either studied and met a member and/or attended worship in
all of these (and more) denominations.

Then I found the Catholics. I was convinced I wanted to be a nun. I even
went through the conversion classes. But something stopped me before I
officially converted.

In college I was a Theology major with an emphasis in Comparative
Religions. I made studying religions my life, not just my hobby. The
more I studied, the more holes I found.

I went on and started to search outside of Christianity. I studied

and/or practiced Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, Neo-paganism, Witchcraft,
Voodoo, Santeria, Bahaism and Judaism. About the only thing I have
stayed away from was Satanism!

How I found Islam is a miracle brought about by the horrible tragedy of
Sept.11. Before then, I thought, as many still do, that Islam was a
controlling, misogynistic, violent religion. In all my religious
studies, I hadnt spent any more time on it then needed for my theology
classes in college.

Though it still seems that the media doesnt portray us in the kindest
light, news reports and articles did begin to open my mind to a new way
of thinking about Islam.

In a conversation with my mother-in-law, we began to discuss Islam. She
made the comment All Muslims, by the very nature of their religion, are
violent. Let me say, and I say this as fact, not as insult, that she is
a very closed-minded person and does not educate herself on religions
outside her narrow view of Protestant Christianity. So when she made the
comment, I didnt believe what she said. But it did occur to me, that I
was unable to agree or disagree based on any knowledge that I personally
had. I felt the need to change that. In classes in college I had learned
the Five Pillars, and that Muslims prayed toward Mecca because Muhammad
was from there (textbooks dont have to be correct do they?)

Soon after I had the chance to receive some free pamphlets about Islam
from a web-site ([www.whyIslam.org](http://www.whyIslam.org)). I sent
for them, thinking that if we were going to be at war with these people,
I should know something about them.

The pamphlets came. I read them and was amazed. This religion was
nothing like what I had previously thought! A volunteer from the
web-site e-mailed me and offered me an English translation of the Quran.
I thought Why not? I had read the Bible, some of the Hindu Vedas, much
of the Talmud, and the

Book of Mormon. So in the interest of education, I accepted the offer.

When the book came, I found that he had generously sent me two other
books. An Illustrated Guide to Islam and Towards Understanding Islam. I
read them first. Then I began the Meaning of the Quran. It was if scales
had fallen off my eyes, and off of my heart. I felt in my heart that I
had found how to please God.

I promised myself I would not take *shahada* until I had read the entire
Quran. Even though I spent hours studying other aspects of Islam on the
internet. There was nothing that I learned that turned me off the faith.
Instead, there were so many ideas that I had believed already. It was as
if Allah had been leading me to Islam all of my life.

I prayed. I searched my heart. I tried to think of some excuse why I
couldnt convert to Islam. I thought about how my family and friends
would take it. I thought about how hard it would be to wear hijab around
here (and I felt that wearing hijab was fard). No matter what excuse I
came up with, I knew they didnt matter. Allah was calling me.

On the evening of August 15, 2002 I repeated after my internet friend,
La ilaha illa Allah Muhammadur rasoolu Allah (There is no true god but
God, and Muhammad is the Messenger of God). I was Muslim. I felt great!
Now I had to break the news to my husband.

I actually hadnt expected to convert so quickly. But when something is
right, it happens.

I told my husband and he was supportive. We had some difficulty over the
next couple weeks, but we worked it out. He was just worried about me.
Worried about violence from people because of 9/11. Worried I was on an
emotional high and would

come down and feel I had made a mistake. He had watched me explore many
other religions over the course of our marriage. He was afraid this was
another of my phases. Of course, he didnt say this all so bluntly. He
was very kind and considerate.

I havent been a Muslim that long yet. Maybe this is another phase. But
is that any excuse not to follow Allah? I had read an article on excuses
of why women dont wear hijab. One was because they were worried they
would take it off at some later point and then would cause more harm
then good. The response was that you cannot predict the future. Maybe
you will take off your scarf. Maybe you wouldnt. Is that any reason not
to wear it now?

So I feel the same about being Muslim. Maybe someday I will fall away. I
pray not. But is that any reason to not follow Allah today?

**Holy Quran 7:203*****  
 And when you bring them not a revelation they say: Why do you not forge
it? Say: I only follow what is revealed to me from my Lord; these are
clear proofs from your Lord and a guidance and a mercy for a people who
believe.***


