Native American Muslim
======================

My name is Mahir Abdal-Razzaaq El and I am a Cherokee Blackfoot American
Indian who is Muslim. I am known as Eagle Sun Walker. I serve as a Pipe
Carrier Warrior for the North-eastern Band of Cherokee Indians in New
York City.

There are other Muslims in our group. For the most part, not many people
are aware of the Native American contact with Islam that began over one
thousand years ago by some of the early Muslim travellers who visited
us. Some of these Muslim travellers ended up living among our people.

For most Muslims and non-Muslims of today, this type of information is
unknown and has never been mentioned in any of the history books. There
are many documents, treaties, legislation and resolutions that were
passed between 1600s and 1800s that show that Muslims were in fact here
and were very active in the communities in which they lived. Treaties
such as Peace and Friendship that was signed on the Delaware River in
the year 1787 bear the signatures of Abdel-Khak and Muhammad Ibn
Abdullah. This treaty details our continued right to exist as a
community in the areas of commerce, maritime shipping, and current form
of government at that time which was in accordance with Islam. According
to a federal court case from the Continental Congress, we help put the
breath of life in to the newly framed constitution. All of the documents
are presently in the National Archives as well as the Library of
Congress.

If you have access to records in the state of South Carolina, read the
Moors Sundry Act of 1790. In a future article, Inshallah, I will go in
to more details about the various tribes, their languages; in which some
are influenced by Arabic, Persian, Hebrew words. Almost all of the
tribes vocabulary includes the word Allah. The traditional dress code
for Indian women includes the kimah and long dresses. For men, standard
fare is turbans and long tops that come down to the knees. If you were
to look at any of the old books on Cherokee clothing up until the time
of 1832, you will see the men wearing turbans and the women wearing long
head coverings. The last Cherokee chief who had a Muslim name was
Ramadhan Ibn Wati of the Cherokees in 1866.

Cities across the United States and Canada bear names that are of Indian
and Islamic derivation. Have you ever wondered what the name Tallahassee
means? It means that He Allah will deliver you sometime in the future.

**The Message, July 1996**

**Holy Quran 10:57*  
 O men! There has come to you indeed an admonition from your Lord and a
healing for what is in the breasts and guidance and a mercy for the
believers.***
