Brother Yahya
=============

Donald Flood: An American English Language Instructor
-----------------------------------------------------

Every culture has its own strengths and weaknesses. It is well known
that American life as a considerable amount of personal freedom. So much
so that many parents give a long rope to their children. They generally
do not interfere in religious matters and in the personal pursuits of
their children. As such, the personal activities of parents and children
tend to be mutually accepted and respected. Don was the product of one
such liberal home. He related his life story to me as follows.

My Religious Background
-----------------------

My religious background was as a typical American. I was a Christian and
occasionally attended church with my family when I was growing up. It
appeared that morality was the most important thing in Christianity. My
lack of Christian knowledge and practice helped me to keep an open mind
for other religions and cultures.

Experience with New Cultures
----------------------------

There is lot of mobility in American life. My father moved from place to
place to follow his professional job. Fortunately, we had the chance to
live in Latin America for several months when I was a high school
student. I encountered a new culture and language there. I fully
comprehended that there were other lifestyles in the world, not just the
American lifestyle. This experience broadened my mind and outlook. I
was, therefore,

curious to know more and more about other cultures and languages. I
returned back to America with my family and completed my high school in
Indiana. Thereafter, I joined the University of Texas in El Paso, which
is on the border of Texas and Mexico, as a Business Administration
major.

Camping Trip
------------

After a few years of study, I knew that this major was not for me. I
felt I needed something more interesting and cultural. It was during
this time that a friend invited me to go with him on a three-month
camping trip all over the USA and Western Canada. I cheerfully accepted
because I knew this experience in the marvels of nature would be an
appropriate setting to reflect upon personal goals and objectives. As a
result of this experience, I didnt arrive at any decisions regarding my
academic pursuits, but I did realize that this world could not have been
created by mistake, and that it was clearly a wonderland of signs
pointing to its Creator. I was, however, not sure how to worship or
appreciate our Creator.

Then one day while sunbathing, I suddenly realized that I could combine
my interests in business and culture by majoring in Latin American
Studies. I went back to the university at the beginning of the next
academic year and transferred to this major.

Social Activities
-----------------

While back in the university, my Hindu friend invited me, along with his
Saudi friend, to a church gathering, which included sports activities
and a home-cooked meal. As a student, you do take advantage of every
opportunity for a home-cooked meal. The dinner was very sumptuous. At
the end of the evening something unexpected happened. The leader of
the  
 church started singing a song scribbled on the blackboard in Hebrew. He
wanted us to repeat it after him. We noticed that

our Saudi friend, Abu Hussein, suddenly stood up and asked us to leave
the gathering with him. The host tried to persuade us to stay, but we
hurriedly left the church. Ironically, this incident made us closer
friends. A few weeks later Abu Hussein and I decided to rent a house
together, along with a student from Kuwait and one from Iran.

This new living arrangement provided me with a closer interaction with
their cultures. I loved their meals and tried to prepare some of them. I
noticed that my housemates often liked to eat with their right hand
without the use of silverware. They also preferred sitting down on the
floor to eat instead of sitting at a table. I did not know why they took
a pitcher of water with them to the toilet for cleaning purposes. I also
noticed that they offered their guests unparalleled hospitality.
Regarding their character, I was impressed with their high level of
self-confidence, which seemed to stem from some special kind of
certainty about what they were doing and where they were going in life.
I understood later that most of these mannerisms were according to the
teachings of Islam and not necessarily cultural behavior.

By partially experiencing both the Latin American and Arab cultures, I
observed many distinct similarities. Moreover, these findings were
confirmed through my university studies on Latin America. I learned this
affinity resulted from the 800-year influence of the Islamic
civilization on Spain and medieval Europe. Thus, through their
historical bond with the Arabs, some Islamic practices continue to be
part of the Latin American culture of today.

Overseas Trip
-------------

After graduation, my housemates went back to their respective countries.
I remained in touch with Abu Hussein. One year after our graduation he
invited me to visit Saudi Arabia for two

weeks. I accepted his invitation and travelled to Saudi Arabia where I
was received like a king. I spent most of the time in a village situated
a few hours south of Riyadh. I came across a very different lifestyle. I
slept in an open space under the stars on big beautiful red carpets.

Abu Hussein sacrificed several sheep and invited all the villagers for a
dinner. I never had attention like this in my whole life and we were
mutually appreciative of each other. One evening after dinner, we went
out to the desert to look at their camels. One of the boys milked a
camel and offered me some of this fresh milk. After drinking some, I
commented that this camel milk was absolutely delicious. Then Abu
Husseins father said to me, If you become a Muslim, I shall give you ten
camels. I responded promptly, If you become a Christian, I shall give
you ten camels. After briefly experiencing life in the desert of Saudi
Arabia, I returned back to America.

My New Career
-------------

After working for two years as a marketing representative for a
publishing company in America, I found a job as an English foreign
language instructor in Abu Dhabi, UAE. I really enjoyed this kind of
work. I decided that teaching English as a foreign language would be my
career from then on. Moreover, this two-year experience provided me with
more exposure to Arab culture. As with my former Muslim roommates, I
also found the people in this country to be extremely generous,
confident and social. Nonetheless, I was feeling a bit homesick and
decided to return home.

My Experience in Las Vegas
--------------------------

After a short time, I went to Las Vegas, Nevada since it has a high
concentration of foreign immigrants who mostly work in the casinos. I
put an advertisement in a newspaper offering to teach English as a
foreign language. Fortunately, I got a few

students quickly. I taught them in my kitchen with the use of a small
blackboard placed on the wall. At that time I  
 realized that Las Vegas didnt have an English language institute, so my
colleague and I established one in the heart of the city. The business
of the institute flourished. However in my free time, I took part in
some of the sinful activities of Las Vegas. This kind of lifestyle made
me sick of myself. I soon got tired of these social evils in the
society. Life appeared meaningless and confused. I wanted to have a
change again so I faxed my resume to Abu Hussein for him to help me find
work in Saudi Arabia. To my surprise, I was offered a job to teach
English to employees of a petrochemical company in Jubail.

Within one month I was there.

Repentance
----------

I took many books to Jubail on various topics. One day I was reading a
book on philosophy. The book suggested the need for making sincere
repentance to God. I had never made repentance in my life. I started
recalling all people I had wronged and the wrong I did to myself in that
process. Then, I repented hoping for the best. After a short time, I
thought that perhaps God had accepted my repentance. A clear indicator
of this acceptance was that God put specific people in my life and
allowed certain situations to occur that guided me to the right path. I
would like to share some of these circumstances with the reader.

The Meaning of Freedom
----------------------

I was with Abu Hussein. He also had a friend visiting him. I mentioned
to them that I was used to having a lot more freedom in America than
what was present in their country. The visitor said, It depends on what
you mean by freedom. In your part of the world, no matter how well
parents teach morality to their children inside the home, as soon as
they go outside, they generally encounter the society in contradiction
to that morality.

On the other hand, in most Muslim communities, the morals taught to the
children at home are very similar to what they find away from home. So
who really has the freedom here?

Like it or not, I was inclined to agree with his interpretation of
freedom in which immorality tends to be prevalent in societies that are
overly liberal. In this case, too much freedom often becomes a negative
aspect of society, not a positive one. From his analogy, I also
understood that the Islamic guidelines and restrictions sanctioning
human behavior in Muslim societies are not meant to curtail human
freedom; rather, they serve to define and dignify human freedom.

The Game of Roulette
--------------------

A further opportunity to learn about Islam arose when I was invited to
sit with a group of Muslims over dinner. After mentioning to the group
that I had been living in Las Vegas, Nevada before coming to the Middle
East, a Muslim from America said, You must make sure you die as a good
Muslim. I immediately asked him to explain what he meant. He said, If
you die as a non-Muslim, it is like playing the game of roulette in
which you put all of your chips (all of your life, including your deeds
and your particular belief in God) on only one number, just hoping that
perhaps by the Mercy of God, you will enter Paradise on Judgement Day.
In contrast, if you die as a good Muslim, it is like spreading your
chips all over the roulette board, so that every number is covered. In
this way, no matter what number the ball falls on, youre safe. In other
words, living and dying as a good Muslim is the best insurance you will
not go to Hell, and at the same time, it is the best investment that
youll go to Paradise. As a former resident of Las Vegas, I could
directly relate to this example with the game of roulette.

At this point, I recognized that it is the duty of all human beings to
seek the truth to this life and not just blindly accept the

religion that their society or parents follow. I also determined that I
would not find the truth until I established a relationship with God.
That being the case, I decided to concentrate on those religions
emanating from Divine revelations linked with specific prophets and
messengers. Hence, I chose to continue my search for the truth within
Judeo-Christianity and Islam.

Even though I grew up as a Christian, I had been bewildered about
Christianity. I felt like I inherited a mysterious religion beyond
understanding. I believe it was for this reason that I was a Christian
by name but not in practice. Whats more, I realized my confusion about
Christian beliefs caused me to be in a state of non-religiousness.
Nevertheless, while I was searching for the truth, I had a chance to
sincerely re-examine those beliefs I inherited from my parents, yet
never bothered to scrutinize.

Not an Ordinary Picnic
----------------------

Some Muslims in Jubail arranged a special picnic for non-Muslims. After
playing some games, we ate a delicious dinner. Finally, we heard a short
lecture about Islam. I was shocked to learn that the Muslims believe in
all the prophets and also in all the revelations of God in their
original form. Moreover, I learned the Quran was the last revelation
sent for  
 the sake of all mankind, and Mohammad(pbuh) was the last Prophet and
Messenger who received this revelation. As the Seal of Prophets, he has
served as the best example for all to follow.

Upon leaving the picnic, they gave us a few booklets on comparative
religion. One of them contained a dialogue between a Muslim and a
Christian. The following conclusions were evident from the study of this
booklet.

a) The real competition in this life is racing with one another to do
good deeds to please the Creator, not the competition of pursuing more
and more wealth or fame.

b) Hell is surrounded by lustful desires. These desires lead you to
nothing else except to the roaring flames of Hellfire. On the other
hand, Paradise is surrounded by challenges and if you look beyond them,
you will find Paradise.

c) I found out that the Bible warns against adding or removing
information from its teachings, which is evidently what happened. (See
Jeremiah 8:8-9; Revelations 22:18-19). God addresses this point in the
Quran as well, So woe to those who write the scripture with their own
hands, then say, This is from God, in order to exchange it for a small
price. Woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for
what they earn. (2:79) Consequently, I was surprised to find out about
hundreds of verses in the Bible which reveal a lack of harmony in
Christian beliefs. According to these materials, God was One prior to
Jesus (pbuh). Likewise, Jesus (pbuh) propagated the belief in One God.
However, after Jesus (pbuh), Christianity emphasized the Trinity instead
of the Oneness of God. Also, before Jesus (pbuh), God was without sons
and equals. Similarly, Jesus (pbuh) said he was Gods messenger, whereas
after his time, Christianity stressed that he is Gods son or God
Himself.

After reading these booklets, I finally determined that the Christian
perception of God is very illogical indeed: God becomes man, which He
created, and then allows himself to suffer and die as a sacrifice at the
hands of His very own creation to cleanse mankind of sin inherited from
Adam(pbuh) and his descendants. Belief in this concept became the source
of salvation according to the Church.

Visiting a Mosque as a non-Muslim
---------------------------------

I happened to be shopping with Abu Hussein and another friend when it
was the time for prayer. We went to a mosque where they advised me to
wash up in a certain way and then follow

them in the rituals of the prayer. I did this by looking out of the
corner of my eye. I sat still after this peaceful experience and was
somewhat nervous since I did not know what else to do. I, however,
realized that non-Muslims are allowed to enter mosques under certain
conditions. My friends asked me to wait outside the mosque during the
congregational prayer to avoid any misunderstandings with the Muslims.

Correspondingly, I was with my Saudi friends on another occasion when it
was again prayer time. They said, Why dont you pray with us? Ask God for
forgiveness, guidance to the truth and express gratitude to Him. At the
end of the prayer I felt relief and contentment, which I had never felt
before. From that point, I was always looking forward to praying with
them, even though I was not a Muslim and I was not praying correctly.

Overcoming Obstacles
--------------------

There were several obstacles preventing me from converting to Islam. The
fear of losing life-long friends and family members was predominantly on
my mind. Furthermore, leaving certain vices in one go was not easy since
conversion demanded a total change in lifestyle. I was mentally not yet
ready to overcome these hurdles, even though Islamic practices were very
soothing to me both mentally and spiritually. I admitted to an American
Muslim friend in Jubail that I was very close to embracing Islam, but I
needed a push forward. Consequently, he gave me an Islamic video to
watch.

An Inspiring Video
------------------

Once again I was invited to a gathering at Abu Husseins residence. There
were many young Saudi men in this group. After dinner they engaged in
conversation, but I wasnt able to speak Arabic. I noticed that there was
a TV and VCR in this room. I remembered I had that video from my
American Muslim friend in the car. Shortly thereafter, I started
watching this video

which posed a very important question: What is the purpose of life? I
was uncertain just as many other people in the world are unsure about
the answer to this question. Needless to say, I learned a few important
points from this video.

The lecturer in the video commented very precisely on what the purpose
of life is. He said that the purpose of life is Islam or total peaceful
submission to the Will of Allah(God). I was surprised to hear such a
short answer to what I thought was such a complex question.

An additional point was that, unlike other religions or beliefs, the
term Islam is not associated with any particular person or place. God
has named the religion in the following Quranic verse: Indeed, the
Religion in the sight of God is Islam (3:19) Anyone who embraces Islam
is called a Muslim regardless of that persons race, sex or nationality.
This is one of the reasons why Islam is a universal religion.

Prior to my search for the truth, I had never seriously considered Islam
as an option because of the constant negative portrayal of Muslims in
the media. Similarly, it was disclosed in this video, that although
Islam is characterized by high moral standards, not all Muslims uphold
these standards. I learned the same can be said about adherents of other
religions. I finally understood that we should not judge a religion by
the actions of its followers alone  
 because all humans are sinful. On that account, we should not judge
Islam by the actions of its proponents, but by its revelation (the
Quran) and by the sayings and actions of Prophet Mohammad(pbuh).

Lastly, the lecturer guided the viewer in decision making by presenting
simple examples, as in the following: If you are a Christian and want to
become a Muslim, it is like having an expensive suit that is a bit too
large. Instead of throwing it away,

you just make certain alterations so it fits you better. In other words,
you do not cast away all your previous  
 beliefs and practices that youve had since your childhood. You rather
take them with you to Islam and incorporate them into your life as a
Muslim, with modifications and due refinements.

The Aftermath
-------------

After viewing the video my heart and mind were absolutely convinced that
Islam is the truth. I experienced the weight of disbelief and sins
flying off my body. I felt so light as if I were rising above the earth.
This experience, coupled with the long process of reasoning, solved the
purpose of life puzzle. It revealed Islam as the truth, thereby
replenishing my spiritual landscape with belief, purpose, direction and
action. From this experience,  
 I deduced that man might neglect the guidance of God and establish his
own standards of living. Ultimately, however, he will discover it was
only a mirage that eluded him.

My Insistence on Accepting Islam
--------------------------------

I called Abu Hussein and walked with him to the passage leading to
another room in order to get away from the gathering. I told him that I
wanted to accept Islam right now. He advised me to study more about
Islam before embracing it. I insisted that I wanted to accept it now and
then without any delay. On my insistence he led me in saying the
*shahada* or  
 the formal testimony of faith to become a Muslim. Abu Hussein then
announced my conversion to the group. They were surprised and overjoyed.
Everybody hugged me one by one. They advised me to take a bath for
purification purposes and start offering prayer as best as I can. I
started praying regularly in the mosque the next day.

I was subsequently reminded that this formal testimony to become a
Muslim confirms ones belief in all the prophets of

God, along with all of His Divine revelations in their original forms,
thereby updating and completing ones religion to the last of the
prophets Muhammad(pbuh) and to the final revelation of God[the Quran].
The following point became overwhelmingly clear to me: Had Jesus(pbuh)
been the last prophet of God and had the Gospel been the final book of
revelation, I would have just followed that creed. As a result, I have
naturally chosen to follow Islam, which represents the final revelation
from the Creator with Prophet Mohammad (pbuh) as the seal of the
prophets, who is the best example for mankind to follow.

Muslim Name
-----------

After two days I went to the mosque to participate in the Friday
congregational prayer. Abu Hussein suggested that I repeat the
***shahada*** again in front of the congregation to have more of an
impact. I agreed. We were both sitting in the mosque waiting for the
sermon. Abu Hussein asked me, What Muslim name you would like to have so
that the Imam(prayer leader) can introduce you with your Muslim name? I
told him, I am not sure. He should introduce me with my American name.
Abu Hussein kept reciting the Quran sitting by my side. Then he came
across the word Yahya. He touched me with his elbow and said quietly to
me, How does Yahya sound to you as your name? I asked, What does it
mean? He said, John the Baptist. Its other meaning is to live. I said,
That will do  
 since I know of John the Baptist from the Bible. Furthermore, this name
signifies a new life for me in Islam. It is, indeed, an appropriate
Muslim name for me. After the prayer, the Imam invited me to repeat the
***shahada*** in front of the very large congregation. About three
hundred people congratulated me and hugged me individually waiting
anxiously for their turns.  
 Many people said, Accepting Islam is the best decision you have ever
made in your life. I was surprised that all the people

cared to personally congratulate me. It raised my morale and spirits
very high.

When I look back on this experience of becoming a Muslim, I believe it
happened because it was the Will of Allah that I had an intense
curiosity to learn about other cultures, followed by a sincere desire to
find the truth of this life. Allah knows best and all Praise is due to
Him!!!

Goal of Life
------------

I was told to learn more about Islam every day and try to put it into
practice. I was also told that I was not responsible for what I didnt
know about in Islam initially. I appreciated this flexibility in Islam.
After a short time, I understood that Islam is in direct contrast to the
western focus on the self. Islam tells us to look beyond ourselves and
our vain desires. Islam guides and motivates us to focus on Allah. By
doing so, we begin to fulfil the purpose of our life, which is to
believe in and worship Almighty God and thus attain peace with our
Creator and ourselves. Hence, Islam serves as the goal and the purpose
of life.

Islamic Education and Growth
----------------------------

I was fortunate to be in an Islamic country when I accepted Islam
because of the presence of many knowledgeable Muslims along with an
abundance of Islamic materials. I could readily understand and
appreciate what I was learning because Islamic teachings were being put
into practice in the society. I attended a weekly Islamic meeting with
individuals from many lands. We met once a week for four years. We
studied Quranic reading and interpretation, along with some memorization
of the Quran. We also received extensive education in various aspects of
Islam at a basic level. This Islamic education provided me with a good
foundation upon which to further purify myself.

Islamic Marriage
----------------

Marriage is highly recommended in Islam. I realized that by marrying an
Arabic-speaking Muslim, I would be giving my children one of the best
possible gifts, which is the Arabic language. Hence, I married a Syrian
lady, and with the Mercy of Allah, our children are doing well in Arabic
and are learning the Quran. When I visited America, my family inquired
about marriage in Islam. I explained to them that the obligations of
spouses are assigned by the Creator and are not man-made rules. For that
reason, these guidelines are perfect and there is no fear of any foul
play if we adhere to them sincerely.

Reaction of the Family
----------------------

My acceptance of Islam stunned my family initially. Finally they said,
If Islam makes you happy, we are happy for you. Thus, we mutually
respected each other.

The Shahada of My Mother
------------------------

My sister called me from America and said that our mother was extremely
ill. My wife and I rushed from Saudi Arabia to America. During our stay
there, I asked my mother, Do you believe in one God? She said, Yes. I
said to her say, La ilaha illa Allah. She repeated this in Arabic. She
also repeated the translation of this sentence in English, There is no
deity but Allah. After a few days I asked her, Do you believe in all the
Prophets like Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Mohammad? She said,
Yes. I said, Then repeat after me, ***La ilaha illa Allah Mohammadan
Rasoolu llah*.** She also said it in English, i.e., There is no deity
but Allah and Mohammad is His Messenger. She left us about five days
after her acceptance of Islam. I thank Allah for guiding my mother to
the right path during her last few days in this world. When I reflect
upon it, I recall that she usually cared for others needs more than her
own. Evidently, Allah has been very merciful to her. Allah knows best!!!

Her Extraordinary Observation
-----------------------------

It was amazing what my mother said to me during her last days in this
world. She said, There is a golden light coming out of your forehead. I
told her that it is there because we believe in and pray to Allah. Her
observation is described in the Holy Quran: the Day that Allah will not
disgrace the Prophet[(Mohammad(pbuh) and those who believe with him.
Their light will run forward before them They will say: Our Lord! Keep
perfect our light for us [and do not put it off till we cross over the
Sirat(a slippery bridge over the Hell) safely] and grant us forgiveness
(66:8)

**Holy Quran 22:8*****  
 And among men there is he who disputes about Allah without knowledge
and without guidance and without an illuminating book.***
