Brother Mubarak
===============

I am from a good and loving family, and we were raisedÂ believing in
Christian principles. From the time I was in my early twenties, I have
always had trouble understanding one very important teaching of
christianity. Why do I need a saviour? Why isnt God powerful enough to
forgive me by himself without the sacrifice of another (Jesus)? No one
ever gave me a very good answer, but I still believed and practiced my
faith.

Until recently, I was an over-the-road truck driver. I was in a
truckstop in Iowa eating, and a driver sat down next to me and got very
creative ordering off of the menu, avoiding eating meat. I asked him if
he was a vegetarian and he said no, he was a Muslim, and he only ate
meat when it had been properly and humanely slaughtered. We talked for a
while, and he  
 brought up my age old question about God having the power to forgive
all by himself, without any help! He gave me an english translation of
the Holy Quran and told me to read it, and my questions would be
answered.

When I started reading al-Fatihah I thought about what a beautiful
prayer it was, and so I started praying it a few times every day. It
became my favourite Psalm. It seemed to so fully and completely address
my inner desire to praise God. And the rest of the Holy Quran! I felt as
though every hidden question about life I had ever had was being
answered one after another. About six to eight weeks passed. And
finally, one Friday, I parked my 18 wheeler, and hunted down a mosque. I
was in the

Twin Cities, and it wasnt easy! I found the Islamic Community Center,
but it was closed for Friday. I looked through the window and saw a
poster on the wall about an Eid bake sale at the Masjid. I wrote down
the address and drove there. I found the mosque, and attended the Friday
Prayers. The sermon was very topical to things I wondered about. I felt
as though the Imam knew I was coming, and had prepared a sermon just for
me. Of course, now I know...Allah knew I was coming, and had a sermon
prepared just for me! And then the prayer...I was never so moved in my
entire life! There are no words that I know of in the English language
to describe the wholeness that washed over me. Here I was, with all
these men, different colors, different nationalities, rich and poor, all
lining up shoulder-to-shoulder to pray together as brothers. I lined up
with them. I didnt know what I was doing, I didnt know what was being
said (I didnt know they were beginning with my beloved al-Fatihah!) but
I knew this was true worship. I knew I had come home. At the conclusion
of the prayers, I asked one of the leaders, Brother Hamdi, How do I
join? He talked with me for several minutes, asked about my journey to
that point. He asked what I knew, and what I believed. He asked what was
my desire. He told me what Gods desire was. I said This makes so much
sense. Then Bro. Hamdi said Lets do it!. So he had the brothers sit back
down, and led me through my *shahada*. When I was finished, all the
brothers shouted Allahu Akbar! (God is the Greatest!) three times. They
all embraced me and said Welcome Home Brother. Welcome home indeed!

That night, as I was driving my truck across the clear, cold Minnisota
night, I looked out my window and saw that the moon was a crescent moon.
Welcome home indeed!

As I became acclimatized to my new life, learning the basic halals and
harams of eating, dressing, behavior--I was a little overwhelmed at
first. Every Friday would find me in a different

city in a different Mosque. They were always my Brothers, and it was
really terrific to see that nothing important changed whether I was in a
mosque that had been built as a mosque and had hundreds of members, or
if it was an old church building converted into a mosque, or a house
with only a handful of Brothers. It was always the same. But I did lack
continuity in my spiritual life. I bet I was really a sight pulling my
big truck into rest areas on the Interstate, and hopping out to perform
Salat! I prayed that I would get the continuity I needed to be more
integrated into Islam. And, AlHamdulillah! My prayers were answered! I
suffered a detached retina and am now unable to drive a truck. I am back
in college studying to be a school teacher. And I am the member of
al-Rasool Islamic Center in Salt Lake City. The Brothers have taken me
under their wings and are providing me with the continuity (and sense of
community that is central to Islam) that I needed. I help out with the
Eid Committee(my speciality is clean-up!) and the Muharrem preparations.
We are a small, but very active shia community here. I am so blessed. It
is all such a blessing! And that is how I got my name; Mubarak (which
means blessed/blessing) because I feel so blessed to have Islam in my
life. It is such a blessing to say: I am a Muslim! My hope and prayer is
that others may come this great gift from God. The gift of Islam!

**Holy Quran 27:77*****  
 And most surely it is a guidance and a mercy for the believers.***
