Islam and Me
============

My name is Lyndsey-Yazmeen Koenig; I am 17 years old and I live in Maine
in the northeastern United States of America. I have been a Muslim since
September 18<sup>th</sup>, 2001. This is my story of Islam and me.

Jewish people celebrate Hanukah and are a different religion than us
different from Christianity. Judaism and Christianity are the two main
religions we should focus on As a teacher of mine from ninth grade
reported to me I knew nothing of Islam. Nine years in Public School and
didnt hear one word about Islam. To be honest with you up until 9\\11 I
have never seen a hijaabed woman.

It seems as though this was a terror attack aimed at the U.S.A. by
someone or something that hated us simply hated us. It was the day after
9\\11 and I was watching the news, as I have done nonstop since then,
and I heard about Islam and Muslims. I sat there wondering what they
were. Right then I felt a string being pulled inside my brain sending a
wave to my fingers telling me, research, research, and research! This
happens to me a lot, I owe much of my knowledge to this reflex, which I
adore so much. So the string was pulled letting the dam of knowledge
came rushing towards me.

I run to the bathroom, bedroom find the comfiest pair of clothes I have
preparing myself for a long day of reading and research. Grab a cup of
coffee and put my long hair in its famous rats nest on the top of my
head. Turn the computer on and get

comfy in the leather chair. Cold to the touch, but comforting like my
pilots chair on my way to wisdom. I proceed to the search engine Dad has
raved about; I type in Muslim and press the magic go key! My eyes fill
with colors of red, white, blue letters of m, i Links! Links! Links!
Which to chose, theyre all so beautiful!? There are the regular
sitesthen there are the exceptional sites! The first one I ventured into
was www.islamonline.net taught me the basics but I still yearned for
more. I continued to visit numerous websites but I still couldnt find
exactly what I was looking for. I wanted to talk to a young Muslim girl
my age. It took me about a week of serious searching and scaling almost
all of the internet (probably, LoL) to find an e-mail pen pal site. Now
the real story begins.

I filed my pen-pal form on the site writing, Non-Muslim seeking to speak
with Muslim young woman to find out more about Islam and hoped for the
best. Within three days I received an e-mail from a young woman named
Maryam who is a born Muslim, but her mom is a revert. Maryam and I began
talking just about school, family, friends, and our problems. We became
very close friends, almost sisters. As I was continuing to watch the
American Media, which I would later find out is very bias, and usually
sides with the Jewish people, I had more and more questions on Islam.
Except this time I actually had someone to ask the specific questions
to. The first question I asked was Do u think UBL did this? and she kind
of avoided my question (which I later found out why and will explain) so
I went on. The next question was about the scarf (hijaab); she answered
me with unwavering attention and precision. The hijaab was the hardest
thing to put into action for me (I will explain later). But Maryam
(bless her soul) did her best and told me everything she could and what
she couldnt she gave me URLs which I could read more information if I
wanted. Then there were the rules about boyfriends, pork, and more. The
rules

werent the things that caught my attention, it was the benefits, love,
structure, discipline, and most of all spirituality.

I was never religious before Islam. I went to church maybe a total of
five times in my life. My mother grew up in a strict Roman Catholic
family in New Hampshire with 6 children. My father grew up in a
Protestant\\Atheist household really not practicing ever once. So our
religious life in the Koenig family was not very strong. I can remember
going to church as a child and hating it. The other times I can only
remember are funerals and weddings. I just remember listening to the
Priests babble on and on never made sense to me. Once in a great while
when I was feeling low I would read some of the Bible but always felt
like it was a boggled mess that was so difficult to understand and
comprehend. Not just that but it didnt make sense to me at all. Before
Islam I always felt like there was a big chunk of my heart missing yet I
didnt know what it was.

So, how do I convert? I asked Maryam on an early fall day. Take the
shaada. I took the shaada. Now I am a Muslim. The date is September
18<sup>th</sup>, 2001. My heart felt full, I felt I have a purpose, life
inside me to live.

I went to good ol Wal-Mart and bought some plain handkerchiefs blue,
red, green, and pink. I decided to wear these as my souped up version of
makeshift hijaab. I have worn handkerchiefs over my hair before; it was
not a big difference for me. Then came the days of wearing the
handkerchiefs for 2 weeks, maybe three and going out one damp cold
morning without it. It was almost as though I couldnt function. I
realized its time to try the full hijaab. I met another sister, Umme
(means Mom in Arabic, but shes like a mom to me), from Maryland via the
computer. Because I was looking for someone to send me some books, maybe
some extra hijaabs. Bless Ummes soul because I went to the mailbox one
morning and got the beloved yellow slip saying you have a box so I went
literally POSTAL

(no pun intended, yeah right) wondering if it was from Umme or my Aunt
my aunt always sends me tons and tons of hair products which I cant get
enough of. Here it issomeone sent you a lot of stuff, said the Postal
Worker and I look up and to my amazement theres a box as two times wider
then me (and trust me, thats wide) and half my height!!! My eyes open
with wonder and shear excitement! I lug the box out to the car and
squeeze it into my moms Nissan Altima, which thank goodness is a large
car, if I would have had my Saab I would have had to tie it to the roof,
and flew home as fast as I could. Its a box of treasures!!! Ma come
look!! I cant believe this!! I said to my mother, screaming with
excitement almost tearing up because I couldnt believe a person could
ever be this generous. This was my second encounter of the love and
sincerity of Islam (of course Maryam).

The box contained treasures. Dresses, Hijaabs, Books, Pamplets, Quran,
Pocket sized Quran, tapes, and the most beloved and used present of all
The Beginners Guide to Prayer. I still have this pamphlet now and its
falling apart I still have to use it on the last part of my prayer
(where youre sitting) because I dont know all of it yet. I have never
used a book so much in my life.

I took out the hijaabs and the dresses and I wore my favorite outfit of
all.

Now comes the story of hijaab; the best benefit Allah has given to us
women. To start the story off correctly I should explain how my mother
reacted to me being a Muslim. She at first didnt understand what exactly
it was. Luckily I had Maryam to help me out on this one as well. Her
mother, is a revert and she had to go through the same thing I was going
through (telling her family) and she was nice enough to send my mother
an e-mail explaining and trying to help. She helped a lot; mom was a bit
more relaxed. It took about a week for her to warm up to Islam; to this
day she still asks questions and I couldnt be more happy

to answer them.

Onto hijaab story! The first day I went out in hijaab was in my new
drabs (above) and could not feel more proud. There are not enough words
in the English, French, and German dictionaries to explain the way I
felt. Since this was about almost 2 months after 9\\11 everyone was
still on shaky ground about Muslims. I thought, living in the sticks of
Maine, that everyone would be so mean to me because a lot of people here
99.99% of them are Christian and about 50% are racist. I was wrong; I
totally underestimated my own people. People were looking at me (of
course) but not in a negative way. I thought the hijaab was going to be
a total mess (the first time I heard of it) but today it is the best
blessing Allah has given to us. The benefits [to list] would take me
years, if not centuries. The most important of all is the modesty in
front of men. I always, since I began to become a woman, have felt like
a sirloin steak being picked over by men every day! The only time when I
feel safe and secure is in my Islamic Dressthat consists of hijaab
(covering hair, neck and ears) and loose fitting clothes. Until this
day, anytime which I go out without hijaab (which, alhumdulilah has been
few) I feel like I am completely naked! The hijaab, for women, is the
best thing possible. I would also like to point out [to the non-Muslims]
this important fact! In the Muslim countries (Iran, Pakistan,
Afghanistan, etc.) where 99.99% of the women cover, the rate of rape and
sexual assault are so low they barely exist. This is a fact (NOTE: Get
the statistics from the sisters!)- Not just a rumor.

The rest of my story is incredibly amazing. I have been living the
Muslim life, alhumdulilah, and I have been trying to do my best. I have
since stopped a lot of haraam (sinful) actions and continue to work on
getting rid of the rest. The last part of my story is the most amazing
part. I would never guess this would ever happen. My father, who I said
earlier has no religion, started to see the change Islam had on my life
(for the positive)

and he took note of this. I was on the telephone with him one night and
he asked me to send him some information on what Islam consists of. When
I heard this I said to myself, This is the pure actions of Allah; no
one, or thing, could have possibly done such an act of pure grace. This
is Islam in brief, and this is Islam and me.

Thank you (Salaams),

**Authors note**: I would like to dedicate This to Maryam Ezzedine, Umme
Zahid, And Allah.

**Holy Quran 28:85*****  
 Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination. Say: My Lord knows best him who has brought the
guidance and him who is in manifest error.***
