It Filled Me With Peace and Happiness
=====================================

My folks believed in God, but did not practice their faith. I was raised
as a devote Christian with my Grandparents being heavily involved with
Church activities and members of the board. As I grew up I was extremely
well versed in all the song hymns and scriptures (as well as I went to a
private school for elementary).

When I went to college I went to a Christian University. It was there
that I was first exposed to Islam. We were required to learn of other
faiths; I believe this was to strengthen our faith. This exposure did
not strengthen my faith, but rather created doubts and questions.

The odd thing is that while studying a little bit of Islam I met a
Muslim man that I befriended who introduced me to their community of
friends where I met a man that is now my husband. When married I still
had not converted nor interested in conversion. I knew that there was
only one faith and it was the path of Christianity. I had no intentions
of converting my husband and he had no intentions of converting me.
After about two years of marriage we decided to have baby and thats when
everything started to change for me.

My husband had been diagnosed with Kidney failure and I was two months
pregnant. Times were difficult needless to say. I found myself angry and
praying to God. I found little comfort in turning to God. At some point
I think I just disconnected from God and my faith. When my daughter was
about 2 I started to think about her future and her up bringing. I knew
there was a God, but had lost my relationship and could not raise a
child into that type of world. I begin to look into Islam, as I knew my
husband would not allow me to raise her in my faith. I did not share
this with him because I did not want to be pushed into something I knew
only a little bit about. I began going to the mosque and meeting with
the Imam as I knew he was an educated man in Islam who could answer my
questions in great detail. I struggled with the thought of conversion,
as it was so ingrained in my head that Christianity was the only correct
faith. I started to analyze my previous beliefs with what I was now
learning and realized that I had some decisions to make and had to be
honest with myself and reasons for even considering a new faith. When I
stepped outside of the box it became apparent to me that I was following
Christianity because that was what I knew and the only faith I really
ever learned about. I realized that there were so many missing pieces to
the puzzle in my faith and lack of understanding why certain routines
and actions were being taken within the faith.

At first I thought, Oh you are just doing this because you want your
daughter to believe in something. It may be that which started the
search, but it is not what ultimately made me decide to convert. After
grilling a ton of people and reading a ton of books, I realized that
Islam was a way of life that provided guidelines and with understanding.
The day that I took *Shahadah* it filled me with peace and happiness.
The idea of conversion

also meant sharing the information with my family so that they would
understand a few changes in my life. Change is always a struggle, but
with our personal Jihad we grow and learn and this makes us stronger
Muslims.

**Holy Quran 31:5*****  
 These are on a guidance from their Lord, and these are they who are
successful.***
