J. Scott Lynch Saeed Muhammad
=============================

I converted to Islam about 21 months ago. My journey to Islam was a long
one that spanned over more than 2 decades.

All-American Boy
----------------

Allah is a permanent reality that works in the lives of those who hear
His message. Not having a personal relationship with my Creator tugged
at my heart and mind for nearly two decades. Then, I discovered Islam. I
would not be considered in the West as a stereotypical Muslim. I believe
the popular Western stereotype of a Muslim male is something like the
following: dark skin, dark hair, bearded, Middle-Eastern or Asian
descent, dressed in modest clothing and possibly a head covering. No, Im
the complete opposite of this. I am in many ways the epitome of the
all-American boy: blond-hair, blue-eyed, corn-fed Protestant/Christian
background. However, Islam and Muslims take on many faces, many
backgrounds, many cultures, many nationalities and many tongues. Our
family moved a few times in my youth, but my world was limited to the
heart of the Bible-belt in Augusta, GA, and Spartanburg and Greenville,
SC, all fairly large communities, but all offered little in religious
diversity. I had normal, loving, God-fearing parentsthey are still
happily married today after more than 30 years, and one younger brother.
I grew up as a PK (for those of you outside of Protestant Christianity,
I was a preachers kid). My father was a Southern Baptist minister for
more than 25 years. As you can imagine, for the first 18 years of my
life, I attended church

every Sunday morning, Sunday night, Wednesday night and any number of
other nights that the church lights were on. I grew up believing in God
and Jesus, or, should I say, fearing God and Jesus. Like most
adolescents, I was afraid not to believe in the religion of my parents.
However, something was wrong. I can recall thinking, even at age 10,
this Jesus story just doesnt make sense to me. Even at this young age, I
didnt accept the divinity of Jesus and the notion of Christian salvation
(i.e., Jesus dying for my sins). As all my church friends were getting
saved, baptized and confirmed during their pre-teen and teenage years
(this all seemed like more of a rite of passage than a sincere decision
for most, or just the popular thing to do), I quietly sat in the church
pews questioning the fundamentals of Christian theology. My parents, my
church-friends and the various churches my father pastored throughout my
childhood all prayed for my salvation.

Then, one Sunday night, I succumbed to the pressure. I was 12 years old
and my family was at the First Baptist Church of North Spartanburg (in
Spartanburg, South Carolina). After a fiery sermon, which obviously
moved a lot of people, my father came to me and said, Son, do you want
to ask Jesus into your heart? Its about time you do so. Tired of all the
solicitations, tired of all the Scott, were praying for you, tired of
always feeling like the one who didnt belong, I lied to my father and
said, Yes POPS. That night, I repeated after my father and supposedly
accepted Jesus into my heart. I was presented to the church as a new
Christian, baptized and immediately became part of the Christian
community; although, I was very empty inside. For the next 5 years, I
put on the charade of a good preachers kid. I attended Bible studies,
went on summer mission trips and even had a couple saves (individuals
becoming Christian) contributed to me. This was all under the veil of a
big lie, that night when I was 12 years old, the night

that I supposedly became a Christian myself, I never asked Jesus in my
heart. True, I went through the motions, but it meant nothing to me.

When I graduated high school and it was time to go off to college, I
only thought of one thing: religious freedom. I viewed the opportunity
as the chance to move away from my parents and explore the religions of
the world. I moved about 70 miles away from my parents to Rock Hill, SC,
enrolled in Winthrop College and majored in religion. However, moving
from one part of the Bible-belt to another part of the Bible-belt didnt
help my search. Rock Hill was a smaller town than I grew up in and there
were even more churches per capita. Once again, the only religious
diversity was in the form of what favor of Christianity you wanted for
the week. I did manage to run across a couple freethinking religion
professors that mentored me in exploring religion. If anything, they
pointed me to many different sources to satisfy my quest. I rarely
pushed the envelope of my comfort level and only ended up exploring
different forms of Christianity. During the two years I spent in little
Rock Hill, SC, I attended Roman Catholic, Greek Orthodox, Pentecostal
and many non-affiliated/community churches. It would not be until
another couple years before I would experience non-Christian religious
expression.

Beyond the Chosen People Vision
-------------------------------

Unsatisfied with the lack of religious diversity, I left Rock Hill, SC
for the University of South Carolina in the states capital of Columbia
(metro population: half-million). I thought, Surely I can find other
religions in a city this size. Once again, I majored in religion. While
in Columbia for the remainder of my undergraduate degree, I became
extremely interested in Judaism, but not on a spiritual level, but
rather, on an academic level. I was attracted to the Hebrew language. I
took more than 4 years of a combined Bible and Modern Hebrew course and

excelled at reading the original scriptures and reading Jewish prayers.
In fact, because one of my professors was a local rabbi, I even taught
6-grade Hebrew school for a term (to this day, a decade later, I can
still read the Hebrew texts). I was very involved with Judaism in
Columbia, SC, but much like Christianity, its fundamental beliefs seemed
empty to me. Inside, I asked questions like, If the Jews are considered
Gods chosen people where does that leave me? While at the University of
South Carolina, I was exposed to a glimpse of Islam. I took a class
entitled Islamic Institutions and Traditions. It was taught by a
non-Muslim who had taught university in Egypt, so he seemed to be an
authority on Islam but the class did little for me other than provide a
good textbook background for me. Half the class consisted of Muslims, so
I think the class integrity was kept in check. Half way through the
class, I did visit the local mosque and witnessed salah (prayer) for the
first time. Although I didnt understand what seemed like an impersonal
approach to prayer and worship I was impressed by Islams simplicity and
humbleness (e.g. prostrating before almighty Allah) in prayer and
worship. My brief encounter with Islam, both in a college class and my
visit to a mosque, planted a seed that would grow for the next ten
years. After my undergraduate studies, I went out into the workforce.
For the next 5 years, I withdrew from religion and became what I
considered to be agnostic. I knew there was one God, however, I didnt
know a lot about Him. For me, Christianity and Judaism did not address
the issue of the proper worship of one God. My professional positions
took me all across the United States where I finally settled in Fort
Collins, Colorado. After waking up day after day to the beautiful
mountains, prairies and expanses of Colorado, I began to question the
concept of God again. How could there be so much beauty and order in the
world and God not intimately reveal Himself to mankind? I began to
recall the religious

experience Id had over the past 10-15 years. I looked at Christianity
and said No. I still couldnt accept the Jesus theology. I looked at
Judaism. Again, Â No. I couldnt live with the Jewish customs and belief
in a chosen people. Finally, I began to look at Islam. My impression of
Islam was a combination of several things. It consisted of the one class
I took in university, my one visit to the mosque in Columbia, SC, and
then the media (Ive now discovered that the U.S. media does not
accurately display Islam). I began researching the fundamental beliefs
of Islam. I decided to strip away the stereotypes and examine exactly
what Islam is all about. After some study, I found the following:

1-Islam has the strongest declaration of monotheistic faith of any
religion (I said to myself, check, I agree),

2-the belief that God has no partners (again, big check),

3-the belief that God has revealed Himself many times through prophets
and messengers and His message has been confused and distorted by man (I
always had a hard time believing parts of the Bible and its
interpretation, so check for now),

4-that Islam is not just a religion, but an entire way of life (very
appealing, check).

Reading the Quran
-----------------

After reading about Islam, I set out to inquire a little deeper. I set
out to find a Muslim. At the time of my inquiry into Islam, I was
working in a very large company with more than 1000 employees. I
thought, Surely theres a Muslim or two that would be willing to answer
my questions.

My search did not take long. I met a kind, quiet Muslim man named Hani.
I approached the man and told him that I wanted to learn more about his
religion. The first thing Hani recommended was reading the Quran, the
revelation of Allah to

His Prophet Muhammad. Hani even gave me a Quran (In fact, the small
Arabic-English Quran that Brother Hani gave me is still one of my prized
possessions.) Hani inscribed in it the following words that continue to
touch my heart: May Allah guide us to the right path. I began reading
the Quran and to my surprise, it made sense to me. Coming from a
Christian background with a good understanding of Jewish
history/theology, the Quran connected all the dots for me. It confirmed
so many doubts I had about Judaism and Christianity, and provided the
roadmap that I was looking for. After reading only part of the Quran, I
said to myself, I believe in this. I should be a Muslim. But what would
my family say? What would my friends say? What would my co-workers
think? So, for months, I kept my feelings quiet and continued to study
Islam silently. I began to read more books, subscribed to Muslim email
lists, purchased Islamic videos and even began memorizing the prayers.
Out of all the aspects of Islam that I observed, the prayer impacted me
the most. Like the worshipers I saw in the videos, I too wanted to bow
down and prostrate myself before my Holy Creator. Finally, after more
than eight months of inquiry with my friend Hani, he must have sensed I
was ready to take the next step.

In early January 2001, he invited me to the Islamic Center of Fort
Collins (Colorado). It is where more than 1000 Muslims in Northern
Colorado go to pray and worship. He invited me to the Fajr prayer
(before sunrise). At that time, it was around 6:15 a.m. You can imagine
what I was thinking: God, you want me to get up before 6:00 on a cold
Colorado winter morning and go worship you? I recall not sleeping too
well the night before. I felt like I was being called to do something. I
made it down to Islamic Center and met up with Hani. When I went in, I
was instructed to take off my shoes in the vestibule. I walked through a
large communal area and Hani showed me the area

that Muslims perform wudu, the washing and purifying of ones body before
going before Allah. Hani and I then went into the prayer area. The
prayer area was a large, simple, quiet room. There were many books,
mostly in Arabic, on several of the walls, and the room seemed to point
in one direction (the direction to the Ka\`bah in Makkah, or the first
house of worship to Allah). When we walked in, there were 6-7 Muslim men
praying. For the second time, I saw again in-person what I had seen only
in videos, worshipers bowing before their Creator, but with a new
understanding after all the careful reading I did. It sent chills down
my spine. I too wanted to worship as the men before me. The familiar
call to prayer, the Adhan, was called and Hani asked me if I wanted to
pray. I nervously said, Yes! Hani said, Just do as the rest of us do.
And for the first time, I prayed and worshiped Allah as He commands. I
didnt know all the words or their meanings, but it had a powerful
impact. After the prayer, Hani asked me if I would like to become a
Muslim. Again, I said, Yes! I had already practiced and said the
*Shahadah* dozens of times, and on that cold morning on January 3, 2001,
at around 6:30 a.m., I said it in front of those Muslim men.
Al-Hamdulilah (Glory be to Allah), I became a Muslim.

The moment I said La ilaha illaAllah Muhammad Rasooul Allah (There is no
god but Allah, Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah) in front of those men,
I felt a huge burden lifted from my heart. I felt liberated from my
search. For the first time in my life, I knew the Truththe Truth of
Allah. Its now been over a year since I became a Muslim. Has it been
easy? Not always. Have I had struggles, setbacks and doubts? Absolutely,
Im human. However, the past year has been the best of my life. Allah has
blessed me beyond belief. Ive had a peace about me that is
indescribable. And although I cant really describe how it feels, I know
where it comes fromit comes minute-after-minute, hour-after-hour,
day-after-day, trying my best to follow

Allahs true Deen (religion, way of life). My peace is knowing that Allah
has revealed the Truth to me. To my Muslims brothers and sisters and all
non-Muslims, may Allah guide us all to the right path.

**Holy Quran 2:23*****  
 Â And if you are in doubt as to that which We have revealed to Our
servant, then produce a chapter like it and call on your witnesses
besides Allah if you are truthful.***


