Khadijah Jones
==============

From a very young age I have always believed in God. My mum used to send
me and my elder sister to places such as Kiro Club, there we would all
play games and the team leaders would read stories from the bible and
before we went home we would all pray in a circle. This took place at
the Primary School we went to St Marks C of E.

Then to get me into the high school where my mother wanted me to go, St
Peters, I had to go church every Sunday, so my mother has always
encouraged me and my sister to go to religious events, but on the whole
my family is not a practicing Christian family. Everyone in my family
was christened, and all the weddings take place in churches.

I started having contact with my father when I was 11 years old, as he
thought that he was going to die in hospital and he wanted to see me and
my sister before. But Alhamdulilah my dad survived, as he got better me
and my sister stayed in touch with him and his family and this was when
I got introduced to Islam. I used to go and see my father very often, he
lived with my nan and cousin, and next door lived my Aunty, her husband
and her son. Both my Aunty and my cousin had embraced Islam for
different reasons. So as I used to go very often I saw how differently
my Aunty and Cousin lived, they were so dedicated to God it was unreal
to me. I respected them in a big way, As I

used to see them praying I started asking questions, like why?

I didnt really understand as at this point I had only just turned 12
years, so they explained Islam to me in a very easy way. I started going
to Islamic circles with them, I went to conferences. After 10 long
months of dedication to Islam I converted. I converted in my Auntys
house with all the sisters there who had helped me, my Aunty made lots
of food, I had to do my Ghusl (Bath) so I was pure and then I was sat
down on a prayer mat and I read the Kalima three times. Everyone brought
me presents and advice it was lovely.

As a treat my father paid for me and my aunty to go to Leicester for a
four day Islamic event. It was the best four days of my life, I met so
many new friends, everyone there was a Muslim, it was just like how an
Islamic state would be. Everyone was treated the same, it was wonderful.
My dad paid for that because he new how my mother and the rest of the
family were treating me, so he lied to my mother and told her that I was
going somewhere with my Aunty because he new that if my mum new the
truth then she would not allow me to go.

My sister and father were the only ones who accepted me, my mums side of
the family hated Islam, they said I could be a Muslim but not dress like
one, so once I had put my views across to them that no matter what they
said or did I would not compromise Islam for NOTHING! They had to except
it. They all thought it was a phase I was going through as I was only
12, I converted on the 22 November 1998.

My father passed away in 1999, I was devastated as I had got so close to
him through Islam, as I could talk to him about anything and I dont have
that kind of relationship with my mum, but as I studied death so many
times I new that Allah would not give me

something that I could not bare. After this my mums side of the family
had learnt to accept it. Now 5 years later everyone is fine, my advice
to people thinking about converting is to study hard and stick with it,
Islam is a beautiful way of life and you will thank yourself at the end,
people learn to accept you for you and if they dont then you may realise
who your family and friends are.

**Holy Quran 8:4*****  
 These are the believers in truth; they shall have from their Lord
exalted grades and forgiveness and an honorable sustenance.***
