Antoinette Azim
===============

What can I say, Allah (swt) called me to Islam. It seemed to happen so
fast, only 28 days passed since I opened my heart to Islam and when I
said ***Shahadah***, the happiest day of my life. I grew up in a
Catholic family, not just Catholic in name, but practicing also. I went
to a Catholic grade school, went to church on a consistent basis, and
said my prayers every night. My mother always hoped for me to become a
nun, that was her dream before she met my dad, and I was the youngest of
four girls. I thought I was a good Catholic too. I believed. I prayed.
But I didnt agree with everything in my religion, which to me seemed ok,
it was enough to believe in God, but I also believe in divorce, I dont
agree with the church hierarchy, and I dont like the fact that there is
a priest between God and me. But I was brought up Catholic and that was
the way it was always going to be.

I lived in Russia for two years teaching English. When I was there I
went to a Catholic service twice. It was four hours long and they told
me I needed to go to confession before I could take communion. These
were believers, that wasnt for me. I got no spiritual fulfilment from
the Russian Orthodox Church even though the icons are beautiful. When I
came back after two years of not going to church I thought my faith was
renewed. The first time I went I actually listened to the Gospel. I
continued to go and even found a church when I moved out to DC. I always
said I was part German, Polish, Irish and Belgian, but one hundred
percent Catholic!

Then I met Mounir. This changed my life in many ways, some good, mostly
bad, now that I look back I understand that I had to go through all of
this to get to the Truth. Mounir is from Morocco. On our first date he
told me about the five pillars of Islam while drinking an Amstel light.
I didnt think anything of the Amstel light, but I thought telling me
about the five pillars of Islam on a first date is strange. In order to
understand my Muslim boyfriend I wanted to understand Islam. I bought a
book, and at the same time I bought a book about Catholicism, I wanted
to get closer to my faith too.

I didnt get into Islam right away, but I started asking a lot of
questions. I spent five weeks in Russia that summer. When I came home I
discovered that Mounir didnt miss me as much as I missed him. The break
up was devastating to me, so much that I didnt even realize what I was
really going through at the time. My only consolation was drinking and
partying. I still went to church during this time, but I couldnt find
the spirituality I needed to get me through this without losing all my
self-respect. Meanwhile, I studied Islam a little more, but to me it was
purely academic. I decided to declare it as my minor in graduate school
and started studying Islamic fundamentalism in Central Asia. But I
thought the more I study Islam, the more I need to study Catholicism.

Come spring semester I signed up for the class Conflict Resolution in
Islamic Studies with Professor Abdul Aziz Said. One day he gave us a
copy of the Noble Quran. I couldnt believe it! I was so excited that I
had a copy of the Quran. I had never read the Bible. I took it home but
didnt start reading it right away. I started talking with a Moroccan at
work. He started to tell me certain Surahs to read and then he said that
once you start digging into Islam you cant stop. I just laughed and
assured him that I was very secure in my Catholic beliefs. In order to
make myself believe that I started to research

Catholicism. It was short lived though.

One day all of this changed. I was doing some tabling at the university
to get some support for our human rights group. Another girl from the
organization, Mandy, came with me. I knew her, but not that well. As we
sat there for two hours I discovered that she was a Muslim, she
converted from Catholicism. When she told me this, I started to feel
like maybe it was ok, the feelings that I was having, Im not alone.
After that I started reading the Quran. It was beautiful. Two weeks
later I went to the mosque with her for Friday prayer. Ill never forget
her tying the scarf on my head for the first time and teaching me how to
say salaam aleykom. I felt an incredible sense of unity with the women
there. I kept reading the Quran, it is so logical, it fills in the gaps
that Christianity had, it answered the questions. I knew I couldnt give
up drinking and partying. I read about Muslim women on the Internet and
discovered the Muslim dress and got scared! That wasnt for me, I couldnt
give up my shorts and skirts.

Mandy left and went to New York for six weeks. I stopped drinking, kind
of as an experiment, also because I was tired of making mistakes when I
was intoxicated. It wasnt hard at all. It came easy, I didnt miss
drinking, I didnt miss feeling intoxicated, I felt great. Not only that,
but things I thought were impossible at first started to make sense,
like dressing modestly, praying five times a day; it became fulfilling.
I realized the more you sacrifice, the closer you are to the Creator.
Before I thought it was enough just to believe, but now I understand
that in order to be close to God I need to live my life the way He
intended.

Two weeks after my first visit to the mosque I had a Friday off of work,
something that never happens. I decided to go to Friday prayer by
myself. I dont know what force took me there, but I went. There was
Sohair from Egypt. She was so excited to see me back. She showed me how
to perform ablution and how

to pray. After prayer we went down for lunch and she introduced me to
Hayat. Ill never forget that conversation. She asked me why I was there
and what was holding me back. I started crying, I couldnt hold it in,
and I didnt even know why I was crying. She took my hand and said, Its
ok, Allah calls whom he wants. Those words changed my life.

I went home after that and was in a cloud for the rest of the day. I
started praying that day. It was March 2, 2001. I was helping my friend
move and as we were driving it just hit me that Allah (swt) had called
ME. The feeling of peace from that moment on was so incredible. I
continued to go to Friday prayer, this time at AU. The first day I
walked out of the prayer room and Yasmin, the president of the MSA, was
standing there waiting for me. She was so excited that I was there and
started asking me questions. I knew that I believed in the Oneness of
God and Mohammed his Prophet (pbuh), but I didnt know what to do with
this belief I was CATHOLIC!

I went to talk to a priest, he was very nice, but didnt know much about
Islam. He told me that Catholics respect Muslims because they are people
of the book. I left feeling good because I hadnt wavered in my belief,
after all, I was quoting from the Quran to a priest. But the biggest
test was telling my mother.

I called her on a Sunday night. I was so scared. I was trying to
convince myself that it would be easier just to stay Catholic than to
have to tell my mother about this. But I knew that I had found the Truth
and there was no turning back now. I knew it would be hard for her, but
I was so happy to have found the Way and so filled with peace I didnt
understand how someone could NOT be happy for me and embrace Islam
themselves. She was shocked, to say the least, but I dont blame her at
all, she didnt know anything about Islam and was brought up to believe
that Christianity was the only way. After a long conversation she agreed
to get a copy of their book as she called it, so it was a

step in the right direction. That whole week I was dreading what would
happen. I was so worried that she was going to tell me I wasnt her
daughter anymore. A week later, it seemed a lot longer, I called her
back. I was very reassured that she still loved me and wasnt going to
disown me. She said that she had to talk to a devout Catholic who
teaches world religions at a college in our hometown. At first I
panicked, but then I was reassured that it would be ok. I believe that
Islam is the Straight Path and Allah (swt) would make my mom understand.

Two days later I got an email from Mom saying that Brian had emailed her
and told her that Islam was not a pagan religion, but deeply rooted in
Judaism and Christianity. At that moment I felt ready to declare my
faith. I was planning on doing it April 6, but then the open prayer date
got pushed back to April 13. I knew that I couldnt wait that long but I
wanted all of my friends to be there. I was at Jumah prayer at AU and
afterwards Yasmin told me that I could talk to the Imam about the life
of the Prophet (pbuh) if I wanted. We started talking. I asked him
questions and then he started to ask me questions. After two hours he
told me that I was ready and very strong in my faith. He didnt pressure
me to say ***Shahadah***, but told me that we dont know what could
happen tomorrow. I still said that I wanted to wait because of my
friends. We continued to talk and then I said that I was ready. Right at
that moment Yasmin walked in, the timing could have only been Allah
(swt). Ill never forget that moment, repeating the words after the imam,
it was the most beautiful moment of my life. Yasmin and I were crying
and then the imam started crying, I cant describe how much that touched
me. The peace that came over my body and soul was more than words can
say. My heart is so full, Insha Allah it will always be this way. I said
***Shahadah*** again two weeks later in front of my friends. The actual
words did not move me as much that time, but afterward I felt like I was
even more ready to accept a life of

Islam, the way Allah wants. When I pray I feel so close to Him.

As I pray every day I pray that Allah (swt) will guide me and keep me on
the Straight Path, and Ill do my part to follow Him in every way. My
goal is to educate people about Islam and to wipe away the damage that
the US media and US foreign policy have created. I realize that I am
very lucky to have the support from my friends and family that I have,
not all converts have this. Islam is so beautiful, so loving, it accepts
everybody, every religion. Insha Allah I can help people to see the
beauty of Islam the way that I do.

**Holy Quran 11:120*****  
 And all we relate to you of the accounts of the apostles is to
strengthen your heart therewith; and in this has come to you the truth
and an admonition, and a reminder to the believers.***
