Brother Yusuf
=============

Since I was a little boy (I am 31 now) I was always very Christian.
Although my family were torn apart with sectarianism since my Mother was
of an Irish Catholic family and my Father of Scottish/Irish orange Lodge
Protestant. They fought so much over religion that my brother was
baptised protestant and I was baptised Catholic. This caused a great
divide because it meant we went to separate schools - we were even given
different names since my Father declared that any son of his who was
Catholic could never have his name - therefore I was given my Mothers
maiden name as my surname.

When I was older I joined a monastery and trained to be a Catholic Monk
(a Priest) and lived in Dublin Ireland for three years. The Monks are
very strict and we were not allowed to leave, in fact it was so strict
that mirrors were banned and we dug our graves with a spoon, a little
every day to teach us humility. We could only speak half an hour each
day and had no access to the outside world, even our mail was censored.
They say that austerity is a way to God and although I do not agree with
this way of life - it does make you more spiritual and has certain
benefits.

Because these days people of this generation do not join these
monasteries, they gave the younger people a few concessions. We could
leave for half days once a month but only to go to certain places with
our leaders. So I was taken to the Mosque in 1999 to try and talk to the
Muslims into becoming Christian but they immediately invited us for
dinner and were so very kind

and gave me a Koran and other books. This started my interest.

Later that year I became Muslim and left the monastery, with no job, no
place to live, nothing. When living there, I had to take a vow of
poverty so they owned everything I had. They even assigned my Pension
benefits to them! Eventually I came back to the UK and am happy here
living near London, in Berkshire (but could be much happier). Im finding
it hard to settle because Im working in the Finance world which I feel I
was never meant to do but Alhamdulilah.

I only found Shia Islam recently and this was through a very kind
brother and Sister at the website convertstoislam.com. I was never told
about Shia before in fact most Muslims I knew became angry at the name
even. I am happier and much more contented and peaceful the Shia way and
feel much more satisfied generally. Alhamidilah all is well with me and
Allah has been very kind to me.

I know I have a long way to go and much to learn but Inshallah Allah
will make it easy for me.

I am a bit worried about the Sunni brothers and the really deep hatred
they have for shias in fact Im really scared to tell them! They are so
kind yet this word shia makes them like savages - it brings up such
conflict, the like of which I have not seen since I was a child - with
Protestants and Catholics.

I dont know much about politics but I know a lot of the nature of God
thanks to my time as a Christian.

Inshallah, may Allah bless you all.

**Holy Quran 13:1*****  
 Alif Lam Mim Ra. These are the verses of the Book; and that which is
revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, but most people do not
believe.***


