Abdur Rahman (formerly Stewart Humes Australian Aboriginal)
===========================================================

I would like to go back in time and tell you a little bit about my
history.

My culture is one of the oldest cultures in the world. I love creation.
The history of aboriginal people, we connect so close to the Earth, that
we are like the Earth. In my younger days as a child I grew up knowing
about the mysteries and spirits, that everything that is made in
creation has a spirit, a formed spirit, that guides it and looks after
it and also guides us.

When we walked night and day in the bush or wherever, we knew that there
was a spirit, a powerful God, that looked over us, all the time. Then as
I grew up I went to high school, was taken away to high school, then I
met this other God, same God but in a different form, had to go to
Church and pray. I also learnt about racism, I was taken and put in a
hostel with about 180 children, 90 boys and 90 girls. It was frightening
really in a way because I didnt know anybody and I didnt know what to
expect, but I stayed there for three years, and in that three years I
learnt about God, Jesus and I learnt about other races. I learnt how to
be hurtful, I learnt how to make people cry and it was sad really
because where I come from, we were all sort of one, the white children
and the black children grew up together, sort of as one family.

I left high school and then I went back home. I worked and then

I wanted to know God more. I got baptized in the Church of England and I
wanted to know more about God, so I read the Bible a bit, and had
meetings with people and I still had my Aboriginal God too, spirits, and
it was very hard to know that there is this other God, that is the same
God you know?  
 Anyway, I went to heaps of Churches. I went to the Catholic Church, the
Methodists Church, and every Church that came from England, every church
that came from America, I was a part of it. I went from one Church to
another, trying to find this God. In 1967 I went to the University of
Western Australia, thats where I met Brother Mohammed Rais.

Brother Rais is a Muslim (revert) now. Anyway I knew that I had to find
something because I became kind of ruff, for ten years, I became like a
madman, Im only small but Ive done some things, some real bad things,
and I needed to find a God, so I tried again, I went to people, to
houses, people would slam doors on your face. I was a person, I had a
hard life, I wanted everything to change for myself, so anyway I
struggled on in life. I used to read the Bible to people, people used to
come to me and ask me questions and Id be out there talking about God
and Jesus and Id be fighting the next day. I would think why am I doing
these things, when I know theres someone more powerful, a God, that can
help me?

So I was like in a washing machine, I was tumbling around, good times
then the bad etc. I said I dont want this, I want more good times in my
life. Id give talks at schools, and Id tell children what to do and I
wanted a better life for myself. So anyway, I met this lady. We were
together for a while, then we fought, then wed get back together again.
Then we started looking into Muslims. I was with the lady that Im now
with, and I was going to the Seventh Day Adventist Church, one day a
week. Then my family would come along and Id go to the Jehovah
Witnesses. I was a little mixed up as to where I was.

So anyway we went for a drive around and tried to find a Mosque. We went
to one Mosque and I think it was the right time for me. We went away and
we met another brother. The lady Im with rang up one Brother and they
said Oh yes come around so we went around and anyway his sister was home
and he said can you wait outside and shell talk to your missus. And I
thought this was a bit strange, because any other time everybody piles
into the house, and dont care less. Anyway, I was waiting outside. My
missus spoke to the lady and her sister and we left. Then we were
invited back again, and this time the Brother was there. We spoke to the
brother, he was a very nice brother, and he told us as much as he could
at that time about Islam, and about being a Muslim. I had about ten cups
of tea! It was nice, and his wife was very nice.

So anyway we went to Thornlie Mosque, I was wandering around there and I
met this brother and he said I know you and I said You know me and it
was Brother Rais back from university in 1967. He was there.Â I remember
I was at my Mums once and she got burnt and she was in hospital and he
took me to the hospital to meet her. I nearly cried because he was such
a nice person at the university, and I hadnt seen him for so long,  
 and I met some of the other brothers. I felt good you know, it was all
men, ladies were one side and we were just having a yarn.

Im not trying to put other churches down, but I feel this one. I feel
better. When youve got the ladies and men altogether, you dont know
whats going on, a lot of things happen in Churches. When you are with
the brothers you know where you are, you find a place where you belong,
and I felt that this is what I want, what I need in my life. So I went
there for a time, and I said well I want to do this for myself, and I
become a Muslim.

In the Quran, I hadnt forgotten Jesus and the Prophets. I havent
forgotten the followers of Allah, because they are all still

in there. What I read in the Bible is still here in the Quran, and it
makes me happy, it makes me feel good.

Muhammad (Peace Be Upon Him) is something I need in my life. I read
about his life, things hed done and I feel free now, much freer than I
used to feel.

I used to go to the Churches and I dont know what sort of under arm I
used to wear but nobody used to sit next to me. I said gee and I felt a
little bit shy, but I didnt worry. I dont care what people are, I love
them, because the Creator made them. He managed to love everybody and if
you cant love somebody with your heart, you cant love Allah.

Allah created all things for all of us to enjoy, and I love creation.

When I look at creation, I see beauty. I see life. If you laugh with
somebody, then someones laughing with you.

So Id like to thank everybody for listening to what Ive had to say.

**Holy Quran 46:4  
 *Say: Have you considered what you call upon besides Allah? Show me
what they have created of the earth, or have they a share in the
heavens? Bring me a book before this or traces of knowledge, if you are
truthful.***
