Brother Ahmad
=============

Twenty Year Search begins a Lifelong Journey
--------------------------------------------

It seems like I have always been a Muslim. I cannot recall ever
believing that any other than Allah created the universe. I used to
stare at the sky, animals, trees, etc and just marvel at how magnificent
and great the Creator of all of these things must be. The only problem
that I had with religion as an adolescent and young adult was that I was
not mature enough to accept that complete submission to the Creator was
necessary. My own desires came first. What do I want, and how do I get
it? was my primary concern. Throughout other experiences later, I came
to understand that my own knowledge was infinitesimally small and that
it was my Creator, Allah, alone who possesses all knowledge and who has
power of all things.

When I was in sixth grade, my oldest brother became a born again
Christian at Immanuels Temple in Lansing, Michigan. He used to try to
get all of us to go to church and praise God with him. I remember being
asked once when his girlfriend was spending the night at our house, Do
you accept Jesus Christ as your lord and savior? I dont remember what my
exact reply was, but I remember saying something to the effect that I
believed that Jesus life was an excellent example of piety but that God
alone was my Creator and that I was unable to accept that Jesus was, in
fact, God. She seemed content enough to hear that I did indeed love
Jesus and went on explaining how that meant I was saved from the fire,
and on and on.

At the time, I was probably eleven years old. I started reading the
bible with my brother from time to time, but I noticed that I had
insights and questions about the passages we would study that he could
not answer. I looked through the index and table of contents
voraciously, thinking that I would find more references to all of the
topics that were important to me, but the verses that I was directed to
were always inadequate. In short, I observed that the book was not very
well put together.

I remember thinking, this does not seem at all like what the Creator of
the universe would choose to tell His creations. Why, for example, in
the opening passage in John, would He spend so much time discussing a
genealogy? Why did Genesis sound so contrived? Why did Revelations and
Acts appear to be so inconsistent with other parts of the book? What was
all that symbolism and apocalyptic chatter mean? Who was supposed to be
impressed? No, I did not accept that this book was from God, at least
not entirely. Some of what I read moved me, but most of it was more
boring and senseless than a 2000 page comic book.

There were only two times when my brother convinced me to attend church
with him. All that I saw were people there trying to make themselves
feel good about their own pathetic shortcomings. The preaching lacked
sophistication. He kept claiming that he possessed all types of powers
due to Jesus Christ. He kept trying to convince the congregation, and
himself, that what he was saying was true. I thought, what a quack. The
best message in the world can never reach its intended target if the
messengers approach is inadequate.

I wondered why all of those people at the church picked up the hymn
books and opened up their bibles to the pages that the minister
instructed them to read. How was it that he got away with making so many
comments without being questioned? How come everyone was following what
he was saying and not looking at other parts of the bible that clearly
contradicted what

he was saying? I did not want to sell myself short by allowing him to
stand in the way of me becoming acquainted with my Creator, but since I
had already turned to and away from the bible, I concluded that those
people were content with suspending their intellect and reasoning
ability.

They accepted what they were feed, and because their beliefs taught them
that despite their poor qualities and severely deficient characters they
were still loved by God, they never looked elsewhere? If you believe
that God loves you as a wretch the same way that he loves you as a pious
person, then why would you ever change your beliefs? If you believed
that Jesus died for your sins, then why would you stop sinning?

My quest for knowledge continued throughout high school. I read Plato
and Aristotle. I studied Greek and Roman mythology. I looked at
contemporary thinkers and philosophers like Bertrand Russell, Nietzsche,
Freud, C.S. Jung and others. I tried to get into Thoreau, Emerson, other
writers and other poets, mostly white Americans. I attempted to find
some substance and depth in Black American writers like Toni Morrison,
James Baldwin, Langston Hughes, Maya Angelou and others. In each of the
different personalities, I found some elements that interested me and
others that did not, but I was not impressed with any of them enough to
make me think that what they knew was worth knowing.

During my first year of college, I started reading about Taoism
(Daoism), Buddhism, Hinduism, Shintoism and Confucianism. Again, there
were interesting elements and not so interesting elements. What path was
I on and how would I know when I got there? Desiring to learn more about
the African experience that I felt disconnected from, I transferred to
another university for my second year to begin an African Studies major.
I studied black social scientists and historians like DuBois, Diop and
Senghor in class, and revolutionaries like Marcus Garvey,

Malcolm X, Steve Biko, Walter Rodney and Amilcar Cabral, out of class.

I started to get absorbed into the struggle; the plight of African and
descendants of Africa in world dominated by Western hegemony. I
revisited the injustices of the transatlantic slave trade and plantation
enterprises in the Americas. I compared the plight of Blacks in the
United States with Africans living in post-colonial (neocolonial)
Africa, and I was determined to unite the oppressed under a banner of
pan-Africanism. Several friends and I founded a small group that we
called, Africas Progeny for Global Power (APGP). We were devoted to
enlightening and empowering our people around the world, the Caribbean,
Latin America, North America, Europe, Asia, and of course, Africa. We
were sharp, results-oriented and focused.

I decided that I had to visit Africa in order to begin to actualize my
dreams. I applied for a scholarship that I eventually won to study at
the University of Dar es Salaam in Tanzania. A few months later, with no
second thoughts, I was on a plane headed back to the motherland. People
told me that living in Africa would change my way of thinking
profoundly. I replied that my most fundamental beliefs could never
change, but admitted that the superfluous activities would probably
vanish forever. What did I feel most committed to at that time?
Ironically, I was committed to serving my Creator, but the difference
between then and now is that I felt my own manner of serving Him was
adequate. I thought I was left free to worship on my terms. Later I
realized worship has to come on the terms of the Worshipped, not on the
terms of the worshipper. Imagine having a your slave tell you, yes
master, I will serve you and commit myself to pleasing you, but before
all that happens, let me go over here and handle some other business!

It does not make sense at all does it? Imagine acknowledging that a
Creator exists. Without knowing any further information

to describe your Creators attributes or His orders and commands to His
creations, one would have to conclude that it was a duty to submit and
worship his Creator. The Being with the power to make things that we
ourselves cannot even comprehend deserves our complete attention.
Anything that a creation wishes to do that is not in harmony with the
desires of the Creator is done in vain. Why keep bumping ones head going
against the grain, when all one needs to do to be successful is submit
to his Maker? All creation must acknowledge that the Creator alone is
fit to be worshipped and must disavow any distraction or partner that
could distract from worshipping the One True Supreme Being.

I lived in mainland Tanzania and in the offshore Zanzibar Islands on and
off for four months before I accepted Islam. I had reached the point
where I realized that all of my efforts were futile if they were not
centered around pleasing my Creator. This is humanitys natural mode of
existence. This is the way that all creation, animate or inanimate,
functions. Mountains have behavioral characteristics determined by
Allah, the Creator. Scientists may believe in geological evidence, but
Muslims understand that all of those sciences are just mans attempt to
comprehend what Allah creates. An astronomer can try to calculate the
earths orbit around the sun, but no matter how close he comes to
accuracy, all he can discover is what Allah already established. In that
sense, there is no such thing as new knowledge. All knowledge is with
Allah, and the only knowledge that we have is what Allah chooses to
endow us with.

For example, lets take someone many societies assume to be
knowledgeable, like a physician. A physician studies anatomy,
physiology, epidemiology, etc in order to gain a better understanding of
the way that a human body operates. However, all of that knowledge and
training can never change a

matter once Allah has ordained it. When someones heart stops and doctors
revive the person, they credit medical technology with a miracle, but if
those same doctors, using that same technology failed to revive the
heart, then they would recognize that technology and knowledge has
limits. The limit is the extent to which Allah endows us with His own
knowledge. That determines our ultimate aptitude.

When I accepted Islam, I did not have any epiphanies or land-shaking
experiences. What I felt, was that after 20 years of searching, Allah
opened my heart to accept the truth. It was always there. Imagine an
archaeologist excavating the remains of the skeleton that he always
believed existed. Whether or not he located the first bones, they were
still there. He did not create them, he merely received the benefit of
having his knowledge expanded by learning about the bones. The
discovery, like accepting Islam, is the first step, and not the final
answer. Assembling the individual bones into the proper order is similar
to a Muslim putting his life together by building his faith. Finally,
after assembling something that resembles a finished piece, the
archaeologist can spend the rest of his life increasing his
understanding of his new finding because he has more evidence than ever
for study. The parallel works with a Muslim who devotes his life towards
increasing his knowledge in order to become the best servant of Allah
that he can possibly be.

Accepting Islam-that is to accept that Allah alone deserves worship, has
no partners, is unlike any of His creations, and towers high above all
things, and to believe that Muhammad was Allahs messenger-that is the
most important step, but it is also only the first. In no way should
merely accepting the faith make one believe that he has become a
believer or even a good Muslim for that matter. Improving oneself and
ones devotion to his Creator is a lifelong endeavor, but only those who
are smart enough to understand and mature enough to accept the truth

will ever experience this felicity. Allah, the High and Exalted, guides
whomever He chooses. I am just thankful to be among that list.

**Holy Quran 16:3*****  
 He created the heavens and the earth with the truth, highly exalted be
He above what they associate (with Him).***


