Ali Molina
==========

In The Name of Allah, The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful

Para leer mi cuento en Espanol, toque aqui.

My name is Ali , Im a 29 year old Mexican American or as some would say
a Chicano.

People have a wrong perception About Islam and Muslims, what little they
know is usually from movies and television which is almost all the time
false.

My life before was bad, I had no direction in life. I was wasting my
life away by dropping out of school in the 11th grade. I would hang out
in the streets with my friends partying getting high, drinking and
selling marijuana, most of my friends were gang members, I myself was
never in a gang. I knew most of them before they were criminals and drug
dealers so it was not a problem. I slowly began to use harder drugs, I
had dreams but they seemed to far away for me to make them reality. The
more I became depressed the more I turned to drugs as a temporary
escape.

One day A friend of mine told me that he knew where to get some good
marijuana, I was eager to sample and buy some so I agreed to go check it
out. We arrived and went inside this apartment there were a couple of
people inside, we sat around and talked for a while and sampled the
weed. My friend and I bought some and were getting ready to leave when
my friend said one of the guys there invited us to his apartment to give

him a book.

We left for this guys apartment when we got there, he gave my friend a
book and asked him to read it, and said that it might help him out with
his problems in life. On the way home I asked my friend to show me the
book that the guy gave him, it was the Quran (Koran).

I had never in my life heard of The Holy Quran, I began to briefly read
some pages while I was reading I knew that what I was reading was true,
it was like a slap in the face, a wake up call. The Quran is so clear
and easy to understand. I was really impressed and wanted to know more
about Islam and Muslims.

The strangest thing is that I was not looking for a new Religion, I used
to laugh at people that went to church, and some times said that there
was no God. Although deep down I knew there was. I decided to go to the
library a couple of days later and check out the Quran. I began to read
it and study it, I learned About Prophet Muhammed (Peace be upon him)
and the true story of Jesus son of Mary(Peace be upon him). The Quran
stressed the fact that God was one and had no partners or a son, this
was most interesting to me since I never understood the concept of the
trinity. The Quran describes the birth of Prophet Jesus (P.B.U.H.) and
his mission. There is also a Surah (Chapter) called Mary and tells her
story as well.

As a child I always went to church, my mother was a Seventh day
Adventist and took my sister and me every Saturday. I never was really
religious and stopped going to church when I was about 14 or 15.The rest
of my family is Catholic, I always wondered why we were Seventh day
Adventist and the rest of my family was Catholic. When we would go visit
my family back in Mexico, we went to a Catholic church for weddings and
Quenceniras (sweet 16 celebration).

Muhammed (peace be upon him) is the last Messenger of God

sent to all mankind. The Quran tells the storys of all the Prophets such
as Adam, Abraham, Noah, Isaac, David, Moses, Jesus (Peace be upon them
all) told in a clear and understandable manner. I did months of research
on Islam I bought a Holy Quran at a bookstore and studied about World
History and Islams contributions to Medicine and Science.

I learned that Spain was a Muslim country for about 800 years and that
when the Muslims were expelled from Spain by the Christian king and
Queen (Ferdanand and Isabela), the Christian Spaniards came to Mexico
and forced the Aztecs and others to become Catholic, history and my
Islamic roots was all becoming clear to me.

After months of study and research I could not deny the truth anymore I
had put it off too long, but was still living the life I was before and
knew that if I became Muslim I had to give all that up. One day while
reading the Quran, I began to cry and fell to my knees and thanked Allah
for guiding me to the truth. I found out that there was a Mosque by my
house so I went one Friday to see how Muslims prayed and conducted their
service. I saw that people from all races and colors attended the
Mosque. I saw that they took off their shoes when entering and sat on
the carpeted floor. A man got up and began to call the Adthan (call for
prayer) when I heard it my eyes filled up with tears it sounded so
beautiful, it was all so strange at first but seemed so right at the
same time. Islam is not just a Religion but a way of life.

After going a couple of Fridays I was ready to be a Muslim and say my
Shahada (declaration of faith).

I told the Khatib (person giving the lecture) that I wanted to be a
Muslim, the following Friday in front of the community I said my Shahada
first in Arabic then in English: I bear witness that there is no other
God but Allah and I bear witness that

Muhammed (P.B.U.H) is His Messenger.

When I finished a Brother shouted Takbir! And all the community said
Allah O Akbar! (God is great!) a few times, then all the Brothers came
and hugged me. I never received so many hugs in one day, I will never
forget that day it was great. I have been Muslim since 1997, Im at peace
with myself and clear in Religion, being Muslim has really changed my
life for the better thanks to Almighty God. I received my G.E.D. and
work in the computer field.

I had the blessing of being able to perform Hajj (Pilgrimage) to the
Holy city of Mecca, it was an experience of a lifetime, about three
million people from every race and color in one place worshiping one
God. Its amazing! Alhamdulilla in December of 2002 I got married in
Morocco to a very good Muslim woman.

I think that Islam is the answer for the problems of the youth and
society in general. I hope my story InshaAllah (God willing) will
attract more Latinos and people of all races to the light of Islam.

**Holy Quran 22:6*****  
 This is because Allah is the Truth and because He gives life to the
dead and because He has power over all things.***


