Suddenly All the Pieces of This Puzzle Were Fitting
===================================================

I have always been aware of the existence of God. I have always felt
that He was there. Sometimes that feeling was distant, and often times I
ignored it. But I could never deny this knowledge. Because of this,
throughout my life, I have been searching for the truth of His Plan.

I have attended many churches. I listened, I prayed, I talked to people
from all different faiths. But it seemed that there was always something
that didnt feel right, it felt confusing, like there was something
missing. Ive heard many people in the past say to me, Well, I believe in
God, but I dont belong to any religion. They all seem wrong to me. This
was my feeling exactly, however, I didnt want to just let it go at that
and just accept it. I knew that if God exists then He wouldnt just leave
us with no direction, or even a warped version of the truth. There had
to be a plan, a true religion. I just had to find it.

The various Christian churches is where I concentrated my search, simply
because that is what I grew up with, and there seemed to be some truths
in some of their teachings. However, there were so many different views,
so many conflicting teachings on basic things like how to pray, who to
pray to or through, who was going to be saved, and who wasnt, and what a
person had to do to get saved. It seemed so convoluted. I felt I was
near giving up. I had just come from yet another church whose views on
God, and the purpose of our

existence, left me so completely frustrated because I knew what they
were teaching wasnt true.

One day, I had wandered in the bookstore and I went over to the
religious section. As I stood there gazing over the vast array of mostly
Christian books, a thought occurred to me to see if they had anything on
Islam. I knew virtually nothing about Islam, and when I picked up the
first book it was solely out of curiosity. But I became excited with
what I was reading. One of the first things that struck me was the
statement There is no god but Allah, He has no associates, and all
prayers and worship are directed to Him alone. This seemed so simple, so
powerful, so direct, and made so much sense. So from there I started
reading everything I could about Islam.

Everything I read made so much sense to me. It was as if suddenly all
the pieces of this puzzle were fitting perfectly, and a clear picture
was emerging. I was so excited my heart would race any time I read
anything about Islam. Then, when I read the Quran, I felt like I was
truly blessed to be able to read this. I knew that this had come
directly from Allah through His Messenger (s.a.w.). This was it, the
truth. I felt like all along I had been a Muslim but I just didnt know
it until now. Now as I start my life as a Muslim, I have a sense of
peace and security knowing that what I am learning is the pure truth and
will take me closer to Allah. May Allah keep guiding me. Ameen.

**Holy Quran 25:33*****  
 And they shall not bring to you any argument, but We have brought to
you (one) with truth and best in significance.***


