Anisah Georgia Liliou
=====================

I welcomed Islam into my life at, what people think, a very young age.
And yet, bringing back to my memory the years before my conversion, is
still a chilling experience for me. In principle, my conversion story
may seem similar to many other stories. But what still amazes me is the
relation between the events; a proof to the fact that Gods Will
prevails, no matter the circumstances.

I was born and brought up in Athens. My parents, like 98% of the people
in Greece, are Orthodox Christians. During the first years of my life I
cannot remember them being particularly religious. They led a normal
family life, which included the occasional visit to the church. The
people who reminded us of our responsibility towards our religion were
almost always my grandmothers and grandfathers. My mothers parents were
both children of priests and had great knowledge in Christian
traditions. In their bedroom, they had converted part of their wardrobe
into a church, shelves stocked with images of Jesus, Virgin Mary and
various saints. Every night, my grandfather would stand in front of that
shelf for a couple of hours, reading with humility the holy book; a
picture I will never forget.

As I almost always spent my holidays with them, they introduced me to
the routine of reading every night little poems to Virgin Mary. That,
however, did not prevent me from having my own spiritual experiences. Up
until the age of ten I used to see in my dream the events of the
following day, which I thought was something normal. I never did my
homework,

unless I saw in my dream that my teacher would examine me. So I would do
it in the school bus, on the way to school. Sometimes I would see dreams
relating to other peoples worries, worries I knew little about. My elder
sister probably realises this better than me. Sometimes in the morning I
would say to her I had the weirdest dream, I would narrate it to her and
then forget all about it. She would not forget though, and years later
she confessed to me that my dreams had affected her life.

When I was 10 or 11, nothing seemed to go well. We had family problems,
school was very hard for me, I had no friends. One night I slowly slid
out of my bed and decided to pray for help. I think I spent about 10
minutes just standing there; I was trying to decide who to pray to.
Should I pray to Jesus or Virgin Mary? Saint George or Saint Helen? Or
that saint, the protector of children? But whats her name? In the end, I
did not pray to anyone that night. My reason was that I did not want to
offend anyone by not praying to them. But deep down, I had realized that
there was something wrong about this religion.

My parents invested a lot of money in my education, and chose
responsible schools that honoured the beliefs of the Christian faith.
However, the principle of respecting the faith of the Greeks was more
inspired to me in the History class, rather than the Theology class. We
had remained Greeks and Christians after a devastating 400-year Turkish
occupation, and we clearly owed that to the religious leaders of that
time. So, although the Christian faith did not appeal to me, I felt it
was my responsibility to show some gratitude by going to the church once
in a while. But I never believed that, just by standing there in front
of an elderly man dressed in gold who was reciting for two hours was
bringing me any closer to salvation.

The huge gap between the message of the scriptures and their application
on peoples lives was something that always made me very skeptical. For
most of the times, I did agree with the

teachings of the biblical stories. But the people around me did not
practice what they learnt from the scriptures. Instead, they had
invented their own traditional rituals with a lot of symbolic elements,
to the extent that everything in their faith remained just that: a
symbolism, and not an everyday practice outside the church.

I believed that all the Prophets mentioned in the Bible were indeed the
Prophets of God, sent to deliver a divine message. However, this message
is not clear in the Bible, and sometimes, it is dangerously
contradicting. For example, the Old Testament lists a large number of
commandments which Prophet Moses conveyed to his people. The Prophet
suffered a lot to deliver these laws and to convince people to follow
them. But nowadays we are told that we do not have to follow these laws,
as our love for Jesus would be sufficient for our salvation. But wouldnt
it be unreasonable of God to make His dear Messenger go through all
this, so that we discard His message today? One has to only see the
effect of the prohibited things in the modern world. People are born
with perfect lungs, yet they destroy them by smoking. Families fall
apart, wives get abused, children become orphans because of some pints
of alcohol. And we still think there is no necessity to exclude these
from our lives.

Imagine you are a teenager and your parents had to go away for some
time. For your own good, they appointed your uncle to keep an eye on
you. Your father said to your uncle: Please, make sure he comes home
early, does his homework, does not mix with bad companies, and does not
do anything that is wrong. They then go away. But your uncle does not
prove as reliable as your parents thought. Instead, he tells you to do
whatever you like. Because you consider your uncle a credible source,
you take advantage of the liberties you are given. So, you are getting
yourself into real trouble and end up being in a really bad state. Now,
although your parents are far away, they

can in fact see everything that you do because, if you like, they have
installed CCTV cameras all around the house. How would you react if
years later you found out they knew you were in this state, yet did not
do anything to help you or protect you? Because, being a parent is not
just someone that brings you into this world, it is also someone with
the responsibility to nurture you and keep you away from evil things.
Would you agree that, in that case your parents did not fulfill their
responsibility as parents?

The relationship between God and man is similar to the one between
parent and child. Through the prophets He gradually introduced us to a
number of laws so that we can find peace in this life and get the reward
of another life. Our first lesson was the story of Adam and Eve, where
we learn that there is an abundance of good things but also a portion of
bad things, of which we should be aware and protect ourselves from. The
Holy Bible contains the truth, but some parts of it are distorted,
either deliberately or by genuine mistake. And by observing people, I
found that they preferred the distorted parts and hence, were led
astray.

My perception of God was always a God who is Perfect, a God who fulfills
His responsibility towards His creation, just as a good parent fulfills
his responsibility towards his child. So, I found it irresponsible of
God that He would conclude His revelation to us with a book which has so
much misguidance in it. How could He stand seeing us falling into sin,
disputing with one another on whether He is one or three, without
putting the record straight? But on the other hand, I really believed
that Christianity was the closest to the truth. I never attempted to
study Buddhism, Hinduism or the similar faiths; I believed in Jesus and
the rest of the Prophets, and I would be denying them by doing so. Islam
had fallen under the same category, because I did not know at the time
that Muslims accept all prophets, from

Adam to Jesus, and finally Muhammad. In fear of loosing my faith that
there is even a God, I remember myself saying, God, show me your true
guidance and I will follow it with my heart and soul. I honestly did not
think that God was listening at that moment, but the events of the years
to follow proved that God was listening very carefully indeed.

I decided to study graphic design when I was 13, after reading an
article about it. Four years later my dream almost reached a dead-end;
to be admitted to the university I had to pass tests on maths, physics
and chemistry, the subjects I was the worst at. Knowing that I was bound
to fail if I followed that route, I started looking anxiously for
alternatives. Somebody suggested studying in UK, which I mentioned to my
parents. To my surprise, my parents were willing to make the sacrifice
and let me go. Although my preparation included 70 hours of studying per
week, I realised I was going only when I got to the airport to catch my
flight. Most students take a parent with them for the first-day
difficulties. I did not do that, because I wanted to avoid becoming too
sentimental about the whole experience.

Adjustment did not prove difficult for me, and I probably have my mother
to thank for that. She always insisted that I learn foreign languages
and at the age of nine I had my first penpal. I grew to correspond with
people from all around the world, different cultures, different faiths a
very exciting experience. During my first months in the UK my circle
consisted predominately by Greek people. But soon I felt unhappy and
wanted to take full advantage of the potential by meeting non-Greek
people. Naturally, I left that circle and started interacting with
other, to my view, much more interesting people.

Amongst these people was a Muslim student that I had met from the first
day there. We used to run into each other all the time; he was always
polite and very tactful. Although we were coming from very different
backgrounds, we were in the same

wavelength and we used to agree in everything apart from religion I
thought. He knew I was very negative about Islam but one day he decided
to address the issue of religion in a very delicate manner. He asked me
to explain to him the theory of the Trinity and how Jesus can be the son
of God.

Under other circumstances I would not make much effort to answer, but
that day I really tried my best. I told him everything I had learnt in
school and I analysed all the different methodologies that reach the
conclusion that there is a Trinity. However, he always managed to answer
back with a better argument, because as I discovered later, he knew more
about Christianity than me. In a moment of absolute frustration, I
uttered these honest words: If you want to know about the Trinity, you
better ask someone who really believes in it. Because I do not believe
that Jesus is the son of God, my instinct tells me that he was just a
Prophet. On that he replied, This is what we believe. That second my
journey in discovering Islam had begun.

I did not allow my friend to preach me about Islam. My whole life I was
being preached at and I did not like it - this time I was after
constructive dialogue. He was superb in debating and great help in
explaining things; two qualities I appreciated much more than preaching.
This way I did not feel that I was being led at something or being
brainwashed; I followed my own pace. I started studying the basics of
Islam, which I compared with Christianity. I never knew there were so
many similarities between these two religions. Just as Christianity is
the next step from Judaism, only that the Jewish people do not accept
Jesus, in the same way Islam is the next step from Christianity, only
that the Christians do not accept Muhammad. The main principle of Islam
is that there is only one God and Muhammad is His Messenger. I agreed
many times with this principle but I kept on studying, sincerely hoping
that Muhammad would have said or

taught something I did not approve of. But whenever I found such points,
after studying them in detail, I discovered that there was always a
perfectly reasonable explanation behind them.

Having agreed with the basics, I moved on studying more complicated
issues. If I were to accept this faith I wanted to eliminate the chance
of regretting it by learning as much as possible about it. As I kept on
reading, not only I found in words what I already felt in my heart, but
something even more complete in a miraculous way. The authenticity of
the message, the wisdom in the divine commandments, the scientific
evidence, all added up into a system that could have never been invented
by man. This system not only solved the problems that I had identified
in the Holy Bible, but it unveiled a whole new perspective in leading a
life where religion is actually a way of life and not just a part of the
jigsaw. Furthermore, if one were to study the commandments in the Bible
and then objectively observe the Christians and the Muslims, he would
find that the Muslims follow it more to the word, and hence the Muslims
are better Christians than the Christians.

My conversion to Islam happened in three stages. In the first stage I
could see that Islam is a better religion than Christianity, but was
scared to admit it. In the second stage I managed to fight my prejudice
towards Islam and be honest with myself by saying, Yes, Islam is
definitely better. But then I did not want to imitate the hypocrites,
who say they believe in one thing, yet they do not act upon it or do the
opposite. If I really believed that I am a sincere person who does not
set double-standards, that was the time to prove it. So, I decided to
accept and act upon the truth to which I was guided, and that was the
final stage of my conversion.

It took me some time to get used to the idea that I was a Muslim now,
but the knowledge I was acquainted with over the years

gave me great confidence. Being in peace with my consciousness gave me
the strength to deal with any problems that were to come. Unfortunately
though, I was so excited over discovering Islam that I thought all
Muslims appreciated this gift and honoured it by acting upon it to the
letter. Many converts say that if they were to judge Islam by the people
and not by the Book, they would have never become Muslims. Indeed, I met
many Muslims who looked very religious, yet gave to Islam a bad name by
following their cultural tendencies or their individual desires. Some
instead of giving support to new Muslims, try to push them towards their
own deviated groups that take people outside the fold of Islam. And some
even find it difficult to accept that a convert may know more than a
born Muslim, and hold grudges when they see that their advice is not
followed. But God is all-praiseworthy, who made it a test and a learning
experience for me, out of which I came out stronger. For now I can
distinguish the good and sincere Muslims, who have good intention in
their hearts and many good deeds in their account with the Lord.

I did not make any formal announcement to my family about my conversion;
I always considered religion to be a very private thing and had grown to
detest the fact that many people in Greece use religion as a social
security system. All the people who accept Islam and act upon it notice
a good change in their personality. The same happened to me, but
unfortunately went unnoticed in my family, because I was always known as
a well-mannered and disciplined child. Yet I had changed considerably; I
was more patient with people, I was able to resolve arguments in a
grown-up manner, I was less stressed and more positive about life. I had
gone through problems, I had asked Gods help, even through routes that I
found impossible, and He did it for me, He protected me and guided me.
And when God is your friend and your helper, you should not fear

anything.

My family did not notice all that. But they noticed changes in my diet,
my dressing code and my social circle. I did not try to hide the fact I
was a Muslim, but I did not make it obvious either. Besides, I was
gradually introducing myself into practicing Islam, and I thought that
gradual progress is something that works well with everyone. Many
children forget that parents are the people who have seen you growing
and know you best; and I was not such a child. I could soon sense that
my parents knew my father knew and accepted it, my mother knew and tried
to deny it by not thinking about the possibility of it. A convert has to
be very sensitive on this issue. Some parents get shocked when their
child decides to abandon a major part of the familys identity. They
start blaming themselves, thinking that they were not good parents, thus
the child is punishing them by denying the principles that they
cultivated in him/her. This is not the case. As other converts parents,
my parents also brought me up very well, giving me a Christian education
because they sincerely believed that it was the best for me. But in
school you also learn to build up arguments by weighing the pros and the
cons, finally coming to a judgment of whether something is beneficial or
not. This is the key to survival in life; if we did this more often, we
would save ourselves from a lot of trouble. And this is exactly what I
have done. I have put Christianity on one side of the scale, and Islam
on the other and Islam, to my surprise, is a clear winner.

It is not a crucial issue for me whether or not my family accepts the
fact that I am a Muslim, because I will always find ways to practice my
religion and therefore have peace within myself. If they do not accept
it now, they will accept it as years go past, when my ongoing commitment
to Islam will be getting more and more obvious. The more I read and
learn, the surer I become that I made the right decision a solid proof
that this is not a

phase. However, holding on to the reality that I am still the same
person, is very essential to me. Unfortunately, a person may be known as
sensible and responsible throughout the years, yet when s/he decides to
follow a route opposite the establishment, he gets stripped off these
qualities. It is an example of the double standards that get applied as
a common practice nowadays, but it is only a self-defense mechanism
people use to create the pretense that an issue is not there, therefore
they do not have to deal with it. I had people around me who knew me
very well, had acknowledged the maturity in me and had declared their
full trust in me. However, when the news reached them, I became this
far-too-young person to take such mature decisions, who had been
brainwashed and had no independent will. Hence, a conversion like this
is also a real test for relationships, which can have shockingly
disappointing outcomes that one ought to be prepared for.

Here it might be interesting to add that after having studied Islam and
Christianity for years, I have come up with my own terminology on what
makes someone a Muslim or a Christian. A Muslim is someone who believes
and accepts the teachings of the Holy Quran wholeheartedly; therefore I
am confident that I am a Muslim because I do not reject any part of the
Quran. Similarly, a Christian is someone who accepts the Holy Bible
wholeheartedly, but I rarely meet people like that. I personally do not
perceive my family as Christian anymore, because each one of them
follows his/her own version of Christianity, whether they realise it or
not. My mother says that she accepts and believes the Bible, but her
whole life has denied studying it, because belief should be free of
investigation. Therefore, in my view, she does not really know what she
believes in. My father also says he accepts the Bible, but uses his
intellect to reject parts of it that his own logic does not agree with.
My sisters faith is the most obvious example of all, as she totally

rejects the Old Testament because of its content, believes in Trinity,
yet when in hardship she does not turn to God/Jesus/Holy Spirit, but to
Virgin Mary. So the Trinity becomes Tetranity.

I think there are two main reasons for filtering and adjusting a
religion to our own liking; (a) we have misunderstood the principle of
religion and therefore we exploit it to our own advantage, or (b) we
realise the importance of religion so well that we are prepared to
scrutinize it and filter it using the intellect that God has gifted us
with. But in this case, when changing it, we indirectly admit that this
religion is not perfect. The question is: will we be honest with
ourselves and ask for guidance, or will we continue to live in
uncertainty because we fear change? Would God really create this perfect
world for us to live in, but according to an imperfect system? My hope
is that one day my family will raise these questions, but for the time
being, they regard themselves as Christians and I ought to respect that.
When I go back home, I practice what we are told in the Quran: Unto you
your religion, and unto me my religion, (109:6). Therefore, I put no
burden on them, but in return I expect them to put no burden on me, in
order to have an ongoing healthy relationship. I do not think that
religion is the cause for the evil wars that happen throughout history,
but it is the peoples unwillingness to be patient and tolerant with each
other.

Before I got to know about Islam, I had created my own framework of what
I perceived the perfect religion to be like. I judged everything I
learnt and saw according to that; if something did not fit to my own
framework, I would reject it, otherwise, I would accept it. Many times I
struggled to protect my own framework against the external influences,
in order to keep it in the same condition as when I was little simple
and pure. In hindsight I realise that I was protecting the instinct that

is granted to every human being, the belief in One God and the will to
worship Him only. Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) said, Every child
is born with a true faith of Islam (i.e. to worship none but Allah
Alone, the One and only God) but his parents convert him to Judaism,
Christianity or Paganism. I believe that the people who convert to Islam
are the people who guard this instinct with honesty and know that there
is a perfect religion somewhere out there, although they have not heard
about it yet. So God rewards them for their honesty and grants them what
they have been hoping for. And the people who are lost are those who
deny to admit Gods Perfection, thus do not expect anything perfect from
Him.

And when it is said to them: Come to what Allah has revealed and unto
the Messenger Muhammad, they say: Enough for us is that which we found
our fathers following, even though their fathers had no knowledge
whatsoever, and no guidance?

Holy Quran, 5:104

**Holy Quran 2:147*****  
 The truth is from your Lord, therefore you should not be of the
doubters.***
