My Conversion Unto Him Aaron Haroon Sellars
===========================================

Why did I accept Islam? This is a question that I have been asked many
times by others, and a question that I have asked myself many times.
Firstly, it was the Will of God because it is He that changes hearts and
guides someone to a way that is straight! Secondly, because I was
looking for the truth, the real truth and nothing but the truth!
Thirdly, because there were doctrinal elements in my previous religion
of Christianity that at first hearing seemed acceptable but when
reflected, analyzed, and prayed upon, proved to be not only unacceptable
but also contradictory, inconsistent, and even blasphemous! But why
ISLAM? Why, when I was looking for the real and whole truth did God
guide me to Islam and not to one of many religions available to man or
just another branch of Christianity? The answer to this important
question was to unfold as I took my first steps towards my spiritual
quest.

The basic seed of God-consciousness was implanted in me from birth, but
my soul was moulded to the teachings of the Christian church. My
religious upbringing was never something that was forced, nor was it
just occasional or just habitual. It seemed to be a natural and
essential part of the fibre of my family. One of my fondest childhood
memories till this day is of my mother reading me Bible stories every
Sunday. But when I reached my teens and especially when I entered
college, that spiritual nurturing became tainted more and more.

The college scene is where most people of religious background either
completely abandon that upbringing or like in my case, just put it on
pause. Its really hard not to when you are surrounded by co-ed dorms,
open promiscuity, easy access to alcohol, 24 hour parties, and
curfew-free nights. There werent any churches around campus that I was
interested in so my Sundays began to feel like any other day of the
week. While in college I experienced many things and learned many
lessons of life but one particular experience had brought me right to
the edge of cliff of death! The situation was so unexpected so shocking,
so overwhelming, that I honestly felt that the only solution was
suicide. It took someone whom I had known for just a little while,
breaking down and crying when he realized what I was about to do, for me
to just pause and think. I thought that something was truly wrong if
this guy had a higher value for my life than I did. As I stood there, I
never felt so empty in my life. There was the big void where my soul was
supposed to be and I felt like Moses (pbuh) and his followers being
chased by the enemy from all sides only to be confronted by the
impassable Red Sea! I realized that it was time to make the call they
had made. The call of faith-the call of God!

I decided to return to the church of my youth, a Baptist church in
Washington D.C. I heard that there was a new pastor preaching there that
was thorough and I decided to try him out. Praise God, the preacher was
young, dynamic, and effective. He really made the Bible come to life in
his sermons and made living for God seem real and worthwhile. Coming
from the position of a person who was ready to kill himself, these
messages were beginning to fill my emptiness and make me want to live
and give life another chance. I remember the nervous excitement of
accepting the call to new membership at church and the newness and
freshness of being dipped into the water at my baptismal ceremony. I
felt reborn! Clean! With the

lips I accepted Jesus (pbuh) as my lord and saviour but deep down in my
heart, I was just reaccepting the reality of God in my life! As I went
deeper in my walk of faith the problem that had almost caused me to slay
myself vanished like an illusion! Like it was only there to make me turn
to my Creator! This gave me a new drive, motivation, and a sense of
purpose. I became very active to the extent of encouraging a few of my
friends to join the church. I would watch and listen to the pastor in
awe, day dreaming of becoming one myself. I honestly felt that the best
thing to do for a living would be to help people turn to God. Something
that had proven to be so successful in my life. But at the same time I
was always very open-minded, especially when it came to spiritual truth,
I think this is what made me a vessel to receive the full truth, in
Islam.

After a while I began a private hobby of studying world religions. The
first book I read, The Religion of Man, was actually one that I had
borrowed from a friend. The first chapter I read was the chapter on
Islam and it was a tremendous surprise! It began with a little Arabian
history and a biography of the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) followed by an
explanation of the basic tenants and doctrines of Islam. I could not
believe the similarity and relationship that it had with Christianity.
It wasnt some foreign religion made up by some foreign man who
worshipped some foreign God. It was the true Abrahamaic (pbuh) religion,
revealed through a man whose very lineage traced back to Abrahams (pbuh)
first son Ishmael (pbuh) who worshipped the same one true God. This
further fed my curiosity and interest in Islam. I had decided to keep
myself open so I also read the history and doctrines of Buddhism,
Hinduism, Judaism, Native American spirituality, and other smaller
religious sects, cults, and movements. Buddhism seemed to renounce the
world too much yet was not clear on the afterlife. In Hinduism the
worship seemed too loose and

unfocused with its great deity residing in many reforms, Judaism seemed
basically true but had had too much of a racial bias, and Native
American to vary by the tribe. Islam was the only one whose theology and
practices seemed truly universal. The information that I had gathered so
far was not enough to make me want to change my religion but that was
soon to change when I came into contact with the Quran!

I was working at a music store where a young woman used to come to the
store with whom I used to have general conversations and on one occasion
happened to bring up the topic of Islam. I then found that she was a
Muslim and she told me that I could get more information on Islam at a
little session that her father helped teach with some other Muslim. I
was both nervous and excited at my first visit but it was my first time
being around real Muslims! I was initially impressed by the racial
variety, the simple environment, and the warm humbleness of the
attendants. They answered a few basic questions of mine but I was there
mostly to listen. When it was prayer time, I quietly watched from a
distance with a smile. Seeing all the men, women, and children bow in
unison and put their faces flat against the ground in prayer seemed a
little strange and funny, yet so humble, so unified, and so natural. It
seemed like this was the ultimate way that we as Gods creations were
supposed to pray. I recalled in my mind accounts in Bible of other
prophets like Abraham, Moses, and Jesus (pbuh), throwing themselves to
the ground in humility and prayer to God yet this is not the way we
prayed in church as Christians, but the Muslims did! Jesus (pbuh) told
us to greet each other by saying Peace be with you, yet we Christians
didnt do this. It was the Muslims who greeted each other saying
As-Salaamu Alaikum which means Peace be with you. In Christianity only
orthodox nuns covered their heads and bodies, but this was a standard
practice of modesty, chastity and humbleness for

millions of practicing Muslim women who were interactive members of the
society. It wasnt something reserved for the orthodox. I left that
little session engulfed in a maze of thoughts.

When I saw my Muslim friend at the music store again I thanked her and
told her how wonderful it was and that I was sure to return. She then
asked me if I had a Quran yet. I said No. I thought that the Quran was
only in a foreign language and that I couldnt read it but she said that
she would give me an English translation from the original Arabic. I
gladly accepted the offer and was even more excited when I received it!
WOW! My first real Quran. I couldnt wait to start reading it. The first
thing I did was to look up Jesus(pbuh) in the index and look up every
verse it listed under his name. This was the prophet that I was raised
on and was dear to me so I had to know what God had revealed in this
book about him. If it degraded, ridiculed, or rejected him in any way I
was going to close the book and leave Islam alone. I agreed when I read
that God was not three in one but one in an exclusive and unique sense.
I agreed even when I read that Jesus (pbuh) was born of a virgin but was
not Gods Son. When I was studying idioms in ancient Hebrew and other
Semitic languages Son meant nearness and was used in the old testament
in reference to other people and prophets, the term Son of God meant one
who was near and closely attached to God, as the term Son of man meant
one near and close to man. Incidentally, the use of the term Son of man
outnumbers the use of the term Son of God in reference to Jesus (pbuh).
Even though, in the Quran Jesus (pbuh) was always referred to as the Son
of Mary. God revealed that the birth of Jesus (pbuh) was like that of
Adam (pbuh)-He merely said BE and He was, and Adam had neither a
physical father or mother and no one worshipped him as the Only Begotten
Son of God! I agreed when I read that Jesus(pbuh)

was not God in human form but a human prophet that was created by God,
sent by God and who himself needed, depended on, feared, and prayed to
God. I agreed when I read that the Jews had no victory in killing him
and that God raised him to Himself. But when I read that they also did
not crucify him I was in shock! The impact of the 157th verse in the 4th
chapter of the Quran was to dramatically change my life from that point
on!

Im not one to just accept something right away or to just reject
something right away. I investigate. In the day I would reflect on that
one verse, and at night I would pray over it. I would beg God in tears
to show me in a dream what actually happened in detail to Jesus (pbuh)
if he was not crucified. What was real? What was false? I wanted to know
badly. I was looking hard. Examining, searching, debating. The soul was
the most important thing in the world to me and mine was on a quest. I
always wanted to know my Creator and serve my Creator but I wanted to
make sure that I knew Him the right way and I wasnt going to let up
until I found what I felt was the right path.

When I finally stopped waiting for that big dream and asked myself Well,
what does this word crucifixion mean for the Christian?. For the
Christian this word meant salvation! Salvation meaning the deliverance
from the penalty of sin which was spiritual death in Hell. It also meant
success in this life and the next. To me this is the vital thing that
religion must give man or else it is useless. To say that if Jesus
(pbuh) was not crucified, theres no way that God Almighty could forgive
His beloved mankind did not sound right. Jesus(pbuh) was very dear to my
heart and to think that the Loving, Forgiving God sent him on earth only
to be murdered for an innumerable mass of sins that he himself never
committed did not seem fair or even sensible. If God could create the
whole universe by saying Be and IT WAS then why couldnt He do the same
for the tiny littler

sinner who is admitting his guilt and asking Him for forgiveness? Why
couldnt He say to the person Be forgiven and he or she is forgiven? Why
was the murder and blood of an innocent man a necessity for this
forgiveness? I said to myself, If this book can map out a plan of
salvation that has nothing to do with murder or blood then I will submit
to God and His plan.

This made me deeply review my Bible and try to find what was essential
necessity for salvation. The Jews and the Muslims never put anything in
between them and their prayer to God so why did the Christians? There
was nothing in between Adam and God, or Abraham and God, or Moses and
God, or David and God, or Jesus and God! God had taught through the
Bible that a person was individually responsible for his sins and that
no one else could pay for or be penalized for them. Jesus(pbuh) was
preaching repentance and telling people that their sins were forgiven
before this supposed crucifixion! So why all of a sudden was the blood
of one martyr necessary for humanity to be forgiven? This issue of
sacrifice, blood, and forgiveness seemed to be summed up in just a few
verses in the Holy Quran.

Concerning sacrifice chapter 22:37, had the answer, It is not their
flesh nor their blood that reaches God, it is your piety that reached
Him. He has made them (animals) subject to you, that you may glorify God
for His guidance to you. Concerning sin and forgiveness God revealed in
chapter 12:87, No one despairs of Gods mercy except those who have no
faith. Also, in chapter 39:53 do not despair of Gods mercy for God
forgives all sins. He is indeed OFTEN Forgiving and Most Merciful. I
found exacting parallels in the Bible in Psalms 30:5, 32:5, 62:1-2, 1st
Samuel 15:22-23, Luke 15:7-10, Ezekiel 18:20-35, Isaiah 12:2-3, and Luke
7:47-50, 10:25, 18:24, and many others if you just look them up and
reflect. When I read in the Quran in chapter 10:57,

O mankind! There has come to you a direction from you Lord and a healing
for the diseases in your hearts - and for those who believe, A Guidance
and a Mercy! I said to myself This is it. This IS THE WORD OF GOD!!

My Muslim Friend from the music store had shown me a mosque that to my
surprise was 10 minutes away from my home! On my second visit to the
mosque, I declared my faith in 1994 and stated that There is no God
worthy to be worshipped except the ONE, Most High God or Allah. That
Muhammad (pbuh) is His Last Messenger to mankind. That the Quran is the
last revealed and written will and testament of Allah to and for mankind
to follow until the Day of Judgment. I had finally come home and found
peace! As I gradually built my faith and practice in ISLAM, I found that
Islam was not the religion of killers and terrorists! It is the true
religion of humankind, nature and all creatures seen and unseen. Islam
is by name the religion of those who seek peace and success through
obedience and submission to the will of Allah! I had found the path to
success, the path to true salvation! Allah in the revelation of the
Quran has refocused all forms of worship, prayer, fear and thanx to Him
and Him alone! You are High, Lord of all creations, and has reminded
mankind and all creations of their true place-dependent and subservient
to Allah and Allah alone!

**Holy Quran 2:149*****  
 And from whatsoever place you come forth, turn your face towards the
Sacred Mosque; and surely it is the very truth from your Lord, and Allah
is not at all heedless of what you do.***


