Chad M. Snyder
==============

When I was about 10, my mother and stepfather decided to become
Christians. Of course, as parents do, they wish to instil the same
social, political, and religious values on their children. I became a
rather active member. My parents went every Sunday and became board
members on various committees and so forth. I spent time in the youth
group. As I further studied Christianity, I began to notice so many
contradictions and various things that I began to question my faith
about two years later when I was about 12. I had always been sceptical
and to the point of cynicism. I believe the final cut that was to seal
my break with Christianity involved my father. As my parents were
divorced I saw my father usually every weekend. We had a large youth
group event coming up and I would have loved to have my father join me.
When my mother found out she immediately didnt allow me to go and made a
rather heated phone call to my father. Her main reason was that it was
her church and if he wanted to go to church he had to find his own
church. My church and your church? I believed that completely went
against all that I was taught. When I asked about this the explanation
only got worse. My mother stated that I had to understand that no matter
how much my father might have found God, he would never go to heaven and
he was not allowed in her church. This had me extremely upset. I thought
it would be a good thing if my father found God and attended church. The
pastor himself took me aside and confirmed what my mother had said.
Since my dad was a really bad sinner he

would never get to heaven. I asked what a really bad sinner was and got
a run around. From that point on I realized that God may be forgiving
but none of his followers had to be. That all that a saved Christian had
to do was ask forgiveness and no matter what they did they would go to
heaven, no questions asked. I knew that what I considered to be
Christianity was no longer for me. I slowly started my break and finally
at the age of 14 completely removed myself from all of it. I knew there
was a god and had faith that there was one, but I didnt know who. I
started reading about religion a few years later. I started reading
about Islam in about 1999. I had always had sympathy for the Muslims in
other countries. I saw how the US always called them militants,
murderers, terrorists, and the like. I had gone to public school and new
several Muslims and knew that they werent like that. I figured that they
picked the bad apples to represent the whole group. The more I read
about Islam the more it appealed to me. In January of 2003, I started to
have a rough time. I was laid off and my employment mainly supported
myself, wife and almost two year old and my wife was pregnant with our
second child, my car broke down and was going to cost about two thousand
to fix. It really looked like everything came crashing down. Like many
people do who are in that situation I wanted to turn to God. But, I
didnt really have one. I saw nothing on TV but the looming war in Iraq,
heard the word Jihad about every ten seconds, and saw a mosque with a
screaming Imam about every thirty seconds. So, I started reading again.
I looked up website after website, started subscribing to Muslim
newsgroups on the internet and looking for someone to talk to. Many of
the emails that I sent and bulletin boards I posted on said the same
thing. Just turn to Allah. If I did this, it would all make sense. One
night after really thinking about this I had a dream. I am still not
positive what it was, but it was an Arab man who did not use his name
but told me to turn to Allah, pray, and life will make sense. The

next day I said Shahada. The following day I found a Masjid. I went one
night for prayer and found what I believe to be the one true path. The
next night I returned and said the Shahada amongst my peers and we ate.
Within two days my employer recalled me from lay off. I have received a
substantial raise and the very real possibility to take a higher paying
position within the same company and work on a better shift. I prayed
heavily for my wife to see the straight way. She now is rapidly
approaching reversion also. I believe that my life has only improved
since my acceptance of Allah as my Lord and Islam as my faith. When my
wife reverts Insha Allah, we will raise our children along the straight
way.

This is my conversion story. It is not earth shattering but, very
personal and a beautiful memory I hope to share.

**Holy Quran 5:84*****  
 And what (reason) have we that we should not believe in Allah and in
the truth that has come to us, while we earnestly desire that our Lord
should cause us to enter with the good people?***

 

Have you fully realized what Islam is? It is indeed a religion founded
on truth. It is such a fountain-head of learning that several streams of
wisdom and knowledge flow from it. It is such a lamp that several lamps
will be lighted from it. It is a lofty beacon illuminating the path of
Allah. It is such a set of principles and beliefs that will satisfy
every seeker of truth and reality. KNOW YOU ALL! That Allah has made
Islam the most sublime path for the attainment of his supreme pleasure
and the highest standard of His obedience.

**- Imam Ali (A.S.)**
