Jameka Neil
===========

I will say right away that I am very young. I am only 18, and that fact
seems to astound most people. I think it is proof that we are never too
young to begin looking for God, or to understand His truth.

I was raised Christian, nondenominational. We were never big
churchgoers, but we always knew who our God was and what our obligation
was to Him. In my living room to this day hangs a big velvet painting of
Jesus as a black man. That left a huge imprint on me, because it made
God real to me. Not only did he come to earth as a man, but also he was
black like me.

In my preteen years I was a crusader for Christ. I wanted to convert the
world and save souls. I believed blindly 100% in everything that was
given to me by the Bible and my pastor/youth leader. Then one day I ran
across something in the Bible that didnt sound anything like the God who
I had learned to love and obey. I thought perhaps I was just too young
to understand and took it to a more knowledgeable Christian who
confirmed that it was what I thought it was. My world fell apart.

I read the Bible, cover-to-cover, and marked along the way all of the
things that were contradictory or ungodly. By the time I got to
revelations I had a large segment of the Bible marked as invalid. So,
thinking maybe I needed to look at it in a historical perspective I did
my history work. There I found even more hypocrisy, blasphemy, and human
tampering with Holy Scriptures. What shocked me was the story of the
council of Nice

where human men divinely guided decided which text would be in the Bible
and which ones needed editing.

I also had to ask myself how God could be three and one at the same
time. What happens to a good man like Ghandi when he dies without Jesus?
Does Hitler get to go to heaven if he accepts Christ as his lord and
saviour? What about those who have never been exposed to Christianity? I
was once told that the trinity was part of the essence of God and that
since the breadth and scope of God is beyond my understanding I should
simply believe. I couldnt worship a God I couldnt understand.

I never lost my faith in God, I just decided that Christianity was not
the right path for me to travel. I felt no kinship with fellow
believers. I never felt anything special while attending service except
that I was doing an obligatory service to God. So I wandered faithless,
looking for something to hold on to. In my search I found Wicca, the
Bahai faith, and finally Islam.

I studied Islam quietly, on my own, in secret, for two years. I wanted
to be able to separate fact from fiction. I did not want to confuse
Islam with the cultures that claim to practice Islam while instituting
things that are clearly against all that Allah has revealed to us. I
wanted to make the distinction between the religion and the societies
that adopted it. That took time and patience. I met a lot of helpful
brothers and sisters via e-mail who answered all of my questions and
opened their lives up for me to examine.

I never liked the image that I was handed as to what a woman was. In
popular culture we are portrayed as very sexy, lady like, independent
enough so that men have no real responsibility toward us or the children
they help create, but dependant enough that we are continually in search
of a new man. The average woman on the street is honked at, whistled at,
has had her butt or breasts pinched, slapped, rubbed, or ogled by some

strange man. I never agreed with any of that and never found a come on
flattering.

In Christianity I was taught that as a woman I should not teach in
church or question the authority of any man in public. The picture
painted of women in Christianity was one of inferiority. We were
supposed to be chaste and silent with children about our feet. In Islam
I found a voice, a system that gave me ultimate respect for being a
mother and acknowledged the fact that I was equal to man in every way
except one: physical strength. The hadith are littered with stories of
women who spoke publicly and Islamic history is full of women who were
leaders. It was a theology that I could respect because it respected me.

I had to ask myself if I really wanted to be like all of the people I
saw around me. Who was really oppressed? The girl wearing skin-tight
jeans getting catcalls from boys rolling by in cars was not free. She
was societys whore and she got no respect. I was thankful that my mother
had never allowed me to wear such things, not that I ever wanted to, but
her disapproval was an added incentive. After examining the position of
the Muslim woman and what I felt to be truth in my heart, how could I
deny Islam?

Six weeks ago I made the decision to convert to Islam. I did so and have
not looked back since. My friends respect it because they see that it
has not changed who I am and what I stand for, in fact it has backed it
up. My advise to any woman out there is to ask herself these questions:

What do you want your daughter to believe about herself?

How should she allow herself to be treated?

Is she really born with evil tendencies because she is a descendant of
Eve?

How do you want her to feel about her body?

What are you modelling for her?

What image of womanhood are you promoting?

How do men treat you and how do you allow yourself to be treated?

**Holy Quran 29:69*  
 And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly guide
them in Our ways; Allah (swt) is most surely with the doers of good.***
