When I Found Islam I Knew It Was the Last Stop
==============================================

In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful

Often when people ask me How did you come to Islam?, I take a deep
breath and try and tell them the short version. I dont think that Islam
is something that I came to suddenly, even though it felt like it at the
time, but it was something that I was gradually guided towards through
different experiences. Through writing this piece I hope that somebody
may read it, identify with some things and may be prompted to learn more
about the real Islam.

I was born in 1978 in Australia, was christened and raised Christian. As
a child I used to look forward to attending church and going to Sunday
school. Even though I can still remember looking forward to it, I cant
remember much about it. Maybe it was getting all dressed up in my best
clothes, maybe seeing the other children, maybe the stories, or maybe it
was just that I could look forward to my grandmothers famous Sunday
lunch when I got home. My family wasnt strict about religion at all -
the bible was never read outside church from what I knew, grace was
never said before eating. To put it simply I guess religion just wasnt a
major issue in our lives. I can remember attending church with my family
sometimes, and as I got older I can remember getting annoyed when the
other members of my family chose not to come. So for the last couple of
years I

attended church alone.

At the time that I attended primary school Religious Education was a
lesson that was given weekly. We learned of true Christian values and
received copies of the bible. While I wouldnt admit it at the time, I
also looked forward to those classes. It was something interesting to
learn about, something that I believed had some sort of importance, just
that I didnt know what.

In my high school years I attended an all girls high school. We didnt
have any sort of religious classes there, and I guess to some degree I
missed that because I starting reading the bible in my own time. At the
time I was reading it for interest sake. I believed that God existed,
but not in the form that was often described in church. As for the
trinity, I hoped that maybe that was something I would come to
understand as I grew older. There were many things that confused me,
hence there seemed to be religious times in my life where I would read
the bible and do my best to follow it, then I would get confused and
think that it was all too much for me to understand. I remember talking
to a Christian girl in my math classes. I guess that gave me one reason
to look forward to math. I would ask her about things that I didnt
understand, and whilst some explanations I could understand, others
didnt seem to be logical enough for me to trust in Christianity 100%.

I cant say that I have ever been comfortable living with a lot of
aspects of the Australian culture. I didnt understand for example
drinking alcohol or having multiple boyfriends. I always felt that there
was a lot of pressure and sometimes cried at the thought of growing up
because of what growing up meant in this culture. My family travelled
overseas fairly often and I always thought that through travelling I
might be able to

find a country where I could lead a comfortable life and not feel
pressured like I did. After spending 3 weeks in Japan on a student
exchange I decided that I wanted to go again for a long-term exchange.
In my final year of high school I was accepted to attend a high school
in Japan for the following year.

Before I left Australia to spend the year overseas I was going through
one of my religious stages. I often tried to hide these stages from my
parents. For some reason I thought that they would laugh at me reading
the bible. The night before I flew to Japan my suitcase was packed
however I stayed up until my parents had gone to sleep so I could get
the bible and pack it too. I didnt want my parents to know I was taking
it.

My year in Japan didnt end up the most enjoyable experience in my life
by any means. I encountered problem after problem. At the time it was
difficult. I was 17 years old when I went there and I learned a lot of
valuable lessons in that year. One of which was things arent always what
they seem. At one stage I felt as though I had lost everything - my
Japanese school friends (friends had always been very important to me,
even in Australia), my Japanese families, then I received a phone call
saying that I was to be sent home to Australia a couple of months early.
I had lost everything - including the dream that I had held so close for
so many years. The night that I received that phone call I got out my
bible. I thought that maybe I could find some comfort in it, and I knew
that no matter what, God knew the truth about everything that everybody
does and that no amount of gossip and lies could change that. I had
always believed that hard times were never given to us to stop us, but
to help us grow. With that in mind, I was determined to stay in Japan
for the whole year and somehow try and stop the ridiculous rumours.
***Alhamdulillah*** I was able to do that.

From that year I came to understand that not only is every culture
different, but also they both have good points and bad points. I came to
understand that it wasnt a culture that I was searching for... but
something else.

I attended an all girls Buddhist school in Japan. We had a gathering
each week where we prayed, sang songs and listened to the principal give
us lengthy talks. At first I wasnt comfortable attending these
gatherings. I was given a copy of the songbook along with the beads that
you put over your hands when you pray. I tried to get out of going to
them at the start, but then decided that I didnt have to place the same
meaning to things as others did. When I prayed, I prayed to the same God
that I had always prayed to - the One and Only God. I cant say that I
really understand Buddhism. Whenever I tried to find out more I met with
dead ends. I even asked a Japanese man who taught English. He had often
been to America and he said that in Japan he was Buddhist, and in
American he was Christian. There were some things about Buddhism that I
found interesting, but it wasnt something that I could consider a
religion.

In a lot of ways I picked what I liked out of religions and spiritual
philosophies and formed what I considered to be my Own Religion. I
collected philosophical quote after quote in high school, read into
things such as the Celestine Prophecy and Angels when I returned to
Australia, and still held onto the Christian beliefs that made sense to
me. I felt like I was continually searching for the truth.

When I returned to Australia from Japan I had grown closer to a girl
that I went to high school with. She was always somebody who I
considered to be a good friend, but wasnt in my group of friends whom I
sat with in class or for lunch. Some of the

people in that group I havent heard from and havent seen since I
returned. I realised that this other girl and I had a lot more in common
than I had first thought. Maybe this was because I had changed a lot in
Japan, or maybe it was because I had learned that being socially
acceptable and popular wasnt important because the people that are
making those judgements are not always morally correct. I didnt really
care who was my friend and who wasnt anymore, but I did care that I was
true to myself and refused to change to suit other people. I felt like I
had found who I really was by losing everything that I had previously
considered important.

The girl that I had grown closer to was Muslim, not that I thought of it
at the time. One night we sat in McDonalds, taking advantage of their
free refill coffee offer and talked about religion, mainly in what way
we believed in God. She was the one asking the questions mostly, about
how I thought God to be. I enjoyed the discussion and felt somehow that
I might be making some sense to her with my Own Religion. When we got
home she got out the 40 Hadith Qudsi and read them for herself. She read
some of them to me, which of course got me interested. I asked to borrow
the book from her so I could sit and read them all too, which I did.
Reading the book in some ways was frightening. To me, examples of Islam
could be found in TV news reports and in books such as Princess and Not
without my daughter. Surely, I thought, the Hadith were just a good part
of it, but the bad part was there too.

From there I moved back to my university for the start of semester and
couldnt really get books from my friend anymore so I started looking on
the Internet. I had already met some Muslims on the IRC but I considered
them my friends too and that they wouldnt tell me the truth about Islam.
I thought that they would only tell me the good parts. I did ask them
some

questions though and MashaAllah they were a great help. I still remember
asking a Muslim guy whether he believed in angels. Angels were a part of
my Own Religion and I certainly didnt believe that a Muslim guy would
admit to believing in the existence of Angels!! My limited and ignorant
understanding of a Muslim male was one who beat his wife, killed female
babies and was a terrorist in his spare time. This sort of person
couldnt possibly believe in angels I thought. Of course I was shocked
when he said Of course I believe in angels. From then I was interested
to know what else Muslims believed in.

I often think that I initially continued reading about Islam through the
Internet to prove it wrong. I was always looking for that bad part.
Everybody couldnt have such a bad view of Islam if there was no reason
for them to. I had always found a bad or an illogical part to every
religion that I had read into. So why would Islam be different? I
remember finding an Islamic chat site for the first time and expected to
see suppressed females just reading what the males were saying. I
expected them not to have an opinion, I expected the typical Muslim girl
that I had always felt sorry for. To my shock I saw girls happily
chatting, with opinions that they were allowed to express. Muslim girls
that were somehow more liberated than I felt.

My learning about Islam through the Internet continued through chatting
to lots of people and printing out homepage after homepage. The more I
learned the more scared I was. I didnt tell any of my friends that I was
reading about Islam, not even my best friend. At first it was because I
didnt want them telling me only the good parts, and then even when I
came to realise that I wasnt going to find any of the bad parts, I didnt
want them to get their hopes up about me reverting to Islam. I wanted
this decision to be one that I made on my own - without pressure.

This decision that I refer to wasnt really a decision at all. I am often
asked What made you decide to become Muslim? but when something as clear
and logical as Islam is put in front of you, there is no choice. This is
not to say that it made the decision to say ***Shahadah*** any easier.
There were many things that stopped me at first. Firstly I didnt think
that I knew enough about Islam but then it didnt matter because I knew
that I would never find anything that was illogical or bad. I came to
realise that saying ***Shahadah*** is not the final step, but the first.
***Insha-Allah*** throughout my life I will continue to learn. The other
thing that made me hesitant was turning the meaning of the word Islam
from all the bad things that I had linked with it. I always thought that
I couldnt possibly be Muslim!! To then learn that my Own Religion and
beliefs for example of God being One, was actually Islam was hard at
first. Islam brought everything together. Everything made sense. To me,
finding Islam was like one big bus ride - I had stopped and had a look
at all of the stops along the way, taken a bit from all of them, and
continued on with the journey. When I found Islam I knew it was the last
stop of my long ride.

In October of 1997, my best friend came with me for me to say my
***Shahadah*** at an Islamic Centre in Melbourne (Jeffcott st). I was
still scared at the time, but after one of the sisters going through the
articles of faith, and me putting a mental tick next to each of them, I
knew that there was nothing left to do but to say it with my mouth. I
still cry when I think of the moment that I said Yes.. Ill do it. I
finally dropped the mental wall that had been stopping me. I was to
repeat in Arabic after the sister. With her first word I cried. It is a
feeling that I cant explain. My friend was sitting beside but a little
behind me, I didnt realise it then but she was already crying. I felt so
much power around me and in the words, but I myself felt so weak.

Sometimes I think my family wonder if this is a phase I am going
through, just like my other phases. I was even vegetarian until mum told
me what was for dinner that night - a roast. There is still so much for
me to learn, but one thing that I would like people to understand is
that I know ***Alhamdulillah*** that Islam is a blessing for mankind.
The more you learn, ***Insha-Allah***, the more beauty you will see in
Islam.

**Your sister in Islam.**

**Holy Quran 45:20*****  
 These are clear proofs for men, and a guidance and a mercy for a people
who are sure.***
