Dr. Kari Ann Owen, Ph.d. / Sister Penomee
=========================================

A salaam aleikum, beloved family.

There is no god but Allah, and Muhammed is his messenger.

These are the words of the ***Shahadah*** oath, I believe.

The Creator is known by many names. His wisdom is always recognizable,
and his presence made manifest in the love, tolerance and compassion
present in our community.

His profound ability to guide us from a war-like individualism so
rampant in American society to a belief in the glory and dignity of the
Creators human family, and our obligations to and membership within that
family. This describes the maturation of a spiritual personality, and
perhaps the most desirable maturation of the psychological self, also.

My road to ***Shahadah*** began when an admired director, Tony
Richardson, died of AIDS. Mr. Richardson director was already a
brilliant and internationally recognized professional when I almost met
him backstage at the play Luther at age 14.

Play writing for me has always been a way of finding degrees of
spiritual and emotional reconciliation both within myself and between
myself and a world I found rather brutal due to childhood circumstances.
Instead of fighting with the world, I let my conflicts fight it out in
my plays. Amazingly, some of us have even grown up together!

So as I began accumulating stage credits (productions and staged
readings), beginning at age 17, I always retained the hope that I would
someday fulfil my childhood dream of studying and working with Mr.
Richardson. When he followed his homosexuality to America (from England)
and a promiscuous community, AIDS killed him, and with him went another
portion of my sense of belonging to and within American society.
American and Western society to Islamic culture for moral guidance.

Why Islam and not somewhere else?

My birthmothers ancestors were Spanish Jews who lived among Muslims
until the Inquisition expelled the Jewish community in 1492. In my
historical memory, which I feel at a deep level, the call of the muezzin
is as deep as the lull of the ocean and the swaying of ships, the
pounding of horses hooves across the desert, the assertion of love in
the face of oppression.

I felt the birth of a story within me, and the drama took form as I
began to learn of an Ottoman caliphs humanity toward Jewish refugees at
the time of my ancestors expulsions. Allah guided my learning, and I was
taught about Islam by figures as diverse as Imam Siddiqi of the South
Bay Islamic Association; Sister Hussein of Rahima; and my beloved
adopted Sister, Maria Abdin, who is Native American and Muslim and a
writer for the SBIA magazine, IQRA.

My first research interview was in a halal butcher shop in San
Franciscos Mission District, where my understanding of living Islam was
profoundly affected by the first Muslim lady I had ever met: a customer
who was in hijab, behaved with a sweet kindness and grace and also read,
wrote and spoke four languages.

Her brilliance, coupled with her amazing (to me) freedom from arrogance,
had a profound effect on the beginnings of my

knowledge of how Islam can affect human behaviour.

Little did I know then that not only would a play be born, but a new
Muslim.

The course of my research introduced me to much more about Islam than a
set of facts, for Islam is a living religion. I learned how Muslims
conduct themselves with a dignity and kindness, which lifts them above
the American slave market of sexual competition and violence. I learned
that Muslim men and women could actually be in each others presence
without tearing each other to pieces, verbally and physically. And I
learned that modest dress, perceived as a spiritual state, could uplift
human behaviour and grant to both men and women a sense of their own
spiritual worth.

Why did this seem so astonishing, and so astonishingly new?

Like most American females, I grew up in a slave market, comprised not
only of the sexual sicknesses of my family, but the constant negative
judging of my appearance by peers beginning at ages younger than seven.
I was taught from a very early age by American society that my human
worth consisted solely of my attractiveness (or, in my case, lack of it)
to others. Needless to say, in this atmosphere, boys and girls, men and
women, often grew to resent each other very deeply, given the desperate
desire for peer acceptance, which seemed almost if not totally dependent
not on ones kindness or compassion or even intelligence, but on looks
and the perception of those looks by others.

While I do not expect or look for human perfection among Muslims, the
social differences are profound, and almost unbelievable to someone like
myself.

I do not pretend to have any answers to the conflicts of the Middle
East, except what the prophets, beloved in Islam, have

already expressed. My disabilities prevent me from fasting, and from
praying in the same prayer postures as most of you. At this time I dress
modestly for an American woman, which is still not hijab.

But I love and respect the Islam I have come to know through the
behaviour and words of the men and women I have come to know in AMILA
and elsewhere, where I find a freedom from cruel emotional conflicts and
a sense of imminent spirituality.

What else do I feel and believe about Islam?

I support and deeply admire Islams respect for same sex education; for
the rights of women as well as men in society; for modest dress; and
above all for sobriety and marriage, the two most profound foundations
of my life, for I am 21 1/2 years sober and happily married. How
wonderful to feel that one and half billion Muslims share my faith in
the character development marriage allows us, and also in my decision to
remain drug- and alcohol-free.

What, then, is Islams greatest gift in a larger sense?

In a society which presents us with constant pressure to immolate
ourselves on the altars of unbridled instinct without respect for
consequences, Islam asks us to regard ourselves as human persons created
by Allah with the capacity for responsibility in our relations with
others. Through prayer and charity and a commitment to sobriety and
education, if we follow the path of Islam, we stand a good chance of
raising children who will be free from the violence and exploitation
which is robbing parents and children of safe schools and
neighbourhoods, and often of their lives.

The support of the AMILA community and other friends, particularly at a
time of some strife on the AMILA Net, causes me to affirm my original
responses to Islam and declare that this

is a marvellous community, for in its affirmation of Allahs gifts of
marriage, sobriety and other forms of responsibility, Islam shows us the
way out of hell.

My husband, Silas, and I are grateful for your presence and your
friendship. And as we prepare to lay the groundwork for adoption, we
hope that we will continue to be blessed with your warm acceptance, for
we want our child to feel the spiritual presence of Allah in the
behaviour of surrounding adults and children. We hope that as other
AMILAers consider becoming new parents, and become new parents, a
progressive Islamic school might emerge... progressive meaning
supportive and loving as well as superior in academics, arts and sports.

Maybe our computer whizzes will teach science and math while I teach
creative writing and horseback riding!

Please consider us companions on the journey toward heaven, and please
continue to look for us at your gatherings, on the AMILA net and in the
colors and dreams of the sunset.

For there is no god but Allah, the Creator, and Muhammed, whose caring
for the victims of war and violence still brings tears from me, is his
Prophet.

**A salaam aleikum,**

**Holy Quran 53:23*****  
 They are naught but names which you have named, you and your fathers;
Allah has not sent for them any authority. They follow naught but
conjecture and the low desires which (their) souls incline to; and
certainly the guidance has come to them from their Lord.***
