7. Birth Of A Little Paradise
=============================

It is impossible to completely eradicate oppression and injustice from
the face of the earth. There will always be some people who are
oppressing and unjustly treating others till the Day of *al-Qiyamah*.
However, incidences of oppression, aggression and injustice can be
reduced to the barest minimum, to the extent they are hardly heard of
anywhere on the globe. This is what Imam al-Mahdi, *‘alaihi al-salam*,
will achieve, with Allah’s Help, through his worldwide revolution. This
is also what the *ahadith* say: that just as cases of equity and justice
are *existent* but unusual today, incidences of oppression, aggression
and injustice will also occur at his time, though very rarely. Imam Abu
Dawud (d. 275 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا سهل بن تمام بن بزيع ثنا عمران القطان عن قتادة عن أبي نضرة عن أبي
سعيد الخدري قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم " المهدي مني أجلى
الجبهة أقنى الأنف يملأ الأرض قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت جورا وظلما ويملك سبع
سنين "
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sahl b. Tammam b. Buzay’ – ‘Imran al-Qaṭṭan – Qatadah – Abu Nadhrah –
Abu Sa’id al-Khudri:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**The Mahdi is from
me**, with a broad forehead, a curved nose. **He will fill the earth
with equity and justice just as it had been filled with oppression and
injustice**, and he will rule by kingdom for seven years.”[^1]

Al-Albani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^2]

Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا محمد بن جعفر ثنا عوف عن أبي الصديق الناجي
عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم لا تقوم
الساعة حتى تمتلئ الأرض ظلما وعدوانا قال ثم يخرج رجل من عترتي أو من أهل
بيتي يملؤها قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت ظلما وعدوانا
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Muhammad b. Ja’far
– ‘Awf – Abu al-Siddiq al-Naji – Abu Sa’id al-Khudri:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “The Hour will not be
established until the earth is filled with injustice and aggression.
Then, a man from my offspring or my Ahl al-Bayt will come out. **He will
fill it with equity and justice just as it had been filled with
injustice and aggression**.”[^3]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^4]

A world with almost no oppression and injustice is only a wild dream
today; and certainly, it will take a great miracle to achieve. This is
why it is clearly one of the miracles of the Mahdi that he will
successfully create a earth which is nothing but a little paradise. The
earth will become virtually crimeless and overwhelming peaceful, once
Allah grants victory to him.

Another major miracle which Imam al-Mahdi will achieve is that he will
completely end poverty in our planet. Literally every single human being
on the earth will become very rich and wealthy. Imam Muslim (d. 261 H)
records how this will occur:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا زهير بن حرب وعلي بن حجر (واللفظ لزهير) قالا حدثنا إسماعيل بن
إبراهيم عن الجريري عن أبي نضرة قال كنا عند جابر بن عبدالله فقال… قال
رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم يكون في آخر أمتي خليفة يحثي المال حثيا
لا يعده عددا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zuhayr b. Harb and ‘Ali b. Hajar – Isma’il b. Ibrahim – al-Jariri – Abu
Nadhrah:

We were with Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah and he said…: The Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him, said: “**There will be a** ***khalifah*** **at the
END of my** ***Ummah*** **who will distribute wealth without ever
counting it**.”[^5]

This *khalifah* is named in this *hadith* of Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرني أبو العباس محمد بن أحمد المحبوبي بمرو ثنا سعيد بن مسعود ثنا
النضر بن شميل ثنا سليمان بن عبيد ثنا أبو الصديق الناجي عن أبي سعيد
الخدري رضي الله عنه أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال : يخرج في آخر
أمتي المهدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-‘Abbas Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Mahbubi – Sa’id b. Mas’ud – al-Nadhr
b. Shumayl – Sulayman b. ‘Ubayd – Abu al-Siddiq al-Naji – Abu Sa’id
al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “**The Mahdi will come
out at the END of my** ***Ummah*****.**.[^6]

Al-Hakim comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain[^7]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^8]

He will be Imam al-Mahdi, and he will distribute wealth to his subjects
without measure. Muslim again records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحدثني زهير بن حرب حدثنا عبدالصمد بن عبدالوارث حدثنا أبي حدثنا داود عن
أبي نضرة عن أبي سعيد وجابر بن عبدالله قالا قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
و سلم يكون في آخر الزمان خليفة يقسم المال ولا يعده
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zuhayr b. Harb – ‘Abd al-Samad b. ‘Abd al-Warith – my father – Dawud –
Abu Nadhrah – Abu Sa’id and Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “There will be a
*khalifah* at the End of Time, **who will distribute wealth and will not
count it**.”[^9]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) too has copied this *hadith* of the
Prophet, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من خلفائكم خليفة يحثو المال حثيا لا يعده عدا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Among your *khulafa* will be a *khalifah* **who will distribute wealth
without ever counting it**.[^10]

He then comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^11]

In the footnote to the report, al-Albani further says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو المهدي المبشر بخروجه بين يدي نزول عيسى عليه الصلاة والسلام، ويصلي
عيسى عليه الصلاة والسلام خلفه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**He is the Mahdi**, whose advent is promised to occur before the
descent of ‘Isa, *‘alaihi al-salat wa al-salam*, **and ‘Isa,**
***‘alaihi al-salat wa al-salam*****, behind him**.[^12]

With such a leader in charge of world affairs, it is no surprise that
the earth will be transformed into the promised land for mankind, which
flows with milk and honey. Imam al-Hakim records about some other
benefits of the Mahdi’s rule for humanity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرني أبو العباس محمد بن أحمد المحبوبي بمرو ثنا سعيد بن مسعود ثنا
النضر بن شميل ثنا سليمان بن عبيد ثنا أبو الصديق الناجي عن أبي سعيد
الخدري رضي الله عنه أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال : يخرج في آخر
أمتي المهدي يسقيه الله الغيث وتخرج الأرض نباتها ويعطى المال صحاحا
وتكثر الماشية وتعظم الأمة يعيش سبعا أو ثمانيا يعني حججا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-‘Abbas Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Mahbubi – Sa’id b. Mas’ud – al-Nadhr
b. Shumayl – Sulayman b. ‘Ubayd – Abu al-Siddiq al-Naji – Abu Sa’id
al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “The Mahdi will come
out at the end of my *Ummah***. Allah will provide rain to him, and the
earth will bring out its vegetation, and he will give wealth correctly.
Livestock will become abundant and the** ***Ummah*** **will become
great**. He will witness seven or eight *Hajjs*.[^13]

Al-Hakim comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain[^14]

Imam al-Dhahabi agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^15]

‘Allamah al-Albani also says about the *hadith* in his *Sahihah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا سند صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: This chain is *sahih*[^16]

Dr. al-Bastawi has the same verdict on it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*.[^17]

Imam Ibn Abi Shaybah (d. 235 H) too has this report:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الله بن نمير قال حدثنا موسى الجهني قال حدثني عمر بن قيس الماصر
قال: حدثني مجاهد قال: حدثني فلان رجل من أصحاب النبي: أن المهدي لا يخرج
حتى تقتل النفس الزكية، فإذا قتلت النفس الزكية، غضب عليهم من في السماء
ومن في الأرض، فأتى الناس المهدي، فزفوه كما تزف العروس إلى زوجها ليلة
عرسها، وهو يملأ الأرض قسطا وعدلا وتخرج الأرض نباتها وتمطر السماء
مطرها، وتنعم أمتي في ولايته نعمة لم تنعمها قط.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Numayr – Musa al-Juhani – ‘Umar b. Qays al-Masir –
Mujahid:

Someone, a man from the Sahabah of the Prophet, narrated to me (from the
Prophet): “Verily, the Mahdi will not come out until the Pure Soul is
murdered. When he (the Pure Soul) is murdered, those in the heavens and
those on the earth will become angry against them. So, the people will
go to the Mahdi, and they will accompany him in a procession, just as
the bride is accompanied in a procession to her groom on the night of
her wedding. **He will fill the earth with equity and justice, and the
earth will bring out its vegetation, and the sky will bring down its
rains. My** ***Ummah*** **will enjoy a comfort during his rule, which it
never enjoined before**.”[^18]

Dr. al-Bastawi says about this *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح. رجاله كلهم ثقات.ومجاهد لم يصرح هنا باسم الصحابي، ولكنه
سمع من جماعة من الصحابة رضي الله عنهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Its chain is** ***sahih***. Its narrators are trustworthy. Mujahid has
not explicitly stated the name of the Sahabi. However, he did hear from
a group of the Sahabah, may Allah be pleased with them.[^19]

The unnamed Sahabi was clearly narrating from the Messenger of Allah.
This is why the phrase “my Ummah” is used in his report. Moreover, all
Sahabah are trustworthy in Sunni *rijal*. Therefore, the fact that the
Sahabi is not named does not hurt the authenticity of the *hadith*. It
is perfectly *sahih*.

[^1]: Abu Dawud Sulayman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijistani al-Azdi, Sunan (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 509,
\# 4285

[^2]: Ibid

[^3]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ], vol. 3, p. 36, \#
11331

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 4, p. 2234, \# 2913 (67)

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 4, p.
601, \# 8673

[^7]: Ibid

[^8]: Ibid

[^9]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 4, p. 2235, \# 2913/2914 (69)

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(al-Maktab al-Islami), vol. 2, p. 1027, \# 5913

[^11]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 1028, \# 5913

[^12]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 1027, \# 5913

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 4, p.
601, \# 8673

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 2, p. 328, \# 711

[^17]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
165

[^18]: ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. Abi Shaybah Ibrahim b. ‘Uthman b. Abi
Bakr b. Abi Shaybah al-Kufi al-‘Ubsi, Musannaf Ibn Abi Shaybah fi
al-Ahadith wa al-Athar (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1409 H) [annotator:
Prof. Sa’id al-Laham], vol. 8, p. 679, \# 199

[^19]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
214, \# 12


