8. The Mahdi Claimants
======================

So, who is this Mahdi, *‘alaihi al-salam*, who will transform our cursed
earth into a land of unprecedented purity and comfort? We only know, at
this point, that he is from the offspring of the Prophet, *sallallahu
‘alaihi wa alihi*, from his Ahl al-Bayt, *‘alaihim al-salam*. We are
also aware that he has a broad forehead and a curved nose, and will be
the leader and ruler over ‘Isa b. Maryam, the Masih, *‘alaihi al-salam*.
We know as well that his name is Muhammad, the name of the Messenger of
Allah. We are yet to look into the other authentic *ahadith* on the
lineage and physical characteristics of our *mawla*, the saviour of
mankind. Nonetheless, what we have so far is a good guide in identifying
the true Mahdi of this *Ummah*, the last *khalifah* of al-Rahman on His
earth.

Meanwhile, a lot of people have claimed to be this Mahdi throughout
Islamic history; and a lot of people have similarly been called “the
Mahdi”, even without or against their approval[^1]. For instance, this
is a list of people who were respectively identified – without their
sanction - as the Promised Mahdi by some sections of the *Ummah*:

1. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (d. 40 H), *‘alaihi al-salam*.

2. Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (d. 93 H).

3. Sulayman b. ‘Abd al-Malik (d. 99 H).

4. ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (d. 101 H).

5. Musa b. Talhah b. ‘Ubayd Allah (d. 103 H).

6. Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Baqir (d. 110 H), *‘alaihi al-salam*.

7. Isma’il b. Ja’far b. Muhammad (d. 138H).

8. Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Nafs al-Zakiyyah (d. 145 H).

9. Ja’far b. Muhammad al-Sadiq (d. 148 H), *‘alaihi al-salam*.

10. Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ja’far (d. 193 H).

11. Musa b. Ja’far al-Kazim (d.182 H), *‘alaihi al-salam*.

12. Yahya b. ‘Umar b. Yahya b. al-Husayn b. Zayd b. ‘Ali b. Husayn b.
‘Ali b. Abi Talib (d. 250 H).

13. Sayyid Ahmad b. ‘Irfan (d. 1246 H)

14. Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Sunusi (d. 1320 H)

15. Muhammad b. al-Qasim b. ‘Ali.

16. Yahya b. Abi Shumayt.

17. ‘Abd Allah b. Mu’awiyah b. ‘Abd Allah b. Ja’far b. Abi Talib.

18. The Masih ‘Isa b. Maryam.

As it can be clearly seen, only six of them were named “Muhammad”. So,
naturally, all the others are ruled out. Interestingly, even the Masih
and other people who were not from the Prophet’s offspring were
identified as the Mahdi by some Muslims! What exactly has happened to
this *Ummah*?

Meanwhile, there were equally a number of others, who each declared
himself the Mahdi. Some of their names are these:

i. Al-Harith b. al-Shurayh (d. 116 H).

ii. Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Mahdi al-‘Abbasi (d. 169 H).

iii. Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Maghribi (d. 524 H).

iv. Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah b. Hashim (d. 740 H).

v. Sayyid Muhammad Nurbakhsh al-Sufi (d. 869 H).

vi. Sayyid Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Jawunburi (d. 910 H)

vii. ‘Ali Muhammad al-Shirazi (d. 1850 CE).

viii. Muhammad Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hasani al-Sudani (d. 1899 CE)

ix. Ghulam Ahmad al-Qadiyani (d. 1908 CE)

x. Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Qahṭani al-Salafi (d. 1980 CE)

Most of them truly had the name “Muhammad” and some of them were indeed
from the Messenger’s offspring. However, only one – or none – of them
could have been the prophesied Mahdi. Therefore, it is apparent that
even those two criterions are not enough to fully identified the Awaited
Imam.

Something that comes to the mind of the researcher is: why would people
identify ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, for instance, as the Mahdi, knowing fully
that he died long ago, long before the end of the world? After all, the
Mahdi is expected to come out during the last generation of our *Ummah*.
A lot of those who have been called the Mahdi – such as al-Baqir,
al-Sadiq and al-Kazim – died more than a thousand years ago! Perhaps,
more puzzling is the fact that these various sects who attributed
*mahdawiyyah* (i.e. office of the Mahdi) to people like ‘Ali and
al-Baqir continued to do so even after witnessing their deaths! How can
a Mahdi die before fulfilling his mission? Worse still, how can a dead
person be the Mahdi who will purify our earth and rule over it with
equity and justice?!

As noted by Dr. al-Bastawi, those ancient sects of Islam had their
solution to the huge puzzle. Each of them believed in the concepts of
*al-ghaybah* concerning its chosen saviour: that its he had not *really*
died, but had only disappeared from human view to “reappear” at the end
of the *Ummah* as the Awaited “Mahdi”. So, his death and burial were
mere illusions – none of them was real – like in the case of ‘Isa b.
Maryam[^2] too. For instance, the Sabaiyyah supposedly claimed that Imam
‘Ali is alive, and will reappear during the End Times to rule the
world[^3]. Some of the Kaysaniyyah also made the same claims about
Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib[^4] while some others among them attribute
the *ghaybah* and *mahdawiyyah* to ‘Abd Allah b. Mu’awiyah b. ‘Abd Allah
b. Ja’far b. Abi Talib instead[^5]. Some of the Jarudiyyah believed too
that Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Nafs al-Zakiyyah never died, but only
disappeared and would reappear at the end of the world as the Mahdi[^6].
Others among the Jarudiyyah awarded the *ghaybah* and *mahdawiyyah* to
Yahya b. ‘Umar[^7] while lots of other Jarudis declared both for
Muhammad b. al-Qasim b. ‘Ali[^8]. The Nawusiyyah announced too that Imam
al-Sadiq never died, but only went into *ghaybah* and would return as
the Awaited Mahdi[^9]. The Isma’liyyah also attributed the *ghaybah* and
*mahdawiyyah* to Isma’il b. Ja’far al-Sadiq[^10] while the Mubarakiyyah
instead gave both to his son, Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ja’far[^11]. Of
course, the Musawiyyah – better known as the Waqifiyyah – affirmed as
well that Imam Musa b. Ja’far al-Kazim never died, and would return as
the Awaited Mahdi[^12].

But, how did they develop this concept of *al-ghaybah* to explain and
excuse the apparent deaths of their saviours? Was it only a tactical
invention created by them to address the contradictions within their
claims, following the unexpected deaths of their Mahdis? Or, was it
their misapplication of a genuine teaching of the Messenger of Allah?
These and others are questions we will be investigating in this book of
ours. Meanwhile, we must quickly mention that ‘Umar too, the second
Sunni *khalifah*, proclaimed the *ghaybah* of Muhammad al-Musṭafa –
although there is not sufficient evidence that he believed in the
latter’s *mahdawiyyah*. Imam al-Bukhari (d. 256 H) ends this chapter
with the report:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا إسماعيل بن عبد الله حدثنا سليمان بن بلال عن هشام ابن عروة عن
عروة بن الزبير عن عائشة رضي الله عنها زوج النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم
:أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم مات وأبو بكر بالسنح - قال إسماعيل
يعني بالعالية - فقام عمر يقول والله ما مات رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم قالت وقال عمر والله ما كان يقع في نفسي إلا ذاك وليبعثنه الله
فليقطعن أيدي رجال وأرجلهم .
  </p>
</blockquote>

Isma’il b. ‘Abd Allah – Sulayman b. Bilal – Hisham b. ‘Urwah – ‘Urwah b.
al-Zubayr – ‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her, the wife of the
Prophet, peace be upon him:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, died while Abu Bakr was at a
place called al-Sunah (i.e. al-‘Aliyah). ‘Umar stood up, saying, “I
swear by Allah! **The Messenger of Allah is not dead**!” She (‘Aishah)
narrated: ‘Umar said, “I swear by Allah! Nothing occurred to my mind
except that. **Verily! Allah will RESURRECT him and he will cut the
hands and legs of some men**."[^13]

[^1]: See generally Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi
al-Muntazar fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal
al-‘Ulama wa Ara al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st
edition, 1420 H), p. 60-118 for the full list and discussions of those
who have been called Mahdi – with or without their knowledge or approval
– and those who have called themselves the Mahdi.

[^2]: See Qur’an 4:157

[^3]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
64

[^4]: Ibid, p. 67

[^5]: Ibid, p. 68

[^6]: Ibid, p. 71

[^7]: Ibid, p. 72

[^8]: Ibid

[^9]: Ibid, p. 74

[^10]: Ibid, p. 75

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Ibid, p. 76

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Musṭafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
3, p. 1341, \# 3467. ‘Umar’s claims are contradictory. If the Prophet
was not dead, how come then that Allah would “resurrect” him later? Are
living people ever “resurrected”? But then, a look into the Sunni
ahadith establishes that ‘Umar was later convinced of the Messenger’s
death by Abu Bakr. However, this author was unable to locate any proof –
Sunni or otherwise - that ‘Umar ever abandoned his belief that Allah
would resurrect Muhammad from death before the end of time.


