10. Finding The True Mahdi: He Is The Twelfth Of A Sinless Dynasty (Part 1)
===========================================================================

The prescribed system of governance in Islam is the *khilafah*. It is
led by a *khalifah* – who is also alternatively called an Imam or an
*amir*. He rules for life, and represents Allah and His Messenger,
*sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*, on the earth. He is equally an heir of
Prophet Ibrahim al-Khalil from his pure offspring. The *khilafah* is
irrevocable, and shall continue uninterruptable till the Hour.

Allah has stated concerning the *khilafah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذ ابتلى إبراهيم ربه بكلمات فأتمهن قال إني جاعلك للناس إماما قال ومن
ذريتي قال لا ينال عهدي الظالمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

And when Ibrahim was tried by his Lord with some statements, and he
fulfilled them, He said, “**I will appoint you an Imam of mankind**.” He
(Ibrahim) asked, “**And of my offspring**?” He (Allah) replied, “**My
Covenant shall not reach the wrongdoers**.”

Explaining this *ayah*, al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الله تعالى} :وإذ ابتلى إبراهيم ربه بكلمات فأتمهن، قال إني جاعلك
للناس إماما، قال ومن ذرتي؟ قال لا ينال عهدي الظالمين {لما وفى ما أمره
به ربه من التكاليف العظيمة، جعله للناس إماما يقتدون به ويأتمون بهديه
.وسأل الله أن تكون هذه الإمامة متصلة بسببه، وباقية في نسبه، وخالدة في
عقبه فأجيب إلى ما سأل وسلمت إليه الإمامة بزمام، واستثنى من نيلها
الظالمون، واختص بها من ذريته العلماء العاملون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah the Most High says: {And when Ibrahim was tried by his Lord with
some statements, and he fulfilled them, He said, “I will appoint you an
Imam of mankind.” He (Ibrahim) asked, “And of my offspring?” He (Allah)
replied, “My Covenant shall not reach the wrong-doers.”} When he
fulfilled the huge obligations which his Lord commanded him with, he
appointed him the Imam of mankind, whom they must follow, and whose
guidance they must copy. **He requested Allah that this** ***Imamah***
**be connected with his lineage, and be** **uninterrupted** **within his
offspring, and be** **perpetual forever** **among his offspring. So,
what he asked WAS GRANTED**, and he was granted full authority of
*Imamah*, and **the wrong-doers were excluded from its reach, and it was
made exclusive to the righteous scholars among his offspring**.[^1]

Our Lord made His dear prophet, Ibrahim, *‘alaihi al-salam*, a
*khalifah* over all mankind of his time. Ibrahim then made a *du’a* to
him to make it uninterrupted and eternally perpetual within his
offspring after him. The supplication was answered, but with a
condition: the *khilafah* would never reach any wrong-doer among his
descendants. Prof. Ibn Yasin also records in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخرج الطبري بسنده الصحيح عن مجاهد (قال لاينال عهدي الظالمين) قال: لا
يكون إماما ظالما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Tabari records **with his** ***sahih*** **chain** from Mujahid that
he said: “(My Covenant shall not reach the wrongdoers) **There will**
***never*** **be an Imam who does wrong**.”[^2]

Of course, every sinner is a wrong-doer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن يتعد حدود الله فقد ظلم نفسه
  </p>
</blockquote>

And whosoever transgresses the set limits of Allah, **then indeed he has
wronged himself**.[^3]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن يتعد حدود الله فأولئك هم الظالمون
  </p>
</blockquote>

And whosoever transgresses the set limits of Allah, **then such are the
wrongdoers**.[^4]

Therefore, the *khilafah* – which is a Covenant of Allah (and therefore
His *exclusive* affair) – will never reach any sinner. Whosoever claims
the *Imamah* but is a sinner, he is only an impostor.

Interestingly, even though he was the *khalifah* of the earth, Ibrahim
had no political or military power. This is a crucial point about
*Imamah*. Whether the people recognize their *khalifah* and give him
their allegiance or not, he remains the only legitimate Imam on the face
of the earth. His authority does not come from the people, nor is he
appointed by them. Rather, he holds the “Covenant of Allah” which He
bestows upon some of His pure servants from the offspring of Ibrahim.

Some other *khalifahs* after Ibrahim also lacked political and military
power, and were nonetheless the true Imams of mankind:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ووهبنا له إسحاق ويعقوب نافلة وكلا جعلنا صالحين وجعلناهم أئمة يهدون
بأمرنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And We bestowed upon him (i.e. Ibrahim) **Ishaq** and **Ya’qub**. Each
one We made righteous. **And We appointed them IMAMS, guiding by Our
Command**.[^5]

Neither Ishaq nor Ya’qub was ever allowed to rule, even though they were
both *khalifahs*.

In line with the *du’a* of Ibrahim, which was answered by Allah, the
*khilafah* remains eternally perpetual and uninterruptible within his
sinless offspring. Naturally, it exists in our *Ummah* too, till the Day
of *al-Qiyamah*. However, amongst us, it has been limited to the
descendants of Ibrahim from the tribe of Quraysh only, as Imam
al-Bukhari (d. 256 H) documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو الوليد حدثنا عاصم بن محمد قال سمعت أبي عن ابن عمر رضي الله
عنهما: عن النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم قال لا يزال هذا الأمر في قريش ما
بقي منهم اثنان
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-Walid – ‘Asim b. Muhammad – my father – Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be
pleased with them both:

The Prophet, peace be upon him, said: “**THIS AUTHORITY shall never
cease to be in Quraysh**, as long as (at least) two of them are
alive.”[^6]

Apparently, the Quraysh – who are in their millions today – will
continue to exist in multitudes till the Hour. Therefore, the *khilafah*
will always be in them till the Day of *al-Qiyamah*. Meanwhile, the
nature of “this authority” – the *Imamah* – is mentioned in this *sahih
hadith* of Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي حدثنا زيد بن الحباب حدثنا معاوية بن صالح قال
حدثني أبو مريم انه سمع أبا هريرة يقول قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم الملك في قريش
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Zayd b. al-Hubbab
– Mu’awiyah b. Salih – Abu Maryam – Abu Hurayrah:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**THE KINGDOM is in
Quraysh**.”[^7]

Assessing the *sanad*, al-Albani (d. 1420 H) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذا إسناد صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

**This chain is** ***sahih***.[^8]

Then, he adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: زيد ثقة صدوق كما في " الميزان " وقد رفعه، وهي زيادة يجب قبولها
كما تقرر في المصطلح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: Zayd is *thiqah* (trustworthy), *saduq* (very truthful) as stated
in *al-Mizan*, and he has narrated it in a *marfu’* manner. **It is a**
***ziyadah*** **which must be accepted** as it has been repeatedly
mentioned in *al-Mustalah*.[^9]

It is royalty. It is monarchy. It is dynasty. Each *khalifah* is a king,
who is appointed by Allah and awarded His Covenant, from the sinless
offspring of Prophet Ibrahim.

We also read this *hadith* of Imam Ahmad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا يونس بن محمد ثنا حماد يعنى بن زيد ثنا
مجالد عن الشعبي عن جابر بن سمرة قال خطبنا رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم بعرفات فقال لن يزال هذا الأمر عزيزا منيعا ظاهرا على من ناوأه حتى
يملك اثنا عشر كلهم قال فلم أفهم ما بعد قال فقلت لأبي ما بعد كلهم قال
كلهم من قريش
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) - Yunus b. Muhammad
– Hammad b. Zayd – Mujalid – al-Sha’bi – Jabir b. Samurah:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, delivered a sermon to us at
‘Arafat and said, “This affair will never cease to be strong, invincible
and victorious over whoever opposes it **as long as twelve (people) RULE
BY KINGDOM**. All of them….”

(Jabir said): I did not understand what was said after that. So, I said
to my father, “What did he say after ‘all of them…’?”. He replied, “All
of them will be from Quraysh.”[^10]

Al-Arnauṭ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حديث صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

A *sahih hadith*[^11]

Of course, these twelve men are the only twelve *khalifahs* of this
*Ummah* till the end of the world. Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) records in
this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا قتيبة بن سعيد وأبو بكر بن أبي شيبة قالا حدثنا حاتم (وهو ابن
إسماعيل) عن المهاجر بن مسمار عن عامر بن سعد بن أبي وقاص قال كتبت إلى
جابر بن مرة مع غلامي نافع أن أخبرني بشيء سمعته من رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم قال فكتب لي سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم يوم جمعة
عشية رجم الأسلمي يقول (لا يزال الدين قائما حتى تقوم الساعة أو يكون
عليكم اثنا عشر خليفة كلهم من قريش)
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qutaybah b. Sa’id and Abu Bakr b. Abi Shaybah – Hatim b. Isma’il –
al-Muhajir b. Musmar – ‘Amir b. Sa’d b. Abi Waqqas:

I sent a letter to Jabir b. Samurah through my servant, Nafi’, to inform
me of something he heard from the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him.
So, he wrote in reply back to me: “I heard the Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him, saying on a Friday, on the eve of the stoning of al-Aslami,
saying: ‘**The religion will never cease to stand until the
establishment of the Hour or as long as there are twelve**
***khalifahs*** **over you, all of them from Quraysh**.’”[^12]

The *hadith* is explicit: Islam will remain standing throughout the
*khilafah* of the twelve kings, and this will be until the Day of
*al-Qiyamah*. So, the twelve *khalifahs* will rule, uninterrupted, till
the Hour.

We further read this *hadith* of Ahmad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا مؤمل بن إسماعيل ثنا حماد بن سلمة حدثنا
داود بن هند عن الشعبي عن جابر بن سمرة قال سمعت النبي صلى الله عليه و
سلم يقول يكون لهذه الأمة اثنا عشر خليفة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Mumal b. Isma’il –
Hammad b. Salamah – Dawud b. Hind – al-Shu’bi – Jabir b. Samurah:

I heard the Prophet, peace be upon him, saying: “**There will be for
this** ***Ummah*** **TWELVE** ***KHALIFAHS***.”[^13]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حديث صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

A *sahih* *hadith*.[^14]

Therefore, any other *khalifah* apart from these twelve is NOT “for”
this *Ummah*. He is only an impostor.

Meanwhile, one of these twelve royal *khalifahs* is our beloved Mahdi.
Imam Abu Dawud (d. 275 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا سهل بن تمام بن بزيع ثنا عمران القطان عن قتادة عن أبي نضرة عن أبي
سعيد الخدري قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم " المهدي مني أجلى
الجبهة أقنى الأنف يملأ الأرض قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت جورا وظلما ويملك سبع
سنين "
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sahl b. Tammam b. Buzay’ – ‘Imran al-Qaṭṭan – Qatadah – Abu Nadhrah –
Abu Sa’id al-Khudri:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**The Mahdi is from
me**, with a broad forehead, a curved nose. He will fill the earth with
equity and justice just as it had been filled with oppression and
injustice, **and he will RULE BY KINGDOM for seven years**.”[^15]

Al-Albani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^16]

Obviously, Imam al-Mahdi is the twelfth and last of these royal
*khalifahs*, since he will rule over the last generation of our *Ummah*.
Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) documents this relevant *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرني أبو العباس محمد بن أحمد المحبوبي بمرو ثنا سعيد بن مسعود ثنا
النضر بن شميل ثنا سليمان بن عبيد ثنا أبو الصديق الناجي عن أبي سعيد
الخدري رضي الله عنه أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال : يخرج في آخر
أمتي المهدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-‘Abbas Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Mahbubi – Sa’id b. Mas’ud – al-Nadhr
b. Shumayl – Sulayman b. ‘Ubayd – Abu al-Siddiq al-Naji – Abu Sa’id
al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “**The Mahdi will come
out at the END of my** ***Ummah***.[^17]

Al-Hakim comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain[^18]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^19]

‘Allamah al-Albani also says about the *hadith* in his *Sahihah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا سند صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: This chain is *sahih*[^20]

Dr. al-Bastawi has the same verdict on it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*.[^21]

The grand Salafi scholar, Shaykh Ibn ‘Uthaymin (d. 1421 H), declares the
same thing in his commentary of *al-‘Aqidah al-Safariniyyah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله : ( منها ) : أي من أشراطها ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله : (الإمام الخاتم الفصيح ) : أي من أشراط الساعة الإمام ، الإمام
يعني الذي يؤم الناس لا في الصلاة ولكن في القيادة ، يكون إماماً لهم
أعظم ، كالخليفة هذا الإمام
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يقول أنه ( الخاتم ) ، الخاتم لمن ؟ الخاتم للأئمة لأنه لا إمام بعده فهو
خاتم الأئمة واسمه يقول : ( محمد ) ، ولقبه ( المهدي ) يعني الذي هداه
الله عز وجل ، هذا المهدي يُبعث في آخر الزمان إذا مُلئت الأرض ظلماً
وجوراً ونُسِّيَ فيها الحق وصار المظلوم لقمةً للظالم وانتشرت الفوضى
فحينئذٍ يبعث الله هذا الرجل رجلاً إماماً مصلحاً للخلق مبيِّناً للحق
  </p>
</blockquote>

His statement (among them): that is, among its signs.

His statement (**the Last**, Eloquent Imam): that is, from the signs of
the Hour is the Imam. “The Imam” (here) refers to the one who leads
mankind, not (just) in *salat* but in government. This Imam will be
their supreme Imam, as the *khalifah*.

**He says that he (the Mahdi) is the last, the last of whom? The last of
the** **Imams, because there will be NO Imam after him. As such, he is
the LAST of** **the Imams**. His name is Muhammad, and his title is “the
Mahdi”, meaning the one who has been guided by Allah the Almighty.
**This is the Mahdi who will be SENT during the End of Time**, when the
earth will have been filled with injustice and oppression, and the truth
will have been forgotten, and the oppressed will have become a morsel to
the oppressor, and chaos will have become widespread. At that period,
**Allah the Almighty will SEND this man as as a male Imam to reform THE
CREATION and to restore the truth**.[^22]

He will be sent by Allah to “the creation”, and will be the last of the
lines of royal Imams on this earth. These Imams are twelve *for* this
*Ummah*. So, the Mahdi is the twelfth Imam.

[^1]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir, Qisas al-Anbiya (Dar al-Kutub
al-Hadithah; 1st edition, 1388 H) [annotator: Musṭafa ‘Abd al-Wahid],
vol. 1, p. 232; Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, al-Bidayah wa
al-Nihayah (Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 1, p. 191

[^2]: Prof. Dr. Hikmat b. Bashir b. Yasin, Mawsu’at al-Sahih al-Masbur
min al-Tafsir bi al-Mathur (Madinah: Dar al-Mathar li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’ wa al-Taba’at; 1st edition, 1420 H), vol. 1, p. 229

[^3]: Qur’an 65:1

[^4]: Qur’an 2:229

[^5]: Qur’an 21:72-73

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Musṭafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
3, p. 1290, \# 3310 and vol. 6, p. 2612, \# 6721

[^7]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ], vol. 2, p. 364, \#
8746

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 3, p. 72, \# 1084

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ], vol. 5, p. 96, \#
20944

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 3, p. 1453, \# 1822 (10)

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ], vol. 5, p. 106, \#
21051

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Abu Dawud Sulayman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijistani al-Azdi, Sunan (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 509,
\# 4285

[^16]: Ibid

[^17]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 4, p.
601, \# 8673

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Ibid

[^20]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 2, p. 328, \# 711

[^21]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
165

[^22]: Muhammad b. Salih al-‘Uthaymin, Sharh al-‘Aqidah al-Safariniyyah
(Riyadh: Dar al-Waṭan li al-Nashr; 1st edition, 1426 H), pp. 450-451


