11. Finding The True Mahdi: He Is The Twelfth Of A Sinless Dynasty (Part 2)
===========================================================================

*Imamah* is from Allah, and He bestows it only to those descendants of
Ibrahim, *‘alaihi al-salam*, who never commit wrongdoing. Sin, of
course, is a form of wrongdoing, as explained by Imam Fakhr al-Din
al-Razi (d. 606 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله تعالى} :لا ينال عهدي الظالمين {فكل من أقدم على الذنب كان ظالما
لنفسه لقوله تعالى} :فمنهم ظالم لنفسه{
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Statement {My Covenant shall not reach the wrongdoers}: **So,
whosoever commits a sin, he is a wrongdoer to himself** due to His, the
Most High’s Statement: {And of them are those who wrong themselves}
[35:32][^1]

This is confirmed by the Book of Allah too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن يتعد حدود الله فأولئك هم الظالمون
  </p>
</blockquote>

And whosoever transgresses the set limits of Allah, **then such are the
wrongdoers**.[^2]

Therefore, Allah grants His Covenant of *Imamah* to those among the
offspring of Ibrahim who never commit sin, to the absolute exclusion of
all else. This process shall continue interrupted till the Hour.

*Imamah* is also a “kingdom”. Therefore, on account of their *khilafah*,
Ibrahim and his offspring were kings too, appointed by Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقد آتينا آل إبراهيم الكتاب والحكمة وآتيناهم ملكا عظيما
  </p>
</blockquote>

We have granted the Book and the *Hikmah* to **the family of Ibrahim**,
**and We gave them A GREAT KINGDOM**.[^3]

Shaykh al-Kulayni (d. 329 H) reports this authentic *riwayah* about the
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن عمر بن أذينة، عن بريد
العجلي عن أبي جعفر عليه السلام في قول الله تبارك وتعالى} :فقد آتينا آل
إبراهيم الكتاب والحكمة وآتيناهم ملكا عظيما {قال: جعل منهم الرسل
والأنبياء والأئمة فكيف يقرون في آل إبراهيم عليه السلام وينكرونه في آل
محمد صلى الله عليه وآله؟ !قال: قلت} :وآتيناهم ملكا عظيما{؟ قال: الملك
العظيم أن جعل فيهم أئمة، من أطاعهم أطاع الله، ومن عصاهم عصى الله، فهو
الملك العظيم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Ibrahim – his father – Muhammad b. Abi ‘Umayr – ‘Umar b. Uzaynah
– Burayd al-‘Ijli:

Abu Ja’far, peace be upon him, said concerning the Statement of Allah
the Most Blessed the Most High {We have granted the Book and the
*Hikmah* to the family of Ibrahim, and We gave them a great kingdom}:
“**He appointed messengers, prophets and Imams from them**. So, how can
they accept concerning the family of Ibrahim, peace be upon him, while
denying it in the case of the family of Muhammad?!”

I said: {**and We gave them a great kingdom**}?

He (Abu Ja’far) said: “**The great kingdom is to appoint Imams among
them**. Whosoever obeys them has obeyed Allah, and whosoever disobeys
them has disobeyed Allah. So, that is the great kingdom.”[^4]

‘Allamah al-Majlisi says about the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^5]

‘Allamah al-Ruhani, on his part, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^6]

Then, he adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الملك بالضم هو المملكة، فجعل الأئمة من جهة الأمر بإطاعتهم وجعلها قرين
إطاعة الله تعالى صاحب الملك العظيم عبارة أخرى عن الحكومة المطلقة كما
هو واضح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The kingdom is the royal power**. So, He appointed the Imams and, in
terms of the command to obey them, He made it equivalent to obedience to
Allah the Most High. Obviously, “the possessor of the great kingdom” is
another terminology for the absolute government.[^7]

The Qur’an has further given the specific example of Dawud, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, who was one of the Imams from the family of Ibrahim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا داوود إنا جعلناك خليفة في الأرض فاحكم بين الناس بالحق
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Dawud! We have appointed you **A** ***KHALIFAH*** over the earth.
Therefore, judge between mankind with the truth.[^8]

Meanwhile, while referring to his *khilafah* elsewhere, Allah emphasizes
its royal nature:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وشددنا ملكه وآتيناه الحكمة وفصل الخطاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

We made **HIS KINGDOM** strong and gave him wisdom and sound
judgment.[^9]

So, he was – as in the case of all the other Imams too – a royal
*khalifah*. More importantly, his *khilafah* was also hereditary in
nature:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وورث سليمان داوود
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Sulayman **INHERITED** Dawud.[^10]

Imam al-Tabari (d. 310 H) says in his exegesis of the *ayah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يقول تعالى ذكره :وورث سليمان أباه داود العلم الذي كان آتاه الله في
حياته، والملك الذي كان خصه به على سائر قومه
  </p>
</blockquote>

He, the Most High, says: Sulayman **INHERITED the knowledge** which
Allah gave his father during his lifetime and **the kingdom** which He
specially bestowed upon him above all of his people.[^11]

Al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H) also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الله تعالى: }وورث سليمان داود) {...النمل: ١٦ (أي ورثه في النبوة
والملك
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah the Most High said: {And Sulayman inherited Dawud...} [27:16],
**that is, INHERITANCE of prophethood and kingdom**.[^12]

And Imam Ibn al-Jawzi (d. 597 H) has these words too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قوله تعالى: }وورث سليمان داود {أي :ورث نبوته وعلمه وملكه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah the Most High says {And Sulayman inherited Dawud}, that is: **he
INHERITED his prophethood, knowledge and kingdom**.[^13]

The moral of all this, simply, is that the *khilafah* is clearly a
hereditary royal system. The *khalifah* is an absolute monarch, and he
rules over the earth by kingdom. His authority, by its nature, is
equally hereditary. Therefore, Allah places His chosen *khalifahs* in
the loins of the reigning Imam, except in extraordinary cases.

At this point, it is imperative to clear a slightly common misconception
within the *Ummah*: that monarchy is an inherently illegitimate system
of government. This wrong notion, interestingly, is held among many
Sunnis and Shi’is alike. In fact, the opposition of some brothers from
the Ahl al-Sunnah – including the Salafiyyah – to the regime in Saudi
Arabia hinges primarily upon its royal nature[^14]. However, kingdom is
a legitimate, Islamic mode of governance. In fact, it is Allah’s Own
style of government:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فتعالى الله الملك الحق لا إله إلا هو رب العرش الكريم
  </p>
</blockquote>

So Exalted be Allah, **the True King**. There is no god but He, the Lord
of the Honourable Throne.[^15]

This was equally His chosen form of government for many of His prophets,
messengers and Imams:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال لهم نبيهم إن الله قد بعث لكم طالوت ملكا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And their prophet said to them, “Indeed, Allah has appointed Talut as
**a king** over you.”[^16]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقتل داوود جالوت وآتاه الله الملك
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Dawud killed Jalut, **and Allah gave him the kingdom**.[^17]

Of course, as we mentioned, his son, Sulayman, *‘alaihi al-salam*,
inherited the kingdom from him.

Even in Paradise, the system of government there will be monarchy:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذا رأيت ثم رأيت نعيما وملكا كبيرا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And when you look there, you will see delight, **and a magnificent
kingdom**.[^18]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متكئين على سرر مصفوفة
  </p>
</blockquote>

They will recline **on thrones** arranged in ranks.[^19]

Looking at these verses, one may even say that kingdom is the best form
of government. Allah never chooses for Himself except the best, and He
never chooses for His prophets, messengers and *awliya* and the people
of Paradise except the best.

Meanwhile, it must be re-emphasized that Allah gave “a great kingdom” to
the “family of Ibrahim.” This made them a royal family, from which the
sinless kings were appointed by our Lord. Interestingly, He has bestowed
the same blessing upon the family of Muhammad too, *sallallahu ‘alaihi
wa ‘alaihim*, in line with this *hadith* of Imam al-Bukhari (d. 256 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا قيس بن حفص وموسى بن إسماعيل قالا حدثنا عبد الواحد بن زياد حدثنا
أبو قرة مسلم بن سالم الهمذاني قال حدثني عبد الله ابن عيسى سمع عبد
الرحمن بن أبي ليلى قال : لقيني كعب بن عجرة فقال ألا أهدي لك هدية
سمعتها من النبي صلى الله عليه و سل؟ فقلت بلى فأهدها لي فقال سألنا رسول
الله صلى الله عليه و سلم فقلنا يا رسول الله كيف الصلاة عليكم أهل البيت
فإن الله قد علمنا كيف نسلم عليكم؟ قال قولوا اللهم صل على محمد وعلى آل
محمد كما صليت على إبراهيم وعلى آل إبراهيم إنك حميد مجي اللهم بارك على
محمد وعلى آل محمد كما باركت على إبراهيم وعلى آل إبراهيم إنك حميد مجيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qays b. Hafs and Musa b. Isma’il – ‘Abd al-Wahid b. Ziyad – Abu Qurrah
Muslim b. Salim al-Hamdani – ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Isa – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi
Layli:

Ka’b b. ‘Ujrah met me and said, “Shall I not give you a present I got
from the Prophet, peace be upon him?” I said, “Yes, give it to me.” He
said, “We asked the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, and said,
‘**O Messenger of Allah! What is the manner of the** ***salat*** **upon
you, Ahl al-Bayt, for Allah has taught us how to send** ***salam***
**you (Ahl al-Bayt)?**’ He replied, ‘Say: O Allah! Send *salat* upon
Muhammad and upon the family of Muhammad, in exactly the same manner as
You sent *salat* upon Ibrahim and upon the family of Ibrahim. You are
the Most Praiseworthy, the Most Glorious. **O Allah! Bless Muhammad and
the family of Muhammad,** **in exactly the same manner** **as You
blessed Ibrahim and the family of Ibrahim**. You are the Most
Praiseworthy, the Most Glorious.’”[^20]

So, the family of Muhammad are a royal family as well, to which “a great
kingdom” has been granted by Allah. They have been blessed *in exactly
the same manner* as the family of Ibrahim. Imam Ibn Abi Shaybah (d. 235
H) also records a *hadith* which leaves no doubt about the matter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو داود عمر بن سعد عن شريك عن الركين عن القاسم بن حسان عن زيد بن ثابت
يرفعه قال : إني تركت فيكم الخليفتين كاملتين :كتاب الله وعترتي، وإنهما
لن يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Dawud ‘Umar b. Sa’d – Sharik – al-Rukayn – al-Qasim b. Hassan – Zayd
b. Thabit – the Prophet:

“**I have left behind over you the two all-comprehensive**
***KHALIFAHS*****: the Book of Allah and MY OFFSPRING**. Verily, both
shall never separate from each other until they meet me at the
Lake-Fount.”[^21]

The two annotators say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والحديث صحيح، له شواهد
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The** ***hadith*** **is** ***sahih***. It has witnesses
(*shawahid*).[^22]

The word *khalifah*, of course, is both singular and plural. Therefore,
it can refer to only one *khalifah* or to many, as submitted by Imam
al-Raghib al-Isfahani (d. 501 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والخليفة يقال للواحد والجمع
  </p>
</blockquote>

The word *khalifah* is used to refer to a single person or to a
group.[^23]

As such, we know from the above *sahih* *hadith* that the offspring of
Muhammad are the *khalifahs* of this *Ummah*. They are the twelve
Qurayshi *khalifahs* who rule by kingdom till the Day of *al-Qiyamah*.
In particular, the *hadith* has emphasized upon their sinlessness – a
fundamental requirement in *Imamah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإنهما لن يتفرقا حتى يردا علي الحوض.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, both shall NEVER separate from each other until they meet me at
the Lake-Fount.

Therefore, those offspring of Muhammad meant in the *riwayah* never
separate from the Qur’an for even a millisecond in any situation or
circumstance – in their thoughts, sayings, actions and omissions. Their
number is only twelve, as indicated in other authentic Sunni narrations.
They are the living Qur’ans, just like their father – Muhammad b. ‘Abd
Allah the Messenger of Allah. Everything they think, say or do is a
fulfilment of the Qur’an – absolutely everything! Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H)
records the same situation for the Prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا عبد الرزاق عن معمر عن قتادة عن زرارة عن
سعد بن هشام قال سألت عائشة فقلت أخبريني عن خلق رسول الله صلى الله عليه
و سلم فقالت كان خلقه القرآن
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – ‘Abd al-Razzaq –
Ma’mar – Qatadah – Zurarah – Sa’d b. Hisham:

I asked ‘Aishah, saying: “Tell me about the behaviour of the Messenger
of Allah, peace be upon him.” She replied, “**His behaviour was the
Qur’an**”.[^24]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs[^25]

Muhammad gave the same description for the twelve *khalifahs* from his
offspring too. They never separate from the Qur’an.

The first of these royal *khalifahs* was Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib, *‘alaihi al-salam*, according to the Prophet himself. Imam Ibn
Abi ‘Asim (d. 287 H) documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا محمد بن المثنى، حدثنا يحي بن حماد، عن أبي عوانة، عن يحيى بن سليم
أبي بلج عن عمرو بن ميمون، عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم لعلي: أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى إلا أنك لست نبيا وأنت خليفتي
في كل مؤمن من بعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. al-Muthanna – Yahya b. Hammad – Abu ‘Awanah – Yahya b.
Sulaym Abu Balj – ‘Amr b. Maymun – Ibn ‘Abbas: **The Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him, said to ‘Ali**: “You are to me of the status of Harun
to Musa, with the exception that you are not a prophet. **And you are
MY** ***KHALIFAH*** **over every believer after me**.”[^26]

Dr. al-Jawabirah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسناده حسن. رجاله رجال الشيخين غير ابي‌ بلج واسمه يحيي بن سليم بن بلج،
قال الحافظ: صدوق ربما اخطأ. وله شواهد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^27]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) also comments on the *sanad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده حسن .ورجاله ثقات رجال الشيخين غير أبي بلج واسمه يحيى بن سليم بن
بلج قال الحافظ" :صدوق ربما أخطأ ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^28]

Grading the same chain, Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has **a** ***sahih*** **chain**.[^29]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) concurs with him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*.[^30]

‘Allamah Ahmad Shakir (d. 1377 H) too says on the same *sanad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*.[^31]

Imam al-Busiri (d. 840 H) does not hold a different opinion either about
the *isnad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سند صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

A *sahih* chain.[^32]

This authentic *hadith* establishes, among other things, that ‘Ali was –
for the purpose of the *khilafah* – counted among the offspring of
Muhammad. This was similar to how Iblis was numbered among the angels by
Allah in His Order to them to prostrate to Prophet Adam, *‘alaihi
al-salam*[^33], even though he was only a *jinn*[^34]. Such instances
exist in Islam.

The last of the twelve Imams, of course, is the Mahdi. So, to find the
true Mahdi, we must look for a man with the following qualities:

1. He is the twelfth Imam from the Ahl al-Bayt, and his name is
Muhammad.

2. He is the last *khalifah* of this *Ummah*.

3. He is a royal *khalifah* who will rule by kingdom.

4. He is part of the sinless dynasty of Muhammad. He never does wrong,
and never separates from the Qur’an for even a single millisecond in his
thoughts, sayings, actions and omissions.

5. All the previous eleven Imams before him were from the offspring of
the Messenger, starting with ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, and none of them *ever*
separated from the Book of Allah in any situation and circumstance.

6. None of the eleven Imams before him ever did wrong.

7. All the eleven Imams belong to the royal family of Muhammad – to whom
Allah bestowed “a great kingdom”; and all of them ruled by kingdom.

8. Succession of their *khilafah* was by inheritance, subject to the
choice of Allah.

9. The rule of the twelve *khalifahs* lasts uninterrupted till the
establishment of the Hour.

10. Each of the eleven Imams before him held the Covenant of Allah and
His Command, never committed any wrongdoing, and was the supreme guide
of humanity during his reign.

Whichever “Mahdi” fails *any* of the above realities is a fake, an
impostor, a *dajjal*. So, which of the numerous “Mahdis” matches the
description?

[^1]: Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, ‘Ismat al-Anbiya (1406 H), p. 14

[^2]: Qur’an 2:229

[^3]: Qur’an 4:54

[^4]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi, al-Usul
min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar
al-Ghiffari], vol. 1, p. 206, \# 5

[^5]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 2, p. 412

[^6]: Muhammad Sadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, Fiqh al-Sadiq (Qum: Muasassat
Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1413 H), vol. 16, p. 157

[^7]: Ibid, vol. 16, p. 158

[^8]: Qur’an 38:26. Prophet Dawud was both a prophet and a khalifah. In
the above verse, Allah is clearly making reference to his khilafah, and
not to his nubuwwah.

[^9]: Qur’an 38:20

[^10]: Qur’an 27:16

[^11]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib
al-Amuli al-Tabari, Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an (Dar al-Fikr; 1415
H) [annotator: Sidqi Jamil al-‘Aṭṭar], vol. 19, p. 172

[^12]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, al-Bidayah wa
al-Nihayah (Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 2, p. 22

[^13]: Abu al-Faraj Jamal al-Din ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad
al-Jawzi al-Qurashi al-Baghdadi, Zad al-Masir fi ‘Ilm al-Tafsir (Beirut:
Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad b. ‘Abd
al-Rahman ‘Abd Allah], vol. 6, p. 60

[^14]: A clarification is needed here. Well, even though kingdom is
itself not an inherently illegitimate system of government, there are
certain conditions that can make it invalid, from an Islamic point of
view, in some situations. We know from Qur’an 4:54 and the hadith of
al-Kulayni that it was Allah Himself Who explicitly appointed the family
of Ibrahim, and the family of Muhammad, royal families by wahy.
Therefore, the legitimacy of every monarchy rests entirely upon this
fact. Did Allah name the concerned ruling family with kingdom in any
revelation sent down from the heavens? If the answer is “no”, then their
kingdom has zero Islamic legitimacy. Moreover, even if the answer is
“yes”, what about the reigning king specifically? There has to be a
separate wahy from Allah declaring him the king, amir, khalifah or Imam,
before his rule can be valid, Islamically. The case of Talut (Qur’an
2:247) is particularly instructive on this point. This has been Allah’s
practice with the kings from the families of Ibrahim and Muhammad,
‘alaihima al-salam: “That was the Sunnah of Allah in the case of those
passed away of old, and you will not find any change in the Sunnah of
Allah” (Qur’an 33:62).

[^15]: Qur’an 23:116

[^16]: Qur’an 2:247

[^17]: Qur’an 2:251

[^18]: Qur’an 76:20

[^19]: Qur’an 52:20

[^20]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Musṭafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
3, p. 1233, \# 3190

[^21]: Abu Bakr ‘Abd Allah b. Abi Shaybah, Musnad Ibn Abi Shaybah
(Riyadh: Dar al-Waṭan; 1st edition, 1418 H) [annotators: ‘Adil b. Yusuf
al-‘Azazi and Ahmad b. Farid al-Mazidi], vol. 1, p. 108

[^22]: Ibid

[^23]: Abu al-Qasim al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. al-Mufadhdhal al-Raghib
al-Isfahani, Tafsir al-Raghib al-Isfahani wa Muqadimmatuh (Kulliyat
al-Adab, Jami’ah Tanta; 1st edition, 1412 H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad
‘Abd al-‘Aziz Basyuni], vol. 1, p. 139

[^24]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ], vol. 6, p. 163, \#
25341

[^25]: Ibid

[^26]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (Dar al-Sami’i li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’)
[annotator: Dr. Basim b. Faysal al-Jawabirah], vol. 1, pp. 799-800, \#
1222

[^27]: Ibid

[^28]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 565, \# 1188

[^29]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 3, p.
143, \# 4652

[^30]: Ibid

[^31]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo: Dar
al-Hadith; 1st edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Ahmad Muhammad Shakir], vol.
1, p. 331, \# 3062

[^32]: Ahmad b. Abi Bakr b. Isma’il al-Busiri, Itihaf al-Khiyarah
al-Maharah bi Zawaid al-Masanid al-‘Ashara (Riyadh: Dar al-Waṭan; 1st
edition, 1420 H), vol. 7, p. 184, \# 6630

[^33]: See Qur’an 2:34, 7:11, 17:61, 18:50, 20:116, 38:71-74,

[^34]: Qur’an 18:50


