16.  Issues Of The Ghaybah:  Reason For The Disappearance
=========================================================

The disappearance of the Mahdi, *‘alaihi al-salam*, is suggested in
authentic Sunni *ahadith*, although the details are not given. A lot of
them talk about his “coming out” during the end of time. For instance,
Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) records this *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرني أبو العباس محمد بن أحمد المحبوبي بمرو ثنا سعيد بن مسعود ثنا
النضر بن شميل ثنا سليمان بن عبيد ثنا أبو الصديق الناجي عن أبي سعيد
الخدري رضي الله عنه أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال : يخرج في آخر
أمتي المهدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-‘Abbas Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Mahbubi – Sa’id b. Mas’ud – al-Nadhr
b. Shumayl – Sulayman b. ‘Ubayd – Abu al-Siddiq al-Naji – Abu Sa’id
al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “The Mahdi will **COME
OUT** at the end of my *Ummah***.**[^1]

Al-Hakim comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain[^2]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^3]

“Coming out” means that he would have been concealed from public view
until then. It must be noted that this same term has been used to
describe what al-Masih ‘Isa b. Maryam, *‘alaihi al-salam*, the Dajjal
and the Yajuj and Majuj will do as well. Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) has
this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحدثني محمد بن بشار حدثنا محمد بن جعفر حدثنا شعبة عن النعمان بن سالم
قال سمعت يعقوب بن عاصم بن عروة بن مسعود قال ... قال عبدالله بن عمرو
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم يخرج الدجال في أمتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Bashar – Muhammad b. Ja’far – Shu’bah – al-Nu’man b. Salim –
Ya’qub b. ‘Asim b. ‘Urwah b. Mas’ud – ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Amr:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “The Dajjal will **COME
OUT** in my *Ummah*.”[^4]

We all know that, according to *sahih* Sunni *ahadith*, the Dajjal was
even alive during the lifetime of the Prophet, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa
alihi*! That means he has been breathing for more than a millennium, or
perhaps even several. But, he has been hidden from public view by Allah.
He will be freed eventually; and then, he will become visible to
everyone. That will be his “coming out”.

We also read this *riwayah* of Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا عبد الرحمن بن مهدي ثنا سفيان عن فرات عن
أبي الطفيل عن حذيفة بن أسيد الغفاري قال أشرف علينا رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم من غرفة ونحن نتذاكر الساعة فقال لا تقوم الساعة حتى ترون عشر
آيات طلوع الشمس من مغربها والدخان والدابة وخروج يأجوج ومأجوج وخروج
عيسى بن مريم والدجال....
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – ‘Abd al-Rahman b.
Mahdi – Sufyan – Furat – Abu al-Tufayl – Hudhayfah b. Usayd al-Ghiffari:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, came out to us from a room
while we were discussing the Hour. Then, he said, “The Hour will not be
established until you have seen ten signs: the appearance of the sun
from its west, the smoke, the creature, **the COMING OUT of Yajuj and
Majuj, the COMING OUT of ‘Isa b. Maryam**, the Dajjal....[^5]

Shaykh Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^6]

The Yajuj and Majuj have been in existence for thousands of years, and
are still alive. However, they are concealed from public view. When they
“come out” – apparently from concealment, they will become visible to
all human beings. The same is the case with Prophet ‘Isa. He has been
alive in the heavens for more than 2000 years. So, none can see him
today. But, when he “comes out” as well, he will descend from the
heavens and will be seen by everyone.

The Mahdi too will “come out”. This raises a very strong possibility
that he – like ‘Isa, the Dajjal, and Yajuj and Majuj – would first be
alive for a very long period, but concealed from public view. When his
coming out occurs, he will then become visible to all human beings.
These facts are confirmed in authentic Shi’i *riwayat*, with the
necessary details. Shaykh al-Saduq (d. 381 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمد بن موسى بن المتوكل رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا علي بن إبراهيم،
عن أبيه، عن عبد السلام بن صالح الهروي، عن أبي الحسن علي بن موسى الرضا،
عن أبيه، عن آبائه، عن علي عليهم السلام قال: قال النبي صلى الله عليه
وآله: والذي بعثني بالحق بشيرا ليغيبن القائم من ولدي بعهد معهود إليه
مني حتى يقول أكثر الناس:ما لله في آل محمد حاجة، ويشك آخرون في ولادته،
فمن أدرك زمانه فليتمسك بدينه، ولا يجعل للشيطان إليه سبيلا بشكه فيزيله
عن ملتي ويخرجه من ديني، فقد أخرج أبويكم من الجنة من قبل، وإن الله عز
وجل جعل الشياطين أولياء للذين لا يؤمنون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Musa b. al-Mutawakil, may Allah be pleased with him – ‘Ali
b. Ibrahim – his father – ‘Abd al-Salam b. Salih al-Harwi – Abu al-Hasan
‘Ali b. Musa al-Ridha – his father – his ancestors – ‘Ali, peace be upon
him:

The Prophet, peace be upon him, said: “I swear by Him Who sent me with
the truth as a bearer of glad tidings, **the Qaim from my offspring will
surely become** **concealed from public view on the basis of a covenant
that has been entrusted to him from me**, such that most of the people
will say “Allah has no need for the family of Muhammad” and the others
will doubt in his birth. Whosoever meets his time, let him adhere to his
religion, and he should not allow Shayṭan to get to him with his doubt,
thereby bringing him down from my path and expelling him from my
religion, for he had expelled your father from the Paradise in the past.
And Allah has made the devils (*shayaṭin*) leaders of those who do not
believe.”[^7]

Al-Haj Muhammad Zakariya says about it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*.[^8]

Verily, Allah and His Messenger speak the Truth! Today, we see Sunni
brothers and sisters who claim that the Twelfth Imam is “useless”, and
we see lots of them denying his birth! This clearly is one of the
miracles of the Prophet. Al-Saduq again documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أحمد بن محمد بن يحيى العطار رضي الله عنه قال: حدثنا أبي، عن
إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن محمد بن أبي عمير، عن صفوان بن مهران الجمال قال:
قال الصادق جعفر بن محمد عليهما السلام: أما والله ليغيبن عنكم مهديكم
حتى يقول الجاهل منكم: ما لله في آل محمد، ثم يقبل كالشهاب الثاقب
فيملأها عدلا وقسطا كما ملئت جورا وظلما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-‘Aṭṭar, may Allah be pleased with him - my
father – Ibrahim b. Hashim – Muhammad b. Abi ‘Umayr – Safwan b. Mahran
al-Jamal:

Al-Sadiq Ja’far b. Muhammad, peace be upon them both, said: “**I swear
by Allah, your Mahdi will become hidden from you**, such that the
ignorant one among you will say, “Allah has no need for the family of
Muhammad.” Then, he will appear like the piercing star. He will fill it
with justice and equity just as it had been filled with aggression and
injustice.”[^9]

Al-Haj Muhammad Zakariya again comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده معتبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is reliable.[^10]

Therefore, it is authentically established. The Awaited Mahdi would
disappear from public view and would later “come out” of the concealment
to liberate the earth from aggression and injustice. The truth of this
matter is further strengthened by the fact that several different sects
declared *ghaybahs* for their self-chosen “Mahdis”, long before the
advent of the Twelfth Imam. In fact, there was a group which declared
Imam ‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*, as the Mahdi and described his death as
his “ghaybah”! That was less than four decades after the death of the
Messenger of Allah. Obviously, these various sects must have learnt that
the true Mahdi would go into occultation for a period from the authentic
*riwayat*. However, they applied the right *ahadith* to the wrong
persons, and thereby lost their ways.

But then, why would he need to hide from public view in the first place?
After all, he is the Imam. Is he not supposed to be visible and
accessible to his followers across the world? What exactly is the
benefit of his concealment from the rest?

First and foremost, it must be noted that *any* human being – in
ordinary circumstances – can be killed, including even prophets and
messengers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذلك بأنهم كانوا يكفرون بآيات الله ويقتلون النبيين بغير الحق
  </p>
</blockquote>

That was because they used to disbelieve in the *ayat* of Allah, **and
also used to kill the prophets wrongfully**.[^11]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفكلما جاءكم رسول بما لا تهوى أنفسكم استكبرتم ففريقا كذبتم وفريقا
تقتلون
  </p>
</blockquote>

Is it that whenever there came to you **a messenger** with what your
souls did not desire, you grew arrogant? Some, you called liars and
**some, you killed**.[^12]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قل قد جاءكم رسل من قبلي بالبينات وبالذي قلتم فلم قتلتموهم إن كنتم
صادقين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Say: “Verily, there came to you **messengers** before me, with clear
signs and even with what you speak of. **Why then did you kill them**,
if you are truthful?”[^13]

Therefore, the threat to the life of anyone sent by Allah is real and
serious.

Moreover, it is permissible for a prophet, messenger or Imam – in
certain circumstances - to flee or hide for his life from his enemies
and opponents.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذ يمكر بك الذين كفروا ليثبتوك أو يقتلوك أو يخرجوك ويمكرون ويمكر الله
والله خير الماكرين
  </p>
</blockquote>

And when those who disbelieve plotted against you (O Muhammad) **to
imprison you, or to kill you, or to drive you out**. They plot, but
Allah (too) plots (against them); and Allah is the Best of
plotters.[^14]

This was what forced Prophet Muhammad to flee Makkah, on the Order of
his Lord. He was in grave danger and his defences were weak. During his
flight to al-Madinah, his enemies still tracked him on the way to “take
him out”. Al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H) gives some further details:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عام الهجرة ، لما هم المشركون بقتله أو حبسه أو نفيه ، فخرج منهم هاربا
بصحبة صدِّيقه وصاحبه أبي بكر بن أبي قحافة ، فلجأ إلى غار ثور ثلاثة
أيام ليرجع الطَّلَبُ الذين خرجوا في آثارهم ، ثم يسيرا نحو المدينة
  </p>
</blockquote>

**During the year of the** ***Hijrah*****, the pagans tried to kill,
imprison or expel him (i.e the Prophet). So, he ESCAPED with his friend
and companion, Abu Bakr b. Abi Quhafah, to the** ***Thawr*** **Cave.
They remained in there for THREE DAYS**. So the scouts who were sent in
their pursuit returned, and they proceeded to Madinah.[^15]

Here, the Messenger fled from his murderous enemies, and hid in a cave
for three days in order to preserve his life. If the scouts in pursuit
of his life had not left on the third day, he would have remained there
for much longer. He was hiding in the cave for days while his followers
in Madinah had no guide to lead them[^16]. This was his own *ghaybah*,
his disappearance from public view, due to dire security concerns. It
was short, and could have been longer. Yet, its significance is heavy,
especially in any discourse on Imam al-Mahdi.

There are circumstances when fleeing is forbidden, especially during a
field battle between Muslims and their religious enemies[^17]. This was
not one of such[^18]. Meanwhile, the case of ‘Isa b. Maryam, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, is even more serious than that of Muhammad. The Masih’s life
got into a true danger of imminent execution. Allah intervened on his
behalf, and took him into the heavens to save him[^19]. Our Lord has
certain future plans for ‘Isa during the kingdom of the Mahdi. If he was
killed – unless a *raj’ah* by him occurred – the plan would capsize, and
Allah is above failure[^20]. That is his own *ghaybah* too. His true
followers were suddenly left without a prophet or messenger![^21] By the
logic of our brothers from the Ahl al-Sunnah, he has been “useless” for
thousands of years.

Interestingly, even in our times, the life of the Masih is still not
safe *at all*. If he came today and expressed ideas that agreed with the
*‘aqidah* of any particular sect, the other Muslims would call him an
impostor and would have him executed or assassinated as soon as they
could. For instance, imagine Prophet ‘Isa telling the *Ummah*: “The
offspring of Muhammad, his Ahl al-Bayt, are his only genuine
*khalifahs*, alongside the Book of Allah”. Despite the presence of this
fact in several *sahih* Sunni *ahadith*, most Sunnis would instinctively
oppose him, and the extremists amongst them would immediately call for
his head. He could even be targeted repeatedly with sniper fire and car
bombs, by none other than Muslims!

Meanwhile, it definitely goes without saying that the Mahdi too is in
exactly the same, or perhaps an even worse, situation. If he “came out”
today, and said things that undermined the legitimacy of certain Muslim
sects, he would be rejected instantly by a lot and his life could be
terminated violently in no time. The armed drones, warplanes and guided
missiles of the powerful Western and Eastern nations, blocs and
alliances are also there, to bomb, or perhaps “nuke”, him at the
slightest opportunity. He will overthrow all juntas, regimes, kingdoms,
administrations, and governments all over the earth, and will establish
a unified worldwide Kingdom of Allah. Apparently, he will be fiercely
targeted by all! This is why the Twelfth Imam has gone into hiding; and
this is why he still remains invisible.

‘Allamah al-Majlisi (d. 1111 H) copies:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إكمال الدين: ماجيلويه، عن عمه، عن البرقي، عن أيوب بن نوح، عن صفوان عن
ابن بكير، عن زرارة، عن أبي عبد الله عليه السلام قال: للغلام غيبة قبل
قيامه، قلت:ولم؟ قال: يخاف على نفسه الذبح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ikmal al-Din*: Majiluyah – his uncle – al-Barqi – Ayub b. Nuh – Safwan
– Ibn Bukayr – Zurarah:

Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, said: “The boy will have a
disappearance (*ghaybah*) before his rise.” I said, “And for what
reason?” He said, “**He will fear his being slaughtered**.”[^22]

The *hadith* has **a** ***mu’tabar*** **(reliable)** **chain**,
according to Ayatullah al-Muhsini.[^23] Here, the Twelfth Imam is
referred to as “the boy” by his sixth ancestor. This reveals that the
Imam was predicted to become invisible very early, as a child. Moreover,
his disappearance is of two stages. This is why it is sometimes also
called the two *ghaybahs*. However, there was no time, since he first
disappeared, that he was ever visible to the general public.

Al-Majlisi again records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إكمال الدين: العطار، عن سعد، عن ابن عيسى، عن خالد بن نجيح، عن زرارة
قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: إن للقائم غيبة قبل أن يقوم
قلت: ولم؟ قال: يخاف وأومأ بيده إلى بطنه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ikmal al-Din*: al-‘Aṭṭar – Sa’d – Ibn ‘Isa – Khalid b. Najih – Zurarah:

I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, saying: “Verily, there shall
be a disappearance for the Qaim before he rises.” I said, “And for what
reason?” **He said, “He will fear” and he gestured with his hand towards
his stomach**.[^24]

Then, he cited six other chains for this *hadith*[^25], and Ayatullah
al-Muhsini declares its *sanad* to be ***mu’tabar***
**(reliable)**.[^26] This one probably refers to poisoning. The Imam
would be killed violently or could get poisoned if he appeared before
the right time.

Shaykh al-Kulayni (d. 329 H) too reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وبهذا الاسناد، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن أبيه محمد بن عيسى، عن ابن بكير، عن
زرارة قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله عليه السلام يقول: إن للقائم غيبة قبل أن
يقوم، إنه يخاف - وأومأ بيده إلى بطنه - يعني القتل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And with this chain – Ahmad b. Muhammad – his father, Muhammad b. ‘Isa –
Ibn Bukayr – Zurarah:

I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah, peace be upon him, saying:

“Verily, there shall be a disappearance for the Qaim before he rises.
**He will fear” - and he gestured with his hand towards his stomach –
meaning (he will fear) being killed**.[^27]

Al-Majlisi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موثق كالصحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Muwaththaq ka al-Sahih*[^28]

But then, will there ever be the right time? Will his life ever be safe?
Moreover, will he ever be able to take on all the world superpowers at a
time, or even at different times, to topple them and establish the
divine kingdom on their lands? We will address these queries soon in the
chapter on how the Mahdi will conquer the world.

[^1]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 4, p.
601, \# 8673

[^2]: Ibid

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 4, p. 2258, \# 2940 (117)

[^5]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ], vol. 4, p. 7, \#
16189

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. Babuyah al-Qummi,
Kamal al-Din wa Tamam al-Ni’mah (Qum: Muasassat al-Nashr al-Islami li
Jama’at al-Mudarisin; 1405 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], p. 51

[^8]: Muhammad Zakariya, al-Sahih wa al-Mu’tabar min Akhbar al-Hujjah
al-Muntazar (Majmu’at al-Rasid; 1st edition, 1434 H), p. 14, \# 1

[^9]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. Babuyah al-Qummi,
Kamal al-Din wa Tamam al-Ni’mah (Qum: Muasassat al-Nashr al-Islami li
Jama’at al-Mudarisin; 1405 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], pp.
341-342, Ch. 33, \# 22

[^10]: Muhammad Zakariya, al-Sahih wa al-Mu’tabar min Akhbar al-Hujjah
al-Muntazar (Majmu’at al-Rasid; 1st edition, 1434 H), p. 15, \# 2

[^11]: Qur’an 2:61. See also 2:91, 3:21, 3:112, 3:181, and 4:155

[^12]: Qur’an 2:87. See also 5:70

[^13]: Qur’an 3:183

[^14]: Qur’an 8:30

[^15]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurashi al-Dimashqi,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah], vol. 4, p. 155

[^16]: We want to ask our Sunni brothers: was the Prophet “useless”
during those three days?

[^17]: Qur’an 8:15-16

[^18]: There is a common mistake among our people who assume that awliya
of Allah never have fear or sadness, based upon Qur’an 10:62. However,
that ayah applies only to the Hereafter, as the authentic ahadith about
it which we have quoted in the chapter “Is the Mahdi Superior to the
Masih?” firmly establish.

[^19]: Qur’an 4:157-158

[^20]: This perhaps explains why Allah protected him, but did not
protect many of the other prophets from death. He spared him because He
had reserved a special job for him at the end of the world. Prophet
Ibrahim, ‘alaihi al-salam, too was protected by Allah (Qur’an 21:69-70).
He too escaped, by Allah’s Help, from his oppressors (21:71). Our Lord
had placed a blessed lineage of prophets, messengers and Imams in his
loins (2:124, 29:27), and his death would have caused a huge disaster
over the earth.

[^21]: Qur’an 5:19

[^22]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar al-Jami’ah li Durar
Akhbar al-Aimah al-Aṭhar (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 3rd
edition, 1403 H), vol. 52, p. 97, Ch. 20, \# 18

[^23]: Muhammad Asif al-Muhsini, Mashra’ah Bihar al-Anwar (Beirut:
Muasassat al-‘Arif li al-Maṭbu’at; 2nd edition, 1426 H), vol. 2, p. 221

[^24]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar al-Jami’ah li Durar
Akhbar al-Aimah al-Aṭhar (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 3rd
edition, 1403 H), vol. 52, p. 146, Ch. 22, \# 70

[^25]: Ibid, vol. 52, pp. 146-147, Ch. 22, \# 70

[^26]: Muhammad Asif al-Muhsini, Mashra’ah Bihar al-Anwar (Beirut:
Muasassat al-‘Arif li al-Maṭbu’at; 2nd edition, 1426 H), vol. 2, p. 227

[^27]: Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi,
al-Usul min al-Kafi (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah; 3rd edition)
[annotator: ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari], vol. 1, p. 340, \# 18

[^28]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini], vol. 4, p. 52


