Bibliography
============

1. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. ‘Abd Allah b. Baz, *Fatawa Nurun ‘ala al-Darb* (Dar
al-Waṭan; 1st edition, 1428 H)

2. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar al-Baydhawi, *Anwar al-Tanzil wa Asrar al-Tawil*
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr)

3. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. Abi Shaybah Ibrahim b. ‘Uthman b. Abi Bakr
b. Abi Shaybah al-Kufi al-‘Ubsi, *Musannaf Ibn Abi Shaybah fi al-Ahadith
wa al-Athar* (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1409 H) [annotator: Prof. Sa’id
al-Laham]

4. ‘Ali Al Muhsin, *Lillah wa li al-Haqiqah* (2nd edition, 1425 H)

5. Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, *Musnad* (Cairo: Dar
al-Hadith; 1st edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Ahmad Muhammad Shakir]

6. Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, *Musnad* (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ]

7. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
*al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa]

8. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Abi Bakr Ayub al-Zar’i, *Ighathah
al-Lahfan min Masaid al-Shayṭan* (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah; 2nd edition,
1395 H) [annotator: Muhammad Hamid al-Faqqi]

9. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. al-Nu’man al-‘Ikbari al-Baghdadi,
*al-Iktisas* (Qum: Manshurah Jama’ah al-Mudarisin fi al-Hawzah
al-‘Ilmiyyah) [annotator: ‘Ali Abkar al-Ghiffari]

10. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah al-Bukhari
al-Ju’fi, *al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar* (Beirut: Dar Ibn Kathir; 3rd
edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Musṭafa Dib al-Bagha]

11. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ja’far al-Idrisi al-Kattani, *Nazam
al-Mutanathir min al-Hadith al-Mutawatir* (Egypt: Dar al-Kutub
al-Salafiyyah; 2nd edition)

12. Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Muhammad b. al-Nu’man al-‘Ikbari
al-Baghdadi, *al-Irshad fi Ma’rifat Hujjaj Allah ‘ala al-‘Ibad* (Beirut:
Dar al-Mufid; 2nd edition, 1414 H)

13. Abu ‘Abd Allah Na’im b. Hammad al-Maruzi, *Kitab al-Fitan* (Dar
al-Fikr; 1414 H) [annotator: Prof. Dr. Suhayl Zakar]

14. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, *al-Mujtaba min
al-Sunan* (Halab: Maktab al-Maṭbu’at al-Islamiyyah; 2nd edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

15. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah* (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H)

16. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu*
(al-Maktab al-Islami)

17. Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Mawsu’at al-‘Allamah al-Albani* (Sana,
Yemen: Markaz al-Nu’man li al-Buhuth wa al-Dirasat al-Islamiyyah wa
Tahqiq al-Turath wa al-Tarjamah; 1st edition, 1431 H) [producer: Shadi
b. Muhammad b. Salim Al Nu’man]

18. Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, *al-Jami’ al-Sahih
Sunan al-Tirmidhi* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

19. Abu ‘Ubayd al-Qasim b. Salam al-Harwi, *Gharib al-Hadith*
(Haydarabad: Majlis Dairah al-Ma’arif al-‘Uthmaniyyah; 1st edition, 1385
H)

20. Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
*Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah* (Muasassat Qurṭubah; 1st edition, 1406
H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim]

21. Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Ahmad b. al-‘Abbas al-Najashi
al-Asadi al-Kufi, *Fihrist Asma Musannafay al-Shi’ah* (Qum: Muasassat
al-Nashr al-Islami; 5th edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Sayyid Musa
al-Shubayri al-Zanjani]

22. Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, *Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi* (Beirut:
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H)

23. Abu al-Barakat ‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b. Mahmud al-Nasafi, *Tafsir
al-Nasafi* (Beirut: Dar al-Nafais; 2005 CE) [annotator: Shaykh Marwan
Muhammad al-Shi’ar]

24. Abu al-Fadhl Jamal al-Din Muhammad b. Mukram b. Manzur al-Afriqi
al-Misri, *Lisan al-‘Arab* (Beirut: Dar Sadir; 1st edition)

25. Abu al-Faraj Jamal al-Din ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad
al-Jawzi al-Qurashi al-Baghdadi, *Zad al-Masir fi ‘Ilm al-Tafsir*
(Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 3rd edition, 1404 H)

26. Abu al-Faraj Jamal al-Din ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad
al-Jawzi al-Qurashi al-Baghdadi, *Zad al-Masir fi ‘Ilm al-Tafsir*
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad b.
‘Abd al-Rahman ‘Abd Allah]

27. Abu al-Fida Ibn Kathir al-Dimashqi, *al-Nihayah fi al-Fitan wa
al-Malahim* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: Prof. ‘Abduh al-Shafi’i]

28. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurashi al-Dimashqi,
*Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim* (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah]

29. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, *al-Bidayah wa
al-Nihayah* (Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri]

30. Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir, *Qisas al-Anbiya* (Dar al-Kutub
al-Hadithah; 1st edition, 1388 H) [annotator: Musṭafa ‘Abd al-Wahid]

31. Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Habib al-Mawardi al-Basri,
*al-Nakat wa al-‘Uyun* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah) [annotator:
Sayyid Ibn ‘Abd al-Maqsud b. ‘Abd al-Rahim]

32. Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, *Sahih
Muslim* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi]

33. Abu al-Qasim al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. al-Mufadhdhal al-Raghib
al-Isfahani, *Tafsir al-Raghib al-Isfahani wa Muqadimmatuh* (Kulliyat
al-Adab, Jami’ah Tanta; 1st edition, 1412 H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad
‘Abd al-‘Aziz Basyuni]

34. Abu al-Qasim al-Musawi al-Khui, *Mu’jam Rijal al-Hadith wa Tafsil
Tabaqat al-Ruwat* (5th edition, 1413 H)

35. Abu al-Qasim Sulayman b. Ahmad b. Ayub al-Tabarani, *Mu’jam
al-Kabir* (Mosul: Maktabah al-‘Ulum wa al-Hukm; 2nd edition, 1404 H)
[annotator: Hamadi b. ‘Abd al-Majid al-Salafi]

36. Abu al-Tayyib Muhammad Shams al-Haqq al-‘Azim Abadi, *‘Awn al-Ma’bud
Sharh Sunan Abi Dawud* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition,
1415 H)

37. Abu Bakr ‘Abd Allah b. Abi Shaybah, *Musnad Ibn Abi Shaybah*
(Riyadh: Dar al-Waṭan; 1st edition, 1418 H) [annotators: ‘Adil b. Yusuf
al-‘Azazi and Ahmad b. Farid al-Mazidi]

38. Abu Bakr Ahmad b. ‘Ali al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, *Tarikh Baghdad*
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1417 H) [annotator:
Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa]

39. Abu Bakr Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. ‘Abd al-Khaliq al-Bazzar, *Musnad
al-Bazzar* (Madinah al-Munawwarah: Maktabah al-‘Ulum wa al-Hukm; 1st
edition) [annotator: ‘Adil b. Sa’d]

40. Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, *Kitab al-Sunnah* (Dar al-Sami’i li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’)
[annotator: Dr. Basim b. Faysal al-Jawabirah]

41. Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, *Kitab al-Sunnah* (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400
H) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

42. Abu Bakr Jabir b. Musa b. ‘Abd al-Qadir b. Jabir al-Jazairi, *Aysar
al-Tafasir li Kalam al-‘Aliyy al-Kabir* (al-Madinah al-Munawwarah:
Maktabah al-‘Ulum wa al-Hikam; 5th edition, 1424 H)

43. Abu Dawud Sulayman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijistani al-Azdi, *Sunan* (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

44. Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b. Ma’bad
al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, *Sahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn Balban*
(Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ]

45. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. Babuyah al-Qummi, *‘Uyun
Akhbar al-Ridha* (Beirut: Muasassat al-A’lami li al-Maṭbu’at; 1st
edition, 1404 H) [annotator: Husayn al-A’lami]

46. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. Babuyah al-Qummi, *Kamal
al-Din wa Tamam al-Ni’mah* (Qum: Muasassat al-Nashr al-Islami li Jama’at
al-Mudarisin; 1405 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari]

47. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. Babuyah al-Qummi, *Man
La Yahdhuruh al-Faqih* (Qum: Manshurat Jama’at al-Mudarisin fi al-Hawzah
al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari]

48. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Husayn b. Babuyah al-Qummi,
*al-I’tiqadat* (Dar al-Mufid; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotator: ‘Isam
‘Abd al-Sayyid]

49. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Tusi, *al-Fihrist* (Muasassat
Nashr al-Faqahah; 1st edition, 1417 H) [annotator: Shaykh Jawad
al-Qayumi]

50. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Tusi, *al-Istibsar* (Tehran: Dar
al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Hasan al-Musawi al-Khurasan]

51. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Tusi, *Ikhtiyar Ma’rifat
al-Rijal* (Muasassat Al al-Bayt) [annotator: Sayyid Mahdi al-Rajai]

52. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Farukh al-Saffar, *Basair
al-Darajat al-Kubra fi Fadhail Al Muhammad* (Tehran: Muasassat
al-A’lami; 1404 H)

53. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Rustam al-Tabari al-Saghir, *Dalail
al-Imamah* (Tehran: Muasassat al-Bi’thah; 1st edition, 1413 H)

54. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib al-Amuli
al-Tabari, *Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an* (Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: Sidqi Jamil al-‘Aṭṭar]

55. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq al-Kulayni al-Razi, *al-Usul
min al-Kafi* (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar
al-Ghiffari]

56. Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Ya’qub b. Ishaq, *al-Furu min al-Kafi* (Dar
al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: ‘Ali Akbar al-Ghiffari]

57. Abu Mansur Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib al-Tabarsi, *al-Ihtijaj*
(Najaf: Dar al-Nu’man li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 1386 H) [annotator:
Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Khurasan]

58. Abu Mansur al-Hasan b. Yusuf b. Muṭahhar al-Asadi, *Khulasat
al-Aqwal fi Ma’rifat al-Rijal* (Muasassat Nashr al-Faqahah; 1st edition,
1417 H) [annotator: Shaykh Jawad al-Qayumi]

59. Abu Muhammad al-Husayn b. Mas’ud al-Baghwi, *Mu’alim al-Tanzil* (Dar
al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 4th edition, 1417 H)

60. Abu Sa’adat al-Mubarak b. Muhammad, Ibn al-Athir al-Jazari,
*al-Nihayah fi Gharib al-Hadith wa al-Athar* (Beirut: al-Maktabah
al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1399 AH) [annotator: Tahir Ahmad al-Zawi and Mahmud
Muhammad al-Tanahi]

61. Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, *Musnad*
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad]

62. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *al-Isabah fi Tamyiz
al-Sahabah* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H)
[annotators: Shaykh ‘Adil Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Shaykh ‘Ali
Muhammad Ma’udh]

63. Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Taqrib al-Tahdhib* (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa]

64. Ahmad b. Abi Bakr b. Isma’il al-Busiri, *Itihaf al-Khiyarah
al-Maharah bi Zawaid al-Masanid al-‘Ashara* (Riyadh: Dar al-Waṭan; 1st
edition, 1420 H)

65. Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, *al-Mahdi al-Muntazar fi
Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah* (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H)

66. Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, *al-Mawsu’at fi Ahadith
al-Mahdi al-Dha’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’at* (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st
edition, 1420 H)

67. Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, *‘Ismat al-Anbiya* (1406 H)

68. Hadi al-Najafi, *Mawsu’at Ahadith Ahl al-Bayt* (Beirut: Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1423 H)

69. Hasan b. ‘Ali al-Saqqaf al-Qurashi al-Hashimi al-Husayni, *Sahih
Sharh al-‘Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah* (Amman: Dar Imam al-Nawawi; 1st edition,
1416 H)

70. Ibn Majah Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Yazid al-Qazwini, *Sunan* (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad ‘Abd al-Baqi]

71. Ja’far al-Subhani, *Kulliyat fi ‘Ilm al-Rijal* (Qum: Muasassat
al-Nashr al-Islami; 3rd edition, 1414 H)

72. Jalal al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Mahalli and Jalal al-Din ‘Abd
al-Rahman b. Abu Bakr al-Suyuṭi, *Tafsir al-Jalalayn* (Cairo: Dar
al-Hadith; 1st edition)

73. Muhammad al-Jawahiri, *al-Mufid min Mu’jam al-Rijal al-Hadith* (Qum:
Manshurat Maktabah al-Mahalati; 2nd edition, 1424 H)

74. Muhammad Asif al-Muhsini, *Mashra’ah Bihar al-Anwar* (Beirut:
Muasassat al-‘Arif li al-Maṭbu’at; 2nd edition, 1426 H)

75. Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Sharbini, *Tafsir al-Siraj al-Munir* (Beirut:
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah)

76. Muhammad b. al-Hasan al-Hurr al-‘Amili, *Amal al-Amil* (Baghdad:
Maktabah al-Andalus)[annotator: Sayyid Ahmad al-Husayni]

77. Muhammad b. Ibrahim al-Wazir al-Yamani, *al-‘Awasim wa al-Qawasim fi
al-Dhabb ‘an Sunnah Abi al-Qasim* (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd
edition, 1416 H) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ]

78. Muhammad b. Salih al-‘Uthaymin, *Sharh al-‘Aqidah al-Safariniyyah*
(Riyadh: Dar al-Waṭan li al-Nashr; 1st edition, 1426 H)

79. Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, *Bihar al-Anwar al-Jami’ah li Durar
Akhbar al-Aimah al-Aṭhar* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 3rd
edition, 1403 H)

80. Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, *Mir-at al-‘Uqul fi Sharh Akhbar Al
al-Rasul* (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah) [annotator: Sayyid Muhsin
al-Husayni al-Amini]

81. Muhammad Husayn al-Tabaṭabaai, *al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an* (Qum:
Manshurat Jama’at al-Mudarisin fi al-Hawzah al-‘Ilmiyyah)

82. Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, *Qissat al-Masih al-Dajjal wa Nuzul
‘Isa* (‘Amman: al-Maktabah al-Islamiyyah; 1st edition, 1421 H)

83. Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, *Silsilah al-Ahadith
al-Dha’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi al-Ummah*
(Riyadh: Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H)

84. Muhammad Sadiq al-Husayni al-Ruhani, *Fiqh al-Sadiq* (Qum: Muasassat
Dar al-Kitab; 3rd edition, 1413 H)

85. Muhammad Zakariya, *al-Sahih wa al-Mu’tabar min Akhbar al-Hujjah
al-Muntazar* (Majmu’at al-Rasid; 1st edition, 1434 H)

86. Muhibb al-Din Abu Faydh Sayyid Muhammad Murtadha al-Husayni
al-Wasiṭi al-Zubaydi al-Hanafi, *Taj al-‘Urus min Jawahir al-Qamus*
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1414 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Shirri]

87. Prof. Dr. Hikmat b. Bashir b. Yasin, *Mawsu’at al-Sahih al-Masbur
min al-Tafsir bi al-Mathur* (Madinah: Dar al-Mathar li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’ wa al-Taba’at; 1st edition, 1420 H)

88. *Re:Naqshbandi luminaries believed Hadrat Mahdi was the son of Imam
Hasan al-Askari?*,
[https://ahmedamiruddin.wordpress.com/2011/07/02/re-naqshbandi-luminaries...](https://ahmedamiruddin.wordpress.com/2011/07/02/re-naqshbandi-luminaries-believed-hadrat-mahdi-was-the-son-of-imam-hasan-al-askari/)

89. Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala* (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 9th edition, 1413 H)

90. Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Tarikh
al-Islam wa Wafiyat al-Mashahir wa al-A’lam* (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab
al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. ‘Umar ‘Abd al-Salam
Tadmuri]

91. *Shaykh Nazim: Imam Mahdi’s Helpers believe he is the son of Imam
Hasan al-Askari – Jan 16th, 2011*,
[https://ahmedamiruddin.wordpress.com/2011/01/21/shaykh-nazim-al-mahdi-an...](https://ahmedamiruddin.wordpress.com/2011/01/21/shaykh-nazim-al-mahdi-and-the-twelve-imams/)

92. Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib* (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H)

93. Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari* (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition)

94. Wahbah b. Mustafa al-Zuhayli, *al-Tafsir al-Wasiṭ* (Damascus: Dar
al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1422 H)


