1. The Awaited Mahdi
====================

The Messenger of Allah, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*, predicted that a
time would come when oppression, injustice and aggression would become
extremely rampant all over the globe. At that period, a man from the
offspring of Muhammad would rise to power over the entire earth, and he
would successfully make oppression, injustice and aggression very rare
on its surface. Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) records the *hadith* in his
*Musnad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي قال الحسن بن موسى قال ثنا حماد بن سلمة عن أبي
هارون العبدي ومطر الوراق عن أبي الصديق الناجي عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم تملأ الأرض جورا وظلما فيخرج رجل من
عترتي يملك سبعا أو تسعا فيملأ الأرض قسطا وعدلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – al-Hasan b. Musa –
Hammad b. Salamah – Abu Harun al-‘Abdi and Maṭar al-Warraq – Abu
al-Siddiq al-Naji – Abu Sa’id al-Khudri:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “The earth will be
filled with oppression and injustice. **Then, a man from my offspring
will come out**. He will rule by kingdom for seven or nine years. **He
will fill the earth with equity and justice**.”[^1]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حديث صحيح دون قوله " يملك سبعا أوتسعا "
  </p>
</blockquote>

**It is a** ***sahih hadith***, with the exception of his statement: “he
will rule by kingdom for seven or nine years.”[^2]

Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H) also documents a *mutaba’ah* for it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أحمد بن علي بن المثنى قال حدثنا أبو خيثمة قال حدثنا يحيى بن
سعيد قال حدثنا عوف قال حدثنا أبو الصديق عن أبي سعيد الخدري عن النبي
صلى الله عليه وسلم قال لا تقوم الساعة حتى تمتلئ الأرض ظلما وعدوانا ثم
يخرج رجل من أهل بيتي أو عترتي فيملؤها قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت ظلما وعدوانا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. al-Muthanna – Abu Khaythamah – Yahya b. Sa’id – ‘Awf –
Abu al-Siddiq – Abu Sa’id al-Khudri – the Prophet, peace be upon him:

“The Hour will not occur until the earth is filled with injustice and
hostility. **Then, a man from my Ahl al-Bayt, or my offspring, will come
out**. So, he will fill it with equity and justice just as it had been
filled with injustice and hostility.”[^3]

Al-Albani (d. 1420 H) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^4]

And al-Arnauṭ concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^5]

This man will be “sent” by Allah Himself, in the same way that He sent
His prophets and messengers, to purify His earth. Imam Abu Dawud (d. 275
H) in his *Sunan* – under the heading: “The Book of al-Mahdi” (*Kitab
al-Mahdi*) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عثمان بن أبي شيبة ثنا الفضل بن دكين ثنا فطر عن القاسم بن أبي بزة
عن أبي الطفيل عن علي رضي الله تعالى عنه عن النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم
قال "لو لم يبق من الدهر إلا يوم لبعث الله رجلا من أهل بيتي يملؤها عدلا
كما ملئت جورا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Uthman b. Abi Shaybah – al-Fadhl b. Dukayn – Fiṭr – al-Qasim b. Abi
Barzah – Abu al-Tufayl – ‘Ali, may Allah the Most High be pleased with
him – the Prophet, peace be upon him:

“Even if there remains only one more day left before the end of Time,
**Allah will surely SEND a man from my Ahl al-Bayt**. He will fill it
with justice just as it had been filled with injustice.”[^6]

‘Allamah al-Albani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^7]

Dr. al-Bastawi, commenting upon the same *hadith*, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*.[^8]

The *same* word has been employed to describe the appointment and
mission of the prophets and messengers, *‘alaihim al-salam*, as well in
the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان الناس أمة واحدة فبعث الله النبيين مبشرين ومنذرين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mankind were one community and **Allah SENT prophets** as givers of glad
tidings and warners.[^9]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولقد بعثنا في كل أمة رسولا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, **We have SENT** within every *Ummah* **a messenger**.[^10]

Of course, this man will not be a prophet or messenger. However, he
obviously will occupy a separate divine rank which will certainly be
very similar in nature to both. One of the top Imams of the Ahl
al-Sunnah from the senior Tabi’in, Ibn Sirrin (d. 110 H), indicated the
status of this man in one of his brave pronouncements. Imam al-Maruzi
(d. 288 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا ضمرة عن ابن شوذب عن محمد بن سيرين أنه ذكر فتنة تكون فقال إذا كان
ذلك فاجلسوا في بيوتكم حتى تسمعوا على الناس بخير من أبي بكر وعمر رضي
الله عنهما قيل يا أبا بكر خير من أبي بكر وعمر؟ قال قد كان يفضل على بعض
الأنبياء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Dhamrah – Ibn Shawdhab:

Muhammad b. Sirrin mentioned a sedition that would occur. Then he said,
“When that occurs, sit in your houses until you hear from the people
about the one who is superior to Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, may Allah be
pleased with them both.” So, it was said, “O Abu Bakr, someone superior
to Abu Bakr and ‘Umar?!” He replied, “**He is even superior to some
prophets**.”[^11]

Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) says about the first narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضمرة بن ربيعة الفلسطيني أبو عبد الله أصله دمشقي صدوق يهم قليلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Dhamrah b. Rubay’ah al-Filisṭini, Abu ‘Abd Allah, his origin was
Damascus: ***Saduq*** **(very truthful)**, hallucinates a little.[^12]

Concerning the second narrator, he equally states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الله بن شوذب الخراساني أبو عبد الرحمن سكن البصرة ثم الشام صدوق
عابد
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Shawdhab al-Khurasani, Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman, he lived in
Basra, then Syria: ***Saduq*** **(very truthful)**, a devout worshipper
of Allah.[^13]

So, the *sanad* is *hasan*.

Al-Maruzi has included the report under the heading “Way of Life of the
Mahdi and His Justice and Length of His Time.”[^14] We know from this
then that Ibn Sirrin was describing “the Mahdi” – the same man mentioned
in the *hadith* of Abu Dawud above - as being superior to some prophets
in rank.

Meanwhile, here is another *riwayah* about this Mahdi, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, from the same Abu Dawud:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا سهل بن تمام بن بزيع ثنا عمران القطان عن قتادة عن أبي نضرة عن أبي
سعيد الخدري قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم " المهدي مني أجلى
الجبهة أقنى الأنف يملأ الأرض قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت جورا وظلما ويملك سبع
سنين "
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sahl b. Tammam b. Buzay’ – ‘Imran al-Qaṭṭan – Qatadah – Abu Nadhrah –
Abu Sa’id al-Khudri:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**The Mahdi is from
me**, with a broad forehead, a curved nose. **He will fill the earth
with equity and justice just as it had been filled with oppression and
injustice**, and he will rule by kingdom for seven years.”[^15]

Al-Albani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*.[^16]

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) also declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأحاديث التي يحتج بها على خروج المهدي أحاديث صحيحة
  </p>
</blockquote>

The *ahadith* that are relied upon as *hujjah* (proof) for the coming
out of the Mahdi are *sahih* *ahadith*.[^17]

So, he will be “the Mahdi”, from the blood and flesh of the Messenger,
and “will rule by kingdom”. He will be “sent” by Allah to reduce
oppression and injustice on the earth to the barest minimum. He will
rule the whole planet as a just, righteous and rightly guided royal
*khalifah*, assisted by his Lord.

Interestingly, his personal name will be Muhammad, like that of our
Prophet. Imam al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H) documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبيد بن أسباط بن محمد القرشي الكوفي قال حدثني أبي حدثنا سفيان
الثوري عن عاصم بن بهدلة عن زر عن عبد الله قال قال رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم لا تذهب الدنيا حتى يملك العرب رجل من أهل بيتي يواطئ اسمه
اسمي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ubayd b. Asbaṭ b. Muhammad al-Qurashi al-Kufi – my father – Sufyan
al-Thawri – ‘Asim b. Bahdalah[^18] – Zirr – ‘Abd Allah (b. Mas’ud):

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “This world will not
end until **a man from my Ahl al-Bayt** rules the Arabs by kingdom.
**His name will correspond with my name**.”[^19]

Al-Tirmidhi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث حسن صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *hasan sahih*.[^20]

And al-Albani agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan sahih*.[^21]

His government, obviously, will be that of the House of Muhammad, and he
will bring the supreme glory to Islam all over the universe. He will
achieve the impossible, with divine help, and will fulfill the dreams of
all the prophets and messengers.

Meanwhile, there are certain quick points about the Mahdi that must not
be overlooked. First, belief in his coming in an *‘aqidah* of Islam, and
has been so named by *‘ulama* of the Ahl al-Sunnah too. For instance,
al-Albani states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما مثل هؤلاء إلا كمثل من ينكر عقيدة نزول عيسى عليه السلام في آخر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزمان التي تواتر ذكرها في الأحاديث الصحيحة، لأن بعض الدجاجلة ادعاها،
مثل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ميرزا غلام أحمد القادياني، وقد أنكرها بعضهم فعلا صراحة، كالشيخ شلتوت،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأكاد أقطع أن كل من أنكر عقيدة المهدي ينكرها أيضا
  </p>
</blockquote>

These people are only like those who deny **the** ***‘aqidah*** **of the
descent of ‘Isa**, *‘alaihi al-salam*, at the end of Time - whose
mention has reached the level of *tawattur* in *sahih ahadith* – simply
because some impostors claim it, such as Mirza Ghulam Ahmad al-Qadiyani.
Some of them, like Shaykh al-Shaltut, have explicitly denied it. Also, I
am fairly certain that everyone who denies **the** ***‘AQIDAH*** **of
the Mahdi** also denies it too.[^22]

This means that whoever does not believe in the descent of Prophet ‘Isa,
*‘alaihi al-salam*, during the End Time or in the coming of the Mahdi
and his mission and activities, has a defective *iman* (faith). Shaykh
Ibn Baz (d. 1420 H) puts the matter forward in an even stronger manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقدصحت وتواترت هذه الأخبار عن رسول الله عليه الصلاة والسلام في نزول
الممسيح ابن مريم من السمماء في آخر الزمان، ومن خروج يأجوج ومأجوج وخروج
الدجال في آخر الزمان، ومن مجيء المهدي، كل هذا االأربعة ثابتة: المهدي
في آخر الزمان يملأ الأرض قسطاً بعد أن ملئت جوراً، ونزول المسيح ابن
مريم، وخروج الدجال في آخر الزمان، وخروج يأجوج ومأجوج، كل هذا ثابت
بالأحاديث الصحيحة المتواترة عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم، فإنكارها
كفر وضلال
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Sahih*** **and** ***mutawatir*** **reports have been reported from
the Messenger of Allah**, peace be upon him, concerning the descent of
the Masih Ibn Maryam from the sky during the End Time, and concerning
the coming out of Yajuj and Majuj and the coming out of the Dajjal
during the End Time, and **concerning the arrival of the Mahdi**. All
these four are well-proved - **the Mahdi during the End Time who will
fill the earth with equity after it had been filled with oppression**;
the descent of the Masih Ibn Maryam; the coming out of the Dajjal during
the End Time, and the coming out of Yajuj and Majuj – **each of these is
well proved through** ***sahih*****,** ***mutawatir*** ***ahadith***
**from the Messenger of Allah**, peace be upon him. **THEREFORE, denial
of them is** ***kufr*** **(disbelief and apostasy) and** ***dhalal***
**(heresy)**.[^23]

We also read this Q&A by the same Shaykh:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يوجد لدينا رجل ينكر المسيح الدجال والمهدي ونزول عيسى عليه السلام
ويأجوج ومأجوج ولا يعتقد في شيء منها، ويدعي عدم صحة ما ورد في ذلك من
أحاديث… وهو يصلي ويصوم ويأتي بالفرائض. فما حكمه؟….
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مثل هذا الرجل يكون كافراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Question) **There is a man with us who denies the Masih al-Dajjal, THE
MAHDI, the descent of ‘Isa,** ***‘alaihi al-salam*****, and Yajuj and
Majuj, and does not believe any of it**, and rejects the authenticity of
the *ahadith* narrated about (all) that …. And he performs *salat* and
fasts, and fulfils the obligatory duties (of Islam). So, what is his
status?....

(Answer) **Anyone like this man is a** ***kafir***.[^24]

It is thus absolutely obligatory upon all Muslims to believe in the
coming of Muhammad the Mahdi from the offspring and Ahl al-Bayt of the
noble *Rasul* to overturn oppression and injustice in our world. Failure
to uphold this belief may kick a Muslim out of Islam.

Another point is that the supplication *‘alaihi al-salam* (peace be upon
him) is added after the name of the Mahdi too, like in the case of
prophets and angels. Al-Albani again says about ‘Isa b. Maryam:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيأتم هو بالمهدي عليهما السلام
  </p>
</blockquote>

He (‘Isa) himself will be led in *salat* by the Mahdi, *‘alaihima
al-salam* (peace be upon them both).[^25]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كما فعل بعض الفرق قديما حين بادروا إلى إنكار القدر الإلهي إبطالا
للجبر، وبعض العلماء في العصر الحاضر إلى إنكار عقيدة نزول عيسى وخروج
المهدي عليهما السلام
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is like how some sects did in the past when they denied the existence
of divine destiny in order to invalidate the doctrine of fatalism, and
how some contemporary *‘ulama* deny the *‘aqidah* of the descent of ‘Isa
and the rise of al-Mahdi, *‘alaihima al-salam*.[^26]

Imam al-Mubarakfuri (d. 1282 H) submits too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الخطابي ويكون ذلك في زمن المهدي أو عيسى عليهما الصلاة والسلام أو
كليهما
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Khaṭṭabi (d. 388 H) said: “That will occur during the time of the
Mahdi or ‘Isa, *‘alaihima al-salat wa al-salam* (peace and blessings be
upon them both), or during the time of both of them.”[^27]

However, we have seen Sunni scholars who prefer to say *radhiyallahu
‘anhu* and other supplications instead.

Lastly, one of the titles of the Mahdi is *al-Muntazar* (the Awaited).
Imam al-Kattani (d. 1345 H) gives this heading in his book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خروج المهدي الموعود المنتظر الفاطمي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The coming out of the Promised Mahdi, **the** **Awaited
(*****al-Muntazar*****)** al-Faṭimi (i.e. from the offspring of
Faṭimah).[^28]

Al-Mubarakfuri also writes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال القاضي الشوكاني في الفتح الرباني الذي أمكن الوقوف عليه من
الأحاديث الواردة في المهدي المنتظر خمسون حديثا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Qadhi al-Shawkani (d. 1250 H) said in *al-Fath al-Rabbani*: “What I
have been able to study from the *ahadith* documented about **the
Awaited Mahdi (*****al-Mahdi al-Muntazar*****)** are fifty
*ahadith*.”[^29]

The title of one of Dr. al-Bastawi’s books bears the appellation as
well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المهدي المنتظر في ضوء الأحاديث والآثار الصحيحة وأقوال العلماء وآراء
الفرق المختلفة
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The Awaited Mahdi (*****al-Mahdi al-Muntazar*****)** in the Light of
*Sahih Ahadith* and *Athar* and the Statements of the Scholars and the
Views of Different Sects.

In that same book, he mentions this book by Imam Ibn Hajar al-Haythami
(d. 974 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القول المختصر في علامات المهدي المنتظر
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Concise Statement on the Signs of **the Awaited Mahdi (*****al-Mahdi
al-Muntazar*****)**.[^30]

He further cites a book by Shaykh Mur’i b. Yusuf al-Hanbali (d. 1033 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فوائد الفكر في ظهور المهدي المنتظر
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Benefits of Thinking about the Appearance of **the Awaited Mahdi
(*****al-Mahdi al-Muntazar*****)**.[^31]

He gives also the title of a treatise by Shaykh ‘Abd al-Muhsin
al-‘Abbad, whom he identifies as a former Vice Chancellor of the Islamic
University of al-Madinah al-Munawwarah, published in the journal of the
university of Dhu al-Qa’dah 1389 H, pp. 126-164:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عقيدة أهل السنة والأثر في المهدي المنتظر
  </p>
</blockquote>

The *‘Aqidah* of the Ahl al-Sunnah wa al-Athar Concerning **the Awaited
Mahdi (*****al-Mahdi al-Muntazar*****)**.[^32]

This again reminds that the issue of the Mahdi is a matter of *‘aqidah*.

‘Allamah al-Albani mentions this as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمنهم مثلا من يتبع من ادعى أنه المهدي أو عيسى، كالقاديانيين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذين اتبعوا ميرزا غلام أحمد القادياني الذي ادعى المهدوية أولا، ثم
العيسوية
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
، ثم النبوة، ومثل جماعة (جهيمان) السعودي الذي قام بفتنة الحرم المكي
على
  </p>
</blockquote>

> رأس سنة (1400) هجرية، وزعم أن معه المهدي المنتظر، وطلب من الحاضرين في

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحرم أن يبايعوه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Among them, for example, are those who follow someone who calls himself
the Mahdi or ‘Isa, like the Qadiyanis, who follow Mirza Ghulam Ahmad
al-Qadiyani who claimed first that he was the Mahdi, then he claimed
that he was ‘Isa (b. Maryam), then he claimed prophethood. Another
example is that of the Saudi group (Juhayman)[^33] that perpetrated the
crisis of the *Haram* of Makkah at the beginning of 1400 *Hijri*, and
claimed that **the Awaited Mahdi (*****al-Mahdi al-Muntazar*****)** was
with it, and demanded allegiance for him from those present (in
Makkah).[^34]

[^1]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ], vol. 3, p. 70, \#
11683

[^2]: Ibid

[^3]: Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b.
Ma’bad al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, Sahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn
Balban (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ], vol. 15, p. 236,
\# 6823

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Ibid

[^6]: Abu Dawud Sulayman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijistani al-Azdi, Sunan (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 509,
\# 4283

[^7]: Ibid

[^8]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
238

[^9]: Qur’an 2:213

[^10]: Qur’an 16:36

[^11]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Na’im b. Hammad al-Maruzi, Kitab al-Fitan (Dar
al-Fikr; 1414 H) [annotator: Prof. Dr. Suhayl Zakar], part 5, p. 221

[^12]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 1, p. 445, \# 2999

[^13]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 501, \# 3398

[^14]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Na’im b. Hammad al-Maruzi, Kitab al-Fitan (Dar
al-Fikr; 1414 H) [annotator: Prof. Dr. Suhayl Zakar], part 5, p. 220

[^15]: Abu Dawud Sulayman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijistani al-Azdi, Sunan (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 509,
\# 4285

[^16]: Ibid

[^17]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurṭubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 8, p. 254

[^18]: There are valid objections to the reliability of this ‘Asim. We
will be examining them later in this book. So, this hadith has a dha’if
chain due to this ‘Asim. However, its matn is confirmed in sahih Sunni
ahadith, as our esteemed reader can see.

[^19]: Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, al-Jami’
al-Sahih Sunan al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 4, p. 505, \# 2230

[^20]: Ibid

[^21]: Ibid

[^22]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 4, p. 43, \# 1529

[^23]: ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. ‘Abd Allah b. Baz, Fatawa Nurun ‘ala al-Darb
(Dar al-Waṭan; 1st edition, 1428 H), vol. 1, p. 355

[^24]: Ibid

[^25]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, Qissat al-Masih al-Dajjal wa
Nuzul ‘Isa (‘Amman: al-Maktabah al-Islamiyyah; 1st edition, 1421 H), p.
54, footnote \# 1

[^26]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1416 H), vol. 6, p. 368, \# 2668

[^27]: Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H), vol. 6, pp. 514-515

[^28]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ja’far al-Idrisi al-Kattani, Nazam
al-Mutanathir min al-Hadith al-Mutawatir (Egypt: Dar al-Kutub
al-Salafiyyah; 2nd edition), p. 225, \# 289

[^29]: Abu al-‘Ala Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Abd al-Rahim
al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwazi bi Sharh Jami’ al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1410 H), vol. 6, p. 402

[^30]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
42, \# 7

[^31]: Ibid, p. 42, \# 9

[^32]: Ibid, p. 137, \# 33

[^33]: This is a reference to Juhayman b. Muhammad b. Sayf al-‘Utaybi
(September 16, 1936 – January 9, 1980), an ultra-Salafist from Najd in
Saudi Arabia, who militarily took control of the Ka’bah in Makkah on
November 20, 1979 and held its pilgrims hostage. He was an ex-student of
Shaykh Ibn Baz, and had become very dissatisfied with the Salafi
credentials of the Saudi monarchy. He led a small militia of 1300-1500
to seize the Haram Mosque, and then announced his son-in-law – Muhammad
b. ‘Abd Allah al-Qahṭani – as the Mahdi. He was eventually defeated,
after three weeks, by a combination of the Saudi army, the Pakistani
army (who were called upon for help by Saudi authorities), and French
commandos (similarly invited) who tactically converted to Islam in order
to be able to take part in the military operations. He was publicly
beheaded, along with 67 of his fighters, on January 9, 1980.

[^34]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 5, p. 278, \# 2236


