2. The Amir Over ‘Isa B. Maryam
===============================

The Masih, *‘alaihi al-salam*, obviously, is a member of our *Ummah*,
under the *Shari’ah* of Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa
alihi*. This is explicitly indicated in this chapter-heading by Imam
Muslim (d. 261 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
باب نزول عيسى بن مريم حاكما بشريعة نبينا محمد صلى الله عليه و سلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Chapter on the Descent of ‘Isa b. Maryam to Judge with the *Shari’ah* of
our Prophet Muhammad, Peace Be Upon Him.[^1]

Imam al-Bukhari (d. 256 H) also records this *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا إسحاق أخبرنا يعقوب بن إبراهيم حدثنا أبي عن صالح عن ابن شهاب أن
سعيد بن المسيب سمع أبا هريرة رضي الله عنه قال : قال رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم والذي نفسي بيده ليوشكن أن ينزل فيكم ابن مريم حكما عدلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ishaq – Ya’qub b. Ibrahim – my father – Salih – Ibn Shihab – Sa’id b.
al-Musayyab – Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “I swear by Him in
Whose Hand my life is, surely the son of Maryam will soon descend
amongst you **as a just** **judge**.”[^2]

Explaining this *riwayat*, al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والمعنى أنه ينزل حاكما بهذه الشريعة فان هذه الشريعة باقية لا تنسخ بل
يكون عيسى حاكما من حكام هذه الأمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

The meaning is that he will descend **to judge with this**
***Shari’ah***, for this *Shari’ah* is eternal. It will never be
abrogated. **In fact, ‘Isa will be one of the judges of this**
***Ummah***.[^3]

Meanwhile, it is an undisputable fact that whosoever follows the
*Shari’ah* of Muhammad is from his *Ummah*. This clearly is why al-Hafiz
has proceeded to give him an entry in his book on the biographies of
**the Sahabah**:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عيسى المسيح بن مريم الصديقة بنت عمران بن ماهان بن الغار رسول الله
وكلمته ألقاها إلى مريم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذكره الذهبي في التجريد مستدركا على من قبله فقال عيسى بن مريم رسول الله
رأى النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم ليلة الاسراء وسلم عليه فهو نبي وصحابي وهو
آخر من يموت من الصحابة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وألغزه القاضي تاج الدين السبكي في قصيدته في آخر القواعد له فقال من
باتفاق جميع الخلق أفضل من خير الصحاب أبي بكر ومن عمر ومن علي ومن عثمان
وهو فتى من أمة المصطفى المختار من مضر
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Isa the Masih b. Maryam the Siddiqah bint ‘Imran b. Mahan b. al-Ghar,
the messenger of Allah and His Word which He said to Maryam.

Al-Dhahabi mentioned him in *al-Tajrid*, supporting those before him,
and said: “‘Isa b. Maryam, the messenger of Allah. **He saw the
Prophet**, peace be upon him, on the night of *al-Isra* and said *salam*
to him. **Therefore, he is a prophet AND A SAHABI; and he will be the
last of the Sahabah to die**.”

Al-Qadhi Taj al-Din al-Subki indirectly referred to him in his poem at
the end of his *al-Qawaid*, and said: “He, who by consensus of all
creatures, is better than the best of the Sahabah, Abu Bakr; and he is
better than ‘Umar, ‘Ali and ‘Uthman. **He is a young man from the**
***Ummah*** **of the Chosen Mustafa** from Mudhar.”[^4]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) further says in his *Siyar*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولم يسم الله تعالى في كتابه صحابيا باسمه إلا زيد بن حارثة وعيسى بن
مريم عليه السلام الذي ينزل حكما مقسطا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah the Most High has not mentioned in His Book **any Sahabi by name
except Zayd b. Harithah and ‘Isa b. Maryam**, *‘alaihi al-salam*, who
will descend as a just judge.[^5]

Basically, ‘Isa b. Maryam is the best of the Sahabah – by Sunni
reckoning – and not Abu Bakr (contrary to the popular Sunni myth). He
will follow and enforce the *Shari’ah* of Muhammad, and will be the last
of the Sahabah to die. Since the advent of our Prophet, the Masih became
a member of our *Ummah*, and will die as one of our own.

Interestingly, after ‘Isa’s descent, he will not be the supreme leader
of the *Ummah*. Of course, he will be a judge who will enforce our
*Shari’ah*. However, he will, in doing that, be taking orders from a
higher authority, the *khalifah* of his time. Imam al-Bukhari records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا ابن بكير حدثنا الليث عن يونس عن ابن شهاب عن نافع مولى أبي قتادة
الأنصاري أن أبا هريرة قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم كييف أنتم
إذا نزل ابن مريم فيكم وإمامكم منكم .
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Bukayr – al-Layth – Yunus – Ibn Shihab – Nafi’, freed slave of Abu
Qatadah al-Ansari – Abu Hurayrah:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “How will you be when
the son of Maryam descends amongst you **while your Imam will be from
you?**”[^6]

Dr. al-Bastawi interprets that in this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
" فإمامكم منكم " أي أن الإمام يكون غير عيسى، رجل من أمة محمد صلى الله
عليه وسلم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“while your Imam will be from you”, that is: **the Imam will NOT be
‘Isa**, he will be a man from the *Ummah* of Muhammad, peace be upon
him.[^7]

Of course, ‘Isa too is from this *Ummah*. However, he is a naturalized
member while the Imam will be someone born into it. Well, by divine
decree, only people from the Arab tribe of Quraysh can be *khalifahs*;
and this rule will never change till the Hour. Imam Ibn Abi ‘Asim (d.
287 H) confirms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا أبو صالح هدبة بن عبد الوهاب، حدثنا النضر بن شميل، ثنا شعبة، عن
حبيب بن الزبير، عن عبد الله بن أبي الهذيل قال: كنا نجالس عمرو ابن
العاص نذاكره الفقه فقال رجل من بكر لتنتهين قريش أو ليجعلن الله هذا
الأمر في جمهور من جماهير العرب فقال عمرو بن العاص: كذبت سمعت رسول الله
صلى الله عليه وسلم يقول: الخلافة في قريش إلى قيام الساعة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Salih Hudbah b. ‘Abd al-Wahhab – al-Nadhr b. Shumayl – Shu’bah –
Habib b. al-Zubayr – ‘Abd Allah b. Abi al-Hudhayl:

We were sitting with ‘Amr b. al-‘As, discussing *al-fiqh*. Then, a man
from Bakr, said, “If Quraysh do not desist, Allah will place this affair
in another group among Arabs.” So, ‘Amr b. al-‘As replied, “You lied! I
heard the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, saying: ‘**The**
***khilafah*** **is in Quraysh till the establishment of the
Hour**.’”[^8]

And ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده جيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is good.[^9]

Imam Abu Ya’la (d. 307 H) also records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا الحسن بن إسماعيل أبو سعيد بالبصرة حدثنا إبراهيم بن سعد عن أبيه
عن أنس رضي الله عنه قال : قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم : الأئمة
من قريش
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Hasan b. Isma’il Abu Sa’id – Ibrahim b. Sa’d – his father – Anas, may
Allah be pleased with him:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**The Imams are from
Quraysh**.”[^10]

Shaykh Dr. Asad says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^11]

Since the Masih is an Israilite, he is automatically disqualified from
running the *khilafah*. He can only pledge allegiance to and take orders
from a supreme royal ruler from Quraysh. Imam al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H)
documents too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أحمد بن منيع حدثنا زيد بن حباب حدثنا معاوية بن صالح حدثنا أبو
مريم الأنصاري عن أبي هريرة قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم الملك
في قريش
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Mani’ – Zayd b. Hubbab – Mu’awiyah b. Salih – Abu Maryam
al-Ansari – Abu Hurayrah:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**The kingdom is in
Quraysh**.”[^12]

Al-Albani comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^13]

The descent of ‘Isa will create a huge potential for confusion within
the *Ummah*. Would it be proper for a prophet to take orders from a
non-prophet? In order to forestall the possibility of disarray, both the
Masih and the *khalifah* of his time will explain the matter clearly by
deeds. Normally, the Imam of the *Ummah* cannot be led in *salat* by any
of his subjects. Imam al-Nasai (d. 303 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا إبراهيم بن محمد التيمي قال حدثنا يحيى بن سعيد عن شعبة عن
إسماعيل بن رجاء عن أوس بن ضمعج عن أبي مسعود قال قال رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم لا يؤم الرجل في سلطانه ولا يجلس على تكرمته إلا بإذنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibrahim b. Muhammad al-Taymi – Yahya b. Sa’id – Shu’bah – Isma’il b.
Raja – Aws b. Dham’aj – Abu Mas’ud:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “**No one can lead a
man in** ***salat*** **in his place of authority**, and no one can sit
in his place of honour except with his permission.”[^14]

And al-Albani declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^15]

Knowing this, the then *amir* of the believers will nonetheless offer
leadership of the *salat* to ‘Isa b. Maryam. If the Masih accepts it and
leads the *amir*, then he (the Masih) confirms himself as the overall
master of the *Ummah*. However, if he rejects it, in that case he
submits to the authority and leadership of the *khalifah*. Imam Muslim
here presents how this will be resolved:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا الوليد بن شجاع وهارون بن عبدالله وحجاج بن الشاعر قالوا حدثنا
حجاج (وهو ابن محمد) عن ابن جريج قال أخبرني أبو الزبير أنه سمع جابر بن
عبدالله يقول سمعت النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم يقول لا تزال طائفة من أمتي
يقاتلون على الحق ظاهرين إلى يوم القيامة قال فينزل عيسى بن مريم صلى
الله عليه و سلم فيقول أميرهم تعال صل لنا فيقول لا إن بعضكم على بعض
أمراء تكرمة الله هذه الأمة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Walid b. Shuja’, Harun b. ‘Abd Allah and Hajjaj b. al-Sha’ir – Hajjaj
b. Muhammad – Ibn Jurayj – Abu al-Zubayr – Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah:

I heard the Prophet, peace be upon him, saying: “There will never cease
to be a group within my *Ummah* who will be fighting upon the Truth,
victorious till the Day of *al-Qiyamah*. Then, ‘Isa b. Maryam,
*sallallahu ‘alaihi wa salam*, will descend, and **their** ***amir***
will say, ‘Come and lead us in *salat*.’ But, he (‘Isa) will reply,
‘**No. Verily, some of you are the** ***amirs*** **of the others**. This
is the honour of Allah to this *Ummah*.’”[^16]

The Masih rejects the offer and performs *salat* behind the *amir*.
Al-Albani records that the Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
منا الذي يصلي عيسى بن مريم خلفه
  </p>
</blockquote>

The one behind whom ‘Isa b. Maryam will perform *salat* is from us.[^17]

Then, he comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فالحديث عندي صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

The *hadith*, in my view, is *sahih*[^18]

Therefore, the authority of the *khalifah* over Prophet ‘Isa is
perfectly established. No one can lead a man in *salat* in his place of
authority; and the son of Maryam will be led. As such, he will not be
the one in overall authority over the *Ummah*.

Who then will this *amir* be, who will give commands to ‘Isa?

Dr. al-Bastawi has copied a *hadith* which identifies for us the Imam of
the *Ummah* during ‘Isa’s Second Coming:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن جابر قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم :ينزل عيسى بن مريم فيقول
أميرهم المهدي: تعال صل بنا. فيقول: لا، إن بعضهم أمير بعض. تكرمة الله
لهذه الأمة .
  </p>
</blockquote>

Narrated Jabir:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “‘Isa b. Maryam will
descend and **their** ***amir*****, the Mahdi** will say, ‘Come and lead
us in *salat*.’ But, he will reply, ‘No. Verily, some of them are the
*amirs* over others. It is the honour of Allah to this *Ummah*.’”[^19]

After quoting its sources and extensively examining its narrators, he
concludes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^20]

He also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابن سيرين قال :المهدي من هذه الأمة وهو الذي يؤم عيسى بن مريم .
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Sirrin said: “**The Mahdi** is from this *Ummah*, **and he will be
the Imam of ‘Isa b. Maryam**.”[^21]

And he has this verdict on it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح. رجاله كلهم ثقات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*. Its narrators are trustworthy.[^22]

So, he will be the Mahdi, *‘alaihi al-salam*. He will be the *amir* and
Imam of the *Ummah*, before and after Prophet ‘Isa joins it. This fact
reveals that the coming out of the Mahdi will occur during the very last
part of life on earth, as ‘Isa will come at that time. Something to note
also is that the Mahdi will actually rule the last section of our
*Ummah*, as Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرني أبو العباس محمد بن أحمد المحبوبي بمرو ثنا سعيد بن مسعود ثنا
النضر بن شميل ثنا سليمان بن عبيد ثنا أبو الصديق الناجي عن أبي سعيد
الخدري رضي الله عنه أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال : يخرج في آخر
أمتي المهدي يسقيه الله الغيث وتخرج الأرض نباتها ويعطى المال صحاحا
وتكثر الماشية وتعظم الأمة يعيش سبعا أو ثمانيا يعني حججا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-‘Abbas Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Mahbubi – Sa’id b. Mas’ud – al-Nadhr
b. Shumayl – Sulayman b. ‘Ubayd – Abu al-Siddiq al-Naji – Abu Sa’id
al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “**The Mahdi will come
out at the END of my** ***Ummah*****. Allah will provide rain to him**,
and the earth will bring out its vegetation, and he will give wealth
correctly. Livestock will become abundant **and the** ***Ummah*** **will
become great**. He will witness seven or eight *Hajjs*.[^23]

Al-Hakim comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain[^24]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^25]

Al-Albani also says about the *hadith* in his *Sahihah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا سند صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: This chain is *sahih*[^26]

Dr. al-Bastawi has the same verdict on it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*.[^27]

[^1]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 1, p. 134, chapter \# 71

[^2]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Musṭafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
3, p. 1272, \# 3264

[^3]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 6, p. 356

[^4]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Isabah fi Tamyiz
al-Sahabah (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H)
[annotators: Shaykh ‘Adil Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Shaykh ‘Ali
Muhammad Ma’udh], vol. 4, pp. 633-634, \# 6164

[^5]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 9th edition, 1413 H)
[annotators of the first volume: Shu’ayb al-Arnauṭ and Husayn al-Asad],
vol. 1, p. 220, \# 36

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-Ju’fi, al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Musṭafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
3, p. 1272, \# 3265

[^7]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
283

[^8]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Dhahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 527, \# 1109

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, Musnad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad], vol. 6, p. 321, \# 3644

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, al-Jami’
al-Sahih Sunan al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 5, p. 727 \# 3936

[^13]: Ibid

[^14]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, al-Mujtaba min
al-Sunan (Halab: Maktab al-Maṭbu’at al-Islamiyyah; 2nd edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 2, p. 77, \# 783

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Sahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 1, p. 137, \# 156 (247)

[^17]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 5, p. 371, \# 2293

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
180, \# 6

[^20]: Ibid, p. 182

[^21]: Ibid, p. 219, \# 14

[^22]: Ibid, p. 220

[^23]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 4, p.
601, \# 8673

[^24]: Ibid

[^25]: Ibid

[^26]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 2, p. 328, \# 711

[^27]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
165


