5. The Black Flags From Khurasan
================================

In the last chapter, we analyzed the *sahih* Sunni *hadith* of Thawban
which establishes that the army of the Mahdi, *‘alaihi al-salam*, will
march from “the Eastern towns” (as explained by Ibn Kathir), and will
fight and kill other Muslims in a way no nation had ever done to them.
So, what are these Eastern towns? Dr. al-Bastawi copies a *hadith* that
gives their name:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن عبد الله قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: إذا أقبلت الرايات
السود من خراسان فائتوها فإن فيها خليفة الله المهدي "
  </p>
</blockquote>

Narrated ‘Abd Allah (b. Mas’ud):

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “When **the black flags
come from Khurasan**, go to them, for among them is the *khalifah* of
Allah, the Mahdi.”[^1]

After thoroughly examining the narrators of its *isnad*, he concludes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعلى هذا فهذا الإسناد صالح للاستشهاد ولا سيما وأن متنه قد ورد من طريق
آخر عن ثوبان رضي الله عنه بسند حسن. وبذلك يصبح هذا الحديث حسنا لغيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

Based upon this, then this chain is fit to be used as a *shahid*
(support), especially since its text has been narrated through another
chain from Thawban, may Allah be pleased with him, **with a**
***hasan*** **chain**. With that, **this** ***hadith*** **becomes**
***hasan li ghayrihi***.[^2]

The Sahabi, Thawban, also confirmed this exact identity of the Eastern
towns in one of his personal statements. Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H)
documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا الحسين بن يعقوب بن يوسف العدل ثنا يحيى بن أبي طالب ثنا عبد
الوهاب بن عطاء أنبأ خالد الحذاء عن أبي قلابة عن أبي أسماء عن ثوبان رضي
الله عنه قال إذا رأيتم الرايات السود خرجت من قبل خراسان فأتوها ولو
حبوا فإن فيها خليفة الله المهدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Hasan b. Ya’qub b. Yusuf – Yahya b. Abi Talib – ‘Abd al-Wahhab b.
‘Aṭa – Khalid al-Hadha – Abu Qilabah – Abu Asma – Thawban, may Allah be
pleased with him:

“When you see the black flags coming out from the direction of
**Khurasan**, then go to them even if you have to crawl, for verily
among them is the *khalifah* of Allah, the Mahdi.”[^3]

Al-Hakim then says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

**This** ***hadith*** **is** ***sahih*** upon the standard of the two
Shaykhs.[^4]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H), on his part, keeps silent on the *riwayah*.
This *hadith*, although *mawquf*, has the status (*hukm*) of a *marfu’*
report. This is because it mentions a matter of the unseen (*al-ghayb*),
which the Sahabi could have gotten only from the Messenger of Allah,
*sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*.

Imam al-Maruzi (d. 229 H) has recorded the same narration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو نصر الخفاف عن خالد عن أبي قلابة عن ثوبان قال إذا رأيتم
الرايات السود خرجت من قبل خراسان فائتوها ولو حبوا على الثلج فإن فيها
خليفة الله المهدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Nasr al-Khaffaf – Khalid – Abu Qilabah – Thawban:

“When you see **the black flags coming out from the direction of
Khurasan**, then go to them even if you have to crawl on snow, for
verily among them is the *khalifah* of Allah, the Mahdi.”[^5]

We already know about Khalid, Abu Qilabah and Thawban from the last
chapter. Their *isnad* is *sahih*. The only new name here is Abu Nasr
al-Khaffaf. His name is ‘Abd al-Wahhab b. ‘Aṭa. We see al-Hakim above
declaring his *hadith* to be *sahih* too. Meanwhile, this is what
al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) also says about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الوهاب بن عطاء الخفاف أبو نصر العجلي مولاهم البصري نزيل بغداد صدوق
ربما أخطأ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Wahhab b. ‘Aṭa al-Khaffaf, Abu Nasr al-‘Ijli, their freed slave,
al-Basri, a resident of Baghdad: ***Saduq*** **(very truthful)**, maybe
he made mistakes.[^6]

Moreover, we also know, from the *riwayah* of al-Hakim, that there
actually was a link between Abu Qilabah and Thawban, and he was Abu
Asma. As such, the *sanad* is *hasan*. Therefore, “the East” and “the
Eastern towns” in the *ahadith* on the black flags are, again, only
references to Khurasan.

In that case, where is Khurasan? The researcher easily notices that on
the world map today, all the places called Khurasan are in the Islamic
Republic of Iran. There used to be the Khurasan province until 2004,
when it was divided into South Khurasan, North Khurasan and Razavi
Khurasan. However, in ancient times, the word “Khurasan” covered a vast
territory now lying in northeastern Iran, southern Turkmenistan and
northern Afghanistan. So, the original army of Imam al-Mahdi will be
made up of non-Arabs: Iranians, Turkmen and Afghans.

[^1]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
158, \# 2

[^2]: Ibid, p. 162

[^3]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 4, p.
547, \# 8531

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Na’im b. Hammad al-Maruzi, Kitab al-Fitan (Dar
al-Fikr; 1414 H) [annotator: Prof. Dr. Suhayl Zakar], part 4, p. 188

[^6]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 1, pp. 626-627, \# 4276


