6. His Holy Companions
======================

The Mahdi, *‘alaihi al-salam*, will have some 313 companions, who will
be of the best of Allah’s entire creation, since Adam, *‘alaihi wa
alihi*, till the Trumpet. Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) documents a beautiful
*hadith* about these noble companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو العباس محمد بن يعقوب ثنا الحسن بن علي بن عفان العامري ثنا
عمرو بن محمد العنقزي ثنا يونس بن أبي إسحاق أخبرني عمار الدهني عن أبي
الطفيل عن محمد بن الحنفية قال كنا عند علي رضي الله عنه فسأله رجل عن
المهدي فقال علي رضي الله عنه : هيهات ثم عقد بيده سبعا فقال : ذاك يخرج
في آخر الزمان إذا قال الرجل الله الله قتل فيجمع الله تعالى له قوما قزع
كقزع السحاب يؤلف الله بين قلوبهم لا يستوحشون إلى أحد ولا يفرحون بأحد
يدخل فيهم على عدة أصحاب بدر لم يسبقهم الأولون ولا يدركهم الآخرون وعلى
عدد أصحاب طالوت الذين جاوزا معه النهر قال أبو الطفيل : قال ابن الحنفية
: أتريده ؟ قلت : نعم قال : إنه يخرج من بين هذين الخشبتين قلت : لا جرم
والله لا أريهما حتى أموت فمات بها يعني مكة حرسها الله تعالى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-‘Abbas Muhammad b. Ya’qub – al-Hasan b. ‘Ali b. ‘Affan al-‘Amiri
– ‘Amr b. Muhammad al-‘Anqazi – Yunus b. Abi Ishaq – ‘Ammar al-Dahni –
Abu al-Tufayl – Muhammad b. al-Hanafiyyah:

We were with ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him and a man asked him
about **the Mahdi**. So, ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, said: “How
impossible!” Then, he counted seven on his hand and said, “**That one
will come out at the End of Time**. (At that time) if a man said,
‘Allah! Allah!’ he will be killed. Then, Allah the Most High will gather
together a group around him, just as the separate pieces of cloud are
joined together. Allah will unite their hearts. They will not fear
anyone and they do not celebrate about anyone joining them. **Their
number is that of the Companions of Badr. THE PAST GENERATIONS WILL NOT
SURPASS THEM AND THE LATTER GENERATIONS WILL NOT REACH UP TO THEM. Their
number will be that of the Companions of Talut who crossed the river
with him**.”

Abu al-Tufayl said: Ibn al-Hanafiyyah asked (me), “Do you want to meet
him?” I (Abu al-Tufayl) answered, “Yes.” He said, “He will come out
between these two pillars.” I said, “Surely, I swear by Allah, I will
never leave them both till I die.” Therefore, he died there, that is
Makkah. May Allah the Most High protect it.[^1]

Al-Hakim says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^2]

And Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) agrees with him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على شرط البخاري ومسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Upon the standard of al-Bukhari and Muslim.[^3]

Dr. al-Bastawi also has this verdict on the *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده حسن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^4]

This *athar*, which has the *hukm* of a *marfu’ hadith* due to its
nature, reveals two primary facts about the close companions of Imam
al-Mahdi. First, their number will be 313, the universally accepted
number of the Badr warriors as well as that of the soldiers of Talut,
*‘alaihi al-salam*, who crossed the river with him. And, also, they will
be from the best of Allah’s creation since the start of existence.

[^1]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa], vol. 4, p.
596, \# 8659

[^2]: Ibid

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Dr. ‘Abd al-‘Alim ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Bastawi, al-Mahdi al-Muntazar
fi Dhaw-i al-Ahadith wa al-Athar al-Sahihah wa Aqwal al-‘Ulama wa Ara
al-Firaq al-Mukhtalifah (Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm; 1st edition, 1420 H), p.
208, \# 10


