Glossary
========

*alīyah:* عالیه two-year program of Islamic studies that follows
the*thānvīyah-i-ḫāsā* تهنویه خاصه

*‘alīm   * عالم* * (pl. ‘ulemā’* * علماء*   * ): scholars of Islamic
religion and law.

*‘alīmīyah* : علمیه two-year program of religious studies that follows
the*‘alīyah* عالیه.

*ahl-i-ḥadīt* :  اهلِ حدیثSunni interpretative tradition not strictly
following any of the four recognized Imams (in Pakistan sometimes
called*Salafi* ).

*Barelvī:*  بریلوی usually refers to the followers of Imam Ahmad Raza
Khan, an important Muslim scholar of the late 19th and early 20th
centuries.*Barelvīs* بریلوس observe practices that are Sufi in
orientation, such as worship at the graves of religious leaders and the
acceptance of rituals associated with this religious tradition.

*Dars-i-Nizāmīدرسِ نظامی the madrasah curriculum of Sunni madrasahs in
the Indian subcontinent was authored by Mullah Niẓām ud-Dīn Sehlāvī of
the Firangi Mahal*madrasah* of Lucknow (d. 1748). With the exception of
minor changes it has remained in use up to the present day.*

*dars-i-Qur’ān:درسِ قرآن literally, study of the*Qur’ān* . Informal
study sessions that convene at a home or a mosque.*

*dār-al-ḥarb:*   دارالحرب abode of war.

*dār-ul-ulūm* :   دارالعلوم *madrasah* , university.

*daurā* : داورا  literally, a tour. Here, a tour of religious
proselytizing, often in the service of groups such as the*Tablīghī
Jamā’at* تبلیغی جماعت.

*da’wa* : literally, “summons” or “invitation”. Implies proselytizing to
non-Muslims to embrace Islam and to Muslims to become better Muslims,
variously defined.

*Deobandī* : دیوبندی School of Islam that emerged from a Muslim
religious revival movement in the Indian subcontinent during British
rule begun in the town of Deoband دیوبند in Uttar Pradesh in modern-day
India. A puritanical movement to uplift Muslims by purifying Islamic
practices through, among other things, discouraging mystical beliefs,
such as intercession by saints and propitiation at graves and shrines.

*dunyavī* : دُنیاوی Related to the world (secular affairs).

*fatwa * فتویٰ*   (* pl.*  fatawa* ): A legal opinion (in Islamic
jurisprudence).

*fauqanī:فقانی  madrasahمدرسه education of eight years in four two-year
stages, beginning with thānvīyah-i-ammahتهنویه عامه  and ending with the
alīmīyah .*

*fiqh:فقه   Islamic jurisprudence.*

* ḥadīt* : حدیثThe sayings, actions and thoughts of the Prophet Muhammad
(Peace be upon Him!) with the Holy*Qur’ān* it comprises the Sunna
(Islamic law). Scholars of various interpretative traditions disagree
about the legitimacy of*ḥadīt* texts in the interpretative traditions of
Islam.

*ḥafez* : حافظ  One who has memorized the Holy*Qur’ān* .

*Ḥanafi* : حنفی Dominant school of Islamic jurisprudence in Pakistan and
South Asia generally. Considered to be the most liberal of the four
school of*fiqh    * (jurisprudence) because it accepts both analogical
reasoning and unanimity in decision making.

*ḥifz-e-Qur’ān* :  حافظِ قُرآن   Memorizing the Holy*Qur’ān* .

*ibtidai* : ابتدائی literally “primary”. The first level (five years) of
religious education roughly equivalent to the period of primary
education in worldly sector.

*ijtihad* : اجتهاد derivation of rules for the new situation from the
principal sources of Islamic jurisprudence.

*Islamiat* : اسلامیات Islamic studies. An official component of
Pakistan’s state curriculum.

*Jamāʽat-i-Islāmī* : جماعتِ اسلامی sectarian Islamist political party in
Pakistan.

*jāmiʽah* :   جامعه    college

*madrasah* : مدرسه(pl.*madaris* مدارس) school that imparts secondary and
post secondary religious education using a specialized
curriculum,*Dars-i-Nizāmī* درسِ نظامی.

*maktab* : مکتب   (pl.*Makatib*  مکاتب) religious primary school that
generally teaches young children to read the*Qur’ān* and sometimes to
recite it.

*markaz: literally, “center.” Headquarters or central offices of an
organization. In the context of this study, the central location of the
five boards that govern Pakistan’s madaris.*

*maslakمسلک * * (pl.*masalik* مسالک ): Way or practice, usually in
reference to a particular interpretative tradition.*

Matriculation (Matric): certificate on completion of ten years of
education and passage of an examination. Matric qualification is a
pre-requisite for many jobs as well as admission to colleges and
universities in Pakistan.

*maulvi* :   مولوی  religious scholar.

*mutawassitah:متوسطه First level of formal religious education that
follows ibtedai.      Three years long; it is the equivalent of middle
school.  (vastani)*

*nazra Qur’ān:     نا ظره قُرآن     Learning to recite the Holy*Qur’ān*
.*

*nisāb* : نصاب   The curriculum.

*qārī* : قاری   a master of the recitation of the Holy*Qur’ān* in one of
the major seven styles of recitation,  *tağwīd* تجوید.

*radd:* Refutation of the doctrines of rival*mazhabs* مذاهب .

*tafsīr* تفسیر (pl*stafāsīr* ): Exegesis of the Holy*Qur’ān* .

*takmīl* : تکمیل Typically a one-year, post-M.A. course of religious
study.

* thānvīyah-i-ammah* : تهنویه عامه  Two-year level of religious studies
that follows*mutawassitah* متوسطه.

* thānvīyah-i-ḫāsā* : تهنویه خاصهTwo-year level of religious studies
that follows*thānvīyah-i-ammah* .

*taqlīd* : تقلید    Imitation (of past jurisprudential precedent).

‘*ulemā’*   علماء   **See** *‘alīm*

* ul-ulūm-al-aqlia* : علوم العقليه Rational sciences, such as
philosophy, geometry, medicine, chemistry and geography. Often
contrasted to*ul-ulūm-al-naqlia* علوم النقليه (religiously “transmitted”
sciences).

* ul-ulūm-al-naqlia:علوم النقليه “Transmitted sciences” such as reading
and interpreting the Holy Qur’ān and ḥadītحدیث   (traditions and sayings
of the Prophet Muhammad). Sometimes called traditional or religious
sciences. Often understood in contrast to ulūm-al-aqlia.*

*umma:اُمّه   The global Muslim community, the community of the Islamic
faith.*

*vustani:* وسطنی  First level of formal religious education that
follows*ibtedai* . Three years long, the equivalent of middle school.
(**See** **Mutawassitah** *.* )

*wafaq* : وفاق   School of thought (**Maslak** ). Usually translated as
“board” as in school board. There are five such boards**(four Sunni and
one Shia)** . And most of Pakistani*madaris * are affiliated with one of
them.

*zakat* : زکوة  Almsgiving. Muslims donate a percentage of their annual
earnings as alms or charity. The mount differs according to Sunni and
Shia traditions.


