Introduction
============

The concept of strict division of knowledge between the religious and
the non-religious has been a topic of debate throughout the history of
Pakistan. But this concept is rarely noted in the history of Islam
before colonial rule in the Subcontinent,*Madrasahs* in the medieval
Muslim world produced a considerable number of distinguished scholars
and philosophers, who contributed to worldly knowledge as well.*Ijtihad*
or independent thinking was a notable feature of these institutions.
However, under colonial rule in the Subcontinent the sphere of*madrasah*
education was restricted to the study of strictly religious disciplines,
especially*fiqh* or Islamic jurisprudence. Pakistan inherited this
dichotomy in the education system from colonial India. However, the
educational planners and policy makers have been unable to resolve this
problem, which is the core of all evil.

*Madrasah* education has been a subject of critique in learned circles,
and calls to reform regularly come from scholars, academics, and public
policy makers and even from the*ulema* themselves. The issue has assumed
far greater importance in the light of greater assertion of powers
of*madrasah* leaders in state policy matters.*Madrasahs* assumed greater
importance at the international level also because of their alleged
involvement in violence and militancy. The 9/11 tragedy in New York
strengthened the global perception that*madrasahs* produce extremists
and breed terrorism.

However, my interest in the subject is as old as my close association
with religious leaders and teachers of traditional religious*madrasahs*
since my school days. I have the credit of having studied some of the
preliminary books of*madrasah* curriculum at that time and enjoy
relatively good intimacy with them.

Statement of the Problem
------------------------

*Madrasah* education is becoming increasingly redundant. It has strayed
from its purely educational role and become involved in activities
contrary to the manifest objectives.*Madrasah* reforms are widely
believed to be the only remedy to overcome this problem.

Objectives of this Study
------------------------

The government plan to reform*madrasah* education is not new. However,
the increasing interest of government in the issue is aimed at
bringing*madrasahs* into the mainstream, in addition to diluting the
negative perception of the international community regarding
the*reason d'tre* of*madrasahs.* The*madrasahs* and the*ulema,* however,
have always expressed serious reservations regarding the sincerity of
government in this matter. While no one, including the*ulema,* is
against the idea of reforms, there are, however, wide differences
between the government and the*ulema* in its practical implementation.
The present study is aimed at an impartial analysis of the present
situation in historical perspective and in the light of the perceptions
of the different actors involved. This study will help to understand the
problem in a realistic way by addressing the following questions:

1. What reforms mean for different actors?

2. Why are reforms necessary in*din-i-madaris?*

3. How far are government and the*madrasahs* justified in their
approaches?

4. To what extent are the prospects of reforms only rhetoric?

Reforming*madrasahs* and, of course, the whole education system
has assumed greater importance in the current modern plural society. As
a vital sector of the educational system of Pakistan,*madrasahs* have
great potential for making positive contributions to Muslim society and
can play important roles in bringing peace and prosperity to the
country.*Madrasahs* have deep rooted relationship with Muslim society
and enjoy the great respect of the common man.*Madrasahs* and religious
elites influence public opinion on different issues of religious and
socio-political importance.

In view of the vital role of*madrasahs* in Pakistani society their
importance cannot be simply ignored in state policy matters. Therefore,
reforming*madrasahs* in Pakistan actually means reforming the entire
society

Review of Literature
--------------------

While debate regarding*madrasahs* is not a new phenomenon, what is new
is the great significance and intensity it has received because of the
changed priorities of the super powers in South Asia, in particular, and
the world over. The government has been trying since the 1960s to
reform*madrasah* education and bring it into the mainstream. Different
types of studies including books, journals, and articles in newspapers,
official documents, and literature published by these*madrasahs* are the
sources of information for this study.

Jamal Malik, University of Erfurt, has carried out in-depth study
of*madrasahs* and government initiatives during the era of the Ayub Khan
and Zia-ul-Haq’s regimes. This is perhaps the first comprehensive study
on the subject, which has always remained controversial because of the
mutually opposed points of view of*madrasah* leaders and the government.
In addition, Malik’s study reveals that the*ulema* of different schools
lack a unanimous approach toward this issue, and that these differences
are deeply rooted in society because students and teachers of*madrasahs*
represent different segments of society. Moreover, Malik thinks that
some*madaris* preach militant views and are openly involved in politics
contrary to their purely educational roles.[^1]

The Institute of Policy Studies (IPS), an Islamabad-based organization,
has several publications to its credit regarding the issue of*madrasah*
reforms. One such study,*Din-i-Madaris may Taalim* (Urdu) by Saleem
Mansoor Khalid, offers the in-depth information on the*din-i-madaris* in
Pakistan together with an impartial analysis of various reform
initiatives. The study contains details of problems faced
by*din-i-madaris* and honest suggestions to address them.[^2] Several
other publications and seminars organized by the IPS are aimed at
creating motivation among scholars, intellectuals, and*ulema* for
reforming religious education.

Dr. Tariq Rehman in his book*Denizens of an Alien World: A Study in*
*Education Inequality and Polarization in Pakistan* opines that the
present curriculum of*din-i-madaris* is mostly based on a centuries-old
syllabus known as the*Dars-i-Nizami* . He writes that*madrasahs*
belonging to different schools of thought teach books which refute each
other’s beliefs. This promotes sectarianism in the society. He believes
that rising militancy in*madaris* is the result of the Afghan war. The
book also contains information regarding the socio-economic background
of students of*din-i-madaris* .[^3]

Mohammad Qasim Zaman in his book*The Ulema in Contemporary* *Islam* ,
has discussed the reform plans and their failures also. He argued that
opposition to the government agenda of reforms exists to varying degrees
among the*ulema.* The study contains the dissenting views regarding the
issue and the motives behind them.[^4]

A leading book on the subject in India by Yoginder Sikand is an
invaluable contribution and perhaps unrivalled among the contemporary
works. In his book*Bastions of Believers: Madrasah and* *Islamic
Education in India* , he has discussed*madrasah* reforms in historical
perspective. This study has valuable information regarding different
aspects of reforms. It also carries the detail of reformed*madrasahs* in
India that can serve as guidance for*madrasahs* in the entire
region.[^5] The article "Religious Education and Violence in Pakistan*"*
is highly informative about the role of*madrasahs* in the
socio-political life of Pakistan. The author believes that a section of
the*ulema* also favors reforms in order to adjust themselves to modern
needs. He advises that the religious and social services of
the*madrasahs* should be recognized by the government and they may be
assigned due role to ensure peace in the society.[^6]

Other contributions by the same author on the same topic can be found in
Robert M. Hathaway’s recent anthology. They contain details of recent
government initiatives of reforming Islamic education. These writings
make valuable suggestions for policy makers in this regard.[^7] Several
articles by the eminent scholar Mumtaz Ahmad are to be consulted on the
topic under study and have been explored for the said purpose.

The reports published by various NGOs, e.g. National Research and
Development Foundation (NRDF)[^8] , International Center for Religion
and Diplomacy (ICRD)[^9] and Sustainable Development Policy Institute
(SDPI) are also sources of information for the present study.

The publications of the Zakir Hussain Institute, New Dehli, are of great
importance on this topic. They contain valuable studies of the relevance
of*madrasah* education in the modern world and proposals for reforming
this vital sector according to current realities.[^10]

The recent study of Saleem H. Ali,*Islam and Education: Conflict and
Conformity in Pakistan's madrasahs,* is one of the latest works
on*madrasahs* in Pakistan. The author has discussed the various aspects
of*madrasah* education, i.e the socio-economic background of*madrasah*
students and violence and relevance of this sector in the modern world.
The book also carries the detail of*madrasahs* in other countries
including India, Bangladesh, Malysia, and Indonesia. It contains certain
recommendations for*madrasah* reforms in Pakistan in the light of
successful experiments in these countries in reforming their*madrasahs.*
[^11]

C. Christine Fair's recent book,*The Madrasah Challenge: Militancy and
Religious Education in Pakistan,* traces the root causes of militancy
in*madrasahs* and suggests various measures to overcome this problem.
The study also discusses the government point of view for
reforming*madrasahs* and also the*madrasah* approach to the issue.[^12]

*Madrasahs* are actors in the present study and their points of view are
essential for understanding the issue in its real perspective. The
monthly Journal*Muhhadis* of the Islamic Research Council is an
authentic source of information for understanding the view points
of*madrasahs* regarding government reform initiatives. It carries
interviews and comments of leading*ulema* on the issue and the response
to the government agenda of reforms.[^13]   The monthly
Wafaq-ul-madaris*,* a journal of*Wafaq-ul-madaris al-Arabia* [^14] *a*
nd Al Haq, a monthly journal of the*Darul Uloom Haqqaniya Akora Khattak*
,[^15] are valuable for understanding the*madrasah* viewpoint on the
subject.

Research Methodology
--------------------

In this study both historical and descriptive methods have been used.
For collection of data primary sources, e.g. field survey, interviews,
and official documents have been used. In addition, secondary sources,
e.g. books, journals, and articles in newspapers and magazines have been
consulted.

Organization of Study
---------------------

The present research study has been organized into the following five
chapters in addition to the introduction and conclusion.

1.*Madrasah* Education: an Historical Evolution

This chapter contains the evolution of*madrasahs* from the middle ages
to the partition of the Subcontinent.

2.*Madrasahs* in Pakistan: a Profile

This chapter contains the growth of*madrasahs* and the wider role they
play in Pakistani society.

3. State and*Madrasahs* Relations: 1947-1999

In chapter 3 the detail of*madrasah* reforms from 1947 to 1999 has been
given. The causes of the failure of these efforts are also discussed.

4. Agenda of Reforms since 2000: An Action against the Status Quo.

This chapter consists of the details of government efforts to
reform*madrasahs* and their implications since 2000. The role of NGOs
has also been mentioned in this connection.

5. Response of madrasahs to the State Sponsored Agenda and Prospects of
Reforms: Rebellion against State Power.

This chapter is devoted to the viewpoint of the ulema and religious
leaders and the causes responsible for their uncompromising stand.
Prospects of reforms have also been discussed here.

The final assessment has been given at the end.
