1- Madrasah Education: A Historical Evolution
=============================================

Introduction
------------

The acquisition and imparting of knowledge is central to Islam. The
first revelation in*sura* in*Alaq* stressed reading and writing in the
following words:

Read: In the name of thy Lord who createth,

createth man from a clot.

Read: And thy Lord is the most bounteous, Who teacheth by the pen.

Teacheth man that which he knows not.

According to the Holy*Qur’an* the human being is exalted over all other
creatures of God because of his knowledge. The superiority of Adam
(A.S.)[^16] over the angels was on the very basis of his knowledge of
nature. The*Qur’an* abhors ignorance and illiteracy and calls knowledge
as the light and blessing of God. The*Qur’an* frequently stresses the
acquisition of knowledge to overcome and exploit natural resources that
have great potential for the welfare of human beings and the need for
exploration and exploitation. Besides the Holy*Qur’an,* the Prophet of
God (PBUH) has also emphasized the acquisition of knowledge. A large
number of*hadiths* are found that highlight the importance of the
acquisition and imparting of knowledge.

Muhammad (PBUH) declared that the seeking of knowledge is the duty of
every Muslim man and women. Muhammad (PBUH) is said to have declared:
“The ink of the scholar is more holy than the blood of a martyr”. In
another tradition the seeker of knowledge is regarded as the one who
strives in the path of God. Insisting on the need of acquisition of
knowledge for all Muslims, the Prophet is reported to have said:
“Valueless is the Muslim who is not a teacher or a student”. These and
many other traditions reveal that the acquisition and imparting of
knowledge is a sacred duty for all Muslims.

In Islamic tradition acquisition of knowledge is not regarded as an end
in itself. Rather, its aim is to understand the will of God and lead
one’s life according to it. So it is clear that the Islamic concept of
knowledge aims at self-actualization. A self-actualizing person is one
who becomes all that he is capable of being.[^17] According to
Maslow[^18] , self actualization means the full use of human talent and
capabilities. It means actualizing all of God’s bounties to the person.
The individual has to put in a lot of effort to use these bounties in
the right way and at the right time so that it will lead to
self-fortification. Self-fortification refers to the strong fort built
within the person that makes him competent, willing, and aware. He can
avoid doing wrong things and face successfully the challenges of
life[^19] .

It is worthy to be noted that the Holy Prophet (PBUH) made no
distinctions in acquisition of knowledge. The acquisition of all sorts
of knowledge was highly appreciated as he said: “A word of wisdom is the
lost property of the true believer. Whenever he finds it, he takes
it.”[^20]

In view of the great importance attached to the acquisition and
spreading of knowledge, efforts were undertaken to evolve a system of
education during early Muslim rule. The system of*maktab* and*madrasah*
was established for this purpose in the Muslim empire and a network
of*madrasahs* expanded with the spread of Islam.

Education during the Time of the Holy Prophet (PBUH)
----------------------------------------------------

During the*Meccan* period, Muhammad (PBUH) was persecuted by his
opponents, and hurdles were created to stop him from preaching the
religion of Islam. The Prophet, however, carried on his mission despite
stiff opposition. In such a situation the*Dar-e-Arqam* proved to be the
very first place where the companions of the Prophet (PBUH) gathered and
listened to the instructions of the Prophet (PBUH) and got religious
training. Similarly,*Shabe-e-Abi Talib* where the family of the Prophet
(PBUH) and his companions were secluded for three years due to the
boycott of the Quraish tribe served as a place of teaching and learning
for the inmates.

After the migration to Madina, the*Masjid-i-Nabavi* was the seat of
religious education and moral training of the companions of the Prophet
(PBUH). Various measures were adopted to make Muslims literate. The
release of the prisoners of*Badr* in return for making the Muslims
literate is unique in history. Encouraging the learning of foreign
languages and subjects such as mathematics and medicine by the Prophet
(PBUH) was really commendable because such measures were unknown among
the Arabs in pre-Islamic times.

About 600 Muslims are believed to have been made literate by the
prisoners of*Badr* . It is said that there were only seventeen literate
people in*Macca* before the Prophet (PBUH).[^21] Since the Prophet
(PBUH) equally emphasized the education of men and women, he arranged to
teach women in the mosque and allotted them separate time for this
purpose.

Some of the wives of the Prophet (PBUH) were literate and the Muslim
women visited them to learn from them. The Prophet (PBUH) is said to
have appointed a teacher for*Hafsa* , one of his wives, to learn the art
of writing.[^22] Similarly,*Ayesha,* another wife of the Prophet (PBUH),
memorized a large number of*hadiths* and the s*ahaba* (companions of the
Prophet) sought her help in resolving religious matters after the demise
of the Holy Prophet (PBUH).

Education during the Time of the Rightly Guided Caliphs
-------------------------------------------------------

During the period of the Rightly Guided Caliphs[^23] education was given
due attention. The learned among the*sahaba* were facilitated to promote
education among the Muslims. During the time of Abu Bakr (632-634A.D.)
Hazrat Ayesha, Hazrat Zaid bin Tabeth, Hazrat Abu Hurara and Abdulla bin
Umar were among the great scholars who imparted education to the people.

Hazrat Umar (634-644A.D) encouraged learning and allocated funds from
the state treasury for the promotion of education. He also deputed
learned men to the newly conquered territories to promote education
among the local people. He issued special instructions to his governors
for the promotion of education among the people. He used to say that it
was the responsibility of the Islamic state to make all subjects
literate[^24] . Hazrat Usman (644-656 A.D) also gave due attention
towards the promotion of knowledge. The Holy*Qur’an* was edited in a
single Arabic script during the caliphate of Hazrat Usman, which
prevented dissensions among the different tribes of Arabs. He also
patronized centers of learning that had been established by Hazrat Umar.

Ali, the fourth caliph (656-661A.D), was himself a great scholar and
remained chief*qazi* during the rule of the previous caliphs. Although
great political disturbances did not allow him to make systematic
efforts for the promotion of education, he framed the principles of
Arabic grammar to facilitate non-Arabs to learn the Arabic
language.[^25]

The Birth of fiqh and the Emergence of the ulema as a Professional Class
------------------------------------------------------------------------

During the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (PBUH) his interpretation of
the*Qur’an* was final. But after the demise of the Holy Prophet (PBUH)
and pious caliphs this duty was assumed by*imams* [^26] *.* These*imams*
made*ijtihad* and interpreted the*Qur’an* and s*unnah* according to
their own understanding, each*imam* having his own followers. Thus,
different schools of thought called*mazahib* came into being. The
followers of each*mazhab* made efforts to propagate their thoughts,
which highly contributed to Muslim education. The followers of
each*mazhab* established*madrasahs* to teach their own*fiqh* [^27] *,*
or Islamic jurisprudence.

Local conditions played an important role in the development of
different*fiqh* schools because Islam had spread from Madina to Syria,
Egypt, Iran and Iraq, and to Africa. The social conditions and political
needs of these areas were totally different from those of the
egalitarian tribal society of Arabia. Therefore, local socio-political
features are reflected in the*fiqh* developed in their respective
regions. Rules of these*fiqh* continued to be taught in the*madrasahs*
in India up to the present day.[^28]

In earlier times, anyone who possessed knowledge in any field or subject
was considered to be an*alim* or scholar. Until the third Islamic
century the*ulema* were not clearly identified as a distinct social
group because there were no systematic rules relating to the profession
of scholarship. In the third century a distinct class of
professional*ulema* emerged, who earned their livelihood from teaching
and scholarship. This must be seen in the wider context of the
development of rival schools of*fiqh* with elaborate rules governing
inclusions and membership and complex linguistic skills and sartorial
codes separating the*fuqaha* or religious scholar from the common mass
of Muslims. The nexus between the*fuqaha* and ruling elites further
strengthened the notion of a separate class of religious specialists.

The founders of*fiqh* schools were very flexible in their approaches,
never claimed to be infallible, and warned their disciples not to
blindly accept their rulings. Instead, they should follow the
instruction of the divine text in matters in which their opinions might
inadvertently violate the*Qur’an* and s*unnah* . The immediate followers
of the founder of each*mazhab* followed these principles and some of the
early*fuqaha* did not hesitate to overrule the opinions of their own
teachers if they found them not to be in accordance with the*Qur’an*
and*hadith.*

However, this tradition did not last for long. The gradual codification
of*fiqh* leads to the contracting of possibilities of*ijtehad* . It
rendered Islamic jurisprudence unable to meet the demands of changing
conditions. This codified form of*fiqh* is a part of the curriculum of
Indian and Pakistani*madrasahs* even today. The stress on the centrality
of*fiqh* went along with the crystallization of a class of*fuqaha,*
specializing in the details of jurisprudence. Quranic verses exhorting
believers to seek the opinion of the knowledgeable were interpreted to
suggest the need for Muslims to consult experts in*fiqh* on every
matter, an insistence that is repeated by*ulema* of*madrasahs* even
today.*Fiqh* thus came to be regarded as the highest form of knowledge
while the rest came to be neglected or degraded. This helped bolster the
claims of*fuqaha* , experts in Islamic jurisprudence, as representative
of what they claimed to be authentic Islamic tradition.[^29]

The Birth of Traditional madrasahs
----------------------------------

As was the practice from the days of Prophet (PBUH), mosques served as
the centers of Muslim education for almost three centuries. It was
during the Abbassid period that the need for a more organized
educational system was felt because of the rapid expansion of knowledge
and to meet the administrative needs of the empire. This gave birth to
the*madrasah* as a separate institution.

*Madrasah,* plural*madaris,* is the Arabic word for any type of school,
secular or religious. It is variously transliterated as,*madrasa,
modresa, madraza,* etc. The word*madrasah* is derived regularly from the
triconsonantal root (*d-r-s* ) which relates to learning or teaching
through the*wazn maf al* , meaning “a place where x is done”.

Therefore,*madrasah* literally means “a place where learning / teaching
is done. The word is also present as a loan word with the same meaning
in many Arabic influenced languages such as,*Urdu, Hindi, Marathi,
Persian, Turkish* , etc. In the Arabic language the word*madrasah*
implies no sense other than that which the word school represents in the
English language, whether religious or secular.[^30]

It is believed that the first*madrasah* in the Muslim world was
established in the ninth century in the city of*Fas (Fez* ) in Morocco
and was known as*Jamiat al-Qarawiyyin* . It was founded by Fatima al
Fihri, the daughter of a wealthy merchant named Mohammad Al Fihri.

During the late Abassid period the Suljuk vizier Nizam-ul-mulk[^31]
created the first major official academic institution known in history
as Madrasah Nizamyya at Nishapur. Nizam Al Mulk, who would later be
murdered by the Assassins (*Hashashin),* created a system of
state-sponsored*madrasahs* in various cities of the Abbasid empire
towards the end of the 11th century of the common era. The syllabi of
these*madrasahs* included the teaching of the*Qur’an* and*hadith* with
increasing emphasis on*fiqh* with the passage of time. The emphasis
on*fiqh* was aimed at providing trained people for the imperial courts.
The subjects of mathematics, astronomy, and other human sciences were
also taught in these*madrasahs* .

George Makdesi contends that these early*madrasahs* were relatively
autonomous. But other scholars disagree and claim that they played
crucial political roles by providing legitimacy to the rulers in the
face of stiff opposition. The administrative staff of the state,
including judges (*qazis* ), legal specialists (*muftis* ) and censors
of public morals (*mustahbibs* ) was mades up of the graduates of
these*madrasah* [^32] *s.*   The most famous among the*Nizamia
madrasahs* was established in Baghdad in 1067A.D. It was sponsored by
the rulers and sizeable funds were allotted for it. About 6000 students
were enrolled in this*madrasah* and it functioned until the fall of
Baghdad in 1257. Since*Madrasah Nizamia* was propagating the*Shaafi
mazhab,* the followers of the Hanafi school of thought also established
their own*madrasahs.*

The Muslims rulers, nobles and wealthy traders established*madrasahs* in
different lands and provided liberal financial supports for earning the
blessings of God as they considered it a pious deed. Some of the*ulema*
were directly linked with the rulers, while others avoided rulers but
enjoyed great respect among the people.

Education in*madrasahs* was free of cost and students were drawn from
far-off regions. They helped in the expansion of Islamic civilization by
creating a class of*ulema* who were linked by their common approach in
the light of Islamic jurisprudence. In medieval*madrasahs* there were no
rigid rules of admission, examination system, or age requirements. The
personality of the teacher was more important than the institution
itself. Piety, expertise, and scholarship were decisive factors for the
student to be attracted towards a particular teacher. In addition to the
transmitted sciences (*ulum-al-naqaliyla* ) such as*Qur’an, hadith* ,
and*fiqh* , rational sciences (*Ulum-al-naqliya* ) i.e. grammar, poetry,
and philosophy, mathematics and astronomy were also taught in
medieval*madrasahs.* However, there was no rigid distinction between
religious and secular education.[^33]

This system of Muslim education spread elsewhere in the Muslim world and
Turkish rulers brought it to India when they consolidated their rule
there. This leads to religious and socio-political transformation on
Indian soil afterwards.

Madrasahs in the Indian Subcontinent
------------------------------------

Missionary activities had been started with the advent of Muslims
traders in the Subcontinent long before the Muslims conquests. However,
the consolidation of the Muslim empire facilitated the establishment of
an organized educational system elsewhere in the Subcontinent. Royal
patronage was always available for this purpose. After the fall of
Baghdad in 1257 A.D, a large number of scholars were attracted towards
India. They also brought with them the syllabus and traditional methods
of teaching which were adopted in Indian*madrasahs* . The courts of the
Dehli sultans were flooded with scholars and intellectuals from Central
Asia. Some of the Sufis and scientists also migrated from Central Asia.
They started preaching and teaching on their own without seeking royal
patronage. They contributed to the conversion of large numbers of people
to Islam.[^34] The traditional*madrasahs* in India mostly taught*Hanafi
fiqh* and*Ashrafia* , the descendants of Central Asian*ulema* were
preferred for teaching. The rulers sought advice (*fatwa* ) of those
scholars on certain matters but did not always act upon them because of
the peculiar conditions of India and personal expediency.
Especially*fatawa* relating to the status of minorities in India were
always ignored by most of the rulers.[^35]

In the time of the Dehli sultans (1206-1525 A.D.) promotion of education
was highly encouraged. However, no restriction was imposed in this
regard by them. The rulers provided financial support and helped the
teachers and students to carry on educational activities in a free
environment. Teachers were free to manage their institutions, frame
courses and syllabus, and decide the aims, nature, and methods of their
teaching. These institutions taught specially prescribed courses which
were not too rigid. Changes were introduced at different times, and, in
some places, certain subjects were given more importance than others.
But these changes were not affected in consequence of official
interference. Endowments attached to large numbers of schools were
monetary sources for these institutions. In addition to those teachers
who got salaries, there was a class of teachers who were not taking
salaries and worked on a voluntary basis, considering it a religious
obligation and a source of gaining eternal salvation.

Every teacher was free in the selection of his place of teaching. The
state facilitated him through monetary aid to devote himself exclusively
to seeking knowledge and imparting instruction.[^36] The in-charge of
religious endowments arranged for grants of tax free lands to*imams*
,*qazis* , and other religious groups who provided education,
particularly, in Islamic subjects. The main subjects were*tafsir*
,*hadiths* , and*fiqh* . For the study of*hadith* the favorite text book
was*Masharriq-ul-Anwar* and in*fiqh, Hidaya* held the field. In the
Deccan, where contact with Iran was maintained, scientific subjects also
got due attention. In northern India, literature, history and mysticism
were taught along with religious subjects. The promotion of learning in
the Deccan was largely the work of Persian statesmen and scholars whom
the rulers had attracted from Iran.[^37]

In the time of the early Mughals rational sciences such as logic,
mathematics, literature, and philosophy got more attention because these
subjects were considered essential for aspiring civil servants. The
Persian Shia scholar Mir Fatehullah Sherazi in the court of emperor
Akbar, the Great Mughal, introduced books on ethics, mathematics,
astronomy, medicine, logic, history, and theology. Interesting
inventions such as the portable cannon, an instrument for cleaning gun
barrels and self-driven corn mills, apart from organization of Mughal
land revenue policy are attributed to the genius of Sherazi*.* During
Akbar’s reign Muslims and sizeable numbers of Hindus studied Sanskrit
grammar and the books of Vedanta were introduced for Hindu children at
the same places. The reaction of orthodox elements against Akbar was
probably due to the increasing influence of the Shia and of rational
sciences during his reign.[^38]

Dars-i-Nizami of Mullah Nizamuddin
----------------------------------

Although Muslim rulers liberally spent on education, there was no
separate education department, no regular examination system and no
uniform standard to be maintained by authority. It was during the reign
of Aurangzeb Alamgir that a man of religious learning Mulla
Qutab-ud-Din, was encouraged to promote education among the Muslims of
the Subcontinent. One of his descendants, Mulla Nizammuddin prepared a
syllabus of studies in 1748, and introduced it in his*madrasah* at
Farangi Mahal.[^39] The scheme of studies introduced by Mulla
Nizammuddin was known as*Dars-i-Nizami* . Even the present-day
religious*madrasahs* in South Asia follow the pattern of
the*Dars-i-Nizami* in their scheme of studies with certain
modifications.

In his scheme of study Mulla Nizammuddin added certain subjects
of*maaqulat* to the existing texts. Subjects like Arabic grammar, logic,
philosophy, mathematics, and rhetoric were given more weight as compared
to the study of the*Qur’an* and*hadith* . The intended syllabus was
mainly aimed at producing*qazis* ,*muftis* , and legal officials
required by Muslim courts. Persian was the medium of instruction.
Transmitted sciences were given less importance as only two books
of*hadith* ,*Mashariqul Anwar* and*Mishkat,* and two books of*Quranic*
commentary,*Jalalayn* and*Bezavi,* were included in the syllabus.
However, the Farangi Mahalis produced renowned scholars and
intellectuals in the field of both rational and transmitted sciences.
The Farangi Mahal attracted both S*unni* and S*hias* from across
India*.* Farangi Mahalis also fostered the tradition of combining
scholarly and mystic learning. Thus, Sufis were attracted to the Farangi
Mahal to study law that was considered to be the exclusive domain of
the*ulema* [^40] *.* The proximity to the courts was a special feature
of the Farangi Mahlis*ulema,* a tradition which continued in the
nineteenth century. The princes also encouraged this arrangement and
took pride in entertaining the highest number of scholars and
intellectuals. The later rulers did not keep this tradition alive.
Although demand for the*ulem* a of Farangi Mahal declined at courts, yet
Farangi Mahalis earned fame and respect all over India because of their
independent efforts to maintain intellectual standards and keeping the
mystic tradition alive to guard the intellectual heritage of Indian
Muslims.[^41]

Shah Waliullah
--------------

Shah Waliullah was born in 1703 towards the end of the reign of
Aurangzeb. His father, Shah Abdur Rahim, was a leading*alim* of
transmitted sciences and was the patron of*Madrasah Rahimiya* known
after his name. After completing his education he made efforts for
reforms, educational, social, and political. Under educational reforms
he preferred the study of*hadith* to that of rational subjects. He
preached against social evils and un-Islamic practices among Muslims.
Under his social reforms programme, he tried to minimize Shia-Sunni
differences. He stressed the need of*ijtihad.* Instead of strict
adherence to a certain school of thought he preferred to follow the one
best suited to the needs of time.[^42]

Shah Waliullah sought a balanced relationship between the rulers and
religious elites instead of accepting an advisory role for the*ulema* in
the affairs of the state. He proposed that Muslim rulers should be
guided by the religious leadership. The role he proposed for the*ulema*
was contrasted with that of the Farangi Mahali*ulema* . He himself
avoided the role set up by the Farangi Mahali regarding the relationship
between the*ulema* and the rulers of the time. However, he constantly
contacted Muslim rulers to remind them of their obligation in the light
of the*Qur’an* and s*unnah* as he considered it his religious duty. Shah
Waliullah denied the importance of the study of*maaqulat* , calling it
as a source of confusion. He emphasized the study of*manqulat* or
traditional subjects for every Muslim. He translated the*Holy Qur’an*
into Persian to be understood by the common Muslim. Before this the
study and interpretation of the*Qur’an* was considered the exclusively
domain of the*ulema.* Therefore, he faced tough resistance in this
regard from the*ulema* of the time. However, he considered*ijtihad* as
the exclusive domain of the learned scholars. In fact, his personality
was the symbol of tolerance, patience, compromise and forbearance in
Indian Islam.[^43]

Both Shah Waliullah and the*ulema* of Farangi Mahal created stimulation
among the*ulema* to fulfill their historic role of preserving the
cultural heritage of the community in times of political uncertainty.
The tradition of writing among indigenous*ulema* started with the
impetus given by Shah Waliullah and the Farangi Mahali simultaneously.
This gave an increasing role to the*ulema* of the eighteenth century in
Muslim society in India.

Madrasahs under Colonial Rule
-----------------------------

In the eighteenth century modern education was rapidly introduced by the
Europeans in the Subcontinent when the decline of Muslim political power
had already begun. In the changed\` context of socio-political life in
the Subcontinent with the establishment of British rule the*ulema* ’s
role was also to be seen from a different context. Under Muslim rule
the*ulema* had enjoyed special privileges. With the collapse of Muslim
political authority this source of patronage, which strengthened their
claim as representatives and leaders of the community, was lost. In the
changed political context the ordinary Muslim also became more conscious
about the survival of his faith. The study of*fiqh* and*fatwas* of
the*ulema* assumed more importance for the Muslim to ascertain their
role in the new environment. Therefore, a new relationship between
the*ulema* and the common Muslim was established under which the source
of strength for the*ulema* were common Muslims instead of the rulers of
the time. Most of the reformist movements during the eighteenth century
and early nineteenth century were led by*ulema* drawing support from
ordinary Muslims. These movements were influenced by the thoughts of
Shah Waliullah and inspired by the teaching of his son Shah Abdul Aziz.
In 1803 Shah Abdul Aziz issued a*fatwa* declaring India to be
a*Dar-ul-Harb* (an abode of war), exhorting the Muslims to fight for the
emancipation of their religion. He was known as the most excellent
teacher of the*Madrasahs Rahimiya* . His*fatawa* carried great
importance in the daily life of the common Muslims of India.

The administrative and legal changes brought about by the British rulers
brought new challenges for the Muslims of India. The response to these
challenges further increased the importance of the*fatawa* or religious
decrees for ordinary Muslims. In the Muslim state,*fatawa* were the
prerogative of the*mufti* given for the guidance of judges. In colonial
India*fatawa* were directly addressed to the believers who welcomed them
as a form of guidance in the changed circumstances. Ordinary Muslims got
detailed guidance in minute matters concerning everyday life in the form
of these*fatawa* under alien rule.

Though the*fatawa* relating to the political status of India were always
ambiguous and lacked consensus among the*ulema* , yet the contention of
Shah Abdul Aziz that the organization of the Indian state was no longer
in Muslim hands was shared by everyone. In the prevailing situation,
when the state could no longer arrange to administer Muslim law, only
the*ulema* could shoulder this responsibility. They could not force the
compliance to the law but they could offer direction to the faithful on
issues of civil behavior such as trade, inheritance, family relations
and other religious matters.

In post-Mughal India with the need of the community and the facility of
the printing press for publication,*fatwa* became important tools for
teaching adherence to the law, and Muslims felt that Muslim religious
and political life could be fostered through such adherence.[^44] Shah
Waliullah’s followers not only made great contributions in the
intellectual sphere but a class among them, believed in re-establishing
Muslim political power through*ijtihad.* The reform movement started by
Syed Ahmad Barelvi and Shah Ismael was aimed at reforming social life
along with practical*jihad* for the establishment of an Islamic state.
It was inspired by the teachings of Shah Waliullah and his sons Shah
Abdul Aziz and Shah Abdul Qadir. This movement gathered support from the
Muslims of central and northern India. They stressed*tauheed* or oneness
of God and denounced those practices which would compromise that most
fundamental tenet of Islam.

The views of Syed Ahmad and Shah Ismael regarding Sufism and the
position of the Prophet led to sharp differences among the*ulema.* Those
differences finally resulted in the division within the Sunni community
which gave birth to*Ahl-e-Hadith* who are bitterly opposed to Sufism
and*taqlid* (following a particular*imam)* .The other group which drew
inspiration from*mujahidin* organized themselves in the form of the
Deoband school, who believed in*taqlid* and also did not oppose Sufism
completely. Yet another group led by Ahmad Raza Khan of Bareilly
emerged, who opposed both*Ahl-e-Hadith* and*Deobandis* and strongly
insisted on the centrality of Sufism in Islam. They branded both the
groups as*Wahhabis* and the agents of infidels. Each of these three
groups runs a chain of*madrasahs* in Pakistan and India even today,
propagating their own points of view.

British Approach towards Muslim Education
-----------------------------------------

The Muslim education system suffered because of the educational and
administrative policies of the British in the Subcontinent. Deliberate
attempts were made to ruin the Muslim educational system in India under
colonial rule.

The worst steps towards this end were replacing Persian as court
language by English and the confiscation of the free land or trusts by
the East India Company. These lands were endowed by the Muslim nobles
and rulers to give financial support to a large number of*madrasahs.*
[^45]

When the British got power in Bengal there was a very large number
of*muafis* , which is a tax-free grant of land. Many of these were
personal but most were in the shape of endowments for educational
institutions. A vast number of elementary schools of the old type
subsisted on them as well as some institutions of higher education. The
East India Company was anxious to make money rapidly in order to pay
dividends to its shareholders in England. A deliberate policy was
therefore adapted to resume and confiscate these*muafi* lands. Strict
proofs were demanded of the original grants. But the old*sanad* and
papers had long been lost or eaten up by termites. So, the*muafis* were
resumed and the old holders were ejected and the schools and colleges
lost their endowments. Huge areas were resumed in this way and many old
families were ruined. The educational establishments, which had been
supported by these*muafis,* ceased to function and vast numbers of
teachers and others connected with them were thrown out of jobs.[^46]
Thus, with economic dislocation, the Muslim education system was also to
be wiped out. The attitude of the British towards Muslim educational
schools in Bengal has been described by W.W. Hunter, a British official,
in the following words:

At an outlay 800000 pounds upon resumption proceedings additional
revenue of 300000 pounds a year was permanently gained by the state,
representing a capital at five percent of six million sterling. A large
part of this sum was derived from land held rent-free by*Musalman* or by
Mohammadan foundations. The panic and hatred which ensued have stamped
themselves for ever on the rural records. Hundreds of ancient families
were ruined and the education system of the*Musalmans* , which was
almost entirely maintained by rent-free grants, received its death blow.
The scholastic classes of the Muhammadans emerged from eighteen years of
harrying absolutely ruined.[^47]

Thus, Muslims were the target of discriminatory polices in every sphere
of life. They were socially disgraced and economically deprived.
Describing the plight of Indian Muslims in the middle of the nineteenth
century because of the discriminatory policy of British, Hunter says:

I have seldom read anything more piteous than the private letters and
newspaper articles of Bengal*Musalmans* . The Calcutta Persian paper
some time ago wrote thus: all sort of employments, great and small are
being gradually snatched away from the Muhammadans and bestowed on men
of other races, particularly the Hindus. The Government is bound to look
upon all classes of its subjects with an equal eye, yet the time has now
come when it publicly singles out the Muhammadans in its gazettes for
exclusion from official posts. Recently, when several vacancies occurred
in the office of the Sunderbans Commission, that official in advertising
them in the government gazette stated that the appointment would be
given to none but Hindus.[^48]

Several other British officials acknowledged their culpability in
seriously undermining indigenous institutions of education. Ludlow, an
early nineteenth century colonial officer, remarked that before the
arrival of the British most Indian children could read and write. But in
Bengal the extension of British rule had resulted in the almost total
destruction of the indigenous system of education.

Changes in the legal system towards the end of the eighteenth century
further curtailed the role of*ulema* as most of the legal matters
concerning Muslims began to be administrated by British judges, while
the realm of the*ulema* was confined to the personal affairs of Muslims
such as marriage, divorce, inheritance etc, and even in these matters,
the non-Muslims judges could decide the cases. With this, the
opportunities for the*ulema* in government services were considerably
reduced. The replacement of Persian as official language by English
totally isolated*madrasah* students from government employment.
Consequently, two streams of education came into being in colonial
India, one representing the traditional*madrasah* system, confined to
the study of only religious subjects, while the other system came to be
known as secular education under which rational and modern sciences were
to be studied. This rigid separation between religious and secular
education was introduced by the colonial masters. The concept was alien
to Islam itself. Such distinction could not be found before this in the
Muslim world. This is why the early*madrasahs* taught both types of
subjects, i.e. rational as well as traditional.

With limiting*madrasah* education to only religious subjects, the sphere
of influence and role of*ulema* was restricted to matters relating to
private lives of individual Muslims. With the passage of time the
traditional*ulema* behaved in such manner as to be content with the role
they had been given by the colonial rulers as was reflected in their
teaching, in their writing, and the contents of*fatwas* that they
issued, which were concerned with personal piety and conduct, ignoring
the issues of state and polity. Consequently,*madrasahs* of the colonial
period geared up to protect the private sphere of Muslim lives from
outside interference. Their focus and role were different from that of
the earlier*madrasahs* .[^49]

Madrasahs and the Role of the ulema after 1857
----------------------------------------------

The War of 1857 was fought in the name of protection of religion and
Indian culture. Therefore, Muslims and Hindus both participated in this
war and the*ulema* led the revolt in various places. These*ulema* had
been inspired by the teachings of Shah Waliullah. Practical*jihad* had
already been started long before the famous*fatwa* of Shah Abdul Aziz in
which he had declared India a*Darul Harb.* [^50] In the events of 1857 a
large number of*ulema* issued*fatwa* declaring*jihad* against the
infidel foreigners. The*Wahhabis* [^51] remained at the forefront of
uprising and faced tremendous hardships at the hands of the rulers after
the war. A large number of*ulema* were executed and many of them were
exiled to the islands of Andaman for long spells of imprisonment at the
end of the war.[^52]

The followers of Shah Waliullah fully participated in the War of
Independence in 1857. The founders of the Deoband School were among
those who fought against the British in 1857, though this claim has been
contested by some sources.[^53] However, the results of the war of 1857
convinced every one of the futilities of armed struggle under the
prevailing circumstances. Therefore, a major shift took place from
armed*jihad* towards educational*jihad* among the Muslims of the
Subcontinent. During this period the concern of*ulema* remained focused
on reforming the individual lives of Muslims for preserving religious
and cultural life through educational*jihad* . For this purpose,
the*ulema* turned their attention to establishing educational
institutions and training men to teach and guide Muslims of all
backgrounds and classes in the society.

Dar-ul-Ulum- Deoband
--------------------

Dar-ul-Ulum Deoband was founded in Deoband, a small town in the district
of Saharanpur (UP) in 1867. Moulana Muhammad Qasim Nanotawi and Moulana
Rashid Ahmad Gangohi were the founders of*Dar-ul-Ulum Deoband* . The
establishment of*Dar-ul-Ulum* was aimed at securing independence and
freedom of Muslim religion and culture through peaceful means. This was
the first private educational enterprise completely independent of
official interference. Loyalty to*mazhab* remained the tradition
of*Deobandis* , which they claimed to be the traditions of Shah
Waliullah.[^54]  The principle framed by the founders of the Madrasah
embodied complete independence and collective decisions for running the
affairs of*Dar-ul-Ulum* . It also rejected the possibilities of
government interference. In a short span of time*Dar-ul-Ulum Deoband*
became a great seat of learning in the Subcontinent, attracting students
from all over India and even from outside. A network of*madrasahs* also
opened all over India on this pattern preserving and preaching the
ideals of*Dar-ul-Ulum Deoband.*

The curriculum adopted for*madrasahs* was largely based
on*Dars-i-Nizami* with slight modifications. The founders of*Deoband*
laid emphasis on the study of*Qur’an* and*hadiths* and other transmitted
sciences on the pattern of the syllabus adopted by Shah Waliullah in
the*Madrasah Rahimiya* .

In 1869 the period of study was reduced from ten years to six
years. Although not rejecting outright the study of rational sciences or
modern subjects,*Deobandis* were unable to arrange for teaching of
modern subjects inside*Dar-ul-Ulum Deoband* . The behavior of*ulema*
in*Deoband* also did not encourage the trend of studying modern subjects
as they considered the student of religious studies superior to their
counterparts in secular institutions. Yet there were a large number
of*fatwas* justifying the study of modern subjects. This drawback in the
curriculum of*madrasahs* always earned criticism from outside, and
sometimes, from inside these*madrasahs.* [^55] Although training in
crafts and trades had been initially included in the curriculum
of*Deoband,* they got scant attention of the students. However, two
kinds of vocational training such as calligraphy and*tibb* (medical
science) drew great interest from the students. The study of these
subjects was in close conformity with the activities of the*ulema* and
their study enhanced the influence of*ulema* in the society.[^56] Since
the syllabus in*Deoband* was loaded with study of traditional religious
subjects, the students could not give attendance to modern subjects
according to modern needs.

Students were examined at the end of finishing each book. The students
were fairly examined and if one failed a certain book he had to repeat
that particular book and not others. The medium of instruction was Urdu.
Great emphasis was laid on the moral standard of students. Piety and
respect for teachers were highly valued for students. For guidance of
Muslims in their daily life, a separate department*Dar-ul-Ifta* (Center
of Religious Verdicts) was setup at*Dar-ul-Ulum* Deoband.

Contrary to the founders of*Dar-ul-Ulum* Deoband some Muslim leaders
believed that the interests of Muslims of the Subcontinent could not be
protected only through traditional religious education. The most fervent
supporter of this idea was Sir Syed Ahmad Khan. He was convinced that
without modern education the emancipation of Muslims in the Subcontinent
would not be possible. Sir Syed sought drastic reforms in the
educational system that was pursued by traditional*ulema* as well as
their approach towards scientific knowledge. The views of Sir Syed
earned wrath from the traditional religious leaders. His idea of modern
education was opposed and his religious views were strongly condemned.
He was declared apostate and an enemy of Islam because of his
outlook.[^57]

Sir Syed, however, established a modern Muslim educational college to
realize his objectives. In Aligarh College religious subjects were also
taught in the Department of Theology which was usually headed by a
Deobandi scholar. Aligarh College proved to be more than a seat of
learning. It soon became the center of political cultural and literary
life of the Indian Muslims. Scientific society came into being under the
patronage of Aligarh to translate the Western classics into Urdu. This
opened ways for the Muslims to wider experiences of mankind in all
branches of learning.[^58] Efforts were also made to bring close the two
seats of learning. However, the most conservative approach of Deobandis
could not be reconciled with the modern Western style of Aligarh. This
gave rise to two streams of educational systems. These differences also
led to different socio-political trends among Indian Muslims which exist
even today in both India and Pakistan.

Nadvat-ul-Ulama
---------------

Realizing the unbridgeable distance between Deoband and Aligharh, a
group of Muslim moderates pondered over establishing an institution
embodying a balanced approach towards traditional religious subjects and
modern education simultaneously.[^59]

*Nadvat-ul-Ulama* was established in 1891 for the said purpose. Maulana
Muhammad Ali Mungeri the first president of Nadwa*,* while introducing
the organization to the*ulema* in a letter, wrote:

Because it is seen that the graduates of Arabic madrasahs have little
knowledge of the affairs of the world around them and they can do little
else at their age, they remain dependent on the people of the
world*(Ahl-e-Dunya)* and are considered useless in the eyes of the
public. They also do not possess the level of knowledge that they
should. This organization seeks to bring about appropriate reforms in
this regard in all Madrasahs.[^60]

Muhammad Ali Mongeri justified the study of English on the grounds that
the religion of Islam could be easily preached to the Westerner through
their language, which could serve to effectively resist the Western
conspiracy against Islam.[^61] For the guidance of Muslims in daily
life, it also established*Dar-ul-Ifta* , providing*fatwa* on matters of
religious importance. The major goal of the Nadwa remained to defend
Islam by building the character of individual Muslims and to spread
Islam among non-believers.[^62]

The*ulema* of the Nadwa hoped to achieve respect as the champions of
Islam by being powerful and intellectually distinguished. The
administration of Nadwa kept close relations with the British and
accepted financial grants from the government. However, the relations
did not go as far as*Aligharh* in courting British support.
The*madrasah* also received financial support from rulers of various
Muslim princely states and donations from individual Muslim supporters.

The*Nadwa* attracted some of the leading Islamic scholars. Maulana
Shibli*,* a noted*alim* joined the*Nadwa* in 1905. He advocated drastic
reforms by introducing modern subjects in the syllabus so that Muslims
could keep pace with the modern world. The views of Shibli, however,
earned criticism from many*ulema* within the*Nadwa* and he had to leave
the*Nadwa* in 1913 because of this opposition.

Though the main concern of the*Nadwa* was to unite all the mutually
opposing Muslim groups, this objective could not be achieved because of
their mutual antagonism. The*Shiah* were the first to withdraw.
The*Deobandis* distanced themselves from the*Nadwa* because of the
modernist theology of Shibli and its close relations with the
government. The*Barelvi ulema* also opposed*Nadwa* for promoting free
thought and irreligion in their view. Initially, there was close
relationship between Aligarh and the*Nadwa* but this relationship also
remained short-lived.[^63]

*      * The*Nadwa,* although never able to forge national leadership
for the Muslims, neverthless made substantial impact on political
movements in India.  Still, the real accomplishment of the*Nadwa* was
its involvement in the self-conscious dissemination of Muslim beliefs
and practices, the fostering of Urdu as the language of the*ulema,* and
the training of more*ulema. Nadwi ulema* emphasized the teaching of
Arabic and to some extent, theology. Their writing both at*Nadwa* and
its offshoot the*Darul Musannifin* were important contributions to
history, biography, and essay writing in Urdu. In this way the*Nadwa*
provided a common platform to different religious groups for free and
open debate.[^64]

Besides*Deoband* and the*Nadwa* a large number of*madrasahs* were
established by*Ahl-e-Hadith* and*Barelvis* to defend their
respective*maslaks.* Similarly,*Shias* also set up their own*madrasahs*
whose aim was to prepare preachers and religious scholars to defend
the*Shia* tradition from the onslaught of the*Sunni ulema* .

Some*ulema* were of the view that inter-*maslak* rivalries led to Muslim
decline and they pleaded the revival of*ijtihad* to meet the challenges
of modernity. Among these*ulema,* Allama Hamidudin Farahi
established*Madrassat-ul-Islah* in 1909 near Azamgarh*.* Farahi
envisaged the aim of this*madrasah* as to liberate the*ulema* from
inter-*muslak* rivalries and strict adherence to a particular*fiqh* . He
also discouraged the study of medieval*Qur’an* commentaries and exhorted
the students to understand the*Qur’an* directly with the help of
dictionaries. This*madrasah* also made arrangement for the teaching of
mathematics, geography, English and Hindi. Several graduates of
this*madrasah* later occupied senior positions in*Jammat-i-Islami* .
About the main objective of the*madrasah* to liberate the Muslim from
the blind imitation of*fiqh* , a graduate of the*madrasah* lamented that
it promoted the*taqlid* of Farahi’s own understanding of the*Qur’an*
.[^65]

Whatever might be the kind of educational institutions, modern or
traditional, the main focus remained on education and social training
during the second half of the eighteenth century. The political role of
educational movements started with the beginning of the twentieth
century on the eve of growing anti-colonial sentiments in the
Subcontinent and the world over as well.
