2- Madrasahs In Pakistan
========================

Madrasahs and the Pakistan Movement
-----------------------------------

The Aligarh Movement, which had been basically an educational movement,
gradually became a political movement when Sir Syed Ahmad Khan, its
founder, initiated the demand for reservation of seats for the Muslim
community in elected bodies and the representation of Muslims through a
separate electorate. Not satisfied with the performance of the Indian
National Congress as representative of all communities of India, the
supporters of the Aligarh Movement set up their own political
organization, the Muslim League, with the explicit objective of
protecting the rights of the Muslim community. Earlier the stand taken
by Sir Syed for the defense of Urdu (when extremist Hindus tried to
replace it by Hindi as official language in 1867) had determined a
different course to be chosen from that of the Congress for the
protection of the rights of the Muslims of the Subcontinent.[^66] He had
become uneasy at the Congress plan for “democratizing” India. He felt
this would leave Muslims at the mercy of the numerically superior
Hindus. A. Hamid quotes him in the*Aligarh* *Movement* in the following
words:

Ours is a vast country inhibited by diverse folks deeply divided by
racial and religious antagonisms. They lack homogeneity. Different
sections of the population stand at varying levels of cultural
development. So long as religion and caste are the chief props of the
Indian social system, electoral machinery based on the Western pattern
would lead neither to equality nor to fraternity. It would enable the
more advanced sections of the population to hold their less fortunate
countrymen in thralldom. Cultural difference, caste dissentions and
religious wrangling would be more pronounced than ever. Inequalities
would sink deeper in the society.[^67]

The Deobandi*ulema* were content with their socio-religious role until
the end of the nineteenth century. However with the beginning of the
twentieth century they made explicit their political views. The approach
of the*Deoband ulema* to Indian politics differed fundamentally from its
counterpart at Aligarh*.* They believed that geography was the ultimate
determinant of nationalism in the context of India and the concept of
Indian Muslim nationalism contradicted the concept of universal Muslim
nationalism.  On the basis of a mutually antagonistic political
approach, both the educational movements chose different political
platforms during the freedom struggle. While Aligarh aligned itself with
the Muslim League under the leadership of Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the
Deobandi supported the Congress during the freedom movement.[^68]

The gulf between Deoband and Aligarh had widened because Sir Syed had
contributed articles to the Aligarh Institute Gazette denying the
pretensions of Sultan Abdul Hamid[^69]   to the*khilafat* and preaching
loyalty to the British rulers of India, even if they were compelled to
pursue an unfriendly policy towards Turkey, while Deoband was consistent
since the very beginning in its policy of friendship and alliance with
the Sultan of Turkey. The Deobandi still considered India as*Dar-ul-arb*
, but Aligarh saw no sense in it. The gulf between the two Muslim
institutions continued to exist and widen and divided the Muslims of
India into two hostile blocks.[^70]

The situation changed after the First World War when the Muslims of the
Subcontinent launched the*Khilafat* Movement seeking to protect the
Ottoman caliphate from attack by the victorious allies and to prevent
the holy cities of Mecca and Madina from falling under European control.
It is worth noticing that, in the period of Muslim unrest, the Muslim
middle class was in the forefront. Now for the first time Aligarh, the
citadel of the Muslim middle class, was coming closer to Deoband, the
center of proletarian dissatisfaction, in so far as the anti-British
attitude was concerned. However, this was a brief rapprochement between
the followers of both hostile camps.[^71]

Jamiat-ul-ulama-i-Hind
----------------------

The brief rapprochement between Aligarh and Deoband during the*Khilafat*
Movement could not be effected at the upper level and the*uema* ,
mostly*Deobandi,* set up their own organization,*Jamiat-ul-Ulama-i-Hind*
in 1919 to protect the rights of Muslims and preferred to join hands
with Gandhi for the realization of their objective, instead of*Jinnah’s
Muslim League* , whom they thought to be secular and irreligious, using
Islam for secular interests.[^72]

The leaders of*Jamiat-ul-Ulama-i-Hind* claimed that it was a genuine
Muslim organization to safeguard the “*Shariat* ” as well as to give the
Muslim community religious and political guidance according to Islamic
principles and commandments. Among the foremost objectives of this
organization was the protection of the Ottoman caliphate from
dismemberment, the protection of the rights of the Muslims of India and
the liberation of India from alien rule. The*ulema* issued a series
of*fatwas* justifying seeking cooperation of non-Muslims for the
achievements of these objectives.[^73]

The movement to protect the caliphate failed due to various internal and
external reasons but it made the*ulema* think pragmatically about the
political situation of India. The encounter between Deoband and Aligarh
led to the establishment of Jamia Millia Islamia at Dehli in 1920. This
institute was inaugurated by Maulana Mohamood-ul-Hasan, the rector of
Deoband, and supported by activists from Aligarh. It managed to educate
Muslims in both modern as well as traditional religious subjects.[^74]

The aims and objectives of the*Jamiat* , when analyzed, reveal its dual
loyalty to Islam and Islamic countries, on the one hand, and to India,
on the other. They also indicate the utmost emphasis on the “*Sharia* ”,
its preservation and its promulgation which concern the personal lives
of Indian Muslims. The country was to be freed from the foreign yoke not
only because of the democratic right of a nascent India but because of
the religious duty of the Muslims to fight for the freedom of their
motherland. The whole program of the*Jamiat* had to revolve around a
single pivot, i.e. the*Sharia,* which was unchangeable and which could
be correctly understood and interpreted only by the*ulema,* who
considered themselves its custodian and, therefore, the correct leaders
of Muslims could come only from them. This rigid and orthodox stand on
the part of*ulema* was bound to create a rift in the communal life of
Muslims, who, in the course of time were led to depend more upon the
leadership of their western educated intelligentsia. This rift was
sharpened by the communal attitude of the Hindus, who being in an
overwhelming majority, were considered by middle class Muslims to be a
threatening force to their legitimate rights in an independent
India.[^75]

Consequently, the*Deobandi ulema* chose to support the Congress instead
of the Muslim League in the political struggle. They disputed the
league’s two-nation theory and repeatedly questioned the religious
credentials of the League’s leadership, and particularly, Jinnah. The
rector of the Deoband*madrasah, Maulana* Husian Ahmed Madani*,* argued,
that in Islam nationality was determined by common homeland and not by
religion, the claim strongly contested by Allama Mohammad Iqbal*.*
Giving an example from the life of the Holy Prophet, Madani claimed that
the state set up by the Holy Prophet in Madina gave equal rights to
Muslims, Jews and pagan Arabs, and all of them were regarded as the
members of one*ummah* or community. Therefore, according to this
principle, all Muslims and Hindus of India were members of a common
nation. Most of the Deobandi believed that in free and united India,
Muslims would be able to lead their personal lives in accordance with
the*Sharia,* while also co-operating with people of other faiths in
matters of common concern.[^76]

The*ulema* were in favor of unconditional co-operation with the Congress
so far as the cause of freedom was concerned. They claimed that once the
British regime was dissolved, the Hindus would come to terms with the
Muslims who formed a strong minority and could not be deprived of their
legitimate rights. They also believed that it was the British Government
which was chiefly responsible for the bitter communal bickering and for
creating a sort of fear complex in the minds of Muslims. Its very
existence in India was the cause of all ills in the Indian body politic,
and it must come to an end. Moreover, their loyalty to Islam and Islamic
countries also demanded the immediate end of British rule in India. They
thought that the hold on rich India made it possible for the British to
rule over the Muslim countries in the Middle East. The enslavement of
India was the cause of British supremacy over all the lands through
which the strategic line of imperial communication passed. Therefore,
the independence of India meant the liberation of a vast Muslim
area.[^77]

The free India that the pro-Congress*Deobandi* envisioned would be a
federation of a number of culturally autonomous religious communities.
Each community would administer its own internal affairs in accordance
with its religious laws. The federal government which would have
adequate Muslim representation would pass no laws that might seem
injurious to the religious interests of any community.[^78]

In addition to the traditional*Deobandi* , a renowned reformist*alim,*
Shibli Nu’mani, an ardent supporter of pan-Islamism also welcomed the
Congress and its demand for broad-based unity among the various
religious communities in India. He was critical of the Muslim league for
its narrowly conceived political base and won over the support of
other*Nadvi ulama* to the Congress. One of the Shibli’s students, Syed
Sulaiman Nadvi, declared that the liberation of India from the British
is more important than any other religious obligation of Indian
Muslims.[^79] The western-educated intelligentsia, particularly the
league leadership, in turn believed that the*ulema* were not capable of
giving correct leadership in politics to the Muslims. Their plea was
that, the*ulema* because of their exclusively traditional education and
complete ignorance of the complexities of modern life did not understand
the nature of politics as such in the twentieth century. Their sphere of
activity was religious and to that end they were expected to confine
themselves. Commenting on the role of Muslim League, Jinnah is reported
to have said to Aligarh in 1937:

What the league has done is to set you free from the reactionary
elements of Muslims and to create the opinion that those who play their
selfish game are traitors. It has certainly freed you from those
undesirable elements of*Maulvis* and*Maulanas* . I am not speaking
of*Mualavis* as a whole class. There are some of them who are as
patriotic and sincere as any others but there is a section of them which
is undesirable.[^80]

Thus, there were apparent reasons why the*Jamiat* and the League could
not be united. Both, although sincere towards the welfare of the Muslim
community, had different approaches to this idea. Therefore, they often
distrusted each other.

The Two-Nation Theory of the Muslim League was provided with an
emotional vigor and intellectual content by the poet-philosopher
Mohammad Iqbal, whose appeal to the Muslim youth was more forceful than
that of the traditional*ulema* . His approach towards the Indian problem
was based on reality and he solicited the support of Indian Muslims for
the Muslim League.[^81] The*Jamiat-ul-ulama i-Hind* never conceded the
doctrine of the two nation theory as propounded by the League. This was
the base of all the League-Jamiat differences. In June 1940, while
presiding over the annual session of the*Jamiat-ul-Ulema* at Jaunpur
(U.P), Maulana Hussain Ahmed Madani reiterated his commitment to united
Indian nationalism.[^82] This League-Jamiat difference brought Deoband
and Aligarh at opposite poles. When Deoband vehemently opposed
partition, Aligarh turned out to be the training center
of*Mujahidin-i-Pakistan* . It is meaningful to note that the major
centers of Muslims education, i.e. Deoband and Aligarh in India,
representing two different trends in the politico-intellectual life of
Indian Muslims since their very beginning, finally collided against each
other in molding the ultimate destiny of the Muslims in the Indian
Subcontinent.

The Deoband leadership opposed the demand for Pakistan also from the
viewpoint of the difficulties its realization would involve in the
missionary activities of the Muslims. They believed that because of the
Muslim League demand for a separate homeland the atmosphere of hatred
created between Hindus and Muslims would hamper the missionary
activities of Islam.

Above all, Deoband was convinced that the Western-educated League
leadership was exploiting the fair name of Islam for the worldly gain of
Muslim vested interests. The credibility of the League’s leadership was
questioned for establishment and building of a truly Islamic state.[^83]

History reveals that religion played a vital role in promoting national
unity. When coupled with social and economic forces it created powerful
national movements. Since the movement for Pakistan was rooted in
social, cultural, and religious distinctions between Muslims and Hindus,
one might logically expect that Muslim religious parties would have
played a major rule in mobilizing the Muslim masses to support the
Pakistan Movement. Contrary to this, with very few exceptions, the
religious parties bitterly opposed Jinnah and the demand for Pakistan.
The Barelvi was, however, the only group to support the Muslim league in
its demand for Pakistan and wholeheartedly opposed the Congress as
anti-Muslim.[^84]

The pre-partition position of religio-political parties on the Pakistan
question contrasts with their present position on religious nationalism.
The*Jamiat-ul-Ulama* stand on the question of Partition was explicitly
in favor of a united India. Maulana Maudoodi and the*Jamiat-i-Islami*
had rejected nationalism because in his view it led to selfishness,
prejudice, and pride. He declared that the demand for Pakistan was
un-Islamic and condemned Jinnah for his un-Islamic habits and
mentality.[^85] The*Jamiat* opposed both the League and Congress.
Another religio-political party, the*Majlis-i-Ahrar,* took a similar
position. However, unlike the*Jamaat,* it was aligned with the
Congress.*Jamaat-i-Islami* ,*Jamiat-ul-Ulama-i-Hind* ,*Majlis-i-Ahrar*
and*Khaksar* considered Jinnah as an agent of the British and the worst
enemy of Islam.[^86]

A rather curious situation confronted the religio-political parties when
Pakistan became a reality in 1947. As they had opposed the very creation
of Pakistan, these religious groups had to adopt themselves to the
changed environment in the newly established Muslim-majority independent
state.[^87]

Leading Muslim religious elites preferred to migrate to Pakistan after
Partition. The Deoband influence had already reached the areas then the
parts of Pakistan. The Barelvi*ulema* and the founder of
the*Jamaat-i-Islami,* Maulana Maudoodi*,* also migrated to Pakistan
after Partition and started religious activities with Karachi and Lahore
as their bases. Subsequently, all the religious groups established their
own*madrasahs* and also organized themselves politically. In present-day
Pakistan the*Jamiat-ul-Ulama-i-Islam* ,*Jamiat-ul-Ulama-i-Pakistan*
,*Jamaat-i-Islami,* and*Jamiat Ahl-e-Hadith* represent the cause
of*Ulama-i-Deoband* ,*Barelvi,* Maudoodi and*Wahhabi* thought,
respectively.

Growth of madrasahs since 1947
------------------------------

At the time of independence very few*madrasahs* existed in Pakistan
because leading centers of Islamic education were situated in other
parts of India. Pakistan inherited a meager 200-odd*madrasahs,* which as
per the government’s conservative estimates has now increased to over
17,000, although some analysts put this number at 25-30,000. These
religious schools are catering to about 2.5 to 3 million students and
employ thousands of*mullahs* as teachers, mentors, and instructors.[^88]

A key drive of growth in the*madrasah* sector is said to be poverty, an
endemic problem of all developing countries, the menace which the
successive governments in the last six decades have vowed to eliminate
but failed even to reduce to a manageable level. Interestingly, on the
one hand, the country has struggled to improve enrolment in formal
schools and has been grappling with the problem of large scale drop-outs
at primary and secondary levels. On the other hand, there is a stiff
competition going on in the rural areas where Pakistan’s majority of
poor live to enroll children in*madrasahs* normally situated in
cosmopolitan cities and suburban areas. There are three main types of
religious institutions in Pakistan: Quranic schools (where only
the*Qur’an* is taught), mosque schools (where both quranic and secular
subjects are taught), and*madrasahs* (where only Islamic learning takes
place).[^89]

The mission of the*madrasahs* in Pakistan is to prepare students for
religious duties. Adhering to strict religious teachings*madrasahs*
teach Islamic subjects such as the*Qur’an* , Islamic law, and
jurisprudence, logic and prophetic traditions.*Hafiz-i-Qur’an* (the one
who memorizes the*Holy Qur’an* ) or*Qari* (the one who can recite
the*Holy Qur’an* correctly and in a melodic tone) are produced at the
lower level of*madrasahs.* The higher level of*madrasahs* produces*alim*
(the Islamic scholar or teacher). An*alim* certificate from a*madrasahs*
is equivalent to an M.A. degree in Islamic studies or Arabic from a
regular university.[^90]

There are five Islamic schools of thought in Pakistan who operate their
own systems of*madrasahs.* They are*Deobandi, Barelvi, Ahl-e-Hadith,
Jamaat-i-Islami* and*Shia* . Each of these schools of thought organized
these*madrasahs* under different boards, responsible for registration,
conduct of examination, and syllabus.

The names of these boards are as follows:[^91]

### Wafaq-ul-Madaris Al-Arabia:

###

This board of*Sunni Deobandi* institutions was established in 1959 and
has its center in Multan.

### Tanzim-ul-Madaris:

###

This board of*Sunni Barelvi* institutions was established in 1960 and
has its center in Lahore.

### Wafaq-ul-Madaris Shia:

###

This board of*Shia* institutions was established in 1959 and has its
center in Lahore.*Shia* *madaris* teach*fiqh Jafria* named after*Imam*
Jafer Sadiq while other*madaris* in Pakistan teach*fiqh Hanafia.*

### Rabitah-ul-Madris-ul-Islamia:

###

This board was established by the*Jamaat-i-Islami* in 1983, and
recognizes the*madrasahs* of all Islamic thought. They teach more modern
subjects. It has its center in Lahore.

### Wafaq-ul-Madaris-Al-Salfia:

###

This board was established by*Ahl-e-Hadith* in 1955 and has its center
in Faisalabad.

Table - 2.1

REIs: Affiliation with various Boards, 1988-2000

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="25%" />
<col width="25%" />
<col width="25%" />
<col width="25%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>Organization</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>1988</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>2000</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Pp Percentage Inrecase</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>Waqaf-al-Madaris al-Arabia (Hanafi,Deobandi)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>1840</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>1947</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>6</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>Tanzim-al-Madaris (Hanafi, Barelvi)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>717</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>1363</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>90</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>Waqaf-al-Madaris al-Salafia (Ahl-e-Hadith)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>161</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>310</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>93</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>Waqf-al-Madaris al Shia`a</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>47</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>297</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>532</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>Rabitah-al-Madaris al-Islamia (Mansoora)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>-</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>191</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>-</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>Others (Not  Affiliated)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>96</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>2653</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>2664</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>Total</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>2861</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>6761</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>136</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Source: Ministry of Education Islamabad, 1988, 2000

The two main sects of Sunni Islam,*Deobandi* and*Barelvi,* dominate
the*madrasah* system in Pakistan. They originated in the colonial Indian
Subcontinent in response to the perceived imperial plot to destroy Islam
and its followers by enforcing its own version of education.
The*Deobandi* sect is considered the most conservative and
anti-Western.[^92]

The courses in religious*madrasahs* are spread over 16 years and are
divided into six grades. The primary and middle grades are of five and
three years duration, respectively, while the next two grades are of
five years duration each.*Darja Ibtidai* consists of five years duration
and is equivalent to primary level of the mainstream education
system.*Darja Mutawassit* is of three years duration and is equivalent
to middle level.*Darja Sania Aama* is of two years duration and is
equivalent to matriculation.*Darja Sania Khasa* ,*Darja Aalia*
and*Darja* *Alamia* are of two years duration each and are equivalent to
intermediate, Bachelor, and Master Levels, respectively. The following
table shows the religious education system and its equivalence with the
mainstream education system.[^93]

REIs Grades of Education;   Table 2.2

Grade

Level

Class

Duration

Equivalence with Mainstream Education Sys.

Ibtidai

Nazira (Primary)

1 - 5

5 years

Primary

Mutawassita

Hifz (Middle)

6 - 8

3 years

Middle

Sania Aama

Tajwid, Qirat (Secondary)

9 - 10

2 years

Matriculation

Sania Khasa

Tehtani (Higher Sec)

11-­­12

2 years

Intermediate

Aalia

Moquf Allah (College)

13- 14

2 years

Bachelor

Alamia

Dora-e-Hadith (Uni.)

15- 16

2 years

Master

REIs stand for religious education institutions

Curriculum in Traditional Pakistani Madrasahs
---------------------------------------------

The syllabus in almost all traditional*madrasahs* conforms to the basic
structure and scholarly standard of the*Dars-e-Nizami* . Although
different schools of thought adopted it with certain modifications, yet
the focus remains on the teaching of traditional religious subjects. A
typical model of what is taught in*madrasahs* in Pakistan is given as
follows.[^94]

First Year:  Biography of the Prophet (PBUH) (*Syrat* ), grammar (s*arf*
) syntax (*nahv* ), Arabic literature, calligraphy, chant illation
(*tajvid)* .

Second Year:          Conjugation-grammer (s*arf)* , syntax (*nahv* ),
Arabic literature, jurisprudence (*fiqh* ), logic, calligraphy (*khush
navisi* ), chant illation (*tajvid).*

Third Year: Quranic exegesis, jurisprudence (*fiqh)* syntax (*nahv* ),
Arabic literature,*hadith,* logic, Islamic brotherhood, chant
illation*(tajvid* ).

Fourth Year:           Quranic exegesis, jurisprudence (*fiqh* ),
principles of jurisprudence, rhetoric,*hadith* , logic, history, chant
illation (*tajvid* ), geography of the Arabian Peninsula.

Fifth Year:  Quranic exegesis, jurisprudence, rhetoric, beliefs
(*aqaid)* , logic, Arabic literature, chant illation.

Sixth Year: Interpretation of the Qur’an, jurisprudence, principles of
interpretation and jurisprudence, Arabic literature, philosophy, chant
illation, study of Prophetic traditions.

Seventh Year:         Sayings of the Prophet (PBUH), jurisprudence,
belief (*aqaid),* responsibilities (*fraiz* ), chant illation, external
study (Urdu texts)

Eighth Year:           Ten books by various authors focusing on the
sayings of the Prophet (PBUH).

The course of study in all*madrasahs* except that of the*Shia* revolves
around the teaching of*Hanafi fiqh* . Most of the texts are 500 or more
years old. These texts are taught with the help of commentaries and
super commentaries and glosses or marginal notes (*hashiya* ), penned by
medieval*Hanafi ulema* for South Asian students, who do not know Arabic
well. They no longer explain the original text. They are in Arabic. They
have to be learnt by heart, which makes students use only their memory,
not their analytical powers. Thus, the system functions on the
assumption that it should preserve the tradition of the past. This led
to the stagnation and ossification of knowledge under the*Dars-i-Nizami*
which earned the criticism not only from Western educated critics but
also from Arabic-knowing authorities such as Maulana Maudoodi.[^95]
Pakistani*madrasahs* lay heavy emphasis on the teaching of Arabic and
Persian languages. The languages in Pakistani*madrasahs* are not taught
for their intrinsic worth but because they facilitate mastery of the
religion and because they are necessary for an*alim.* For this reason,
Arabic occupies the center stage. Persian, which was socially and
academically necessary in Muslim India, still forms part of the
curriculum. Urdu is generally the medium of instruction in
Pakistani*madrasahs.* However, in the Pashto-speaking part of the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, Pashto is the medium of instruction, while Sindhi is the
medium of instruction in*madrasahs* in Sindhi- speaking parts of Sindh.
Urdu is, indeed, the language in which*madrasah* students become most
competent and is the medium of instruction in most*madrasahs.*

Refutation of Other Sects Radd
------------------------------

A major aspect of the course of study in most of*Pakistani madrasahs* is
refutation or*radd* of other sects. Sectarian violence in Pakistan in
the recent past has been attributed to this aspect of*madrasah*
education. The sectarian divide has become sharper and more violent in
the society because of the inculcation of bias against other beliefs
among the followers by the respective sects.[^96]

The theological debate (*munazra* ) was the feature of religious sects
in colonial India which led to the exchange of invective and scuffles
among the followers of main debaters but never turned to terrorism as
witnessed in Pakistan’s recent history. Though the administration
of*madrasahs* usually deny the teaching of any text refuting the beliefs
of other sects, they refute other sects through question and answer,
interpretation of texts and sometimes teachers recommend supplementary
reading material specifically for the refutation of the doctrines of
other sects and sub-sects. In most cases, in writings, sermons and
conversations, teachers refer to the pioneers of their own “*maslaks”*
so that the views of their sect are internalized and become the primary
way of thinking.[^97]

Despite all denials, the printed syllabus of different sects contains
the books to refute the beliefs of other sects. The report on the
religious seminaries of 1988 lists several books of*Deobandi madrasahs*
to refute*Shia* beliefs. There are several books on the debates between
the*Barelvis* and the*Deoband* and even a book refuting Maudoodi's
views. The Barelvis have named only one book: “*Rashidiya* ” under the
heading of preparation for debates on controversial issues.
The*Ahl-e-Hadith* has given a choice of opting for any two of the
following courses. The political system of Islam, the economic system of
Islam, “*Ibn-e-Khaldun,s Muqaddamah* ”, the history of ideas and
comparative religious systems. The*Shia* courses list no book on this
subject.[^98]

Recently published courses list no book on “*maslak* ” for Deobandis.
The*Barelvi* mention comparative religions but no specific books.
The*Ahl-e-Hadith* retains the same courses as before. The*Shia
madrasahs* list books that include comparative religions, though*Shia*
beliefs are taught as the only true ones. Polemical pamphlets claiming
that there are conspiracies against the*Shias* are available. Similar
pamphlets, warning about alleged*Shia* deviations from the right
interpretation of faith are also in circulation among the*Sunni
madrasahs* .[^99]

Moreover, some guide books for teachers note that Quranic verses about
controversial issues should be taught with great attention and students
should memorize them. In one*Barelvi* book it is specified that teachers
must make the students note down interpretations of the*ulema* of their
sub-sect concerning beliefs and controversial issues, so that students
can use them later, i.e. as preachers and*ulema* .[^100]
The*Jamaat-i-Islami* syllabus (2002) mentioned additional books
by*Maulana Maudoodi* and other intellectuals of the*Jamaat* on a number
of subjects including the*hadith* and comparative religions.

The Refutation of Heretical Beliefs and Alien Philosophies
----------------------------------------------------------

To counter the heresies within the Islamic world and outside influence
is the traditional role of*madrasahs* . Several books refuting the
beliefs of*Ahmedis* (*Qadianis* )[^101] are included in the*Aliya* (BA)
course of*Deobandi* . The*Barelvis* and*Ahl-i-Hadith* , have no such
books. However, they refute the beliefs of*Ahmedi* through the course of
comparative religions. The*Jamat-i-Islami* has also included in its
course four books to refute the beliefs of the*Qadiani.* These books are
written is Urdu in a polemical style.[^102]

Most religious*madrasahs* refute Greek philosophy and Western thought.
The*Deobandi* have several books refuting capitalism, socialism, and
feudalism. The*Jamat-i-Islami* strongly refutes Western political and
economic ideas and the influence of Western culture on the Muslim world.
Though not necessarily taught in the*madrasah* , such literature is
found circulated by almost all sects.[^103]

Students of Traditional madrasahs
---------------------------------

While traditional*madrasahs* attracted people from all social classes
during the*Mughal* and*Sultanate* period, now these*madrasahs* cater for
the children of the lower middle class, the peasantry, and the poor with
few exceptions.[^104]   This shift in student composition owes largely
to the fact that education in a traditional*madrasah* is no longer seen
as providing its students with skill needed for lucrative occupations.
Well-off Muslims might send their children to part-time “*maktab* ” as
well as regular schools or might arrange for an a*lim* to come to their
homes to teach them the*Qur’an* , and the Islamic rituals but few send
them to full time*maktabs* or*madrasahs.*

As the Muslim education system characterizes rigid dualism between
traditional*madrasahs* and modern schools, it is important to note that
a fairly large number of middle-class families send one of their sons
to*madrasah* and the rest to regular schools. Some families known for
their Islamic scholarship also carry on in an ancestral tradition by
having at least one son trained as an*alim* , while others are educated
in schools and colleges.

The students of*madrasahs* belong to families having emotional
attachment with the particular school of thought*(maslak* ) that
the*madrasah* represents. The followers of different sects always oppose
each other and cannot make a united homogeneous group. Because of weak
economic and social backgrounds the students are often reactionary and
inflexible in their attitude and seek extremist ways for the realization
of their ideological goals.[^105] Their understanding of the modern
world is limited because teaching of modern subjects, games, literature,
art and extra curricular activities are always ignored in most of
the*madrasahs.* [^106]

Apart from*madrasahs* in rural areas the majority of students
in*madrasahs* in major cities of Pakistan also hail from rural areas. In
Karachi the*madrasah* students represent all the districts of Pakistan.
Pashto-speaking students always outnumber any other community. The
graduating students are normally 17 to 27 years old. The girl students
are on average younger than the boys. One reason for this is that their
course duration is shorter than that of boys.[^107] Larger*madrasahs*
attract students from different parts of the country and from different
communities. Therefore, they help to promote a sense of Muslim unity and
representing internal division on the basis of*maslak* at the same time.

Admission to a traditional*madrasah* is relatively informal. While some
have an entrance examination and fixed quotas at each level, others are
more flexible. Larger*madrasahs* have specific dates for application for
admission, usually soon after the fasting month of Ramzan. The schedule
of admission is advertised through leaflets and wall posters. In
smaller*madrasah* the procedure is much simpler and the students can
join at any time of the year. They may not be able to afford to issue
advertisements, in which case news of admissions is spread simply by
word of mouth. Most*madrasahs* have a somewhat open admission policy
with no rigid entrance requirements. Most*madrasahs* charge no fee and
also provide food, hostel accommodation and books free of cost.[^108]
Thus,*madrasahs* also serve as a kind of orphanage for those having no
elders or relatives.

The students of traditional*madrasahs* are taught strict adherence to
the rules of conduct or*adab.* Dress, food and behavior are regulated
according to the*Sharia* and the students are expected to observe them
faithfully. Western clothes are frowned upon, and students are expected
to grow their beards when they come of age, in imitation of the Prophet
(PBUH). The students are more obedient and pay more respect to their
teachers as compared to their counterparts in modern educational
institutions.[^109] However, in practice, modernization also affects the
students of*madrasahs* . Many*ulema* nowadays complain about the
deterioration of the moral standard of*madrasah* students. Increasing
materialism and modernization of media are said to be responsible for
the deteriorating moral standard of*madrasahs* students.

Graduates of traditional*madrasahs* take up a range of occupations. Many
of them go on to teach in their own or another*madrasah* . Some of them
join the armed forces of Pakistan as religious teachers and*khatibs* .
They also get jobs in secondary and higher secondary educational
institutions as teachers of Islamic studies and Arabic language[^110]
while some of them join family businesses or setup*unani* medicine
clinics. The graduates of*madrasahs* usually maintain links with
their*alma* *mater* in various ways. They encourage others to enroll in
the*madrasah* , circulate*madrasah* literature representing the
religious-political views of the particular*madrasah* , and also collect
donations for the*madrasahs* from the public. Thus, the students of
the*madrasahs* are an asset throughout their lives.

Teachers of Madrasahs
---------------------

In almost all traditional*madrasahs* no rigid rules are applied for the
recruitment of teachers. They are often appointed through personal
networks and serve as long as the administrator of the*madrasah* is
satisfied with their performance. All*madrasahs* employ those teachers
who belong to that particular “*maslak* ” which the*madrasah*
represents.

Generally, the teachers have the qualification of*alim* or*fazil* course
from the traditional*madrasahs* , without having any specialized teacher
training. They get meager salaries. The average salary of*madrasah*
teacher was two thousand rupees in 2004.[^111] Because of financial
constraints many teachers are forced to supplement their income through
other means, such as giving tuitions, hiring*imamat* (leading prayer),
lecturing in religious meetings, preparing amulets (*ta’wiz* ) or
working on collection of donations for*madrasah* on commission. Besides
poor service conditions and low salaries the unlimited authority of the
administration is responsible for the failure of*madrasahs* to attract
the best teachers.

In traditional*madrasahs* there are no rules for the protection of
service. Therefore, the administrators of*madrasahs* often impose strict
discipline and undue restrictions which curtail the freedom of
expression among the teachers. Sometimes, the administrators interfere
in their personal lives and exploit their compulsions. In
traditional*madrasahs* the teacher student relationship is generally
authoritarian, but deeply personal at the same time, somewhat like
between a father and son. It often resembles the hierarchical yet close
bond between a spiritual preceptor and his disciples. The teacher is
considered to be a model for the student to emulate faithfully. Students
are taught to hold their teachers in awe and reverence for through them
they acquire the knowledge that they believe hold the key to their
salvation in this world and in the next. Intricate rules of proper
conduct governing relations between teachers and students are elaborated
upon in special texts on*madrasah* pedagogy which are often part of
the*madrasah* syllabus. Students even serve the teachers to the extent
of washing their clothes and massaging their bodies. In turn the
teachers are expected to treat their students as their children. In
practice, however, some deviations take place from the established norms
as some of the teachers are most authoritative and least tolerant in
dealings with their students.[^112]

Methods of Teaching
-------------------

Traditional*madrasahs* follow centuries-old methods of teaching in which
the text is the center of all activities instead of the student.
Typically, the teacher sits on a low platform, reclining against a
bolster, while the student sit below him on mats spread on the floor,
placing their books on low tables in front of them. The teacher reads
out from the text and asks the students to take turns in reading aloud,
and then explains the content of the portions read out. The text is
usually in Arabic and the teacher comments on it in Urdu. Although
questioning is allowed, dissent and debate are usually unlinked and
sometimes discouraged. The study of books of rival*maslaks* is strongly
opposed in most*madrasahs* and even leads to expulsion from
the*madrasah.* [^113] This highly restricts the field of study for
students and, therefore, most*madrasah* students have little enthusiasm
for intellectual research and hardly any expertise in any discipline.
Rote learning is emphasized even in purely subjective courses. Students
are also encouraged to learn by heart entire speeches on a range of
subjects that they occasionally deliver to public congregations or to
gatherings at mosques. Great stress is laid upon the intricate problems
of Arabic grammar while the application of knowledge for the solution of
problems of contemporary needs is generally ignored.[^114]
Consequently,*madrasahs are* usually unable to produce broad-minded and
intellectually enriched personalities who have a pragmatic approach
towards the changed environment in which they have to adjust themselves.
Therefore, leading*madrasahs* now feel the need of reform in their
teaching methods.

In a seminar of*Madaris-i-Arabia* held in*Dar-ul-Uloom Deoband* on
October 29, 1994 a unanimous resolution was passed in which appeal was
made to all*madaris* to bring meaningful reforms in teaching methods to
enable students to adjust themselves to the changing environment.[^115]

Management of Madrasahs
-----------------------

Traditional*madrasahs* are individual enterprises in Pakistan.
Larger*madrasahs* are, however, run by an elaborate hierarchy of
functionaries. At the apex is the s*arparast* (Chancellor), who is also
often the founder of the*madrasah* or his successor, in which case he is
generally a direct descendant of the founder. Below him is the*muhtamim*
(Vice Chancellor), who is followed by the s*adar madrasah* (Dean) and
teachers of different subjects. The senior most teacher is the
s*heikh-ul-hadith* who teaches the books of*hadith* to senior students.
The rector of the*madrasah* is assisted in his work by a committee of
elders (*shura* ) consisting of senior*ulema* and teachers, and
sometimes of notable Muslims including rich traders, philanthropists and
important donors. The members of the*shura* are generally appointed by
the s*arparast* . Although, in theory, staff appointments are made
strictly on the basis of merit and piety, often the management
of*madrasahs* is in the hands of the families of their founders. In many
cases the founder of the*madrasah* appoints his own sons or close
relatives as his successor. Likewise,*madrasah* rectors often select
their own son or close relative or other members of their own caste as
senior teachers. Thus, many*madrasahs* come to be seen as family
ventures with key posts and access to funds being limited to a narrow
circle of friends and relatives, many of whom may not have the religious
or intellectual skill needed for the important posts that they handle.

In theory, elaborate rules govern the management of*madrasahs* and all
decisions are supposed to be taken through discussion and consensus. In
practice, however, things are always very different. The managers and
administrators often override the decision-making process for their
personal interests. The report of leading psychologists of the Pakistan
Institute of Medical Sciences reveals that the cult culture grown inside
the*Jamia-Hafsa* [^116] under the influence of its administrators was
responsible for the clash of its students with society and with the
state. The report also recommended that seminaries need to be under the
education department so that individuals may not use them for their
personal interest.[^117]

Many of the people in the religious circles also complain that most of
traditional*madrasahs* have degenerated into dens of corruption,
nepotism, and dirty politics because of the obsession with power and
wealth of their administrators.

Madrasah Finances
-----------------

Traditional*madrasahs* have run on self-help basis from the time of
colonial rule. These*madrasahs* rely on a variety of sources to meet
their expenses. The vast majority depend on local funds which are
generated from within the community. Many*madrasahs* have land or
property endowed to them as*waqfs* from which they earn some income.
Appeals are regularly issued by*madrasah* authorities to Muslims to
contribute in cash or kind to the*madrasah* as a religious duty in the
form of*zakat* or*sadaqa* . Such appeals appear in the publications
of*madrasahs.* In posters put up on boards outside mosques and on walls
in Muslim localities. On the occasion of*Bakr-e* -*Eid* , students are
sent out to the houses of local Muslims to collect the skins of
slaughtered animals which are sold to leather merchants. The money is
given to the*madrasah.* Some people make donations to*madrasah* as an
act of piety. This is done in different ways i.e. constructing a room in
a*madrasah* or donating fans or coolers or any other items of common use
to*madrasahs* simply to earn the blessing of God for himself or for
deceased relatives. The peasants of the localities also contribute in
kind of grains after harvest to help run the local*madrasahs* . In
smaller*madrasahs* teachers and even students are sent to neighboring
towns and villages to collect donations in cash and in kind.
Larger*madrasahs* appoint special staff to collect funds for
the*madrasah* on commission.[^118] Beside this the administrators also
accept financial help from those who earn illegal money which negatively
affects the integrity of*ulema* . The proper use of funds is also not
often ensured.[^119]

Government Financial Support
----------------------------

The Government of Pakistan provides financial support to
those*madrasahs,* which register themselves for such help. The Ministry
of “*auqaf* ” and Religious Affairs manage*madrasah* affairs. However,
the funds provided by the Government of Pakistan to*madrasahs* is
negligible as compared to the funds earmarked for government educational
institutions. According to details provided by Institute of Policy
Studies the government provided fifteen lacs of rupees to
religious*madrasahs* of Pakistan during the financial year 2000 to 2001.
This amount if divided by the number of students comes roughly equal to
one and half rupees per student per year.[^120]

In 2001-02 the government initiated a*madrasah* reform program at the
cost of Rs.5759.395 millions for modernizing the curriculum
of*din-i-madaris* by introducing modern subjects, i.e. general science,
social studies and computer science. In 2001-02 a total of Rs.1, 654,000
was given to all*madrasahs* which accepted this help. As the number of
students are 1,065,277, this amount to Rs.1.55 per student per year. An
additional aid of Rs.30.45 million was promised for providing for
computers and changing the syllabus in 2003-04 and this comes to
Rs.28.60 per student per year.[^121] However, since all*madrasahs* do
not accept financial help from government, the money is not distributed
evenly as the above calculation might suggest.

Madrasahs and Society
---------------------

*Madrasahs* in Pakistan are not simply educational institutions but
social institutions as well.*Madrasahs* are linked to the wider
community through the*ulema* who serve there and play a variety of
functions in society. Thus,*madrasahs* play a vital role in protecting
the socio-religious traditions of Muslims in the Subcontinent since the
colonial era. A major role of*madrasahs* is to provide guidance to the
general Muslim public. The*ulema* connected with the*madrasahs* closely
interact with Muslims outside the*madrasah* in their capacity as
specialists in Islamic law and theology. The public often seek the
opinions of*ulema* in matters relating to marriage, divorce and
inheritance. They are invited to preside over community functions and
their names often figure on the boards of various community
organizations. They might be requested to solemnize weddings and lead
prayers during important festivals, marriages and burials.*Madrasahs*
provide “*imams* ” and “*khatibs* ” to almost all the mosques in the
country. The teachers and students might travel the nearly localities,
instructing Muslims in matters relating to virtues and vices.

Some religious organizations having affiliation with a network
of*madrasahs* such as*Jamaat-u-Dawa, Jamaat-i-Islami,*
and*Tahrik-e-Minhaj-ul-Qur’an* actively take part in providing social
services in society.[^122]

A particularly important function of many*madrasahs* is to
deliver*fatwas* in response to specific requests from the public.
Several*madrasahs* have arrangements for separate*Darul-Ifta* offices
where “*muftis* ” deliver*fatwas* . Requests for*fatwas* come from the
public.*Fatwas* are often sought regarding social matters such as
marriage, divorce, inheritance, taking interest, or the proper methods
of performing various rituals. Sometimes*fatwas* are also sought
relating to the national or international developments, such as
the*fatwa* delivered by many*ulema* of different*madrasahs* to boycott
purchase of American products after the American attack on Afghanistan
in 2001.

*Fatwas* are not binding, though for many Muslims they carry great
prestige, as authoritative statements claiming to represent the
authentic Islamic position on a particular matter. Still some*fatwas* do
not get the favor of the public. Such as the*fatwa* declaring modern
banking as un-Islamic by many*ulema* gets little public support.
Some*madrasahs* regularly publish their collection of*fatwas* in the
form of voluminous compendia which are then made available for sale to
the general public.

In some of the larger*madrasahs,* special courts or*Dar-ul-Qaza,* exist,
which handle cases in accordance with their understanding of the*Sharia*
. Generally, these cases related to family laws.*Shariat* courts are
often cheaper and more expeditious than regular civil courts where
litigation is often expensive and long drawn-out. The demand for the
establishment of*Shariat* courts in different parts of the country is
the result of the inability of civil courts to deliver cheap and speedy
justice to the people. Another important role of*madrasahs* is the
publication of religious literature. Some*madrasahs* bring out regular
religious magazines having wide circulation, while some*madrasahs* have
separate publication departments and publish different types of
literature in different languages, including Arabic, Urdu, and other
vernacular languages.[^123] Larger*madrasahs* have their own printing
presses and even their own websites now. Many among the*ulema* have also
regularly contributed articles on Islamic themes to widely circulating
magazines and newspapers. The daily*Jang,* Pakistan’s most widely
circulating Urdu newspaper began an Islamic page in 1978 to which
religious scholars have regularly contributed. Mufti Mohammad Yousaf
Ludhianavi, a leading religious scholar affiliated with
the*Jamiat-al-Ulum* *madrasah* of Karachi wrote a weekly
question-and-answer column called “Your Problems and their Solutions”
for many years. This provided religious guidance to common Muslims on
all sorts of issues in a highly simplified style. These and other
writings were later compiled and published as a seven volume work under
the same title and for a similar target audience.[^124] The publisher
introduces this work as follow;

“Your Problems and their Solution”, is the best loved serious column in
the*Jang* newspaper. It is the first thing to be read every Friday. God
has granted it a popularity such that hundreds of thousands of people
not only await it eagerly but consider it a necessary part of their
lives. It has brought about revolutionary change in the lives of
countless people. Thousands of people have molded their lives according
to the life of the Prophet.[^125]

Nowadays the Daily Mashriq, a widely read Urdu newspaper, carries a
special*dini* supplement on every Friday, which is highly popular among
common Muslims. It is eagerly awaited and widely read by common Muslims.
Thus, the*ulema* successfully utilize the press for access to the
general public.

The foregoing discussion reveals that*madrasahs* have deep-rooted
historical relations with the Muslim society in Pakistan.
Therefore,*madrasahs* are not only educational institutions; rather they
play crucial socio-political roles in Muslim society. Immediate denial
of this role to the*madrasahs* may lead to polarization and chaos in the
society.
