4- Reforms Since 2000: Action Against The Status Quo
====================================================

Reforming*madrasahs* is a major cause for concern in the 21st century.
The new developments at international level, especially the events of
11th September 2001, increased the importance of*madrasah* reforms not
only for Pakistan but for the whole world.

The Government of Pakistan and countries in the West, particularly
America, are now eagerly seeking to enforce changes in the*madrasah*
system in the belief that non-reformed*madrasahs* are rapidly emerging
as major training grounds for terrorists.  In addition, many Muslims,
including the*ulema,* are also at the forefront of demand for change
in*madrasah* system. The different actors in this complex game have
widely differing understandings of reforms, each reflecting their own
particular agenda. This chapter is aimed at analysing different ways in
which reforms in*madrasahs* in Pakistan are imagined and advocated by
different actors, especially the state and its agencies. This chapter
also looks into the detailed efforts for this purpose undertaken by the
government and the efforts of NGOs with the collaboration of*madrasahs*
since 2000.

The expansionist designs of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan towards
the end of 20th century worried neighbouring countries especially
Pakistan because of the increasing trend of*Talibanization* at border
areas (FATA) and in the N.W.F.P (=Khyber Pakhtunkhwa). Rising extremism
and militancy remained a constant threat to successive governments
during the last decade of the 20th century. The military government
which came into power as a result of a bloodless revolution on October
12, 1999 faced the same challenge in an increasing way. Therefore, the
government wanted to remove the general perception of the international
community that*madrasahs* were breeding terrorism. In addition, the
government wanted an effective control over the religious movements
which it considered were drawing support from*madrasahs* . The
government also wanted to bring the*madrasahs* into the mainstream
education system by changes in the existing curriculum
of*din-i-madaris.*

Agenda of Reforms and the Musharraf Regime
------------------------------------------

The government policy towards reforms dates from August 2001, prior to
the 11th September terrorist attacks on the USA. The president’s
wide-ranging and widely reported speech of January 12th, 2002 underlined
the need to curb the influence of religious institutions. His proposals
included the need to widen the*madrasah* curricula and bring them within
the mainstream of education and instructed*madrasahs* not to take
students from other countries.[^214]

The press is currently full of discussion and press releases related
to*madrasah* reforms. Views are, however, divided on the actual role
of*madrasahs.* Some people argue that these are the hub of evil
activities occurring in the world while some consider them the cradles
of peace and harmony. The responsibilities of these institutions
increased many fold in the backdrop of the present worldwide criticism
about their role as far as peace and harmony is concerned.

It is difficult to identify the exact time when*madrasahs* became
violent. A major contribution to the militancy rampant in*madrasahs*
today was made in the 1980s. A study conducted by Patrick Belton shows
how textbooks developed at the University of Nebraska-Omaha and
published by the United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) were used to encourage and justify the holy war against the
Soviets. These books were so radical that they were used by the Taliban
in the*madrasahs* under their rule. What is obvious now is
that*madrasahs* faced interference from many external forces ranging
from the Pakistani government to the US government and*al-Qaeda* , which
wanted them to serve their respective political interests.[^215]

As a part of the*madrasah* reform program of the government, the
National Education Policy 1999-2010 had envisaged the following
objectives in the context of the*din-i-madaris* .

To bridge the existing gulf between formal education and
the*din-i-madaris.*

To equate their degrees with the formal education system.

To recognise them and provide valuable and related books for research
and reforms.

To evolve an integrated system of national education by
bringing*Din-i-madaris* and modern schools closer in the curriculum and
the contents of education.[^216]

In line with these objectives the government initiated certain
revolutionary steps for improvement of the working conditions
of*madaris* across the country.

Table 1.4

REIs: Government’s Development Programs, 1985-2004

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="33%" />
<col width="33%" />
<col width="33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>Duration</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>For</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Amount in Million</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>1985-88 (3 years)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Teaching of English, Economics and Pak-study</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>1.90</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>1994-97 (3 years)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Teaching of English, Economics and Pak-study</p>
<p>(at Metric Level)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>19.95</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>2000-03 (3 years)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>Introduction of Computer for 50 Institutions and Improvement of communication at Intermediate Level</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>30.45</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>2001-04 (3 years)</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>5 Computers and 2 printers each per 150 Din-i-madaris</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>99.50</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Source: Ministry of Education Islamabad, 2001

The Pakistan Madrasah Education (Establishment and Affiliation of Model Deeni Madrasah) Board Ordinance 2001
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the first instance an ordinance called “The Pakistani Madrasahs
Education (Establishment and Affiliation of Model*Din-i-Madrasahs* )
Board Ordinance 2001 was promulgated on August 18, 2001 with the
objective of enabling the establishment of*din-i-madaris* , improving
and securing uniformity of the standard of education and integration of
the system of Islamic education imparted in*din-i-madaris* within
general education, providing for securing the registration, regulation,
standardization and uniformity of curricula and standard of education
of*din-i-madaris* imparting specialised Islamic education in Pakistan
with the general education system, maintaining the autonomous character
of*din-i-madaris* , bringing education and training imparted in
religious institutions in consonance with the requirements of the modern
age and the basic tenets and spirit of Islam, providing greater
opportunities in national life for the graduates of*din-i-madaris* and
according recognition of equivalence of degrees, certificates,
and*Asnad* awarded by*din-i-madaris* and to regulate their examination
system.[^217] The ordinance provided for representation of the different
schools of thought in the Board.[^218]

To start with, a Pakistan Madrasah Education Board provided under the
ordinance was setup on September 8, 2001 under the control of the
Ministry of Religious Affairs. The board further established in the
preliminary stage three model*din-i-madaris,* two at Karachi and Sukker
for boys and one at Islamabad, exclusively for girls. In
these*madrasahs* religious education along with general education is
given to the students. Sufficient funds were allocated for proper
functioning of the Board and the model*din-i-madaris* . Moreover, the
board is fully equipped with essential staff, building, furniture and
office equipment and is utilizing its powers to perform such functions
as are necessary to implement and achieve the objectives of the
ordinance.[^219]

The ordinance, however, could not be properly enforced as religious
circles, particularly; the*Ittehad-i-Tanzemat-e-Madaris-i-Deenia* did
not cooperate with the government in any activity of the Madrasah Board
or accept any membership therein. In the backdrop of such a situation,
the government reviewed its policy and initiated more steps in the
context of registration of*din-i-madaris* , rationalizing of syllabus
and mainstreaming of*madrasahs* which formed government policy on the
issue.[^220]

While undertaking initiatives on*madrasah* reforms it was envisaged that
the activities and functioning of*madrasahs* may also be regulated
through an independent enactment, providing for their registration. No
specific law existed to regulate the activities of*madaris.* Neither was
registration mandatory nor did registration provide any regulatory
mechanism. Except for those affiliated with the well-known institutions,
the majority of*madrasahs* were unaware of registration obligations and
formalities. In the absence of a specific law, the*madrasahs* in the
country were operating in a void, the dangers of which were amply
witnessed in the protests and demonstrations. Hence, there was a need
for a specific law[^221] .  For registration purposes there was reliance
on

The Social Welfare Voluntary Organization Act 1961.

Act XXI of 1860 for the Registration of Literary, Scientific and
Charitable Societies (for*madrasahs* which are trusts).

Under these acts the registration authority is vested with the
registration firms and joint stock companies or with an officer duly
authorized by the provincial government. Thus it was expedient to
provide a forum for the registration, standardization, and uniformity of
curriculum of religious institutions.[^222]

Before that, urgent action was needed to start a consultative
process for evolving consensus to create a regulatory framework. A
number of meetings with heads
of*Wafaqs/Tanzeem-ul-Madris/Rabita-ul-Madris* and some prominent*ulema*
were held in the Ministry of Religious Affairs to strike a consensus on
forming a law for this purpose. The consensus could not develop for a
considerable period due to the reservations of the religious circles and
heads of*Wafaqs/Tanzeems* on the proposed framework. At last the (ITMD)
agreed to cooperate with the government in the registration process. As
a result the government after consultation with the ITDM, promulgated an
ordinance by amending the Societies Registration Act of 1860 on December
1, 2005 by adding section 21 after section 20 of the Act.

Societies Registration Ordinance of 2005
----------------------------------------

The ordinance is also called the*Din-i-Madaris* Voluntary Registration
and Regulation Ordinance, 2005. In the ordinance it is has been clearly
provided that:

No*madrasah* shall operate without getting itself registered.

Every*madrasah* shall submit an annual report of its educational
activities   and performance to the registrar.

Every*madrasah* shall cause to be carried out the audit of its accounts
by an auditor and submit a copy of its audited report to the registrar.

No*madrasah* shall teach or publish any literature which promotes
militancy or spreads sectarianism or religious hatred.[^223]

Madrasah Reforms Project (M R P)
--------------------------------

The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) agreed between the federal,
provincial and regional educational authorities for executing a
multimillion rupees project for reforming 8000*madaris* within five
years is a ground-breaking event.[^224] The Madrasah Reform Project
(MRP) is a part of the government comprehensive program for the reform
of religious institutions in the country.  The Madrasah Reform Project
was started on January 8, 2003 with the approval of Rs: 5759.395 million
(Rs: 5.759 Billion) to reform some 8000*madrasahs* by introducing
subjects taught at schools across the country. The aim of the project
was to teach formal subjects such as English, Mathematics, Pakistan
Studies/Social Studies, and General Science along with religious
education. This program was launched by the Federal and Provincial
Educational departments and two separate project management units were
setup at Federal and Provincial Levels[^225] .

The project envisages teaching of English, Mathematics, Pakistan Studies
and Social Studies and General Science from primary to secondary level.
English, Mathematics, Pakistan Studies and Social Studies and General
Science were to be taught at Primary, Middle and Secondary levels. At
the intermediate level pupils are to be taught English, Economics,
Pakistan Studies and computer sciences, thereby opening up to them the
field to pursue higher studies in the colleges, universities and
professional institutions to compete for and take up well regarded and
well paid jobs in the corporate and public sectors.[^226] The project
covers the cost of books, stationary items, sport facilities and utility
charges as well as one-time grants for library and furniture. It
includes the provision of computer sets and also payment of salaries to
teachers hired on contract by the concerned institution in consultation
with provincial education departments for teaching formal subjects.
Willing*madrasahs* will be helped for three years under a phased program
by extending these facilities to 3000 teachers in the first year, an
equal number in the second year, and 2000 in the third year. The total
period of the project would be five years.[^227]

The funds were to be released by the Ministry of Education to the
provincial education department, which together with the provincial
education foundation are to be responsible for monitoring and evolution
of the project implementation. An allocation of Rs: 225 million has been
made in the next year budget for the project whose beneficiaries are
estimated to be around 1.5 million students both male and female
throughout the country as well as in Azad Kashmir.

Specifically, the Federal Government signed a memorandum of
understanding with the four provinces, the Federal Administrated Tribal
Areas (FATA), Federal Administrated Northern Areas (FANA) and Azad
Kashmir. The provincial education departments have to select the schools
for the project in line with the education reform formula. The Federal
Education Ministry was to oversee its execution.[^228]

The establishment of the MRP marks the first-ever concrete step taken to
equip the pupils of*din-i-madaris* with modern knowledge along with
religious learning. Over the years there had been hardly a government
that had not toyed with this idea but all plans drawn to this effect
failed, partly because of bureaucratic apathy and, partly, because of
resistance by clerical orders and managers of these schools. The
educational bureaucracies, manned by the products of the formal school
system, had, in effect, no real heart in the venture. They drew up
blueprints to bring these schools into the formal system just to meet
their bosses’s wishes. Otherwise, they had neither particular motivation
nor the will to implement those plans. For their part, the clerical
orders viewed any reform plan for these schools with suspicion and as an
encroachment on their domain.[^229]

Owing to the lack of understanding between both sides in the past, the
present (MRP) initiatives seem to have met the same fate at the
completion of its five years tenure. Five years on, the pessimist
outlook has been prove right, and the government has decided to wrap up
the project after having targeted only a small fraction of some
8000*madrasahs* (as per the Education and Planning Commission) in the
country. The Ministry of Education is forthright in admitting its
failure. “In the last five years we reached out to only 507*madrasahs*
”, reveals the project coordinator, Dr. Muhammad Hanif.[^230]

MRP had started with two main objectives, to mainstream the*madrasah*
education system by introducing formal subjects in their syllabi and to
open lines of communication with the elaborate network of seminaries. In
order to achieve the first objective the Ministry was given the target
to educate 1.5 million*madrasah* students (as per the Education Ministry
and Planning Commission) in modern subjects. At present, only
50000*madrasahs* students are receiving education in these subjects. The
Ministry had promised to provide four formal subjects teachers to all
8000*madrasahs* . However, presently only 2291 teachers are employed
under this arrangement against the target of 32000. A senior official of
the MRP says, “We failed to develop the capacity to utilize all the
funds which were allocated for the project.[^231] The total expenditure
in five years was less than 2.8 percent of the total allocation of Rs:
5.759 billion.

The second objective also failed to be achieved. Right from the start
the Ministry of Education lacked clout with the*madrasahs’s* leadership
and failed to build bridges with them. The lack of cooperation from the
Ministry of Religious Affairs, which enjoyed a far better relationship
with the*madrasahs,* did not help either. “Non-existent communication
and lack of understanding and consensus among the stake holders did not
bode well for the project” declares a senior planning commission
official who was also member of the project evaluation team in early
2007. The prime minister had tasked the planning commission to prepare
the report on MRP.[^232]

In fact, inter-departmental wrangling contributed to the failure of the
programme. The Ministry of Religious Affairs which has long served as
the government’s contact point with the*madrasahs’s* leadership acted as
rival to the Education Ministry in the reformation drive. As the
planning commission report notes, “this diarchy has created some tension
and misunderstanding between the two ministries at the cost of effective
implementation of the Madrasah Reform Project”.[^233]

At the same time, the details of 507*madrasahs* that registered with the
Ministry of Education lent credence to the belief that the project was a
dismal failure. Among other reasons the Ministry of Education has the
share to blame for this failure as it could not overcome bureaucratic
red tape. For instance, the delay in the release of funds to*madrasahs*
created doubts about the seriousness of reform efforts. “It takes
roughly 24 months to release funds to the*madrasahs* once we had
completed the process of identification and selection”, a senior
Education Ministry official discloses. The Ministry of Interior and the
provincial home departments are also partly responsible, as they have to
provide clearance before a seminary is deemed eligible.

The provincial governments further compounded the problem. For instance,
at the commencement the MRP, the Punjab Home Department objected to the
implementation of the project in the province citing fears of possible
backlash, and the Punjab component of programme was executed by the
Federal Ministry because of this reluctance. The NWFP (=Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa) government has yet to proceed with the project because of
certain reservations. With such hurdles it is no wonder that the total
number of*madrasahs* that applied for the money to purchase educational
material far exceeds those actually received grants from the Ministry of
Education.[^234]

This is really sad because government had expressed great optimism soon
after launching of the MRP. At that time it was hoped that all the
stakeholders had come to realise the importance of turning the pupils of
these schools into vibrant personalities, well-grounded in spiritual
attainments and well equipped with temporal knowledge. According to the
Federal Education Minister the scheme has received positive response
from all religious*madrasahs* , a factor that she says has encouraged
her ministry to launch the reform project.[^235]

While the Madrasah Reform Project (MRP) of the Ministry of Education
failed to take off, the Ministry of Religious Affairs has apparently
succeeded in convincing the*madrasahs's* leadership to join its
registration drive. Currently, the total number of registered*madrasahs*
all over the country is roughly 15102.[^236] While the Religious Affairs
Ministry has made headway in its registration drive it has been able to
do so by making critical concessions. For instance, they have
permitted*madrasahs* not to disclose their sources of income.
A*madrasah* leader to this said, “There is no clause in the existing
agreement that makes it obligatory for us to reveal our sources of
income.” As long as this clause was enforced, most of the*madrasahs*
refused to register themselves. Another crucial compromise has been the
government recognition of the five*wafaqs* or educational boards as
officially recognized institutions that can issue educational degrees to
students.[^237]

The contacts between the*madrasahs* leadership and the government were
discontinued in July 2007 because of the Lal Masjid operation. When
negotiation resumed after five months the ITDM and Ministry of Religious
Affairs agreed to grant board status to*madrasahs* organisations and; in
turn, the*madrasahs* leadership agreed to the establishment of an
inter*-madrasah* board which will oversee the functioning of*madrasahs*
all over Pakistan.[^238]

It is, however, unclear how the Pakistan People’s Party government will
view the understanding reached between the ITDM and the provincial
governments while the government has directed the Ministry of Education
to wrap up the programme, though continuing funds to 507*madrasahs*
cleared by Interior Ministry. The present government has jumped into the
arena by launching its own project named the*Madrasah* Welfare
Authority.[^239] How much chance there is for the success of this
project, we will have to wait for another five years to say for sure.

Madrasah’s Asnad Issue and Religious Parties
--------------------------------------------

The issue of the*madrasah’s* *asnad* resumed importance when graduation
was declared a precondition for contesting the election to provincial
and National Assembly elections in 2002.  While no one with less than
the graduation degree was allowed to contest the election, the graduates
of*din-i-madaris* were allowed to contest the general election of 2002,
though they had yet to fulfil the requirements setup by the UGC
(University Grants Commission) for the equivalence of*madrasah asnad* .
The issue finally came before the Supreme Court of Pakistan.

On 29 August 2005, the Supreme Court of Pakistan ruled that the*asnad*
(certificates) issued by the*madrasahs* are not valid as these
institutions run without statutory sanction and without affiliation with
the University or Educational Board. The court ordered the election
commission not to recognise the results of those candidates who won had
seats in recently held local council’s election, holding*madrasahs*
degrees. Pakistani law has imposed a minimum educational requirement of
matriculation to hold local council office.[^240]

The apex court noted that the*madrasahs asnad* cannot be considered
equivalent to matriculation certificate if their holders did not pass
examinations in English, Urdu and Pakistan Studies. In its detailed
verdict, the court held further that*madrasahs* were functioning
illegally in the country, since they don’t have affiliation with any
university or board of intermediate and secondary education. The apex
court noted that unregistered*madrasahs* don’t teach a curriculum that
can train students to face the harshness of the modern world.
Seminaries, the court observed, are not providing students with general
education that could enable them to come into the mainstream of society
and compete with the educated class for employment or other purposes,
including election. It noted that not a single religious educational
institution included in its curriculum subjects like English, Urdu and
Pakistan Studies, even though the interboard committee chairmen had
recommended this. While supporting the reservation expressed by the apex
court, the*Daily Times* observed,

The seminaries in Pakistan enlist a million pupils and throw out
thousands of graduates every year with nothing much to do except to
setup new mosques to earn their livelihood. Pakistan cannot produce
young people who can propel the economy forward. What kind of young men
does Pakistan produce? In a word: warriors. The truth is that there is
nothing secular in Pakistan Studies, English and Urdu either, if you
take a close look at the text books that the students have to mug
up.[^241]

In the prevailing scenario when a large number of madrasahs graduates
take active part in the affairs of the state and form the leadership of
almost all the religious parties, the court decision is significant.
Incidentally, the qualification of 68 parliamentarians holding madrasah
degrees were challenged in the Supreme Court in 2003 and judgment is
still awaited. The recent supreme court judgment and its delaying
tactics regarding the erstwhile degree issue of 2003 is seen to be the
part of the Musharraf strategy to placate MMA rather than taking the
issue seriously that is becoming more and more of an embarrassment and
burden to the dictator, says Iftikhar Hussain Gilllani, an unsuccessful
candidate in the 2002 election against an MMA candidate. Gilani who had
challenged the madrasah degree of his rival in 2003, regretted the
attitude of apex court regarding his case.[^242]

The verdict provided Musharraf with a weapon to exclude an entire
spectrum of Islamists from their present positions of power and
membership in the national parliament and the state assemblies. The move
might be counter productive as the religious parties have close links
with*jihadi* groups, and their retaliatory violence targeting government
interests could not be ruled out if Musharraf failed to exercise
adequate control in the emerging circumstances.[^243] The leadership of
religious parties defended the*wafaqs* and*tanzeemat* of
religious*madaris* in their struggle to resist the registration process
started by the government and identified their interests with
the*madrasahs.*

Maulana Fazl ur Rehman the leader of the opposition in the National
Assembly and Secretary General of the*Muttahedda Majlis-e-Amal* (MMA)
while rejecting the Registration and Regulation ordinance 2002, claimed
that*madrasah* syllabus contained no material encouraging sectarianism
and extremism. Addressing a conference at the*dar-ul-uloom* , Rehman
demanded, “When we do not take a single penny from the government, why
should we furnish the details of our accounts to them?” Adding further
“we have returned to the assemblies only with the force of these
religious seminaries. If their independence or survival is threatened,
we will resign forthwith."[^244]

Maulana Samiul Haq, another stalwart of the Islamist movement and one of
the most prominent patrons of the Taliban, expressed fears that Pakistan
would become a secular state if the government dismantle the*madrasahs*
system. Speaking at the Madrasah*Taaleem-ul-Qur’an* in Rawalpindi on
August 26, Haq the chief of his own faction of*Jammiat-ul-Ulama-e-Islam*
, said, “The government should not be at the US and the West’s beck and
call” adding that Pakistan should try to uphold the freedom and
character of the*madrasahs.* [^245]

Speaking about the government stand Religious Affairs Minister Ijazul
Haq declared that the government would not tolerate terrorism,
sectarianism or spreading hatred. However, the words could not be
translated into action as the resistance to reform is widespread.[^246]

The government seemed to compromise on this issue also as it was
witnessed in the past when the previous two ordinances of 2001 and 2002
in this regard could not be implemented in letter and spirit.[^247]
Nor does the present situation offer any hope.

Government Concerns regarding Militancy and Foreigners in Madrasahs
-------------------------------------------------------------------

The role of the*madrasahs* in national political developments and armed
conflicts has been a subject of intense debate in Pakistan since
1980.[^248]

Much of the armed resistance against the Soviet occupation of
Afghanistan was initially organised in the N.W.F.P (=Khyber Pakhtunkhwa)
and Baluchistan. Pakistani*madrasahs* and Afghan and
Pakistani*madrasahs* students were in the forefront of the*jihad*
movements against the communist regime.*Darul-ul-Ulum Haqqania* of Akora
Khattak near Peshawar and several other*Deobandi madrasahs* in
N.W.F.P(=Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) played an important role in the mobilizing
and recruitment of the thousands of volunteers for the Afghan*jihad* .
The*Jamaat-i-Islami* also used foreign funds for the Afghan*jihad* to
establish a network of*madrasahs* in Afghan refugee camps in Baluchistan
and N.W.F.P(=Khyber Pakhtunkhwa), which, subsequently, became
recruitment centres for the foot soldiers of Gulbadin
Hikmatyar’s*Hizb-i-Islami* movement. The emergence of the*Taliban*
movement in 1994 is, in fact, a logical extension of the role
Pakistani*madrasahs* was playing in the Afghan*jihad* during the 1980’s.
It provided an excellent excuse to the*madrasahs* and their associated
religious political groups to receive a vast amount of funds from Muslim
countries mostly from Saudi Arabia and Iran in the name of Afghan relief
and*jihad* projects and then to use these funds, or part of them, for
recruiting more students, expanding the physical facilities of
their*madrasahs,* and also for their sectarian activities including the
acquisition of weapons.[^249] Later in the 1990s the Afghan Taliban and
other*jihadi* organizations were provided with fresh blood by a large
number of*madrasahs* in Pakistan. These*madrasahs* became major centres
for training of foreign and indigenous warriors for*jihad.*

According to the journalist Ahmad Rasheed, the Taliban primarily evolved
from the dozens of*madrasahs* established in the refugee camps along the
Pak-Afghan border territories. Besides teaching, these children received
hands-on training on some of the most lethal weapons in the world. The
Taliban, as a result, soon became an invincible force.[^250]

According to government sources, the*madrasahs* that impart training to
militants to fight the security forces also included the*madrasah* of
Maulana Fazlullah, a key leader of
the*Tehreek-i-Nifaz-i-Shariat-i-Muhammadi* (TNSM) Swat. A similar
allegation was also levelled against the*madrasah* of Maulana Liquat in
Bajaur. The same*madrasah* was later destroyed as a result of a drone
aircraft attack.[^251]

Security officials consider that these*jihadi* elements were a main
reason behind Ghazi Abdul Rasheed’s refusal to surrender during the Lal
Masjid operation. He had been made hostage by the militants and, in case
of surrender, they would not have spared him.[^252] In any case, besides
the domestic fallout the instrumental use of*jihad* had serious
repercussions for Pakistan’s foreign relations.

The state policy shift following 9/11 was, therefore, deeply resented,
resisted, and agitated against by conservative Islamists. The activities
of those conservative forces became a challenge to the writ of the
military government at home and a major cause of embarssment for the
government in foreign relations.[^253] Therefore, the government had to
adopt strict measures against conservative elements to overcome the
internal security challenges and to pacify the perception of the
international community that Pakistani*madrasahs* bred global terrorism
and militancy. These steps led to the breach of the traditional
mulla-military alliance.[^254] In his address to the nation on January
12th, 2002 General Musharraf declared:

Madrasahs will be governed by the same rules and regulation applicable
to other schools, colleges, and universities. All*madrasahs* will be
registered by 23rd March, 2002 and no new*madrasah* will be opened
without permission of the government. If a*madrasah* is found indulging
in extremism, subversion, militant activity, or possessing any type of
weapon, it will be closed.

At the same time, Musharraf announced a ban on five extremist groups and
put another on the watch list.[^255] Meanwhile, an ordinance, namely,
Madrasah Registration and Control Ordinance 2002, was introduced to
control the entry of foreigners into*madrasahs,* to keep check on them,
and also their sources of funding. The law was rejected by most of
the*madrasahs* which wanted no state inference in their affairs.[^256]
Following this, intelligence agencies backed by heavy contingents of
police and other law enforcement agencies raided several seminaries in
September in Karachi and picked up about 21 Indonesian and Malaysian
students from at least two*madrasahs* ,*Jamia Abu Bakr* and*Jamia
Darsat* located on University Road. The administration of
these*madrasahs* said that security officials asked the particulars of
students and picked up some of them after marking their names.[^257]

Interior Ministry officials in Islamabad confirmed one of the arrested
students as a brother of Hambali, a key suspect in the Bali bombing in
Indonesia, and claimed that most of these arrested students were staying
here illegally and involved in activities which were not in Pakistan’s
interests. “These are suspected terrorists or people who have links with
the terrorists”, an Interior Ministry spokesmen was quoted as saying in
Islamabad.[^258]

The administrators of these*madrasahs,* however, contested the claim of
the Interior Ministry and rejected the involvement of*madrasahs* in
activities against the interests of the state. They called it a part of
the global agenda of the West to defame Islam and*madrasahs* .[^259]

Later, in February 2005, an agreement was made between the
administration of*madrasahs* and the government that foreigners have to
obtain an NOC from their respective embassies for further stay and new
entrants should possess proper educational visa.[^260]

All these efforts, however, failed to bring the desired results. The era
of Musharraf demonstrates that it is not easy to dismantle the
infrastructure of militancy for it was installed in the name of
Islamic*jihad* and it is deeply rooted in the socio-economic and
political life of the nation. How to get the militants isolated
from*mullas* and religio-political parties remains a big problem. The
Lal Masjid episode demonstrates the point. The role played by*ulema*
during the six month long standoff indicate that they shared the
ideology of the Ghazi brothers because they never explicitly condemned
the establishment of a state within the state by the Lal Masjid
administration.[^261]

The alternative moderate view of Islam with a peaceful progressive
outlook, though held by the large majority, is largely unsupported by
the clergy. It has quite a few public faces, mainly, some scholars
without a chain of*madrasahs* . They remain vulnerable to attacks from
the well entrenched militants. Their credentials as Islamic scholars are
also made questionable by the conservative religious class having a
large*madrasah* network. Thus, conservative, reactionary, and militant
views of Islam dominate religious discourse. The dilemma faced by the
state is that it cannot follow the prescription of the Islamists nor do
the Islamists seem likely to subordinate their agendas to the will of
the state.[^262] The situation has reached the point of no return. The
collision between the two will ultimately be decided in one way or
another. But, the fallout will be costly for the whole nation.

The key reasons responsible for this situation are the strong opposition
of religious institutions to change, the limited preparation for
planning and implementation of appropriate measures in a positive
manner, and the insufficient will of the government to bring about
changes in the overall system.
