5- Response of Madrasahs and Prospects of Reforms:
==================================================

Madrasah Reforms and the Role the of NGOs
-----------------------------------------

So far we have come to know that the pace of*madrasah* reforms is slow,
mainly, because of the distrust prevailing between government
and*madrasahs* . Since reform is inevitable for competing with other
institutions, the role of Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) and that
of the people from within the*ulema* may play an important role in
creating a sense of awareness for reforms among the teachers, students
and administration of*madrasahs* and in the society as well. Presently,
several NGOs are working in this sector.

International Centre for Religion and Diplomacy (ICRD)
------------------------------------------------------

The International Centre for Religion and Diplomacy (ICRD), a prominent
NGO, is endeavouring to address conflict across the world that exceeds
the reach of traditional diplomacy by incorporating religion as a part
of solution. More often than not, these are identity-based conflicts
that take the form of ethnic disputes, tribal warfare or religious
hostilities”, said Azhar Hussain ICRD vice president in an interview
with The*Nation* . He said that in Pakistan the ICRD was working on a
project aimed at helping teachers of religious schools by conducting
teachers training workshops which would, in turn, ensure better
education and improved moral guidance.[^263]

The ICRD is working in collaboration with religious and civic
organizations in Pakistan to encourage the expansion of*madrasah*
curriculum, to include the scientific and social disciplines with
special emphasis on religious tolerance and human rights. Under this
program the religious institutions*(madrasahs* ) are encouraged to adopt
pedagogical techniques that can promote critical thinking among
students, teach conflict resolution and dialogue facilitation skills,
and equip newly trained teachers with the skills to train other leaders
of*madrasahs* in this area.[^264]

By providing*madrasah* leadership with the opportunity to discuss and
reflect on Islamic principles with the leaders of other sects, the ICRD
is fostering peaceful coexistence among these diverse groups. It is also
encouraging greater adherence to the principles of tolerance and human
rights in Islam, upheld in past Islamic civilization.[^265]

In order to achieve the objective of changing the culture of intolerance
ICRD has conducted training workshops for*madrasah* leaderships from
five religious schools of thought*, Deobandi, Ahl-e-Hadis, Shia, Barelvi
and Jamat-e-Islami* that sponsor these religious schools. In addition,
workshops are being conducted in separate tracks for administrations and
senior faculty from Deobandi*madrasahs* in Baluchistan near the Afghan
and Iranian border and*Ahl-e-Hadith* *madrasahs* throughout the country
at the special requests of selected*madrasah* leaders. The ICRD has also
begun conducting “training of trainers” workshop to produce trainers who
can train other*madrasahs* leaders on their own.[^266]

About the impact the ICRD has created so far its vice president said the
centre work has been greeted with enthusiasm by the*madrasahs* leaders.
He said that their role is one of helping the*madrasahs* to help
themselves. Toward this end it has been essential that the*madrasahs*
view this as their own effort and not as something imposed from outside.
Exposure to the pioneering breakthrough in the arts and sciences that
took place under Islam a thousand years ago, including those relating to
religious tolerance, is providing added incentives for*madrasahs* to
expand their horizons by reshaping their curriculum, the ICRD head
observed.

The ICRD also plans to help religious schools develop model curricula
for their students. Giving an outline of this program, the ICRD head
said that it would offer several alternative curricula that could serve
as models for future consideration of*madrasah* leaders through engaging
them in determining best practices in Islamic education, convening
curriculum enhancement conferences for systematic enhancement
of*madrasah* curriculum, and creating an inter-sectarian curriculum
development committee to develop the models. The exchange of faculty
visits between Pakistani*madrasahs* and American Islamic religious and
culture centres is also a part of programme.[^267]

National Research and Development Foundation (NRDF)
---------------------------------------------------

The National Research and Development Foundation (NRDF), a Peshawar
based NGO, is working to modernize the curricula of*madaris* with the
collaboration of the*ulema.* The NRDF facilitates the task of arranging
workshops to prepare a draft reformatory package for the religious
institutions with the objectives of analyzing the present educational
system of*din-i-madaris* , prepare a draft reformatory package
for*din-i-madaris* in the light of all these discussions so that they
can play their roles in maintaining peace and harmony in the society,
devise strategies for enforcing this reformatory package in these
religious institutions and arrange conferences for*ulema* in which they
preach the real teachings of Islam. The NRDF plays the role of host
facilitator in all these workshops.[^268]

Workshops were held in the NWFP(=Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) and Islamabad at
the same time in which prominent scholars and*ulema* participated from
the surrounding areas in large number. The participants included*ulema,
muhtamimin* (administrators) from prominent religious institutions,
teachers, scholars, intellectuals, serving university professors, and
political leaders. After thorough deliberation the participants of the
workshops strongly recommended changes in the curriculum
of*din-i-madaris* in the light of the point of views of the*ulema* of
the country to modernize and upgrade it to the present times. The
participants agreed that the following changes in the curriculum
of*din-i-madaris* should be made to bring them in conformity with the
present age.[^269]

The curricula of*din-i-madaris* “*Dars-i-Nizami* ” were according to the
standards of that age. But now the needs and requirements of the time
have changed. At that time the Muslims were under the imperialist
control of the British. The main goal at that time for Muslims was to
save Islamic values and teaching. But today Islam needs to be presented
in its true form as a religion of peace and harmony.

It was possible to live in isolation from the world in the past but
today no country or society should survive completely cut off from the
world. Therefore, it is appropriate to upgrade the curricula, keeping in
mind modern needs and requirements.

The modern day unsolved issues are permanent threats to the status of
Islam as a religion of peace and harmony. It has created confusion and
disappointment in Muslim society. Therefore, this perception should be
changed through reforming the system of*din-i-madaris* .

There are a number of economical, social and cultural issues that cannot
be solved with the outdated curriculum in vogue in religious
institutions. Therefore, efforts should be made to introduce modern
subjects in the curricula of these institutions.

Some important subjects like knowledge of world and Islamic history,
social and economical issues, comparative religions, and international
law must be included in the curriculum of*din-i-madaris* .

English should be introduced in the curricula and Arabic must be
modernized, so that students can speak and write both languages
effectively.

Books relating to the*fiqh* of all schools of thought should be taught
so that students can understand inter-sectarian differences.

Subjects like mathematics, sciences, and computer science should be
introduced in*din-i-madaris* .

The libraries of*din-i-madaris* should be upgraded with the latest books
in all disciplines.

Modern and upgraded*tafseers* should be included in the syllabus
of*madrasahs.* The workshops recommended training for the administrators
of*din-i-madaris* on modern lines so that they may be able to run their
institutions effectively. Similarly, teacher’s training and refresher
courses on teaching methodology were also recommended.[^270]

The participants of workshops agreed that the present examination system
in vogue in*din-i-madaris* was highly defective. Therefore, it should be
completely revamped. A uniform examination system was recommended for
all the*madaris* . It was suggested that the examinations should be
transparent and the schedule of academic year and examinations should be
strictly adhered to.[^271]

The NDRF coordinator made it clear that all these efforts need the
cooperation of religious*madaris* and, therefore, appealed for their
active support in this mission.

The Euro-Consultant Pakistan (ECPAK)
------------------------------------

The Euro-Consultant Pakistan, one of the prominent NGOs sponsored by
European Commission Pakistan, works on projects that link poverty
alleviation with education. The focus of its activities is the rural
areas of Pakistan. ECPak is endeavouring to reduce religious extremism
through reforming the*madrasah*  system in Pakistan.[^272]

The organization intends to facilitate the launching of cost
effective process suited to the local condition in central districts of
N.W.F.P(=Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) with the support of local community and the
stakeholders with the following objectives.

To set up a mechanism whereby local communities are able to take part in
establishing new community-based schools through private-public
partnership in their respective areas in a sustainable manner.

To enhance the capacity of local communities, education departments, and
local environmental representatives for management of the primary
education programs at the local level.

To develop public-private partnership for exchange of knowledge,
training of teachers, and assessment of procedures.

To develop the capacity of communities for monitoring and evaluation,
particularly for participatory evaluation.

To bring students and teachers of*madaris* into the framework of
educational development programs and to build their capacity for
enabling them to interact with the outside world and reflect on local
issues according to the modern interpretation of the teaching of
the*Qur’an,* based on the advanced knowledge and research available to
them.

To evolve a locally acceptable and self-sustaining model for the
promotion of primary education which could also be reliable in other
parts of the province after conducting in-depth investigation of
education as a whole covering all problems and opportunities, weakness
and strength, scope and potential for improvement and expansion, and the
capacity of the education sector to accommodate the future needs of the
community in the target areas.

To enable local communities to set up 60 community-based schools in the
central districts of the N.W.F.P(=Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) while ensuring
there efficient management and sustainability.

Improve in-service teacher training.

To utilize the services of the*ulema* for mobilization of the
communities and fund raising.

To support private schools and local communities to take over
dysfunctional and non-functional schools.

To encourage and upgrade the rate of enrolment in primary education
through advocacy and awareness rising.

To organize workshops and meetings with*ulema* from*madaris* to discuss
improvement and widening of the curriculum. This could be accepted and
developed by*ulema* themselves.

To develop a profile of existing government and private schools
and*madaris* to set up benchmarks for future planning and assess change
and impact.

The ECPak is conducting research studies on the basis of which reforms
will be introduced in religious institutions to bring them into the
mainstream and include modern subjects in their curricula.[^273]

According to the final report of the ECPak, progress towards the
achievement of these objectives is encouraging because of active public
support. The report reveals that 25*madaris* have introduced modern
subjects in their syllabus. One hundred teachers of*din-i-madaris* have
attended five training sessions under this program. One hundred and
sixty*ulema* have gone through training related to educational
development, resources mobilization, monitoring, etc. Support of
religious political leaders has been ensured for all these activities. A
group of*ulema* has been facilitated to make recommendations for reforms
in the syllabus of*din-i-madaris.* The existing libraries
of*din-i-madaris* have been provided with new books. The response of
stakeholders to all these efforts is encouraging, according to the final
report.[^274]

Several other NGOs engaged in promoting literacy and basic education in
Pakistan are working to bring different streams of education closer.
These efforts need more attention of government and wide public support
in the larger interest of the country.

The foregoing discussion reveals that like all other initiatives of
reforming*madrasahs* in the past, the reform agenda of the Musharraf
regime also failed to achieve its objectives, more or less for the same
reasons. However, at the same time non-governmental organisations made
some progress, though very limited, in this sector with the
collaboration of*madrasahs* leadership. How the*ulema* responded to the
government sponsored initiatives and what factors are responsible for
such response? In next chapter I will discuss this in detail.

However, it is to be realized that reforms introduced without the
collaboration of religious leaders never succeed. In addition, the
government should reform its own institutions first and open itself to
public scrutiny before setting about to reform*madrasahs.*

Rebellion Against State Power
-----------------------------

While it is widely understood that the agenda of*madrasah* reforms since
2000 has miserably failed to realize its objectives, we have so far
focused only on the government’s own shortcomings and drawbacks in this
regard. The previous chapter while discussing all the state sponsored
initiatives also analyzed the lack of coordination among different
ministries and bureaucratic hurdles besides malafide intentions of some
responsible officials behind the failure of all these efforts.

This chapter will mainly discuss the response of*madrasahs* to state
sponsored reforms agenda as a party in this connection. How
did*madrasahs* respond to the reform agenda? How did they argue their
case? How far are they responsible for the failure of reforms initiative
since 2000? In this chapter I will address these questions.

Before going on to discuss the response of the*ulema* to state sponsored
reforms, one should know the excessive US interest in educational
systems, especially, religious educational institutions in the Muslim
world.

US Policy and Religious Education in the Muslim World
-----------------------------------------------------

The US repeatedly blames the religious educational institutions for
breeding violence and increasing militancy in the society. If it is
true, it is not the product of an Islamic approach to education but of
the militaristic policies of General Zia-ul-Haq and his supporters. For
nearly a decade, the US government among others, poured hundreds of
millions dollars of weapons into Pakistan. Much of it through*madaris*
and used*madaris’* students to fight a proxy war in Afghanistan.

According to the*Washington Post* , the US government even supplied
texts to*madaris* glorifying and sanctioning war in the name of
Islam.[^275]

After the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, the US took no further
interest in the region for almost a decade. During this period other
foreign and domestic actors jumped into the field and fully exploited
the situation for their own interests.[^276]

Thus, degeneration was accelerated by the activities of cult*mullas,*
evangelical US policies and continued occupation of Afghanistan by
foreign forces as well as hostile propaganda dominated Western media,
and*madrasah* education lost its hereditary image. The government also
failed to harness, defuse and redirect the rising militancy
in*madrasahs* after the Afghan war.[^277]

The events of 9/11 almost revolutionized the mind set, not only of the
ruling evangelical hawks of the United States but also of the religious
extremists all over the Muslim World.[^278]

Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, Islamic schools known
as*madrasahs* have been of increasing interest to analysts and officials
involved in formulating US foreign policy towards the Middle East,
Central and Southeast Asia.*Madrasahs* drew added attention when it
became known that several*Taliban* leaders and*Al-Qaida* members had
developed radical political views at*madrasahs* in Pakistan, some of
which allegedly were built and partially financed through Saudi Arabian
sources. These revelations have led to accusations that*madrasahs*
promote Islamic extremism and militancy and are recruiting grounds for
terrorism. In this context the Pakistan educational infrastructure of
which the religious educational institutions are an important part has
been of great concern to the United States.[^279]

In September 2002, USAID committed 100 million dollars over five years
for general education reforms. The Research Triangle Institute (RTI) a
US based non-profit corporation received a USAID contract for 60 million
dollars of this aid to implement a USAID education sector reform
assistance (ESRA) project in Pakistan.[^280]

The United States has also committed additional resources through the
Middle East Partnership Initiative (MEPI) which received 29 million
dollars in the financial year 2003. One of the MEPI goals is to
encourage improvement in secular education throughout the Arab world,
and MEPI’s draft strategies have registered concern over the rising
enrolment in Islamic schools (*madrasahs* ).[^281]

The Bush administration requested 145 million dollars for MEPI for the
financial year 2004. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended
45 million dollars for MEPI and “Islamic Outreach” programs in the
financial year 2004. The committee cited the importance of educational
training and exchanges but stated that these funds must be apportioned
more equitably between Arab Muslims and Non-Arab Muslim nations. The
Senate reports on foreign operations and appropriation support the
administration's full budget requests for MEPI.[^282]

The congressional hearing on terrorism two years after 9/11*,* Senate
Judiciary Committee on Technology and Government Information, September
10, 2003 and the hearing on terror financing, the Senate Government
Affairs Committee, July 31, 2003, have examined the possible
relationship between*madrasahs* and terrorists’ financing. During the
year 2004 the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations criticized the
educational system of Saudi Arabia calling the country the center of
Wahabism*,* the ultra-purist,*jihadist* form of Islam. A Saudi-based
charity*Al-Haramyn* which was operating educational institutions in
Indonesia has been named by the US government as a conduit of
terrorism.[^283]

Anis Ahmad of Institute of Policy Studies writes that 26 of 28
recommendations of the American senate committee constituted to
investigate the events of 11 September 2001 were related to education
and media through which the committee had stressed that the Muslim mind
should be changed. Anis Ahmad quotes three papers published by the
American think-tank and the*Washington Quarterly* . These papers have
been written by Charly Bernard Edward, P. Dejerjian and Stephen Philip
Cohen. In these papers Americans have been advised to keep close
contacts with the Pakistani Army rulers and through them education and
educational institutions must be targeted for favorable reforms. In
these papers Muslims were divided in four groups, traditionalists,
fundamentalists, modernists and seculars. Among them seculars were
chosen as favorites to be promoted and helped. Modernists may be
required to write down books for the educational institutions in which a
moderate soft image of Islam was to be presented.[^284]

Even high-profile American officials made direct comment on*madrasahs.*
The US Secretary of State, Colin Powell, said that Pakistan was expected
to introduce a new educational system as in*madrasahs* anti-American
sentiments were imparted and these have to be changed. Even if American
financial aid is needed that would come.[^285] The Defense Secretary,
Donald Rumsfeld, while talking about*madrasahs* said that these
institutions train people to be suicide killers and extremists, violent
extremists.[^286] All such US policies and accusations played crucial
roles in shaping the stand of*madrasahs* regarding reforms.

Media’s Role regarding madrasahs
--------------------------------

The media, especially international news media, paint a very negative
picture of*madrasahs* and their activities. More often than
not,*madrasahs* are shown as sites brewing anti-social activities,
brainwashing for suicide bombing, attacks on civilian targets hosting
Western interests and other such happenings are all shown
with*madrasahs* in the background. The print media, especially the
English press is especially hostile to*madrasahs.* [^287]

The media reports of the*Washington Times* have tied former madrasahs
students to terrorist attacks in the United States and Europe and to
militant groups operating in Afghanistan.[^288]

Urdu newspapers, however, are not so hostile to*madrasahs* , and provide
a wide coverage of their activities and outlooks.[^289]

The Approach of Liberals, Academics and Scholars to madrasah Reforms
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The liberal elements are viewed as the arch rivals of*madrasahs* in
Pakistan. In their pursuit of liberal thinking and attitude, they
consider*madrasahs* as harbingers of retrogression and
orthodoxy.*Madrasahs* and clerics, in turn, denounce the liberals,
terming them the promoters of evil. Both camps refuse to recognize the
existence and subsequent validity of each other’s school of
thoughts,*modus operandi* of learning and the overall ideology of life.

In comparison, academics and scholars have a mixed approach. Skeptical
of liberals who demand dissent from convention they mostly mend fences
with the clerics and share some wavelengths, at least on controversial
issues with them.[^290]

A.H. Nayyer, noted analyst working with the Islamabad-based NGO
Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI), said any government
that announces*madrasah* reforms must first identify the nature of
reforms. It is clear that the present claim of reforming*madrasahs*
emanates from an urge to eliminate sources of extremism in the
society.[^291] Nayyer believes the roots of extremism lie in so many
other nooks and corners.

Almost all agree that extremism has taken roots because of the absence
of governance and justice in the society. If the government does not
have any plan to fill this vacuum, any action against*madrasahs* would
be meaningless and only temporary. If it has a plan to improve its
governance and the system of justice, it will have to share it with the
public at large, for no scheme for good governance and justice would
succeed without an active participation by the general public.

Nayyer claims that the people behind Musharraf”s efforts of reforming
religious education were those who influenced by the*Jamaat-i-Islami* .
The*Jamaat* has been trying for quite sometime to convince*madrasah* to
include secular subjects in their curriculum. Several meetings in this
regard were held with the four boards of*madrasahs* education which
failed.[^292] Fearing opposition from*madrasahs,* Nayyer said, the
Musharraf government modified curriculum that retained everything
existing and added a few subjects like English, mathematics, sciences
and social studies from public school curriculum. A state grant was also
offered for those who agreed to government’s proposals. Despite the
monetary incentives the majority of*madrasahs* spurned this offer. Those
who accepted, however, knew that the modification meant added burden. In
any case, what escapes everyone’s mind was the fact that the*madrasah*
teaching methodology centered on the rote system and added subjects
would be taught and learnt in the same spirit.[^293]

Regarding the elimination of extremism and militancy with the
introduction of modern subjects Nayyer said social study and Urdu text
books contain a lot of material that can potentially be a source of
extremism and militancy. Moreover,*madrasahs* are not the sources of
extremism and militancy. Our normal school system and our media do not
do any less.[^294]

According to Christopher Canland, an initiative must proceed from the
recognition that Islamic boarding schools and Islamic education are an
integral part of national education of Pakistan. Reform efforts based on
the assumption that national education must remove off religion from
educational curriculum are only impractical. Avoidance of religious
subjects in national education and weakening of Islamic education sector
are neither likely to improve tolerance and understanding between people
of different faiths nor diminish violence in Pakistan or abroad.[^295]

Tariq Rehman, an eminent educationalist, believes that reforms of
Islamic education must also recognize that present backwardness in
administrative, curricular and financial terms of Islamic institutions
is a direct product of a highly polarized educational system. In this
context it should be recognized that the promotion and subsidy of elite
education is responsible for much of the backwardness of the institution
of Islamic education.[^296]

While analyzing the approaches of different actors we can easily
understand the nature and prospects of state-sponsored reforms. This
will also help us to know the response and reservation of the stake
holders*(madrasahs)* in its real perspectives.

The madrasahs’ Response to State-Sponsored Reforms
--------------------------------------------------

The response of*ulema* to the state-sponsored reforms is not always
encouraging. The reasons behind*ulema’s* reservation are mainly based on
the lack of sincerity on the part of government. The*ulema’s* response
to different state-sponsored measures shows that these measures were
aimed at destroying their educational system as a part of a global
conspiracy of the West to destroy Islam.

Maulana Hafiz Abdul-Rehman Madani, a leading Islamic scholar and chief
editor of the monthly journal Muhhadis, in an interview with The News
expressed his reservations regarding*madrasah* reforms in detail. He
claimed that the government’s present initiatives are being taken for
fulfilling the foreign agenda because these reforms are being executed
through the Ministry of Interior, which is not its domain. “The move is
indicative of the bad intention of the government as it should have been
executed through the Ministry of Education”, he claimed.[^297]

He regretted the discriminatory attitude of government towards*madaris*
because it does not provide financial help to*madari* s, rather it
criticize foreign Muslims providing financial help to*din-i-madaris.* He
pointed out that several NGOs functioning with the help of foreign aid
are not questioned while*madaris* are repeatedly blamed for the same
reasons.[^298]

Commenting on the standard of curriculum of*din-i-madaris* he observed
that it is superior to that of the formal education system and it is
being reformed by the*ulema* themselves according to their needs. On the
other hand, the curriculum of formal education which is the legacy of
the colonial era which needs urgent reforms could not be reformed
according to the needs. However, he outrightly rejected the integration
of*din-i-madaris* with the formal education system as it would be
detrimental to Islam itself. About the registration of*din-i-madaris,*
Maulana Madani termed it a step to interfere with their affairs which
the*madaris* will never allow.[^299]

Regarding the audit of financial sources of*madaris* , he was of the
view that when the government does not provide sufficient financial
help, it has no right to know about the income and expenditure
of*madari* s. Commenting on the misuse of money by*madari* s, he was of
the view that the government’s own institutions are deeply involved in
this which could not be overcome so far.[^300]

Regarding the involvement of*madrasahs* in terrorism and sectarianism,
Maulana Madani claimed that*madrasahs* are not involved in such
activities. He termed it a part of the Jewish conspiracies to defame
religious educational institutions all over the world. He regretted that
some secular elements in Pakistan shared the views of anti-Islamic
forces. He confirmed that no*madrasah* teach sectarian hatred. It is the
product of international political developments which have no relation
with*madaris* . However, during my personal interaction with members of
the*ulema* for collecting data for research, most agreed that
sectarianism has been a reality in the Subcontinent for a long time, and
its existence cannot be denied.[^301]

The reservations and apprehensions expressed by Maulana Madani were also
supported by the president of*Waqaf-ul-Madaris Al-Arabia* , Maulana
Muhammad Hanif Jalandhri. In an article in the daily*Nawa-i-Waqt* he
observed that government efforts of reforms are based on malafide
intentions and these are being taken on the behest of the Western and
Jewish lobbies. He contended that the West never wanted*madaris* to
prepare good Muslims by spending money for*madaris* reforms, rather they
want to involve the students of*madaris* in worldly pursuits and to
weaken their zeal for the study of purely religious subjects.[^302]

He revealed that*madrasahs* are not only aimed at preparing experts of
religious knowledge but the people who speak truth irrespective of its
consequences, those who do not believe in materialism, who are always
content with the simplest means of life, and whose loyalties could not
be purchased with money. What reforms one intended to introduce for the
achievement of these objectives? In his views the present curriculum of
the*din-i-madaris* fulfills these objectives.[^303]

About the lack of worldly knowledge of*madaris* graduates, he claimed
that the*ulema* know about this more than others know about their own
religions. He questioned why the government is not introducing reforms
in formal educational institutions where so many flaws are witnessed and
they need immediate redress.

Regarding terrorism he denied the involvement of*madaris* in it.[^304]
He complained that government agencies were behind harassing*madaris*
while several high-ranking government officials have confessed
that*madaris* are not involved in anti-state activities.[^305] He warned
government that any interference in*madaris* would have serious
repercussions. Therefore, he advised that*madaris* should be left in
their present positions.[^306]

While commenting on the terrorist attacks in the United States and
Europe, which were associated with*madrasah* students according to
the*Washington Times* report[^307] the late Mufti Dr. Sarfaraz Naeemi
(1948­-2009), head of*Jamia Naeemia* Lahore and Secretary
General*Tanzeem-ul-madaris* , observed:

The actions of a small minority have given bad name to Islam and its
centuries-old educational system that can interface with the modern
world.

He said it was the duty of the government to find and crush*madrasahs*
that preach violence. “We are preparing our students for every field of
life”, he claimed.[^308]

Khalid Rehman, director of the Institute for Policy Studies in
Islamabad, said that in conservative parts of the country such as the
Tribal Areas and Baluchistan, religious institutions generally see
prescribed reforms as ‘out of context’ with Islam and the traditional
life-style.

This does not necessarily mean that they are extremists. But
because*madrasahs* in these areas play a dominant role in the
development of children with limited exposure beyond school walls, it is
easier for them to be converted to any kind of venture if influential
figures are so inclined, Rehman said.[^309]

A student of*madrasah* in Lahore while reacting to the US missile
attacks on suspected Taliban targets that included*madrasahs* said that
they harbor no ill will towards Americans but are angry with their
government policies that they have hurt Muslims. “The US wants to treat
us like slaves here when they should treat us like friends” said Akbar
Syed, a 21 years old*madrasah* student.[^310]

During my visit to several rural*madrasahs* in the NWFP(=Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa), the*ulema* expressed similar reservations regarding
reforming*madrasah* education. They declared that*madaris* curriculum is
capable of fulfilling its objectives. They repeatedly claimed that they
do not need government help because of much complicated official
procedure of audit and because they are content with the least modern
facilities. Their contention is based on reality and I agreed with them
on the basis of my personal experience because the honest officials in
the government department have to grease the palms of auditors to get
financial clearances.

However, the administrator’s claim of relying on the least worldly means
at least for themselves was found contrary to the fact during my field
work because they used many of modern facilities for themselves which
their counterparts in government institutions usually do not
enjoy.[^311]

Madrasah Registration Ordinance and Response of madrasahs
---------------------------------------------------------

While undertaking government initiatives on*madrasah* reforms, it was
envisaged that the activities and functioning of*madaris* may also be
regulated through an independent enactment providing for their
registration.*madrasahs* were therefore directed in 2002 to register
with the government within six months or face closure. The ordinance for
this purpose was introduced in August 2002, known as*Madrasah*
Registration and Control Ordinance 2002. According to this ordinance,
no*madrasah* will function without government permission. The officials
of the*Madrasah* Authority will monitor the activities of*madrasahs* ,
no*madrasah* shall accept foreign financial help without government
permission.[^312]   The representatives of*madaris* of four schools of
thought rejected the said ordinance.[^313]

Addressing a press conference after the protest convention, the leaders
of different schools of thought pledged that they will never allow the
government move to control*din-i-madaris* on behest of America through
various pretexts.[^314] The*ulema* were of the opinion that measures
like registration, change of curriculum, and mainstreaming*madaris* are
aimed at depriving*madaris* of their independence and to destroy their
Islamic identity.[^315] They claimed that all such measures were a part
of the American agenda to secularize the educational system,
which*madaris* will resist at any cost.[^316] They assured their support
to the government against*madrasahs* involved in sectarianism, terrorism
or possessing arms, but stressed that the government should provide
solid proofs in this regard.[^317]

While commenting on the registration issue Mufti Munibur Rehman, one of
the representatives of*Wafaq-ul-Madaris* said, “The issue must not be
resolved only to please external players”. He said the present
government has not contacted us even once to discuss the issue. We are
ready to accept the reforms which are in the best interests of our
students and without being pressurised[^318] . Rehman, however, denied
the charges of ambiguous, illegal, unlawful and un-Islamic activities
urging the government to notify such*madrasahs* and to give proof of
their militant actions.[^319]

Regarding such widespread discontent among the*ulema* about the
government initiative, Dr. Mahmood Ahmad Ghazi, member of the National
Security Council, categorically declared that the government holds
the*ulema* in high esteem and believes in protecting the sanctity of
religious institutions. He regretted that some anti-government elements
are instigating*ulema* and spreading misconceptions about the
government’s policy in regard to religious matters.[^320] He further
declared that the government has no intention of intervening in the
working of ‘*din-i-madaris* ’ or to curtail their freedom and
independent status in any manner whatsoever.[^321]

In order to create consensus on the issue of registration the government
initiated consultative process with the*ulema* . A number of meetings
between the officials of Ministry of Religious Affairs and the heads of
organizations of different schools of thought were held to strike a
consensus on framing a law for this purpose. All these efforts failed to
get the cooperation of the*ulema* until the government made some vital
compromises. For instance,*madrasahs* were permitted not to disclose
their sources of income and the government also withdrew the demand
that*madrasahs* should immediately expel foreign students, besides the
government recognition of the five*waqafs* or educational boards as
officially recognized institutions that can issue educational degrees to
the students was another crucial compromise.[^322]

After such compromises to get the cooperation of the*ulema* the
government was able to promulgate the Madrasahs Voluntary Registration
Regulation Ordinance 2005. General Musharaf and the Ministry of Interior
are said to have been unhappy with such compromises. But four years ago
when this exercise began, the*madrasahs* had refused to get themselves
registered if forced to disclose their sources of funding and repatriate
of foreign students.[^323]

The report of the Ministry of Religious Affairs, however, revealed that
the progress in registration is not encouraging because the total number
of registered*madrasahs* in 2007 was 13,000, while their actual number
is estimated to be over 200,000 across the country.[^324] The Interior
Ministry has expressed concern over the issue as the Ministry of
Religious Affairs does not have a proper mechanism to determine the
exact number of seminaries operating unlawfully.[^325]

The exact number of the students studying in the country is not known
yet as the Ministry of Religious Affairs has so far registered only
those seminaries that house 30-40 students. The ministry provided
cursory figures to the Ministry of Interior after the voluntary
registration ordinance was promulgated. Officials in the Ministry of
Religious Affairs observed that it was an uphill task for the Ministry
to register religious seminaries as there was no mechanism to trace
unregistered*madrasahs.* [^326] A source in the Religious Affairs
Ministry said that there has been a sharp growth in the institutions
associated with the*Deobandi* school of thought and the N.W.F.P(=Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa) witnessed the largest unregistered*madrasahs,* adding that
a number of*madrasahs* were brainwashing students for militant
activities and the Interior Ministry was quite concerned about
this.[^327]

Former education Minister Javed Ashraf Qazi was of the opinion that the
main reason behind the failure of*madrasah* reforms during the Musharaf
regime was the refusal of “The Alliance of Madrasahs”
(*Ittihad-i-Tanzeemat-e-Madars-i-Deeniya* ) to cooperate with the
government. At first, the*madrasahs* refused to enlist and register
under the Companies Act, refusing also to provide other required
details, i.e. number of students, boarders, and sources of funding, he
claimed.[^328]

Madrasah Education Board and Response of madrasahs
--------------------------------------------------

As a part of the government agenda of reforms, an ordinance
called*Madrasah* Education (Establishment and Affiliation of
Model*Din-i-Madaris* ) Board Ordinance 2001 was promulgated. It was
aimed at the establishment and affiliation of model*din-i-madaris* in
which modern subjects are to be taught along with traditional religious
subjects and to prepare students to perform better in the modern world.

*Madrasah* reforms project (MRP) was initiated by Ministry Of Education
with two main objectives: to mainstream the*madrasah* educational system
by introducing the formal subjects in their syllabi and to open lines of
communication with the elaborate network of seminaries.[^329] The*ulema*
expressed serious reservations regarding the*Madrasah* Education Board
Ordinance as they have expressed in the past for similar initiatives on
the part of the government. The alliance of*madrasahs* of all the five
boards of different schools of thought in its response rejected
the*Madrasahs* Board Ordinance and refused to cooperate with government
in this regard. They warned that the*madrasahs* are fully prepared to
resist any move aiming at curbing their influence. They made it clear
that they do not need government financial aid because of their total
reliance on God’s help. Therefore, they could not surrender this
permanent source of strength by accepting temporary government
aid.[^330]

Regarding the employment opportunities for*madrasah* graduates with the
introduction of modern subjects, they declared that the aim of religious
education was not to get jobs. However, they advised the government to
focus on the provision of jobs to those who have studied in government
colleges and universities and were roaming jobless.[^331]

While reacting to the government initiative to introduce modern subjects
the*ulema* showed mixed reaction. A small number of*ulema* mostly from
the*Barelvi* school of thought welcomed it as a positive sign to promote
modern education in*madrasahs* while the majority termed it a part of
the government agenda to control*din-i-madaris* and to kill the spirit
of*jihad* among Muslims.[^332]

Maulana Hanif Jallandhri, the head of*Wafaq-ul-Madaris-al-Arabia* and
coordination secretary of the Alliance of*Madaris Deenia* in his
response said that the*madaris* will never allow changes in their
curricula whatever amount the government may allocate for this purpose.
He declared that*Wafaq-ul-Madaris* has unanimously rejected the official
aid. He advised the government to waver utility bills of*din-i-madaris*
if they really want to help*madrasahs* [^333] *.* Maulana Jalandhri
clarified that the curriculum of*din-i-madaris* is aimed at preparing
religious scholars and not engineers or doctors. He said that
only*ulema* have the right to make and propose changes in the curriculum
of*din-i-madaris* . Commenting on the introduction of modern subjects
along with the existing religious disciplines, he argued that this will
be a burden on the students. Therefore, they will neither be able to
become experts in modern disciplines nor in religious ones.[^334] He
regretted the discriminatory attitude of government towards*madrasahs*
and demanded of the government to hold talks with the*ulema*
and*madrasah* boards on all vital issues related to*madaris* .[^335]

The head of*Tanzeem-ul-Madaris Ahl-e-Sunnah,* Mufti Muneeb-ur-Rehman,
while addressing a convention of heads of*din-i-madaris* announced that
the*Tanzeem-ul-Madaris* which is an organization of a network of ten
thousands*din-i-madaris* will never become a part of government
initiative to change the syllabus of

*din-i-madaris* .[^336]

During my personal interaction with the*ulema* and heads of
different*madaris* in the NWFP(=Khyber Pakhtunkhwa), similar
reservations were expressed by them regarding the changes in the
curriculum of*din-i-madaris* . They emphasized eternal salvation and
stressed that they have no reason to care for this world. The ground
realities, however, speak otherwise.[^337]

Five years on, the*Madrasah* Reforms Project could reach only
507*madaris* against its target of some 8000*madrasahs.* A senior
official of the Ministry Of Religious Affairs revealed that the Ministry
Of Education reached out to only those*madrasahs* that are either
alienated from the mainstream or are not part of any of the five
recognized*madrasah* organizations.[^338]

Table 5.1

English-teaching in the religious Schools (Maktabs and Madrasahs)

Area

Number of Institutions

Number of Students

Institutions Teaching English

Students learning English

Percentage

Middle metric higher

Punjab

1332

206,778

101

78

36

6951

3.4

NWFP

678

88,147

24

15

8

2607

3.00

Sindh

291

71,639

10

13

7

2529

3.5

Baluchistan

347

40,390

14

7

2

1139

2.8

AK

76

43,447

nil

7

2

91

0.2

Islamabad

47

7,858

2

4

1

110

1.4

Northern Area

103

12,150

4

1

nil

102

0.8

Total

2862

470.490

155

125

56

13,529

2.2

Source: Calculated on the basis of figures given in Report Madrasahs
1988 in: Rehman Tariq,*Language, Ideology and Power* , 2002.

Pre-Conditions of madrasahs
---------------------------

As*madrasahs* and*ulema* were of the opinion that all the initiatives of
government reforms were undertaken unilaterally and without consultation
with the representatives of*madrasahs* organizations and
prominent*ulema,* they refused to cooperate with the government until
the following conditions were met.

1.  The government should promise to hold talks with good intentions
with*madrasah* at high level regarding any important matters relating to
them;

2.    *Madrasah* boards may be granted the status of degree-awarding
universities;

3.   If granting of university charter was not possible, the status
similar to*Model*   *Din-i-Madrasah* may be extended to*madrasah*
boards;

4.   Not only*Shahadat-ul-Aaliya* with B.A degree may be notified but
the condition of getting equivalence certificate from Pakistan
universities may be withdrawn for the*Shahadat-ul-Alamiya* degree. On
the same footing*sanvia aama* and*sanvia khassa* may be recognized at
par with secondary and higher secondary school certificates
respectively;

5.  The simple and easy procedure for registration agreed upon between
the two sides may be introduced;

6.   Procedure for permission for those foreign students who want to
study in*din-i-madaris* should be made simple and easy;

If any*madrasah* was suspected to be involved in any unlawful activity,
its case may be investigated according to the law. But it is best to
inform the respective*Wafaq.* [^339]

The*ulema* made it clear that these measures will create atmosphere of
goodwill between*madrasahs* and the government.[^340]

Islamic Education Commission
----------------------------

After the failure of the government’s previous efforts of reforms and in
the present atmosphere of distrust, the government planned to establish
a separate Islamic education commission under which the*Madrasah*
Education Board will be established. This board will conduct
examinations for the students studying in*madrasahs* belonging to
different schools of thought and registered to this board.  The cost
will be borne by Ministry of Religious Affairs. The plan included vital
changes in curriculum and examination system with consultation with
Islamic scholars imparting training at local and international
level.[^341]

Commenting on fresh initiative of the government, the*Daily Pakistan*
(Urdu) observed that all such efforts in the past failed to get the
support of the*madaris.* Therefore, there is no guarantee that
the*madaris* will accept the proposed education commission and allow
their students to appear in examination of an inter-*madaris* board. In
this connection, it is necessary to take*madaris* into confidence
because it is a general perception that the government try to weaken
the*madaris* under foreign pressure. Therefore,*madaris* do not support
any government policy. If this perception is removed,*madaris* may agree
to possible cooperation.[^342]

The new developments in 2007 because of the Lal Masjid operation
worsened the prospects of cooperation as*ulema* of*Wafaq-ul-Madaris*
announced that no further talks will be held with the government as
reaction to the Lal Masjid operation.[^343] The proposed plan, however,
could not be realized because of mutual distrust until the new
government of Pakistan Peoples’ Party came into power.

Current Situation and the din-i-madaris
---------------------------------------

*Din-i-madaris* again became a hot topic of discussion when the war on
terrorism intensified once again in N.W.F.P (=Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) and
FATA.

The government of the Pakistan Peoples Party seems to deal with*madaris*
on the same lines as the previous government had done. President Asif
Ali Zardari during his visit to Washington announced that all
the*madrasahs* in the country will be taken over by the government to
separate students from extremism and impart them modern as well as
religious education.[^344]

Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani when taking oath in March 2008,
announced under PM’s 100 days programme to set up a*Madrasah* Welfare
Authority which was supposed to be functional by July 9, 2008 has not
been set up because the task has yet to be assigned between ministries
of Interior, Religious Affairs, and Education. One of the main reasons
of the failure of previous reforms is stated to be the lack of
coordination among these Ministries.[^345] After the present
government’s announcement, to proceed with*madaris* reforms, survey
forms for collecting details of*madaris* have been distributed.

Madrasahs Reaction to the Present Initiatives
---------------------------------------------

In a meeting of*Wafaq-ul-Madaris-al-Arabia* held on 8th April 2009, the
government’s announcement of*madrasah* reforms was declared unilateral
and expressed concern was expressed that the government had not contact
the leadership of the*madrasahs* in this regard during the past year. It
was declared that the present initiatives were the continuation of the
Musharaf policy. It was resolved that no government initiative will be
supported without taking the*madrasahs* into confidence.[^346]

A convention of the Alliance of Organizations of*Din-i-madaris*
“*Ittehad-i-Tanzeemat-e-Madaris-i-Deeniya”* was held on April 9, 2009 in
Islamabad. The unanimous declaration after the convention termed the
present initiatives of government reforms of*din-i-madaris* as
continuation of the agenda of the previous government. They rejected the
distribution of survey forms. All the organizations directed their
respective affiliated*madrasahs* that they should not complete the
survey forms distributed by government agencies. They advised the
government to contact the respective organizations of*din-i-madaris* for
this purpose.[^347]

The response of the*din-i-madaris* to this declaration was quick, and
nearly all the*din-i-madaris* do not usually cooperate in this regard.
The situation is so pathetic that I failed to convince most of
administrators of*madaris* to cooperate in this regard during my field
work in April-May 2009.

The response to the issue of*madrasah* reforms reflects different
understandings of appropriate Islamic education. To many
traditionalist*ulema* ,*madrasah* education is a perfect system of
education and change in it is considered to be a threat to the identity
and intensity of faith and departure from the path of pious leaders. To
them reforms are aimed at undermining the power of*ulema* as leaders of
the community and their claim to speak authoritatively for Islam. They
often see proposals for reforms as interference in their own
jurisdiction. Since their claims to authority as spokesmen of Islam are
based on their mastery of certain disciplines or texts, any change in
syllabus will directly undermine their own claims. Moreover, they
consider it a foreign conspiracy to convert purely religious education
into secular education.

A section of traditionalist*ulema,* however, accepting the need for
reforms, argue that this should be strictly limited and must not
threaten or dilute the religious character of*madrasahs.* They favor
reforms to the extent that*madrasah* students should get basic knowledge
about modern subjects. Yet they argue that the main focus should remain
on the study of religious education. They believe that excessive stress
on modern subjects would harm the cause of both of religious as well as
modern education. Though their apprehensions may not be entirely
baseless, it is a fact that reforms may seriously undermine the monopoly
of traditionalists of interpretation of knowledge. Despite this
deep-rooted controversy regarding*madrasah* reforms, no sector
including*madrasah* education is immune to change, the demand for which
also regularly comes from different people, including some
leading*ulema.*

Prospects of Reforms
--------------------

An analysis of the response of*madaris* to state-sponsored reforms
during the last eight years predicts that high resentment and deep
suspicion among the*madrasahs* regarding government’s efforts prevailed
all the time. The same atmosphere of distrust exists even today with the
PPP government in power. The present government seems to take the
previous agenda forward to which the initial response of*ulema* is not
encouraging. While the fate of all previous efforts aimed at
reforming*madaris* are before the present government.

How to address the present challenge? A number of options are available
but require clear leadership from the government and a willingness to
take some political risks. In the case of*madrasah* reform strategy
the*conditio* *sine qua non* is to have a formal regulatory mechanism
for guaranteeing efficacy of all educational institutions and ensuring
quality control whether it is private secular schools or*madrasahs.*
This should encourage registration, create concomitant statutory
obligation on the registered entity and its sponsors by way of
governance, financial accountability, and responsibility towards
society.[^348]

The reform efforts should inter alia provide for the following elements:

A:   Registration of*madrasah* as well as private schools for quality
control purposes is essential. However, to give more credibility to the
efforts, this process is best managed at the provincial level with
minimum interference from federal government;

B:    Construction of*madrasahs* on public lands must be scrutinized
more carefully to ensure that the intended purpose of state land use is
being met;

C:    Inclusion of local council representatives in the management
committee or board of directors of*madrasahs* *wafaq* should be
suggested in order to ensure local citizenry are involved in the working
of*madrasahs;*

D:            There is a need to set up an interdepartmental committee
headed by a*Nazim* (local-level governor) to steer the reform agenda
forward based on local input but with accountability to the federal
government;

E:    Some measures for ensuring that the local student body
representation balances external students enrollment in urban*madrasahs*
should be encouraged so that there is greater connection between the
community and*madrasahs.*

F:    Greater placement of*madrasah* graduates should be encouraged
through apprenticeship programs in which*madrasah* graduates can find a
way to teach their religious ideals while also contributing as
productive members of society.

G:   Exchange of possible practices and ideas between schools
and*madrasahs* within    Pakistan and abroad. It is important to promote
greater interaction between youth of various schools in Pakistan to
reduce class tensions. There are some very promising programs that a
few*madrasahs* are starting on their own accord in Pakistan and abroad.
However, it is important to ensure that the lessons are meant to be
mutual and no particular role model is chosen as that is likely to lead
to conspiracies of political patronage.[^349]

All such measures should aim at giving these essential Islamic
indigenous institutions back to the community which is the need of the
time. But taking on board the stake- holders (*madrasahs)* is
prerequisite.
