Publisher's Word
================

Imamate, which means leadership, is a principle of Islam that is
probably one of the most debated and, at the same time, most
misunderstood of all its principles. Even the word “Imam” has been taken
on as a general term of leader, where, in Islam it has a very precise
designation.

The Imams of the Ahlul Bayt (as) were not leaders chosen by the people,
although many times in order to take their rightful position among the
ummah they were “selected” by the people. The true Imams, those
descending from the first Imam, ‘Ali bin Abi-Talib (as) and Fatimah
al-Zahra (as) were chosen by Allah, Most High and number, including Imam
‘Ali, twelve.

These twelve, Fatimah (as) and the Messenger of Allah (S) make up the
Ahlul-Bayt (as). They were pure, sinless and possessed Divine knowledge
of the seen and unseen. They are those who were “deemed weak in the
land” and upon whom the “favor of Imamate” was bestowed. May they
intercede for us on the Day of Judgment.

In these series of books about the Ahlul Bayt (as), Al-Balagh Foundation
hopes to clear up many of the distorted “historical facts” about this
most blessed group of human beings, may Allah, Most Gracious, count us
among their lovers and followers.

The purpose of Imamate, through the kindness and love of Allah for His
creatures, was to provide a guide for us after the death of the last
Prophet, Muhammad bin Abdullah (S). These guides would keep us on the
straight path and lead us to victory in this life and the next. The
first of them was Imam ‘Ali (as) and the last of them is Imam al-Mahdi,
the Awaited One (as).

Eleven of these blessed Imams came to power and proceeded with their
Divinely assigned task. All of them met with the same
fate -assassination.

The last of them, Imam Mahdi, through Allah's most high grace, has been
given a long life to manage the affairs of the ummah in occultation
until Allah calls him forward to achieve the task for which he was
created - to bring justice to a world filled with injustice and to bring
mankind to its final stage.

This book is about the second Imam, Imam Hasan (as). He was the son of
the first Imam who received his commission upon the death of his father,
may Allah allow us to be called his Shi'ah. Many erroneous accounts have
been given about Imam Hasan (as), the most treacherous of them being
about the number of wives he had and attributing worldly passions to
him, God forbid! The most misunderstood and underestimated act of this
great Imam was the signing of a peace treaty with the usurper Mu'awiyah.

A large portion of this book has been dedicated to clarifying this
treaty. Why it was made, why Imam Hasan (as) was forced to sign it. What
it contained and how it was broken.

We pray that Allah is pleased with our efforts and that the true glory
of this Imam shines forth for all to see.


