His Generosity
==============

Maybe the most eminent of Imam Hasan's (as) attributes is his
generosity. He believed that money was only a means to clothe the naked,
help the destitute, pay the debts of the indebted, or satisfy the
hungry. Once, he was asked: “We do not see you disappoint a beggar.
Why?”

He replied:

“I am asking Allah for His favors, and I love to be near Him. I am
ashamed, as I am myself in need of Allah, to repulse a beggar. Allah got
me used to a habit; to shower me with His bounties, and I get Him used
to me showering His bounties on the people. I fear that should I stop my
habit, He may stop His habit.”

Following are examples of his unlimited generosity:

An Arab desert-dweller once asked for help. In response Imam said: “Give
him what is in the safe.” In it there was ten thousand Dirhams.

“Sir,” the Bedouin said, “won't you allow me to reveal my need and
praise you?”

Imam's reply was something like this:

“We are people whose bounties are flowing. In them hopes and wishes
dwell. Our souls give out before we are asked in fear of the disgrace of
the one who asks. Should the sea know how much we give who asks us, it
will shrink, after its flooding, in shame.”

The grandson of the Holy Prophet (S) bought an orchard from the Ansars
(the supporters of the Holy Prophet (S) in Madina), at the price of
400,000 Dirhams. Then he got word that they lost their wealth. He gave
them the orchard back with no charge.

These are only a few insights into Imam Hasan's (as) generous acts. Such
good deeds had the greatest effect in personifying his high Islamic
ethics..

Now we are able to form a clear idea of the ingredients of the character
of Imam Hasan (as). It was the top example of the Muslim character ever
witnessed by this planet after the prophets (as). This was the character
of the Ahlul Bayt (as) generally and all of them shared the same
character and personality.


