Post-Treaty Era
===============

After signing the treaty, Imam Hasan (as), the grandson of the Holy
Prophet (S), remained in Kufa for a few days. His heart was wrung by
pain for what had happened. He prepared to return to Madina, the city of
his illustrious grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (S).

When his noble procession set out, all the people of Kufa went out. They
were deeply remorseful, with the look of great sorrow on their faces.
They were either in tears or sad-looking. And why not? They would be
humiliated after Imam Hasan (as) and Ahlul Bayt had departed. The
seditionists were by now in control of their lives, they appeared
helpless, and disgrace descended upon their city.

Mu'awiyah transferred the caliphate and general command from Kufa to
Damascus. The Umayyad military forces entered Kufa, tightening their
grip on it, striking fear into the hearts, and spreading their terror.
Those who collaborated with the Urnayyads were rewarded, and those who
opposed them were put to the sword.

Imam Hasan's (as) caravan set off crossing the desert, while pain was
striking at his heart, parting with his capital, and the places which
held his memories. It was hard for him to abandon his Shi'ites and elite
who supported him with firm determination and resolution, until they
arrived at a blind alley. They were besieged and hunted down with the
employment of every low and cheap method. The Umayyad clique began their
vengeance.

On the other hand, when his caravan approached the holy city of Madina,
its people rushed to welcome the Imam and his family (as). Rapture
colored their faces. Why not?

The blessing of the presence of the Ahlul Bayt (as) had returned to
them, and the goodness, all goodness, came to their city.

As soon as he settled, Imam Hasan (as) and his family set about to take
up his religious responsibilities, but on a new line.

If he was a ruler before who discharged the affairs of the ummah, and
set plans for its future through the office of political Imamate, and
steered the ship to the coast of happiness, goodness and guidance; after
the signing of the treaty he tread upon a new path.

He established a great ideological school and leadership so as to be a
seat of guidance and knowledge by which the ummah would be guided to the
straight path of Allah, and His concluding Message.

That school played an effective part in ripening public opinion,
correcting its course, and saving it from the deviation of the official
bodies led by Mu'awiyah bin Abu-Sufyan.

The school of Imam Hasan (as) gave fruit twofold. It graduated the
greatest scholars and traditionalists, like Hasan al-Muthanna,
al-Musayyab bin Najbah, Suwaid bin Ghaflah, al-Sha'bi, al-Asbagh bin
Nubatah, Abu-Yahya al-Nakha'i, Ishaq bin Yasar, and others...

If Imam Hasan (as) had scored a great and glorious victory for Islam by
establishing this school; he obliged the ummah and the Message another
great favor. He called the people to uprightness of behavior and faith,
and the following of the Messenger (S) and his family (as), doing their
best to spread good manners and fight every evil act.

Apart from this, he paid special attention to his society. He took care
of the poor, the helpless and destitute. He looked after the needy. We
cited some examples of his care of the poor previously.

Beside his ideological activities, it was only natural that Imam Hasan
(as) would plan the future of his ummah, both in social and political
spheres. In these fields, he took a good course for the benefit of the
Divine Message and the ummah. He created an Islamic current of awareness
among the ummah.

It became clear for the ummah that the legitimate Imamate was the right
of Ahlul Bayt (as), and particularly Imam Hasan (as). Mu'awiyah and the
likes of him were not fit to rule. Obedience to them was incompatible
with the pristine Islamic line. Imam Hasan (as), and the Muslim
intellectuals who graduated from his school, succeeded in bringing about
an ummah with a sharp political awareness. An ummah which opposed the
Umayyad rule, in thought, course of action, and method, and which
defended Islam throughout the next generations.

The Umayyad rule was not unaware of these nascent Islamic activities. It
was they, as a matter of fact, who were to be reckoned with. That is why
the high-ranking officials of the Umayyad government held a meeting to
discuss the matter. The meeting was attended by, in addition to
Mu'awiyah, Amru bin al-Aas, al-Walid bin Aqabah bin-Mu'eet, Utbah bin
Abu-Sufyan and al-Maghirah bin Shu'bah!

They said to Mu'awiyah, in part: “Hasan has certainly animated his
father and revived his memory. He talked and he said the truth, gave
orders and was obeyed, and was followed by the people. Such thing would
raise him to a higher level. Every time we hear from him something which
does us harm...”[^1]39

This report, though brief, was the most dangerous report submitted by
the chiefs of the Umayyad house and its leaders, to their chief,
Mu'awiyah, about the activities of Imam Hasan (as).

The movement of Imam Hasan (as) gained strength, so much so that he left
for Damascus, the capital of the Umayyads.

There he sat down with Mu'awiyah, explained to him the mistakes and
schemes of the Umayyad rule, the superficiality of those in charge, and
their diversion from the original Islamic line. His discussions there
won him a lot of supporters and advocates. [^2]40

The fresh activities of Imam Hasan (as), and the new, historical mission
which he shouldered to preserve the sound Islamic line among the people,
made the Umayyad rule lose its head, and forge a hostile policy to get
rid of the Imam (as) and his Islamic leadership.

The main ingredients of that policy were:

1. Hunting down the faithful leadership in every Islamic region, and
putting them to the sword. Men like Hijr bin Uday and his companions,
Rasheed al-Hajari, Amru bin al-Hamq al-Khauza'i and others, were
murdered, and persecuted.

2. Cracking down on all of the Shi'ites of Imam ‘Ali (as) by resorting
to terror, suppression, making people homeless, cutting off their
income, tearing down their houses, and so on.

3. Employing some of the preachers and those loyal to the Umayyads, to
tarnish the image of Ahlul Bayt and particularly Imam ‘Ali (as) who was
cursed, as a ritual, on the pulpits. Traditions were invented and
attributed to the Holy Prophet (S). They were of great benefit to
Mu'awiyah and his party. False beliefs were also made up and unfairly
ascribed to Ahlul Bayt (as).

This is one of the most sad and enduring results of the Umayyad rule. So
many false ahadith were introduced, first by the Umayyads and later by
the Abbasids, that today, we Muslims of the 20th century have become so
misguided by the lies which have remained in our ahadith and sunnah of
our Prophet (S).

Surprisingly enough, the historians and narrators of hadith have not
tried to eliminate and filter through these obvious lies. They continue
to propagate them, confuse the ummah and misguide them to their own
detriment. This is one of the main reasons that the Muslims of today
remain weak and disunited.

4. Handing out money, boundlessly, to the tribal leaderships which posed
a threat to the Umayyads in order to bring them under control. For
example, Malik bin Hubairah al-Sakooni, who was shocked at the murder of
Hijr bin Uday and his companions, planned to lead a military offense
against the Umayyad rule. But Mu'awiyah dissuaded him with 100,000
Dirhams which he sent to him. [^3]He was pleased with this sum and
forewent his earlier plans.

Others were hushed by money also. A poet described this phenomenon in
these two lines of verse:

“When a tongue criticizes you, it is cut with dinars,

And when a conscience rocks you, it is shaken with a good official
post.”

5. The last item of this unjust, oppressive policy, was the plan to
murder Imam Hasan (as) with poison. Mu'awiyah presented it to him
through Imam's wife, Ja'dah, the daughter of al-Ash'ath.

Thus, Imam Hasan (as) went to meet his Lord, while standing in the
fields of jihad, for the sake of Islam, which was preached by his
father, the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) and his
grandfather, the Great Messenger of Allah (S).

Imam Hasan (as) attained martyrdom on the seventh day of the month of
Safar (or the fifth or twentieth of the month of Rabi' al-Awwal in some
reports), in the year 50 A.H.

He had asked his family, in his last will, to be buried by the side of
his grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (S), but the Umayyads and the
governor of Madina refused to allow his burial there. [^4]42

Ahlul Bayt (as) was thus forced to inter him at al-Baqi', by the side of
his mother, Fatimah al-Zahra' (as).

Peace by upon you, Abu-Muhammad Hasan bin ‘Ali, when you were alive,
wronged, and dead.......

[^1]: Tawfeeq Abu Alam, Ahlul-Bayt, p. 343, quoted from Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah.

[^2]: See: Hayat al-Imam Hasan (as) to be acquainted with those
arguments, vol.2, p. 305 and the following pages.

[^3]: Muhammad Mahdi Shams al-Deen, Thawrat al-Husayn (as) (Revolution
of Husayn (as),), (Beirut:1977) , 4th ed., p. 127.

[^4]: Bin Abi al-Hadeed says: “Abu Faraj says: 'Hasan (as) was laid to
rest in the tomb of Fatimah, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah,
(S), at al-Baqi'. He had expressed his desire in his last will, to be
buried with the Prophet (S) but Marwan bin al-Hakim did not allow it.
The tribe of Ummayad carried their weapons. Marwan said: 'O Lord! War is
better than easy and comfortable life.'“ See: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah,
(Egypt:1962), vol. 16, p. 50.


