Introduction
============

Praise be to Allah, the Praiseworthy, and peace and the blessing of
Allah be upon the choice of His Messengers, Muhammad, and on the chosen
people from among his ummah, his pure household and his righteous
companions.

Leaving aside what the “official” historians have written and the
fabrications, lies and falsehoods they have made, we will see that the
majority of unbiased analysts and the common biographers recounted the
life of Imam Hasan bin ‘Ali (as), the Prophet's grandson, with no
analysis or explanation about the great and unique position he took
towards Mu'awiyah bin Abu Sufyan.

It is axiomatic that one cannot evaluate any historical event devoid of
its major heroes, causes, reasons, the circumstances that led to it, and
its results. Given objective, comprehension and unbiased examination
into the event, the judgment can be correct, and the conclusion sound.
History can, thus, say the truth.

The basil of the Messenger of Allah, peace and the blessings of Allah be
with him and his progeny, the pure Imam Hasan bin ‘Ali, peace be with
him, drew the most excellent image of political expertise and clever
sense of jihad (Holy War), by his move against Mu'awiyah. It is not
because he chose to seek peace or compromise that he agreed to a treaty
in the Year of Unity as it was later called. It was because he wished to
disclose the veiled falsities, and foil the plot of the unbelievers with
the conditions he stipulated in the treaty with Mu'awiyah. Imam Hasan
(as) was sure Mu'awiyah wouldn't honor any one of them. That is exactly
what had happened. Mu'awiyah put the terms of the treaty under his foot!

Moreover, Hasan (as) wanted to reserve his brother, Husayn (as) for the
Day of Taff (sacrifice). By so doing, the epic would be consummated. The
family of the Messenger of Allah (S) would attain martyrdom. No child,
youth or grown-up would be spared. The family of the Prophet, the trusts
of Allah, the Compassionate, would be taken captive from Karbala to
Yazid bin Mu'awiyah, bound up in fetters and shackles.

In signing and agreeing to this treaty, Imam Hasan (as) aimed at
perpetuating the steadfastness of the right in the face of the
falsehood, and supporting the uprising of the mujahidin (those who fight
in the way of Allah) against any deviation from Islam.

In presenting “Rays from the Life of Imam Hasan bin ‘Ali (as)”,
Al-Balagh Foundation hopes the present Muslim generation would find in
it the light which brightens their path towards Allah, the Most High,
and a flame which sharpens their determination, and solidifies their
will to fight the enemies of Islam and humanity.

Allah, the Most High, is certainly, the best Patron, and best Supporter.


