Spiritual Side
==============

The excellent preparation which was provided for the grandson of the
Holy Prophet (S), helped his spiritual entity to sublimate. His
closeness to Allah, and his attachment to Him was a source of awe and
respect.

Following are a few narratives which shed light on this side of his
character:

Imam al-Sadiq (as) said:

*“Hasan bin ‘Ali (as) was certainly the most true worshiper, ascetic and
merited man among the people of his time.”*

Rawdhat al-Waideen (Orchard of the Preachers) mentions that whenever
*“Hasan would do his ablution, he would tremble and his face would turn
pale. He was asked about it, and he replied: 'It is only natural that
one who stands in the presence of the Lord of the Throne turns ashen,
and trembles...'“*

Imam al-Sadiq (as) is also reported to have said:

*“Hasan bin ‘Ali (as) had certainly gone to Hajj twenty-five times on
foot. He shared his property with Allah twice...or three times.”*

‘Ali bin Jadh'an, and Abu Na'im report in Hulyat al-Awaliya (Ornament of
the Saints) and Tabaqat bin Sa'd (Castes of bin Sa'd) that Imam Hasan
had given all his money to the needy twice, seeking Allah's pleasure,
and had given half his money to the needy three times. He would even
give a single shoe and retain the other, and give a single sandal and
retain the other. When he approached the door of the mosque, he would
say: *'O Lord! Your guest is at Your gate. O Generous! The transgressor
has come to You. Forgive me my ugly deeds with Your Generosity. O
Generous!'*

When he remembered death he wept. When he thought of the grave he wept.
When he thought of the Resurrection and Day of Judgment he gasped so
deeply and painfully that he fainted because of it.

When he recited the Qur'an and came across a verse addressing the
faithful by these words: *'O you who believe...,'* he said: *'Here I am,
my Lord, here I am...'*


