Knowledge and Faith
===================

Sometimes you see that one has knowledge of these realities but has no
faith. Undertakers are not afraid of the dead, for they have certainty
that the dead cannot harm one, even when he was alive and had a spirit
in his body he was not harmful, so what harm can he be now as an empty
frame? However, those who are afraid of the dead are afraid because they
do not have faith in this truth. They merely have knowledge. They know
about God and the Day of Atonement, but they lack certainty.

The heart is unaware of that which the intellect has understood. They
know the proofs for the existence of God and the reality of the
Resurrection, but these very same intellectual proofs may be veils
covering the heart which do not permit the light of faith to shine in.
Until God, the Exalted, frees them from the darkness and the obscurities
and leads them to enter the worlds of light and radiances:

***“Allah is the Guardian [*****wali*****] of those who believe; He
brings them out of the darkness into the light”*** (Q 2:257).

He whose Guardian [*wali*] is God, the Blessed and Exalted, and who is
taken by Him out from the darkness never commits another sin, never
backbites, never slanders others, and he is never vengeful or envious of
his brothers in faith. His own heart is filled with a feeling of
luminosity and he no longer holds the world or what it contains in high
esteem.

As Imam ‘Ali (*as*) said, “If all the world and what it contains were
offered to me to cruelly and unjustly take the skin of a grain of barley
from the mouth of an ant, I would never accept it.” [^1]

But some of you trample over everything, and you backbite the great
[scholars] of Islam. If others speak ill of the grocers and perfume
sellers on the street and backbite them, for your part some of you
relate unfair things, insult and are impudent toward the scholars of
Islam, because you are not firmly grounded in faith and you do not
believe in [divine] retribution for your own deeds.

Impeccability [*ismat*] is nothing but perfect faith. The meaning of the
impeccability of the prophets and the Friends of God [*awliya*] is not
that, for instance, Gabriel took them by the hand. Of course, if Gabriel
had taken the hand of Shimr, [^2] he would never have committed a sin.
However, impeccability is the offspring of faith.

If a man had faith in God, the Exalted, and if he saw God Almighty with
the eyes of his heart as one sees the sun, it would not be possible for
him to commit a sin, just as if he were standing before an armed power,
he would find some ‘impeccability’.

This fear comes from committing sin. The Impeccable, [*ma‘sumin*], peace
be with them, after their creation from pure clay, because of the
effects of their spiritual discipline, and acquisition of radiance and
virtuous character traits, always see themselves as being in the
presence of God, who knows all things and encompasses all affairs.

They have faith in the meaning of the words, *“La ilaha illallah”*
[There is no god but Allah], and they believe that other than God, all
persons and all things are perishing and have no role in determining
man’s destiny,

***“All things are perishing but His Face”*** (Q28:88).

If man is certain and has faith that all the outward and inward worlds
are in the presence of the Lord, and that God, the Exalted, is present
everywhere and sees everything, in the presence of God and God’s
blessings there would be no possibility for committing sins. Man is not
able to commit sins before a discerning child, and he does not expose
his private parts; so how could he expose his private parts before God,
the Exalted, and not dread to commit a crime?

This is because he has faith in the presence of the child, however, with
regard to the divine presence, if he has knowledge, he still lacks
faith. Due to the multiplicity of his sins which have darkened and
blackened his heart, he is totally unable to accept such truths, and may
not even consider them to be likely.

Actually, man would not recklessly run wild if he considered it all
likely, he need not have certainty, that which is reported in the Noble
Qur’an is right, the promises and the threats, and that he should amend
his ways and deeds. If you consider it all likely that ferocious beasts
are to be found along the path which might harm you, or that there are
armed bandits who might hold you up, you would refrain from taking that
path, and you would try to ascertain the correctness or incorrectness of
these reports.

Is it possible for someone to consider it possible that hell exists and
that one may remain forever in its fire while at the same time doing
wrong? Can it be said that one who considers God Almighty to be present
and watching and Who sees himself to be in the presence of the Lord, and
who considers it possible that there should be retribution for his words
and deeds, a reckoning and chastisement, and that in this world every
word he speaks, every step he takes, every deed he does, is recorded by
angels of Allah called ‘*Raqib and ‘Atid*,’ [^3] and they carefully
record all his words and deeds, and in such a state, could he fearless
of his own doing?

It is painful [to realize] that they do not even consider these truths
to be possible. From the manners of some and their way of living it is
obvious that they do not even consider the existence of a supernatural
world to be possible, since the mere consideration of this possibility
keeps man from committing many wrongs.

[^1]: “By Allah, if the seven climes and what is under their skies were
offered to me to be sinful to Allah by taking the skin of a grain of
barley from the ant, I would not do it.” Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 215.

[^2]: Shimr was the assassin of Imam Husayn, peace be with him, and
symbolizes evil. [Tr.]

[^3]: “He utters not a word but there is by him a watcher at hand
[raqibun ‘atidun]” (Q 50:18).


