Another Warning
===============

Your future is dark: numerous enemies are surrounding you on every side
and from all strata; dangerous fiendish plans are ready to be enacted
which will destroy you and the seminaries. The colonialists dream about
what they will do with you; they have deep dream about what they will do
with Islam and the Muslims. With the pretense of Islam, they have drawn
up dangerous plans for you.

Only in the shade of refinement, preparation and the proper arrangement
and order will you be able to push away these corruption and
difficulties, and frustrate the plans of the colonialists. I am now
living the last days of my life. Sooner or later I will leave you. But I
see before me dark black days ahead for you. If you do not reform and
prepare yourselves, and if you do not rule your studies and your lives
with order and discipline, then, God forbid, you will be doomed to
annihilation.

Before you lose the chance, before you fall into the hands of the enemy
with regard to every religious and scholarly affair, think! Wake up!
Arise! The first stage is to decide to refine and purify your souls and
to reform yourselves. Prepare and organize yourselves. Establish some
order and discipline in the seminaries. Do not let others come to
arrange [the affairs of] the seminaries.

Do not let others take hold of the seminaries with the excuse that
‘these people are not capable of it; it is not their sort of work; they
are just a group of loafers who have gathered in the seminaries,’ and
then in the name of organization and reform, to spoil the seminaries and
take you under their own control. Do not give them an excuse. If you are
organized and purified, and if in every respect you are well ordered and
arranged others will not be able to aspire to control you.

There will then be no way to penetrate into the seminaries and the
clerical society. Prepare and purify yourselves. Get ready to prevent
the mischief with which you will be faced. Prepare your seminaries for
resistance against the events which are to come. God forbid, black days
lie ahead of you. The conditions are ripe for bad days to come. The
colonialists want to destroy all aspects of Islam, and you must stand up
against them.

With love of self and position, with arrogance and pride, you cannot
mount any resistance. An evil scholar, a scholar who inclines toward the
world, a scholar who thinks of preserving his position and
administrative post, will not be able to combat the enemies of Islam. He
will be more harmful than others. Take a step for the sake of God.
Dispel the love of the world from your heart. Then you will be able to
engage in combat.

From this moment on, develop and raise this point in your heart, that I
must be an armed soldier of Islam, and sacrifice myself for Islam. I
must work for Islam until I am destroyed. Do not make excuse for
yourself that today is inappropriate. Try to be useful for the future of
Islam. In short, become a human being! The colonialists are afraid of
human beings. They are afraid of man. The colonialists, who want to
plunder all we have, will not allow the training of human beings in
religious and scholarly universities.

They are afraid of man. If a man is found in a country, it bothers them,
and endangers their interests. It is your duty to make something of
yourselves, to become perfect men, and to stand up against the vicious
plans of the enemies of Islam. If you are not organized and prepared, of
you do not resist and combat the lashes which whip the body of Islam
every day, not only will you yourselves be destroyed, but also the
precepts and laws of Islam will be annihilated, and you will be
responsible.

You *‘ulama*! You scholars! You Muslims! You will be responsible. First
you *‘ulama* and seminary students and then the rest of the Muslims will
be responsible: “All of you are shepherds and all of you are responsible
for tending the flock.” [^1]

You young people must strengthen your wills so that you can stand up
against every oppression and injustice. Other than this there is no
alternative: your dignity, the dignity of Islam, and the dignity of the
Islamic countries depend upon your resistance and opposition.

God Almighty! Protect Islam, the Muslims and the Islamic countries from
foreign evils. Cut the hands of the colonialists and traitors to Islam
in the Islamic countries and in the seminaries. Grant success and help
to the Islamic *‘ulama* and to the great *marja’*[^2] in their defense
of the sacred laws of the Noble Qur’an and their advancement of the holy
ideals of Islam. Make the clergy of Islam aware of their heavy duties
and important responsibilities in the present epoch.

Protect and keep safe the seminaries and clerical centers from the
thievery and influence of the enemies of Islam and the hands of the
colonialists. Grant the success of making something of themselves and
purifying and refining the soul to the young generation of clerics and
university students and to the entire Muslim community.

Free the people of Islam from the sleep of negligence, from frailty,
from apathy and inflexibility of thought, so that with the lustrous
revolutionary teachings of the Qur’an they may come to themselves, rise
up, and in the shade of unity and oneness they may cut the hands of the
colonialists and of the inveterate enemies of Islam from the Islamic
countries, and so that they may regain the freedom, independence,
nobility, and greatness which they have lost.

***“Our Lord, pour down upon us patience, and make our steps firm and
assist us against the unbelieving people”*** (Q 2:250).

[^1]: ‘Awali al-La’ali, vol. 1, p. 129, chap. 8, hadith 3. Al-Jami‘
as-Saghir, vol. 2, p. 45, 95.

[^2]: The maraji‘ at-taqlid are the sources of imitation for Islamic
law. [Tr.]


