Preface
=======

The ordinary man normally has a one-dimensional personality, but great
people who are truly liberated, such as the prophets and friends of
Allah have personalities of several aspects. Sometimes it is difficult
or even impossible for an ordinary person’s intellect to grasp how these
various dimensions can be encompassed in the existence of such great
people.

As an outstanding religious figure, Imam Khomeini may be included among
such great personalities. In addition to his leadership abilities,
political insight and far sightedness, he now also may be considered to
be a distinguished teacher of Islamic ethics.

For various reasons, this aspect of his personality has not become very
well known. The book which is before you is composed of some of his
lectures on morals, which were delivered prior to the victory of the
Islamic Revolution during the period of his exile in Najaf. He invites
all, and especially the students of divinity, to refinement of the soul,
asceticism and piety.

Since English speaking Muslims have expressed interest in studying this
work, the Islamic Thought Foundation has undertaken its publication, and
Dr. Muhammad Legenhausen has accepted the responsibility for its
translation. Prior to this, another of Imam Khomeini’s works, *A Jug of
Love*, was also published by this Foundation.

It is worthy of mention that the Islamic Thought Foundation is a
charitable organization which is independently funded and administered
for the purpose of printing and publishing beneficial works in various
languages.

Accordingly, more than sixty works by outstanding Islamic figures have
been published thus far. We pray that God may grant our dear readers
with the success of benefiting as much as possible from the contents of
this work.

Islamic Thought Foundation  
*First Publication, 1995*


