Introduction
============

In New York City on West Broadway there is a bookstore affiliated with a
Turkish Sufi order. In the summer of 1993, I purchased a few books
there, and one of the other customers, a black man wearing a small white
cap began talking with me. After exchanging *Salams*, and after I told
him that I was working in Iran, he asked me whether I had ever seen a
book by Imam Khomeini called *Jihad al-Akbar*.

I told him that although I was not familiar with the work, I thought
that it had been translated by Hamid Algar, and included in his
collection of translations of Imam’s speeches, *Islam and Revolution*
(Mizan Press). He was not familiar with that work, but insisted that the
Muslims in America had a real need for translations of Imam’s works, and
he was particularly interested in *Jihad al-Akbar*.

When I went home, I found that a couple pages of the speeches of Imam
which were given in Najaf and later collected under the title *Jihad
al-Akbar* had been translated by Prof. Algar. The following autumn, when
I returned to Iran, I found the *Jihad al-Akbar* had recently published
as a small booklet. Remembering the American Muslim I met in the Sufi
Bookstore, I decided to make a complete translation of it.

Since I lacked the competence in Farsi for such an undertaking, I
solicited the assistance of ‘Azim Sarvdalir, with whom I was studying
Farsi and doing other translations at *Bunyad Baqir al-‘Ulum* in Qum.
Mr. Sarvdalir was happy to take up the project, which, with the
encouragement of the *Bunyad*, was completed the following June;
*Al-hamdulillah*!

This is a work in morals, in Farsi and Arabic, *akhlaq*. It is not a
philosophical work, but a moral exhortation directed toward the seminary
students of Najaf, and toward the institution of the seminary, or
*hawzah ‘ilmiyyah*, as well. The work reveals the moral sensitivity of
Imam Khomeini, his paternal anxiety regarding the seminarians and his
dedication to the institution of the seminary.

Upon reading this work one will discover that along the revolutionary
fervor and condemnation of foreign imperialism there can be found a
mystic’s taste for spiritual devotions. The waters of *‘irfan* (gnosis)
run deep in the thought of Imam Khomeini and nourish his moral outlook.
This work is a testimony to the truth of Shahid Mutahhari’s[^1] remark
that *‘irfan* and ethics are both concerned with the improvement of
character, but from different perspectives.

In ethical works one finds a description of virtues and vices and moral
prescriptions and proscriptions, while in *‘irfani* works one finds a
description of a process through which the soul moves toward Allah and
acquires virtues corresponding to the divine attributes along the way.

The way of moral reform advocated by Imam Khomeini is a process of
spiritual development in which the adept learns to conquer and then lose
interest in his worldly desires and become totally devoted to God. This
process is described as a journey toward Allah, a journey which holds a
central place in *‘irfan*, which may be considered the kernel of Islam.

This journey is described in different ways and from a variety of
viewpoints in the poetry of the Sufis, in the transcendent philosophy of
Mulla Sadra, [^2] and in the poetry and teachings of Imam Khomeini, as
well.

Although the present work consists of speeches delivered to the students
at Najaf, the moral advice given is particularly pertinent for all
Muslims in the contemporary situation of discord and confusion. Imam
Khomeini advises the seminarians to abandon their quarrelling, which
only serve as an opportunity for mischief on the part of the enemies of
Islam.

In the Islamic world today, we also observe that the opponents of the
Islamic movement take advantage of disputes among Muslims. Imam reminds
the students that they do not possess sufficient wealth and power to
make these things worth fighting over even according to the standards of
materialism.

Parallel remarks are appropriate for the Muslim world as a whole, given
the poverty and powerlessness which characterized the vast masses of the
Islamic *ummah*. Imam sanctions the students that they should take heed
of the fact that the major purpose of the prophets and the Imams has
been spiritual progress and moral improvement, and that the students
must not content themselves with learning a few terms of Islamic
jurisprudence.

The same warning should be heeded by contemporary Muslims. We must not
content ourselves with a handful of slogans and the performance of a few
rituals, but must take steps for spiritual and moral growth. Not merely
in the seminary of Najaf, but wherever and to whom ever Islam is taught,
this teaching must not confine itself to a rehearsal of basic beliefs
and necessary practices, but must be accompanied by the moral and
spiritual teachings which were the primary focus of the prophets and the
Imams, peace be upon them all.

The present work may be read in order to gain insight into the thought
of the founder of the Islamic Revolution of Iran. It may be read in
order to become familiar with the sort of problems which existed in
Najaf at the time the lectures were delivered. It can be read as an
example of the type of moral preaching which could be expected from
among the best of Shi‘ite moral teachers of this age.

It is a work which can be read in order to learn something about
history, sociology or anthropology, and in all of these areas valuable
lessons are to be learned. But more important than any of these is the
moral lessons to be drawn for the Islamic community in general. Let us
not content ourselves with ritual duties while ignoring the need for
moral reform.

Let us appoint moral guides in all of our Islamic educational
institutions, so that Islamic education may become more truly a training
in submission to Allah, and let us draw upon the example as well as the
teachings of the prophets and the Imams so that we may learn to seek to
commence the journey of the believer toward Allah, *insha Allah*!

The remainder of this introduction consists of a few biographical
remarks with particular reference to the moral and spiritual training of
Imam Khomeini, may he rest in peace.

Ruhullah Musawi Khomeini, was born in 1902 in the town of Khomein, which
is about half way between Tehran and the southwestern city of Ahwaz.
Ruhullah’s father and grandfather were religious scholars in Khomein.
His father, Ayatullah Mustafa, is said to have been murdered by bandits
when Ruhullah was less than six months old. His mother, Hajar, was the
daughter of the religious scholar Aqa Mirza Ahmad Mujtahid Khansari.

The boy was raised by his mother and an aunt, both of whom died of
cholera when he was six. His education was then supervised by his older
brother, Ayatullah Pasandideh. At nineteen, Ruhullah traveled northwest
from Khomein to the city of Arak, where he became a student of Shaykh
‘Abd al-Karim Ha’eri, a leading religious scholar of his day.

The following year, Shaykh Ha’eri and his student Ruhullah moved to Qum,
where the Shaykh reorganized and revitalized the entire institution of
religious education in that city, which was already famous as a center
of learning. Ruhullah studied in Qum until the death of Shaykh Ha’eri,
in 1936 after which he began teaching theology, ethics, philosophy, and
mysticism.

It was during his first fourteen years in Qum that Ayatullah Khomeini
became familiar with the intertwined traditions of philosophy and
mysticism which flourished during Iran’s Safawid period (16th and 17th
centuries) and which continue to exert an enormous influence on
contemporary Shi‘ite thought.

When he arrived in Qum, Imam Khomeini began to receive private
instruction in ethics with Haj Mirza Jawad Maleki Tabrizi, the author of
a book entitled, *The Secrets of Prayer* (*Asrar as-Salat*), Imam
Khomeini also wrote a book on this topic, called *The Secret of Prayer:
Prayers of the Gnostics or Ascension of the Wayfarers* (*Sirr as-Salat:
Salat al-‘Arifin ya Mi‘raj as-Salikin*). His instruction under Mirza
Jawad continued until the death of the teacher, in 1925.

Imam Khomeini also studied the mystic traditions from Haj Mirza
Abu’l-Hasan Rafi’i Qazvini, who was in Qum from 1923 to 1927. Qazvini is
known for his commentary on a supplication which is recited daily in the
pre-dawn hours during the month of Ramadan. Later, Imam Khomeini would
also write a commentary on this prayer.

Finally, and perhaps most importantly among his spiritual guides, there
was Aqa Mirza Muhammad ‘Ali Shahabadi, the author of *Spray from the
Seas* (*Rashahat al-Bahar*), who was in Qum from 1928 to 1935. In the
mystic tradition of which Shahabadi was a part, the phrase ‘spray from
the sea’ may be taken as a symbol for inspiration from God.

It was with Shahabadi that Imam Khomeini is reported to have studied the
*Fusus al-Hikam* [Bezels of Wisdom] of Ibn al-‘Arabi [^3] (d. 1240) and
the important commentary on that work by Qaysari (d. 1350).

In 1929, Imam Khomeini married, and a year later his first son, Mustafa,
was born. Over the course of the years, two other sons and four
daughters were born. Mustafa would grow up to be killed in Iraq by
agents of the Shah. The youngest son Sayyid Ahmad, would become a
secretary to his father, and afterward, a political leader in his own
right.

Recalling his years as a student in Qum, Imam Khomeini himself has
publicly commented on the hostility toward mysticism and philosophy
which was to be found in certain quarters in Qum, feelings which are
still harbored by some members of the clergy. The story is often
repeated that when Imam had begun teaching philosophy in Qum and his
first son was a small child.

Some seminarians felt it necessary to perform a ritual cleansing of a
cup from which the child had drunk water because of his impurity as the
son of a teacher of philosophy! Imam reports that his teacher,
Shahabadi, sought to oppose this hostility by making people familiar
with the doctrines of the mystics so they could see for themselves that
there was nothing inimical to Islam in the teachings of the Gnostics.

Once a group of merchants came to see the late Shahabadi (may God have
mercy on him), and he began to speak to them on the same mystical topics
that he taught to everyone. I asked him whether  
 it was appropriate to speak to them of such matters and he replied:
“Let them be exposed just once to these heretical teachings! I too now
find it incorrect to divide people into categories and pronounce some
incapable of understanding these matters.”

One of the most dramatic efforts of Imam Khomeini to bring mysticism to
the people occurred after the Islamic Revolution with his Lectures on
*Surah al-Fatihah* from which the above report has been quoted. After
the Revolution, there were televised lessons on the interpretation of
the Qur’an by Ayatullah Taleqani.[^4]

When Ayatullah Taleqani died on September 10, 1979, about a half year
after the victory of the revolution, the televised commentary on the
Qur’an was taken up by a younger scholar. Imam Khomeini suggested that a
more senior authority might be sought for the program. After consulting
among themselves, those responsible for the broadcast decided to request
that Imam himself provide the commentary.

Imam responded that if the cameras could be brought to his residence he
would comply with the request. The result was the Lectures on *Surah
al-Fatihah*, a stunning mystical interpretation of the opening verses of
the Qur’an, in which one of the dominant themes was the claim that the
whole world is a name of God.

In these lectures Imam also contends that the philosophers of Islam, the
mystics and the poets have used different terminologies to express the
same insights, and he urges his viewers not to reject what is taught by
members of these groups until they understand what is being expressed,
even if  
 the language used raises suspicions of heterodoxy. Thus, Imam’s
preaching in this area was very much a plea for tolerance.

Imam Khomeini’s emphasis on tolerance was not limited to mysticism and
poetry. Imam Khomeini’s teacher in Islamic jurisprudence, Shaykh Ha’eri,
was succeeded in Qum by Ayatullah Burujerdi, who came to be recognized
as the supreme authority on the subject. After the death of Ayatullah
Burujerdi, in 1961, Imam Khomeini came to be recognized as one of
several supreme experts in Islamic jurisprudence, a *marja‘-e taqlid*.

In this role, Imam Khomeini issued a number of decrees which were looked
upon with suspicion by more conservative clerics. Many of the religious
scholars in both Sunni and Shi‘ite legal schools have ruled that music
and chess are forbidden activities. Imam Khomeini ruled that some forms
of music are permissible and that playing chess is not contrary to
Islamic law. As a result, interest in traditional Iranian music has
thrived since the Revolution.

Imam Khomeini has also encouraged women to play an expanded role in
society, to the chagrin of more conservative interpreters of Islamic
law.

To Western observers it may seem paradoxical that the very same man who
preached tolerance with respect to the perceived challenges to orthodoxy
posed by philosophy, mysticism, poetry, and music, should also have been
so intolerant toward the proponents of Westernization, toward the form
of Marxism propagated in the name of Islam by the People’s Mojahiden
Organization (PMOI), and toward those who, like Salman Rushdie, would
insult the Prophet of Islam or his family.

The apparent contradiction is removed once it is recognized that Imam
Khomeini did not value tolerance for its own sake, but for the sake of
Islam. Central to Imam Khomeini’s understanding of Islam is gnosis,
*‘irfan*. In Sunni Islam, the exoteric and esoteric dimensions of
religion have been kept largely distinct, with the esoteric mostly
confined to the Sufi orders.

In Shi‘ite Islam, there has been a long tradition in which many of the
practices and teachings of the Sufis have been integrated into the
religious life and thought of an important segment of the official
clergy. Those form of mysticism, or gnosis, draws upon the Sufi theory
of Ibn al-‘Arabi, the philosophical mysticism of Sadr ad-Din Shirazi[^5]
(d. 1640) and Hadi Sabzewari[^6] (d. 1878), both of whom were Shi‘ite
clerics, and the poetic expression of mysticism by Mawlawi Jalal ad-Din
ar-Rumi[^7] (d. 1273) and Hafiz [^8](d. 1391).

The poetry is often set to music. Because of political and religious
repression, those involved in *‘irfan* often had to keep their teachings
underground. Imam Khomeini, in line with sentiments his reports having
been expressed by his teacher Shahabadi, sought to initiate a process
through which *‘irfan* could become public.

This process was not to be a sudden revolution. His own works on
*‘irfan* were not very widely distributed during his lifetime, but a
persistent emphasis on the mystical elements of Shi‘te thought were
interspersed among the more popular political declaration, and may be
found in *The Greatest Jihad*, as well.

The revolutionary Islamic movement led by Imam Khomeini may even be
viewed as the exoteric dimension of the impetus to reveal Islamic
mysticism to the public. The Islamic revolution was a means to bring
Islam into public life, from which it was being marginalized during the
reign of the Shah. The process of making Islam central to public life
was also resisted by conservative religious groups, who saw in this
movement a departure from tradition.

Imam Khomeini argued that the guardian jurist of Islamic law had the
authority to modify the traditional understanding of the law in order to
protect the Islamic order. Conservatives would argue that any break from
tradition could only bring deviation from Islamic order.

The kind of judgment required by Imam Khomeini’s vision of Islamic
government is one which goes beyond what is provided for in traditional
discussions of Islamic jurisprudence. It is a kind of wisdom, however,
which can be expected of the ‘perfect man’, the *insan kamil*, the goal
of personal development in the mystic tradition.

An example of the way in which his political awareness demanded a
tolerance not found among more conservative clerics may be found in his
attitudes toward Sunni Islam. In traditional Shi‘ite circles it would
not be considered permissible for a Shi‘ite to stand behind a Sunni
prayer leader. Imam Khomeini ruled that such prayer was valid, and even
himself publicly participated in ritual prayer behind a Sunni cleric.

Thus, the flexibility and tolerance which characterized Imam Khomeini’s
thought do not stem from the libertarian element in Islamic thought, but
from a commitment to a movement from the esoteric to exoteric dimensions
of Islamic life, a movement which demanded the implementation of Islamic
law as well as the propagation of mystical ideas.

Imam Khomeini’s attitudes toward mysticism and politics are especially
well illustrated by his invitation to President Gorbachev to embrace
Islam. On January 7, 1989, Imam Khomeini sent a delegation to Moscow led
by Ayatullah Jawad Amuli who presented Imam’s letter of invitation to
President Gorbachev. [^9]

In the letter, Imam Khomeini congratulated Gorbachev for his admission
of the failures of communism, and he suggested that the Soviet leader
consider the alternative to communist ideology posed by Islam.

In order to acquaint the Russian leader with Islam, Imam Khomeini
recommended the works of the philosophers Farabi and Ibn Sina
(Avicenna), and the mystic, Ibn al-‘Arabi. Conservative clerics were
incensed that Imam should choose to represent Islamic thought through
the works of philosophers and a Sufi, instead of works of jurisprudence
and traditional devotional literature.

President Gorbachev politely declined the invitation to convert,
although he said that he would consider the importance of spiritual
values in society. Imam Khomeini appears to have been genuinely
disappointed that the response was not affirmative, and when a Soviet
delegate read Gorbachev’s reply to Imam Khomeini in Tehran.

Imam repeatedly interrupted with criticism of the views expressed in the
letter. Such unconventional diplomacy demonstrates Imam’s propagation,
despite criticism from the clergy which he championed. It also provides
an indication of the unusual way in which mysticism and politics were
combined in the thinking of Imam Khomeini.

Imam wrote several works which treated mystical topics, or which treated
topics in a way characteristic of the mystical tradition. Their titles
are suggestive: *Commentary on the Supplication before Dawn* (*Sharh
ad-Du‘a as-Sahar*)*, The Lamp of Guidance to Vicegerency and
Guardianship* (*Misbah al-Hidayat ala’l-Khilafat wal-Wilayah*)*, The
Countenance of Allah* (*Liqa’ Allah*)*, The* *Secret of Prayer: Prayers
of the Gnostics or Ascension of the Wayfarers* (*Sirr as-Salat: Salat
al-‘Arifin ya Mi‘raj as-Salikin*)

*Annotation to the Commentary on ‘Bezels of Wisdom’* (*Ta’liqat ala
Sharh al-Fusus al-Hikam*)*, Annotation to the Commentary on ‘The Lamp of
Intimacy’* (*Ta’liqat ala Sharh al-Misbah al-Uns*)*,*

Two books of commentaries and annotations to another commentary on a
collection of reports regarding the Prophet and Imams called *Ras
al-Jalut,* Lectures on *Surah al-Fatihah, Marginalia to ‘The Journeys’*
(*Hashiyeh ala’l-Asfar*)*, Disciplines of the Prayer* (*Adab
as-Salat*)*, Commentary on Forty Sayings of the Prophet and Imams*
(*Chehel Hadith*).

After he became a *marja‘-e taqlid*, political events dominated the life
of Imam Khomeini. In 1963, the Shah’s forces massacred thousands who
protested against the dictatorship. Imam Khomeini was arrested for his
inflammatory speeches and was taken to Tehran. Later he was released
with the announcement that he had agreed to refrain from further
political activity. He denied that he had made any such agreement and
was picked up again.

He was taken to an unknown destination by car. When the car turned off
the main highway, it is reported that Imam imagined that he would be
assassinated in a remote quarter of the desert. He felt his heart to see
if it was racing, but found out that it was calm. He narrated that he
was never afraid. He was taken to a small airstrip where a plane waited
to take him to exile in Turkey.

The following year his place of exile was changed to the shrine city of
Najaf in southern Iraq. Imam Khomeini remained in Najaf for fourteen
years, and it was during these years that the lectures collected under
the title, *Jihad al-Akbar* were delivered. In 1978, the Shah put
pressure on the Ba‘athist government in Iraq to expel Ayatullah
Khomeini.

After being refused asylum at the airport in Kuwait, Imam commented that
he would spend his life traveling from one airport to another, but that
he would not be keep silence. Finally, he was admitted to France, where
he resided at Neauphle-le-Châteaux, outside Paris. In February 1979, he
returned triumphantly to Iran and the Islamic Republic was launched.

Imam Khomeini was revered for the simplicity of his life-style and for
his rigorous attention to even supererogatory details of Islamic ritual.
He is said to have always faced Mecca when he performed ablutions. He
preferred to purchase the less expensive shoes. If he drank half a glass
of water, he would put a piece of paper over it to keep the dust out and
save the rest for later.

Some claim that he had a special relation with the twelfth Imam, the
Mahdi, peace be upon him, the awaited one who will defeat injustice
prior to the final judgment. Such claims are also part of the mystical
tradition of Shi‘ite Islam.

Yet another year of our lives has passed. You young people are advancing
toward old age, and we old people toward death. During this academic
year you have become aware of the extent of your learning and study. You
know how much you have acquired and how high the edifice of your
education has been raised.

However, with respect to the refinement of virtue, the acquisition of
religious manners, divine learning and purification of the soul, what
have you done? What positive steps have you taken? Have you had any
thought of refinement or self-reformation? Have you had any program in
this field? Unfortunately, I must submit that you have not done anything
striking, and that with regard to the reformation and refinement of the
self you have not taken any great steps.

[^1]: Professor Ayatullah Murtada Mutahhari (1298-1358 AHS) was born on
Bahman 13, 1298 AHS in the village of Fariman near Mashhad to a family
of clergy. At the age of 12, he went to Mashhad where he learned the
basics of Islamic sciences and then moved to Qum where he attended the
class sessions conducted by the great authorities of the theological
center. From 1319 AHS Mutahhari had taken part in the sessions led by
His Eminence Imam Khomeini (r) and other famous teachers of the time.
Moreover, he himself conducted lessons in subjects like Arabic
literature, logic, kalam (scholasticism), jurisprudence, and philosophy.
In 1331 AHS Mutahhari was transferred from Qum to Tehran and in 1334 AHS
he was invited to teach Islamic sciences at the Faculty of Islamic
Sciences, Tehran University. He was arrested at the midnight of Khordad
15, 1342 AHS and spent 43 days in prison. After Imam Khomeini’s
migration to Paris in France, Mutahhari went to meet him and His
Eminence assigned him the responsibility of organizing the Council of
the Islamic Revolution. On the night of Ordibehesht 11, 1358 AHS [May 2,
1979] Mutahhari was martyred by an agent of the Furqan terrorist group.
He wrote more than 50 books and tens of articles, and delivered scores
of speeches. His Eminence Imam Khomeini (r) said of Mutahhari: “His
written and spoken words are, without exception, educational and
enlivening… I recommend the students and intellectual group not to let
Mutahhari’s words be forgotten by un-Islamic tricks…” (Pub.)

[^2]: Mulla Sadra (d. 1050 AH/1640), also called Sadr ad-Din Shirazi,
was a philosopher who led the Iranian cultural renaissance in the 17th
century. The foremost representative of Ishraqi [Illuminationist] School
of philosopher-mystics, he is commonly regarded by Iranians as the
greatest philosopher of Iran. A scion of a notable Shirazi family, Mulla
Sadra completed his education in Isfahan, then the leading cultural and
intellectual center of Iran. After his studies with scholars there, he
produced several works, the most famous of which was his Asfar
(Journeys). Asfar contains the bulk of his philosophy, which was
influenced by a personal mysticism bordering on the ascetic that he
experienced during a 15-year retreat at Kahak, a village near Qum in
Iran. Toward the end of his life, Mulla Sadra returned to Shiraz to
teach. His teachings, however, were considered heretical by the orthodox
Shi‘ite theologians, who persecuted him, though his powerful family
connections permitted him to continue to write. He died on a pilgrimage
to Mecca. (Pub.)

[^3]: Muhyi ad-Din ibn al-‘Arabi, the celebrated Muslim mystic whose
influence came to permeate the intellectual and spiritual life of
virtually the entire Muslim world, was born at Murcia in Southern Spain
in 1165. Much of his youth was spent in Seville, where he devoted
himself to literary, theological and mystical studies. After visiting
Granada and other Spanish towns, as well as Tunis, Fez, and Morocco, he
set out in 1202 for the East by way of Egypt, whence he made the
pilgrimage to Mecca. He did not return to Spain. Many of the remaining
years of his life were passed in the neighborhood of Mecca, but he also
traveled extensively to Babylonia, Asia Minor, and Syria, everywhere
gaining disciples and spreading his doctrines through dialogues with
scientists and scholars. Whether we regard the extent of his theological
writings or their influence on the subsequent development of Islamic
mysticism, Ibn al-‘Arabi can justly claim the supreme position among
Sufi authors which posterity has accorded him, and which is attested by
the title, Ash-Shaykh al-Akbar, conferred on him by the almost unanimous
voice of those who are best qualified to judge. The list of his works
drawn up by himself contains 289 titles, and some of them are of
enormous length. The most famous and important is the Futuhat
al-Makkiyah. In this, as in many of his works, Ibn al-‘Arabi professes
to communicate mysteries revealed to him in ecstatic vision by prophets,
angels, and even God Himself. (Pub.)

[^4]: Ayatullah Sayyid Mahmud Taleqani (1289-1358 AHS / 1910-1979) was a
highly learned and dedicated clergyman who played a pivotal role the
struggle against dictatorial regime of the Shah. After the victory of
the Islamic Revolution, Ayatullah Taleqani was appointed as the Chairman
of the Revolutionary Council and was an elected member of the Council of
Experts. In Mordad 1358 AHS [August 1979], Imam Khomeini designated him
as his representative to lead the first Friday congregational prayers at
the Tehran University campus. Ayatullah Taleqani had many written works
on the exegesis of the Qur’an, Islamic education, and socio-political
issues. (Pub.)

[^5]: See ft. 2, p. VIII-IX.(Pub.)

[^6]: Hajji Hadi Sabzewari (1797-1878) was the philosopher and poet
noted for disseminating and clarifying the doctrines of Mulla Sadra. The
Qajar Shah Nasir ad-Din ordered a mausoleum to be built for him at
Mashhad. (Pub.)

[^7]: Mawlawi Jalal ad-Din ar-Rumi (1207-1273) was the greatest mystic
poet in the Farsi language and founder of the Mawlawiyyah order of
dervishes (“The Whirling Dervishes”). He is famous for his lyrics and
for his didactic epic, Spiritual Couplets. (Pub.)

[^8]: Khwajah Shams ad-Din Muhammad Hafiz Shirazi (ca. 1325-1391) was
the fourteenth century Persian lyric bard and panegyrist, and commonly
considered as the preeminent master of the ghazal form. (Pub.)

[^9]: The text of the said letter of Imam Khomeini to Mikhail Gorbachev
along with explanatory notes is published by this Institute under the
title, A Call to Divine Unity. Its second edition is forthcoming. (Pub.)


