The Importance of the Refinement and Purification of the Soul
=============================================================

Those who have constructed [their own] religions, causing the straying
and deviation of masses of peoples, have for the most part been
scholars. Some of them even studied and disciplined themselves in the
centers of learning[^1] The head of one of the heretical sects studied
in these very seminaries of ours.

However, since his learning was not accompanied by refinement and
purification, since he did not advance on the path toward God, and since
he did not remove the pollution from himself, he bore the fruit of
ignominy. If man does not cast pollution from the core of his soul, not
only will whatever studying and learning he does be of no benefit by
itself, rather it will actually be harmful.

When evil enters knowledge in this center, the product will be evil,
root and branch, an evil tree. However much these concepts are
accumulated in a black impure heart that which covers them will be
greater. In a soul which is unrefined, knowledge is a dark cover:
*Al-‘ilm huwa al-hijab al-akbar* (Knowledge is the greatest cover).
Therefore, the vice of a corrupt *‘alim* is greater and more dangerous
for Islam than all vices.

Knowledge is light, but in a black corrupt heart it spreads wide the
skirts of darkness and blackness. A knowledge which would draw man
closer to God, in a worldly soul brings him far distant from the place
of the Almighty. Even the knowledge of divine unity (*tawhid*), if it is
for anything other than God, it becomes a cover of darkness, for it is a
preoccupation with that which is other than God.

If one memorizes and recites the Noble Qur’an in all fourteen different
canonical methods of recital, if it is for anything other than God, it
will not bring him anything but covering and distance from *Haqq Ta‘ala*
(God). If you study, and go to some trouble, you may become an *‘alim*,
but you had better know that there is a big difference between being an
*‘alim* and being refined.

The late Shaykh, [^2] our teacher, may Allah be pleased with him, said,
“That which is said, ‘How easy it is to become a mullah; how difficult
it is to become a man,’ is not correct. It should be said, ‘How
difficult it is to become a mullah, and it is impossible to become a
man!”

The acquisition of the virtues and human nobilities and standards is a
difficult and great duty which rests upon your shoulders. Do not
supposed now that you are engaged in studying the religious sciences,
and learning *fiqh* (jurisprudence) which is the most honorable of these
sciences, that you can take it easy otherwise, and that your
responsibilities and duties will take care of themselves. If you do not
have a pure intention of approaching God, these sciences will be of no
benefit at all.

If your studies, may Allah protect us, are not for the sake of God, and
are for the sake of personal desires, the acquisition of position and
the seats of authority, title and prestige, then you will accumulate
nothing for yourself but harm and disaster. This terminology you are
learning, if it is for anything but God, it is harm and disaster.

This terminology, as much as it increases, if it is not accompanied by
refinement and fear of God [*taqwa*], then it will end in harm in this
world and the next for the Muslim community. Merely knowing terminology
is not effective. Even the knowledge of the divine unity [*‘ilm
al-tawhid*] if it is not accompanied with purity of the soul, it will
bring disaster. How many individuals have been *‘ulama* with knowledge
of monotheism, and have perverted whole groups of people?

How many individuals have had the very same knowledge that you have, or
even more knowledge, but were deviant and did not reform themselves, so
that when they entered the community, they perverted many and led them
astray? This dry terminology, if it is not accompanied by piety
[*taqwa*] and refinement of the soul, as much as it accumulates in one’s
mind it will only lead to the expansion of pride and conceit in the
realm of the soul.

The unfortunate *‘alim* who is defeated by his own conceit cannot reform
himself or his community, and it will result in nothing but harm to
Islam and the Muslims. And after years of studying and wasting religious
funding, enjoying his Islamic salary and fringe benefits, he will become
an obstacle in the way of Islam and the Muslims.

Nations will be perverted by him. The result of these lessons and
discussion and the time spent in the seminary will be the prevention of
the introduction to the world of Islam and the truths of the Qur’an;
rather, it is possible that his existence will be barrier preventing the
society from coming to know Islam and spirituality.

I am not saying that you should not study, that you should not acquire
knowledge, but you have to pay attention, for if you want to be a useful
and effective member of society and Islam and lead a nation to awareness
of Islam and to defend the fundamentals of Islam, it is necessary that
the basis of jurisprudence be strengthened and that you gain mastery of
the subject. If, God forbid, you fail to study, then it is forbidden for
you to remain in the seminary.

You may not use the religious salary of the students of the religious
sciences. Of course, the acquisition of knowledge is necessary, although
in the same way that you take pains with the problems of *fiqh* and
*usul* (jurisprudence and its principles), you must make efforts in the
path of self-reformation.

Every step forward which you take in the acquisition of knowledge should
be matched by a step taken to beat down the desires of the soul, to
strengthen one’s spiritual powers, to acquire nobility of character, and
to gain spirituality and piety [*taqwa*].

The learning of these sciences in reality is an introduction to the
refinement of the soul and the acquisition of virtue, manners and divine
knowledge. Do not spend your entire life with the introduction, so that
you leave aside the conclusion. You are acquiring these sciences for the
sake of a holy and high aim, knowing God and refining the self.

You should make plans to realize the results and effects of you work,
and you should be serious about reaching your fundamental and basic
goal. When you enter the seminary, before anything else, you should plan
to reform yourselves.

While you are in the seminary, along with your studies, you should
refine yourselves, so that when you leave the seminary and become the
leader of a people in a city or district, they may profit from you, take
advice from you, and reform themselves by means of your deeds and
manners and your ethical virtues.

Try to reform and refine yourselves before you enter among the people.
If now, while you are unencumbered, you do not reform yourselves, on the
day when people come before you, you will not be able to reform
yourselves.

Many things ruin people and keep them from studying and purifying
themselves, and one of them, for some, is this very beard and turban!
When the turban becomes a bit large, and the beard gets long, if one has
not refined oneself, this can hinder one’s studies, and restrict one. It
is difficult to trample the commanding self under one’s feet, and to sit
at the feet of another for lessons.

Shaykh at-Tusi, [^3] may Allah have mercy on him, at the age of
fifty-two would go to classes, while between the ages of twenty and
thirty, he wrote some of his books! His *Tahdhib* was possibly written
during this period. [^4] Yet at the age of fifty-two he attended the
classes of the late Sayyid Murtada, [^5] may Allah have mercy on him,
and thereby achieved a similar status as he did.

God forbid that prior to acquiring good habits and strengthening one’s
spiritual powers that one’s beard should turn a bit white and that his
turban should get big, so that he would lose the blessings of knowledge
and spirituality. So work, before your beards before white; before you
gain the attention of the people, think about your state!

God forbid that before a person develops himself, that people should pay
heed to him, that he should become a personality and have influence
among the people, causing him to loose his soul. Before you loose hold
of the reins of your self, develop and reform yourself! Adorn yourselves
with good traits, and remove your vices! Become pure in your lessons and
discussions, so that you may approach God!

If one does not have good intentions, one will be kept far from the
divine precincts. Beware that, after seventy years, when the book of
your deeds is opened, Allah forbid that you should have been far from
God Almighty for seventy years. Have you heard the story of the ‘stone’
which was dropped into hell? Only after seventy years was the sound of
its hitting the bottom of hell heard.

According to a narration, the Prophet, may the peace and blessings of
Allah be with him and his progeny, said that it was an old man who died
after seventy years, and during these seventy years he was falling into
hell[^6]

Be careful that in the seminary, by your own labor and the sweat of your
brow during fifty years, more or less, that you do not thereby reach
hell! You had better think! Make plans in the field of refinement and
purification of the soul, and reformation of character.

Choose a teacher of morals for yourself, and arrange sessions for
advice, counsel, and admonition. You cannot become refined by yourself.
If there is no place in the seminary for moral counselors and sessions
of advice and exhortation, it will be doomed to annihilation.

How could it be that *fiqh* and *usul* (jurisprudence and its
principles) should require teachers for lessons and discussions, and
that for every science and skill a teacher is necessary, and no one
becomes an expert or learned in any specific field by being cocky and
disdainful, yet with regard to the spiritual and ethical sciences, which
are the goal of the mission of the prophets and are among the most
subtle and exact sciences, they do not require teaching and learning,
and one may obtain them oneself without a teacher!

I have heard on numerous occasions that the late Shaykh Ansari, [^7]was
a student of a great Sayyid[^8] who was a teacher of ethics and
spirituality. The prophets of God were raised in order to train the
people, to develop humanity, and to remove them from ugliness, filth,
corruption, pollution, moral turpitude, and to acquaint them with virtue
and good manners, “I was raised in order to complete noble virtue
[*Makarim al-Akhlaq*]. [^9]

This knowledge which was considered by God Almighty to be so important
that He raised the prophets for it is not considered unfashionable in
the seminaries for our clergy. No one gives it the importance of which
it is worthy. Due to the lack of spiritual and gnostic works in the
seminaries, material and worldly problems have come so far as to
penetrate the clergy [*ruhaniyyat*], and has kept many of them away from
holiness and spirituality [*ruhaniyyat*].

So that they do not even know what *ruhaniyyat* means, nor what the
responsibilities of a cleric are and what kind of programs they should
have. Some of them merely plan to learn a few words, return to their own
localities, or somewhere else, and to grab facilities and position, and
to wrestle with others [for them].

Like one who said: “Let me study *Sharh al-Lum‘ah*[^10] and then I will
know what to do with the village chief!” Do not be this way, that from
the beginning you aim to win someone’s position by studying, and that
you intend to be the chief of some town or village. You may achieve your
selfish desires and satanic expectations, but for yourself and the
Islamic community you will acquire nothing except harm and misfortune.
Mu‘awiyah[^11] was also chief for a long time, but for himself he
achieved no result or benefit except curses and loathing and the
chastisement of the life hereafter.

It is necessary for you to refine yourselves, so that when you become
the chief of a community or a clan, you will be able to refine them, as
well. In order to be able to take steps toward the reform and
development of a community, your aim should be service to Islam and the
Muslims. If you take steps for the sake of God, God the Almighty is the
turner of the hearts.

He will turn hearts in favor of you:

***“Surely for those who believe and do good deeds, the Merciful
(ar-Rahman) will bring about love”*** (Q 19:96).

Take some trouble on the way to God, devote yourselves; God will not
leave you unpaid, if not in this world, then in the next He will reward
you. If, aside from Him, you have no reward in this world, what could be
better? This world is nothing. This pomp and these personalities will
come to an end after a few days, like a dream passes before the eyes of
man, but the other worldly reward is infinite and never ending.

[^1]: This group includes Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab (founder of the
Wahhabi sect), Shaykh Ahmad Ahsa’i and Sayyid Kazim Rashti (founders of
the Shaykhi sect), Ahmad Kasravi, and Ghulam Ahmad (founder of the
Qadiyani sect).

[^2]: Grand Ayatullah Haj Shaykh ‘Abd al-Karim Ha’iri Yazdi (1276-1355
AH), was one of the greatest of Islamic jurists and a source of
imitation of the Shi‘ah in the fourteenth Islamic century. He attended
the classes of masters such as Mirza-ye Bozorg Shirazi, Mirza Muhammad
Taqi Shirazi, Akhund Khorasani, Sayyid Kazim Yazdi, Sayyid Muhammad
Isfahani Fesharaki, in Najaf and Samarra. In the year 1340 AH/1921, at
the insistence of the ‘ulama of Qum after finding a good omen in a
passage from the Qur’an he took up residence in Qum and organized the
Seminary of Qum. Among his works are Durar al-Fawa’id dar Usul,
As-Salah, An-Nikah, Ar-Rida, Al-Mawarith, in all the fields of
jurisprudence.

[^3]: Abu Ja‘far Muhammad ibn Hasan at-Tusi (385-460 AH/995-1067 CE). He
is known as Shaykh at-Ta’ifah, and he was one of the most distinguished
scholars of the Imami Shi‘ah. He was the head of the jurists and
theologians of his time and he was also strong in literature, biography,
exegesis, and hadith. His teachers were Shaykh Mufid, Sayyid Murtada,
Ibn Ghada’iri, and Ibn ‘Abdun. The Shaykh is the author of two famous
books of Shi‘ite hadiths, Istibsar and Tahdhib, and are counted among
the four (most important) books of the Imami Shi‘ah. Shaykh at-Tusi
established Najaf as the center for Shi‘ite learning.

[^4]: Shaykh at-Tusi began to write the Tahdhib, which is a commentary
on the Mughni‘ah of Shaykh Mufid, during the lifetime of his teacher
(Shaykh Mufid, d. 413 AH/1022 CE). Shaykh at-Tusi was about twenty-six
old at that time.

[^5]: ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn Musa, known as Sayyid Murtada, and ‘Alam
al-Huda (355-436 AH/965-1044 CE), is one of the greatest scholars of
Islam and Shi‘ism. Most of the great scholars of the Imami Shi‘ah,
including Shaykh at-Tusi, have benefited from his teaching. He wrote:
Amali, Adh-Dhari‘ah ila Usul ash-Shari‘ah, An-Nasiriat, Al-Intisar, and
Ash-Shafi.

[^6]: Fayd Kashani, Kalamat Maknunah, p. 123.

[^7]: Shaykh Murtada Ansari (1214-1281 AH/1799-1864), known as Khatam
al-Fuqaha wal-Mujtahidin, was one of the descendants of Jabir ibn
‘Abdullah al-Ansari, a Companion of the Prophet, may the peace and
blessings of Allah be with him and his progeny. He was a genius in the
Principles of Jurisprudence [‘ilm al-usul], and hebrought great
developments in this field. Some of his professors were Shaykh Musa
Kashif al-Ghita, Shaykh ‘Ali Kashif al-Ghita, Mulla Ahmad Naraqi, and
Sayyid Muhammad Mujahid. Shaykh Ansari trained some great jurists,
including Akhund Khorasani, Mirza Shirazi and Mirza Muhammad Hasan
Ashtiani. His works include Fara’id al-Usul (known as Rasa’il) and
Makasib, one of the most famous text books.

[^8]: Sayyid ‘Ali ibn Sayyid Muhammad (d. 1283 AH/1866), was one of the
great ascetics and mystics of his day. He received authorization (as a
mujtahid) from Shaykh Ansari and Sayyid Husayn, the Friday Prayer leader
of Shushtar. Sayyid ‘Ali spent some time in Shushtar as a judge and
legal authority (mufti), and then moved to Najaf al-Ashraf. There he
attended the classes of Shaykh Ansari in fiqh. And Shaykh Ansari also
attended his classes in ethics. When Shaykh Ansari passed away, Sayyid
‘Ali was the executor of his will and he succeeded him in his
professional position. The late Shaykh Sayyid ‘Ali was the professor and
counselor of Akhund Mulla Husaynqulli Hamadani, who had many students
who were led by him, some of the greatest of whom were Mirza Jawad
Maliki Tabrizi, Sayyid Ahmad Karbala’i, Shaykh Shaykh Bihari, Sayyid
‘Ali Qadi Tabrizi, and ‘Allamah Tabataba’i.

[^9]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, under the exegesis of the fourth ayah of the
Surah al-Qalam [Chapter: The Pen].

[^10]: As a major work of Shaykh Zayn ad-Din ibn ‘Ali al-‘Amili
al-Juba’i (911-966 AH), better known as ash-Shahid ath-Thani [The Second
Martyr], Sharh al-Lum‘ah (likewise known as Rawdah al-Bahiyyah)is the
book on the foundations of canonical theology, which is actually the
commentary on Al-Lum‘ah written by ash-Shahid al-Awwal [The First
Martyr], Shams ad-Din Muhammad ibn Makki al-‘Amili al-Jizzini (734-786
AH). Though written four centuries ago, it continues to be studied in
the Islamic seminaries today. For biographical sketches of ash-Shahid
al-Awwal and ash-Shahid ath-Thani, see Mulla Asghar ‘Ali Jaffer, Fiqh
and Fuqaha (Middlesex: World Federation of Khoja Shia Ithnaasheri Muslim
Communities, n.d.) chapter 2,
http://www.al-islam.org/fiqh-and-fuqaha-world-federation-of-ksimc (Pub.)

[^11]: Mu‘awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan was the first caliph of the Umayyad
dynasty (40 AH/662 CE), which ruled the Muslim world after the martyrdom
of the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib and the five-month
rule of the second Imam, Hasan ibn ‘Ali (‘a). As the founder of the
Umayyad dynasty (Umayyad is derived from Bani ‘Umayyah, the name of the
tribe to whom he belonged), Mu‘awiyah revived hereditary monarchy and
aristocracy in sharp contrast and opposition to the rudimentary precepts
of Islam. History is replete with innumerable instances of cruelty and
oppression perpetrated in the world of Islam during the reign of the
Umayyads including the murder, banishment and imprisonment of the
followers of the Prophet’s Progeny [Ahl al-Bayt] (‘a) as epitomized by
the tragedy in Karbala (61 AH) during the reign of Mu‘awiyah’s son and
second Umayyad caliph, Yazid. (Pub.)


