About the Author
================

Now writing under the pen-name of HARUN YAHYA, he was born in Ankara in
1956. Having completed his primary and secondary education in Ankara, he
studied arts at Istanbul's Mimar Sinan University and philosophy at
Istanbul University. Since the 1980s, he has published many books on
political, scientific, and faith-related issues. Harun Yahya is
well-known as the author of important works disclosing the imposture of
evolutionists, their invalid claims, and the dark liaisons between
Darwinism and such bloody ideologies as fascism and communism.

His pen-name is a composite of the names Harun (Aaron) and Yahya
(John), in memory of the two esteemed Prophets who fought against their
people's lack of faith. The Prophet's seal on his books' covers is
symbolic and is linked to their contents.

It represents the Qur'an (the Final Scripture) and the Prophet Mohammed
(May God bless him and grant him peace), last of the prophets. Under the
guidance of the Qur'an and the Sunnah (teachings of the Prophet), the
author makes it his purpose to disprove each fundamental tenet of
godless ideologies and to have the "last word," so as to completely
silence the objections raised against religion. He uses the seal of the
final Prophet, who attained ultimate wisdom and moral perfection, as a
sign of his intention to offer the last word.

All of Harun Yahya's works share one single goal: to convey the
Qur'an's message, encourage readers to consider basic faith-related
issues such as God's existence and unity and the Hereafter; and to
expose godless systems' feeble foundations and perverted ideologies.
Harun Yahya enjoys a wide readership in many countries, from India to
America, England to Indonesia, Poland to Bosnia, and Spain to Brazil.
Some of his books are available in English, French, German, Spanish,
Italian, Portuguese, Urdu, Arabic, Albanian, Russian, Serbo-Croat
(Bosnian), Polish, Malay, Uygur Turkish, and Indonesian.

Greatly appreciated all around the world, these works have been
instrumental in many people recovering faith in God and gaining deeper
insights into their faith. His books' wisdom and sincerity, together
with a distinct style that's easy to understand, directly affect anyone
who reads them. Those who seriously consider these books, can no longer
advocate atheism or any other perverted ideology or materialistic
philosophy, since these books are characterized by rapid effectiveness,
definite results, and irrefutability. Even if they continue to do so, it
will be only a sentimental insistence, since these books refute such
ideologies from their very foundations. All contemporary movements of
denial are now ideologically defeated, thanks to the books written by
Harun Yahya.

This is no doubt a result of the Qur'an's wisdom and lucidity. The
author modestly intends to serve as a means in humanity's search for
God's right path. No material gain is sought in the publication of these
works. Those who encourage others to read these books, to open their
minds and hearts and guide them to become more devoted servants of God,
render an invaluable service.

Meanwhile, it would only be a waste of time and energy to propagate
other books that create confusion in people's minds, lead them into
ideological chaos, and that clearly have no strong and precise effects
in removing the doubts in people's hearts, as also verified from
previous experience. It is impossible for books devised to emphasize the
author's literary power rather than the noble goal of saving people from
loss of faith, to have such a great effect. Those who doubt this can
readily see that the sole aim of Harun Yahya's books is to overcome
disbelief and to disseminate the Qur'an's moral values. The success and
impact of this service are manifested in the readers' conviction.

One point should be kept in mind: The main reason for the continuing
cruelty, conflict, and other ordeals endured by the vast majority of
people is the ideological prevalence of disbelief. This can be ended
only with the ideological defeat of disbelief and by conveying the
wonders of creation and Qur'anic morality so that people can live by it.
Considering the state of the world today, leading into a downward spiral
of violence, corruption and conflict, clearly this service must be
provided speedily and effectively, or it may be too late. In this
effort, the books of Harun Yahya assume a leading role. By the will of
God, these books will be a means through which people in the
twenty-first century will attain the peace, justice, and happiness
promised in the Qur'an.


**Introduction**

We are living in an era in which the world is desperately in need of
peace, friendship, and solidarity. The tensions and conflicts that so
defined the twentieth century continue in this new century, and innocent
people all around the world continue to suffer from them.

Despite the urgent need for solidarity and cooperation, certain circles
are inciting conflict, particularly conflict between the world's two
greatest and deep-rooted civilizations. This issue needs to be
scrutinized, as the war of civilizations that they envisage would have
disastrous consequences for humanity. One of the best ways of preventing
such a disaster is to strengthen the dialogue and cooperation between
these civilizations. This is not a hard task, as there are no
fundamental differences between Islam and the Judeo-Christian western
world. To the contrary, there is much common ground between them.
Considering the current situation and the nature of the world's
problems, these shared values will make the cooperation necessary for
solving them possible.

Today, ideological struggles, indeed, continue to divide the world.
However, Muslims are not at one pole and Jews and Christians are not at
the opposing pole. In fact, one pole represents people who believe in
God's existence and unity, and the other pole represents the
unbelievers, who believe in such anti-religious ideologies as
materialism and Darwinism. There is only one way to defeat the alliance
of the various groups of unbelievers on an ideological level: eradicate
the negative and destructive influences of anti-religious materialism
and further the cause of a society dominated by morality, happiness,
tranquility, security, and prosperity. This will be done by forming an
alliance of all conscientious people, namely, sincere Christians, along
with religious Jews and Muslims, who will come together and unite in
this common cause.

There have been conflicts and disputes between members of these three
religions in the past, but those were the result of the erroneous
reasoning and evil motives of certain states, nations, and individuals
who pursued their own economic and political gain instead of the central
beliefs of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. One of the common aims of
these divinely revealed religions is to ensure the happiness, security,
peace, and tranquility of all people by opposing conflict.

Therefore, this dialogue and alliance will be based on the sincere
believers' quest for justice, peace, and support for all people. The
resulting dialogue will not be restricted to meetings and conferences,
but will cement an alliance between people who advocate common values,
fight for the same cause, and seek permanent solutions to common
problems. This alliance will be one of the main contributing factors to
tranquility at a time when Prophet Jesus' (peace be upon him) second
coming is expected.


