Chapter 1 : Muslims and the People of the Book
==============================================

This book reveals that Muslims, Christians, and Jews have common
principles of faith, worship, and moral values; face common dangers; and
calls on the People of the Book (Christians and Jews) to unite with
Muslims as fellow believers opposed to atheism, anti-religiosity, and
social as well as moral degeneration. In short, it is an invitation to
spread virtue around the world, a call to all Jews, Christians, and
Muslims who are sincere,

conscientious, tolerant, helpful, conciliatory, reasonable, virtuous,
peaceful, and fair to recognize that we believe in the same God and
strive to live and extend the reach of God's morality. The followers of
these three faiths believe that God created the universe and sustains
all matter; created all life forms in a miraculous way; gave each human
being a soul; sent Prophets to humanity throughout history, like Prophet
Mohammed (may God bless him and grant him peace), and Prophets Jesus,
Moses, Noah, David, Abraham, Isaac, and Joseph (peace be upon them all);
created our lives according to destiny; and believe in the Resurrection,
Hell, Paradise, and angels.

The People of the Book and Muslims also have common moral values. For
example, in a world in which prostitution, homosexuality, and drug
abuse, together with selfishness, greed, and hardheartedness are
spreading fast, they value and seek to live by honor, chastity, modesty,
selflessness, honesty, compassion, mercy, and unconditional love.

We Muslims love and respect Prophets Moses (pbuh) and Jesus (pbuh),
know that they are loved and dear people in God's presence, and believe
in all His Prophets. Furthermore, we respect Jewish and Christian
beliefs, values, and traditions, for God commands us to invite the
People of the Book to unite on a common premise:

Say: "O People of the Book! Come to a proposition that is the same for
us and you - that we should worship none but God, not associate any
partners with Him, and not take one another as lords besides God." If
they turn away, say: "Bear witness that we are Muslims." (Qur'an,
3:64)

This is our call to Jews and Christians: As believers in God and His
revelation, let us unite in faith, love and obey our Master and Creator,
and pray to Him for enlightenment. When Muslims, Christians, and Jews
unite under these premises, when they realize that they are friends and
not enemies, and when they see that the real enemies are atheism and
irreligion, the world will become an altogether different place. Wars,
antagonisms, fears, and violence will end, and a new civilization
founded on this common premise, one based on love, respect, and
contentment, will emerge.


**Islam Accepts Judaism and Christianity**

There is a basic difference between how the members of the divinely
revealed religions view each other. Judaism does not recognize
Christianity and Islam, which superseded it, and Christianity recognizes
Judaism but not Islam, which superseded it. Islam however, recognizes
both Judaism and Christianity as divinely revealed religions that
originated in God's revelation and does not view them as systems of
idolatry or unbelief. Rather, it regards Jews and Christians as People
of the Book and advises Muslims to accept and respect their beliefs:

Alif Lam Mim. That is the Book without any doubt. It contains guidance
for those who guard against evil: those who believe in the Unseen,
perform prayer, and spend from what We have provided for them; those who
believe in what has been sent down to you, what was sent down before
you, and are certain about the Hereafter. (Qur'an, 2:1-4)

These verses describe Muslims as people who believe in the Qur'an
revealed to Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and grant him peace) as
well as in the earlier divinely revealed books: the Pages of Abraham
(pbuh), the Torah revealed to Moses (pbuh), the Book of Psalms revealed
to David (pbuh), and the Bible revealed to Jesus (pbuh). However, over
time these books were tampered with and therefore contain both accurate
(e.g., belief in God, virtue, the Day of Judgment, and the rejection of
idolatry), and inaccurate information. One verse says:

He has sent down the Book to you with truth, confirming what was there
before it. And He sent down the Torah and the Gospel, previously, as
guidance for humanity... (Qur'an, 3:3-4)

Another verse states the following about the Torah:

We sent down the Torah containing guidance and light, and the Prophets
who had submitted themselves gave judgment by it for the Jews - as did
their scholars and their rabbis - by what they had been allowed to
preserve of God's Book, to which they were witnesses. (Qur'an, 5:44)

The Qur'an reveals that some Jewish scholars and rabbis "distorted
words from their proper meanings" in the Torah (Qur'an, 5:41) and
falsified it: "Woe to those who write the Book with their own hands and
then say: 'This is from God,' to sell it for a paltry price" (Qur'an,
2:79). Christians, on the other hand, made a grave mistake by deifying
Jesus (pbuh) Qur'an, 4:171). However, God's revelation of such mistakes
does not mean that the People of the Book are in complete ignorance and
error, for He also reveals that some of them are deeply religious and
devoted to God:

They are not all the same. There is a community among the People of the
Book who are upright. They recite God's Signs throughout the night, and
they prostrate. They believe in God and the Last Day, enjoin the right
and forbid the wrong, and compete in doing good. They are among the
righteous. You will not be denied the reward for any good thing you do.
God knows those who guard against evil. (Qur'an, 3:113-15)

Among the People of the Book are some who believe in God and in what
has been sent down to you and what was sent down to them, and who are
humble before God. They do not sell God's Signs for a paltry price. Such
people will have their reward with their Lord. And God is swift at
reckoning. (Qur'an, 3:199)

Therefore, a Muslim's attitude toward the People of the Book reflects
the probable existence of genuinely faithful people among them. Only God
knows the hearts of people, and He reveals that some Jews and Christians
have earned His good pleasure.

**Prophet Abraham (pbuh) Was a Haneef**

God reveals that He has created a way and a method for all nations.
Throughout history, He has sent Prophets to people to inform them of His
laws, commands, and prohibitions. Essentially, all Prophets have invited
their nations to believe in and worship God and to abide by the limits
He has established for humanity. In other words, all true religions in
their original state are based on the principles of not associating
others with Him and of working to win His good pleasure, compassion, and
Paradise. All nations are expected to follow God's will without fail and
to do good deeds in order to earn His reward:

We have appointed a law and a practice for every one of you. Had God
willed, He would have made you a single community, but He wanted to test
you regarding what has come to you. So, compete with each other in doing
good. Every one of you will return to God, and He will inform you
regarding the things about which you differed. (Qur'an, 5:48)

The People of the Book were given a different law than the Muslims, but
all sincere Jews, Christians, and Muslims are required to submit
wholeheartedly to Him, do what is good, and compete in doing good deeds.
All of them who believe in God's existence and unity and the Hereafter
and do good deeds are, in reality, following the true religion revealed
to Abraham (pbuh). God reveals that Adam (pbuh) was the first of a long
line of Prophets, to which his descendents Noah and Abraham (peace be
upon them all) also belong:

"Peace be upon Noah, among all beings." That is how We recompense the
good-doers. He truly was one of Our servants who believes. Then We
drowned the rest. One of his followers in faith was Abraham. (Qur'an,
37:79-83)

The Qur'an reveals that Abraham (pbuh) was a haneef, meaning one who
surrenders to God's will, not compromising in any way on his religion,
and being devout. In one verse, God commands Prophet Mohammed (may God
bless him and grant him peace) to abide by this religion:

Then We revealed to you: "Follow the religion of Abraham, a man of pure
natural belief. He was not one of the idolaters." (Qur'an, 16:123)
Abraham's (pbuh) sons, grandchildren, and other devout Muslim
descendents all abided by his religion, for, Who would deliberately
renounce the religion of Abraham, except someone who reveals himself to
be a fool? We chose him in this world, and in the Hereafter he will be
one of the righteous. When his Lord said to him: "Become a Muslim!" he
said: "I am a Muslim who has submitted to the Lord of all the worlds."
Abraham directed his sons to this, as did Jacob: "My sons. God has
chosen this religion for you, so do not die except as Muslims." Or were
you present when death came to Jacob and he said to his sons: "What will
you worship when I have gone?" They said: "We will worship your God, the
God of your forefathers, Abraham, Ishmail and Isaac - one God. We are
Muslims submitted to Him." (Qur'an, 2:130-33)

As we can see, the religion followed by Abraham (pbuh) represents the
common ground among Muslims, Jews, and Christians. Love, faith, and
respect for Abraham (pbuh) are just as important to Muslims as they are
for Christians and Jews. However, those who follow his morality are the
ones who are closest to him. He was exuberant in his faith in God, loved
him deeply, followed all of His commands willingly, and thus was an
example for all humanity. As God says:

The people with the strongest claim to Abraham are those who followed
him and this Prophet, and those who believe. God is the Protector of the
believers. (Qur'an, 3:68)

Therefore, all Jews and Christians, who believe wholeheartedly in God,
like Abraham (pbuh) and the believers who followed him, must only turn
to God and follow this great Prophet's example of virtue, sincerity, and
insight. The best way to show one's love, obedience, and closeness to
the Prophets is by emulating them. Muslims do not discriminate among all
of the Prophets and what was revealed to them, for God commands:

Say: "We believe in God and what has been sent down to us, what was
sent down to Abraham and Ishmael, Isaac and Jacob, and the Tribes; what
Moses and Jesus were given; and what all of the Prophets were given by
their Lord. We do not differentiate between any of them. We are Muslims
submitted to Him." (Qur'an, 2:136)


**Chapter 2 : Muslims and The People Of The Book in History**

Unbiased people who study Islamic history and the Muslims' relationship
with the Jews and Christians living under Islamic rule will come across
the following fact: The People of the Book have always lived in peace
and tranquility under Islamic rule. Sometimes, Jews and Christians who
were oppressed by their own religious or political rulers sought refuge
and safety in Muslim countries. The most important reason for their
enviable position, when compared to that of their coreligionists in
Europe, was the Muslims' submission to the Qur'an's morality.

Islam, a religion of peace and acceptance, requires believers to treat
all people with justice and respect. Devout Muslims are tolerant,
forgiving, modest, understanding, gentle, genuine, and honest. In fact,
God commands them to be just even when it is not in their own interests
or those of their families to be so; to feed orphans and prisoners of
war first, even if they are hungry themselves; and to be selfless,
patient, and firm in virtue. Such Muslims are far more accepting of
non-Muslims, for they know that compulsion is disallowed in religion.
When dealing with non-Muslims,

they do their best to show the way to the right path, address the other
person's conscience, and become the means of this person's acceptance of
a virtuous life, which is only possible if God grants him or her faith.
The following verse reveals that God rules people's hearts and that only
He can bring light into them:

Do those who believe not know that if God had wanted to He could have
guided all humanity? (Qur'an, 13:31)

You cannot guide those you would like to, but God guides whoever He
wills. He has best knowledge of the guided. (Qur'an, 28:56) Muslims are
only responsible for relaying the truth and inviting people to believe,
for belief cannot be forced upon someone. God says: There is no
compulsion in religion. Right guidance has become clearly distinct from
error. Anyone who rejects false deities and believes in God has grasped
the Firmest Handhold, which will never give way. God is All-Hearing,
All-Knowing. (Qur'an, 2:256)

Muslims naturally abide by the Qur'an's morality when dealing with the
People of the Book. For example, the Qur'an says that Muslims are
expected to respect the Christians' and the Jews' beliefs and
reputations, protect them and be compassionate toward them, for they are
fellow believers in God's existence and unity, His angels and Prophets,
the Day of Judgment, and the necessity to abide by religious morality.

God also reveals that those Christians and Jews who believe in Him and
the Day of Judgment and do good deeds will receive the fairest rewards
for their virtue:

Those with faith, those who are Jews, Christians, and Sabaeans, all who
believe in God and the Last Day and act rightly will have their reward
with their Lord. They will feel no fear and will know no sorrow.
(Qur'an, 2:62)

Thus, good tidings are given to all who believe in God and the Day of
Judgment and do right deeds. The faithful will attain salvation and
happiness. Qur'an 5:48 states that "We have appointed a law and a
practice for every one of you," and they have to "compete with each
other in doing good." This is a request for all sincere believers to
live righteously and compete in doing good. Therefore, Muslims cannot be
uncompromising and intolerant toward people who, like themselves,
believe in God and are righteous. The history of Islam proves this
point.
Before we analyze this history, we must point out a very important
factor that determines the Muslims' attitude toward the People of the
Book: Muslims' love for Prophets Moses (pbuh) and Jesus (pbuh).

**Muslims Love Prophets Moses (pbuh) and Jesus (pbuh)**

In all epochs, God has sent Prophets to deliver His revelations to
humanity. Prophets are chosen in His presence and therefore are ennobled
by Him. These role models of virtue taught His religion to their
nations, advocated goodness and warned of evil, and helped people toward
faith. The Qur'an gives many examples of past nations and peoples and
their Prophets' lives. These narratives reveal details of their
teachings about God and His religion, their ideological fight against
unbelievers, and the responses they received from the people they
invited to faith. The Prophets' patience, selflessness, sincerity, fine
thinking, and other superior human virtues made them ideal role models.
Muslims believe in all Prophets who were chosen by God to reveal the
truth to humanity, such as Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Mohammed
(peace be upon them all):

He has laid down the same religion for you as He enjoined on Noah: that
which We have revealed to you and which We enjoined on Abraham, Moses,
and Jesus: "Establish the religion and do not make divisions in it."
What you call the idolaters to follow is very hard for them. God chooses
for Himself anyone He wills, and guides to Himself those who turn to
Him. (Qur'an, 42:13)

God also reveals that Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and grant him
peace) is an ideal role model for all people who believe in God and the
Day of Judgment (Qur'an, 33:21), which is why Muslims seek to acquire
his morality, follow his noble path, and become people who please Him.
The Qur'an's accounts of Jesus (pbuh) and Moses (pbuh), whose lives are
told in some detail in the Qur'an, contain many examples of wisdom and
morality for Muslims.

God reveals that Moses (pbuh) and his brother Aaron (pbuh) were His
ennobled servants:

We showed great kindness to Moses and Aaron. We rescued them and their
people from their terrible plight. We supported them, and so they were
the victors. We gave them the clarifying Book, guided them on the
Straight Path, and left the later people saying of them: "Peace be upon
Moses and Aaron." That is how We recompense good-doers. They truly were
among Our believing servants. (Qur'an, 37:114-22)

God sent Moses (pbuh) to the Children of Israel, then enslaved by
Pharaoh, for the following reason: "Then We gave Moses the Book,
complete and perfect for him who does good, elucidating everything, and
a guidance and a mercy, so that hopefully they will believe in their
encounter with their Lord" (Qur'an, 6:154). The Qur'an reveals how Moses
(pbuh) was chosen:

Has the story of Moses not reached you? When he [Moses] saw a fire and
said to his family: "Wait here. I can make out a fire. Maybe I will
bring you a brand from it, or will find guidance there." Then when he
reached it, a voice called out: "Moses! I am your Lord. Take off your
sandals. You are in the holy valley of Tuwa. I have chosen you, so
listen well to what is revealed." (Qur'an, 20:9-13)

Moses (pbuh) fought against Pharaoh and his close allies, as well as
those hypocrites and people of weak faith from among his own nation, and
proved himself a universal role model by means of his submission to God
and his faith, patience, courage, selflessness, intelligence,
motivation, and drive. Muslims feel deep respect for him. Prophet Jesus
(pbuh) is introduced as "God's Messenger and word" (Qur'an, 4:171), as
well as a "sign" (Qur'an, 21:91) for people. The Qur'an reveals some
enlightening information about his mission, miracles, and life. For
example;

When the angels said: "Mary, your Lord gives you good news of a Word
from Him. His name is the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, of high esteem in
this world and the Hereafter, and one of those brought near." (Qur'an,
3:45) The nature of the divine revelation given to him is described as
follows:

And We sent Jesus, son of Mary, following in their footsteps,
confirming the Torah that came before him. We gave him the Gospel
containing guidance and light, confirming the Torah that came before it,
and as guidance and admonition for those who guard against evil.
(Qur'an, 5:46)

As the Qur'an reveals, Jesus (pbuh) is distinguished from the other
Prophets in several ways. The most significant of these is that he did
not die, but was raised up to God's presence and will return. The Qur'an
states that "they certainly did not kill him" (Qur'an, 4:157), but that
God raised him up to His presence. The Qur'an also reveals information
about his second coming and future life. Given that all of the events it
foretells come true, Muslims are awaiting his return with great joy and
anticipation, and are doing their best to prepare for his arrival.

**Prophet Mohammed's (may God bless him and grant him peace) Exemplary
Attitude**

Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and grant him peace), the best role
model for Muslims who deal with the People of the Book, was always just
and compassionate toward Jews and Christians and tried to create an
atmosphere based on reconciliation and love among these three religious
communities. Various agreements and guarantees allowed Christians and
Jews to live as autonomous religious communities. When the young Muslim
community was still suffering from the Makkan polytheists' cruelty and
oppression, our Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) advised
some of them to seek refuge with the Christian king of Ethiopia, Negus
(or al-Najashi).

The Muslims who later on migrated to Madinah with our Prophet (may God
bless him and grant him peace), on the other hand, developed a model of
coexistence with that city's Jewish community that was to become a model
for all later generations. The Muslims' acceptance of Jews and
Christians during the period of Islam's expansion in Arabia entered the
history books as an example of justice and acceptance.

One such example was our beloved Prophet's (may God bless him and grant
him peace) reading of the verse: "Only argue with the People of the Book
in the kindest way - except in the case of those of them who do wrong -
saying: 'We believe in what has been sent down to us and what was sent
down to you. Our God and your God are one, and we submit to Him'"
(Qur'an, 29:46) after he had the following words written in the text of
an agreement prepared for the Christian Ibn Harris bin Ka\`b and his
co-religionists: "The religion, churches, lives, chastity, and goods of
all Christians living in the East are under the protection of God and
all believers. None of those living by Christianity will be forced to
turn to Islam. If any Christian is subjected to any killing or
injustice, Muslims must help him."1

Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and grant him peace) allowed the
Jews to become a party to the Constitution of Madinah signed with the
Aws and Khazraj clans, which permitted them to continue living as a
separate religious community. The basis for this acceptance of the Jews'
faith and traditions was laid down in the following article: "The Jews
of Banu Awf [non-Muslim minorities] are a community along with the
believers. To the Jews their religion, and to the Muslim their
religion."2

As a requirement of the morality ordained by God, Prophet Mohammed (may
God bless him and grant him peace) not only showed compassion and
understanding toward the People of the Book, but also taught his
Companions that those Jews and Christians living under the rule of Islam
must be protected. The privileges that he granted them in the
settlements of Adruh, Maqna, Khaybar, Najran, and Aqaba prove that
Muslims both guaranteed these non-Muslims' lives and property and
recognized their freedom of belief and worship. The following articles
of the agreement between our Prophet (may God bless him and grant him
peace) and the Christians of Najran need to be pointed out:

To the Christians of Najran and the neighboring territories, the
security of God and pledge of His Prophet are extended for their lives,
their religion, and their property - to those present as well as those
absent and others besides;

No bishop shall be removed from his bishopric, nor any monk from his
monastery, nor any priest from his priesthood, and they shall continue
to enjoy everything great and small as heretofore... They shall not
oppress or be oppressed. If anyone demands his right from you, justice
will be maintained between you.

Neither you will be oppressed, nor you will be allowed to oppress
others.3 In addition, according to some hearsay, our Prophet (may God
bless him and grant him peace) attended their weddings, visited their
sick, and was generous to them. Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and
grant him peace) even spread out his cloak so that the Christians of
Najran who came to visit him could sit on it. Following his death, the
Muslims' moral conduct toward the People of the Book continued to be
based on the acceptance that Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and
grant him peace) had shown to them throughout his life.

**Freedom of Belief and Worship**

Beginning at the time of Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and grant
him peace), there has always been freedom of religion in Muslim-ruled
lands. Muslims protected the Christians' and Jews' belief systems,
rituals, churches and synagogues, and schools of religious education.
Articles guaranteeing the protection of monasteries and churches have
been important parts of all agreements signed between Muslims and the
People of the Book. Early agreements also allowed Muslim travelers to
rest in the monasteries located along the travel routes. This suggests
that Muslims were attempting to base their relationship and dialogue
with the People of the Book on mutual respect. Historical documents
reveal that many Muslims visited monasteries to rest for the night, to
enjoy a meal, or even to have a civilized conversation during their
travels or campaigns.

The People of the Book often responded warmly toward Muslims. The
following expressions were recorded in an agreement signed by Caliph
Umar, which was presented to Abu Ubayda by the Syrian Christians:

[We imposed these terms on ourselves:]… not to withhold our churches
from Muslims stopping there by night or day; to open their doors to the
traveller and wayfarer; …to entertain every Muslim traveller in our
customary style and feed him… We will not abuse a Muslim, and he who
strikes a Muslim has forfeited his rights.4

As "if God had not driven some people back by means of others,
monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, where God's name is
mentioned much, would have been pulled down and destroyed," (Qur'an,
22:40) points out, Jewish and Christian places of worship are regarded
by Muslims as holy places in which God's name is remembered. Thus, as it
is their responsibility to protect such places, throughout Islamic
history all Jewish and Christian houses of worship have been protected
so that the Jews and Christians can pray and worship in them as they
please. For instance, historic documents signed during Abu Bakr's reign
state that the Christians of the peacefully taken city of Tabarriya were
given guarantees that their churches would not be harmed. Likewise, the
agreement signed after the conquest of Damascus stated that churches
would not be destroyed or occupied.

Umar's covenant to the people of Jerusalem guaranteed the protection of
all places of worship. During the conquest of the Armenian city of Dabil
(Dvin) in Uthman's time, the assurances given to Christians, Jews, and
Zoroastrians guaranteed the protection of all places of worship.5
Permission to restore damaged churches and build new monasteries was
never withheld. For instance, the St. Sergius monastery outside of
Medain was destroyed by Patriarch Mar Amme and rebuilt during Uthman's
reign.

Uqba, the governor of Egypt, contributed to a Nestorian monastery, the
Church of Edessa was restored during the reign of Mu'awiyya, and the
Saint Marcos Church was built in Alexandria. These are just a few
examples of this tradition. The continued existence of churches and
synagogues in Palestine, Syria, Jordan, Egypt, and Iraq proves the
Muslims' respect for the other divinely revealed religions. The Sinai
Monastery with a mosque right next door is an important pilgrimage
center on Mount Sinai and a symbol of Muslim acceptance.

Under Islamic rule, the People of the Book have always celebrated their
religious festivities as they pleased. From time to time, the Muslim
leadership even attended them. A letter by the Nestorian Patriarch
Isho'yab III (650-60) reveals the Muslim leaders' compassion and
acceptance toward the People of the Book: They [Abbasids] have not
attacked the Christian religion, but rather they have commended our
faith, honored our priests... and conferred benefits on churches and
monasteries.6

Benjamin of Tudela, a famous twelfth-century Jewish explorer who could
not conceal his astonishment when he discovered such attitudes in the
Islamic world, expressed the impossibility of such religious acceptance
and pluralism in Christian Europe. He also stated that Jews and Muslims
prayed together in holy places and at the tombs of holy people, that
mosques were built next to synagogues, and that different congregations
celebrated each other's religious festivities.7 These historical facts
reveal that, contrary to much of what we read today, Islam is a religion
of peace and acceptance. Christians and Jews lived freely under Muslim
rule and enjoyed the freedoms of religious belief and thought.

**Tranquillity under Muslim Rule**

Christians and Jews enjoyed the highest degree of freedom and tolerance
under Muslim rule. During the first few centuries of the Christian era,
Jews oppressed Christians; as the latter became more powerful, they
began to oppress Jews and even fellow Christians belonging to other
sects. The Middle Ages were dominated by the Catholic church's
oppression of all Jews and Christians who did not agree with its
teachings. Some non-Catholics sought refuge with the Muslims. The
oppression and violence directed by Byzantium against the Egyptian
Monophysite and the Jacobean Christians, the horrors endured by those
Jews and Orthodox Christians who found themselves in the path of the
Catholic Crusaders, and the persecution endured by the Jews of Europe,
as well as by the Muslisms and Jews in Spain after the reconquista, have
never occured on Muslim soil.

The Ottoman Empire set an example of acceptance. The Patriarch of
Antalya, Makarios, compared the tyranny of Catholic Poland against the
Orthodox population with the Ottoman administration and concluded:

We mourned the thousands of people, men, women, and children killed by
those heathens. The Polish wish to exterminate people of the Orthodox
faith. May God make the Turkish state eternal, because they do not
interfere with the Jews or Christians, provided they pay their taxes.8
Jews escaping Spanish tyranny found the peace and security they sought
on Ottoman soil. Driven out of Spain and faced with more hardship in
other countries where they sought refuge, many died of hunger and thirst
at the gates of towns and cities they were not permitted to enter. Jews
who boarded Genoese ships were either exploited or sold to pirates.
Sultan Bayazid welcomed the Jews into his empire and demanded that the
people show them the respect and acceptance to which they were
entitled.

The order proclaimed not to refuse the Jews entry or cause them
difficulties, but to receive them cordially.9 Sultan Bayazid is known to
history as a religious man, and his hospitality and acceptance were
based on the Qur'an's morality.

Another example of the comfortable and prosperous lives led by Jews on
Muslim soil was seen in Muslim Andalusia. This state, which founded the
most advanced civilization in Europe at that time, was characterized by
its acceptance of non-Muslims. Andalusia was gradually weakened due to
the constant attacks of Spanish Christians. Granada was its last
stronghold, and historic documents state that "those who have not seen
the splendor of Jewish life do not know what splendor is." At that time,
Granada was the safest place on Earth for Jews.10

Another example is Palestine, where Jewish and Christian communities
enjoyed religious freedom, lived in peace and safety, and engaged in
trade and crafts. The Ottoman Empire guaranteed peace and security for
five centuries in the area, and such order has never been seen there
since. The freedoms and acceptance enjoyed in Jerusalem and its
surrounding area under Ottoman rule is described by one of Israel's
ex-foreign ministers, Abba Eban, as follows:

Jerusalem and the Jewish nation suffered bloodshed and torture from the
Romans and every other occupying force. Only after the conquest of
Jerusalem by Sultan Yavuz Selim and its fortification by Kanuni did the
Jewish nation discover what humanity, equality, and a peaceful life
meant.11 Throughout the Muslim world, Muslims, Christians, and Jews
lived together in peace and tranquility for centuries. The People of the
Book engaged in commerce and acquired property as they wished, engaged
in the trade or profession of their choice, and were appointed to posts
in the state administration and even in the sultan's palace. They
enjoyed the freedom of thought and expression at the highest degree, and
made scientific and cultural achievements that are still with us today.
They were not denied their social rights, and enjoyed maximum freedoms
of belief and worship.

For instance, historical sources reveal that Christian physicians in
the Abbasids' palace could read the Bible with their families and staff,
and no one interfered with their worship.

The importance of science and scientists in the Islamic world
guaranteed the caliphs' patronage of Christian and Jewish scientists.
Scientists of various religious denominations would meet at
state-organized gatherings to discuss scientific matters. Jewish and
Christian physicists would exchange views with their Muslim
counterparts, and many medical works would be discussed in the presence
of the caliph or his bureaucrats.12 Living under the Islamic rule,

the People of the Book took part in the bustling cultural life. Muslim
leaders extended their cultural patronage to the lands they conquered
and imported them to Baghdad, capital of the empire, where they would be
studied by Muslim, Christian, and Jewish scientists. Each of them in
turn, could teach their works based on these studies alongside their own
religious beliefs. At a time when Muslims supported science and freedom
of thought, Europe, the center of Christianity, had Inquisition courts
that burned people at the stake for their heretical, meaning
non-Catholic, thoughts or religious beliefs.

The Muslim leaders' sense of justice led many Christians and Jews to
bring their cases to Islamic courts, even though they had their own
courts with their own laws. At one time, the Nestorian patriarch Mar
Timothee I (780-825) even circulated a decree to counteract the
ever-increasing number of Christians taking their cases to Islamic
courts.13

This unequalled acceptance and justice in Muslim lands was based on the
Qur'an's morality. Muslim leaders who adopted such ethical standards
always achieved security, peace, and justice in their domains. These
administrations' priority was the public's happiness and prosperity;
therefore, they established systems that set the standards for future
generations. When these same values of compassion, mercy, justice,
understanding, modesty, patience, selflessness, and devotion derived
from the Qur'an's morality begin to pervade modern-day societies, it
will be possible to create a world order in which all people will find
peace and security.

**The Non-Muslims' Legal Status**

The People of the Book living within the Muslim realm were considered
dhimmis, rather than prisoners of war, and therefore were guaranteed
certain legal rights. For example, in exchange for paying the jizya tax,
their lives and property were guaranteed, and they enjoyed freedom of
religious belief and thought, were exempted from military service, and
had the right to their own law courts to resolve their disputes. On some
occasions, their taxes were refunded.

This tax on non-Muslims has sometimes been misinterpreted in order to
portray it as an injustice. But as we have seen above, the protections
that they secured after paying it were hardly insignificant. In
addition, the collected money was used to protect the non-Muslims'
rights and future, and to take care of their needy coreligionists.
Studying the dhimmis' status and the Muslim administrators' practices in
this regard reveal the truth of the matter.

Our Prophet (may God bless him and grant him peace) said: "I am the
adversary of those who wrong the dhimmis or burden them with a load they
cannot carry." According to this principle, Muslims considered it their
duty to protect those non-Muslims living under their rule. The Muslims'
sense of justice dictates that dhimmis come under the state's
protection. During the reign of Umar ibn al-Khattab, the Muslims signed
an agreement with the Christians of Hira. One of the provisions stated:
"If any of their men become weak and old,

or inflicted with a disease, or was rich and had become poor, the jizya
shall be lifted from him, and he and his family shall be supported by
the public treasury [bayt al-mal] so long as he resides in the dar
al-Islam."14 This clearly reveals the attitude of the Muslim authorities
toward the dhimmis. When non-Muslims could not pay their taxes, they
were supported by public funds, which were an important aspect of state
support. Before signing the agreement he had made with the people of
Damascus, Umar revealed the sensitivity of Muslims toward the jizya and
non-Muslims:

My own opinion and on the Book of Allah [citing Q. LIX, 6-8] is that
you should keep what has been given by Allah to you [of the land] in the
hands of its people …If the jizya is paid by them [the dhimmis], you
should require no more of them … For if we divide the land [among us],
nothing will be left for our descendants …[If the land is left with its
people,] the Muslims will be able to live on its produce.

You may therefore impose on them [the dhimmis] the jizya, never to take
them as prisoners, nor to do any injustice or harm to them, or to take
any of their property unless you have a [valid legal] claim to it. You
must fulfill the obligations you accepted in accordance with your
agreement with them.15

As we have seen, genuine Muslims who abide by the Qur'an's morality
considered it their responsibility to protect the lives, property, and
peace of non-Muslims. Once, during a battle with the Byzantine army, the
situation became so untenable that Muslims could no longer provide the
necessary protection to Christians. Thus, Mohammed, our Prophet (may God
bless him and grant him peace), ordered the jizya to be returned to
them.16 The amicable history between Muslims and Jews and Christians is
an example for the present.

The Islamic code of ethics requires that non-Muslims be accepted, that
their values and beliefs be respected, and that an environment in which
peaceful coexistence is possible be created. Therefore, the spread of
this code, as well as efforts to correct some misguided practices
claiming to be Islamic, will play an important role. In addition, the
Muslims' acceptance and understanding must find an appropriate response
in the Jewish and Christian communities, because God also commands them
to love all other people and to be the leaders in all matters of good
and peace.


