Chapter 3 : Uniting Against Radicalism
======================================

Radical tendencies, irrespective of their origin, are one of the most
dangerous threats to world peace and security. Radicalism means to
advocate fundamental and sudden changes by means of uncompromising and
hard-line policies. Radicals seek such changes by employing cunning and
often aggressive policies. One of radicalism's characteristic traits is
the angry attitude visible in its adherents' speeches, books, and
demonstrations.

Radical movements are dominated by blindly advocated taboos, instead of
conscious behavior, and reflect amass psychology. This psychology, in
turn, can get so out of control that people, who no longer know what
they are doing or why, turn their aggression on others. In an
environment where mutual acceptance and understanding have ceased to
exist, people begin to feel animosity toward different ideologies or
races without knowing what the other party really represents or
believes.

Ignorance enables radicalism to find new recruits, even though it is a
harmful and destructive movement. Misinformed or one-sidedly informed
people are vulnerable to extremist movements, whose philosophical
programs they adopt without careful reflection. This is why education is
an essential aspect of the ideological fight against radicalism.

In our own time, radicalism has emerged among Muslims, Christians, and
Jews. This situation is abused and taken advantage of by proponents of
Samuel Huntington's proposed clash of civilizations theory. The scale of
radicalism's threat to world peace has become apparent in the 9/11
attacks on the United States and its consequences. The fact that these
attacks are widely believed to have been carried out in the name of
Islam resulted in a great deal of prejudice against Muslims and
misunderstanding of Islam.

Given the fact that Islam prohibits all acts of violence and
aggression, most of the Islamic world condemned these terrorist attacks.
Muslims prayed alongside Christians for the innocent lives lost, and
American Muslims rushed to the aid of the victims. Despite this,
prejudice against Muslims in the United States and some European
countries has vastly increased, and incidences of violence have been
reported. The arguments of those radicals who seek to divide the world
into two warring factions have created an atmosphere of anxiety.

In order to eradicate radicalism and its damaging consequences,
cultural and educational campaigns designed to reach all sections of
society must be organized. We can list the topics and the
responsibilities of various sections of society to be covered by this
program, as follows:

An awareness that radicalism, an extremist tendency that is
incompatible with true religious morality, must be defeated
ideologically so that its claim to be acting in the name of religion can
be exposed as false. People of all three divinely revealed religions
must be told that they have a responsibility to be compassionate,
patient, gentle, friendly, polite, and respectful. They have to be made
aware that God forbids violence, aggression, and anything that harms
innocent people. They must understand that it is wrong to go down that
path. These efforts will ensure that all radicals will be recognized as
misguided liars and thereby prevented from finding new recruits.

A program must be designed to give full and accurate information about
all parties involved in the conflict, so that international dialogue
becomes possible. An important step toward mutually friendly relations
is the creation of an environment in which Jews, Christians, and Muslims
can begin to know each other's beliefs, traditions, and rituals better.
This can be done through cultural and educational programs. As people
come to know each other better, they will realize that they have many
things in common. This, in turn, will make reconciliation possible.
Muslims, Christians, and Jews should tell one another about their
respective worldviews in line with God's divine books of revelation,
thereby preventing the mutual misunderstanding and radicalism caused by
a lack of accurate knowledge.

The media must support the cultural activities necessary to create an
environment conducive to international dialogue. They should refrain
from sensationalism, which incites violence and segregation, and focus
on broadcasts that encourage moderation and acceptance. Carefully
prepared broadcasts by the western media will play an important role in
eradicating the currently widespread anti-Muslim prejudice. Muslim media
organizations, for their part, must refrain from broadcasts and opinions
that incite hatred toward non-Muslims and concentrate instead on
cultural and spiritual education in the Islamic world.

Jewish, Christian, and Muslim religious leaders and opinion makers must
identify people who are bent on portraying myths and false beliefs as
part of the religious code. They must teach people that God commands
believers to be balanced and gentle, and that all extremism is contrary
to religious morality. Political leaders must support this awareness
campaign in order to prevent extremism in society and to prepare the
ground for moderation. These and similar joint efforts will eradicate
the conditions conducive to radicalism. In addition, believers must
begin to show sincere respect for others' beliefs and values. In Qur'an
2:113, God reveals that the Jews claimed that the Christians "have
nothing to stand on" and vice versa. In reality, God knows best who is
right, which is why genuine believers must seek to draw closer to God
instead of accusing one another.

They should concentrate on enhancing their sincerity and work to earn
God's good pleasure and mercy. The following verse reveals that people
who act otherwise are wrong:

The Jews say: "The Christians have nothing to stand on," and the
Christians say: "The Jews have nothing to stand on," yet they both
recite the Book. Those who do not know say the same as they say. God
will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding the things
about which they differ. (Qur'an, 2:113)

Eradicating the harm caused by Jewish, Christian, and Muslim radicals
is possible only if all moderate, peace-loving, civilized, and genuinely
religious people cooperate and form an alliance. Such an alliance will
defeat those who present war and conflict as the only option, and
disprove the assertions of those who advocate a show of force as the
only way to achieve security and prevent further bloodshed, tears, and
material damage. Another important way to curb radicalism is to expose
the movements and ideologies that promote extremism as false. In the
coming pages, we will scrutinize the errors of radical Jewish and
Christian movements. But first, we need to remind people in the Islamic
world to be alert against radicalism.

**Qur'anic Morality Forbids Extremism**

As mentioned earlier, Islamic societies have been centers of mutual
acceptance and goodwill toward non-Muslims throughout history,
particularly in our Prophet's (may God bless him and grant him peace)
time. Islamic history is full of examples of Christians and Jews seeking
and finding refuge with Muslims. Bearing this reality in mind at a time
when the world so desperately needs peace, Muslims must develop a model
based on the Qur'an's morality and our Prophet's (may God bless him and
grant him peace) life that will set the standards for the rest of the
world.

Radicalism is wholly incompatible with God's prescribed way of life.
God describes Muslims as those who speak nicely, refrain from conflict
and fighting, are friendly and moderate toward even the fiercest
opponents, and modest, patient, compassionate, and loving. The Qur'an
reveals that all of the Prophets were moderate, gentle, and accepting of
others. For example, God describes Abraham (pbuh) as: "tender-hearted
and forbearing" (Qur'an, 9:114) and Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him
and grant him peace) as:

It is a mercy from God that you were gentle with them. If you had been
rough or hard of heart, they would have scattered from around you.
(Qur'an, 3:159)

Since Muslims are only responsible for announcing the Qur'an's
morality, and since they are prohibited from being bullies or enforcers
and are required to be softly spoken to even the cruelest tyrant, they
cannot be extremists or radicals, for such groups advocate that which
violates the Qur'an's morality.

Radicalism is an ideological movement and political approach that is
foreign to Islam. When radical groups are examined, it gradually becomes
clear that they are, in reality, using a compilation of communist
slogans and methods or that they have adopted the "fanatical rage of the
Time of Ignorance" (Qur'an, 48:26). One of the common characteristics of
such ideologies is their emotional force, an underlying cause of
radicalism that is totally incompatible with God's commands. The Qur'an
describes Muslims as people who control their anger and who are
reasonable, moderate, and tolerant. They always prefer reconciliation in
order to reach solutions within the framework of mutual acceptance and
optimism. They show their calming and peaceful sides in all situations.
One verse reveals these attributes:

Those who give in times of both ease and hardship, those who control
their rage and pardon other people - God loves the good-doers. (Qur'an,
3:134) Muslims must be polite and respectful when interacting with
people of different beliefs and ideologies. They never resort to force
or threats, for their responsibility is limited to teaching others about
the Qur'an's morality. The rest is up to the conscience of those people.
The following verse describes this approach:

Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and fair admonition, and argue
with them in the kindest way. Your Lord knows best who is misguided from
His way. And He knows best who are guided. (Qur'an, 16:125)

God commanded Prophets Moses and Aaron (peace be upon them) to speak
with Pharaoh, and to do so softly:

"Go to Pharaoh; he has overstepped the bounds. But speak to him with
gentle words so that, hopefully, he will pay heed or show some fear."
(Qur'an, 20:43-44) Pharaoh was the worst denier and tyrant of his time.
He rejected God, claimed divinity, and was a despot who killed and
oppressed the believers (Israelites). Yet, God commanded His Prophets to
speak with gentle words when they visited him. Notice that God's
ordained method is to establish a friendly dialogue. Agitating words,
expressions of anger, and heated protest are incompatible with His code
of preaching and morality.

Therefore, all Muslims must refrain from a harsh, angry, and
challenging approach, for these are contrary to the Qur'an's method and
essence. Instead, Muslims must adopt the accepting, moderate, calm, and
rational approach described in the Qur'an. In other words, they must be
role models for humanity and earn people's admiration for the morality
of Islam and themselves. Muslims should also make great progress and
produce superb works of science, culture, art, and aesthetics, as well
as live Islam in the best way, and thus represent it to the world.

**The Errors of Radical Christians**

The vast majority of Christians approach members of other religions
with the acceptance, love, and respect required by the Bible. This is a
very important - and very recent - development. During the second half
of the twentieth century, the Christian world's conviction that all
other religions are completely wrong was largely abandoned, and the view
that non-Christians should not be automatically condemned gained the
upper hand. Christian writers, researchers, and officials expressed this
view regularly. Organizations representing Christians decided to
establish a dialogue and cooperate with other religions to find
solutions to the world's problems. Fundamentalism made way for
acceptance.

However, it is still possible - although not often - to encounter
Christian intolerance and even aggressions toward non-Christians. Some
religious figures make unfounded allegations against other religions and
claim that their followers are destined for Hell. Such allegations
create discomfort in the Islamic world. Some Christian leaders continue
to make aggressive comments about Muslims, misinterpret the Old
Testament, and claim that in the near future a Muslim-Christian war will
occur. Or, even worse, they claim that such a war is both necessary and
unavoidable.

The Old Testament relates stories from past nations, their wars, and
the consequences thereof. Most of these are specific to those times and
events. Therefore, such narratives must be considered in the context of
those times, and one should refrain from reinterpreting those narratives
to support war and conflict.

One of the most fundamental errors of Christian radicals is their
belief in Armageddon, which they think will take place before the
Messiah's arrival. This unfounded belief violates the morality that
Jesus (pbuh) taught to his followers. Even a cursory reading of the New
Testament shows that Jesus recommended love, peace, and friendship.

Christians should know that Muslims are also awaiting Jesus' (pbuh)
second coming, for this miracle is foretold in the Qur'an and in Prophet
Mohammed's (may God bless him and grant him peace) hadiths. Therefore,
Muslims and Christians should make joint preparations for his arrival.
The best preparation is to adopt the morality that pleases God.

After Jesus (pbuh) returns, he will defeat all atheist ideologies and
idolatrous philosophies; such ideologies as fascism and racism will be
eradicated; the world will be freed from ethnic violence, tyranny, and
injustice; and humanity will experience peace, happiness, and
tranquility. Therefore, genuinely religious people who are preparing for
this great event should make the necessary preparations, try to prevent
all kinds of conflict, and leave all disputes, divisions, and
animosities behind.

No doubt, the Christians are the best placed to render invalid all of
those opinions and attitudes that seek to prevent a dialogue based on
mutual understanding and respect between the two communities. True
Christians must reveal such people's errors to them, as well as to
society, by reminding them that Jesus (pbuh) commanded his followers to
treat all people well, love their enemies, and do good to those who hate
them.

In other words, he does not call for intolerance toward non-Christians
and does not support those self-proclaimed Christians who seek to turn
the world into a great arena of warfare. Such a biased and hateful
attitude toward non-Christians, especially Muslims, is the result of
misinterpreted Christian teachings and certain irreligious ideologies.
Moderate Christians must expose the radicals' views as contrary to
Christian teachings so that the Christian community will not be led
astray. As we stated earlier, radicalism feeds on ignorance, and
Christians are morally obliged to prevent this danger. As the Bible
says:

For it is God's will that by doing good you should silence the ignorant
talk of foolish men... Show the proper respect to everyone. Love the
brotherhood of believers, fear God... (1 Peter, 2:15-17)

All conscientious Christians must shoulder this responsibility, for the
war and conflict demanded by radicals will bring great losses, tears,
and suffering to both sides. It would be a grave mistake to refrain from
taking the necessary steps, when an alliance of all believers could
remove this probability. The tensions desired by radicals can be
prevented by Muslims and Christians of common sense. Removing the
prejudices and creating an alliance of believers will enable them to
play a leading role in delivering world peace. In this way, Christians
and Muslims will bring peace and happiness to the world, just as the
morality ordained by God demands.

**The Errors of Radical Jews**

On 25 February 1994, Baruch Goldstein unleashed a vicious attack on the
Abraham Mosque in al-Khalil (Hebron) in the West Bank. This settler, a
member of a radical Jewish organization claiming to be following in the
footsteps of Meir Kahane, entered the mosque and, under the protection
of Israeli soldiers, walked to its center and opened fire with his M-16
assault rifle on the 500 Muslims performing their morning prayers,
repeatedly changing magazines.

Sixty-seven Muslims died on the spot; a further 300 were wounded. The
Israeli administration announced that this was a frenzied attack by an
individual. However, the facts that he entered the mosque with his
rifle, passed Israeli soldiers protecting the mosque, and fired on the
worshippers for a long enough time to empty many clips prove that this
statement was questionable. If nothing else, the Israeli soldiers had
given him passive support.

In reality, this was only one of the many attacks carried out by
radical Jewish groups. In 1980, the same groups tried to blow up Muslim
places of worship in Jerusalem (e.g., al-Aqsa Mosque and the Qubbat
as-Sakhrah) in order to rebuild the temple of Solomon. The radical
Jewish settlers who walk around with their weapons and launch bloody
attacks on Palestinians are members of these groups.

The most radical of them is the Kahane faction, to which Goldstein
belonged. Founded by Rabbi Meir Kahane, this organization is
well-organized in both Israel and America. It is totally committed to
Rabbi Kahane's fanatical doctrines and operates in Israel under the name
of Kach and in America under the name of the Jewish Defense League.
Kahane believed that Jews are superior to all other races, which he
considered to be some sort of animals (goyim), and that all Arabs in the
occupied territories should be subjected to ethnic cleansing. This
organization expressed its rationale as the only good Arab is a dead
Arab. His organization survived his assassination in 1990 in New York,
and reorganized, particularly in Israel, under such names as Kahane Chai
(Kahane lives). Followers of Kahane are responsible for many more
massacres besides the one mentioned above.

Another strange aspect of the al-Khalil massacre was the widespread
support it received from certain sections of Israeli society. Israel
Shahak, one of Israel's critical voices, wrote that Goldstein's attack
received the support of "a disturbing level of approval" of Israelis.17
A poll conducted after the massacre revealed that 40 percent of Israelis
supported the massacre or at least understood his motives. Among young
people, 30 percent supported it and another 35 percent understood him.

Shahak also wrote that this support was not limited to the al-Khalil
massacre, but that the group's doctrines received the support of a
frighteningly large proportion of society. Polls revealed that 39
percent of young people totally shared Kahane's views. When his views
were put to young people without mentioning his name, this number
increased to a whopping 66 percent. This majority believed in forcing
the Palestinians living in the occupied territories to migrate. As
Shahak said, a considerable proportion of Israelis regarded the Arabs as
Amalek, an Arab tribe mentioned in the Old Testament as a people who
were ordered to be killed, including their women and children. It
says:

This is what the LORD Almighty says: "I will punish the Amalekites for
what they did to Israel when they waylaid them as they came up from
Egypt. Now go, attack the Amalekites and totally destroy everything that
belongs to them. Do not spare them; put to death men and women, children
and infants, cattle and sheep, camels and donkeys." (1 Samuel, 15:2-3)

All of these events and attitudes prove the existence of a real danger:
Jewish radicalism. We have scrutinized this radical ideology and its
consequences in earlier publications. We can summarize them as
follows:

There is a radical tendency in the Jewish world to promote hate and
animosity toward non-Jews and advocate the harshest and most unforgiving
treatment of Palestinians. This tendency has strong support within
Israel and plays an important role in forming and continuing its
aggressive, uncompromising, and occupying 50-year attitude against
Palestinians and its Arab neighbors. No doubt, the Kahane organization
and such militants as Baruch Goldstein are a small minority within the
Israeli Jewish community (also among all Jews around the world).
However, there is a radical culture, albeit less radical, that provides
ideological support and continues to threaten Middle Eastern and world
peace.

Let us state here that these radical Jews are not part of a presumed
global Jewish conspiracy and that the majority of Jews, especially those
outside of Israel, oppose this movement and wish to live in peace with
other religions and nations. It must also be remembered that many Jews
who oppose these radical Jews and their views, often with religious
content, are religious themselves or are even rabbis.

The sources of this Jewish radicalism must be analyzed in order to
understand this issue correctly. There are two main sources: the
hostility toward non-Jews within Jewish tradition based, in particular,
on the misinterpretation of some fanatical views in the Talmud; and
political Zionism, which was founded in the nineteenth century and
inspired by the contemporaneous Social Darwinist and other imperialist
ideologies.

The first source has been comprehensively studied in Israel Shahak's
Jewish History, Jewish Religion. As Shahak clearly establishes, the
Jewish diaspora, beginning in the first century AD, exposed the Jews to
many centuries of Christian oppression and tyranny, and gradually caused
certain circles to develop a deep hostility towards non-Jews. This
misplaced hostility came to be reflected in the Talmud, part of the
Jewish tradition. Talmud writers often misinterpreted or distorted Old
Testament passages and decreed that it was legitimate to cheat or harm
non-Jews. These erroneous decrees developed into traditions that even
today cause certain Jewish groups to regard non-Jews with distrust or
even hatred.

The second source consists of political Zionism, a movement founded at
the end of the nineteenth century to create a Jewish nation-state in
Palestine. This can be considered a perfectly legitimate project, for
the Jews had no homeland, were mainly treated as second-class citizens,
and suffered from anti-Semitic attacks and oppression. But Zionism went
beyond this legitimate right, as it became a project of acquiring the
whole of Palestine by driving out all of the Arabs. As stated above,
this is a consequence of the influence exerted by the Social Darwinist
and imperialistic ideologies that dominated Europe at the time. In the
1920s and 1930s, Revisionist Zionism appeared on the scene. This
movement was led by the fascist ideologue Vladimir Jabotinsky, who was
inspired by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy and thus brought an element
of fascism into Zionism.

More dangerous than all of this, however, was how certain Zionist
thinkers twisted ideas that sought complete world domination and support
the oppression of non-Jews in the event that this came about. Again, it
needs to be made clear that the Jews are perfectly justified in wishing
to live in peace with Muslims and Christians in Palestine, the land of
their ancestors. If, however, that justification turns into a despotic
policy that takes away from Muslims and Christians their right to live
and exist in the region, then it is natural that all sincere, devout
Jews, Christians and Muslims should object and engage in intellectual
moves to redress the situation.

We may set out what is necessary for the revision of Jewish radicalism
as follows:

1- Jewish religious figures should cleanse Jewish tradition of the
fanatical, superstitious teachings of certain circles that encourage
hostility toward non-Jews and replace it with the Old Testament's moral
approach of love, respect, justice, and compassion. Many Jewish
religious figures are working toward this end. Those rabbis who
criticize Israeli state terror on the grounds that it is incompatible
with the Jewish moral code are a hope for the future.

2- Zionism must be moderated in a political sense. Of course Israel has
the right to exist and protect itself, but it has no right to force a
whole nation to live under occupation for over 50 years. It must not be
forgotten that this land is the ancestral home of the Palestinians as
well, who have lived there for centuries. There are as many sites sacred
to Muslims and Christians in this land as there are to the Jews. This
land is sufficiently large to allow all the peoples to live together in
peace. For this reason, Israel must withdraw from all of the territories
that it has occupied since 1967, recognize an independent Palestinian
state in the West Bank and Gaza, and make peace with the Palestinians as
well as the Arab world by entering a friendly and constructive dialogue
with them.

In addition, it is very important that religious Jews follow God's
advice and invite all Jews to abide by the moral conduct ordained by
Him. For this, the claim of supremacy must be dropped. The Qur'an
reveals that the Israelites were at one time rewarded by God and given
rule over other nations. Some of the verses in this regard are as
follows:

O Tribe of Israel! Remember the blessing I conferred on you, and that I
preferred you over all other beings. (Qur'an, 2:47)

We gave the Book, Judgment, and Prophethood to the tribe of Israel;
provided them with good things; and favored them over all other people.
(Qur'an, 45:16) However, these verses do not speak of being preferred in
the sense that the Jewish radicals understand it. Many Prophets have
been chosen from the Jewish nation, who at one time reigned over a large
geographic area. They were granted superiority, as they ruled the
worlds. With the end of Prophets Solomon's (pbuh) and David's (pbuh)
rule, however, this Jewish privilege came to an end.

Radical Jews read a racial attribute of superiority into various Old
Testament passages. They then developed a misguided theory of Jewish
superiority at birth, according to which the Israelites are eternally
above all other races. This view led to even greater errors, for
example, the above-mentioned massacre by Baruch Goldstein, who murdered
Muslims while they were praying. In other words, radical Jews deduce
from this claim of superiority that they should subject other nations to
violence.

Often, they try to justify their views with passages from the Torah (as
was the case with the Amalek tribe mentioned earlier). Accordingly,
these Jews have no qualms about cheating non-Jews, plundering their
property and possessions, or even killing their women and children. But
God commands Jews, just like Christians and Muslims, to be just and
honest, protect the rights of the vulnerable, and be loving and
peaceful. Killing women, children, and the elderly is against the
morality of the Qur'an, in which God reveals the promise of Jews to be
virtuous and not to cause mischief:

Remember when We made a covenant with the tribe of Israel: "Worship
none but God, and be good to your parents, relatives and orphans, and
the very poor. Speak good words to people, perform prayer, and give
alms." But then you turned away - except a few of you - you turned
aside. And when We made a covenant with you not to shed your blood and
not to expel one another from your homes, you agreed and were all
witnesses. (Qur'an, 2:83-84)

It also must not be forgotten that radical Jewish fanaticism
contradicts other passages from the Torah, such as: Who stops his ears
against plots of murder and shuts his eyes against contemplating evil
(Isaiah, 33:15). Fanatics have created a belief based on hate and
aggression, disregarding all condemnations of violence and barbarism
contained in the Torah in the belief that they will acquire world
dominion in this way. In reality, no ideology that sanctions violence
and aggression, and disrupts law and order, can succeed. Violence always
brings only loss. Preventing such destructiveness necessitates the
exposure of the fanatics' deceptions and errors, which also will prevent
their influence over any other people as well as help them to see
reason.

Jews who genuinely believe in God must abide by the Torah's true
principles and advocate for peace in order to prevent others from
embracing radicalism. Some of the Torah passages that recommend peace,
love, compassion, and virtue are as follows:

Do not pervert justice; do not show partiality to the poor or
favoritism to the great, but judge your neighbor fairly. Do not go about
spreading slander among your people. Do not do anything that endangers
your neighbor's life... Do not seek revenge or bear a grudge against one
of your people, but love your neighbor as yourself... (Leviticus,
19:15-18)

He has showed you, O man, what is good. And what does the LORD require
of you? To act justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with your God.
(Micah, 6:8) You shall not murder. You shall not commit adultery. You
shall not steal. You shall not give false testimony against your
neighbor. You shall not covet your neighbor's house... (Exodus,
20:13-17)

Peace-seeking citizens of Israel, as well as Jews living in other
countries, must oppose radicalism and be fiercely critical of Israeli
state terror. Jews of genuine faith must bear in mind that the Torah
prohibits murder, committing injustice, taking revenge, and bloodshed,
and should become leaders in the ideological and cultural struggle
against fanaticism in solidarity with all conscientious Christians and
Muslims. The ideological warfare against Jewish radicalism is one of the
most important means of finding a lasting and peaceful solution to the
Palestinian issue. Only then will Jews and Muslims - as well as
Christians - be able to live with each other in peace.

Tranquility, love, and peace will only grace Palestine and Israel when
true religious morality is practiced. It must be remembered that both
Jews and Muslims have suffered the greatest damage in their history at
the hands of irreligious ideologies. The Old Testament is full of
accounts of the cruelty inflicted on Jews by idolaters. The genocide and
tyranny against Jews by atheists is well documented (e.g., the Nazis and
Stalin's officially encouraged anti-Semitic racists, and communists).
These irreligious forces hated and terrorized Jews because of their
faith in God.
Muslims and Jews must join forces against these anti-religious entities
and disregard the radical propaganda that could prevent such an
alliance.


