Chapter 5 : Common Prayers and Common Moral Values
==================================================

It is God, Who created humanity and has the best and most complete
knowledge of each person's constitution and needs. Therefore, each
person should follow the path ordained by God, Who has guided humanity
since His creation of Adam (pbuh) and Eve with His Prophets and Books,
and has revealed to them the values, beliefs, and code of conduct of
which He approves. Those who adopt this way of life and moral code can
hope to find happiness, contentment, and beauty in this life as well as
the Hereafter.

Followers of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, regardless of when and
where they lived, had the same moral values. Refraining from murder,
theft, adultery and fornication, lying, injustice, and every kind of
wrong-doing, as well as behaving in a polite and respectful manner to
others, are basic values recognized by all believers. Thus, they respond
in a very similar manner to events, even though there are differences in
their views and practices.

This moral code is common to Christians, Muslims, and Jews. For
example, members of these three divinely revealed religions are told to
avoid ungratefulness, transgression, arrogance, rebellion, lies,
mockery, selfishness, greed, fraud, envy, aggression, disobedience,
avarice, betrayal, gossip, confrontation, tyranny, slander, lack of
patience, hypocrisy, and agitation, for they are incompatible with the
morality that He tells believers to follow. In fact, He clearly tells
all believers to be respectful, loving, just, conscientious,
compassionate, merciful, helpful, modest, honest, trustworthy, generous,
grateful, selfless, gentle, obedient, and loyal.

Genuinely religious people who abide by these principles are
respectable, honorable, and distinguished. They have submitted
wholeheartedly to God, have deep faith and superior moral qualities,
expect no reward for helping others, and desire only to earn His good
pleasure. They side at all times with the right, good, true, and
virtuous morality, and refrain from all kinds of evil and immorality.

Many philosophies contain teachings that contradict the morality of
divinely revealed religions. For instance, those materialistic
philosophies that have been so influential during the last two centuries
portray individuals as selfish and unscrupulous and depict life as an
arena full of people ruled by their selfish desires and thus driven to
satisfy their strong desire at all costs. Since materialism rejects the
existence of God's revelation, it does not recognize any absolute
criteria applicable to human nature, disregards all moral values, and
rejects all values introduced by the divinely revealed religions. The
results of such views are clearly visible: conflict and tension;
ruthless aggression directed toward a piece of land, status, or office;
the ever-worsening oppression of the vulnerable and needy; and
increasing injustice, immorality, and rapid degeneration in the quality
of life.

In the face of this reality and for the salvation of those who have
been misled by materialism, all followers of the divinely revealed
religions must unite. Believing in God's existence and unity and that He
has sent Prophets to guide humanity are important common points. Jews,
Christians, and Muslims have much more in common with one another than
with people who reject these facts.

We will study the common moral principles between the three divinely
revealed religions under their respective headings. Each of these
principles makes a case for an alliance between the followers of the
divinely revealed religions. It must not be forgotten that a world
dominated by virtue is attainable if the believers work together.

**Modesty**

Modesty is a common attribute of believers, for God reveals that He
disapproves of arrogant and vain people. Believers know that God gives
them all they have and that He is the One and true owner of everything.
Therefore they never surrender to vanity, because they know their
helplessness in His presence and that reason, knowledge, beauty, wealth,
status, and all other desirable commodities originate with Him, not
within themselves. God reveals the believers' modesty, as follows:

The servants of the All-Merciful are those who walk lightly on Earth
and, who, when the ignorant speak to them, say: "Peace." (Qur'an, 25:63)
Another verse reveals that modest Muslims will be rewarded with
Paradise:

Your God is One God, so submit to Him. Give good news to the
humble-hearted. (Qur'an, 22:34)

The Bible reveals that modesty is important and that humble people are
superior in His presence:

Be completely humble and gentle; be patient, bearing with one another
in love. (Ephesians, 4:2) Likewise, the Torah states that one must
refrain from arrogance and that God approves of humble people. Believers
are required to be modest, and arrogant people will be humbled. For
example: Hear and pay attention, do not be arrogant, for the LORD has
spoken. (Jeremiah, 13:15) Seek the LORD, all you humble of the land, you
who do what He commands. Seek righteousness, seek humility...
(Zephaniah, 2:3) You save the humble, but your eyes are on the haughty
to bring them low. (2 Samuel, 22:28)

**Conceit**

When he is told to fear [and respect] God, he is seized by pride, which
drives him to wrongdoing. Hell will be enough for him! What an evil
resting-place! (Qur'an, 2:206)

Bible God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble. (James, 4:6)
Command those who are rich in this present world not to be arrogant nor
to put their hope in wealth, which is so uncertain, but to put their
hope in God, Who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment.
(1 Timothy, 6:17) Torah You warned them to return to Your law, but they
became arrogant and disobeyed Your commands. They sinned against Your
ordinances, by which a man will live if he obeys them. Stubbornly they
turned their backs on You, became stiff-necked, and refused to listen.
(Nehemiah, 9:29)

**Ungodly Environments**

It has been sent down to you in the Book that when you hear God's Signs
being rejected and mocked at by people, you must not sit with them until
they start talking of other things. If you do, you are just the same as
them. God will gather all the hypocrites and unbelievers into Hell.
(Qur'an, 4:140) Torah Blessed is the man who does not walk in the
counsel of the wicked, or stand in the way of sinners, or sit in the
seat of mockers. But his delight is in the law of the LORD, and on His
law he meditates day and night. (Psalm, 1:1-2)

**Pointless Things**

Those who turn away from worthless talk. (Qur'an, 23:3) Bible Avoid
godless chatter... (2 Timothy, 2:16) Torah Turn my eyes away from
worthless things; preserve my life according to Your word. (Psalm,
119:37)

**Remember God at All Times**

[People with intelligence are] those who remember God, standing,
sitting, and lying on their sides, and reflect on the creation of the
heavens and Earth: "Our Lord, You have not created this for nothing.
Glory be to You! So safeguard us from the punishment of the Fire."
(Qur'an, 3:191) [There are people who are] not distracted by trade or
commerce from the remembrance of God, the performance of prayer, and the
giving of the alms; fearing a day when all hearts and eyes will be in
turmoil. (Qur'an, 24:37)

Torah Blessed is the man... [whose] delight is in the law of the LORD,
and on His law he meditates day and night. (Psalm, 1:1-2) In all your
ways acknowledge Him, and He will make your paths straight. Do not be
wise in your own eyes; fear the LORD and shun evil. This will bring
health to your body and nourishment to your bones. (Proverbs, 3:6-8)

**Trust in God**

God is the believers' best friend and helper. When they encounter
hardship or troubles, and when they are in safety and tranquility, they
know that He is with them and so turn only to Him with absolute trust
and in complete reliance upon Him. They take all possible precautions
and make contingency plans, but do not forget that everything happens
according to His will. Whatever the outcome, they know that there is a
reason and wisdom in it. For instance, believers refrain from unhealthy
things as a precautionary measure. However, if they somehow become
infected with a deadly disease, they know that it is God's will. Given
this fact, they do not panic or despair; rather, they remain patient and
trusting. Believers are not saddened or worried by events, but live in
the peace and calm that comes from trusting God.

Such trust brings a comfort and beauty to believers that no unbeliever
can ever experience. One of the most fundamental causes of the stress,
depression, sorrow, and suffering experienced by unbelievers is their
turning away from this reality. The Qur'an reveals this truth in several
verses, some of which are given below:

Whoever has fear [and respect] of God - He will give him a way out. And
[He will] provide for him from where he does not expect. Whoever puts
his trust in God - He will be enough for him. God always achieves His
aim. God has appointed a measure for all things. (Qur'an, 65:2-3) Say:
"Nothing can happen to us except what God has ordained for us. He is Our
Master. It is in God that the believers should put their trust."
(Qur'an, 9:51)

Trusting in God and relying only on Him are attributes required of all
devout Christians and Jews as well. The Bible reveals the futility of
worrying and calls for faith in God in all matters:

But the Lord is faithful, and He will strengthen and protect you from
the evil one. (2 Thessalonians, 3:3) Then Jesus said to his disciples:
"Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat;
or about your body, what you will wear... Consider the ravens: They do
not sow or reap, they have no storeroom or barn. Yet God feeds them...
Who of you, by worrying, can add a single hour to his life? Since you
cannot do this very little thing, why do you worry about the rest?
(Luke, 12:22-26) The Torah reveals that someone who turns to God and
trusts and relies only on Him will be rewarded with success: ..."Listen
to me, Judah and people of Jerusalem! Have faith in the LORD your God
and you will be upheld; have faith in His Prophets and you will be
successful." (2 Chronicles, 20:20)

Trust in the LORD with all your heart and lean not on your own
understanding. (Proverbs, 3:5)

**God Protects Believers**

He [Moses] said: "Never! My Lord is with me and will guide me."
(Qur'an, 26:62) God is with those who fear Him and with those who are
good-doers. (Qur'an, 16:128) My Protector is God, Who sent down the
Book. He takes care of the righteous. (Qur'an, 7:196)

Torah Have I not commanded you? Be strong and courageous. Do not be
terrified or discouraged, for the LORD your God will be with you
wherever you go. (Joshua, 1:9) Have no fear of sudden disaster or of the
ruin that overtakes the wicked, for the LORD will be your confidence...
(Proverbs, 3:25-26)

**Justice**

Being just is one of the believers' most important qualities. God
commands people to be fair with each other, even if this means going
against their own interests or those of their relatives. Believers
protect justice and prevent injustice, for, as the Qur'an states: God
commands you to return to their owners the things you hold on trust and,
when you judge between people, to judge with justice. How excellent is
what God exhorts you to do! God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing. (Qur'an,
4:58)

For Muslims, it is irrelevant whether the person is rich or poor or
whether their decision may conflict with their personal interests.
Whatever the circumstances, Muslims do not compromise on justice. This
superior morality is described in the Qur'an, as follows: O you who
believe! Be upholders of justice, bearing witness for God alone, even
against yourselves or your parents and relatives. Whether they are rich
or poor, God is well able to look after them. Do not follow your own
desires and deviate from the truth. If you twist or turn away, God is
aware of what you do. (Qur'an, 4:135)

Another verse states that hatred should not cause people to be
unfair:

O you who believe! Show integrity for the sake of God, bearing witness
with justice. Do not let hatred for a people incite you to being unjust.
Be just, for that is closer to heedfulness. Fear [and respect] God, for
God is aware of what you do. (Qur'an, 5:8) The Torah and the Bible also
call for justice. In the Bible, Jesus (pbuh) condemns those religious
figures and Pharisees who disregard justice: Woe to you, teachers of the
law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You give a tenth of your spices -
mint, dill, and cumin. But you have neglected the more important matters
of the law - justice, mercy, and faithfulness. You should have practiced
the latter without neglecting the former. (Matthew, 23:23)

Other Biblical passages require people to be just, as follows:

Stop judging by mere appearances, and make a right judgment. (John,
7:24) Masters, provide your slaves with what is right and fair.
(Colossians, 4:1) When the Torah describes virtuous people, it
emphasizes fairness. Furthermore, it states that just and righteous
people refrain from evil, are just to others, and protect the poor. Some
of the passages encouraging justice are as follows: ... "Since you have
asked for... discernment in administering justice, I will do what you
have asked. (1 Kings, 3:11-12) This is what the LORD says: "Maintain
justice and do what is right." (Isaiah, 56:1) Woe to those who make
unjust laws, to those who issue oppressive decrees, to deprive the poor
of their rights and withhold justice from the oppressed of My people,
... and robbing the fatherless. (Isaiah 10, 1-2)

**Slander and Aggression**

Throughout history, Prophets have called people to righteousness, God's
religion, and guided them to enlightenment. But in every era, some
people turned on His Prophets and did their best to prevent them from
teaching. These people believed that by slandering these individuals,
whom God had chosen to serve as role models of morality, they could
block their mission. When they realized that their slander had little or
no effect, they resorted to exile, arrest, or even murder.

The Qur'an relates the Prophets' struggles in great detail, especially
those of our Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and grant him peace),
who struggled against the Makkan unbelievers and hypocrites. It also
reveals that those believers who faced slander and aggression never
compromised; rather, they continued their struggle with the same
motivation and persistence.

The Qur'an reveals that Prophets endured slanders like "mad" (Qur'an,
15:6; Qur'an, 68:51) and "lying magician" (Qur'an, 38:4). These and
other slanders were used against Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and
grant him peace), and his people conspired to imprison, kill or expel
him (Qur'an, 8:30).

Believers will experience similar hardships, for:

Or did you suppose that you would enter the Garden without facing the
same as those who came before you? Poverty and illness afflicted them,
and they were shaken to the point that the Messenger and those who
believed with him asked: "When is God's help coming?" Be assured that
God's help is very near. (Qur'an, 2:214)

The Bible reveals that Jesus (pbuh) was accused of being
demon-possessed (John, 7:20, 8:48, 8:52), as well as of madness (John,
10:20), subverting their nation (Luke, 23:2), and not living according
to the traditions of the elders (Mark, 7:5). Other passages relate that
Jesus (pbuh) was mocked and subjected to insults and physical attacks.
No doubt, the unbelievers' ugly slanders were the product of their
mediocre intellect and misguided beliefs. God has created all Prophets
as role models characterized by such qualities as superior intellect,
foresight, and morality. But they and their followers, as the Qur'an
reveals, never relented or despaired. As the Qur'an states:

Many a Prophet has fought, when there were many thousands with him.
They did not give up in the face of what assailed them in the Way of
God, nor did they weaken or yield. God loves the steadfast. (Qur'an,
3:146)

The Prophets enlightened their followers and gave them this good news.
Muslims who were with our Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and grant
him peace) said, while enduring hardships: "This is what God and His
Messenger promised us. God and His Messenger told us the truth" (Qur'an,
33:22). Our Lord also reveals that those who show determination and
virtue will have their faith and submission enhanced. The Torah also
reveals the Prophets' struggles and the hardships they endured in great
detail. The Bible, on the other hand, states that sincere believers will
encounter hardship and troubles and that these will be causes of joy for
them:

Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness...
Blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you, and falsely say
all kinds of evil against you because of me. Rejoice and be glad,
because great is your reward in heaven, for in the same way they
persecuted the Prophets who were before you. (Matthew, 5:10-12)

The Bible reveals that Jesus (pbuh) warned his followers that they
would suffer injustice: You must be on your guard. You will be handed
over to the local councils and flogged in the synagogues. On account of
me, you will stand before governors and kings as witnesses to them...
Whenever you are arrested and brought to trial, do not worry beforehand
about what to say. Just say whatever is given you at the time, for it is
not you speaking, but the Holy Spirit. … but he who stands firm to the
end will be saved. (Mark, 13:9-13)

**Fear and Sorrow**

Those who conveyed God's Message and had fear [and respect] of Him,
fearing [and respecting] no one except God. God suffices as a Reckoner.
(Qur'an, 33:39) They said: "Our Lord, we are afraid that he might
persecute us or overstep the bounds." He said: "Have no fear. I will be
with you, All-Hearing and All-Seeing." (Qur'an, 20:45-46)

[Believers are] those to whom people said: "The people have gathered
against you, so fear them." But that merely increased their faith, and
they said: "God is enough for us and the Best of Guardians." So they
returned with blessings and bounty from God, and no evil touched them.
They pursued the pleasure of God. God's favor is indeed immense. That
was only Satan who intimidated his adherents. But do not fear them -
fear [and respect] Me, if you are believers. (Qur'an, 3:173-175)

Bible But even if you should suffer for what is right, you are blessed.
"Do not fear what they fear; do not be frightened." (1 Peter, 3:14)

Torah Be strong and courageous. Do not be afraid or terrified because
of them, for the LORD your God goes with you; He will never leave you
nor forsake you. (Deuteronomy, 31:6) The LORD Himself goes before you
and will be with you; He will never leave you nor forsake you. Do not be
afraid or discouraged. (Deuteronomy, 31:8) Be strong and courageous. Do
not be afraid or discouraged because of the king of Assyria and the vast
army with him, for there is a greater power with Us than with him. (2
Chronicles, 32:7)

**Those Who Plot Evil**

They have the word "Obedience!" on their tongues. But when they leave
your presence, a group of them spend the night plotting to do other than
what you say. God is recording their nocturnal plotting. So let them be,
and put your trust in God. God suffices as a Guardian. (Qur'an, 4:81)

Torah Woe to those who go to great depths to hide their plans from the
LORD, who do their work in darkness and think: "Who sees us? Who will
know?" (Isaiah, 29:15)

**Pagan Religions and Traditions**

God reveals that some people opposed the true religion delivered by the
Prophets, for their deep-rooted pagan beliefs dominate their societies,
as do their misguided religious practices and some traditions. The
Qur'an refers to this as the "religion of their forefathers," and the
Bible and the Torah refer to it as the tradition of the elders. In
reality, the true religion in His presence is the religion taught by His
Prophets. Believers will not be held accountable for these pagan beliefs
and traditions, but will be judged by God's Books of revelation and his
Prophets' practices. The situation of the people who follow such
traditions is described in the following terms:

When they are told: "Follow what God has sent down," they say: "No, we
will follow what we found our fathers doing." What! Even if Satan is
calling them to the punishment of the Blazing Fire? (Qur'an, 31:21)

When they are told: "Come to what God has sent down, come to the
Messenger," they say: "What we found our fathers doing is enough for
us." What! Even if their fathers did not know anything and were not
guided! (Qur'an, 5:104)

The Torah relates that some people who had been informed of the true
religion chose to follow their forefathers' misguided religious
practices. One such passage is given below: They have returned to the
sins of their forefathers, who refused to listen to My words. They have
followed other deities to serve them... I will bring on them a disaster
they cannot escape. (Jeremiah, 11:10-11)

The Bible reveals that the Pharisees and the Sadducees accused Jesus
(pbuh) and his disciples of forsaking their forefathers' traditions.
However, it would have been righteousness to abide by the true religion
delivered by Jesus (pbuh) instead of following the misguided beliefs so
fervently advocated by these people. Obviously, genuine believers need
to abide by Jesus' (pbuh) religion in obedience to him. The Bible states
that those who persisted in rejecting Jesus' (pbuh) teachings accused
his disciples of forsaking their forefathers' traditions: Then some
Pharisees and teachers of the law came to Jesus from Jerusalem and
asked: "Why do your disciples break the tradition of the elders?"
(Matthew, 15:1-2)

Another verse reveals Jesus' reply to such accusations, as follows: So
the Pharisees and teachers of the law asked Jesus: "Why don't your
disciples live according to the tradition of the elders?" … He [Jesus]
replied: "You have let go of the commands of God and are holding on to
the traditions of men." And he said to them: "You have a fine way of
setting aside the commands of God in order to observe your own
traditions!" (Mark, 7:5-9)

**Hypocrisy and Ostentation**

One other shared moral quality of believers is sincerity. Believers are
aware that God knows everything and that they will have to account in
the Hereafter for all of their thoughts, speeches, and conduct in this
world. They strive to earn God's approval and are sincere in their
conduct. As they expect to be rewarded by God for their actions, they
have no petty interests and do not behave in ways designed to impress or
gain the love of other people. The Prophets' devotional behaviors, as
related in the Qur'an, are examples for believers to follow. Good news
awaits His sincere servants, for "Those who shun the worship of false
deities and turn toward God will have good news" (Qur'an, 39:17). Other
verses deal with those who show off to attract other people's notice,
such as:

O you who believe! Do not nullify your charity by demands for gratitude
or insulting words, like him who spends his wealth, showing off to
people and not believing in God and the Last Day. His likeness is that
of a smooth rock coated with soil, which, when heavy rain falls on it,
is left stripped bare. They have no power over anything they have
earned. God does not guide disbelieving people. (Qur'an, 2:264) So woe
to those who perform prayer and are forgetful of their prayer, those who
show off. (Qur'an, 107:4-6)

The Bible warns: Be careful not to do your acts of righteousness before
men, to be seen by them... (Matthew, 6:1). The Pharisees, supposedly men
of religion, are mentioned: Everything they do is done for men to see...
(Matthew, 23:5). Their hypocrisy is likened to tombs that are impressive
on the outside but full of filth on the inside:

You are like whitewashed tombs, which look beautiful on the outside but
on the inside are full of dead men's bones and everything unclean. In
the same way, on the outside you appear to people as righteous. But on
the inside, you are full of hypocrisy and wickedness. (Matthew,
23:27-28) Various passages in the Torah condemn those who pray to
impress others and reveal that such people do not live by the morality
they preach and thus are bent on evil. The situation of those who
pretend to be close to God while their hearts do not appreciate Him
appropriately are described, as follows: You are always on their lips,
but far from their hearts. (Jeremiah, 12:2)

**Love**

And [We gave John] tenderness and purity from Us - he guarded against
evil. (Qur'an, 19:13) As for those who believe and do right actions, the
All-Merciful will bestow His love on them. (Qur'an, 19:96) Torah Let
love and faithfulness never leave you; bind them around your neck, write
them on the tablet of your heart. Then you will win favor and a good
name in the sight of God and man. (Proverbs, 3:3-4) Hatred stirs up
dissension, but love covers all wrongs. (Proverbs, 10:12) Bible This is
my command: Love each other. (John, 15:17) And this is love: that we
walk in obedience to His commands. As you have heard from the beginning,
His command is that you walk in love. (2 John, 1:6)

God Guides Those Who Seek Him If My servants ask you about Me, I am
near. I answer the call of the caller when he calls on Me. They should
therefore respond to Me and believe in Me so that, hopefully, they will
be rightly guided. (Qur'an, 2:186) O you who believe! Fear [and respect]
God, seek the means of drawing near to Him and strive in His Way, so
that, hopefully, you will be successful. (Qur'an, 5:35) Torah I love
those who love Me, and those who seek Me find Me. (Proverbs, 8:17) Bible
Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the
door will be opened to you. (Matthew, 7:7) Come near to God, and He will
come near to you. (James, 4:8)

**Saying Nice Things**

Do you not see how God makes a metaphor of a good word: a good tree
whose roots are firm and whose branches are in heaven? God makes
metaphors for people so that, hopefully, they will pay heed. (Qur'an,
14:24-25)

Torah Through patience a ruler can be persuaded, and a gentle tongue
can break a bone. (Proverbs, 25:15) The wise in heart are called
discerning, and pleasant words promote instruction. (Proverbs, 16:21)
Bible Do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only
what is helpful for building others up according to their needs, that it
may benefit those who listen. (Ephesians, 4:29) Let your conversation
always be full of grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how to
answer everyone. (Colossians, 4:6)

Good Advice

We have conveyed the Word to them so that, hopefully, they will pay
heed. (Qur'an, 28:51) What of him who spends the night hours in prayer,
prostrating and standing up, mindful of the Hereafter, hoping for the
mercy of his Lord? Say: "Are they the same - those who know and those
who do not know?" It is only people of intelligence who pay heed.
(Qur'an, 39:9)

Torah Apply your heart to instruction and your ears to words of
knowledge. (Proverbs, 23:12) Bible Obey your leaders and submit to their
authority. (Hebrews, 13:17) Do not merely listen to the word and so
deceive yourselves. Do what it says. (James, 1:22) Righteousness

People usually understand righteousness in different ways: giving some
money to the poor, helping an old person cross the road, or not lying.
Clearly these are all good deeds, but on their own they cannot define
righteousness. God reveals the true meaning of righteousness, as
follows: It is not righteousness to turn your faces to the East or to
the West. Rather, those with true devoutness are those who believe in
God and the Last Day, the Angels, the Book and the Prophets; and who,
despite their love for it, give away their wealth to their relatives and
orphans and the very poor; to travelers and beggars, and to set slaves
free; and who perform prayer and give the alms; those who honor their
contracts when they make them and who are steadfast in poverty and
illness and in battle. Those are the people who are true. They are the
people who guard against evil. (Qur'an, 2:177)

Those who are steadfast in seeking the face of their Lord, perform
prayer, and give from the provision We have given them, secretly and
openly, and stave off evil with good. It is they who will have the
Ultimate Abode. (Qur'an, 13:22)

Believers refrain from injustice, never compromise when it comes to
honesty, protect the poor, are polite and respectful to all people, and
are gentle and friendly. They do good and call on others to emulate
them. The Torah defines righteousness, as follows: He who walks
righteously and speaks what is right, who rejects gain from extortion
and keeps his hand from accepting bribes... (Isaiah, 33:15) Suppose
there is a righteous man who does what is just and right. He does not
eat at the mountain shrines or look to the idols of the house of Israel.
He does not oppress anyone, but returns what he took in pledge for a
loan. He does not commit robbery, but gives his food to the hungry and
provides clothing for the naked. He does not lend at usury or take
excessive interest. He withholds his hand from doing wrong, and judges
fairly between man and man. He follows My decrees and faithfully keeps
My laws. That man is righteous. (Ezekiel, 18:5-9) The Bible reveals that
people can find happiness in both worlds only if they believe and do
good:

[Jesus said:] "There is only One Who is good. If you want to enter
life, obey the commandments." "Which ones?" the man inquired. Jesus
replied: "Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not
give false testimony, honor your father and mother, and love your
neighbor as yourself." "All these I have kept," the young man said.
"What do I still lack?" Jesus answered: "If you want to be perfect, go,
sell your possessions and give to the poor. … Then come, follow me."
(Matthew, 19:17-21)

Give to everyone who asks you, and if anyone takes what belongs to you,
do not demand it back. Do to others as you would have them do to you. If
you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners
love those who love them. And if you do good to those who are good to
you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners do that. (Luke, 6:30-33)

**Combatting Evil with Goodness**

They will be given their reward twice over, because they have been
steadfast and because they ward off the bad with the good and give from
what We have provided for them. (Qur'an, 28:54) A good action and a bad
action are not the same. Repel the bad with something better and, if
there is enmity between you and someone else, he will become like a
bosom friend. (Qur'an, 41:34)

Bible Do not repay evil with evil or insult with insult, but with
blessing, because to this you were called so that you may inherit a
blessing. (1 Peter, 3:9)

But I tell you who hear me: Love your enemies, do good to those who
hate you, bless those who curse you, and pray for those who mistreat
you. If someone strikes you on one cheek, turn to him the other also. If
someone takes your cloak, do not stop him from taking your tunic. (Luke,
6:27-29) Torah If your enemy is hungry, give him food to eat; if he is
thirsty, give him water to drink. In doing this... and the LORD will
reward you. (Proverbs, 25:21-22)

**Immorality**

But do not obey any vile swearer of oaths, any backbiter,
slander-monger, impeder of good, evil aggressor, gross, coarse, and,
furthermore, despicable [person] simply because he possesses wealth and
sons. When Our Signs are recited to him, he says: "Just myths of
previous peoples!" (Qur'an, 68:10-15)

An evil generation succeeded them, [one] who neglected the prayer and
followed their appetites. They will plunge into the Valley of Evil.
(Qur'an, 19:59)

Bible They have become filled with every kind of wickedness, evil,
greed, and depravity. They are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, and
malice. They are gossips, slanderers, … insolent, arrogant, and
boastful; they invent ways of doing evil; they disobey their parents;
they are senseless, faithless, heartless, ruthless. (Romans, 1:29-31)

Torah They would not be like their forefathers - [rather, they were] a
stubborn and rebellious generation, whose hearts were not loyal to God,
whose spirits were not faithful to Him. (Psalm, 78:8)

Suppose he has a violent son who sheds blood or does any of these other
things: He eats at the mountain shrines. He defiles his neighbor's wife.
He oppresses the poor and needy. He commits robbery. He does not return
what he took in pledge. He looks to the idols. He does detestable
things. (Ezekiel, 18:10-12) He thwarts the plans of the crafty, so that
their hands achieve no success. He catches the wise in their craftiness,
and the schemes of the wily are swept away. (Job, 5:12-13)

Do not spread false reports. Do not help a wicked man by being a
malicious witness. Do not follow the crowd in doing wrong. When you give
testimony in a lawsuit, do not block justice by siding with the crowd...
Do not deny justice to your poor people in their lawsuits. Have nothing
to do with a false charge, and do not put an innocent or honest person
to death, for I will not acquit the guilty. Do not accept a bribe, for a
bribe blinds those who see and twists the words of the righteous.
(Exodus, 23:1-8)

**Forgiveness**

People make mistakes. While in this arena of testing, they will make
many mistakes and be wronged by other people. Most unbelievers are
intolerant of mistakes and impatient with those who make them. If they
are harmed by the mistakes of others, they often retaliate viciously.
Religious morality, however, commands forgiveness and tolerance.
Believers, aware of their total dependence upon God, know that they can
make the same mistakes as others. Thus, they speak soothingly and are
forgiving. The Qur'an reveals that God praises those who forgive:

Correct and courteous words accompanied by forgiveness are better than
charity followed by insulting words. God is Rich Beyond Need,
All-Forbearing. (Qur'an, 2:263) Whether you reveal a good act or keep it
hidden, or pardon an evil act, God is Ever-Pardoning, All-Powerful.
(Qur'an, 4:149)

Hold to forgiveness, command what is right, and turn away from the
ignorant. (Qur'an, 7:199)

The Qur'an reveals that people who wish to be forgiven should forgive
others and be tolerant:

Those of you possessing affluence and ample wealth should not make
oaths that they will not give to their relatives, the very poor, and
those who have migrated in the way of God. They should rather pardon and
overlook. Would you not love God to forgive you? God is Ever-Forgiving,
Most Merciful. (Qur'an, 24:22)

The Torah states that believers must be patient and forgiving. One must
not elaborate upon another person's mistakes, and must not surrender to
rage and revenge:

A man's wisdom gives him patience; it is to his glory to overlook an
offense. (Proverbs, 19:11) He who covers over an offense promotes love,
but whoever repeats the matter separates close friends. (Proverbs, 17:9)
Do not say: "I'll do to him as he has done to me; I'll pay that man back
for what he did." (Proverbs, 24:29) The Bible states that forgiving
others brings forgiveness from others (Luke, 6:37). People are required
to say such prayers as: "Forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven
our debtors" (Matthew, 6:12). Other verses request believers to be
forgiving and tolerant: ... clothe yourselves with compassion, kindness,
humility, gentleness, and patience. Bear with each other and forgive
whatever grievances you may have against one another. Forgive, as the
Lord forgave you. (Colossians, 3:12-13)

**Stinginess**

The Qur'an condemns stinginess. People who do not realize that God is
the true owner of all property and possessions passionately cling to
their material possessions, believing that these will be theirs forever
or that their wealth will protect them. This belief is seriously
mistaken, however, for whatever people possess ultimately belongs only
to God, Who gives or removes wealth or poverty as He wills. As a result,
the Qur'an disapproves of both vanity and despair. Believers are deeply
thankful to God for what He has bestowed upon them and use these gifts
in His cause. If they are poor, they remain patient due to their
knowledge that some good will come of it.

Many unbelievers are stingy. They show off their wealth, but do not
help the needy. They forget that God is perfect and above all needs, and
that people need to earn His good pleasure by using their God-given
gifts wisely. The Qur'an reveals the truth of this statement:

Here you are then: people who are called upon to spend in the Way of
God and then some of you are tight-fisted! But whoever is tight-fisted
is only tight-fisted to himself. God is Rich and you are poor. If you
turn away, He will replace you with a people other than yourselves, and
they will not be like you. (Qur'an, 47:38)

People who think that wealth and property are eternal are wrong. In
fact, such things have no value in His presence: We never sent a warner
into any city without the affluent people in it saying: "We reject what
you have been sent with." They also said: "We have more wealth and
children. We are not going to be punished." Say: "My Lord expands the
provision of anyone He wills or restricts it. But the majority of
humanity do not know it." It is not your wealth or your children that
will bring you near to Us - only in the case of people who believe and
act rightly; such people will have a double recompense for what they
did. They will be safe from all harm in the High Halls of Paradise.
(Qur'an, 34:34-37)

The Torah states: Woe to you who add house to house and join field to
field till no space is left, and you live alone in the land (Isaiah,
5:8). Judaism condemns hording possessions and greed.

The Bible proclaims that wealth can prevent people from practicing the
religion's morality (Matthew, 19:23) and that You cannot serve both God
and money (Luke, 16:13) (May God forbid this). It also relates the story
of a rich but stupid man who horded possessions to ensure his security:
... The ground of a certain rich man produced a good crop. He thought to
himself: "What shall I do? I have no place to store my crops." Then he
said: "This is what I will do. I will tear down my barns and build
bigger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods. And I
will say to myself: 'You have plenty of good things laid up for many
years. Take life easy; eat, drink, and be merry.'" But God said to him:
"You fool! This very night your life will be demanded from you. Then who
will get what you have prepared for yourself?" This is how it will be
with anyone who stores up things for himself but is not rich toward God.
(Luke, 12:16-21)

**Spending and Giving**

O you who believe! Give away some of the good things you have earned
and some of what the earth produces for you. Do not have recourse to bad
things when you give, things you would only take with your eyes tight
shut! Know that God is Rich Beyond Need, Praiseworthy. Satan promises
you poverty and commands you to avarice. God promises you forgiveness
from Him and abundance. God is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing. (Qur'an,
2:267-68)

You will not attain true goodness until you give of what you love.
Whatever you give away, God knows it. (Qur'an, 3:92) Those who give away
of their wealth by night and day, secretly and openly, will have their
reward with their Lord. They will feel no fear and will know no sorrow.
(Qur'an, 2:274)

The metaphor of those who spend their wealth, desiring the pleasure of
God and firmness for themselves, is that of a garden on a hillside. When
heavy rain falls on it, it doubles its produce; and if heavy rain does
not fall, there is dew. God sees what you do. (Qur'an, 2:265)

Bible Jesus sat down opposite the place where the offerings were put
and watched the crowd putting their money into the temple treasury. Many
rich people threw in large amounts. But a poor widow came and put in two
very small copper coins, worth only a fraction of a penny. Calling his
disciples to him, Jesus said: "I tell you the truth. This poor widow has
put more into the treasury than all the others. They all gave out of
their wealth; but she, out of her poverty, put in everything - all she
had to live on." (Mark, 12:41-44) The man with two tunics should share
with him who has none, and the one who has food should do the same.
(Luke, 3:11) Share with God's people who are in need. Practice
hospitality. (Romans, 12:13)

**Practicing What You Preach**

Believers encourage others to live a life of which God approves and
help them improve themselves. They advise them to win God's good
pleasure, whereas insincere and hypocritical people do so with profit in
mind. They do not seek to serve God's religion with what they do, but
pursue worthless or evil aims like status, reputation, admiration, or
respectability. Such insincere people are warned in the Qur'an, as
follows:

Do you order people to devoutness and forget yourselves, when you
recite the Book? Will you not use your intellect? (Qur'an, 2:44) The
Bible severely reprimands people who claim to follow Moses (pbuh) but do
not abide by the morality he taught: ... they do not practice what they
preach. They tie up heavy loads and put them on men's shoulders, but
they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them. (Matthew,
23:3-4)

**Thankfulness**

Thankfulness means to express one's thanks and love to God for all of
the gifts He gives, to declare that all we have comes from Him. Careful
reflection reveals that God's gifts are countless and that we receive
them due to His grace. For example, the fact that each of the 100
trillion or so cells in your body works for you continuously and without
fail is only a small fraction of His gifts. Believers are thankful to
God regardless of their circumstances, whereas being thankful does not
even occur to unbelievers. The Qur'an requires that believers be
thankful, which it considers a form of worship, and tells them to adopt
this attitude wholeheartedly, as the following verses indicate:

No! Worship God and be among the thankful. (Qur'an, 39:66) So eat from
what God has provided for you, lawful and good, and be thankful for the
blessing of God, if it is Him you worship. (Qur'an, 16:114) The Qur'an
also states that thankful believers will receive more rewards, whereas
ungrateful unbelievers will deserve His fierce punishment. [Moses said
to his people:] "And when your Lord announced: 'If you are grateful, I
will certainly give you increase. But if you are ungrateful, My
punishment is severe.'" (Qur'an, 14:7)

The Bible says; give thanks in all circumstances (1 Thessalonians,
5:18), and passages dealing with Jesus' (pbuh) life reveal that he
thanked God for all things. All believers should follow his example. The
Torah tells believers to be thankful, as follows: ...there had been ...
songs of praise and thanksgiving to God. (Nehemiah, 12:46) Enter His
gates with thanksgiving and His courts with praise; give thanks to Him
and praise His name. (Psalm, 100:4) I thank and praise you. (Daniel,
2:23) We give thanks to you, O God. We give thanks... (Psalm, 75:1)

Rage

Rage, which prevents people from evaluating situations correctly,
undermines accurate and fair decision-making, as well as acceptance and
compassion. Thus, the Qur'an urges believers not to succumb to it, for
doing so only results in misguided behavior and damaged relationships
with others. The Qur'an commends those who overcome their anger:

[People who guard against evil are] those who give in times of both
ease and hardship, those who control their rage and pardon other
people - God loves the good-doers. (Qur'an, 3:134)

The Bible states that rage is evil and that those who are angered by
others deserve to be punished: Get rid of all bitterness, rage and
anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice.
(Ephesians, 4:31) The Torah expresses similar sentiments: A
quick-tempered man does foolish things... (Proverbs, 14:17)

Prayer

Most people pray to God at certain times for certain reasons. Almost
everybody knows what praying signifies, but the believers' prayers are
completely different from those of the unbelievers. Believers turn to
God at all times and pray wholeheartedly. Prayers made to impress
others, pursue one's self-interest, or ward off disaster may not be
acceptable by God. The following verses deal with this matter:

He is the Living - there is no deity but Him - so call on Him, making
your religion sincerely His. (Qur'an, 40:65)

Call on your Lord humbly and secretly. (Qur'an, 7:55)

Restrain yourself patiently with those who call on their Lord morning
and evening, desiring His face. (Qur'an, 18:28) If My servants ask you
about Me, I am near. I answer the call of the caller when he calls on
Me. They should therefore respond to Me and believe in Me, so that,
hopefully, they will be rightly guided. (Qur'an, 2:186)

Both the Bible and the Torah stress the importance of prayer and
provide examples of the believers' prayers. We relate some of these
below: And pray in the Spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers
and requests. With this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for
all the saints. (Ephasians, 6:18)

And when you pray, do not be like the hypocrites. (Matthew, 6:5) And
when you pray, do not keep on babbling like pagans. (Matthew, 6:7) If
you believe, you will receive whatever you ask for in prayer. (Matthew,
21:22)

Devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful and thankful. (Colossians,
4:2) The Torah reveals that praying is an important act of worship, how
prayers should be made, and that God answers prayers: The LORD is near
to all who call on Him, to all who call on Him in truth. He fulfills the
desires of those who fear [and respect] Him; He hears their cry and
saves them. The LORD watches over all who love Him. (Psalms, 145:18-20)
I spread out my hands to You; my soul thirsts for You like a parched
land. Answer me quickly... Let the morning bring me word of Your
unfailing love, for I have put my trust in You. Show me the way I should
go, for to You I lift up my soul. Rescue me from my enemies, O LORD, for
I hide myself in You. Teach me to do Your will, for You are my God... in
Your righteousness, bring me out of trouble. (Psalm, 143:6-11)

Repentance

All people have faults and make mistakes. Believers need to admit their
sins after committing them, make the intention to correct them, and ask
God to forgive them. Even if they repent and then commit the same sin
again, they should repent and seek His forgiveness yet again, for
nothing is hidden from Him. Those who try to deceive God (may God forbid
this) deceive only themselves. People must accept God's compassion and
mercy for His servants and not delay their repentance, for a death-bed
repentance may not be accepted. Many Qur'anic verses request people to
repent, as follows:

Turn to God every one of you, believers, so that, hopefully, you will
have success. (Qur'an, 24:31) But if anyone repents after his wrongdoing
and puts things right, God will turn toward him. God is Ever-Forgiving,
Most Merciful. (Qur'an, 5:39) Except for those who repent and believe
and act rightly: God will transform the wrong actions of such people
into good - God is Ever-Forgiving, Most Merciful. (Qur'an, 25:70)

According to the Bible, Jesus (pbuh) proclaimed:

I have not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance.
(Luke, 5:32) I tell you, no! Unless you repent, you too will all perish.
(Luke, 13:5)

**God's Good Pleasure**

People answer the question of what they have done for God in many
different ways. For example, they may say: I have stilled the hunger of
the poor, I have prayed, or I have worshipped. Each of these is
commendable, but it is a serious error to do what God asks at certain
times and then, at all other times, be oblivious of His existence and
the proximity of the Day of Judgment. Those who truthfully believe do
not forget that they are always surrounded by God, and so do their
utmost at all times to earn His good pleasure and Paradise and to avoid
Hell. The Qur'an states that the believers' prayers, life, and death are
"only for the Lord of the universe, God" (Qur'an, 6:162). This means
that each believer's life is dedicated to earning God's good pleasure.
The Qur'an says that those people who work only to win His good pleasure
will find salvation:

Who is better: someone who establishes his building on fear [and
respect] of God and His good pleasure, or someone who establishes his
building on the brink of a crumbling precipice, so that it collapses
with him into the Fire of Hell? God does not love wrongdoers. (Qur'an,
9:109) Solomon's (pbuh) prayer, as recorded in the Qur'an, asks God to
let him do those deeds that will earn His good pleasure. Given below, it
is an example for all believers:

"My Lord, keep me thankful for the blessing You have bestowed on me and
on my parents; keep me acting rightly, pleasing You; and admit me, by
Your mercy, among Your servants who are righteous." (Qur'an, 27:19) The
Old Testament reveals that believers asked God to "teach them to do His
will." This prayer is as follows:

... I hide myself in You. Teach me to do Your will, for You are my
God... (Psalm, 143:9-10) The Bible reveals that Jesus' (pbuh) main
request of his followers was that they do their best to earn God's good
pleasure. According to it, Jesus (pbuh) always did what God approves of,
and thus all of his followers should emulate his behavior. The Bible
reveals that believers should do everything only for God: So whether you
eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God. (1
Corinthians, 10:31) ... Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart,
as working for the Lord, not for men. (Colossians, 3:22-23)

Patience

People have been created impatient, for they want their desires to be
fulfilled at once. But God has determined a time and place for
everything, and no one can bring it forward or postpone it. This is why
believers must remain patient. Prophets as well as believers have proven
their patience to the day they died.

God commands: "Be patient for your Lord" (Qur'an, 74:7). Patience is a
form of worship, and the believers' patience is a beautiful one (Qur'an,
70:5). Those who remain patient during this short life are promised the
following reward: We will test you with a certain amount of fear and
hunger, loss of wealth, life, and fruits. But give good news to those
who are patient. (Qur'an, 2:155)

Patience is a moral quality that strengthens believers mentally as well
as physically. The Qur'an states that at the times of our Prophet (may
God bless him and grant him peace), 20 patient believers could defeat
200 enemies on the battlefield. This clearly demonstrates how much
strength the believers gain by remaining patient. This is revealed in
the following verse:

If there are twenty of you who are patient, they will overcome two
hundred; and if there are a hundred of you, they will overcome a
thousand of those who do not believe. (Qur'an, 8:65)

The Torah emphasizes the importance of patience and declares that such
people are superior. The power of the patient is described as follows:
Better a patient man than a warrior... (Proverbs, 16:32) The Bible
teaches this as well: ... be patient, bearing with one another in love.
(Ephesians, 4:2) ... help the weak, be patient with everyone. (1
Thessalonians, 5:14)

**Thinking**

The Qur'an invites people to think. God commands them to reflect on its
verses, humanity's creation, natural phenomenon, His gifts, and other
beings. Believers are told to think carefully when evaluating events so
that they can help other people comprehend the profound evidence for
God's existence and the magnitude of His creation. One verse reveals
this reality:

In the creation of the heavens and Earth, the alternation of the night
and the day, the ships that sail the seas to people's benefit, the water
that God sends down from the sky - by which He brings Earth to life when
it was dead and scatters about in it creatures of every kind - the
varying direction of the winds, and the clouds subservient between
heaven and Earth there are Signs for people who use their intellect.
(Qur'an, 2:164) The Qur'an also reveals that believers reflect deeply
while drawing conclusions:

In the creation of the heavens and the Earth, and the alternation of
night and day, there are Signs for people with intelligence: those who
remember God, standing, sitting, and lying on their sides, and reflect
on the creation of the heavens and Earth: "Our Lord, You have not
created this for nothing. Glory be to You! So safeguard us from the
punishment of the Fire." (Qur'an, 3:190-91)

Wherever people turn and wherever they are, they encounter God's
infinite wisdom, unequalled artistry, inexhaustible might, greatness,
and supremacy. However, before they can benefit from all of this, they
must free themselves from prejudice and carefully study and observe the
other beings in their environment. Genuinely reflective people will find
an underlying purpose in their encounters. Learning from these
encounters enables them to have a better and deeper understanding of
God's providence. As a result, their love, respect, and devotion to Him
will increase. The Bible states that genuine believers need to ponder
and learn from their encounters, as the following passages make clear:

Do you still not see or understand? Are your hearts hardened? (Mark,
8:17)
Brothers, think of what you were when you were called. (1 Corinthians,
1:26)
Reflect on what I am saying, for the Lord will give you insight into
all this. (2 Timothy, 2:7)
The Torah also emphasizes the importance of pondering God's artistry in
creation and His might, and calls on believers to contemplate these
matters deeply. For example:

… and on His law he meditates day and night. (Psalm, 1:2) On my bed I
remember You; I think of You through the watches of the night. (Psalm,
63:6) I will meditate on all Your works and consider all Your mighty
deeds. (Psalm, 77:12)

**Calling Others to Virtue**

Throughout history, Prophets and believers have invited people to God's
path and virtue. They told people about God, the Hereafter, Paradise and
Hell, and morality, and called on them to live according to His will.
One verse commands: "Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and fair
admonition" (Qur'an, 16:125). Other verses commend those who call others
to God and virtue:

Let there be a community among you who call to the good, enjoin the
right, and forbid the wrong. They are the ones who have success.
(Qur'an, 3:104) Those who repent, those who worship, those who praise,
those who fast, those who bow, those who prostrate, those who command
the right, those who forbid the wrong, and those who preserve the limits
set by God [for humanity]: give good news to the believers. (Qur'an,
9:112) The Qur'an refers to the People of the Book (Christians and Jews)
who were given books of revelation by God and mentions that genuine Jews
and Christians called others to virtue as well:

They are not all the same. There is a community among the People of the
Book who are upright. They recite God's Signs throughout the night, and
they prostrate. They believe in God and the Last Day, enjoin the right
and forbid the wrong, and compete in doing good. They are among the
righteous. (Qur'an, 3:113-14)

Jesus' (pbuh) and his Disciples' lives are a good example of this. As
the Bible relates:

And will give our attention to prayer and spreading the word of God.
(Acts, 6:4) My brothers, if one of you should wander from the truth and
someone should bring him back, remember this: Whoever turns a sinner
from the error of his way will save him from death and cover a multitude
of sins. (James, 5:19-20)

**Miracles**

Throughout history, people have asked Prophets for miracles so that
they would believe. As Jesus (pbuh) put it:

"Unless you people see miraculous signs and wonders," Jesus told him,
"you will never believe." (John, 4:48) The Qur'an reveals that those who
persisted in their unbelief demanded that the Prophet (may God bless him
and grant him peace) perform miracles: They say: "We will not believe
you until you make a spring gush out from the ground for us; or have a
garden of dates and grapes through which you make rivers come pouring;
or make the sky, as you claim, fall down on us in lumps; or bring God
and the angels here as a guarantee; or possess a house built out of
gleaming gold; or ascend up into heaven - and even then we will not
believe in your ascent unless you bring us down a book to read!" Say:
"Glory be to my Lord! Am I anything but a human Messenger?" (Qur'an,
17:90-93)

Conscientious and rational people do not require miracles to believe in
God, because for such people of awareness everything is a proof of God's
existence. Everything from atoms to galaxies, every piece of the
universe, is full of His existence and creation. Those who persistently
demand miracles are, in reality, only looking for an escape route. In
fact, they always make allegations of sorcery or anarchy when they
witness the Prophets' miracles. Such an attitude only proves their
unbelief.

The insincerity of such people is exposed, as in the passage given
below:

If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, they will not be
convinced even if someone rises from the dead. (Luke, 16:31) The Qur'an
states that such people will not believe, even if they see a miracle:

Even if We sent down angels to them, and the dead spoke to them, and We
gathered together everything in front of them right before their eyes,
they would still not believe, unless God willed. The truth is that most
of them are ignorant. (Qur'an, 6:111) They have sworn by God with their
most earnest oaths that if a Sign comes to them, they will believe in
it. Say: "The Signs are in God's control alone." What will make you
realize that even if a Sign did come, they would still not believe?
(Qur'an, 6:109)

**Insensitive Eyes, Ears, and Hearts**

They say: "Our hearts are covered up against what you call us to, and
there is a heaviness in our ears. There is a screen between us and you.
So act - we are certainly acting." (Qur'an, 41:5) God has sealed up
their hearts and hearing, and over their eyes is a blindfold. They will
have a terrible punishment. (Qur'an, 2:7) We created many of the jinn
and humanity for Hell. They have hearts with which they do not
understand. They have eyes with which they do not see. They have ears
with which they do not hear. Such people are like cattle. No, they are
even further astray! They are the unaware. (Qur'an, 7:179)

Bible

For this people's heart has become calloused; they hardly hear with
their ears, and they have closed their eyes. Otherwise they might see
with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their hearts and
turn, and I would heal them. (Matthew, 13:15) [Jesus asked:] "Do you
have eyes but fail to see, and ears but fail to hear? And do you not
remember? When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many
basketfuls of pieces did you pick up?"... (Mark, 8:18-19)

Humility

Perfection and faultlessness belong to God. Believers make mistakes
knowingly or unknowingly, but always repent each time wholeheartedly and
try their best never to repeat the same sin. They do not try to portray
themselves as free of sin and faults or exalt themselves by looking down
on others. Those who arrogantly take salvation for granted through their
insincere acts cannot earn God's approval and compassion:

Do you not see those who claim to be purified? No, God purifies whoever
He wills. They will not be wronged by so much as the smallest speck.
(Qur'an, 4:49)

The Qur'an reveals that such people's insincere efforts will not save
them, and that they will be devastated: Say: "Shall I inform you of the
greatest losers in their actions? People whose efforts in the life of
this world are misguided, while they suppose that they are doing good."
(Qur'an, 18:103-104)

The Torah reveals to believers that expecting any compliments and
admiration is immoral (Psalm, 25:27). Many Biblical passages state that
those who expect exaltation in their conceit are, in reality, debased.
For example:

For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles
himself will be exalted. (Luke, 18:14)

**Wishing Others Well**

Greetings or wishing well are ways to express one's best wishes for
someone else when they meet. Believers do this without fail, even when
they are busy or have urgent business elsewhere, when they enter each
other's houses or meet somewhere. The Qur'an commands believers to reply
in a similar manner, or with even nicer wishes, when they are greeted
and to say suitable words of greeting when they enter another person's
house: When you are greeted with a greeting, return the greeting or
improve on it. God takes account of everything. (Qur'an, 4:86) And when
you enter houses, greet one another with a greeting from God, blessed
and good. In this way God makes the Signs clear to you so that,
hopefully, you will use your intellect. (Qur'an, 24:61)

The Bible contains similar instructions, such as: As you enter the
home, give it your greeting. (Matthew, 10:12) Jesus came and stood among
them, and said: "Peace be with you!" (John, 20:19)

Envy

Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of Daybreak, from the evil of what He
has created, from the evil of the darkness when it gathers, from the
evil of women who blow on knots, and from the evil of an envier when he
envies." (Qur'an, 113:1-5)

Bible The acts of the sinful nature are obvious: sexual immorality,
impurity, and debauchery; idolatry and witchcraft; hatred, discord,
jealousy, fits of rage, selfish ambition, dissensions, factions, and
envy; drunkenness, orgies, and the like. (Galatians, 5:19-21)

Lying

… have done with telling lies. (Qur'an, 22:30) O you who believe! Fear
[and respect] God, and speak the right word. (Qur'an, 33:70)

Bible For out of the heart come evil thoughts... false testimony...
(Matthew, 15:19) Do not lie to each other... (Colossians, 3:9)

Torah Do not spread false reports. Do not help a wicked man by being a
malicious witness. Do not follow the crowd in doing wrong. When you give
testimony in a lawsuit, do not pervert justice by siding with the crowd.
(Exodus, 23:1-2)

Sexual Misconduct

And do not go near to fornication. It is an indecent act, an evil way.
(Qur'an, 17:32) Torah You shall not commit adultery. (Exodus, 20:14)
Bible ... What comes out of a man is what makes him unclean. For from
within, out of men's hearts, come ... sexual immorality, theft, murder,
adultery, greed, malice, deceit, lewdness, envy, slander, arrogance, and
folly. All these evils come from inside and make a person unclean.
(Mark, 7:20-23)

Stealing

O Prophet! When women who believe come to you pledging allegiance to
you on the grounds that they will not associate anything with God, or
steal or fornicate, or kill their children or give a false ascription of
paternity - making up lies about their bodies - or disobey you in
respect of anything right, then accept their pledge and ask forgiveness
for them. God is Ever-Forgiving, Most Merciful. (Qur'an, 60:12)

Torah Do not steal... Do not deceive one another. (Leviticus, 19:11)
Bible Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not give
false testimony, do not defraud, and honor your father and mother.
(Mark, 10:19) Tr Treating Parents Well

Your Lord has decreed that you should worship none but Him, and that
you should show kindness to your parents. Whether one or both of them
reach old age with you, do not say "Ugh!" to them out of irritation, and
do not be harsh with them. Rather, speak to them with gentleness and
generosity. (Qur'an, 17:23)

Bible Honor your father and mother. (Luke, 18:20; Matthew, 19:19)
Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. Honor your
father and mother - which is the first commandment with a promise - that
it may go well with you and that you may enjoy long life on the Earth.
(Ephesians, 6:1-3) Torah Honor your father and your mother. (Exodus,
20:12)


