Chapter 6 : Uniting in Ideological Warfare
==========================================

When humanity's present living conditions are scrutinized, the need for
alliances among believers become apparent. Social ills, among them
conflicts, wars, genocide, poverty, famine, social injustice, and moral
degeneration, pose a serious threat to many countries. Moreover, a great
number of innocent people suffering under those conditions are
desperately waiting for a helping hand to be extended. Conscientious
people around the world are trying to help them. Aid packages are
dispatched to areas affected by famine, peace envoys are trying to
protect people in war zones, and efforts are being made to curb crime
and decadence. But these efforts are regional and limited to finding
solutions to the most pressing issues. In fact, it is actually possible
to eradicate all kinds of human suffering and to bring happiness,
security, and prosperity to the world.

However, achieving this goal depends on identifying the true causes of
such ills - the decline of religious morality - and eradicating their
ideological basis. The fact that the law of the strong prevails
throughout the world is partly responsible for this situation, for this
attitude engenders a social model based upon self-interest. Even more
seriously, it has replaced acceptance, love, sympathy, compassion, and
cooperation with conflict, greed, and dispute. In short, it disregards
humanity's obligation to serve God, view this life as a realm of testing
designed to win His good pleasure, and strive for the Hereafter.

The ideological changes that took place in the nineteenth century laid
the foundations for the spiritual collapse in the next century. Whereas
the majority of people believed in God's existence until that time,
these changes enabled atheism to become a major influence. In the
eighteenth century, such materialists as Denis Diderot (d. 1784) and
Baron D'Holbach (d. 1789) asserted that the universe had existed forever
and that only matter existed, and this view found an ever-increasing
following in Europe. In the nineteenth century, atheism expanded further
with the influence of such thinkers as Ludwig Feuerbach (d. 1872), Karl
Marx (d. 1883), Friedrich Engels (d. 1894), Friedrich Nietzsche (d.
1900), Emile Durkheim (d. 1917), and Sigmund Freud (d. 1939).

Charles Darwin (d. 1882) did the greatest service to atheism by
devising his theory of evolution, which was designed to oppose creation.
Darwinism provided a scientific answer to the question of how humanity
and other life forms emerged - a question that atheists had never
managed to answer until that time. He proposed that nature had a
mechanism that could enliven dead matter and give rise to millions of
species. Many people, unfortunately, believed this erroneous idea.

At the end of the nineteenth century, atheists had formulated a
worldview that, they claimed, explained everything. They postulated that
the universe was not created, but had existed since eternity and thus
had no beginning. They assumed that its clear order and equilibrium was
coincidental and devoid of purpose. Darwinism claimed to answer the
question of how humanity and all other beings were created. Marx and
Durkheim provided atheistic answers to history and sociology, and Freud
did the same for psychology. These theories, however, were shown to be
baseless and without merit by the scientific, political, and social
developments of the twentieth century. And, moreover, discoveries in
astronomy, biology, psychology, and social behavior completely destroyed
atheisms' propositions.

During this period, however, movements based on Darwinism and
materialism devastated humanity. Such ideologies as communism, fascism,
racism, nihilism, and existentialism caused people great sorrow and
engendered countless conflicts, wars, and calamities. Their aftereffects
continue to be felt today, albeit with a lesser impact, and certain
circles persist in defending Darwinism as a scientific fact. We will
briefly scrutinize how Darwinism is being imposed on nations and what
the consequences are. But first, we want to point out an important
fact.

At present, the burden of responsibility rests upon the shoulders of
all conscientious believers to do something about the global situation
created by all ideologies opposed to religious morality. All Christians,
Jews, and Muslims should join in this effort, for they are the target of
these atheistic ideologies. Therefore, the sincere People of the Book
and sincere Muslims must cooperate, join forces, and tell the world of
Darwinism's false worldview, which is based on materialism, not science.
All of the other anti-religious ideologies (e.g., communism, fascism,
racism) as well as decadence must be fought together on an ideological
level so that the world can enjoy peace, tranquility, and justice in the
near future. When this great task has been completed, suffering,
hardship, killing, calamity, injustice, and destitution will make way
for enlightenment, calmness, prosperity, wealth, health, and good
fortune.

**Darwinism: The Source of Corrupted Values**

The theory of evolution proposes that life emerged coincidentally and
then developed and evolved as a consequence of the struggle for
survival. Consequently, Darwinism's underlying message is that you are
not answerable to anyone; that you owe your life to coincidence; and
that you must fight and, if necessary, oppress others in order to
survive, as you are living in a world of self-interest and conflict.
These are the moral implications of such Darwinist slogans as natural
selection, struggle for survival, and survival of the fittest.
Obviously, this worldview is the exact opposite of the worldview based
on religious morality. Moreover, if forms the basis of the anti-religion
front.

Studying society's values is enough to expose Darwinism's destructive
nature. When we look at present-day societies, we see that most people
live for self-preservation, a good job, material wealth, more money,
entertainment - in other words, for success in the struggle for
survival. Such people naturally seek a good and happy life. However,
religious morality also requires people to take care of the needy,
cooperate with each other, and avoid selfishness. Darwinism does not
concern itself with other people; in fact, it teaches its adherents that
if any benefit can be had from the hardship of others, so be it.

Especially among the young people, luxurious houses and cars, unlimited
financial means, fame, wealth, and power have become ideals. Not
wondering about the purpose of their existence and hardly ever pondering
God's existence and might, they consider themselves to be independent
beings who have no responsibilities toward our Creator. They would
rather not be reminded of death, which is a reality for all beings,
resurrection, and the Day of Judgment.

But such willful ignorance does not affect the truth. Even if they
ignore such questions until death comes for them or turn away from all
reminders of truth, they remain nothing more than created and feeble
servants who will die one day and be brought to His presence for
judgment. These people often are not even aware of Darwinism's influence
on their lives. Worse, great number of them believe that Darwinism is a
subject matter of biology and therefore none of their concern. Even if
they are not aware of the theory of evolution's influence, their
continued exposure to it deeply affects their worldview.

People who consider themselves to be highly evolved animals reflect
their corrupted worldview in their behavior and decision-making: They
are selfish, greedy, ruthless, and cruel, and oblivious of the need to
practice compassion, mercy, devotion, and modesty. This attitude
naturally gives rise to social disorder and causes social as well as
moral collapse.

Another undesirable side effect is the ensuing belief that one's
personal self-interest is the only thing that matters. Within such
societies, altruism, love, respect, and compassion have all been
forgotten. Such conditions push people into loneliness and despair. Out
of these conditions come stress, discontent, unhappiness, and worry, all
of which make many people's lives living nightmares. The resulting
spiritual void drives some people to alcohol, drugs, gambling, suicide,
or other disastrous courses.

Decadence continues to spread rapidly in societies whose people have
abandoned spiritual values. The rising levels of homosexuality and
prostitution, sexual crimes, rape, and sexually transmitted disease are
important indicators of decadence. Prostitution destroys families and
people's self-respect. Homosexuality and other sexual practices that all
divinely revealed Books have condemned are now considered normal in many
parts of the world, and people who oppose such immorality are accused of
being out of date. It is certainly no sign of progress that homosexuals
can get married officially in some countries, coordinate their efforts
at the international level, and display aggressive behavior against
religious morality.

Decadence is also widespread in the political realm. The twentieth
century was characterized by the most horrific and destructive wars in
human history. Countless people were killed, injured, or disabled in
terrorist or anarchist attacks. Such cruelty is perpetrated by
anti-religion ideologies (e.g., communism, fascism, and racism), all of
which are offshoots of Darwinism. Regional wars, conflicts, and bloody
acts of terror continue to erupt in many parts of the world.

At present, vast numbers of people live in destitution and hardship.
Statistics reveal that famine, destitution, and the gap in wealth
distribution have reached alarming levels. These negative developments
are the natural consequences of a world order based on selfishness,
self-interest, and other materialistic values.

Social degradation is also reflected in the increasing number of crimes
committed. Throughout the world, illegal activities are increasing and
the scope of criminal activities continues to expand. These are the
natural consequences of abandoning spiritual and moral values. People
far from religious morality consider all types of crimes (e.g., theft,
fraud, robbery, and blackmail) to be normal and do not believe that such
practices can ever be eradicated.

This gloomy picture is the result of the increasing penetration of
materialist philosophies over the past two centuries. Beginning in
Europe, it has now spread around the world. This product of rejecting
belief in God, which features such lies as you are not answerable or you
are highly evolved animals that struggle for survival in the jungle, has
proven to be remarkably resilient.

**Two Choices**

Having presented and explained the reasons for humanity's current
deplorable state, we now must ask the following question: What is the
best and most appropriate thing to do about the prevailing conditions?

For anyone who sees the destructiveness of immorality, injustice and
degeneration, there are two options: either ignore it or mobilize to
fight it. Those who choose the first option remain passive and
uninterested in what is happening around them. They fool themselves by
asking rhetorically: Am I going to save the world? or What could I do,
anyway? In conversations, they express their sorrow over the sad state
of affairs and donate some time or money to various charities, but make
no effort to eradicate these evils. Such people should remember that
those who remain silent in the face of suffering, hardship, and evil, or
who do not do their utmost to combat them, share in the responsibility
for their continued existence.

The second option, mobilizing all means in an ideological struggle to
save the world from its present condition, is the one that all sincere
believers choose. They never give up the struggle and continue to
contribute as best they can. Sincere, reasonable, conscientious, and
responsible people must choose this second option. Since the evil and
immoral tyrants present a united front against religious morality,
sincere People of the Book and sincere Muslims must unite against this
alliance of evil, pool all of their mental and material resources, and
then fight this ideological war together. All sincere Jews, Christians,
and Muslims are responsible for doing their utmost in this regard. By
embarking on this path, they ensure the gradual emergence of honest,
respectful, loving, accepting, sensitive, and virtuous people who will
live together in an environment of peace, tranquility, security,
happiness, and prosperity.

In the present environment of hardship and troubles, sincere Jews,
Christians, and Muslims must be even more accepting, conciliatory,
complementary, and respectful of each other. They should not forget that
unity, togetherness, and cooperation bring success, and that dispute,
argument, and conflict bring nothing but weakness. The current situation
demands the immediate formation of such an alliance. Besides the
ideological warfare against the enemies of religious morality, all
believers must prepare for the most celebrated era in human history: the
second coming of Jesus (pbuh).


**Chapter 7 : The Second Coming Of Jesus (PBUH) The Messiah**

In this chapter, we will examine the revelation of Jesus' (pbuh) second
coming, as described in the Bible and the Qur'an. Like all other
Prophets, Jesus (pbuh) is a distinguished and celebrated person who was
blessed by God with superior moral qualities and sent to guide his
people to the righteous path. However, certain other qualities set him
apart from the other Prophets: He was born without a father and will
return to Earth at some point in the future. The Qur'an, Prophet
Mohammed's (may God bless him and grant him peace) hadiths, and the
works of Muslim scholars all confirm this fact.

All of the information we have indicates that Jesus' (pbuh) second
coming is imminent. The time of his return, expected for centuries by
both Christians and Muslims, is on the verge of being fulfilled (God
knows best.) What we need to do now is to learn how to best prepare
ourselves and our world for his arrival. For genuine believers in God,
the best way is to join together in order to establish his teachings in
our societies and attain the honor of being counted among his
supporters.

**Jesus' (pbuh) Return in the Bible**

The Bible describes Jesus' (pbuh) second coming in detail. However, it
also states that only God knows the time and place of his arrival
(Matthew, 24:36; Mark, 13:32-33) and that he will come unexpectedly,
which is why people must be aware and ready (Matthew, 24:44, 25:13;
Mark, 13:35-37; Luke, 12:40).

The circumstances and telltale signs of his return that are known are
given below: Anarchy and chaos will increase in the End Times (the final
period of the world); wars and conflicts will be commonplace; decadence
will be widespread; love and trust between people will be lost;
treachery, infidelity, and cruelty will increase; and most people will
be far from religious morality. One other indication will be the large
number of false Prophets or Messiahs that will appear. The Bible
describes this era as follows:

Jesus answered: "Watch out that no one deceives you. For many will come
in my name, claiming: 'I am Jesus,' and will deceive many. You will hear
of wars and rumors of wars, but see to it that you are not alarmed. Such
things must happen, but the end is still to come. Nation will rise
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be famines and
earthquakes in various places. All of these are the beginning of birth
pains... At that time, many will turn away from the faith and will
betray and hate each other, and many false Prophets will appear and
deceive many people. Because of the increase of wickedness, the love of
most will grow cold. But he who stands firm to the end will be saved.
And this gospel of the kingdom will be preached in the whole world as a
testimony to all nations, and then the end will come. (Matthew, 24:4-14)
It also depicts the situation of the societies before Jesus' (pbuh)
second coming, as follows:

But mark this: There will be terrible times in the Last Days. People
will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, proud, abusive,
disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, unholy, without love,
unforgiving, slanderous, without self-control, brutal, not lovers of the
good, treacherous, rash, conceited, lovers of pleasure rather than
lovers of God - having a form of godliness but denying its power. Have
nothing to do with them. (2 Timothy, 3:1-5)

According to the Bible, when these developments are taking place,
Jesus' (pbuh) return will be imminent (Matthew, 24:33). One further
telltale sign will be the widespread denial that he will really come.
The Bible reveals this, as follows:

First of all, you must understand that in the Last Days scoffers will
come, scoffing and following their own evil desires. They will say:
"Where is this 'coming' he promised? Ever since our fathers died,
everything goes on as it has since the beginning of creation." (2 Peter,
3:3-4)

**Jesus' (pbuh) Return in the Hadith**

The signs of the End Times as described in the hadiths of Prophet
Mohammed (may God bless him and grant him peace) are very similar to
those described in the Bible. Our Prophet (may God bless him and grant
him peace) also related in detail the circumstances and condition of the
world in this time, and revealed that Jesus (pbuh) would be sent back to
Earth during that period. Some of these signs are given below:

When anarchy prevails throughout the world, mischief appears, roads are
cut, some attack others, the elder do not show mercy for the younger,
and the younger fail to be polite toward the elder…18

The Hour will come when one kills his own brother.19

The Hour will come when the evil ones become successors in your
world.20

The Hour will come when violence, bloodshed, and anarchy become
common.21

The unlawful things become lawful… is one of the signs of the Hour.22

Large cities perish, as if they never existed.23

In the End Times, such people will appear who will trade their religion
in return for worldly benefits. To appear clement, they will wrap around
sheep skin; their tongues will be sweeter than candy, but their hearts
will be as hard as a wolf's heart.24 There are two great events before
the Day of Judgment... and then years of earthquakes.25 Deceiving years
will pass by. During those years... people will trust the traitorous
person, and the honest person will be deemed traitorous.26 People will
not respect the elderly or show mercy to the young ones. Adultery will
become widespread... to such an extent that people will commit adultery
in the middle of a street.27 Hunger and the high cost of living will
become widespread.28

The Hour will become near when people cease to do good deeds, and do
not enjoin good deeds and forbid bad deeds...29 The increase in the
number of evil ones, deeming liars as honest and honest ones as liars,
deeming traitorous ones as reliable, and reliable ones as traitorous…
are among the signs of the Hour.30

Those who pay attention to what is going on in the world, both in their
own area and more further a field, can see that these signs are taking
place one after the other in our own time. We receive almost daily news
of conflict from different parts of the world; people are troubled by
corruption, injustice, and other social ills; and dishonesty, fraud,
cheating, fornication, and sexual license are rising by the day.
Disregard for moral values prevents true love and compassion between
people, and an atmosphere of distrust and anxiety eventually engulfs
everyone. The numbers of devastating famine, earthquakes, and other
natural disasters are increasing, and shocking events are clearly
happening all around us. Of course such events have taken place in the
past, but never have these signs occurred so clearly and comprehensively
as they are right now. This situation is a clear sign, God willing, of
Jesus (pbuh) the Messiah's imminent return, a truly historic event and a
cause for excitement and joy for all believers. Over the next few pages
we will examine the evidence for Jesus' (pbuh) return in the Qur'an and
our Prophet's (may God bless him and grant him peace) hadiths.

**Jesus' (pbuh) Characteristics According to the Qur'an**

The Qur'an contains a great deal of information about Jesus (pbuh). For
example, he was born without a father, following the good tidings that
an angel revealed to Mary, and performed miracles, by God's will, such
as speaking with people while still an infant. Throughout his life, he
was an exemplary servant of God and called people to become genuine
servants of God. The following are some of Jesus' (pbuh) features:

Jesus (pbuh) is the word and Messenger of God:

O People of the Book! Do not go to excess in your religion. Say nothing
but the truth about God. The Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, was only the
Messenger of God and His Word, which He cast into Mary, and a Spirit
from Him. (Qur'an, 4:171) He was given the name Jesus (pbuh) the
Messiah:

When the angels said: "Mary, your Lord gives you good news of a Word
from Him. His name is the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, of high esteem in
this world and the Hereafter, and one of those brought near." (Qur'an,
3:45) He is a sign for humanity:

… and she [Mary], who protected her chastity. We breathed into her some
of Our Spirit and made her and her son a Sign for all the worlds.
(Qur'an, 21:91)

His mother Mary was chosen and preferred by God above all other
women:

And when the angels said: "Mary, God has chosen you and purified you.
He has chosen you over all other women." (Qur'an, 3:42) He spoke with
people while still in the cradle:

[The angels said:] "He will speak to people in the cradle and also when
fully grown, and will be one of the righteous." (Qur'an, 3:46) He
performed many miracles by God's will:

As a Messenger to the tribe of Israel, saying: "I have brought you a
Sign from your Lord. I will create the shape of a bird out of clay for
you and then breathe into it, and it will be a bird, by God's
permission. I will heal the blind and the leper, and bring the dead to
life, by God's permission. I will tell you what you eat and what you
store up in your homes. There is a Sign for you in that, if you are
believers." (Qur'an, 3:49)

Remember when God said: ''Jesus, son of Mary, remember My blessing to
you and to your mother, when I reinforced you with the Purest Spirit so
that you could speak to people in the cradle and when you were fully
grown; and when I taught you the Book and Wisdom, and the Torah and the
Gospel; and when you created a bird-shape out of clay by My permission
and then breathed into it and it became a bird by My permission; and
healed the blind and the leper by My permission; and when you brought
forth the dead by My permission; and when I held back the tribe of
Israel from you, when you brought them the Clear Signs, and those of
them who did not believe said: 'This is nothing but downright magic.'
"(Qur'an, 5:110)

He preached the Bible sent as guidance and confirmation of the Torah
(errors, myths, and legends entered the Bible at a later date):

And We sent Jesus, son of Mary, following in their footsteps,
confirming the Torah that came before him. We gave him the Gospel
containing guidance and light, confirming the Torah that came before it,
and as guidance and admonition for those who guard against evil.
(Qur'an, 5:46)

Then We sent Our Messengers following in their footsteps and sent
Jesus, son of Mary, after them, giving him the Gospel. We put compassion
and mercy in the hearts of those who followed him. They invented
monasticism - We did not prescribe it for them - purely out of desire to
gain the pleasure of God, but even so they did not observe it as it
should have been observed. To those of them who believed We gave their
reward, but many of them are deviators. (Qur'an, 57:27)

**He was supported with Purest Spirit:**

We gave Moses the Book and sent a succession of Messengers after him.
We gave Jesus, son of Mary, the Clear Signs and reinforced him with the
Purest Spirit. Why, then, whenever a Messenger came to you with
something your lower selves did not desire, did you grow arrogant, and
deny some of them and murder others? (Qur'an, 2:87)

These Messengers: We favored some of them over others. God spoke
directly to some of them and raised up some of them in rank. We gave
Clear Signs to Jesus, son of Mary, and reinforced him with the Purest
Spirit. If God had willed, those who came after them would not have
fought each other after the Clear Signs came to them, but they differed.
Among them are those who believe and among them are those who do not
believe. If God had willed, they would not have fought each other. But
God does whatever He wills. (Qur'an, 2:253)

**His Disciples assisted him:**

O you who believe! Be helpers of God as Jesus, son of Mary, said to the
Disciples: "Who will be my helpers to God?" The Disciples said: "We will
be the helpers of God." One faction of the tribe of Israel believed, and
the other disbelieved. So We supported those who believed against their
enemy, and they became victorious. (Qur'an, 61:14)

He was a role model for the Israelites:

He [Jesus, son of Mary] is only a servant on whom We bestowed Our
blessing and whom We made an example for the tribe of Israel. (Qur'an,
43:59) The unbelievers conspired to assassinate him, but God foiled
their plots and raised him up to His presence:

They planned, and God planned. But God is the best of planners. When
God said: ''Jesus, I will take you back, raise you up to Me, and purify
you of those who do not believe. And I will place the people who follow
you above those who do not believe until the Day of Resurrection. Then
you will all return to Me, and I will judge between you regarding the
things about which you differed." (Qur'an, 3:54-55)

**Jesus' (pbuh) Second Coming According to the Qur'an**

The Qur'an reveals that Jesus (pbuh) did not die and was not killed.
Rather, he was raised up to God's presence and will be returned to Earth
at a time of His choice.

This part of the book will examine the Qur'anic evidence for this. (For
detailed information, see Harun Yahya, The Glad Tidings of the Messiah,
Global Publishing, [Istanbul: 2003].) 1. Those who sought to kill Jesus
(pbuh) failed. Thus, their claim to have killed him is based only upon
their assumption: And [on account of] their saying: "We killed the
Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, Messenger of God." They did not kill him
and they did not crucify him; rather, it was made to seem so to them.
Those who argue about him are in doubt about it. They have no real
knowledge of it, just conjecture. But they certainly did not kill him.
(Qur'an, 4:157)

2. Jesus (pbuh) did not die, but was taken from the dimension of human
existence to the presence of God:

God raised him [Jesus] up to Himself. God is Almighty, All-Wise.
(Qur'an, 4:158) 3. Jesus (pbuh) is a sign for the Hour:

He [Jesus] is a sign of the Hour. Have no doubt about it. But follow
me. This is a straight path. (Qur'an, 43:61) This verse signals Jesus'
(pbuh) return in the End Times, because Jesus lived approximately six
centuries before the Qur'an's revelation. Therefore, we cannot
understand his first life as a sign of the Hour or, in other words, a
sign of the End Times. Given this interpretation, Jesus (pbuh) will
return in the End Times, and that this is a sign of the Day of Judgment.
(God knows best.) 4. Jesus' (pbuh) followers will be preferred over
unbelievers until the end of time:

When God said: ''Jesus, I will take you back and raise you up to Me,
and purify you of those who do not believe. And I will place the people
who follow you above those who do not believe until the Day of
Resurrection. Then you will all return to Me, and I will judge between
you regarding the things about which you differed." (Qur'an, 3:55)

God says that Jesus' (pbuh) true followers will be superior to the
unbelievers until the Day of Judgment. He only had a few followers while
he was alive on Earth and, after his ascension to God's presence, the
true religion revealed to him was gradually falsified. During the next
two centuries his followers were persecuted ruthlessly, for they did not
have any political power. Therefore, we cannot say that the early
Christians dominated the unbelievers and, therefore, that they were the
subject of this verse. Today, Christianity is far from its original
state as the real religion taught by Jesus (pbuh). In this situation,
the expression I will place the people who follow you above those who do
not believe until the Day of Resurrection, takes on a clear meaning: A
community of Jesus' (pbuh) followers will live until that time. This
community will emerge on Jesus' (pbuh) second coming and be preferred
over the unbelievers until the Day of Judgment. (God knows best.)

5. All People of the Book will believe in Jesus (pbuh) before he
dies:

There is not one of the People of the Book who will not believe in him
before he dies; and on the Day of Resurrection he [Jesus] will be a
witness against them. (Qur'an, 4:159)

This verse contains three promises in relation to Jesus (pbuh), all of
which have not yet been fulfilled: first, Jesus (pbuh) will die like all
other human beings; second, all People of the Book will believe in him
before he dies. (Both of these prophecies will be realized when he comes
again); and third, Jesus (pbuh) will be a witness over the People of the
Book on the Day of Judgment. (God knows best.) 6. Jesus' (pbuh) second
coming is proclaimed in Surah Maryam:

[Jesus said:] "Peace be upon me the day I was born, the day I die, and
the day I am raised up again alive." (Qur'an, 19:33) When this verse is
considered together with Surah Al 'Imran 3:55, an important fact
emerges, for this latter verse states that Jesus (pbuh) was raised up to
God's presence. This verse contains no reference to his death or
killing. However, Surah Maryam 19:33 speaks of the day that Jesus (pbuh)
will die. This second "death" is only possible with Jesus' (pbuh) return
to Earth to live among humanity for a certain number of years. (God
knows best.) 7. The following verse indicates his return to Earth:

He will teach him [Jesus] the Book and Wisdom, and the Torah and the
Gospel. (Qur'an, 3:48) When we look at other verses to understand the
meaning of Book in this verse, we realize the following: As it is used
in conjunction with the Bible and the Torah in the same sentence, it
must stand for the Qur'an, as the verse below suggests:

He has sent down the Book to you with truth, confirming what was there
before it. And He sent down the Torah and the Gospel. (Qur'an, 3:3) Many
other verses state that wisdom and the Book were revealed to Mohammed
(may God bless him and grant him peace). The following is one such
verse: God has sent down the Book and Wisdom to you, and taught you what
you did not know before. God's favor to you is indeed immense. (Qur'an,
4:113) As the book revealed to Prophet Mohammed (may God bless him and
grant him peace) was the Qur'an, the Book referred to in Surah Al 'Imran
3:48, which Jesus (pbuh) will be taught, is most probably the Qur'an.
Given that Jesus (pbuh) knew the Torah and the Bible, obviously he will
learn the Qur'an on his second coming. (God knows best.)

8. Surah Al 'Imran 3:59 states: "The likeness of Jesus in God's sight
is the same as Adam." This verse points out similarities between the two
Prophets. For example, both Adam (pbuh) and Jesus (pbuh) did not have a
father. Moreover, it could be indicating that Jesus (pbuh) will be
brought down to Earth in the End Times, just as Adam (pbuh) was brought
down from Paradise. (God knows best.)

9. The word kahlaan, in Surat al-Ma'ida 5:110 and Surah Al 'Imran 3:46
is further proof for Jesus' return to Earth. These verses are as
follows: Remember when God said: ''Jesus, son of Mary, remember My
blessing to you and to your mother, when I reinforced you with the
Purest Spirit so that you could speak to people in the cradle and when
you were fully grown." (Qur'an, 5:110) [The angels said to Mary:] "He
[Jesus] will speak to people in the cradle and also when fully grown,
and will be one of the righteous." (Qur'an, 3:46)

The dictionary meaning of kahlaan, which denotes the adult stages of
Jesus' (pbuh) life, is between 30-50 years of age, at the borderline of
youth and old age. Islamic scholars agree that this word denotes that
part of a person's life that begins after one becomes 35 years old.
Islamic scholars base their view on the hadiths, transmitted by Ibn
\`Abbas, that Jesus (pbuh) was raised up to the heavens at the beginning
of his thirtieth year and that he will live for another 40 years on his
return. Scholars say that his old age will occur after his return to
Earth. Therefore, this verse is a proof for Jesus' (pbuh) return.31

All Prophets spoke with people, invited them to religion, and taught
religion at a mature age. But the Qur'an does not use this word for any
other Prophet. Thus, kahlaan indicates Jesus' (pbuh) miraculous return
to Earth, as the expressions of while in the cradle and when fully grown
come one after the other in the verses, indicating the two miraculous
times.

Jesus' (pbuh) speaking from the cradle was a miracle, for such a thing
had never happened before. This suggests that the expression when fully
grown, which appears immediately after the other, is also a miracle. If
this expression indicates Jesus' (pbuh) life before he was raised up to
God's presence, Jesus' (pbuh) speech would not have been a miracle. This
is why the verse points out two miraculous times: when he was in the
cradle (the first) and when fully grown (the second). Therefore, the
expression when fully grown most probably indicates the miraculous time
following his miraculous return to Earth, when he will speak with people
again. (God knows best.)

**Recognizing Jesus (pbuh)**

People are curious about how Jesus (pbuh) will be recognized on his
second coming and what features will reveal his true identity. As a
person of superior knowledge, intellect, body, and virtue, he will have
an expression of Prophethood on his face. His strong fear and respect of
God and deep faith will enlighten his face. This enlightenment on his
face will be so revealing that people who encounter him will know that
they are dealing with a superior human being.

God reveals that he is "of high esteem in the world and the Hereafter,
and one of those brought near" (Qur'an, 3:45). Thus, Jesus (pbuh) will
be recognized by his respectability, honor, and superiority, just as all
other Prophets were. Those who see him will know him instantly, and
their hearts will have no doubts; those who have denied his return will
realize their error straight away. Jesus (pbuh) will be recognizable by
the qualities of Prophethood, but other signs will also make him
recognizable, such as that he will have no family or relatives, and no
one will have known him from an earlier period in his life.

**No One Will Know Jesus (pbuh) When He Returns**

How will we recognize Jesus (pbuh)? Surely he will have all the
attributes of a Prophet, which will enable believers to recognize him.
Moreover, no one will have seen or known him before, and no one will
know his past. No one will know his physical qualities, face, or voice.
Even if some people make such claims, they cannot prove them, for
everyone who knew Jesus (pbuh) has been dead for approximately two
thousand years. Mary, Zachariah (pbuh), his Disciples, the Jewish
leaders of that era, and those who were taught by Jesus (pbuh) have all
died. As we explained earlier, Jesus (pbuh) was created without a
father, by God's command Be! Centuries later, he has no known relatives.
In fact, God compares Jesus' (pbuh) creation to Adam's (pbuh):

The likeness of Jesus in God's sight is the same as Adam. He created
him from earth and then He said to him: "Be!" and he was. (Qur'an,
3:59)

No doubt, this situation removes the threat of false Messiahs. On his
second coming, no one will be able to cast doubt on Jesus (pbuh) as the
Messiah, because he will be instantly recognizable by this fact: No one
will be able to say that he or she knows him. Besides, Jesus (pbuh) will
have all the attributes of His chosen Messengers: virtue, pureness,
wisdom, convincing speech, foresight, and modesty. Naturally, these will
set him apart from false Messiahs and enable true believers to recognize
him in the light of faith and to believe in him.

Jesus (pbuh) will remove all of Christianity's false beliefs and
practices, free both the Christian and the Islamic worlds from their
errors, and call all people to live by the true religion and superior
morality. One Qur'anic verse states that all People of the Book will
believe in Jesus (pbuh) (Qur'an, 4:159). Thus, Jews will also believe in
Jesus (pbuh) as the Messiah and enter the alliance of all three divinely
revealed religions in the pursuit of delivering peace, tranquility, and
justice to the world.

Islamic sources contain a great deal of information on the new world
order to be established under Jesus' (pbuh) leadership. Many hadiths
also give the good tidings about his return. A few of them are given
below:

I swear, the son of Mary [Jesus (pbuh)] will perform hajj or umra or
perform both.32 The Hour will not come until you see ten signs: the
smoke, the Dajjal, the Beast, the Sun rising from the West, the descent
of Jesus (pbuh) son of Mary… 33

By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, son of Mary [Jesus (pbuh)] will
shortly descend among you people [Muslims] as a just ruler...34 Hadiths
reveal that a Golden Age era will begin after Jesus' (pbuh) return, a
time in which wealth, tranquility, peace, happiness, and ease of life
will rule. It will see new developments in art, medicine, communication,
manufacturing, transport, and many other fields, completely unlike what
we have seen in any other time. In addition, morality will define the
lives of people. The hadiths describe this era, as follows: Earth will
fill with union of faiths, just as a bowl is filled with water. No
enmity will remain among people. And all enmities, struggle, hostility,
and jealousy will disappear.35

People will have so many possessions that no one will accept any.36
Earth will fill with justice, just as a bowl is filled with water.
Everyone will worship God. No strife or war will remain… Earth will be
like a silver table; it will grow its plants, just as it was in the time
of Adam. A bunch of grapes will satisfy a person. A group of people will
feed on a single pomegranate. An ox will be very cheap, just as a horse
will be very cheap.37

**Awaiting Jesus (pbuh)**

For us Muslims, Jesus' (pbuh) second coming is of utmost importance.
Born as a miracle of God, he invited the Israelites to the righteous
path, performed many miracles in their presence, and is the Messiah and
God's word (Qur'an, 4:171). When he returns, the differences between
Christians and Muslims, who actually share the same values and have the
same belief in God, will be resolved. According to the Qur'an,
Christians are the closest to Muslims in terms of affection. Once their
differences have been resolved, Muslims and Christians will unite, and
the Jews will believe in Jesus (pbuh) and find enlightenment (Qur'an,
4:159). Thus, these three divinely revealed religions will merge into
one religion based on belief in God and obedience to Jesus (pbuh), and
will then ideologically defeat all anti-religion philosophies and
idolatry, thus finally ridding the world of war, conflict, racism,
ethnic hostility, tyranny, and injustice. People will live in a golden
age of peace, happiness, and tranquility.

This will be one of the most significant events in world history. The
merger of the three divinely revealed religions will mean that both
North and South America, Europe, the Islamic world, Africa, Russia, and
Israel will form an alliance under a common religion, something that has
never been witnessed before.

Jesus' second coming is one of the greatest miracles in human history.
God's chosen Prophets, by His will, performed various miracles. By His
grace, 2,000 years ago in Palestine Jesus (pbuh) revived the dead, cured
lepers and the blind, and gave life to lifeless objects (Qur'an, 5:110),
all by God's will.

It will be a great miracle to witness Jesus' (pbuh) return to begin
life once again without parents and as an adult. He will also perform
new miracles so that existing materialist philosophies, already weakened
to the point of collapse on a scientific as well as philosophical level,
will be destroyed. People will see clear proof of God's existence and
might.

Based on the signs revealed in the Qur'an and the hadiths, as well as
the scholars' opinion, we believe that this event is imminent. We
Muslims are excited about this and are doing everything we can to
prepare ourselves and the world for the arrival of this celebrated
guest. We call on Christians to be sensitive, conscientious, and
passionate about this too.

Is Christendom Ready for Jesus' (pbuh) Return?

The love of Jesus (pbuh) made Christians virtuous throughout history.
God describes Christians in the following terms: You will find the
people most affectionate to those who have faith are those who say: "We
are Christians." That is because some of them are priests and monks and
because they are not arrogant. (Qur'an, 5:82)

Another verse speaks of the Christians' positive morality:

Then We sent Our Messengers following in their footsteps, and sent
Jesus, son of Mary, after them, giving him the Gospel. We put compassion
and mercy in the hearts of those who followed him. (Qur'an, 57:27)

Throughout history Christians endured much tyranny, withdrew from the
world's pleasures, and made many sacrifices. All of these are proof of
their sincerity, but at a time when Jesus (pbuh) return is imminent,
this sincerity needs to be reaffirmed. The New Testament states
repeatedly that Jesus (pbuh) will return. For example, it says that he
[Jesus] will appear a second time, … to bring salvation to those who are
waiting for him (Hebrews, 9:28). Since this promise is certain, all
Christians are obliged to make this the basis of their worldview, be
ready and waiting at all times, and act accordingly wherever they may
be.

Many Christians are convinced that Jesus (pbuh) will return soon,
because most of the prophecies related to the Messiah's arrival have
been fulfilled already. The expansion of religious morality across the
world, the near collapse of materialist philosophies, and the fact that
people are turning to the belief in God are important signs. It would be
there inappropriate for Christians to remain impassive about this
event.

Since his second coming is imminent, this must become the most
important issue on Christendom's agenda. Since Jesus (pbuh) will unite
all believers, the differences between Christians will soon be rendered
meaningless and therefore, the separations, disputes, and animosities
must be abandoned. As all Muslims and Christians will unite under one
common belief when he arrives, it is necessary to begin working on
overcoming the bias and distrust between them straight away.

The last chapter of the Bible says:

The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of
Jesus [Messiah], and He will reign forever and ever. (Revelation, 11:15)
Come, let us prepare together for Jesus' (pbuh) imminent arrival.
Knowing that he will teach us the truth, let us respect our differences
in faith. Let us try to bring the peace, brotherhood, compassion, love
that he envisages to the world. Let us fight together the ideological
war against the philosophies and ideologies that oppose him and deny
God. Come, let us await one of the world's greatest miracles together.


