Chapter 8
=========

All of the truths revealed thus far show that the People of the Book
and Muslims have very similar beliefs and worldviews. Followers of all
three divinely revealed religions believe in God's unity, that He
created the universe and all living beings from nothing, and that people
should order their lives according to divine revelation. The moral code
and ideals of social life contained in the parts of the Bible and the
Torah are very much like those of the Qur'an.

Sure, there are some fundamental differences in terms of faith that
have become the subject of disputes and even wars between the three
divinely revealed religions. But at a time when anti-religion and
atheist ideologies dominate the world, it is necessary to accentuate the
similarities among the three religions.

Putting our differences aside is not something impossible. Consider
what happens when we learn of rescue efforts launched to help the
survivors of earthquakes or large-scale floods. Something in common
draws our attention to such images, and soon people of different
countries, nations, and religions mobilize themselves and their
resources to cooperate with one another in order to save the affected
people. Even countries that hate each other drop their mutual hatred at
such times of hardship and rush to the help of the affected country
without a second thought. This is what humanity should do anyhow. It is
an act of grave indecency to bring up past problems, conflicts,
disputes, arguments, and prejudices when people are desperately waiting
to be rescued from the rubble of their homes or from the threat of
drowning.

Let us visualize the situation of the world's nations: The global
activities of atheist and materialist ideologies, social degeneration,
decadence, poverty, famine, increasing evil, disintegrating families,
spiritually starved people, crime, murder, fights, conflicts, wars, and
troubles… No doubt, these and other evil acts are dragging the world at
alarming speed toward spiritual as well as physical destruction.
Atheistic materialism and other destructive ideologies are threatening
people's lives here and in the Hereafter. All of this shows that the
billions of people are, in reality, no different from the victims of
natural disasters awaiting rescue.

It is the duty of all faithful, sincere, conscientious, and rational
Christians, Jews, and Muslims to cooperate against evil, join forces in
the ideological battlefield, and work together in unity and harmony.
This unity must be based on the principles of love, respect, acceptance,
and cooperation. The urgency of the situation must be remembered, and
disputes, arguments, and all other human-made (and therefore artificial)
barriers between people must be abandoned.

When we look at the Old Testament, the New Testament, and Qur'an, we
see that they all recommend using friendly words and conducting oneself
properly and with dignity. The Christians' attitude toward others is
described, as follows, in the Bible:

… always try to be kind to each other and to everyone else. (1
Thessalonians 5:15) … to slander no one, to be peaceable and
considerate, and to show true humility toward all men. (Titus, 3:2) The
Torah states that Jews must treat people well:

Seek good, not evil, that you may live. Then the LORD God Almighty will
be with you, just as you say He is. Hate evil, love good; maintain
justice in the courts... (Amos, 5:14-15) In the Qur'an, God states the
importance of virtue, righteousness, and responding to evil with
goodness and commands Muslims to approach Christians and Jews in the
appropriate manner.

The Qur'an clearly states that the People of the Book are closer to
Muslims than idolaters or atheists. Even though some Jewish and
Christian beliefs and practices no longer accord with the original
divine revelations, their revealed books still contain moral values
based on divine revelation and a code of good and evil, which is why
their food is halal (lawful) for Muslims. Likewise, Muslim men are
allowed to marry Jewish and Christian women, for:

Today all good things have been made halal [lawful] for you. The food
of those given the Book is also halal for you, and your food is halal
for them. So are chaste women from among the believers and chaste women
of those given the Book before you, once you have given them their
dowries in marriage, not in fornication or taking them as lovers. But as
for anyone who rejects faith, his actions will come to nothing, and in
the Hereafter he will be among the losers. (Qur'an, 5:5)

These rules show that Muslims and the People of the Book can establish
good relations among themselves through marriage and the sharing of
food, both of which enable the formation of warm human relationships and
tranquil togetherness. It is inconceivable that Muslims could have
different views when the Qur'an advises moderation and acceptance.
Therefore, Muslims must approach Christians and Jews with respect and
politeness and inform them of the Qur'an's call to unite under a common
word. The secret of such an alliance is found in this call:

Say: "O People of the Book, come to a proposition that is the same for
us and you - that we should worship none but God, not associate any
partners with Him, and not take one another as lords besides God."
(Qur'an, 3:64)

Come, Let Us Unite in Proclaiming God's Existence and the Reality of
Creation

The universe is full of evidence that disproves the unbelievers'
misguided and erroneous philosophies. All people who listen to the voice
of their conscience and study the universe and nature in a sincere and
unbiased manner will find the evidence of creation wherever they look.
Everything, whether alive or lifeless, contains messages that teach us
God's superior art of creation. Thus, we are surrounded by the signs of
His existence and unity.

In order to destroy the unbelievers' claim that everything evolved
accidentally, it is necessary to examine and inform others of the
evidence for creation in the light of modern science. Conscientious
people, who come to see the spectacular structures and perfect design of
living beings, will realize that these could not have been the result of
coincidental developments, but that they are the creation of God. In
this way, the coincidence lie will be destroyed. The evidence for
creation covers God's existence and oneness, as well as His supreme
might, wisdom, and art. They will lead people to notice God's existence
and to turn to Him.

One of the most effective ways to remove the people's unawareness of
this truth is to display the many proofs of creation and its perfection
in great detail. This will cause people to think about those things that
they have always taken for granted. For example, each person's body is a
great proof of creation. Our eyes are more complex and superior to the
most advanced cameras in the world. All of our bodily functions work in
harmony and in equilibrium with each other, and chemical processes that
could otherwise be reproduced only in huge chemical plants are carried
out perfectly well in our relatively small internal organs. God created
countless foodstuffs for us, all of which grow in the same soil and yet
have different delicious tastes, smells, appearances, vitamins, and the
minerals we need to stay alive and healthy. All of the fruits,
vegetables, and other sources of food present evidence for God's
creation. At this time and age, most people consume God's gifts without
ever pondering this reality and so never think to thank Him for them. In
order to end such unawareness, sincerely religious believers must join
forces.

Many verses of the Qur'an invite people to ponder such facts and to
witness and understand these proofs for God's existence and greatness.
Among them is the following passage:

Do you not see how He created seven heavens in layers, and placed the
Moon as a light in them and made the Sun a blazing lamp? God caused you
to grow from the soil and will return you to it and bring you out again.
God has spread Earth out as a carpet for you so that you could use its
wide valleys as roadways. (Qur'an, 71:15-20)

The subjects mentioned in these verses are so detailed that scholars
could - and have - written volumes about them. For instance, the seven
strata of the heavens and their effects on and benefits to the world's
ecological systems and life on Earth; the Moon and the Sun's influence
on the seasons, the climate, day and night, and over the life of
people - when people think about such things, their worldview is
broadened and their faith is strengthened. The slightest changes to
these systems are similarly awe-inspiring, especially when the dangers
of such changes are considered. The whole universe is full of such
details, and yet most people hardly ever ponder these wonders in their
daily lives. Telling people about these proofs of creation and their
ramifications on their own lives will lead them to contemplate and thus
recognize God's power and might.

Naturally, people who admit God's existence will find their lives,
morality, and general behavior greatly affected, for they will do their
best to obey His commands and live by His morality. This, in turn, will
increase the number of people who are gentle, modest, accepting,
understanding, patient, loyal, selfless, compassionate, brave,
open-minded, honest, and just, and the world will become a beautiful
place due to the expansion of His morality.

Therefore, come and let us investigate the reality of creation; let us
research them and announce them to all people; let us invite them to
love God, be thankful to Him, live by the morality He prescribes, and
worship Him in order to earn His good pleasure.

Come, Let Us Unite against Darwinism

As we stated earlier, atheist, materialist, and other anti-religion
power centers are waging an unprecedented war against religious
morality. They have been working systematically across the world to
divert people from God's path, have them deny God's existence and unity,
and annihilate religious morality.

Amazingly, they claim to be following a scientific system that has all
the answers: Darwinism. However, this system only leads people into
atheism by encouraging them to reject His existence and creation. They
portray the world as an arena in which only the fittest survive and seek
to distance people from religious morality, and thereby turn them into
selfish and merciless animals. The famous atheist evolutionist, Prof.
Richard Dawkins, sums up the theory of evolution's mission as follows:
"Darwin made it possible to be an intellectually fulfilled atheist."38

In reality, the theory of evolution does not make this possible for
them, because the theory is in clear conflict with recent scientific
discoveries. Many sciences (e.g., paleontology, biochemistry, genetics,
comparative anatomy, and biophysics) prove that the creation of life
cannot be explained through natural processes and natural selection, as
evolutionists claim. In short, evolution is defended not by science, but
in spite of science.

However, the leading positions of power in the scientific world and in
the media are filled by people who continue to assert that the theory of
evolution is absolute truth. Seeking to keep this theory alive at all
costs, they have no qualms about concealing or twisting those scientific
discoveries that refute it, or belittling or disparaging those
discoveries that expose its falsity or those scientists who criticize
it. This inquisition causes many scientists and researchers to conceal
their true views so that they will not be excommunicated by having their
funds cut off or their reputations destroyed.

All people who believe in God must join forces to resist and,
ultimately, overthrow the Darwinist dictatorship ruling the world of
science and thought. Therefore, come let us unite; let us use the
scientific and technological means of the twenty-first century to tell
the world that Darwinism is nothing but a sham, and that the true source
of life is creation.

Come, Let Us Unite for Peace

God commands believers to make peace with each other and to defend it
against those who conspire to make war without justification (i.e., not
for self-defense or protecting the innocent), and curses those who
create disorder and kill innocent people. Believers who abide by God's
prescribed morality have a duty to work for peace and security and to
provide a world in which all people can live in peace and tranquility.
Wars fought to acquire more land, prove the supremacy of one's nation or
race over another, and dominate other nations leave nothing behind but
dead innocent people, cripples, orphans, mentally disturbed individuals,
destroyed cities, devastated civilizations, destitution, fear, and
hunger. These losses, which affect all parties involved in warfare, take
many long years - even generations - to replace.

The lack of religious morality is the source of all wars, skirmishes,
and bloodshed. Sometimes, people claiming to act in the name of religion
can manipulate other people who are not sufficiently well-informed about
religion to commit crimes that are completely incompatible with
religious morality. Those who believe that disagreements and problems
should be resolved through violence tyrannize people with their
despotism and oppression. Believers must join forces against them and
oppose their efforts to legitimize their tyranny.

Therefore, let us unite; let us eradicate all causes of conflict and
fighting by telling people about the true morality of religion. Let us
prove to people that there is absolutely no cause for conflict between
different religions by our united efforts and actions. Let us tell
people about the love of God in order to spread love, acceptance, and
compassion.


**Conclusion**

The true friend, helper, guardian, and protector of believers is God.
He knows everything and has power over everything. In addition, He eases
the believers' burdens and makes them strong and superior. This is why
believers never succumb to hopelessness, despair, sorrow, carelessness,
or surrender. God promises in the following verse that He will help
those who follow His path:

Those who were expelled from their homes without any right, merely for
saying: "Our Lord is God." If God had not driven some people back by
means of others, monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, in
which God's name is mentioned much, would have been pulled down and
destroyed. God will certainly help those who help Him - God is
All-Strong, Almighty. (Qur'an, 22:40)

The Qur'an also conveys the following good news: Irrespective of the
indestructible appearance of the unbelievers' rule and conspiracies,
their efforts will come to naught and they will not achieve the results
they desire. Every conspiracy and scheme to disseminate evil and
immorality will eventually fail, and the schemes of those who organize
evil and immorality will turn against them, for the Qur'an states:

They concocted their plots, but their plots were with God, even if they
were such as to make the mountains vanish. Do not imagine that God will
break His promise to His Messengers. God is Almighty, Exactor of
punishment. (Qur'an, 14:46-47)

It only increased their aversion, shown by their arrogance in the land
and evil plotting. But evil plotting envelops only those who do it. Do
they expect anything but the pattern of previous peoples? You will not
find any changing in the pattern of God. You will not find any
alteration in the pattern of God. (Qur'an, 35:42-43)

The duty of all believers is clear, whether they are Muslims, Jews, or
Christians: to unite and join forces in order to establish societies
dominated by peace, tranquility, prosperity, morality, goodness,
happiness, and security. If we coordinate our efforts for such a pure
undertaking, God will give us success. Every believing Christian,
Muslim, and Jew is responsible to do whatever he or she can in this
respect. Given that they believe in the One and Only God, try to win His
good pleasure, have submitted to Him wholeheartedly, praise Him, and
advocate essentially the same values, it is only natural for them to
join together to fight their common foe.

Jews, Christians, and Muslims must permanently end all of their
historical disputes, prejudices, misunderstandings, and conflicts caused
by bigotry and intolerance. They must not forget that we have not even
one day to waste. Followers of all three divinely revealed religions
must accept each other, for what matters most is to point out their
common ground and make things easier for everyone, to be constructive
and complimentary, and to unite.

The prejudices caused by ignorance or by the agitation of those who
oppose the morality of religion must be eradicated. All of the walls
that have been erected over the years among and against the followers of
Islam, Christianity, and Judaism only help the unbelievers undermine and
lead people further away from religious morality. In this book, we have
called upon the People of the Book: Let us join forces in the
ideological fight against all ideologies that promote immorality and
irreligion, especially Darwinism. Let us pool our technological
resources and knowledge, our experience and efforts. Let us announce the
errors of the followers of Darwinism, evolutionism, and materialism in
the light of current scientific research. Let us move together to tell
all people that Almighty God created the universe and all things
therein, whether alive or lifeless, along with all of the supporting
evidence and its miracles.

No doubt, those who call to goodness, recommend doing good and avoiding
evil, and work together in this holy cause can expect salvation and
eternal happiness. The unbelievers will be at a loss, whereas the
believers will receive an eternal reward: By the Late Afternoon, truly
man is in loss - except for those who believe and do right actions and
urge each other to the truth and urge each other to steadfastness.
(Qur'an, 103:1-3)


