The Tale of Human Evolution
===========================

The subject most often brought up by advocates of the theory of
evolution is the subject of the origin of man. The Darwinist claim holds
that modern man evolved from ape-like creatures. During this alleged
evolutionary process, which is supposed to have started 4-5 million
years ago, some "transitional forms" between modern man and his
ancestors are supposed to have existed. According to this completely
imaginary scenario, four basic "categories" are listed:

1. Australopithecus
2. Homo habilis
3. Homo erectus
4. Homo sapiens

Evolutionists call man's so-called first ape-like ancestors
Australopithecus, which means "South African ape." These living beings
are actually nothing but an old ape species that has become extinct.
Extensive research done on various Australopithecus specimens by two
world famous anatomists from England and the USA, namely, Lord Solly
Zuckerman and Prof. Charles Oxnard, shows that these apes belonged to an
ordinary ape species that became extinct and bore no resemblance to
humans.51

Evolutionists classify the next stage of human evolution as "homo,"
that is "man." According to their claim, the living beings in the Homo
series are more developed than Australopithecus. Evolutionists devise a
fanciful evolution scheme by arranging different fossils of these
creatures in a particular order. This scheme is imaginary because it has
never been proved that there is an evolutionary relation between these
different classes.

Ernst Mayr, one of the twentieth century's most important
evolutionists, contends in his book One Long Argument that "particularly
historical [puzzles] such as the origin of life or of Homo sapiens, are
extremely difficult and may even resist a final, satisfying
explanation."52 By outlining the link chain as Australopithecus \> Homo
habilis \> Homo erectus \> Homo sapiens, evolutionists imply that each
of these species is one another's ancestor. However, recent findings of
paleoanthropologists have revealed that Australopithecus, Homo habilis,
and Homo erectus lived at different parts of the world at the same
time.53

Moreover, a certain segment of humans classified as Homo erectus have
lived up until very modern times. Homo sapiens neandarthalensis and Homo
sapiens sapiens (modern man) co-existed in the same region.54

This situation apparently indicates the invalidity of the claim that
they are ancestors of one another. A paleontologist from Harvard
University, Stephen Jay Gould, explains this deadlock of the theory of
evolution, although he is an evolutionist himself:

What has become of our ladder if there are three coexisting lineages of
hominids (A. africanus, the robust australopithecines, and H. habilis),
none clearly derived from another? Moreover, none of the three display
any evolutionary trends during their tenure on earth.55 Put briefly, the
scenario of human evolution, which is "upheld" with the help of various
drawings of some "half ape, half human" creatures appearing in the media
and course books, that is, frankly, by means of propaganda, is nothing
but a tale with no scientific foundation.

Lord Solly Zuckerman, one of the most famous and respected scientists
in the U.K., who carried out research on this subject for years and
studied Australopithecus fossils for 15 years, finally concluded,
despite being an evolutionist himself, that there is, in fact, no such
family tree branching out from ape-like creatures to man.

Zuckerman also made an interesting "spectrum of science" ranging from
those he considered scientific to those he considered unscientific.
According to Zuckerman's spectrum, the most "scientific" - that is,
depending on concrete data - fields of science are chemistry and
physics. After them come the biological sciences and then the social
sciences. At the far end of the spectrum, which is the part considered
to be most "unscientific," are "extra-sensory perception" - concepts
such as telepathy and sixth sense - and finally "human evolution."
Zuckerman explains his reasoning:

We then move right off the register of objective truth into those
fields of presumed biological science, like extrasensory perception or
the interpretation of man's fossil history, where to the faithful
[evolutionist] anything is possible - and where the ardent believer [in
evolution] is sometimes able to believe several contradictory things at
the same time.56

The tale of human evolution boils down to nothing but the prejudiced
interpretations of some fossils unearthed by certain people, who blindly
adhere to their theory.

**Darwinian Formula!**

Besides all the technical evidence we have dealt with so far, let us
now for once, examine what kind of a superstition the evolutionists have
with an example so simple as to be understood even by children:

The theory of evolution asserts that life is formed by chance.
According to this claim, lifeless and unconscious atoms came together to
form the cell and then they somehow formed other living things,
including man. Let us think about that. When we bring together the
elements that are the building-blocks of life such as carbon,
phosphorus, nitrogen and potassium, only a heap is formed. No matter
what treatments it undergoes, this atomic heap cannot form even a single
living being. If you like, let us formulate an "experiment" on this
subject and let us examine on the behalf of evolutionists what they
really claim without pronouncing loudly under the name "Darwinian
formula":

Let evolutionists put plenty of materials present in the composition of
living things such as phosphorus, nitrogen, carbon, oxygen, iron, and
magnesium into big barrels. Moreover, let them add in these barrels any
material that does not exist under normal conditions, but they think as
necessary. Let them add in this mixture as many amino acids - which have
no possibility of forming under natural conditions - and as many
proteins - a single one of which has a formation probability of 10-950 -
as they like. Let them expose these mixtures to as much heat and
moisture as they like. Let them stir these with whatever technologically
developed device they like. Let them put the foremost scientists beside
these barrels.

Let these experts wait in turn beside these barrels for billions, and
even trillions of years. Let them be free to use all kinds of conditions
they believe to be necessary for a human's formation. No matter what
they do, they cannot produce from these barrels a human, say a professor
that examines his cell structure under the electron microscope. They
cannot produce giraffes, lions, bees, canaries, horses, dolphins, roses,
orchids, lilies, carnations, bananas, oranges, apples, dates, tomatoes,
melons, watermelons, figs, olives, grapes, peaches, peafowls,
pheasants,

multicoloured butterflies, or millions of other living beings such as
these. Indeed, they could not obtain even a single cell of any one of
them. Briefly, unconscious atoms cannot form the cell by coming
together. They cannot take a new decision and divide this cell into two,
then take other decisions and create the professors who first invent the
electron microscope and then examine their own cell structure under that
microscope. Matter is an unconscious, lifeless heap, and it comes to
life with God's superior creation.

The theory of evolution, which claims the opposite, is a total fallacy
completely contrary to reason. Thinking even a little bit on the claims
of evolutionists discloses this reality, just as in the above example.

**Technology in the Eye and the Ear**

Another subject that remains unanswered by evolutionary theory is the
excellent quality of perception in the eye and the ear. Before passing
on to the subject of the eye, let us briefly answer the question of how
we see. Light rays coming from an object fall oppositely on the eye's
retina. Here, these light rays are transmitted into electric signals by
cells and reach a tiny spot at the back of the brain, the "center of
vision." These electric signals are perceived in this center as an image
after a series of processes. With this technical background, let us do
some thinking.

The brain is insulated from light. That means that its inside is
completely dark, and that no light reaches the place where it is
located. Thus, the "center of vision" is never touched by light and may
even be the darkest place you have ever known. However, you observe a
luminous, bright world in this pitch darkness.

The image formed in the eye is so sharp and distinct that even the
technology of the twentieth century has not been able to attain it. For
instance, look at the book you are reading, your hands with which you
are holding it, and then lift your head and look around you. Have you
ever seen such a sharp and distinct image as this one at any other
place? Even the most developed television screen produced by the
greatest television producer in the world cannot provide such a sharp
image for you.

This is a three-dimensional, colored, and extremely sharp image. For
more than 100 years, thousands of engineers have been trying to achieve
this sharpness. Factories, huge premises were established, much research
has been done, plans and designs have been made for this purpose. Again,
look at a TV screen and the book you hold in your hands. You will see
that there is a big difference in sharpness and distinction. Moreover,
the TV screen shows you a two-dimensional image, whereas with your eyes,
you watch a three-dimensional perspective with depth.

For many years, tens of thousands of engineers have tried to make a
three-dimensional TV and achieve the vision quality of the eye. Yes,
they have made a three-dimensional television system, but it is not
possible to watch it without putting on special 3-D glasses; moreover,
it is only an artificial three-dimension. The background is more
blurred, the foreground appears like a paper setting. Never has it been
possible to produce a sharp and distinct vision like that of the eye. In
both the camera and the television, there is a loss of image quality.

Evolutionists claim that the mechanism producing this sharp and
distinct image has been formed by chance. Now, if somebody told you that
the television in your room was formed as a result of chance, that all
of its atoms just happened to come together and make up this device that
produces an image, what would you think? How can atoms do what thousands
of people cannot?

If a device producing a more primitive image than the eye could not
have been formed by chance, then it is very evident that the eye and the
image seen by the eye could not have been formed by chance. The same
situation applies to the ear. The outer ear picks up the available
sounds by the auricle and directs them to the middle ear, the middle ear
transmits the sound vibrations by intensifying them, and the inner ear
sends these vibrations to the brain by translating them into electric
signals. Just as with the eye, the act of hearing finalizes in the
center of hearing in the brain.

The situation in the eye is also true for the ear. That is, the brain
is insulated from sound just as it is from light. It does not let any
sound in. Therefore, no matter how noisy is the outside, the inside of
the brain is completely silent. Nevertheless, the sharpest sounds are
perceived in the brain. In your completely silent brain, you listen to
symphonies, and hear all of the noises in a crowded place. However, were
the sound level in your brain was measured by a precise device at that
moment, complete silence would be found to be prevailing there.

As is the case with imagery, decades of effort have been spent in
trying to generate and reproduce sound that is faithful to the original.
The results of these efforts are sound recorders, high-fidelity systems,
and systems for sensing sound. Despite all of this technology and the
thousands of engineers and experts who have been working on this
endeavor, no sound has yet been obtained that has the same sharpness and
clarity as the sound perceived by the ear. Think of the highest-quality
hi-fi systems produced by the largest company in the music industry.

Even in these devices, when sound is recorded some of it is lost; or
when you turn on a hi-fi you always hear a hissing sound before the
music starts. However, the sounds that are the products of the human
body's technology are extremely sharp and clear. A human ear never
perceives a sound accompanied by a hissing sound or with atmospherics as
does a hi-fi; rather, it perceives sound exactly as it is, sharp and
clear. This is the way it has been since the creation of man.

So far, no man-made visual or recording apparatus has been as sensitive
and successful in perceiving sensory data as are the eye and the ear.
However, as far as seeing and hearing are concerned, a far greater truth
lies beyond all this.

**To Whom Does the Consciousness that Sees and Hears within the Brain
Belong?**

Who watches an alluring world in the brain, listens to symphonies and
the twittering of birds, and smells the rose?

The stimulations coming from a person's eyes, ears, and nose travel to
the brain as electro-chemical nerve impulses. In biology, physiology,
and biochemistry books, you can find many details about how this image
forms in the brain. However, you will never come across the most
important fact: Who perceives these electro-chemical nerve impulses as
images, sounds, odors, and sensory events in the brain? There is a
consciousness in the brain that perceives all this without feeling any
need for an eye, an ear, and a nose. To whom does this consciousness
belong? Of course it does not belong to the nerves, the fat layer, and
neurons comprising the brain. This is why Darwinist-materialists, who
believe that everything is comprised of matter, cannot answer these
questions.

For this consciousness is the spirit created by God, which needs
neither the eye to watch the images nor the ear to hear the sounds.
Furthermore, it does not need the brain to think. Everyone who reads
this explicit and scientific fact should ponder on Almighty God, and
fear and seek refuge in Him, for He squeezes the entire universe in a
pitch-dark place of a few cubic centimeters in a three-dimensional,
colored, shadowy, and luminous form.

**A Materialist Faith**

The information we have presented so far shows us that the theory of
evolution is a incompatible with scientific findings. The theory's claim
regarding the origin of life is inconsistent with science, the
evolutionary mechanisms it proposes have no evolutionary power, and
fossils demonstrate that the required intermediate forms have never
existed. So, it certainly follows that the theory of evolution should be
pushed aside as an unscientific idea. This is how many ideas, such as
the Earth-centered universe model, have been taken out of the agenda of
science throughout history.

However, the theory of evolution is kept on the agenda of science. Some
people even try to represent criticisms directed against it as an
"attack on science." Why?

The reason is that this theory is an indispensable dogmatic belief for
some circles. These circles are blindly devoted to materialist
philosophy and adopt Darwinism because it is the only materialist
explanation that can be put forward to explain the workings of nature.
Interestingly enough, they also confess this fact from time to time. A
well-known geneticist and an outspoken evolutionist, Richard C. Lewontin
from Harvard University, confesses that he is "first and foremost a
materialist and then a scientist":

It is not that the methods and institutions of science somehow compel
us accept a material explanation of the phenomenal world, but, on the
contrary, that we are forced by our a priori adherence to material
causes to create an apparatus of investigation and a set of concepts
that produce material explanations, no matter how counter-intuitive, no
matter how mystifying to the uninitiated. Moreover, that materialism is
absolute, so we cannot allow a Divine Foot in the door.57

These are explicit statements that Darwinism is a dogma kept alive just
for the sake of adherence to materialism. This dogma maintains that
there is no being save matter. Therefore, it argues that inanimate,
unconscious matter created life. It insists that millions of different
living species (e.g., birds, fish, giraffes, tigers, insects, trees,
flowers, whales, and human beings) originated as a result of the
interactions between matter such as pouring rain, lightning flashes, and
so on, out of inanimate matter. This is a precept contrary both to
reason and science. Yet Darwinists continue to defend it just so as "not
to allow a Divine Foot in the door."

Anyone who does not look at the origin of living beings with a
materialist prejudice will see this evident truth: All living beings are
works of a Creator, Who is All-Powerful, All-Wise, and All-Knowing. This
Creator is God, Who created the whole universe from non-existence,
designed it in the most perfect form, and fashioned all living beings.

**The Theory of Evolution: The Most Potent Spell in the World**

Anyone free of prejudice and the influence of any particular ideology,
who uses only his or her reason and logic, will clearly understand that
belief in the theory of evolution, which brings to mind the
superstitions of societies with no knowledge of science or civilization,
is quite impossible.

As explained above, those who believe in the theory of evolution think
that a few atoms and molecules thrown into a huge vat could produce
thinking, reasoning professors and university students; such scientists
as Einstein and Galileo; such artists as Humphrey Bogart, Frank Sinatra
and Luciano Pavarotti; as well as antelopes, lemon trees, and
carnations. Moreover, as the scientists and professors who believe in
this nonsense are educated people, it is quite justifiable to speak of
this theory as "the most potent spell in history.

" Never before has any other belief or idea so taken away peoples'
powers of reason, refused to allow them to think intelligently and
logically and hidden the truth from them as if they had been
blindfolded. This is an even worse and unbelievable blindness than the
Egyptians worshipping the Sun God Ra, totem worship in some parts of
Africa, the people of Saba worshipping the Sun, the tribe of Prophet
Abraham (pbuh) worshipping idols they had made with their own hands, or
the people of the Prophet Moses (pbuh) worshipping the Golden Calf. In
fact, God has pointed to this lack of reason in the Qur'an. In many
verse, He reveals in many verses that some peoples' minds will be closed
and that they will be powerless to see the truth. Some of these verses
are as follows:

As for those who do not believe, it makes no difference to them whether
you warn them or do not warn them, they will not believe. God has sealed
up their hearts and hearing and over their eyes is a blindfold. They
will have a terrible punishment. (Qur'an, 2:6-7) … They have hearts with
which they do not understand. They have eyes with which they do not see.
They have ears with which they do not hear. Such people are like cattle.
No, they are even further astray! They are the unaware. (Qur'an,
7:179)

Even if We opened up to them a door into heaven, and they spent the day
ascending through it, they would only say: "Our eyesight is befuddled!
Or rather we have been put under a spell!" (Qur'an, 15:14-15)

Words cannot express just how astonishing it is that this spell should
hold such a wide community in thrall, keep people from the truth, and
not be broken for 150 years. It is understandable that one or a few
people might believe in impossible scenarios and claims full of
stupidity and illogicality. However, "magic" is the only possible
explanation for people from all over the world believing that
unconscious and lifeless atoms suddenly decided to come together and
form a universe that functions with a flawless system of organization,
discipline, reason, and consciousness; a planet named Earth with all of
its features so perfectly suited to life; and living things full of
countless complex systems.

In fact, the Qur'an relates the incident of Prophet Moses (pbuh) and
Pharaoh to show that some people who support atheistic philosophies
actually influence others by magic. When Pharaoh was told about the true
religion, he told Prophet Moses (pbuh) to meet with his own magicians.
When Moses (pbuh) did so, he told them to demonstrate their abilities
first. The verses continue:

He said: "You throw." And when they threw, they cast a spell on the
people's eyes and caused them to feel great fear of them. They produced
an extremely powerful magic. (Qur'an, 7:116)

As we have seen, Pharaoh's magicians were able to deceive everyone,
apart from Moses (pbuh) and those who believed in him. However, his
evidence broke the spell, or "swallowed up what they had forged," as the
verse puts it. We revealed to Moses, "Throw down your staff." And it
immediately swallowed up what they had forged. So the Truth took place
and what they did was shown to be false. (Qur'an, 7:117-118)

As we can see, when people realized that a spell had been cast upon
them and that what they saw was just an illusion, Pharaoh's magicians
lost all credibility. In the present day too, unless those who, under
the influence of a similar spell, believe in these ridiculous claims
under their scientific disguise and spend their lives defending them,
abandon their superstitious beliefs, they also will be humiliated when
the full truth emerges and the spell is broken. In fact, world-renowned
British writer and philosopher Malcolm Muggeridge also stated this:

I myself am convinced that the theory of evolution, especially the
extent to which it's been applied, will be one of the great jokes in the
history books in the future. Posterity will marvel that so very flimsy
and dubious an hypothesis could be accepted with the incredible
credulity that it has.58 That future is not far off: On the contrary,
people will soon see that "chance" is not a deity, and will look back on
the theory of evolution as the worst deceit and the most terrible spell
in the world. That spell is already rapidly beginning to be lifted from
the shoulders of people all over the world. Many people who see its true
face are wondering with amazement how they could ever have been taken in
by it.

They said, "Glory be to You!
We have no knowledge except
what You have taught us. You are
the All-Knowing, the All-Wise."
(Qur'an, 2:32)


**Notes**

1. Yrd. Doc. Dr. Orhan Atalay, Dogu-Bati Kaynaklarinda Birlikte Yasama
(Co-existence in Eastern-Western Sources) (Istanbul: Gazeteciler ve
Yazarlar Vakfi Publications, 1999), 95.

2. "Islam and anti-Semitism," 31 January 2004;
www.worldhistory.com/wiki/I/Islam-and-anti-Semitism.htm

3. "Muhammad's Treaties with
non-Muslims;"www.fortunecity.com/marina/commodity/1089/id94.htm

4. Majid Khadduri, War and Peace in the Law of Islam (Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins Press, 1955), 193-94.

5. Levent Ozturk, Asr-i Saadetten Hacli Seferlerine Kadar Islam
Toplumunda Hiristiyanlar (Christians in Islamic Society from the Blessed
Period of the Prophet to the Crusades) (Istanbul: Iz Publishing Co.,
1998), 114-15.

6. Fred Aprim, "The A to Z of the ancient Chaldeans and their relation
to modern Chaldeans;" www.atour.com/education/20001021a.html

7. Mark Cohen, Hac ve Hilal Altinda Ortacaglarda Yahudiler (Under
Crescent and Cross: The Jews in the Middle Ages) (Istanbul: Sarmal
Publishing, 1997), 185.

8. Osman Turan, Turk Cihan Hakimiyeti Mefkuresi Tarihi (A History of
the Ideal of Turkish World Sovereignty) (Istanbul: Nakislar Publishing,
1979), 193.

9. Abraham Danon, in the Review Yossef Daath, no. 4.

10. Felipe Torroba Bernaldo de Quiros, The Spanish Jews (Madrid,
[Rivadeneyra] 1966), 17.

11. Ilhan Bardakci, "Biz Hic Irk Olmamisiz" (We Have Never Been a
Race!), Tercuman Magazine, May 7, 1983.

12. Levent Ozturk, Asr-i Saadetten (Christians in Islamic Society from
the Blessed Period of the Prophet to the Crusades), 437.

13. Ibid., 188.

14. Majid Khadduri, War and Peace in the Law of Islam (Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins Press, 1955), 184; Abu Yusuf, Ya'qub ibn Ibrahim
al-Ansari, Kitap al-Kharaj, (Cairo: 1352 ah), 143-44.

15. Ibid., 186; Abu Yusuf, Kitap al-Kharaj, 140-41.

16. Abu Yusuf, Kitap al-Kharaj, 139; al-Baladhuri, Futuh al-Buidan,
187.

17. Israel Shahak, "Poverty, Religious Instruction Breed Xenophobia in
Israel," Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, July-August 1994.

18. Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-Zaman,
12.

19. Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rasul Barzanji , Al-Isha'ah li- Ashrat
al-Sa'ah, 141.

20. Ibid.

21. Al-Muttaqi Al-Hindi, Muntakhab Kanzul Ummaal.

22. Mukhtasar Tazkirah Qurtubi, 454.

23. Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Al-Burhan fi Alamat al-Mahdi Akhir al-Zaman,
38.

24. Hadith at-Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 60.

25. Narrated by Umm Salama (r.a.).

26. Mukhtasar Tazkirah Qurtubi, 476.

27. Ibid., 476

28. Ibid., 440.

29. Ibid.,480.

30. Son Zamanlarla Ilgili Hadisler (Hadiths Related the End Times),
92.

31. Muhammed Khalil Herras, Fasl al-Maqal fi raf\`i \`Isa hayyan wa
nuzulihi wa qatlihi ad-Dajjal, (Cairo: Makatabat as-Sunnah, 1990), 20.

32. Sahih Muslim, Kitab al-Hajj, 216, 1252.

33. Al-Gifari (r.a.), Buyuk Hadis Kulliyati (Complete Hadiths),
al-Rudani, 5:362.

34. Sahih Bukhari, 102 and Sahih Muslim, 242.

35. Sahih Muslim, 1:136.

36. Sunan Ibn Majah, 10:340.

37. Ibn Majah, narrated by Abu Umama (r.a.), Buyuk Hadis Kulliyati
(Complete Hadiths), al-Rudani, 5:370-72.

38. Richard Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker (London: WW Norton, 1986),
6.

39. Sidney Fox, Klaus Dose, Molecular Evolution and The Origin of Life,
W.H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 1972, 4.

40. Alexander I. Oparin, Origin of Life, Dover Publications, NewYork,
1936, 1953 (reprint), 196.

41. "New Evidence on Evolution of Early Atmosphere and Life", Bulletin
of the American Meteorological Society, vol 63, November 1982,
1328-1330.

42. Stanley Miller, Molecular Evolution of Life: Current Status of the
Prebiotic Synthesis of Small Molecules, 1986, 7.

43. Jeffrey Bada, Earth, February 1998, 40

44. Leslie E. Orgel, "The Origin of Life on Earth", Scientific
American, vol. 271, October 1994, 78.

45. Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species by Means of Natural
Selection, The Modern Library, New York, 127.

46. Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species: A Facsimile of the First
Edition, Harvard University Press, 1964, 184.

47. B. G. Ranganathan, Origins?, Pennsylvania: The Banner Of Truth
Trust, 1988, 7.

48. Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species: A Facsimile of the First
Edition, Harvard University Press, 1964, 179.

49. Derek A. Ager, "The Nature of the Fossil Record", Proceedings of
the British Geological Association, vol 87, 1976, 133.

50. Douglas J. Futuyma, Science on Trial, Pantheon Books, New York,
1983. p. 197.

51. Solly Zuckerman, Beyond The Ivory Tower, Toplinger Publications,
New York, 1970, pp. 75-94; Charles E. Oxnard, "The Place of
Australopithecines in Human Evolution: Grounds for Doubt", Nature, vol
258, 389.

52. "Could science be brought to an end by scientists' belief that they
have final answers or by society's reluctance to pay the bills?"
Scientific American, December 1992, 20.

53. Alan Walker, Science, vol. 207, 7 March 1980, p. 1103; A. J. Kelso,
Physical Antropology, 1st ed., J. B. Lipincott Co., New York, 1970, p.
221; M. D. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge, vol. 3, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1971, p. 272.

54. Jeffrey Kluger, "Not So Extinct After All: The Primitive Homo
Erectus May Have Survived Long Enough To Coexist With Modern Humans,"
Time, 23 December 1996.

55. S. J. Gould, Natural History, vol. 85, 1976, 30.

56. Solly Zuckerman, Beyond The Ivory Tower, 19.

57. Richard Lewontin, "The Demon-Haunted World", The New York Review of
Books, 9 January, 1997, 28

58. Malcolm Muggeridge, The End of Christendom, Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
1980, 43

**BACK COVER**

We are living in an era in which the world is desperately in need of
peace, friendship, and solidarity. Despite the urgent need for
solidarity and cooperation, certain circles are inciting conflict,
particularly conflict between the world's two greatest and deep-rooted
civilizations. One of the best ways of preventing the disastrous war of
civilizations is to strengthen the dialogue and cooperation between
these civilizations. This is not a hard task, as there are no
fundamental differences between Islam and the Judeo-Christian western
world. This dialogue and alliance will be based on the sincere
believers' quest for justice, peace, and support for all people. This
alliance will be one of the main contributing factors to tranquility at
a time when Prophet Jesus' (peace be upon him) second coming is
expected.

**ABOUT THE AUTHOR**

The author, who writes under the penname Harun Yahya, was born in
Ankara in 1956. He studied arts at Istanbul's Mimar Sinan University,
and philosophy at Istanbul University. Since the 1980s, the author has
published many books on political, faith-related and scientific issues.
Greatly appreciated all around the world, these works have been
instrumental in helping many to return their faith in God, and, in many
others, to gain a deeper insight into their faith. Harun Yahya's books
appeal to all kinds of readers, regardless of their age, race, or
nationality, for they focus on one objective: to broaden the readers'
perspective by encouraging them to think about a number of critical
issues, such as the existence of God and His unity, and to live by the
values He prescribed for them.


