Concept of Martyrdom in Islam
=============================

A lecture delivered at Husain Day, held at New York, on Sunday, October
25, 1987 Allah says in (he Qurjan:

And reckon not those who are killed in Allah \*s way as dead; nay, they
are alive (and) are provided sustenance from their Lord; rejoicing in
what Allah has given them out of his grace, am\* they rejoice for the
sake of those who, (being left) behind them, have not yet joined them,
that they shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve.

They rejoice on account of favour from Allah and (His) grace, and that
Allali will not waste the reward of believers. (The Family of'Imran, vs.
169-171) These three verses prove that the martyrs are not conquered by
death, The moment a believer is slain in the way of Allah, his eternal
life begins; a life in which he gets sustenance from Allah. He rejoices
for himself and hopes that even those whom he has left behind would
receive the honour of martyrdom, so that they too would achieve this
ever-lasting, never-ending life as he has. Why has Allah bestowed this
special favour on martyrs?

The value and worth of a sacrifice entirely depends on the value of the
purpose for which that sacrifice was offered. Many people sacrifice
their lives for wealth. But it Is just a wastage of life, and nothing
eise. How can a life be immortal, if it was worthless enough to be
sacrificed for some stones or minerals? No matter how precious gold and
diamonds are, they are lifeless. These treasures themselves have no
life; how can they make a life immortal?

Political power? Prestige? Fame? Popularity? None of these have any
independent existence. These are imaginary things. As they say, beauty
is in the eyes of the beholder. Likewise, these imaginary pictures are
in people's minds only. They are merely transient images. Now they are;
now they are not. A life sacrificed on their altar will disappear just
like a passing shadow.

Those whose faith in the Creator is superfluous, can never solve the
mystery of martyrdom. They feel puzzled as to why the Muslims, the true
believers, appear eager to die in the way of Allah. They call them
"suicide squad". But it is not suicide. Suicide implies termination of
life, while martyrdom is continuation of life.

Although in Islam even a normal death is not the end of life; it is a
transition from this world to the nex l How good or bad that life will
be, depends on one's faith and deeds. But martyrdom removes that
uncertainty, that suspense. It immediately bestows on the martyr the
joy, the everlasting bliss and an immortal life in of Allah.

So this is the reality which the Qur'an has taught us: That if we are
killed in the way of Allah, we shall continue our lives in the next
world with true honour and real prestige. Not only that: We shall be
sacrificing a transitory life of a few years; but Allah will reward us
with eternal and everlasting life in His presence. It is because Allah,
the Eternal, is the Creator of life, and when a life is sacrificed to
please Him, He in His mercy bestows prestigious immortality on that
life. Shahudat or martyrdom means testifying, witnessing. A martyr
testifies with his blood the glory of God; his indelible blood becomes a
permanent evidence of God's unity, His power and His majesty. Allah as a
reward makes him immortal The flame of life is never extinguished; death
cannot conquer his soul Allah has said in the Qur'an: Surely Allah has
bought of the believer their persons and their properties for this: that
they shall have the Garden. (9:111)

Here we find a business deal made between Allah and the believers.
There are four elements in every trade transaction: a seller, a buyer, a
merchandise and a price. In this deal too all the factors are clearly
mentioned: The believers are the sellers; and Allah is their customer,
who has bought from them their lives and their properties, and has
offered the Garden as the price.

It should not be forgotten that, in real fact, every thing - including
the believers and their lives and properties -belongs to Allah. Still
He, in His mercy and grace, is buying His own belongings from the
believers -which they had received from Allah Himself, in the first
place. So He buys what in fact already belongs to Him, and then offers
an everlasting price for it, and that is the Garden.

Islamic laws, sent down by Allah, recognize three modes of business
deal: (1) Where on conclusion of deal, goods are handed over to the
customer and price paid to the seller-all in the same sitting; (2) Where
the goods are delivered in that sitting but payment of price is deferred
to an agreed date; (3) Where price is paid in that sitting but delivery
of good is deferred to an agreed date. Islam recognizes all three types
of transactions as valid and binding. But if neither the goods have been
delivered nor the price has been paid, then such a deal is not binding
in Islamic jurisprudence.

Now let us look at this deal of the believers in this background. We
know that we have not received the price, i.e. the Garden, yet. Now if a
believer does not hand over his own life and properties immediately to
Allah, that deal would not be binding. In other words, we shall have no
claim on the price, on the Day of Judgement But here arises the big
question: How can we hand over our lives and properties to Allah? The
answer: We can easily do so by changing their status. Let me give
another example from Islamic Laws. Suppose a believer dedicates his
property as an endowment (waqf) in the way of Allah, and appoints
himself as its first trustee (mutawalli). Now he will continue to look
after and manage that property as he was doing before but with one
difference: Previously he was managing it as his own property; now he
shall do it as Allah's property. Previously he was the owner; now he
considers himself merely the agent of the owner- agent of Allah.

Likewise, we should immediately hand over our lives and properties to
Allah, although we shall continue to look after them as Allah's agents.
And whenever the Owner, i.e.

Allah, tells us to return His belongings to Him, to spend our lives and
properties (which now belong to Him) in His way, we should gladly
sacrifice all that is in our hands. After all it is not our life, it
belongs to Allah; it is not our wealth, we are keeping it as agents of
Allah; our family, our children, our honour, our authority- nothing
belongs to us, we have sold everything to Allah, and when He, as the
rightful Owner, decides any thing about His property, we as His agents
have no right to grumble. When the call comes to return our lives to
Allah, to sacrifice our families and children in the way of Allah,
weshould gladly hand back every thing to Allah; rather we should be
thankful to Him that He has relieved us from the responsibility of
looking after a trust property.

Thus a believer knows that he has no say about his life or about his
death. His own soul does not belong to him, and he keeps the Our' anic
guidance before his eyes: Say: Surely my prayer and my sacrifice and my
life and my death are all for Allah, the Lord of the worlds. (6 :162)

Let us look at Imam Husayn's life and martyrdom if we want to find the
most perfect and the most brilliant example of this verse. A great
number of Muslims all over the world have just been busy commemorating
the tragedy of Karbala in which Imam Husayn (peace be upon him)
sacrificed his life 1347 years ago to save Islam from the strangulating
hold of Yazid. When he refused to give allegiance to Yazid, he know very
well what he would have to suffer. But he was not after worldly power or
material gain which could be abandoned in face of danger. He was seeking
the pleasure of Allah, and this he could not abandon, come what may. He
was following the policy of Islam and the Our' an. He made it perfectly
clear in his will which he wrote at the time of his departure from
Medina. He writes:

"I am not leaving Medina because of any arrogance or vanity. I am
leaving, so that I may reform the community of my grandfather, and so
that I may enjoin good and forbid evil, and establish the way of my
grandfather, the Messenger of Allah, and my father, the Leader of the
faithful."

This explains in prose what Imam Husayn often declared in a poem when
he was proceeding to Iraq. He was frequently heard reciting these two
lines:

If the religion of Muhammad cannot be kept intact except with the
sacrifice of my head, then O swords! come and take it.

And to save the religion of Muhammad, Imam Husayn offered not one, but
at least 72, heads. He, and his children and companions were denied
water for three days; his companions, relatives and children were
killed; even the six-month's infant, 'All Asghar, was made target of a
three-pointed arrow. When Imam Husayn was martyred, the ladies of the
Prophet's household were imprisoned, and brought to the courts of Ibn
Zayad and Yazid in Kufa and Damascus. But their determination, their
firm resolve, like that of Imam Husayn never faltered.

And who can imagine the determination, the love and the joy which Imam
Husayn (peace be upon him) had and felt for Islam, for the cause of
Allah. On l()th Muharram, when every passing moment brought a new
hardship for him and his small caravan, Imam's face radiated more and
more with content and tranquillity. It was this prestigious love of
Allah which prompted Imam Husayn to say to Allah in the last moments of
his earthly life: O Alldli! I left the world altogether for Your love I
orphaned my children so as to see You Even if You cut me into pieces in
way of love My heart would not incline to anyone but You.

In this way he has shown us how a man should live for Allah and how he
should die for Allah. His supreme sacrifice has taught us how we can
turn death into eternal life.


