Concluding Observations
=======================

   
 Muslims at present are more concerned with preserving their own
religious identity. They are not paying much attention to spreading the
message of Islam among non-Muslims. There are some Sufi groups who are
engaged in this field. Also Islamic Information Service, an organization
in Southern California, is producing since Ramadan 1985 television shows
on Islam, which is heard from LA to Buffalo, (*The Minaret*, Summer
1987). Some conversions have been made through personal contacts. And
that is how it should be.

Islam was not spread by sword; it spread through noble virtues of the
Prophet and the Muslims. Just an example will suffice here. The Prophet
used to pass a house every day. An old lady used to stand, with the
basket of garbage in hand, waiting for the Prophet to pass. When the
Prophet reached near her, she threw the garbage on his head. The Prophet
never admonished her. One day the routine was broken. The Prophet asked
the neighbours where the old lady was; he was told she was sick. The
Prophet sought permission of the lady and entered the house. She thought
he had come to take revenge. But the Prophet asked her how was she
feeling and if there was anything he could do for her — nursing her,
getting medicine or food for her.

The woman was surprised. And she at once accepted Islam. You see, there
was no theological argument or philosophical discussion. It was only the
noble virtue of the Prophet which attracted people to Islam. And lastly,
I will tell you another anecdote which will show you in miniature how
this godless society pollutes our children's minds: A teacher in a
Muslim madrasah in U.S.A. was teaching young Muslim kids on a weekend.
When she narrated the above story of the Prophet, a small kid got up and
fired his question: “Why didn't he sue her?”

   
  


