Languages
=========

   
 When the Muslims came to India, they gradually adopted the local
languages. Many of their kings and military and religious leaders in the
Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western India acquired literary
distinction in their regional languages. Tipu Sultan of Mysore and
Abdullah Qutub Shah of Golcanda were reputed poets. The Muslims spoke
local languages, wrote in local languages and composed poetry in local
languages, but it was not, and could not be, a one-way traffic. Their
own language, i.e. Persian, also influenced the local languages. This is
a natural process; language does not remain static: if it did, it would
die. Every living language absorbs foreign words foreign ideas, and thus
its strength grows and its beauty is enhanced. Thus, the daily contact
in social gatherings, markets and administration gave birth to a
composite language, Urdu.  
    
 “Urdu” is a Turkish word. Some say, it means army; others say, it means
market. Be it as it may. The implication is the same: When people
mingled with each other, in army or in market, this new language came
into being. There is a difference of opinion concerning its birth-place.
A group claims it was born at Delhi while another one says it was at
Hyderabad (Deccan) in the South. What is certain is that the new
language appeared in both places almost simultaneously; and it shows
that there was a widespread inter-action and give-and-take ranging from
Delhi in the north to Hyderabad in the south.  
    
 Urdu was, and still is, the commonly spoken language in a vast area of
India and Pakistan. The Hindi-Urdu conflict is a bitter legacy of
post-World War I politics in India.  It may be said truthfully that as
far as the spoken language is concerned there is little difference
between Hindi and Urdu, The basic difference is in the scripts —the
language written in Persian script is called Urdu, while that written in
Devnagari script is Hindi. Of course when it comes to literary works,
the Urdu writers and poets use many Arabic  and  Persian  words  and 
phrases,  while  those  writing  in Hindi  lean  mostly on  Sanskrit 
expressions. 

In  some cases  this tendency  leads  the  writer\*  (who  perhaps  to 
prove  their  high erudition) to use Persianised or Sanskritised
expression, as to make the Urdu or Hindi quite unintelligible to the
common masses. However, the Urdu language was a common bond among the
people of India, and especially between Hindus and Muslims. It was Urdu
that gave India its famous revolutionary slogan, Inqilab zindabad (long
live the revolution) which was heard from Assam to North-West Frontier,
and from Kashmir to Ras Kumari. It is still heard in political rallies
and processions. Urdu was not confined to the Muslims; hundreds, even
thousands, of its writers and poets were, and are, Hindu. Pandit Rattan
Nath Sarshar, Munshi Prem Chand, Brij Narain Chakbast, Daya Shankar
Nasim, Firaq Gorakhpuri, Sahir Lodhyanawi, Rajendra Singh Bedi,
Jagannath Azad, Arsh Malsiyani, Tilok Chand Mahroom, Gopi Chand Narang,
Molvi Mahesh Parshad are just a few names that have come to mind at
random.  
    
 We may also say that the Urdu language, or more correctly the Islamic
literature, was saved, preserved and put in the hands of the public by a
famous Hindu publisher, Munshi Nawal Kishore of Lucknow. This great son
of India opened his eyes during the reign of the East India Company, and
lived to see India being ruled by Queen Victoria. He started a printing
press, and unearthed rare books of Hindu and Islamic philosophies,
religions and literatures in Urdu, Arabic, Persian, Hindi and Sanskrit,
and got them printed. This Hindu was held in such a great esteem that
when the Muslim king of Afghanistan visited India, he made special
request to the viceroy of India to make arrangements so that he could
meet Munshi Nawal Kishore.  
    
 Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru, the first prime Minister of India spoke Urdu.
Dr. Rajendraprasad, the first President of India, has written in his
auto-biography that his education began not with “Shri Ganesh” (i. e..
the Hindu formula) but with ” Bis-millahi 'r-Rahmani 'r-Rahim' (i. e .
the Muslim formula). He took Hindi as a subject in his B. A. class.  
    
 It was Urdu which was chosen when the first attempt was made by Indians
during the British Raj to use an Indian language as the medium of
instruction at the university level. When Mir 'Usman 'Ali Khan, the
seventh Nizam and last ruler of Hyderabad state, established the Osmania
University with this object in view, there were misgivings in many
circles. But the attempt proved tremendously successful. Committees were
formed to coin Urdu terms for scientific and other subjects. Men of
repute in various fields of knowledge were engaged to write books for
the courses of studies. And teaching in Urdu medium started up to the
Masters courses. And this was done without sacrificing the high
standards of education. Soon the Oxford University in Britain recognised
its degrees.  
    
 Unfortunately, the bitterness after the partition of India prompted the
Indian leaders to deprive Urdu of its rightful place in India. Osmania
University was turned overnight into a Hindi University; and all the
academic and literary work done there in Urdu was relegated to oblivion
and none of those titles are now available. Although, the Indian
Constitution counts the Urdu as one of the 14 regional languages of
India, the language has not been recognised yet as the regional language
of any state or region. So, on governmental and official level, Urdu
does not exist in India.  
    
 Pakistan has made Urdu its official language, although it is not a
language spoken in any district of Pakistan. Punjabis speak the Punjabi
language, Sindhis speak the Sindhi, Baluchis speak the Baluchi and the
Pushto is spoken in the NWFR. Yet the official language of Pakistan is
Urdu. Although it has been banished from U.P., Delhi and Hyderabad, the
places where it was born, but —so far as the public support is
concerned— it still flourishes in those areas. The number of the
magazines and newspapers published in Urdu surpasses that of every other
official language except Hindi.  
  


