Azadari
=======

   
 Now we come to a particular manifestation of the inter-action between
Muslim and Hindu cultures, that is “Azadari”. It is an Urdu word, which
denotes mourning rites commemorating the  martyrdom  of  Imam  Husayn 
(peace  be  upon  him)  and  is companions about 1350 years ago at
Karbala in Iraq. The Shi’ahs and  a  great  number  of  the  Sunnis 
observe  these  rites  during Muharram, the first month of the Islamic
calendar. In India, this system was popularized by Abdullah Qubt Shah,
the King of Golcanda, who founded the city of Hyderabad. Gradually it
spread to the whole kingdom among the Hindus as well as the Muslims. In
the month of Muharram, replicas are made of the mausoleum of Imam
Husayn; these are called “ta'ziya” in Urdu. Processions are taken out
with ta'ziyas in which poems are recited lamenting the tragedy of
Karbala.  
    
 Legend says that ta'ziya was invented in India — not the Azadari on the
whole, but only this particular system of making replicas of Imam
Husayn's mausoleum. When Timur Lang (known in the West as Tamerlane)
came to India, and could not go in the month of Muharram to Karbala to
participate in the mourning ceremonies there, he built a replica of the
to him in commemorating the events of Karbala (Those who are against
ta'ziya say that it was the influence of the Hindu culture, even if
their claim was correct, it doesn’t make it automatically unlawful or
condemnable!)  
    
 When you see some merry-making, you may ignore them. But if you find
someone crying, you will certainly go near him to ask what was the
matter. So grief always attracts, while it is not necessary that joy
should do so. As the rites of Muharram were related to grief and
mourning, they attracted all the people from every walk of life,
belonging to every belief and creed. In pre-partition days Maharajas of
Gwaliar, Bharaipur, Patiala and many other Hindu states actively
participated in Azadari. They had built very grand ta'ziyas which were
taken out in processions and then kept safely in the building especially
dedicated to the memory of Imam Husayn.  
    
 Even now thousands and thousands of Hindus participate in Azadari. One
interesting example is of Bhavnagar (Gujarat) where ta'ziya processions
are taken out on the eve of the 10th Muharram; every ta'ziya is given a
permanent number by the government, and that number fixes its position
in the procession. The first ta'ziya belongs to a Hindu; and out of some
eighty ta'ziyas, only two or three belong to the Shi'ahs.  
    
 This is how the things go. If one wants to remain in peace and harmony,
one can easily do so. But how long can this unity survive? Unfortunately
there are some bad elements in every country and every society; and
India is a very big country. You must be reading in the newspapers, time
and again, that there was a Hindu-Muslim riot in Moradabad, Meerut,
Delhi, Aligarh, Ahmadabad and other places. Divisive forces have
gradually got upper hand. Communal riots are becoming a regular feature
of Indian life. And every riot leaves a legacy of bitterness and
distrust in its wake. Even more unfortunate is the fact that now there
is no leader like Mahatma Gandhi who was ready to sacrifice his own life
on the altar of communal harmony and peace.

Or like the Home Minister, Gulzari Lal Nanda, who, in 1964, had made all
District Commissioners Superintendents of Police “personally” answerable
for the peace in their districts. What is more disturbing nowadays is
that in places like Meerut and Muzaffarnagar police and para-military
forces had joined the attacking forces against the Muslims, and no
action was taken against those responsible for it. This has created a
pervasive feeling of insecurity in the Muslim community. That feeling is
not good either for the community or for the country. But the
politicians and the powers seem to be oblivious to this danger. They are
either unable or unwilling to control this situation.  
  


