Foreword
========

In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful


Human being is the most wonderful and complex creation of God, a
creature who, aside from natural and animal instincts and physical
reactions, has spiritual disposition and personality, which has made him
excel over other living creatures; a being who thinks, chooses, and
through rational planning and physical endeavor, he tries to remove the
obstacles along the pursuit for a better living. Along with this
venture, he makes his life’s history and increases the learning which he
has inherited from his predecessors and he paves the way for the future
generation to have a more rapid development, more extended dominance
over the nature, and further ingenuity in unraveling the unknown and
mysteries of creation.

Yet, it is lamentable to note that amidst man’s endeavors to attain his
desires and yearnings, and the hullabaloo of man’s encounter with the
nature, an ever more precious truth has been consigned in the limbo of
oblivion. That truth is the spirit and essence of man’s personality. In
other words, it is the “man’s primordial self”, self-refinement and
purification, and nurturing an exalted man—the man to whom God has
bestowed a superior station over all creatures. In understanding this
truth, the true and authorized exegetes and expounders of the revelation
say, “He who knows himself knows his Lord.”

Yes, negligence of the self, overlooking the infinite aspects of man’s
spirit, and inattentiveness with respect to man’s ingenuities in
traversing the path of perfections and moral excellences are maladies
with which most of the human societies have been afflicted.
Technological ascendancy and mechanical living as well as hegemony of
the materialists and mammonists over the extensive regions of the world,
on one hand, and the inability of divergent schools and thoughts in
presenting a clear direction and exact explanation of man, on the other
hand, have exacerbated retrogression and self-alienation. In the midst
of this, only the forerunners of monotheism, the prophets and vanguards
of the sanctities of values and spiritualities can mould man in the form
of their incessant struggle, and in consonance with the light of reason
and the call of natural disposition they have guided human society
towards perfection and lofty values. Indeed, the source of pride, great
values and true civilizations in the history of mankind, are the outcome
of such struggle.


The Islamic Revolution which, to the astonishment of the world, has
occurred in the contemporary period through the effort and aspiration of
one of the men of God, was in essence not only a political movement or a
populist uprising in a bid to overthrow a despotic rule but more than
that, it is a moral and cultural revivification that summons the
contemporary weak and feeble man to regain his divide natural
disposition.


The founder of the Islamic Republic, in his abiding last will and
testament under the importance of the great revolution, which he has
initiated, said:


“In the world the extent of one’s toils, sufferings and acts of self-
sacrifice and self-abnegation is commensurate with the loftiness and
worthwhile sublimity of his goal. What you rose for, what you pursue,
what you sacrifice your lives and your means for is the noblest of all
goals since the creation of the universe till eternity. It is the divine
ideology in the broadest sense of the word and the idea of the unity of
God in its lofty magnitude, which is the foundation and final goal of
the earthly world and of the Unseen and which idea is fully crystallized
in the Muhammadan school, peace and blessings of God be upon him and his
progeny, and for the realization of which all the leading prophets and
holy saints, peace be upon them all, worked hard. It is something
without which man will not attain absolute perfection or find reunion
with the Absolute and the Infinite Beauty of His Divinity. It is this
very same thing which has exalted earthlings beyond the rank of those in
the celestial world, and the journey to that very destination by an
earthling has a consequence solely to him and not to any of His other
creatures, visible or invisible.”

In the logic of Imâm Khomeinî, struggle, involvement in politics and
taking over the government is not the objective. The objective is the
victory of getting out from the conflict about which God, after
successive oaths, says: “Indeed he who purified it succeeded! And indeed
he who polluted it failed!”[^1]

That is, the aim is the refinement of man and guiding him from the
mundane to the celestial world. The aim is the establishment and
creation of a society and environment wherein only God is worshipped,
and the beacons of servitude, sincerity and manifestation of faith in
the unseen would dispel the darkness of carnal desires and worldly
passion, let the eyes of humanity see the shining splendor of truth, and
make monotheism and its sublime dimensions govern the entire human
relations and interactions. All of these are not possible except through
self-purification, a subject which is unknown to the leaders of both the
East and the West and for which the weary world of today is thirsty.

The secret behind the greatness of Imâm Khomeinî’s works and the wonder
of the influence of His Eminence’s pen and thought on his followers
should be studied within the framework of this very truth. Those who are
looking for the secret behind the slogan of blood’s victory over the
sword and the triumph of the armless votaries of the Imâm against the
most militarily equipped American surrogate government, would lead to
nowhere they as are looking for political and economic factors in the
context of materialistic analyses. Those who have not heard of, and do
not understand, the success of Imâm Khomeinî in the experience and
training in the different forms of struggles against the self and the
tussle in the intricate realm of the greatest jihâd (jihâd al-akbar),
could not also comprehend the quintessence of the Imâm’s revolution.

The Greatest Jihâd: Combat with the Self is the title of the present
book and a valuable mystical work which he himself practically traversed
for years through spiritual journey, worship and cognition of such
perilous route. Before apparently entering the world of political
resistance as well as in the midst of his struggles, Imâm Khomeinî (r),
while relying on discussions such as this, used to teach the wayfarers
in his path that his course is distinct from the conventional political
movements and professional statesmen, and that the real victory in the
political, military and economic struggles is in no way attainable
except through the greatest struggle and combat with the self.

The topics of this book are a transcription of the discourses of Imâm
Khomeinî in Najaf al-Ashraf, which he delivered at the threshold of the
blessed month of Ramadân and other days in the Islamic theological
center,[^2] and through the initiatives of the Imâm’s followers, are
compiled and published many times before the victory of the Islamic
Revolution both in Iran and abroad. The painful warnings and moral
admonitions of Imâm Khomeinî during those days of hurdle and vicissitude
used to arouse zeal of faith and divine motivations to the devoted
students and seminarians, separate the course of the movement from the
path of those who are alien to self-purification, and sow the seed of
sincerity and faith in the hearts of truth-seekers - a seed, which
through the divine assistance has finally brought fruit, and the people
of the world had witnessed scenes of its miracle during the days of fire
and blood, the confrontation between hand fist and weapon in 1357 AHS
(1979) as well as the subsequent predominance of the faithful youth in
traversing the path of martyrdom and manifestations of indescribable
moments of the basîjîs’(mobilization forces’) resistance and fervent
prayers in the warfronts.

Now, in commemoration of the thirteenth death anniversary (June 4,
2002) of that pious servant of God, we are pleased to present this
enduring literary work with explanatory notes as well as selected
quotations from the book and Munâjât of the Month of Sha‘bân as
appendices, to his admirers, enthusiasts and adherents of his sublime
and transcendent path.

The Institute for Compilation and Publication

of Imâm Khomeinî’s Works

Second Publication, June 2002

**Notes:
**
[^1] Sûrah ash-Shams [Chapter: The Sun] 91:9-10 of the Glorious
Qur’an.

[^2] It should be noted that the subjects of the book, The Greatest
Jihâd, are excerpts of Imâm Khomeinî’s lectures and admonitions in the
different levels of Islamic theology during the days of his residence in
Najaf al-Ashraf, Iraq (1964-1978), which has been transcribed and
compiled by Hujjat al-Islâm wal-Muslimîn Sayyid Hamîd Rûhânî.


