Islam in U.s.a. Its Prospects & Problems
========================================

a lecture delivered at University of California, Santa Cruz, Oakes
College on October 28, 1987 I am a student of religion; and therefore
shall confine my talk to describing the religious problems and prospects
of Muslims in U.S.A. This country is a land of emigrants, People from
different countries have been landing on its shores since Columbus set
foot on what he thought was India. They spoke different languages,
belonged to diverse ethnic groups and followed various religions and
beliefs. You will now find here followers of all major world religions;
but the majority has been of white Protestant Christians.

ARRIVAL OF MUSLIMS: The first Muslims were brought here some two
centuries ago, by European slave traders mostly from Western Africa.
Those helpless Africans lost their liberty on the shore of Africa; their
dignity was drowned in the Atlantic Ocean, and not long after their
arrival at the plantations they lost their identity, culture and then
religion in quick succession. But in recent past some of them reverted
with vengeance to what they thought was their original religion, Black
Muslims,. Now Imam Warith Deen Muhammad, the son of the founder of the
movement, is bringing them to the mam Muslims tenets and beliefs. They
have built hundreds of mosques for their use, and they preach mostly
among black Americans.

Beginning with this century up to the end of World War II, hundreds of
thousands, if not millions, of Muslims came to the Western Hemisphere.
An overwhelming majority of them was from the Middle East, Turkey, and
probably North Africa. A considerable number of them preceded ahead 10
South America and hundreds of thousands of them are now settled in
Columbia, Brazil and Argentina, as well as in some Caribbean
countries.

From 1950 onwards, other groups have emigrated from the Indian
sub-continent, East Indies and Africa, apart from the former areas.


