Desire and Anger
================

   
 There are two characteristics which man shares with animals. They are
“desire” and “anger”. He is attracted to what he thinks is useful and
beneficial to him; he wants to obtain or keep the things which give him
pleasure and joy; he wants to remain near those people whom he loves.
All these feelings are manifestations of the desire. Led by this factor,
man is attracted towards food and drink, sleep and recreation; it is
this factor that creates bond of love between parents and children,
between husband and wife, between brothers and sisters, and between two
relatives or friends. It is because of desire that man strives to
achieve excellence in various fields of knowledge and arts; or to seek
authority and power.  
    
 Anger is opposite of desire. Fear and courage are two manifestations of
anger. It is because of this faculty that man repulses or tries to
remove whatever he thinks would be harmful to him or whatever displeases
him.  
    
 Man shares these faculties with animals, A cow welcomes green grass and
runs away from a lion. If these were the only characteristic of man,
there would have been no difference between man and cow. But God has
bestowed upon man another especial faculty which distinguishes him from
the animal world, and that is “Reason”. In Arabic language, reason is
called *'aql* which literally means, a tie, a restraint.  
    
 It is reason that puts restraint on our desire and anger. Reason is the
rope that keeps these two faculties confined within permissible limits.
You see, desire and anger both are essential for mankind’s safety of and
continuity of human race. But they must remain on a middle course.

They should not be unnecessarily crushed, nor should they be left
unfettered. They should be properly channeled, in order that they could
achieve the goals for which they were created. This could be done only
when desire and anger both are under the complete control of reason and
divine law: in this way we would remain on the middle course, in the
right direction. This medium path is called *i'tidal* in Arabic;
*i'tidal* is a derivative of *'adl* — justice.  
    
 In this way, when man gives predominance to reason, and reason
maintains the and on the middle path, keeping harmony and equilibrium
between all his faculties and characteristic, man's psyche in peace with
itself.  
    
 If, on the other hand, there is any deficiency in any of these
faculties or if either exceeds the limit, then man loses his
equilibrium, and becomes unjust to himself, and as a result inflicts
injustice to other members of the society.  
    
 The equilibrium between various psychological traits creates inner
peace, which in its turn brings peace in society. Of course, it is
easier said than done. Our traditions say that this medium way of life,
this middle path, is thinner than, hair, sharper than sword and hotter
than fire. To proceed on this path without stumbling, without deviation,
one needs God's help. Thus we finally come to the concept of peace with
God. “From You originates peace, and to You it returns.”

\*\*\*

   
 There is a short treatise *Risalatu 'l-Huquq*[^1] (The Charter of
Rights), written by our 4th Imam, 'Ali Zaynul' Abidin (peace be upon
him), the great-grandson of the Prophet (upon whom be peace). In this
booklet, the Imam has divided the things and persons (with whom man
comes into contact, with whom he deals) into fifty categories. It begins
with the rights of God on man; then the rights of man's soul on himself;
then rights of various powers and organs of his body, like eyes, ears,
hands and feet.

Then come the rights of the mother, father and children; of husband and
wife; of other relatives. Then it proceeds to the rights of neighbours,
friends, teachers, students, employer and employee; the rights of an
advisor, of one whom you advise, creditors and debtors. It goes on until
it reaches to the rights of your adversary on you. It is a gem of
Islamic ethics, and it may be adopted even by non-Muslim scholars of
ethics – if one has the will to do so.  
    
 Before going ahead, I should mention an important principle of Islamic
ideology, and that is the inter-relation of Islamic Law and Islamic
Ethics. Islamic Laws teach the minimum a person is required to do, and
transgression of which entails sin and is sometimes considered a crime.
Islamic Ethics takes a man from that starting point to the highest peak
of spiritual perfection.

If a man is sick and weak, he first needs treatment to cure his disease;
after that he needs special regimen of diet, exercise and tonics to
restore his body, to bring him to the peak of his health and strength.
The same principle applies in the spiritual field. Islamic Laws keep man
free from ills of sin and crime, while Islamic Ethics show him the way
to noble spiritual perfection and strength. From Islam's point of view,
it is not enough to merely ordain some basic laws to protect the
believers from sins, and leave them at that. A weak patient, even when
cured of a disease is an easy target of further attacks unless his
strength is restored. Nor has Islam merely exhorted its followers to
strive to reach high moral standards, without prescribing some rules to
prevent them from negative influences. Of what use will be tonics if the
body is riddled with debilitating diseases. Thus Islamic Laws and
Islamic Ethics are inter-linked; they are different stages of the same
spiritual journey, Islam knows that the spiritual level of all people is
not the same. Therefore, it has chosen for us the highest ethical and
spiritual ideals, and exhorted us to strive hard to reach the summit; at
the same time it has laid down minimum requirements which one cannot
transgress except by exposing himself to spiritual peril.  
    
 Many  Orientalists  who  are  generally  oblivious  or  even ignorant 
of this inter-relation of the  Islamic  Laws and  Islamic Ethics, take
it upon themselves to pronounce judgement on Islam, unfavourably
comparing its Laws (i.e. the minimum requirements) with “the highest
ethical standpoints” of Christianity; and then pontificating that
Islamic “moral teachings” have “shortcomings”.[^2]

Now I would like to mention a few of the rights that others have on us—
in other words, our duties towards others.  
    
 Let us begin with the beginning of it all; i.e. God. Islam by its very
definition is submission to Allah. A Muslim should forget his ego or
self; he should submerge his thoughts and actions to the will of Allah.
That is the “just” relationship between the Creator and the created.
Some of us obey Allah's commands because they are afraid of the hell —
this is the lowest level; and, according to 'Ali (as.), it is like the
obedience of slaves. Others worship Allah in the hope of going to the
paradise —it is a bit higher, and the above-mentioned tradition of 'Ali
(a.s.) equates it with traders' mentality. But the ideal worship and
obedience is that which springs and emanates from the love of Allah.  
    
 When man reaches that stage, then he is neither afraid of the hell nor
cares for the paradise. His whole being is immersed into the love of
Allah. Of course, it does not make him oblivious of his shortcomings and
he feels apprehension — not of hell but of Allah's displeasure. At the
same time he remains confident and optimistic, because he knows Allah is
Merciful. Neither his hope exceeds his fear, nor does his fear exceed
his hope. These well-balanced feelings create equilibrium, tranquility
and peace in his inner self, or as they say, in his heart.  
    
 It will not be out of place to quote here a short paragraph from a
well-known supplication, called Du'a' Kumayl. It is a long invocation,
regularly recited by many Muslims every week. It was taught by ' Ali
(a.s.) to his companion, Kumayl ibn Ziyad. In this supplication, the
reciter, after confessing his sins and transgressions, asks Allah for
His forgiveness and pardon. Then he expresses his hope that Allah would
not punish him, because He, being the Creator, knows that His servant's
body cannot endure even this world's transient pains; so how can it
endure next world's punishment. Then comes the part in which the servant
asks his Lord:  
    
 Therefore, my Lord if You will subject me to the penalties in company
of Your enemies, and cast me with them, and keep me away from Your
friends and those and who will be near to you, then, my God! My Lord! My
Master! Suppose I may patiently bear Your punishment, but how can I
calmly accept being kept away from You? And suppose I may patiently
endure the scorching fire, yet how can I resign myself to the denial of
Your mercy?  
    
 Here we find the love and fear of Allah radiating from every sentence.
And this is the Islamic ideal of man's relation with God, where the
servant loves only God and fear only denial of God's favour.  
    
 After this, Islam has very clearly demarcated mutual rights and duties
of family members and other relatives.  
    
 The above-mentioned *Risalatu 'l-Huquq* says about the rights of the
father: “It is the right of your father to realize that he is your root
and you are his branch; and that without him you would have been
non-existent. Therefore, whenever you find in yourself anything
likeable, remember that your father is the basic means of that gift [of
Allah] to you. And be thankful to Allah and grateful to your father
accordingly.”  
    
 About the mother it says: “It is the right of your mother that you
should appreciate that she carried you as nobody carries anyone, fed you
the fruits of her heart which nobody feeds anyone, protected you [during
the pregnancy] with her ears, eyes, hands, legs, hairs, limbs [in short]
with her whole being, gladly, cheerfully and carefully; suffering
patiently all the worries, pain, difficulties and sorrows till the hand
of God removed you from her and brought you into this world.  
    
 “Then she was most happy feeding you, forgetting her own hunger;
clothing you, even if she herself had no clothes; giving you milk and
water, not caring for her own thirst; keeping you in the shade, even if
she had to suffer from the heat of the sun; giving you ever comfort with
her own hardships; lulling you to sleep while keeping herself awake…”
Allah joins parents' obedience to His worship and thankfulness in three
places in the Qur'an, implying that if a servant was obedient and
thankful to Allah, but did not do good to his parents, Allah would not
accept His worship from that servant. Allah says in the Qur'an:  
* *  
***And worship Allah and join not any partner with Him ad do good to the
parents…(4:36)***  
* *  
***And your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him, and that you
be kind to parents… (17:23)***

***Be thankful to Me and to your parents… (31:14)***  
    
  It will not be out of place to mention that in Islam the rights of the
mother are greater than the rights of the father. But the scope of time
prevents me from going into further details.  
    
 Then the *Risalah* has laid down the neighbours' rights on each other.
Here too the minimum rights have been given as follows:  
    
 “It is the right of your neighbour to safeguard [his interest] in his
absence, and respect him in his presence, and to help and assist him in
both situations. Do not look for his [hidden] shame and do not dig into
his affairs to know his disgrace. And if you come to know it
inadvertently without looking for it, then you should become an
impregnable castle to [hide] what you have learned and a thick cover for
it, so much so that if spears penetrated into your heart to detect it,
they could not touch it. Do not eavesdrop on him when he is not on
guard. Do not leave him in hardship and do not envy him in his comfort.
Forgive his faults and forgo his slips. And if he behaves with you
disgracefully you should not forget your forbearance, but deal with him
peacefully. Be his shield against the tongue of abuse and protect him
from the treachery of those who pose as sincere to him [but are not].
And live with him a graceful life.”  
    
 And the highest standard of the neighbour's rights is shown in a
tradition of the Prophet (s.a.w.) who has said: “Gabriel kept advising
me to be generous to the neighbour, until I thought that probably Allah
would prescribe for him a share in inheritance.”  
    
 The *Risalah* says about wealth: “It is the right of the wealth that
you should not obtain it except by lawful means, and do not spend it but
in lawful ways. And, when the wealth is from Allah [as all wealth is] do
not use it but to [reach] Allah and to make it a way of Allah…”  
    
 This is the minimum which, if neglected, would put man in perdition.
Its high point is reached when man sacrifices his own needs for the sake
of others, gives preference to others even when he himself is in need of
it. Allah says in the Qur’an:

***“and they prefer others over themselves even though poverty be their
portion.” (59:9)***  
    
 Leaving all other categories aside, 1 would like to briefly mention the
rights of some adversaries from that Charter:  
    
 Right of a claimant in a law-suit: “…If his claim against you is
correct then do not try to break his argument and do not labour to
refute his claim, instead, you should be your own adversary in his
favour, and be the judge against yourself, and be his witness for his
claim without any need of other witnesses, because it is the duty
imposed upon you by Allah. 

“If his claim is wrong, then deal with him gently and put the fear [of
Allah] in his heart and adjure him by his religion and dull his wrath
against you by reminding him of Allah…”  
    
 And what are your rights on him? He is addressed in these words: Rights
of a defendant: “If your claim against him is correct, then talk with
him benevolently in describing that claim, because the sound of a claim
itself is harsh enough [so do not add to it the rudeness of your
language too]; and explain your arguments gently; give him time, make
your talk clear, and deal with him kindly….”  
    
 If both parties of a conflict follow these rules, no dispute can ruin
the society's peace.  
    
 Then the Imam mentions the “Rights of One who was unjust to you”. He
writes:  
    
 “…If he did knowingly and intentionally then forgiveness is more
suitable for you. Because it will weed out the enmity between you two.
And further, there are many people like him in this world, and if is
better to deal with them with good grace…”

As I mentioned before, these are the minimum rights which cannot be
violated. Rut the same Imam has guided us to the peak of the moral
standard in another place. In one of his famous invocations, called
*Makarimu 'l-akhlaq* (The Noble Virtues), Imam Zaynul' Abidin prays to
Allah:

“O Allah! Send blessings on Muhammad and his progeny; and help me so
that I wish well to him who works secretly against me; and treat him
with kindness who forsakes me; and reward him generously who harms and
injures me; and perform all my obligations to him who violates the ties
of kinship; and in return speak well of him who backbites me; and that I
be thankful for good and overlook evil.”  
    
 If a society is based on such a foundation, then obviously it will be a
heaven of peace. As everyone's rights and duties will be clearly
demarcated, it will leave no room for friction and strife. When man has
established peace with his Creator, within his own soul and body, with
his family and relatives, with his neighbours and friends, and even with
his adversaries, then surely PEACE will reign over the world. And it
will not be a peace imposed by some outside forces, but a peace which
will spring from people's inner selves, from the collective character of
the society.  
    
 Keeping these moral values in their true perspective, man can change
this world into a better world, where human dignity would prevail,
universal brotherhood would flourish, and lasting peace would reign.  
    
  

Questions & Answers
-------------------

### 1st Question

   
 You have said that mothers have more rights on children than the
fathers have. Is it mentioned in the Qur’an or the traditions?  
    
 Answer: It is based partly on the Qur’an and partly on the traditions.
In the Qur’an where Allah has apportioned shares of inheritance of a
deceased, He has allotted one-sixth of the estate to the father and
one-third to the mother. It is the only occasion where a woman has been
given twice the share of a man.  
    
 As for tradition, Hakim ibn Hizam asked the Holy Prophet: “O Messenger
of Allah! Whom should I do good to?” The Holy Prophet said: “Your
mother,” He asked: “Then who?” The Holy Prophet again said: “Your
mother” He again asked: “Then who?” The Holy Prophet again said: “Your
mother”. He asked the fourth time: “Then who?” Then the Holy Prophet
said: “Your father.”  
    
 It is from this tradition that the Muslim scholars have inferred that
the mother's right are three times greater than those of the father.  
    
  

### 2nd Question

   
 You have said that Allah will not accept His own worship from a child
who is not obedient to his parents. What if the parents are
unbelievers?  
    
 Answer: The reply is clearly given in the Qur'anic verse, a sentence of
which I had quoted in my speech, It says:

***“Be thankful to Me, and to thy parents; to Me is the homecoming. But
if they strive with you to make you associate with Me that of which you
have no knowledge, then do not obey them; yet bear them company in this
life with fairness…”(31:14-15).***  
  

### 3rd Question

   
 How can you justify the permission of jihad in the light of what you
have said about Islam being a religion of peace?  
    
 Answer: This question needs somewhat detailed reply. But I'll try to
make it as brief as possible. Let me tell you at the outset that Islam
does not want to exterminate wrong-doers; it only wants to remove the
wrong. Evil deeds are like disease. They need treatment and every doctor
wants to cure the ailments with medicines as far as possible. But
sometimes the ailment reaches a stage where no medicine can do any good;
he feels that surgical operation is necessary if the life of the patient
is to be saved. Then he decides, not happily but reluctantly, to
amputate one or more limbs of the patient. It may cause severest pain
for the time being; but it is not torture, it is mercy.  
    
 Likewise, suppose that this humanity is a compact body, some of its
parts become infected with spiritual disease and every medicine of
sympathetic persuasion and rational pleading has failed. And there is a
danger that their infection is causing and inflicting hardships upon
other parts, and the spiritual doctor, I mean the Prophet or the Imam
who is guided by Allah, is confident that now the surgical operation is
essential to save other parts of mankind from trouble. Then, and only
then, he will order a holy-war; and then also it will be limited to that
part which is most necessary to remove.  
    
 Moreover, even if you feel that there is necessity of a surgical
operation you will never entrust this most dangerous task to an
unauthorized person. It will be a very foolish and irresponsible action.
You can never be satisfied that the operation is essential unless a
qualified doctor tells you so. Therefore, according to Shi'ah Ithna
'Ashari law, a war cannot be started unless specifically authorized by
the Prophet or the Imam himself, and that also to the limits prescribed
by that Representative of Allah. After all, life is a creation of Allah
and it should not be destroyed unless it has been authorized to do so by
a Representative of Allah. Accordingly, the holy-war is forbidden for
the Shi'ah Ithna 'Asharis during the period when our Imam is in
occultation. This is our law about the holy-war. Self-defence is
permitted at any time, but to start it is forbidden without specific
authority of the Prophet or the Imams.  
  

[^1]: Risalatu 'l-Huquq was translated by me some twenty years ago and
was published in Pakistan; its new edition has recently been published
in Canada.

[^2]: See, for example, G. Margoliouth's introduction to J. M. Rodwell's
translation of The Koran (London: Everyman's Library, 1974) p. viii.


