Problems
========

Their problems may broadly be divided into two categories:

Those related to their own religious and social conditions, and those
emanating from the social and behavioural atmosphere of their adopted
country. We may call them internal and external problems,
respectively.

Internal Problems:

For almost all Muslim it in reverse. In the Prophet's time, the to
leave their homes and families, their wealth and properties, and come to
Medina for protection of their faith. Their hijrah was for God, But
modern emigrant Muslims, with exception of those who were brought here
forcibly, had not migrated to the Western Hemisphere for the sake of
religion. They had come here for worldly motives, for material gain. The
Prophet has said that one gets from hijrah exactly that thing for which
he migrates. Accordingly, those new-comers to the Americas gained
worldly benefits for which they had come; but as for their religious
condition, the less said the better.

The First Group: Much more adversely affected were those who came
during the first half of this century. I do not want to make sweeping
general comments. There are always exceptions to every general statement
It seems that, with a few exceptions, most of them had but a superfluous
knowledge of their religion, or had no knowledge at all. They were
Muslims because they were born in a Muslim family and lived in a Muslim
society. When the emigration undid the ties of family and society, it
also released them from the hold of religious values and moral
restraints. They had come from less affluent society; and when they
found themselves in midst of glittering material progress, they were
dazzled. They were and entranced and lost the to look at the things in
no wonder. Back their political leaders, military commanders and even
some so-called religious scholars believed that the advancement of the
West, and European and American prosperity had their roots, no; in their
academic research, scientific discoveries advancement, but in hat and
trousers, writing their language, from left to right i.e. in Roman
script, free mingling of sexes and dancing and drinking. So many
new-comers adopted these "ingredients of advancement" as fast as they
could.

Many of them lost their identity. Names were changed: Muhammad became
Mo, Abbas became Abe, Maqboot into MacBuli, Jafary became Jeffreys,
Zainab changed into Jenny and Rabra into Ruby. Behaviour changed and in
some cases religion was changed too. Those who were steadfast in Islam
felt bewildered. They did not know how to check that trend
Unfortunately, in many places, society could not any leader who could
assess the situation, suggest the remedies and implement his
suggestions.

The Second Group: Those who came here after World War II, were
comparatively more conscious of identity of their Islamic heritage. Many
In of knowledge; others came for trade and commerce, were sent with
compliments of Field Martial Idi Amin of Uganda. Whatever the reason of
their emigration, many of them wanted to continue their lives as
practicing Muslims, External Problems:

Let us now look at the problems which are the product of the U.S.A.
society. Broadly speaking, these problems are of three types: (i)
ignorance of, and prejudice against Islam and Muslims; (ii) propaganda
against Islam and Muslims by news-media, politicians, writers and
speakers; (iii) social and ethical problems.

i. Ignorance & Prejudice: Prejudice is a product of ignorance. And
unfortunately there is a lot of ignorance in the West about Islam. In
one of the opinion polls, mentioned in The Minaret (May-June, 1986), it
was found that nearly eighty two per cent of those whose number one
source of information regarding Islam was mass media believed that the
Muslims worshipped Muhammad. Reading this statement, I was reminded of a
novel No room in the Ark which I had seen some twenty years ago, in
which the novelist had described the Somalis as worshipers of Muhammad,
Recently there was a cover story in Time magazine, showing how the
standard of education was going down in the U.S.A.. It showed the
decline in every field of knowledge. For example in history, majority of
the students wrote that American Civil War was fought in Europe;
Declaration of Independence was written by Abraham Lincoln; and soon.

After reading that story, I am now inclined to give the American public
benefit of doubt. I would say that they know as much about Islam as they
know about their own history or geography!

Many Americans identify Islam with Arabs, or Iranians, or some such
ethnic groups. Islam is perceived as an anti-Christian or anti-Semitic
religion. They have no idea that Islam itself originated among the
Semitic tribes, nor do they know that the Islam and the Our'an revere
the previous prophets and have put the Jews and the Christians in a
separate favoured category of Ahlu 'l-kitab (the people of the Book).

ii. Propaganda-Against Islam & Muslims: I would like to quote
observations of Mr. Herbert S. Wilson, a sympathetic non- Muslim who
explained some underlying causes of anti-Islamic attitude in an article,
"Misunderstanding Islam/' He thinks, and I agree, that the mass media is
the root cause of the wide-spread ignorance about Islam. It is generally
believed that American news media is the freest, but people equate this
freedom with accuracy. They think that the freest media must also be the
most truthful. The same issue of The Minaret gives a quotation from
Edward Mortimer, former foreign correspondent of The Times (London) in
which he says: "Why worry? All that is expected of you is a good story,
so let them have it. Truth? What is truth?"

I will give you an example of the level of truth and accuracy attained
bv journalists. After the recent blood-bath at Mecca, a journalist wrote
that the procession was being directed by Ruhullah, wife of Ayatullah
Khumaini!

As a result many highly opinionated statements are accepted as facts.
Thus they begin to believe caricatures as facts. They to sincerely
believe that Islam is a backward religion, a stagnant cul- ture; Muslims
are fanatics; Iranians (or Arab, depending on the American government's
politics of a given time) are blood-thirsty terrorists, The name of the
game is labelling. iii. Social & Ethical Problems: The above mentioned
ignorance and prejudice is curable. The responsibility lies primarily on
the to Muslim to present Islam to the American public (forget about
politicians) in its true perspective. Then the responsibility goes to
the American public to learn the facts before accepting cheap journalism
as truth. Of course, it is a very slow process, but not impossible.

But I am. not so optimistic about the social and ethical, environment
of the country. Of course again it is not a generalization. And I am not
going to pass judgement on any trend of thought, or mode of life. It is
the individual's concern, not mine. Everyone is free to behave as he
likes, and so am I, to say what I believe is the state of the affairs.
As I said the individuals' behavior is not my concern. But it becomes my
concern when it to tries to engulf Muslim children and make them lose
their footing. Muslim parents' primary concern nowadays is not the
prevailing ignorance about Islam, or the against Islam. Their immediate
is as to how to protect their upcoming iin-Islamic ways being as the of
advancement The real problem is the family-ties are now loosened and in
many totally broken. People now do not think any bad thing that it might
bring disgrace to their families. The United States' constitution is
based on the principle of separation of the Church and the State. Its
roots go deep into the history, as many of those who came here in early
days of colonization had done so to escape from religious persecutions
in their countries of origin.

But the Constitution does not say that the society too should be
divorced from religion. From a Muslim's point of view, it is unfortunate
that the ethical values which had prevailed even half a century ago,
have greatly diminished; this has opened the doors to a vast array of
trendy ideas and mushrooming cults in the midst of spiritual
emptiness.

People still say that it is an over-whelmingly Christian country, I
WISH IT WAS.

Jesus Christ had said: "You have heard that it was said by them of old
times: Thou shalt not commit adultery; but I say unto you that whoever
looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her
already in Ms heart." (Matt 5:27-28) And what are the burning questions,
dominating of the American society nowadays? They are: Whether be free
or not; whether sex education should be given in schools or not;
licentiousness and promiscuity have become norm of the day, so so that
chastity is considered abnormal. Magazines, novels, movies, TV shows and
video industries, all thrive on sex and violence. Advertisement becomes
flop if it does not show a woman's body in various degrees of nudity.
This commercialism has turned womanhood into a sort of merchandise.
Purveyors of narcotics are hunted down and punished. Why? Because these
drugs corrupt the body. But manufacturers of nasty video films showing
all types of violence and explicit sex are free to amass millions from
their trade. Nobody cares that such films, magazines and shows corrupt
the soul. Here I am reminded of the question put by Jesus Christ: If you
have gained the whole world and lost your soul, what have you gained?

Journalists and even some academicians vie with each other in inventing
some long-winded, high-sounding names for religious sins. Theft is
called kleptomania, fornication is pre-rnarital sex, adultery is called
extra-marital sex. In this way they take out the sting of sin from
sinful behavior and put a garb of normalcy on these shameful actions.
The sinners are no more ashamed of their behaviour. They proudly
announce their homosexuality, their lesbianism and sodomy. Only this
month a huge demonstration (estimates range between two to five hundred
thousand) was taken out in Washington in which sodomites and lesbians
proudly announced their sins and demanded "recognition". In the midst of
all the arguments for or against abortion, I have not seen any
journalist exhorting the society that it should re-establish the ideal
of chastity. Ways are suggested as how to prevent pregnancy, hut nobody
speaks of chastity.

I think here I should quote a parable given by our first Imam, 'Ali
(peace he upon him). He said: "Gabriel came to Adam and said to him: O
Adam! I have been ordered to let you choose one of the three things.
Therefore choose one and leave the other two. Adam asked: What are the
three things? Gabriel said: Wisdom, modesty and religion, Adam said: I
choose wisdom. Gabriel said to modesty and religion to withdraw and
leave Adam; but they replied: O Gabriel! We both ha : been told by God
to remain with wisdom wherever it may he. So Gabriel ..aid: Then do what
you have been told and he ascended to heaven."

An Encouraging Factor: From a Muslim's point of view it is fortunate
that some religious communities and denominations, like the Roman
Catholics and the Orthodox Jews, are striving to hold fast to their
religious teachings.

The Muslims should join hands with all those communities who are trying
to stem the flood of licentiousness and irreligiousness. Twists of the
Middle East politics should not prevent them from standing shoulder to
shoulder for the sake of common causes of ethics and morality.


