Prospects
=========

Muslims are now fully aware of these problem. Now they are awake.
Perhaps their biggest difficulty is the lack of unified leadership.
Nowadays a t of war is going on among various groups of t Muslim
intelligentsia here because of their having allegiance to this or that
Middle Eastern country and trying to pull the Muslim umrnah in this or
that direction.

However, there is a feeling that before exposing their children to the
above-mentioned unhealthy environment, they must immunize them through
proper religious education and training Steps have been taken in some
big cities as well as some small places to establish religious
schools.

Mosque is center of Islamic activities, and now there are hundreds of
mosques in U.S.A. and Canada.

**CONCLUDING OBSERVATION S**

Muslims at present are more concerned with preserving their own
religious identity. They are not paying much attention to spreading the
message of Islam among non-Muslims. There are some Sufi groups who are
engaged in this field. Also Islamic Information Service, an organization
in Southern California, is producing since Ramadan 1985 television shows
on Islam, which is heard from LA to Buffalo, (The Minaret, Summer 1987)
Some conversions have been made through personal contacts. And that is
how it should be. Islam was not spread by sword; it spread through noble
virtues of the Prophet and the Muslims. Just an example will suffice
here. The Prophet used to pass a house every day. An old lady used to
stand, with the basket of garbage in hand, waiting for the Prophet to
pass. When the Prophet reached near her, she threw the garbage on his
head. The Prophet never admonished hen One day the routine was broken.
The Prophet asked the neighbours where the old lady was; he was told she
was sick.

The Prophet sought permission of the lady and entered the house. She
thought he had come to take revenge. But the Prophet asked her how was
she feeling and if there was anything he could do for her - nursing her,
getting medicine or food for hen The woman was surprised. And she at
once accepted Islam. You see, there was no theological argument or
philosophical discussion. It was only the noble virtue of the Prophet
which attracted people to Islam. And lastly, I will tell you another
anecdote which will show you in miniature how this godless society
pollutes our children's minds: A teacher in a Muslim madrasah in U.S.A.
was teaching young Muslim kids on a weekend. When she narrated the above
story of the Prophet, a small kid got up and fired his question: "Why
didn't he sue her?"


