The Culture of the Muslims in India
===================================

By: Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi a lecture delivered at the Anthropology
Department University of California Santa Cruz, on Thursday, 29th
October, 1987 As Professor Pandya has told you, I am sup-posed to speak
on the Muslim Culture in India. Although I know about religion, I do not
know much about culture. Therefore, whatever I will say, will be based
not on book knowledge, but on personal experience and observation.

**ISLAM IN INDIA:**

The of Muslims in India is greater in any single Muslim country, except
Indonesia. There are about 105 million Muslims in India, out of 750
million of the total Indian population, which comes to about 15%. Their
number is in fact greater than the whole Mid-die East Muslim population
taken together.

The Muslims have lived in India, in small or large numbers, since the
beginning of Islam. There are legends and traditions which say that
Islam reached Rajputana, in the heart of India, during the days of the
Prophet himself. Even if there is some doubt about the authenticity of
that legend, there is no doubt whatsoever that Islam had entered India
within fifty years after the death of the Prophet. It was brought there
by the refugees who had fled Arabia to escape from the persecution
because of sectarian differences. Since then Islam has taken root in the
Indian soil.

When two cultures meet, they cannot remain isolated from each other.
There is always tangible and intangible action and reaction; there is
always a continuous give and take. It affects the newly arrived culture
as well as the old established one. The resulting culture is, in most
cases, more vital and refined than the originals.

Islam was spread in India through the efforts, and the good virtuous
lives, of the Sufis, i.e. the mystics. It may seem strange to many who
are influenced by the common cliche that "Islam was spread by sword."
Although this is not the place to talk on this subject; but I think some
light should be thrown on it.

The fact is that it was not Islam that was spread by sword. It would be
more to the point to say that the Muslim empire -or the Arab empire- was
spread by sword. No doubt a great empire was established. But one or two
examples will show how insignificant effect it had on the spreading of
Islam:

Some 88 years after the death of the Prophet, the Caliph 'Urnar ibn
'Abdu 'l-'Aziz came to the throne. The Muslim empire by that time had
stretched from Spain and the north-west of Africa to the present day
Pakistan, and going north to Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tadjikistan
(in present day's Russia).3 But what was done to propagate Islam in the
colonies? (he answer may he found in a circular letter sent by the
Caliph to his governors, in which he, mfer d/m, wrote that it was a
matter of concern that even after all those decades of Muslim rule,
nothing was done to spread Islam in the colonies; therefore, the
governors should do something to rectify the situation. But this
directive did not please the governors.

The governor of Egypt wrote back that if he tried to spread Islam and
people became Muslims, the jizya (poll-tax levied on non-Muslims under
Muslim rule -it was the only tax they had to pay) would stop and the
treasury would he empty. The governor of Persia wrote that even the few
persons who had accepted Islam, had not done so with sincerity; that
they had not got themselves circumcised. Caliph wrote to the former that
it was preferable to have the treasury empty and encourage the Egyptians
to embrace Islam, rather than having the treasury full and the Egyptians
3 This is a lad which has hccn acknowledged even by some non-Muslim
writers ol India. Sec, for example, Khushwant Singh, A History of the
Sikhs, vol. 1 (N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1963) pp. 20-28.

outside the fold of Islam. To the latter he wrote back that the Prophet
had come to propagate the Creed: There is none to be worshipped except
Allah, and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; he had not come to
circumcise the people.

However, this attitude of the new caliph was not liked by the ruling
clique, and when he died only after two and a half years, it was widely
believed that he was poisoned, because he wanted to take the empire
towards a new direction.

Therefore, it is wrong to say Islam was spread by sword, rather it was
the empire that was spread in that way. It were the Sufis whose piety
and spirituality made them immensely popular among the Indian masses,
and as a result of it, they entered into the fold of Islam.\* Even
today, every year thousands and thousands of people, belonging to every
religion and creed, visit their graves, to obtain blessings and peace of
mind through them. Some shrines like those of Khwajah Mu'inuddin Chishti
(in Ajmer) and Nizamuddin Awliya' (in New Delhi) are very famous and
popular.

As I have said earlier, it was but natural that when Islam spread in
India, neither Hinduism could remain unaffected by Islam, nor Islam
could remain isolated from Hinduism.

Islamic belief in one God and the resulting brother-hood gave rise to
many movements among the Hindus. Baba Kabir Das began his movement known
as Kabir pant his, which was a revolt against idolatry and casteism.
Thereafter, Guru Nanak established the Sikh religion with the same
ideals. In recent past, Arya Samaj movement was started by Swami
Dyanandji to preach against idol- worship and the caste system.

This much about the ideological side of culture. Now, we should turn
our eyes to some other aspects.

ARCHITECTURE: One of those aspects is architecture. Lotus is a very
outstanding and holy motif in Indian culture. You must have seen
pictures of the statues of Gantama Buddha in which he is shown sitting
on lotus. Sometimes Shiva and Krishna are shown in the same position. It
has its roots in the old legends and myths, going back to Brahma. When
the Muslims settled in India, they brought dome and minaret from Middle
East and Turkey. But the domes built by them in the early periods were,
like those of the Middle East, simplistic in design. Then the process of
mutual give- and-take began, until we come to the ultimate poetry in
marble, which is know as Taj Mahal, pictures of which you must have seen
every where. If you study the upper section of its dome, you will see
that the architects have capped it with inverted lotus. Thus by
combining the Muslim dome and Hindu lotus, they have created the
master-piece of Indian architecture, which is rightfully called the
eighth wonder of the world.

We also find many features and designs in Muslim buildings in India
which show the influence of the ancient culture that was prevalent in
India.


