Languages
=========

When the Muslims came to India, they gradually adopted the local
languages. Many of their kings and military and religious leaders in the
Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western India acquired literaiy
distinction in theii regional languages. Tipu Sultan of Mysore and
Abdulluh Qutuh Shah of Golcanda were reputed poets. The Muslims spoke
local languages, wrote in local languages and composed poetry in local
languages,

But it was not, and could not be, a one-way traffic. Their own
language, i.e. Persian, also influenced the local languages. This is a
natural process; language not remain static if it did, it would die.
Every living language absorbs foreign words foreign ideas, and thus its
strength grows and its beauty is enhanced. Thus, the daily contact in
social gatherings, markets and administration gave birth to a composite
language, Urdu.

"Urdu" is a Turkish word. Some say, it means army; others say, it means
market. Be it as it may. The implication is the same: When people
mingled with each other, in army or in market, this new language came
into being. There is a difference of opinion concerning its birth-place.
A group claims it was born at Delhi while another one says it was at
Hyderabad (Deccan) in the South. What is certain is that the new
language appeared in both places almost simultaneously; and it shows
that there was a widespread inter-action and give-and-take ranging from
Delhi in the north to Hyderabad in the south.

Urdu was, and still is, the commonly spoken language in a vast area of
India and Pakistan. The Hindi-Urdu conflict is a bitter legacy of
post-World War I politics in India. It may be said truthfully that as
far as the spoken language is concerned there is little difference
between Hindi and Urdu, The basic difference is in the scripts -the
language written in Persian script is called Urdu, while that written in
Devnagari script is Hindi. Of course when it comes to literary works,
the Urdu writers and poets use many Arabic and Persian words and
phrases, while those writing in Hindi lean mostly on Sanskrit
expressions.

In some cases this tendency leads the writer\* (who perhaps to prove
their high erudition) to use per-sianised or Sanskritised and
expression, as to make the Urdu or Hindi quite unintelligible to the
common masses, However, the Urdu language was a common bond among the
people of India, and especially between Hindus and Muslim, It was Urdu
that gave India its famous revolutionary slogan, Inqildb zifida bad
(Long live the revolution) which was heard from Assam to North-West
Frontier, and from Kashmir to Ras KumariL It is still heard in political
rallies and processions.

Urdu was not confined to the Muslims; hundreds, even thousands, of its
writers and poets were, and are, Hindu. Pandit Rattan Nath Sarshar,
Munshi prem chand, Brij Narain Chakbast, Daya Shankar Nasim, Firaq
Gorakhpuri, Sahir Lodhyanawi, Rajendra Singh Bedi, Jagannath Azad, Arsh
Malsiyani, Tilok Chand Mahroom, Gopi Chand Narang, Molvi Mahesh Parshad
are just a few names that have come to mind at random.

We may also say that the Urdu language, or more correctly the Islamic
literature, was saved, preserved and put in the hands of the public by a
famous Hindu publisher, Munshi Nawal Kishore of Lucknow. This great son
of India opened his eyes during the reign of the East India Company, and
lived to see India being ruled by Queen Victoria. He started a printing
press, and unearthed rare books of Hindu and Islamic philosophies,
religions and literatures in Urdu, Arabic, Persian, Hindi and Sanskrit,
and got them printed. This Hindu was held in such a great esteem that
when the Muslim King of Afghanistan visited India, he made special
request to the viceroy of India to make arrangements so that he could
meet Munshi Nawal Kishore.

Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru, the first prime Minister of India spoke Urdu.
Dr. Rajendraprasad, the first President of India, has written in his
auto-biography that his education began not with "Shri Canesh" (i. e..
the Hindu formula) but with " Bis-nultahi 'r- Rahmdni 'r-Rahim' (i. e .
the Muslim formula). He took Hindi as a subject in his B. A. class.

It was Urdu which was chosen when the first attempt was made by Indians
during the British Raj to use an Indian language as the medium of
instruction at the university level. When Mir 'Usman ' Ali Khan, the
seventh Nizam and last ruler of Hyderabad state, established the
Osrnania University with this object in view, there were misgivings in
many circles. But the attempt proved tremendously successful. Committees
were formed to coin Urdu terms for scientific and other subjects. Men of
repute in various fields of knowledge were engaged to write books for
the courses of studies. And teaching in Urdu medium started upto the
Master courses. And this was done without sacrificing the high standards
of education. Soon the Oxford University in Britain recognised its
degrees.

Unfortunately, the bitterness after the partition of India prompted the
Indian leaders to deprive Urdu of its rightful place in India. Osmania
University was turned overnight into a Hindi University; and all the
academic and literary work done there in Urdu was relegated to oblivion
and none of those titles are now available. Although, the Indian
Constitution counts the Urdu as one of the 14 regional languages of
India, the language has not been recognised yet as the regional language
of any state or region. So, on governmental and official level, Urdu
does not exist in India.

Pakistan has made Urdu its official language, although it is not a
language spoken in any district of Pakistan. Punjabis speak the Punjabi
language, Sindhis speak the Sindhi, Baluchis speak the Baluchi and the
Pushto is spoken in the NWFR. Yet the official language of Pakistan is
Urdu. Although it has been banished from U.P., Delhi and Hyderabad, the
places where it was born, but -so far as the public support is
concerned- it still flourishes in those areas. The number of l! e
magazines am! newspapers published in Urdu surpasses that of every other
official language except Hindi, AZAiMRi; Now we come to a particular
manifestation of the inter-action between Muslim and Hindu cultures,
that is ''Azadari".

If is on Urdu word, which denotes mourning riies commemorating the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (peace be upon him) and is companions abom 1350
years ago at Karbala in Iraq, The Shf ahs and a great number of the
Sunnis observe these rites during Muharram, the first month of the
Islamic calendar, In India, this system was popularized by s Abdullah
Oubt Shah, the King of Golcanda, who founded the city of Hyderabad,
Gradually it spread to the whole kingdom among the Hindus as well as the
Muslims, In the month of Muharram, replicas are made of the mausoleum of
Imam Husayn; these are called "ta'ziya" in Urdu, Processions are taken
out with ta'ziyas in which poems are recited lamenting the tragedy of
Karbala.

Legend says that ta'ziya was invented in India - not the Azadari on the
whole, but only this particular system of making replicas of Imam
Husayn's mausoleum. When Timur Lang (known in the West as lamedane) came
to India, and could not go in the month of Muharram to Karbala to
participate in the mourning ceremonies there, he built a replica of the
to him in com- memorating the events of Karbala\* (Those who are against
ta'ziya, say that it was the influence of the Hindu culture, if claim is
correct, it does not it automatically unlaw-ful or condernnable!)

When you see some merry-making, you may ignore them. But if you find
someone crying, you will certainly go near him to ask what was the
matter. So grief always attracts, while it is not necessary that joy
should do so. As the rites of Muharram were related to grief and
mourning, they attracted all the people from every walk of life,
belonging to every belief and creed, In pre- parti-tion days Maharajas
of Gwaliar, Bharaipur, Patiala and many other Hindu states actively
participated in Azddari. They had built very grand ta'ziyas which were
taken out in processions and then kept safely in building especially
dedicated to the memory of Imam Husayn.

Even n:?w thousands and thousands of Hindus participate inAzdddri. One
interesting example is of Bhavnagar (Gujarat) where ta'ziya processions
are taken out on the eve of the 10th Muharram; every ta'ziya is given a
permanent number by the government, and that number fixes its position
in (he procession. The first ta'ziya belongs to a Hindu; and out of some
eighty ta'ziyas, only two or three belong to the Shf'ahs.

This is how the things go. If one wants to remain in peace and harmony,
one ean easily do so. But how long can this unity survive? Unfortunately
there are some bad elements in every country and every society; and
India is a very big country. You must be reading in the newspapers, time
and again, that there was a Hindu-Muslim riot in Moradabad, Meerut,
Delhi, Aligarh, Ahmadabad and other places. Divisive forces have
gradually got upper hand. Communal riots are becoming a regular feature
of Indians\* life. And every riot leaves a legacy of bitterness and
distrust in its wake.

Even more unfortunate is the fact that now there is no leader like
Mahatama Gandhi who was ready to sacrifice his own life on the altar of
communal harmony and peace. Or like the Home Minister, CMzari Lal Nanda,
who, in 1964, had made all District Commissioners Superintendents of
Police "personally" answerable for the peace in their districts. What is
more disturbing nowadays is that in like Meerut and Muzaffarnagar.
police and para-military forces had joined the attacking forces against
the Muslims, and no action was taken against those responsible for if.
This has created a -pervasive feeling of insecurity in the Muslim
community. That feeling is not good either for the community or for the
country. But the politicians and the powers seem to be oblivious to this
danger. They are either unable or unwilling to control this situation.


