Lucknow Culture
===============

However, coming hack to our topic of Muslim Culture, we must briefly
mention the culture of Lucknow, the capital of the Kingdom of Awadh.
When you go to visit a governor or president, there are some manners you
have to observe, some etiquette you have to tuilow. This culture began
at the imperial court of the Mushrr monarchy of Delhi. Of course, there
existed the court etiquette in the palaces of the Hindu Kings of
Rajputana, But the Moghuis of Delhi refined 2% to a very high degree.

From Delhi, it spread to the courts of the provincial governors and
rulers throughout India. When it reached Lucknow, the Nawwabs And the
Kings popuJanzed it to such a extent that even common people began
observing thai etiquette . those manners, in their own houses. Thus the
Lucknow culture came into being, where people on meeting one another bow
down to each other, use approved phrases and words, each insisting that
the other should go ahead - and many things like that. This culture
spread to Patna and Murshidabad in the Rase, and Hyderabad in the
South.

It enriched the Indian cultural fabrics. Although the hustle and bustl
oi modem life had taken its toll, it is still the hallmark of civility
and culture. This culture teaches you to give preference to others,
accord due respect to every one; it trains you to speak politely even
while angry, to express your displeasure in civilised manner.

In the past, the people of Lucknow gave so much importance to teaching
their children good behaviour and proper manners of talking, sitting,
walking, eating, drinking and things like that, that (hey used to send
the children to some reputable courtesans. It may look strange but
actually those courtesans maintained very strict discipline in their
places; nothing was done which could not be seen by the wives and
daughters. And just by sitting in those gatherings, youths learned how
to behave properly.

Those days are gone, although its influence may be found here and
there. I am optimistic by nature, and I expect and hope that the respect
and love which the Lucknow culture showed to others, the respect and
love which Islam accords to others, which Hinduism shows to others, will
eventually prevail; and the people of India will again return to their
original way of thinking, and settle their differences amicably and
peacefully, showing love and respect to one another, living in harmony
and brotherhood.


