Introduction and Acknowledgments
================================

**Praise is to Allah (SWT), The Lord of The Universe!**

**In His Name, The Most Beneficent, The Most Merciful!**

Concentration in Prayer was written over a few years and significant
research went into completing this project. The main goal of this book
is to educate The Muslims of the importance of The Five Daily Prayer and
to explain **HOW** to create, develop and maintain concentration in
Prayer. This is an important aspect of Prayer since Allah (SWT) only
requires our undiminished attention during Prayer.

This book on Prayer requires active reading and active participation.
Interested readers will find wealth of information, research and
exercises one can effectively employ to reap the fruits of the Prayer.
It is envisaged that the reader, in particular the youth and leaders of
tomorrow, will look up to this book and apply its recommendations on a
daily basis. It is definitely not a once-read book! Charts and diagrams
have been provided to aid the reader in understanding the nature of this
book.

Even though the book quotes many sources, it is sometimes unable to
provide specific citing and references because the collection of the
traditions in this book began a few years ago. Suffice it to say that
the traditions quoted are authentic and form reliable sources. With the
help and assistance of learned scholars, the like of my father – Yusuf
Kermalli, Ma’alim Muhsin Alidina, Ma’alim Mohamed Raza Dungersi, and a
few close friends, this project was recently completed. Once again, I
would also like to thank my parents who have provided their unlimited
love and support in the production of this book. And finally, my wife
and two lovely children that God has blessed me with, for their patience
and confidence throughout the write-up and production of this book.

The Chapter of al-Fatiha is requested for the benefit of the soul of my
mother and the souls of all believers who have already made their
journey into the next world.

Jameel Kermalli


