Introduction to Prayer
======================

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) narrates that it is written in The Torah:

“O’ Son of Man, if you **empty** yourself, i.e. disengage yourself from
all other pre-occupations to make yourself available for My worship, I
will fill your heart with richness and I will not abandon you to what
you seek and long for. And it will be upon Me to close the door of
poverty upon you and to fill your heart with awe for Me.

And if you don’t empty yourself for My worship, I will fill your heart
with preoccupation with the world. I will not close upon you the door of
poverty and will abandon you to what you seek.”

*(al-Kulayni (RA), Usul al-Kafi,2, "Kitab al-'Iman wa1-Kufr', "Bab
al-‘Ibadah",*

*Tradition number 1)*

Importance of Prayer
--------------------

Prayer is the most effective way of spiritual migration towards Allah
(SWT) and attaining the exalted position of His nearness. When al-Sadiq
(AS) was asked what was the best deed that brings human beings close to
Allah (SWT) and is also liked by Him? He replied:

After enlightenment of God’s Essence, I do not know anything better than
The Prayer. The most esteemed and favorite deed before Allah (SWT) is
Prayer. Prayer is the last dying will of all Prophets (AS).

How good it is that a human being takes a bath or performs ablution,
then retires into a secluded corner where he is not seen by anyone, and
has the honor of performing genuflection and prostration. When a servant
bows himself down into prostration and prolongs it, then Shaytan says,
*‘O’, Woe Upon Me! This servant has obeyed Allah (SWT), while I
transgressed, and he has offered prostration that I refused’.*

In *Falah al-Sail Page 23, Chapter 2, On the Description of The Prayer,*
on the authority of al-Sayyid ‘Ali ibn Tawus (RA), al-Sadiq (AS) said:  
 The Prayer will not be complete except for the one who has full purity
and a mature completeness, and is away from temptation and deviation. He
knows Allah (SWT) and so stands before Him, submits to Him and persists.
He thus, stands between despair and hope, between patience and worry, as
if the promises to him have been fulfilled, and the threats upon him
have transpired, lowering his fame and manifesting his aim.  
 He sacrifices for Allah (SWT) his soul, treads upon the road to Him as
his goal willingly. He severs the relations of interest for the sake of
The One to Whom he bounds and comes, and from Whom he seeks help. Should
he achieve all these, The Prayer would be of the ordered type and of the
informed about, and it is the very Prayer which forbids evil and vice.

In *Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Book of The Prayer,* Muhammad, son of Ya’qub
(RA), quotes al-Sajjad (AS) as having said:  
 As regards the rights of The Prayer, you are to know that it is a visit
to Allah (SWT) and that in it you are standing before Him. If you
realized that, you would deserve to be, through it, in the position of a
slave who is humble, desirous, horrified, frightened, hopeful,
distressed, and imploring. He is also glorifying the state of The One in
front of Whom he stands with complete stillness, solemnity, submission
of the limbs, humility, well supplicating to Him for himself, requesting
Him to free his neck, which is encircled by his faults and consumed by
his sins. And there is no power except by Allah (SWT).

The Reality Of Prayer
---------------------

Saying your Prayer on time is a highly recommended act, and none other
than Allah (SWT) reminds us of this obligation:

And when he (the worshipper) knows that it is time of Prayer and he does
not pray, he is indeed careless about Me.  
 (Hadith al-Qudsi)

In *Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, vol. 3, Page 90*, al-Sadiq (AS) is reported to
have said:  
 Whoever performed the obligatory Prayer at the beginning of their times
and observed their restrictions, the angels would raise them white and
pure into heaven. The Prayer would say (to the performer): *‘May Allah
(SWT) preserve you as you preserved me and entrusted me to a generous
angel’*.  
 But whoever performed them after the appointed times with no excuse,
and did not observe their restrictions, the angels would raise them,
black and dark. The Prayer would shout at the performer: *‘You have lost
me, may Allah (SWT) lose you, and may He not care for you as you did not
care for me’*.

Prayer has several built in properties that make the worshipper far
better than the angels and makes life worth living. Only when the true
reality of Prayer is understood then one is awestruck by its daily
performance. In explaining the true nature of Prayer, al-Ridha (AS)
comments:

The reason for Prayer is that it is the acknowledgment of The Lordship
of Allah (SWT) and negating all kinds of partners and plurality for Him.
Prayer is standing before The Omnipotent, with humility, humbleness and
confession (of sins), and begging forgiveness of the previous sins.
Prayer is placing the face on dust five times a day as (a sign of)
recognition and confession of His Greatness.

Prayer is for remembering Him and keeping away from arrogance and
negligence. Prayer leads to humility, submission and humbleness towards
Allah (SWT), and the enthusiasm for the desire to material and spiritual
progress (both in this world and the hereafter).

Moreover, Prayer enables a person to constantly engage in remembering
Allah (SWT), both day and night, so as not to forget one’s Lord, Master
and Creator, since forgetting will cause rebellion. Man, while offering
Prayer, stays in the presence of His Lord and in the state of His
remembrance, and this very condition constrains and stops him from sins
and many kinds of corruption.

In order for you to be part of manifestation of the authority of Allah
(SWT) on this earth, you must pledge complete submission, bondage and
servitude to The Lord of the Worlds. You must manifest all this in your
behavior, in general, by remembering Allah (SWT) at all times and
seeking His Will and specifically, by performing the ritual acts of
worship e.g. giving alms, fast, etc.

Scholars have noted that if a man does not fulfill the conditions of
this act of Prayer, he defies Allah (SWT) becoming a rebel and a devil.
For man to climb higher in the realm of existence, he must lower himself
to Allah (SWT). The more he lowers himself to Allah (SWT), the higher he
reaches in the realm of existence.

It has been the practice of Allah (SWT) to conceal important grace to
mankind, and Prayer is no exception. S. V. Mir Ahmad ‘Ali (RA), in his
*Commentary of The Qur’an,* narrates seven values that have been kept
concealed by Allah (SWT), The Most High:

According to some reports, The Night of Power (Qadr) is concealed in the
year as a whole. This is because man may ever seek His grace every night
as much as he possibly can. Similarly, one of these several nights in
the months of Sha’ban and Ramadhan are said be The Night of Qadr, The
Night of Grandeur.

The Greatest Name of Allah (SWT), with which one could have everything
he desires, is concealed in several names, so that one may remember and
recite all the Divine Names of The Lord.

The Prayer a*l-Wusta* or the Middle one of the prescribed Daily Prayer
is kept concealed in The Five Daily Prayer so that one may offer every
one of them with eagerness to earn its special reward.

In one particular hour of Friday, every week, it is said, the prayer is
heard without fail. However, the hour is not disclosed particularly so
that one may engage in Prayer the whole day as much as he can.

God’s pleasure is concealed in Prayer so that one may always worship The
Lord.

The displeasure of The Lord is mentioned to be in sinning in general so
that man may abstain from all kinds of sinning.

The most honorable with Allah (SWT) is the most pious, so that one may
acquire piety for himself and seek the friendship of the most honorable
ones with The Lord; love the pious and the righteous one, hate impiety,
and stay away from disobedience.

The Prophet (S) in his last remaining hours of life further advised his
followers to take Prayer seriously, and pray according to what has been
prescribed upon them.

The Value Of Prayer
-------------------

Allah (SWT) manifests Himself to His perfect friends in a kind manner,
and the attraction of love becomes their guide. As the tradition says
that The Prophet of Allah (S) used to be waiting for the time of the
Prayer, his longing ever increasing, until at last he would say to Bilal
(The Prophet’s Caller to Prayer): *‘Relieve us, O’ Bilal’*.  
 (a*l-Mahajjat al-Bayda fi Tahdhib al-Ahya vol. 1, Page 377)*

In advising Abu Dharr (RA), The Prophet (S) says:

O’ Abu Dharr! Allah (SWT), Glorious is His Praise, has made the pleasure
of my eye in (daily) Prayer, and has made me love Prayer like food is
made lovable to the hungry and water to the thirsty. And surely, while
the hungry one, when he eats is satiated, and the thirsty one, when he
drinks he is quenched; I am not satiated from Prayer.

O’ Abu Dharr! Anyone who voluntarily prays 12 units of Prayer, other
than the obligatory, he has earned the right to a House in Paradise.

O’ Abu Dharr! Surely, so long as you are in Prayer, you are knocking on
the door of The Great King, and whoever knocks long on the door of The
King it will be opened for him.

O’ Abu Dharr! There is no believer that stands in Prayer but falls on
him goodness onto what is between him and The Throne. And, an angel is
appointed for him that calls out, *‘O’ Son of Adam (AS), if you knew
what there is for you in Prayer and whom you are calling, you would not
turn away’*.

O’ Abu Dharr! Be like him, who in a deserted place (though alone), calls
Adhan and Iqamah (Call for Prayer) and says his Prayer. So your Lord
says to the angels*, ‘Look at My servant! He is praying and no one sees
him but Me?’* Then descend 70,000 Angels and pray behind him and seek
forgiveness for him until the next day. And a man who stands in the
midst of night and prays alone, prostrates, and falls asleep while
prostrating, Allah (SWT) says, *‘Look at My servant! His soul is with me
and his body is in prostration; and (be like) a man who is in a war and
all his companions flee, but he stays firm fighting until he is
killed’*.

O’ Abu Dharr! No man puts his forehead (in prostration) in any place on
earth but that place bears witness of that for him on The Day of
Judgment. There is no place that a group of people visit but that it
starts either sending salutation on them, or cursing them.

O’ Abu Dharr! Do you know the reason behind revelation of the verse*:
‘Be patient, exhort others to be patient, establish Prayer, and fear
Allah that you may be successful?*’ I said, ‘*I don’t know - May my
father and mother be sacrificed for you*’. The Prophet (S) said, ‘*For
waiting for the next Prayer after every Prayer*’.

Prayer And The Day Of Judgment
------------------------------

On The Day of Judgment, before one is even permitted to present the good
deeds that he has performed in this world, the first question asked will
relate to Prayer and only then will he be allowed to proceed. The
Prophet (S) has made this clear by saying:

All good deeds depend on Prayer. Prayer is the cornerstone of Islam. If
Prayer is accepted then the good deeds will be accepted. If Prayer is
not accepted, then the good works will not be accepted.

This proclamation becomes clear when we examine Shaykh al-Qummi (RA)’s
comments in his *Manazil al-Akhirat,* that there will be approximately
60 stations over The Bridge on The Day of Judgment. Each one of us will
have to answer questions satisfactorily at each of those stations. Only
after one is finished with one station, is he going to proceed to the
next one. Each station is named and the first station, according to
Shaykh al-Qummi (RA), is *Prayer.*

Therefore, the first station in The Bridge involves *Questioning on
Prayer* and how you fulfilled this obligation. If, in any case, you
don’t fulfill the requirements at that station, then unless you get
intercession of The Infallible Prophet and Imams (AS) or by your own
actions, you would fall down into the bellies of Hell without
establishing the remainder of your good deeds in this world.
Undoubtedly, the first thing Allah (SWT) will ask on The Day of Judgment
is Prayer, and this comes to us from all The Prophets and Imams (AS).

The Blessings Of Prayer
-----------------------

Muhammad, son of Ya’qub, quoting al-Sadiq (AS), says:

When you recite the Adhan and the Iqamah, two rows of angels will
perform the Prayer behind you; but if you said the Iqamah (only), one
row of angels would perform the Prayer behind you.  
*(Furu’ al-Kafi, Volume 3, Page. 303)*

There are many other traditions to the same effect, some of which say
that the length of each row is as the distance between the east and the
west.

al-Baqir (AS) has quoted The Prophet of Allah (S) as saying:

When a believing servant stands for the Prayer, Allah (SWT) looks at him
until he finishes. Allah’s Mercy shadows over his head, the angels
surround him from all sides up to the horizon of the heaven, and Allah
(SWT) assigns an angel to stand at his head, saying*: ‘0’ Worshipper! If
you know who is looking at you, and to whom you are supplicating, you
will look nowhere else, nor will you leave your position.’*  
*(Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Chapter 2, Tradition 22)*

He further said:

Whoever performs 2 units of Prayer without paying attention to any
worldly matter, Allah (SWT) will forgive him his sins.  
*(Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Chapter 2, Tradition 13)*

Considerable importance has been attached to Prayer, and no words can
describe the amount of reward Allah (SWT) grants to this individual, who
is only fulfilling an obligation. The Aimmah (AS) have said:

Prayer is what angels love,  
 Prayer is the practice of The Prophets (AS),  
 Prayer is the light of understanding,  
 Prayer is what makes faith strong,  
 Prayer is what makes actions accepted,  
 Prayer increases sustenance,  
 Prayer keeps you away from illness,  
 Prayer is what Shaytan hates,  
 Prayer is a weapon to confront your enemies,  
 Prayer is what will assist you with The Angel of Death (AS),  
 Prayer is the light in your grave,  
 Prayer is an answer to Munkar and Nakeer (AS), and  
 Prayer is what will help you in the grave till The Judgment Day.

Treating Prayer Lightly
-----------------------

Some wives of The Prophet of Allah (S) have said that:

The Prophet of Allah (SWT) used to talk to us and we used to talk to
him. But when the time for the Prayer arrived he appeared as if he did
not know us and we did not know him, as his attention was fully directed
to Allah (SWT).  
*(Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Chapter 2, Tradition 17)*

Ibn Tawus (RA) says, in *Falah al-Sail*, that when al-Husayn (AS) used
to perform the wudhu, his face changed color and his joints trembled.
Asked about the reason, The Imam said:

When one is going to stand before The Owner of The Throne, his color
ought to turn pale and his joints to tremble.

The same narrator also states Al-Hasan, son of ‘Ali (AS) used to
experience a similar condition before and during Prayer. (*Bihar
al-Anwar, Volume 77, Page 346.)*

Unfortunately, many of us treat Prayer as another kind of daily entry in
our logbook. Some of us not only treat the timely performance of Prayer
lightly, but others do not even offer this obligation, which is a duty
that carries immense weight. To those who treat Prayer lightly, The
Prophet (S) says:

The one who takes Prayer lightly is not of me. No! By Allah (SWT)! Such
a person will not reach The Pond of al-Kawthar.

According to The Prophet (S), one who wastes his Prayer will be raised
with *Qarun* and *Haman,* so that it will be right for Allah (SWT) to
put him in Hell together with the hypocrites.

al-Sadiq (AS) said to Zurarah (RA):

*Don’t be negligent in regard to your Prayers.* Verily, The Prophet (May
Peace Be Upon Him And is Progeny) said on his deathbed:

One who makes light of his Prayers does not belong to me, or the one who
takes intoxicating drinks. And, by God! He will not reach me at The Pond
(of al-Kawthar).  
*(Furu’ al-Kafi, iii, 269)*

al-Kulayni (RA) further reports with his trustworthy narrators, from Abu
Basir, that al-Kadhim (AS) said:

At the time of his death my father said to me, ‘My son, the one who
makes light of Prayer will not receive our intercession’.  
*(Furu\` al-Kafi, iii, 270)*

al-Khomeini (RA) has the following advice to those people who treat the
performance of The Five Daily Prayer lightly and of no concern:

A devout person should be observant of the times of his worship under
every circumstance. Of course, he should observe the timings of
Prayer*,* which is the most important of the acts of worship, and carry
it out in the most meritorious part of its time, refraining from
engaging in any other work during those times.

In the same way as he assigns a certain time to making an earning and
for study and debate, he should do the same in respect of these acts of
worship. During this time, he must be free from other pre-occupations,
so that he can achieve concentration of the heart. This makes up the
quintessence and kernel of worship.

But should he, like this author, offer his Prayers out of compulsion and
consider the performance of the worship of The Lord as a superfluous
matter, he would, of course, delay it as long as it can be delayed. And
when he offers it, he offers the Prayer in a perfunctory manner,
considering it as an impediment in the way of what he imagines to be
important tasks. However, such worship has not only no spiritual
brilliance, it deserves divine wrath, and such a person is one who makes
light of Prayer and neglects it as something trivial.

I seek refuge in God from making light of Prayer and not giving it its
due importance.   
*(al-Tawhid, Quarterly Islamic Journal. 27th* *Hadith – Prayer and
Concentration)*

Genesis of The Prescribed Prayer
--------------------------------

al-Majlisi (RA) writes a long narration in his book Hayaat al-Quloob
(Part Two), about one of the incidents that took place during Me’raj:

At Bayt al-Ma’moor, The Prophet (S) beheld The Ka’bah directly under
him, so that if he had dropped anything from his hand, it would have
fallen on its roof. The Prophet (S) says:

I heard a voice saying, *‘This is the sacred place, and you are the
ordained Prophet, imparting honor to the temple. Whatever exists on
earth has its similitude in Paradise’*.

My Lord then commanded me to open my hand, and take of the water flowing
from the right pillar of The Empyrean, which I did; and for this reason
it became meritorious to take up water for ablution with the right hand.

A voice then commanded, *‘Wash your face with this water that you may be
pure to behold The Light of My Majesty and Glory. Then wash your hands,
for you will take My Word. Then draw your wet hands over your head and
your feet, which signifies that I will draw The Hand of Mercy over your
head, and send down My Blessings on you. Drawing the hand over the foot
will elevate you up through several regions where no foot has ever
trodden, nor will it ever after you’.*

The Most High then commanded, *‘Turn towards The Black Stone which is
before you and extol Me according to the number of curtains by saying
ALLAHU AKBAR!’* On account, seven repetitions of this phrase have been
recommended for Prayer, because there were seven curtains.

He (S) passed the seven heavens and seven curtains of exaltation and
glory, and arrived near the place of communion with The Merciful Lord of
Glory. *Prayer is The Celestial Ascent of The Believer.* When the
perfect believer thus ascends, and recites the seven *Takbeers*, the
curtains of darkness, which on account of errors of worldly inclination
come between him and The Most High, are removed, and he approaches The
Lord of The lords.

The Lord then commanded The Prophet (S)*, ‘Now you have arrived at this
place of communion with Me, pronounce My Name’*. Accordingly The Prophet
(S) said, *‘In the Name of Allah, The Compassionate, The Merciful’*, and
thus this phrase became established as the beginning to each chapter.

Being commanded to offer praise, he said, *‘Thanks to Allah (SWT), The
Lord of The Universe’*, and proceeded in this manner till he recited the
whole Chapter *‘Praise be to Allah (SWT), The Lord of all creations’*.

A voice then commanded him to recite The Chapter of Divine Unity,
saying, ‘*That Chapter is a description of My Praise and Attributes.
What likeness can exist between Me and My creations?*’

After I had recited this Chapter, *‘Say! Allah is One; He is Perfect; He
neither begets, nor is begotten; and there is none like Him’*, the voice
said*, ‘Bow before My exaltation, and put your hands on your knees and
look toward My Empyrean’*.

On doing this, Light from The Glory of God overpowered me, and I fell
into a swoon, and by divine inspiration, I said, *‘Praise and Thanks to
The God of The Glory’*. In purity I named the Lord of exaltation, and I
am employed in His Praise.

After repeating this I soon recovered, and the tremor of my spirit
subsided, when by divine inspiration, I had seven times pronounced the
ascription of praise. It was then ordained that this expression of
praise should, in the performance of Prayer, be recited in the bending
position.

Allah (SWT) then commanded me to raise my head and stand erect, I heard
the voices of the angels uttering praises and ascribing unity and
thanksgiving to God. I said, ‘*Allah (SWT) hears everyone that utters
His Praises*’.

I looked up and saw a light more intense than that which had caused me
to swoon before, and my fear was greater than in the former instance.
Out of awe, I fell into prostration before The King, The Lord of The
Glory, and placed my face in the dust of humility, and on account of the
exaltation, I witnessed, seven times repeated by divine inspiration,
‘*Glory and praise to The Exalted Allah*’. At each repetition of this
ascription, my terror diminished, till I recovered from the state of the
overwhelming awe, and attained to perfect knowledge of Allah (SWT).

I then raised my head from prostration, and sat till I recovered from
the amazement into which I had fallen. By divine inspiration, I again
looked upward, and saw a light more overpowering than I had witnessed
before, and again fell involuntarily in prostration before The Lord, and
repeated seven times, ‘*Glory and praise to Allah*’. Thereafter, I was
more worthy of beholding the divine lights.

I again raised my head, and sat for a while, and looked toward the
angels.

For this reason, al-Majlisi (RA) says, two prostration in (a unit of)
Prayer were established, and sitting a short time after them became
meritorious.

The Prophet (S) continues,

I then arose and stood in the attitude of a servant before my Lord, when
He commanded me to recite again The Chapter of Praise, and afterwards
The Chapter of Power (Qadr). I again bent with my hands on my knees, and
then prostrated myself with my head on the ground. As I was about to
rise, The Most High commanded, ‘*Mention My favors to you and pronounce
My Name*’.

By divine inspiration I said, ‘*In The Name of Allah, and by Him, There
is no God but Allah, and all perfect names belong to Allah*’.

When I had repeated the two testimonies, He commanded, ‘*Pronounce
blessings on yourself and on your Family*’. I prayed, ‘*O Allah! Have
mercy on me and on my Family*’, which was answered with blessings from
The Most High.

On looking around, I beheld the angels and spirits of The Prophets
arrayed in ranks behind me, and The Most High Commanded me to salute
them and I said, ‘*Peace be upon you and The Mercy and Blessings of
Allah*’. The Most High then addressed me saying, ‘*I am your Peace,
Mercy, and Blessing, and of the Imams after you*’.

The Presence Of Heart In Prayer
-------------------------------

al-Sadiq (AS) has said:

Dear to me is the believer from among you who attends to God with his
heart at the time of Prayer and does not pre-occupy his heart with any
mundane matter. For, whenever a devotee turns with his heart to God, The
Exalted, during Prayer, God heeds him and turns towards him the hearts
of the faithful who regard him with affection, following God’s love of
him.  
*(al-Hurr al-‘Amili, Wasa'ilush-Shi'ah, iv, 686)*

The Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (AS) says:

If the worshipper knew to what extent His (Allah’s) Mercy surrounded him
during Prayer, he would never raise his head from the state of
prostration.

According to a number of traditions, the Prayer has been called - a
believer’s heavenly journey that protects him from moral indecencies.
Ayatullah Ibrahim Amini says in his book *Self Building* that, ‘*it is a
pure sparkling stream of spirituality that whosoever enters it five
times a day will purify his soul from all sorts of pollution and
contamination’.* Likewise, a Prayer offered without heart’s presence,
although satisfies the performance of compulsory religious obligation,
nevertheless, does not help in elevating the worshipper towards higher
spiritual realms.

In another tradition, he said:

A Prayer, half of it may be accepted, or one-third, or a quarter, or
one-fifth, or even one-tenth. Another Prayer may be folded like an old
dress, and be thrown back at the face of its owner. No part of the
Prayer is yours except that part which you perform with an attentive
heart.  
*(Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 81, Page 260, Chapter 16, Tradition 59)*

A similar tradition is narrated by al-Kulayni (RA) in al-Kafi, 3, page
363. al-Baqir and al-Sadiq (AS) have further said:

Nothing of your Prayer is yours except that which you did with an
attentive heart. So, if one performed it completely erroneously, or
neglected its disciplines, it would be folded and thrown back at its
owner’s face.  
*(Wasa’ilush-Shi’ah, Volume 4, Page 687, Chapter 3, Tradition 1)*

al-Sadiq (AS) warns us that:

When a servant stands to offer Prayer, Allah (SWT) pays attention to him
and does not shift His attention until the servant deviates from His
remembrance for the third time. When this happens, Allah (SWT) too turns
His attention away from the worshipper.

Therefore, the heart’s presence is a must in every single act in Prayer
and that is the only way to achieve the merits hidden in this great
obligation. It is narrated in *Bihar al-Anwar* that in the above
instances, if the worshipper returns his attention and struggles not to
lose his concentration, then his past sins are erased and he shall be
granted such blessings that his reward cannot be counted. Allah (SWT)
says:

Pay attention to Me, because I and the Angels are paying attention to
you (in your Prayer).

According to al-Khomeini (RA), ‘*the reality of invocation and
remembrance is the invocation of the heart, without which the invocation
of the tongue will be futile and worthless. This is referred to in a
number of traditions’.*

In his book *Self Building,* al-Amini relates:

In as much as heart’s presence is important and worthwhile, in the same
proportion, its attainment is extremely difficult. No sooner a person
starts his Prayer, Shaytan whispers in his heart pulling him from one
side to another, and continuously engaging him into all sorts of
thoughts and memories.

The heart engages itself into accounting, planning, reviewing past and
future problems, solving academic problems, very often recollecting
during Prayer, and topics, which were forgotten by him completely. And
when he returns to himself, he discovers his Prayer are over.


