Strategies for Concentrating In Prayer
======================================

Attention is like a muscle. Initially, when you try and hold your
attention on something, it may feel that you are using more and more
energy and it is fatiguing. That perception is sound, as you have to use
energy to maintain attention. However, the more you flex your attention
the stronger it becomes, and easier to hold.

From the moment you are born your mind functions every second, minute,
hour, and day of your life. It is active day and night, extensively
while awake, less so while you’re asleep, but it is continually working.
It is therefore, apparent that the train of thought would continue while
you are saying your Prayer unless you make changes to the way you
function in Prayer.

Setting The Prayer Scene And Burning Incense
--------------------------------------------

The place you say your Prayer should be special. Every item that can
distract you from your Prayer should be taken care of. The room should
be the one that you don’t use regularly, and should be neat and clean, a
comfortable temperature, and dark. With comfortable temperature, you do
not have to worry or entertain thoughts that may distract you when the
room is hot or cold. Human skin is filled with thermal receptors that
will constantly remind you of any discomfort to your body.

If the room you use to say your Prayer is slightly dark, the sense of
darkness brings into us fear and awe, increasing one’s concentration by
further limiting eyesight. The lesser the items you are able to see
during Prayer, the better it is. The walls should be free from pictures
and other objects that might attract your attention or stimulate a
memory or thought.

You are also advised to select an isolated place free from noise and
disturbance. You should not have direct access to a telephone, as its
ring would only create thoughts in your mind as to the urgency of the
call. Also, you should be away from any kind of smell from the kitchen
to allow you to focus more on the task at hand, rather than salivating
and thinking about food during Prayer. Finally, you should appreciate
and respect your communication with Allah (SWT) by closing doors (not
locking them) of the room you pray in, so as not to hear other family
members conversing and kids screaming at each other.

You should burn incense to perfume your Prayer room. It is a greatly
recommended act and carries significant weight in research and science.
There is significant evidence on the practical applications of burning
incense, as this is one major way to relax one’s nerves and emotions,
and through deep breathing and meditation, a high inner state of purity
is attained. Aroma therapists are experts in this field and the oils
they use to apply on the skin or burn to release fumes can significantly
reduce stress in the brain, lower muscle activity, decrease the train of
thoughts, thereby increasing concentration in Prayer.

According to researchers, the aromatic properties of pure, natural
essential oils are a catalyst for change in the human mind and body.
Essential oil aromas stimulate the part of the brain that affects
emotion. The shape of an essential oil molecule is like a key that opens
lock-like structure in the olfactory nerve receptors in our nostrils.
Impression of the aroma is sent directly and immediately to the limbic
system where memories are stored and pleasure and emotion is perceived.
When stimulated, the limbic system releases chemicals that affect the
central nervous system. *Serotonin* counteracts anxiety, *endorphins*
reduce pain, and so forth.

Inhaling essential oils can also help one attain a pleasurable emotional
balance. A balanced emotional state in turn can have a therapeutic
effect on physical problems, particularly those that are stress-related.

Therefore, increasing your level of concentration, through relaxation
with essential oils, using direct inhalation or diffusion is highly
recommended. Direct inhalation is beneficial when immediate relief is
needed. For instance, to relieve stressful thoughts, anxiety or lethargy
before Prayer, drip 2-5 drops of *Chamomile* onto a handkerchief, hold
it under your nose and breathe deeply. Because of their volatile nature,
essential oils will readily diffuse into the air. An aroma therapy lamp,
a ceramic vessel equipped with a small basin to hold a mixture of water
and essential oil is a good way to diffuse scent. The basin is warmed
from underneath by a candle or light bulb. Diffusing relaxing oils like
*Chamomile, Rose or Sandalwood* can significantly reduce over-load in
the brain, thus allowing you to be attentive in your Prayer.

Wudhu as A Way To Increase Your Attention
-----------------------------------------

**Wudhu** (formal/minor ablution) is one of the most effective ways to
prepare the scene for your daily Prayer. It has powers to re-organize
your thoughts before Prayer and assist you in offering your Prayer with
confidence and not to be swerved by Shaytan, The Accursed.

Performing wudhu slowly and contemplating on the words in the invocation
recommended during every wash would help you a great deal to think about
your life, death and the Creator whom you will be standing in front of
soon. This way, you employ wudhu as a strategy to re-organize thoughts
and prepare for Prayer. There should be no interval of talking and
discussing worldly matters between the performance of wudhu and your
Prayer. If there is an interval, you ought to recite invocations. This
way the link of concentration is established between Wudhu and Prayer.
True, the more time you engage in meditation and the conception of
having only one thought before your Prayer, the more chances you have to
say your Prayer without any distraction.

The Invocation Of Wudhu
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ِ الحَمدُ للهِ الَّذي جَعَلَ الماءَ طَهُوراً ولَم يَجعَلْهُ نَجِسا و
بِسمِ اللهِ وَبِالله
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the beginning of Wudhu, you start in the Name of Allah (SWT) and
praise Him for making the water a pure element

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ اجعَلْني مِن التَّوّابينَ ، وَاجعَلْني من المُتَطِهّرينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the time of washing your hands, you request Allah (SWT) to place you
among those who seek His forgiveness and those who are pure.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهُمَّ لَقِّني حُجَّتي يَومَ ألقاكَ وَأطلِقْ لِساني بِذِكرك
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the time of rinsing the mouth, you invoke to Allah (SWT) to teach you
the correct way to answer the questions on The Day of Judgment when you
shall meet His Divine Presence.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ لا تُحَرِّمْ عَلَيَّ رِيحَ الجَنَّةِ، وَاجعَلني مِمَّن
يَشمُّ رِيحَها وَرَوحَها وَطيبَها
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the time of rinsing the nose, you request Allah (SWT) not to deprive
you from the smell of Paradise and to place you among those who smell
its fragrance.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهُمَّ بَيِّضْ وَجهي يَومَ تَسْوَدُّ فيه الوجُوهُ، وَلا تُسوِّدْ
وَجهي يَوم تَبيَضُّ فيه الوجُوهَُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the time of washing the face, you ask Allah (SWT) to brighten your
face on that Day when He will disgrace and darken the faces of a great
number of people.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ أعطِني كِتابي بيَميني، والخُلْدَ في الجِنانِ بِيساري،
وحاسِبْني حِساباً يَسيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the time of washing the right forearm, you plead to Allah (SWT) to
place the scroll of your deeds in your right hand and the certificate of
permanency in Paradise in your left hand, and that He should render your
accounts leniently.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ لا تُعطِني كِتابي بِشِمالي وَلا مِن وَراءِ ظَهري، ولا
تجعَلْها مَغلُولَةً إِلى عُنُقي، وأعُوذُ بِكَ مِن مُقَطِّعاتِ
النِّيرانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the time of washing the left arm, you ask Allah (SWT) not to place
the scroll of your deeds in your left hand, nor on your back, and He
should not hang it around your neck. You also seek refuge from the
fierce eternal Fire of Hell.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ غَشِّني برَحمَتِكَ وَبَرَكاتِكَ وعفْوِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

At the time of wiping the head, you request Allah (SWT) to cover you
with His Mercy, Blessings and Pardon.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ ثَبِتْني عَلى الصِّراط يَومَ تَزِلُّ فيهِ الأقدامُ، واجعَلْ
سَعْيي في ما يُرضيكَ عَنّي ياذا الجَلالِ والإكرامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Finally, at the time of wiping the feet, you ask Allah (SWT) to keep you
steadfast on His Path on that Day when feet shall slip, and make your
efforts like of those that will please Him.

It is reported in authentic traditions that the Infallible Imams (AS)
used to tremble and sometimes even the color of their skin changed,
demonstrating fear and awe for Allah (SWT) whilst performing the act of
wudhu. One should try and create, as well as maintain such fear whilst
performing wudhu.

Strategy 1: Understanding And Appreciating Allah (SWT)’s Presence
-----------------------------------------------------------------

It is always to your benefit if you were to ponder the Existence of
Allah (SWT) and His Power, Signs and Decisions related to this world and
the next. Appreciating His presence is one way of bringing humility into
your heart and humbling yourself in Prayer, performed with attention and
concentration. It is only He Who looks at you Mercifully during your
Prayer, and you ought to keep this in mind every time you say your
Prayer.

Abu Ja’fer, the son of Babawayh al-Qummi (RA) says,

... Allah (SWT), Exalted is He, is One and Absolutely Unique. There is
no one like Him. He is Prior; He never was, and never will be, but The
Hearing and The Seeing One. The Omniscient; The Wise; The Living; The
Everlasting; The Mighty; The Holy; The Knowing One; The Powerful; The
Self-sufficient.

He is a Thing, but not like other things. He is Unique, Eternal Refuge;
He begets not lest He may be inherited, nor is He begotten lest He may
be associated with others. There is no one like Him. He has no equal or
opponent, compeer or consort. Nothing can be compared with Him. He has
no rival, no partner. Human eyes cannot behold Him, while He discerns
the power of eyes. The thoughts of men cannot compass Him, while He is
aware of them. Slumber overtakes Him not, nor sleep.

He is The Gracious and The Knowing One, The Creator of all things. There
is no deity other than Him. To Him alone belongs The Power of Creation
and Authority. Blessed is Allah (SWT), The Lord of the Worlds.

Therefore, piety, perseverance and appreciation of The Lord and His
Mightiness are effective ingredients in developing and maintaining your
attention in Prayer. This way, you can willingly humble yourself in
Prayer.

A good example is from The Prophet (S) who used to treat Prayer very
seriously and gave his full attention and concentration. He appreciated
and knew his Creator well enough to fear His Presence and attend with
full concentration when standing before Him. al-Khomeini (RA) reports a
tradition that, *‘For ten years The Prophet of Allah (S) stood on his
toes (in his Prayer) until his blessed feet became swollen and his face
turned pale. And he would stand erect all night, until a time came when
the Lord consoled him (with the following verse):*

***We have not sent down The Qur’an on you to cause you distress.***
***(Qur’an - Chapter 20, Verse 2)***

al-Saduq (RA) quotes the following advice from al-Sadiq (AS) that he
gave to one of his trusted companions:

O’ Servant of Allah! When you offer Prayer*,* pray like someone who bids
farewell and fears that he will never return (i.e. pray in such a manner
as if it were the last Prayer of your life). Then fix your gaze on the
point of your prostration. If you know that there is someone on your
left or right, you take more care in offering your Prayer*;* then know
that you stand in front of Someone Who sees you and you don’t see Him.  
*(al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, iv, 685)*

Strategy 2: Reminding Yourself Of Allah
---------------------------------------

One of the reasons why *Adhan* and *Iqamah* have been much emphasized
before Prayer is to establish a strong link between the worshipper and
his Creator, before he ventures into this sacred journey of Prayer and
be in direct communication with The Almighty. This way, you start
reminding and convincing yourself of the presence of Allah (SWT) before
you begin Prayer.

***Lo! In the creation of the heavens and the earth and (in) the
difference of night and day are tokens (of His sovereignty) for men of
understanding. Such as remembering Allah (SWT), standing, sitting, and
reclining, considering the creation of the heavens and the earth, (and
instinctively lament): Our Lord! You have not created this (world) in
vain! Glory be on You! Preserve us from the doom of Fire.***
***(Qura’n - Chapter 3, Verse 90-91)***

The Great Scholar, al-Mutahhari (RA) quotes a tradition, which is
referenced in the book *Light Within Me:*

The aim in Dhikr (remembrance) of Allah (SWT) is that the heart be
always aware of al-Haqq (The Most Truthful, a Name of Allah (SWT), for
its practice banishes inattention.

Liturgies are as important as water is to the living cells within your
body. Take, for instance, the air you breathe day and night, upon which
your existence as well as that of other living beings is dependent,
nothing can remain alive without it. What a marvelous gift it is. If all
the creation contrives such a thing, they cannot do that. The same
applies to the other gifts that we have been favored without any
hesitation from The Lord (e.g. sight, hearing, taste, and so forth),
each one of which carries unlimited benefits.

He fulfills your needs in this world and the hereafter, without needing
your adoration. Observance of His commands, or transgressing them does
not make any difference to Him. It is for the sake of your own benefit
that He has enjoined good and forbidden indecencies.

al-Khomeini (RA) comments, *‘while remembering all these, do you not see
that respecting and obeying such a Benefactor is essential for you? He
is The Creator and King of this vast cosmos, whose infiniteness cannot
be measured or even conceived by human intellect’.*

*‘We, human beings, creatures crawling on one of the smallest planets
miserably fail to grasp the extent of our own small world, whose sun
cannot be compared with far greater suns of innumerable galaxies. Our
solar system is nothing compared to other lesser solar systems, which
still elude the keen eyes of great explorers and investigators of the
world’.*

We have been advised by the Scholars in Islam to try and remember Allah
(SWT) at all times possible. This includes repeating certain phrases of
worship and servitude, or it can be in the form of meditation,
appreciating this world and the hereafter.

al-Taba Tabai (RA) in his book, *al-Mizan* Volume Two, discusses the way
of living that is happier and the life that is more durable. In this
narration, al-Daylami narrates in his *al-Irshad* that Allah (SWT), at
one stage during The Ascension (on The Day of Me’raj), told The Prophet
(S):

As for the happy way of living, it is that in which the person is not
tired of remembering Me, does not forget My bounties, and does not
ignore My rights (on him). He seeks My pleasure day and night. The
ever-lasting life is realized when the person works for his spiritual
benefit until the world loses its significance for him, and looks small
in his eyes. The hereafter becomes great for him.

He gives preference to My pleasure over his own desire; seeks My
pleasures; thinks the right of My bounty great; keeps in mind what I
have done for him (i.e. for his benefit); remembers Me day and night
whenever he is tempted to commit any wrong or sin; keeps his heart clean
from that I dislike; hates Shaytan and his whisperings, and does not let
Shaytan establish a hold over, or a passage to his heart.

When he acts like this, then I put (My) love into his heart, until I
make his heart, as well as his leisure and engagement, and his thought
and speech, a part of (My) favors which I have bestowed on those of (My)
Creations who love Me; and I open his heart’s eye and ear, so that he
hears with his heart and looks with his heart to My Majesty and
Greatness; and I make the world straitened for him and make him hate it
with all its pleasures; and I caution him of the world and all that it
contains, as a shepherd protects his sheep from dangerous pasture lands.

When this happens, he flees from people and transfers from the house of
termination to the abode of eternity, and from the house of Shaytan to
The Seat of The Beneficent Allah (SWT). O’ Ahmad! I adorn him with
dignity and majesty. So, this is the good way of living and the eternal
life, and it is the status of those who are pleased (with Me).

So, whosoever acts for My pleasure, I give him three characteristics: I
teach him gratitude, which is not polluted by ignorance, remembrance,
that is unadulterated with forgetfulness, and love that takes preference
over the love of creatures. Then when he loves Me, I love him and I open
the eye of his heart to My Majesty. I do not keep (My) special beings
hidden from him. I converse with him secretly in the dark of night and
the light of day, until he ceases talking with and sitting with the
creatures.

I make him hear My talk and the speech of My Angels. I make My secret
known to him, which I have kept hidden from all (My) creation. I dress
him in modesty, until all the creation is awed of him. He walks on the
earth (and all his sins are) forgiven. I make his heart hearing and
seeing, and I do not hide from him anything of The Garden or the Fire. I
make known to him the terror and afflictions awaiting the people on The
Day of Resurrection, and about the things I will question the rich and
the poor, as well as the learned and the ignorant.

I will make him sleep (in peace) in his grave, and I will send Munkar
and Nakeer (AS) to question him. He will not experience the sorrow of
death, or the fright of the prelude (of the next world). Then I will
erect his weighing scale for him, and will unroll his book (of deeds). I
will then put his book in his right hand and he shall read it unfolded.
Then I will not keep any interpreter between Me and him.

So these are the attributes of the lovers. O’ Ahmad! Make your concern
one concern, make your tongue one tongue, and make your body (i.e. your
person) alive that is never oblivious (of Me). Whoever is oblivious of
Me, I do not care in which valley he perishes.

Strategy 3: A Relaxed And Alert State Of Mind
---------------------------------------------

An alert state of mind is one of the many vital ingredients of Prayer.
If you are tired and exhausted, it is better to rest and do some deep
breathing and relaxation exercises before you make the commitment to
stand in front of your Lord. And yes, it is preferred to pray a bit late
but with attention and concentration. Of course, the delay in performing
Prayer from its allocated time should only be for the length of time one
has to relax and rejuvenate himself, gain energy to stand before the
Almighty. As Imam ‘Ali (AS) has advised us:

Do not offer Prayer in the state of drowsiness. While offering Prayer,
do not think about yourself because you are standing in front of Allah
(SWT). Indeed, only that portion of the Prayer will be accepted that he
has paid full attention towards Allah (SWT).

al-Saduq (RA) reports from Imam ‘Ali (AS) that he said:

None of you should ever stand for Prayer in a lazy or drowsy state, nor
should you let (random) thoughts pass through your mind (in the state of
Prayer*).* For, in that state, you stand before your Glorious and
Almighty Lord. Verily, the reward a devotee derives from Prayer is equal
to the extent of it that he offers with an attentive heart.  
*(al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, iv, 687)*

In *Fiqh al-Ridha* it is stated:

When you want to perform the Prayer, do not go to it lazily, sleepy,
hurriedly, or unmindfully. Approach it calmly, solemnly and slowly. You
should display submission, imploringly and humbly to Allah (SWT). You
are to show awe and signs of fear and hope, with caution and
apprehension. Thus, you are to stand before Him, as an escapee and
sinful slave stands at attention before his master; on the alert, with
joined heels, erected trunk, not looking to right and left, reckoning as
if you see Him. If you do not, He certainly does see you…  
*(Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Chapter 1, Tradition 7)*

Imam (AS)’s posture always allowed him to relax and to be comfortable.
Your posture in Prayer also has to allow you to remain alert and aware.
There is a two-way relationship between slumping and distraction. Good
posture means there is musculoskeletal balance. This balance helps to
protect the joints in the spine from excessive stress. It also guards
against injury and possible deformity. Good posture helps prevent
distress and pain that lead to distraction.

As your concentration in Prayer progresses, your body metabolism will
generally become slower and slower, until your heartbeat and breathing
are barely perceptible. At this point, when you are totally focused in
your Prayer, it is when you achieve your greatest benefit from the
worship that has limitless rewards. You would seem to be at a point
where mental fatigue and stress is easily released.

Upon completion of your Prayer, most often you will feel relaxed,
renewed, alert, and better focused. Your senses will be more acute. You
will often find yourself with a heightened sense of awareness. You will
generally feel confident and secure in a positive state of mind.
Happiness will be yours. This is the state of mind you should strive to
achieve after completion of Prayer.

Strategy 4: Understanding What You Recite
-----------------------------------------

It is clear that if you don’t strive to learn and appreciate the
meanings of the verses and glorification you proclaim in your Prayer,
you stand very little chance of developing and maintaining the
concentration you need to focus in Prayer. Focusing on the meanings of
what you recite would generally keep your mind busy and involved in
Prayer.

In the Thawab al- A’mal, al-Saduq quotes with his chain of transmitters
from al-Sadiq (AS):

One who offers two units of Prayer with the knowledge of what he says
therein, he does not finish them without God forgiving him every sin
that there is between him and God.  
*(Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, iv, 686)*

Understanding every word of what you recite in Prayer is helpful in
developing a tranquil mind and in allowing you to control your immediate
thoughts and feelings that would distract you from your Prayer. You also
need to appreciate the words and its meaning in your language of
preference, recite and understand them so that your mind does not wander
and remains focused on the task at hand. However, one would not think or
ponder on the meanings for this is not the time for it, but only occupy
his mind with the meanings of the phrases being recited.

The Prophet of Allah (S) is quoted to have said to Abu Dharr:

Two light units of Prayer offered with contemplation are better than a
whole night spent in worship.  
*(Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 74, Page 82 and Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, iv, 686)*

**Takbir**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله أكبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah is Great

**Translation of Chapter of al-Hamd**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I commence with The Name of Allah, The Compassionate, The Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَمْدُ للّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Special Praise be to Allah, The Sustainer of the creation

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Compassionate, The Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lord of The Day of Judgment

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيَّاكَ نَعْبُدُ وإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

You alone we worship, and to You alone we pray for help

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اهدِنَــــا الصِّرَاطَ المُستَقِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Guide us to the straight path

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنعَمتَ عَلَيهِمْ غَيرِ المَغضُوبِ عَلَيهِمْ وَلاَ
الضَّالِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The path of those whom You have favored,

Not of those who have incurred Your wrath, nor of those who have gone
astray

**Translation of Chapter of al-Ikhlas**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I commence with The Name of Allah, The Compassionate, The Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Say: Allah is One - The Eternal Being

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الصَّمَدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah is He Who is independent of all beings

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يَلِدْ وَلَمْ يُولَدْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

He begets none, nor was He begotten

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَكُن لَّهُ كُفُوًا أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And none in the creation is equal to Him

**Translation of the Dhikr During Ruku (Bending) and Sajdah
(Prostration)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ رَبِّيَ الْعَظِيمِ وَبِحَمْدِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Glory be to my High Sustainer and I praise Him

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ رَبِّيَ الأَعْلَى وَبِحَمْدِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Glory be to my Great Sustainer, Most High, and I praise Him

**Before Going into Prostration**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَمِعَ اللهُ لمَنْ حَمِدَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah hears and accepts the praise of one who praises

**Istighfar, Between Two Prostration**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْتَغْفِرُ اللٌّهَ رَبِّي وَأَتُوبُ إِلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I seek forgiveness from Allah Who is my Sustainer, and I turn to Him

**While Standing**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِحَوْلِ الله وَقُوتِهِ أَقُومُ وَأَقْعُدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I stand and sit with the help and strength of Allah

**Translation of Tasbihat al-Arba'ah**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سبحان الله والحمد لله ولا اله الا الله والله اكبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Glory be to Allah, and all praise is for Him and there is no one worth
worshipping other than Allah, and He is Greater than any description

**Translation of Tashahhud and Salam**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أشْهَدُ أنْ لا إله إِلاَّ اللَّهُ وَحْدَهُ لا شَرِيك لَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I testify that there is none worth worshipping except the Almighty
Allah, Who is One and has no partner

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأشْهَدُ أنَّ مُحَمَّداً عَبْدُهُ وَرَسُولُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I testify that Muhammad is His servant and Prophet

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهم صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَّ الِ مُحَمَّدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Send Your blessings on Muhammad and his progeny

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلَامُ عَلَيْكَ أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ وَرَحْمَةُ اللَّهِ
وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Prophet! Allah's peace, blessings and grace be upon you!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلَامُ عَلَيْنَا وَعَلَى عِبَادِ اللَّهِ الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah's peace be on us, those offering prayers - and upon all pious
servants of Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليكم ورحمة الله وبركاته
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah's peace, blessings and grace be on you believers!

Strategy 5: Proper Pronunciation
--------------------------------

Arabic language is considered one of the sweetest of all the languages.
So, reciting Prayer with proper *Makhaarij* (proper pronunciation) and
*Tajweed* (following the rules of the Arabic Language) and learning the
rules of reciting The Qur’an, would make your efforts in maintaining
attention a lot easier.

Listening to your own tone of voice (and of others), and how they can
sound hurtful and blunt at times is yet another alternative. You should
try and work with changing your tone to a more appropriate one.
Combining the rules of recitation and frequency of your whole recitation
is what is required and needs to be practiced. These qualities in The
Prophet (S) were what made people stop and listen to The Prophet (S)
reciting The Qur’an.

If you possessed these qualities in your voice, then you would never
feel tired and exhausted reciting long Chapters of The Qur’an or reading
long and repeated glorification during Prayer, because you would be
deeply involved in the parts of the recitation itself. This is an
effective way to prolong your bending (Ruku) and prostration (Sujud),
and a way to lengthen your Prayer without discomfort.

For those devoted Muslims whose mother-tongue is not Arabic and have yet
to master the correct recitation of the Arabic verses involved in
Prayer, they are advised to at least learn to read the compulsory parts
of the Prayer correctly and with proper pronunciation. This way they are
sure their Prayer is valid. This person should also try and not
completely focus on his recitation, as he would lose his focus on Allah
(SWT). However, there is no excuse for not learning to recite with
proper *Makhaarij* and *Tajweed.*

Strategy 6: Confidence
----------------------

In his book *Self Building,* al-Amini suggests a secluded place, removal
of all obstacles, strengthening of faith, remembrance of death, and
readiness as four main ways to develop and maintain one’s attention in
Prayer. He also concludes that:

If one does not succeed in the very first attempt, instead of getting
disappointed, he should become more determined and serious in trying
again, until attaining domination over the self gradually. The mind
should be cleansed thoroughly from scattered thoughts and should be
motivated to pay attention towards God Almighty. If attaining such a
kind of attention is not possible within a day, few weeks or even few
months, he should not be disappointed because, after all, such kind of
devoted attention is possible.

To have firm intention and belief that whatsoever the case, you will
never be mislead in Prayer, you need to be confident and accept with
full heart that Shaytan’s forces are weaker than what you have been
endowed with by your loving Lord, The Most High. Allah (SWT) states in
The Qur’an:

***Indeed! The cunning of Shaytan is feeble.*** ***(Qur’an - Chapter 20,
Verse 125)***

Moreover, it is only you who will be in turmoil on The Day of Judgment
when Shaytan will exclaim:

***... I only invited you to evil, and you accepted on your own
volition. Therefore (On this Day of Judgment), do not blame me but blame
your own selves.*** ***(Qur’an - Chapter 14, Verse 22)***

Self-confidence is arguably one of the most important traits you can
possess. Self-confidence reflects your assessment of your own
self-worth. It will play a large part in determining your level of
attention and concentration in Prayer.

Building self-confidence and defeating the distracting thoughts in
Prayer takes time and effort. Goal setting is probably the most
effective way of building self-confidence. By setting measurable goals,
achieving them, setting new goals, achieving them and so on, you prove
your ability to yourself. You are able to prove to yourself that you are
able to perform and achieve effectively. You can see, recognize and
enjoy your achievement, and feel real self-worth in that achievement.
*Please refer the 30-Day Workbook for more details.*

Strategy 7: Alternating Recitations
-----------------------------------

Next, you need to alternate recitations by reciting different chapters
of The Qur’an, different supplications and different forms of
glorification in your Prayer. This is vital because your brain will not
become accustomed and habituated to what is being recited daily and
switch off attention to something else.

The human brain can handle different situations at any given time, so
you need to restrain this quality whilst communicating with Allah (SWT).
One way of doing this is alternating recitations so you are ever
mindful. Learning and memorizing new chapters of The Qur’an, learning
new and different supplications and glorification is therefore highly
recommended.

For example, if you always recite *Suratul Qadr* after *Suratul Hamd* in
your first unit of Prayer, then you would recite *Suratul Falaq*
instead, or any other Chapter from The Qur’an. Since this is a
completely new chapter, your mind will not allow any distracting
thoughts since it is occupied and focused on completing the *new*
Chapter.

Similarly, if you recite a particular invocation in your Qunoot, spend
time to learn new and different invocations and recite them in your
Prayer. Also, if you are used to recite glorification in your last
prostration, why not try and have these recitations in your earlier
prostration as well - something different at all times. We have to be
careful though, because in some instances like *Tashahhud, Salaam,* and
some other acts in Prayer, we are not allowed to add or substitute the
compulsory recitations.

Strategy 8: Continued Cleanliness
---------------------------------

An important and attractive aspect of Islamic teaching is related to
cleanliness. It means to be ritually pure at all times by performing
ablution (wudhu) and ghusl (major ablution) whenever necessary. The
major ablution (ghusl) on Friday, for example, has been much stressed
and cleans your soul from many sins. By keeping yourself clean and pure,
you make it difficult for Shaytan to enter your soul. Cleanliness is a
barrier preventing lustful ideas and disruptive thoughts from entering
your mind during Prayer. One of the traditions of The Prophet (S), which
has come down in the form of an everlasting proverb is that,

Cleanliness is part of faith, and faith leads a person to Paradise.

It is, therefore, a good idea to brush your teeth, perfume yourself, and
observe some kind of uniform, preferably white, and stand in-front of
Allah (SWT), fresh and clean. *Cleanliness is a weapon of a believer*
and evokes inner enlightenment.

This part of your Prayer may involve any of the following elements:
always wearing a clean white dress during Prayer, applying perfume,
burning incense, using a clean Prayer mat and tidy Prayer room, seeking
forgiveness before Prayer, and so forth. All the above-mentioned
elements create a healthier and spiritual environment for Prayer.

Strategy 9: Seeking Forgiveness And Accepting Limitations
---------------------------------------------------------

After every Prayer you should seek forgiveness, as this will indirectly
increase your attention and concentration during Prayer and bring you
nearer to Him. While reciting this invocation, you should sincerely
repent to Allah (SWT) that the Prayer you just finished was not up to
the required standards and pray to be forgiven for it by The Merciful
Lord. Then, you return to Him promising that the next Prayer will be a
better one. This process in itself is a motivation to perform better
next time you stand before the Almighty. Accepting faults will create in
you desire to perform even better.

Strategy 10: Trust
------------------

It is said that The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali (AS) used to writhe
and tremble when it was time for the Prayer. Asked once about his
uncommon state, he said:

The time has come for the trust which Allah, The Exalted, offered to the
heavens, the earth and the mountains, but they refused to carry it and
were afraid of it.  
*(Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Book of Prayer, Chapter 2, Tradition 14)*

This is in direct reference to the following verse of The Qur’an:

***Verily, We offered the trust to the Heavens, the earth and the
mountains, but they refused to bear it, and were afraid thereof, and man
undertook it. Verily he was (proved) unjust, ignorant.*** ***(Qur’an -
Chapter 33, Verse 72)***

Whenever The Infallible (AS) used to stand before Allah (SWT) in Prayer,
their limbs trembled, and because of the intensity of fear, even the
number of their breaths could be counted. They used to become restless
as if bitten by a snake, and Prayer was offered as though there would
never be another chance to offer another Prayer.

Muhammad, son of Ya’qub, quoting al-Sadiq (AS) in *Furu’ al-Kafi, Volume
3, Page 300, Tradition 4 says:*  
 My father used to say, when ‘Ali, son of al-Husayn (AS) used to stand
for the Prayer, he looked like a trunk of a tree, nothing of which would
move unless the wind would move it.

In *al-’Ilal,* Aban ibn Taghlib, quoting Muhammad, son of ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn:

I said to al-Sadiq (AS): ‘I noticed that when ‘Ali, son of al-Husayn
(AS) stood for the Prayer, his color changed.’ He said to me: *By Allah
(SWT), ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn knew before whom he was standing.*  
*(Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, Volume 4, Page 685, Chapter 2, Tradition 4)*

This is an excellent precedent for us from The Infallible (AS) whose
every word and action were in accordance with the pleasure of The
Almighty. It is truly meritorious to be able to convince yourself that
the Prayer you will be offering may be your last one and that you may
not have a chance to say another Prayer. This behavior can be maintained
only in pious people, and piety and the fear of Allah (SWT) are the two
qualities you should endeavor to possess.

In *‘Uddatud-Da\`i,* it is stated:

The imploring moaning of Ibrahim (AS) used to be heard from a mile’s
distance, such that Allah (SWT) praised him by saying: *‘Ibrahim was
mild, imploring, penitent’.*

When performing his Prayer, a sound of fizz like that of a boiler was
heard coming from his chest. A similar sound was also heard from the
chest of our Prophet (S). Fatimah (AS) used to pant in the Prayer
because of her fear of Allah (SWT).  
*(Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Chapter 2, Tradition 15)*

Strategy 11: Stress Management
------------------------------

Of the important cordial disciplines of worship, especially the invoking
worship, one is tranquillity, which is not the same tranquillity as
demanded by the Scholars of Fiqh (Allah be pleased with them) in the
Prayer. It is that the person who prays should perform his worship with
quietude of the heart and a tranquillity of the mind. This is because if
the worship were performed in a state of anxiety and with shaky heart,
the heart would not have any reaction. Thus, no effects of worship would
appear in the dominion of the heart, and the reality of the worship
would not become an inner image of the heart.  
*(al-Khomeini, The Disciplines of Prayer)*

Your body responds to all kinds of stress by trying to get back to a
normal physiological state. Depending on the stress agent, hormones like
adrenaline, may surge. Your heartbeat and blood pressure will probably
increase. Your blood sugar rises. Besides many health problems related
to stress, from high blood pressure to asthma, significant overload is
noticed in the brain, and with such a mind, one can hardly say his or
her Prayer with concentration.

Less stress will bring much more happiness into your life and more
vigilance in your Prayer. The stress you accumulate, as a result of your
reaction to everyday events, bred by various anxieties, creates a
barrier to your happiness and normal living.

No one can cause you to become stressful. Only those insecurities and
deep-seated anxieties can cause you to react irrationally to events in
your life and lead to stress. Once this is relieved, your interpersonal
relationships will improve, as you emanate warmth from being at peace
with yourself.

Once stress has been dissipated through an effective meditation and
relaxation exercise, your view of the world becomes much more pleasant.
This way the brain is also relieved of the pressure from the overload
and you are able to concentrate in your Prayer. It is therefore
recommended that you exercise, meditate and relax, employing deep
breathing strategies before resting at night and in the early morning
hours.

Take time for yourself to relax each day; exercise regularly after
getting your doctor’s okay; learn to let go of things which are outside
your control; learn to adapt to changes; learn to take action when you
can make a difference; avoid excessive caffeine, fats, and sugar; don’t
smoke; go away for the weekend, and give your time to something or
someone you believe in.

Strategy 12: Senseless Conversations
------------------------------------

Let it be known that,

There is no worship superior than silence…  
*(Prophet (S)*

It has been recorded that,

Silence is part of wisdom. It is a sign of every virtue. It is the way
of the devotees of Allah (SWT), because Allah (SWT) likes it. It is the
style of The Prophets (AS), and the habit of the chosen people.  
*(al-Sadiq (AS)*

According to traditions, all the organs in your body are safeguarded
when your tongue is protected. However, in many cases, silence is
strenuous to practice but very fruitful in the end. By maintaining
silence and pondering over every sentence you speak, you would hardly
commit yourself to speculation, backbiting, pride, mockery, lying, etc.
This way, you have less to think about and less thoughts to interrupt
you in your Daily Prayer.

You should try and protect the organs of your body from disobedient
actions, as they would invite Allah (SWT)’s displeasure. The scholars
have said, *‘One’s speech should always be in remembrance of Allah
(SWT), one’s silence should be an effort to think and contemplate, and
one’s vision should be for deriving a lesson’.*

It will only add to your disadvantage if you involve yourself in
careless and purposeless conversations, as you increase the chances of
losing the train of your thought in your Prayer. The more careless you
are with the tongue, the more defensive you’ll have to be, and Shaytan
will not lose this opportunity to remind you of your inaccuracies and
feelings of guilt during Prayer. You should be careful of your tongue at
all times and employ it in earning only the pleasure of Allah (SWT).

Imam ‘Ali (AS), The Master of Believers, once exclaimed to an individual
who was chattering away and admonished him that,

O’ Man! You are dictating to your angel a letter to Allah (SWT), so
speak what concerns you and omit that which does not concern you.

The celebrated mystic of our time, the great al-Taba Tabai (RA)
concludes the following, after years of struggle in his quest for
attaining spiritual perfection:

I have witnessed the most precious effects of silence. Practicing
silence for forty days and nights, speaking only when it is absolutely
required and remaining occupied in meditation and invocation until
attaining purity and enlightenment.

Strategy 13: Moderation In Eating
---------------------------------

Eating and drinking is also one of those matters with regard to which
people go to extremes and, of course, mostly towards excess. No doubt,
you need food to live and it is necessary that food should reach the
cells of your body to maintain life. However, the important question is
how much food your body needs and whether excessive food is good or
harmful.

al-Ridha (AS) says:

You should know that a human body is like fertile land. If moderation is
exercised in the matter of its development, i.e. necessary quantity of
water is provided to it, which should neither be so excessive as to
drown it and change into swamp and bog, nor so scanty that it should
remain thirsty and dry, such land yields much produce. However, the land
will become barren if not properly looked after.

Therefore, over-eating is a major cause of inattention in Prayer, and
one needs to take care of this problem five times a day before every
Prayer. Luqman Hakim once said to his beloved son:

Dear son! When the stomach is full your faculty of thinking goes to
sleep, and your tongue of wisdom becomes dumb and your limbs fail to
worship Allah (SWT).

Strategy 14: Checking And Inspection
------------------------------------

Keep track of the level of your attention and concentration in Prayer.
If it is the right level, give thanks; if wrong, ask for forgiveness.

Self-conditioning, contemplation and self-examination are essential
pre-requisites for a seeker of truth who is battling with his self.
Self-conditioning or stipulation means binding oneself with the
resolution not to do anything against God’s commands.

al-Khomeini (RA) advises you to specifically be in this state of mind at
night, the time for introspection and inner deliberation, and evaluate
your deeds of the whole day. *This is the time to see whether you have
been honest to the Giver of all, to whom everybody is accountable. If
you have been faithful to Him, you should be thankful to Him that He has
made you successful in your intentions.* Furthermore, *Shaytan and his
accursed legions may magnify the volume of the task in your eyes, but
these are the guile played by the cheat. You should always curse, and
drive away the devil and evil thoughts from within the depths of your
heart and the domain of your mind.*

Reviewing your performance on the Daily Prayer should be part of the
contemplation you employ every night, to be able to scan through all the
problems and suggest possible solutions. Thus, the next Prayer is
significantly different from the previous one. *Please refer the 30-Day
Workbook for more details.*

Strategy 15: Putting Thoughts In Writing
----------------------------------------

Unfortunately, in any relaxed state and in particular the Prayer, it is
only human to have numerous creative thoughts, as well as recollections
of things you forgot or need to do. These thoughts may haunt your
continued meditation if you don’t write them down.

It has been advised by great scholars to write these thoughts down on a
piece of paper so you may free your mind to concentrate on the Prayer.
You can then more easily continue without clinging to thoughts you fear
you might forget. You will be bringing your conscious and subconscious
mind closer together and this will yield much useful information and
ideas you will want to pursue upon completion of your Prayer. *Please
refer the 30-Day Workbook for more details.*

Strategy 16: Removing Obstacles
-------------------------------

Also, before the Prayer, all obstacles in attaining heart’s presence
must be removed. As such, you should relieve yourself before starting
Prayer, and you should satisfy your hunger or thirst as well. Also,
since over-eating creates a lack of attention and concentration, you
should observe moderation if you have to eat before Prayer.

Drinking a full glass of water is recommended before Prayer. A campaign
has been launched in several schools in the United Kingdom to encourage
children to drink more water to increase their concentration. Studies
have found that children who are dehydrated do not work as well in the
classroom as those who have drunk the recommended eight glasses of water
a day. All brain activity is neurological and is a chemical activity
which doesn't function without water

If you are busy investigating something or you are disturbed and
agitated about a particular event, you should try within the bounds of
possibilities, to eliminate the causes of the worry before Prayer.
*Think it, and work it out before you stand in front of the Almighty.*
This way you appear before Allah (SWT) secured and free from
insecurities of life.

The cloth you wear during Prayer may also be an obstacle if it is tight,
or very loose and uncomfortable. To avoid such instances, proper attire
to one’s liking is recommended at all times. The following tradition
gives us an idea of what could transpire in Prayer and what one is
supposed to do to maintain the concentration in his Prayer.

al-Khomeini (RA) reports from Shaykh Muhammad, son of al-Hasan (al-Tusi
– RA) reporting in al-*Tahdhib* with his trustworthy narrators leading
to Abu Hamzah al-Thumali RA), that he said:

*I saw ‘Ali, son of al-Husayn (al-Sajjad (AS) offering Prayer, when the
cloak slipped from his shoulders. The Imam did not arrange it until he
had finished his Prayer.* When I questioned him about it, he said:

*‘Woe to you, don’t you know before whom I stood? Nothing is accepted of
a devotee’s Prayer except what he offers with the proper attention of
his heart’.*

Thereupon I said to him, *‘May I be ransomed for you, (if that is so)
then we (i.e. the like of us) are doomed!’* He replied, *‘No indeed.
Verily God compensates for that for the faithful by the means of
supererogatory Prayers’.*  
*(al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’iI al-Shi'ah, iv, 688)*

Strategy 17: Grief-Stricken, Submission And Sadness
---------------------------------------------------

No doubt, sadness brings to your soul many benefits, one of which is a
revolution of the soul. It is the time when you are sad and
grief-stricken, that you are able to fully organize and empower yourself
to be most attentive in Prayer. It is widely accepted that a sad mind is
more attuned towards an objective (Allah (SWT), in this case) and more
capable of maintaining a high level of attention and concentration.

There shouldn’t be any problem practicing this kind of emotion before
Prayer, since you have to warn yourself of the following, *‘You have no
way of knowing that your past sins have been forgiven; no way of knowing
that you will refrain from committing sins in the future; no way of
knowing that your actions win the pleasure of Allah (SWT)…’*  
*(al-Sadiq (AS)*

The Prophet (S) puts this all clearly by saying to Abu Dharr (RA):

O’ Abu Dharr! Allah (SWT) has not been worshipped with anything like
that of length of grief.

O’ Abu Dharr! Whoever is given knowledge which doesn’t cause him to cry
simply because he has been given knowledge, it will not benefit him.
Allah (SWT) has described the learned and said:

Surely those who were given knowledge before it, when it is recited unto
them they fall upon their faces in prostration and they say, *‘Glory be
to our Lord! Surely the promise of Allah (SWT) shall take place’.* They
fall on their faces crying and they become increasingly humble.

At this juncture, it should be made clear that crying and shedding tears
for personal reasons during Prayer will make your Prayer null and void.

Strategy 18: Patience, Accepting Fault, And Addressing The Problem To Allah (SWT)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You should be patient with your practice of attention. You do not
perform masterfully the first time in any given circumstance. It is the
continued practice of meditation, relaxation and attention that reaps
benefits. You should not expect specific benefits in a short period of
time. Invoking Allah (SWT) and addressing your problem of inattention is
a good practice, as He would definitely assist you in this matter.

Patience is vital when we have to perform obedient acts for the love of
Allah (SWT), the Great. As He has said:

Indeed, you will not get what I possess, but being patient with those
things, which you don’t like (but you still do) in order to seek My
pleasure. Patience on My obedience is easier for you than patience in
the Fire of Hell.  
 (Hadith al-Qudsi)

Whenever you intend to perform a good deed, Shaytan is there instantly
to persuade you not to do it. He may practice tricks on you and convince
you not to do the deed, but you have to be careful. You should be able
to identify these tricks and discard them. *Diagnosing* his entrance to
your soul is an effective way to solve this issue. And if Shaytan is not
successful in convincing you not to do a particular obedient act then he
will try his level best to make you do it quickly and with the least of
concentration.

What a difference between us and those obedient servants of Allah (SWT)
who welcome acts of worship, attend to them with pleasure and fulfill
them efficiently. We think that Allah (SWT) Almighty has burdened us
with duties, consider them troublesome and view them as a burden. This
is surely not so.

al-Khomeini (RA) reports that Patience is of 3 kinds:

Patience at the time of Affliction; Patience in regard to Obedience;
Patience in regard to Disobedience.

One who bears patiently with affliction, resisting it with a fair
consolation, Allah (SWT) uplifts him 300 degrees, the elevation of one
degree over another being like the distance between earth and heavens.

And one who is patient in regard to obedience, Allah (SWT) uplifts him
600 degrees, the elevation of one degree over another being like the
distance between the earth’s depths and The Throne.

And one who is patient in regard to disobedience, Allah (SWT) uplifts
him 900 degrees, the elevation of one degree over another being like the
distance between the earth’s depths and the furthest frontiers of The
Throne.

Strategy 19: Fasting
--------------------

al-Khomeini (RA) reports a tradition that there was once a person who
was in great misfortune. He had nothing to eat and neither was he
invited for a meal on that strenuous day. He thus decided to visit one
of the houses of Allah (SWT) (i.e. a mosque) and declare his poverty in
front of his Lord. It is reported that he passed the whole night in
hunger and his invocation was not answered. The next day The Prophet (S)
was informed of the situation. He (S), at that very moment, was blessed
with a revelation from the Almighty that:

Tell our guest that We were his Host last night and wanted to provide
him with sumptuous food, but found no better food than hunger!

There is a tradition by Imam ‘Ali (AS) that on The Night of Me’raj,
Allah (SWT) said to The Prophet (S):

O’ Ahmad! How sweet and beautiful are the hunger, silence and seclusion?
Wisdom, heart’s tranquillity, nearness to Me, continuous grief,
righteous talks, thriftiness, indifference at the time of ease, and
hardships, are the characteristics acquired by My servant as a result of
hunger, silence, and seclusion.

Fasting has not only been well established and well researched as a
primal source of mental alertness, but the act has also been well
ignored. Fasting is considered one of the safest therapeutic agents
known today in natural as well as conventional medicine. If only we
could use fasting, as a way to increase our mental capability to
concentrate, not only would we benefit from the fast, we would also
achieve the pleasure of Allah (SWT).

It has been reported by researches in Alternative Medicine that during
the process of fasting, the body lives on it’s own substance. In its
wisdom, and here lies the secret of the extraordinary effectiveness of
fasting as a powerful mode of therapy, the body will decompose and burn
those cells and tissues which are diseased, damaged or dead and
responsible for accumulating toxins in our body and brain.

During fasting, there also occurs the building of new, healthy cells
thus bringing your body to a dynamic state. In this process, the
cleansing capacity of the eliminative organs - lungs, liver, kidneys and
the skin - is greatly increased, and masses of accumulated metabolic
wastes and toxins are quickly expelled.

Fasting also offers physiological rest to all the major organs in the
body, including the brain, and there is a stabilizing effect on all the
vital physiological, nervous and mental functions. Mental powers are
thus improved.

Strategy 20: The World And Its Pleasures
----------------------------------------

Daylami, in *Irshadul Qulub,* quoting The Commander of the Faithful
(AS), says that The Prophet of Allah (S) said:

On The Night of The Me’raj (Ascension), Allah, the Exalted, said: *‘0
Ahmad! If a servant performs the Prayer as much as that of the people of
the earth and the heaven, and fasts as much as that of the people of the
earth and the heaven, and refrains, like the angels, from food, and
wears the apparel of a devotee, then I see in his heart a bit of love
for this world or for worldly reputation, leadership, celebrity and
ornaments, he will not be in an abode in My neighborhood and I will
drive My love out of his heart and make it dark until he forgets Me. I
will not let him taste the sweetness of My love.’*  
*(Irshad al-Qulub, Volume 1, Page 206)*

According to Ayatullah Ibrahim Amini, one of the greatest obstacle to
attaining the state of perfect communion with Allah (SWT) is unwavering
attachment to worldly allurements namely, wealth and property, power and
position. One’s attraction to these things causes the worshipper’s
attention to these transient things. Therefore, you must cut-off these
attractions at all cost, and at all times, so that the heart’s presence
and attention towards Allah (SWT) becomes easier during Prayer.

There are various interpretations of the term World. What is essential
here is to understand the *Disapproved World.* According to al-Majlisi
(RA):

All things that prevent men and women from obeying Allah (SWT) and keep
them away from His Love, and from seeking the hereafter, is defined as
the Disapproved World.

Let it be known to you that which can be deduced from all the verses of
The Qur’an and the traditions in this regard, according to our
understanding of them, is that the accursed (disapproved) world is the
sum total of all those things that prevent man from obeying Allah (SWT)
and keep him away from His love and from seeking the Hereafter.

These attractions may include television and radio and their related
illicit pleasures; being part of a group that only backbites people and
uses foul language; fill oneself with food at all times; being lazy and
wasting time on useless matters, and so forth. This is the world one has
to refrain from.

The Prophet (S) had this advise to his companion Abu Dharr (RA) with
regards to the *Disapproved World,* and reads as follows:

O’ Abu Dharr! The (disapproved) world is cursed! Curse is what’s in it
except that which seeks Allah’s (SWT) pleasure. And there is nothing
more hateful to Allah (SWT) than the (disapproved) world. He created it
then left it. He didn’t look at it and will not look at it until the
Final Hour (Judgment Day). And there is nothing more pleasurable to
Allah (SWT) than faith in Him and abandoning that which He forbids.

O’ Abu Dharr! Blessed are those people who stay far away from this
world, and those who await the Hereafter. They take the earth of Allah
(SWT) as a carpet, its soil as a pillow and its water as perfume. They
read the Book of Allah (SWT) loudly, call Him loudly and they cut
themselves off from worldliness.

The *Approved World* is,

The abode of truth for him who appreciates its truthfulness, a place of
safety for him who understands it, a mine of treasures for him who
collects provisions from it (for the next world), and a house of
instructions for him who draws lessons from it. It is the shrine of
worship for those who love Allah (SWT), the house of Prayer for His
Angels, the place where the revelations of Allah (SWT) descend, and the
market place for those devoted to Him. Herein, they earn His Mercy and
herein they acquire Paradise by way of profit.  
*(Imam ‘Ali (AS)*

Worshipping Allah more than the compulsory prayers; using the time in
this world to do useful things and help people; taking care of one’s
Family and earning lawful income; refraining from the forbidden acts
that displease Allah, and so forth, are acts that will plant healthy
seeds in this world for the person to enjoy its fruits in the next. This
is the Approved World.

Strategy 21: Arresting Thoughts
-------------------------------

Because any individual’s mind is filled with thoughts at all times, he
is supposed to arrest them, and put a stop on them during Prayer. When a
thought comes, a command *stop* is used subconsciously to arrest and
halt that thought and the person does not dwell on it. If this strategy
is used on all incoming thoughts, then one will assume command and
control over his incoming thoughts during Prayer.

In *al-Kafi,* on the authority of al-Baqir (AS), it is stated that he
has said:

When doubts in the Prayer become too frequent, do not give heed to them,
and regard the Prayer to be correct. It is hoped that this state would
leave you, as Shaytan causes it.  
*(Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Page 359, Tradition 8)*

In another narrative, al-Baqir (AS) says:  
 Do not make it Shaytan’s habit to frequent you by breaking your Prayer,
as this will stir his greed against you. Shaytan is evil and gets
accustomed to what he is habituated to.

Zurarah says that the Imam added:

That malignant (Shaytan, the Accursed) wants to be obeyed. So, if he is
disobeyed he will not come back to you.  
*(Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Tradition 2)*

Arresting your thoughts can help you overcome nagging worry and doubt,
which stands in the way of your attention towards the Almighty.
Arresting a thought involves concentrating intensely on the unwanted
thought and suddenly stopping and emptying the mind. The command STOP is
generally used to interrupt the distracting thought.

One technique is to draw a small dot on a piece of paper and
concentrating on it very intensely. Any thought coming to your mind has
to be thrown back and ignored. Focusing more on the dot, and freezing
your mind will give rise to unwavering meditation. The more time you
involve yourself with thinking about NOTHING, the more attentive and
focused you become. This way your brain gets habituated to concentrating
for longer periods of time without letting distracting thoughts
interrupt your goals. **(Figure One)**

It is also more effective if you explore and list down all the stressful
and negative thoughts that interfere with your Prayer. You should then
categorize them in the following four sections - *No interference,
Interferes a little, Interferes moderately and Interferes a great deal.*
This way, you have a list, and all this needs to be done in writing. It
should be understood as an accepted fact that *none of these thoughts
are productive during Prayer.* **(Figure One)**

Arresting your thoughts requires consistent motivation. You should
decide now that you really want to eliminate these negative thoughts
during Prayer. Once this is done and the thoughts put in writing and
categorized as mentioned above, close your eyes and visualize each
thought, starting with the one that interferes a little only, and try
and solve the problem in your mind. This way, a thought will be
eliminated and will have no place in your Prayer. Together, and after
some time, you will eliminate all the thoughts including the ones that
interfere a great deal.

This exercise should be performed daily so no thought is misplaced or
forgotten. Taking care of every thought and why it should distract you
is one way of making sure the thought doesn’t appear in front of you
during your Prayer and distract you from your goal. Some thoughts may
return again and again, so you will just have to learn to interrupt
them. Like the experts say, *the main effort is to stifle each thought
as it begins, and to concentrate on your Prayer. The thoughts will
return less and less readily in most cases, and eventually cease to be a
problem.*

According to al-Khomeini (RA), in *The Disciplines of Prayer:*

The principal way of taming it (evil desires) is to act to its contrary.
That is, at the time of the Prayer one is to prepare himself to control
the imagination during the Prayer and confine it to action, and, as soon
as it tries to slip out of his hand, to recapture it. One should
carefully watch it in all the actions, recitations, invocations, etc. of
the Prayer, observing it so as not to be obstinate.

At the beginning, this seems to be a difficult task. But after a while
of strict practice and treatment, it will certainly become tame and
obedient. You should not, of course, expect yourself, at the beginning,
to be able to control the bird of imagination along the Prayer
completely. Actually, this is impossible. Perhaps those who stressed
this impossibility had such expectations. The situation requires
intention, careful patience and gradual training.

It is possible that you can first control your imagination during only
one-tenth of the Prayer or even less than that, in which you can have
the presence of heart. Then, if one pays more attention, and if he feels
himself in need of that, he can attain a better result, and can
gradually overcome the Shaytan of fancy and the bird of imagination,
such that they come under his control in most of the Prayer.

Strategy 22: Remembrance Of Death
---------------------------------

Great Scholars have advised you to keep busy reminding yourself of death
as a way to fear Allah (SWT) and maintain vigilance in your daily Prayer
and communication with Allah (SWT). The idea is to develop piety and
fear in you and to convince your soul the importance of Prayer.

Allah (SWT) says in Hadith al-Qudsi,

I am surprised at that person who is sure of death and yet laughs
(unnecessarily)!

O’ Son of Adam (AS)! Everyday your life is getting shorter but still you
do not understand? Each day I send down to you My bounties but you are
not thankful to Me about them. You are neither content with My little
provision nor are you satisfied with a lot of it.

You can only fear death if you have the knowledge of what will happen to
you after death. Indeed, the Infallible Imams (AS) have advised you to
constantly think and fear death and that death is a strong weapon for
the devout believer to defeat Shaytan and his weak forces. Indeed,

Frequent remembrance of death decreases one’s desires.  
*(Imam ‘Ali (AS)*

Unlike some people’s belief that the remembrance of death and the
Resurrection Day makes one negligent about worldly affairs and material
gains, our belief is that the remembrance of death prevents us from
heedlessness and chaos. He who is cautious about his performances, big
or small, will not commit any wrong act. Apparently, this is one of the
most efficient ways to scrutinize your behavior and lead a good and
decent life.

This way, you would have a strong and valid reason not to lose your
concentration whilst communicating with Allah (SWT).

al-Sadiq (AS) says the following about the effects of remembering death
and the Day of Judgment:

Remembering death suppresses inordinate desires. It uproots the very
foundation of negligence and apathy. With the reminding of Allah’s
promise, it strengthens a man’s heart. It softens the hard mentality of
a man. It demolishes the banners of inordinate desires and
transgression. It suppresses the evil of greediness and makes the world
humble before one’s eyes.

Allamah Taba Tabai (RA) quotes the following long tradition in his
*Exegesis of The Qur’an, al-Mizan:*

Indeed! When the son of Adam comes to his last day in this world and the
first of the next, his property, his children and his actions flash
before him. He turns to his property and says, *‘By Allah (SWT)! I was
covetous of you and avaricious. What have you got for me?’* Then he
turns to his children and says, *‘By Allah (SWT)! Surely I was your love
and I was your protector. What have you in store for me?’* They will
say, *‘We shall convey you to your grave and bury you in it’.*

Then he turns to his actions and says, *‘By Allah (SWT)! I was
indifferent to you and you were distasteful to me. What do you have for
me?’* So it says, *‘I am your companion in your grave as well as on the
Day of Gathering when I am presented with you before your Lord’.*

After his death, if he is a friend of Allah (SWT) there comes to him a
visitor, the most sweet-scented of all people, of most beautiful
appearance and wearing the most adorned apparel, and says to him*,
‘Rejoice with refreshments from Allah (SWT) and flowers from the Garden
of Bounties. You arrived a good arrival’.* Thereupon he says, *‘Who are
you?’* The visitor then replies, *‘I am your good actions. Proceed from
the world to The Garden’.* And he recognizes the one who washes his body
and earnestly appeals to his carrier to hasten him to the grave.

Then when he enters his grave, two angels come to him and they are the
interrogators in the grave, with elegantly dressed hair, writing on
earth with their teeth, their voice like roaring thunder and their eyes
like streaking lightening. They ask him*; ‘Who is your Lord? And who is
your Prophet? And what is your Religion?’* And he says, *‘Allah (SWT) is
my Lord, Muhammad (S) is my Prophet and Islam is my Religion’.* They
exclaim, *‘May Allah (SWT) confirm you in what you like and are pleased
with’.* And this is the meaning of The Word of Allah (SWT):

***Allah (SWT) confirms those who believe with the sure word in this
worldly life and the Hereafter.*** ***(Qur’an - Chapter 14, Verse 27)***

They make his grave spacious for him as far as his eyes can see and they
open for him a gate to Heaven and say, *‘Sleep with joy, the sleep of a
fine looking bride’.* And it is the Word of Allah (SWT):

***The dwellers of the Garden shall on that Day be in a better abiding
place and a better resting-place.*** ***(Qur’an - Chapter 25, Verse
24)***

And if he is an enemy of his Lord, then comes to him a visitor, the
ugliest of the creatures of Allah (SWT) in attires and the
foulest-smelling. And he tells him, *‘Welcome to the entertainment of
boiling water and roasting in Hell’.* And he (the dead person)
recognizes the one who washes his body and earnestly appeals to his
carrier (the bier-bearer) to hold him back.

And when he is buried in his grave, the examiners come to him and remove
his shroud from him. Then they ask him, *‘Who is your Lord? What is your
Religion? And who is your Prophet?’* And he says, *‘I do not know!’* So
they say to him, *‘You did not know, nor were you on the right path’.*
Then they hit him with an iron-rod, a stroke, which frightens every
creature of Allah (SWT) except the Jinn and the men.

Thereafter they open for him a door to the Hell and tell him, *‘Sleep in
the worst condition’.* So he is squeezed in a narrow space like a shaft
in an arrowhead, until his brain comes out from between his nails and
flesh. And Allah (SWT) sets on him the serpents of the earth and its
scorpions and insects which go on biting him until Allah (SWT) will
raise him from his grave, and he will long for the advent of the Hour,
because of the trouble in which he finds himself.

It is recommended that a worshipper should think of death before every
Prayer. He should imagine that the moment of death has arrived, and that
the Prayer is his last one to his Lord and the last few moments to ask
for forgiveness and win Divine Mercy. As Imam ‘Ali (AS) says:

Offer compulsory Prayer at its time, like someone who is offering his
farewell Prayer, and is afraid that after this he will never have the
opportunity to offer the Prayer again. If one realizes someone nearby is
watching his Prayer, he becomes more careful in offering his Prayer.
Beware! You are standing in front of someone Who sees you but you do not
see Him!

However, the important thing in this respect is to feel being in need -
a mood, which is little felt by us. Our heart does not believe that the
source of the happiness in the Hereafter, and the means of a
long-lasting life, is the Prayer. We take the Prayer to be an additional
burden on our lives. We think it an imposition and an obligation. The
love of a thing understands its consequences. We understood its
consequence and the heart believes in it, and therefore, we are not in
need of any advice or admonition in acquiring it.

But, if we believe in the Hereafter-life and feel we are in need of that
life, and regard worship, especially the Prayer, to be the capital for
living there, and the source of happiness in that world, we, naturally,
will try to do our best to acquire it, and we will not feel any
difficulty and fatigue in ourselves; or rather, we will hurry to acquire
it with complete eagerness and craving, and endure every hardship and
undergo all circumstances for that purpose.  
*(al-Khomeini, The Disciplines of Prayer)*

Strategy 23: Fixing Your Gaze
-----------------------------

The Prophet (S) has said:

While a person is in the standing position during Prayer, he must be
looking down fixing his gaze to the point where he places his forehead
while in prostration; while in Ruku’ (bending position) the gaze should
be between his two feet; while in Qunoot (when he raises his hands
reciting the invocation) he should fix the gaze on the palms of his
hands, placing them in front of his face; during Sajdah (prostration)
his eyes looking at his nose; and while in the final sitting position
the gaze to be towards his armpits.

After quoting this tradition, Mir Ahmad Ali (RA) continues:

Man, while praying should totally forget himself and get so much mindful
to Allah that he must be practically away from the world around him, and
with the constant practice, and with the due concentration, the gradual
earning of this state is not difficult.  
 *(S. V. Mir Ahmad ‘Ali, Commentary of The Qur’an)*

Attention and concentration problems are directly related to eye
movements. When one stands for Prayer, the less his eyes moves, the
better. High level of visual efficiency, and to fix your gaze on a
particular item will greatly lessen your distraction and allow you to
concentrate on the task at hand. According to researchers, attention is
greatly enhanced when the eyes align themselves on a fixed point and
focus accurately.

Eye teaming is the term used in Optometry to define the ability to point
(fixate), focus and move the eyes to the same place at the same time.
These visual skills must be maintained effortlessly for prolonged
periods if the person is to maintain his concentration in Prayer.
Problems occur when extra effort is necessary to produce and maintain
singular vision. Further, a person may become drowsy due to excessive
fatigue attempting to maintain focus. Performance will then decrease.
Headaches, fatigue, blur, eye rubbing, loss of place when reading,
tearing, light sensitivity, eyestrain are all common symptoms. The
exercises that are mentioned in later sections should help one eliminate
such deficits.

Unfortunately, symptoms of eye-teaming and focusing problems often
become worse with time. While struggling to overcome these problems
during Prayer, one may find ways to avoid and just stop trying to focus
and his whole Prayer is filled with distracting thoughts.

Strategy 24: Avoiding The Whisperings Of Shaytan, The Accursed
--------------------------------------------------------------

‘Abdullah, the son of Sinan, is reported to have said:

I mentioned to al-Sadiq (AS) about a man who was troubled by *waswas
(whisperings from Shaytan)* in his Wudhu and Prayer, adding that he is a
man of intelligence. Thereupon al-Sadiq (AS) said: ‘What kind of
intelligence has he, when he obeys Shaytan?’ I said: ‘How does he obey
Shaytan?’ The Imam replied, ‘Ask him regarding its cause and he will
tell you that it is a work of Shaytan’.  
*(al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, i, Kitab al-Aql Wal-Jahl, Tradition 10)*

In *al-Kafi* (al-Kulayni (RA) reports) from Zurarah and Abu Basir that
they said:

“We asked him (i.e. al-Baqir or al-Sadiq (AS) about a man who had
frequent doubts in his Prayer*,* to the extent that he wouldn’t know how
much he has offered and how much remains to be offered. He said, *‘He
should repeat (the Prayer)’.* We said to him, *‘That happens to him a
lot and wherever he repeats his doubt also recurs.’* The Imam said,
*‘(In that case) he should ignore his doubt’.* The Imam then added,

*‘Do not let the evil one get accustomed to haunting him by tempting him
to break the Prayer. For Shaytan is wicked and gets accustomed to that
which he gets used to. So when one of you does not pay attention to his
doubt and does not break his Prayer frequently, and this is done a
number of times, the doubt will not recur to him’.”*

Then the Imam added, *‘The evil one wants to be obeyed, and when he is
disobeyed he will not return to any of you.’*

The assurance from the Aimmah (AS) is that if you do not permit Shaytan
to enter your souls during Payer, then he has no power to divert your
attention during Prayer. He (i.e. The Prophet (S) said, *Shaytan lays
his snout, which is like the snout of a pig on the heart of the son of
Adam, and instigates him to turn towards the world and that which God
has not made lawful. But when a person remembers Allah, Shaytan slinks
away.*  
*(Majma' al-bahrayn, Page 305)*

Further, since *Certainty, Conviction, Tranquillity, Steadiness, and
Sincerity* of the heart are caused by divine inspiration and angelic
suggestions, you ought to pray to the Almighty for His divine
deliverance and assistance during Prayer.

al-Sadiq (AS) has said:

A man came to The Prophet of Allah (S) and said: *‘O Prophet of Allah, I
complain to you concerning the whisperings from Shaytan that so troubles
me during Prayer that I don't know how much of my prayer I have
offered.’* The Prophet (S) said to him:

‘When you enter the state of Prayer, strike your left thigh with the
forefinger of your right hand, then say: *“In the Name of Allah and by
Allah, I put my trust in God, I seek refuge in God, the All-hearing, the
All-knowing from Shaytan, the Stoned One.”* You will exorcise him
(Shaytan) and drive him away’.”

Strategy 25: Exercises To Develop Attention, Meditation
-------------------------------------------------------

Meditation is one effective way to enhance alertness in Prayer. It is
popularly known as the practice of uncritically attempting to focus your
attention on one thing at a time. It is important to understand that the
heart of meditation in Prayer lies not simply in focusing on one entity
to the exclusion of all other thoughts, but rather in the attempt to
achieve good focus. The nature of our minds is such that it does not
want to stay concentrated. Myriad of thoughts will appear and seemingly
interfere with your Prayer. Therefore, repeating liturgies,
contemplating on the nature of Allah (SWT), His creations, and the
natural phenomena are effective ways to reap benefits from this kind of
exercise.

Contemplation whilst walking and performing our daily chores is another
alternative. al-Sadiq (AS) has said:

If you are intelligent, then you should be of firm resolution and
sincere intention before you set out for any place, for surely the
self’s nature is to overstep the bounds and encroach on the forbidden.
You should reflect when you walk, and take note of the wonders of God’s
work wherever you go.

Lower your gaze from whatever is inappropriate to faith, and remember
Allah (SWT) frequently. Those places where, and in connection with
which, Allah (SWT) is mentioned will testify to that before Allah (SWT)
on The Day of Judgment, and will ask forgiveness for those people so
that Allah (SWT) will let them enter the Garden.

Gradually this meditation becomes stiffer and higher, and sometimes mean
concentration on one’s silence, or on one’s self or on a higher truth,
i.e. the names and the attributes of Allah (SWT). The following are the
different types of meditation and relaxation exercises that will create
in you mental alertness in Prayer.

### 1. Focused Meditation Exercise

Sit with a pencil and paper. Allow your eyes to rest gently on the blank
paper. Pay attention to what you are experiencing. When something comes
to mind (a thought, an emotion, a memory, a sensation), follow this
direction very carefully:

Write down just enough that, if you wanted to, you could remember that
what you just experienced. Then let that experience go, and your eyes
rest gently on the paper. This is important: Do not think about what you
wrote. Do not analyze it. Do not resist it or fight it or try to change
it. Do not connect it with anything. Simply accept it, note it, and let
it go. To keep yourself from being drawn into the words on the paper,
and the thoughts behind them, rotate the page around 15 degrees after
writing, so that as you write more, the words appear on the page as a
roughly circular series of jottings.

If a thought recurs, just put a check by it. If it keeps recurring, sit
with it a while to make certain you have noted enough about this
experience so that you could fully remember it if you wanted to. Then
let it go and return to the open-ended focus on your present awareness.

Continue doing this for 10 minutes.

When you have the time, continue the exercise as long as the thoughts
keep coming. Then continue the open focus for about 5 minutes after the
last thoughts came to you.  
**(Figure Two)**

Another form of this exercise is as follows:

An ancient technique is to use a candle as a visual focus. In that
technique, you meditate with your eyes open. The candle is your focus.
Whatever you think is OK. Whatever you imagine or feel is OK. Just keep
bringing your focus back to the candle.

Do not JUDGE your meditation. Whatever happens is okay. Keep practicing
at least ten minutes a day, preferably in the early morning when there
are very few distractions. After a while, when you sit down for these
two exercises, nothing should come to your mind that can significantly
distract you. Your mind will be as blank as ever. Exercise two should be
much easier for you – give it a try.

### 2. Blank Meditation Exercise

A blank form of Meditation equals a *frozen* mind (not even one thought
should be entertained; one should play dead and should not think of
anything - a blank mind throughout the exercise) and this act may be
practiced for five to ten minutes each day, and within a few weeks, you
may notice that your intuition and level of concentration on any given
task will begin to increase.

### 3. Breathing Meditation Exercise

Quoted by al-Mutahhari (RA), The Prophet (S) said:

True worship does not lie in engaging oneself constantly in
supererogatory Prayer or in fasting frequently, but in contemplation of
the creation and seeking to know the Creator through His works.

Indeed, if one were to lie down, eyes closed, all muscles relaxed,
practicing very slow and deep breathing, and contemplate on the Creation
and workings of Allah (SWT), this act would be considered not only an
effective way to develop one’s attention, but a form of worship.
However, one should not entertain any other thought during this 5 - 10
minute exercise, except that which concerns the Creation of Allah (SWT).

During this process, you would learn to breathe slow and deep, provide
enough oxygen to furnish and satisfy the brain and other major parts of
your body.

#### A Note On Respiration

To continue with breathing, normal respiration begins with a slow calm
exhalation carried out by relaxing the muscles. The chest is depressed
by its own weight, expelling air. This exhalation must be as silent as
every other action involved in breathing (you should not hear yourself
breathe), and because it is silent, it will also be slow. At the end of
the expiration the abdominal muscles help the lungs to empty to their
fullest extent, by means of a contraction, which expels the last traces
of polluted air. The spongy make-up of the lungs does not allow them to
be emptied completely, so there is always a residue of impure air in the
lungs. We must attempt to minimize this residue because with the fresh
air provided by inhalation it makes up the actual air we breathe. The
more complete the exhalation, the greater the quantity of fresh air
enters the lungs, and the purer the air gets into the lungs.

### The Stages of Breathing, Meditation Exercise

This method works best while you are lying on your back. Here is a brief
description of the various phases:

1) Empty the lungs entirely by breathing out all the air in your lungs  
 2) Slowly lower the diaphragm allowing air into the lungs. The abdomen
swells filling the bottom of the lungs with air.  
 3) Expand the ribs without straining.  
 4) Allow the lungs to completely fill by raising the collarbone.

Throughout this procedure, the air should enter in a continuous flow,
without gasping. It is essential to breathe silently! It is of great
importance to concentrate the mind entirely upon the action of breathing
in the first few minutes before filling your mind with thoughts
concerning the Creation of Allah (SWT).

Inhalation, like exhalation, must be silent, slow, continuous and easy.
Do not blow yourself up like a balloon! Breathe easily without
straining. Remember that the ideal respiration is deep, slow, silent,
and easy.

As we all know, Oxygen plays a vital role in the circulatory and
respiratory systems. As you breathe, oxygen that is inhaled purifies
your blood by removing poisonous waste products circulating throughout
your blood. Irregular breathing will hamper this purification process
and cause waste products to remain in circulation. Digestion will then
become irregular, leaving tissues and organs undernourished. Improper
oxygen consumption will thus ultimately lead to fatigue and heightened
anxiety states.

Irregular breathing elicited during stressful situations not only makes
it hard to cope with them but also contributes to a general
deterioration of health. By careful control of your breathing pattern,
you not only rejuvenate your system, but you also counter the unhealthy
effects of stress. Although this exercise can be practiced in a variety
of postures, the following is recommended for beginners, at night before
sleeping:

Lie down on a blanket or rug on the floor. Bend your knees and move your
feet about eight inches apart, with your toes turned outward slightly.
Make sure your back is straight. Place one hand on your abdomen and one
hand on your chest. Inhale slowly and deeply through your nose into your
abdomen to push up your hand as much as feels comfortable. Your chest
should move only a little and only with your abdomen.

Continue until your breathing becomes rhythmic and comfortable. Now,
inhale through your nose and exhale through your mouth, making a quiet,
breezy sound as you gently breathe out. Your mouth, tongue and jaw will
be relaxed. Take long, slow, deep breaths raising and lowering your
abdomen. Hear the sound and feel the texture of breathing as you become
more and more relaxed.

When you first begin this technique, do it for five minutes. When you
become more comfortable with it, you may extend it up to 20 minutes.
Upon ending a session, stay still for a few minutes and try to keep the
entire body relaxed.

The purpose of this technique is to develop a good, relaxing breathing
method and developing and maintaining attention during any given task,
in particular the Five Daily Prayer.


