Introduction
============

This is the first part, entitled "Gunneh-ha-ye mukhtalif-a Tashayyu'wa
awamil-e gustarish-e an," from the author's study on the history of
Shiism in Iran until the Safavid era, Ta'rikh-a Tashayyu' dar iran, az
aghaz ta qarn-e dahum-e hijri (Qum: Intisharat-a Ansariyan, 1375/
[^1996])Preface:

The literal meaning of shi 'ah is follower and supporter, and only when
accompanied by a qualifier that does it signify the followers of a
certain person. During the days when the word was used only in its
common literal sense it was usually used along with the names of Ali
(a), 'Uthman or Mu'awiyah. Hence there would be the "shi'ah of Ali," the
"shi'ah of Uthman" and the "shiah of Mu'awiyah."

After some time the word shi'ah came to be used specifically as a term
for the followers of Imam Ali ( a) and during this period the article
"al' in the word "al-shiah" clearly denoted the followers of the Ahl
al-Bayt ('a). It is difficult to determine the exact time since when the
term al-shi'ah acquired currency as a name for the followers of Imam Ali
('a).

[^1] Perhaps the letter written, on the occasion martyrdom of Imam Hasan
('a), by the Shi'is of Kufah under the lead of Sulayman ibn Surad as a
message of condolence to Imam Husayn ('a) is the earliest documented
instance of its use as a term. Ya'qubi has cited the text of this
letter. In it the Sh'is of Kufah wrote:

How great is [the calamity] which has struck this ummah in general
('ammah), you, and the Shi'ah in particular (khassah)! [^2] Here, one may
as well note the use of the word 'ammah as a kind of term used in
opposition to khassah as the term for the Shi'ah.

Another point which is important for understanding the development of
the term shi'ah is to know whom it excluded. In other words, who were
those who stood in contradistinction to the Shiah of Ali. There is
indisputable evidence provided by older and recent research that there
existed two distinct factions during the era of the Messenger of God
(s).

The first consisted of the Quraysh who were not on good terms with the
Banu Hashim since before the advent of Islam. The second faction was
that of the supporters of Ali consisting of the Hashimis and their
supporters from among the Muhajirin and the Ansar, such as Abu Dharr,
Ammar, Miqdad and Salman. Al-Farsi concedes the existence of these two
factions before the episode of Saqifah. [^3] The extent of their
political differences, which had religious roots from the very
beginning, increased with time.

For instance, some of the Companions from the very early days did not
recognize a role for the Prophet's Sunnah by the side of the Qur'an.
This belief was the important characteristic of the Qurayshi faction.
Denial of the religious authority of the Prophet's prescriptions and
prohibition on the writing and narration of hadith are clearly visible
elements in the stance of the leaders of this faction right from the
Prophet's days.

Without doubt one can say that the Companions of the Prophet (s) formed
two different groups from this angle: those who believed in the
necessity of following the Prophet (s) in all aspects and those who did
not consider it obligatory to follow the Prophet (s) in matters relating
to government and political affairs.

The pre-Islamic influence of the Quraysh, along with other factors, led
the latter group to acquire power. A little later when Abd al-Rahman ibn
Awf laid down the condition that he would deliver the office of the
caliphate to the candidate who would follow the practice (sirah) of the
Shaykhayn (i.e. Abu Bakr and 'Umar) and Imam Ali insisted that he would
base his policy only on the Qur'an, the sirah of the Prophet and his own
judgements (ijtihad) it was obvious that the religious difference was
gradually expanding.

Until the time when Umar was in the office of the caliphate, the
generality of people, excepting the followers of Imam Ali, followed the
decrees (fatwa) of the State, not attaching much significance to the
difference that existed at that time between the practice of the Prophet
(s) and that of others.

But when Uthman, besides allegations of political and financial
misdemeanor, was accused of acts that were considered to be religiously
deviant (bid'ah) and he was challenged by a large number of Companions,
the problem arose as to whom the people should regard as a competent
religious authority. In other words, whom were they to emulate? If we
note that it were the opponents of the Qurayshi faction who led the
movement against Uthman, we can understand better the connection between
differences on political and religious issues.

'Uthman was killed at the end of 35 H./656 and Ali assumed the duties
of caliphate. Now the leader of the anti-Qurayshi faction, who
incidentally had no role in the revolt against Uthman and whose counsel
went unheeded by the extremists, had assumed the office of the
caliphate. From the very beginning, Syria, which led one wing of the
Qurayshi faction, did not recognize his caliphate.

Other leaders of the Qurayshi faction were Talhah and Zubayr who were
also disgruntled with the rule of Imam Ali ('a). They made Basrah their
base and as a consequence of this rebellion the Imam was compelled to
shift his capital to Kufah. In Madinah itself a number of Companions,
albeit very small, refused to give allegiance to the Imam. They were the
neutralists' (Qa'idin).

Aside from political issues, an important problem was the clarification
of religious issues concerning controversial matters especially in
relation to emergent issues. It was for this reason that two political
and, as a consequence, religious factions emerged. There were those who
accepted Imam Ali's religious authority and considered it a religious
obligation to follow him; they were those who were not acceptable to the
Uthmanid party now represented by Syria and Basrah.

The second group consisted of those who were not prepared to accept the
Imam's rule and opposed him with the motive of avenging Uthman's death.
All that which went into forming the attitudes of the opponents,
acquiring a more developed form in the course of time, came to be called
the Uthmani creed. This creed stood in contrast to the Alawid faction to
which the term Shiah came to be applied shortly afterwards.

During the developments of the period of the Imam's caliphate, a group
became the followers and supporters of Imam M and gradually came to be
called al-Shi'ah or Shi'is. As against them a group of people became
partisans of Uthman and the Uthmanid faction and they came to be known
as al-'Uthmaniyyah or 'Uthmanis. For this reason the Uthmaniyyah became
the name for the religious approach that opposed Shiism. In the course
of time it came to represent the religion of the common people who took
their religious beliefs and practices from the Umayyad rulers. The
Umayyads considered themselves as the continuation of the earlier
caliphs and considered Imam Ali ('a) as standing in contradistinction to
them.

During this period, the term shi'ah generally stood in contrast to the
term 'Uthmaniyyah. However, the term shi'ah was not used in a univocal
sense in all its applications. Among the "Shiis" there were those who
were named so merely because they were against 'Uthman and supported the
Imam as the legitimate caliph.

Many of them also accepted the preceding caliphs and, as will be seen,
they too were called Shi'is' by extremist Uthmanis. However, among these
undifferentiated Shiis there were those who considered the Imamate as
the sole right of Imam Ali ('a) as someone who had been appointed by the
Prophet (s) to that office which they viewed as vested with a kind of
Divine right. They did not consider it necessary to refrain from
cooperating with the earlier caliphs, for the Imam himself had
maintained silence in those circumstances for the sake of Islam, as was
repeatedly pointed out by him.

In the course of their support of the Uthmani creed, the Umayyads
basically did not recognize the caliphate of Imam Ali ('a), and they
propagated this notion throughout the greater part of Muslim society.
However, this attitude did not find many supporters in Iraq, with the
exception of Basrah. On the contrary, whenever there arose any
opportunity the Iraqis would display, on the political scene, their
belief in the right of the Alawids.

Beside the Shi'i and the 'Uthmani tendencies, there was a third one
which related to the so-called Qa'idin, and Nashi' Akbar considers them
as consisting of two groups with two different tendencies. According to
him, one of them were the Hulaysiyyah, who believed that one should
withdraw into political seclusion during tines of social turmoil
(fitnah).

They considered both the warring groups as misguided and destined for
hell, and considered keeping aloof (qu'ud) from war as piety (din) and
entry into it as fitnah.' Abd Allah ibn Umar, Muhammad ibn Muslimah and
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas belonged to this group. The second group of the
Qa'idin was that of the "Mu'tazilah" who believed that one of the two
warring groups was in the right but it could not be clearly
identified.

Abu Musa Ash'ari, Abu Said Khudri and Abu Mas'ud Ansari belonged to
this group. According to Nashi' Akbar, they were the ones who were known
as Mu'tazilah, and later on Wasil ibn Ata' and Amr ibn Ubayd had a
similar attitude regarding Talhah and Zubayr. [^4] An important concept
employed by these two groups in their analysis of the state of affairs
was that of fttnah, and they believed that during times of fitnah "it is
better for one to be among those who get killed rather than being one of
the killers." [^5]

The Hijaz did not take sides in the conflict between the pro-Alid and
pro-Umayyad parties, but it staged a movement which may be called "the
movement of the Companion's descendants" (abna' al-sahabah).


