Supplement 5
============

In these verses, as well as those which have been narrated from Abbas
ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib, one can well discern the Shii belief of the
Imam's companions, something which possesses doctrinal dimensions and is
far different from mere political support and favour. During the life of
Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn ('a) the creedal Shiis were clearly recognizable.
Ibn Ziyad is reported as having told Amr ibn Hurayth, "I do not fear any
danger for him (i.e. Yazid) from Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr; rather, I fear
for him. from the quarter of the Turabiyyah, the Shiah of Abu Turab Ali
ibn Abi Talib. [^122]

During this period, the slogan of the Tawwabin was restoration of the
rule of the Household of the Messenger of Allah. Ubayd Allah ibn Abd
Allah, while recounting the preeminence of the Household of the Prophet
(s) and the insult which was dealt to them in the events of Karbala',
pointed out the way to repentance in these words:

I summon you to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the His Prophet, to
avenge the blood of his household, and to jihad against those who permit
what is unlawful and the renegades. Should we be killed, that which is
with is God is better for the virtuous, and should we be victorious we
shall restore this affair to the household of our Prophet. [^123]

The slogan of the Tawwabun was that in case of victory they would
restore the Prophet's family's right to rule:

We shall restore the affair to the household of our Prophet, through
whom God has blessed us and honoured us. [^124]

By the time of the uprising of Mukhtar, creedal Shi'ism had become not
only well established in Kufah, the emergence of the ghulat had become
an issue. The criticism of Kufan nobility against the Shi'ism of Mukhtar
and his supporters was that they showed disaffection towards "the
righteous predecessors" (aslafuna al-salihin). [^125] Probably what they
meant was the Shiis' condemnation of many Companions of the Prophet (s)
for their deviant actions.

Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sajjad ('a) in his supplications presents
creedal Shiism in quite distinct and clear terms. In his supplications
there is hardly any which does not invoke blessings on 'Muhammad and the
Household of Muhammad.' The employment of this expression clearly
indicates its connotations. One finds such expressions as:

Muhammad and his Household, the pure ones and the good ones, the elect
and the chosen, repeatedly in his supplications. [^126]

The Imam's emphasis on mentioning the Prophet's progeny by the side of
the Prophet's' name, in accordance with the command of God to invoke
blessings upon the Prophet (s), has a great importance for the
expression of Shi'i belief. Before citing some of the relevant
statements from the Imam's supplications, it would be proper to mention
a narration concerning the affirmation of the linkage between the
Prophet and his Household. The Imam would say, God has made it
obligatory upon the whole world to invoke blessings upon the Prophet
(s), and He has united us with him. Someone who invokes blessings upon
the Prophet (s) but does not invoke blessings upon us, his invocation of
blessings is deficient and incomplete and such a one has forsaken God's
commands. [^127]

The raising of the issue of Imamate in the supplications of Imam Sajjad
(a) is a clear instance of the explication the Sht'j concept of Imamate
in supplications. In them the concept of Imamate, aside from the aspect
of worthiness for caliphate and leadership, is projected in its most
sublime form as a divine office held by the infallible Imams as heirs to
the knowledge of the prophets, especially that of the Noble Messenger
(s). Here we will mention some of such statements from the
supplications. In some of them, Imam Sajjad ('a) declares:

My Lord, bless the best of his (i.e. the Prophet's) Household, those
whom Thou hast chosen for Thy affair, appointed the treasurers of Thy
knowledge, the guardians of Thy religion, Thy vicegerents in thy earth,
and Thy arguments against Thy servants, purified from uncleanliness and
defilement with a thorough purification by Thy desire, and made the
mediation to Thee and the road to Thy paradise. [^128]

O God, this station belongs to Thy vicegerents, Thy chosen, while the
places of Thy trusted ones in the elevated degree which Thou hast
singled out for them have been forcibly stripped! [But Thou art the
Ordainer of that-Thy command is not overcome, the inevitable in Thy
governing is not overstepped! However Thou willest and whenever Thou
willest! In that which Thou knowest best, Thou art not accused for Thy
creation or Thy will!] Then Thy selected friends, Thy vicegerents, were
overcome, vanquished, forcibly stripped; [they see Thy decree replaced,
Thy Book discarded, Thy obligation distorted from the aims of Thy laws,
and the Sunnah of Thy Prophet abandoned!] O God, curse their enemies
among those of old and the later folk, and all those pleased with their
acts, and their adherents and followers! [^129]

And bless Thy chosen, O God, from Thy creation, Muhammad and his
descendants, the friends selected from among Thy creatures, the pure,
and make its listeners to them and obeyers, as Thou has commanded!
[^130]

O God, surely Thou hast confirmed Thy religion in all times with an
Imam whom Thou hast set up as a guidepost to Thy servants and
.lighthouse in Thy lands, after his cord has been joined to Thy cord!
Thou hast appointed him the means to Thy good pleasure, made obeying him
obligatory, cautioned against disobeying him, and commanded following
his commands, abandoning his prohibitions, and that no forward-goer go
ahead of him or back-keeper keep back from him! So he is the sanctuary
of the shelter-seekers, the cave of the faithful, the handhold of the
adherents, and the radiance of the worlds! [^131]

Through him, establish Thy book, Thy bounds, Thy laws, and the norms of
Thy Messenger's sunnah (Thy blessing, O God be upon him and his
Household), revive the guideposts of Thy religion, deadened by the
wrongdoers, burnish the rust of injustice from Thy way, sift the
adversity from Thy road, eliminate those who deviate from Thy path, and
erase those who seek crookedness in Thy straightness! Make him mild
toward Thy friends, stretch forth his hand over Thy enemies, give us his
clemency, his mercy, his tenderness, his sympathy, and make us his
hearers and obeyers, strivers toward his good pleasure, assistants in
helping him and defending him, and brought near through that to Thee and
Thy Messenger (Thy blessings, O God', be upon him and his Household).
[^132]

From the passages that have been cited, it becomes clear that the Imam
was intent on propagating the Shi'i belief in Imamate as the most
important of Shi'i conceptions. Similar statements concerning the high
station of the Ahl al-Bayt are found in Imam Ali's statements in the
Nahj al-balaghah. The original Shi'i doctrine and beliefs that were
prevalent among the generality of the Shiah were inspired by teachings
whose groundwork was laid by the Imams.

In the period under discussion, Imam Muhammad Baqir ('a) and Imam Jafar
al-Sadiq ('a) were exponents of this original tendency The followers of
Imam Muhammad Baqir consisted of a large number of narrators of
traditions whose names are collected in Shi'i works of rijal such as the
Rijal of Shaykh Tusi. [^133] One of the implications of the belief in the
divine office of the Imamate was that only the traditions narrated
through the Imams were to be considered as reliable in matters of law
and Shari'ah.

In other words, the Imams employed all their efforts to introduce the
Ahl al-Bayt as the sole authority to lead the people in religious and
political life. The notion of obligatory obedience to the Imam was
central to this outlook and it implied the necessity of referring to the
teachings of the Ahl al-Bayt in all affairs as set forth in the
statements of the Imams from Imam M onwards. Earlier we have reviewed
the statements of Imam Ali ('a) regarding the station of the Ahl
al-Bayt.

Towards the end of the first century and the beginning of the second,
when Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and Imam Jafar al-Sadiq assumed the
leadership of the Shi'ah, there emerged various creeds and sects each of
which claimed the leadership of Muslims. Most of them acknowledged the
political authority of the ruling caliphs so as to secure the people's
religious leadership for themselves. But the Shi'i Imams in their
statements stressed the principle, which is also mentioned in the hadith
al-Thaqalayn, a famous tradition of the prophet, that the only valid
source of the Shari 'ah were the Qur'an and the Ahl al-Bayt.

In the statements of Imam Baqir ('a) there are many instances in which
the people are summoned to acquire their religious teachings from the
Ahl al-Bayt as the sole source of authentic Sunnah and hadith. In a
tradition it is reported that Imam Baqir ('a) said to Salamah ibn Kuhayl
and Hakam ibn Uyaynah:

You will not find in the east or the west any sound piece of knowledge
except that which is drawn from us. [^134] In another statement referring
to al-Hasan al-Basri, who was a well-known scholar of those times, the
Imam said: Let Hasan go wherever he may, by God, he would not find
knowledge anywhere except here. [^135] In another tradition it is
stated:

Let they people go wherever they may want, but, by God, the affair lies
nowhere but here (i.e. his own house). [^136] These statements expressly
call upon the people to consider the Ahl al-Bayt as the sole authority
on religious teachings. The acceptance of such summons meant the
acceptance of Shiism. In another statement Imam Muhammad Baqir declares:
The Household of Muhammad are the doors leading to Allah, who call the
people to paradise and lead them towards it. [^137] In another tradition
he states:

Everything that does not derive from this house is disastrous. [^138]
Our purpose behind citing these statements is to make clear the decisive
role that they played in the development of Shiism from a historical
point of view.

Similarly in another statement Imam Muhammad Baqir is reported to have
declared:

O people, where are you going, and where are you being led away? It is
through us that God guided the first of you and it will be through us
that the last one of you will be guided. [^139]

When Hashim, the Umayyad ruler, came to Madinah, among things that the
Imam said to him was the following: All praise belongs to God who sent
Muhammad with the truth as the prophet, and honoured us through him. We
are those whom God has elected over His creatures and chosen over His
servants and (we re) His vicegerents. The felicitous are those who
follow us and the wretched are those who oppose us and are hostile to
us. [^140]

It was on account of these statements that Hisham summoned the Imam to
Syria. In the traditions of Imam Sadiq ('a) too one finds a large number
of statements which introduce the Ahl al-Bayt and their traditions as
the sole means of guidance. In one of them the Imam declares: O people!
Take care to follow the legacy of the Apostle of Allah (s) and his
Sunnah and the legacy of the Imams of guidance from the Household of the
Apostle of Allah (s). [^141]

In another statement addressing Yunus ibn Dabyan, the Imam says:

O Yunus, if you seek authentic knowledge, it is with us, the people of
the Prophet's household, for we have inherited it and have been bestowed
with the canon of wisdom as well as conclusive judgement. [^142]

Imam Sadiq declares in another tradition:

Verily, in our possession is that by virtue of which we do not stand in
need of the people and the people stand in need of us. Verily, in our
possession is a book (sahifah) dictated by the Apostle of Allah and in
the handwriting of Ali, in which is mentioned everything pertaining to
what is lawful and unlawfu1. [^143]
These statements reiterate what Imam Ali used to declare in his sermons
addressed to the people of Kufah:


