Iraqi Shiism
============

With attention to what has been stated it may be said that in the early
Islamic centuries the term Shi'ism (tashayyu') had a wider meaning than
is current today.

That which is called tashayyu' today would be referred to in the old
jargon of the Uthmanis as Rafd.' In that period the term Shi ah in its
general use was applied to those who preferred Imam Ali ('a) to Uthman.
In addition those who preferred him to the other two caliphs or
basically believed in his Imamate and that of his descendants were also
called Shiah.

' In the sense of a general tendency a Shi'ah' was someone who
preferred Imam 'Ali to the other caliphs, while a Rafidi' was someone
who rejected the caliphate of Abu Bakr and Umar and believed in the
Imamate of Imam 'Ali ('a) as something ordained by God. Shiism' in the
above sense of a general tendency may be called Iraqi Shi'ism.'

From the Sunni viewpoint, giving preference to Imam Ali ('a) over
Uthman has been considered a heretical belief (bid'ah). [^6] Some extreme
Sunnis are even of the view that such a preference of the Imam over
Uthman is rafd. Hence they have said, Someone who says, "Abu Bakr, Umar,
Ali and then Uthman" (in a descending order or merit) is a rafidi or a
heretic (mubtadi). [^7]

The people of Kufah were Shi'ah as they accepted this descending order
of merit for the caliphs (Ahl al-Kufah yaqulun: Abu Bakr wa 'Umar wa
'Ali).[^8]

It was said about the people of Wasit that they were Shi'ah (kana
'ammatu ahl a-Wasit yatashayyi'un). [^9] It is stated in Masail al-Imamah
that the Ahl al-Hadith from among the Kufans, such as Waki' ibn Jarrah
and Fadl ibn Dukayn, were Shi'is' because they believed in Ali's merit
over Uthman and considered Ali's caliphate to be legitimate (Yaz'amuna
anna afdal al-nas bad al-Nabi [s] Abu Bakr thummah 'Umar thumma 'Ali,
thumma 'Uthman, yuqaddimuna Aliyan 'ala 'Uthman wa hadha tashayyu' ashab
al-hadith min al-Kufiyyin wa yuthbituna imamata 'Ali).

As against this viewpoint was that of the Ahl al-Hadith of Basrah who
preferred Uthman to Imam Ali, followed by the rest of the participants
of the council (shura) constituted by 'Umar (afdal al-ummah bad al-Nabi
[s] Abu Bakr, thumma 'Umar thumma 'Uthman, thumma 'Ali, thumma yasuwwuna
bayna baqiyyat al-shura).

This was the case at a time when the leading scholars (mashayiq) of Ahl
al-Hadith at Baghdad basically did not accept the caliphate of Imam Ali
('a) (wa amma mashayikh: ashab al-hadith min al-Baghdaiyyin fa innahum
la yuthbituna imamata 'Ali; minhum Ibn Main wa Abu Khaythamah, wa
Muhammad ibn Hanbal, kanu yahdhifuna Aliyan min al-imamah wa yaz'amuna
anna wilayatahu kanat ftnah).[^10]

Another witness is that of Yahya ibn Main, one of the prominent figures
of the Ahl al-Hadith during the 3rd/9th century: He is cited as having
said: "I say: Abu Bakr, Umar, then Uthman." [^11] Ahmad ibn Hanbal was
somewhat moderate and he would say "We do not find fault with someone
who considers Ali as the fourth caliph" (la nu'ibu man rabba'a bi Ali).
[^12] In this regard there were many who were opposed to Ahmad ibn
Hanba1. [^13] It appears that towards the end of his life Ahmad ibn
Hanbal had become firmer in his belief in the legitimacy of the
caliphate of Ali ('a) as the fourth caliph, and accordingly he would say
that someone who did hot consider Ali as the fourth caliph was more is
error than an.

ass (man lam yurabbi' bi Aliyin fa-huwa adallu min himari ahlih).[^14]
Someone who found fault with Mu'awiyah and Amr ibn As was presumed to be
a rafidi. [^15] Ahmad ibn Hanbal was told about someone who preferred Ali
('a) to Abu Bakr and Umar. He disapproved of such a belief and said, "I
fear that he might be a rafidi" (Akhsha an yakuna rafidiyan).[^16] Ahmad
ibn Hanbal's son says, "I asked my father as to who the rafidis were. He
replied, It is someone who abuses and curses Abu Bakr and Umar (al-ladhi
yashtumu wa yasubbu Aba Bakrin wa 'Umar).' " [^17] In connection with the
meaning of rafd one may refer to the forgeries that have been attributed
to the Prophet (s) concerning the rawafid. [^18]

An important term that must be considered for explanation of a
significant part of Shi'i inclinations during this period is that of
"Iraqi Shi'is." This name applies to those who despite their Shii
inclinations and their narration of the virtues and merits (fada'il) of
the Ahl al-Bayt and hostility towards the Umayyads-and later on towards
the Abbasids-do not belong to any of the Shi'i sects, including Zaydi,
Imami and the Isma'ili sects.

Certainly individuals of this type could be Mutazilites, but this name
does not describe all of them and it might be said that there were those
who were Iraqi Shi'is' without being Mu'tazilis. In view of the large
number of this type of persons among Iraqi traditionists (muhaddithin)
it must be said that this is an acceptable name for them which solves
the problem of explaining the religious tendency of this type of
individuals.

In any case, it should be noted that while referring to Shiism of
Kufah, or basically to that of Iraq, it must be made clear whether the
individual or tendency concerned is of the type associated with mere
preference (tafdil) for Imam Ali ('a) over Uthman or that of Shi'ism in
its doctrinal Imami sense. There were many in Kufah who were Shi'is only
in the former sense and were very attached to the Ahl al-Bayt and many
of them were narrators of the fada'il of Imam Ali and other figures of
the Ahl al-Bayt.

These persons must not considered Sunnis in its technical sense
although many of them considered the first two caliphs to have been
legitimate. In other words, their narrations must be studied with
attention to their strong Shi'i inclinations. Naturally; the
Uthmaniyyah, who were the progenitors of the later Sunnis, had a
character different from that of this group and they were not on good
terms with one another. It is for this reason that in rijal works of the
Ahl al-Hadith and the Hanbalis the allegation of tashayyu', in the sense
of narration of the fada'il of the Ahl al-Bayt, is considered one of the
marks of discredit (qadh).

They are "Iraqi Shiis" whose names are not mentioned in Shii works of
rijal. Nevertheless, many of these persons have been considered
trustworthy (thiqah) narrators by staunch Hanbalis and writers belonging
to Ahl al-Hadith. For instance, concerning Dawud ibn Abi Awf, who has
been considered a thiqah narrator by Ahmad ibn Hanbal and Yahya ibn
Main, it has been said: "He is a Shii, and most of what he narrates is
concerning the fada'il of the Ahl al-Bayt" (Shi'i, 'ammatu ma yarwihi fi
fadi'il Ahl al-Bayt). Thereafter Dhahabi cites an example of his
narrations which is a hadith of the Prophet (s) addressed to Ali ('a):

..... O Ibn Abi Talib, indeed you and your shi'ah shall be in
paradise.

Following this hadith is a statement against the rafidis attributed to
the Prophet (s). [^19]

Examples of the phrases and statements concerning Shi'is and cited by
al-Dhahabi from experts of rijal of early centuries will serve to
elucidate the use of the terms shi'ah and rafidi during that era. These
expressions become harsher in accordance with the higher degree of the
Shi'i tendency of the individual concerned. The expressions cited here
are from Dhahabi's Mizan al-i.'tidal and are cited with the related
volume and page number. Concerning 'Ubayd Allah ibn Musa, who was also
one of al-Bukhari's teachers (mashayikh), it is said: "a fiery Shii"
(kana Shi'i mutaharriqa) (iii, 16).

About Adi ibn Thabit it is said, "An extremist Shii, an extremist
rafidi" (Shi'i mufrit, rafidiyun ghali) (iii, 62).

About Ali' ibn Salih al Taymi al-Kufi: "A mellowed Shii" (kana min 'atq
al-shi'ah) (iii, 101).

Concerning Ala' ibn Abi al-Abbas it is said: "An extreme Shii" (Shi'i
ghali) (iii, 102).

Concerning Ali ibn Thabit al-Jazari it is said: "He was one of the
confirmed Shi'is, but does not go to the extremes" (kana min man yaskunu
fi tashyyu'ihi wa la yaghlu) (iii, 116).

Concerning Ali ibn Musa al-Simsar it is said: "In him are Shi'i
leanings tending towards rafd" (fihi tashayyu' yafdi ila al-rafd) (iii,
158).

Concerning Ali ibn Hashim ibn Burayd it is said: "He was extreme in his
Shii leanings" (kana mufritan fi al-tashayyu) (iii, 160).

About Amr ibn Shamir al-Jufi it is said: "a rafidi who reviles the
Companions" (rafidiyyun yashtammu al-sahabah) (iii, 368).

About Isa ibn Qirtas it is said, "He was one of the extremists in rafd'
(kana min al-ghulat fi al-rafd) (iii, 322).

About Isa ibn Mihran al-Musta'tif it is said, "a rafidi, a monstrous
liar, fiery in his rafd, was one of tile devils of the rafidis and their
leaders" (rafidi, kadhdhab jabal, muhtariq fi al-rafd, kana min shayatin
al-rafidah wa maraddatihim) (iii, 324). Najashi has also mentioned him.
[^20]

Concerning Fudayl ibn Marzuq al-Kufi it is said: "He possessed Shi'i
leanings but did not revile [the three caliphs" (kana yatashayyi ' min
ghayri sabb) (iii, 362).

Concerning Fitr ibn Khalifah it is said, "Fitr was considered
trustworthy by Yahya ibn Main, but he was an extreme khashabi. [^21]"
(kana Fitru 'inda Yahya thiqah, wa lakinnahu khashabiyyun mufrit) (iii,
364).

Concerning Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari, the famous historian, it is
said: "He had mild Shi'i leanings and an attachment for the Ahl al-Bayt
which is not harmful" (fihi tashayyu' yasir wa muwalat la tadur) (iii,
498).

Sunni scholars and traditionists were accused of Shi'i tendencies on
the slightest grounds. For instance, Daraqutni was accused of Shi'i
inclinations merely for collecting the diwans of poets including that of
Sayyid Himyari. [^22]

The following remark is made about Sayyid Murtada, the great Shi'i
scholar: "A staunch rafidi" (Shi'i jald) (iii, 523).

Concerning Zurarah ibn Ayan, an eminent Shi'i figure, it is said: "He
practised rafd" (kana yatrafad) (ii, 68).

Of Salim ibn Abi Hafasah, an Imami, it is said, 'An extremist in
tashayyu', he used to say, O assassin of Na'thal (i.e. Uthman), I am at
your service! O destroyer of Banu Umayyah, I am at your service!... He
was one of the leaders of the detractors of Abu Bakr and Umar" (mufrit
fi al-tashayyu' . . . yaqul: Labbayka qatila Na'thal, labbayka muhlik
Bani Umayyah. . . wa kana min ru'us man yatanaqqasu Aba Bakr wa 'Umar)
(ii, 110).

Concerning Abbad ibn Abd al-Samad, who is referred to as ghali fi
al-tashayyu', it is stated, "Most of his narrations are about the
fada'il' ('ammatu and yarwihi fi al fada'il) (ii, 369).

Concerning Abbad ibn Ya'qub it is stated, "He is one of exreme Shi'is,
a leader of heresy, . . . He would abuse the forebears . . . and Uthman
. . . and he would say, God is too just to let Talhah and Zubayr into
paradise: they went to war against Ali after having sworn allegiance to
him' ' (ii, 379).

About Abd al-Ralunan ibn Yusuf ibn Kharash it is stated, "He practised
Shi'ism. . . and narrated the vices of the Shaykhayn and was a rafidi. .
. and Abdan says, I asked Ibn Kharash concerning the hadith, "We
[prophets] do not leave any inheritance, whatever we leave behind is
charity (sadaqah)." He said, It is false (batil)." (ii, 600)

The following passage from Dhahabi also helps define mild' Shi'i
leanings. After denying that Muhammad ibn Ziyad, one of the shaykhs of
Bukhari who has been accused of hostility (nasb) towards the Ahl
al-Bayt, was a nasibi, he says:

It is usual among the Syrians to exclude [from the list of legitimatc
caliphs] Amir al-Muminin Ali, may God be pleased with him, since the
days of Siffin. . . in the same way that among the Kufans there is an
antipathy toward Uthman and a love for Ali, and their forebears used to
be his shi'ah and his partisans .... Furthermore, there is a group among
the Shiis of Iraq who befriend Ali as well as Uthman but they prefer Ali
to Uthman and do not have friendly feelings towards those who fought
'Ali, though they do invoke God's forgiveness for them. That is a light
form of tashayyu. [^23] He also considers the term "extremist Shi'i"
(Shi'i ghali) to have had a different sense formerly He writes:

In former days "Shi'i ghali" used to mean someone who finds fault with
Uthman, Zubayr, Talhah, Mu'awiyah and those who fought against 'Ali, may
God be pleased with him, and someone who abuses them. And in our times
and in our usage a ghali is someone who considers those figures to be
unbelievers and disowns the Shaykhayn i.e. Abu Bakr and Umar). [^24]

It may be said that basically one rarely finds a Kufan without "Shii"
leanings. [^25] That which is meant by this term is a general sense
covering a range from the lowest to the highest degree.

Yahya ibn Main cites Abd Allah ibn Mubarak as having said, "Anyone who
desires martyrdom should enter the Dar al-Bittikh in Kufah and invoke
God's mercy for Uthman." [^26] According to another report some Kufans
professed their superiority over the Basrans in these words in
al-Ma'mun's presence: Everyone knows that aside from Kufah there is no
town on earth's surface whose people should be united in their love of
Banu Hashim, and no individual belonging to Banu Hashim has ever been
slain in the east or the west without the corpses of Kufans lying about
him with their blood mingling with his blood. [^27]

In a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq ('a) it is said:

Indeed God presented our wilayah to the people of every town but none
of them accepted it except the people of Kufah. [^28]

Sa'id ibn Abi Arubah says, "I arrived in Baghdad and sat in a session
of Abu Hanifah's lectures. One day he mentioned Uthman and invoked God's
mercy for him. I said to him, May God have mercy on you. I have not
heard anyone except you invoking mercy upon Uthman in this city."'
[^29]

There were so many virtues (fada'il) recounted concerning Kufah, and
later on Qum, that Sa'd ibn Abd Allah al-Ashari compiled a book named
Fadl Qum wa al-Kufah. [^30]


