Creedal Shiism
==============

Concerning the dissociation of the Shi'i sect from the Sunni community
one may say that the area of divergence grew gradually and from
political issues it extended to matters pertaining to religion and
culture. During the early years the main problem was that of government
and the conflict between the State's religious policies and attitudes
and the demands of the Shi'ah led to a divergence in the realm of ideas.
These differences could relate to legal and doctrinal issues as well as
to political notions.

It should be noted that among the followers of Imam Ali ('a) there were
different groups that were attached to him for different reasons. Among
them there were those who considered him a worthy ruler but who in the
course of time came to follow other Companions, including those who were
associated with the ruling regime as well as others.

Later we find the clear instance of Zaydi Shiis who followed Hanafi
fiqh or independent persons among the Companions and the Tabi'in living
in Iraq. In view of that which has been said, this phenomenon was a
Shi'ism of the political type and a variety of Iraqi Shi'ism. Naturally,
such persons did not acquire their religious knowledge solely from the
Ahl al-Bayt; they could be Mu'tazilis or followers of some other
tendency.

Among those who were Mu'tazilis from a doctrinal point of view, and
among those who were Hanafis from a ritual and legal point of view,
there were not few those who had a kind of pro-Ali or Shi'i inclination.
Abu Hanifah himself was one of such individuals due to his support of
Zayd ibn Ali and al-Nafs al-Zakiyyah.

As against this, there existed another tendency which consisted of
total obedience to the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt The Shi'is who possessed
this tendency followed the Imams in all matters of doctrine and law, and
in the field of hadith they considered only the narrations of the Imams
as authoritative.

Although this tendency might not have been completely manifest until
the last quarter of the 1st/7th century when doctrinal and legal issues
became the prime issues of the day in Muslim society, yet it is evident
that the movement that emerged under this name during the time of Imam
Baqir and Imam Sadiq ('a) has had its historical roots and background.

This tendency may be called creedal Shi'ism (tashayyu' i'tiqadi). The
roots of this tendency lie in a special conception of Imamate in which
the Imam has a particular spiritual and intellectual station. The
function of the Imam, apart from governing the society, consists of
interpreting and expounding the religion and it derives from his special
relationship with the Messenger of God (s).

The followers of this tendency generally referred to the office of the
Imam with such expressions as wisayah, wilayah and imamah, not with the
term khilafah. Of course, in this case there were possible differences
in the understanding of the Imamate and related beliefs and its deviant
form is represented by the tendency called ghuluww.

An important point in this regard relates to the historical background
of creedal Shiism and its roots. Here we will undertake a study of this
issue.

Among the definitions that have been suggested for creedal Shi'ism,
perhaps the best one is the one given by Aban ibn Taghlib, who said,
"The Shi'ah are those who followed Ali ('a) when the people differed
concerning the Messenger of Allah (s), and who followed Ja'far ibn
Muhammad ('a) when people differed concerning Ali ('a)" (al-Shi'atu
al-ladhina idha ikhtalafa al-nasu 'an Rasulillah, sallallahu alayhi wa
alih, akhadhu bi qawli Aliyyin, 'alayhi al-salam, wa idha ikhtalfa
al-nasu 'an Aliyyin akhadhu bi qawli Ja far ibn Muhammad, 'alayhi
al-salam). [^39]

A creedal Shi'i considers the office of the Imamate as a continuation
of prophethood, though without the element of new revelation, and
considers the statements of the Infallible Imams ('a) as decisive in all
matters and as the final judge in respect of all opinions advanced by
various individuals and creeds. Such an approach differs altogether from
the kind of Shi'i tendency that prefers Imam Ali to 'Uthman or even to
all other caliphs. This approach had precedents among the followers of
the Ahl al-Bayt (a) since the very beginning.

Among followers of Imam Ali ('a) there were many who had more than an
ordinary kind of attachment for the Imam and who believed him to possess
a Divine office of Imamate. Aside from the extent to which these cases
delineate the character of the belief in the Imam, one may infer from
them the belief that the office of Imamate derived from a designation by
God and the Prophet.

After swearing allegiance to Imam Ali ('a) Khuzaymah ibn Thabit is
reported to have said, "We have elected someone who was chosen for us by
the Messenger of God (s). [^40] In reply to Umar's remark that the reason
why the Quraysh did not choose Ali ('a) for the caliphate was that they
did not like prophethood and caliphate to be in one family, Ibn Abbas
said to him, "They were averse to [submit to] what God had revealed."
[^41]

Darimiyyah Hujuniyyah, while describing for Mu'awiyah the reasons for
favouring Ali ('a) said: "I favour Ali for his love of the poor, his
generosity towards strangers, his religious learning, his sacrificing
character and for his having been designated for wilayah by the
Messenger of Allah." [^42]

According to a report cited by Tabari, after the Battle of Siffin when
Ali ('a) returned to Kufah and the Khawarij broke away from him, the
Shi'ah remained steadfast on Ali's side and declared that they were
bound to him by yet another oath of allegiance: to befriend his friends
and to regard his enemies as their own enemies (Nahnu awliya' man
walayta wa a'da'u man 'adayt). [^43]

Iskaf says, "The common people swore allegiance to Ali ('a) on the
basis of the Book and the Sunnah and the Shi'ah of 'Ali on the basis of
friendship of his friends and enmity of his enemies." [^44] The stress on
such an allegiance as a second allegiance in addition to the first one
as well as its content indicate the Shi'i character of this group. Abu
Dharr, who died during the days of Uthmam's rule, invited the people to
follow the Ahl al-Bayt ('a) and he would refer to the Prophet's family
in such words:

O people! The Family of Muhammad are the progeny of Noah and the
descendants of Abraham and the elect of the progeny of Ismail, and the
guiding and pure kindred of Muhammad. [In relation to the Ummah] reckon
them to be like the head in relation to the body or rather as eyes in
relation to the head, for, indeed, they are for you like the elevated
heaven, the firmly established mountains, the radiant sun and the olive
tree whose oil gives light and whose fire is blessed.

He would say; "Muhammad was the heir of Adam and the prophets were not
superior to him, and 'Ali ibn Abi Talib is the designated successor
(wasi) of Muhammad (s) and heir to his knowledge." He would address the
people saying, "You, who are a community that has remained in perplexity
after the Messenger, had you given preferred one who has been preferred
by God and had you set back those who have been set back by God, and had
you placed the wilayah and succession in the family of your Prophet you
would have enjoyed all kinds of bounties from all sides. [^45]

Elsewhere it has been narrated that Aba Dharr said, "O people! There
will appear heresies in the future. When they visit you hold on to the
Book of God and to Ali." [^46] When Abu Dharr was being banished to
Rabdhah, Ali ('a) and his sons came out to bid him farewell. Abu Dharr
looked at the Imam and said, "When I see you and your sons, I remember
what the Prophet (s) had said about you and that makes me cry" [^47]


