Supplement 1
============

Salman also felt sorry that the people did not drew benefit from Ali's
presence while he was alive and in their midst, and he would say, "By
God, after him there will be no one who may inform you about the secrets
of your Apostle." [^48] Miqdad also narrated from the Prophet that he had
said, "The ma'rijah of the Household of Muhammad amounts to deliverance
from hellfire; the love of the Household of Muhammad amount to secure
passage over the Sirat; the wilayah of the Household of Muhammad is
amnesty from chastisement." [^49]

Ammar Yasir also narrated the Prophet's tradition, "This is my counsel
to someone who has faith in God and who affirms me through the wilayah
of Ali ibn Abi Talib: one who loves him loves me, and one who loves me
loves God." [^50]

Traditions of this kind which indicate Shi'i convictions have been
narrated in a large number from Abu Dharr, Salman, Ammar and Miqdad. In
defining the term Shi'ah' Abu Hatin al-Razi says, "It is the appellation
of those who were attached to Ali ('a) during the lifetime of the
Messenger of Allah (s), such as Salman, Abu Dharr Ghifari, Miqdad ibn
al-Aswad and Ammar ibn Yasir and others. Concerning these four, the
Messenger of Allah (s) had declared, The paradise is eager for four men:
Salman, Abu Dharr, Miqdad, and Ammar."' [^51]

Umm Sinan, daughter of Khaythamah ibn Kharashah, portrays Ali ('a) in
these verse:

After Muhammad you were for us his heir, He had exhorted you concerning
us, and you were faithful (to his exhortations) [^52]

Umm al-Khayr is reported to have made this statement while encouraging
Ali's troops during the Battle of Siffin May God have mercy on you!
Rally to the help of the just and pious Imam, the faithful and truthful
successor (wasi)! [^53]

The fact that these persons and many others like them among the Shi'i
followers of Imam Ali ('a) considered him to be wasi means that their
notion of his station went- far beyond the title of khalifah acquired by
him through the allegiance (bay'ah) given him by the people. There are
many verses in the sources ascribed to such Shiis as Hujr ibn Adi, Ibn
Tayhan, Ibn Ajlan and others wherein this term is employed. [^54]

While summoning the people for bay'ah with Imam Ali ('a), Maik Ashtar
referred to him in these words:

This is the wasi of the awsiya' and the heir to the knowledge of the
prophets. [^55]

He recited these verses during the Battle of Siffin:

One - who sees the dignity of 'Ali, the Wasi, has a light in the dark
of night. [^56]

Umm Araban recited this verse to mourn Ali's martyrdom:


