Supplement 3
============

In another instance, in a letter to one of his officers assigned for
the collection of zakat, in which the Imam sets forth the manner in
which the latter is to approach the people, he writes to him to make the
following announcement while approaching the tribes:

O creatures of God! The waft of God and His vicegerent has sent me to
take from you God's due pertaining to your property. [^85] The
expressions "waliullah" and "khalifatulluh," applied by the Imam to
himself, are entirely Shii conceptions.

In any case, the conception of wilayah is one that grew during the
caliphate of Imam Ali (a) and it characterizes the Shi'i viewpoint
concerning Imamate. [^86] In the course of several sermons that he
delivered during the period of his caliphate the Imam makes prophesies
of future events, which are traditionally known as malahim wa
al-fitan.

In these statements, the like of which were never heard from any other
caliph, he would make prophesies about the future, though of course not
as a political analyst. The attraction of the Imam's personality for the
mystics and the sufis had roots in his profoundly pious and ascetic
life-style and thinking.

It led to a conception of his personality that introduced him as
someone who was a perfect instance of the high spiritual station of
wilayah. The conception of wilayah as a preeminent spiritual station has
roots in the statements and conduct of the Imam himself, who would make
declarations from the minbar (pulpit) formally claiming to possess the
knowledge of everything and asking the people to question him about
anything before the time when he would not be in their midst. [^87]

At the conclusion of the citation of these precedents it would be
appropriate to mention an important episode. When A'ishah was preparing
to stage a rebellion against Imam Ali, Umm Salamah, one of the most
dignified wife of the Prophet (s), tried to persuade her against
carrying out her plans. Abd Allah ibn Zubayr objected to her and said,
"You have been an enemy of the family of Zubayr since past days."

Umm Salamah said to him, "Do you think that the people will follow
Talhah and your father while Ali is still in their midst about whom the
Messenger of Allah (s) said, " Ali is the wali of every believer, man
and woman, after me." Abd Allah said, "We have not heard any such thing
from the Messenger of God." Umm Salamah said to him, "If you haven't,
your aunt, A'ishah, certainly has. I myself heard the Messenger of Allah
say:

Ali is my successor (khalifah) amongst you, in my life and after my
death; whoever disobeys him disobeys me."

A'ishah too confirmed that she had heard such a statement from the
Prophet (s). [^88]

On the basis of what has been mentioned, one may say in explanation of
certain statements of Imam Ali (a) in the Nahj al-balaghah which refer
to the allegiance of the Muhajirun and the Ansars that the popular
principle of caliphal election until that time was the allegiance of the
Muhajirun and the Ansars, an allegiance which was also pledged by them
to the Imam.

The Imam was forced to take recourse to this principle in defence
against the opposition of those who had broken the allegiance they had
sworn him (nakithin) and those who had rebelled against him (qasitin).
As a result of this argument of the Imam, many people accepted his
leadership and went to war against his enemies.

Verses have been narrated from one of the Imam's supporters in
affirmation of the validity of his caliphate and the people's commitment
to him. Their author compares the covenant that the people made with him
to those made with the first two caliphs:

The people have made with him a pledge and a covenant, Like the
covenant made with Abu Hafs (i.e. Umar) and Abu Bakr.

So pledge allegiance to him and do not turn back an apostate, I exhort
you to take refuge its Allah from apostasy. [^89] However, the Imam
himself did not consider such an approach as the basis of the legitimacy
of his Imamate, nor was such a basis subscribed to by his close
companions, who considered his Imamate to be something that lay beyond
the allegiance of the Muhajirun and the Ansar.

That which is certain is that, as was mentioned earlier, Shi'ism grew
in l its extent and character during the events that occurred in the
aftermath of the assassination of Uthman and the caliphate of Imam Ali.
Earlier, only a few of the Prophet's Companions possessed such a
tendency. But for reasons that were mentioned, Shi'ism spread in Iraq.

This tendency is called an Alit and Shi'i tendency. Its weak degree
involved the rejection of Uthman and affirmation of the caliphate of
Imam 'Ali ('a), and in its most developed form it meant the affirmation
of the Imamate of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib ('a) after the Messenger of God (s)
and his superiority over other caliphs. There were as well certain
extremist tendencies that emerged during this period about whose exact
extent and character there is a difference of opinion. [^90]

Another trend that emerged and grew during this period was the Uthmanid
tendency It emerged during the events of the Battles of the Camel and
Siffin. Although the protagonists of this trend faced a defeat during
the Battle of the Camel, but its effects remained in Basrah, and the
people of this city were known for their Uthmanid affiliations. [^91]

Another branch of this trend came to dominate Syria (al-Sham) during
the Umayyad era and it came to rule over Iraq. The rule of the Umayyads
was an expression of the domination of the Uthmanid creed. This creed
did not acknowledge the legitimacy of the caliphate of Imam Ali (a), and
its argument was that the third caliph was killed by the Imam or at his
instigation. Moreover, it asserted that there was not a general
consensus of the people about his caliphate.

This belief was prevalent among the Uthmaniyyah, who were the
prototypes of the latter-day Ahl al-Sunnah. During that era, the terms
the Shiah and the Uthmaniyyah stood in contrast to one another. The
'Uthmaniyyah believed that Mu'awiyah was the next legitimate caliph
after 'Uthman. The basis of his legitimacy, as they claimed, was
Mu'awiyah's kinship with Uthman and his claim to be the next of kin in
this case of homicide (wali al-dam). [^92]The two cities of Basrah and
Kufah with their Uthmanid and Shi'i inclinations were considered rival
towns.

Another interesting aspect of the Battle of the Camel was the greater
prominence acquired by Shi'ism in contrast to the Uthmanid creed. During
the course of the battle, Amr ibn Yathribi, who killed Zayd ibn Suhan, a
companion of the Imam, said that he had killed the latter in a state
when he was an follower of "the creed of Ali" (din-i 'Ali). On the other
hand, Ammar Yasir, addressing Amr, said these verses during that
battle:

O Son of Yathribi, I wilt not leave the field Until I fight you while I
am on the creed of 'Ali.

We and the House of God are nearer to the Prophet. [^93]

The term "creed of Uthman" (din-i 'Uthman) emerged in opposition to the
term "creed of 'Ali." A poet belonging to Syria declared concerning the
Syrian troops:

Eighty thousand strong whose creed is the creed of Uthman, Squadrons,
amongst whom is Gabriel who leads them on. [^94]

Another Syrian poet who was at Siffin introduced himself in these
words:

I am a descendant of the lords of the princes of Ghassan, And today I
am a follower of the creed of Uthman. [^95]

Rifa'ah ibn Shaadad also declared in a couplet:

I am the son of Shaddad, on the creed of Ali, I am not a friend of
Uthman, son of Arwa. [^96]

It has also been stated concerning the Syrian troops that they were
eighty thousand soldiers who "followed the creed of Uthman." [^97]

After the martyrdom of Imam Ali ('a), the people of Iraq pledged
allegiance to Imam Hasan. Among them were Shiis who actually had belief
in the Imamate of Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba ('a) and they swore
allegiance to him on that basis.

Of course, in these circumstances there exited in general two
tendencies, Shi'i and Uthmanid. The religious tendency of the people of
Kufah was predominantly Shi'i, in the sense that they did not
acknowledge Uthman and affirmed the caliphate of Imam Ali ('a). During
the five years of the Imam's rule they had been influenced by him and
his companions. They followed the Alid tendency in religion and
disdained the 'Uthmanid tenets. Opposition to Uthman and his ill fame in
this city was such since the era of Imam Ali that Jarir ibn Abd Allah
al-Bajali said, "I would not stay in a town where they formally denounce
Uthman." [^98]

To the point that is relevant to the notion of Shi'i Imamate, there is
evidence that Imam Ali designated his son as his successor, although the
Sunni writers have not referred to it as signifying successorship. [^99]
In this regard, a tradition has been narrated from the Messenger of God
(s) that is cited in many sources. It reports the Prophet (s) as
stating:


