Supplement 4
============

Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are two Imams, whether they are active rulers or
not. [^100]

The said tradition is a clear evidence that there was a designation in
favour of the Imamate of these two brothers. In this regard, there are
also historical reports that corroborate the Shii viewpoint concerning
the Imamate of Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba ('a)

Nasr ibn Muzahim reports that during the time of Imam Ali himself Awar
al-Shanni said addressing the Imam, May God increase you in guidance and
felicity. You have seen with the light of God, and given preference to
some men and set back other men. It is for you to command, and for us to
obey You are an Imam, and if you die, after you the Imamate will lie
with these two (i.e. al-Hasan and al-Husayn). Then he said to Imam Ali
(a), "Listen to some verses that I have sung:

O Abu al-Hasan, you are the resplendent midday sun, And these two (sons
of yours) are like moons in times of crisis.

You and these two, until the last breath, are like our hearing and
sight.

You are men of a high station, Whose heights are beyond the aspirations
of men.

People inform us concerning your merit, Yet, your merit today is so
great as to lie beyond reporting." [^101]

Mundhir ibn Jarad is also reported as having said to the Imam in
Siffin, If your die, these two, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, will be our
imams after you. [^102]

Thus it becomes clear that since the day of Imam Ali ( a) his
companions considered the Imamate as belonging to al-Hasan and al-Husayn
after him. We know that after the martyrdom of Imam Hasan, the Shi'is of
Kufah sent a message extending their support to Imam Husayn. Abd Allah
ibn Abbas also summoned the people to pledge allegiance to Imam Hasan,
declaring, "He is the son of your Apostle and the wasi of your Imam.

Pledge your allegiance to him." [^103] Imam Hasan, too, in a letter to
Mu'awiyah wrote, "When my father was about to die, he entrusted this
affair (amr) to me." [^104] Haytham ibn Adi has narrated from many of his
teachers (mashayikh) that they said that Hasan ibn Ali was the wasi of
his father. [^105] Abu al-Aswad Du'ah too, who was in Kufah at the time
when allegiance was being sworn to Imam Hasan (a), said, "He has
acquired the wisayah and Imamah from his father." [^106] The people are
also reported as having said to the Imam, "You are the successor and
wasi of your father and we shall obey you." [^107] In any case, on the
whole it may be conceded that Imam Ali introduced his eldest son as
someone whose succession was favoured by him. [^108] One Friday when the
Imam was unwell, he ordered Imam Hasan to lead the prayers. [^109].

Aside from the fact that the Shiis of Kufah were drawn to Imam Hasan on
the basis of their religious sentiments, one must take note of the
peculiar Shi'i notions of Ahl al-Bayt and the station of Imamate at this
stage. As reported by all the relevant sources, Imam Hasan stated in his
first sermon:

Anyone who knows me, knows me. And if anyone does not know me, let him
know that I am Hasan, son of the Messenger of Allah. I am the son of the
bringer of good tidings and the warner. I am the son of him who invited
the people to God with His command. I am the son of the shining lamp. I
belong to a household from which God has kept of all uncleanliness and
filth and He has purified them with a thorough purifiction-they are the
ones loving whom has been made obligatory by God in His Book, where He
says, "and anyone who does good We shall increase in his
goodness"(42:23). Hence the good work' is loving us, the People of the
Household. [^110]

Mas'udi reports part of one of the sermons of Imam Hasan in his
history. In it the Imam is reported as declaring:

We are the felicitous party of God. We are the kindred of the Messenger
of God (s). We are the people of the pure Household, the pure ones, and
one of the two precious. thugs (thaqalayn) that the Messenger of God
left behind amongst you, the other being the. Book of God, into which
falsehood cannot enter . . . . So obey us, for obedience to us, as those
in authority (uli al-amr),

is obligatory, for it is appended to the obedience to God and obedience
to the Messenger of God, as the Book of God declares, "If you dispute
concerning anything, then rifer it to Allah and His Messenger and those
in authority amongst you (4:59). When there comes to them a matter, be
it of security or fear, they broadcast it; if they had referred it to
the Messenger and to those in authority among them, those of them whose
task is to investigate would have known the matter. (4:83). [^111]

Hilal ibn Yasaf say, "I was present at the sermon of Imam Hasan ibn Ali
when he said, "O people of Kufah, fear God regarding us. We are your
leaders and your guests. We are a household concerning whom God has
said, Verily, God wills to keep uncleanliness away from you O people of
the house and to purify you with a thorough purification.' " [^112] It
seems that it was after this sermon that Imam Hasan was wounded in an
assassination attempt at Sabat.

Similar was the situation during the time of Imam Husayn ('a); that is,
a part of the Shi'is were creedal Shi'is, while others consisted of
those who preferred the Alids over other groups and were strongly
opposed to those who followed the Utlunanid faction.

It may be said that those who embraced martyrdom with Imam Husayn ('a)
at Karbala' were Shi'is who considered the Imamate to be the sole right
of Imam 'Ali and his sons. The Imam himself, in several instances,
summoned the. people to "restore the right to those who were most worthy
of it" and to assist him, as the Umayyads had usurped the right that
belonged to him. [^113] In one case, he declared, O people I am the son
of the Messenger of Allah and we have a greater right to govern your
affairs than those who claim that which is not their right. [^114]

In another place, lie declared:

I have a greater right (to the caliphate) than anyone else by virtue of
my relationship with the Messenger of Allah. [^115] Besides the Imam
himself, his companions expressed such a belief on various occasions.
Muslim ibn Ziyad declared, "By God, Muawiyah is not a rightful caliph,
but he has prevailed over the Messenger's successor with his cunning and
usurped the caliphate." [^116] Abd al-Rahman ibn Abd Allah al Yazani, one
of the companions of Imam Husayn at Karbala', declared:

I am son of Abd Allah, from the house of Yazan, My creed is the creed
of Husayn and Hasan. [^117] Similarly, Hajjaj ibn Masraq said addressing
imam Husayn:

Thereafter your magnanimous father, 'Ali, He it is whom we know to be
the wasi. [^118] Hilal ibn Nafi Bajali declared in a verse:

I am a youth belonging to Ranu Tamim and a Bajali, My creed is the same
as that of Husayn and Ali. [^119] Uthman ibn Abi ibn Abi Talib also
delcared in these verses:

Indeed, I am Uthman, possessor of several honours:

My master is Ali, man of sublime feats,
I am son of the Prophet's cousin,
And brother of Husayn, the chosen one among the elect,
The chief of the great ones and the humble, After the Messenger and his
wasi and helper. [^120]

Nafi ibn Hilal would say, I am a Jamali and I am on the creed of
'Ali.

In response to him someone from the opposite camp called out:

I am on the creed of Uthman. [^121]


