Introduction
============

***In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful***

The importance of reciting, studying and contemplating on the verses of
the Holy Qur’an cannot be stressed enough. Indeed this great revelation
has many depths and mysteries that have yet to be discovered. Those who
frequently read the Holy Qur’an can attest to the fact that it is an
unending source of information and a bottomless well of fresh knowledge
and guidance. Reading it repeatedly does not lead to ennui, but rather
causes one to open many more avenues of thought.

How unfortunate is the person who forsakes the words of his Creator? And
what excuse would be acceptable for doing so? If the true value of the
Holy Qur’an was understood, the Muslims of the world would not be where
they are today. Lifetimes can be spent in research about the meanings of
what is contained in this divine book and yet nothing would be exhausted
from it.

Yet this great living miracle lies abandoned in our libraries,
bookshelves, or even in a beautifully created casing; gathering dust
from lack of use. All this while we digress in all spheres of our lives.
This is why when we will be brought to account for our deeds and
misdeeds on the Day of Judgment, we will have no reason to say that we
were not adequately guided, because we are the ones who did not take the
readily available guidance.

At this point it should be mentioned that one cannot interpret the
verses of the Holy Qur’an using their own logical deductions or
reasoning. If we were to do this then we would easily stray from the
correct path and would begin to justify our fallacies with our own
interpretations of this divine text. Many traditions have been narrated
about this and grave punishments have been promised to those who misuse
the Holy Qur’an for personal gain.

The *Tafsir* or interpretation of the Holy Qur’an is actually done very
carefully by very learned religious scholars who refer to vast amounts
of historical texts and traditions of the Holy Prophet (S.) and the
*Aimmah* (a.s). Fortunately, many *Tafasir* are readily available today
and one can easily find the interpretations of any particular verse of
the Holy Qur’an.

It should be noted, however, that aside from the benefits of guidance
towards divine truth, the verses and chapters of the Holy Qur’an also
have a hidden benefit. In fact, there is so much benefit in the
recitation of some portions of this great book, that it would surprise
us.

This is the aspect of the Holy Qur’an that we wish to discuss in the
following pages. Hopefully, it will be a way of encouraging people to
frequently recite the Holy Qur’an and take advantage of its numerous
benefits. We pray to Allah (S.w.T.) to enlist us from those who always
recite the Holy Qur’an when He raises us on the Day of Judgement –
Ameen.


