Benefits of reciting various verses of the Holy Qur’an
======================================================

Verses to be recited after prayers
----------------------------------

Some actions are to be performed after the completion of every
compulsory prayer and these are called *Ta’qibaat*. Out of the numerous
actions that have been recommended, there are a few verses of the Holy
Qur’an that have also been prescribed and carry much reward if recited
after the daily prayers.

The following is a list of the verses that should be recited and a note
of the reward gained for the recitation of each one.

1. *Ayah ash-Shahada* (Surah Ali-’Imran: 18-19)

In the commentary of *Majma’ul Bayaan*, it is narrated from the Holy
Prophet that those who recite this *ayah* make a covenant with Allah
(S.w.T.) and Allah always fulfils His covenants. If this *ayah* is
recited after every prayer, then *Jannah* is guaranteed to the reciter.

2. *Ayah al-Mulk* (Surah Ali-’Imran: 26-27)

It is narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) once advised one of his
companions, who was in debt, to recite this *ayah* after every prayer
and then supplicate to Allah (S.w.T.) for the repayment of his debts
saying that even if the debts are equal to the entire land on Earth,
they will be repaid.

3. *Ayah al-Kursi* (Surah al-Baqarah: 255-257)

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that there is no barrier
between the person who recites this *ayah* after every prayer and
*Jannah* except for death ie. he will be taste the pleasures of *Jannah*
immediately after his death, and only that person will be able to recite
it who is pious and righteous.

4. *Ayah al-Madhkurah* (Surah ar-Rum: 17-22)

Whoever recites this after every compulsory prayer will get a reward
equal to drops of rain and grains of sand. The Holy Prophet (S) has
highly recommended the recitation of this *ayah* especially during the
early morning and evening times.

5. *Ayah as-Sakhrah* (Surah A’araaf: 54)

This should also be recited after every prayer. The benefit of reciting
this *ayah* is that it acts as a protection from *Shaitan*. It is said
that the one who recites this *ayah* is protected against the plots of
*Shaitan* even if he is alone in the desert.

Other recitations are also recommended, for example, it is said in a
narration that whoever recites Surah at-Tawhid after prayers will wed a
Hur-ul-Ein in Jannah. It is recommended that Surah at-Tawhid be recited
ten times after every prayer and this leads to being forgiven be Allah
(S.w.T.) and being blessed with the good of this world and the
hereafter.

For the sake of brevity, here is a list of ayaat and Surahs that are
also recommended to be recited after prayers:

a) Surah al-Ahzaab: 56

b) Surah al-Baqarah: 285-286

c) Surah al-Kahf: 109-110

d) Surah as-Saffaat: 1-10 and then the last three ayaat.

e) Surah ar-Rahman: 33-36

f) Surah al-Hashr: 21-24

g) Surah al-An’aam: 1-3

h) Surah al-Falaq, an-Naas, ar-Rahman al-Qadr, al-Fatehah, Ya Sin,
al-Waaqiyah, al-Mulk, ad-Dahar and an-Naba are all recommended.

Verses to be recited before sleeping
------------------------------------

It is narrated that whoever recites [Surah al-Fatir: 41] before going to
sleep is kept safe from the collapse of his home on top of him. Imam Ali
(a.s.) has said that if a person recites [Surah al-A’araaf: 196] and
[Surah az-Zumar: 67] before going to sleep, he will be safe from
drowning (if he is sleeping on a ship) or burning (in his home).

Recitation of [Surah al-Kahf: 110] is good for making a person wake up
at a particular time. All that has to be done is to make an intention of
the exact time you wish to wake up and then recite this *ayah* before
sleeping. Surah at-Takathur is also recommended and the Holy Prophet (S)
said that whoever recites it before sleeping will be saved from the
horrors of the grave.

Recitations specifically for Thursday nights and Fridays
--------------------------------------------------------

It is recorded that if a person recites Surah Bani-Isra’il on Thursday
night, he will meet the 12th Imam (a.t.f.) and will be among his
companions. The one who recites Surah al-Kahf will die a martyr and will
be raised with the martyrs on the Day of Judgement.

Whoever recites Surah Saad on Thursday night will be blessed with good
in this world and good in the hereafter to such an extent that nobody
except the prophets and those who are very close to Allah (S.w.T.) will
get a similar reward.

If Surah ad-Dukhan is recited on this night, all his sins will be
forgiven. He will get the reward equivalent to that of freeing a
thousand slaves for each letter he recites and seventy thousand angels
will pray for his sins to be forgiven. The one who recites Surah
al-Waqi’ah will be counted from the friends of Allah (S.w.T.). The other
Surahs that have been recommended on Thursday nights are Surah an-Naml,
al-Qasas and Hamim Sajdah.

On the day of Friday, the Surahs that are highly recommended are Surah
al-Ikhlaas, an-Naas, al-Falaq, at-Tawba, al-Kahf, as-Saffaat, ar-Rahman,
an-Nisaa, Hud and al-Qadr. All these carry great reward and should be
recited if possible. Imam Ali (a.s.) has said that whoever recites Surah
an-Nisaa on Fridays will be protected from the torments of the grave.
The one who recites Surah Hud will be counted with the prophets and
messengers and his sins will be forgiven.

The benefit of reciting Surah al-Kahf is that all sins of the past week
are forgiven. Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) said that if a person recites
Surah as-Saffaat on this day, he will be protected from all calamities
and misfortunes. The one who recites Surah ar-Rahman will have a shining
face on the Day of Judgement.

It is also recommended to recite [at-Tawba:128-129] and [al-Hashr:
21-24] on Friday mornings.

Recitations for increase in sustenance
--------------------------------------

It is narrated that writing Surah al-Mu’min at night and then keeping it
in one’s place of business increases sustenance. Keeping Surah al-Hijr
in one’s pocket or tied to the arm is also a means of increase in
livelihood. Surah al-Qaari’ah should be worn around the neck and Surah
al-Waaqi’ah should be recited every night to stay independent in terms
of earning an income. Reciting Surah adh-Dhariyaat every day also
increases sustenance.

Writing [al-Fatir: 29-30] and keeping it at the place of trade also acts
as a means of increase in income. Keeping [al-Jumu’ah: 4] together with
your goods for sale brings blessing and keeps the goods safe from
damage. Drinking water in which Surah Yusuf has been dissolved (after
writing) also increases sustenance.

Verses that help to quickly repay debts
---------------------------------------

As mentioned earlier, *ayah* al-Mulk [Ali-’Imran: 26-27] should be
recited for those who wish to repay their debts. One should recite this
*ayah* and then supplicate to Allah (S.w.T.) that he wishes to repay his
debts and seeks help for doing so. For the same purpose, the last two
verses of Surah al-Baqarah should also be recited after every ‘Isha
prayer.

The recitation of *ayah* al-Kursi after every prayer and reciting Surah
al-Waaqi’ah 41 times are other means of getting divine assistance in the
repaying of debts.


