Doctrine may be a Framework for Science
=======================================

We have so far come to know that just as the science of economics deals
with production, discovering the crop underproduction law, for e.g., it
also deals with distribution, discovering a law such as that of the
“iron law of wages.”

In spite of all of this, however, there is often a difference between
the scientific research that deals with production and that which deals
with distribution. Let us take the law of the crop underproduction and
the iron law of wages as examples: The first law represents the
scientific research in production; the second represents the scientific
research in distribution.

If we study the crops underproduction law, we will find it to include
one fact about agricultural production applicable to land in every human
society, regardless of its economic doctrine. Land in the capitalist
society, according to that law, decreases in producing crops in the same
manner it does in the Socialist or Islamic society. This means that the
crops underproduction law is not confined to the situation of one
particular doctrine; rather, it expresses an absolute scientific fact.

As regarding the iron law of wages, which we explained in the second
example, it discovers, as we have already seen, the fixed level of
laborers’ wages in a society that enjoys economic freedom. It concludes
by stating that in a society wherein freedom dominates, laborers’ wages
always remain on the level of subsistence. If they rise or fall, for any
reason whatsoever, they always go naturally back to that same level.

This law is scientific in nature, context and objectivity because it
tries to discover the reality and to get acquainted with the movement
and direction of wages as it takes place in the society. At the same
time, it decides that such a fact is true only in the capitalist society
in which economic freedom prevails, and it is not applicable to the
society which is economy-geared (to a certain direction), one wherein
the government enforces restrictions on wages.

Capitalistic freedom is a precondition for the applicability of this
scientific iron law of wages, that is to say, it is its general frame
within the range of which the iron law of wages is also applicable. This
means that the law’s context is scientific, and its general framework
(which precludes its application) is doctrinal.

Most likely, the inability to distinguish between the context and the
frame, or between the scientific law and its conditions, led to the
claim that all distribution laws are doctrinal, and that science does
not have to research distribution. Preconditioning a certain doctrinal
frame for the scientific laws of distribution made those who put forth
such a claim imagine that those laws are doctrinal in nature.


