Derived Conclusions
===================

From the above, we reach these conclusions:

**First:** The science of economics and the economic doctrine differ in
their basic function: The function of science is the discovery (and
analysis) of the economic life and its phenomena as they exist in the
world of reality, while the function of the doctrine is to find a way to
regulate the economic life as it ought to be, according to its general
concepts of equity. Science, therefore, tries to embody reality, while
doctrine tries to embody equity.

**Second:** The science of economics deals with both production and
distribution, while the economic doctrine deals with both production and
distribution, and there is no basis for distinguishing between them
(between the science and the doctrine) on the basis of the
subject-matter by making production the concern of science while
assigning distribution as the concern of the doctrine, because science
and doctrine differ only in the task and method of research, not in the
subject-matter.

**Third:** The laws of the science of economics, regarding production,
express fixed facts applicable to various societies regardless of the
economic doctrine they follow. As regarding the laws of the science of
economics in distribution, these are conditioned to a certain doctrinal
frame; that is, the economist preconditions the existence of a society
which practices a certain kind of doctrine like capitalism and of
economic freedom, then he tries to discover the laws and economic life
of such a society.


