Doctrine does not Apply Scientific Methods
==========================================

From the previous analyses of both doctrine and science, we have come to
know that the doctrine's function is to express the demands of justice,
while science assumes the responsibility of discovering the economic
events, as they occur, their causes and interrelations.

This difference in the basic function necessarily requires their
difference in the methods of research. This means that the science of
economics, as such, discovers what occurs in the world and in the
society of everything related to the economic life, using the scientific
methods of observation and experiment, monitoring the events the
economic life is full of in order to derive, in their light, their
interrelations and general laws.

Whenever there is a case to doubt, and the extent of its truth and
reflections of reality are not known, the economist is capable of
referring to the scientific criteria and to his own well-organized
observations of successive events in order to discover the extent of the
truth of such case and of its being a true reflection of the reality.

Both economist and naturalist are on the same footing in this aspect:
When the naturalist desires to find out the degree at which water boils,
he can scientifically measure the water’s temperature as a natural
phenomenon, observing the temperature when boiling starts.

When the economist desires to discover the sequence of famous crises
which inflict the human society from time to time, he has to refer to
the events of the economic life as they happened successively in order
to determine the historical dividing line between one crisis and
another. If he finds such a line to be the same in all crises, he will
be able to define the cycle of such crises and in the end look for their
causes as well as the factors that affect them.

Contrariwise, the economic doctrine cannot measure the subjects it deals
with scientifically because it studies such subjects from the angle of
equity and justice, trying to find a regulation method according to the
demands of justice and equity.

Obviously, justice is different from the water temperature and boiling
degree, and it is different from the economic crises and cycles, because
the latter are *not* cosmic or social phenomena which can be observed
subjectively or measured scientifically through the well-known means of
experiment in the world. In the economic doctrine, it is not sufficient
to look at facts and observe events scientifically in order to know what
equity is in organization, as is the case with the economist who studies
economic crises in order to know their cycle and code.

Let us take the issue of equity in distribution as an example:

There are some people who say that equity in distribution is achieved in
the shade of a system that guarantees equality among all members of the
society during austerity as well as during prosperity, and there are
others who consider equality of freedom among the members of the
society, instead of equality in sustaining them, to be the just basis
for distribution, even if individuals practice their free right to
variations in sustenance and the increase of the wealth of some over
that of others, as long as they all enjoy the same freedom granted
equally to each and every one of them.

There are also others who see that the equity of distribution is
achieved through guaranteeing a general level of sustenance to all
people, while granting them freedom outside the limits of such level, as
does Islam.

Can equity of distribution be achieved? Is it equality in subsistence
and wealth that matters, or is it the granting of everybody the freedom
to practice various norms of economic activity, while limiting each
person’s share of subsistence according to the way he practices such
freedom? Or is it according to a third method that lies between this and
that?

If we want to know the answers to these questions, and to know the
approach and concept of equity in as far as these means are concerned,
we cannot use science to reach our objective simply because equity is
not an external natural phenomenon like temperature or boiling which we
can measure by applying our vision or touch or the rest of our physical
senses, nor is it a social phenomenon such as economic crises in the
capitalist society in order to be evaluated, observed and tested.

Science can surely assess individuals in order to determine the extent
of their similarity or dissimilarity in physical or psychological
features in order to decide whether it is fair to equate all of them in
subsistence or not. Justice and truth are not subjective qualities that
can be measured by science or by the senses in the way all bodily or
natural phenomena are measured, felt, viewed, etc.

Take the example of the capitalist who believes that people are equal in
their right to enjoy freedom even if their shares of subsistence vary,
and the socialist who believes that all people are equal in their right
to be sustained, and ask both of them this question: “Is there a
thermometer for justice like the one for measuring temperature so that I
may be able to know the degree of justice in a society where people’s
shares of freedom are equal even when their shares of wages and
subsistence vary?

Are the ‘rights’ enjoyed by the members of society a natural phenomenon
which can be felt as we can feel their own colors, heights,
intelligence, voice, etc., in order to study such rights through the use
of scientific methods based on the senses or the experiment?”

The answer, of course, to these questions is a plain “No.” Equity has no
thermometer because it is not a phenomenon that can be realized through
the senses or through observation; nor is the right of people to achieve
it one of their own characteristics such as height or intelligence so
that we may apply science to determine such right.

The conclusion we draw from this is that as long as it studies the
issues from the angle of equity and truth, the doctrine can derive the
method it prefers to use in regulating the economic life from its own
concepts of equity, from the principles and ideals in which it believes,
or from its general attitude towards life.


