The Islamic Economic System We Advocate
=======================================

I believe that the previous research suffices to help us form an
outlined concept of what the economic doctrine is all about and its
relevance to the science of economics, the function of each, as well as
the methods of research each applies. For this reason, we can now
explain the nature of our concept of the Islamic economic system, what
we mean when we emphasize the existence of economics in Islam, or when
we refer to the Islamic economic system.

Islamic economics, as we have come to know at the onset of this
research, comprise an economic doctrine, not a science of economics.
When we say, “Islam produced an economic doctrine,” we do not claim that
Islam invented the science of economics. Islam did not come in order to
discover the events of the economic life, its interrelations and causes;
this is not its responsibility.

Nor is it responsible for uncovering for people natural laws, the cosmic
phenomena, their interrelations and causations, etc. Just as religion
does not necessarily have to contain astronomy and natural sciences, by
the same token, it does not have to contain the science of economics.

Islam incorporates a system for regulating the economic life rather than
for discovering one, and a system to provide the structure within which
it has to be regulated, all in accordance with its own concepts of
justice and equity. The Islamic economic system represents the Islamic
viewpoint of equity and its method for regulating the economic life. It
does not unveil scientific discoveries regarding the links and
interrelations of the economic life as they actually take place. This is
the meaning of saying that the Islamic economic system is a doctrine,
not a science.

In other words, if Islam had come in order to narrate to us about the
economic life in Hijaz (where Islam had set roots), and the reasons
which cause the Hijazi society, for e.g., to increase the interest rate
the lenders receive, then such a narrative would be scientific, one
which deals with the science of economics.

But, instead of this, Islam has come to *evaluate* and consequently
prohibit such an interest, regulating the relationship between capital
and the project’s owner upon the basis of contracting instead of usury
and interest; hence, Islam adopts the doctrinal position, not the
scientific one.

When we clearly get to know the nature of Islamic economics to be an
economic doctrine, not a science of economics, we can easily remove the
largest obstacle in the way of believing in the existence of economics
in Islam.


