Inclusion and Absorption of Shari’a
===================================

The inclusion of Shari’a and absorption of all fields of life is one of
its own fixed characteristics, not only through following its tenets in
such fields, but also in emphasizing this fact in its general sources of
derivation, too. We can find, in many such sources, texts which clearly
emphasize the absorption of such Shari’a of and extension to all fields
lived by man, and also of its being rich with its solutions for all
problems in his path in various fields.

Observe these texts:

1) Abu Busayr, through the authority of Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (ع),
narrated saying that the Imam talked once about the inclusion and
absorption of Shari’a, and the knowledge of the Family of the Prophet
(ص) of all of that, saying, “It has the details of everything
permissible and prohibited, and everything which people need to know,
even the fine to be paid for the extremely tiny cut on one’s cheek.”
Then he clasped his hands and said, “Do you permit me, O Abu Muhammed?”
Abu Busayr answered, “May my life be sacrificed defending yours! I am
yours to do whatever you please.” The Imam (ع) stretched his hand to the
latter’s cheek, slightly pinched it then said, “Even your [facial] cut
this!”

2) In *Nahjul-Balagha*, the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib
(ع), describing the Messenger of Allah (ص) and the Holy Qur’an, said:
“He (the Almighty) sent him (Muhammed) after a long period of time which
had lapsed since a messenger was sent, and when the nations were
sleeping sound, slighting even that who had a grievance. He came to
testify (in his own personal conduct) to the truth which he brought
forth, the light of guidance, the Qur’an! Ask it to speak; but it will
not speak to you (since you do not belong to Ahl al-Bayt); but I can
tell you about it: It contains news of the future, tales of the days of
yore, the remedy for your ailments and the final judgment in your
disputes.”

All of these texts clearly emphasize the inclusion of the Shari’a of all
aspects of life. If the Shari’a contains the solution for even the most
trivial problem, such as the amount of monetary compensation to be paid
by one who slightly pinches or scratches the facial tissue of another’s
cheek, then it becomes necessary, according to the logic of such texts,
that the Shari’a also contains the solutions for the economic problems,
and a method to regulate the economic life; otherwise, how can it be
called “inclusive” if it were to neglect one of the most significant and
spacious aspects of life, one of its most important and complicated
facets?

Can you imagine that the Shari’a, which determines the amount of
compensation you should receive when someone very slightly scratches
your skin, does not define your share of the produced wealth, nor does
it regulate the contract between you and your employer, or with the
capitalists, in various jobs which require an employee or a capitalist?

Is it conceivable that the Shari’a defines your right when you are very
slightly cut while it does not do so when you bring life back to a
barren land or extract a mineral or dig a well or take care of a forest?

Thus do we come to know that anyone who believes in the Shari’a and in
its sources and texts is capable of deriving from such texts the
solutions such Shari’a provides for the economic problems, its
regulating of the economic field and, in the end, the existence of an
Islamic economic system extracted from the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah.

In the light of these texts, the reader can come to know the error
committed by some people who claim that the Shari’a regulates the
conduct of the individual, not the society, and that the economic
doctrine is a “social system”; therefore, it is beyond the limit of the
Shari'a which confines itself to regulating the conduct of only the
individual. The texts quoted above prove that such a claim is erroneous.
These texts disclose the extension of the Shari'a to all fields of life,
and that it regulates the life of both society and individual.

In fact, the claim that the Shari'a regulates the individual's conduct
and not the society's is self-contradictory besides colliding with those
texts because if both the individual's conduct and the regulating of
this conduct are studied separately from those of the society, a
grievous mistake will then be committed. The social system, which
regulates the society's general aspects, be they economic or political,
is embodied in the individual's own conduct; it is impossible to
regulate the individual's conduct without regulating the society in
which he lives.

Take a look at the capitalist system: As a social system, it regulates
the economic life upon the basis of taking free economy as its
principle. Such a principle is embodied within the conduct of the
capitalist towards the laborer, and his way of making a work contract
with him, in the conduct of the usurer with his customers whom the first
lends the latter money on interest basis and in the way he conducts the
interest contract with them, etc. Every social system, therefore, is
linked to and directly affects the individual's conduct.

If the Shari'a regulates the individual's behavior, it, thereupon, has
its own method in regulating his conduct when borrowing some money, or
hiring a laborer, or working for someone else, and all of this is by
necessity linked to the social system. Any separation between the
conduct of the individual and that of the society in organization is
certainly self-contradictory.

As long as we admit the fact that the Shari'a regulates the individual's
conduct, and that it has a say in every act of man, as long as we admit
all of this, we then have to carry such an admission to its conclusion
and come to believe in the existence of a social system within the
Shari'a.

I do not know what those who disbelieve in the existence of the Islamic
economic system, or of the solutions to the economic problems in the
Muslim society, say about the period of such an application during the
dawn of Islam. Did not Muslims at the dawn of Islam live as a society
that led an economic life and applied Islam in all its social
activities? Was not the leadership of the Islamic society in the hands
of the Prophet (ص) and according to the tenets of Islam?

Did not that leadership possess defined solutions in dealing with its
problems of production and distribution and various other economic
problems? What if we claim that these solutions express Islam's way in
regulating the economic life and, then, an economic doctrine in Islam?

If we conceive the Islamic society during the government of the Prophet
(ص), we cannot conceive it as lacking an economic system, because there
is no society in the world without its economic system which regulates
its economic life and the distribution of wealth among its members.

We cannot conceive the economic system during the period of the Prophet
(ص) to be separated from Islam and from the Prophet of Islam (ص) who was
the bearer of the Message and was entrusted with putting it to practice.
The economic system, then, had to have been derived from his sayings,
actions, or edicts; that is, it was derived from the texts of his
sayings, actions, or methods in regulating the social work, since he was
the Head of the State, or from his recognition and approval of a custom,
or whatever. All of this stamps the economic system with its own Islamic
stamp.


