Doctrines Need Molding
======================

When we discuss the existence of an Islamic economic system, or an
Islamic economic doctrine, we do not mean that we will find (directly in
these texts) the same basic theories of the Islamic economic doctrine,
in their general formulas. Rather, the texts and sources of legislation
provide us with a large number of legislations which regulate the
economic life and the relationship between man and his brother man in
the fields of production, distribution and handling, such as Islamic
codes regarding farming, mining, leasing, contracting, usury, *zaka*t,
*khums*, taxes and State treasury. This collection of canons and
legislations, when organized and comparatively studied, will lead us to
their own sources and to the general theories which we indicate here. It
is from such theories that we can derive an economic doctrine in Islam.

It is not necessary, for example, that we should find within the texts
and sources of Shari'a a common formula for the definition of a
principle which agrees with or is similar to the principle of economic
freedom in the capitalist system. But we can find within such texts and
sources a number of legislations from which we can derive Islam's stance
towards the principle of economic freedom and through which we can find
the substitute for such a principle from the Islamic viewpoint.

Islam's prohibits capitalist usurious investment and land possession
without utilization or farming as well as granting a man of authority a
prerogative to regulate the pricing of goods [as he pleases]. All these
are examples testifying to our argument. They form our view regarding
Islam's stance towards the economic freedom, and they reflect the
general Islamic principle.


