Ethics of Islamic Economics
===========================

Someone may say, "The economics you claim to exist in Islam do not
comprise an economic doctrine but an ethical code the religion (of
Islam) provides as guidelines which Islam exhorts people to follow. Just
as Islam enjoined the prohibition of deception and backbiting, etc., it
also enjoined helping the poor.

It prohibits injustice, admonishes the rich to console the needy,
forbids the strong from confiscating the rights of the weak, and warns
the first against earning their wealth through illegal means. It also
imposes a mandatory rite, among others, called *zakat*. It imposes it
besides prayers, pilgrimage and the fast in order to make a variety in
the means of worship, and to emphasize the necessity of helping the poor
and being generous to them.

"All of this has been done by Islam in accordance with a general ethical
procedure, and these injunctions, pieces of advice and directives are no
more than ethics which aim at the growth of the good energies within the
Muslim individual's own self, and to tie him closer to his Lord as well
as brother man. They do not imply an economic doctrine or the level of a
generally inclusive organization of the whole society.

"In other words, the above stated injunctions, which have an
individualistic ethical nature, aim at the individual's reform and the
growth of goodness within him. They do not have a social organizational
nature. The difference between the preacher who ascends the pulpit in
order to admonish people to be kind and compassionate, to warn them
against injustice, wrongdoing and trespassing on the rights of other,
and like the social reformer who plans the sort of relations which have
to exist among people, defining rights and obligations."

Our answer to all of these arguments is as follows:

The facts about Islam and its economics do not agree at all with such an
interpretation which reduces the level of Islamic economics to that of
mere providing counsels and ethical codes. It is true that the ethical
trend is obvious in all Islamic tenets. And it is true that Islam
contains a huge multitude of injunctions covering all spheres of life,
the human conduct, and the economic sphere in particular.

It is also true to say that Islam has gathered the most fascinating
means to ethically nurture the Muslim individual, help the growth of his
good energies and bring out of him perfection personified. But this does
not at all mean that Islam confines its teachings to ethically nurture
the individual while setting social organization aside. Nor does it mean
that Islam preaches only to the individual rather than being, in
addition to this, a doctrine and an organization for the society in its
various aspects of life, including its economic life.

Islam has not forbidden injustice, admonished people to be just, warned
them against transgressing against the rights of others, without
defining the concepts of injustice and iniquity, from its own viewpoint,
or without outlining the rights not to be trespassed. Islam has not left
the concept of justice, injustice and righteousness clouded with
obscurity, nor has it left their interpretation for others, as do
ethical preachers.

Rather, it has brought a defined image of justice and general rules of
coexistence of people in the fields of wealth production, distribution
and handling, considering any deviation from such rules and the justice
it defines as sheer injustice and flagrant transgression on the rights
of others.

This is the difference between the position of the preacher and that of
the advocate of the economic doctrine. The preacher preaches about
justice and warns against injustice, but he does not lay down the
criteria for justice and injustice; rather, he leaves such criteria to
the commonly followed customs, those that are recognized by both
preacher and the congregation to which he preaches alike.

As regarding the economic doctrine, this attempts to put down such
criteria and mold them into a well-planned economic system that
regulates various economic fields.

Had Islam come simply in order to say to people, "Quit injustice!
Practice equity! Do not be transgressors!"—leaving to them to define the
meaning of "injustice," to draw the portrait which embodies justice and
to agree on the rights required by equity according to their own
circumstances, education and the ideals in which they believe and the
interests and needs they realize.

Had Islam left all of this for people to determine, confining itself to
enjoining justice and attracting people towards it, forbidding injustice
and warning them against it through both methods of attracting and
warning…, then it would have, indeed, remained a preacher and nothing
else.

When Islam required the Muslims to quit injustice and practice equity,
it at the same time provided them with its own definition of justice and
injustice. It has taken upon itself to differentiate between the fair
method in distribution, handling and production, and the foul one. It
has indicated, for e.g., that forceful possession of land without
tilling it is injustice, that maintaining it on the basis of utilizing
it is "permissible," that the accumulation of wealth by acquiring a
portion of the produced wealth in the name of "interest" is injustice,
that its own achievement of profit is right, and many such relations and
norms of behavior in which Islam has distinguished between injustice and
justice.

As regarding Islam urging the rich to help their poor brethren and
neighbors, it is true, but Islam did not confine itself to merely urging
and ethically admonishing the rich; rather, it has imposed on the State
the obligation to guarantee the securing of the rights of the needy, and
to provide them with an honorable living standard in a way that falls
into the backbone of the Islamic system which regulates the relationship
between the ruler and the ruled.

According to the *hadith* narrated through the authority of Imam Musa
ibn Ja'far al-Kazim, peace be with him, the Imam mentioned, while
defining the ruler's responsibility in faring with *zakat*, that he has
to take this money in order to divide it in the way which God has
ordained to eight shares to the poor and the needy, to distribute it
among them till they become self-sufficient for an entire year without
fearing any hardship or stringency.

If any amount of it is left, it will have to be returned to his
treasury, and if it is not sufficient for the public, the ruler will
then have to provide them from the treasury according to their needs and
until they become self-sufficient.

It is clear, from this text, that the concept of security and the
necessity to provide everybody with a dignified standard of living is
not a preaching idea; rather, it is one of the ruler's own
responsibilities in Islam; therefore, it falls into the social backbone
and it expresses an aspect of the Islamic structure relevant to the
economic life.

There is a big difference between the famous text of *hadith* which
says, "One does not believe in God and in the Latter Day if he spends
his night satisfied while his neighbor is hungry," and the text that
says, "The ruler has to spend on them, each according to his need, until
they all have enough." The first text has a preaching nature, while the
second is organizational, reflecting, therefore, one aspect of the
Islamic system. The latter cannot be seen except as part of a general
social system in Islam.

*Zakat* is one of the most significant of all rites. Its use as a tool
to implement social security in the Islamic society, as we have seen in
the previous text, is alone sufficient to distinguish it from all other
rites of an "individualistic" nature. This proves that it is not merely
an individual form of worship, an ethical exercise for the rich to be
kind to the poor; rather, it is on the level of social organization of
people's way of life.

Add to this the fact that the very legislative structure of *zakat*
expresses a general doctrinal aspect in Islam. The texts which deal with
*zakat* indicate that the latter is given to the needy in order to
improve their general standard of living. This proves that *zakat* is
part of a general Islamic plan aimed at finding harmony and a generally
unified standard of living for members of the Muslim society. It is
obvious that planning for such harmony is not preaching but is an
organizational ideology on the level of an economic doctrine.


