Emphasizing that Islamic Economics Comprise a Doctrine
======================================================

After putting forth several examples explaining the differences between
doctrine and science, we shall emphasize the fact that by the economic
doctrine, whose existence in Islam we have been questioning and
answering in the affirmative, we do not mean here the science of
economics. As a religion, Islam does not have to discuss the sciences of
economics, astronomy, mathematics, etc. We mean by it, rather, the
economic doctrine itself.

Our research and inquiry are about whether Islam provides a method for
regulating the economic life, not whether Islam undertakes upon itself
to conduct a scientific study of the available means and methods of
economics contemporary to its advent and of their results. Such is the
task of scientists of economics, the economists.

The series arrives, after that, at an explanation of the viewpoint
regarding the answer, deriving the accurate concept from the Islamic
legislative system (Shari’a) which absorbs and incorporates different
fields of knowledge. We prove this even by the very nature of Shari’a
and its sources. After that, we shall dispel some doubts cast about the
belief in the existence of the Islamic economics, and we shall answer
these, too.

In particular, I would like to refer to the allegation which says that
Islam has brought ethical principles, and that it did not bring an
economic system to regulate life; so, it is allegedly a mere preacher,
not a system maker. We will explain how this charge capitalized on the
ethical aspect of Islam and used it to overshadow the characteristics of
its social organization despite the fact that Shari’a has indeed tackled
both fields.

It has, as a religion, applied the ethical aspect in order to ethically
nurture the individual Islamically, and it has practiced the social
organization as a system chosen by God for all the human family.

This briefly sums up this discussion and its subject-matters. The
details of these researches and subject-matters follow.


