Is There an Economic System in Islam?
=====================================

Probably the most persistent question which occupies many minds, one
which is repeated on every tongue and is recurrent with every problem
through which the nation passes as long as it exists, is the question
regarding the economic doctrine in Islam; so, is there any economics
theory in Islam?

Can we find a solution for this polar contradiction between capitalism
and Marxism, which is dominating the world nowadays, through a new
substitute derived from Islam and extracted from its method of
legislation and organization? What is the extent of the potential of
this new Islamic substitute in providing a good standard of living, in
carrying out its message to the nation which is suffering nowadays from
a severe doctrinal dilemma within the tumultuous torrent of such intense
conflict with capitalism and Marxism?

Contemplating on this new substitute, or wondering about its reality and
Islamic context, is **not** an intellectual luxury a Muslim relishes;
rather, it is an expression of the disappointment of the Muslim
individual with both contesting wrestlers and a manifestation of his own
reaction to their failure throughout the various experiences he has
lived, the failure of the combating wrestlers, capitalism and Marxism,
in filling the Muslim nation's doctrinal and ideological vacuum.

Contemplating on the Islamic substitute, or inquiring about it, in
addition to the indication of the disappointment of the Muslim
individual with the contesting wrestlers, reveal a new trend towards
Islam, and all in all they reflect an Islamic consciousness which has
begun crystallizing and taking various intellectual levels in the minds
of many people, each according to the extent of his readiness and degree
of response to Islam.

The seeds of an Islamic consciousness manifest their existence in the
minds of a large number of people on the level of raising questions
about Islam, in the minds of others on the level of an emotional
inclination towards it, and in yet other minds on the level of believing
in it and in its rightly-guided leadership, in all spheres; it is their
very belief in life itself.

Islamic consciousness, which is stirring now in the minds of the Muslim
nation on various levels, is the one that once laid the question, and
inspired the answer in favor of Islam. On other occasions, it was
embodied as a giant conscious belief planted in the right soil of the
nation’s minds, the soil that represents Islam among Muslims.

On the other hand, the Islamic faith itself forces Muslims to lay this
question down to the faith or to its *‘ulema* (theologians) who
represent it, asking them to provide the better substitute for both
contesting opponents, capitalism and Marxism. Islam declares very
clearly in the Holy Qur’an, in the legislative texts of the Shari’a, and
through all other vehicles of media at its disposal, that it opposes
both capitalism and Marxism.

Naturally, it is responsible for defining a positive situation, besides
that negative one, to lead us to another path with whose viewpoint and
general structure it agrees. The negative attitude, when separated from
a constructive response which outlines its objectives and defines its
pathway, means the retreat from life’s battlegrounds and the final
social disintegration, not merely subscribing to a new ideology.

Since it does not approve to be included within the frameworks of
capitalism, socialism and Marxism, Islam, then, has to provide an
alternative, or at least lead us to one. It becomes only natural for
Muslims, who have come to know Islam’s negative attitude towards
capitalism and Marxism and its disapproval of them, to inquire about the
extent of Islam’s might and ability to provide this alternative, and the
extent of success which we may attain if we are to be satisfied with
Islam itself, inspired thereby to derive an economic system.

Our answer to all of this is: Islam is capable of providing us with a
positive stance rich in legislative characteristics, general outlines
and detailed canons from which a complete economic system can be
formulated, one which differs from all other economic doctrines in its
Islamic framework, divine link and harmony with humanity, all humanity,
in its spiritual and materialistic spheres and dimensions of both time
and place.

This is exactly what we shall witness in the forthcoming researches.


