Conclusion
==========

In religious education, the universe consists of material and immaterial
things. God has created the world. The universe is a goal – centered
collection. Human being is much respected and has a very high esteem; he
has been created for perfection, elevation, nearness, and servitude and
surrendering to God.

Man has some authority and freewill and so he is responsible. In
religious education, all the potentials of the man’s nature are
actualized harmoniously for reaching divine goals. The ultimate aim of
education is the same as man’s creation, i.e. man’s perfection,
elevation, etc. Paying attention to the personality and views of the
student and the teacher is very important.

Man’s cognition is not considered as a material process. Sense,
intellect and heart are considered as the tools of cognition, and self,
nature, history and books can carry human beings to knowledge and
cognition thus they are knowledge resources.

Informal education plays a very important role in one’s education; the
students and teachers should not confine themselves only to one resource
of knowledge, i.e. books; rather they should pay attention to all
knowledge and cognition resources. The teacher should use all teaching
methods according to the situation and subject matter he teaches.

Different educational contents, which are useful for students and
society, to be taught. Knowledge is considered as a very significant
matter, but those persons can reach the truth of the knowledge and
cognition that have purified themselves from all sorts of knowledge and
cognition obstacles, i.e. sins and evils.

This is why morality, spirituality, values, and virtues are very crucial
facts in the religious foundation philosophy. The individuals and
students should have a good knowledge and a good attitude towards the
values so that these values may be observed in their behaviors.

Therefore, we can design a comprehensive model for religious foundation
philosophy, and use it as a basis and foundation in our educational
activities. The future researches can compare the religious foundations
of philosophy with scholastic and other educational philosophies to
illustrate its strengths and precedence as compared with them.

It can also be concluded from this book that Islam and Christianity,
when considered as a religious educational – philosophical school, have
many similarities regarding foundation of education, and these
similarities can overshadow their differences and therefore can unify
and bring the Muslim and Christian societies close together.

According to this result of the research it is suggested that Muslim and
Christian scholars, and the Muslims and the Christians in general,
despite logical and rational expression of the differences, do try not
to exacerbate these differences, rather they should try to discover and
interpret the similarities so that these two societies may come to the
highest understanding and unity forming a God – centered school with the
intention of the real and true propagation of religiosity, spirituality,
morality, values, virtues and education.


