Ontology
========

Ontology in Greek means “on being.” Its other meaning is, “being qua
being.” The word ontology was coined in the early seventeenth century to
avoid some ambiguities of “metaphysic” – Leibniz was the first
philosopher to adopt the word.

The terminology introduced by Christian Wolf in the early eighteenth
century came to be widely adopted: ontology is the general theory of
being as such, and forms the general part of metaphysics, or theoretical
philosophy.

The three special parts are general cosmology, rational psychology and
natural theology, i.e. the theory of the world, the soul, and God. It is
on the ontological question that modern materialism, physical and
naturalism differ sharply from their opponents: the question of what
there is (Maunter, 2005).

In Islam, it is believed that the world outside the mind has a real
being. The original fact in everything is its “being” (Tabataba’i, 1971)
and the “being” is considered as the most evidential things which do not
need to be proved (Ebrahim Zadeh, 1990). The world is not only
summarized in the material aspect, but also immaterial facts have
reality.

The reality of the being, in spite of having different forms, is unique
and one (Tabatabaie, undated). Infirmity of the effect is inherent in it
and dependent being will never be needless of the “cause.” In other
words, the being and existence of the effect is the very belonging and
dependence to the creator cause (Mesbah Yazdi, 1986).

Thus, the being of the world is the very belonging and dependence on
God, that is, the entire world is as an effect, the cause of which is
God. Each particle of the world owes its being to God. In other words,
God is absolute and complete being who has encompassed the world, and
that’s why the entire universe manifests the existence of the creator.

Therefore, God can’t be considered as an existing for example, “in the
sky”, who is creating the being and the creatures.

The God which the Glorious Qur’an defines is peerless and unique,
creator of all things and the worlds, and all other things are created
by Him (Goreshi, 1985). The origin of the world, i.e. the creator or
God, should possess the necessary conditions and merits for creating the
world.

The creator of discipline and general movement should have continuous
knowledge, intellect, episteme, innovation, life and management. The
main origin of the world should possess originality and should be
pre-existing and eternal (Dashti, 1981).

The world is a goal-centered. There is resurrection or eternal life and
then a new birth as an undeniable principle in the whole of the being
and existence system. The appearance of creatures is possible through
cooperation and unity of diverse forces and elements of the world.

A new creature is created by combination of different elements that this
birth is very principle of resurrection, and so the world is created
based on this dynamic and productive principle (Dashti, 1981).

Change and transformation are from the characteristics of matter, thus
each material “being” takes part in this process. According to this,
absolute destruction and annihilation can only be considered as a
relative interpretation that measures each stage of the change process
against its previous one, because all material things are always
confronting frequent changes and transformations in the route of their
continuity.

In other words, the being goes through stages in a goal – centered style
and flows dynamically in the way to accomplish the creation goals. For
example, a seed is dropped in the earth. This very seed will grow into a
corpulent and giant tree having many branches, leaves and fruits, that
is, a collection possessing millions of cells each of which has
thousands of particles and ingredients.

The seed in the very beginning can’t be compared with the greatest
computers and the most complicated programs of the world. That seed
possessing such a program has a potential power to go through the
highest stages of transformation. Such a program is definitely governing
the universe and its events.

On the other hand, if the leaves of that tree are fallen on the earth
they will fall to decay by passing of time and will turn into other
particles in the soil…. This is an unlimited process and it is a
transformation. It is a process in which there is no sign of
destruction.

That is the reason why the Holy Qur’an has not used even for one time in
its verses the word “***fout***”= (passing away, dying) for man; rather
it has used the word “***vafat***” = (departure) because in the Arabic
language the word “fout” indicates absolute destruction and the word
“vafat” = (departure) indicates transformation and change from one stage
to another.

The first and the most important belief in Islam is the doctrine of the
oneness of Allah (God). This belief is called the “Tawhid.” This is made
clear in the shahadah, the first pillar of Islam, which states that,
“There is no God except Allah the One God &“Muhammad” is the Messenger
of Allah.

A Muslim is someone who has submitted himself or herself to the will of
Allah. Since Allah (God) is beyond all human understanding, so human
beings cannot describe Him: “Say: He is Allah, the One and the only;
Allah, the eternal, Absolute; He beget not, nor is He begotten; and
there is none like unto Him” (quoted in Keene, 2005).

The first statement of the Holy Bible describes God as the creator of
the heaven and the earth whose command encompasses the entire world,
“God said, let there be light and there was light… And let the dry land
appear: and it was so…” (Genesis 1: 2 & 7).

God is the central subject of the Bible and always presented in
relationship with the world, with that which is not God. God’s existence
is assumed from the first verse of Genesis, God’s core character and
most basic purposes are very constant across two testaments, and the
divine speaking and acting are always in service of those purposes,
whether in creation, judgment, or salvation.

God is a character in every biblical tradition (except Esther). God is
presented as one who speaks, is spoken to, and is spoken about (though
God’s direct peaking is rare in the NT), and one who acts and is
affected by the action of others (e.g. provoked to anger).

Most commonly, God is presented as a character in a narrative, whose
presence may be depicted as both intense (Sinai, Jesus Christ) and
unobtrusive (the Joseph story). Narratives provide depth to God’s
character without bringing closure to the depiction of God; they present
God as a complexity.

The following claims are central regarding the biblical understanding of
God; texts are cited from both OT and NT and are significantly
represented across various genres and traditions: living and eternal,
unity, unique and incomparable, present, active, relational,
intentional, interactive, situational, effective, vulnerable, use of
agents, mighty acts, extraordinary events (Fretheim, cited from
Freedman, Myers & Beck, 2000)

Christians believe that God is omnipotent (the all – powerful creator of
everything) who has a plan and purpose for all things, omniscient – the
Being Who knows everything and everyone, perfect – the perfectly good
and all–loving Being, eternal – outside and beyond all space and time,
the Judge – the one who decides what happens to us when we die, the
Father – the one who cares for us all.

Christians believe that God is one but is known or experienced through
Holy Spirit. They call this belief the Trinity (Keene, 2005).

From the viewpoint of the Bible, God is not only “one” in an absolute
sense, but also contains “within himself”, so to speak, a plurality of
characteristics and personhood (Renn, 2005).

In the Bible, God has been variously defined as “God most high” or “most
high God” (Gen. 14:1377; Dan. 3:6; Num. 24:16; Deut. 32:8; Dan 5:13,2),
“almighty” (cf. Gen.17:11;35:11; Exod. 6:3, Num. 24:4&16; Ruth 1:20, 21;
ps. 63:14; Isa. 13:6; Joe 11:15) “holy one” (cf. 2Kgs. 19:22; ps. 89:12;
Isa. 5:19; Hab. 3:3), “mighty God ”(cf. Isa. 9:6; 10:21; Jer. 32:12),
“righteous” (cf. exod. 9:27; 2 chr. 12: 6; pss. 129:4; 145:17; Lam.
1:13), “King” (e.g. pss. 24:8010; 29:10; 89:13; Isa. 6:5; 43:15; Jet.
10:10; 48:15; Zech. 14:9, 16, 17; Mal. 1:14), and such other names and
properties as: father, judge, redeemer, saviour, deliverer, shield,
strength (Renn, 2005).

“God is our refuge and strength” (Psalm 46:1). “God is my salvation”
(Is. 12:2). “Beside me there is no God” (Is. 44:6). “There is one God”
(Mk. 12:32). “Heavens declare the Glory of God” (Psalm 19:1). “All the
earth bows down to you, they sing Praise to you, they sing the Praises
of your name” (Psalm 66:4). “Tremble before him, all the earth” (Psalm
96:9).

Therefore, as for man as a particle of the universe: “come, let us bow
down in worship, and let us kneel before the Lord our maker” (Psalm
95:6).

Then, the duties of mankind and bondman before such God are referred to:
“Ask of God, God will give it thee” (In. 11: 22). “You believe in God”
(Acts 5: 29). “Fear God” (rev. 14: 7). “Follow him” (I King 13: 21). “In
God I have put my trust” (Psalm 56: 4). “Give thank unto the God of
Gods” (Psalm 136: 2). “Hope is in the Lord his God” (Psalm 146: 5), etc.

One of the oldest and the most important Christian statements of belief
is the Nicene Creed, which goes back to the fourth century C.E. It opens
with the words: “I believe in one God…Maker of heaven and earth and all
things visible and invisible…” This is the point at which the Bible also
begins.

The universe, the world and human beings are not divine – as God is.
They are created, God is the creator. That is the real message behind
the two Creation Stories in Genesis (Keene, 2005).

Jesus came into the world to share its hopes and sadness – and to show
just what God was like. He left behind the teachings that would allow
people who followed also to know what God is like – as they can read the
Bible: “The word (Jesus) became flesh and made His dwelling among us. We
have seen His glory of the one God and the only, which came from the
father, full of grace and truth” (John 1.14) (cited from Keene, 2005).

According to the Bible, the world was created with purpose in mind, and
God is closely involved in this purpose (Dewar, 2002). That’s because He
is the Creator and Sustainer of all things the universe finds its
purpose and meaning only in Him (Perks, 1992).

Therefore, since the universe has not been created in vain, there will
surely be an eternal life after this worldly life: “***The gift of God
is eternal life***” (6:23). “About the resurrection of the dead – have
you not read what God said to you, ‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac and God of Jacob’, He is not the God of the dead but of the
living” (Matthew 22:31-32).

The story of the creation of the universe and all forms of life, both
animal and human, is told in the opening chapter of the book of Genesis.
The description there speaks of the essential goodness of God’s
creation: “God looked at everything he had made and he was very pleased”
(Genesis 1.31). The creation was perfect and God was totally satisfied
with all that He had made (Keene, 2005).

The idea that everything strives towards the ultimate good is based on
Aristotle’s Four Causes. This striving towards ultimate reality is also
the basis of Augustine’s theodicy (Dewar 2002). Unlike the Greek idea of
God being associated with the world of humans, He intervenes directly in
events. In other words, the Bible shows God’s involvement in the world
to be dynamic (Dewar, 2002).


