Anthropology
============

As the study of mankind, or humankind, anthropology could encompass many
studies that ordinarily fall under some other academic discipline. In
theological discourse, anthropology often refers to the doctrine of man,
or human beings, as created, fallen, and redeemed (Childress, 2001).

Christians have always believed that it is their soul that makes human
beings different from the rest of creation. Human beings are a body and
a soul. Animals are only a body. This is how the Bible describes the
spiritual nature of human beings: “…The Lord God formed the man from the
dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,
and the man became living beings” (Genesis 2.7).

The Apostles’ Creed clearly states Christian belief in the resurrection
of the body. The 1662 Book of Common Prayer (the defining book of the
Church of England) states that Christians expect this body resurrection
to occur followed by everlasting life.

There are also Biblical passages that support the idea: “The tombs
broken open and the bodies of many holy people who had died were raised
to life. They come out of the tombs, and after Jesus’ resurrection they
went into the holy city and appeared too many people” (Matthew
27:52-53).

Some thinkers reject the idea that there is any continuation of
individual psychological or physical identity. Other theologians have
argued that only God is eternal, and any concept of eternal life should
be connected to that fact.

Fundamentalists maintain a belief in a bodily resurrection, based on
Biblical authority, and some Christians have rejected the idea of life
after death completely, seeing it a mythological construction seeking
validation of the virtuous life.

The Christian view is that the body will be resurrected after death –
this is a reward for the righteous. St Paul speaks of a recreation – a
resurrection with a glorified body: “so will it be with the resurrection
of the death.

The body that is shown is perishable, it is raised imperishable; it is
shown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is shown in weakness, it is
raised in power; it is shown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body. If there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual body” (1
Corinthans 15:42-44) (cited from Dewar, 2002).

The Christian view of life after death involves separate beliefs: 1. the
resurrection of the body. Christianity teaches that the body of each
believer stays in the grave until the end of the world, when everyone is
brought back to life. In some way, the actual body of each Christian is
resurrected. 2. The immorality of the soul. This is the belief that when
a person dies, their soul continues to survive because it is immortal.
It is important to realize that Christians do not believe in
reincarnation or rebirth.

John of the Cross (1542-1591) believed that the soul is spiritualized by
divine action. The process of the purifying of the soul prepares it for
union with God (Dewar, 2002).

Man as a subset of being, is not summarized only in the material aspect,
it has also an immaterial aspect that is spirit. Therefore, the man’s
resurrection and hereafter is an acceptable fact. He is created by God,
and he is a goal –centered creature.

Goals of Man’s Creation
-----------------------

Considering the Qur’anic verse, “***I have not created jinn and mankind
except to serve me***” (51:56), we can conclude that the aim of man’s
creation has been “worship” or in fact “submission to or servitude of
God.”

Tabatabaie (1999) considers the dependencies of worship, such as
blessing, forgiveness, etc. as some of the goals of the creation of jinn
and man, the most important of which is the particular knowledge that
one acquires regarding his Lord. Worship without knowledge will never
cause man to reach submission to and servitude of God.

On the other hand, the position of servitude of God and real worship is
in itself knowledge – creating. Ja’fari (1981) considers knowledge as an
integral part of worship, “as soon as man is delivered from the natural
process of his being, and reaches the stage of awareness about his soul
– which is of divine and heavenly world – his worship has started.

Whenever man becomes aware of his pure soul and spirit and comes to know
that he is a part of the whole being tune played for divine grace, he
has become involved in worship.” Mesbah Yazdi (1986) believes in this
regard that the ultimate goal of man’s creation is attaining the last
ranks of perfection and God’s nearness and utilizing and enjoyment of
the highest and the most durable God’s bounty, grace and His eternal
paradise and satisfaction.

A goal of the creation has been the accomplishment of worship and
obedience to God that in turn is considered as a tool for achieving the
ultimate goal. The immediate goal of creation has been the preparation
of material and social background, and actualization of necessary
cognitions for choosing freely the straight path of the life and
extending and development of Godliness and worship of God in society.

That’s why in the Glorious Qur’an, after emphasis on the fact that
worlds and man’s creation has not been in vain and “***for sport***”
(23:115) and it has a wise goal, the aim of the world’s creations has
been introduced as preparation of divine tests and the freely selection
for man on one part, and worshipping of the exalted and sublime God on
the other part.

The ultimate goal of man’s creation has been introduced as placing him
in the vicinity of the divine grace and utilizing and enjoyment of
eternal happiness, triumph and deliverance. Nasri (1989) believes that
the ultimate goal of creation has been man and his existence elevation
as all the creatures have been created in order that man might be able
to use them and reaches himself to divine nearness as the Qur’an says,
“***It is He who created for You all that is in the earth***” (2:29).

Goth (1996) says about the real meaning of worship that worship is not a
series of lifeless actions and percepts and limited and definite formal
ceremonies, rather it has a very comprehensive meaning that involves all
parts, thoughts and actions and feelings of the human being.

In other words, worship means turning to God in all life activities,
attaining His satisfaction in all affairs and fearing of all factors
that cause God’s anger. Shariatmadarii (1992) states that when man’s
goal is nearness to God and Truth, worship, trying for earning a
livelihood, effort for solving the problems of fellow creatures,
choosing the job and vocation, acquiring moral virtues and sacrifice are
all activities that are necessitated by movement towards God.

The most important thing for a Muslim is to live in submission to God.
By doing this, each Muslim shows respect for God and finds the Key to
true happiness (Keene, 2005).

“Submit yourselves, then, to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee
from you. Come near to God and he will come near to you… Humble
yourselves before the Lord, and he will lift you up” (the bible, James
4: 7-8 & 10).

The word “worship” means “worthiness.” Christians believe that in their
worship, they are offering something that is worthy and precious to God
– because He is worth it. Worship is important to Christians because God
almighty Creator of the universe should be praised.

It is opportunity to say and show how much God means to loving Him in
return – and also by loving their neighbors to express their love for
God (Keene, 2005).

Worship in NT usually means expression of Praise or thanksgiving (Luke
17: 15-16). Sometimes it implies obeisance as an attitude for
supplication (Matt. 8:2). In any case, it is the appropriate human
response to the magnificence glory to God. Summons and encouragement to
worship abound (Col. 4: 2; Heb. 13: 15).

The centrality of worship of Christians is evident in a book such as the
Gospel of Luke, which opens and closes with scenes depicting worshippers
(Luke 1: 8; 24: 52-53) and contains 21 specific references to people
glorifying, Praising, or giving thanks to God. Likewise, the book of
Revelation is inundated with images of worship.

The NT takes over the concern of OT prophets that worship be integrated
into the life of faith. Thus, passages that prioritize merry over
sacrifice (Hos. 6: 6) or decry worship with lips but not heart (Isa. 29:
13) are quoted in new context (Matt. 9: 13; Mark 7: 6-7).

Genuin worship is not merely for show (Matt. 6: 1-18) but involves
surrender of the self to God in faithful obedience (Rom. 12: 1).
(Powell; quoted in Freedman, Myers & Beck, 2000). There are general
commands for all to “worship” God alone in Matt. 4: 10; Mark 4: 8 (Renn,
2005). “Worship before the Lord my God” (Deut 26: 10). “Worship thou
him” (Psalm 45: 11).

At the heart of worship, it is said, is a numinous sense of the presence
of the holy God. The numen is experienced “outside oneself”’, ‘over
against” the worshipper. Worship may serve to prepare for, allow and
evoke experience of God.

It may put People in the place, psychologically and epistemologically
where God can be “seen” and “heard.” That would be learning – through –
experience with a vengeance (Astley; cited from Astley, Francis &
Crowder, 1996).

The teaching of Christian doctrine and the formation of Christian
attitudes must take place together. Neither Process can take place
authentically without the other. Worship is the paradigm situation for
the joint activity (Astley; cited from Astley, Francis &Crowder, 1996).

Astley (1996, p. 245) believes that, “worship is not for anything; it
has no ulterior point or purpose, least of all an educational one.
Religious people do not worship in order to do or become anything else,
to teach or to learn. Worship is an end in itself.”

It should be noted that it is quite right worship can be considered as
an end, meanwhile, each worship can also considered as a tool and an
instrument which can lead the worshipper to other worship. For example
“prayer” is a worship that can be considered as an independent goal or
end i.e. the people should try to reach the position to establish
prayer.

On the other hand, it can also be considered as a tool or instrument,
i.e. the prayer should reach man to such positions (or ends) as he or
she helps the poor, not backbite, etc. It is interesting that Astley
refers to this in another part of his article when he says, “Both
worship and meditations have a powerful effect in leading to a loss of
self – centeredness” (p. 245).

On the other hand, Astley takes emphasis on the emotional side of
worship where he expresses “such an account of worship will lead us to
construe the language of worship as performing non – cognitive, rather
than cognitive, functions” (p. 246).

In another part of his article, when Astley tries to describe the
Christian education and the emotions, he concludes, “Christian truth is
learned both affectively and cognitively. It is when reason and emotion
are divorced that religion most rapidly loses its sense and its power
for people. Religion is a cognitive – affective activity” (p. 250).
Thus, in addition to the cognition, God should also be loved: “I will
love thee, O Lord, my strength” (Psalm 18: 1).

Loving God is a necessary part for His real worship. Therefore we should
thank and appreciate Him that He has guided us to the way to love Him:
“Praise is to the Lord, for he showed me the wonders of his love when I
was in a city under siege.”

On the other hand, God loves those who love Him and trust Him: “The
Lord’s unfailing love surrounds those who trust in him.” Then, it should
again be emphasized: “Rejoice in the Lord and be glad, you righteous:
sing, all you who are upright in heart!”(Psalm 32: 11), “sing joyfully
to the Lord, you righteous” (Psalm 33: 1), “Play skillfully, and shout
for joy” (Psalm 33: 3), “The lord loves righteousness and justice; the
earth is full of his unfailing love” (Psalm 33: 5).

Man’s Personality
-----------------

We mean by the Personality here those characteristics which
differentiates man from other creatures:

1- Man is breathed with God’s spirit: “***And (I) breathed my spirit in
him***” (Qur’an, 15:29; 38:72). Considering the Hadith of the prophet of
Islam (Mohammad), “the exalted God created man on His Own Face”, one can
conclude that man can become God –like and can actualize the divine and
spiritual potentials which have been trusted in him.

“And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul” (the
Bible, Genesis 2: 7). The second part of the Genesis creation story
(chapter 2-3) involves the creation of Adam and Eve, and the “Fall” and
eviction from the Garden of Eden: God is pictured in a more super –
human way. Adam is created of dust from the ground, and breathed into
his nostrils the breath of life (Dewar, 2002).

Image of God (imago Dei): “Then God said, ‘Let us make man in our image,
after our likeness; and let them have dominion ….’ So God created man in
his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he
created them” (the Bible, Gen. 1: 26f; cf. 5: 1 and 9: 6).

According to Reformation theology, original sin affects the core of
human nature, but there were also disputes among Reformation
theologians. As Van Hervey writes, “In general, the Lutheran tradition
emphasized the loss of the image of God while the Calvinist tradition
regarded it as corrupted but not lost.

Although the image of God is often construed as reason and freewill, it
has also been interpreted as spiritual capacities, such as self –
transcendence or the capacity for and the call to relationship with God,
as excellence, such as righteousness (Childdress, 2001).

The image of God in human beings remains. According to the Bible, human
being alone worship God (Keenes, 2005). Being made in God’s image means
that human beings share something of His nature. Christians refer to
this as their ‘spirit’ or ‘soul’. It is this that worships God. After
death, the spirit or soul lives on since it is immortal (eternal)
(Keene, 2005).

2- Man is prostrated by God’s angels, “***And when we said to the
angels, ‘Bow yourselves to Adam’; so they bowed themselves***” (Qur’an,
2:34; 17:61; 20:116). Therefore, man can reach a higher position than
God’s angles if he keeps his humanistic properties.

3- Man is viceroy of God on the earth: “***I am sending in the earth a
viceroy***” (Qur’an, 2:34; 17:30).” Therefore, it can be deduced that
man has the most similarity to God, because a “viceroy” should have the
most similarity to the one who has appointed him as his viceroy.

Muslims believe that God created the world and everything in it. Human
beings are the most important part of creation and they have been made
so that they alone can serve the God. They have been appointed to act as
earth’s ‘guardians’.

The earth belongs to God but He has delegated responsibility for its
day-to-day care to the Muslim community. (Human beings are God’s
‘vice-regents’, appointed by Him to look after what He has made.

They must guarantee that the whole of creation is kept healthy so that
food is provided for everyone. No one should ever be in want. In Islam,
the more the one has, the more one should make sure that it is used
properly.

This responsibility is seriously because, on the Day of Judgment,
everybody will have to answer to God for how they have treated the
planet. All animals and insects are a part of God’s creation – no matter
how big or how small! (Keene, 2005).

As God has dominion over all particles of the world, He has given some
authority to man as His viceroy on the earth: “Have dominion over the
fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living
thing that moveth upon the earth” (the bible, Genesis 1: 28).

4- Man has covenanted friendship with God and has accepted God as his
Lord: “***And when we took from the Children of Adam, from their loins,
their seed, and made them testify touching themselves, ‘Am I not your
Lord?’ They said: ‘Yes, we testify’***” (Qur’an, 7:172). Thus, the man
should remain truthful to his covenant with his Lord (God): “With thee
will I establish my covenant” (the Bible, Genesis 6: 18).

Faith is a necessary condition of authentic knowledge of God and of the
human good. This is faith as belief and believing. Faith as trust, its
ties with certifiable knowledge of God and of the human good loosened,
is put under heavy pressure to posit it and for itself value absolutes –
ideals and/ or beings deemed worthy of unconditional loyalty. In Jesus
Christ God makes Himself known; in this transaction, and here alone, the
divine moral imperatives for the faithful are ascertained (Hartt, 2002).

5- Man accepted a trust which the heavens, the earth and the mountains
feared to take it: “***We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth
and the mountains, but they refused to carry it and were afraid of it;
and man carried it***” (Qur’an, 33:72).

If we interpret this trust as man’s freewill in acceptance of God’s
ordainments and acting according to them, then it is up to man not to
leave down this trust in halfway and not to refrain from doing God’s
ordainments even for a moment.

6. Man is at rest by God’s remembrance: “***In God’s remembrance are at
rest the hearts***” (Qur’an, 13:28). The Holy Qur’an emphasizes that it
is only possible through God’s remembrance that man’s hearts may feel
rest.

On the other hand, the above verse indicates that man has a great and
high status and he has similarity with God that his heart is only at
rest in God’s remembrance.

Thus, God is the only and the real source of any rest and comfort:
“Praise be to God… the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our
troubles, so that we can comfort those in any trouble with the comfort
we ourselves receive from God” (Corinthians: 374).

7. Man possess a moral conscience that blames him when committing a sin:
“***No! I swear by the reproachful soul***” (Qur’an, 75:2). This verse
indicates that God considers a great importance for man’s regret and
penitence after committing a sin.

It is due to this sacred and holy feeling that man repents. Thus, it is
necessary for all mankind not to do those actions which might cause them
to become indifferent to committing sins.

8. Man has been created in best existential conditions: “***We indeed
created man in the fairest nature***” (Qur’an, 95:4). Therefore, man
should not do those actions which reduce him to the lowest states:
“***then we restored him the lowest of the low***” (Qur’an, 95:5).

In spite of the very high status of man between creatures, he does also
suffer from some weak points: “And God saw the wickedness of man was
great in the earth and that every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was only evil continually” (Genesis 6:5).

According to the Qur’an, man’s weaknesses can be divided into three
groups (Baqeri, 1991):

1. Those verses in which the words “create” and “man” has been used, and
it has been referred to man’s creation. One can conclude from such
verses that God Himself has placed these weak points in man, and these
weak points can be removed by man’s endeavor and free will or be
utilized positively.

The peak of elevation and luminousness of faithful man is in such a
confrontation and utilization, and all of his virtue and skillfulness is
to have such an effort. Some of the verses which places in this
category, are as follows:

1. “***Man was created of haste***” (21:37)

2. “***Man was verily created greedy***” (70:19).

3. “***Man was created weakling***” (4:23).

All of these verses have the word “man” – that refers to mankind in
general – and also the word “created.” In other words, God has created
man with such qualities, and so man has not himself chosen them, and
since God does nothing in vain, thus man can positively utilize these
properties.

For example, if human beings use their “hurry or haste” property in such
a manner that instead of they reach their goals sooner, they reach
later, or they don’t reach their goals at all, such haste will be
considered as negative and disagreeable haste.

However, if man hurries in the route of goodness so that he might reach
faster and better to the good goal of his creation, that is elevation,
perfection and submission to God, he has applied a positive and
agreeable haste. That’s the reason why the Muslims say several times in
day and night before they begin establishing they prayers, “hurry to the
prayer”, “hurry to the salvation”, “hurry to the bets action.”

Alternatively, it is said that, “hurry to the prayer before death, and
hurry to the repentance before death”, or the Holy Qur’an says, “***Vie
with one another, hastening to forgiveness from your Lord***” (3:133),
or “***so be you forward in good works***” (5:48).

As for the verse, which refers to this fact that man has been created
greedy, it can be said that such a greed and avarice may be applied in
the route of the worldly abject comforts in such a manner that forces
man to stinginess.

Therefore the Qur’an introduces those who keep themselves from such
stinginess as the successful, “***And whosoever is guarded against the
avarice of his own soul, those – they are the prosperous***” (59:9).

It is also possible that every person utilize positively from the “greed
or avarice”, for example, he becomes greedy for knowledge, spirituality
and guidance. One of the dispositions God attributes to the prophet of
Islam is that he was very eager and greedy for people’s guidance (that
they may be guided): “***Now there has come to you a messenger from
among yourselves; grievous to him is your suffering; anxious is he over
you, gentle to the believers, compassionate***”(9:128).

As for the verses, which referred to this fact that man has been created
“weak”, it can be said that from one respect man’s power is not infinite
in different aspects such as physical, intellectual, etc.

From another respect it can be said that man in facing God’s ordainments
may remain still weak and show weakness, feebleness and disability in
doing good affairs or not committing sins if he doesn’t strengthen his
religious beliefs and certitude.

But he, on the other hand, can reach a position in which he reduces his
weakness by strengthening his faith and piety and becomes, like the
disciples of the prophet of Islam who fall under this verse of the
Qur’an: “***…they fainted not for what smote them in God’s way, neither
weakened, nor did they humble themselves***” (3:146). But in every case
he should feel himself weak and unable before the powerful God: “***O
men, you are the ones that have need of God***” (35:15).

The second category includes those verses in which the word “man” is
used, but the word “create” is not seen in them. In other words, the
weakness attributed to man in such verses has not been considered as the
weak points created by God in man’s nature. Thus, it can be concluded
that man has a role in such weak points. The following verse is an
example of such verses: “***Surly man waxes insolent, for he thinks
himself self-sufficient***” (96:6).

In this verse, this character of most of men has been blamed that when
they feel themselves needless of God, they will rebel and disobey. It
should also be mentioned that human beings can reach to a position they
only see themselves in need of God and feel an absolute freedom from
whatever is against God and attains to the real position of magnanimity
and loftiness of nature, and then be delivered from all worldly
instabilities and agitations, and say, as Hafez, one of the Iranian most
famous poets said: “Last night, at morning time, me freedom from grief,
they gave” (p. 178)

“Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession” (Psalm 2:8).
Therefore, man in such a position reaches a status in which he says:
“But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory and the lifter up of
mine head” (Psalm 3: 3). Because he believes that “I will not be afraid
of ten thousands of people that have set themselves against me round
about” (Psalm 3: 6).

“The Lord foils the plans of the nations; he thwarts the purposes of the
peoples. But the plans of the Lord stand firm for ever… Blessed is
nation whose God is the Lord, the people he chose for inheritance”
(Psalm 33: 10-11). That is because “No king is saved by the size of his
army; no warrior escapes by his great strength” (Psalm 33: 16). “This is
the very position that Hafez names it as “Kingdom of poverty”, “O heart!
If thee, the Kingdom of Poverty, they give, thy least territory will be
from the moon to the fish” (p. 471). In fact, the real piety is not
anything else save such a position. In other words, piety is “not
wanting”, not “not having.”

The third category includes those Qur’anic verses referring to man’s
serious weak points which himself intentionally has acquired them. For
example, the Qur’an says that some individuals committed a very great
and indecent trick against one of the greatest God’s prophets: ***“…
have devised a mighty device***” (71:22). The blameworthy state seen in
such verses is more than the verses of the second category.

Determinism and Free Will
-------------------------

We can see the idea of Islam concerning determinism and free will in its
most summarized form in this valuable speech of Imam Ja’far Sadiq, one
of the Muslim Imams, where he says, “There is no absolute determinism,
and there is no absolute free will, but it is between these two.”

Tabatabaie (2002) in interpretation of “it is between these two” says
that the meaning of this statement is that the exalted God intended that
His bondmen do the actions with their own free wills, as God says in the
Qur’an: “***but you will not unless God wills***”(76:30). In other
words, if God does not will, there will not be any man, nor will be any
knowledge, power, and free will for him (Mesbah Yazdi, 1986).

According to Baqeri (1991), it can be deducted from the Qur’an that no
power can take from man his free will and force him, including Satan
(17:22), governmental system (4:77), social culture (43:23), penetrating
and great figures of society (33:67), family system (66:10) and heredity
(31:33).

This doesn’t not mean that society has no influence upon man, in other
words although the society cannot seize free will from man, it can
definitely affect man’s feelings, emotions and motivation positively or
negatively.

If we pay sufficient attention to different verses of the Glorious
Qur’an regarding determinism and freewill, we will notice that the
Qur’an considers two aspects for man, the individual aspect and the
group or social aspect, that is to say some of the Qur’an verses refer
to man’s individual aspect, for example the prophet of Islam is
addressed that; “***establish prayer***” (11:114; 17:78). On the other
hand, some of the Qur’an verses refer to man’s social aspect, for
example: “***And do not spy, neither backbite one another***” (49:12).

According to this, the Qur’an considers two individual (17:14) and
social books (45:28), two individual (19:95) and social summoning
(64:9), two individual (6:164) and social punishment (16:25).

For example in man’s social the Qur’an speaks of those losses that has a
social aspect: “***upon the day when He shall gather you for the Day of
Gathering; that shall be the Day of Mutual Fraud***” (64:9). The word
“Mutual Fraud” (Taghabun) indicates in the Arabic language those losses
which have a social aspect that is society sometimes causes its members
to be cheat and lose, for example the society causes the religious
motivation of some of its members to be decreased and they commit some
sins, etc.

The question of freedom in relation a specifically Christian ethic
becomes acute at two points in particular – where it impinges on the
doctrines of original sin and grace. His awareness of this tension found
its classic expression in the controversy between Augustinianism and
Plagiarism.

The first of these views held that the human will is so disabled by sin
that it cannot choose well except through the supervening of divine
grace; the second, that a genuine autonomous freedom remains.

In practice, the church seems to have settled for a compromise between
these extremes. Even if we allow that our fallen nature pulls us toward
bad choices, we are not absolutely determined by this pull, and the very
fact that there is a natural awareness of sin itself is in itself a
branch in the domination of sin.

On the other hand, if we allow that the human will needs enabling grace,
it cannot be supposed that such grace is irresistible or imposed in such
a way that we become more puppets. The dialectic of sin and grace is the
theological counterpart of the ethical dialectic between freedoms and
determinism. In both cases, the dialectic must be minted and explicated
in fully personal terms (Macquarrie, 2001).

John Calvin (1509 – 1564) is most closely associates with Calvinism, the
protestant theological movement that emphasizes the sovereignty of God,
the goodness of creation, the authority of scripture, and the sinfulness
of humanity. Calvin taught that God is all – powerful and all – knowing.

A logical of this belief is that God already knows which humans will be
welcomed into heaven, and which will go to heaven, the humans have moral
choice. This idea is known as Predestination, and is supported by
several writers, including St Paul: “We know that all things work
together for good for those who love God, who are called according to
his purpose.

For those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed of the
image of his Son, in order that he might be the firstborn within a large
family. And those whom he predestined he also justified; and those whom
he justified he also glorified” (Romans 8: 28-30).

St Augustine says “will any man presume to say that God did no foreknow
those to whom he would grant belief! …This is the predestination of
saints; namely, the foreknowledge and planning of God Kindness, by which
there are most surely delivered.”

The belief has strong support from several Christian groups, and remains
as one of the 39 Articles of Faith of the Church of England:
“predestination to life is everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before
the foundations of the world were laid) he hath constantly decreed by
his counsel secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom
he hath chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to
everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor” (Article 17, Articles
of Religion, Book of Common prayer, cited from Dewar, 2002).

Augustine (354 – 430) based his theory on his reading of Key Biblical
passage: Genesis 3 and Romans 5:12-20. He also based it on two
assumptions: 1. Evil is not from God – God’s creation was faultless and
perfect. 2. Evil came from within the world. Augustine accounts for evil
by ascribing it to human agency. Evil came about because of the misuse
of “free will.”

All suffering is therefore a consequence of this abuse of free will.
“Natural evil” is caused by the imbalance in nature brought about by the
“fall.” “Moral evil” is caused because the world has become estranged
from God, and immorality has been able to thrive. However, God has not
relinquished the responsibility for the world.

If God were simply just, everyone would be suitably punished. Instead,
God’s grace brought about the possibility of reconciliation through
Jesus Christ, whose crucifixion saved a certain number from eternal
punishment (Dewar, 2002).

Aquinas believed that goodness is wrapped up in cause and purpose. An
act is good as far as it achieves its potential. Aquinas’s application
of Aristotelian causation is the foundation of Roman Catholic morality.
Every action has a purpose given it by God (Dewar, 2002).

According to these materials, we understand well why the Bible
explicitly applies such words as free and freedom for humankind: “It is
for freedom that Christ has set us free. Stand firm, then, and do not
let yourselves be burdened again by a yoke of slavery” (Galatians 5:1).

Man’s Responsibility
--------------------

Since man is a free and authorized being, thus he should undertake the
responsibility of his actions (Ebrahim Zadeh, 1990). Albahi (translated
by Sajjadi, 1993) says that this idea of Islam that everyone is
responsible of his actions is due to distinction and privilege of man as
compared with other creatures because of his intellect and
understanding.

Responsibility is an inner question when a person has for example
ability, whether he or she has done his or her duties according to his
or her ability. Human beings, because of possessing intellect, power of
thinking and their other inner and natural characters, entered into an
agreement with their Lord (Qur’an, 7:172), that they act according to
their characteristics and potentials.

Therefore, in this a position, it is not only that ask themselves such a
question, but also the others, too, have the right for asking this
question, that’s the reason why God addresses the men this question
that: “***Where then are you going***?” (81:26).

Evidentially the wise God asks man this question when He has given man
the ability of identification and distinguishing between the right way
from the wrong way, and this ability has surely been given to the
humans: “***Surely we guided him upon the way whether he be thankful or
unthankful***” (76:3).

Therefore in the light of the very ability for identification of the
right way from wrong way, it is necessary for man to see himself obliged
to do good deeds and avoid from doing bad things, that is, feels
responsibility since such a feeling responsibility comes from the man’s
nature, and religion is nothing else but the message of man’s nature,
thus these two are consistence with each other, and then: “***No
compulsion is there in religion***.”

Particularly when the truth of the religion is comprehended and
understood considering its harmony with the man and its matchless
attractiveness and brightness, then there would be no force and
compulsion for human beings to accept it.

Within the word for response is hidden the Greek word for “promise”,
recalling the practice of reliably performing one’s part in a common
undertaking. In this sense, responsibility refers, not merely to the
conditions for immutability, but to the trustworthiness and
dependability of the agent in some enterprise.

This meaning has been explored by theologians rather than by
philosophers. God as creator dictates a law and will judge accordingly;
human beings must know God’s law and freely obey it. They are
responsible, that is, accountable before God’s judgment (Jonsen, 2001).

The poem of creation speaks of humanity’s God-given responsibility for
looking after the earth. The human race is to “rule over” the earth. It
is told: “Be fertile and increase, fill the earth and master it, and
rule the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky and all the living things
that creep on the earth” (the Bible, Genesis 1: 28).

Christians today believe that human beings have been called by God to be
“stewards” of the world that He has created. This simply means that each
generation is responsible for passing on God’s good gifts to the next
generation in a good shape. The earth does not belong to us. It belongs
to God: “The earth is the Lord’s and everything in it, the world, and
all who live in it” (Psalm 24:1-2).


