Effect of Ontology on Education
===============================

Definition of Education
-----------------------

In some of the books about Islamic education, the writers usually have
defined “education” in general, and not defined the Islamic education.
Sanei (1996) speaks of correct education and defines it as a process,
which breeds the sublime potentials, and abilities trusted in pupil’s
nature and make them reach the goal for which they have been created. He
considers education as a growth, Purification and refinement those
individuals aptitudes are affected by it.

Faezi and Ashtiani (1996) define education as the preparation of
backgrounds and factors for actualizing man’s potential aptitudes in the
desired direction. Motahhari (1997) considers education as cultivation,
that is, actualization and breeding the interior aptitudes that exist
potentially in a creature, such an education should be a function of
dependent things’ or creatures’ natures. Ahmadi (1985) has defined the
concept of education in Islam as follows:

1. Breeding and making to grow

2. Guidance to the right way and straight path

3. Making the individual to reach intellectual maturity and
comprehension and identification of truth from falsehood

4. Soul purification and cleansing it from contaminations and adorning
it with virtues

5. Reaching all of the aspects of human personality to the peak of
perfection.

All of the writers whose views on the definition of Islamic education
were mentioned above are unanimous that Islamic education is the growth
and actualizing of man’s aptitudes in the direction of his elevation and
perfection.

All of them have used the word “aptitude” in their definitions
(excluding “Ahmadi” who has preferred to use the combination
“personality’s aspects.” Baqeri’s definition from Islamic education
seems somewhat different.

He believes that Islamic education is the cognition of God as world’s
and man’s one and unique Lord, and choosing Him as one’s Lord,
submission to His Divinity and not accepting the divinity whatever is
against Him.

There is no great content difference between the aforementioned
definitions. Man’s personality has different aspects. Islamic education
becomes applicable when this personality and its different aptitudes in
the physical, intellectual, emotional, social and moral aspects are
nurtured and bred and actualized according to the standards of Islam
which is a position where the pupil reaches of the cognition of God and
thus, chooses Him as his Lord.

Even in a more comprehensive view, it can be said that God Himself has
created the above-mentioned aptitudes in man, and He has wanted man to
nurture them, thus the process of this nurturing and cultivation
according to standards is called religious or Islamic education.

According to Rashid Pour (1989) in the process of cultivation it is up
to the educator to discover what abilities the student has, and then
nurture him exactly according to his abilities and potentials.

Motahhari (1983) believes that man is perfect when he is not inclined to
nurturing only one of his aptitudes and keeping inactive his other
aptitudes, but he nurturers all of his aptitudes harmoniously.

Islam pays attention to all of man’s creation aspects at the same time,
which is his physical, intellectual and spiritual aspects (Gotb, 1996).
God’s prophets did also considered man, considered all of his material
and spiritual aspects, and in their humanistic program, satisfied all of
his animal and humanistic trends parallel to and along with each other
and thereby caused man’s complete evolution, perfection and elevation
(Falsafi, undated).

Christian education is education for the Christian life. Since this life
is inherently a moral life, Christian moral education means the way this
particular form of moral life is taught. Education may be understood
both broadly and more narrowly.

Education, broadly understood, involves all the influences of a Person’s
social context, which shape his or her values, beliefs, skills, and
patterns of behavior, etc. In this sense, education is socialization,
and is in part unplanned, unintentional, and unsystematic.

More strictly defined, education is limited to the intentional,
conscious, and willed actions of persons and institutions in relation to
others in order to influence them in particular ways. Christian moral
education has historically involved several constant elements, however
The Church has always found it important for the formation of moral life
that people be intimately involved in the life of Christian community.

Here children and adults learn and assimilate the values, convictions,
and patterns of perception, interpretation, and action of the faith
community through participation in myriad events of worship, fellowship,
service expression (Dykstra, 2001).

A Christian university functions in two different but essentially
related ways for its students. It will at once and the same time be a
home which provides security and peace for its inhabitants, and also a
place of orientation from which students will be able to explore and
take possession of the wider world around them (Thiessen, quoted in
Astley et, al., 2004).

Goals of Education
------------------

After definition of education, another discussion, which is necessary to
be put forward here (Ontology and education), is description of the
goals of education. As mentioned in “ontology” the ultimate aim of man’s
creation has been submission to God.

It is interesting that the ultimate aim of man’s education from the
viewpoint of Islam is submission to God too, that is the aim of man’s
education is not separate from the aim of his education, and these two
aims are in harmony and consistent with each other.

In other words, each step that man takes in the direction of the aim for
which he has been created, that is “submission to God” is considered as
worship and thus educational. It is not inopportune that Imam Sajjad –
one of the Muslim Imams in Sahifah Sajjadieyyeh, the collection of his
prays, requires God that his life to be spent doing the things he has
been created for.

Considering this fact, it can be deduced that man’s education is not
restricted and confined to any particular place and time. It may be that
formal education suffers from such a limitation but informal education
does not.

If religious instruction is to work, its aims must be formed in such a
way that they can be taught and learned. If aims are such that they
cannot be taught or learned, they are not religious instruction aims
(Lee; cited from Astley, Francis & Crowder, 1996). Some of the Islamic
thinkers and scholars have considered the goals of education as follows
(Bureau of Houzeh and university Cooperation, 1998):

Viewpoint of Ibn-Sahnun: acquiring of literacy, and learning reading and
writing, Learning the Qur’an, and making acquaintance with it, learning
religious ceremonies and traditions and becoming committed to the
religion and religious ceremonies, and guidance to the good affairs.

Viewpoint of Farabi: Instruction of right opinions and strengthening the
belief in them, Instruction of necessary skills for incumbent of duties
in the Utopia, encouragement of individuals for doing actions in
accordance with right opinions, encouragement of individuals for doing
their social duties.

Gabesi viewpoint: cognition of the religion, and acting according to
Islam, beneficence, endurance, goodness (as the ultimate aim of
education).

Beheshti, Abuja’fari and Faqihi (2000) state the goals of education from
the viewpoints of other Islamic scholars as follows:

**Ibn-e-Moskovayh viewpoint**: Physical cultivation, Intellectual
cultivation, Moral cultivation, Religious cultivation.

**Sheykh-e-Eshrag viewpoint**: Divine nearness, Submission to God,
Insight, Purity of heart or inner serenity, Thought strengthening,
Moderation in the morality.

**Rumi’s (Moulavi’s) viewpoint**: Annihilation in God, and eternity in
God, Voluntary death, Insight; heart knowledge, Receiving the direct
bounty of God (these four goals as the ultimate aims), Cultivation and
guidance of intellect and thought, Solving the existential problems
(these two goals as the intermediary goals).

Beheshti, Abuja’fari and Faqihi (2001) state the viewpoints of the other
Islamic scholars regarding the goals of education as follows:

**Sadi’s viewpoint**: Separation from the world and adherence to God,
Spirit cultivation, Body health, Social adjustment. Sadi considers the
factors causing social adjustment as follows: Justice, Humility, Self –
esteem, deliverance and uprightness, Goodness and beneficence.

**Ibn Khaldun viewpoint**: knowledge, faith and monotheistic belief (as
the ultimate goal). From the viewpoint of general goals of education are
perfected proprieties that creates in the soul, but he considers faith,
obedience and refinement as the origin of all of these perfected
proprieties. From his viewpoint, the other goals of education are: Skill
and mastering the knowledge, Practical – thinking skills, such as
tailoring and carpentry, Moral and humanistic firm manner that makes man
near to God, His angels, and the ultimate aim.

**Allameh Majlesi’s viewpoint**: Knowledge, Servitude to God, Divine
nearness.

**Molla Mahdi Naragi and Molla Ahmad Naragi’s viewpoint**: Reaching
virtue and absolute happiness, becoming good and deserving all of the
individuals’ manners and behaviors.

**Ghazzali’s viewpointl**; Rafiee (2002) introduces the goals of
education from the viewpoint of Ghazzali as follows: Knowledge and
freedom (as the worldly aim), vision of the exalted God (as the other
worldly aim), Creating, changing, stabilizing knowledge and manners and
behavior in pupils (as middle aims), Sub goals from the viewpoint of
Ghazzali are (other goals):Biological goals: cleanliness and adornment,
hygiene and nourishment, exercise and play, intellect cultivation ,
knowledge and experience elevation, Vocational education, Spirit
elevation, Soul education, Morality position and elevation.

Delshad Tehrani (1997) believes that one should achieve the general
goals in order that he or she might reach the ultimate goal of
education. The relationship between these two kinds of education is
linear.

The general goals are correcting the relations of man with God, himself,
society, nature and history. Shariatmadari (1990) mentions the following
items as the educational goals in Islam: God worship, piety, instruction
of wisdom, cultivation of justice – wanting spirit, man evolution,
brotherhood and cooperation, friendship with other nations, cultivation
of thinking power, cultivation of social spirit, and cultivation of
moral character.

Ahmadi (1995) considers the goals of Islamic education as follows:
nurturing man’s existential and personality aspects, movement of man to
toward God, making man aware of his position and status in the world,
nurturing the identification power in man through observation,
experience, thinking and instruction, cultivation of seeking the right
spirit in men, causing the spirit of brotherhood, equality, cooperation,
beneficence and sacrifice, cultivation of the spirit of striving and
endeavor and fighting poverty and its manifestation.

Fazel Jamali (translated by Saidi, 1981) summarizes the educational
goals of the Qur’an as follows:

1. Definition of man (human being) from situation and position point of
view among other creatures, and his individual responsibilities in his
life in this world

2. Definition of man (human being) considering his social relations and
his responsibilities in the life in this world

3. Definition of man (human being) considering his creation (naturally)
and making man to understand the creator’s wisdom for His innovation and
creativity, and making man to use it

4. Definition of man (human being) from the position and status point of
view with regard to the creator of the nature, and worshipping God

Delshad Tehrani (1997) believes that the aim of education should be
consistent with the man’ truth, the very purpose for which he has been
created. He adds that the more man goes higher in the ranks of
submission and servitude to God, the more he will achieve Divinity, and
the more he passes from himself, the more he will achieve some
abilities, owes some affairs, and is endowed with Divine properties.

Hojjati (1989) mentions finding oneself, adherence to God as the goals
of education. He believes that nurturing body, intellect and heart leads
man to these goals. Faezi and Ashtiani (1996) consider the goals of
Islamic education as follows: freedom and deliverance, faith and worship
of God, justice-wanting, removing of oppression, independence.

Comprehension of this fact that the world and man are goal – centered,
following the prophet of Islam, cutting the captivity chains, certitude,
and Divine nearness, mans’ evolution. Sanei (1996) says that the
ultimate goal of education in Islam, according to the researches of the
high council of education is facilitation of man’s elevation trend and
loftiness towards perfection state that has been determined in his
creation according to Divine.

Will some of the goals that the above council has admitted are: the
individuals’ education in connection with the creator, himself, society
and nature. Malkavi (translated by Mottagi Far and Tusi, 2001) considers
“freedom” as the ultimate aim of education in Islam, and describes such
a freedom as follows: freedom is here meant to be delivered from those
limitations, which act as obstacles for thinking power and any movement
and action that man wishes to do.

Baqeri (1991) knows the following items as the ultimate aims of Islamic
education: guidance and growth, purification and clean life, piety,
nearness to God, paradise and God’s satisfaction, worship and submission
to God.

He introduces, among these aims, submission to God as the most ultimate
aim and believes that if we consider submission to God as the center of
man’s creation, we can consider the other aims as some of its aspects
that have appeared in different words.

If we see submission to God considering its effects in man’s existence,
it can be called clean life and piety, if we see it considering man’s
reaching to the destination, it can be called guidance and growth, and
if we see it considering achievement to purpose and Beloved it can be
called nearness to God and His Paradise and satisfaction.

Education goals from the viewpoint of Islam can be divided into general
groups: ultimate goals and intermediary goals. The ultimate goals are
the most final purposes that man should reach them, and the intermediary
goals are considered as the steps to the ultimate goals. The most
ultimate goal is submission to God (51:56).

The other ultimate goals from the viewpoint of the Qur’an are guidance,
nearness to God, Paradise and satisfaction of God and clean life
(Baqeri, 1991).

Considering some of the import respects of the individuals and society,
we can consider the following items as the most important intermediary
goals of education in Islam

1. Health, strength and cleanliness (physical respect) (28:25; 74:4).

2. Thinking and intellection (intellectual respect) (2:242; 22:46;
2:164; Nahj-al-Fasahah: 235; Nahj-al-Balaghah: letter 31).

3. Purification and refinement (moral respect) (62:2; Ghorar-al-Hekam:
247 and 248).

4. Adducting of just (economic respect) (57:25).

5. Cooperation (social respect) (5:2; 23:52; 21:292; 49:10; 59:9).

6. Dependence and esteem of Islamic society (political respect) (5:54;
63:8; 4:141; 3:139; Nahj-al-Balaghah: Khotbeh 207).

As mentioned before, submission to God is the truth of worship. Every
worship has an appearance and interior. Contenting one with the
appearances of worship does not lead humans to submission to God that is
man’s peak of elevation and perfection.

For example, “prayer” has been introduced in Islamic traditions as the
faithful light ascension and the pillar of the religion. Can it be
claimed that sufficing oneself to a standing and sitting in a prayer can
cause man’s effulgence and ascension or there is higher truth after
apparent moves, behavior, and actions of the prayer that is obtained
through paying attention to these parts? Heart courtesy, presence of
hearth, man’s effulgence and increasing of his ranks of servitude and
surrounding to God are among the things that are created in the light of
prayer, and undoubtedly, submission to God is taking steps in the route
of acquisition of such manners.

This Position-that is submission to God-which is acquired because of
real worship and receiving the truth of worship can be considered as the
philosophy and aim of man’s creation. The word “submission” mainly is
reminder of the spirit of surrendering before the wise and capable God.

When the Glorious Qur’an wants to attribute the highest ranks of
“servitude to God” to some of the prophets of God, it speaks of their
surrender before God like Abraham: “***When his Lord said to him,
“surrender,” he said, “I have surrendered me to the Lord of all
Being***” (2:131). There were many signs for Abraham’s surrender and
servitude but probably none of which are comparable with the status he
accepted God’s order based on sacrificing his son Ismael in God’s way:
He said, “***My son, I see in a dream that I shall sacrifice thee;
consider, what thinkest thou?” He said, “My father, do as thou art
bidden; thou shall find me, God willing, one of the Steadfast***”
(37:102).

This is one of the highest scenes of submission to God in which a father
has taken his son’s hand to scarify him in the God’s way and a son who
gives his hand to his father to be scarified for the sake of God. It is
not inopportune that God chose Abraham as His friend: “***And God took
Abraham for a friend***” (4:125), or Abraham was fallen in fire but God
ordered the fire to become cold upon him: “***We said, “O fire, be
coolness and safety for Abraham***” (21:69).

Thus, it can be concluded that acquiring popularity and being loved
before God is possible by submission to God. It can also be said that
those who have attained the highest states of submission to God can be
chosen as God’s messengers and prophets, as we say in our prayers: “I
bear witness that Mohammad was God’s bondman and messenger”, because he
was at first a real “bondman”, then he was chosen as God’s messenger.

Or we read in the Qur’an, that when the people had gathered around the
cradle of Jesus Christ when he was born asking Maryam about that child
(Jesus), that suddenly he began to talk and said: “***Lo, I am God’s
servant; God has given me the book, and made me a prophet***” (19:30).

Jesus said that he was first God’s bondman and then he was deserving for
being chosen as God’s prophet. It is not only man that should surrender
to God, it is also the whole universe and all of its particles that
surrender to God’s order, glorifying Him: “***Nothing is that does not
proclaim His praise, but you do not understand their extolling***”
(17:44).

A bud that opens and bestows freshness, a tree which casts a shadow, a
bush that moves because of a breeze blowing, a star that lightens, all
do their divine duties and tasks that God has ordained for them. It is
only man that, because of the Partial free-will given to him, sometimes
he turns away from surrendering to God, tries to act contrary to the
universe system and commit a sin, and involves in disharmony with other
Particles of the universe.

Therefore, it can be claimed that servitude to God is typically complete
adjustment and harmony with the whole existence and the world,
eventually it cannot be confined to a particular time and place, and
rather it covers all human being’s life, and is a status in which man
with his purification from all unbalance, that is every error and sin,
finds himself nearer to his creator that is the manifestation of all
goodness and purities.

Man’s nearness (p.120), that is one of the goals of man’s creation, is
applied here, because God is near to us, even nearer than the jugular
vein: “***We are nearer to him than the jugular vein***” (50:16). We
feel ourselves far from God because of the sin we have committed, thus
purifying ourselves from those sins will cause that we feel nearer to
the God whom he was nearest to us.

Man, in such a position, takes more divine state and utilizes from God’s
properties and his behavior will be confirming such a truth. Therefore,
it cannot be stated that we mean by nearness to God that we go several
steps nearer towards God locally because of some worships, because such
a withdrawal is considered as polytheism and indicates God’s limitation
that He does not exist in all places, while God manifests in the entire
universe including man himself.

On the other hand, a man whose whole life scope is God’s manifestation
and God is present in all of his thoughts, states and behaviors, will
possess a clean or goodly life “***…We shall assuredly give him to live
a goodly life***” (16:97).

Contrary to those persons who turn away from God’s remembrance and will
possess a hard and unpleasant life, if we can call it ‘life’:
“***Whosoever turns away from my remembrance, his shall be a life of
narrowness***” (20:124).

That is why we can also consider clean and goodly life as one of the
man’s goals of creation. So much is certain that those men who have
attained such a position, their aptitudes, physical, intellectual,
social, emotional and moral aptitudes, have completely actualized, i.e.
have reached the peak of “guidance”, that is another goal of man’s
creation (20:50; 29:69).

Also a man who has such a “piety”, will try to gain Divine satisfaction
and Paradise that these can be considered as the other goals of man’s
creation (3:135, 7:201; 59:418; 9:72). Therefore, as it was shown, these
goals are not separated and independent from each other, they are a unit
light, or harmonious and unit states that are complementary and can
totally be gained through the position of “submission to God” which is
the highest goal of man’s creation.

On the other hand, those goals can lead man to the higher ranks of
submission to God. His holiness Imam Ali – the first Imam of Muslims –
points in different cases and in different styles to the ultimate aim,
general goals and sub – goals of instruction and education. Including
these goals (cited from Al – Hayat) are:

1. Man reaches to positions in which he obeys and worships God: “It is
due to knowledge that God will be obeyed and worshiped”
(Amali-al-Salug).

2. reaching to the position of abstinence and piety and asceticism to
the fleeting world and interest to the Hereafter: “A knowledgeable
person is the one whose knowledge will lead him to abstinence and piety,
and asceticism in the fleeting world and interest to the Paradise”
(Ghorar-al-Hekam). According to Imam Ali, asceticism is summarized in
two Qur’anic words: “***That you may not grieve for what escapes you,
nor rejoice in what has come to you***” (57:23).

3. Knowledge should make the erudite to a position they are not jealous
of their superiors and do not despise their inferiors: “An erudite
cannot be considered as erudite until he is not jealous of his
superiors, and do not despise his inferiors” (Ghorar-al-Hekam).

4. It is up to an erudite to reach a status to know his value
(Behar-al-Anvar, v.7).

5. The erudite reach to a position that God, His angels and His
worshippers love them: “if the erudite bear knowledge as it deserves,
God, His angels, and His worshippers will definitely love them”
(Behar-al-Anvar, v.2).

6. Knowledge cause the real needs of individuals and society be
satisfied: “Know that there will be no benefits and good in that
knowledge which does not benefit” (Nahj-al-Balaghah, letter 31).

7. Scientific question and researches should be with the intention of
reaching to a deep sighting and a real knowledge: “Ask for understanding
not for confusion” (Nahj-al-Balagah, Hekmat 320).

8. Knowledge leads man to growth and perfection: “Knowledge will make
you to grow” (Ghorar-al-Hekam).

9. The learner should acquire knowledge for reaching a real and right
knowledge and guidance to truth: “He learns for jurisprudence and
righteousness” (Al – Kafi: 172/8). Thus, learning should never be
carried out for bragging and acquiring rank and fame before scientists,
or flaunting before the ignorant or hypocrisy in sessions or honoring
and bowing of others in the direction of seeking superintendence
(Al-Ershad).

The general aim of Christian religious teaching is to co-operate with
divine grace in forming Jesus Christ in the soul of the child;
instructing him by word and example in the truths revealed by Christ and
taught by His Church till he clearly knows them and, according to his
capacity, perfectly understands them, in his daily life and conduct
lives up to them and faithfully practices them, and finds pleasure and
satisfaction in so doing (Cronin, 1952).

For Christians, moral education is not something separate from or added
to Christian education. Christian education is education for the
Christian life. Since this life is inherently a moral life, Christian
moral education means the way this Particular form of moral life is
taught (Dykstra, 2001).

A Christian education is one which enables the student to think God’s
thoughts after Him in every discipline and area of life (Perks, 1992).
The aims, objectives and methods of religious, moral, Personal and
social education, for example, are far from being self – evident
(Straughan, 1983), and have generated heated debate and substantial
literature (Quoted in Bailey, 2005). Basic requirements for effective
religious education are:

1. Respect for self

2. Respect for others

3. Respect for the environment, natural and cultural

4. Respect for beauty

5. Respect for truth

These constitute a basic concern for wholeness and seeing inter –
connectedness of everything, and desire to try to sort out
contradictions, not resting satisfied with fragmented and perhaps
schizophrenic understanding (Watson, 1993).

The fact of the matter is that the learner acquires, for example,
knowledge of the Ten Commandments (cognitive outcome), a love of the Ten
Commandments (affective outcome) and obedience to the Ten Commandments
(lifestyle outcome), primarily according to the on – going laws of his
own human development and not Primarily to the logical structure or
eternal import of the Ten Commandments themselves.

There is no empirical research evidence to suggest that a Person learns
religion (or even theology) in a way fundamentally different from the
basic manner in which he learns any other area of reality (Lee; cited
from Astley, Francis & Crowder, 1996).

Is Religious Education Pupil – Oriented or Teacher – Oriented?
--------------------------------------------------------------

In reply to this question, it should be said that most of the books
written about Islamic education do not represent a clear answer, there
are even, in some cases, differences of opinions among the writers.

From one respect, it can be claimed that “teacher” from the viewpoint of
Islam has particular esteem, respect and authority who decides to
represent on acceptable instructional content using desirable teaching
methods, and apply necessary standards and regulations for management of
his class.

Therefore, at the first sight, it appears that Islam is a teacher –
oriented or teacher – centered school. However, it should be noted that
the instructional content and the teaching methods that the teacher uses
are chosen based on the cognition that he has acquired from his
students, and from man, in general.

In other words, the teacher cannot decide in advance regarding
instructional plan and contents, curriculum and teaching methods, rather
he is really required to recognize his pupils’ concerns, motives, and
aptitudes, and act in harmony with them, i.e., it is his students that
determine the teacher’s instruction and his teaching from all respects.

Evidentially it should also be noted that every superficial and
unoriginal interest of every student, which is not rooted in the pure
nature of the students, cannot be acceptable for the teacher. Thus, in
fact, the teacher must take expedient decisions concerning his teaching
methods and plans.

It appears that, according to this interpretation, we can consider
Islamic education as a pupil – oriented or pupil – centered education,
but a middle pupil – oriented education in which the teacher possess a
very high esteem and respect whose decisions based upon a perfect
cognition on humanistic and natural standards of his pupils are
considered respectful. Islamic education, according to this, can be
considered as a combination of teacher – oriented and student – centered
education.

However, a spirit of “God – oriented” state governs Islamic education.
Thus, if it is here spoken of paying attention to pupil and teacher, it
is in the very direction of observing Divine principles and respecting
God’s rules.

In other words, considering the aptitudes and interests God has trusted
in man’s nature, and has ordered human beings to actualize them, is
typically paying attention to God and appointing God and His
Commandments as basis in education.

Imam Ali emphasizes that it is necessary to approach for action at the
time when they are passionate and when they are in a mood for advancing,
because if hearts are forced (to do a thing) they will be blinded
(Nahj-al-Balaghah, Hekmat 193).

Considering the students’ interests causes their serious participation
in learning and showing their suitable interaction and reflexes
(Shariatmadari, 1991). Therefore, the teacher is required to consider
the interests of his or her student as the starting point of his work
and try to activate the students with due attention to their interests
(Shariatmadari, 1985).

Education in the Bible was transition from a family – based phenomenon
to something the society saw as its Primary responsibility. It was a
peculiar mix of institution and individual, sage and prophet, law and
aphorism, all grounded in values which could and were given humanistic
rationales and, finally, attributed to God the teacher (Morgan; cited in
Freedman, Myers & Beck, 2000).

It is indoctrination, not education, which seeks to inculcate, fixed
views on essentially controversial issues. Any educational approach to
controversial area must focus on the controversy itself. The reason for
it and the arguments that can be produced on both sides; helping pupils
to make their own informed judgments is always a prime educational aim,
whatever the context (Straughan, cited from Bailey, 2005).

Therefore, in Christianity, students cannot be considered higher than
their teachers can: “students are not above their teachers, nor servants
above their masters” (Matthew 10:24). Two interesting examples of
“teachers” in the Bible are the prophet Amos and Jesus.

Both were itinerant. Both used forms of wisdom literature and rhetoric
to express their message to the People (Parables, rhetorical questions).
While neither is usually seen primarily as a sage, both are given
authority because of their teaching and its power. At the very last Amos
and Jesus, reflect the existence of wisdom teaching and its influence.
Both were educated and educators (Morgan; quoted in Freedman, Myers &
Beck, 2000).

Brümer applies the claim even to God’s love for us, arguing that
Nygren’s position, which asserts that God’s love, creates value in its
object but is indifferent to it, is incoherent. Brümer writes, “Only by
needing us can God bestow value on us and upon our love for him”, others
have expressed similar views.

James Mackey has even argued that a “defensible and meaningful” use of
the term God could be derived from a notion of Eros as a pervasive
originating impulse of the cosmos.

In teaching, too, there can be a proper and natural form of need – love.
It is a need – love that must be qualified, added to, transmuted and
transcendent, but never ignored or disparaged. Real teachers need to
teach; they want to teach; they are deeply fulfilled by teaching. They
love it, as they love their learners’ learning.

It is not too much to say that many teachers need their learners; they
need the joy of watching them learn – of sharing in that disclosure
situation in which the student comes to see the truth or masters a
skill, or are charged in some other way. This is a desire and need that
may properly be fulfilled, if it is recognized, directed and channeled
aright (Astley, 2004).

Learning and teaching, but – like worship – if we never enjoy them, it
would be far better to give them up. Both learning and teaching need
such passion (Astley, 2004).


