Axiology
========

Axiology, is taken from the Greek word “Axia”, which means “value”,
“worthiness”, it is a theory of value. It seems that the term was first
used by Lotze, and they by Brentano, Husserl, Scheler, Nicolai, Hartmann
and others, chiefly for general format theory of value. Scheler
contrasted it with praxeology, a general theory of action, but it has
for the most part been contrasted with deontology, a theory of morally
right action (Maunter, 2005).

Axiology denotes a value theory that typically indicates the nature,
kinds, criteria, and status of values and value judgments and attempts
to resolve such disputes as whether values are subjective or objective.
Although moral value is important such as religious and aesthetic one,
“Axiological ethics” determines right and wrong actions by reference to
their ends, consequences, often identical to theological ethics
(Findlay, 1970; cited by Childress, 2000).

Agathology is another word, which can be used in this field. Agathology
is taken from the Greek “agathos” (good) and “logos” (discourse),
agathology is the science or theory of the good (Macquarrie and
Childress, 2001).

Yaqar is an adjective occurring about forty times in the Bible with the
primary meaning “precious” or “valuable.” The love of God is described
as “precious” (Ps. 36:7), as are the people of God (Lam. 4:2). And lady
wisdom in prov. 3:15 is declared to be “more valuable “than jewels
(Renn, 2005).

In some cases, the word “goodness” has been applied in the Bible in the
sense of “perfection” or “completeness” in Gen. 1:4ff, as God’s
assessment of his creative endeavors. Other examples of his sense are
found in pass. 136:1; 145:9, which point to the goodness of God given at
Sinai.

“God” in the sense of high quality is indicated, for example, in
reference to gold in the land of Eden (Gen. 2:12); cattle (Gen. 18:7),
trees (2 Kgs. 3:25); figs (Jer. 24:2); the intelligence of Abigail (1
Sam. 25:3). The fertility of Cancan is also described this way (e.g.,
Exod. 3:8; Num. 14:7; Josh. 23:13ff; 1 kgs. 14:13).

The sense of “goodness” as a moral or spiritual virtue is found in Gen.
2:17; 3:5 in reference to the “tree of knowledge of good and evil.”
Material blessing from God is also described as that which is “good”
(cf. Gen. 50:20; 1 Sam. 24:19; Ps. 107:9).

Also, that which is “good” include the blessing of God in a general
sense (e.g. pass. 23:6; 118; Jer. 21:10; Amos 7:4); kindness (cf. 2 Sam.
3:13); God’s protection (cf. Ezra 7:9; 8:18; Neh. 2:8); that which is
pleasing to the Lord (cf. 1 Kgs. 14:13); and that which brings comfort
(cf. 2 Kgs. 20:19), (Renn, 2005).

“Doing well”, that is, acting in accordance with God’s character, is
mentioned in Gen. 4:7 in relation to the warning God gives to Cain after
the murder of his brother Abel. “Doing good” in a general sense in
referred to in Lev. 5:4; Ps. 36:3; Jer. 10:5.

The nominal meaning “good” in the sense of “that which is morally
upright”, including people, is indicated in Matt. 5:45; 12:35; John
5:29; Rom. 2:10; 7:13, 18; 9:11; Eph. 6:8. Elsewhere, “good” denotes
“ultimate spiritual benefit” in Rom. 8:28; 2 Cor. 5:10; Heb. 9:11; 10:1
(Renn, 2005).

In relation to ethical standards, data in the Bible refers to the
knowledge of right living, wisdom, and understanding in Gen. 2:19, 17;
prov. 1:29; 2:6; 6:9ff; 12:1; 13:16; 23:12, prov. 1:7 defines the
beginning of knowledge as the fear of God (Renn, 2005). Moral principles
are meaningful and unchanging, because they reflect absolute moral
realities (Peterson, 1986).

Islam has introduced absolute and unchangeable values. The reason of
their unchanged ability is that they are based on man’s unchangeable
nature, and since man’s nature does not change, “there is no changing
God’s creation” (30:30), therefore, those values do not change as well,
that is all men in all times and in all places consider them inherently
and naturally valuable.
Islam itself is a collection of these very values, and the reason of
eternality and exchangeability of Islam is summarized in the above
point: “set thy face to the religion, a man of pure faith – God’s
original upon which He originated mankind” (30:30).

Since man’s nature does not change, thus Islam and Islamic values that
are quite consistent with man’s nature does not change too. Therefore,
it can be deducted that the Divine religion is not an unfamiliar set
and, collection for human being, rather it is the very familiar story
that all humans has naturally an inherent acquaintance with it, and it
was in the light of this very interior union that all men in “the world
of Zar” when God prepared and made present all of them and asked them
whether I am not your Lord, they all answered yes, we bear witness that
Thou art our Lord: ***“And when thy Lord took from the Children of Adam,
from their loins, their seed, and made them testify touching themselves,
‘Am I not your Lord’? They said, ‘yes, we testify’*** (the Qur’an, 7:
172). “With thee will I establish my covenant” (the Bible, Genesis
6:18).

We cannot confine “the world of Zar” only as word before this nature and
this world in which all men were present and inherently answered the
question of God, rather when man purifies his soul from all sorts of
sins, or has not contaminated his nature by different sins, if he at any
moment is asked this question from God that: ***“Am I not your Lord?”,
he verily will answer that “yes, we testify.”*** Thus, it is not for
nothing that one of the names of the prophet of Islam is “the reminder”:
***“then remind them! Thou art only a reminder”*** (88:21).

We use the word “reminding”, when we remembered something and then we
forgot it, and we remembered God’s message, and forgot it, thus it is
the God’s prophet, which reminds us of it. Imam Ali considers natural
and inherent rapprochement with men as the main duty and task of the
God’s prophets (to get them fulfill the pledges of His creation)
(Nahj-al-Balaghah, Khotheh 1).

The Bible refers to an intimate relationship between God and humankind,
sovereignty initiated, maintained and fulfilled by God alone; and
involving a commitment to life and death from both God and humankind.
The solemn bonding between God and his people lies at the heart of the
covenant phenomenon.

This bond testifies to God’s mercy and compassion in nurturing and
redeeming his people, guaranteeing them an intimate relationship with
himself as well as the prospect of blissful life in the land he had
given them. All of this, however, was conditional on the people’s
response of gratitude, obedience, and exclusive loyalty (Renn, 2005).

“Take hold of eternal life to which you were called when you made your
good confession in the presence of many witnesses” (1 Timothy 6:12).
That is because: “when you make a vow to God, do not delay to fulfill
it. He has no pleasure in fools; fulfill your vow. It is better not to
make a vow than to make one and not fulfill it.

Do not let your mouth lead you into sin. And do not protest to the
(temple) messenger, ‘My vow was a mistake’. Why should God be angry at
what you say and destroy the work of your hands” (Ecclesiastes 5:4-6).
“Obey the King’s commands, I say, because you took an oath before God.
Do not be in a hurry to leave the King’s presence. Do not stand up for a
bad cause” (Ecclesiastes 8:2-3).

This very natural man’s agreement with God, i.e. with Divine values,
indicates that these values are in harmony with the man’s nature, and
then indicates their being absolute and eternality. Therefore, it can be
said that as man does not force himself to enjoy the beauty of a
beautiful flower or a beautiful handwriting and painting in the same
way, he will not force himself to enjoy and love beautiful morality,
behavior and thought (religion in itself is nothing else save these very
beauties), unless that man in not normal.

If a man involves in the nature deforming (metamorphosis), that is his
Divine nature has deformed, has become lightless or insensible and
unfeeling, then it may be that he feels contrary to his nature, i.e.
enjoys indecency and obscenity. “Although I want to do good, evil is
right there with me. For in my inner being I delight in God’s law” (the
Bible, Romans 7:21-22).

This superficial and seeming pleasures of the worldly men are nothing
save repelling the pains, such as huger or thirst which are pains and
affiliations that food and water remove them, now if that food or water
is eaten or drunk more, they in turn change into a pain, while the real
pleasures (happiness) are those ones the more the seeker of which
reaches them, not only he does not get tired and weary, rather he will
become more lovesick, because spiritual pleasures such as the nearness
to God have a state that the more the wayfarer of this route is closer
to God, and the more feels the pleasure of comprehension of acquaintance
with God, and the more he utilizes from immense ocean of Divine love,
his thirst will be increased.

It is not inopportune that Imam Sajjad refers to this fact that: “My
God, who can have tasted the sweetness of Thy Love, then wanted another
in Place of Thee” (Sahifah-al-Sajjadiah, the whispered prayer of the
lovers).

Therefore, it can be claimed that one’s soul thirst for God (Psalm
42:2). And according to Jesus Christ: “Love the Lord Your God with all
your heart and with all your soul and with your entire mind. This is the
first and greatest commandment.

And the second is like it: \`love your neighbors as yourself\`. All the
law of the Prophets hang on these commandments” (Matthew 22:37- 40).
Thus, “Love must be sincere. Hate what is evil. Cling to what is good.
Be devoted to one another in love. Honor one another above yourselves.
Never be lacking in Zeal, but keep your spiritual favor, serving the
Lord. Be joyful in hope, patient in affliction, and faithful in prayer.

Share with the Lord’s people who are in need. Practice hospitality.
Bless those who persecute you, bless and do not curse. Rejoice with
those who rejoice; mourn with those who mourn. Live in harmony with one
another. Do not proud, but be willing to associate with people of low
position. Do not think you are superior.

Do not repay everyone evil for evil. Be careful to do what is right in
the eyes of everyone. If it is possible, as far as, it depends on you,
live peace with everyone. Do not take revenge, my dear friends, but
leave room for God’s wrath…Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil
with good” (Romans 12: 9-21).

This is happiness if God lightens a minute of man’s life with it, its
value should surely be known and should not be easily lost because it is
alchemy and the world sizes it easily from men. That is the reason why
the prophet of Islam emphasizes that for all the people there is
breathes for their Lord in the days of their lives breathes, thus it is
up to all people to expose themselves to these spiritual breathes and
not to turn away from them.

It reminds us of the Hafez’s poem: “In the morning from Laila’s
dwelling, lighting flashed; Alas! With the harvest of Majnun, heart –
rent what it did” (p.134). As if these were parts of the heaven and
paradise that God has placed in the earth.

According to the Bible, God will surely bestow joy and happiness to
those who are deserving for it: “You removed my sackcloth and clothed me
with joy” (Psalm 30:11). The result of such a holy joy will be praising
of God: that my heart may sing your praises and not be silent. Lord my
God, I will praise you forever” (Psalm 30:12).

Although, on the other hand, it can be said that reaching God and
praising Him as it deserves will cause such a joy and happiness: “I will
be glad and rejoice in your love, for you saw my affliction and knew the
anguish of my soul”(Psalm 31:7).

Those who hope in God achieve a position in which their hearts rest in
Him: “Be strong and take heart, all you who hope in the Lord” (Psalm
31:24). That is because “The Lord preserves those who are true to him,
but the proud he pays back in full” (Psalm 31:23).

“In Him our hearts rejoice, for we in his holy name, may your unfailing
love be with us, Lord, even as we put our hope in you”(Psalm 33: 21-22).
“Take delight in the Lord and he will give you the desires of your
heart” (Psalm 37:4).

The real faithful do not do the values –related affairs habitually,
rather they have reached a position that they have identified and
experienced them valuable and have identified the bad affaires as
indecent and they have really achieved a state that have become sure and
convinced themselves of this fact that goodness causes happiness and
man’s deliverance from every grief, affliction and sorrow, and that
badness causes all sorrows, and since they have identified God’s
ordainment as all wisdom and knowledge, thus they have embraced it most
heartily and have acted according to it.

According to the Bible, “This is what I have observed to be good: that
it is appropriate for people to eat, to drink and find satisfaction in
their toilsome labor under the sun during the few days of life God has
given them – for this is their lot.

Moreover, when God gives people wealth and possessions, and ability to
enjoy them, to accept their lot and be happy in their toil – this is
gift of God. They seldom reflect on the days their lives, because God
keeps them occupied with gladness of heart” (Ecclesiastes 5:18-20).
“There is nothing better for people under the sun than to eat and drink
and be glad.

Then joy will accompany them to their toil all the days of the life God
has given them under the sun” (Ecclesiastes 8:15). But contrary to
these: “I have seen another evil under the sun, and it weighs heavily on
the human race: God gives some people wealth, possessions and honor, so
that they lack nothing their hearts desire, but God does not grant the
ability to enjoy them, and strangers enjoy them instead” (Ecclesiastes
6:1-2).

“Those who love money never have enough: those who love wealth are never
satisfied with their income. This too is meaningless. As good increase,
so do those who consume them. And what benefit are they to the owners
except to feast their eyes on them?” (Ecclesiastes 5:10-11).

These are the real causes of wars and quarrels: “What causes fights and
quarrel among you? Do not they come from your desires that battle within
you? You desire, but do not have, so you kill” (James 4:1-2).

Therefore, we should understand this valuable fact, that: “Whoever wants
to save their life will lose it but whoever loses their life will find
it. What good will it is for you to gain the whole world, yet forfeit
your soul? Or what can you give in exchange for your soul?” (Matthew
16:25-26).

“Hypocrisy” will be increased in a society which an interior
transformation has not occurred in its individuals. In such a state,
which is frequently occurred in the society, the peoples’ value
standards are false and truth less.

Therefore, their standards for pleasure and pain are mistaken, then they
enjoy in their minds those things which are not really deserving for
pleasure, and they suffer from those things that there is no place for
grief and sorrow thus wherever they should enjoy, they do not, and
wherever they should regret, they do not.

Imam Ali, in this field says: “What is your condition? You feel
satisfied with what little you secured from this world while much of the
next world of which you have been deprived does not grieve you. The
little of this world which you lose pains you so much so that it becomes
apparent in your faces, and in the lack of your endurance over whatever
is taken away from you; as thou this world is your permanent abode, and
as though its wealth would stay with you for abode” (Nahj-al-Balaghah,
Khotbeh 113).

Imam Ja’far Sadeq believes that the brief and summation of all of the
beautiful religion of God is “friendship and affection”, and according
to the Bible: “God is love “(1Jn. 4:10). It should also be noted that
man can achieve a position in which not only loves all humans but also
he loves all particles of the universe.

God as a creator of the world is at the peak of beauty and He loves the
beauty. How is it possible that God is the manifestation of all
beauties, and the universe and the world which is the place of
manifestation of His being and existence is not at the peak of
perfection and beauty: “Who created all things well (the best or the
fairest)” (32:7).

As, along with this existence and originating book, His law book
(scripture, i.e. the Qur’an) is the best and the most beautiful: “Learn
the Qur’an for it is the fairest of discourses” (Nahj-al-Balaghah,
Khotbah: 110), that is because: “God has sent down the fairest discourse
as Book” (39:23).

The Bible describes the universe as collection of “good” things: “And
the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind,
and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind:
and God saw that it was good”(Genesis :12). And such a “good” system and
process rules over other things of the world, such as day and night
(Genesis: 18), every living creature… (Genesis 1:21).

The idea of creation implies that the whole created word is good
(Peterson, 1986). Thomas Aquinas believed that everything in the world
that exists is more or less good. There are varying degrees of
excellence. There cannot be infinite scale of good. Therefore, there
must be something, which is perfection. This is what everyone
understands to be God (Dewar, 2002).

The more is man’s wisdom and knowledge and his comprehension from the
nature and its beauties, his goodness and beneficence will be increased,
on the other hand, the more is goodness and beneficence in man, a
particular kind of knowledge and wisdom will be increased in him and he
will better comprehend the values and beauties of the world.

It is not for nothing that the prophet of Islam do not consider as a
Muslim a man who does not try for the Muslim’s affairs, because, as
said, “How it is possible for such a man to understand the beautiful
facts of the God’s religion and act according to them?” Thus, a real
Muslim and religious person, in first place, confirms by his behavior
that religiosity and faith is good and beautiful.

It is not desirable that he says only with his tongue that values are
valuable while his actions do not confirm this. According to the Bible,
“Therefore everyone who hears these words of mine and puts them into
practice is like a wise man who built his house on the rock. The rain
came down, the streams rose, and the winds blew and beat against that
house; yet it did not fall, because it had its foundation on the rock.
But everyone who hears these words of mine and does not put them into
practice is like a foolish man who built his house on sand.

The rain came down, the steams rose, and the winds blew, and beat
against house, and it fell with a great crash” (Matthew 7:24-27). If man
does not possess a good personality, and he only establishes prayer
apparently, then he will make other people pessimistic to the prayer.

On the contrary, if a man with a lovely personality and sufficient
popularity establishes prayer, prayer will become respected and lovely
for the other people.

The first criteria for the judgment about a society with a special
religion are the behaviors of the individuals of that society. If those
behaviors are not confirmable, then the others may dislike such
religion.

While it is seen nowadays that there has been created a long distance
between the behaviors and cultures of some societies as compared with
their religions.

Some people have imagined the religion as an awful and horrible in their
mind, escaping from it in a confused state, while religion and its
cognition is the most beautiful, the most scientific, the most artistic
and the most subtle categories and topics of the world. Thus, it is the
artist knowledgeable that can the truth of the beautiful religion of God
as it is and transfer it to the others as it deserves.

As a religion, Islam is much more than just a system of beliefs. It is a
way of life, though, word and deed. To the Muslim believer faith without
action is meaningless. Faith must lead to action and action brings faith
into the outside world where it can grow and deepen (Keene, 2005).

The word “ethics” is related to the Greek ethos habit, custom. It is
used in a number of related senses. The Latin moral is was first used by
Cicero, which explains why in many contexts moral ethical morality
ethics, moral philosophy ethics are pairs of synonyms (Maunter, 2005).

Ethics is the study of the concepts involved in practical reasoning:
good, right, duty, Obligation, virtue, freedom, rationality, choice.
Also the second-order study of the objectivity, subjectivity,
relativism, or skepticism that may attend claims made in these term
(BlackBurn, 2005).

From the Qur’an we learn that God has endowed human beings with values.
They are innate in the human Spirit. The Spiritual entity in a human
being cannot therefore be considered as a social product but an innate
reality (Ashraf; quoted in Ashraf & Hirst, 1994).

Virtues are general dispositions to do the right thing at the right
time. Any list of virtues, therefore, embodies the values which prevail
in social or cultural traditions. One might have a list of virtues which
would constitute our views of the thoroughly virtuous person.

It is quite possible for a person to accept the reasons for behaving in
a particular way but not be disposed so to act – not to have the
relevant virtue. Indeed, such capacity to reason may be put at the
disposal of the very feelings which are not virtues (Pring, 2000).

Moral and religious behaviors are based on values: “Jesus replied; you
shall not murder, you shall not commit adultery, honor your father and
mother, and love your neighbors as yourself …. Sell your possessions and
give it to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven” (Matthew 19:
18-19 & 21).

We should really ask God to make us committed to values, according to
the Bible: “In you, Lord, I have taken refuge; Let me in your
righteousness” (Psalm 31:1). (Trust in the LORD and do well) (Psalm
30:3). But as for the evildoers: “The words of their mouths are wicked
and deceitful; they have caused to be wise and to do well; even on their
beds they plot evil; they commit themselves to a sinful course and not
reject what is wrong.”

“How great is your goodness, which you bestow in the sight of all on
those who take refuge in you. In the shelter of your presence, you hide
them from all human intrigues. You keep them safe in your dwelling from
accusing tongues” (Psalm 31:19-20). Therefore: “Turn from evil and do
good; then you will dwell in the land forever” (psalm 37: 27).

We refer here to the parable of the sheep and goats, a story that Jesus
told (Matthew 25: 31-46) to teach his followers that they would, one
day, have to account for they actions on earth. These are the questions
they will be asked for God according to the parable: have they fed the
hungry? Have they given water into the thirsty? Have they invited the
stranger into their house? Have they visited the prisoner in his prison
cell? Have they looked after the sick? Have they clothed the naked?
(Keene, 2005).

The Qur’an also teaches Muslims how they should prepare themselves to
appear before God on the Day of Judgment. To help them in this
preparation, Muslims are given guidance about matters such as (avoiding)
drinking alcohol and gambling; marriage and devoice; the treatment of
widows and orphans and the lending of money with interest (avoiding
usury) (Keene, 2005).

There are many examples in the Hadith of how the prophet of Islam
avoided waste, was kind to animals and respected the earth. All Muslims
must follow has example.

What often lies at the hearth of religious behavior, and indeed
conviction, is not morality but duty. It is the person’s responsibility
to respond in certain ways; to do their duty, to God, to another person,
to society, to their community.

Morality, in religious term, is less connected with conventional actions
and more with a developing sense of responsibility and commitment.
Religion may of course embody ethical principles which are not unhelpful
to moral understanding (Elan and Brown; cited from Best, 2000).

Astley (1994) lists the (overlapping) categories of Christian attributes
as follows:

Christian beliefs – that, understanding and knowledge: including beliefs
about God, Jesus, the Church, human nature and the world; Christian
beliefs –in: including faith and trust in God, or in salvation, baptism
etc.; Christian attitudes and values: covering Christian spirituality
and moral virtues; the valuing of Jesus, Mercy etc.; Christian emotions
and feelings: including awe, thankfulness, pity, joy, etc. (this
category may be entitled “subjective religious experiences”).

Christian experiences, in the sense of “objective religious experiences”
of God, Christ, the Spirit etc. and their activity; Christian moral
actions: e.g. active love, forgiveness, trust, obedience; Christian
religious actions: e.g. prayer, profession of faith, evangelism,
worship, church membership/ involvement; Christian or theological
reflection and criticism: including those interpretative and evaluative
cognitive skills and processes – with their related attitudes, unless
these are placed in category (3) – that lead to active “Christian
reflection” and/ or “doing theology.”

Astley (1994) concludes that Christianity is many – sided. Robert H.
Thouless listed a range of factors in the development of a “religious
attitude” – viz intellectual, social, the experiential in various forms,
and personal. Charles Y. Glock and Rodney Stark designated five core
dimensions of religiousness: belief, ritual and devotional religious
practice, religious experience, intellectual knowledge, and
consequential effects on general conduct.

The empirically – based factor analytic studies of Morton B. King and
Richard A. Hunt found various religious dimensions including creedal
assent, personal devotion, church attendance, attitudes towards the
church, religious belief, subjective religious disposition (measuring
the importance of religion in one’s life etc.), spiritual experience and
(respect for) moral beliefs.

The psychologist of religion, Laurence Brown, lists knowledge, beliefs,
attitudes, experiences, belonging and practice as individual factors of
religiousness; together with trust, doctrines, consequence and rituals
under the heading of “social contexts.”

Such research has encouraged students of religion to move away from
thinking of religion “as a coherent ‘thing’ with rather sharp
boundaries.” “Bundle” has the wrong connotations, perhaps, but this
cognition of the multiplicity of religious dimensions is surely to be
welcomed.

To be religious is to have certain religious attitudes and to engage in
certain patterns of behavior that are expressive of such attitudes, the
attitude predisposing person to behave in that way. Clearly religious
people have such attitudes at least partly because they have learned
them.

They have developed them as a result of certain experiences, including
their experiences of other people. Very often these experiences have
been placed in their way by Christian religious education (Astley,
1994).

Christianity introduces people to, and “imposes” on them, certain
spiritual values. Those who learn Christianity adopt some elements of
Christian spirituality that lead to their (this worldly and/ or other
worldly) “release” and “hearing.”

It is some such form of Christian spirituality, experienced as salvific,
that constitutes the hearth of the Christian religion. The word
“spirituality” is used here in a very broad sense to describe “those
attitudes, beliefs, and practices which animate people’s lives and help
them to reach out towards super – sensible realities” (Astley, 1994).

Human beings are expected to be committed to values because the
knowledge of identification of “good and evil” has been given to man:
“And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know
good and evil” (Genesis 3: 22).

According to Aquinas, reason is the God – given tool for discerning what
is good (Dewar, 2002). Martin Luther and the Reformist insisted that
human reason played no part in seeing right and wrong. God’s revelation
(in the Bible) was sufficient, and the Bible acts as the source of all
Christian morality.

In contrast, the scholastic (such as Aquinas) argued that God – given
reason was the tool by which distinction between right and wrong could
be seen (Dewar, 2002). Therefore: “I have set the Lord always, before
me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved” (Psalm 16:8).

The result of the above will be: “Therefore my heart is glad, and my
glory rejoiceth: my flesh rest in hope” (Psalm 16: 9). Because God, only
God, is the real source of happiness: “Thou wilt shew the path of lie in
thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures
for evermore (Psalm 16:11).

“I shall be satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness” (Psalm 16: 15).
That man who has tried to be committed to values and virtues is defined
in the Bible as: “Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of
the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat
of the scornful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his
law doth the mediate day and night. And he shall be like a tree planted
by the rivers of water, that brighten forth his fruit in his season; his
leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper”
(Psalm 1:1-3).

But the man who is not committed to these values is described as: “The
ungodly are not so: but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away.
Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in
the congregation of the righteous. For the Lord knowledge the way of the
righteous: but the way of the ungodly shall Perish” (Psalm 1: 4-6).

Theology has sometimes argued truly to love God or our neighbor requires
us to renounce Eros entirely, and with it our desire for the beatitude
of God’s presence and our natural reactions to our neighbor’ charms.

In “believing in God”, Gareth Moore wrestled with the problem of
rewards, while framing a powerful account of Christian spirituality. He
argues there that the talk of reward that we so frequently encounter in
the new Testament is often not what it seemed, but is being used by
Jesus only “in order to encourage people to forget all about rewards.”

The depth grammar of Jesus’ language is that ‘to seek a reward from God
is not to seek a reward at all’, for the Christian life is presented as
an end in itself and not as a means to something further. The point is
that the reward is not the point; and, in any case, seeking the reward
for its own sake is as counter – productive spirituality as seeking
happiness for its own sake is psychologically. We must seek first the
kingdom of God (Mtt. 5: 33; cited in Astley, 2004).


