Preface By the Compiler of Nahjul Balaghah, al-'Allamah ash-Sharif ar-Radi
==========================================================================

**In the Name of Allah, the Merciful the Compassionate**

So now, praise is due to Allah who has held praise as the price of His
bounties, protection against His retribution, pathway to His paradises
and means for multiplication of His good treatment, and blessings be on
his Messenger, the Prophet of Mercy, the torch of the people, the chosen
one from the origin of greatness and family of long-standing honours,
the plantation of all engrossing glory and the branch of sublimity full
of fruits and foliage, and on the members of his family who are lanterns
of darkness, protection of the peoples, brilliant minarets of religion
and high standards of greatness, Allah may shower upon them all
blessings befitting their distinction as reward for their actions and
suitable to the chastity of their lineage so long as the morning dawns
and the stars twinkle.

In my early age at the dawn of youth I commenced writing a book on the
characteristics of the Imams covering the account of their virtues and
masterpieces of their utterances. The purpose of the compilation was
stated by me in the beginning of the book. Therein I completed the
portion relating to the account of Amir al-mu'minin 'Ali (peace be upon
him) but I could not complete that part concerning the other Imams due
to impediments of the time and obstacles of the days. I divided the book
into several chapters and sections, in a manner for its last section to
comprise whatever had been related to \`Ali's (p.b.u.h.) short
utterances such as counsels, maxims and proverbs but not long lectures
and detailed discourses.

A number of my friends and brothers-in-faith, while wondering at its
delicate and blossoming expressions, admired the contents of this
particular section, and desired me to complete a book which should cover
all the forms of the utterances of Amir al- mu'minin, including diverse
materials such as lectures, letters, counsels, ethics, etc., as they
were convinced that the entire proceedings would comprise wonders and
surprises of eloquence and rhetoric’s, brilliant jewels of Arabic
language and shining expressions about faith; collected in any other
work, nor found together in any other book, because Amir al-mu'minin was
the fountain of eloquence and the source of rhetoric’s.

Through him the hidden delicacies of eloquence and rhetoric’s came to
light, and from him were learnt its principles and rules. Every speaker
and orator had to tread on his footprints and every eloquent preacher
availed of his utterances. Even then none could equal him and so the
credit for being the first and foremost remained \`4th him, because his
utterances are those that carry the reflection of Divine knowledge and
savour of the Prophet's utterance.

Accordingly, I acceded to their request as I knew that it meant great
reward, handsome reputation and a treasure of recompense. The object of
this compilation is to bring forth Amir al-mu'minin's greatness and
superiority in the art of rhetoric’s, in addition to his countless
qualities and innumerable distinctions, and to show that he had risen to
the highest pinnacle of this attainment; was singular among all those
predecessors whose utterances are quoted here and there, whereas his own
utterances are such an on-rushing stream that its flow cannot be
encountered and such a treasure of delicacies that cannot be matched.

Since I proudly trace my descent from him I have a pleasure of quoting a
couplet of al-Farazdaq: "These are my forefathers O' Jarir. When we get
together, can you claim forth their equals?” [^1]

In my view Amir al-mu'minin's utterances are divisible in three
categories; firstly Sermons and Decrees, secondly Letters and
Communications and thirdly Maxims and Counsels, Allah willing I have
decided to compile first the Sermons, then letters, and finally the
Maxims and Counsels, whilst proposing a separate Chapter for each
category, leaving blank page in between each so that if anything has
been left out and becomes handy afterwards it may be inserted therein,
whereas any utterance which is routine or in reply to some question or
has some other aim does not fit in with any of my divisions should be
included in the category for which it is most suitable or to which its
subject matter is most akin. In this compilation, some sections and
sentences have crept in whose arrangement savours of disarray and
disorderliness.

This is because I am only collecting the most representative brilliant
utterances but do not wish to arrange or array them.

The characteristic of Amir al-mu'minin[^2] in which he is un-paralleled
and is shared by no one, is that his utterances on reclusion, piety,
remembrance of Allah and admonition are such that when a person peruses
them without bearing in mind that they are the words of a man who enjoys
great and ruling position and who controls destinies of men he can have
no doubt that it is the utterance of a man who has no interest other
than reclusion and no activity save worshipping; who is confined to the
interior of some house or the valley of some mountain where he hears
nothing save his own murmur arid sees no one except himself.

He would not believe that this is the utterance of one who plunges in
battles with drawn sword severing heads and vanquishing the heroes and
comes back with his sword dripping with blood and heart's fluid. And
despite all this he is supreme among the recluse and chief among the
saints.

This distinction is one of those astonishing characteristics of Amir
al-mu'minin with which he collected in himself contradictory qualities
and patched together diverse greatnesses. I often mention these to my
brethren-in-faith and put them wondering over it. It is indeed a subject
to ponder over and think about.

Within this compilation, some repetition of words or subject matter are
to be expected, as the utterances of Amir al-mu'minin have been known to
be related in numerous forms. Sometimes it happened that a particular
utterance was found in a particular form in a tradition and was taken
down in that very form. Thereafter, the same utterance was found in some
other tradition either with acceptable addition or in a more attractive
style of expression. In such a case with a view to further the object of
compilation and to preserve the beautiful utterance from being lost it
was decided to repeat it elsewhere. It has also happened that a
particular utterance had appeared earlier but due to remoteness it has
been entered again. This is through omission, not by intent.

In spite of all this I do not claim that I have collected Amir
al-mu'minin's utterances from all sources and that no single sentence of
any type or construction has been left out. In fact I do not rule out
the possibility that whatever has been left out might be more than what
has been collected, and what has been in any knowledge and use is far
less than what has remained beyond my reach. My task was to strive to
the best of my capacity and it was Allah's part to make the way easy and
guide me to the goal; Allah may will so.

Having completed my work, both in the collection and compilation of this
manuscript; Nahjul Balaghah, the pathway of rhetoric’s would be the
appropriate title of the book, in that it would open the doors of
eloquence for the reader and shorten its approach for him; the scholar
and the student would meet their needs from it while the rhetoricians as
well as the recluse would find their objectives in it as well.

In this book would be found a wonderful discussion on Allah's One-ness,
Justness and His being free from body and form, that would quench every
thirst (for learning), provide cure for every malady (of un-belief) and
remove every doubt.

I seek from Allah succor, protection against straying, correctness of
action and His assistance. I seek his protection against mistakes of
heart before mistakes of tongue and against mistakes of speech before
mistakes of action. He is my Reliance and lie is the best Trustee.

[^1]: Al-Farazdaq, whose name was Hammam ibn Ghalib, belonged to the
tribe of Bani Darim and was a notable poet. He was generally at
loggerheads with another Arab poet named Jarir ibn 'Atiyyah and they
showed their merit only in mutual abuse and boasting over each other.
The quoted couplet of al-Farazdaq is a link from that chain, wherein he
addresses Jarir saying "My forefathers were such as you have just heard,
now you come forward with what your forefathers were, and if there were
any one like mine, name them before all of us." Reciting this couplet
about his own fore father’s as-Sayyid ar-Radi challenges everyone to
bring forth their like, if any. Al-Farazdaq had addressed only Jarir but
its quotation here has made it general and universal when its addressee
is no more one single individual, but every person can consider himself
to he its addressee. Despite this generality and universality the
challenge to name their “like" remains unresponded like the Qur'anic
challenge "then bring forth it’s Like." As-Sayyid ar-Radi has pointed at
this relationship and distinction at such an appropriate moment that
there can be no better occasion, because the greatness of the
personality (namely Amir al-mu'minin) through whom he claims pride has
already been mentioned and eyes have stood dazzled at the brilliance of
his status while mind has acknowledged the sublimity of his position.
Now hearts can easily be made to bow before the height and greatness of
this individual who bears relationship to him. Thus at the moment when
heart and mind were already inclined as-Sayyid ar-Radi's
eloquence-conscious eyes turned the sight towards himself as he was the
ray of the sun whose abundant light dazzles the eye, and a scion of the
same lineal tree whose root is in the earth and whose branch extends up
to the sky. Now who is there who would remain unaffected by this
relationship and distinction and refuse to acknowledge his greatness and
sublimity?

[^2]: In the world such persons are rarely found in whom besides one or
two virtuous qualities other qualities might also attain prominence,
much less the convergence of all contradictory qualities, because every
temperament is not suited for the development of every quality, each
quality has a peculiar tempo and each virtue needs a particular climate,
and they are appropriate only for such qualities or virtues with which
they accord, but where there is contradiction instead of harmony the
natural tendencies act as obstacles and do not allow any other quality
to grow. For example, generosity and bountifulness demand that a person
should possess the feeling of pity and God-fearing so that on seeing
anyone in poverty or want his heart would rend, and his feelings would
be disturbed at other's tribulations while the dictates of bravery and
fighting require that instead of pity and compassion there should be the
passion of blood-shed and killing, prompting the person at every moment
to enter into scuffle, ready to kill or be killed. These two qualities
differ so widely that it is not possible to fuse the delicacies of
generosity into the stiff manifestations of bravery just as bravery
cannot be expected from Hatim nor generosity from Rustam. But the
personality of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (p.b.u.h.) showed full accord with
every greatness and complete harmony with every accomplishment, and
there was no good attribute or accomplishment which he lacked, nor any
robe of greatness or beauty which did not fit his body. Thus the
contradictory qualities of generosity and bravery were found in him side
by side. If he rained like the cloud in generosity, he also fought
bravely standing firm as a mountain. Thus his generosity and liberty of
nature was of a degree that even during days of want and starvation
whatever he earned as the wage of his day's toil its major part was
distributed among the poor and the starving, and he would never allow a
beggar to return disappointed from his door, so much so that even when
in the battle field the enemy asked him his sword he threw it before him
being confident of the prowess of his naked arm. An Urdu couplet says:
The unbeliever depends on his sword but the believer fights even without
it. And his bravery and courage was such that the onslaught of armies
could not shake the firmness of his foot with the result that he
achieved success in every encounter and even the bravest fighter could
not save his life in an encounter with him. Thus Ibn Qutaybah writes in
al-Ma'arif, "Whomever he encountered was prostrated." The heartless
nature of the brave is not won to thinking or pondering nor do they have
anything to do with foresight or fore-judging but 'Ali (p.b.u.h.) had
the quality 'of thinking of the highest degree. Thus, ash-Shafi'i said
as follows: "what can I say about a man in whom three qualities existed
with three other qualities that were never found together in any other
man - generosity with want, bravery with sagacity and knowledge with
practical achievements". It was the result of this proper thinking and
correct judgment that when after the death of the Prophet some people
advised him to fight and promised to enlist warriors for him he rejected
this advice, although on such occasions even a slight support is enough
to encourage the heartless brave, yet 'Ali (p.b.u.h.) far-sighted mind
at once foresaw that if battle was raged at that moment the voice of
Islam would be submerged under the clutter of swords, and then even if
success was achieved it would be said that the position was gained by
dint of sword and that there was no right for it. Thus, by withholding
his sword on the one hand he provided protection to Islam and on the
other saved his own right from the imputation of bloodshed. When the
veins are full of daring blood and the bosom full of flames of anger and
wrath it is extremely difficult to curb the passion of vengeance by
adopting the course of forgiving and, despite authority and power, to
pardon and overlook. But 'Ali's (p.b.u.h.) metal used to shine on such
occasions when his forgiving nature would accommodate even his
blood-thirsty foes. Thus, at the end of the Battle of Jamal he made a
general proclamation that no one who flees away from the field or seeks
our protection would be molested and he let go without any punishment
even such enemies as Marwan ibn Hakam and 'Abdullah ibn Zubayr. And the
treatment that he meted out to 'A'ishah matchless manifestation of his
nobility and high character - is that in spite of her open enmity and
rebellion he sent with her women in men's garb to escort her to Medina.
By giving his own personal malice the garb of fundamental differences,
man not only deceives others but also tries to keep himself under
deception, and in these conditions such a delicate situation arises that
a man fails to distinguish and separate his personal malice from a
fundamental difference but easily mixing them together considers that he
has followed the Command of Allah, and In this way he satisfies his
passion for vengeance as well. But Amir al-mu'minin's discerning eyes
never got deceived nor did they willingly deceive themselves. Thus, on
an occasion when after prostrating the opponent he placed himself on his
bosom the vanquished opponent spat on his face. As man his rage should
have risen and his band should have moved quicker but instead of being
enraged he got off from the man's bosom lest his action would be
tarnished by personal feeling, and slayed him only after the anger had
subsided. There is nothing in common between combat and encounter and
reclusion and God-fearing because one shows valour and courage while the
other supplication and submission. But Amir al-mu'minin was a unique
combination of both these qualities as his hands that were bound in
devotion were equally active in the battlefield, and side by side with
relaxing in seclusion for devotion he was a common visitor of the field
of action. The scene of the night of Harir puts human wit in
astonishment and wonder when closing his eyes to the bloody action
around he spread his prayer cloth and engaged himself in prayer with
full peace of mind and heart while arrows were darting off sometimes
over his head and sometimes from his right or left. But he remained
engaged in Allah's remembrance without any fear or apprehension. After
finishing he again cast his hand on the sword's handle and the fierce
battle that then followed in unparalleled in history. The position was
that on all sides there was such hue and cry and fleeing activity that
even voices falling on the ears could not be discerned. Of course, after
every moment or so his own call of Allahu Akbar rose in the atmosphere
and resounded in the ears, and every such call meant death of a foe.
Those who counted these calls of takbir recorded their number as five
hundred and twenty three. The taste for learning and God-knowing does
not combine with material activity but Amir al-mu'minin adorned the
meetings of learning and scholarship along with war-like pursuits, arid
he watered the field of Islam with springs of learning and truth along
with shedding streams of blood (in battles). Where there is perfection
of learning, then even if there is not complete absence of action, there
must no doubt exist shortness of action. But Amir al-mu'minin treaded
the field of knowledge and action equally, as has been already shown in
ash-Shafi'i's verse. Examples of harmony in utterance and action are
quite rare but Amir al-mu'minin's action preceded his utterance, as he
himself says: O people I do not exhort you to any action but that I
myself first proceed towards it before you and do not desist you from
any matter but that I first desist from it myself. As soon as we think
of a recluse and a pious man we visualise a face null of frowns because
for piety severity of temper and hardness of face are inseparable so
much so that the thought of a smile on the lips of a pious man is
regarded as a sin. But despite extreme piety and self-denial Amir
al-mu'minin always had such appearance that his light temper and
brightness of face was apparent from his looks and his lips always bore
playful smile. He never showed frowns on his fore-head like the dry
recluse, so much so that when people could not find any defect in him
this very lightness of temper was taken to be his fault, while hard
temper and bitter face was held to be a virtue. If a man possesses
cheerful heart and joyous temper he cannot command authority over
others; but Amir al-mu'minin's cheerful face was so full of awe and
dignity that no eye could face it. Once Mu'awiyah tauntingly said "Allah
bless 'Ali. He was a man of cheerful taste," then Qays ibn Sa'd
retorted. "By Allah despite cheerful disposition and entertaining
countenance he was more awe-inspiring than a hungry lion and this awe
was due to his piety not like your awe over the non-descripts of Syria."
Where there is rule and authority there is also a crowd of servants and
workers, checks of grandeur and eminence with equipment of pageantry but
Amir al-mu'minin's period of rule was an example of the highest
simplicity. In him people saw only a tattered turban in place of a Royal
Crown, patched apparel in place of the regal robes and the floor of
earth in place of the ruler's throne. He never liked grandeur and
pageantry nor allowed show of external grandiosity. Once he was passing
on a horse back when Harb ibn Shurahbil started walking with him and
began talking. Then Amir al-mu'minin said to him, "Get back because
walking on foot with me by one like you is mischievous for the ruler
(me) and an insult to the believer (you). In short he was such a
versatile personality in whom numerous contradictory qualities had
joined together and all the good attributes were centered in their full
brightness as though his oneself was a collection of several selves and
each self was an astounding portrait of achievement which showed forth
the delineation of distinction in its untained form, and on whose
accomplishment one wonders with bewilderment. A Persian couplet says:
The figure of my beloved is so beautiful that when I cast my glance on
the body from head to foot, every spot thereof calls my attention
claiming to be the most enchanting.


