Sermon 12: Does your brother love us? ...
=========================================

When[^1] Allah gave him (Amir al-mu’minin) victory over the enemy at the
Battle of Jamal one of his comrades said on that occasion, “I wish my
brother so-and-so had been present and he too would have seen what
success and victory Allah had given you,” whereupon Amir al-mu’minin
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كلام له (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لمّا أظفره الله تعالى بأصحاب الجمل وقد قال له بعض أصحابه:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وددت أن أخي فلاناً معك شاهداً ليرى ما نصرك الله به على أعدائك، فقال له
عليه السلام
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Did your brother hold me friend?”

He said: “Yes,”

Then Amir al-mu’minin said:

In that case he was with us. Rather in this army of ours even those
persons were also present who are still in the loins of men and wombs of
women. Shortly, time will bring them out and faith will get strength
through them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَهَوَى أَخِيك مَعَنَا؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: نَعَم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ: فَقَدْ شَهِدنَا، وَلَقَدْ شَهِدَنَا في عَسْكَرِنَا هذَا
أَقْوَامٌ في أَصْلاَبِ الرِّجَالِ، وَأَرْحَامِ النِّسَاءِ، سَيَرْعُفُ
بِهِمُ الزَّمَانُ، ويَقْوَى بِهِمُ الاْيمَانُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Alternative Sources for Sermon 12
---------------------------------

(1) Al-Barqi, *al-Mahasin,* I*,* 262.

[^1]: If a person falls short in his actions despite means and
equipment, this would be indicative of the weakness of his will. But if
there is an impediment in the way of action or his life comes to an end
as a result of which his action remains incomplete, then in that case
Allah would not deprive him of the reward on the basis that actions are
judged by intention. Since his intention in any case was to perform the
action, therefore he should deserve reward to some extent. In the case
of action, there may be absence of reward because action can involve
show or pretence but intention is hidden in the depth of heart. It can
have not a jot of show or affectation. The intention would remain at the
same level of frankness, truth, perfection and correctness where it is,
even though there may be no action due to some impediment. Even if there
is no occasion for forming intention but there is passion and zeal in
the heart, a man would deserve reward on the basis of his heart's
feelings. This is to what Amir al-mu'minin has alluded in this sermon,
namely that "If your brother loved me he would share the reward with
those who secured martyrdom for our support."


