1. Introduction
===============

Art moves human beings and satisfies their emotional dimensions.
Artistic emotional response inspires a man to shed light on the
profundities of human existence as well as facial appearance of the
universe. One universal explanation on the subject of art that has been
acknowledged by all thinkers and aestheticians of all the times is „that
“art, a creative course of action is the expression of frame of mind,
feeling or spirit.1 In the entire expansion of art the space-time aspect
plays an crucial character. In every epoch and at every phase of human
rational advance art becomes a crucial and successful standard to give
details of man‟s inner potenti-alities. In every religion it has its
exceptional place and a crucial character to engage in recreation
importance of the true spirit of that religion. Religion and art have
their close correlation. The development of the correlation of religion
to life has been analogous to the advance of art. The idiosyncratic
rationale of art, according to various philosophers and aestheticians,
is on the whole advance of human character and the improvement of his
mind's eye. Both religion and art contribute to their widespread
endeavor to reshape or recreate, the world with a view to communicate an
integrated vision to man‟s personality or give him a holistic point of
view upon human existence as well as the encountering celestial
circumstances.

Religion has all the way through been a source of stimulation for
approximately all creative artists and aestheticians of different ages.
From the beginning of man‟s history till date, religion has proved
itself to be a turning point in man‟s onward civililizational
demonstration. Various art-forms such as music, sculpture, painting,
calligraphy, architecture and poetry have been profoundly motivated by
intense religious consciousness. In every epoch and at every phase,
religion has helped an artist to create something new with the help of
his idiosyncratic spiritual approaching. Religion, like art, also
highlights the emotional aspect of man. This physical world or Nature
provides us a deep feeling as well as a „means‟ to ecstasy.2 Both
religion and art have engraved their never-ending special effects on
human civilization in prehistoric, medieval and modern epoch. Wundt has
rightly understood that “Ideas and .feelings are religious which refer
to an ideal existence.”3 So, according to him, it is a crucial
aspiration for the artist to create something and direct people to lead
an ideal life. Religion inspires a human being and penetrates every
activity of his life. Art is one of the most crucial and dominant
mediums of religion. An artist, stimulated by religion, has the
astonishing aptitude to characterize a religious subject matter or
communication all the way through painting or other art-forms or
art-techniques.


