II. What is Islamic Art?
========================

Islam is one of, the greatest religions of the world. Its approach to
man‟s life and his spirituality is to some extent different from that of
other religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism and Christianity.
There is no objective or representation of the Supreme Reality in
Islamic art-world to be painted or portrayed as in case of other
religions. On the other hand, the consequent Void (‘adam) has its
distinctive implication in the Islamic art-world. AI-Tawhid (Unity of
Being) is the real meaning of Islam and this metaphysical belief of
Unity is the spiritual significant of the Void which is the only
aspiration and soul of Islamic art.4

Allah (God) is not seen like an entity but He is realized as the Supreme
Creator of everything. That Allah (God) is anthropomorphically portrayed
in the Holy Qur‟an as having hands and seated on a throne, should not be
taken literally. Such figures of verbal communication purely represent
his symbolic demonstration. He has bestowed upon man the supremacy of
perception and inspiration. In the present article we shall try to
discuss briefly some of the‟ most crucial art-forms in order to
comprehend the real meaning and implication of Islamic art as well as‟
its spiritual message. Here we shall also discuss how Islamic art
conveys the spiritual and prototypical meaning of Islam itself through a
timeless and symbolic language; and how even today this art has the
ability to present the spirit of Islam in a much more direct, wholesome
and intelligible manner than many other communicative expositions.
Generally, the work of art, as we be familiar with, is a well
thought-out multifarious of sensuous and communicative fundamentals, and
its organization is its form. But in Islamic art man‟s spiritual
dimension has been overemphasized. All art and thought have been
derivative from this very emphasis.

According to Seyyed Hossein Nasr, it is in reality” to the inner
dimension of Islam, to the batin as contained in the manner and
elucidated by the Truth that one must turn for the origin of Islamic
art. This inner aspect is besides inextricably interrelated to Islamic
spirituality.”5 Man‟s inwardness has been given much value in Islam.
Likewise, it is .within the inner aspect of the Islamic tradition that
one must seek the origin of Islamic art and the „power‟ which has
created different „forms‟ and sustained them over the ages.6 The Qur‟an
and the prophetic hadith are the main sources of Islamic philosophy as
well as Islamic art. All forms of art must be created in the light of
the Qur‟an and the Tradition of the Prophet. The Qur‟an provides the set
of guidelines of Unity while the Prophet provides the manifestation of
this Unity into multiplicity and the witness to this Unity in His
creation.7 In brief, Islamic art is the result of the manifestation of
Unity upon the plane of multiplicity. It reflects in its own
idiosyncratic manner the Unity of the Divine Principle - the dependence
of all multiplicity upon the One-Allah (God). This art manifests itself
in the substantial order in a straight line perceivable by the senses
and the archetypical realities and acts, and as a result, it is a
hierarchy for the expedition of the soul from the audio-visual world to
the world of Silence and Invisible one.


