Do the Shiite Muslims Say That the Qur'an Is Incomplete?
========================================================

The late Egyptian Muslim scholar Muhammad Abu Zahra said in his book
al-Imam al-Sadiq that Muhammad bin Ya'qub al-Kulayni (a hadith recorder,
died in 329 AH), recorded in his book "Usul al-Kafi" that the Imam
Ja'far al-Sadiq said that the Qur'an which was revealed to the Prophet
Muhammad contained seven thousand verses, while the verses we read in
the Qur'an are only 6262. The rest is treasured by the members of the
House of the Prophet ...

Sheikh Abu Zahra issued a harsh judgment against the hadith recorder
al-Kulayni while Sheikh Kulayni is unable to defend himself because he
met his Lord centuries ago. In spite of Sheikh Abu Zahra's harsh
judgment against al-Kulayni, he did not try to accuse all the Shiites
with what he accused al-Kulayni.

Al-Kulayni's report concerning the incompleteness of the Qur'an is
unacceptable to the Imamate Shiites (who are the overwhelming majority
of the Shiites). They say that the Qur'an is complete without addition,
deletion, or change.

Professor Muhammad Abu Zahra in his book Imam al-Sadiq said that
al-Safi, a prominent Shiite scholar, said in his commentary on the Holy
Qur'an the following:

"According to Sheikh Abu Ali al-Tabarsi, another prominent Shiite
scholar, 'There are no words added to the Qur'an. Any claim of added
words is unanimously denied by the Shiites. As to the deletion, some
Shiites and some Sunnis said that there is change or deletion. Our
scholars deny that.' "

Sayyid al-Murtada, another prominent Shi'ite scholar, said:

"... our certainty of the completeness of the Qur'an is like our
certainty of the existence of countries or major events which are
self-evident. Motives and reasons for recording and guarding the Holy
Qur'an are numerous, because the Qur'an is a miracle of the Prophet hood
and the source of Islamic knowledge and religious rule. Their concern
with the Qur'an made the Muslim scholars highly efficient concerning its
grammar, its reading, and its verses. "

With this unequaled concern, there is no possibility the Qur'an was
changed or deleted in some parts. The mercenary writers---who only try
to divide Muslims as a service to the hypocrite Muslim
governments---should be informed of the following:

(1) Al-Kulayni is not an Imam of the Shiites. He is only a hadith
recorder who reported what was conveyed to him through one or more
sources. He did not say that he heard from al-Imam al-Sadiq. He only
said that a hadith came to him through some reporters. He did not live
during the days of the Imam al-Sadiq. He did not see any of the Imams of
the Members of the House of the Prophet.

**The Reporters Of The Incompleteness Of The Qur'an From The Sunnis Are
Numerous**

2) Al-Kulayni was not the only scholar who reported the incompleteness
of the Qur'an. There are many hadith recorders, in the books of Sunni
scholars, who reported that the Caliph 'Umar, 'A'ishah, and a number of
the companions of the Prophet said that the Qur'an is incomplete.

**The Sahih Of Al-Bukhari**

Al-Bukhari recorded in his Sahih (authentic), part eight, pages
209-210, that Ibn 'Abbas reported that 'Umar bin al-Khattab said in a
discourse which he delivered during the last year of his caliphate:

"Certainly Allah sent Muhammad with the truth, and revealed to him the
Book. One of the revelations which came to him was the verse of stoning.
We read it and understood it.

"The Messenger of God stoned and we stoned after him. I am concerned
that if time goes on, someone may say, 'By God, we do not find the verse
of stoning in the Book of God;' thus, the Muslims will deviate by
neglecting a commandment the Almighty revealed.

"Stoning is in the Book of God. It is the right punishment for a person
who commits adultery if the required witnesses are available, or there
was pregnancy without marriage or adultery is admitted."

Again, we used to read in the what we found in the Book of God:

"Do not deny the fatherhood of your fathers in contempt because it is
disbelief on your part to be ashamed of the fatherhood of your
fathers."

Similar reports were recorded by Imam Ahmad in part one of his Musnad
(in the Musnad of 'Umar under the caption of the Hadith al-Saqifah,
pages 47 and 55). Ibn Hisham recorded similar things in his Seerah of
the Prophet. part 2, page 658 (second printing, 1955).

**Sahih (Authentic) Of Muslim**

Muslim in the seventh part of his Sahih (commentary of al-Nawawi) in
the Book of al-Zakah, about the virtue of being satisfied with whatever
God gives and about urging people to have that virtue, pages 139-140,
reported that Abu al-Aswad reported that his father said:

" Abu Musa al-Ash'ari invited the Qur'an readers of Basra. Three
hundred readers responded to his invitation. He told them: You are the
readers and the choice of the people of Basra. Recite the Qur'an and do
not neglect it. Otherwise, a long time may elapse and your hearts will
be hardened as the hearts of those who came before you were hardened.

" 'We used to read a chapter from the Qur'an similar to Bara'ah in
length and seriousness, but I forgot it. I can remember from that
chapter only the following words:

" 'Should a son of Adam own two valleys full of wealth, he would seek a
third valley, and nothing would fill Ibn Adam's abdomen but the soil.

" 'We used to read a chapter similar to Musabbihat and I forgot it. I
only remember out of it the following:

" 'Oh you who believe, why do you say what you do not do? Thus a
testimony will be written on your necks and you will be questioned about
it on the Day of Judgment.' "

It is obvious that these words which Abu Musa mentioned are not from
the Qur'an, nor are they similar to any of the words of God in the
Qur'an. It is amazing that Abu Musa claims that two surahs from the
Qur'an are missing, one of them similar to Bara'ah (the chapter of
Bara'ah contains 130 verses).

**'A'ishah**

Muslim also reported in the Book of al-Rida'ah (Book of Nursing), part
10, page 29, that 'A'ishah said the following:

"There was in what was revealed in the Qur'an that ten times of nursing
known with certainty makes the nursing woman a mother of a nursed child.
This number of nursings would make the woman 'haram' (forbidden) to the
child. The this verse was replaced by 'five known nursings' to make the
woman forbidden to the child. The Prophet died while these words were
recorded and read in the Qur'an."

**'Umar Said Chapter 33 Is Incomplete**

Al-Muttaqi 'Ali bin Husam al-Din in his book "Mukhtasar Kanz al-'Ummal"
printed on the margin of Imam Ahmad's Musnad, part two, page 2, in his
hadith about chapter 33, said that Ibn Mardawayh reported that Hudhayfah
said:

'Umar said to me 'How many verses are contained in the chapter of
al-Ahzab?' I said, '72 or 73 verses.' He said it was almost as long as
the chapter of the Cow, which contains 287 verses, and in it there was
the verse of stoning.

**Mustadrak Al-Sahihayn**

Al-Hakim al-Nisaburi in his book al-Mustadrak in the book of commentary
on the Qur'an, part two, page 224, reported that Ubay bin Ka'b (whom the
Prophet called the leader of al-Ansar), said that the Messenger of God
said to him:

"Certainly the Almighty commanded me to read the Qur'an in front of
you, and he read 'The unbelievers from the people of the Book and the
pagans will not change their way until they see the evidence. Those who
disbelieve among the people of the scripture and idolaters could not
change until the clear proof came unto them. A Messenger from Allah,
reading purified pages ...' "

And of the very excellent part of it "Should Ibn Adam ask for a valley
full of wealth and I grant it to him, he would ask for another valley.
And if I grant him that, he would ask for a third valley. Nothing would
fill the abdomen of Ibn Adam except the soil. God accepts the repentance
of anyone who repents. The religion in the eyes of God is the Hanafiyah
(Islam) rather than Yahudiyyah (Judaism) or Nasraniyyah (Christianity).
Whoever does good, his goodness will not be denied."

Al-Hakim said:

"This is an authentic hadith but the two shaykhs (al-Bukhari and
Muslim) did not record it. Al-Dhahabi also considered it authentic in
his commentary (on al-Mustadrak)."

Al-Hakim reported also that Ubay Ibn Kabb used to read:

"Those who disbelieved had set up in their hearts the zealotry of the
age of ignorance; and if you had had a similar zealotry, the Sacred
Mosque would have been corrupted, and God pought down His peace of
reassurance upon His Messenger."

When this reading was conveyed to 'Umar, he became very angry with
Ubay. He sent for him while he was treating his she-camel with tar. He
also invited other companions, including Zayd Ibn Thabit. Ubay came to
him. 'Umar asked: "Who among you would read the chapter of al-Fatah
(victory)? Zayd Ibn Thabit read the chapter the way we read it now.
'Omar spoke to Ubay angrily. Ubay said 'Shall I speak?' 'Umar said
'Speak out.' Ubay said 'You know that I used to enter the house of the
Prophet, and he used to teach me the reading of the Qur'an while you and
others were by the door.'"

"If you want me to teach people the way the Prophet taught me, I will
teach them; otherwise, I will not teach them one letter ever."

'Omar said to him: "Continue teaching people how to read."

Al-Hakim said this is authentic according to the standards of the two
sheikhs (al-Bukhari and Muslim). However, they did not report it.

Al-Dhahabi also considered it authentic in his Commentary on
al-Mustadrak, part two, pages 225-226.

If we take the report of Ibn Mardawayh which Hudhayfah attributed to
'Omar in which he said that the chapter of al-Ahzab, which contained 72
verses, was as long as the chapter of the Cow (which contained 287) and
take the report of Abu Musa which says that a chapter equal in length to
the chapter of Bara'ah (which contains 130 verses) was deleted from the
Qur'an, then the deletion in the Qur'an according to these reports would
be about 345 verses.

If this is true, what would be the difference between the deletion
according to these reports and the report which is attributed to
al-Kulayni that claims a deletion of 600 verses?

Furthermore, suppose that al-Kulayni had recorded in his book al-Kafi
that some of the Qur'anic verses were deleted. Why should all the
Shi'ites be accused of the belief in the incompleteness of the Qur'an?
Kulayni is not an Imam of the Shi'ites, and the Shi'ites are not his
followers.

Al-Kulayni was no more than a hadith recorder. If a scholar like him
makes a mistake, why should we attribute that mistake to the millions of
Shi'ites who are not even his followers?

If such an accusation is permissible, why should we not accuse all the
Sunnis of the belief in the incompleteness of the Qur'an because they
all are followers of 'Omar who was quoted by al-Bukhari, Muslim, Imam
Ahmad, and Ibn Mardawayh to have said that the Qur'an was incomplete,
and that more than 200 Qur'anic verses were deleted?

Why should the Caliph 'Umar, 'A'ishah, Abu Musa, and Ubay Ibn Ka'b not
be accused of the same thing because all of them stated the
incompleteness of the Qur'an?

Accusing Muslims of Kufr or deviation is abhorable to God. We have been
commanded by the Qur'an and the Prophet to consider anyone who declares
that there is no God but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of God
to be a Muslim. al-Bukhari reported that 'Abdullah Ibn 'Umar reported
that the Messenger of God said:

"When a person calls his Muslim pother a Kafir, one of the two would
carry the sin."

We believe that the Qur'an as it is now is the entire Qur'an without
addition, subtraction, or change.

It is the Qur'an which no falsehood from the era of pre-revelation or
post-revelation entered it. It is a revelation from the Mighty, the
Praised.

Allah promised that He will protect the Qur'an. He said "Certainly We
revealed the Reminder (the Holy Qur'an), and certainly We shall preserve
it." (ch. 15, v. 9)

It is the Qur'an through which the Messenger and the Members of his
House commanded us to test the authenticity of every hadith, and accept
the hadith which agrees with the Qur'an and reject the hadith that
disagrees with it.

We believe that whoever says that the Qur'an is incomplete, or was
added to, or changed, is completely wrong. What was reported on this
subject from Caliph 'Umar, Abu Musa, Ubay Ibn Ka'b, al-Bukhari, Imam
Ahmad, Muslim, al-Hakim, and al-Kulayni is completely rejected and
absolutely unacceptable.

We certainly reject all of these reports, but we will not pass any
judgment on any of the above mentioned reporters. Passing judgment
belongs only to Allah.
It is hoped that what was offered on this subject is sufficient for
those who try to find the truth, that the Shiite Muslims are true
believers deserving respect from their Sunni pothers. It is unbecoming
of those who seek the truth to accuse others of a sin of which they are
entirely innocent, especially when the accusers have committed worse
than that of which they accuse others.

Finally, I would like to say that al-Kulayni's report concerning the
incompleteness of the Qur'an does not indicate that he believed in what
he recorded. al-Bukhari, Muslim, Imam Ahmad, and al-Hakim have reported
that 'Omar, 'A'ishah, and a number of companions stated that the Qur'an
is incomplete. Yet we do not say that these hadith recorders believed in
what they recorded.
I am inclined to believe that al-Kulayni did not subscribe to what he
reported because he mentioned in his book al-Kafi that all hadiths
should be tested by the Book of God (the Qur'an). Whatever agrees with
the Qur'an should be accepted, and whatever disagrees with the Qur'an
should be rejected.

Al-Kulayni mentioned in his introduction to his book the following:

"pother, may God lead you to the right road. You ought to know that it
is impossible for anyone to distinguish the truth from the untruth when
Muslim scholars disagree upon statements attributed to the Imams. There
is only one way to separate the true from the untrue reports, through
the standard which was declared by the Imam:

"'Test the various reports by the Book of God; whatever agrees with it
take it, whatever disagrees with it reject it.

"'Take what is agreed upon (by scholars). Certainly the universally
accepted should not be doubted. '"

These words indicate that al-Kulayni believed that the Book of God is
the Qur'an which we read; otherwise, how can we test the various reports
through the Book of God?

At the same time, these words indicate that the reports which indicated
the incompleteness of the Qur'an should be rejected because they are in
disagreement with the Book of God, which declares:
"Certainly We (the Almighty) have revealed the Reminder (the Qur'an),
and We shall preserve it."

The Imam said:
