Do the Shi'ite Muslims Say That the Revelation Came To Muhammad Bymistake, and That It Was Intended For Ali?
============================================================================================================

This is a vicious lie widely spread in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and other
Arab countries in order to discredit the followers of the members of the
House of the Prophet. This accusation was made during periods of
oppression against the Shi'ites. The rulers of the periods of the
Umayyads and Abbasids used to consider every follower of the Members of
the House of the Prophet revolutionary and dangerous. They conspired
against these Shi'ites and accused them of heresy and disbelief in order
to encourage the Muslims to shed their blood and usurp their rights and
wealth.

The centuries of oppression passed with all their injustices and
terrors. It was expected that during the new period of freedom, the
mistakes of the past would be corrected. It was hoped that the Muslim
scholars would make a serious study in order to see if there is any
justification for such terrible accusations.

**It is very easy to know the truth.**

There are hundreds of books written by Shiite scholars about their
beliefs. Had the Sunni scholars read any of these books, they would have
found that the Shi'ite beliefs are in full agreement with the Book of
God and the well-known statements of the Prophet.

We are living in the era of speed and easy movement. It is easy for
Muslim scholars to have conferences, discuss problems, and find
solutions.

The simplest principle of justice is to follow the commandments of the
Holy Qur'an:

"Oh you who believe, if a transgressor comes to you with news, try to
verify it, lest you inflict damage on people unwittingly; then you may
consequently regret your hasty action" (ch. 49, v.6).

The Almighty commanded us to try to find out whether an accusation is
true or false, and that we ought not to try people and convict them
without questioning them.

We do not know of any court in the world in which the judge convicts a
person before interviewing him, provided the accused is available and
honors the summons.

In spite of the ease with which one can find the correct information
nowadays, we find that those who accuse and spread hatred among Muslims
do not take one single step in order to find the truth which may unite
the Muslim world.

While writing these words, I recollect that the Egyptian government
during the fifties sent the late Dr. Muhammad Bisar to Washington, D.C.,
as director of the Islamic Center there. I went to visit him and he
received me kindly and informed me of the knowledge he had acquired
concerning American Muslims. He initiated a dialogue between us,
saying:

"Some of the Muslims in this country asked me about the various Islamic
sects. I declared to them that all Muslim sects are good except the
Shiite Ithna 'ashari."

I immediately realized that Dr. Bisar did not know the meaning of the
Shiite Ithna 'ashari. Otherwise, he would not have been rude enough to
say that to me while I am a Shiite Ithna 'ashari. Thus, we had the
following dialogue:

Chirri: What is wrong with the Ithna 'ashari?
Bisar: They believe in things opposed to Islam.
Chirri: Give us an example of their wrong belief.
Bisar: They say the revelation came to Muhammad by mistake, and that
Ali Ibn Abi Talib was supposed to receive the revelation.
Chirri: How did you learn that?
Bisar: I read it in the book of Al-milal wa al-nihal by
al-Shahrastani.
Chirri: Have you asked any Shiite scholar about this subject?
Bisar: No, I have not.

Chirri: Then you have convicted millions of Muslims and considered them
"kafir" without asking any of them about this serious accusation. Did
the Almighty command you to do that? And did Egypt send you to propagate
such a vicious message?

A year after our meeting in Washington, I met Dr. Bisar in Philadelphia
at an Islamic conference. He informed me that he re-examined the book of
AI-milal wa al-nihal by al-Shahrastani and found that what was
attributed to the Shi'ites, that the revelation came to Muhammad by
mistake, was not the belief of the Ithna 'ashari Shi'ite school of
thought. It was, rather, a sect which existed and disappeared hundreds
of years ago. Hearing that from him, I accepted his apology. Yet, I was
amazed that it took him a whole year to re-read the book and discover
the truth.

I spent years studying hadith and Islamic history books which were
written by Sunni and Ithna 'ashari scholars. I never found in any
Shi'ite book a hadith or historical report indicating that Ali Ibn Abi
Talib was higher than or equal to Muhammad. As a matter of fact, I found
only the opposite. The Shi'ites consider Ali to be the best man after
the Messenger because he was the most obedient to him.

One of the hadiths which the Shi'ites pride themselves upon is a hadith
attributed to the Messenger of God. The Prophet said to the tribe of
Wulay'ah:

"Bani Wulay'ah, you must change your attitude, or I shall send to you a
man who is from me to punish you severely."

Some of the people who were present asked the Prophet "Who is the man
you are going to send to them?" The Prophet replied: "He is the man who
was patching the sole of my shoes." They looked around and found Ali
patching the sole of the Prophet's shoes.

It is inconceivable that the Shi'ites can be proud of the fact that Ali
was the patcher of the Prophet Muhammad's shoes and claim that the Imam
is higher than or equal to the Prophet. Therefore, I do not find any
justification for directing such an accusation at the Shi'ites who
glorify the Prophet the most.

The Shi'ites say that the highest honor the Imam Ali acquired is that
he was chosen by the Prophet to be his pother. When the Prophet
commanded every two Muslims to become pothers, he held Ali's hand and
said "This is my pother." Thus, the Messenger of God, the highest
Messenger, the Imam of all righteous people, the one who had no equal
among the servants of God, made Ali his pother. (Al-Seerah
al-Nabawiyyah, by Ibn Hisham, part 1, page 505).

**Are The Sunnites Clear Of Exaggeration?**

Certainly the Shi'ites are not extremist, and there is no hadith
reported by the Shi'ites that may justify such an accusation. However,
it would not be improper to ask the following question: Are the Sunnites
and their scholars free of exaggeration and extremism concerning the
position of some prominent companions of the Prophet?

It would not be out of place to say that the Sunnites are closer to
extremism than the Shi'ites. We find in the books of the Sunni scholars
and hadith recorders indications that they put 'Umar in a position
higher than that of the Messenger of God. The following are some of the
hadiths:

"Al-Hakim Al-Nisaburi (in his book AI-Mustadrak, part 3, page 84),
reported that Ubayy Ibn Ka'b said the following:

"I heard the Messenger of God saying: The first one the Almighty will
empace on the Day of Judgement is 'Umar. The first one the Lord will
shake hands with will be 'Umar, and the first one the Almighty takes by
His hand and admits to paradise is 'Umar."

Al-Hafiz Muhammad Ibn Majah in his authentic Sunan reported that Ubayy
Ibn Ka'b said:

"The Messenger of God said: The first one God will shake hands with (on
the Day of Judgement) will be 'Umar. The first one God will greet is
'Umar, and he is the first one Allah takes by His hand and admits to
paradise."

These hadiths clearly indicate that 'Umar will be above all the
Prophets including the head of the Prophets, Muhammad. When 'Umar is to
be the first empaced and his hand shaken by the Almighty, all the
prophets will be after him.

This is a strange and astonishing hadith. It portrays the Creator of
the Heavens and the Earth as a human who empaces people and shakes hands
with them.

Al-Hakim also reported that Jabir Ibn Abdullah said that Abu Bakr said
that he heard the Messenger say: "The sun never rose on a man better
than 'Umar."

Al-Hakim said "This hadith is authentic." (AI-Mustadrak, part 3, page
90).

If the sun never rose on a man better than 'Umar, it means that 'Umar
was not less than any of the Prophets of God including their highest,
Muhammad Ibn Abdullah.

It is reported among the virtues of 'Umar that the Messenger of God
said: "Whenever Gapiel delayed in his visits to me, I guessed that he
was sent to 'Umar." (Ibn Abi Al-Hadid, Vol.6, part 12, page 178).

It is also reported that 'Umar is the lamp of the people of paradise.
(Ibn Hajar, Al Sawa'iq AI-Muhriqah, page 97).

If the Prophet had been concerned whether Gapiel could have visited
'Umar, 'Umar would have been equal to the Prophet in position and would
have been a competitor. Furthermore, how could 'Umar be the light of the
people of paradise while the Prophets, including the Messenger of God,
are among the people of paradise?

This means that the light of 'Umar is higher than the light of all the
prophets. Furthermore, if 'Umar is the light of the people of paradise,
and the width of paradise is the Heaven and the Earth, it means that
'Umar's light is the light of the universe. Should that be the case, all
the prophets would be in need of his light, and that would mean that
'Umar is above the messengers of God.

In conclusion, I would like to say that I do not mean, through these
hadiths, to accuse our Sunnite pothers of placing 'Umar above the Final
Messenger of God and the rest of the prophets. This is certainly not my
intention; but I wanted to say that what the Sunnites attributed to the
Shi'ites, that Ali is above Muhammad, is an unjustifiable and vicious
lie because there is nothing in the Shi'ite books that indicates this
allegation.

The Shi'ites consider the spread of such a lie a flagrant aggression
against the glory of Islam and the honor of the Shi'ites.

I wanted to ping to the attention of the readers that the Imamite
Shi'ites are too righteous to accuse their Sunnite pothers of placing a
man above the Prophet in spite of the fact that there are many hadiths,
which are considered by the Sunni scholars to be authentic, indicating
that 'Umar is higher than the great Messenger and the messengers who
were before him.


