Do the Imams Have Any Authority On the Universe?
================================================

The mercenary writers have tried more than one way to insult the
followers of the Members of the House of the Prophet Muhammad. Among
these shameful ways is the allegation that the Shiite Muslims believe
that the Imams from the Members of the House of the Prophet Muhammad
control the atoms of the universe. These writers declare that such a
belief is a belief in the divinity of the Imams.

They tried to prove this accusation by another allegation. They accused
the revolutionary Islamic leader, Imam Khumayni, of saying in one of his
books or lectures that the Imams from the Members of the House of the
Prophet Muhammad control the atoms of the universe.

I have never read such a statement in the books or lectures of Imam
Khumayni. However, let us assume that he indeed said this. But let us
try to understand his words instead of deliberately trying to
misunderstand them.

Did the revolutionary leader mean that the Imams have an independent
authority over the atoms of nature separate from the authority of God
Almighty? Did he mean that the Imams are able, by their own power, to
change the course of nature? Could he not have meant that the Imams are
so absolutely obedient to God, and that because of their purity and
obedience to Him, He responds to their prayers? Therefore, if they ask
Him to change a natural course, their prayers are answered.

There is no doubt that Imam Khumayni does not think that the Imams have
power independent from the Almighty. He is too pure and righteous to
voice such a thing, write it, or think it. He is one of the most
righteous, pure, and obedient to the Almighty.

If Imam Khumayni had said that the Imams can control the atoms of the
universe, he undoubtedly meant that the Imams of the House of the
Prophet Muhammad had ascended in their obedience and worship to God to
such a high degree that they could have asked the Almighty to transform
the atoms of one object into the atoms of another, and He would have
granted their request. Furthermore, if they had asked Him to revive a
dead person, God would have bought him back to life. Is this a belief in
the divinity of the Imams?

Those who attribute such a statement to Imam Khumayni and consider it a
deviation from the Islamic course should give the matter serious
thought. They should test such a statement with the contents of the Holy
Qur'an. The Great Book informs us of the miracles of the Prophets of
God.

And what is that in thy right hand, O Moses? He said: This is my staff.
On it, I lean, and with it, I beat pinches for my sheep, and in it I
find other uses.

"God said: Cast it down, O Moses! He cast it down, and behold! It
became a snake, slithering. God said:

Grasp it and fear not. We shall return it to its former state.

"And draw thy hand to your side, it will come forth white without harm.
That will be another miracle." (ch. 20. vs. 17-22).

This means that the dead cells which composed the rod of Moses were
transformed into living cells. Then those living cells miraculously went
back to dead cells. In chapter Al-Shu'ara, we read the following words
of the Almighty:

"We revealed to Moses: Strike the sea with thy staff. It parted, and
each part was like a huge mountain." (ch. 26, v.64)

Does this not mean that God made the sea obedient to Moses to such a
degree that Moses was able to divide the water of the sea into two solid
parts, each of them as huge as a mountain in height and size?

**The Qur'an Informs Us Of Jesus**

In Al- 'Imran, we read that the Almighty informed us about Jesus:

"And we will make him a messenger to the children of Israel (with this
message): I come to you with a sign from your Lord. Lo! I fashion for
you out of clay the likeness of a bird, and peathe into it, and it
becomes a bird, by Allah's leave. I heal those born blind, and the
lepers, and I raise the dead by Allah's leave . . ." (ch. 3, v.49)

Here we see that the Almighty enabled Jesus to transform a piece of
clay into a living bird that could fly like other birds. Is this the
work of Moses or Jesus? Would the Qur'an invite us to deify someone
other than God?

**The Qur'an Informs Us Of Muhammad**

In regard to the Prophet Muhammad, we read God's word in the chapter of
The Moon:

"The hour (of judgement) is near, and the moon has been split. But if
they see a sign, they turn away and say: This is prolonged magic." (ch.
54, vs. 1-2)

This verse informs us that Allah split the moon in response to His
Messenger Muhammad's prayer, and this never happened before the time of
Muhammad.

**A Tree Walked In Response To The Order Of Muhammad**

We find in Nahj al-Balaghah that Imam Ali reported that he was with the
Prophet when the chieftains of Quraysh challenged him and asked him to
order a nearby tree to uproot and walk to him. They said that this would
be visible evidence of his prophethood. The Messenger of God spoke to
the tree saying:

"Tree, if you believe in Allah and the Hereafter and know that I am a
Messenger of God, uproot and walk until you stand in front of me, with
permission of God."

The tree, obeying the Prophet, uprooted and walked to him while making
a loud noise like the wings of a flying bird.

When the chiefs saw the tree standing in front of the prophet, they
asked him to make half the tree come forward and keep the other half in
its original place. When he did that, they said: "Let the half that came
to you go back to the other half. He did." (Nahj al-Balaghah, part 2,
pp.158-9)

Ibn Hisham reported similar to this:

"Rukanah Al-Muttalibi was the strongest man in Mecca. He met the
Messenger outside Mecca and the Messenger invited him to Islam. Rukanah
said: "If you can prove that you are a true messenger, I will follow
you." The Messenger said: "What do you say if I wrestle you down? Will
that make you believe that I am a true prophet?" Rukanah said: "Yes."
The Prophet wrestled him down twice. Rukanah said: "Muhammad, this is
really amazing. Did you really wrestle me?" The Prophet said: "I will
show you more amazing things than this if you obey God and follow my
way."

Rukanah said: What is it? The Prophet said: "I will call this tree
which you are looking at, and it will come to me." Rukanah said: Call
it, and the Prophet called it. The tree came until it stood in front of
him. The Prophet said to it: "Go back to your place," and it went to its
original place. (Ibn Hisham, AI-Seerah al-Nabawiyyah, part 1, page
391)

These miracles which occurred in response to prayers of the Messenger
of God testify, as documented in the Qur'an, that Allah empowers His
great servants to perform miracles by His permission. In other words, He
responds to the prayers of His Messengers by creating miracles.

What happened through the prophets does not indicate that they had any
touch of divinity. On the contrary, it testifies that those prophets
were true servants of God. They ascended to the highest degree of
servitude to Him, and that their obedience to Him was absolute. Had they
been otherwise, they would not have been able to perform any miracles,
and no prayer by them would have been answered. They obeyed God
completely and He responded to their prayers.

**Are The Imams Like The Prophets?**

It may be said that miracles are conceivable when they are attributed
to messengers of God. However, the Imams of the Members of the House of
the Prophet are not prophets. They were men of knowledge and
righteousness, but none of them ascended to the degree of prophethood.

This is true, but the Imams from the House of the Prophet were
non-prophets because the prophethood was concluded by the Messenger of
God, the Prophet Muhammad. Had the Messenger not been the last of the
prophets, it would have been possible for the Imams, or some of them, to
be prophets. Probably other people could have become prophets as well.

The evidence of this is that the prophet said to Ali:

"You are to me like Aaron was to Moses except that there shall be no
prophets after me." (al-Bukhari, his Sahih, part 5, page 24).

This means that Ali was like Aaron in everything except the
prophethood.

If any of the Sunnite scholars think that we are exaggerating by saying
that Ali and the Imams from his children were qualified for the
prophethood if the Messenger had not been the last of the Prophets, they
should remember that prominent Sunnite scholars reported similar to this
concerning 'Umar.

The hadith-recorder Ahmad Ibn Hajar Al-Haythami in his book AI-Sawa'iq
AI-Muhriqah, page 96, documents that Imam Ahmad, Al-Tirmidhi, Al-Hakim,
and Al-Tabarani reported that 'Uqbah Ibn 'Amir said that the Messenger
of God said:

"Had it been possible to have a prophet after me, that prophet would
have been 'Umar."

Why should anyone think that it would be an exaggeration to say that
Allah would make nature and the atoms of the universe obedient to the
Imams of the House of the Prophet Muhammad when we do not consider it an
exaggeration to say that 'Umar could have been a prophet if Muhammad had
not been the final prophet.

Ibn Hajar, in his Al-Sawa'iq, page 102, reported that when Egypt was
conquered by the Muslims, there was a custom to throw a girl in the Nile
River on the 11th night of one of the non-Arabic months in order that
the Nile would continue to flow. It was believed that without throwing a
girl into it, the Nile would not flow. Amr Ibn al-As wrote to the Caliph
'Umar concerning this custom. 'Umar sent a message to the Nile saying:

"If you were flowing before by your own power, we do not want you to
run; and if Allah is the one who makes you flow, we ask the Almighty to
make you flow."

Amr Ibn al-As threw the letter of 'Umar into the Nile one day before
the Christian commemoration of the crucifixion. The following morning
they woke up to find the river flowing stronger and had gone up 48 feet
in one night.


