Was Ibn Saba the Organizer of the Revolt Against 'uthman in Basra, Kufa, and Egypt?
===================================================================================

Should a reader of Islamic history be liberated from his emotions
towards or against the Third Caliph, he can be assured that the call for
a revolt against the Caliph did not start in Basra, Kufa, Syria, or
Egypt.

The agitation against the Caliph started in Medina by prominent and
influential individuals. The most prominent among them were 'A'ishah,
the mother of believers, Talhah, Zubayr, Abdul Rahman Ibn Awf, Amr Ibn
al-As, and Ammar Ibn Yasir.

The Third Caliph, 'Uthman, was given the allegiance of the people with
the stipulation that he would manage the affairs of the nation according
to the Book of God and the teachings of the Prophet. He was to follow
the method of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, if there was no instruction from the
Qur'an or the Prophet.

It is well-known that the first two caliphs lived very simple lives.
They did not give members of their clans a preference over other people,
nor did they appoint any of their relatives to prominent positions in
the State.

'Uthman, on the other hand, had his own opinions. He allowed himself to
live luxuriously. He put members of his clan in prominent and strong
positions in the State, preferring them over other Muslims. However, his
relatives were not righteous. 'Uthman thought that his preference
towards them was in accordance with the Book of God because the Qur'an
urges people to be kind to their relatives. This method of handling the
affairs of the State did not please many companions. They found it
extravagant and extreme.

They criticized the Caliph for the following things:

(1). He pought his uncle Al-Hakam Ibn Al-As, (son of Umayyah, son of
Abd Shams), to Medina after the Prophet had exiled him from Medina.

It was reported that Al-Hakam used to hide and listen to the words of
the Prophet as he spoke secretly to prominent companions and circulated
what he heard. He used to imitate and ridicule the Prophet in the way he
walked. The Prophet one time looked at him while he was being imitated
and said: "This way you will be." Al-Hakam started immediately shaking
and continued that way until he died.
One day, while sitting with some of his companions, the Messenger of
God said, "A cursed man will enter the room." Shortly thereafter,
Al-Hakam entered. He was the cursed man. (Yusuf Ibn Abd Al-Barr,
AI-Isti'ab, part one, pages 359-360)

(2). After pinging him to Medina, 'Uthman gave his uncle Al-Hakam
300,000 dirham.
(3). He made Marwan, son of Al-Hakam, his highest assistant and top
advisor, giving him influence equal to his own. Marwan bought a fifth of
the spoils of North Africa for 500,000 dinars. However, he did not pay
this amount. The Caliph allowed him to keep the money. This amount was
equal to ten million dollars.

(4). The Caliph appointed his foster pother Abdullah Ibn Sa'd governor
of Egypt. At that time, Egypt was the largest province in the Muslim
State.

Ibn Sa'd had declared his Islam and moved from Mecca to Medina. The
Prophet enlisted him as a recorder of the revelation. However, Ibn Sa'd
then deserted the faith and returned to Mecca. He used to say: "I shall
reveal equal to what God revealed to Muhammad."

When Mecca was conquered, the Prophet ordered the Muslims to kill Ibn
Sa'd. He was to be killed even if he was found tying himself to the
cloth of the Ka'bah. Ibn Sa'd hid himself at the house of 'Uthman. When
the situation calmed down, 'Uthman pought Ibn Sa'd to the Prophet and
informed him that he had put Ibn Sa'd under his protection. The Prophet
remained silent for a long while, hoping that one of those present would
kill Ibn Sa'd before he honored 'Uthman's request. The companions,
however, did not understand what the Prophet meant by his long silence.
Since no one moved to kill Ibn Sa'd, the Prophet approved the protection
of 'Uthman.
(5). The Caliph 'Uthman appointed Al-Walid Ibn 'Uqbah (one of his
Umayyad relatives), governor of Kufa after dismissing the previous
governor, the famous companion Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas. Sa'd was a famous
marksman known for combating enemies of Islam in front of the Prophet at
the Battle of Uhud. The Prophet prayed for him saying:

"Lord, I ask Thee to make his arrow accurate as I ask Thee to respond
to his prayer."

Walid's past during the time of the Prophet was not honorable. The
Qur'an discredited him and called him a transgressor. For instance, the
Messenger sent him to Banu Al-Mustalaq to collect their Zakat. Walid
witnessed from a distance the Mustalaqites coming toward him on their
horses. He became frightened due to a previous hostility between the
Mustalaqites and him. He returned to the Messenger of God and informed
him that the Mustalaqites wanted to kill him. This was not true.
However, Walid's information infuriated the Medinite Muslims, and they
wanted to attack the Mustalaqites. At this time, the following
revelation came down:

"Oh you believe, if a transgressor comes to you with news, try to
verify it, lest you inflict damage on people unwittingly; then you may
consequently regret your hasty action. (ch. 49, v.6)

Walid continued in his non-Islamic way for the rest of his life. He
used to drink wine and several witnesses testified to the Caliph that
they had witnessed Walid drunk while leading a congregational prayer.
Upon the testimony of good witnesses, Walid was lashed eighty times and
was dismissed by the Caliph. The Caliph was expected to replace this
transgressor with a good companion of the Prophet but, instead, he
replaced Walid with Sa'id Ibn al-As, one of his Umayyad relatives.

**The Companions Of Medina Wrote To The Companions Outside Medina**

Al -Tabari reported that when people witnessed what 'Uthman had done,
the companions living in Medina wrote to the companions living in other
provinces:

"You have left Medina to endeavor in the way of God and promote the
religion of Muhammad. The religion of Muhammad has been corrupted. Come
back and straighten the religion of Muhammad."

The companions came from every province and killed the Caliph.
(Al-Tabari, al-Ta'rikh, part 4, page 367)

**Talhah**

Talhah Ibn Ubaydullah was one of the biggest agitators against 'Uthman.
It is reported that Imam Ali said to Talhah:

"I ask you in the name of Allah to deter people from attacking
'Uthman."

Talhah retorted: "No, by God, until the Umayyad returns to the people
their rights." 'Uthman was the head of the Umayyads. (Al-Tabari, page
405)

'Uthman was besieged in Medina while Imam Ali was in Khaybar. The Imam
came to Medina and found people gathering at the residence of Talhah,
one of the influential people in Medina. 'Uthman came to Imam Ali and
said:

"You owe me my Islamic right and the right of potherhood and
relationship. If I have none of these rights and if I were in the
pre-Islamic era, it would still be a shame for a descendant of Abd-Manaf
(of whom both Ali and 'Uthman are descendants) to let a man of Taym
(Talhah) rob us of our authority." Imam Ali said to 'Uthman: "You shall
be informed of what I do." The Imam went to Talhah's house. There were a
lot of people there. Imam Ali spoke to Talhah saying: "Talhah, what is
this predicament in which you have fallen?"

Talhah said: "Abu al-Hasan, it is too late." The Imam went to the
treasury and ordered people to open it. Unable to find the key, he poke
the door and distributed some of the money among the people. People then
deserted Talhah. 'Uthman was very pleased.

Talhah came to 'Uthman and said: "Amir Al-Mu'minin, I tried to do
something but Allah prevented me from doing it."

'Uthman said: "By God, you did not come as repenter; you came only
because you were defeated. May God punish you for your intention." (Ibn
Al-Athir, AI-Kamil, part 3, page 84).

Al-Tabari reported in his history that when 'Uthman was besieged, Ibn
Abbas came to see him. 'Uthman said: "Ibn Abbas, come with me." He made
him listen to some of the conversations among the besiegers outside the
house. They witnessed Talhah pass and ask the people: "Where is Ibn
'Udays (the leader of the Egyptian revolters)?"

Ibn 'Udays came and conferred secretly with Talhah. Ibn 'Udays then
returned to his group and said: "Do not let anyone enter or leave
'Uthman's house."

'Uthman said to Ibn Abbas: "This is an order from Talhah. God, I ask
Thee to take care of Talhah Ibn Ubaydullah. He instigated these people
against me. By God, I hope his share of the caliphate is zero and that
his blood is shed." (Al-Tabari, part 4, page 379)

**'Aishah**

Talhah was not the only collaborator against 'Uthman. His cousin,
'A'ishah, was collaborating and campaigning against 'Uthman as well. She
was hopeful that Talhah would be the successor to 'Uthman. She said to
Ibn Abbas while both were performing the pilgrimage:

"Ibn Abbas, you are endowed with an effective tongue. I ask you in the
name of God not to try to scatter people away from Talhah by putting
doubt in their minds. The situation of 'Uthman has become obvious.
People have come from many locations for something big that is about to
happen. I know that Talhah Ibn Ubaydullah has acquired the keys of the
treasury houses. If Talhah succeeds 'Uthman, he will follow the path of
his cousin Abu Bakr . . ." (Al- Tabari, page 407)

Al-Baladhuri in his history (Ansab Al-Ashraf) said that when the
situation became extremely grave, 'Uthman ordered Marwan Ibn Al-Hakam
and Abdul Rahman Ibn Attab Ibn Asid to try to dissuade 'A'ishah from
campaigning against him. They went to her while she was preparing to
leave for pilgrimage and said:

"We pray that you stay in Medina and that Allah may through you save
this man ('Uthman)."

'A'ishah said: "I have prepared my means of transportation and vowed to
perform the pilgrimage. By God, I shall not honor your request."

Marwan and Ibn Attab stood up and Marwan said: "Bishr built the fire to
stir up the people against me; and when the fire became large he left
the scene."

'A'ishah said:

"Marwan, I wish that he ('Uthman) was in one of my sacks, and that I
could carry him. I would then throw him into the sea." (AI-Baladhuri,
part 1 of Vol.4, page 75)

Certainly the revolution against the Third Caliph started in Medina,
not in Basra, Kufa, or Egypt. The prominent people of Medina are the
ones who wrote to those outside of Medina and instigated them against
'Uthman. To say that a Jew named Ibn Saba is the one who inspired people
to revolt against the Caliph is not logical unless we say he is the one
who inspired 'A'ishah, Talhah, and Zubayr to revolt. But those who speak
of Ibn Saba and his role do not include 'A'ishah and the people of her
position as followers of Ibn Saba.

The alleged role of Ibn Saba, in the revolt against 'Uthman, would also
be credible if we were to say that Ibn Saba was the one who persuaded
the Caliph to follow a path contrary to that of the first two Caliphs,
and that he was the one who advised 'Uthman to give Islamic funds to his
relatives and appoint them governors of Islamic provinces.

The manner in which 'Uthman conducted the affairs of the Islamic State
gave 'A'ishah, along with Talhah, Zubayr, and others, reason to
instigate the Muslims against 'Uthman. However, those who attribute the
revolution against 'Uthman to Ibn Saba do not accept that Ibn Saba was
the one who advised 'Uthman to follow that wrong policy. They are
correct, because that alleged Jew never existed except in the
imagination of Sayf Ibn 'Umar Al-Tamimi.

It is amazing that such an important role in the revolution against
'Uthman is attributed to a man whose existence has no evidence. Yet
historians forget the important role which was played by a person well
known in Islamic history, namely: Amr Ibn Al-As. He was more intelligent
and more clever than any Jew that ever existed in that era. Amr had all
the reasons to conspire against the Caliph and he had all the abilities
to instigate most of the Medinite personalities against him.

**Amr Ibn Al-As**

Amr Ibn Al-As was one of the most dangerous agitators against 'Uthman.
He was the governor of Egypt during the reign of the second Caliph.
However, the Third Caliph dismissed him and replaced him with his foster
pother Abdullah Ibn Sa'd Ibn Abi Sarh. Amr became extremely hostile
towards 'Uthman. He returned to Medina and started a malicious campaign
against the Third Caliph, accusing him of many wrong doings. 'Uthman
blamed Amr and spoke to him harshly. This made Amr even more bitter. He
used to meet Zubayr and Talhah and conspire against 'Uthman. He used to
meet the pilgrims and inform them of the numerous deviations of 'Uthman.
When 'Uthman was besieged, Amr left Medina and went to Palestine. He
rested in an area called Al-Saba. He dwelt in a palace called Al-Ajlan.
He would repeatedly say "I wonder what news is coming about 'Uthman."

While he was at his palace accompanied by his two sons Muhammad and
Abdullah, along with Salamah Ibn Zanba'a Al-Juthami, a traveler passed
by. Amr called him and the following conversation took place:

Q. Where did you come from?

A. From Medina.

Q. What is 'Uthman doing?

A. I left him heavily besieged.

As soon as Amr finished his conversation with the traveler, another
traveler appeared. Amr asked:

Q. What is 'Uthman doing?

A. He was killed.

Amr retorted saying:

"I am Abu Abdullah. When I scratch an ulcer, I cut it. I used to
campaign against him vehemently. I even instigated the shepherds at the
top of the mountains to revolt against him."

Salamah Ibn Zanba'a Al-Juthami said:

"You, the Qurayshites, have poken a strong door between yourselves and
the Arabs. Why did you do this?"

Amr answered: "We wanted to ping the truth out of the falsehood."
(AI-Tabari, part 4, pages 356-57)

The dividers of Muslims ignored what is well-known in the history of
Islam and which was reported by a host of good reporters. The revolution
against 'Uthman was a result of the efforts of prominent personalities
in Medina, such as 'A'ishah, Talhah, Zubayr, Abdul Rahman Ibn Awf, and
Amr Ibn Al-As. Instead of attributing the revolution to real people who
rebelled against 'Uthman and pought about the revolution, the dividers
of the Muslims refuse to accept the truth or mention it. They attribute
the revolution to an imaginary Jew, relying on the report of Sayf Ibn
'Umar Al-Tamimi, a man who was accused by prominent Sunni scholars to be
a man of lies and deviations. They chose to accept Sayf's report in
order to cover up for the Caliph, 'A'ishah, Talhah, and Zubayr.

It is even more amazing that 'A'ishah, Talhah, Zubayr, and Mu'awiyah
Ibn Abi Sufyan fought the Imam in two wars, unprecedented in the history
of Islam. They were the most zealous to smear the reputation of Imam Ali
and his followers. Yet the opponents of Imam Ali did not accuse his
supporters of being students of Ibn Saba.

History clearly states that Mu'awiyah commanded all the Imams of the
mosques throughout the Muslim World to curse Imam Ali at every Friday
prayer. If the imaginary Ibn Saba had any small role in the revolution
against 'Uthman, Mu'awiyah would have made it the main topic of his
defamation campaign against the Imam and his supporters. He would have
publicized throughout the Muslim World that those who killed 'Uthman
were students of Ibn Saba and that they were the ones who pought Ali to
power. However, neither Mu'awiyah nor 'A'ishah took this route because
Ibn Saba's story was invented by Sayf Ibn 'Umar Al-Tamimi who lived in
the second Hijra century after their death.

**Who Started The Battle Of Basra?**

The circulators of false accusations against the followers of the
members of the House of the Prophet say that the followers of Ibn Saba
started the battle of Basra at night just before the negotiations
between Imam Ali and his three opponents ('A'ishah, Talhah, and Zubayr)
were about to succeed. They started the battle at night by attacking the
two armies simultaneously in order to make them plunge into battle. This
would abort the peaceful efforts whose stipulations were supposed to
include the punishment of 'Uthman's killers. This allegation is opposed
to many clear historical facts of which the following events were
recorded by Al-Tabari in his history (part 4).

(1). Al-Shi'abi reported the following:

"The right side of Amir Al-Mu'mineen 's army attacked the left side of
Basra's army. They fought each other and people resorted to 'A'ishah and
most of them were from Dabba and Al-Azd tribes."

"The Battle started after sunrise and continued until afternoon. This
means that the fight did not start during the night as the inventors of
Ibn Saba claim. The Basrites were defeated and a man from the tribe of
Al-Azd said:

'Come back and attack.' Muhammad, son of Imam Ali (Ibn Al-Hanafiyya),
hit him with his sword and severed his hand. The man shouted: 'Azdites,
run away.' When the Azdites were overwhelmed by the army of the Imam,
the Azdites shouted: 'We belong to the religion of Ali Ibn Abi Talib.' "
(Al- Tabari, page 312)

(2). The report of Qatadah said:

"When the two armies faced each other, Zubayr appeared on his horse
while he was well armed. People said to the Imam, 'This is Zubayr.' The
Imam said: Zubayr is the more expected of the two to remember God, if he
is reminded." Talhah also came to face the Imam. When Imam Ali faced
them, he said:

"Certainly you have prepared arms, horses, and men. Did you prepare an
excuse for the Day of Judgement when you meet your Lord? Fear God and do
not be like the lady who unravels her weaving after she had woven it
strongly. Was I not your pother and you used to believe in the sanctity
of my blood? Did anything happen to make it legal for you to shed my
blood?

Talhah said:

"You have instigated people against 'Uthman," Imam Ali retorted,
quoting from the Qur'an:

"On the Day of Judgement, Allah will pay them their just due, and they
will know that He (Allah) is the Manifest truth."

The Imam continued:

"Talhah, you are fighting for the blood of 'Uthman? May God curse those
who killed 'Uthman.

"Zubayr, do you remember the day when you passed by with the Messenger
of God at Banu Ghunam and he looked at me and smiled? I smiled back at
him and you said to him: 'Ibn Abi Talib is always conceited.' The
Messenger of God said to you: 'He is not conceited, and you shall fight
him unjustly."'

Zubayr retorted:

"By God, this is true. Had I remembered that, I would not have made
this journey. By God, I shall never fight you."

Zubayr left and informed 'A'ishah and his son Abdullah that he took an
oath never to fight Imam Ali. His son counseled him to fight the Imam
and pay atonement. Zubayr agreed and made his atonement by freeing his
slave Makhul. (Al-Tabari, pages 501-502)

This event tells us that Talhah and Zubayr confronted the Imam before
the start of the battle, and the confrontation was in the day time
rather than at night. Otherwise, people could not have seen the
confrontation or heard the conversation between the Imam and his
opponents. We are sure that there was no electricity for light, nor was
there any voice amplifier to make conversations heard.

Since the conversation and the confrontation took place before the
start of the battle, it is clear that the report of Sayf about the
battle starting during the dark night is a sheer lie.

(3). Al-Zuhri reported that Imam Ali had a dialogue with Zubayr and
Talhah before the battle. He said that the Imam said:

"Zubayr, do you fight me for the blood of 'Uthman after you killed him?
(by his instigation) May God give the most hostile to 'Uthman among us
the consequence which he dislikes. He said to Talhah: 'Talhah, you have
pought the wife of the Messenger of God ('A'ishah) to use her for war
and hid your wife at your house (in Medina)! Did you not give me your
allegiance?"'

Talhah said:

"I gave you the allegiance while the sword was on my neck."

At this point, the Imam tried to invite them to peace, leaving them no
excuse. He addressed his army saying:

"Who among you will display this Qur'an and what is in it to the
opposing army with the understanding that if he loses his hand he will
hold the Qur'an with his other hand...?"

A youth from Kufa said: "I will take the mission."

The Imam went through his army offering them the mission. Only the
youth accepted it. The Imam said to him:

"Exhibit this Qur'an and say to them: 'It is between you and us from
its beginning to its end. Remember God, and spare your blood and our
blood."'

As the youth called upon them to resort to the Qur'an and surrender to
its judgement, the Basrites attacked and killed him. At this time, Imam
Ali said to his army: "Now the fight has become legal." The battle
started. (Al-Tabari, page 905)

All these reports clearly indicate that the battle started in the day
time rather than at night, as Sayf Ibn 'Umar has alleged. Had the
confrontation between Imam Ali and Talhah and Zubayr taken place at
night, it would have had no benefit because the two armies would not
have been able to witness it or hear their conversation. Also, the
confrontation between the carrier of the Holy Qur'an and the Basrites
would have been useless. None of the opposing soldiers could have seen
the Qur'an in the hands of the young man at night.

Furthermore, the alleged agreement between the Imam and the three
leaders, to punish the ones who shared in 'Uthman's murder, would be
logical only if the three leaders were serious in seeking punishment for
the killers. But the three leaders were the main agitators who induced
people to kill the Third Caliph.

Had the revolters elected Talhah or Zubayr instead of the Imam as
Caliph, they would have given the killers of 'Uthman the biggest prize.
Certainly the leaders did not seek revenge for the blood of 'Uthman.
They only pretended to do that as a means of destroying the Imam's
caliphate.


