Preamble
========

**In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent the Merciful**

All praise belongs to the Lord of the worlds, Who bestowed upon us
guidance, grace and power, and Who favoured His bondmen with all good in
order to be righteous. He is enough for whoever relying upon Him,
protecting him against the devils’ stratagem, while those diverting from
His straight path shall verily be among the frustrated and defeated.

Benediction and peace be upon the one delegated as a mercy for all the
worlds, the supporter of the oppressed and those reckoned feeble, the
beloved of the needy who believed in Allah, out of desire for the
rewards that Allah the Glorified — has prepared for His truthful
bondmen...And also upon his good and pure Household, whose status is
elevated over all other creatures, so as to be a good example for the
gnostic, a beacon of guidance, and ship of deliverance, of which whoever
stays behind will be verily among the perished ones.

God’s pleasure and assent be upon the Prophet’s good Companions, who
swore allegiance to and aided him against his enemies, never being among
the covenant-breakers, and those who kept abide by the covenant, never
altering or reversing, and being among the grateful... and also upon
those who kindly followed their guide, from among the earlier and latter
(people) till the Day of Resurrection.

My Lord! Dilate my bosom, ease my affair, and untie a knot of my tongue
so that my words will be comprehended.  
 My Lord! Make the truth, with which you guide Your faithful bondmen, be
revealed for whoever reads my book, and open his insight.

In the beginning, my book, “Then I was Guided” was encountered with good
approval among dear readers, who, furnished us with some significant
remarks regarding miscellaneous subjects in the book, asking for more
details concerning the issues that created controversy among a large
number of Muslims — Sunnah and Shi‘ah.

So, for the sake of eliminating any ambiguity and obscurity about this
matter, for those seeking to reach the truth and be acquainted with the
minute details of the issue, I have compiled this book with the same
style I followed in the former one, so that the equitable researcher can
easily attain to truth through its nearest routes, as I have reached it
through investigation and analogy. I have named the book — with Allah’s
blessing — To be with Truthful (Ma‘a al-Sādiqin), deriving it from the
saying of the Almighty:

***"O ye who believe! Be careful of your duty to Allah, and be with the
truthful." (Qur’ān, Sura at-Tawba, 9:1l9)***

And is there anyone among Muslims ready to refuse or abstain from being
with those truthful ones!

This was in fact my own belief, and the fact I am trying to elucidate
for others, as possible as I can, without dictating my opinion upon the
others, but with full respect for others’ opinions. And Allah alone is
the Guide, and He is to take the custody of the upright people.

Some people have opposed the title of my previous book “Then I was
Guided”, due to its implying an abstruseness entailing contemplation and
wondering, whether others are misguided, and what indication is got from
that misguidance when that meaning being intended? For this objection I
give the following clarifying reply:

First: The word dalātah (strayal) is referred to in the Holy Qur’ān to
mean forgetfulness, when the Almighty said:

***“He said: The knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a book, my Lord
errs not, nor does He forget” (Sura Ta-Ha, 20:52).***

He — the Glorified the Exalted — also said:

***“...so that if one of the two errs, the second of the two may remind
the other…”(Sura al-Baqara, 2:282)***

Further the word *dalālah* is cited in the Holy Qur’ān to indicate the
state of investigation, searching and questing, when Allah, the Almighty
addressed His Holy Messenger by saying:

***“And find you lost (that is, unrecognized by men) and guide (them to
you)?” (Sura ad-Duha,93:7),***

meaning that He found you looking for truth and He guided you toward it.
From the biography of the Prophet (Allah’s peace and benediction be upon
him and his progeny), it is known that he, before the descent of the
Revelation (wahy) over him, used to desert his folk at Makkah seeking
seclusion in the Cave of Harra,’ for many long nights looking for truth.

Out of this meaning too, the Prophet (S) is reported to have said:
*Wisdom is the lost property of a true believer; wherever he may come
across it, he is the one who deserves it most.* And this the very
meaning implied in the title of my first book.

Second: Supposedly the title implies the meaning of deviation that comes
versus the guidance, which we intend to refer to intellectually, in
order to obtain the right Islamic trend and plain course, that leads us
toward the straightforward path, as commented by some readers, then let
it be so. This is the abstract truth that some fear facing it with a
constructive sport spirit, and creative objective breath... and whose
conception goes in line with the Messenger’s (S) saying:  
 “*I am leaving behind among you two precious things (Thaqalayn): the
Book of Allah and my Kindred (‘Itrah) my Ahl al-Bayt. As long as you
adhere to them you will never go astray after me.*”

This tradition (hadith), explicitly and expressly refers to the going
astray of whoever not adhering to both the Book and the ‘*Itrah.*

Anyhow, I am certain that I have been, with Allah’s favour and grace,
guided to hold on to the Book of Allah and the Kindred of the Messenger
(may Allah’s benediction and peace be, upon him and his progeny) All
praise be to Allah, who guided us toward this (path), and we would have
never been guided (to it) had not Allah guided us... the messengers of
our Lord have been delegated with truth.

The titles of my first and second books are derived from the Holy
Qur’ān, which is the most truthful and best of speech. And all the
information I compiled in both the books, if not being true, they be
nearer to truth, as being among that upon which all Muslims Sunnah and
Shi‘ah — have concurred, and whose veracity was approved by the two
sects. As a result, I produced — thanks to Allah — these two books —
"...*Then I was Guided*," and "*To be with the Truthful*."

I implore Allah to guide the *Ummah* of Muhammad (S), so as to be the
best *Ummah* and able to take the leadership of the whole world toward
light and right path, under the standard of the awaited at-’Imām
al-Mahdi, with whom we were promised by his grandfather, to fill the
earth with justice and equity after it was filled with oppression and
tyranny, and so that Allah shall perfect His light, however much the
disbelievers are averse.

***The Author***


