Imitation (Taqlid)
==================

The Shi’ah hold: Regarding branches of religion (furu‘ al-Din), which
represent the rules of Shari‘ah (Islamic Law) related to worship acts
like: salāt, sawm (fasting), zakāt and hajj, for whose rules the
following conditions are obligatory:

a. Man should exert himself and strive to deduce rules from its valid
sources, if being competent for this.

b. Or either he can take precaution in all of his acts if it be in his
capacity.

c. Or otherwise he should imitate a mujtahid possessing full
qualifications, on condition that he (mujtahid) be: alive, sane, just,
knowledgeable, and who safeguards his soul, takes care of his Din,
opposes his desires, and obeys the commands of his Lord.

Ijtihād in the sub-laws being a kifā’i obligation on all the Muslims,
when any full-qualified one performs it, other Muslims will be exempted
from it, and it is permissible for them to imitate him and refer to him
regarding branches of religion. Because the position of ijtihād can
never be attained so easily, or be accessible for all people, but rather
requires abundance of time, sciences, knowledge and capability, the
characteristics that can never be possessed but only by whoever toiling
and striving hard, spending his life in investigation and seeking
knowledge.

Ijtihād can never be acquired and attained but only by that who is lord
of rare good fortune.  
 The Prophet (S) said:  
 “When Allah intends good for anyone, He shall make him learned in
religion.”  
 There is no difference between this opinion of the Shi’ah and that of
the Sunnah, except in respect of the condition of the mujtahid’s being
alive.  
 But the manifest disagreement between them lies in applying taqlid. The
Shi’ah believe that the qualified mujtahid being the viceroy of the
(12th) Imam (‘a) during his occultation, and he shall be the ruler and
absolute chief, entitled to whatever be in the capacity of the Imam, in
settling the disputes regarding all issues and judging among people, and
that who contradicts him is contradicting the Imam.

The qualified mujtahid, in the perspective of the Shi’ah, is not only a
reference (marji‘) to be referred to in cases of giving verdicts, but
also he enjoys all-inclusive *wilāyah* (guardianship) over his
imitators, who refer to him in respect of rules (ahkām), settling all
the disputes and differences among them in judicial matters, handing him
the zakāt and khums of their properties and funds, to dispose of them as
ordained in the Shari‘ah, on behalf of the Imam of Time (peace be upon
him).

While, the mujtahid does not enjoy this position in the perspective of
Ahl al-Sunnah, who refer in the jurisprudential questions to one of the
four imāms, leaders of the schools of thought (madhāhib): Abu Hanifah,
Mālik, al-Shāfi‘i and Ahmad ibn Hanbal. The contemporary Sunnis may not
abide by imitating anyone of these four in particular, as they may take
the rules for some of their questions from one of them and some others
from another one, according to what their needs necessitate, as
practised by Sayyid Sābiq who composed a fiqh derived from the four
leaders.

And since the Sunnis believe that blessing lies in their disagreement,
so the Māliki is entitled, for instance, to refer to Abu Hanifah when
finding near him the solution for the problem he has, that may not be
found near Mālik.  
 I will cite an example to demonstrate for the reader so as to be able
to conceive the meaning.

In Tunisia (during the epoch of judicial courts) there was a mature girl
who fell in love with some man and intended to get married to him. But
her father refused to marry her to that youth, for a reason God knows
alone. Then the girl fled her father’s house and got married to that
young man, without taking the permission of her father. The father
lodged a suit against that marriage.

When the girl and her husband were summoned and brought before the
judge, he asked her about the cause behind her escaping from her
father’s house, and getting married without the permission of her
guardian (wali). She replied: Sir, I am twenty-five years old, and I
desired to marry this man according to the Sunnah of Allah and His
Messenger; and since my father intends to marry me to someone I dislike,
so I married in accordance with the opinion of Abu Hanifah, who gives me
the right to marry the one I love, as I am full-grown (adult).

The judge (who himself narrated this story to me) — may God’s mercy be
upon him — says: “When we considered and investigated the case, we found
her claim to be right, and I think that one of the well-aware ‘ulamā’
has taught her what to say”. The judge says: Then I rebutted the
father’s complaint and endorsed the marriage (judged it to be correct).
So the father departed the court being at loss, reiterating these words:
“The she-dog became Hanafi”, i.e his daughter has abandoned Mālik and
followed Abu Hanifah, and the word “she-dog” (kalbah) implies an insult
to his daughter, from whom he has disowned later on.

The issue stems from the difference in the ijtihād of the schools. As
Mālik is of the opinion that the marriage of the maiden girl (bikr) can
never be valid but only with the permission of her guardian (wali), and
even when she be a thayyib (that is, a girl who has had sexual
intercourse), he will be her partner in marriage, and she is not allowed
to decide to marry anyone without his consent. Whereas Abu Hanifah holds
that the sane, grown-up female is competent to choose her husband and to
contract marriage, irrrespective of being a maiden or a thayyib.

So this fiqhi issue has caused to separate between the father and his
daughter, to the extent that he declared his disavowal of her. Very
often fathers used to disown of their daughters for several reasons, one
of which being to flee home with the man with whom she likes to get
married. This sort of disowning entails inconvenient consequences, as
the father most often may resort to deprive his daughter from her right
to inherit him, so as the girl remaining to be an enemy to her brothers
who, in turn, would disown their sister who brought them shame.

Hence the truth is not as claimed by Ahl al-Sunnah that blessing
(rahmah) lies in their disagreement, or at the least, blessing can never
be implied in all the controversial matters.

Moreover, there is another point of dispute between them, which is
imitation of the dead mujtahid (taqlid al-mayyit). The Sunnis imitate
imāms who died several centuries ago, closing the door of ijtihād since
that era, and all the ‘ulamā’ succeeding them would be content with the
expositions (shuruh), and whatever written in poetry and prose from the
fiqh of the four schools of thought. Then some of the contemporary
‘ulamā’ began to call for opening the doors and restoration the practice
of ijtihād, due to what the time requirements necessitating, and to find
solutions for new questions and issues that were unknown during the
lifetime of the four imāms (leaders of Sunni schools).

Whereas the Shi’ah never permit (anyone) to imitate the dead mujtahid
(for the first time), referring in all their rules to the alive mujtahid
possessing all the necessary qualifications we mentioned previously,
during the occultation of the Infallible Imam, who charged them to refer
to the equitable ‘ulamā’ in the time of his occultation (ghaybah) till
his reappearance.

The Sunni Māliki, for instance, may declare: This thing is lawful
(halāl) and that thing is forbidden (harām) according to the belief of
al-’Imām Mālik, who is dead more than twelve centuries ago. The same
claim is uttered by the followers of the Hanafi, Shāfi‘i and Hanbali
schools, since these four leaders lived contem prory, with each one of
them learning under the hand of the other. Besides, the follower of any
of the Sunni schools never believes in the infallibility of these four
leaders (imāms), who never claimed this trait for themselves, but
believing in the possibility to err and to be correct. Besides, they
claim that they are worth rewarding in all their exertions of opinion
(ijtihādat), deserving two rewards in case of being right, and one
reward in case of being wrong.

While the Imāmi Shi’i, for instance, has two stages in taqlid
(imitation):

**First Stage:** Which being during the lifetime of the Twelve Imams
that extended for almost three and a half centuries. During that epoch,
every follower of the Shi’i school was imitating the Infallible Imam,
who never speaks out of his opinion or ijtihād, but through knowledge
and narrations he inherited from his grandfather (S), saying regarding
any issue: My father has reported from my grandfather, from Gabriel,
from Allah, the Glorified and Mighty.

**Second Stage:** Which represents the time of occultation that extended
up to the present time. Every Shi’i says: This thing is halāl and that
one is harām according to the opinion held by al-Sayyid al-Khu’i or
al-Sayyid al-Khumayni, for instance, who both being alive, and their
opinion never exceeds striving (ijtihād) in deducing the laws from the
texts of the Qur’ān and Prophetic Sunnah, depending on the traditions of
Ahl al-Bayt Imams at first, and after them the trustees among the
Companions. The reason behind their discussing the traditions of Ahl
al-Bayt Imams at first, lies in the fact that these Imams refuse the use
of opinion in respect of Shari‘ah (Islamic Law), observing: There is
nothing but a judgement was revealed regarding it by Allah. When we lack
the law (hukm) on any issue, this never means that it is neglected by
Allah, the Glorified, but our inadequacy and ignorance prevented us from
being able to recognize the hukm (law) of the issue. Ignorance of
anything and inability to realize it can never be an evidence indicating
its non-existence, as stated by Allah, the Glorified in the Holy Qur’ān:

***“We have not neglected in the Book (the Qur’ān) anything ....”
(6:38)***


