Doctrines with which Ahl al-Sunnah Revile the Shi‘ah
====================================================

Among the creeds and beliefs with which Ahl al-Sunnah defame the Shi‘ah,
there are some which merely being resulted from the abominable
partisanship, created by the Umayyads and ‘Abbāsids in the early epoch
fo Islam, out of their grudge and hatred against al-’Imām ‘Ali, to the
extent that they kept on cursing him on the tribunes for forty years.

So no wonder to see them slandering and extremely disgracing everyone
following him, to the extent that anyone of them preferred to be called
a Jew than to be called a Shi’i. And their followers kept on this
practice in every age and region, with the Shi’i being subject to be
reviled all the time by Ahl al-Sunnah, since he contradicts them in
their beliefs and is regarded a renegade against their company. They
used to calumniate him with all sorts of slanders, charging him with all
accusations, calling him with numerous (bad) nicknames, and
contradicting him in all his sayings and acts.

Some of the well-known Sunni ‘ulamā’ say: “Putting on the finger-ring in
the right hand being a Prophetic sunnah (habit), but it should be
abandoned since the Shi‘ah made out of it a motto for them.[^1]

Further, Hujjatul Islam Abu Hāmid al-Ghazzāli says: Flattening the
graves is legitimately prescribed by Islam, but when the Rufiddah
(Shi‘ah) made it a motto for them we substituted it with tasnim (making
large humps).

Also Ibn Taymiyyah, who is labelled by some of them with the epithet
al-Muslih al-Mujaddid (the Reviving Reformer), says: Hence, several
fuqahā’ embarked on abandoning some of the recommended acts
(mustahabbāt), when noticing that they were turned to a motto for the
Shi’ah. Though abandoning these acts is not obligatory, but
demonstrating these acts would mean resembling them (the Shi‘ah), so as
no one would distinguish between the Sunni and the Rāfidi, and the
convenience in being distinguished from them for the sake of forsaking
and contradicting them is greater than the convenience implied in the
recommended act.[^2]

When asked about the way of lowering the turban, al-Hāfiz al-‘Iraqi
said: I have never come across any evidence indicating the specification
of the right side, but only in an unauthentic (da‘if) hadith reported by
al-Tabarrāni. And as estimated through his prophecy, it might be that he
used to let it down on the right side turning it then to the left as
practised by some. But since this practice turned to be a distinguishing
motto for the Imāmiyyah, so it should be abandoned and left in order to
evade being resembled to them.[^3]

Glorified is Allah! And there is neither might nor power but in God!
Everyone can observe clearly how the bigotry allows these so-called
‘ulamā’ to contradict the Prophet’s Sunnah, while the Shi’ah have
adhered to those sunan (precepts) till becoming a motto for them.
Furthermore they see no interdiction in confessing this practice
frankly. Praise belongs to Allah Who manifested the truth to everyone
having foresight and sincerely seeking for truth. Praise be Allah’s Who
demonstrated to us that the true followers of the Sunnah of the
Messenger of Allah being thet Shi’ah as you yourselves testified! As you
gave witness against yourselves that you neglected the Messenger’s
Sunnah in purpose, so as to contradict the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt and
their devoted Shi‘ah, and followed the sunnah of Mu‘āwiyah ibn Abi
Sufyān, as testified by al-’Imām al-Zamakhshari when proving that the
first to put on a ring in the left hand, contrary to the Prophetic
Sunnah, was Mu‘āwiyah ibn Abi Sufyān.[^4]

You also followed the sunnah of ‘Umar in his innovation of al-tarawih
prayers, contrary to the Prophetic Sunnah that commanded the Muslims to
perform the supererogatory prayers (nāfilah) by ones (furādā) at home,
not congregationally, as by al-Bukhāri in his Sahih,[^5] and as
confessed by ‘Umar himself of its being a bid‘ah (heresy)[^6] innovated
by him, without being performed by him since he never believed in it. It
is reported by al-Bukhāri, from ‘Abd al-Rahmān ibn ‘Abd al-Qāri, that he
said: I went out with ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb, during one of the nights of
the Month of Ramadān the mosque, when we noticed people separated into
groups, with some man praying alone once and also praying as a leader
(imām) being followed by a multitude of people. Thereat ‘Umar said: I
opine that gathering all these people under one reciter (qāri’), will be
more proper and better. Then he (‘Umar) gathered them to follow Ubayy
ibn Ka’b (in performing supererogatory prayers). ‘Abd al-Rahmān added:
The next night I went out with him (‘Umar), and we found people perform
their prayers through following their reciter (leader), when ‘Umar said:
What a good bid‘ah (heresy) is this! ....[^7]

What arouses our wonder in this respect is considering it a bounty
(ni‘mah) after it was forbidden by the Messenger? That was when they
exclaimed loudly, after gathering in front of the door of his house (the
Prophet’s) asking him to lead them in performing the nāfilah prayer of
the Month of Ramadān. He (S) went out, furious and angry, saying to
them:

“The making of your hands is still pushing you till I thought it to be
prescribed on you. You have to abide by performing prayers (nāfilah) in
your houses, as the best prayer of man being in his house, except the
prescribed (obligatory) prayers.”[^8]

Further, you followed the sunnah of ‘Uthmān ibn ‘Affān, which calls for
completing the prayers during travel (four-rak‘ah prayers), contrary to
the Sunnah of the Messenger (S) who used to perform it (travel prayer)
in two rak‘ahs (qasr).[^9]

Had I intended to enumerate all the rules in which you contradicted the
Messenger’s Sunnah, it would need a separate book, but we suffice with
your witness through what you confessed against yourselves. Sufficient
is also your testimony through your confession that the Rafidite Shi’ah
have taken the Prophet’s Sunnah as a motto for them.

After all these evidences, will there remain any reason to admit the
ignorants claiming that the Shi‘ah have followed ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib,
while Ahl al-Sunnah have followed the Messenger of Allah? Do these
people want to prove that ‘Ali contradicted the Messenger of Allah, and
invented a new religion? What a greatly slandering word coming out from
their mouths! ‘Ali is verily the very incarnation, interpreter and
guardian of the Prophetic Sunnah, and in his regard the Messenger of
Allah (S) said:
“The position ‘Ali has to me is the same that I have to my Lord.”[^10]

That is, in the same way as Muhammad (S) being the only one propagating
on behalf of his Lord, so also is ‘Ali, being alone in propagating on
behalf of the Messenger of Allah. But the fault of ‘Ali lies in the fact
that he never acknowledged the caliphate of those predecessors, and the
fault of his followers (Shi’ah) being in their following his guide in
refusing to submit and be under the caliphate of Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and
‘Uthmān, the reason why they were called Rawafid.

If these people (Ahl al-Sunnah) deny the (Prophetic) Sunnah’s being
followed by the Shi’ah’s beliefs and sayings, it stems from two reasons:
The first being the animosity flared up by the Umayyad rulers through
spreading falsities and publicities, and composing fabricated
narrations.

The second reason being that the Shi’ah’s doctrines contradict their
(Sunnah’s) opinions in supporting the caliphs and confirming their
blunders and ijtihādat (exertions of opinion) against the texts (nusus),
particularly the Umayyad rulers, at the head of whom being Mu‘āwiyah ibn
AbiSufyān.

Hence, every truth-seeker, following up the matter, will find out that
the dispute between the Shi’ah and Ahl al-Sunnah originated, in fact,
since the Saqifah Day, and exacerbated afterwards, and every dispute
erupted after it is verily dependent on and stemmed from it. The best
evidence for this being that the beliefs and creeds with which Ahl
al-Sunnah vilify their brethren the Shi’ah, are firmly relevant with and
ramifying from the issue of caliphate, like the number of the Imams, the
text in determining the Imam, infallibility, the Imams’ knoweldge, the
badā’, taqiyyah (dissimulation), and the Promised al-Mahdi, beside other
beliefs.

Investigating the claims of the two parties in an unprejudiced way, we
will never see any long distance between their beliefs, finding no
justification for this exaggeration and vilification. As when you read
the books of the Sunnah in which they revile the Shi’ah, you will
imagine that the Shi’ah have contradicted Islam, and violated its
principles and legislations, inventing another religion.

While any equitable researcher will find in the Shi’ah’s doctrines, a
firm origin in the Qur’ān and Sunnah, and even in the books of those
contracting them in these doctrines and vilifying them with.
Moreover, those doctrines never contain or imply anything contrary to
reason ('*Aql*), or narration (naql) or morals. For proving to you, dear
reader, the veracity of my claims, I will review with you those
doctrines (‘aqā’id).

(Belief in) Infallibility
-------------------------

The Shi’ah observe: The Imam — like the Prophet — should be infallible
against (perpetrating) all kinds of indecencies and vices, whether the
apparent or hidden ones, deliberately or out of forgetfulness, from
childhood till death.

Further, he should be immune against any lapse, erring and oblivion,
since the Imams are the guardians of the Islamic Law, and responsible
for bringing it into effect, exactly as the Prophet is. The evidence
that made us believe in the infallibility of the prophets being the same
one obligating us to believe in the infallibility of the Imams, with no
slight difference.

This is clearly the Shi’ah’s opinion regarding the issue of
infallibility (‘ismah). Does it contain anything contradicting the
Qur’ān and Sunnah? Or what can’t be imagined by reason? Or that which
disgraces and be detrimental to Islam, or belittling the status of the
Prophet or the Imam?

Far it be from it and verily it is not so; we never see in this saying
but a confirmation to the Book of Allah and His Prophet’s Sunnah, and
that which goes on with the sound reason, without contradicting it, but
rather that which elevates and honours the Prophet and the Imam.
We initiate our discussion with following up the Holy Qur’ān.
Allah, the Exalted, said:

***“Verily, verily God intendeth but to keep off from you (every kind
of) uncleanness O’ ye the people of the House, and purify you (with) a
thorough purification)....” (33:33)***

If removing the uncleanness that includes all kinds of mischiefs, and
purifying from all sins, do not denote ‘ismah, but what does it mean
then??
The Almighty Allah says:

***“Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil
thought from the Satan afflicteth them, they become mindful (of God and
get awakened) then lo! They see (aright).” (7:201)***

So if the pious believer bring protected by Allah against the stratagems
of the Satan, when trying to provoking and misleading him, so as to
become mindful and see the truth and follow it, what to say then
regarding those whom were chosen by Allah the Glorious, removing
uncleanness from and purifying them a thorough purification??
Allah says in another verse:

***“Then made We the inheritors of the Book (Qur’ān) those whom chose We
from among Our servants ...” (35:32).***

And undoubtedly that who is chosen by Allah, the Glorified, should be
immaculate from errors. By this verse, in particular, al-’Imām al-Ridā
(‘a) argued against the ‘ulamā’ gathered by the ‘Abbāsid Caliph
al-Ma’mun ibn Hārun al-Rashid, proving to them that they (Ahl al-Bayt
Imams) being verily the ones meant by the afore-mentioned verse, and
whom Allah has chosen and made inheritors of the knowledge of the Book,
whereat they (‘ulamā’) admitted and acknowledged that fact.[^11][^12]

These were some examples from the Holy Qur’ān, and other verses are
there indicating infallibility for the Imams, like His saying,
“....leaders guiding (the people) by Our command”, beside other verses,
but we suffice with these ones due to brevity.”

After the Holy Qur’ān, we cite some proofs from the Prophetic Sunnah:
The Messenger of Allah (S) said:
“O people, I am leaving among you that which if you hold on to, you
shall never go astray: the Book of Allah and my kindred, my
household.”[^13]

It is expressly indicating the Ahl al-Bayt Imams’ being infallible,
since: First, the Book of Allah is verily unassailable, that falsehood
cannot come at it from before it or from behind it, and is verily the
word of Allah, that whoever doubts it has in fact denied God. Second:
Due to the fact that the one holding on to them both (the Book and
‘Itrah) will be safe against astrayal and misguidance. So this hadith
indicated clearly that lapse can never be found in the Book and ‘Itrah.

The Messenger of Allah (S) has also said:
“Verily, the parable of my ahl al-bayt is that of the boat of Noah;
Whoever gets aboard it is saved, and whoever stays away from it is
drowned.”[^14]
As clearly seen, this hadith expressly stating that Ahl al-Bayt Imams
(‘a) being infallible against (committing) sins, so anyone getting
aboard their ark shall be saved, while that staying away from it shall
be drowned in misguidance (dalālah).

Further, the Messenger of Allah said:
“Whoever desires to live my life and dies my death, and enters the
heavens with which my Lord has promised me, which is the Land of the
Leal (jannat al-khuld), he should follow the guide of ‘Ali and his
offspring after him. They shall verily never take you out of the door of
guidance and never bring you into the door of dalālah
(misguidance).”[^15]

It is also expressly stating that the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, who are ‘Ali
and his progeny, being infallible against any lapse, since they never
bring their followers into misguidance. And it is intuitive that anyone
liable to commit a lapse, can never guide other people.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:
“I am the warner, and ‘Ali is the guide. And the rightly guided will be
guided by you O ‘Ali after me.”[^16]

Again this hadith explicitly shows the Imam’s being infallible, as it is
unhidden for those who have understanding.
Al-’Imām ‘Ali himself has proved infallibility to be enjoyed by him and
the Imams among his sons when he said:
“So wither are you going to, and how are you then turned away? Ensigns
(of guidance) are standing, indications (of virtue) are clear, and the
miracles (of light) have been fixed. Where are you being taken astray
and how are you groping while you have among you the descendants of the
Prophet? They are the reins of Right, ensigns of Faith and tongues of
truth. Accord to them the same good position as you accord to the
Qur’ān, and come to them (for quenching the thirst of guidance) as the
thirsty camels approach the water spring.

O’ people, take this saying of the last of the prophets that he who dies
from among us is not dead, and he who decays (after dying) from among us
does not really decay. Do not say what you do not understand, because
most of the Right is in what you deny. Accept the argument of one
against whom you have no argument. It is I. Did I not act before you on
the greater thaql (i.e. the Qur’ān) and did I not retain among you the
smaller thaql (al-thaql al-’asghar, i.e. the descendants of the
Prophet). I fixed among you the standard of faith...”[^17]

After all these statements and excerptions from the Holy Qur’ān, and the
Prophetic Sunnah, and sayings of al-’Imām ‘Ali all indicating the
infallibility of all Imams (peace be upon them), can the intellect
reject the ‘ismah of that who is chosen by Allah to guide (people)? The
reply is definitely. No it can’t refuse this.On the contrary, reason
('*Aql*) believes in the obligation of that 'ismah, due to the fact that
the one who is entrusted the task of leadership and guiding the mankind,
can never be an ordinary human being subject to laspe and oblivion,
burdened with sins and heavy guilts, so as to be vulnerable to
vilification and criticism of people.

Rather, the reason necessitates that he (the Imam) should be the most
knowledgeable, equitable, courageous and righteous of his time, the
characteristics elevating the position of the leader, and glorifying him
in the view of people. They too make all people to venerating and
appreciating, and consequently obeying them without any reservation or
adulation.

If so be the case, what causes all this vilification and exaggeration
against whoever believing in this?

When listening to and reading the Ahl al-Sunnah’s critisim regarding the
issue of infallibility, one will imagine that it is the Shi’ah who are
girding the badge of ‘ismah to whomever they wish, or that the one
believing in ‘ismah is claiming an abomination and blasphemy. Whereas
the truth is neither this nor that, but ‘ismah in the perspective of the
Shi’ah, is in fact the state in which the infallible should be favoured
with a Divine care and Lordly patronage, so that neither Satan can
seduce him, nor the soul enjoining unto evil can ever overcome his mind,
leading him toward (perpetrating) sins. And Allah has never denied His
pious bondmen this favour, as referred to in the verse:

***“Verily those who guard (themselves against evil) when an evil
thought from the Satan afflicteth them, they become mindful (of God and
get awakened) then lo! they see (aright).” (7:201)***

This provisional infallibility that is imparted upon Allah’s bondmen in
a certain case, might vanish with the loss of the cause originating it,
that is the taqwā (piety). As when the bondman being distant from piety
of Allah, he shall never be protected by Allah, while the Imam, who is
chosen by Allah the Glorified, never deviates or turns aside from taqwā
and God-fearing.
In the Holy Qur’ān a story is cited about our master Yusuf (peace be
upon him):

***“And indeed she longed for him, and he (also) would have longed for
her, had he not seen the evidence of his Lord; Thus it was that We turn
away from him evil and shameful deeds; Verily he was (one) of Our freed
servants.” (12:24)***

And since our Lord Yusuf hasn’t longed for adultery (zinā) as
interpreted by some exegetes, far be the prophets of Allah from such
abominable act, but he in fact intended to drive her back and, if
necessary, beat her. So Allah the Glorified prevented him from
(perpetrating) such a sin, since had he perpetrated it, it would have
been exploited as a plea to accusing him of corruption, so as to be a
strong proof against him, afflicting him with evil on the part of them.

Number of Imams (Ithnā ‘Ashar)
------------------------------

The Shi’ah hold that the number of the Infallible Imams, who succeeded
the Prophet (S), being twelve Imams, no more no less. They were
mentioned by the Messenger of Allah (S) by name and number,[^18] as
follows:

1. Al-’Imām ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib.
2. Al-’Imām al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali.
3. Al-’Imām al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali.
4. Al-’Imām ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (Zayn al-‘Abidin).
5. Al-’Imām Muhammad ibn ‘Ali (al-Bāqir).
6. Al-’Imām Ja’far ibn Muhammad (al-Sādiq).
7. Al-’Imām Musā ibn Ja‘far (al-KāZim)
8. Al-’Imām ‘Ali ibn Musā (al-Ridā).
9. Al-’Imām Muhammad ibn ‘Ali (al-Jawād).
10. Al-’Imām ‘Ali ibn Muhammad (al-Hādi).
11. Al-’Imām al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali (al-‘Askari).
12. Al-’Imām Muhammad ibn al-Hasan (al-Mahdi al-MuntaZar).

These are the Twelve Imams believed to be infallible by the Shi’ah, so
as Muslims not to be beguiled and deceived. The Shi’ah, long ago and
recently, never acknowledge anyone to be infallible except these Imams,
who were determined by the Messenger of Allah before being born.

Their names, as mentioned before, were reported by Ahl al-Sunnah
‘ulamā’, and al-Bukhāri and Muslim reported in their Sahihs, the hadith
of the Imams in number, who being twelve ones all from Quraysh.

These traditions never be true and proper but only when taking it to
mean Ahl al-Bayt Imams, as believed by the Imāmiyyah Shi’ah. And the
Sunnis are required to solve this enigma, since the number of the Twelve
Imams which they reported in their Sihāh remained yet an unsolvable
riddle.

The Imams’ Knowledge
--------------------

The point which is exploited by Ahl al-Sunnah to revile the Shi’ah being
their (Shi’ah’s) saying: “That the Ahl al-Bayt Imams (peace be upon
them) have been distinguished by Allah the Glorified with a knowledge
that no one shared them with. And that the Imam being the most
knowledgeable of his time, with no possibility that he being questioned
by someone and fails to give a reply!
Is there any evidence for this claim?

Let’s begin our discussion, as usual, by the Holy Qur’ān.
Allah, the Glorified and Most High, says in His Book:

***“Then made We the inheritors of the Book (Quran) those whom chose We
from among Our servants...” (35:32),***

the verse clealry indicating that Allah, the Glorified, has chosen some
servants from among people making them inheritors of the knowledge of
the Book. Have we to recognize these upright people?

Previously we stated that the Eighth Imam of Ahl al-Bayt, ‘Ali ibn Musā
al-Ridā, has proved that the aforementioned verse was revealed in their
(Imams) regard. That was (when the Caliph) al-Ma’mun gathered for him
forty famous judges, with every one of them preparing forty questions to
put forth to him, for all of which he gave convincing answers that
dumbfounded them, making them to admit his knowledgeability.[^19][^20]

If this Imam being only fourteen years during this conversation with the
fuqahā’, who admitted his knowledgeability, so how would it be strange
then the Shi’ah’s belief in their knowledgeability, while Ahl al-Sunnah
‘ulamā’ and leaders acknowledge the same for them.
But when intending to interpret the Qur’ān by the Qur’ān, we shall see
many verses indicating one meaning, stating that Allah, for an extreme
wisdom, distinguished the Imams of the Prophet’s Household with a given
knowledge of His own, so as to be leaders of guidance and lights for
darkness.

The Almighty Allah said:

***“He granteth wisdom to whomsoever He willeth, and he who hath been
granted wisdom hath been given abundant good; and none shall mind it
save those endowed with wisdom.” (2:269)***

He also said:

***“But nay! I swear by the setting of the stars. And verily it is a
great oath if ye only knew it. Verily it is Qur’ān honourable. In a book
hidden. Toucheth it not save the purified ones.” (56:75-79)***

In this verse Allah the Glorified swore with a great oath, that the Holy
Qur’ān contains secrets and inner concealed meanings that can never be
comprehended with their real intentions but only by the purified ones,
who are the people of the House from whom Allah has removed uncleanness
and purified a thorough purification. This verse indicates too the
Qur’ān’s having an innermost with which Allah, Subhanah, distinguished
the Ahl al-Bayt Imams, that can never be recognized but only through
them.

To this reality the Messenger of Allah has referred by saying: “Do not
outstrip them, for then you shall perish, and do not fall short of them
for then you shall perish. Do not teach them for they are verily more
knowledgeable than you.”[^21]

Al-’Imām ‘Ali himself also said: “Where are those who falsely and
unjustly claimed that they are deeply versed in knowledge, as against
us, although Allah raised us in position and kept them down, bestowed
upon us knowledge but deprived them, and entered us (in the fortress of
knowledge) but kept them out. With us guidance is to be sought and
blindness (of misguidance) is to be changed into brightness. Surely
Imams (divine leaders) will be from the Quraysh. They have been planted
in this line through Hāshim. It would not suit others nor would others
be suitable as heads of affairs.”[^22]
Allah, the Exalted, said:

***“Ask the followers of the Remembrance if ye know not.” (16:43).***

This verse also was revealed in the regard of Ahl al-Bayt (peace be upon
them).[^23] It indicates that the *Ummah*, after the demise of its
Prophet, should refer to the Imams of the Household, in order to realize
the realities. The Companions, as reported, referred to Al-’Imām ‘Ali
ibn Abi Tālib to explain for them the questions they could not solve,
and throughout long years, people resorted to the Imams for recognizing
the halāl (lawful) and harām (unlawful), and to acquire from their
knowledge and virtues.

And when Abu Hanifah says: Had not been the two years, al-Nu‘mān would
have perished (meaning the two years he spent on learning under al-’Imām
Ja’far al-Sādiq). And when al-’Imām Mālik ibn Anas says: No eye has ever
seen, no ear has ever heard, and no heart has ever thought of a human
better than Ja’far al-Sādiq, in respect of virtue, knowledge, worship
and godliness.[^24] When this be the case as admitted by Ahl al-Sunnah
Imams, so why all this vilification and disapproval be made against Ahl
al-Bayt, after citing all these proofs, and after Muslims history proved
that Ahl al-Bayt Imams were the most knowledgeable men of their time.
And why to be wondering when noticing Allah the Glorified distinguish
His friends (awliyā’) “whom He chose” with wisdom and knowledge of His
own, making them an ideal example for the believers and leaders for all
Muslims.

Had the Muslims followed up each other’s evidences, they would have been
convinced of acknowledging Allah and His Messenger, and would be one
community some supporting the others, and neither disagreement nor
various schools of thought (madhāhib) would have been there.

But all this is inevitable, so that Allah might conclude a thing that
must be done,

***“that he who perished (on that day) might perish by a clear proof (of
His Sovereignty) and he who survived might survive by a clear proof (of
His Sovereignty). Lo! Allah in truth is Hearer, Knower.” (8:42)***

Principle of al-Badā’
---------------------

It means that some idea seems to Him regarding a thing. He intends to
do, but then He changes His opinion concerning that thing, doing other
than what He determined to do previously.

Concerning what the Shi’ah observe in respect of the badā’ with
ascribing it to Allah, the Exalted, and vilifying them on the basis that
it entails ascribing ignorance and incompleteness to Allah, the Glorious
and Exalted, as the Sunnites conceive it. Verily this interpretation is
false and never claimed by the Shi’ah, and whoever ascribes it to them
has in fact slandered them. There are many evidences proving their
belief, that can be derived from their sayings, in the past and
recently.

In his book ‘*Aqa’id al-’Imāmiyyah*, al-Shaykh Muhammad Ridā al-MuZaffar
says: “Al-Badā’ in this meaning is quite impossible to be ascribed to
Allah, as it denotes ignorance and incompetence, which can enver be
possible for the Most High God, and never believed by the Imāmiyyah.”
It is reported that Al-’Imām al-Sādiq (‘a) said: “Whoever claims that
something seemed to be done by Allah in a repentful way (i.e. repented
for not doing it before), we consider him as disbelieving in Allah the
Great.” He also said: “Whoever alleges that something appeared newly for
Allah, without being aware of it before, I proclaim freedom from him”
(i.e. I never regard him a Muslim). So the badā’ believed by the Shi’ah,
never transgresses the limits of the Qur’ān, as prescribed by Allah, the
Glorified and the Most High, in the verse:

***“(Of it) Effaceth out God whatever He pleaseth and confirmeth He
(similarly); and with Him is the Mother (Basic Source) of the Book.”
(15:39)***

This belief is held by the Sunnis in the same way as held by the Shi‘ah.
So why the Shi‘ah are vilified while Ahl al-Sunnah are exempted, whereas
they (Sunnis) claim that Allah, the Glorified, alters the decrees and
changes the prescribed destinies and sustenances (of mankind).
Ibn Mardawayh and Ibn ‘Asākir have reported from ‘Ali (‘a) that he once
inquired the Messenger of Allah (S) about the verse: “Effaceth out God
whatever He pleaseth and confirmeth He (similarly), and with Him is the
Mother (Basic Source) of the Book.” In his reply, the Messenger of Allah
(S) said:
“I will verily delight you and also my *Ummah* after me with its
interpretation. Charity in its due aspect, and to be kind to the
parents, and doing the good (ma‘ruf), altogether render wretchedness
(shaqa’) into bliss and increase in life, and safeguard against evil
death.”

In the book al-Shu‘ab, Ibn al-Mundhir, Ibn Abi Hātam and al-Bayhaqi
reported from Qays ibn ‘Ubbād that he said: On every tenth night of the
inviolable months, there is a certain thing (amr) for Allah, but on the
tenth of Rajab, Allah effaces what He will, and establishes He (what He
will).
‘Abd ibn Hamid, Ibn Jarir and Ibn al-Mundhir have reported that ‘Umar
ibn al-Khattāb, while circumambulating round the House (of Allah),
said:
“My God, if You have prescribed upon me a wretchedness (shaqāwah) or a
sin (I implore you to) efface it, as You efface what You will and
establish (what You will), and with You is the Mother (Basic Source) of
the Book. (I beg You to) make it bliss and forgiveness.”[^25]

In his Sahih,[^26] al-Bukhāri reported an amazing and strange story,
about the ascension (to heaven) of the Prophet (may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny), and his meeting with his Lord,
beside what is said by the Messenger (S):
“...Then fifty prayers were prescribed upon me, when I came toward Musā
(‘a) who said: What have you done? I said: Fifty prayers are prescribed
upon me. He said: I am better aware of people than you, as I have worked
with and treated the Children of Israel so strictly, but your *Ummah*
never endures (these prayers). Go back to your Lord and ask Him (to
decrease them). So I returned and implored Him, whereat He made them
forty. Then the same conversation was repeated with Moses, and they were
made thirty. Then again the same thing was repeated and He made them
(prayers) twenty, then the same and He made them ten. Thereat I came
near Moses and he reiterated his speech. Then God made it only five
(prayers), when I came near Musā who said: What have you done? I
replied: (He (God) made it five. He said the same aforementioned words.
I said: I saluted (Allah), but I heard a call (from Allah) saying: I
have prescribed my obligation, and eased for My servants. I shall reward
every good deed (hasanah) with ten ones.”[^27]

In another narration reported also by al-Bukhāri, it is said: After
reference of Muhammad (S) many many times to his Lord, and after
obligating the five prayers, Musā (‘a) asked Muhammad (S) to refer to
his Lord to ask Him more easiness, since his *Ummah* would never
tolerate even five prayers. But Muhammad (may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny) answered him saying: I feel
ashamed of my Lord.[^28]

Everyone reading this be baffled and amazed at these beliefs held by the
Ahl al-Sunnah traditionists, who, nevertheless, vilify the Shi’ah, the
followers of Ahl al-Bayt Imams, due to believing in the principle of
badā’.

Through this tale, they presume that Allah the Glorifed has prescribed
fifty prayers upon Muhammad (S), then it seemd for Him, after Muhammad’s
referring to Him, to make them forty, and then, after another reference
by Muhammad, to make them thirty, and so on, making them twenty, and
then ten, and lastly five prayers after being asked by Muhammad for the
fifth time.

Regardless of our admitting or refusing such a notion, it is to be known
that holding the idea of badā’ being a sound belief, going with and
complying to the concepts of Islam and spirit of the Qur’ān: “Verily God
changeth not the condition of a people until they change what is in
themselves ...” And without our belief — Sunnah and Shi’ah — that Allah
changes and substitutes, all our prayers and supplications shall verily
be devoid of any use or cause or explanation. We further believe that
Allah, the Glorified, changes the judgements, and abrogates the laws
from one prophet to another, and even in the Shariah of our Prophet (S)
verily exist nāsikh (abrogating) and mansukh (abrogated). Hence, to
believe in the principle of badā’ is neither blasphemy nor renegading
from religion (aspotasy). So the Sunnites are asked not to vilify the
Shi’ah due to this belief, and the Shi’ah, on their part, have no reason
to vilify Ahl al-Sunnah.

On my part, I view this tale of mi‘rāj (ascension to heaven) as
necessarily attributing ignorance (jahl) to Allah, the Mighty and the
Glorious, and entailing defamation of the dignity of the greatest man
ever known throughout mankind history, i.e. our Prophet Muhammad (upon
whom and whose Progeny be God’s peace and benediction). That is because
the tale says that Musā said to Muhammad (S): I am better aware of
people than you, indicating that the decrease of prayers was done by
virtue of Musā, i.e. without him Allah would have never eased for the
*Ummah* of Muhammad (S).

I can never conceive, how would Musā know that the *Ummah* of Muhammad
(S) can never endure even five prayers, while Allah knows not this and
charges His bondmen with (duties) beyond their capacity, prescribing
upon them fifty prayers?!

Brother reader, you can imagine the case in which fifty prayers are
performed through one day, which meaning that no work or business shall
be executed by the society, and people will never go out for learning or
earning their living or undertaking any responsibility. In this way man
will turn to be like angels, charged only with (performing) prayers
(salāt) and worship. By making a simple arithmetic operation, we shall
find out the falsification of this narration. When multiplying ten
minutes — the reasonable time for performing one obligatory prayer
(salāt) congregationally — by fifty, the result that we get will show
that the determined time (for these prayers) shall be about ten hours.
That means, you either have to tolerate and endure this burden, or you
can reject such religion that imposes upon its followers duties beyond
their capacity prescribing upon them obligations they can never endure.

Here a question is raised: If Ahl al-Sunnah vilify the Shi’ah for
believing in badā’, and that Allah, after it seems for Him in a thing,
changes His decision as He will, why don’t they vilify themselves their
belief that it seems for Allah something and He changes the rule or
judgement five times regarding one duty (faridah), and on one night
being the night of mi‘rāj (ascension to heaven)?

May Allah’s damnation be upon such bigotry, and detested obstinacy
overshadowing the realities, and turning them upside down, when the
fanatic persecutes that who contradicts him in opinion, with negating
the clear-cut matters. Beside that, he may vilify him, and disseminate
rumours against him, with exaggerating regarding the simplest issues, in
more horrible than which he may believe.

This reminds me of what is said by our master Jesus (peace be upon him)
when addressing the Jews:
“You look at the straw in the eyes of people, but you never see the
wood in your eyes.”
Or (reminds of) the proverb saying: “She infected me with her illness
and slipped away.” Some may object that the term badā’ was never used by
Ahl al-Sunnah, and that this story, though giving the meaning of
changing and altering the judgement, but it never confirms decisively
that something seemed (badā) for Allah in it.

I utter this since most often when I was citing the tale of mi‘rāj,
making it as a proof to show the belief in the badā’ by the Sunnites, I
was encountered with objection of some of them in relation to this
opinion. But later on they submitted and admitted it when I showed them
another narration from Sahih al-Bukhāri, that referring to the badā’ by
a doubtless express term.

It is reported by al-Bukhāri, from Abu Hurayrah, that the Messenger of
Allah (‘a) said: It was seemed for Allah to test three Israelites, a
leprous, a blind and a bald. So He sent them an angel who came to the
leprous one and asked him: Which thing you desire more? He replied: A
good colour (for the feature) and a well-shaped skin, as I became
disgustful for people. Then the angel rubbed him and he recovered from
leprosy, with being given a good colour and well-shaped skin. After that
the angel said to him: Which kind of property you like more? He said:
The camels. So he was given a pregnant she-camel. Then he went to the
bald one, and asked him: Which thing you desire more? He replied: A
well-formed hair and be recovered from this (baldness). The angel rubbed
his head when his baldness disappeared, and he was given fine hair. Then
he asked him: Which kind of property you love more? He said: The cows.
So he gave him a pregnant cow. Then he (the angel) came unto the blind
one, and questioned him: Which thing you desire more? He said: May Allah
give me back my sight. Then he wiped him and Allah returned his sight to
him. Again he asked him: Which property you love more? He said: The
sheep. Thereat he gave him a productive sheep ...

Then the angel returned to them, after multiplication of their camels,
cows and sheep, until everyone of them turned to be owning a herd (of
animals). He approached the leper and the bald and the blind, each with
his same image. He asked each one of them to give him from what he owns.
The bald and the leper repelled him (refused to give him), so Allah
restored them to the same condition they were in. While the blind man
gave him (of what he owned), as a result of which Allah increased in his
property, and kept him wont to see. [^29]
Therefore I address my brothers with this verse:

***“O’ ye who believe! Let not a people laught at (another) people (to
scorn) who haply may be better than them; nor let women laugh at other
women who haply may be better than these and find out not fault with
your own selves nor call ye one another by nicknames; evil is a bad name
(for any one) after his accepting the faith; and whoso turneth not
(repenting against such of his conduct), these are they who are the
unjust (ones).” (49:11)***

I also have a heart-felt wish that Muslims come to their senses, forsake
bigotry and let alone passion so as to be replaced by reason in every
debate, even with their enemies. I hope that they learn from the Holy
Qur’ān the proper way of investigation, discussion and argumentation
with that which is better (method), as Allah revealed to His Messenger
(S) to tell the obstinate:

***“...Lo! We or you assuredly are rightly guided or in error manifest.”
(34:24)***

Thus the Messenger of Allah (S) elevates the position of these
polytheists, with making concessions on his part, to make them feel
equal to him so as to introduce their proofs and reason, had they been
truthful. What a sublime morality had he, that can never attained by
ordinary people.

Taqiyyah (Dissimulation)
------------------------

In the same way we referred previously to the belief in the principle of
badā’, taqiyyah (dissimulation) too is among the points disapproved and
deplored by Ahl al-Sunnah. They misuse it to vilify their brethren, the
Shi’ah, labelling them among the hypocrites, as they claim that they
(Shi’ah) show the opposite of what they hide inside their hearts!!

Most often I conferred some of them (Sunnis), endeavouring to convince
them that taqiyyah is never like hypocrisy (nifāq), but all was in vain.
Even you may see some of them feel disgusted sometimes, and other times
may be amazed and baffled, thinking that such beliefs being innovated
(as heresies) into Islam, as if they be among the fabrications and bida‘
(heresies) of the Shi’ah.

When any truth-seeker fairly investigates the matter in an equitable way
without any prejudice, he will verily find out that all these beliefs
being (derived) from the kernel and essence of Islam, and a product of
the Holy Qur’ān and Prophetic Sunnah. Rather the magnanimous Islamic
concepts and sound Shari‘ah can never be established and straight but
only through these beliefs.

What is amazing about Ahl al-Sunnah, being that they disapprove of
creeds (held by the Shi’ah) in which they themselves believe, and with
which their books, Sihāh and Musnads are replete, testifying against
them.
We can read together what is said by Ahl al-Sunnah regarding the issue
of taqiyyah:

— It is reported that Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hātam, with the chain of
al-‘Awfi, from Ibn ‘Abbās that regarding Allah’s saying: “... except
(when) ye (have to) guard yourselves against (them) for fear from
them...”, he said: Taqiyyah (dissimulation) is verily by the tongue, and
whoever intends to talk about a thing implying disobedience to Allah,
disclosing it then for fear from people (to avoid their evil) with his
heart being still content with the Faith. This will verily be not
detrimental for him, since taqiyyah is in fact with the tongue.”[^30]

— It is reported and confirmed by al-Hākim, and by al-Bayhaqi in his
Sunan, from ‘Ata’, from Ibn ‘Abbās, that regarding Allah’s words:
“...except (when) ye (have to) guard yourselves against (them) for fear
from them ...” he said: Taqiyyah is verily uttering something by the
tongue with the heart being still content with the Faith.[^31]

— ‘Abd ibn Hamid reported from al-Hasan (‘a) that he said: The taqiyyah
is permissible till the Day of Resurrection.[^32]

— ‘Abd ibn Abi Raja’ said that he used to read thus: “... except (when)
ye (have to) guard yourselves against (them) with taqiyyah.”[^33]

— It is reported by ‘Abd al-Razzaq, Ibn Sa’d, Ibn Jarir, Ibn Abi Hātam,
and Ibn Mardawayh, and confirmed by al-Hākim in al-Mustadrak, and by
al-Bayhaqi in al-Dalā’il, that he said: The polytheists took away ‘Ammār
ibn Yāsir, never letting him alone till he slandered the Prophet (S) and
referred to their idols with good terms, only then they left him. When
the Messenger of Allah (S) came, he asked him: What is the matter with
you? He replied: I have bad news, I was never forsaken till defaming you
and mentioning their idols with good (glorifying them). The Prophet
said: How do you feel inwardly (in heart)? He replied: My heart is still
content with the faith. He (S) said: If they return and resume you can
resume. Thereat the following verse was revealed:

***“...save he who is compelled while his heart remaineth steadfast with
the faith...” (16:106)***

— Ibn Sa’d reported from Ibn Sirin that he said: The Prophet (S)
encountered ‘Ammār as he was crying. He wiped his eyes (the tears)
saying: “Have the disbelievers taken and plunged you into water, and you
said so and so (?), (no problem) if they return to it you can tell them
the same.”[^34]

— It is reported by Ibn Jarir, Ibn al-Mundhir, Ibn Abi Hātam, and
al-Bayhaqi in his Sunan, through the chain of ‘Ali, from Ibn ‘Abbās,
that regarding the verse: “He who disbelieveth in God after his belief
in Him, save he who is compelled while his heart remaineth steadfast
with the faith ...”, he said: Allah the Glorified informs that: Whoever
disbelieves in God after having faith in Him, on him is the wrath of God
and for him shall be a great torment. Whereas that who is compelled and
coerced, saying something (bad) with his tongue while his heart
contradicting this through (firm) faith, so as to protect himslef and be
safe from his enemy, for him no harm is there and he is not to blame.
This due to the fact that Allah calls His bondmen to account for what is
deliberately determined insdie their hearts.[^35]

— Ibn Abi Shaybah, Ibn Jarir, Ibn al-Mundhir and Ibn Abi Hātam, reported
from Mujahid that he said: This verse was revealed in regard to some of
the Meccans who believed (in Allah). Then some of Sahābah at al-Madinah
wrote (a letter) to them telling them: Travel toward us, as we never
regard you belonging to us till you migrate toward us. So they went out,
starting their travel to al-Madinah. On the way, they were caught by
some Qurayshi people who seduced them, compelling them to disbelieve.
Then in thier regard this verse was revealed: “... save he who is
compelled while his heart remaineth steadfast with the faith...”[^36]

— In his Sahih, under bāb al-Mudārāt ma‘a al-nās, al-Bukhāri reported
from Abu al-Dardā’ that he said: “We grin (the teeth) before some people
while our hearts are cursing them.”[^37]

— Al-Halabi in his Sirah, is reported to have said: “When the Messenger
of Allah (S) conquered the Town of Khaybar, Hajjāj ibn ‘Allāt said to
him: O’ Messenger of Allah, I have a property at Makkah, in which I have
a household, and I intend to go there. Would you absolve me if I speak
ill of you, and utter something (bad) about you? The Messenger of Allah
(S) permitted him to say whatever he would like.[^38]

— Al-’Imām al-Ghazāli, in his book Ihyā’ al-‘ulum, is reported to have
said: “To prevent shedding the blood of the Muslim is obligatory.
Whatever be the purpose for shedding the blood of a Muslim hiding
(himself) from the oppressor, then to lie about him (not divulging his
place) is verily obligatory.[^39]

— In his book al-‘Ashbah wa al-naZa’ir, Jalāl al-Din al-Suyuti is
reported to have said: “It is permissible to eat the (meat of) carrion
during hunger, and to wash down the morsel into wine, and pronouncing
word of infidelity. When harām prevails in a country, to the extent that
halāl (lawful) can rarely be found, thereat using whatever is needed is
permissible.”

— Abu Bakr al-Rāzi, in his book Ahkām al-Qur’ān, is reported to have
interpreted Allah’s words “... unless (it be) that ye but guard
yourselves against them, taking (as it were) security ...” thus: It
means that when you fear loss of life or some of body organs, you can
guard yourselves against them and show loyalty without believing in it
(in the heart). This is the outward meaning of the utterance, on which
multitude of men of knowledge are unanimously concurring, as reported by
Qatādah about Allah’s saying: “Let not the believers take the
disbelievers as their friends rather than the believers” that he said:
It is not permissible for any believer to take a disbeliever as his
friend (wali) in his religion. And regarding His saying: “... unless (it
be) that ye but guard yourselves against them, taking (as it were)
security”, he said: It necessitates the permissibility of showing
disbelief in case of taqiyyah (dissimulation).”[^40]

— In Sahih al-Bukhāri, it is reported from Qutaybah ibn Sa‘id, from
Sufyān, from Ibn al-Mukandar, who narrated on the authority of ‘Urwah
ibn al-Zubayr that ‘A’ishah told him that: A man took permission to
enter upon the Prophet (S), when he (S) said: Let him in, how bad is the
son (or the brother) of the clan! As he entered, the Prophet talked to
him so mildly and tenderly. I said: O Messenger of Allah, after you
uttered those words, you talked to him so gently (what for)? The Prophet
(S) said: “O’ ‘A’ishah, verily the most wicked person in position near
Allah, is that whom people forsake or be gentle with for the sake of
guarding against his obscenity of language.”[^41]

After reviewing all these traditions, we have a sufficient proof that
the Sunnites believe in permissibility of taqiyyah, in the extreme,
holding that it is permissible till the Day of Resurrection as
previously mentioned. They believe in the obligation of lying, as
reported by al-Ghazāli, and in demonstrating disbelief (kufr) as
unanimously concurred by a multitude of the learned men,and confessed by
al-Rāzi, and in permissibility of showing ostensible smile while cursing
inwardly, as confessed by al-Bukhāri. Besides, they hold that man is
free in defaming or slandering the Messenger of Allah (S) with any words
he likes for protecting his money and properties, as expressed by the
author of al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, and to say whatever implying
disobedience to Allah or obscenity for fear from people, as reported by
al-Suyuti.

So Ahl al-Sunnah need not to vilify and negate the Shi‘ah for a doctrine
believed by them, and reported in their Sihāh and Musnads as permissible
or rather obligatory (belief). The Shi’ah never went farther than what
is held by the Sunnites, except that they became known in practising it
more than other sects, due to the oppression and persecution they
suffered at the hands of the Umayyads and ‘Abbāsids. At those times,
just saying: This man is following and taking the part of Ahl al-Bayt,
was a reason enough to make him face his end, and being murdered so
savagely at the hands of the enemies of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

Therefore, they (the Shi’ah) had no alternative but to practise and
apply taqiyyah, following the instructions of Ahl al-Bayt Imams (peace
be upon them). Al-’Imām al-Sādiq is reported to have said: Verily
taqiyyah is of my Din (religion) and the Din of my fathers, and one who
does not keep taqiyyah has no din. Taqiyyah was verily a motto for the
Ahl al-Bayt Imams themsleves, to safeguard themselves and their
followers and lovers against all sorts of danger and damage, and sparing
their lives, and reforming the conditions of the Muslims who were
afflicted with trial in their Din, as occurred to’Ammar ibn Yāsir (may
God be pleased with him) or even more.
While the Sunnites were far from such a trial since, most the time,
they were on good terms with the rulers, as a result of which they were
never subjected to murder, looting and injustice. So it was quite
natural for them to negate taqiyyah, and vilify those practising it,
with the Umayyad and ‘Abbāsid rulers playing a great role in defaming
the Shi’ah because of the taqiyyah.

And since regarding it (taqiyyah) Allah revealed a verse to be recited
and laws to be executed, and since the Messenger of Allah (S), as
reported in Sahih al-Bukhāri, practised it himself, permitting ‘Ammār
ibn Yāsir to revile him and declare his disbelief if the infidels
resumed torturing him, and also since the ‘ulamā’ of Muslims permitted
this practice (taqiyyah), following the precepts of the Book of Allah
and Sunnah of His Messenger, how is it correct then to vilify and
deplore the Shi’ah, and for what reason?!

Taqiyyah was practised by the dignified Companions during the eras of
the tyrant rulers, like Mu‘āwiyah, who used to kill whoever refusing to
curse ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib. The story of Hijr ibn ‘Adiyy al-Kindi and his
fellowmen is widely known. And the likes of Yazid, Ibn Ziyād, al-Hajjāj,
and ‘Abd al-Mālik ibn Marwan, and their equals are so many, that
intending to gather the examples and evidences indicating the
Companions’ practice of taqiyyah, we shall need a separate book to cover
them, we shall need a separate book to cover them, but the reasons of
Ahl al-Sunnah that I cited can be sufficient, thanks to God.

I avail myself of this opportunity to cite a nice story I personally
experienced with one of the Sunni scholars. It coincided that we met on
board of an airplane, while we were among those invited to attend an
Islamic conference in Britain. We exchanged our viewpoints about the
Shi’ah and Sunnah for nearly two hours. He was one of callers to unity,
and I admired him. But I was displeased when he said that: the Shi’ah
are asked now to abandon some of the beliefs that create disagreement
among the Muslims, and causing them to defame and attack each other.
When I asked him: Like what? He immediately replied: Like the mut‘ah
(temporary marriage) and taqiyyah. I tried my best to convince him that
mut‘ah being a legitimate and legal kind of marriage, and taqiyyah being
a permission from Allah, but he insisted on his opinion, never be
persuaded by all the evidences I cited for him. He claimed that whatever
I cited and mentioned was correct and true, but it should be abandoned
for the sake of a higher and more significant convenience, being unity
of Muslims.

I found strange his logic which calling to abandon the precepts and
rules of Allah for the sake of unity of Muslims. In a courteous way, I
said to him: Had the unity of Muslims mainly depended on this thing, I
would have been the first to respond and submit.

We disembarked in London airport, and I was walking behind him. As we
approached the airport policemen, we were questioned about the reason of
travelling to Britain. He answered by claiming that he came for
treatment, and I claimed that the reason of my coming being to visit
some of my friends. We passed safely and without any delay, toward the
hall of bags delivery. Thereat I whispered in his ear: Have you noticed
how taqiyyah be valid and possible at all times? He said: How? I said:
Because we lied to the police, I through claiming to have come to
visiting my friends, and you through claiming to have come for
treatment, while we actually came for participating in the conference.

He smiled, while recognizing that he told a lie in the hearing of me,
saying: Don’t the Islamic conferences have a remedy for our souls? I
laughed saying: And don’t they have a visit to our brethren?!

I resume the topic and say that taqiyyah is verily not in the way
claimed by the Sunnah — that it be a sort of hypocrisy — but the
opposite is right. As hypocrisy means to show out faith (Imān) and
conceal disbelief (kufr), while taqiyyah being to demonstrate kufr and
conceal faith, and what a great difference is there between the two
positions. Regarding the former one, i.e. hypocrisy (nifāq), Allah said:

***“And when they meet with those who believe, they say, “We believe”,
but when they go apart to their devils, they say, “Surely we are with
you, verily, we did but mock.” (2:14)***

That means: outward faith + inward kufr = hypocrisy (nifāq).
While regarding the second situation, i.e. taqiyyah, Allah, the
Glorified and Most High, said: ***“And said a man who was a believer,
from among the people of Pharaoh; who used to conceal his faith ...”***
which means: outward disbelief (kufr) + inward faith (imān) =
taqiyyah.
The believing man of the people of Pharaoh used to conceal his faith
inwardly, with no one being aware of it except Allah, pretending before
Pharaoh and all people of his being the follower of the din of Pharaoh.
(Allah referred to him in His Holy Book as a sign of extolness and
glorification for his status).

Dear reader, I invite you to recognize in full what the Shi’ah hold in
regard of taqiyyah, so as not to be beguiled by what falsely and
calumniously claimed about them.

In his book ‘Aqa’id al-’Imāmiyyah, al-Shaykh Muhammad Ridā al-Muzaffar
is quoted to have said:
“There are certain rules for taqiyyah, in respect of its obligation and
non-obligation, in accordance with the difference of situations of fear
from damage. They are stated classified of fear from damage. They are
stated classified under their relevant chapters in the fiqhi books sof
the ‘ulamā’. It is not obligatory in all cases, but rather it may be or
should be contradicted in certain cases, such as when disclosing and
proclaiming the truth implies a support to the Din, and a service
rendered to Islam and jihād in its way. Only then it can be disposed of
funds and properties, and selves can never be endeared or held on.
Taqiyyah may be forbidden in respect of the acts obligating the killing
of honourable persons, or spreading abroad of falsehood (bātil), or
corruption in Din, or an extreme loss for the Muslims, through
misleading them, or making injustice and despotism to prevail among
them.”

“However, taqiyyah, in the perspective of the Imāmiyyah, never makes
them an underground society working for destruction and sabotage, as
intended to be portrayed by their enemies who never endeavour to realize
the matters in their true sense, bothering not themselves to comprehend
the correct opinion held by us.”

“Also its purpose is not to render Din and its rules a secret that it is
impermissible to be divulged to those denying it. How can it be so while
the Imāmiyyah books and works, in the fields of fiqh, laws and themes of
kalām and doctrines, have covered the East and West and gone beyond the
limits expected from every community believing in them.” (End of his
speech).

Everyone can clealry observe that there neither be any nifāq
(hypocrisy), nor deceit, nor foist, nor cheating, as claimed by their
enemies.

Al-Mut‘ah (or Temporary Marriage)
---------------------------------

It means the mut‘ah marirage (nikāh), or unpermanent marriage, or
temporary marriage to a determined term. It is like the perpetual
marriage, as can never be valid but only through a marriage contract
including a consent and corresponding acceptance, when recited by the
bride employing the words: I have married myself to you (zawwajtuka
nafsi), with so and so dower, and for so and so period. Thereat the man
says: qabiltu (I have accepted).

For this kind of marriage certain conditions are stated in the fiqhi
books of the Imāmiyyah, such as determining the dower (mahr) and period.
It will be valid with any condition agreed by both parties, and like the
prohibition of concluding a marriage contract (temporarily) with female
relations (al-muharramāt), due to consanguinity, as in the case of the
permanent marriage.

The temporarily married woman should, after expiry of the term (ajal),
undergo ‘iddah (waiting without concluding another marriage contract)
for two menstrual courses, and in case of the death of her husband for
four months and ten days.

There is neither inheritance nor maintenance (nafaqah) between the
couple married temporarily, that is neither of them can inherit the
other side after death. But the child born due to temporary marriage has
the same rights granted to the child born due to permanent marriage, in
regard of inheritance and maintenance (nafaqah), beside all other
breeding and material rights, and should be acknowledged as the legal
child of his father.

This is mut‘ah with all its conditions and limits, which can certainly
never be like fornication, as claimed by some people.

The Sunnis, like their brethren the Shi’ah, unanimously concur on that
the legitimacy of such a marriage being prescribed by Allah, the
Glorified and the Exalted, in the verse 24 of Surat al-Nisā’:

***“... And as such of them ye had mut‘ah with them, give them their
dowries as a fixed reward; and it shall not be a sin on you, in whatever
ye mutually agree (to vary) after the fixed reward; Verily God is
All-Knowing, All-Wise.”***

They also concur that the Messenger of Allah (S) has permitted this kind
of marriage, and the Sahābah exercised it during his lifetime.
But they (the Shi’ah and Sunnah) differ regarding its being abrogated
or not. Ahl al-Sunnah believe in its being abrogated and forbidden after
it was halāl (lawful), and that the abrogation was made by the
(Prophetic) Sunnah not by the Qur’ān. Whereas the Shi’ah believe in its
being not abrogated, and its being lawful till the Day of Resurrection.

Hence, the dispute concerns only whether it was abrogated or not, and to
review the beliefs of the two sects so as to elucidate to the dear
reader where the truth lies, for being followed without any fanaticism
and prejudice.

Regarding the Shi’ah believing in its not being abrogated, and its being
halāl till the Day of Resurrection, their proof being: It is never
confirmed for us that the Messenger of Allah (S) has ever forbidden it
(mut‘ah), and our Imams from the Pure Kindred (‘itrah) believe in its
being lawful (halāl). Had there been any abrogation issued from the
Messenger of Allah (S), the first to know it would have been the Ahl
al-Bayt Imams headed by al-’Imām ‘Ali (‘a), as Ahl al-Bayt (household)
are better aware of what is there inside it (the house).

But that which is established for us being that it is the 2nd Caliph
‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb who has forbidden it and considered it unlawful
(harām), through exerting his own opinion as testified by the Sunni
‘ulamā’ themselves. But we can never leave the ahkām (rules) of Allah
and His Messenger to be ordained by the opinion and ijtihād of ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattāb!

This was altogether the belief held by the Shi’ah regarding the
lawfulness of mut‘ah, which is verily an apposite belief and a sober
opinion, since all Muslims are required to follow and adhere to the
precepts of Allah and His Messenger, refusing everyone other than them
whatever high his position be, when his ijtihād being contradictory to
the Qur’ānic or Prophetic texts.

Whereas Ahl al-Sunnah believe that the mut‘ah was lawful, a verse was
revealed in its regard, and the Messenger of Allah (S) permitted people
to prarctise it, and it was exercised by the Companions, but it was
abrogated afterwards. But they differ concerning who has abrogated it,
some saying that the Messenger of Allah (S) has forbidden it before his
death. And some other hold that it was ‘Umar ibn al-Khattāb who forbade
it, claiming that his words being hujjah (authority) in their view, due
to the hadith of the Messenger of Allah (S):
“Adhere to my sunnah and the Sunnah of the rightly-guided successors
after me. Hold on to it and cling on it stubbornly.”

Concerning those believing in its being unlawful due to its being
prohibited by ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, and that his act being a binding
sunnah, we have nothing to do with them, nor any debate, since their
belief is a mere bigotry and affectation. Otherwise, how is it feasible
for any Muslim to abandon and contradict the precepts and sayings of
Allah and His Messenger, and adhere to the words of a human being
exerting his opinion, liable to err and be correct, in case his ijtihād
being about a matter regarding which no text in the Book (Qur’ān) and
Sunnah is found. But how would be the case when a text (nass) is
revealed (in the Qur’ān):

***“And it is not for a believer man or woman to have any choice in
their affair when God and His Apostle have decided a matter, and whoever
disobeyeth God and His Apostle, indeed he hath strayed off a manifest
straying.” (33:36)***

Whoever disagrees with me regarding this rule (or principle), is asked
to reconsider his information in respect of the concepts of the Islamic
Law, and study the Holy Qur’ān and the Prophetic Sunnah. Because the
Qur’ān itself indicated in the above-mentioned verse, beside many other
similar Qur’ānic verses, that whoever not adhering to the Qur’ān and
Prophetic Sunnah is verily but a disbeliever and strayed (misled).

Further, many proofs are found in the noble Prophetic Sunnah, of which
we suffice with this hadith uttered by the Messenger of Allah (S):
“Whatever deemed halāl (lawful) by Muhammad is halāl (for you) till the
Day of Resurrection and his harām is harām (unlawful) till the Day of
Resurrection”.
So no one is entitled to deem lawful or unlawful regarding any matter
on which a text (nass) and rule is revealed and established by Allah or
his Messenger (S).
Due to all that is mentioned, we tell those trying to convince us that
the acts and exertions (ijtihādat) of the Rightly-guided Caliphs are
binding, i.e. we should follow them, we tell them this verse:

***“Say thou (unto the people of the Book), Dispute ye with us about
God; whereas He is our Lord, and your Lord, and for us are our deeds and
for you are your deeds; to Him (alone) we are (exclusively) loyal?”
(2:139)***

But those believing in this proof agree with the Shi’ah in their claim,
and will be verily a hujjah against their brethren from among Ahl
al-Sunnah.

Our debate is limited only with those claiming that it is the Messenger
of Allah (God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny) who
has prohibited it (mut‘ah), abrogating the Qur’ān by the hadith.

Such people are confused and non-established in their sayings, with
their proof being unsubstantial and never established on a firm basis,
even though the forbiddance (nahy) from it was reported by Muslim in his
Sahih. Because had there been any nahy issued by the Messenger of Allah,
it would have never been neglected by the Sahābah who practised mut‘ah
(temporary marriage) during the era of Abu Bakr and a part of the era of
‘Umar himself, as reported by Muslim in his Sahih.[^42]

‘Ata’ said: Jābir ibn ‘Abd Allāh came back from ‘Umrah (short
pilgrimage), when we visited him in his house. Then some of us
questioned him about several matters, till referring to the mut‘ah,
where he said: Yes, we practised it during the lifetime of the Messenger
of Allah (S) and that of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.

Had the Messenger of Allah (S) forbidden the mut‘ah, it would have never
been permissible for the Companions to practise it during the reign of
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, as mentioned before. The fact is that it was not the
Messenger of Allah (S) who forbade or deemed it harām, but the
forbiddance was issued by ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, as reported in Sahih
al-Bukhāri.

— Musaddad said: It is reported by Yahya, from ‘Imran Abu Bakr, from Abu
Raja’, from ‘Imran ibn Husayn, that he said: The verse of mut‘ah is
revealed in the Book of Allah, and we exercised it during the lifetime
of the Messenger of Allah (S) with no verse being revealed deeming it
unlawful or its being forbidden (by anyone) till he (S) died. Then a man
exerted his opinion, ascribing it to Muhammad, who is said to be
‘Umar.[^43]
It is made quite clear that the Messenger of Allah (S) has never
forbidden it till the end of his life, as expressed by this Companion
who ascribed forbiddance to ‘Umar so expressly and with no any
obscurity, adding that he exerted his opinion in everything, as he
desired.
Also Jābir ibn ‘Abd Allāh al-’Ansari so explicitly says: We used to
consummate temporary marriage (mut‘ah) with (only) a handful of dates
and flour during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (S), and era of
Abu Bakr, until it was forbidden by ‘Umar in the case of ‘Amr ibn
Hurayth.[^44]

No wonder to see some of the Sahābah were of the opinion of ‘Umar, as
previously mentioned during our discussion about the Thursday
Misfortune, when they agreed with him in his saying: The Messenger of
Allah (S) utters obscene language and we suffice with the Book of Allah!
So when they supported him in that critical situation, implying that
much of defamation against the Messenger, how wouldn’t they agree with
him in respect of some of his ijtihādat? The evidence can be seen in
this utterance of one of them: I was with Jābir ibn ‘Abd Allāh, when
someone entered upon him saying: Ibn ‘Abbās and Ibn al-Zubayr disagreed
about the two enjoyments (of hajj and marraige). Thereat Jābir said: We
did both of them during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (S), till
the time of ‘Umar who forbade us, when we stopped practising them
both.[^45]

Therefore I personally believe that some Companions ascribed prohibition
of mut‘ah to the Messenger of Allah (S), for the sake of justifying the
position of ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, and approving of his opinion.
Otherwise, how would the Messenger of Allah (S) forbid what is deemed
lawful (halāl) in the Qur’ān, as it is infeasible for us to find any of
the Islamic rules that being deemed halāl by Allah, the Glorified, while
being forbidden by His Messenger. Such a claim can never be expressed
but only by that who being obstinate and fanatic. Even when presuming so
for argument’s sake that the Messenger (S) has forbidden it, it was not
for al-’Imām ‘Ali (‘a), the nearest in kinship to the Prophet (S) and
the most knowledgeable in the (Islamic) rules, to say:
“Mut’ah is verily a blessing showered from Allah upon His bondmen, and
had not been ‘Umar’s forbiddance no one would have committed fornication
but the wretched.”[^46]

It is to be known that ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab himself has never ascribed
the prohibition to the Prophet (S), but rather he uttered his
widely-known proclamation, so outspokenly:
“Two enjoyments were commonly practised during the lifetime of the
Messenger of Allah (S), from which both I forbid and on which I punish:
mut‘t al-hajj (pilgrimage) and enjoyment (mut‘ah) with women.”[^47]

The Musnad of al-’Imām Ahmad ibn Hanbal is the best evidence proving the
presence of great differences among the Sunnis concerning this issue, as
some of them deem it lawful, heeding in this regard to the Messenger’s
precepts, while some others deeming it harām (unlawful) following the
opinion of ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab. Al-’Imām Ahmad is reported to have
said:
— Ibn ‘Abbās said: The Prophet (S) practised the Mut‘ah (temporary
marriage) once, when ‘Urwah ibn al-Zubayr said: Mut’ah is forbidden by
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar! Thereat Ibn ‘Abbās said: What is that uttered by
‘Uryah? (belittlement for ‘Urwah)? He said: He says that mut‘ah was
forbidden by Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. Then Ibn ‘Abbās said: I am sure that
they shall verily perish, and I say: The Prophet said, while they say:
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar forbade.”[^48]

Also in Sahih al-Tirmidhi, it is reported that ‘Abd Allāh ibn ‘Umar was
questioned about the hajj enjoyment. In reply he said: It is halāl. Then
the questioner said to him: But your father has forbidden it? He
replied: When my father forbids something practised by the Messenger of
Allah (S), what do you think me to do better: to follow the order of my
father or that of the Messenger of Allah (S)? The man said: Certainly
you have to obey the commandment of the Messenger of Allah (S).”[^49]

It is known that Ahl al-Sunnah obeyed Umar regarding the mut‘ah with
women, and disobeyed him regarding mut‘ah of pilgrimage, though
forbidding from them both was issued by him, altogether in one position,
as previously referred to.

The most important point in all this discussion and debate, being that
the Ahl al-Bayt Imams and their followers (the Shi’ah) contradicted and
negated his (‘Umar’s) claim, considering it (mut‘ah) as halāl (lawful)
till the Day of Resurrection. This belief (held by the Shi’ah) was
pursued also by some Sunni ‘ulamā’, of whom I refer to the eminent
Tunisian scholar, the leader of the Zaytunah Mosque al-Shaykh al-Tāhir
ibn ‘Ashur (may God’s mercy be upon him). In his famous Tafsir
(exegesis) he cited for its (mut‘ah) lawfulness the verse: “... and as
such of them ye had mut‘ah with them (marrying them), give them their
dowries as a fixed reward...” [^50]

True, such should be the ‘ulamā’, free in their creed, never being
influenced by any prejudice or bigotry, and never fearing on the way of
Allah the blame of any blamer.
After this brief discussion, no justification or plea is left for Ahl
al-Sunnah’s vilification and defamation against the Shi’ah due to their
permitting the marriage of mut‘ah, beside the fact that the decisive
proof and evident argument being on the side of the Shi’ah.

Every Muslim is asked to portray in the mind the words of al-’Imām ‘Ali
(‘a) that: “Mut’ah is verily a blessing showered from Allah upon His
bondmen. Actually, is there any blessing greater than such one which
quenches a refractory lust that might overwhelm man, male or female,
renderring him/her like a beast of prey.

All Muslims in general, and the youth in particular, have to know that
Allah, the Glorified, has imposed upon the adulterer the punishment of
death through pelting stones (rajm), when perpetrated against the
married, males and females. It is not for Allah to forsake His servants
with no mercy, while He being the Creator of them and their instincts,
having full knowledge of what can ameliorate them. And when Allah, the
Beneficent and the Merciful, has showered His mercy upon His bondmen
through permitting them to practise mut‘ah, so no one would commit
adultery thereafter, but only the mischievous, exactly like passing the
sentence of amputating the thief’s hand. And in the same way, as long as
there being a treasury dedicated exclusively for the destitute and needy
people, no one will steal but only the mishievous.

Claim of Tahrif of the Qur’ān
-----------------------------

This claim in itself being so horrible that no Muslim, Shi’i or Sunni,
believing in the message of Muhammad (S), can ever endure or accept.
This is due to the fact that the Lord of Glory has undertaken its
preservation, when He said:

***“Surely We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be its
preserver.” (15:9)***

Thus it is immune from any addition and loss even with one letter, being
the miracle of our Prophet (S), which will never die or fall into
oblivion, and falsehood cannot come at it from before it or from behind
it, being a revelation from the Wise, the Owner of Praise.

The Muslims’ practical status quo refuses the tahrif of the Qur’ān,
since many Sahābah were memorizing it by heart, competing in memorizing
it and teaching their children to learn it by heart, throughout the
course of time till the present day. It is infeasible for any man,
group, community or government to mutilate or alter the Qur’ān, at all.

Traversing all Muslim countries, eastwards and westwards, northwards and
southwards, all over the world, we will surely find the same Qur’ān with
no addition or loss whatsoever. Though Muslims being separated into
schools (madhāhib), sects, cults and religions, the Qur’ān remains the
sole incentive able to gather them, with no disagreement between even
two among them, except regarding exegesis and interpretation (ta’wil),
as each group rejoicing in its tenets.

So the tahrif (corruption) attributed to the Shi’ah is no more than a
vilification and exaggeration, having no existence in the Shi’ah’s
beliefs. When going through the Shi’ah’s view regarding the Holy Qur’ān
we can notice that they unanimously believe in its being guarded against
any mutilation.

Al-Shaykh al-MuZaffar, the author of the book ‘Aqā’id al-’Imāmiyyah,
says in this regard:
“We believe that the Qur’ān being the Divine revelation (wahy) sent
down from Allah, the Exalted, upon His noble Prophet, containing an
exposition of all things. And also it is His everlasting miracle
disabling all mankind of keeping pace with it in respect of rhetoric and
eloquence, and the realities and sublime knowledge it contains, being
guarded against any alteration or changing or mutilation (tahrif). The
Qur’ān we have nowadays being surely the same one revealed to the
Prophet, and anyone claiming other than this is but a violater, or
obstinate errant or mistaken, all being misguided and misled, as it is
surely Allah’s word that falsehood can never come at it from before it
or from behind it.” (His speech is over).

Besides, all the Shi’ah lands are widely known and their rules in fiqh
are commonly recognized by all. Had they possessed any Qur’ān other than
that we have nowadays, it would have been discovered by people. I
remember that when, for the first time, I visited the Shi’ah land, such
gossips were filling my mind, that whenever seeing a bulky volume, I
would pick it up hoping to put my hand on that alleged Qur’ān. But very
soon, such fancy has vanished away, recognizing later on that it was
only one of the fabricated vilifications aimed at causing people to have
aversion to the Shi’ah. Nonetheless, there is, ever and anon, someone
vilifying and arguing the Shi’ah with a book named: Fasl al khitāb fi
ithbāt tahrif Kitāb Rabb al-’Arbāb, whose author is Muhammad Taqi
al-Nuri al-Tabrasi (d. 1320 H.), who was a Shi’i. In this way those
transgressors intend to overburden the Shi’ah the responsibility for
this book! The act that is far from equity.

So many books were written, that in fact never express but the
viewpoints of their writers and authors, containing the lean and strong,
truth and falsehood, and implying wrong and correct. This fact includes
all the Islamic sects, and is not confined to the Shi’ah alone. Are we
permitted to hold Ahl al-Sunnah responsible for what was written by the
Egyptian Culture Minister and dean of Arabic literature Dr. Tāhā Husayn
regarding the Qur’ān and pre-Islamic (Jāhili) poetry? Or what al-Bukhāri
reported, which is considered veracious near them, about the presence of
loss and addition in the Qur’ān, and so also is Sahih Muslim, and other
sources? [^51]

Let’s turn aside from this and return good for evil. What an excellent
words uttered in this regard, those said by the Professor Muhammad
al-Midyani, Dean of al-Shari‘ah College in al-’Azhar University, when
writing:
“And as regards the claims that the Imāmiyyah believe in presence of
loss in the Qur’ān, I seek God’s protection... they are no more than
narrations reported in their books, the like of which are reported in
our books. The investigators from among both the sects have refuted
them, proving their falsehood and fabrication. No one among the Imāmi
Shi’ah or Zaydiyyah is ever believing in this, neither is there anyone
among the Sunnis.

Anyone desiring to have more information can refer to al-Suyuti’s book
al-’Itqān, in which he can see the likes of such narrations, of which we
turned aside.

“In 1498, an Egyptian compiled a book calling it al-Furqān,
interpolating it with such poor, exotic and rejected narrations,
reporting quotations (in their confirmation) from the Sunni books and
references. Al-’Azhar then asked the Government to stop publication of
(confiscate) the book, after demonstrating with scientific proof and
argument the aspects of falsehood and deviation in it.The Government
responded to this request and confiscated the book. Its author then
filed a case demanding an indemnity, but the Administrative Judiciary in
the State Cabinet dismissed the case.
“Should we say then that Ahl al-Sunnah deny the sanctity of the Qur’ān?
Or believe in presence of loss in the Qur’ān due to a narration reported
by so and so? Or due to a book compiled by so and so?

The same is true concerning the Imāmi Shi’ah, that reports can be found
in their books similar to those recorded in some of our books (the
speech to al-Midyani). Al-’Imām al-‘Allāmah Abu al-Fadl ibn al-Hasan
al-Tabrasi, an eminent Imāmi scholar in the 6th Hijrah Century, in his
book Majma’ al-bayān li ‘ulum al-Qur’ān, says in this respect:

“There is consensus and unanimity among the Muslims that there is not
any ‘excess’ in the Holy Qur’ān. But with regard to the deficiency of
the text of the Holy Qur’ān, a group of Imāmiyyah and a group of
Hashwiyyah who are Sunnis have claimed presence of atterations and
deficiencies in the Holy Qur’ān, but the true belief accepted by the
Imāmiyyah holds otherwise.

This is supported by al-Sayyid al-Murtada (may God sanctify his soul),
giving it its full due in reply to the questions of al-Tarābulusiyyāt,
saying in some places: Knowledge and certainty of the validity of the
narration of the Holy Qur’ān are like the knowledge and certainty on the
existence of countries, cities, famous historical events, popular books,
and the poems compiled by the Arabs.

This is because the specific regard and attention and the strong motive
for the narration of the text of the Holy Qur’ān and its upkeeping had
been much stronger than the precision and attention given to the
above-cited items, since the Qur’ān being the miracle of Prophethood,
source of legal sciences and religious rules. And Muslim ‘ulamā’ paid so
great attention in preserving and safeguarding it, to the extent that
they came to recognize all controversial things regading which
disagreement was there, including its syntax (i‘rāb), readings, letters
and verses. So how is it permissible to believe in its being altered, or
decreased, with the presence of this sincere attention and strict
precision.”[^52]

To elucidate for you, dear reader, the fact that this accusation
(decreasing and increasing the Qur’ān), should verily be attributed to
Ahl al-Sunnah rather than being ascribed to the Shi’ah. This was one of
the motives urged me to reconsider all of my beliefs, as whenever I
tried to criticize the Shi’ah and negate or disapprove them regarding
anything, they would prove their acquittal from it, with attributing it
to me. Then, with passage of days, and through investigation, I
recognized the truth of their claims, of which I was convinced, for
which I praise God. Hereunder I shall present the evidences proving my
claim in this topic:
Al-Tabarrāni and al-Bayhaqi are reported to have said: There are two
surahs (dropped) in the Qur’ān, one being:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنا نستعينك ونستغفرك ونثني عليك الخير كله ولا نكفرك ونخلع ونترك من
يفجرك
  </p>
</blockquote>

meaning: We ask You to help us and seek Your forgiveness, and praise You
with all good, never deny You, and disavow from and forsake whoever
dissipates You ) . The second one is thus :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم – اللهم إياك نعبد ولك نصلي ونسجد وإليك نسعى نحن
نرجو رحمتك ونخشى عذابك بالكافرين ملحق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Its translation is: O God, we worship You and for You we pray and
prostrate, and toward You we endeavour and haste. We seek Your mercy and
fear Your serious torment. Your chastisement will verily afflict the
disbelievers).

These two (alleged) surahs are called by al-Raghib in al-Muhādarāt as
suratay al-Qunut (two surahs of supplication) that were read by ‘Ummar
ibn al-Khattab during qunut in his prayers, and are found in the mushafs
of Ibn ‘Abbās and of Zayd ibn Thābit.[^53]

Al-’Imām Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, is reported to have said:
Ubbay ibn Ka’b asked someone (Zirr ibn Hubaysh) How many verses do you
recite in the Surat al-’Ahzāb? He replied: Seventy and a few verses. He
(Ubayy) said: ‘Never, I read it with the Messenger of Allah (S), and it
is about the length of the Surat al-Baqarah or lengthier, and in it is
the āyat al-rajm (verse of stoning).’[^54]

It is obvious for every witty reader that these two surahs, which are
called Surata al-Qunut, mentioned in the books al-’Itqān and al-Durr
al-manthur of al-Suyuti, and reported by al-Tabarrāni and al-Bayhaqi,
can never be found in the Book the of Almighty Allah.

This means that the Qur’ān we have today is missing these two surahs,
that are recorded in the mushaf of Ibn ‘Abbās and that of Zayd ibn
Thābit, indicating also the presence of masāhif other than those we
have. This also recalls to my mind Ahl al-Sunnah’s claim of the Shi’ah’s
having Fatimah’s mushaf, so it is to be conceived!

Ahl al-Sunnah used to recite these two surahs in the qunut supplication
of every morning prayers, and I personally learn them by heart and used
to read them in the dawn prayer qunut.

The second riwāyah (narration) reported by al-’Imām Ahmad in his Musnad,
which claims that three quarters of Surat al-’Ahzāb have dropped, since
Surat al-Baqarah contains 286 verses while their number in al-’Ahzāb
doesn’t exceed 73. When consdiering the counting of the parts of Qur’ān
through hizbs, we conclude that Surat al-Baqarah is composed of five
hizbs, whereas Surat al-’Ahzāb never exceeds one hizb (the whole Qur’ān
is 120 hizbs).

Also the utterance expressed by Ubayy ibn Ka’b: “I used to read it
during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (S), and it was the length
of the Surat al-Baqarah or lengthier.” This man who was the most famous
among the reciters who used to learn the Qur’ān by heart, during the
lifetime of the Prophet (S), and who was chosen by ‘Umar[^55] to lead
people in salāt al-tarawih, by so saying will verily and undoubtedly
confuse the readers and create doubts inside their hearts.

Again al-’Imām Ahmad ibn Hanbal reported in his Musnad,[^56] from Ubayy
ibn Ka’b that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said:
“Allah, the Glorious and Most High, has commanded me to recite for you
the Qur’ān: Those who disbelieve among the people of the Scripture could
not ..., (Ubayy said:) then he (S) read in it:

**لو أن إبن أدم سأل وادياً من مال فاعطيه لسأل ثانياً فلو سأل ثانياً
فأعطيه لسأل ثالثاً لا يملاء جوف إبن أدم إلا التُراب ، يتوب الله على من
تاب ، وإنَّ ذلك الدين القيّم عند الله الحنيفة غير المشركة ولا الهودية
ولا النصرانية من يفعل خيراً فلن يكفره**.

(Meaning that: If son of Adam demanded a valley of funds and was given
it, he will demand another one, and if given it would demand a third
one, and nothing would fill the belly of the son of Adam except the
earth (turāb). Allah shall verily return in mercy toward that who
returns (in penitence). That is the straight religion near Allah, the
Hanafi other than the polytheists, Jewish and Christians. Whoever does
good it will never be denied).

Al-Hāfiz ibn ‘Asākir reported in interpretation of Ubayy ibn Ka’b, that
Abu al-Dardā’ betook himself toward al-Madinah with a number of people
of Damascus. On reaching, he entered upon ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, reciting
for him the following (alleged) verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذا جعل الذين كفروا في قلوبهم الحميّة حميّة الجاهلية ولو حميتم كما
حموا لفسد المسجد الحرام.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(meaning): Hamiyyah (fervour) of Jahiliyyah was made inside the hearts
of disbelievers, and if you become impetuous as they are, corruption
would afflict the Sacred Mosque (Ka’bah).”

Thereat ‘Umar asked: Who taught you to recite such reading? They
replied: Ubayy ibn Ka’b did. He summoned Ubayy, and asked them to read
(before him). So they read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولو حميتم كما حموا لفسد المسجد الحرام.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ubayy said to ‘Umar: True, I taught them to read thus. Then ‘Umar said
to Zayd ibn Thābit: O Zayd, read. Zayd read the common one (ordinary).
Then ‘Umar said: O God, I never know other than this (reading)! Ubayy
ibn Ka’b then said:

“O ‘Umar, by God you know well that I used to attend (the Prophet’s
meetings) and they were absent,and I used to come near while they be
away. I swear by Allah, if you wish, I will stay home and never talk to
anyone or teach anyone to read, till my death.” ‘Umar said: “I seek
God’s forgiveness; you know that Allah has gifted you with knowledge, so
teach people whatever you know.”
He (Ibn ‘Asākir) also said: ‘Umar passed by a youth reading in a
mushaf:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النبيّ أولى بالمؤمنين من أنفسهم وأزواجه أمّهاتهم وهو أب لهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(meaning: The Prophet has more right over the believers than they over
themselves, and his wives are their mothers, and he is their father.)
‘Erase it, boy’, said ‘Umar. ‘I will not erase it, for it is so in the
mushaf of Uhayy ibn Ka’b’, said the youth. ‘Umar went to Ubayy who told
him: ‘The Qur’ān has kept me busy, and you have been busy making
transactions in the bazaar.’[^57]

The same riwāyah was reported too by Ibn al-’Athir in Jāmi‘ al-’usul,
and Abu Dāwud in his Sunan, and also by al-Hākim in his Mustadrak.

This time, I leave to you, dear reader, to comment yourself on such
reports which are filling the books of Ahl al-Sunnah who are unaware of
them, but vilifying the Shi’ah with whom even one-tenth can never be
found.

But some of the Sunni obstinates may have aversion to such narrations,
rejecting them as usual, disapproving al-’Imām Ahmad’s reporting such
superstitions. They may consequently weaken the authenticity of the
asānid of such narrations, regarding the Musnad of al-’Imām Ahmad and
Sunan of Abu Dāwud as not viewed by Ahl al-Sunnah at the same level of
Sahih al-Bukhāri and Sahih Muslim, whereas such riwāyāt are recorded in
both the Sahihs.

Al-Bukhāri, in his Sahih[^58] under “bāb Manāqib ‘Ammār wa Hudhayfah
(r)”, reported from ‘Alqamah that he said: I entered the Sham, performed
two-rak’ah prayer and said: My God, bring me a virtuous companion. Then
I came near a people, sitting with them, when a man entered and sat
beside me. I asked: Who is that man? They replied: He is Abu al-Dardā’.
I said I invoked Allah to send me a righteous associate, and He sent
you. He asked me: Where are you from? I said, from people of Kufah. He
said: Don’t you have among you the son of Umm ‘Abd, the owner of the two
sandals and the pillow and purger, and the one whom Allah protected
against the Satan, as confirmed by the Prophet (S)? Isn’t there among
you the trustee of the Prophet (S), other than whom no one has
knowledge? Then he said: How do you read “By the night when it spreadeth
its evil!”? Then I recited for him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والليّل إذا يخشى. والنهار إذا تجلّى. وما خلق الذكر والأنثى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

in 92:3). (Then He asked: Did you hear it from your teacher’s mouth?) I
said: By God, I heard it from the Prophet’s mouth (mouth to mouth).”

In another narration he added: “... and yet they reject my assertion of
something I heard from the Messenger of Allah, may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny.[^59]
Again, in another report he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والليّل إذا يخشى. والنهار إذا تجلّى. وما خلق الذكر والأنثى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then he said: “The Prophet (s) has read it to me, from his mouth, and
yet those people insist till it was about to reject my
assertion.”[^60]
All these narrations indicate that in the Qur’ān we have today the
words **"وما خلق"** are added.

Al-Bukhāri, in his Sahih, on the authority of Ibn Abbas reported that
‘Umar ibn al-Khattab said: Allah has delegated Muhammad, upon whom be
God’s peace and benediction, with the truth, and revealed upon him the
Book. Among what He revealed was āyat al-rajm (verse of stoning), which
we read, accepted and comprehended. So the Messenger of Allah (S) stoned
and we stoned after him. I fear that when time prolongs, someone may
say: By God we can never find āyat al-rajm in the Book of Allah, as a
result of which people may go astray through ignoring an obligation
prescribed by Allah. And stoning is a punishment mentioned in the Book
of Allah against any married man or woman when perpetrating fornication,
when it is proved by evidence or through the woman’s conceiving and
confession. We also used to recite in our reading of the Book of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أن لا ترغبوا عن أبائكم فإنه كفر بكم أو أن كفرا بكم إن ترغبوا عن
أبائكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(meaning: Don’t shun your parents since this will be counted as
ingratitude on your part, or: It is ingratitude to shun your
parents).[^61]

In his Sahih,[^62] under the “bāb: Law anna libn Adam wādiyayn labtaghā
thālithan” (If the son of Adam has two valleys he would ask for a third
one), Al-’Imām Muslims said:
“Abu Musā al-‘Ash’ari sent for the qurrā’ (reciters) of Basrah. Three
hundred qurrā’ of the Qur’ān came to him. He told them: “You are the
elect of the people of Basrah’. He asked them to recite, which they did.
(He told them): ‘Do not remain long without reciting the Qur’ān, lest
your hearts, like those who went before you, should harden. Indeed we
used to recite a surah similar in length and power to the Surat
al-Barā’ah, which I forgot except for a single verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو كان لإبن أدم واديان من مال لأبتغى وادياً ثالثاً ولا يملاء جوف إبن
أدم إلا الترَّاب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We would also read a surah like one of the al-Musabbihit, which I forgot
all except this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أيها الذين أمنوا لما تقولون ما لا تفعلون فتكتب شهادة في أعناقكم
فتسألون عنها يوم القيامة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(meaning: O you who believe! Why say you that which you do not? Then it
will be counted a testimony against you and you be answerable about it
on the Day of Resurrection).[^63]

These two alleged surahs, which were forgotten both by Abu Musā
al-‘Ash’ari, one resembling Surat al-Barā’ah, i.e. 129 verses, and the
other resembling one of the Musabbihit, i.e. twenty verses, have both no
existence except in the imagination of Abu Musā. It is really
astonishing. I leave the judgement to the equitable reader.

When Ahl al-Sunnah’s books and Musnads and Sihāh be replete with such
reports, claiming once that the Qur’ān is incomplete, and increased
another time, so what is the reason behind all this vilification against
the Shi’ah who unanimously concurred on the invalidity of such claims.

And when the Shi’i man, the author of Fasl al-Khitāb fi ithbāt tahrif
Kitāb Rabb al-’Arbāb, who died in 1320 Hijrah, had compiled his book
about a hundred years ago, he was preceded by the Egyptian Sunni writer,
the author of the book al-Furqān with about four centuries, as referred
to by al-Shaykh Muhammad al-Midyani, the Dean of al-Shari‘ah College in
Al-’Azhar University.[^64]

The important point to be got from all this discussion, is that the
Sunni and Shi’ah investigating ‘ulamā’ have annulled such narrations,
regarding them as eccentric and unusual, proving through convincing
evidences that the Qur’ān we have today being the very Qur’ān that was
revealed to our Prophet Muhammad (S) without any addition or omission or
substitution or alteration.

How can Ahl al-Sunnah vilify the Shi’ah because of traditions deserving
no credence whatsoever near them, acquitting themselves from this
charge, while their Sihāh confirm the veracity of those traditions?

While referring to such narrations so bitterly and regretfully, how
badly are we in need of disposing of them and discarding them away, had
not been the outspreading campaign launched by some writers and authors
claiming to be committed to the Prophetic Sunnah. They are backed,
behind the scenes, by uncovered circles, financing and urging them to
defame and charge the Shi’ah with impiety, particularly after the
culmination of the Islamic Revolution in Iran.

I address such people and their supporters with these words: Observe
your duty toward Allah regarding your brethren,and hold you fast by the
cord of God all together, and be not divided (among yourselves) and
remember the bounty of God bestowed upon you, when you were enemies (of
each other) He united your hearts together with (mutual) love, and thus
by His favour you have become brethren.

Performing Two Prayers Together
-------------------------------

The other point which is exploited to revile the Shi’ah with, being
their performing salāt al-zuhr (noon prayers) and salāt al-’asr
(afternoon prayers) together, and so also salāt al-maghrib and
al-’ishā’.
While vilifying the Shi’ah (for the alleged defect), Ahl al-Sunnah, in
contrast, assert their being adherent to preserving the salāt, complying
to Allah’s words when saying:

***“Verily prayer is (imposed) upon the believers as (‘a) timed
Ordinance.” (4:103)***

Before issuing any judgement for or against them, we have to discuss the
subject from all dimensions and aspects, reviewing what the two sects
hold in its regard.
There is unanimous agreement among Ahl al-Sunnah concerning the
permissibility of performing salāt al-zuhr and al-‘asr (noon and
afternoon prayers) together at ‘Arafāt (Mount), which is called jam‘
taqdim (precedent joining), and also the permissibility of performing
maghrib and ‘isha’ prayers at the time of ‘isha’, the act called jam‘
ta’khir (late joining). This act is unanimously concurred by all
Muslims, including the Shi’ah and Sunnis, and rather all the Islamic
communities, with no exception.

The disagreement between the Shi’ah and Ahl al-Sunnah lies in the
permissibility of performing together the two obligatory prayers of zuhr
and ‘asr, and also the maghrib and ‘isha’ prayers, throughout the whole
days of the year during settlement, without the presence of excuse of
travel.
The Hanafi school believes in its impermissibility even during travel,
despite the existence of express texts permitting it (jam‘) especially
during trave, contradicting thus the unanimity of the *Ummah*: Shi’ah
and Sunnah.

The Mālikis, Shāfi‘is and Hanbalis concur on the permissibility of jam‘
(performing together) between two obligatory salāts during travel, but
disagree concerning its permissibility in the times of (public) panic
(khawf), sickness, raining and mud (flood).

The Imāmiyyah Shi’ah unanimously concur on its absolute permissibility,
without the excuses of travel or raining or panic, following in this
respect the guide of Ahl al-Bayt Imams among the Pure Kindred (peace be
upon them).

In this point, in particular, we should take an accusative and skeptical
standpoint toward them, as whenever the Sunnis argue against the Shi’ah
with a proof, they would rebut the argument with saying that the Ahl
al-Bayt Imams have taught and explained to them all the unsolvable
matters, boasting of following the example of Infallible Imams having
full knowledge of the Qur’ān and (Prophetic) Sunnah!

I remember that the first time I performed salāt al-zuhr and salāt
al-‘asr, was led by the Martyr Muhammad Bāqir al-Sadr (may God be
pleased with him). I used to perform the noon and afternoon (‘asr)
prayers separately, when being in the Holy City of Najaf, till the
coming of that blessed day. In that day, I went out with al-Sayyid
Muhammad Bāqir al-Sadr from his house to the mosque where he used to
lead the congregational prayers, before his imitators who welcomed me
respectfully, leaving me a room just behind him. When the noon prayers
expired and iqāmah was made for the ‘asr prayers, I had a presentiment
to quit and leave them. But I remained for two reasons, the first being
the dignity of al-Sayyid al-Sadr and his profound solemnity in his
prayer, that I wished to be prolongated. The second reason was my
presence in that place, being the nearest worshipper to him, feeling as
if a force majeure pulling me toward him. As we finished performing the
‘asr prayers, people accumulated around him putting forth their
questions before him, when I stayed behind him listening to the
questions and their answers given by him, except for some undisclosed
ones. Then he accompanied me home for lunch, where I found myself as
honorary guest. I availed myself of the opportunity of that meeting, and
asked him about performing two salāts together, thus:

— O master! Can the Muslim perform two obligatory prayers together in
case of exigency?
He replied: He can do so in all cases with no necessity of presence of
exigency.
I said: What is your proof for this?
He said: Since the Messenger of Allah (S) has performed two obligatory
prayers in al-Madinah with no travel, fear, raining or exigency, but
only for keeping us away from troubles. This fact, thanks to God, is
confirmed and established for us through the pure Imams, and it is also
established for you.
I said: I wonder how could it be established for us while I have never
heard of it before, nor seen any Sunni applying it. Rather, on the
contrary, the Sunnis believe in the invalidity of the salāt if performed
even one minute before the adhān (call for prayer), so what about that
performing prayers hours before (its time) with the noon prayers, or
performing the ‘isha’ prayers together with the maghrib, the act we view
to be indecent and invalid.

Al-Sayyid Muhammad Bāqir al-Sadr realized my perplexity and wonder. He
whispered in the ear of someone of the attendants, who hurriedly went
and brought him two books, which I recognized to be Sahih al-Bukhāri and
Sahih-Muslim. Al-Sayyid al-Sadr asked that knowledge-seeker to make me
acquainted with the traditions related to performing two prayers
together. I myself read in Sahih al-Bukhāri (the traditions showing) how
the Prophet (S) performed together the zuhr and ‘asr prayers and maghrib
and ‘isha’ prayers. In Sahih Muslim I came across a full chapter on
al-jam‘ bayna al-salātayn (performing two prayers together) at time of
presence (hadar) other than times of fear or raining or travel.

I could not hide my wonder and astonishment, while being doubtful that
al-Bukhāri and Muslim with them might be falsified, deciding privately
to review these two books in Tunisia.
After that proof, al-Sayyid al-Sadr sought to know my opinion.
I said: You are quite right, and what you say is the very truth. I
would like to put forth another question.
He said: Please do.
I said: Is it permissible to perform together the four salawāt
(prayers), as practised by a lot of people who perform the prayers of
zuhr, ‘asr, maghrib and ‘isha’ together out of (due) time (qadā’) when
returning home at night?
He said: This is impermissible.
I said: You yourself said before that the Messenger of Allah (S) used
to perform the prayers separately and altogether, the practice through
which we recognized the due times (mawāqit), approved by Allah the
Glorified.

He said: There is a common time for the two faridahs (obligatory
prayers) of zuhr and ‘asr, that starts from the meridian till sunset.
And also for the prayers of maghrib and ‘isha’, that starts from sunset
till the midnight. While the morning prayer has one time beginning from
breaking of dawn till sunrise. Whoever contradicts these fixed times,
has in fact contradicted the Holy verse:

***“Verily prayer is (imposed) upon the believers as (‘a) timed
Ordinance.” (4:103).***

So we cannot, for instance, perform the morning prayer before
dawn-breaking, nor after sunrise. Also it is impermissible to perform
the zuhr and ‘asr prayers before the meridian or after sunset. And
further we are not allowed to perform the maghrib and ‘isha’ prayers
before sunset or after midnight.

I then thanked al-Sayyid Muhammad Bāqir al-Sadr. And though I was
content with all his words, but I never performed two ordinances
together after departing him, till my return to Tunisia, where I engaged
myself deliberately in investigation and research till being
enlightened.

This was my story with Martyr al-Sadr (may God’s mercy be upon him),
concerning the performing together of two obligatory prayers, intending
from citing them that my brothers, among the Sunnis may realize, first,
the morality of the ‘ulamā’ who humbled themselves to deserve the
epithet of being the inheritors of the prophets in respect of knowledge
and ethics. Second, to show how we be unaware of what our Sihāh contain,
while reviling the others on some matters in whose veracity we verily
believe, and which are stated in our Sihāh.

In his Musnad,[^65] Al-’Imām Ahmad ibn Hanbal reported from Ibn ‘Abbās
that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) performed seven and eight
(rak‘ahs) altogether (i.e. maghrib with ‘isha’, and zuhr with ‘asr
prayers) at al-Madinah while being resident not traveller.

In al-Muwatta’,[^66] Al-’Imām Mālik reported that Ibn ‘Abbās said: The
Messenger of Allah (S) performed the zuhr with ‘asr prayers, and maghrib
with ‘isha’ prayers together, without presence of fear or travelling.
The same tradition is reported also by al-’Imām Muslim, in his Sahih,
under the bāb “al-jam‘ bayna al-salātayn fi al-hadar”.[^67]

Muslim also reported from Ibn ‘Abbās that he said: The Messenger
performed together zuhr with ‘asr prayers, and maghrib with ‘isha’
prayers at al-Madinah, with no fear or travel. He (Muslim) said: I asked
Ibn ‘Abbās: Why did he do so? He replied: So that he would never cause
any problem for his *Ummah*.[^68]

The fact indicating that this Prophetic Sunnah was widely known among
the Sahābah, and practised by them, can be sought in the tradition
reported by Muslim too in his Sahih, under the same bāb, by saying: Ibn
‘Abbās addressed us in a sermon after the ‘asr (afternoon), and
continued till sunset and appearance of the stars, when people started
calling: al-salāt, al-salāt. Thereat a man from Banu Tamim, while
perpetually exclaiming: al-salāt, al-salāt., came toward him. Ibn ‘Abbās
said to him: O son of no mother! Do you teach me the Sunnah? Then he
said: I have seen the Messenger of Allah (S) performing together the
zuhr with ‘asr and maghrib with ‘isha’ prayers. In another narration,
Ibn ‘Abbās said to the man: O motherless man, do you teach us the
prayers, and we used to perform two prayers together during the lifetime
of the Messenger of Allah (upon whom be God’s peace and
benediction).[^69]

In his Sahih,[^70] under the bāb “waqt al-maghrib”, al-’Imām al-Bukhāri
said: Adam informed us saying, Shu’bah told us and said, ‘Amr ibn Dinar
said: I heard Jābir ibn Zayd, quoting Ibn ‘Abbās who said: The Prophet,
upon whom be God’s peace and benediction, performed seven (rak‘ahs)
together and eight togetherr (meaning maghrib with ‘isha’ and zuhr with
‘asr prayers).

Also, in his Sahih,[^71] under the bāb ‘”waqt al-‘asr”, al-Bukhāri is
reported to have said: I heard Abu Imamah saying: We performed with
‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz the zuhr prayer, after which we went out and
entered upon Anas ibn Mālik whom we found performing the ‘asr prayer. I
said: What is that prayer you performed? He said: It is the ‘asr prayer,
and it is the prayer of the Messenger of Allah, upon whom be God’s peace
and benediction, which we used to perform with him.

Despite the plainness of these traditions, still there are some who
exploit this point to revile the Shi’ah with. It has once upon a time
occurred in Tunisia, when the prayers leader (imām) in the City of
Qafsah, stood up for reviling and defaming us in the midst of the
worshippers, saying: Have you noticed the religion they brought ...
after performing the zuhr prayer they rise up and perform the ‘asr. It
is a new religion other than the Din of Muhammad the Messenger of Allah.
These people contradict the Qur’ān which says: ***“Verily prayer is
(imposed) upon the believers as (‘a) timed Ordinance.”*** He spared
nothing but reviled with it those who were enlightened and guided.

One of the enlightened, who was a highly learned youth, came toward me
and cited to me so sadly and bitterly what hte leader (of prayer) said.
So I handed him both Sahih al-Bukhāri and Sahih Muslim, asking him to
show the imam the (traditions proving the) veracity of jam‘ (performing
two prayers together), which being of the Prophet’s Sunnah. As I never
intended to debate with him; since I did this before by that which is
better but he responded with reviling and slander, and baseless charges.

However, my friend never stopped praying behind him and when the prayers
finished, the imam sat as usual to give the lessons. Then my friend
advanced to him and put forth the inquiry about performing two faridahs
together. He replied: It is one of the Shi‘ah’s heresies. My friend said
to him: But it is recorded in Sahih al-Bukhāri and Sahih Muslim, with
giving them to him. On reading the bāb al-jam‘ bayna al-salātayn”, he
was shocked by the truth, before all the worshippers, attending his
classes. So he immediately closed the books, and returned them to me
saying: This (sunnah) belongs in particular to the Messenger of Allah,
and when you become an apostle of Allah you can apply it. After that
this friend said to me: I realized then that this man was no more than a
bigoted illiterate (jāhil), making an oath not to pray behind him any
more (being led by him).[^72]

Thereafter, I asked my friend to go back to him to let him be acquainted
with the fact that Ibn ‘Abbās used to perform that salāt (two prayers
together) besides Anas ibn Mālik and many a Companion, so why does he
intend to distinguish the Messenger of Allah to perform it alone?
Haven’t we had a good example in the Messenger of Allah? But my friend
begged me to excuse him of this task, saying: No need for this, since I
am sure that he will never be convinced even when the Messenger of Allah
(S) himself comes to him.

All praise belongs to Allah, that a large number of the youths, after
recognizing this reality, (the performing together of two prayers),
resumed their (performance of) prayers after discarding it. That was
because they were suffering from missing the performing of the prayers
in their due times, in a way they used to resort to perform the four
prayers altogether at night, the act causing them troubles and their
hearts being fed up.But they realized then the wisdom that lies behind
performing two prayers together, as all employees, students and common
people would, through this sunnah, be able to perform the daily prayers
in their due times with restful hearts. Only then they realized the true
meaning of the Messenger’s expression: “.... so that I never create any
trouble for my *Ummah*.

Prostration on Clay
-------------------

All Shi’ah ‘ulamā’ unanimously agree on the preferability of prostrating
on the earth, in accordance with the tradition they report from the
Messenger of Allah (S): “The best prostration is on the earth.”

In another narration, he (S) said:
“It is not permissible to prostrate but only on the earth, or any plant
coming out from it, provided it be unedible and unwearable.”
The author of Wasā’il al-Shi’ah, reports from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn, with the authority of Hishām ibn al-Hakam, from Abu ‘Abd
Allāh (‘a) that he said: Prostration on the earth is preferable since it
is more extremely indicative of modesty, and submission to Allah, the
Mighty and the Glorious.” In another narration, he reported from
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan, through his isnād from Ishaq ibn al-Fadl, that he
questioned Abu ‘Abd Allāh (al-’Imām al-Sādiq) [A] about prostration on
mats (hasir) woven from reed (qasab). He (‘a) replied: There is no
objection to it, but to prostrate on earth is more preferable to me, and
the Messenger of Allah, may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and
his Progeny, liked this, that to make the forehead touch the earth. I
like for you whatever was liked by the Messenger of Allah (S).”

Whereas the Sunni ‘ulamā’ see no objection to prostrate on pens
(zaribah) and carpets, though they prefer it to be (reedy) mats.

There are some narrations reported by al-Bukhāri and Muslim in their
Sahihs, confirming the Messenger’s having a mat made of palm leaves,
using it for prostration. Muslim reported in his Sahih under kitāb
al-hayd, on the aurhotiy of Yahya ibn Yahya and Abu Bakr ibn Abi
Shaybah, from Abu Mu‘āwiyah, from al-’A’mash, from Thabitt ibn ‘Ubayd,
from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad, from ‘A’ishah who said: The Messenger of
Allah (S) said to me, hand me the khumrah from the mosque. She says: I
said: I am menstruant. He said: Your menstruation is not from your
hands.[^73] (Muslim says: Al-Khumrah is a small rug-like, with the size
enough for prostration).

The evidence indicating that the Messenger of Allah was much preferring
prostration on earth, can be sought in the tradition reported by
al-Bukhāri in his Sahih, on the authority of Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri (may
God be pleased with him), who said that the Messenger of Allah, may
God’s peace and benedictions be upon him and his Progeny, used to
seclude himself during the second ten days of the Month of Ramadān. He
kept on this habit for one year, till the coming of the twenty-first
night, the morning of which he was supposed to end his seclusion, when
he said: Whoever secluded himself with me, should do so in the last ten
days. I saw this night, and was made to forget it; I saw myself (in
dream) wading in water and mud, in its morning. So seek it (the night)
in the last ten days, and in every odd night. At that very night, it
rained, and the mosque which was supported by a trellis, started to
leak, when my eyes felt on the Messenger of Allah, may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny, seeing the trace of water and
mud on his forehead, in the morning of the twenty-first day.[^74]

The other evidence demonstrating the Companions’ preferring prostration
on earth, in the presence of the Prophet (S), being the hadith reported
by al-’Imām al-Nasā’i in his Sunan, under “bāb tabrid al-hasā Lis-sijud
‘alayh” (cooling the stones for prostrating on them), who said: Qutaybah
informed us and said, ‘Abbād reported, from Muhammad ibn ‘Amr, from
Sa’id ibn al-Harth, from Jābir ibn ‘Abd Allāh, who said: When we were
performing the zuhr prayers with the Messenger of Allah (S), I picked up
a handful of stones in the palm of my hand, cooling them and shifting
them to the other palm, and when prostrating I would place them to put
my forehand on.[^75]

Added to this, the hadith uttered by the Prophet (S):
“The earth is made for me a place for prostration (masjid) and a
purifier.”[^76]
He also said:
“The earth as a whole is made to us a place for prostration and its
soil made a purifier.”[^77]
Why are Muslims then be fanatic against the Shi’ah because of their
prostration on earth instead of zarābi (moquette)?
And how dare they to charge them with impiety, reviling and defaming
them, falsely and calumniously with the charge of being idolaters?
Further how do the Saudis beat them (the Shi‘ah) merely for keeping the
turbah (piece of clay on which foreheads are put) in their pockets or
bags?

Is this truly the Islam that commands us to respect each other, and
never insult any monotheist Muslim witnessing that there is no god but
Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, establishing prayers,
pyaing the poor-due, fasting the Month of Ramadān and making pilgrimage
to the House of Allah (Makkah)? And can it stand to reason that the
Shi’i undergoes all those troubles, sustaining all those losses to make
pilgrimage to the House (Ka’bah), and visit the Prophet’s tomb, while
being worshippers of stones, as some people desire to portray?

Can’t the Sunnis be convinced with the statement of the Martyr Muhammad
Bāqir al-Sadr, which I quoted in my first book Thumma Ihtadayt (Then I
was guided), when I asked him about the piece of clay (on which they put
their foreheads during their prayers, calling it al-turbah, and he
answered thus: We all prostrate on the dust for Allah, but not for the
dust, as some people claim that the Shi’ah do. And there is difference
between prostration on the dust and prostration for the dust! For the
prostration is only for Allah, praise be to Him the Highest.

And when the Shi’i takes care so as the place of his prostration be pure
and accepted by Allah, responding to the commands of the Messenger of
Allah and the Pure Imams of Ahl al-Bayt. Especially nowadays where all
mosques being carpetted with soft moquette, which are made of unknown
material to all the Muslims, and never be made in Islamic countries,
besides some of them being made of materials on which prostration is
forbidden... are we to discard and renounce the Shi’i who is concerned
about the validity of his salāt, and accuse him of being infidel and
polytheist just for a fictitious suspicion?

The Shi’i who cares about the affairs of his Din (religion),
particularly his salāt which is the backbone of religion (‘amud al-Din),
taking off his belt and watch whose band is made of leather of unknown
origin; and sometimes his foreign trousers so as to pray in a loose and
waving trousers, for the only reason to take precaution and attaching
much importance to that magnificent halting before Allah, so as not to
meet his Lord with any undeirable thing ... does all this deserve to be
met with all this scorning and aversion, or it should be met with
respect and exaltation? Since he has magnified the offerings consecrated
to Allah, as said in the Qur’ān:

***“And whoever respecteth the signs of God verily it is (the
reflection) of the piety of the hearts.” (22:32)***

O bondmen of Allah, fear the wrath of Allah and speak words straight to
the point. Allah says:

***“And had it not been God’s grace upon you and His mercy in this world
and the hereafter, indeed had seized you for the slander ye entered
into, a grievous chastisement.” (24:14, 15)***

Al-Raj'ah (Restoration to Life)
-------------------------------

This is exclusively held by the Shi’ah. I investigated and searched in
all the Sunni books but failed to find any trace of it.

In this regard, the Shi’ah depend upon akhbār (reports) and narrations
they quoted from the pure Imams (peace be upon them), which indicate
that Allah, the Glorious and the Exalted, will resurrect some of the
believers and some corrupt culprits so as the believers revenge against
their and Allah’s enemies in this worldly life before the hereafter.

These reports, through being sahih (correct) and mutawātir (narrated
through authentic chains), but are not necessarily binding upon Ahl
al-Sunnah if they trust not their veracity, and consequently it is not
incumbent upon them to believe in them, just because Ahl al-Bayt Imams
reported them from their grandfather the Messenger of Allah (S)! Nay, as
we have committed ourselves to be equitable in research, and discard
bigotry, so we never task them but only with that they bind themselves
to, and report in their Sihāh, since the traditions on raj‘ah have never
been cited in their books or transmitted by them. Therefore, they are
quite free to disbelieve in these reports, and reject them, in case
anyone of the Shi’ah intends to let them be acquainted with such
narrations.

Due to the fact that the Shi’ah have never imposed on or coerced anyone
to believe in the raj‘ah, nor they charge with impiety anyone denying
it, so no need is there for all that vilification and exaggeration
against the Shi’ah, specially when taking into consideration their
interpreting some Qur’ānic verses in a way denoting this meaning and
confirming it, such:

***“And on the Day when We will collect from every people a party from
those who belied our signs, then will they be formed into groups”
(27:83).***

In Tafsir al-Qummi, it is reported from Ibn Abi ‘Umayr, from Hammād,
from Abu ‘Abd Allāh (al-’Imām) Ja’far al-Sādiq (peace be upon him), that
he said: What do people say about this āyah “And on the Day when We will
collect from every people a party”? (Hammād says:) I replied: They
believe this to be on the Day of Resurrection. He (‘a) said: It is not
that which they claim, but it is verily about the raj‘ah (restoration to
life) ... is it proper for Allah to resurrect a party of every *Ummah*
(community) and leave the rest? (No) but the āyah on Resurrection (Day)
be this one:

***“We will gather them (and) then leave not behind, of them any one.”
(18:47)***

It is also reported in the book ‘Aqā’id al-’Imāmiyyah of al-Shaykh
Muhammad Ridā al-MuZaffar, that he said: The belief held by the Imamiyah
in accordance with what is reported from Al al-Bayt (the Prophet’s
Household), peace be upon them, that Allah, the Most High, will
resurrect a group of the dead and return them to the world (dunyā), with
the same shapes they were before, dignifying some and humiliating some
others, distinguishing between the rightful from falsifiers and the
oppressed from the oppressors. This shall occur during the reappearance
and rise of al-Mahdi of Al Muhammad, upon him and them be the best
benediction and peace.
And no one will be resurrected but whoever attained the extremest
degree of faith (imān) or the extremest degree of corruption, who all
shall be caused to die afterwards, and then to nushur (gathering for
reckoning) and to get the thawāb (reward) and ‘iqāb (punishment)
according to what they deserve. It is exactly as stated by the Almighty
Allah in His Noble Book, about those resurrected ones, who were never
reclaimed through restoration to life, deserving consequently Allah’s
wrath, desiring then to be resurrected for the third time with the hope
of being reclaimed: They shall say: “O’ our Lord! Twice dist Thou cause
us to die, and twice didst Thou give us life, and (now) we do confess
our sins: Is there then a way to get out (of this)?”[^78]

My view is that if Ahl al-Sunnah never believe in the doctrine of
raj‘ah, they are quite rightful in this respect, but they have no right
whatsoever to revile and defame whoever believing in it, due to the
establishment of the texts regarding it for him.As that who knows not
has no authority over that who knows, and also the ignorant has no
authority over the learned, and disbelieving in something can never be
an evidence on its non-existence or falsehood, as there are many
irrefutable proofs being approved by the Muslims while being disapproved
by the people of scripture (Ahl al-Kitāb) including the Jews and
Christians.

And there are numerous beliefs and narrations held by the Sunnis
concerning God’s friends (Awliyā’) and the pious, and followers of the
Sufi creeds, that seem impossible and abominable, but not calling for
vilification and exaggeration against the Sunnis’ faith.
On the other hand, the doctrine of raj‘ah has a support in the Qur’ān
and the Prophetic Sunnah, besides its being not imposible for Allah, Who
cited for us examples about it in the Qur’ān, like His saying:

***“Or (didst thou not see) like him who passed by a town and it had
fallen on its roofs, he exlaimed, (Oh) How can God (ever) bring it to
life (again), after (this) its death,” Where-upon God caused him to die
a hundred years and thereafter raised him (again to life).” (2:259)***

Or the Almighty’s saying:

***“Didst thou not see those who went forth from their homes, and they
were in thosuands, for fear of death; then God said unto them, ‘Die ye!’
(and they died) and thereafter He restored them to life ...” (2:243)***

Allah caused some people from among the Children of Israel, and
thereafter restored them to life, in accordance with the following
verse:

***“And (remember ye!) when ye said, “O’ Moses! Never will we believe in
thee until we see God manifestly,” the Thunder seized you while ye
looked on. Then We raised you after your death that haply ye might be
thankful.” (2:55, 56)***

Further, about the fellows of the Cave who stayed dead in their cave for
more than three hundred years, God says:

***“Then We raised them up that We might know which of the two parties
reckoneth best the duration of their stay.” (18:12)***

Thus we noticed how the Book of Allah indicates that the raj‘ah happened
for the previous nations, so its occurrence for the *Ummah* of Muhammad
is not impossible, especially when it is to be reported and confirmed by
Ahl al-Bayt Imams, peace be upon them, who are the truthful and
knowledgeable.

But there are some intruders who claim that to believe in raj‘ah is the
same as believing in the tanāsukh (transmigration), which is held by
some of the atheists. This claim is manifesty devious and false, the
purpose of which being no more than vilification and tahwil
(exaggeration) against the Shi’ah. Since those believing in the
principle of tanāsukh, never hold that man is restored to life with his
own body, soul, shape and nature, but say that the soul is transmitted
from the body of a man died to that of another man born anew, or even to
an animal.

This, as known by all, is absolutely far off from the creed and beliefs
of Muslims who say that Allah will raise up the dead from their graves
with their bodies and souls. While the raj‘ah in fact has nothing to do
with the tanāsukh, which is held only by the ignorant and illiterate
people who have no knowledge, or the impious who have evil intentions.

Extravagance (Ghuluww) (In Loving the Imams)
--------------------------------------------

We never mean by ghuluww here to deviate from the path of truth and
follow the hawā (desire), till the beloved turning to be the worshipped
god, which is verily a blasphemy and polytheism that can never believed
by any Muslim having faith in the Islamic message and prophethood of
Muhammad (S).
The Messenger of Allah (S) determined fixed limits for such love, when
he said to al-’Imām ‘Ali (‘a):
“Two categories of people will face ruin on account of you: he who
loves you with exaggeration, and he who hates you intensely.”

He (S) also said:
“O ‘Ali, in you there is a parable of Jesus, the son of Mary, who was
detested by the Jews to the extent astonishing his mother, and loved by
the Christians till imparting upon him the position that he was unfit
for it.”[^79]
This being the negative meaning for ghuluww, when love exceeds the
bounds till rendering the beloved as a god, giving him a rank higher
than his own, or when hatred exceeds the bounds reaching the extent of
calumny and false accusation.

While the Shi’ah have never gone to the extremes in loving ‘Ali and the
Imams among his sons, but imparted upon them the reasonable position
determined by the Messenger of Allah (S), as his executors (awsyā’) and
successors, with no one claiming their attaining the degree of
prophethood let not the divinity. We should never care or give heed to
the allegations of some troublesome persons claiming that the Shi’ah
have made a god of ‘Ali and believed in his deity. Such people, if what
is reported be correct, could neither represent a sect, nor a school of
thought (madhhab), nor Shi’ah, nor Kharijites (khawārij).

And what is the fault of the Shi’ah if the Lord of Power and Glory says
in His Book: “Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I demand not of you any
recompense for it (the toils of the apostleship) save the love of (my)
kinsfolk.” And the mawaddah (loving kindness), as is known, is greater
than mere love (hubb). Also the Messenger of Allah (S) says:
“None of you will be a (true) believer till loving for his brother (in
Din) what he loves for himself, and mawaddah enjoins on you to deprive
you of something so as to love with it another one.”

And what fault the Shi’ah have when the Messenger of Allah (S) says:
“O ‘Ali, you are a master in this world and a master in the Hereafter.
Whoever loves you has loved me and whoever hates you is hating me. Your
lover is the lover of Allah and your hater is the hater of Allah, and
woe be unto that who detests you.”[^80]
He further says: “To love ‘Ali is faith, and to hate him is
hypocrisy.”[^81]
He also says:
“Whoever dies with the love of Al Muhammad be in his heart, his death
is that of a martyr. Verily that who dies upon the love of Al Muhammad
shall die forgiven, and whoever dies upon love of Al Muhammad shall die
penitent. Whoever dies upon love of Al Muhammad shall die a believer of
perfect faith, and that who dies upon love of Al Muhammad the angel of
death will augur him with heavens...”[^82]

And why to blame or reproach the Shi’ah if they love a man about whom
the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Tomorrow I will give my standard to a
man loves God and His Messenger, and God and His Messenger love
him...”[^83]
As the lover of ‘Ali is the lover of Allah and His Messenger, with
being a mu’min (true believer), while the hater of ‘Ali is in fact the
hater of Allah and His Messenger, and being a munāfiq (hypocrite).

It will not be out of context here to cite al-’Imām al-Shāfi‘i’s famous
quartrain on their love:

O Household of the Messenger of Allah, love for you.

Is an obligation from Allah, revealed in the Qur’ān.

It suffices as the greatest honour bestowed on you,

That his prayer is as nothing who does not salute you.

In regard of them and their love, al-Farazdaq disclosed his famous poem:

From a folk whose love is Din, and hatred is.

Kufr and their nearness is deliverance and refuge.

When counting pious people, they be their leaders,

Or said who the best on earth, none be except them.

The Shi’ah loved Allah and His Messenger, and through this love they
were made to love Ahl al-Bayt: Fātimah and ‘Ali and al-Hasan and
al-Husayn, the fact on which countless traditions are there, reported by
the Sunni ‘ulamā’ in their Sihāh, some of which I have cited for the
sake of brevity.

And when the love for ‘Ali and Ahl al-Bayt represents in general the
love for the Messenger of Allah (S), we have to know the extent of love
required from the Muslims so as to learn if there be ghuluww (excess) as
alleged by some.
The Messenger of Allah (S) said:
“None of you will be a (true) believer till I become for him more
beloved than his children, and father and all people.”[^84]

On this basis, every Muslim should love ‘Ali and the Pure Imams among
his sons more than people as a whole including his family and children,
as only through this the faith (imān) can be established, as confirmed
by the Prophet (S) in the aforementioned hadith.

Thus the Shi’ah never overstate, but give each right owner his due, and
they were commanded by the Messenger of Allah to hold ‘Ali in a position
parable to that of the head to the body, and the same position of the
two eyes to the head. Is tere anyone ready to relinquish of his eyes or
his head?

On the other side, an excessive extravagance is found with Ahl al-Sunnah
in their love for the Sahābah and undue consecration.But it seems as
merely a reaction against the Shi’ah, who never believed in the ‘adālah
(justice, straightforwardness) of the Sahābah as a whole.Whereas the
Umayyads used to elevate the status of the Sahābah, belittling and
degrading on the other hand the Prophet’s Household, to the extent that
when sending benedictions upon Muhammad and his Progeny, they would add:
“and upon his Companions all.” All this is due to the fact that sending
benedictions upon Ahl al-Bayt has a virtue to which there was no
precedent, nor can be reached by anyone.

So they (the Umayyads) intended to elevate the Sahābah to that sublime
degree, being unaware of the fact that Allah the Glorified has commanded
the Muslims on top of whom be all the Sahābah, to send benedictions upon
Muhammad and ‘Ali and Fātimah with al-Hasanayn. And the prayer of that
who does not send blessings upon them is rejected and can never be
accepted by Allah if it be confined upon Muhammad alone, as is confirmed
and recorded in Sahih al-Bukhāri and Sahih Muslim.

The reason why we call it ghuluww on the part of the Sahābah lies in the
fact that Ahl al-Sunnah exceed the logic limits when ascribing justice
to all of the Sahābah while Allah and His Messenger bear witness that
among them are debauchees, renegades, deviators and hypocrites.

Their ghuluww is quite manifest when claiming that the Messenger of
Allah (S) may err and be corrected by a Companion, or that the Satan
plays and sports in the presence of the Prophet, but escapes when seeing
‘Umar. And also the ghuluww is explicit when they say that if Allah
inflicts the Muslims, including the Messenger of Allah, with a
tribulation, no one would be in safe of it except Ibn al-Khattāb. The
extravagance is even more explicit when they annul the Prophet’s Sunnah
and follow the sunnah of the Sahābah particularly al-Khulafā’
al-Rāshidun. Till now I have revealed instances of some of these
practices, and anyone desires to get more information, has to search and
meditate in order to put his hand on more of such misconceptions.

Al-Mahdi, the Awaited
---------------------

He also became one of the topics misused by Ahl al-Sunnah to revile the
Shi’ah. Some of them transgressed the limits by making of it a point of
mockery and derision, as they negate, or say, believe it impossible for
a human being to be alive and unseen for twelve centuries. Some of the
contemporary writers even dare to say: “The Shi’ah have fabricated and
forged the idea of the occulted Imam who will verily deliver them,
because of the much oppression and persecution they experienced from
time immemorial to the present day. So they consoled themselves by the
wish of the Awaited al-Mahdi, who will fill the earth with justice and
equity and take their revenge from their enemies.”

The topic of the Promised al-Mahdi has become the town-talk in the
recent years after the culmination of the Islamic Revolution in Iran,
with the Muslims, especially the educated youth starting everywhere, to
inquire about the truth and authenticity of al-Mahdi .... whether is he
factually there and has existence in the Islamic doctrines or just one
of the compositions or forgeries of the Shi’ah?

Despite the books and researches compiled and written by the Shi’ah
‘ulamā’, long ago and recently[^85] and despite the communications
between many Sunnis and their brethren the Shi’ah through numerous
conferences and discussions on miscellaneous doctrinal subjects, this
topic remains so ambiguous to many of them, since they never used to
hear the like of these episodes.

What is then the reality of the Promised al-Mahdi in the Islamic
creeds?
The discussion about the topic is divided into two parts: the first
relates to make a research on al-Mahdi through the Book (Qur’ān) and
(Prophetic) Sunnah. The second focuses on his life (biography),
occultation and reappearance.

Concerning the first research, it can be said that there is agreement
between the Shi’ah and Sunnah on the fact that the Messenger of Allah
(S) has foretold about him, informing his Companions that Allah, the
Glorious and Exalted, shall verily make him to reappear at the end of
Time (world, zamān). It is to be noticed that both the Shi’ah and Sunni
‘ulamā’ have reported many traditions about al-Mahdi (‘a) in their
authentic books (Sihāh) and Musnads.

I, in my turn, and as usual, to fulfil the commitment I undertook on
myself in all the subjects discussed in this book, that not to infer (as
a proof) but only through what is confirmed and sahih (correct,
authentic) for Ahl al-Sunnah and the Shi’ah.

In Sunan Abi Dāwud,[^86] it is reported that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said:

“If there remained but a single day of the (end of) Time, Allah would
prolong that day till He sends a man of my progeny, whose name is like
mine, and whose father’s name is my father’s, who will fill the earth
with justice and equity as it had been filled with oppression and
tyranny.”
In Sunan Ibn Mājah, [^87] the following tradition is reported. The
Messenger of Allah (S) said:
“We are the Ahl al-Bayt for whom Allah has chosen the hereafter to this
world. My Ahl al-Bayt will face after me difficulties, hardships and
persecution in the lands, until a people will come from the east
(mashriq) bearers of black banners. They will demand the right but it
will be denied. So, they will fight and will emerge victorious. They
will be given what they demanded, but will not accept it till they give
it (the right to rule) to a man from my Ahl al-Bayt, who would fill it
(the earth) with justice as it was filled with oppression.”

In his Sunan, Ibn Mājah said: The Messenger of Allah (may God’s peace
and benediction be upon him and his Progeny) said:
“Al-Mahdi is from us, the Ahl al-Bayt. Al-Mahdi is among the children
of Fātimah.”
He said:
“Al-Mahdi will verily rule my *Ummah*, for seven years if it (his rule)
be short, or otherwise it be nine years. During this period my *Ummah*
will live in an unprecedented bounty, giving its fruit, saying nothing
of it. Fortunes will be, in that period, accumulated. A man would rise
and say: O Mahdi, give me. He will say: Take.”[^88]
In Sahih al-Tirmidhi,[^89] it is reported that the Messenger of Allah
(S) said:
“A man of my Ahl al-Bayt whose name is like mine, will verily rule (the
world). And if there remained but a single day of the (end of) time,
Allah would prolong that day till he assumes the rule.
Further the Messenger of Allah (S) is reported to have said:
“The world shall never end till the Arabs will verily be ruled by a man
of my Ahl al-Bayt, whose name is like mine.”

In his Sahih[^90] al-’Imām al-Bukhāri is reported to have said: Ibn
Bukayr, told us saying we are told by al-Layth, from Ibn Shahab, from
Nafi’ the mawlā of Abu Qatādah al-’Ansari, that Abu Hurayrah said: The
Messenger of Allah ( upon whom be God’s peace and benediction) said:
“What would be your condition when the son of Mary (Jesus) is raised
down among you, and your leader (Imam) be of you.”

The author of Ghāyat al-ma’mul says: It is commonly known among the old
and contemporary ‘ulamā’, that at the end of Time, a man of Ahl al-Bayt
called al-Mahdi should appear. The ahādith (traditions) about al-Mahdi
reached us through a group of pious Sahābah and chains of reliable
traditionists like: Abu Dāwud, al-Tirmidhi, Ibn Mājah, al-Tabarani, Abu
Ya‘lā, al-Bazzaz, al-’Imām Ahmad ibn Hanbal, and al-Hākim (may God be
pleased with them all). And mistaken is whoever has weakened all the
traditions about al-Mahdi.

Al-Hāfiz, in Fath al-Bāri, says: There are many authentic traditions
(mutawātir) confirming that al-Mahdi is of this *Ummah*, and that Jesus
the son of Mary will reappear and perform his prayers behind him.[^91]
In al-Sawā‘iq al-muhriqah, Ibn Hajar al-Haythami said: The ahādith
containing references to the reappearance of al-Mahdi are so many and
mutawātir (authentic).”[^92]

Al-Shawkāni, in his risālah (treatise) called: al-Tawdih fi tawātur mā
jā’a fi al-muntaZar wa al-dajjāl wa al-Messiah, after citing the
traditions about al-Mahdi, says: “Whatever we cited, that reaching the
extent of tawātur, as is not covered or unknown for that who has honour
of cognizance.”

In al-Lumu‘āt, al-Shaykh ‘Abd al-Haqq says: “The ahādith reaching the
extent of tawātur (authentic chains) unanimously confirm that al-Mahdi
is of Ahl al-Bayt and son of Fātimah.”[^93]
Also al-Sabbān, in his book Is‘āf al-rāghibin, says: “Many authentic
(mutawātir) akhbār reported from the Messenger of Allah (may God’s peace
and benedictions be upon him and his Progeny) confirming his
(al-Mahdi’s) reappearance, and his being of Ahl al-Bayt, and that he
will fill the earth with equity and justice.”[^94]

In his book Sabā’ik al-dhahab, al-Suwaydi is reported to have said:
“That upon which all the ‘ulamā’ have concurred is al-Mahdi’s being the
one who is to rise (al-qā’im) at the end of the Time (al-zamān), and
that he will fill the earth with justice. The ahādith that confirm his
reappearance are so many.”[^95]
Ibn Khaldun, in his Muqaddimah, also says: “Know that what is widely
known among Ahl al-’Islām (‘ulamā’ and people) throughout course of
time, is that at the end of the Time a man of Ahl al-Bayt should appear,
who would support the Din, and establish justice. He is called
al-Mahdi.”[^96]

Moreover, many traditions about al-Mahdi are reported by contemporary
‘ulamā’, such as the Mufti of al-’Ikhwān al-Muslimun al-Sayyid Sābiq in
his book al-‘Aqā’id al-’Islāmiyyah, deeming the idea of al-Mahdi to be
among the Islamic doctrines (‘aqā’id) in which all should believe.
With their multiplicity, the ahādith about al-Mahdi are reported and
cited in the Shi’ah books, to the extent it is said that the ahādith
reported from the Messenger of Allah (S) about al-Mahdi exceed in number
all his ahādith about other subjects.

Further, the researcher Lutf Allāh al-Sāfi, in his encylopedia Muntakhab
al-’athar, reported many traditions about al-Mahdi from more than sixty
sources of Ahl al-Sunnah books, including al-Sihāh al-Sittah (the Six
Sahihs), and more than ninety references of the Shi’ah books, including
al-Kutub al-’Arba‘ah.

In regard of the second subject, which deals with the birth, life,
occultation of al-Mahdi and his being alive. This part also was never
negated by some of the reliable Sunni ‘ulamā’, who believe al-Mahdi to
be Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-‘Askari, the Twelfth Imam of Ahl al-Bayt.
And that he was born, and is still alive, and will reappear at the end
of the Time to fill the earth with equity and justice, and through him
Allah will surely make His Din victorious. In this respect they agree
with the beliefs held by the Imāmiyyah Shi’i. Hereunder some of those
‘ulamā’:

1. Muhyi al-Din ibn al-‘Arabi, in al-Futuhāt al-Makkiyyah.
2. Sibt ibn al-Jawzi, in his book Tadhkirat al-khawāss.
3. ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-Shirāni, in ‘Aqā’id al-’akābir.
4. Ibn al-Khashshāb in Tawarikh mawalid al-’A’immah wa wafayātihim.
5. Muhammad al-Bukhāri al-Hanafi, in Fasl al-khitāb.
6. Ahmad ibn Ibrāhim al-Balādhuri, in al-Hadith al-mutasalsil.
7. Ibn al-Sabbāgh al-Māliki, in al-Fusul al-Muhimmah.
8. Al-‘Arif ‘Abd al-Rahmān, in Mir’āt al-’asrār.
9. Kamāl al-Din ibn Talhah, in Matālib al-sa’ul fi manāqib Al
al-Rasul.
10. Al-Qunduzi al-Hanafi, in Yanābi‘ al-mawaddah.

If any researcher pursues the matter, he will verily come across among
Ahl al-Sunnah ‘ulamā’, in greater number than those we referred to, who
believe in the birth of al-Mahdi and that he is still alive till Allah
the Most High makes him to reappear.

Then we are left with only those among Ahl al-Sunnah who deny his birth
and his being alive, though admitting the veracity of the ahādith about
him (al-Mahdi). But they can never be considered hujjah (authority) over
the others believing in such issue.
Such assumption is not denied by the Holy Qur’ān, in which Allah coined
many a similitude about this for those having inactive minds, so as to
be liberated from the fetters and to give the reins to their thoughts
and intellects to be certain and submit that Allah, Subhanah, is Able to
do all things.

So the Muslim, whose heart is filled with faith, can never be astonished
when hearing that Allah has caused ‘Uzayr (Ezra) to die for a hundred
years, then brought him back to life. Thereat he would look at his food
and drink which have not rotted,and to his ass how would Allah assemble
its bones and then clothe them with flesh, rendering it to its former
condition after its bones have rotted away. And when the matter became
clear unto him, he said: I know now that Allah is Able to do all things.
Glorified is Allah! How soon he changes his mind. As before the event,
he wondered and thought it to be impossible when passing by a township,
which had fallen into utter ruin, exclaiming: How shall Allah (ever)
bring this (township) to life (again), after its death?

The Muslim believing in the Qur’ān never finds strange the story of our
master Abraham, when he made the bird into parts, placing each of them
on the hills, calling them then, when they would come to him in haste.

And any Muslim would never find strange the fire’s being cool, and never
burning or harming our lord Abraham, as when he be thrown into it, Allah
said to it: O fire, be coolness and peace (for Abraham).

The (true) Muslim also would never find strange that our doyen Jesus was
born without the male’s sperm-drop (nutfah), i.e. with no father, and
that he is still alive, not dead, and will be restored to the earth.

Moreover, every Muslim would never find strange to see our master Jesus
Christ raising the dead, healing that who was born blind, and the leper;
and that the sea be split for our master Moses and the Children of
Israel, so as they would walk through it without being moistened, and
his staff be turned into a serpent, with his transforming the Nile water
into blood.

The Muslim would also never find strange when knowing that our lord
Solomon used to talk to the birds, and the jinn, and the ants, with his
throne be carried and flown in the skies place to place, and the throne
of Balqis be straightened within moments.
Even the Muslim would never find strange that Allah caused the fellows
of the Cave to die for three hundred years, and more other nine (years),
raising them again to life, when the grandson of the grandson became
older than the grandfather’s grandfather.

Further he would never find strange being told that our master al-Khidr
(peace be upon him) is still alive, and never died, and that he met our
lord Moses (‘a).

He would never find strange too the fact that Iblis (upon whom be God’s
damnation) is not dead and still alive, and that he was created before
Adam (peace be upon him). And also he is still joining the procession of
mankind from the first day of his creation till the day of his
perishness. However he is hidden with no one being ever able to see
him,despite his hideous deeds and abominable acts, while he can see all
the people.

Every Muslim has faith in all these things, never wondering or finding
their occurrence to be strange, so why should he consider the existence
of al-Mahdi unseen for some time — for a wisdom ordained by Allah the
Glorious — to be strange or incredible.

It is to be noted that whatever is stated in the Qur’ān, which is
extensively more than the instances we referred to, cannot be regarded
ordinary or common things among people, besides being impossible to be
done by them even if they combine together for the purpose.

But it is altogether the making of Allah, Whom nothing in the earth or
heavens can escape or strive against. And it also should be trusted by
all Muslims, as they have believed in whatever revealed in the Holy
Qur’ān, without any exceptio or reservation.

And due to the fact that al-Mahdi is the Imam of the Shi’ah, who lived
among them beside his forefathers, so they should be better aware of
whatever is related to him and said about him, and the people of Mecca
are better aware of its (mountain) passes.

Further, the Shi’ah revere and glorify their leaders, making for Ahl
al-Bayt Imams special tombs, which they constructed and kept abide to
make pilgrimage to, seeking blessings through them. Based on this, had
the Twelfth Imam — al-Mahdi (‘a) — deceased, there would have been a
tomb (or shrine) known for all. Besides, it would have been feasible for
them to claim the permissibility of raising him (to life) after death,
the thing possible to come true, as is referred to by the Qur’ān, when
taking into consideration their belief in the doctrine of raj‘ah
(restoration of life). Moreover, they even insist on the belief that
al-Mahdi (‘a) is alive and having provision, and his being unseen for a
wisdom willed by Allah, the Glorious and the Exalted, that is only known
by those who are firmly rooted in knowledge and their awliyā’
(followers).

Anyhow it should be known that the disagreement between the Sunnah and
Shi’ah regarding the case of al-Mahdi (‘a) is not of essential nature,
as they both believe in his reappearance at the end of the Time, and
that Jesus (‘a) will perform his prayers behind him.Further they both
believe that he will fill the earth with equity and justice as it had
been filled with oppression and tyranny, and the Muslims taking
possession of the whole earth during his reign, with prevalence of
welfare and prosperity that no poor shall be there.
The only point of controversy between them being that the Shi’ah
believe that he is born, while the Sunnah hold that he is to be born (in
future), with concurring both on his reappearance at the end of the
Time.

So let the Sunnah and Shi’ah unite and be in agreement on truth word,
and on bringing together the disintegrated *Ummah* with striving to
eliminate any difference, and gathering it again. Further, all of them
should sincerely invoke Allah, with good intentions during their
prayers, to hasten his reappearance in which lies the deliverance, and
which entails victory for the *Ummah* of Muhammad (may Allah’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny).
Our last prayer is that all praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the
Worlds, and benediction and peace be upon the most honourable of the
prophets and apostles, our master and lord Muhammad and his good and
pure Progeny.

Muhammad al-Tijāni al-Samāwi
----------------------------

[^1]: Musannaf al-Hidāyah; also al-Zamakhshari, in his book Rabi'
al-'abrār, reported that the first who used the finger-ring in the left,
contrary to the Prophetic Sunnah, was Mu'āwiyah ibn Abi Sufyān.

[^2]: Minhāj al-Sunnah of Ibn Taymiyyah, Vol. II, p. 143, "bāb
al-tashabbuh bi al-rawāfid".

[^3]: Al-Zarqāni, Sharh al-Mawāhib, Vol. V, p. 13.

[^4]: Al-Zamakhshari in his book Rabi' al-'abrār.

[^5]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. VII, p. 99, "bāb mā yajuz min al-ghadab wa
al-shiddah li-amr Allāh".

[^6]: Ibid., Vol. II, p. 252, "kitāb salāt al-tarāwih".

[^7]: Ibid., Vol. II, p. 252, "kitāb salāt al-tarāwih".

[^8]: Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 99, op. cit.

[^9]: Ibid., Vol. II, p. 35, (... and thus interpreted by 'A'ishah too
who performed four rak'ahs) — p. 36.

[^10]: Ibn Hajar in al-Sawā'iq al-muhriqah, p. 106; Dhakhā'ir al-'uqbā,
p. 64, al-Riyād al-nādirah, Vol. II, p. 215; Ihqāq al-haqq, Vol. VII, p.
217.

[^11]:

[^12]: Ibn 'Abd Rabbih, al-'Iqd al-farid, Vol. III, p. 42.

[^13]: Sahih al-Tirmidhi, Vol. V, p. 328; Mustadrak al-Hākim, Vol. III,
p. 148; al-'Imām Ahmad in his Musnad, Vol. V, p. 189.

[^14]: Mustadrak al-Hākim, Vol. II, p. 343; Kanz al-'ummāl, Vol. V, p.
95; al-Sawā'iq al-muhriqah, of Ibn Hajar, p. 184.

[^15]: Kanz al-'ummāl, Vol. VI, p. 155; al-Haythami in Majma'
al-zawā'id, Vol. IX, p. 108; Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalāni in al-'Isābah;
al-Tabarāni in al-Jāmi' al-Kabir; Ta'rikh Ibn 'Asākir, Vol. II, p. 99;
Mustadrak al-Hākim, Vol. III, p. 128; Hilyat al-'awliyā', Vol. IV, p.
349; Ihqāq al-haqq, Vol. V, p. 108.

[^16]:

[^17]: Nahj al-balāghah, Kutbah No. 87. In his exposition of this
sermon, Muhammad 'Abduh made this commentary: Any of Ahl al-Bayt Imams
may die, but in fact he is not dead, since his spirit remains effulging
light and brighness over the world of being.

[^18]: Yanābi' al-mawaddah, of al-Qunduzi al-Hanafi, Vol. III, p. 99.

[^19]: Sahih Al Bukhari Vol. VIII, p. 127; Sahih Muslim, Vol. VI, p. 3.

[^20]: Ibn 'Abd Rabbih, al-'Iqd al-farid, Vol. III, p. 42.

[^21]: Ibn Hajar al-Shāfi'i, al-Sawā'iq al-muhriqah, p. 148; al-Suyuti,
al-Durr al-manthur, Vol. II, p. 60; Kanz al-'ummāl, Vol. I, p. 168; Usd
al-ghābah fi ma'rifat al-Sahābah, Vol. III, p. 137.

[^22]: Nahj al-balāghah, Muhammad 'Abduh, Khutbah No. 144.

[^23]: Tafsir al-Tabari, Vol. XIV, p. 134; Tafsir Ibn Kathir, Vol. II,
p. 570; Tafsir al-Qurtubi, Vol. XI, p. 272; Shawāhid al-tanzil, of
al-Hasakāni, Vol. I, p. 334; Yanabi' al-mawaddah; Ihqāq al-haqq of
al-Tustari, p. 482.

[^24]: Manāqib Al Abi Tālib, "bāb fi ahwāl al-'Imām al-Sādiq".

[^25]: Al-Suyuti, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 661.

[^26]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. IV, p. 78, "Kitāb bad' al-khalq", "bāb
dhikr al-malā'ikah".

[^27]: Ibid., Vol. IV, 250, "bāb al-mi'rāj", Sahih Muslim, Vol. I, p.
101, "bāb al-'isrā' bi Rasul Allāh wa fard al-salawāt".

[^28]: Ibid., Vol. IV, 250, "bāb al-mi'rāj", Sahih Muslim, Vol. I, p.
101, "bāb al-'isrā' bi Rasul Allāh wa fard al-salawāt".

[^29]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. II, p. 259.

[^30]: Al-Suyuti, op.cit.

[^31]: Sunan al-Bayhaqi, Mustadrak al-Hākim.

[^32]: Al-Suyuti, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 176.

[^33]: Al-Suyuti, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 176.

[^34]: Ibn Sa'd, al-Tabaqāt al-Kubrā.

[^35]: Sunan al-Bayhaqi.

[^36]: Al-Suyuti, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 178.

[^37]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. VII, p. 102.

[^38]: Al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, Vol. III, p. 61.

[^39]: Ihyā' 'ulum al-Din, of Hujjatul Islām Abu Hāmid al-Ghazāli.

[^40]: Al-Rāzi, Ahkām al-Qur'ān, Vol. II, p. 10.

[^41]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. VII, p. 81, "bāb lam yakun al-Nabi
fāhishan wa la mutafahhishan".

[^42]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. IV, p. 158.

[^43]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. V, p. 158.

[^44]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. IV, p. 131.

[^45]: Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 131.

[^46]: Al-Tha'labi in al-Tafsir al-kabir, and al-Tabari in his al-Tafsir
al-Kabir too, in his interpretation of the verse on mut'ah.

[^47]: Al-Fakhr al-Rāzi, in al-Tafsir al-kabir, in his interpretation of
the verse: "And those of whom ye seek content (by marrying them) ..."
(4:24).

[^48]: Al-'Imām Ahmad in his Musnad, Vol. I, p. 337.

[^49]: Sahih al-Tirmidhi, Vol. I, p. 157.

[^50]: Al-Tāhir ibn 'Ashur, al-Tahrir wa al-tanwir, Vol. III, p. 5.

[^51]: As the book Fasl al-khitāb has no consideration among the Shi'ah
whatsoever, while the narrations about the loss and addition in the
Qur'ān being reported by the Sihāh of Ahl al-Sunnah like those of
al-Bukhāri and Muslim, with Musnad Ahmad.

[^52]: The article written by the Professor Muhammad al-Midyani, the
dean of al-Shari'ah College in al-Jāmi' al-'Azhar, appeared in the
journal Risālat al-'Islām, issue No. 4, the 11th year, pp. 382-383.

[^53]: Al-Suyuti, op. cit., and al-'Itqān.

[^54]: Musnad Ahmad, Vol. V, p. 132.

[^55]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. II, p. 252.

[^56]: Musnad Ahmad, Vol. V, p. 131.

[^57]: Ibn 'Asākir, Ta'rikh Dimashq, Vol. II, p. 228.

[^58]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. IV, p. 215.

[^59]: Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 216.

[^60]: Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 218, "bāb manāqib 'Abd Allāh ibn Mas'ud".

[^61]: Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 26, "bāb rajm al-hublā min al-zinā idhā
uhsinat".

[^62]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. III, p. 100, "bāb law ann li-ibn Adam wādiyān
la-ibtaghā thālithan".

[^63]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. III, p. 100, "bāb law ann li-ibn Adam wādiyān
la-ibtaghā thālithan".

[^64]: The Journal Risālat al-'Islām, issue No. 4, the 11th year, pp.
382, 383

[^65]: Musnad al-'Imām Ahmad, Vol. I, p. 221.

[^66]: Muwatta' al-'Imām Mālik (Sharh al-Hawālik), Vol. I, p. 161.

[^67]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. II, p. 151, "bāb al-jam' bayna al-salātayn fi
al-hadar".

[^68]: Ibid., Vol. II, p. 152.

[^69]: Ibid., Vol. II, p. 153, "bāb al-jam' bayna al-salātayn fi
al-hadar".

[^70]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. I, p. 140, "bāb waqt al-maghrib".

[^71]: Ibid., Vol. I, p. 138, "bāb waqt al-'asr".

[^72]: It is narrated that two men went out for hunting, when they met a
black thing at a far distance. The first one thought it to be a crow,
while the second opposed him saying it was a she-goat. Each one of them
insisted on his claim, persisting in his opinion. But on approaching to
it they found it to be a crow, who became disturbed and flew away.
Thereat the first man said: Haven't I told you that it was a crow? Are
you satified now? But his friend persisted in his opinion saying:
Glorified is Allah! (how can) a she-goat fly?!

[^73]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. I, p. 168, "bāb jawāz ghasl al-hā'id ra's
zawjihā"; Sunan Abi Dāwud, Vol. I, p. 68, "bāb al-hā'id tunāwil min
al-masjid".

[^74]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. II, p. 256, "bāb al-'i'tikāf fi al-\`ashr
al-'awākhir".

[^75]: Sunan al-'Imām al-Nasā'i, Vol. II, p. 204, "bāb tabrid al-hasa li
al-sujud 'alāyh".

[^76]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. I, p. 86, "kitāb al-tayammum".

[^77]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. II, p. 64, "kitāb al-masājid wa mawādi'
al-salāt".

[^78]: 'Aqā'id al-'Imāmiyyah of al-Muîaffar, p. 80, doctrine No. 32.

[^79]: Mustadrak al-Hākim, Vol. III, p. 123; Ibn 'Asākir in Ta'rikh
Dimashq, Vol. II, p. 234; al-Bukhāri's al-Ta'rikh al-Kabir, Vol. II, p.
281, al-Suyuti in Ta'rikh al-Khulafā', p. 173; Khasā'is al-Nasā'i, p.
27; Dhakhā'ir al-'uqbā, p. 92; Ibn Hajar's al-Sawā'iq al-muhriqah, p.
74.

[^80]: Al-Hākim in his Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 128, says that it is a
correct hadith on the condition it be accepted by al-Shaykhayn; Nur
al-'absār of al-Shablanji, p. 23; Yanābi' al-mawaddah, p. 205; al-Riyād
al-nādirah, Vol. II, p. 165.

[^81]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. I, p. 48; al-Sawā'iq al-muhriqah, p. 73; Kanz
al-'ummāl, Vol. XV, p. 105.

[^82]: Al-Tha'labi in al-Tafsir al-kabir, about āyāt al-mawaddah
(42:23); al-Zamakhshari in his Tafsir al-Kashshāf; Tafsir al-Rāzi, Vol.
VII, p. 405; al-Tustari in Ihqāq al-haqq, Vol. IX, p. 486.

[^83]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. IV, p. 20 and Vol. V, p. 76; Sahih Muslim,
Vol. VII, p. 120, "bāb fadā'il 'Ali ibn Abi Tālib".

[^84]: Ibid., Vol. I, p. 9, "bāb hubb al-Rasul min al-'imān"; Sahih
Muslim, Vol. I, p. 49, "bāb wujub mahabbat Rasul Allāh akthar min
al-'ahl wa al-walad wa al-wālid wa al-nās ajma'in; Sahih al-Tirmidhi.

[^85]: Like the Martyr Muhammad Bāqir al-Sadr in his book Bahth hawl
al-Mahdi.

[^86]: Sunan Abi Dāwud, Vol. II, p. 422.

[^87]: Sunan Ibn Mājah, Vol. II, hadiths Nos. 4082 & 4087.

[^88]: Ibid., Vol. II, hadith No. 4086.

[^89]: Al-Tirmidhi in al-Jāmi' al-sahih, Vol. IX, pp. 74-754.

[^90]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. IV, p. 143, "bāb nuzul \`Isā ibn Maryam".

[^91]: Fath al-Bāri, Vol. V, p. 362.

[^92]: Ibn Hajar, al-Sawā'iq al-muhriqah, Vol. II, p. 211.

[^93]: Hāshiyat Sahih al-Tirmidhi, Vol. II, p. 46.

[^94]: Is'āf al-rāghibin, Vol. II, p. 140.

[^95]: Sabā'ik al-dhahab, p. 78.

[^96]: Muqaddimat Ibn Khaldun, p. 367.


