The Qur’ān in the Perspective of Ahl al-Sunnah and the Shi'ah
=============================================================

The Holy Qur’ān is Allah’s word revealed on His Messenger Muhammad (may
Allah’s benediction and peace be upon him and his Progeny), the book
that falsehood cannot come at it from before it or from behind it. It is
the superior reference for Muslims in all their rulings, rituals
(‘ibādāt) and doctrines (‘aqā’id). Whoever doubts or affronts it will
verily be out of the pale of Islam, as the Muslims as a whole are in
agreement on sanctifying and revering it, with adhering strictly, in
their worship, to all the teachings stated in it.

But Muslims differ concerning its exegesis and interpretation, in a way
that the Shi‘ah refer in this respect to the Prophet (S) and expositions
of the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (peace be upon them), Ahl al-Sunnah wa
al-Jamā‘ah refer too to the Prophet’s traditions, but they depend on the
Sahābah (Companions) — without any distinction — or anyone of the four
imāms, the leaders of the known four Islamic schools of thought, in
reporting and exposing and interpreting the traditions.  
 Naturally, this led to the emergence of dispute and disagreement in
opinions concerning so many Islamic — particularly fiqhi — issues.  
 And when we can clearly find difference among the four Islamic schools
of thought of Ahl al-Sunnah, it is not strange in any way to see the
disagreement be more explicit between them and the school of Ahl al-Bayt
(peace be upon them).

As I mentioned in the outset of the book, I would never refer but to a
few examples for the sake of brevity, and anyone seeking more details
must plunge into the depths of the ocean to extract as many as he can of
the potential realities and hidden jewels.

Ahl al-Sunnah concur with the Shi‘ah in believing that the Messenger of
Allah (S) has verily exposed to the Muslims all the precepts of the
Qur’ān, and interpreted its verses completely. But after the Prophet’s
demise the two sects differed regarding to whom they should refer, in
order to have full knowledge of that exposition and interpretation. Thus
Ahl al-Sunnah have determined to refer to the Sahābah — with no
distinction — and after them to the four imāms and the ‘ulamā’ of the
Islamic *Ummah*. Whereas the Shi‘ah held that. The Imams from among the
Prophet’s Household (Ahl al-Bayt) being competent alone for this status,
beside just an elite of the selected Companions, since Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
are the followers of the Remembrance, whom Allah — the Exalted —
commanded us to refer to when He — the Almighty and the Glorious — said:

***“…so ask the followers of the Reminder if you do not know…”***
***(Sura an-Nahl, 16:43)***[^1]

They are too those whom Allah — the Exalted — has chosen and made them
to inherit the knowledge of the books, when He — Subhānahu — said (in
the Holy Qur’ān):

***“Then We gave the Book for an inheritance to those whom We chose from
among Our servants;…” (Sura Fatir, 35:32).***

Based on this, the Messenger of Allah (Allah’s peace and benediction be
upon him and his Progeny) has counted them the equal of the Qur’ān, and
the second thaql (precious asset) of which he (S) ordered the Muslims to
get hold, when he said:  
*“I am leaving behind among you two precious things. The Book of Allah
and my kindred (‘Itrah), as long as you hold on to them you shall never
go astray.*”[^2]

In another narration reported by Muslim, he (S) said:  
 “*... The Book of Allah and my Household (Ahl al-Bayt), I urge you to
remember Allah regarding my Ahl al-Bayt (He repeated the last statement
three times)*”.[^3]

It is commonly known that Ahl al-Bayt (peace be upon them) were the most
knowledgeable, piousl, godliest and best of people, in whose regard
al-Farazdaq has said:  
 When enumerating men of piety they be their leaders,  
 Or said who are the best of people, is replied they be.  
 I cite here one example just to show the nature of association between
Ahl al-Bayt (peace be upon them) and the Holy Qur’ān, in which Allah—
the Exalted — said:

***"But nay! I swear by the falling of stars; and most surely it is a
very great oath if you only knew; most surely it is an honoured Qur’ān,
in a book kept hidden, none shall touch it save the purified ones.***
***" (Sura Al-Waqi’a, 56: 75 — 79).***

These verses undoubtedly indicate that Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) — headed by the
Messenger of Allah (S) — are the only people entitled and able to
realize the obscure meanings of the Qur’ān. When pondering upon the oath
sworn by the Exalted and Glorious Lord, we will face this fact: When
Allah — the Exalted — swears by the declining day, the pen, the fig and
the olive, then the greatness of taking oath by the places of the stars
shall be manifested due to the secrets and influence on the universe it
implies, with Allah’s permission.  
 Confirming the oath in the negative and affirmative forms is explicitly
observed, as after the oath the Almighty affirms by saying:  
***"That (this) is a noble Qur’ān. In a Book kept hidden.”*** And what
is hidden here means that which is internal and concealed, then Allah —
the Mighty and Glorious — says: "***none shall touch it save the
purified ones***," and ‘none’ (lā) here is a particle of negation, and
“touches it”means, realizes and comprehends it, not meaning contacting
by hand, as theree is difference between contacting by hand (lams) and
touching (mass). Allah, the Exalted, said:

***“Surely those who guard (against evil), when a visitation from the
Shaitan afflicts them they become mindful, then lo! they see”(Sura
al-A’rāf, 7:201)***

Allah — the Glorious — also said:

***"Those who swallow down usury cannot arise except as one whom Shaitan
has prostrated by (his) touch does rise.." (Sura al-Baqara, 2:275).***

"Touch' in these verses is relevant to '*Aql* (reason) and apprehension
not to cantacting by hand (lams). And how is it possible that Allah
swears that the Qur’ān should be touched only by who is purified, while
several episodes in history books indicate that several tyrants have
toyed with and torn it. Further we witnessed how the Israelis have
trodden the Qur’ān under their feet — we seek protection with Allah -,
beside setting it to fire at the time of occupying Beirut during their
ill-famed invasion, the event about which ugly and appalling pictures
and films were transmitted by TV devices. So the meaning we conceive
from Allah’s saying is that the meanings of the Qur’ān can never be
realized but only by an elite from among Allah’s servants, whom He has
chosen and cleansed with a thorough cleansing. The word “the purified”
in the verse (56:79), is passive participle, i.e. those who were
purified; and Allah — the Mighty and the Glorious — said:

***“…Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O People
of the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.”*** ***(Sura
al-Ahzab, 33:33)***

The Almighty’s saying: "***none shall touch it save the purified
ones***,"indicates that the Qur’ān’s reality can never be realized but
only by the Messenger of Allah (s) and his Ahl al-Bayt (peace be upon
them), so the Messenger (S) said in their regard:  
 *“The stars are safety for inhabitants of the earth against drowning,
and my Ahl al-Bayt are safety for my Ummah against disagreement,
whenever being opposed by any Arab tribe, disagreement will prevail
amongst them, after which they will turn to be party of Iblis
(Satan).*"[^4]

This idea that is held by the Shi‘ah is derived from the Holy Qur’ān and
the Messenger’s traditions, which are reported even in Ahl al-Sunnah’s
*Sihah* (collection of Ahadith) as we noticed.

[^1]: Tafsir al-Tabari, Vol. IXV, p. 109; Tafsir Ibn Kathir, Vol. II, p.
570.

[^2]: It is reported by al-Tirmidhi in his Sahih, Vol. II, p. 329, and
also by al-Nasā’i and al-’Imām Ahmad.

[^3]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. II, p. 362, “bāb fadā’il ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib”.

[^4]: This hadith is reported by al-Hākim in al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p.
149, on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbās, and said: this hadith is of
authentic chain of narrators.


