The Prophetic Sunnah in the Perspective of Ahl al-Sunnah and Shi‘ah
===================================================================

The Prophetic Sunnah is whatever said or done or approved by the
Messenger of Allah (God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his
Progeny), that is considered the second source after the Qur’ān for
their rulings, rituals (‘ibādāt) and doctrines (‘aqā’id).

But Ahl al-Sunnah wa al-Jamā‘ah add to it another source, which being
the sunnah (conduct) of the four Rightly — Guided Caliphs (al-Khulafā’
al-Rāshidun) who are Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthmān and ‘Ali, according to a
hadith narrated by them as follows:
“Adhere to my sunnah and the sunnah of the rightly — guided successors
after me. Hold on to it and cling to it stubbornly.”[^1]

The clearest evidence for this lies in their following of ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattāb’s conduct (sunnah) in performing Salāt al-Tarāwih (amusement
prayer) of which the Messenger of Allah (s) has forbidden. Sahih
al-Bukhāri, Vol. VII, p. 99, “bāb mā yajuz min al-ghadab wa al-shiddah
li-amr Allāh”[^2] Some of them even dare to add to the Prophetic Sunnah
the sunnah of the Companions as a whole (whoever of them), according to
a hadith narrated by them:

“Verily, my Companions are like the stars (nujum) whichever of them you
follow, you shall be guided rightly," beside the hadith: "My Companions
are safety for my *Ummah*.:"[^3]

But Hadith al-Nujum is verily incompatible with reason ('*Aql*), logic
(mantiq) and scientific reality since the Arabs were never guided in
their desert travelling, by merely following any one of the stars. But
in fact they were guided by following certain specific stars, having
known names. Besides, this hadith is not supported by the consequent
events and practices that were exercised by the Companions after the
demise of the Messenger of Allah (S), as some of them have
apostatized,[^4] beside differing in numerous issues that entailed
disparagement between each other,[^5] cursing each other,[^6] and
killing each other.[^7]

Moreover some of the Companions were chastised for imbibing wine,
perpetrating adultery and robbery, beside other crimes; so how can any
sane man accept such a tradition commanding to follow such people? And
can that one following Mu‘āwiyah, who renegaded against his time Imam —
Amir al-Mu’minin, through warring against al-’Imām ‘Ali (‘a), be guided?
How can he be guided while knowing that the Messenger (S) has called him
the imam of the tyrant band (al-fi’ah al-bāghiyah)?[^8]

How can he be among those rightly-guided when he follows the example of
‘Amr ibn al-‘As, al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah and Bisr ibn Arta’ah who
murdered the innocent, for the sake of supporting the rule of the
Umayyads? You also, the intelligent reader, when reading the hadith ‘my
companions are like the stars’, you will come to realize that it is
fabricated, since it is addressed to the Companions, so is it reasonable
that the Messenger(S) says:
“O my Companions follow the guide of my Companions"?

Whereas the hadith "O my Companions, adhere to the Imams from among my
household, since they guide you after me" is nearer to truth, due to
having many evidences supporting it in the Prophetic Sunnah.

Besides, the Imāmiyyah Shi‘ah hold that those meant by the hadith
"Adhere to my Sunnah and the Sunnah of the rightly-guided successors
after me" being the Twelve Imams from Ahl al-Bayt (peace be upon them),
to whom the Messenger of Allah (s) has commanded his *Ummah* to adhere
and follow, in the same way they adhere to and follow the Book of
Allah.[^9]

And since I have committed myself not to argue but with the evidences
used by the Shi‘ah from the Sihāh of Ahl al-Sunnah wa al-Jamā‘ah, so I
sufficed with these examples, whereas the Shi‘ah books are replete with
many other evidences that are more explicit and indicative.[^10]

But the Shi‘ah never claim that Ahl al-Bayt Imams (‘a) are entitled to
legislate, or that their Sunnah is of their ijtihād, but they hold that
all the rulings and precepts they follow are derived from the Book of
Allah and the Sunnah of his Messenger ... the Sunnah which the Messenger
of Allah has taught to ‘Ali, who in turn has taught to his sons, as it
is a knowledge they inherit one from the other, having for this a large
number of evidences reported by the ‘ulamā’ of Ahl al-Sunnah in their
Sahihs, Musnads and Ta’rikhs. The question that insistently raised all
the time is: Why have al-Sunnah wa al-Jamā‘ah never acted according to
the content of those traditions, which they consider Sahih
(veracious)...???

After all this, the Shi‘ah and Sunnah disagree concerning the
interpretation of the traditions that are authentically reported from
the Messenger of Allah (S), as previously explained in the statement
about the dispute between them in respect of the exegesis (tafsir) of
the Qur’ān. They disagree in regard of who are meant by the
rightly-guided successors (al-Khulafā’ al-Rāshidun), that are referred
to in the Prophet’s hadith which is approved by both the sectts. Ahl
al-Sunnah interpret it to mean the Four Caliphs who assumed the rostrum
of caliphate after the Messenger of Allah, while the Shi‘ah interpret it
to mean the twelve successors, who are the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt (peace
be upon them).

So we see this disagreement so common concerning whatever is related to
the persons that were exculpated by the Qur’ān and the Messenger, or
whom he (S) commanded to follow, like the following hadith uttered by
him (S):

"The ‘ulamā’ of my *Ummah* are superior to the prophets of Banu Israel,"
or "The ‘ulamā’ are the inheritors of the prophets."[^11]
Ahl al-Sunnah wa al-Jamā‘ah take this tradition to include all the
*Ummah* ‘ulamā’ as a whole, while the Shiah specify it to the Twelve
Imams, the reason making them to prefer them (‘a) over the prophets,
with the exception of Ulu al-'Azm (of resolution) among the messengers.
In fact reason ('*Aql*) inclines more to this specification, for:

**First:** the Qur’ān has made the knowledge of the Book be inherited by
those whom Allah has chosen from among His bondmen, the fact indicating
the specification. Besides, the Messenger of Allah (S) has specified his
Ahl al-Bayt with particular traits, never making any partners to share
them in these traits, when he called them Ark of Salvation, and Imams of
Guidance, and Beacons of Darkness, and the Second Thiql (precious asset)
that safeguards against deviation and astrayal.

The fact manifested from this is that the claim of Ahl al-Sunnah
contradicts this specification that is confirmed by the Qur’ān and the
Prophetic Sunnah. Besides, reason is never content with it due to its
implying the obscurity and ignorance for the real ‘ulamā’, far from
Allah has removed cleanness and cleansed, and not distinguishing them
from the (courtly) ‘ulamā’ imposed upon the *Ummah* by the Umayyad and
‘Abbāsid rulers. How far is it between those ‘ulamā’ and Ahl al-Bayt
Imams, for whom history books never reported their learning under any
teacher, except that the son was getting knowledge from his father.
Despite this fact, Ahl al-Sunnah ‘ulamā’ have reported in their books,
wonderful narrations, especially concerning al-’Imām al-Bāqir, al-’Imām
al-Sādiq, and al-’Imām al-Ridā who managed, through his knowledge, in
dumbfounding forty judges al-Ma’mum gathered for (debating with) him,
while he was only a boy.[^12]

The point affirming the distinguishment of Ahl al-Bayt from others, lies
in the obvious disagreement among the four schools of thought of Ahl
al-Sunnah, regarding numerous fiqhi issues, while no difference is there
among the Twelve Imams of Ahl al-Bayt concerning even one issue.

**Second:** If we approve the claim of Ahl al-Sunnah in generalizing
these verses and traditions on all the *Ummah* ‘ulamā’, this will
necessarily lead to the multiplication of the opinions and schools of
thought throughout long generations, to the extent that thousands of
schools (madhāhib), would find way into the scene. Discerning the
triviality of this view and its goal of disintegrating the unity of
creed and faith, Ahl al-Sunnah hastened to close the door of ijtihād
since time immemorial.

Whereas the opinion held by the Shi‘ah calls to the unity and to gather
round known Imams, upon whom Allah and the Messenger have imparted all
sorts of knowledge that are necessary for all Muslims throughout all
ages and times. After all this, no claimant can fabricate any lie
against Allah and the Messenger, or innovate a new school compelling
people to follow and believe in it. The two sects differ regarding this
issue in the same way they differ concerning al-Mahdi, in whom they both
believe. But for the Shi‘ah he (‘a) is known of definite father and
grandfather while in the perspective of Ahl al-Sunnah he is still
unknown, and will be born at the end of the Time. For this reason many
of them have alleged to be al-Mahdi each, and al-Shaykh Isma’il the
author of al-Tariqah al-Mudaniyyah, has said to me personally that he
was the Awaited al-Mahdi, in front of a friend of mine, who was one of
his followers, but he was enlightened and guided to truth afterwards.

But in the perspective of the Shi‘ah, none of their newborn dares to
claim this. And even if anyone of them names his son ‘Mahdi,’ he does so
only for seeking auspiciousness and blessing, in the same way as done by
anyone of us when calling his son Muhammad or ‘Ali. Besides, the
reappearance of al-Mahdi is considered by them in itself as a miracle,
since he was born twelve centuries ago, and disappeared.

Then, after all these facts, disagreement may appear amongst Ahl
al-Sunnah wa al-Jamā‘ah, in respect of the meaning of the authentic
veracious (sahih) hadith in the view of both the sects, even when the
hadith being irrelevant to individuals, like the following one:

“The disagreement of my *Ummah* is a blessing,” which is interpreted by
Ahl al-Sunnah that any difference in the fiqhi rulings regarding one
issue is a blessing for the Muslim individual, in a way that he can
select any rule proper for him and keep pace with the solution he likes.
In this way it will be a blessing (rahmah) for him since when finding
al-’Imām Mālik, for instance, being strict regarding one issue, it is
permissible for the Muslim person to imitate (take the opinion of) Abu
Hanifah, who being lenient in it.

But in the perspective of the Shi‘ah, they interpret the hadith in
another way, reporting that when al-’Imām al-Sādiq (‘a) was asked about
the hadith "The disagreement of my *Ummah* is a blessing, he said: The
Messenger of Allah said the truth! The inquirer then said: If their
disagreement is a blessing, so their agreement should be indignation!
Al-Sādiq replied: It is not the way you think or they think (i.e. in
this interpretation), but what the Messenger of Allah (S) meant is that:
Their frequenting to each other, that is one of them travels to the
other, going out and betaking himself to him to gain knowledge from him,
inferring for this, as an evidence, Allah’s saying:

***Of every troop of them, a party only should go forth, that they (who
are left behind) may gain sound knowledge in religion, and that they may
warn their folk when they return to them, so that they may beware."
(9:122)***

Then he added to it saying: When they differ concerning religion, they
will turn to be the party of Iblis (Satan). This, as can be clearly seen
by all, being a reasonable and convincing interpretation, is inviting
toward unity in creed and belief not disagreement in it.[^13]

Thereafter, the hadith as conceived by Ahl al-Sunnah is unreasonable,
since it calls to disagreement, disunity and multiplicity of opinions
and schools, the fact contradicting the Holy Qur’ān that calls us
towards unity, agreement and to gather round one thing, when Allah,
Subhānahu, says:

***“And lo! This your religion is one religion and I am your Lord, so
keep your duty unto Me.” (23:52)***

He also says:

***“And hold fast, all of you together, to the cable of Allah, and do
not separate.” (3:103).***

In another verse He says:

***“...and dispute not one with another lest ye falter and your strength
depart from you...” (8:46)***

And is there a dispute or separation worse than dividing one *Ummah*
into several schools, parties and sects, contradicting and deriding each
other, or rather even charging each other with disbelief and infidelity
to the extent that each deeming the blood (killing) of the other as
lawful, the event that actually took place throughout consecutive ages,
as recorded in history books. So we were warned by Allah — the Glorified
— against the untoward consequences our *Ummah* will verily face when
being separated and in dispute, when the Almighty said:

***"And be ye not as those who separated and disputed after the clear
proofs had come unto them." (3:105)***

He also said:

***"Lo! As for those who sunder their religion and become schismatics,
no concern at all hast thou with them." (6:159).***

In another place He said:

***"...and be not of those who ascribe partners (unto Him). Of those who
split up their religion and became schismatics, each sect exulting in
its tenets." (30:31-32)***

It is worth mentioning that the meaning of schismatics (shiya‘) has
nothing to do with the Shi‘ah, as wrongly conceived by some naive and
simple-minded people, when one of them came to advise me saying:"O
brother, for God’s sake! Forget about the Shi‘ah, as Allah detests them
and has warned His Messenger against being one of them! I said: How is
that? He said: (the verse): "Lo! As for those who sunder their religion
and became schismatics, no concern at all hast thou with them." I tried
hard to persuade him that the word schismatics (shiya‘‘) means clans or
parties, and has nothing to do with Shi‘ah. But he unfortunately
insisted on his opinion and was never convinced, since his master, the
mosque (prayers) leader has taught him in this way, warning him against
the Shi‘ah, so he was not ready to accept other than that.

Returning to the topic, I want to say that I was at a loss before being
guided when reading the hadith “The disagreement of my *Ummah* is a
blessing” and comparing it with the hadith: “My *Ummah* will separate
into seventy-two sects, all being in hell-fire, except only one.”[^14] I
used to wonder. How can the disagreement of the *Ummah* be a blessing,
while at the same time causing (people) to enter the fire??

But after reading the interpretation of al-’Imām Ja’far al Sadiq for
this hadith, my perplexity has vanished and the enigma was solved, with
knowing afterwards that the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt are the Imams of
guidance and beacons for darkness, being truly the interpreters of the
Qur’ān and Sunnah, be meritorious for what the Messenger of Allah (S)
said in their regard:

“The parable of my Ahl al-Bayt among you is that of the boat of Noah;
whoever gets aboard it is saved and whoever stays away from it is
drowned. So don’t outstrip them, for then you shall perish, and don’t
fall short of them, for then you shall perish. Don’t teach them for they
are more knowledgeable than you.”[^15]

Also al-’Imām ‘Ali (‘a) said the truth when he uttered the following
statement:
“Look at the people of the Prophet’s family. Adhere to their direction
and follow their footsteps, because they would never let you out of
guidance, and never throw you into destruction. If they sit down you sit
down, and if they rise up you rise up. Do not go ahead of them, as you
would thereby go astray, and do not lag behind of them as you would
thereby be ruined.”[^16]

In another sermon, he (‘a) describes the position and worth of Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) by saying:
“They are life for knowledge and death for ignorance. Their forbearance
tells you of their knowledge, and their outward of their inward, and
their silence of the wisdom of their speaking. They do not go against
right nor do they differ (among themselves) about it. They are the
pillars of Islam and the asylums of (its) protection. With them right
has returned to its position and wrong has left its place, and its
tongue is severed from its root. They have understood the religion
attentively and carefully, not by mere heresy or from relaters, because
the relaters of knowledge are many but its understanders are
few.”[^17]
Al-’Imām ‘Ali has verily said the truth, as he is the gate of the city
of knowledge. And there is a great difference between that who
comprehends religion with consciousness and observance, and that who
comprehends it through hearing and narrations.

Those who hear and narrate are so many, as a large number of Companions
enjoyed the company of the Messenger of Allah (S), hearing and reporting
from him numerous traditions unconsciously and unknowingly. This led to
changes in the meaning of the hadith, in a way that it might give the
opposite of what the Messenger (S) meant of it, or leading sometimes to
disbelief due to the difficulty in realizing the real meaning of the
hadith by the Companion.[^18]

Whereas those who comprehend and observe knowledge being very few. Man
may exhaust his entire life in seeking knowledge, but might not gain but
only scanty of it, or may specialize in one of the fields of knowledge
or one of its arts, without being able to have full command of its
branches as a whole. But the fact commonly known is that Ahl al-Bayt
Imams (‘a) were thoroughly acquainted with, and grasping miscellaneous
sciences, as proved by al-’Imām ‘Ali, according to the reports confirmed
by the historians. This fact is further proved by al-’Imām Muhammad
al-Bāqir, and Ja’far al-Sādiq too, under whom thousands of shaykhs have
learnt different sciences and fields of knowledge, including philosophy,
medicine, chemistry and natural sciences, and others.

[^1]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, Vol. IV, p. 126.

[^2]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. VII, p. 99, “bāb mā yajuz min al-ghadab wa
al-shiddah li-amr Allāh”

[^3]: Sahih Muslim, “kitāb fadā’il al-Sahābah”; Musnad Ahmad, Vol. IV,
p. 398.

[^4]: In the case of those whom Abu Bakr fought, who were called later
on the apostates (Ahl al-Riddah).

[^5]: It is obvious in the case of ‘Uthmān, who was continuously reviled
and defamed by most of the Sahābah, till being slain by them.

[^6]: It is exactly as done and practised by Mu‘āwiyah, who kept on
giving his orders to curse and slander ‘Ali.

[^7]: Like the Battles of al-Jamal, Siffin and al-Nahrawān, and others.

[^8]: According to the hadith: “May God have mercy on ‘Ammār, he shall
be killed by the rebellious gang.”

[^9]: Sahih al-Tirmidhi, Vol. V, p. 328; Sahih Muslim, Vol. II, p. 362;
al-Nasā’i in al-Khasā’is and Kanz al-‘ummāl, Vol. I, p. 44; al-’Imām
Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his Musnad, Vol. V, p. 189; al-Hākim in his
Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 148; Ibn Hajar in al-Sawā‘iq al-muhriqah, p.
148, Ibn Sa‘d in al-Tabaqāt al-Kubrā, Vol. II, p. 194; al-Tabarāni, Vol.
I, p. 131.

[^10]: I cite for this only one example: It is reported by al-Saduq in
al-’Ikmāl, with his sanad reaching back to al-’Imām al-Sādiq, from his
father, from his grandfather, that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S)
said: Verily, there will be twelve Imams after me, the first of them
being ‘Ali and the last one is al-Qā’im (al-Mahdi). These are my (true)
successors and executors.

[^11]: . Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. I, “kitāb al-‘ilm”; Sahih al-Tirmidhi”,
kitāb al-‘ilm”.

[^12]: Al-‘Iqd al-farid, ibn ‘Abd Rabbih; al-Fusul al-muhimmah, of Ibn
al-Sabbāgh al-Māliki, Vol. III, p. 42.

[^13]: Basmalah in the salāt is makruh (reprehensible) according to the
Mālikis, obligatory according to the Shāfi‘is, mustahabb (recommendable)
according to the Hanafis, while the Hanbalis hold that it should be read
inaudibly even in the audible (jahri) prayers.

[^14]: Sunan Ibn Mājah, “kitāb al-fitan”, Vol. II, hadith No. 3993;
Musnad Ahmad, Vol. III, p. 120; al-Tirmidhi in his Kitāb al-’Imān.

[^15]: Ibn Hajar, al-Sawā‘iq al-muhriqah, pp. 136, 227; al-Suyuti,
al-Jāmi‘ al-saghir, Vol. II, p. 132; Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his Musnad,
Vol. III, p. 17, and Vol. IV, p. 366; Hilyat al-’awliyā’, Vol. IV, p.
306, Mustadrak al-Hākim, Vol. III, p. 151; Talkhis al-Dhahabi;
al-Tabarāni in al-Mu‘jam al-saghir, Vol. II, p. 22.

[^16]: Nahj al-balāghah, Khutbah No. 97.

[^17]: Ibid., Khutbah No. 239.

[^18]: The example for this can be found in what is reported by Abu
Hurayrah who said: “Allah has created Adam with the same shape of him”
(in an incomplete and ambiguous way). But al-’Imām Ja‘far al-Sādiq (‘a)
elucidated the matter by saying: The Messenger of Allah (S) passed by
two young men, and heard them reviling each other, one saying to the
other: May Allah disfigure your face and that of whoever resembles you.
Thereat the Messenger of Allah said to him: “Allah created Adam with the
same shape of him.” That is, with your slandering whoever resembling
him, you have in fact defamed Adam as he is the one who is like him.


