Doctrines in the Perspective of Shi'ah and Ahl al-Sunnah
========================================================

My belief that the Imāmiyyah Shi‘ah being the delivered sect, is even
more strengthened by the fact that their beliefs are tolerant and
flexible, that is, easily admitted by any wise sane man of sound
adroitness. With them we can find for every question and creed, a
satisfactory and sufficient solution given by any one of Ahl al-Bayt
Imams (‘a) that can never be found with Ahl al-Sunnah or other sects.

In this chapter, I will follow up with details the most important
beliefs of the two sects, trying to point out those ones which I have
admitted, giving the reader the freedom of thought, choice, criticism
and sarcasm.

I draw the attention to the fact that the original and genuine creed for
all Muslims being only one, which is having faith in Allah— the Exalted
— and His Angels and Scriptures and Messengers, without making any
difference between His Messengers. All the Muslims also agree on the
fact that Hell-fire is true, and Paradise is true, and that Allah will
verily resurrect all the dead from graves, gathering them for the Day of
Reckoning.

They concur too regarding the Qur’ān, believing that their Prophet being
Muhammad the Messenger of Allah, and that their qiblah (direction for
prayer) being one. But the difference lies in the conception of these
doctrines and beliefs, which turned to be a stage for the theological
schools, exposing on it miscellaneous opinions and madhāhib (religious
doctrines)

Believing in Allah the Exalted by Both Sects
--------------------------------------------

The most important point that can be referred to in this respect, is
sighting Allah — the Exalted — which Ahl al-Sunnah have established in
the Hereafter for all the believers. When going through the Sihāh of Ahl
al-Sunnah, like those of al-Bukhāri and Muslim for instance, we shall
find narrations proving the sighting really not figuratively.[^1]

Rather they contain even anthropomorphism to Allah — the Glorified — and
that He laughs,[^2] comes and walks and descends to this world
(dunyā),[^3] or even that He uncovers His leg that has a distinguishing
sign.[^4] Moreover, they say that He (Subhānahu) places His foot in
hell, whereat it will be filled saying: at all, at all; beside other
things and descriptions from which Allah — the Glorified and the Mighty
— is free and far.[^5]

One day I have passed by the City of Laamo in Kenya, at East Africa,
finding a Wahhabi Shaykh giving a sermon in the mosque. He was telling
the worshippers that Allah has two hands, two legs, two eyes and a face.
When I disapproved this from him, he began to confirm his argument by
citing some Qur’ānic verses, saying:

***“The Jews say: Allah’s hand is fettered. Their hands are fettered and
they are accursed for saying so. Nay, but both His hands are spread out
wide in bounty.” (5:64)***

He also said:

***"Build the ship under Our eyes...” (11:37)***

He further said:

***“Everyone that is thereon will pass away; There remaineth but the
Countenance of thy Lord...” (55:26,27).***

I said: O brother, all these verses you cited and other ones, are all
but metaphors and not real meanings!
He replied by saying: All the Qur’ān is real and has no metaphor at
all. Thereat I said: How do you interpret then the verse:

***“Who so is blind here will be blind in the Hereafter...” (17,72),***

Do you conceive it with the real meaning? Is every blind in the world
will be blind in the Hereafter? The Shaykh replied: We are talking about
Allah’s hand and eye and face, and have nothing to do with the blind!
I said: Forget about the blind. How do you interpret the verse I
mentioned: “Everyone that is thereon will pass away; there remaineth but
the Countenance of thy Lord...?” He turned his face to the attendants
saying to them:
Is there anyone among you who couldn’t understand this verse? ...It is
as clear and explicit as the Almighty’s saying:

***“Everything will perish save His Countenance...” (28:88)***

I said to him: You have added fuel to the fire! My brother, we have
disputed regarding the Qur’ān... you claimed that the Qur’ān has no
figurative speech, and all is but reality! While I claimed that there is
figurative speech in the Qur’ān, especially the verses having
materialization or anthropomorphism. If you insist on your opinion, you
have to say that the meaning of “Everything will perish save His
Countenance” is that his two hands and legs, and all of His body will
perish, and nothing will remain of Him but the face, above which Allah
is highly elevated, and too far! I then turned my face toward those
present in the meeting saying: Do you approve of such an interpretation?
All of them kept silent, and even their shaykh could never say one word.
So I bade them farewell, invoking Allah to guide and help them to know
the truth.

This is the way they believe in Allah, as recorded in their Sihāh and
their sermons. I hold that some of our scholars deny this, but the
majority of them believe in sighting Allah— the Glorified — in the
Hereafter, and that they will see Him in the same way as seeing the moon
at the night of full moon, with no cloud covering it, citing as a proof
the verses:

***“That day will faces be resplendent. Looking toward their Lord.”
(75:22,23)***[^6]

But as soon as you be acquainted with the creed of the Imāmiyyah Shiah
in this respect, your conscience will be at rest and your mind will
submit to accept the interpretation of the Qur’ānic verses having
incarnation or anthropomorphism to Allah — the Exalted — holding them to
indicate figurative meaning and metaphor, not reality or the
superficiality of utterances, as imagined by some people.

In this regard al-’Imām ‘Ali (‘a) says: “...Whom the height of
intellectual courage cannot appreciate, and the divings of understanding
cannot reach’; He for Whose description no limit has been laid down, no
eulogy exists, no time is ordained and no duration is fixed...”[^7]

In refuting the anthropormorphists, al-’Imām al-Bāqir (‘a) says:
“Rather, whatever we have distinguished with our imagination, in its
minutest meanings, is but a creature that is made like us, returning
toward us...”[^8]

Further we should be sufficed in this respect with Allah’s reply in His
Holy Scripture: “Naught is as His likeness,” and His saying: “Vision
comprehendeth Him not”, beside His saying to His messenger and
conversationalist Musā (‘a), when he asked to see Him”... He said: My
Lord! Show me (Thy self), that I may gaze upon Thee. He said: Thou wilt
not see Me,", and this lan (wilt not) in the verse, which is called
Zamakhshari lan gives the meaning of ta’bid (neverness), as grammarians
observe.

All this being a decisive evidence proving the veracity of the opinions
of the Shi‘ah, who derive them from the traditions of Ahl. al-Bayt Imams
— the source of knowledge and trustees of the Message, and whom Allah
made to inherit the knowledge of the Scripture.
Whoever intends to go into details about this research, has to refer to
the books elucidating this topic, like Kalimah hawl al-ru’yah of al—
Sayyid Sharaf al-Din, the author of al-Murāja‘āt.[^9]

Belief in Prophethood by the Two Sects
--------------------------------------

The dispute between the Shi‘ah and Ahl al-Sunnah mainly lies in the
issue of ‘ismah (infallibility). As the Shi‘ah believe in the prophets’
‘ismah before and after their mission (bi‘thah), while Ahl al— Sunnah
hold that their infallibility is confined only in Allah’s words that
they propagate, and other than this they, like all other people, may err
and be correct. Their Sihāh are filled with narrations indicating that
the Messenger of Allah(S) has mistaken in several places, and the
Companions were correcting him and telling him the right. The examples
they cite for this being the issue of the captives of Battle of Badr, in
which the Prophet (S) has erred and ‘Umar hit the mark, and without him
the Messenger of Allah would have perished.[^10]

In another place, when he entered al-Madinah, he saw its people cutting
the date-palms, whereat he said to them: “Don’t cut them as they will
give dates”, but they turned to be shays (unwanted bad dates). Then they
came to him complaining about the matter, whereat he said to them: “You
are better aware of your world affairs more than me.” In another
narration he said:
“I am just a human being, if I command you to anything related to your
religion you take it, and if I order you to do anything according to my
opinion, I am but a human being.”[^11]

Another time they relate that he was bewitched, remaining so for several
days not knowing what to do, to the extent that he was imagining of
making sexual intercourse with women and not doing so,[^12] or fancying
to himself the doing of something and not doing it.[^13]

Again they report that he once forgot in his prayer, being uncertain of
the number of rak‘ahs he performed,[^14] and also he once slept so
deeply that his snoring could be heard by all, and then he got up and
prayed without taking ablution.[^15] Once again they narrate that he be
angry with, reviles and curses whoever undeserving that, saying “O Allah
I am no more than a human being, any of the Muslims I have cursed or
reviled, You make this exculpatory and purifying fever for him...”[^16]

They also report that he once upon a time he was lying in ‘A’ishah’s
house, with his thighs being uncovered, whereat Abu Bakr and then ‘Umar
entered upon him, conversing with him while he was on this condition...
when ‘Uthmān asked permission to enter, he (S) sat and made up his
clothes. When asked by ‘A’ishah about the reason, he said to her:
“Shouldn’t I be ashamed of a man of whom the angels are ashamed.”[^17]

They further claim that he sometimes would enter upon the morning
ritually impure in the Month of Ramadān,[^18] missing the dawn prayer...
beside other strange traditions that no reason or religion or conscience
is ready to accept or approve of.[^19]

Whereas the Shi‘ah — in accordance with Ahl al-Bayt Imams — exculpate
the prophets from such trifles and silly things, in particular our
Prophet Muhammad (upon whom be peace and the best of benediction),
holding that he is impeccable and immune against all minor and major
sins, wrongs and insubordinations. They believe in his being infallible
(ma‘sum) against error, forgetfulness, absence of mind, sorcery and
whatever causing mind to be disordered. And rather he is impeccable
against practising any act contradictory to manliness and good morality,
like eating on the roads, or giggling loudly, or joking with
impropriety, or any reprehensible act disapproved by public norms. It is
needless to refer to their claims that he used to place his cheek on his
wife’s cheek before people, sharing her in looking at the dancing of the
Negroes,[^20]or to let his wife go out in a battle, competing with her,
in a way defeating her one time, and she defeating him the other,
telling her then: “This one is versus that one.”[^21]

The Shi‘ah consider all the narrations reported in this respect, which
are incongruous with the prophets’ ‘ismah, to be altogether composed and
fabricated by the Umayyads and their supporters with these aims: First,
for degrading the Messenger of Allah (S). Second, for seeking
justification for their abominable deeds and unsightly wrongs recorded
in history books. And if — supposedly — the Messenger of Allah (S) errs
and be inclined to love and lust, as in the story they narrated of his
passionate love for Zaynab bint Jahash, when he saw her combing her hair
(while being the wife of Zayd ibn Hārithah), exclaiming: “Glorified is
Allah Who changes the hearts.”[^22] Or the story of his inclination
toward ‘A’ishah and his unjust treatment with his other wives, that they
have delegated to him Fātimah once and Zaynab bint Jahash another time,
asking and pleading him to deal equally between them.[^23]

So if this be the state of the Messenger of Allah (S), no blame then is
upon Mu‘āwiyah ibn Abi Sufyān, or Marwan ibn al-Hakam, or ‘Amr ibn
al-‘As, or Yazid ibn Mu‘āwiyah, with all the caliphs who have
perpetrated all kinds of abominations, and violated the sanctities and
slaughtered the innocent.

This being the case, while the Imams from Ahl al-Bayt (peace be upon
them), the Imams of the Shi‘ah, believe in his ‘ismah (infallibility),
interpreting the Qur’ānic verses which apparently indicate that Allah
has admonished His Prophet, like

***"He frown and turned away" (80:1),***

or the verses containing confession of the sins like His saying:

***"That Allah may forgive thee of thy sin that which is past and that
which is to come" (48:2),***

or His saying:

***"Allah hath turned in mercy to the Prophet" (9:117),***

and also:

***"Allah forgive thee (O Muhammad)! Wherefore didnt thou grant them
leave." (9:43).***

They affirm that all these verses never derogate from this (S) ‘ismah,
as some of them were not meant at him in particular, while some others
have to be figuratively interpreted not according to the external
meanings of the words, the method that is most often used in the Arabic
language, and also by Allah-the Glorified — in the Holy Qur’ān.

Whoever seeking more information and intending to obtain certain
knowledge of things, he has just to refer to the Shi‘ah exegesis books,
like al-Mizān fi tafsir al-Qur’ān of al-‘Allāmah al-Tabātabā’i, and
Tafsir al-Kāshif of Muhammad Jawād Maghniyyah, and al-’Ihtijāj of
al-Tabrasi, beside other books. I haven’t quoted from these books since
I intended brevity and exposing the creed and belief of the two parties
in general. And the aim of this is but to reflect my own beliefs in
which I have conviction, and myself selecting a school believing in the
infallibility of the prophets, and successors after them, to relieve my
mind, dissipating my concern, and eradicating my suspicion and
perplexity.

To claim that the Prophet’s infallibility being confined in propagating
Allah’s words (Qur’ān), is just baseless nonsense, since no proof is
there indicating which part of his speech is Allah’s, and which one is
his, so as to be ma‘sum in the former and not ma‘sum with being liable
to err in the latter.

I seek protection by God from this contradictory utterance prompting to
doubt and vilification in the sanctity of religions. This fact recalls
to my mind a conversation held between me — after being guided — and a
group of friends, in which I tried my best to convince them that the
Messenger of Allah (S) being infallible (ma‘sum), while they were
attempting to persuade me of his being ma‘sum in propagating the Qur’ān
alone. Among them there was a professor from Tozad (region of
al-Jarid),[^24] and they were known for wittiness, knowledge and crack
jokes. He contemplated for a while and said: “O company I have an
opinion regarding this issue,” we all exclaimed: Please give us what you
have! He said:
-What our brother al-Tijani says, as the Shi‘ah hold, is the very
truth, and we should believe in the Messenger’s absolute ‘ismah,
otherwise suspicion will find its way into our hearts in the Qur’ān
itself!
—They asked: What for?
He immediately replied:
— Have you seen any of the Qur’ānic verses with Allah’s signature
underneath??

By the signature he meant: The stamping with which the contracts and
letters were sealed, denoting the identity of each party to the contract
and sender of the letter. All those present laughed at this witty
remark, that was in fact of a deep meaning. Every unprejudiced person,
contemplating attentively, will be shocked by the fact that: believing
in the Qur’ān’s being God’s words is to believe in the absolute
infallibility of its communicater, without partitioning it, since it is
infeasible for anyone to claim of hearing Allah speak, and no one can
allege that he saw Jabriel when descending with revelation (wahy).

The quintessence of the above-mentioned exposition, is that the Shiah’s
opinion about ‘ismah is an apposite opinion, making hearts feel assured,
eliminating all whispers of the self and Satan, and closing all doors
before the riotous, particularly enemies of religion from among the
Jews, Christians, and infidels looking for gaps to sneak from. Their aim
of this, being to overturn our beliefs and religion from the foundation
and degrade our Prophet. So they most often dispute against us with what
Sahih al-Bukhāri and Sahih Muslim reported of the deeds and sayings
ascribed to the Messenger of Allah (S), from which he is far
exempted.[^25]

How can we convince them that the books of al-Bukhāri and Muslim contain
many lies and forged narrations, which being a dangerous speech of
course, as it is never accepted by Ahl al-Sunnah, who consider Sahih
al-Bukhāri as the most authentic book after the Book of Allah!

[^1]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. II, p. 47, & Vol. V, p. 179 & Vol. VI, p.

[^2]: Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 226 & Vol. V, pp. 47-48; Sahih Muslim, Vol. I,
pp. 114-122.

[^3]: Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 197.

[^4]: Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 182.

[^5]: Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 187, and on page 202 he confirms Allah’s
having a hand and fingers.

[^6]: Verse 23 of Surat al-Qiyāmah was interpreted by Ahl al-Bayt Imams
(peace be upon them), that the faces at that Day (Doomsday) be
resplendent (nādirah), to mean prettiness and splendour (bahjah), while
looking at their Lord’s mercy.

[^7]: Nahj al-balāghah, exposition (sharh) of Muhammad \`Abduh, Vol. I,
Khutbah No. 1.

[^8]: ‘Aqā’id al-’Imāmiyyah.

[^9]: Al-Murāja‘āt is one of the books that should be read by whoever
desiring to be acquainted with the Imāmi Shi‘ah’s beliefs and thoughts.

[^10]: Al-Bidāyah wa al-nihāyah, of Ibn Kathir, who reported from
al-’Imām Ahmad, Muslim, Abu Dāwud and al-Tirmidhi.

[^11]: Sahih Muslim, “kitāb al-fadā’il”, Vol. VII, p. 95; Musnad
al-’Imām Ahmad, Vol. I, p. 162 and Vol. III, p. 152.

[^12]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. VII, p. 29.

[^13]: Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 68.

[^14]: Ibid., Vol. I, p. 123 and Vol. II, p. 65.

[^15]: Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 37, 44, 171.

[^16]: Sunan al-Dārimi, “kitāb al-riqāq”.

[^17]: Sahih Muslim, “bāb fadā’il ‘Uthmān”, Vol. VII, p. 117.

[^18]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. II, pp. 232, 234.

[^19]: Ibid., Vol. III, p. 114 and Vol. VII, p. 96.

[^20]: Ibid., Vol. III, p. 228, and Vol. II, p. 3, “kitāb al-‘idayn”.

[^21]: Musnad al-’Imām Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Vol. VI, p. 75.

[^22]: Tafsir al-Jalālayn, about interpretation of God’s words: “... And
thou didst hide in thy self that which Allah was to bring to light.”
(33:37).

[^23]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. VII, p. 136, “bāb fadā’il ‘A’ishah”.

[^24]: Region of al-Jarid is located south of Tunisia, with 92 kms from
Qafsah, the birthplace of Abu al-Qāsim al-Shābi, the renowned poet, and
al-Khidr Husayn, who was the head of al-’Azhar, beside many Tunisian
‘ulamā’ who were born in this region.

[^25]: In his Sahih, Vol. III, p. 152, bāb shahādat al-’a‘mā from “kitāb
al-shahādāt”, al-Bukhāri is reported to have said: Ibn \`Ubayd ibn
Maymun narrated to us, saying, we are told by \`Isa ... from ‘A’ishah
who said: The Prophet (upon whom be God’s peace and benediction) heard a
(blind) man reciting the Qur’ān in a mosque. Thereat he (S) said: “May
Allah have mercy upon him, he reminded me of so and so verses I dropped
from so and so surah ...” — How is it wonderful, dear reader, such a
messenger who forgets the verses (āyāt), and had not this blind man been
there to remind him of them, they would have been buried in oblivion — I
seek Allah’s forgiveness of this hallucination.


