Al-Khums (One-fifth)
====================

It is also one of controversial topics between the Shi’ah and Sunnah.
Before giving judgement to their benefit or against them, we have to
give a brief exposition about the issue of khums, and we start it with
the Holy Qur’ān; Allah, the Exalted said:

***“And know ye (O’ believers) that whatever of a thing ye acquire a
fifth of it is for God, and for the Apostle and for the (Apostle’s) near
relatives and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer ...” (8:41)***

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:
“I order you to do four things: To have faith in Allah, to establish
prayers, to pay zakāt, and to fast the month of Ramadān, and to pay for
Allah the fifth of whatever you acquire.”[^1]

The Shi’ah — complying to the command of the Messenger of Allah (S) —
usually take out fifth of whatever they earn of money throughout the
whole year, explaining the word “spoil” (ghanimah) to mean whatever man
earns of profits in general.

Whereas Ahl al-Sunnah concur on specifying khums on the spoils of war
solely, explaining God’s saying: (And know ye that whatever of a thing
ye acquire) to mean whatever you acquire during war. This being the
abstract of what the two sects hold regarding khums, and their ‘ulamā’
have written many articles about this issue.

I know not how can I convince myself or others to accept the opinions of
Ahl al-Sunnah, that were based — as I think — on the sayings of the
Umayyad rulers, headed by Mu‘āwiyah ibn Abi Sufyān who seized the whole
estates of Muslims, looting with his retinue all the gold and silver
there.

So, no wonder seeing them interpreting the khums verse to be
specifically related to the spoils of war, since the course of the verse
happened to be within the verses of war and fighting. Not only this
verse, but they have interpreted many verses in accordance to the course
of the preceding verse or the one coming after. For instance, they
interpret the verse of removing the uncleanness and purification
(tathir), to be specifically referring to the Prophet’s wives, as
whatever preceding and succeeding it being about the wives of the
Prophet (S).

They also interpret the Almighty’s saying: “...They who hoard up gold
and silver and spend it not in the way of Allah, unto them give tidings
(O Muhammad) of a painful doom,” to be specifically related to the
People of Scripture (Ahl al-Kitāb).

Also the story of Abu Dharr al-Ghifāri (may God be pleased with him)
with Mu‘āwiyah and ‘Uthmān ibn ‘Affān, and exiling him to al-Rabadhah,
is so common, when he vilified them for hoarding up gold and silver,
arguing them with the aforementioned verse. But ‘Uthmān consulted Ka’b
al-’Ahbar about it, and he answered him that it was specified for Ahl
al-Kitāb. Thereat Abu Dharr reviled him saying: May your mother be
bereaved of you, O the son of the Jewish woman! Do you teach us our
religion? These words angered ‘Uthmān, who ordered to exile him to
al-Rabadhah, after his displeasure toward him became greater. Then Abu
Dharr died there, alone and driven away, with his daughter finding no
one to undertake the ceremonies of washing and shrouding him.

Ahl al-Sunnah have a well-known technique and fiqh (jurisprudence) in
relation to interpretation of the Qur’ānic verses and Prophetic
Traditions, following in this respect what the earlier caliphs and
famous Companions interpolated against the express texts from the Book
and Sunnah.[^2]

Intending to investigate respecting this matter, a separate book will be
needed to cover it, but it is sufficient for every truth-seeker to refer
to the book al-Nass wa al-’ijtihād, where he can find out how the
interpreters play with Allah’s decrees and precepts.

For me, as a researcher, I have no right to interpret the Qur’ānic
verses and Prophetic traditions according to my likings, or in
accordance with what the school (madhhab) I follow dictates upon me. But
what to do while noticing Ahl al-Sunnah themselves reporting in their
Sihāh that khums being imposed on the earnings in other than war,
contradicting thus their interpretation and school of thought.

It is reported in Sahih al-Bukhāri, under the bāb “Fi al-Rikāz
al-Khums”, that Mālik and Ibn Idris said: Al-Rikāz (buried treasure) is
the burial (dafn) of Jahiliyyah, upon its little and much khums is
imposed and minerals cannot be considered rikāz. The Messenger of Allah
(S) said: “On minerals repairment is imposed and on rikāz the
khums.”[^3] Under the “bāb mā yustakhraj min al-bahr” (what is retrieved
from the sea), Ibn ‘Abbās is reported to have said: Ambergris is not
regarded rikāz, but a thing driven forward by the sea. Whereas al-Hasan
said: Khums is imposed (wājib) on ambergris and pearls, and verily the
Prophet (S) made rikāz liable to khums, not that which is retrieved from
the sea.[^4]

From all these traditions any researcher may conclude that the scope of
the term ghanimah, on which khums made wājib by Allah is not confined to
the spoils of war, since rikāz is a treasure extracted from the earth,
and it becomes the property of that who extracted it.But he is obliged
to pay its khums because it is a ghanimah. Moreover anyone extracting
ambergris and pearls from the sea is liable to take out the khums since
it is a ghanimah.
According to what is reported by al-Bukhāri in his Sahih it becomes
clear that khums is not confined to the spoils of war.

While the Shi’ah’s opinion remains always to represent the truth that
being devoid of any contradiction and difference, since they refer in
all the rules and beliefs to the Imams of guidance, far from whom Allah
removed uncleanliness and purified a thorough purification. The Imams
who are verily equals to the Book (Qur’ān), to whom everyone holds on
will never go astray, and feels safe whoever seeking their shelter.

However, we can never depend on wars to establish the State of Islam,
since this never goes with the liberality of Islam and its invitation
toward peace. Islam is not a colonialist State that is established on
exploiting the nations and looting their fortunes and resources, the
charge that the Westerners trying to accuse us with when referring to
the Prophet of Islam with disgrace, claiming that he (S) extended his
dominion through force, compulsion and sword to exploit the peoples.

And as money being the sinew of life, especially when the theory of the
Islamic economics necessitates origination of what is called nowadays:
the social insurance, for the sake of guaranteeing for the needy and
disabled their livelihood with consideration and dignity.

The Islamic State can never be sustained through depending upon the
zakāt taken out by Ahl al-Sunnah, which never exceeds at the best 2.5
percent. It is a very low percentage that can never meet the needs of
the State including: making ready of force, building the schools and
hospitals and paving the roads, beside guaranteeing for every individual
an income that can be sufficient for his livelihood and insuring his
life. Further the Islamic State can never be dependant on bloody wars
and fighting people to safeguard its existence, and develop its
foundations at the cost of the slain people who were averse to Islam.

The Ahl al-Bayt Imams (peace be upon them) were the most knowledgeable
people in the denotations of the Qur’ān. Why not, while they being its
true interpreters, undertaking the task of laying down for the Islamic
State the guidelines of economy, and sociology, had they an obeyed
opinion.

But, unfortunately and regretfully, power and leadership were in the
hands of other than them, those who seized and usurped caliphate by
force and subjugation, and assassinating the righteous among the
Companions, as practised by Mu‘āwiyah. Moreover they altered the rules
of Allah according to the dictates of their political and worldly
interests and lusts, going astray thus and misleading the others,
leaving the *Ummah* to reach the lowest point, with no consideration or
power till the present time.

Thus the precepts and teachings of Ahl al-Bayt became mere thoughts and
theories, believed only by the Shi’ah with no way to apply them, since
they were persecuted and chased out eastwards and westwards of the
earth, being pursued by the Umayyads and ‘Abbāsids throughout ages.

After the disintegration of these two dynasties, the Shi’ah managed to
bring about a society committed to pay the khums to the Imams (peace be
upon them) secretly. And nowadays, they pay it to the high religious
authority (marji‘) whom they imitate (in Islamic rules) as a deputy to
al-’Imām al-Mahdi (peace be upon him), who in turn expends it within its
legitimate purposes and uses, such as founding theological schools,
charity centres, public libraries, and orphanages, beside other noble
works such as paying monthly salaries and stipends to the
knowledge-seekers, and alike.

From all this we can conclude that the Shi’ah ‘ulamā’ act independently
from the ruling authorities, since the khums meets all their needs, and
out of it they give everyone his due.

Whereas Ahl al-Sunnah being a burden provided by the rulers, and agents
working for the ruling authority, with the ruler being free to bring
near, or exclude whoever he wills from among them, in accordance with
their treatment and behaviour toward him and sacrifice for serving his
benefit. In this way the scholar turns to be merely an agent close to
the ruler rather than just a scholar (‘ālim)! which being one of the bad
consequences that resulted from forsaking and ignoring performing the
obligation of khums, in its meaning conceived by Ahl al-Bayt (peace be
upon them).

[^1]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. IV, p. 44.

[^2]: In his book al-Nass wa al-'ijtihād, al-'Imām Sharaf al-Din cited
more than a hundred instances where ta'wil (interpretation) occurred
against the express texts. The researchers are required to refer to this
book, since in it he has collected only those traditions reported by the
Sunni 'ulamā', admitting its veracity.

[^3]: Sahih al-Bukhāri, Vol. II, p. 137, "bāb fi al-rikāz al-khums.

[^4]: Ibid., Vol. II, p. 136, "bāb mā yustakhraj min al-bahr".


