Preface
=======

Throughout the history, there have been some philosophers and thinkers
who have generously given the product of their philosophical thinking to
the society. These works have initiated and inspired behavior of many
people living in the society because in general, a personâ€™s
philosophical foundation can influence their behavioral and educational
bases.

Although there have been many books and writings regarding the thoughts
of such philosophers, the writings in which the viewpoints of the
philosophers of different schools and religions have been compared are
rarely seen. With such a comparison, that emphasizes the shared aspects
of philosophical theories, it might be possible to generate
philosophical theories that are comprehensive and global in their
impact. This is the main aim of this book.

Philosophy, in the present book, has been considered as a discipline,
which consists of branches such as - ontology, epistemology, and
axiology. Anthropology has been considered as the subset of ontology.

Each chapter, of the book has a short introduction about the personality
and biography of the two (or four) philosophers investigated in that
chapter. Then their views about the branches of philosophy or their
philosophical viewpoints have been explained. A conclusion about the
comparison of their views has been reached at the end of each chapter.
Finally the book is concluded with a general summary and conclusion.

The philosophers studied and compared in this book are as follows: Tusi
and Aristotle, Ghazali and Aquinas, Ibn Miskawayh and Aquinas, Farabi
and Spinoza, Avicenna- Ibn Sina and Edwards and Rumi, Saadi, Rousseau,
and Dewey. Thus in all, the viewpoints of 14 philosophers and thinkers
have been explained and compared in this book.

It should be noted that the chapters about Farabi, Ibn Miskawayh and a
part about the ethics of Ibn Sina have been selected from Persian books
titled: Theories of Muslim scientists about Education and its
Principles - volumes 1 and 2, which have been written by
Howzeh-University Co-operation Center and M. Beheshti, M. Abujafari and
A. N. Faqihi respectively. These were then translated into English by
the author of the present book (Dr H. R. Alavi).


