Chapter 1: Comparative Study of Tusi and Aristotle’s Shared Views on Philosophy
===============================================================================

Introduction
------------

Khajeh Naseeroddeen Tusi was one of the great scholars of mathematics,
astrology and wisdom in Iran in the seventh century of the Hejira. He
was also one of the ministers of that time and a great jurisprudent of
Shiite Islam. Khajeh wrote numerous books regarding different sciences
(Moin, 1992). Khajeh Naseer Tusi had also compiled very valuable works
in ethics and education (Beheshti, Abujafari and Faqihi 2000, P. 113).

Khajeh Tusi was born in Tus or in Jahrud of Qom, in 597 A.H. He died in
Baghdad, in 672 A.H. (Modarresi, 2000). Khajeh spent his childhood with
those who, according to him, were pious, religious, and aware of some
sciences, occupations and crafts. His father was an experienced person,
and always encouraged him to learn different techniques and sciences. He
encouraged him to listen to the speech of those who practiced their
religion with consciousness.

Naseeroddin emigrated from Tus to Neishapur and travelled to some other
cities to complete his education. Two of his important activities were
the establishing of the very great observatory of Maragheh, and a great
library in Maragheh, which had 400 thousand books. He planned to allow
thinkers to continuously extend their research and keep the great
heritage of Islam alive.

Tusi himself wrote about 274 books. Most of his writings concerned
philosophy, theosophy, mathematics, astrology, and ethics. His writings
could be classified under the following ten titles: mathematics, ethics,
interpretation, religious jurisprudence, history, geography, medicine,
logics, theosophy, and philosophy (Beheshti, Abujafari and Faqihi, 2000,
p. 113 -121).

In spite of the fact that Khajeh Naseer Tusi was making an effort to
promote his own religion and belief (Shiite, Islam), he was very kind to
other religious groups of Islam. He respected the scholars of each class
or religion and refrained from rigid religious intolerance and
dogmatism. This was the reason why some Christian orientalists, some
Sunni scholars and all of Shiite scientists have highly esteemed his
spiritual greatness, religiosity, humility and good manners (Modarresi,
2000).

Ontology
--------

### Tusi

Tusi believed that the First Origin was not possible in existence. This
origin could not be more than one. He also asserted that a wise person
would not engage much in the bodily pleasures (Modarresi, 2000, p.
171-172).

#### Anthropology

Tusi’s works and writings revealed the following views about the
characteristics of a human being (Behesht, Abujafari and Faqihi 2000, p.
122-129):

#### The superiority of human being

According to Tusi human being was superior in creation to inanimate
objects, plants and animals because they possessed a soul with
intellect, reason and free will besides their other characteristics.

#### The truth of human being

Tusi believed that a human being consisted of body and a soul. This soul
was free of material form. The body and soul both interacted with each
other.

#### The faculties of the soul

In spite of its unity, the soul with intellect consisted of diverse
animal, animal-like and human faculties. It possessed mobility and
perceptive faculties. Man’s perceptive functions were carried out
through external senses such as sight, hearing, smelling, taste, and
touch as well as through inner senses such as common sense, imagination,
estimate and memory. While the mobility of a man remained a function of
his muscles, it was the soul that made him move toward the behavior for
which he was motivated.

#### Free will and authority

These two were considered to be innate characteristics of a human being.
Only the humankind could achieve perfection and happiness through their
intention, deeds and behaviors. In this way, man could move towards
perfection and attain status higher than that of angels.

It was in the light of free will that a man comprehended something and
then found himself inclined or averse to it. Thus knowledge and
enthusiasm formed the basis and foundation of human free will.

The problem of determinism could also be solved with this principle as
humans behaved according to their authority and freewill. If they did
not want, they would not engage with those behaviors. On the other hand,
it was God who had wanted to give such authority and freewill to humans
due to which they could freely engage with or not with a behavior.

#### Rationality

The most outstanding privilege that mankind had, was their rationality.
Humans not only possessed sensory and intellectual perception to
recognize and solve their conceptual and affirmation of unknown things
and extend their awareness, they also had knowledge of the present and
non-present.

Tusi introduced rationality, knowledge and awareness as the greatest
bounty that God had bestowed upon His bondmen, after their existence
itself.

#### Being sociable

Tusi believed that no one could satisfy his or her needs alone without
assistance and cooperation from others. On the other hand, cooperation
of individuals was needed in order to achieve perfection and better
enjoyment of different bounties from God

#### Complimentary and evolutionary movement

Man’s soul had different potential powers, and in trying to achieve
perfection, he should nurture his abilities to reach closer in nearness
to God. Man could make his freewill a function of the Divine freewill,
and achieve the position of being contented first and subsequently
attain positions of trust, submission and finally that of infinite
knowledge and power and being eternal where there would be no veil
between God and him.

#### Achieving the Position of nearness to God

One of the characteristics of human beings was the fact that they could
reach a position of nearness to God. This position had different ranks
and human beings were able to attain this position in various degrees.
Therefore, although man had been expelled from Paradise, he could again,
through servitude and submission to God, ascend and return to his first
and original abode. To achieve this, he had to purify himself in the
field of knowledge and action.

Tusi maintained that human soul was simply an essence, which could be
perceived through intellect and could affect the sensory body. That
essence itself was not the body. It was neither physical, nor sensory
for any of the senses. Intellect of the soul remained unaffected even
after destruction of one’s body. Death could not destroy the soul, and
it could never be destroyed. Man’s body was like an instrument for the
soul (Adamson 1998, p. 94-102).

### Aristotle

Aristotle was convinced that the characteristic, which determined a
thing’s nature, was what determined its successful operation, that is,
its ability to achieve what was good for itself (as is implicit in his
ethical writings).

A species became the one it was in its present form through its goals
and by being organized in a way so as to achieve them. Some goals were
extrinsic; for example, the goal of an axe being to cut wood explained
the arrangement of the metal on the axe. Likewise, the teleological goal
of man was to live a life of a given kind (e.g. of rational activity),
and the rest of his nature was designed to achieve this intrinsic goal.
The distinctive goal of each biological kind was what determined its
respective essence (Honderich, 2005, p. 56).

Aristotle believed in the fact that it was the Pure One who was the
cause of all things and was unlike any of them (Adamson, 2008).
According to Aristotle, things could be a cause of one another, causing
each other reciprocally, as hard workout produced fitness and vice
versa. Aristotle further marked out two modes of causation: proper
(prior) causation and accidental (chance) causation. All causes, proper
and incidental, could be spoken of as potential or as actual, particular
or generic (Wikipedia, 2008).

Epistemology
------------

### Tusi

Tusi considered sensory perception as the first step towards cognition.
Knowledge from imagination arose from the perception of material objects
with all its characteristics whether that object was present or absent.
Estimated knowledge was said to be from perception of non-sensory
partial meanings of a situation, such as man’s fear of darkness.
Intellectual knowledge was considered to be the real cognition as it was
a perception of intellect. An object was thus perceived as a whole by
including aspects that were the properties of matter and abstract from
it.

Knowledge of intuition was deemed higher than knowledge of intellect.
This kind of knowledge brought humans to a position from where they
could observe the realities of the Universe. Undoubtedly the knowledge
of a person, who saw fire from nearby and observed its light, was
greater than that of one who knew about fire from a distance only
through seeing its smoke.

Divine knowledge was the effusion of knowledge from exalted God Himself.
It was received without direct instruction or thinking. Tusi was not
convinced that the human intellect alone could answer the ultimate
metaphysical questions (ibid). From his early life al-Tusi had believed
that the rationale of intellect needed to be sustained by a non-rational
(or super-rational) guarantor. His move to Twelver Shiism, with its
doctrine of a hidden Imam, indicated growing strength of his convictions
about the ability of the intellect (Cooper, 1998).

### Aristotle

Aristotle believed that human understanding was analogous to a
sensation. Intellect was a sense in itself (Genest, 1998)*.* Aristotle’s
remarks on how we came to know about the starting point of a matter, was
somewhat baffling. What was clear however was that while he considered
sensory perception to be a crucial ingredient in the process of coming
to know, sensory perception by itself did not constitute knowledge. This
was because sensory perception was able to show us only particular
aspect of an object.

Real knowledge by definition pertained to the universal characteristics
of things. One thus needed to be able to grasp the universal
characteristics that presented itself in a material form, which imparted
the sensory information. Aristotle showed no lack of confidence in the
ability of human beings to do this reliably. However, this was no
surprise.

It was clear that he conceived the world to be ordered in a way that
made it comprehensible. And, human beings had the capacities necessary
to achieve this understanding more notably through their rationality.
However, he stressed, particularly in his ethical work, that one could
not expect to achieve complete precision in all subjects (Irwin and
Fine, 2008).

Aristotle’s philosophy was aimed at the Universal. Aristotle found the
Universal in the particular aspect of things. He called it to be the
essence of a thing. For Aristotle, philosophical method implied
advancing from the study of particular phenomena to knowledge of
essences. Aristotle’s method was both inductive and deductive
(Wikipedia, 2008).

Axiology
--------

### Tusi

#### Ethics

Tusi explained the foundation of his ethics on the bases of anthropology
and epistemology. Some of the most important points that he proposed in
this field were as follows (Beheshti, Abujafari and Faqihi, 2000,
p.134-141):

A disposition was a firm faculty of a person’s soul. It was due to this
disposition that their behavior was carried out easily. This disposition
of man lay behind their nature and habits. Tusi believed that humans
could save their souls from becoming base and from darkness. By doing
so, they could achieve the highest ranks of perfection and reach closer
to God.

Tusi considered ethics in two sections: keeping up of virtues and
values, and treatment of diseases of the soul. Tusi believed that a
man’s morality was changeable, although changing of some dispositions
might be difficult. He asserted that people by nature were susceptible
to virtues, happiness and wickedness. The human nature tended towards
virtues or vices that had been placed in man’s nature.

Besides this, the natures of people were different. Some natures that
tended towards happiness and virtues had greater readiness to accept
virtues and goodness. However, some turned to vices as they had greater
readiness for these. Importantly, each person was capable of changing
his or her morals, habits and faculties.

According to Tusi moral education should be carried out depending on the
stage of natural development of mankind. Moreover, while every person
should be engaged in their own soul’s refinement, their faculties had to
be guided through correct moral plans that were consistent with the
development of their natural abilities.

Cognition of pleasure and pain played a major role in causing man to
turn toward virtues and to keep away from vices, in Tusi’s view. He
maintained that pleasures and pains were of two kinds: sensory and
intellectual. Man comprehended sensory pleasures through his external
and superficial senses, such as the pleasure of eating, drinking and
sleeping. However, intellectual pleasures are not comprehended by the
external senses.

Sensory pleasures were often experienced together with pain; these along
with other pleasures were fleeting in nature. For this reason, even if
someone were aware of their deficiencies, they would undoubtedly
overlook them to pursue easily accessible intellectual and sensory
pleasures. However, even though the ultimate aim of human being was to
achieve happiness through purification and perfection of the soul, this
happiness could not be obtained through any of the sensory pleasures.

Real happiness was understood to be pure pleasure free from pains and
difficulties. It was based on wisdom, courage, chastity and justice. The
one who attained real happiness would never grieve and nor could be
annoyed due to decay of superficial pleasures and bounties. The real
happiness was a constant, durable and unchangeable fact and was not
affected by life’s difficulties and adversities.

Tusi maintained that different kinds of virtues were all based on
wisdom, courage, chastity, and justice. Therefore, no one became worthy
of praise unless he or she had gained one or all of these virtues
(Zadeh, 1998, p.127).

Tusi was of the opinion that a human being was higher in spiritual
ranking and virtue to other creatures. A person could reach the highest
spiritual position, or could descend to lowest ranks in life. Man’s
perfection and virtue were ensured through thinking, reason and wanting.
His own hands held the keys to happiness, wickedness, development or
deficiency.

If a person tended to be on the straight path, sciences, knowledge,
manners and virtues, he would finally attain nearness to God. However if
he moved toward corruption and worldly lusts, he would merely become
deficient day by day and finally be destroyed. Therefore it was really
necessary for all human beings to have a divine guide to show and lead
them to their real goal for which they had been created (Zadeh, 1998,
p.103-112).

A happy and virtuous person was one who used his aptitudes and powers to
attain the virtue for which he had been created (ibid, p. 116).

### Aristotle

In ethical theory, Aristotle used human nature to determine good life.
While everyone considered a good life to be about happiness, people did
not agree upon what that happiness consisted of. According to Aristotle,
the answer depended on the understanding about who the human beings were
essentially with regards to their distinctive function.

A distinctive human life was lived in accordance with reason.
Consequently a good life for human beings was a life of reason lived
‘with excellence’ (or ‘with virtue’). Happiness or the good life
involved functioning well in life.

Aristotle seemed to waver between declaring the good life to be a life
dominated by a single activity namely contemplation of the results of
(theoretical) reasoning or a life inclusive of many different activities
(Mautner, 2005, p. 46). He suggested that well-being consisted of
activity towards excellence such as intellectual contemplation and
virtuous actions that stemmed from a virtuous character.

Virtuous action was what a person with practical wisdom would choose;
and the practically wise were those who deliberated successfully towards
well-being. This might be termed the Aristotelian circle because the key
terms, (well-being, virtue,and practical wisdom) appear to be
interrelated. Aristotle developed a theory of virtue, which aimed to
explain the fact that what was good seemed to be so to the virtuous.

Man, if he was to achieve well-being as a human being, needed friendship
and other directed virtues (such as courage, generosity, and justice).
On occasions, Aristotle seemed to find his account of the good life to
be based on a background assumption about the human nature. At other
places, he based his account of human nature on what was good for the
human beings to achieve. He remarked that the virtuous saw that which
was good. In another place he wrote that what was good was so because it
appeared to be good to the virtuous (Honderich, 2005, p 55).

Aristotle distinguished between moral excellence and intellectual
excellence - one was attained through habits and the other through
learning. Moral excellence was the acquired rational capacity to choose
the way between extremes, for example, courage is the tendency to act
with right amount of boldness to avoid cowardly fear on one hand and
foolish overconfidence on the other (Mautner 2005, p. 46).

Aristotle taught that virtue had to do with the proper function of a
thing. An eye was a good eye only in so much as to how well it could see
because the proper function of eye was sight. Aristotle reasoned that a
person must have a function that was not common to anything or anyone
else, and that this function must be an activity of their soul.
Aristotle identified the best activity of the soul as *eudemonia* - a
happiness or joy that pervaded good life.

Aristotle thought that to achieve good life, one must live a balanced
life and avoid any excess. This balance varied for different persons and
situations. It existed as a golden mean between two vices - one was
excess and the other was deficiency (Wikipedia, 2008).

Conclusion
----------

Tusi believed that a ‘First origin’ was not possible for existence as
origin could not be more than one. Aristotle believed that the ‘Pure
one’ was the cause for all things and was not like any of the other
existing things.

Tusi also believed in superiority of human beings in comparison to other
creatures. Human beings possessed soul with intellect, reason and free
will. Man consisted of both - a body and the soul, the soul being free
from material form. Human soul was simply an essence. The soul with its
intellect remained as such after the destruction of body.

According to Aristotle the teleological goal of man was to live life of
a given kind (e.g. of rational activity). The ability to think for this
purpose had been given to mankind. Human beings were superior to other
creatures in this ability. They also had a spirit, in addition to the
body. It was this spirit that gave them their main characteristic.

Tusi asserted that a man’s perception was carried out through his
external and internal senses. Knowledge or episteme could be sensory,
imaginary, estimated, intellectual, intuitional, divine and revealed. In
this regard Aristotle asserted that sense perception was the crucial
ingredient in the process of coming to know, but that sensory perception
by itself did not constitute knowledge.

Tusi maintained that a moral disposition existed, which imparted nature
and habits to a man. Human beings could save their souls from
inferiority and darkness, achieving highest of ranks in perfection by
reaching closer to God through directing their soul towards the good and
virtues.

Pleasures and pains were of two kinds: sensory and intellectual.
Intellectual pleasures could not be comprehended by the external senses.
The ultimate aim of a human being was to gain happiness through
purification and perfection of the soul. This happiness was achieved
through sensory pleasures.

Real happiness was a pure pleasure free from pains and difficulties and
was based on wisdom, courage, chastity and justice. All the other kinds
of virtues were based on these fundamental attributes or
characteristics.

It was necessary for all human beings to have a divine guide to show and
lead them to the real goal for which they had been created. According to
Aristotle, happiness and the good life consisted of functioning well in
life. A distinguished human life was lived in accordance with reason. A
person with practical wisdom would choose virtuous actions for his life.

Moral excellence and intellectual excellence were acquired through habit
formation and learning respectively. Moral excellence was an acquired
rational capacity to choose a balance between two extremes. To achieve
the good life, one must live a balanced life and avoid excess.

References
----------

Adamson P (2008), The Theory of Aristotle. Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy:
<http://www.science.uva.nl/~seop/entries/theology-aristotle/>

Beheshti M., Abujafari M. and Faqihi, A.N. (2000). Theories of Muslem
Scientists in Education and Its principles; volume. 2, supervised by:
Ali Reza Arafi. Qom and Tehran: Research Center of Howzeh and Univesity
and Samt

Moddaresi (Zanjani) M. (2000). Biography and Philosophical Opinions of
Khwajah Nasir Tusi (2nd ed), Tehran: Amir Kabir

Cooper J. (1998). Al-Tusi,Khwajah Nasir (1201-74). In Routledge
Encyclopedia Of Philosophy. London and New York: Routledge

Genest J. (1998). Aristotelien Epistemology and Its Arabic Developments.
<http://www.grante.demon,co.uk/arsm/jg/arist-> epist.html

Honderich, T. (2005). The Oxford companion to Philosophy. Second
edition. UK: Oxford university press.

Irwin, T. and Fine, G. (2008). Aristotle, posterior Analysis, In
Aristotle: Selections.
<http://science.jrank.org/pages/9174/Epistemology-Ancient->
Aristotle.html

Khwajah Nasir Tusi. (1998).Selected Parts of Akhlaq-e-
Naseri.Introduction selection and explanation of works by: Shahram Rajab
Zadeh. Tehran: Qadyani

Mautner, T. (2005). Dictionary of philosophy. (2nd ed). London: Penguin
Reference

Moddaresi (Zanjani),M. (2000).Biography and Philosophical Opinions of
Khwajah Nasir Tusi. (2nd ed). Tehran:Amir Kabir

Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (2008). Aristotle.
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aristotle>


