Chapter 3: Comparative Study of Ibn Miskawayh and Aquinas’s Shared Views on Philosophy
======================================================================================

Introduction
------------

According to Druart (2006, p. 116 -117), even though some presentation
of philosophy had been made in Islam, there was much pioneering work yet
to be done. Important texts still needed to be critically analysed,
besides the analyses of arguments and works of interpretation.

It could be said that at least a deeper understanding of philosophy in
medieval Islam, including a more nuanced awareness of the debate around
the very existence of *falsafa* in Islamic culture. This could serve to
improve our insight into the nature and role (and perhaps the
limitations) of philosophy in general.

Among Muslims, this tradition continued with Ibn Miskawayh (d. 1030 AD).
His teaching on the reformation of character reversed the traditional
order. It began with a systematic presentation of ethics that was much
influenced by the Nicomachean Ethics, and ended by prescribing medicine
for the soul.

Ibn Miskawayh, in first part of his treatise, laid down a foundation
involving a study of the faculties of the soul and reflections on the
good, happiness, virtues and vices. He surveyed the good and happiness
in greater detail after discussing human character, its perfection and
its means. He focused the fourth part of his treatise on justice and
dealt with love and friendship in the fifth. Finally, medicine for the
soul was provided, with references to Galen and al-Kindi.

Miskawayh analysed different diseases of the soul, such as anger, fear
of death, and sadness. He determined their causes and suggested
appropriate treatment. His Treatise on Happiness relied heavily on
al-Farabi’s - Reminder and belonged entirely to the “medicine of the
soul” genre (Druart 2006, p 116).

St Thomas Aquinas (c.1225-74 AD) was born in the castle of Roccasecca in
the Kingdom of Naples in southern Italy, into a family of the Counts of
Aquino. He was brought up in the Benedictine monastery of Monte Cassino.
He was sent to complete his studies at the university of the time at the
age of fourteen, where a full rang of Aristotelian doctrine was studied.
This influenced him and he joined the Dominican order when he reached
rang of twenty.

Aquinas studied in Paris, and then Cologne, under Albert the Great, and
returned to Paris in 1251-52 AD He subsequently resided at Orvieto,
Rome, Viterbo, Paris again, and Naples, constantly writing and engaging
during the daytime. His work included numerous translations and
commentaries on Aristotle, theological writing, and the two major texts
for which he is best known, the Summa Contra Gentiles - “Against the
errors of the infidels” - a textbook for missionaries, and the Summa
Theologiae, which he began in 1266 AD. It was universally acknowledged
to be the crowning achievement of medieval systematic theology
(Blackburn 2005, p. 20).

For Aquinas the theological virtue of having God as one’s ultimate end
and objective was prior to all other virtues whether natural or
acquired. Since the ultimate end must be present in the intellect before
it was presented to the will. Since the ultimate end was presented to
the will through hope and charity (the other lower theological virtues),
in this respect faith was prior to hope and charity.

Hope was the theological virtue through which we trusted that with
divine assistance we would attain the infinite good – the eternal
enjoyment of God (ST II-IIae, qu.17aa.1-2). In the order of generation,
hope was prior to charity; but in the order of perfection charity was
prior both to hope and faith.

While neither faith nor hope would remain in those who attained the
eternal vision of God to come to them in life itself, charity would
endure in these blessed ones. This was a virtue or habitual form that
was infused into one’s soul by God and it inclined us to love Him for
His own sake. If charity was more excellent than faith or hope (ST
II-IIae, qu. 23, a. 6), it was so because through charity the acts of
all other virtues were directed towards God - their ultimate end (qu.23,
a.8; Audi, 2001, p. 40).

Building upon Aristotle's teaching, particularly the Nicomachean Ethics
III and VI, Aquinas gave a detailed analysis of human actions, focusing
upon their voluntary nature, intention, choice, and deliberation. He
argued that these features had to be present if an act was out of human
volition, and not merely like sneezing or twitching – acts, which might
be truly said to happen to us rather than being something we did, and
which could happen equally to an animal too.

Human acts were said to be out of volition when they were performed
because of a reason, our reason being the value that we attached to
something which was the desired end in relation to our act. Aquinas
argued that beyond all the subsidiary ends that which we might aim at,
there was an ultimate end - happiness, which we would not reject.

Although we might act in such a way as to put obstacles in the way of
our achieving it through ignorance or incompetence, the fundamental
practical principle - ‘Eschew evil and do good’ was in-built into all of
us in such a way that no person could be ignorant of it. This practical
principle and others following from it form, a full and detailed system
of natural law in the Summa Theologiae, which has had major impact on
modern discussions in the philosophy of law (Honderich, 2005, p. 48).

Ibn Miskawayh's views on Ethics
-------------------------------

Ethics was considered to be a technique and method which when applied to
one’s soul, some dispositions could be created in a way that only good
deeds would be issued form that soul. Ethics was seen as the noblest of
sciences. The nobility of each science was dependent upon its subject,
and the subject of ethics was human spirit, that was the noblest of
things and subjects that had been created.

Man could purify himself to perfection in the light of obstacles placed
in his way through spiritual struggle with his carnal desires. He could
thus save himself from real loss, i.e. loss of his own self. In the
light of moral teachings a human being could refrain from evil and
atrocity, and achieve virtue and happiness to an extent that he or she
became the companion of the pure ones and angels, and could receive
Divine bounty (Ibn Miskawayh, 1992, p. 27 & 166).

### Natural and ordinary Ethics

A deep disposition was a soul-related state that caused a person to act
without thinking and speculation (Ibn Miskawayh, 1370 AH, p. 119).
Miskawayh divided this disposition into two kinds. Natural disposition
sprung from a man’s nature and temper. Some people could become
naturally angry or excited over a minor event. These people were
naturally coward, excitable and tough.

The second kind of disposition was ordinary. It was created in the soul
because of the habit of repetition. This might in the beginning require
effort by thinking consciously about it and one may encounter
difficulty. However, it gradually became a deeply established
disposition through repetition (Ibn Miskawayh 1992, p. 51).

Miskawayh believed that one’s morality changed due to education and
admonishment. This change was sometimes rapid and sometimes slow. To
consider morality to be unchangeable was contrary to reason and nature
of conscience. If we believed in such a thing, then we would have to
deny our ability to educate our children and youth and regard all the
strategies related to education in societies, as useless. And finally,
in this situation we would need to know the faculty of discrimination in
human being as useless and ineffective (ibid).

### Man’s original nature

Ibn Miskawayh (1992, p. 53) accepted Aristotle’s theory that every
disposition was changeable, and non-changeability was temperamental.
Therefore, no disposition was temperamental. Even a temperamental bad
person could appeal to virtue because of education. Admonishment and
education could transform and change all of human's dispositions.
However, such a change and changeability was rapid in some people and
slow in others.

### Virtues and vices

Human soul had three different faculties. The faculty related to
distinguishing and thinking about the truth of affairs, was called
intellect (rational faculty), and its physical was the brain. The second
faculty was related to anger, fear, fearlessness and hegemonism etc. It
was called irascible faculty, and its instrument in one’s body was the
heart. The third faculty which was related to lust, and one’s desire for
food, shelter, marriage and other sensory pleasures was called appetite,
and its instrument in the body was liver.

Each of these faculties could become powerful or weak in accordance with
temper, habit and education. If the trend of the intellectual faculty
was moderate and it was directed toward reaching correct sciences, the
virtue of knowledge would emerge and as a result of it – wisdom – would
be created.

If the trend of the basic appetites remained moderate and surrendered to
the intellect, it would not be involved with its carnal desires. Thus,
the virtue of chastity would be created. If the trend of irascible
faculty was seemly and merited, and if it was accompanied with the
following of intellect the virtue of – courage - would be created. The
product and a result of having these three virtues was a fourth virtue
called – justice. It was an outcome of perfection in having all the
other virtues (Ibn Miskawayh, 1992, p. 37-38).

### Pleasure and its kinds

Human beings experienced particular pleasure and pains to satisfy their
physical needs. The pleasure resulted from a removal of pain. Man
removed his thirst or hunger through drinking water and eating food and
such a removal created a pleasure for him. Therefore, pleasure in human
beings was like taking drugs for treatment of pain. So, one should pay
attention to their merited quantity and quality; immoderation with them
could lead man to other pains, diseases and finally death (Ibn Miskawayh
1992, p. 61-64).

Some of man’s pleasures were sensory which sprang from appetites and
irascible faculties and man shared them with animals. Such pleasures
were accidental and transitory. Excessive engagement with them could
sometimes lead to pain. Since these kinds of pleasures were consistent
with man’s nature, they were more desirable for people. Pleasures such
as eating, sleeping, marriage, vengefulness, chairmanship, etc. were
among such sensory pleasures (ibid, p. 96).

Another kind of pleasure peculiar to mankind was intellectual
(rational). These kinds of pleasures were innate, durable, and their
repetition did not annoy man, rather the pleasure experienced was
deeper. Such pleasures were contrary to man’s natural desires. Being
attentive to them and wanting them required patience, practice, obeying
religious commandments, and following the guidance of good people
including parents.

In spite of such high requirements, the intellectual (rational)
pleasures were the highest and noblest of pleasures. Many men welcomed
pain, and showed forbearance against sensory pleasures on their way to
attain such pleasures (ibid, p. 96 & 100-102).

### Happiness and its kinds

In general, it could be said that the happiness of each creature was in
achieving the particular goal for which it has been created. Ibn
Miskawayh, in reply to the question - what brings happiness to man, put
forward three different theories.

First was theory of sensory pleasure, which had been attributed to
Epicureans. It stated that the ultimate aim of human being was to reach
sensory pleasures. According to this theory, the desirable virtue and
the great happiness were sensory pleasures, and all faculties of man had
been created for such pleasures, even intellect, memory and imagination,
had been created for comprehension and identification of these
pleasures, and their better attainment.

Ibn Miskawayh had attributed this theory to ignorant people and
considered it invalid. He said that this opinion was adjusted to man’s
nature, most of people followed it, and its followers considered even
worships, prayers and paradise as a useful transaction which was
necessary for further pleasures.

Miskawayh asserted that sensory pleasures were usually mixed with pains,
and they were nothing else save temporary removal of pains. Achieving
them was neither considered as happiness nor as a virtue for mankind
because the angels and other beings nearest to God kept clear of such
pleasures. Such base human pleasures were shared with animals and many
animals enjoyed such pleasures in the same way as human beings (Ibn
Miskawayh, 1992, p. 60-61).

The second theory of happiness of spirit had several advocates like the
wise before Aristotle such as Pythagoras, Hippocrates and Plato. They
deemed man's happiness in the perfection of his soul (spirit), and
considered the accomplishment of the virtues such as wisdom, courage,
chastity and justice in the soul as a harbinger of happiness even though
the body was imperfect and afflicted with disease. These scholars did
not consider poverty, impotence, weakness and other similar issues that
were harmful to the human soul for achieving happiness (ibid, p. 86-87).

Miskawayh denied this theory for it only paid attention to one aspect of
man’s personality, i.e. his soul, and neglected its other aspect, i.e.
the body.

The third theory of happiness of spirit and body had Aristotle as one of
its advocates. This theory believed that man’s happiness lay in the
perfection of his spirit and body. They, contrary to the second group,
maintained that the attainment of happiness was also possible in this
world.

The followers of this theory considered things such as health of body,
moderation of temper and senses, wealth, good reputation, success in
affairs, correctness of beliefs, moral virtues, and behavior of merit as
part of happiness. They believed that the ultimate happiness was
obtained through the accomplishment of all of perfections related to
spirit and body (ibid, p. 85-86).

Ibn Miskawayh confirmed this third theory and considered it on the basis
of a comprehensive view of human being and his existential dimensions
(Beheshti, Abujaafari & Faqihi, 2000, p. 57-59).

Thomas Aquinas's Views on Ethics
--------------------------------

Increasingly it had been recognized that ethics of virtue was central to
Aquinas’ moral thought and his consideration of the characteristic
capacities and achievements of human nature (McEvoy 2006, p. 262).
Aquinas saw ethics as having two principal topics - first, the ultimate
goal of human existence, and second, how that goal was to be won or lost
(Kretzmann & Stump,1998).

### God and Happiness

Aquinas maintained that happiness did not lie in riches, honors, fame,
glory, power, bodily endowment, pleasures, any endowment of soul, or any
created good. For Aquinas, however, the essential respect in which God
constituted our blessedness was in direct vision of the Divine nature.
Happy was he who had whatever he desired, and desired nothing amiss.
Happiness was the attainment of the last end. The essence of happiness
consisted in an act of the intellect; happiness is joy in truth (McEvoy
2006, p. 263-264).

Aquinas argued that often the unrecognized, genuine and ultimate end for
which human beings existed (their ‘object’) was God - perfect goodness
personified and perfect happiness. The ultimate end for which they
existed (their ‘use’ of that object) was the enjoyment of the end for
which they existed. That enjoyment could be fully achieved only in the
beatific vision, which Aquinas conceived of as an activity. Since the
beatific vision involved the contemplation of the ultimate (first) cause
of everything, it was, whatever else it might be, also the - perfection
of all knowledge and understanding (Kretzmann & Stump, 1998).

Aquinas argued that a human being necessarily (though not always
consciously) sought everything it sought for its own ultimate end -
happiness (Kretzmann & Stump, 1998). The happiness, which was the final
end, was of course not just a matter of an exercise of the virtues. It
could be attained only through a development of all powers. So far as
the attainment of happiness in worldly term was concerned, the
actualization of our highest powers depended on and presupposed the
actualization of our lower powers (MacIntyre 1998, p. 100).

Aquinas maintained that the ultimate end of human beings, their
perfected happiness, could not be any finite or created good, since no
finite or created good could finally and completely satisfy human
desire. Only God could be that good, the God whose existence and
goodness became known through philosophical inquiry (MacIntyre 1998, p.
101).

Aquinas maintained that for the conditional sort of happiness that one
could hope for during earthly life (where health of body and soul, and
some degree of possessions were relevant conditions) friends were indeed
necessary, since we needed to love (McEvoy 2006, p. 264).

Aquinas also emphasized the misery and unhappiness of earthly life, as
many before him had done. However, he chose to value and recommend those
experiences and achievements through these, which were related in a
positive way to perfect happiness. He wisely regarded the happiness as
attainable in this life as being imperfect at best, but clearly held
that this was happiness in an analogical and not merely an equivocal
sense (McEvoy 2006, p. 264).

According to Aquinas, beatitude, or the final end was to hold the
beatific vision of God. Thomas, Aquinas endeavored to relate happiness
to moral and speculative virtues. He argued that beatitude did not lay
in bodily or material goods such as pleasure or wealth, but rather that
the highest happiness, attainable by human beings lay in the
contemplation of truth (McEvoy, 2006, p. 262).

Aquinas recognized intellectual virtues that, like the moral virtues,
could be acquired with human effort. On the other hand, the supreme
theological virtues of faith, hope and charity could not be acquired,
rather these had to be directly ‘infused’ by God (Kretzmann & Stump,
1998).

Aquinas believed that God indeed was good and that this conclusion could
be argued for (Davies 2003, p. 139). For Aquinas, ‘God is good’ could
mean nothing more than that God was desirable. Goodness was visible in
its many forms in what God had creatively brought forth. He also thought
that the Cause was reflected in its effect. He thought that the Cause
expressed itself in them. The effect visible in the Creation was a
reflection of what their Causes would look like in action. On this
basis, he concluded that God was good, as the source of things, which
are good in their various ways, and desirable, since ‘good’ implied them
being ‘desirable’.

Thus Aquinas meant that God was good since the goodness of creatures
preexisted in Him as their cause (ibid, P.145). For Aquinas, nothing
could exist without somehow being good. In this sense, he thought that
everything real was good, even though it might not be as good as it
could be (ibid, p. 148).

According to Aquinas, faith was a virtue infused through reason that
made us accept God’s authority on what He had revealed to us (Audi 2001,
p. 40). He held that there was one final end for human beings towards
which they were directed through their innate nature as rational
animals. It was for the sake of this travel that all was done and by
itself, it was a means for reaching a state with no further end.

Good acts were those that directed us towards the achievement of that
end. They were a movement towards perfection, so that by performing them
we became the kind of human beings who were able to achieve that end
(MacIntyre 1998, p. 99).

What made an action morally bad was that it moved the agent not toward,
but away from, the agent's ultimate goal. Such a deviation was patently
irrational. Aquinas’ analysis of moral evil of human action identified
it as fundamentally irrational, since irrationality was an obstacle to
the actualization of human being’s specific potentialities – the one’s
that made distinction of the human species rational.

In this, as in every other respect, Aquinas ethics was reason-centered
(Kretzmann & Stump, 1998). According to Aquinas, the good of the human
being as individuals acting in isolation could not be achieved overall
for two reasons. First, we needed the aid and friendship of others at
each stage in our lives, if we were to become able to perform the tasks
for that stage. And second, the achievement of the good of each
individual was inseparable from the achievement of the common good that
was shared with those other individuals with whom he or she cooperated
in making and sustaining a common life (MacIntyre 1998, p. 100).

### Moderation and four cardinal virtues

According to Aquinas, the four ‘Cardinal Virtues’ could be understood as
habits, and were as follows: habit of good governance generally was
prudence; reason’s restraint of self- serving concupiscence was
temperance; reason’s preserving despite self-serving ‘irascible’
passions such as fear was courage; reason’s governance of one’s
relations with other despite one’s tendencies toward selfishness was
justice.

Aquinas normative ethics was based not on rules but on virtues; it was
concerned with dispositions first and only then with actions (Kretzmann
& Stump,1998). He demonstrated that of the four cardinal virtues,
prudence was the one that must govern the others. Without prudence, he
said that temperance, courage, and justice could tell us neither what
should be done nor how it should be done - thus, they would be blind or
indeterminate virtues (Comte-Sponville, 2003).

Aquinas kept an important place for the Aristotelian virtues, such as
fortitude and temperance (Mautner 2005, p. 39). Whether a particular
individual judged and acted so as to achieve his or her good was whether
and how far that individual had acquired the virtues of character.
Temperance disciplined and educated the bodily appetites, courage
ordered our passions in response to threats of harm or danger, and
justice disposed the will rightly in relation to others by giving to
each their due.

Prudence was the exercise of practical intelligence in relationship to
the particulars of any given situation. Aquinas understood a range of
other virtues as parts or aspects of these four cardinal virtues. The
endurance involved in the exercise of patience was an aspect of courage.
Untruthfulness was a failure in justice, since we owde truth to each
other in our utterances (MacIntyre 1998, p. 99).

What was indispensable to the acquisition of these virtues was
performance of right kinds of habit. It was only through practice that
the virtues could be acquired and changed into stable and fixed
dispositions (MacIntyre 1998, p. 100).

### The problem of evil

For Aquinas, the evil that was suffered was no illusion. It was
perfectly real in the sense that we could truly say things like this
person was blind. Yet Aquinas also thought that to say such things was
not to refer to something that existed in its own right. There were, he
held, no such things as blindness - there were only people who could not
see.

Something was bad because what we expected or wanted to be there was not
there. Aquinas said that evil could not signify a certain way of
existing or a certain from of a nature. Therefore, we signified a
certain absence of good by the term ‘evil’. And he took this to imply
that God could not have created evil for suffering. God could not have
produced evil because when He made something to be there, it was good
rather than nothing (Davies 2003, p.155-156).

Conclusion
----------

It could thus be concluded from this article that Ibn Miskawayh and
Aquinas had many similar and shared views on ethics. Human dispositions
were changeable, and they could change through some environmental
influence, particularly with repetition and habit formation.

The ultimate goal of ethics was consistent with the ultimate goal of
human being’s creation, i.e. reaching God who was the perfect goodness.
Man’s real happiness was ensured when he reached this goal. Those
attributes which led human beings to achieve God for human happiness to
become manifest were considered to be virtues. Likewise, those
attributes that kept humans from achieving this goal were considered to
be vices. Thus, only virtues could bring happiness to human beings.

Although worldly things created some sensory and superficial pleasures,
these could never lead human beings to happiness. Man’s happiness
resulted from actualization of all of his powers or faculties.

Happiness being a comprehensive state included human body and spirit,
this world and the hereafter. In spite of this fact that the highest
rank of happiness remained possible only in the hereafter, a high level
of happiness could be possible in this world itself.

References
----------

Audi, R. (2001). The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy. 2nd edition.
UK: Cambridge university press.

Beheshti, M. ; Abujaafari, M. and Faqihi A.N. (2000). Theories of Muslem
Scientists in Education and Its Principles, Vol. 2, Supervised by A. R.
Aarafi. Qom and Tehran: Howzeh and University Researching House, and
Samt.

Comte-Sponvill, A. (2003). Great Virtues. Translated into English by
Catherine Temerson. U.K: Vintage

Davies, B. (2003). Aquinas. London and New York: Continuum Druast, T.A.
(2006). Philosophy in Islam. In A.S. McGrade (education). The Cambridge
Companion to Medieval Philosophy (p. 97-120). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press

Honderich, T. (2005). The Oxford companion to Philosophy. Second
edition. UK: Oxford university press.

Ibn Miskawayh, A. (1370 AH). Al-Havamel Va al- Shavamel. Cairo:
Institute of compilation, publication and translation.

Ibn Miskawayh, A. (1992). Tahzib al-akhlaq va Tahrir al-araq
(Purification of morality and refinement of souls). Qom: Bidar

Kretzmann, N. and Stump, E. (1998). Aquinas, Thomas. In Routledge
Encyclopedia of philosophy, London and New York: Routledge

MacIntyre, A. (1998). Aquinas’s Critique of Education: Aganst His own
Age, Against Ours. In A. O. Rorty (Education; Philosophers on Education,
Hisorical Perspectives (p. 95-108), London and New York: Routledge

McEvoy, J. (2006). Ultimate Goods: Happiness, Friendship, and Bliss. In
A.S. McGrade (education.). The Cambridge Campanion to Madieval
philosophy (p. 254-275). Cambridge:
Cambridge university Press


