Chapter 4: Comparative Study of Farabi and Spinoza's Shared Views on Philosophy
===============================================================================

Introduction
------------

Abu Nasr Farabi, also known as the ‘Second Teacher’, was a great Muslim
philosopher. He was born in Farab in 874 AD and died in 950 AD. He
learned logic in Baghdad and Harran. In a short period of time, he
mastered all popular sciences of his time and was considered an eminent
figure.

Farabi was one of the prominent critics of Aristotle’s philosophy and
had a major role in the dissemination of Greek thought among Muslims. He
was called ‘Second Teacher’ because, after Aristotle, no philosopher had
been known to have similar awareness of different branches of science.

Farabi described diverse aspects of logic for Muslims. He completed and
instructed what all his predecessors had left out (Sharif 1986, p. 124).
Farabi’s thoughts were inspired by different sources. He was especially
influenced by the religion of Islam, specifically Shiite thought besides
the Platonic, Aristotlean and Neo-Platonic wisdom. His views changed,
evolved and became firmly established by involving a systematic and
goal-centered system (ibid & Davari Ardakani 1995, p. 45) that had
heavily influenced posterity.

Ibn Sina, who considers himself student of Farabi, was an outstanding
philosopher. One of the characteristics of Farabi and many other Muslim
philosophers was that they believed in harmony between religion and
philosophy. According to these philosophers, the product of intellectual
thinking in philosophy was similar to what God’s prophets achieved.
Therefore, no conflict could exist between their thoughts because the
origin of philosophers and prophets was one and the same.

Baruch Spinoza (1632-77 AD) was a Dutch metaphysician, epistemologist,
psychologist, moral philosopher, political theorist, and philosopher of
religion, generally regarded as one of the most important figures of
seventeenth-century rationalism born and educated in the Jewish
community of Amsterdam. He forsook his given name ‘Baruch’ in favor of
the Latin ‘Benedict’ at the age of twenty-two.

Between 1652 AD and 1656 AD, he studied the philosophy of Descartes in
the school of Francis Van den Enden. As he developed unorthodox views of
the divine nature and ceased to be fully observant of Jewish practice,
the Jewish community excommunicated him in 1656 AD.

He spent his entire life in Holland. After leaving Amsterdam in 1660 AD,
he resided successively in Rijnsburg, Voorburg and Hague. He declined a
professorship at the University of Heidelberg partly on the grounds that
it might interfere with his intellectual freedom. His premature death at
the age of forty-four was due to consumption (Audi 2001, p. 870).

Ontology
--------

### Farabi

Farabi believed that all of particles in this world were created by an
Eternal existence. The most important characteristic of this Existence
was absolute unity, which made the unity of the world possible. That
supreme existence was the ultimate cause of life. In this system, all of
the particles of the Universe were struggling for perfection (i.e.
attainment of a higher rank).

### Spinoza

Spinoza’s ontology consisted of substances, their attributes, and their
modes (Audi, 2001, p. 871). Spinoza’s monism extends to mind and matter:
each had a different characteristic, or a way of rationality, which led
to appreciating the essence of the same one eternal Reality.

Spinoza believed that it was the intellect rather than the senses that
disclosed the essential nature of things. A complete and adequate idea
of God showed that He primarily had two attributes. He could be
conceived under the heading of a material extension, or under that of a
thought. In other words God, or Reality could be conceived in either of
these two commensurable ways, which in turn disclosed an attribute or an
aspect of His essence.

A problem encountered in interpreting Spinoza had been that God
supposedly possessed infinitely many more attributes. By understanding
our aim for increasing our knowledge about God or the Universe we
discovered the way in which a closed system, which was self-sufficient
and completely unified was made for. In this system everything that
occurred was necessary, and nothing could be other than as it was
(Blackburn 2005, p. 348).

Spinoza ascribed to nature, most of the characteristics that Western
theologians ascribed to God. Spinozistic nature was infinite, eternal,
necessary, existing, the object of an ontological argument, the first
cause of all things, all-knowing, and the being whose contemplation
produced blessedness, intellectual love, and participation in a kind of
immortal or eternal life.

Spinoza’s claim to affirm the existence of God was therefore no move
towards evasion. However, he emphatically denied that God was a person
or acte for a purpose; that anything could be good or evil from the
divine perspective; or that there was a personal immortality involving
memory (Audi 2001, p. 874).

According to Spinoza, except for God, no substance could be or be
conceived. It followed from an analysis of the concept of substance that
whatever was not it; it must be a modification of a substance thereof.
Spinoza concluded that, whatever was, was in God, and nothing could be
or be conceived without God’.

Together these views expressed Spinoza’s substance-monism, which could
be defined as a complex thesis that there was only one substance in the
universe; that this substance is to be identified with God; and that all
things, were a modification of this one substance; in some sense it was
an extension of God (Allison 1998).

According to Spinoza a substance was not merely infinite among its own
kind. That is, it became ‘absolutely infinite’ ultimately through any
other thing of the same kind. For Spinoza, that which was all-inclusive
or possessing all-reality was meant to have infinite attributes. The
more reality or essence of being a thing had, the more attributes
belonged to it.

A being that possessed all reality, that is - God - could be described
as possessing infinite attributes. God alone was the substance that
possessed all the attributes, which existed. Therefore, there were none
left for any other conceivable substance.

Combining this with the proposition that two substances could not share
an attribute, it followed that there could be no substance apart from
God (ibid). In fact, identification of God with nature immediately led
to a distinction between two aspects of nature: active or generating
nature and passive or generated nature.

The former referred to God as bring conceived through Himself, that is,
substance with infinite attributes. The latter referred to a modal
system conceived through these attributes (which included, but was not
identical to a total of particular things). Consequently, the task was
to explain the connection between these two aspects of nature - a task
that would be the Spinozistic analogue to the traditional problem of
explaining the relationship between God and creation (ibid).

According to Spinoza, God was infinite being. God was infinite
substance, consisting of infinite attributes, each of which expressed
God’s eternal and infinite essence (I, prop. XI). Spinoza argued that
God necessarily existed, because God’s essence was existence. God’s
essence was perfect, and therefore God’s perfection implied that God
must exist. God’s existence and the perfection itself were the same (I,
prop, XX). Each attribute, which expressed God’s essence, also expressed
God’s perfection.

Spinoza argued that God being the infinite substance, no attribute that
expressed the essence of the substance could deny God (I, prop. XIV).
Every being had its essence in God. Nothing could come into being or
exist without God. For Spinoza, God was the essential cause for all
things.

All things by nature proceeded from necessity. God predetermined all
things, and for anything that existed some effect had to follow (Scott,
2001). Spinoza believed that God as a being was absolutely infinite,
that is, a substance that possessed infinity of attributes, and each one
expressed an eternal and infinite essence (1996, p. 1)

Spinoza asserted that God, or a substance consisting of infinite
attributes, each of which expressed its eternal and infinite essence,
existed by necessity (1996, p.7). Spinoza maintained that God was the
efficient cause, not only for the existence of things, but also for
their essence (1996, p. 18).

According to Spinoza, a thing that had been determined to produce an
effect had been necessarily determined in this way by God. And one,
which had not been determined by God could not possibly determine itself
to produce an effect (1996, p. 19).

According to Spinoza since a perfect substance existed, which possessed
all attributes, and since there could not be more than one substance
possessing the same attribute, it followed that this perfect substance
was the only substance, since there were no attributes left for any
other substance. Thus, except God, no substance could exist by itself or
be conceived (Honderich 2005, p. 890).

For Spinoza perfection was the same as reality (TI, def. VI). The more
perfect a thing was, the more real it was. Inasmuch as God was perfect,
God was also real. God was infinitely perfect and infinitely real
(Scott, 2001).

Spinoza maintained that there was only one substance. His metaphysics
was thus a form of substance-based monism. This one substance was God,
which Spinoza defined as an infinite being i.e. a substance consisting
of infinite number of attributes, of which each was expressed as an
eternal and infinite essence (Audi 2001, p. 871).

Spinoza believed that everything else that existed was in God (Nadler,
2005). His argument was that if God was the only substance, and whatever
existed, was either a substance or in the attribute of a substance, then
everything else must be in God. Nadler (2005) cited this by stating -
‘Whatever is - is there in God; nothing can be or be conceived without
God’ (IP 15).

Since only one substance - God - existed the individual things present
in the world could not be distinguished from one another by any
difference in substance. Rather, among the internal qualitative
modifications and differentiations of each divine attribute, there were
patterns that had tendency to endure; these constituted the individual
things (Audi 2001, p. 872).

Spinoza believed that all was one - nature equaled to God. In other
words, he believed that a substance could not be produced from anything
else and as such therefore, it would be its own cause, that is, its
essence would necessarily involve its existence, or its existence would
appertain to its nature (Spinoza, 1673).

Spinoza said that we were part of nature as a whole whose order we
follow. The pantheist philosopher Spinoza realized two profound things.
Firstly, all that existed was One (God, Nature) and secondly that the
movement was fundamental to existence. He described reality (what
existed) in terms of one substance.

He began by describing what could be known about God. According to
Spinoza, God was an infinite being. God necessarily existed, argued
Spinoza, because God’s essence was existence. God’s essence was perfect,
and therefore God’s perfection implied that God must exist. God’s
essence and existence were the same (I, prop. XX). Every attribute that
expressed God’s essence also expressed God’s existence (Scott, 2001).

Anthropology
------------

### Farabi

From Farabi’s viewpoint, man was a combination of an abstract spirit or
soul and a material body. Farabi also believed that man’s spirit was
superior to his body (Farabi 1405 A.H. b, p. 24).

Man’s body and soul interacted with each other (Farabi 1991, p. 136).
The body was an instrument for soul’s deeds and the soul carried out
acts of virtue and vice. Therefore, health or illness of the soul was
dependent upon the deeds that it committed. The health or illness of the
body depended on the degree of its ability to satisfy the soul’s needs.

The health of the soul was maintained by its virtue and goodness, and
illness occurred in the soul when it partook in vices and sins. Action
was attributed to the soul, while the body was only an instrument for
the soul. A body was healthy when it and its parts were able to allow
the soul to do its deeds, good or bad, in the most perfect form (Farabi
1405 A.H. b, p. 23). A body was ill when it could not help the soul
execute its deeds. The health of the body was ensured through
moderation, and its illness was caused by deviation from moderation
(ibid, p. 24).

Farabi believed that humans were superior creatures for whom and it was
for their service that the other creatures had been created and not vice
versa (Farabi 1887, p. 68). The goal of a human being was to reach
perfection similar to other created things. Mankind’s perfection was
happiness in particular, and each human being would attain a special
level of happiness (Farabi 1401 AH, p. 81).

Happiness being the ultimate virtue was desirable in itself (Farabi
1991, p. 106). Happiness was the most preferred and ultimate aim that a
human being could achieve. It was not an intermediate instrument chosen
to attain other aims (Farabi 1987 a, pp. 178 - 180). People differed in
the way they perceived happiness. However once it had been recognized,
it became the aim of a person’s actions (Farabi 1991, p. 106 - 107). If
another measure other than happiness itself were mistakenly perceived to
be a purpose for life, then the actions taken to reach that goal would
be a waste.

A person who aimed for achieving happiness had a tendency to endeavor
for perfection. He strove to be free of material things (ibid, p. 135).
Upon reaching such a state, he or she would not be destroyed when the
body was destroyed.

Even when this person remained in the material body, there was no need
for material things (ibid, p. 135). Physical and external things were no
longer required for survival. A person had to ascend through different
ranks to reach this position. Farabi believed that intellect was an
absolute requirement for attaining happiness (Fakhri 1993, p. 141).

#### Freedom and Authority

According to Farabi's viewpoint, particular actions could bring a person
to ultimate perfection (Farabi 1991, p. 105). Pursuing the actions that
were geared towards achieving perfection, made the human soul powerful.
This strength prepared the soul for attainment of happiness and
perfection, eliminating the requirement of material things (Farabi 1887,
p. 81).

The actions that caused a person to achieve perfection arose from man’s
own authority and freewill. It was through authority that a person could
choose to do good or bad work, resulting in either reward or punishment
in the afterlife, respectively (Farabi 1991, p. 105). Therefore, the
attainment of perfection became possible because humans had authority
over their own actions.

A question arose here regarding the differences between humans. If all
humans’ original natures were unique, and some are originally gifted in
certain subjects, while others excelled in other topics, what was the
meaning of reward, retribution, and authority?

There were two major elements to this question. The first element
involved the learned individual differences that existed between human
beings, and the second involved hereditary, natural differences among
them.

Individual differences in people can be divided into two groups. Some of
these characteristics occurred naturally, while others were acquired.
For example, Farabi discussed differences in body and temperament, as
well as variations in aptitude for learning certain sciences or
industries. Some people were prepared for learning some kinds of
sciences, and others had aptitude for learning other kinds. There were
also differences in the quantity, speed, and rate of learning.

Existence of such differences in human beings did not determine or
govern their fates. Education and other external factors could dominate
natural aptitudes and even alter a person’s actions. For example, it is
possible that an active intellect could create different aptitudes in
two different people.

Further, the individual nature of human beings could result in different
abilities for learning. However, these factors could not force a person
to work or learn (Farabi, 1987 b, p. 76). Thus, differences among human
beings that were secondary, such as in environment or education could
affect factors such as social circumstances, social class, happiness,
and interpretation of happiness (ibid, p. 77; Farabi 1991, p. 140 -
141).

### Spinoza

Spinoza regarded a human being as a finite mode of God, existing
simultaneously in God as a mode of thought and as a mode of extension of
one substance (Audi 2001, p. 871). Spinoza maintained that the body and
the mind constituted a single individual expressed in the attributes of
thoughts and extension of form. Since the fundamental modifications of
the single individual was expressed in the attributes, thoughts, ideas
and other modifications, such as desires and volitions were presupposed
to be an idea of their object.

As the attributes of extension in physical or material form was that
which extended itself, altogether, it constituted the single thing
(Allison, 1998). Spinoza determined the means through which and the
extent to which human beings, as finite forms of existence, were capable
of attaining freedom. Freedom here was understood as the capacity to act
rather than be governed by the passions (Allison, 1998).

Spinoza defined a thing as free when its actions were determined by its
nature alone. Only God - whose actions were determined entirely by the
necessity of His own nature, and for whom nothing was external - was
completely free in this sense. Nevertheless, human beings could achieve
a relative freedom.

Hence, Spinoza’s philosophy was a compatibility that concerned itself
with the relation between freedom and determinism. ‘Freedom of will’ in
any sense implied a lack of causal determination (Audi 2001, p. 871).
\`
Human liberation consisted in movement through from the second to the
third type of knowledge. Only at that level do we cease to be victims of
emotions, which we do not properly understand and cannot control. The
third type of knowledge ultimately yielded the ‘intellectual love of
God’- Spinoza’s version of salvation (Honderich 2005, p. 891).

In such a rigid and deterministic world there might seem to be no room
for human free will. However, Spinoza found its place by abstracting
from the dimension of time. Freedom became the capacity to see the world
under the heading of eternity, and without bondage to emotions and
desires. These themselves were the result of ignorance of the causes
whereby we had been determined.

Activity and agency were the result of adequate cognition. In other
words, it ceased to be true that one was individually in control of
them. In so far as in the thoughts went, the course of events was
displayed as it turned out (Blackburn 2005, p. 349). For Spinoza, the
will could not be separated from the intellect.

There was no such thing as free will, because the human mind was
determined in willing by a cause other than itself. God’s will, which
had no cause other than itself, revealed itself by necessity rather than
by freedom. Thus, Spinoza explained that their will could only be a
necessary cause of action, and not a free cause of action (I, prop,
XXXII- cited in Scott, 2001). Spinoza said that the will could not be
called a free cause, but only a necessary one (Curley 1996, p. 21).

Epistemology
------------

### Farabi

According to Farabi, things that sound-minded people were aware of were
called the ‘known sciences’. These sciences were so infallible that even
a person who had vocally denied them could not deny them in their mind.
Evidence that was contrary to this did not exist.

This knowledge was instinctively produced for each person from the time
of his or her birth. Sometimes human beings did not pay attention to
thoughts in their minds unless there were words to explain the meaning
of those thoughts. Awareness of these things could be compendious and
knowledge would expand through hearing of words that explained those
thoughts (Farabi 1987, p. 81 - 82).

Shared primary contemplative matters among human beings were divided
into three groups: first, practical skills, second, judgments of
practical intellect and third, judgments of speculative intellect. The
primitive or original types of practical intellect were the origin of
propositions that define whether an action was good or bad. Primitive
judgments of speculative intellect were the origin of propositions
regarding knowledge about other creatures (Farabi 1991, p. 103)

Based on these three primitive rational ideas, speculative intellect was
concerned with episteme or knowledge. Speculative intellect was the
faculty through which certain knowledge about general and necessary
preliminaries was naturally obtained. These preliminaries are the
foundations of other sciences (Farabi, 1405 AH a, p. 50 - 51).

Episteme or knowledge, in its general and broad sense, was divided into
three categories - sensory, imaginary, and intellectual (rational).
Since real knowledge was that which was always true and certain, only
intellectual (rational) knowledge was considered to be real knowledge.
Therefore, attaining rational knowledge increased the rank of a soul,
and of those souls who comprehended. The rational ideas existed
eternally even after their material bodies had been destroyed (Farabi
1991, p. 142 - 145).

### Spinoza

The epistemological teaching of ‘ethics’ of Spinoza culminated in the
distinction between three kinds of knowledge. The first was an
experientially determined knowledge, which could be based either on the
perception of particular things or signs, which for Spinoza included
both sensory and memory images. The second was knowledge through reason,
which was based on common notions and idea about the common properties
of things.
Since the former mode of knowledge involved inadequate ideas and the
latter adequate ones, this was just the contrast one would expect. At
this point, however, Spinoza unexpectedly introduced a third kind of
knowledge, termed’ intuitive knowledge’. This supposedly proceeded from
an adequate idea about the adequate knowledge of the essence of things
(Allison, 1998).

Spinoza distinguished three kinds of knowledge. The first or the most
basic kind was called opinion or imagination. It included or terminated
in random experiences and hearsay or knowledge from mere signs. It thus
depended on the confused and mutilated deliverances of the senses, and
its inadequate.

He called the second kind of knowledge reason. It depended upon ‘common
notions’ – in other words, upon characteristics of things that were
common to all and were equally present in the part and in the whole. It
was based on adequate knowledge of these characteristics as opposed to
the essence of things.

The third kind of knowledge, which he called intuitive knowledge,
proceeded from the
knowledge of the essence or attributes of God. It was derived from
knowledge of essence of things, and hence proceeded in the proper order,
from causes to effects. The third kind was preferable, however, as it
involved not only a certain knowledge about something that it is so, but
also on knowledge of ‘how’ and’ ‘why’ it is so (Audi 2001, p. 871, 872).

From Spinoza’s viewpoint, man’s activities were three, and for each one
there was a corresponding moral perfection. With sensible cognition man
was governed by positions, with rational cognition man enjoyed
tranquility and contemplation on the unity of the world and with
intuition, man enjoyed the intellectual love of God (Radical Academy,
2003).

The better we were able to control our emotions, the better we would
understand God. For Spinoza the more active the mind, the more
adequately it came to know God. The more passive the mind was, the less
adequately it knew God. The more active the mind is, the more it was
able to avoid emotions, which were evil. The more passive the mind was,
the more it accepted emotions, which were evil.

Spinoza, believed that evil was a lack of good and that falsehood was a
lack of truth. Error and falsehood arose from inadequate knowledge of
God (Scott, 2001). According to Spinoza, all
ideas, insofar as they were related to God, were true. Error or
falsehood arose because not every idea possessed by the human intellect
was related by intellect to God, that is, it was not always viewed as a
determinate member of the total system of ideas. In other words, error
or falsehood was a function of incomplete comprehension, or of partial
truth being taken as complete truth (Allison, 1998).

Axiology
--------

### Farabi

#### Virtue

Whether something was virtuous or not determined the perfection of the
essence and action of that thing (Farabi 1987 a, p. 24). The virtues of
a human being caused him or her to do good deeds. Vices resulted in bad
deeds (Farabi 1405 AH b, p. 24). The relationship between virtue and
happiness is created through good deeds. Good deeds, which sprang from
virtues, brought happiness to human beings.

This mutual relationship between deed and virtue was cyclical (Farabi,
1991, p. 106). In other words, as good deeds sprang from virtues,
virtues were also created from good deeds (Farabi 1405 AH b, p. 30).
Good deeds that were carried out before the development of virtues and
good disposition were attributed to the natural power of authority in
humans. Those deeds that are carried out after the development of
virtues were created through a good disposition
(Farabi 1987 a, p. 193).

Farabi divided virtues into four groups - speculative, intellectual,
temperament and practical acts. According to Farabi, these virtues
produced happiness for human beings during life as well as in the
afterlife.

Speculative virtues were those that accrued based on constant and
unchangeable things. Intellectual virtues developed when a person tried
to identify a way to accomplish something that was more useful and more
desirable based on volitional rational ideas. When the aim of the goal
was good, intellectual virtue was created, but if the aim of the goal
was bad, the intellectual virtue will not be generated (Farabi 1401
A.H., p. 69 - 70).

The virtue of temperament involved effects on the soul through lust,
pleasure, refreshment, anger, fear, enthusiasm, zeal, and mercy.
Practical crafts were concerned with physical actions such as
socializing, appearance, and spiritual singing.

If the possessor of intellectual virtue had not intended to perform
action consistent with his realisation, no temperament or practical
virtue would be created in him or her. Thus, the temperament and
practical virtue of each person became a function of his or her
intellectual virtue. There was a possibility of the actualization of
temperament and practical virtues in a person only to the extent that
the person had the ability to identify good aims and how to attain them.

A person having the capacity to recognize the lasting value in others
was superior in temperament and practical virtues than the person who
only identified a fleeting value of others (ibid, p. 71 - 72). When a
person achieved the highest virtue and maintained its use, he or she
would inevitably use all the other virtues. A person who possessed the
highest virtue is completely prepared for having all virtues (ibid, p.
72).

Actualizing all four virtues caused a person to reach a rank higher than
rest of the mankind. Such a person was called a divine individual.
Contrary to this, a predatory soul would be one, which has actualized
all vices. A divine person could be considered a real angel, while a
predatory person got expelled from the society (Farabi, 1405 A.H. b, p.
33).

Farabi said that a person should cultivate virtues to attain happiness.
In other words, he or she should obtain all virtues, or soul-related
attributes, in order to make it possible to reach their happiness
through cognition and action. These soul-related attributes were good
disposition and a strong mind. A good disposition was achieved by
expelling negative soul-related influences. Strength of mind was gained
through positive cognition and by maintaining harmony with reality.

Happiness was stated to be the highest goal that human beings could hope
to reach. Happiness could be divided into real and imaginary.
Acquisitions such as knowledge, wealth, esteem, and physical pleasures
constituted imaginary happiness, when considered as the highest aim.
Real happiness was that which, after being attained left no other goal
worthy of trying to achieve (Farabi 1987, p. 80).

#### Ethics and Morality

Farabi believed that morality of a person could be changed. He was of
the opinion that morality - good or bad - was learned and was not
hereditary. A person could obtain a particular disposition through
learning and experiences, and if a special disposition is gained, it can
be changed through free will (ibid, p. 190 - 191).

Farabi suggested that the long and continuous repetition of an action
consistent with each disposition caused its occurence in a human’s soul.
If these actions would be consistent with virtues, they would cultivate
virtues, and if they were consistent with vices, they would create vices
(Farabi 1405, A.H. b, p. 30)

Good or bad dispositions created in human beings were not equal from a
changeability point of view. Some of these were removed through the
repetition of contradictory deeds and the creation of new habits. Others
were only weakened. Some of them might not be removed. Yet, a person
could avoid doing actions related to that habit through patience (ibid,
p. 33 - 34).

Farabi considered a good deed to be the moderate deed (Farabi 1987 a, p.
194). A good deed was the average of two extremes - both of which were
considered vices. One was doing in excess and the other involved falling
short (Farabi 1405, A.H. b, p. 36). The meaning of moderate differed in
depending on the time and surrounding conditions. Therefore, it was
necessary to evaluate deeds and dispositions in accordance with their
subject, action, and location so that a moderate deed and moderate
disposition could be created in accordance with the circumstance (ibid,
p. 37 - 39 and Farabi 1987, p. 198).

Farabi believed that deeds were moderate when they are most efficient in
bringing about humans happiness. Moderate consumption of food was the
most suitable for maintaining a healthy body (Farabi 1987 a, p. 197 -
198). According to Farabi, moderate actions were the most reliable way
for human beings to achieve happiness. Anyone who could develop the
power to forsake the pleasure of engaging in bad actions had obtained
the ability to choose moderately had approached good morality (Farabi
1405 A.H. b, p. 32).

Pleasures were divided into two groups - sensory and comprehensible.
Sensory pleasures were perceived through superficial senses and
comprehensible pleasures involved faculties of chairmanship and
knowledge. Human beings usually remained in pursuit of sensory pleasures
and believed that these kinds of pleasures could result in perfection.
This was so because material pleasures were able to satisfy personal and
social needs. For example, eating was a pleasure that satisfied a
personal need and reproduction satisfied a social need for surviving in
the world.

Sensory pleasures had two characteristics that increased human attention
towards them. First, they were easily understood. Secondly, they were
easy to achieve. These two characteristics prevented human beings from
many virtues and moved them away from what led them to happiness. When
doing a good deed caused a person to lose a sensory pleasure, a tendency
to forsake that deed could develop (ibid, p. 31 - 32).

Sensory and comprehensible pain and pleasures could be immediate or
delayed. A person needed to assess whether the pain or pleasure produced
by an action would be its immediate or delayed outcome. This would help
the person determine whether an immediate pleasure could cause pain in
the future.

Considering the future pain produced by a bad action would prevent a
person from developing a tendency to act for immediate pleasure alone.
The realization of worth of future pleasure produced by a good action
would facilitate forbearance of immediate pain. Therefore, the
motivation for performing a bad action would be suppressed and the
motivation for doing a good action would be strengthened.

### Spinoza

Spinoza argued that knowledge of good and evil arose from an awareness
of what caused pleasure and pain. The greatest good of the mind, and its
greatest virtue, was to know God (IV, prop. XXVIII).

To act with virtue was to act according to reason (IV, prop XXXVI ). If
we acted according to reason, then we would desire only that which was
good. When acting in accordance with reason, we would try to promote
what was good not only for ourselves but for others as well.

Freedom was said to be the ability to act rationally and to control the
motions. Servitude was the inability to act rationally or to control the
emotions. Spinoza admitted that all emotions might not necessarily
conflict with reason. Emotions, which agreed with reason, might cause
pleasure, while emotions, which did not agree with reason, could cause
pain. Inability to control the emotions could cause pain.

Spinoza maintained that reason could control the emotions. Reason was
virtue, and virtue was love toward God, The more we loved God, the more
we were able to control emotions (V, prop. XLII, proff). Spinoza’s
ethics proceeded from a premise similar to that of Hobbes - that men
call ‘good’ whatever gives them pleasure - but they reached very
different conclusions.

Human beings, indeed all of Nature, shared a common drive for self -
preservation by this drive all individuals seek to maintain the power of
their being, and in this sense virtue and power were one. Knowledge,
virtue and power were one (The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 2005).

Spinoza argued that the ‘highest good’ was the knowledge of the
connectedness that the mind had with the whole of Nature. Distinguished
from this was the true good, which was defined as whatever that could be
a means to attaining one’s highest good. (Miller, not dated, p. 157).
According to Spinoza, if something ‘agreed’ with our nature, it was
good. And, if it disagreed and was neither good nor bad – it was
indifferent (Miller not dated, p. 151).

Spinoza was a relativist about value. He appeared to maintain that good
and evil were relative in some ways (Miller not dated, p. 150). The
notion that the usefulness of a good determined its value was so
fundamental to Spinoza’s thought that he made them his official
definition of good and bad.

Spinoza determined value in terms of use (Miller not dated, p. 152).
Spinoza asserted that insofar as physical things - food, drink, theatre,
green plants - were useful to the body; they are valuable and hence good
(Miller, not dated, p. 157). Spinoza was of the opinion that, the good
was identified with what was truly useful in this regard and the bad
with what was truly harmful.

In spite of his amoralism, Spinoza did not equate virtue with the
ability to survive or the good with what was in one’s self-interest that
was narrowly conceived. What mattered was not mere living, but living
well; and this meant being active - that is, being, to the fullest
extent possible. This was an adequate cause for one’s existence. And
since being an adequate cause was a function of adequate ideas, virtue
was directly correlated with knowledge.

Knowledge, however, had a dual role in the Spinozistic scheme. It was
the major weapon in the struggle against the passions, since it was
through understanding our passions and their cause that we were able to
gain some measure of control over them. But it was also itself
constitutive of the good life, since our freedom was manifested
essentially in exercise of reason.

Spinoza concluded that knowledge of God was mind’s greatest good; its
greatest virtue was to know God (Allison, 1998). Spinoza insisted that
the goods of the body were of secondary worth. Since the body’s
maintenance itself was less important than that of the mind, they too
are accorded lower status and not valued as true goods (Miller, not
dated, p.157).

Spinoza said that he meant the same thing when stating ‘virtue’ and
‘power’ (pr. 7, III). Virtue, in so far as it was related to man, was
man’s very essence or nature in so far as he had the power to bring
about that which could be understood solely through the laws of his own
nature (IVD 8). To the extent that we acted virtuously, we necessarily
sought what we judged to be good and avoided what we judged to be evil.

However, given Spinoza’s understanding of ‘good’ and ‘evil’, this
amounted to the pursuit of our own welfare. ‘The more every man
endeavored and was able to seek his own advantage, that is, to preserve
his own being, the more he was endowed with virtue’ (p. 20). Spinoza’s
ethics was no narrow doctrine of self-interest, for the only things that
contributed to our ‘real advantage’ (IVP 18 S) were those that actually
increased our power, or determined for us to become more active.

Spinoza said to maintain absolute conformity that ‘pleasure’ was defined
as the transition from a less perfect state to a state of greater
perfection . He defined ‘pain’ as the (passive) transition from a state
of greater perfection to a state of less perfection. Spinozistic ethics
sought to show how a person acted when ‘guided by reason’. To behave in
this way was to behave with virtue or power at the same time.

All actions that resulted from understanding - i.e. virtuous actions -
could be attributed to strength of character. Such virtuous actions
could further be divided into two classes. Those due to tenacity, or
‘the desire by which each one strove, solely from the dictate of reason,
to preserve his being’; and those due to nobility, or ‘the desire by
which each one strove solely from the dictate of reason, to aid other
men and join them to him in friendship.’

Thus, the virtuous person did not merely pursue private interests, but
sought to join himself with others in a political state. Nevertheless,
the ultimate reason for doing so was conducive to one’s own welfare, and
particularly to one’s pursuit of knowledge, which emphasized that it was
a good that could be shared with loss. A free man who achieved an
increasing participation in gaining knowledge during his lifetime,
acquired a body of adequate knowledge that always had been eternal. So,
at death, a large part of the free person’s mind would become identified
with the eternal (Audi 2001, p. 872).

Spinoza argued that those who lived under the guidance of reason desired
nothing for themselves that they did not also desire for others. This
reflected his undoubtedly idealized portrayal of those devoted to a life
guided by the mind. In so far as this devotion was pure (which it can
never be completely), such individuals would not come into conflict
because the good which they sought i.e. knowledge could be held in
common (Allison, 1998).

Spinoza believed that maximizing our understanding of God (i.e. Nature)
contributed most to our welfare. Not only was this most satisfying
intrinsically, it also enabled us to minimize conflicts with others
(Mautner 2005, p. 569).

Spinoza’s account of the specific virtues reflected his general
principles. These virtues were identified with certain affects or
emotional states and their value was regarded as a function of their
capacity to promote an individual’s efforts. For this purpose the
affects are divided into three classes - those that were intrinsically
bad, and a large group that was good in moderation but bad if they
became excessive. In identifying the virtues with affects that could
never become excessive, Spinoza differed from Aristotle for whom virtues
were regarded as a mean between two extremes (Allison, 1998).

Spinoza believed that love of God was crucial to mental health and
blessedness. Moreover, since the ultimate positive thought was the love
of God, this love served as the chief remedy against the passions. On
the other hand, since the adequate knowledge of anything involved the
love of God as its affective dimension, it could be said that the
love-knowledge of God was to be considered as the supreme remedy against
the passions (Allison, 1998).

Spinoza took up popular religion, the interpretation of scripture, and
their bearing on the well-being of the state in his works (Audi, 2001,
P.873). Spinoza intended to demonstrate the truth about God, nature and
especially ourselves along with the highest principles of society,
religion and the good life. From Spinoza’s viewpoint, our happiness and
well-being lay not in a life enslaved to passions and to the transitory
goods we ordinarily pursue; nor in the related attachment to the
superstitions that pass as religion without any reflection; rather, it
was present in a life of reason (Nadler, 2005).

Conclusion
----------

Farabi believed that the world was like a single frame, with all its
particles having been created by an eternal existence. The supreme
existence, i.e. God, was the ultimate cause of every being or existence.

In the world, which was a system, all the particles of the universe were
struggling for perfection, i.e. attainment of a higher rank. Farabi
maintained that man was combination of an abstract spirit and a material
body, and his spirit was much more superior than his body. The health or
illness of the soul was dependent upon the deeds that it did. The health
of the body was ensured in the light of moderation, and its illness was
due to deviation from moderation.

According to Farabi, man had been created to reach perfection, and
specific perfection for man was happiness. Happiness was absolute
virtue. The actions, which sprang from man’s authority and freewill
could cause man to attain perfection. It was through authority on self
that man could perform good or bad acts.

Spinoza asserted that except God, no substance could be or be conceived
by itself. His view was: ‘Whatever is - is in God, and nothing could be
or be conceived without God.’ There was only one substance in the
Universe. This substance was to be identified as God. This could be
called substance-monism.

Spinoza argued for God’s necessary existence with God being an infinite
being and infinite substance. God’s being and existence in nature were
the same. All was one: Nature and God.

God was the efficient cause of not only the existence of all things, but
also of their essence. A thing, which had been determined to produce an
effect, had necessarily been determined in this way by God.

As for human being, Spinoza believed that human beings were finite
forms. They were capable of attaining freedom, understood as their
capacity to act rather than to be governed by their passions. Only God
was completely free. Humans could only achieve a relative freedom.
Spinoza maintained that the mind and the body constituted a single
individual.

According to Farabi, since a real knowledge was that which was true and
certain for all times, then only the intellectual (rational) knowledge,
as compared with sensory and imaginary, could be considered as the real
knowledge. Those souls that attained understanding of the contemplative
matters (rational ideas) became eternal after destruction of material
bodies.

Spinoza believed that it was the intellect rather than the senses that
disclosed the essential nature of things. The first knowledge for
Spinoza included both sensory and memory images. The second was
knowledge through reason, and the third was intuitive knowledge.

The better we could control our emotions, the better we could understand
God. The more active the mind was, the more it was able to avoid
emotions, which were evil. Evil and falsehood arose from inadequate
knowledge of God. Error or falsehood were a function of incomplete
comprehension.

Farabi believed that the virtue of everything was that which caused the
perfection of the essence and action of that thing. Good deeds brought
humans to happiness. Virtues caused happiness to humans in this world
and in the hereafter. Such happiness was the highest aim that man had
been seeking. Real happiness was that which once attained, one would see
no other aim as worthy of trying to achieve.

Farabi maintained that one could change their disposition in the light
of free will. Farabi considered the good deed as the moderate deed. A
good deed was the average (moderate) of two extremes. Those deeds that
were moderate were the most efficient in bringing man to happiness.

According to Spinoza, the greatest good of the mind, and its greatest
virtue, was to know God. To act with virtue, was to act according to
reason. If we would act according to reason, then we would desire only
that which was good. Reason was virtue, and virtue was love for God. Our
happiness and well-being lay in a life of reason. On the other hand,
Spinoza determined value in terms of use.

References
----------

Davari Ardakani, R. (1995). Farabi. Tehran: Tarh - e - Nou

Fakhri, M. (1993). Development of Philosophy In Islamic World. Tehran:
University Publication Center

Farabi, A. (1991). Ara-e-Ahlal-Madinah al-Fazelah (Ideas of the People
of Utopia. (6th ed.). Beirut: Dar al-Mashreq

Farabi, A. (1401 A.H.). Tahsil al-saadah (Acquisition of Happiness).
Beirut: Dar al-Andoles

Farabi, A. (1405 A.H.a). Al-Jam Bayn Ray Al-Hakimayn (compromising
between two Wises’ ideas). (2nd ed).Tehran: Al-Zahra

Farabi, A. (1987 b). Al-Siyasah Al-Madaniyyah Al- Molaqqeb Be Mabade
Al-Maujudat (Social Politics titled Origins of Creatures). Tehran:
Al-Zahra

Farabi, A. (1987 a). Resalah Al-Tanbih Ala Sabil Al-Saadah (A Thesis on
the Acquisition of Happiness). A Research by Sobhan Khalifat. Jordan:
Faculty of Letters: Department of Philosophy of Jordan University

Farabi. A. (1405 A.H. b). Fosul Al-Montazeah. Tehran: Al- Zahra

Miller, J. (undated) Spinoza’s Axiology. Ontario: Queen’s University

Nadler, S. (2005). Baruch Spinoza. Stanford Encyclopedia of philosophy
Scott, A. (2001). Spinoza’s Ethics
<http://www>.angelfire.com/md2/timewarp/Spinoza.html

Sharif. M. M. et al (1986). History of Philosophy in Islam. Tehran:
University Publication Center

Spinoza, B. (1996). Ethics. Translated by Edwin Curley. London: Penguin
Books

The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia. (2005). (6th ed). Columbia:
Columbia University Press


