Chapter 5: Comparative Study of Ibn Sina and Edwards’s Shared Views on Philosophy
=================================================================================

Introduction
------------

Avicenna (Ibn Sina) (980-1037 AD), the Persian (Iranian) philosopher and
physician, has been regarded as the greatest of the medieval Islamic
philosophers. He served as court physician for the Sultan of Bukhara.

Avicenna was deeply influenced by Aristotle, yet, maintained a Muslim
faith. He was best known for his distinction between essence and
existence, in which the essence of an existing thing had to be explained
by their existing cause (s), whose reality was higher than the
philosophical and theological perspective (Pojman, 2003).

Avicenna as a Persian philosopher, scientist and physician, was widely
called ‘The Supreme Master’. He held an unsurpassed position in Islamic
philosophy. His works, including the Canon of Medicine, that were cited
throughout most Medieval Latin philosophical and medical texts, had been
subject of more commentaries, explanations, and reviews than any other
Islamic philosopher. They inspired generations of thinkers, including
many Persian poets.

His philosophical work especially - Healing: Directives and Remarks and
Deliverance - defined Islamic peripatetic philosophy, one of the three
dominant schools of Islamic philosophy. His contribution to science and
philosophy was extraordinary in scope. It was thought that he was the
first logician to define temporal modalities in prepositions. He
contributed to diagnosis and identification of many diseases, and the
use of specific number of pulse beats in making diagnosis (Honderich,
2005).

His autobiography described him as an intuitive student of philosophy
and other Greek Sciences, who could not see the point of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics, until he read a tiny essay by al-Farabi (870-950 AD), which
showed him what it meant to seek the nature of ‘Being’ as such. It was
in metaphysics that Avicenna made his greatest contributions to
philosophy, brilliantly synthesizing the rival approaches of the
Aristotelian-Neo-Platonic tradition with the creationist monotheism of
Islamic dialectical theology *(Kalam).*

Aristotle sought and found ‘Being’ in its fullest sense in that which
was changeless in nature (above all, in the cosmos as a whole). *Kalam*
understood ‘Being’ as the immediately given, allowing no inference
beyond a single contingent datum to any necessary properties,
correlatives, continuators, or successor. The result was a stringent
atomist occasionalism resting ultimately on an early version of logical
atomism.

Avicenna preserved Aristotlean naturalism alongside the idea from
scriptures of the world that arguably states that any finite being which
although could be a chance event in itself, was a necessary output of
its cause. He adapted al-Farabi’s Neoplatonic emanationism to this
schematization. He naturalized his own distinctive version of the
*kalam* argument from contingency in philosophy, which stated that any
being must be the necessary ‘Being’, and it was therefore simply the
ultimate cause of all other things.
Avicenna found refuge at the court of one ‘*Alaal-Dawla*’, who bravely
resisted the military pressures of Mahmud against his lands around
Isfahan. He made the philosopher and savant his vizier. Avicenna
completed his famous philosophic work the ‘Shifa’ (known in Latin as the
Sufficientia) and his ‘Qanun fi Tibb’ - the Galenic Canon here. The
latter remained in use as a medical textbook until finally it was
brought down by the weight of criticisms during the Renaissance.

Avicenna’s philosophy was the central target of the polemic critique of
the Muslim theologian al-Ghazali (1058 -1111 AD) in his ‘Incoherence of
the Philosophers’, mainly on the ground that the philosopher’s retention
of the Aristotelian doctrine of the eternity of the world was
inconsistent with his claim that God was the author of the world.

Al-Ghazali argued that Avicenna’s affirmations about causation being
necessary and that God’s knowledge was universal made miracles
impossible and divine governance too impersonal to deserve the name.
Yet, Avicenna’s philosophic works (numbering over a hundred in Arabic
and Persian) continued to exercise a major influence on Muslim and
Jewish philosophers and (through Latin translations) on philosophers in
the West (Audi, 2001).

One of his arguments concerning the nature of the soul postulated that
if a fully grown man suddenly came into existence while remaining
suspended in empty space, with eyes covered and limbs separated - this
‘flying man’ would have no sensation, but nevertheless he would be aware
of his own being and his self. The argument anticipated the cogito of
Descartes.

Avicenna believed that ‘Being’ was an accident of essence, and that
contingent beings required a necessary cause to sustain their existence.
Aquinas accepted this version of cosmological argument to explain
existence. Neo-Platonism surfaced in Avicenna’s work in the theological
context of considering concepts such as the kinds of intelligence
(Blackburn, 2005)

Considering his knowledge regarding man and belief that man’s attributes
and habits could be changed, Avicenna put forward some ideas about
ethics. He stated some issues of ethics and morality in his
philosophical and social discussions, through which he perhaps wanted to
show that morality was a virtue, which should be considered in all such
affairs and discussions.

Avicenna appointed religion as foundation for one of his theories. He
emphasized that it was important to ensure every individual’s perfection
and happiness in this world and in the hereafter through their moral
education in society.

Jonathan Edwards (1703-1758 AD) was an American philosopher and
theologian (Audi 2001, p. 253 & Blackburn 2005, p. 110). He could be
said to be the most eminent American philosopher of his time (Mautner
2005, p. 179) and perhaps the foremost of puritan theologians and
philosophers (Honderich, 2005).

Edwards was considered by many to be the greatest philosopher-theologian
yet to grace the American scene (Miller 1957; cited in Talbot 2004, p.
13). He deeply influenced congregational and Presbyterian theology in
America for over a century (Audi 2001, p. 253).
He was also considered a Saint, Pastor, Polymath, Theologian,
Metaphysician, Apologist, and Educator (Packer 2004, p. 82), who was
characterized by his wide-ranging intellect, penetrating analysis, and
philosophical power (Lachs & Talisse, 2008, P.215).

Edward’s influence on the development of American Christianity, theology
and philosophy had been evidenced by his influence on contemporaries
like Samuel Hopkins and Nathaniel Emmons, and controversies that arose
between luminaries such as Edwards A. Park and Charles Hodge (Lachs &
Talisse 2008, p. 215).

On the other hand, Edwards was also described as God-centered,
God-focused, God-intoxicated and God-entranced. So indeed he was (Parker
2004, p. 86). Edwards was educated at Yale, preached in New York in 1729
AD, and assumed a congregational Pastorate in Northampton,
Massachusetts, where he became a leader in the Great Awakening.

In 1750 AD, he was forced to leave this Parish because of a dispute with
his parishioners over qualifications for communion. In 1751 AD he took
charge of the congregation in Stockbridge, a frontier town sixty miles
to the west. He was selected third president of Princeton in 1757 AD but
died shortly after inauguration (Audi 2001, p. 253).

Ontology
--------

### Avicenna

Avicenna introduced God as the prime or ultimate cause of all things
(Kemal, 1998). He maintained that God, the principle of all existence,
was pure intellect, from whom other existing things such as minds,
bodies and other objects all emanated. Therefore all that existed was
necessarily related to God.

That necessity, once fully understood, was rational and allowed all that
existed to be inferred from each other hand and ultimately from God
(ibid). Avicenna believed that the highest point above the active
intellect was - God, the pure intellect. God also remained the highest
object of human knowledge. This was because the highest and purest
intellect - God - was the source of all that existed in the world
(ibid).

According to Avicenna, essence existed in supra-human intelligence and
also in the human mind (ibid). Entire nexus of causes and effects needed
to have a first cause, which existed necessarily for itself; this was
God. Avicenna went on to explain how the world and its order emanated
from God (ibid).

### Edwards

Edwards believed that God was the complete cause of everything that
occurred, including human volition itself. Edwards was also an
occasionalist, idealist and mental phenomenalist. For him, God was the
only real cause of events. Human volition and ‘natural causes’ were
further ‘occasions’ through which God produced appropriate effects
(Routledge concise Dictionary of Philosophy 2000, p. 233).

According to Edwards, the ‘vulgarly’ called causal relations were more
constant conjunctions. True causes necessitated their effects. Since God
alone would meet this condition, God remained the only true cause. He
also was the only true substance. Physical objects were collections of
ideas of color, shape, and other ‘corporeal’ qualities. As the only true
cause and the only real substance, God was in general the ‘Being’ and
the objects were His own effect (Audi 2001, p. 253).

Edwards argued from an unthinkable perspective the notion of absolute
nothingness being the nature of existence of the eternal ‘Being’. This
necessary Eternal, which began before time began, had to be infinite and
omnipresent and it could not be solid. It could only be space, or God
(Crittenden, 2005). Since absolute nothingness was impossible, a
beginning was necessary. This beginning had to be identical with God
(Mautner 2005, p. 179).

Edwards said that God’s understanding and power were infinite. God being
infinite in power and knowledge must be self-sufficient and
all-sufficient (Piper 2004, p. 23). The whole was of God, in God, to
God, and God was the beginning, middle and end in this affair (Piper
2004, p. 23).

Nothing existed without Him creating it (ibid, P.24). As George Marsden
observed, “The Key to Edwards’ thought was that everything was related
because everything was related to God” (Nicholas 2004, p. 51-52).
Edwards advocated for a God-centeredness that was achieved through a
dependence on Him. It was worth nothing that Edwards emphasized God
dependence over self-dependence as well. Edwards saw man as helpless,
standing entirely empty-handed before God (Nicholas 2004, p. 52).

Edwards believed that father, mother, husband, wife, or children or the
company of earthly friends - were nothing but shadows of God as the
substance. These were but scattered beams, and God was the sun. These
were but streams, and God was the ocean (Taylor 2004, p. 14).

Edwards asserted that the enjoyment of God was the only happiness, which
could satisfy our souls. To go to heaven to fully to enjoy God was seen
as being infinitely better than living in the most pleasant
accommodation here (Taylor 2004, p. 14). Human happiness lay in union
with God. The more the happiness experienced, the greater was the union.
The union would become more and more strict and perfect as this
happiness increased towards eternity, (Parker 2004, p. 94).

Nothing was separated from God through spatial or temporal distance.
Furthermore, His activity was a necessary and fully sufficient condition
for any spatio-temporal effect to occur. Finally, God’s will was
necessary and effective. This will was the true cause. Nothing else met
these conditions. Hence, God was the only real cause (Wainwright, 1998).
As the only true substance and only true cause, God was the ‘Being in
general - He remained the sum of all; everything was in Him and He was
all’.

God was the ‘properly’ and ‘necessarily existing’, ‘intelligent willing
agent’ like our souls, only it was without our imperfections, and was
not some inconceivable, unintelligent, necessary agent’. Edwards
believed that ‘degree of existence’ was a function of ‘greater capacity
and power’. He identified God’s perfect activity with His out flowing
love and Holy will. As God’s power and consciousness were unlimited, so
too was His ‘Being’.

Edwards asserted that finite beings were totally dependent on God for
their existence and attributes. Because He was the only true substance
and cause, created beings were no more than God’s ‘images’ or ‘shadows’.
God was the ‘Head’ of the system of beings, its ‘Chief’, an absolute
sovereign whose being, power and perfection were so great ‘that the
whole system of created beings was like light dust of the balance in
comparison to Him’.

‘Being in general’ thus referred to a system of beings – related
principally to God but to ‘particular beings’ as well in so far as they
depended and reflected upon Him (Wainwright, 1998). According to
Edwards, God’s goals for the creation was – to exercise God’s perfection
to produce a proper effect, manifestation of His internal glory to
create understanding, communication of the infinite fullness of God -
the Creator, and creature’s high esteem, love for God, finding
complacence and joy in God, proper exercise of will and expression of
Him as themselves (Wainwright, 1998).

Anthropology
------------

### Avicenna

Avicenna considered man as a truth that consisted of body and soul with
characteristics and properties such as intellect that bestowed a
particular position for him in the universe, and distinguished him from
other creatures.

Man’s soul was spiritual and abstract, in spite of possessing diverse
faculties belonging to both plant and animal kingdom. Their reasoning
and differences in nutrition, growth, reproduction, feeling, voluntary
movement, intellect - had a single and unique truth, which was not
annihilated when body was separated from the soul, rather the soul
continued its eternal life (Howzeh-University Co-operation center 1998,
p. 242).

From Avicenna’s point of view, the existence of the soul in body was not
the existence of a accident in its subject. Rather, the soul could be
realized without the body. However, the body could not continue its
existence without the soul (ibid, p. 246). Thus, soul was an essence.

For Avicenna, the soul was incorporeal. This also implied that it was
immortal. The decay and destruction of the body did not affect the soul.
The body was not a cause for the soul in any of the four senses of
cause. Both were substances - corporeal and incorporeal. Therefore, as
substances they had to be independent of each other.

Destruction of the soul could not be caused by anything. While composite
objects that existed were subject to destruction; by contrast, the soul
as a simple incorporeal being was not subject to destruction (Kemal,
1998).

### Edwards

According to Edwards the chief end of man was to glorify God and enjoy
Him forever (Packer 2004, p. 92). Edwards’s purpose was to clearly to
address a ‘prevailing’ concept of human freedom that was thought to be
the foundation of moral accountability (Storms 2004, p. 201).

Choices could be entirely predestined by God and nevertheless the agent
was not prevented from carrying them out, he was free. Indeed Edwards
could reconcile freedom with not only Calvinism but with Newtonian
science, which saw nature as entirely determined (Crittenden, 2005).

The faculties of will and intellect in man - being both passive - did
not have the power of self-determination, which was specific to God
(Mautner 2005, p. 179). Edwards believed that indeterminism was
incompatible with our dependence on God and hence with His sovereignty.
If our responses to God’s grace were contra-causally free, then our
salvation partly depended on ourselves and God’s sovereignty was not
absolute and universal (Wainwright, 1998).

Edwards maintained that physical objects were collections of sensible
‘ideas’ of colour, shape, solidity, and so on, and finite minds were
collections of ‘thoughts’ or ‘perceptions’ (Routledge Concise Dictionary
of philosophy 2000, p. 233).

Edwards agreed with the view often attributed to Locke that secondary
qualities such as colour and taste did not exist in objects but in the
mind. But Edwards held that primary qualities had a similar existence;
solidity was just resistance, shape was the termination of resistance,
and motion was the communication of resistance from space to space
(Crittenden, 2005).

Epistemology
------------

### Avicenna

Avicenna divided perception into two kinds: sensory and intellectual.
Sensory perception was a manifestation of forms that could be sensed by
one’s senses and intellectual perception was a manifestation of forms
that were intelligible through reason.

Sensory perception remained the first step of cognition (1998, p. 258 -
259; cited in Howzeh-University Co-operation Center, 1998). In regard to
intellectual perception, Avicenna classified reason (intellect) into two
categories - practical and speculative.

Practical reason was explained to be the faculty that originated
physical movements towards practical deeds. Speculative reason was the
faculty, which distinguished the general forms from abstract aspects of
matter. If these forms were not intrinsically abstract, the reason
(intellect) made them abstract and separated them from material concerns
(ibid, p. 265-266).

According to Avicenna, knowledge began with abstraction. Sensory
perception, being a property of mind, was derived from the object that
was perceived. Sensory perception responded to the particular object
with its given material form. As an event of mind, it perceived form of
the object rather than the object itself. Perception of that particular
object then occurred.

We must retain both the images obtained through senses and abstract
particulars perceived by the intellect. Disintegration of parts of these
percepts, their manipulation and re-alignment according to their form
and other attributes were achieved through sensory organs and intellect.
This response was to help analyze and classify form and abstract aspects
of the perceived object.

However, this manipulation and correlation of attributes were distinct
epistemological functions, and could not depend on the same
psychological faculty. So, Avicenna distinguished faculties of
manipulation and correlation as appropriate to those diverse
epistemological functions.

Avicenna identified the faculty of retention as ‘representation’ and
charged imagination with the task of reproducing and manipulating
images. To conceptualize our experience and to order it according to its
qualities, we must be able to revoke images of what we have experienced
earlier, but is now absent. For this we needed sensation and
representation at least, in addition, to order and classify the content
of representation. We need to be able to discriminate, separate and
recombine parts of images. Therefore we must possess both imagination
and reason.

To think about a black surface we must be able to analyze its color,
separate this quality from other, or its part in the image from other
images, and classify it with other black things, thereby showing that
the concept of black was applied to all such objects and their images.
Imagination carried out this manipulation. It allowed us to produce
images of objects we had not seen, out of the images of things that we
had already experienced. There also thereby generated images for
intelligible concepts and prophecies (Kemal, 1998).

Avicenna held that it was important to gain knowledge. Grouping of
intelligible concepts determined the fate of rational soul in the
hereafter, and therefore was crucial to human activity. When human
intellect grasped these intelligible concepts, it came into contact with
the - active intellect - a level of being that ultimately emanated from
God and received a ‘divine effluence’ (ibid).

Axiology
--------

### Avicenna

Avicenna maintained that evil was usually an accidental result of things
that would otherwise produce good. God produced more good than evil when
he produced this sublunary world. That He would abandon an
overwhelmingly good practice because of a ‘rare evil’ would be a
privation of good.

God generated a world that contained good, evil and the agent - the
soul, which acted in this world. The rewards and punishment it gained in
its existence beyond this world was a result of its choices in this
world. There could be both destiny and punishment because the world and
its order was precisely what gave souls a choice between good and evil
(Kemal, 1998).

#### Changeability of Morality

Moral dispositions, good or bad, were all acquired. One could acquire a
disposition not yet obtained, or he could change his disposition through
his free will and create its opposite in his soul (Abd al-Amir 1998, p.
373).

Avicenna (Ibn Sina 1404, AH) defined morality as ‘a permanent
disposition through which, some deeds were easily done without any doubt
by the man’s soul’. Avicenna, like previous thinkers, deemed ‘habit’ as
the origin of creation of a disposition in the soul. He defined ‘habit’
was a frequent repetition of an action over a long period and in equal
conditions (ibid).

#### Standard of Virtue, and Principle of Virtues and Vices

According to Avicenna (Ibn Sina 1404, AH), the standard of virtue and
vice for one’s disposition was ‘moderation’. This word was applied to a
disposition that was between two opposite dispositions, i.e.
immoderation (the two extremes). Simply doing an action with due
attention to moderation was not considered virtue or vice; rather, it
had to become a permanent disposition in one’s soul. The permanent
disposition of ‘moderation’ was necessary to exist in both with regards
to animal-like faculties and the faculty of speech (rational faculty).

Avicenna believed that the principles of morality for virtues were -
chastity, wisdom, courage, and justice. Chastity was moderation in
faculties that triggered passion for pleasures such as marriage, food,
and clothes. Courage was a moderation in irascible faculties such as
fear, anger, grief, animosity, and jealousy. Wisdom was moderation in
faculty for discernment, i.e. practical wisdom. Justice was the
perfection in each of these three faculties and achieving moderation in
them. Therefore, it can be said that a man’s faculties could be amorous,
irascible, discernment, and they corresponded with three virtues:
chastity, courage, and wisdom. A fourth virtue called ‘justice’ was a
comprehensive faculty that included all the three virtues (ibid, p.
455).

The subdivisions of virtues were either types of these principles or
combinations of them. For example, generosity, contentment, loyalty,
ambitiousness, and humility were related to chastity and moderation in
the appetitive faculty; endurance, patience, and grace are related to
courage and moderation in irascible faculty; and prudence, truthfulness,
modesty, and perspicacity were related to wisdom and moderation in the
discernment faculty (ibid).

#### Pleasure and Pain

Pleasure was considered to be achieving what was perfect and virtuous
for a person, and pain was achieving what was vice (Ibn Sina, 1403 AH).
Mere achievement of a pleasurable thing could not be considered as
pleasure or pain if the person experiencing it did not consider it to be
perfection or vice. The standard of perfection and virtue was in the
person himself and not in the related thing. This virtue (goodness) or
vice (evil) was related to the person and differed from real virtue and
vice.

#### Superiority of Inner Pleasures to Sensory Pleasures

According to Avicenna (Ibn Sina 1403 AH), human beings, and even some
animals, desisted from sensory pleasures even if they were not
intellectual, and this was the reason for the superiority of intrinsic
pleasures over sensory pleasures.

#### Intellectual and Sensory Pleasures

Avicenna (Ibn Sina 1403 AH) asserted that an intellectual soul had its
own particular perfection - the manifestation of the first truth in it
so far as it was possible, followed by the manifestation of the certain
ordered effects of the exalted God, i.e. all existence as it existed in
that intellectual soul.

He mentioned two points regarding the comparison of the intellectual and
sensory pleasures. Intellectual perception was much higher than sensory
perception from a qualitative point of view. When quality was being
considered in intellectual perception, the depth of the object being
perceived was comprehended; while in sensory perception, only the
surface and appearance of things were comprehended. The more powerful
and pure the perception was, the stronger was the pleasure related to
it.

When considering quantity, details perceived by intellect were infinite
in contrast to data from sensory perception. There was a great
difference between intellectual and sensory perception from the
‘percept’ point of view. Since the difference between pleasures from a
quality point of view was related to the difference of the perception
and percept, it was beyond just sensory perception of the percept.
Intellectual perception remained the highest of perceptions.

Sensory pleasures and worldly chairmanships were not pure, perfect, and
pain-free pleasures. All sensory pleasures were mixed with elements of
adversities, deficiencies, pain and disasters, while the intellectual
pleasures were pure from deficiencies and sorrows. According to Avicenna
(Ibn Sina 1400 AH), these deficiencies and sorrows were as follows:

- Sensory pleasure was accomplished whenever annoyance was afflicted
upon a man before that pleasure; for example, the pleasure of eating and
drinking came after a painful desire from hunger or thirst.

- None of the sensory pleasures were pure; rather, they were accompanied
pain and adversity.

- All sensory pleasures were fleeting and not durable for more than a
moment.

- Involvement in sensory pleasures causes discontinuance of divine
bounty because such a person was unable to receive spiritual bounty.

- Relinquishing sensory pleasures did not cause a defect in one’s
humanity and did not bar one from other worldly happiness.

#### Suffering of the Soul from Ignorance

Each faculty was interested in reaching its inherent perfection and
suffered from creation of the opposite of those perfections in itself.
For example, the faculty of sight aspired for light and detested
darkness.

Intelligence was a perfection of the soul’s intellect. Lack of
enthusiasm and suffering from ignorance was related to us, not to the
faculty of intellect. The reason for lack of enthusiasm in acquisition
of ability to perceive with intellect was that the soul was involved in
the sensory experience, which prevented it from paying attention to
intellect. In such circumstance enthusiasm was unlikely to be created
for the perception of intellect. As a result, no eagerness will be
demonstrated to exercise this faculty.

The reason for lack of suffering due to ignorance, which was opposite in
outcome as regards to exercise of intellect was that while it was always
in some people's souls, it did not stimulate perception so that a man
involved in other things would fail to comprehend it and would suffer
from it (ibid).

After separation of the soul from body, the obstacles of comprehension
and enthusiasm for attaining perfection were removed. It was when the
soul paid attention to its separation from perfection, it suffered from
being hindered from acquisition of happiness (Ibn Sina, 1404 AH).

#### Happiness

According to Avicenna (1953), some people thought that happiness was
achieved through sensory pleasures and worldly chairmanships, but a real
researcher knew that none of sensory pleasures were considered to be
happiness because all of them were accompanied by different deficiencies
and adversities.

Avicenna believed that real happiness was a thing that was desirable and
had been chosen for its own privileges. It had been evident to him that
a thing that was desirable or made other things desirable would be
superior to any other thing that was sought for sake of other things
(ibid, p. 260-261).

Happiness was the highest thing that a human being could search for.
Guiding people to their happiness was also the highest kind of guidance
because the superiority of guidance was dependent upon the kind of aims
toward which they led (ibid). The great happiness was found in ‘nearness
to the First Truth, i.e. God. Other desirable objects were worthless in
its comparison. The divine interest to attain such happiness involved
more than attaining bodily happiness (Ibn Sina, 1404 AH).

#### The Way of Acquisition of Happiness

Real happiness occurred when one achieved the perfection of the
speculative and practical faculties. The one who observed moderation in
the appetitive, irascible, and discernment faculties and as a result
possessed the virtues of chastity, courage and wisdom (which are
inclusive of other virtues) will be adorned with justice, which is the
comprehensive faculty of these three virtues, and this was the
perfection of practical faculty. The perfection of speculative faculty
happened when the complete and perfect form and the intellectual system
manifested in a human being and they transformed into a world of reason
(ibid. p. 423, 455 &1985, p. 328).

Thus, the way to acquire happiness was to attain perfection in the two
speculative and practical faculties. Avicenna (Ibn Sina1400 AH)
recommended that all people should try to acquire real happiness.

#### Rank of those who have attained happiness

Happiness was attained from intellectual happiness, and since
intellectual pleasure had different ranks from quality and quality
points of view, happiness would also have different ranks. These ranks
indicated that those who had attained happiness would not all have the
same rank. Avicenna (Ibn Sina 1403 AH, p. 350, 354, 355) divided them
into the following groups:

- Exonerated mystics: Avicenna referred to the perfection of the
speculative faculty using the word ‘mystics’. He referred to the
perfection of practical faculty, i.e. purification from physical or
bodily interests, using the word ‘exonerated.’ He believed that this
group had the highest pleasure and that happiness was not restricted to
the hereafter; rather, they also possessed a high rank of pleasure and
happiness in this world.

- Sound souls: this group relied on their innate nature. Truth (divine
knowledge and
Sciences) had not been imprinted on their souls, nor they have been
involved with beliefs against truth. They show enthusiasm and spiritual
pleasure, and astonishment was created in them when hearing a divine
word because of the harmony of their souls with the world of
abstractions.

- The dumb: these were those souls that were free from both - perfection
and the opposite of perfection. These souls might reach finally
happiness.

#### Rank of the Atrocious

The soul might not achieve perfection due to two factors: deficiency of
reason and the existence of affairs opposite to perfection in the soul
*(*Ibn Sina, 1403 AH p. 350).

Avicenna called those souls that could not reach perfection due to
deficiency or a ‘dumb’ attitude, and he believed that these souls will
not be tormented because doom will be for a soul that had enthusiasm for
raising performance and this enthusiasm occurred when they became aware
of the perfections. The dumb ones were unable to acquire awareness of
these perfections (ibid, p. 352). The second group included those ones
who would be tormented because of lack of acquisition of the perfection
towards which they had enthusiasm (ibid, p. 350).

### Edwards

The beauty or splendor of God’s holiness was the principal theme of
Edwards’ later works: End of creation and True virtue. The first argued
that God’s creation was the external manifestation of His internal
splendor. That splendor primarily consisted in His holiness and its most
perfect external expression was the holiness of the saints, which
mirrored and depended upon it.

True Virtue defined holiness as ‘true benevolence’ or the love of ‘being
in general’. It distinguished it from such counterfeits as rational
self-love, instincts like parental affection, pity, and natural
conscience. Since beauty was defined as ‘agreement’ or ‘consent’ and
since true benevolence alone was truly beautiful, natural beauty and the
beauty of art were merely its image. Only those with truly benevolent
hearts, however, could discern this beauty (Routledge Concise Dictionary
of Philosophy, 2000, p. 233).

In ethical matters Edwards retained the view that any virtue people
acquired was through a free gift of God, and that no unaided effort
could improve the fallen condition of humanity (Blackburn, 2005, P.110).

According to Edwards, moral judgments were based on sentiment and not on
reason - one perceived the beauty of heart, or a virtuous motive in a
virtuous act through a sense of beauty. There were two kinds of beauty -
there was benevolence or love of being in general, which was the only
true, spiritual, or divine beauty. This was relished by a divine sense
that was activated by God in only a few people whom He had elected for
heaven.

The other kind of beauty consisted of harmony, proportion, and
uniformity and in variety. This was a secondary, natural, inferior
beauty perceived by a natural sense (Crittenden, 2005). Edwards puts
forth the thesis that ‘as heaven was a world of love, so the way to
heaven was the way of love’ (Nicholas 2004, p. 45).

Edwards admonished that our desires ‘must be taken off the pleasure of
this world’. This was not deprivation. Edwards simply did not want our
desires to be so small as to cause us to miss the true happiness and
pleasure of what God had for us - both now and in the world to come. For
him, sometimes happiness came at times of triumph. Sometimes it came to
him on the anvil of suffering, conflict and hardship (Nicholas 2004, p.
53).

True virtue’s aim was the general good. Those who love the general good,
however, also prized the disposition that promoted it. Truly benevolent
people thus loved two things – ‘being’ and benevolence. But truly
virtuous people not only valued benevolence because it promoted the
being in general; they also relished it for its own sake. Hence, while
virtue 'most essentially consist in benevolence but also a delight or
‘complacence’ in benevolence's intrinsic excellence or beauty.

It was God who was ‘infinitely the greatest being’ and ‘infinitely the
most beautiful and excellent’. True virtue thus principally consisted
‘in a supreme love to God, both of benevolence and complacence’
(Wainwright, 1998). Only God's was perfect. Hence, God alone was (truly)
beautiful without qualification.

The fitness of God's dispensations, the harmony of His providential
design, and so on, also exhibited the highest degree of secondary
beauty. God, therefore was infinitely the most beautiful and excellent.
God was also the ‘foundation and fountain…of all beauty’. ‘All the
beauty was to be found throughout the whole creation which is excellent.
The reflection of the diffused beams of the Being who hath an infinite
fullness of brightness and glory’ (Wainwright, 1998).

Conclusion
----------

Avicenna believed that God was the prime or ultimate cause of all
things. God was the source of all the existent things in the world. The
world and its other forms emanated from God. He was the first cause,
which was the nexus of causes and effects and existed necessarily for
it.

In this regard, Jonathan Edwards believed that God was the complete and
the only real and true cause of everything that existed. Nothing existed
without His creating it. Finite beings were totally dependent on God for
their existing and properties.

Avicenna maintained that God was the pure intellect to whom other
existing things - even the highest and purest of intellect were all
necessarily related. Edwards maintained that God was the only real
substance. Everything was related to God. God was ‘Being in general’. He
was ‘the sum of all being and there was no being without His Being. All
things were in Him and He was all. The whole was of God, and in God, and
to God, and God was the beginning, middle and end in this affair. God
being infinite in power and knowledge, He had to be self-sufficient and
all sufficient.

Avicenna asserted that man consisted of body and soul. Man’s soul was
spiritual and abstract, and was incorporeal and immortal, and was not
annihilated when separated from the body but it continued its eternal
life. However, the body could not continue its existence without the
soul.

Man was a truth that had such attributes such as intellect. He had the
power of nutrition, growth, reproduction, feeling, and voluntary
movement. Mankind had a free will with which he could decide. Edwards
believed in this regard that indeterminism was incompatible with our
dependence on God and hence with his sovereignty. Choices could be
entirely predestined by God and yet the agent, who was not prevented
from carrying them out, was free. The faculties of will and intellect in
man were both passive.

Avicenna asserted that the first step of cognition was sensory
perception. Knowledge was associated with abstraction. Sensory
perception, being already in the mind, was from the object perceived. We
had to retain the images given by sensation and also manipulate them by
dissembling parts and then aligning them according to their form and
other attributes. Therefore it could be concluded that a real world with
its objects existed. Edwards said that physical objects were a
collection of sensory ‘ideas’ of colour, shape, solidity, and so on, and
finite minds were collections of ‘thoughts’ or ‘perceptions’.

Avicenna maintained that evil was the privation of good, therefore was
not created by God. According to him, the standard of virtue or vice in
one’s disposition was ‘moderation’. The principles of morality for
virtues were: chastity, wisdom, courage, and justice.

Avicenna asserted that pleasure was achieving of what was perfection and
virtue for a person, and pain was achieving what was vice. The standards
of perfection and virtue were in the person and not in the related
things. Inner or sensory pleasure was superior to sensory pleasures.
Intellectual pleasures were higher in worth than sensory pleasures.

An intellectual soul had its own particular perfection: the
manifestation of the first truth (God) in it so for as it was possible,
followed by the manifestation of the certain ordered effects of the
exalted God, i.e. all existence as it were. The great happiness was
‘nearness to God’.

Real happiness occurred when one achieved the perfection of the
speculative and practical faculties. Edwards admonished that our desires
must be taken off the pleasures of this world. This was not deprivation.
He simply did not want our desires to be so small as to cause us to miss
the true happiness.

It was God who was infinitely the greatest being and infinitely the most
beautiful and excellent. True virtue thus principally was a supreme love
for God, both of His benevolence and complacence. Only God’s benevolence
was perfect. Hence, God alone was truly beautiful without qualification.
God also was the foundation and fountain of all beauty.

References
----------

Abd al-Amir Sh.Z. (1988). Al-Mazhab Al-Tarbovi Enda Ibn Sina [Ibn Sina
on Education]. Beirut: World Corporation for Book.

Audi, R. (2001). The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy. 2nd edition.
U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Blackburn, S. (2005). Oxford Dictionary of philosophy. Oxford: Oxford
University press.

Crittenden, C. (2005). In T. Honderich (ed.).The Oxford Companion to
Philosophy. (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press

Honderich, T. (2005). The Oxford companion to philosophy. Second
edition. UK: Oxford university press.

Howzeh- University Co-Operation Center (1998), Theories of Muslim
Scientists in Education and Its Principles, Vol. 1, Tehran: Samt.

Ibn Sina, A. (1400 A.H.). Rasael [Treatises]. Qom: Bidar.

Ibn Sina, A. (1403 A.H.). Al-Esharat va al-Tanbihat. [Directives and
Admonishments] (2nd Ed.). Tehran: Bureau of Book Publication.

Ibn Sina, A. (1404 A.H.). Al-Shfa, Tabieeyyat va Elahiyyat [Treatment,
Physics and Theology.] Qom: Marashi Najaf’s Library.

Kemal, S. (1998). Ibn Sina, Abu Ali al-Husayn (980-1037). In Routledge
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. London and New York: Routledge

Mautner, T. (2005). Dictionary of philosophy. (2nd ed.). London: Penguin
Reference.

Nichols , S. J. (2004). Jonathan Edwards: His Life and Legacy. In J.
Piper & J. Taylor (Eds.), The Legacy OF Jonathan Edwards
(PP.35-54).Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway Books

Packer, J.I. (2004). The Glory of God and the Reviving of Religion: A
Study in the Mind of Jonathan Edwards. In J. Piper & J. Taylor (Eds.),
the Legacy of Jonathan Edwards (PP.81-
108). Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway Books

Piper, J. (2004). A God-Entranced Vision of All Things: Why We Need

Pojman, L.P. (2003).Classics of Philosophy. (2nd ed). Oxford: Oxford
University Press

Talbot, M.R. (2004). Godly Emotions (Religious Affections). In J. Piper
& J. Taylor (Eds.),A God Entranced Vision of All Things - The Legacy of
Jonathan Edwards (p. 221-256).
Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway Books

Taylor. J. (2004). Introduction. In J. Piper & J. Taylor (eds) The
Legacy of Jonathan Edwards (p. 13-20). Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway Books

Wainwright , W .J. (2001). in R. Audi(ed). The Cambridge Dictionary of
Philosophy. (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

Wainwright, W. (2006). Jonathan Edwards. Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. <http://pl>ato.stanford.edu/entries/Edwards/

Wainwright, W.J. (2000). In Concise Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy
.London and New York: Routledge

Ward, R.A.(2008). In J. Lachs and R.Talisse (eds). American Philosophy
An Encyclopedia. New York and London: Routledge

Whitney, D.S. (2004). Pursuing a Passion For God Through Spiritual
Disciplines: Learning From Jonathan Edwards. In J. Piper & J. Taylor
(Eds.), A God Entranced Vision of All Things The Legacy of Jonathan
Edwards (p. 109-128). Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway Books.
.


