Chapter 6: Comparative Study of Rumi, Saadi, Rousseau, Dewey’s Shared Views on Moral Education
==============================================================================================

Introduction
------------

Throughout history many books and articles have been written regarding
philosophy and education from the point of view of Rousseau and Dewey,
but rarely does one see any publication on the views of Muslim Iranian
scholars such as Rumi. To have a comparative study of their points of
view regarding moral education, is much more important than this. Such a
comparison could reveal their shared theories and ideas, which could
then useful in designing a model based on moral education that could be
applied by both Muslims and Christians all through the world.

A Brief Biography of Rumi, Saadi, Rousseau, Dewey
-------------------------------------------------

Jalal al-Din Rumi (Rumi or Moulavi or Moulana), was author of a vast
collection of Persian odes and lyrics. A translation of selection of
these has been offered here.

Rumi was born in 1207 AD at Balkh, which now lies within the frontiers
of Afghanistan, and died in 1273 A.D at Konya, in Turkey that lies in
Asia. John Murray, in his account of Rumi’s - Fīhi mā fīhi - published
in 1961 AD, said under the title Discourses of Rumi - “there is nothing
I wish to add to what has been written here, except to highlight the
curious circumstances, which attended Rumi’s transformation from a sober
theologian and preacher into ecstatic dancer and enraptured poet.”

Rumi’s father, Bahā al-Dīn Valad, had attained eminence in religious
circles in Khorasan before his undertook headlong flight to Saljūq
Turkey when the Mongols invaded. He enjoyed royal patronage and popular
esteem as preacher and teacher in Konya, where he died in 1230 AD Rumi
completed his long formal education in 1244 AD He was already
thirty-seven years of age and seemingly set in his ways as a
conventional mullah, when a wandering dervish named Shams al-Din - a
native of Tabriz apparently of artisan origin, suddenly arrived in the
capital of Saljūq and attracted attention by the wildness of his
demeanor (Arberry, 2002).

Saadi’s full name was Mosharraf-e-din bin Moslehedin-Abdullah, and he
was born in Shiraz, a city in Iran, in 1184 AD and died there in 1291 AD
He adopted the pen name of Saadi in honor of his patron, Abu-Bakr Saadi,
a contemporary king of the Atabakan dynasty in Fars, a province of Iran.
He lost his father at an early age and came under the protection of this
Atabak Ruler upon his accession to throne in 1195 AD

Thereafter, Saadi’s life may be divided into three periods: The period
of study, lasting until 1226 AD when he was sent to the famous Nezamieh
College of Baghdad to study. There he was deeply influenced by the
eminent Sufi Suhravardi, as well as Ibn-e-Jowzi, another great teacher,
whose name has appearred in some of his poems. His period of travel
began in 1226 AD and lasted till 1256 AD, during which he traveled
widely to many parts of India, Yemen, Hejaz, Arabia, Syria, Abyssinia,
North Africa and Asia Minor. He had several opportunities to mingle with
people of those countries and gain rich experiences, which are reflected
in all his works (Pazargadi, 2000). This was followed by a period of
literary contributions.

Saadi of Shiraz, or Sheikh Moslehedin Abdullah Saadi Shirazi - poet,
writer and distinguished thinker of the 13th century AD (7th century AH)
was one of the few men of letters of Iran who had acquired fame not only
in Persian-speaking regions, but was renowned well beyond Iran. He
became well known and a recognized literary figure in the wider literary
circles of the world.

Saadi was born in Shiraz. According to him, he was born in a household,
all members of which were theologians steeped in religious learning. The
first years of his childhood and early youth were spent in his own
hometown where he got a grounding in the sciences and learning of his
own times. He then moved on to Baghdad to continue his studies at the
‘Nizamieh’, which was the University of his day.

Saadi pursued and completed his studies in theology and literature over
a period of twenty years, and then left on a long journey covering Iraq,
Hejaz and North Africa and, according to some sources, India, Asia Minor
and Azerbaijan as well. It was during the course of these travels that,
he came across personalities such as Mowlana Jalaludin Mohammad Moulavi,
the great poet of Balkh, Sheikh Safiyudin of Ardabil, Hamam Tabriz and
Amir Khosro of Delhi, adding to his valuable experiences alongside
travel (Hakimi, 2005)*.*

Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-78 AD) was a Swiss-born French philosopher,
essayist, novelist and musician, best known for his theories on social
freedom and social rights, education, religion (Audi 2001, p. 800), and
for his contributions to political philosophy (Honderich 2005, p. 823).
He was also a philosopher of history and a central figure in the
eighteenth century - Enlightenment - and its most formidable
contemporary critic (Mautner 2005, p. 541), thus taking his place
alongside Diderot, Voltaire and others as one of the emblematic figures
of his time, for all that he came to violently differ in view from them
(Dent, 1998)[^1].

Born in Geneva, Rousseau was largely self-educated and moved to France
as a teenager. Throughout, for much of his life he moved between Paris
and its provinces with several trips abroad (Audi 2001, p. 800). After
the publication of the Social Contract and Emile in 1762 AD, Rousseau
was persecuted for his blasphemous views about natural religion, and
fled to Paris. He also renounced his citizenship of Geneva, where his
books were burned.

After some extremely unsettled years, he was eventually permitted to
resettle in France, on sufferance, and he returned to Paris in 1770 AD.
Most of the writing in the last decade of his life was autobiographical
in nature, including his outstanding Confessions as well as the prolix
and uneven exercise in self-justification – ‘Dialogues de Rousseau juge
de Jean-Jacques’. His body was transferred to the Pantheon in 1796 AD
(Honderich 2005, p. 823-824).

John Dewey (1859-1952 AD) was an American philosopher, a social critic,
a theorist of education (Audi 2001, p. 229), who had developed a
systematic pragmatism addressing the central questions of epistemology,
metaphysics, ethics, and aesthetics (Honderich 2005, p. 211). His
extensive writings contended systematically with problems in
metaphysics, epistemology, logic, aesthetics, ethics, social and
political philosophy, education and philosophy, and philosophical
anthropology (Gouinlock, 1998).

Dewey was born on 20th October 1859 AD, in Burlington, Vermont. He
completed his school grade at twelve years of age. Thereafter, he chose
the newly established track of preparatory college. He entered the
University of Vermont at the age of sixteen Graduating from the
University of Vermont in 1879. He taught high school for two years in
Oil City, Pennsylvania (Lachs & Talisse 2008, p. 185). Then, he took a
PhD at John Hopkins University, where C.S. Peirce, G. Stanley Hall, and
George Sylvester Morris taught him.

In 1884 AD, he began teaching at the University of Chicago (Mautner
2005, p. 156) in Chicago. Dewey was instrumental in founding the famous
laboratory school, and some of his most important writings on education
grew out of his work in that experimental school (Audi
2001, p. 229). In 1904 AD, he moved to Columbia University, where he
remained until he retired in 1930 (Mautner 2005, p. 156). However, he
remained active in both philosophy and public affairs until his death in
1952.

Over his long career Dewey was a prolific speaker and writer, as
evidenced by a literary output of forty books and over seven hundred
articles (Audi 2005, p. 229). Dewey remained as an emeritus professor
until 1939 AD, after which he traveled and lectured widely until his
death at age of ninety-three (Lachs & Talisse, 2008, p. 186). In this
period, he was mostly active in New York City, until his death in this
city (Gouinlock, 1998).

A. Rumi's Views on Moral Education
----------------------------------

### Goals of Education

Moulavi said that the goal of man’s creation was ‘knowledge and
guidance’. In another part of his ‘Masnavi’ he introduced ‘knowledge of
the truth’ as the purpose of man’s creation. Therefore, Moulavi believed
that knowledge should only be for God. The possessors of such knowledge
were those who were affected by their knowledge and insight, and their
intellect restrained them from doing any evil or committing sins.

Moulavi placed a particular emphasis on ‘intent’. He said that, for
example, when a poet composed poetry with a special intent, his intent
played the main role on his work. Therefore, all men benefitted from
their deeds and sciences they learnt on the basis of their intent and
goal. If these intents and goals were good, the results and benefits of
their deeds and behaviors would be unimaginable and very good.

A man, who offered his prayer for God, would thus definitely be rewarded
in this world and the hereafter. One could therefore, understand that
each of the disciplines were a means and instrument that could lead man
to God, truth, true peace and tranquility if his intent or goal was good
and met God’s approval.

However, these disciplines could not by themselves, give sublimity to
man. These were not consolatory. Sciences that were tools for
submission, sublimity and transcendence were for leading man towards the
goal of creation, and should not be taken as the final goal. Moulavi
emphasized that all the branches of sciences and knowledge were for the
sake of man.

Therefore, it could be said that those, who loved God, should really
love Him, and their final desire should be for God alone. In this case,
it was possible for us to speak of a loving worship with God as one of
the most important goals of man’s creation. Thus, it was up to all the
virtuous and wise scientists and scholars to not involve themselves in
words, utterances and appearances. They should not forget the real goal
behind the words and controversies.

Education had two main goals from Moulavi’s viewpoint - ultimate and
intermediary. The following could be extracted from Moulavi’s poems and
writings regarding the ‘ultimate aims’ (Beheshti, Abujafari and Faqihi
2000, p. 211-219).

### Annihilation in God

This implied abiding in Him with absolute devotion and servitude to God.
Moulavi believed that the ultimate and final perfection of human beings
lay in disengagement from existence or being and in reaching an abiding
state after annihilation. This was the meaning of living in proximity to
God.

Annihilation in God meant becoming free from darkness, involvements,
material and worldly attachments, and disillusionment with everything
other than God. A man annihilated in God did not see and did not want
any other save God (Beheshti, Abujafari and Faqihi 2000, p. 211-212).

### Voluntary death

This particular kind of death meant that man died or isolated himself
while living, from nature and material attachments. He was borne in
divine world, fought against carnal desires, lived free from ambition,
disgrace, position and eminence. In this way he destroyed all devilish
temperaments and dispositions. He reached a position that killed the
evil-prompting self, made him free. He was then reborn with divine and
spiritual life and humanly admirable dispositions - this was the second
birth of human being.

### Intuition or knowledge by heart

In addition to the value of formal sciences, Moulavi believed that a
seeking mystic or possessor of intuition through gnosis had really
achieved the infinite Divine knowledge. He had undoubtedly been revealed
some secrets of being, even a sea of sciences and facts that others were
deprived of. This knowledge from intuition and inspiration was not only
endless, but it was always in a state of being created and presented new
sciences and discoveries for the wayfaring mystics at every moment.

### Immediate receiving of God’s bounty or emanation

In the beginning, a mystic went through the way along with his or her
educator or leader, but the highest position or rank was attained when
he or she received the bounty and favor of God. In such a case, even the
seeker became the channel of Divine bounty immediately.

As for intermediary goals, the following points could be extracted from
Moulavi’s works.

### Cultivation and guidance of intellect and thought

Moulavi deemed it necessary to cultivate and guide the intellect and
thought towards spiritual experience and intuition. He considered it to
be the goal of education. Moulavi said that the real knowledge was the
intuitive knowledge that a man received immediately from God, and it was
endless. The superficial sciences could not be considered real because
of their limitations and instability. However, if people received these
sciences correctly, followed them well, acted according to them,
cultivated and guided their intellect and thought in their light, they
would gradually achieve the real knowledge.

### Solving the existential problems

From Moulavi’s point of view, the existential problems of human beings
were behind the philosophy of creation. Imprisonment of the spirit in
the body, fear of future, man’s attachment to lust, shackles of anger,
fame, position etc, negligence of the real ‘ego’ and of the original
home, defect in thinking and intellect, loneliness - were among other
things on whose basis existential problems occurred. Solving these
problems was the goal of the mystical education in Moulavi’s viewpoint.

Moulavi said that appealing to spiritualties, acquisition of the soul’s
virtues, avoiding vices, and seeking help from those endowed with divine
breath and spiritual soul could solve these difficulties. And finally,
the basic solution of these problems was ‘love’. A lover always dwelled
in happiness and exhilaration. He or she complained of nothing and no
one. There was no short sightedness, meanness, malignancy, cynicism,
arrogance, temptation, greed, self-interest, or grief over affairs of
this world and the hereafter in the heart of a mystic.

Love satisfied the thirst of spirit, satiated the heart, and dissolved
the lover in the Lord. The joy that he or she enjoyed was heartfelt
because the right cause for enjoyment and happiness was internal, not
external. No happiness was possible through possessions, position, fame,
or prestige; rather, it was emitted from the inner being.

Moulavi (2000) believed that acquisition of knowledge should be for the
sake of God. In other words, man’s intention from learning and the
dissemination of knowledge should be the nearness to God (p. 1-2). The
knowledge of such scholars was not superficial, because superficial
sciences could lead to negligence (Rum: 7). It was intellect and reason
that governed their lives (ibid, p.2). Even their religiosity was based
on knowledge.

According to the Prophet of Islam ‘the best of you in faith, was the
best of you in knowledge’ (Mohammadi Rey Shahri 1993, p. 121). So, the
faith of such scholars was the best and firmest kind of faith. This was
so because Imam Baquer had said that those who acquired knowledge, their
knowledge would lead them to righteous deeds (ibid, p. 131).

Therefore, it could be concluded that human beings received benefit from
the sciences they learnt according to the intentions they had. It was in
the light of their good intentions that real tranquility was received
and they were led to God and truth (ibid, p. 32). The Prophet of Islam
said that if a person learnt science for hypocrisy and worldliness, God
would remove blessing from his life and make the life troubled and
difficult for him (Mohammadi Rey Shahri, 1993, p 479).

### Individual Differences

Due to the viewpoint of Moulavi, it was important that the teacher
considered individual differences between the students. The teacher must
pay attention to the fact that their addressees and students were quite
different in aptitudes, attitudes, interests, knowledge, etc., and
therefore, the sayings and teachings of the teacher should be in
accordance with these differences.

It was also up to the teacher to consider the spiritual capacity of his
students. The word ‘reminding’ indicated that Moulavi believed that man
had the best potential aptitudes within himself, and one of the
responsibilities of the tutor and teacher was to nurture those
aptitudes.
Moulavi believed that all teachers should really pay attention to the
individual differences of their students, and speak to them according to
their merits and powers of understanding.

Not every person deserved receiving wisdom and higher ranks of knowledge
and insight (Rumi 2000, p. 50-51, 19-20, 34). The Prophet of Islam said
that God’s prophets have been ordered to speak with people in accordance
to the level of their understanding and intellect (Al- Hakimi 1991, p.
167).

### Real Knowledge

Moulavi confirmed the knowledge of those who were not superficial in
sciences and attained ‘certainty through their sense-perception’ as well
as, higher ranks of knowledge (Jafari, 1994, vol.2, p.616). He complains
of an imitational science, where a learner did not apply his or her
intellect, and did not understand anything through thinking and
reflection. They relied only on suspicion (2000, p. 357). Therefore,
those, who were satisfied only with using their senses for cognition,
knowledge thus obtained would be an obstacle for them. It will debar
them from achieving all kinds of perfection (Jafari 1994, vol. 11, p.
375).

Imam Ali introduced the real science at the root of every good
(Ghorar-al-Hekam). Moulavi introduced ‘ignorance’ as ‘disbelief’ and
‘knowledge’ as a factor, which removed such disbelief (Jafari 1994, vol.
7, p. 156). He also believed that knowledge had a particular luminosity.
Therefore, it could be said that persons without knowledge were in the
dark and without effectiveness (Moulavi, 2000). Therefore, Moulavi
believed that it was knowledge that caused piety to be effective and
fruitful (Jafari 1994, vol. 14, p. 50).

Moulavi emphasized informal education, in addition to formal education.
According to Moulavi, the skies and the earth spoke with the one who
understood. However, everyone comprehended the wise words of the
universe according to their spiritual ability. Also, life could teach
the highest lessons to human beings provided they took those lessons
(Rumi 2000, p. 15, 19-20, 71).

According to Moulavi, it was up to people and students to reinforce the
power of thinking and reflection in themselves so that they could
understand the real and hidden aspect of every fact and achieve to
understand very comprehensive and deep meanings of every thing (Rumi
2000, p. 8, 20, 38, 40, 49, 53, 60).

Moulavi was of the opinion that speeches, deeds and characteristics of
teachers and educators could actually affect students (Rumi 2000, p.
21). Moulavi believed that man already had the best aptitudes given to
him by nature. So, the main role of educators was to realize and
actualize these potential aptitudes in pupils and not to create new
aptitudes in them (Rumi 2000, p. 22).

According to Moulavi, motivation, interest and enthusiasm in seeking and
the acquisition of science and knowledge could be very effective factors
in the success of individuals. If one wanted to attain comprehension of
truth, it would be quite necessary to make his thought free from all
carnal desires and all worldly goals, which were against the Divine aims
(Rumi, 2000, P.4). The Quran confirms this fact that:

***O you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) God and believe in
His Apostle: He will give you two portions of His mercy, and make for
you a light with which*** ***you walk and forgive you (Hadid (57: 28)***

It was in the light of real knowledge that man achieved a status in
which he could see the Being or the Universe as it was. That was the
reason why Moulavi repeated this prayer of the Prophet of Islam - “O
God, show us the things as they are for it is in the light of real
possessors of such knowledge that the entire world was filled with
light, and all human beings were guided” (Rumi 2000, p. 2).

If man wished to understand the truth, it was quite necessary to purify
his thought from all sorts of temptations and those intents and
objectives which were not Divine and god-like. Moulavi asked God to show
him the entire universe as it was so as to not stray. Worldly belongings
that appeared very beautiful and attractive for some superficial people
were in fact objects that those who have not understood their reality
would fall in love with and never identify their true worthlessness.
From the viewpoint of Moulavi, ‘knowledge and sciences’ could both
‘guide’ or ‘make man to go astray’.

Knowledge guided a man onto the straight path if he was free from the
shackles of materialism and temptations. Moulavi emphasized that if man
could overcome lust and carnal desires, even for a moment, all the
knowledge of the prophets would become clear for him. However, those,
who were pawns of selfishness and egoism and had not been delivered out
of passing fancies and urges, could not possess useful knowledge for
themselves or others. This was because worldliness and profanity made
man’s intellectual eye blind and separated him from the real knowledge.

Moulavi even believed that teaching the ill-natured people was like
giving a sword to a thief. That is the reason why Moulana said that
giving the sword to a deaf and blind drunk was better than to give
knowledge to the base and abject. Knowledge, wealth, and status would
create havoc, turbulence and disturbance for the ill natured.

For a man who possessed intellect with insight and intuition and had
‘knowledge and action’ - that is, he thought well and was driven to do
deserving deeds, the others would assuredly hold humility, and be
humbled before such an intellect. Moulavi spoke of ‘the pleasure of
knowledge and Divine action’. He deemed Divine acceptance as sufficient
for his own ‘knowledge’ and ‘action’ and he also expressed his
repugnance toward any thing other than this.

Nevertheless, Moulavi did not agree with those sciences and actions that
had no spiritual effect, and sprung from blind following and
repetitions. He asked God that he be freed from such sciences and
actions before his death.

From his viewpoint, the real knowledge tried to impart the ‘certitude’
and ‘certitude’ tried to see ‘the Beloved’. Moulavi believed that such
love could not be found in the pages of usual books, because this real
love came from pure hearts and souls that were free of the shackles of
egotism and therefore had come to a position where they could see and
understand the truth as it was.

Moulavi introduced the ‘love’ as a real school that its teacher was God
and all human beings were the students. The knowledge received in such a
school was ‘infinite’ because ‘the Beloved’, that is the Lord of the
worlds was ‘infinite’ This was the reason why Moulana ordered man to
acquire knowledge that was not limited to ‘signs and marks’.

Moulana believed that one could be delivered from usual schools, pages
and repetition of lessons. The seekers of truth did not become tired of
such inborn and instinctive knowledge. The sciences that were found in
the usual schools were something different from ‘love’. Thus, a man who
appealed to the Divine love was as if he had obtained all the real
sciences and it was not necessary for him to have any other distinction
or sciences. Because when the knowledge was blended in man’s heart and
soul, it really helped and saved him.

Moulavi used the words ‘spirit’, ‘knowledge’, and ‘love’ with each
other. He believed in the light of such knowledge, that the real life
was ingrained with love, which pervaded the man’s body, and the body
received the spirit and life. It was in the light of ‘love’ that a man’s
intellect transformed into pure gold and found its true worth.

Thus, Moulana insistently asked the jurisprudents with a superficial
understanding to seek the ‘knowledge of love’, learn and teach it. This
was so because this knowledge could save man in this world, as well as,
in the hereafter. Therefore, the enlightened gained knowledge of
reaching closer to God through their hearts.

### Educational Principles

The following educational principles could be extracted from Moulavi’s
works (Beheshti, Abujafari & Faqihi, 2000, p. 220-232):

#### 1. Submission to God

Moulavi had emphasized this principle in many of his writings and poems.
By obeying this principle, human beings received a particular insight,
in the light of which they would not see or want anything save God. They
would not attach to anything other than Him, and would worship Him
alone. In fact, the real philosophy and reason for all worships was
submission and servitude to God.

#### 2. Following the Educator

Moulavi had expressed the need of human beings to have an aware and
reliable educator. He believed that following such an educator would
take man to perfection and elevation. Such educator knew the soul,
faculties of the soul, existential dimensions of the soul, temptations
and deceptions of the soul, and the spirit’s pains. This was why this
educator could help others and treat them well. These educators were
physicians and guides, and pure bondsmen of God that never thought of
the material and worldly pleasures.

#### 3. Motivation and Request

Moulavi said that the basis and foundation of attaining truth was the
request or a wanting that increased man’s efforts and activities to this
end.

#### 4. Effort and Activity

Moulavi considered effort and activity as great factors for bringing man
to goals and aims. He had also introduced these two factors as the cause
of man’s happiness and joy.

#### 5. God’s bounty and grace

In addition to effort and activity, the grace of God was a major factor
for bringing human beings to perfection.

#### 6. Esteem or the dignity of man

Moulavi believed that in addition to the satisfaction of material and
superficial needs of a person, we should not neglect their higher and
supreme needs. Man had a constitution that could be a manifestation of
God and be light from Him. Therefore, he should not lose himself, his
self-esteem or dignity.

#### 7. Sociability

Moulavi believed that there was no monasticism or renunciation in Islam.
He introduced joining a society as the way of attaining growth,
elevation and perfection. Moulavi said that membership in a society made
man valuable and spiritual. This caused man to avoid egoism and
individualism. It was in the light of joining the society that the
spirit of compassion, altruism, patience, trust or good judgment, and
affection were cultivated in human beings. That was the reason why the
principle of sociability was considered in Islamic worships.

#### 8. Individualism

Moulavi stated the importance of individual differences in psychological
and intellectual characteristics of each person, and the necessity of
observing these factors in life and education. In his view, educational
policies should be consistent with the rate of comprehension,
understanding, intelligence and aptitude of each student.

#### 9. Simplification

Moulavi was of the opinion that this principle was the educational
principle of all Divine religions and the recommendation of all high
mystics; while severity and imposing an ignorant plan for education
indicated crudeness.

### Educational Methods

The educational methods from Moulavi’s viewpoint could be considered in
two categories - methods of student education and methods of
self-training.

#### Methods for educating students

The following could be extracted from Moulavi’s works as some of the
important educational methods for students.

##### 1. Suggestopedia or mimesis method

Moulavi emphasized the effective role of this method in education. He
believed that the admonishment of others through one’s deeds was more
attractive.

##### 2. Affection Method

Moulavi believed that an educator could make students attached to him or
her and provide the ground for the student’s acceptance of learning and
place trust in the educator.

##### 3. Encouragement or punishment Method

Moulavi agreed that education was based on encouragement and affection.
In spite of this, he sometimes spoke of punishment when encouragement or
kindness was not effective in teaching a student. Importantly, the
intention of the teacher should be educational and correction of the
student’s behavior. It must not however be a kind of revenge, acting out
of self-interest or self- comfort.

##### 4. Good Admonishment or Positive Advice Method

Moulavi introduced good admonishment or good exhortation as the
educational method of God’s prophets. He used this method in many cases
and in different stories and exemplum. He referred to two major points
in this regard – firstly, if admonishment was prudent, tactful and its
conditions observed, it would have a great influence and effect;
secondly, the main condition for effectiveness of admonishment was
readiness of the one who was to receive it. Many a stubborn men opposed
friendly advice, or justified them.

##### 5. Counseling Method

Moulavi had spoken of this method in many cases, and had mentioned its
role and importance in helping individuals for making cognitive changes,
creating new insights and finding solutions to different problems.

##### 6. The Method of taking an object lesson

Moulavi had introduced the taking lessons as a sign of intellect,
insight and growth. He believed that a man could take many lessons from
the history of the past.

##### 7. Storytelling Method

Storytelling was one of the most frequent used methods of Moulavi. He
had explained many facts in different kinds of stories.

##### 8. Exemplum Method

Moulavi had used exemplum to clarify different subjects to permeate them
to his audiences and addressees. He had described, in some cases,
difficult and complex subjects by running several subsequent exempla.

#### Methods for training Self

The following self-training methods were some of the important methods
that could be extracted from Moulavi’s works in this regard (Beheshti,
Abujafari & Faqihi 2000, p. 235- 262).

##### 1. Fulfillment of Knowledge

According to Moulavi, the heart of the matter of knowledge was
commitment and action. The criteria of humanity should be searched for
in practical obligation and commitment. We should not be beguiled by
superficial knowledge of some people. If knowledge was combined with
action, it not only brightened the soul of its owner, but also guided
the ignorant people.

A man, who had no commitment to gaining knowledge about self, was like a
tree that had no root. On the other hand, in Moulavi’s view, the basis
of knowledge was intuition. This particular kind of knowledge could only
be obtained through action. It should also be noted that in the event of
acting according to superficial sciences (not the science of intuition),
one could eventually achieve the desired perfection and knowledge from
intuition in a gradual manner.

##### 2. Loving God

Moulavi considered love as the most basic educational method for
mysticism, and believed that spiritual education and development were
only possible through having such a love, as love had a power to change
or revolutionize the personality of the lover and purify him from
himself and from his unbecoming attributes, habits and behaviors, and
led him to harmony with the beloved.

##### 3. Watching over the soul and self- examination

Moulavi talked much about watching over the soul and self-examination
and their role in self-training. He considered them as factors that led
human beings to perfection, self-revelation, indulgence of heart and
passage through different stages of a mystic’s journey.

##### 4. Reciting the Quran

Moulavi said to us, regarding the Quran, not to consider it like other
words and usual concepts because its appearance had a great inner form.
If we read the Quran and speculated on the deep meaning of each verse,
our soul will gain such a magnitude that enthusiasm for spiritual flight
would leave it restless with no moment of calm.

##### 5. Remembrance and Thinking

Moulavi was of the opinion that man’s thinking should be combined with
remembrance of God, because this remembrance produces dynamism,
purification, and magnificence of thinking. It also caused separation
and purification from all sorts of evils and vices. It not only
enlightened man’s thought, but also it cultivated his inner senses.

B. Saadi's Views on Moral Education
-----------------------------------

### Educational Goals

According to Beheshti, Faqihi and Abujafari (2001), although Saadi had
not explicitly stated the educational goals in his works, the following
goals could be deduced from his sayings and poems:

#### 1. Detachment

Saadi spoke in detail about self-cognition, faith, servitude to God, and
praising God in his writings. He considered such traits necessary if one
desired to reach the position of attachment to God i.e. to reach a place
that included all values.

Saadi recognized serving God was a way to gain esteem, power and
greatness. He regretted that people came and passed away without tasting
the most pleasurable and enjoyable pleasure of sincere devotion and
absolute sincerity, which would cause springs of wisdom to flow from the
heart to the tongue.

Therefore, the ultimate goal of education, in Saadi’s viewpoint, was
cognition of the exalted God and devotion to Him. He said that the way
to reach this state was through the soul and being detached so that one
acquired inner purity or good morality and was able to surrender to God.

#### 2. Cultivation of spirit

Saadi considered the cultivation of spirit as the basis of education and
man’s personality, development. He believed that it was impossible to
cultivate the spirit without the purification of the soul and banishing
carnal desires, arrogance, rancor, and oppression. He said that it was
also impossible without acquiring moral virtues such as humility,
modesty, benevolence, justice, and magnanimity.

#### 3. Health of Body

Saadi considered man to consist of physical body and a spiritual soul.
He stated that spirit’s cultivation was by itself desirable and was a
major goal. However, he considered procurement of health, the power of
body, and the satisfying its needs as desirable intermediate goals for
the purpose of worship of God and rendering service to people.

Saadi warned humans against indolence. He mentioned four points
regarding preserving the health of the body: avoiding gluttony,
moderation, preservation of greatness and magnanimity, and finally,
refraining from idleness.

#### 4. Social Adjustment

From the viewpoint of Saadi, social adjustment that led to peaceful
coexistence was desirable as we aspired to attain the perfection of an
ideal society. He imagined a Utopia in which these two things were the
firm foundation of each individual in such society.

It was for this reason that Saadi, in all parts of Gulistan and Bustan,
spoke of characteristics of the individuals in a desired society and
mentioned properties such as justice, humility, peace, benevolence,
sympathy, and contentment as the characteristics of a desirable society.
Saadi mentioned the following items as factors, which created social
adjustment - justice, humility, self-esteem and uprightness, and
finally, benevolence and goodness.

### Teaching and Instructional Methods

Teaching and instruction methods should bring the students to the
educational goals. Therefore, to reach the goals envisioned by Saadi,
there was an emphasis on activities such as question and answer and
improved lecture methods.

Saadi also suggested some points in teaching, instruction, and learning
that could improve the students’ education. He not only emphasized
paying attention to the techniques of speaking or talking but also
placed much emphasis on the distinct role of silence as one of the
greatest techniques or methods of increasing and improving educational
policies.

The importance of questioning and asking according to Saadi’s viewpoint
was revealed when he said, “They asked Imam Mohammad Bin Mohammad
Ghazali, (on whom be the mercy of God) about the means by which he had
attained such a degree of knowledge. He replied – ‘In this manner that
whatever I did not know, I was not ashamed to enquire about’”

He told people to enquire about everything they did not know, ‘since for
the small trouble of asking, you will be guided onto the respectable
road of knowledge’ (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LXXVII). However, he
also noted that ‘whenever you were certain that anything will be known
to you in time, be not hasty in inquiring after it’ (ibid, tale
LXXVIII). However, one should think and then answer. He said, ‘whosoever
doth not reflect before he giveth an answer, will generally speak
improperly’ (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale XXXVI).

Saadi referred to three points in applying the question-and- answer
method. Firstly, we should question for knowledge. He believed that one
should not ask a question for pedantry, ostentation and dawdling, or for
getting information about the others’ private and personal affairs.
Therefore, if the questioner received his answer without asking and with
patience and silence, it was not necessary that he asked a question.

Secondly, questions should be asked of the wise ones. Saadi was of the
opinion that one should only ask educated, knowledgeable and
well-intentioned scholars.

Thirdly, he believed in the necessity of a well-thought-out answer. When
a wise person wanted to give the answer to a question, he would do so in
a thought-provoking way, sound technique and with good intentions
because the unexamined speech could mislead instead of increasing
knowledge (Beheshti, Faqihi & Abujafari, 2001).

When speaking and questioning or answering, Saadi emphasized not
interrupting the others. He has been quoted to say: “No one confesses
his own ignorance, excepting he who begins to speak whilst another is
talking, and before the discourse has ended” (Gulistan, chapter IV, tale
VII). The reason Saadi said this was that “a discourse hath a
commencement and a conclusion” (ibid). In another instance, he said,
“Whosoever interrupts the conversation of others to make a display of
his own wisdom, certainly betrays his ignorance” (Gulistan, chapter
VIII, tale LXXXII). He added, “A wise man speaketh not until they ask
him a question” (ibid).

Saadi ordered all people, “Till you perceive a convenient time for
conversing, lose not your own consequence by talking to no purpose”
(Gulistan, chapter I, tale XIII). Saadi said that when a business could
be managed without one’s interference, it was not proper for him to
speak on the subject; but if he sees a blind man headed towards a well
and he kept silence, it was a crime (Gulistan, chapter I, tale
XXXVIII)”.

Therefore, Saadi concluded, “until you are persuaded that the discourse
is strictly proper, speak not; and until you are convinced that whatever
you know will obtain a favorable answer, ask not” (Gulistan, chapter
VII, tale XIII). Another wisdom from Saadi stated, “He who listens not
to advice, studies to hear reprehension. When advice gains not admission
into the ear, if they reprehend you, be silent” (Gulistan, chapter VIII,
tale XLVIII).

### Educational Contents

Since Saadi believed that the sources of knowledge were unlimited, he
did not confine himself to formal and classic textbooks. He placed
particular emphasis on informal learning, for which the students would
try to take lessons from the great school of nature, the events of their
lives and the lives of other people, in all places and times.

Thus, people should not confine themselves to the appearance of matters;
rather, they should make great effort to get to the essence of matters
and subjects and try to comprehend their truth. The educational method
of storytelling utilized by Saadi in both poetry and prose, could be
considered as an epitome of the teaching methods. Therefore, students
should be committed to this approach in that they should not only study
history books, for example, but also must pay great attention to all of
history, nature and all human beings, if they wished to reach their
highest educational goals. This was also a task for all scholars and
authorities in the educational system.

Saadi believed in hidden learning and learning from all things. For
example, he related, “They asked Loqman from whom he had learnt
urbanity, and he replied, ‘From those of rude manners; for whatsoever I
saw in them that was disagreeable, I avoided doing the same.’ Not a word
can be said, even in the midst of sport, from which a wise man will not
derive instruction” (Gulistan. Chapter II, tale XXI).

Saadi believed in ‘informal learning’ and said, “listen to the discourse
of a learned man with the utmost attention” (Gullistan. Chapter II, tale
XXXVIII). Saadi wanted all people to pay attention to the admonitions of
the advisers and take lessons from them. He said, “know you not, that
you will see your feet in fetters, when you listen not to the admonition
of mankind” (Gulistan, chapter I, tale XVI).

Saadi believed that ‘admonition’ came before ‘confinement’ and said,
“Great men first admonish, and then confine; when they give advice and
you listen not, they put you in fetters” (Gulistan, chapter XIII, tale
XC). Saadi said that it was up to people to admonish even though the
other did not listen. “Admonish and exhort as your duty requires; if
they mind not, it does not concern you. Although thou knowest that they
will not listen, nevertheless speak whatever you know that is advisable.
It will soon come to pass that you will see the silly fellow with his
feet in the stocks, there smiting his hands and exclaiming, ‘Alas! that
I did not listen to the wise man’s advice’” (Gulistan, chapter VII, tale
V).

Saadi also believed that the fortunate took warning from the histories
and precepts of the ancients, in order that they did not become an
example to posterity (Gulistan, chapter XIII, tale XC). Therefore, Saadi
ordered all people, “Take warning from the misfortunes of others so that
others may not take example from you” (ibid).

Teaching methods and instructional content alone were not considered to
be sufficient to bring students to their educational goals. It was also
necessary to utilize particular techniques to improve and accelerate the
gradual progress of students toward those goals. Encouragement and
punishment of students were necessary techniques. The reasons for using
these two were the same - leading students to educational goals. It was
necessary for educators and teachers to be the epitome of both authority
and affection, so students will both respect and love them.

A teacher should be the epitome of affection and authority. He
explained, “Anger, when excessive, createth terror; and kindness out of
season destroyed authority” (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale XVIII).
Therefore, Saadi believed that teachers should be not so severe as to
cause disgust, nor so lenient as to encourage audacity. Severity and
leniency should be tempered together. A wise man did not carry severity
to excess, nor suffered such relaxation as will lessen his dignity.
Thus, one should be complacent, but not to that degree that they may
insult him with sharp teeth of the wolf (ibid).

Saadi believed that one should use both encouragement and punishment
adequately and thoughtfully, in a timely manner. This was so because
undue, unnecessary and unexamined anger and punishment made students
truant, and undue encouragement made him or her be arrogant, egoistic
and exigent to the extent that he or she did not obey the teacher or the
educator. According to Saadi, encouragement and motivating others was of
particular importance and could influence them for better performance to
accomplish their desired goals (Gulistan, chapter I, tale III).

Saadi put emphasis on praising the students and said in this regard, “If
you wish to preserve peace with your enemy, whenever he slanders you in
your absence, in return praise him to his face; at any rate as the words
will issue from the lips of the pernicious man, if you wish that his
speech should not be bitter, make his mouth sweet” (Gulistan, chapter I,
tale XXIV). Saadi did not think it was advisable to overindulge in blame
even when blame was necessary (Gulistan, chapter I, tale XVI).

It appears that Saadi affirmed punishment when necessary. Saadi said, “A
king sent his son to school, and placed a silver tablet under his arm.
On the face of the tablet was written in gold – ‘The severity of the
master is better than the indulgence of the father’ (Gulistan, chapter
VII, tale IV). However, punishment should be the last method in
education and not the first one.

He professed, “When the hand has failed in every trick, it is lawful to
draw the sword” (Gulistan, chapter XIII, tale XV). “Forgiveness was
commendable, but apply not ointment to the wound of an oppressor.
Knoweth he not that whosoever spareth the life of a serpent, committeth
injury towards the sons of Adam” (ibid, tale XVI).

The reason Saadi confirmed punishment in some cases was that, “An enemy
did not become a friend through indulgence; nay, it increases his
avarice. Be humble unto him who shows you kindness” (Gulistan, chapter
VIII, tale LXXXI). In another tale, he added, “When you speak to a low
fellow with kindness and benignity, it increases his arrogance and
perverseness” (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LXI).

He believed the men with base nature did not deserve affection because
“when you connected yourself with base men, and showed them favor, they
committed crimes with your power, whereby you participate in their
guilt” (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale VIII). In another instance, he
said, “When you support and favor the vicious, you commit wickedness
with your power, by participation” (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LIII).

### Individual Differences

Saadi believed that in spite of some of similarities between different
people, there were some differences in their aptitudes in comparison
with one another (meaning there were differences between their physical,
intellectual, social, emotional and moral aptitudes).

Saadi said that people should consider the extent of their abilities. He
was of the opinion that “whosoever contendeth with the great sheds his
own blood. He, who thinks himself great, had been compared to one who
squinted and saw double. You would get a broken front by sporting your
head against a ram” (Gulistan, chapter XIII, tale XLV).

In another example he said, “It is not the part of a wise man to box
with a lion, or to strike his fist against a sword. Neither fight nor
contend with one more powerful than you are; put your hands under your
armpit” (ibid, tale XLVI). He also warned, “A weak man, who contended
with one who was strong, befriended his adversary by his own death”.
(ibid, tale XLVII). Saadi emphasized that the teachers should speak to
students in conformity with the temperament of the listener (Gulistan,
chapter VIII, tale XXIX).

### Real Knowledge

Saadi considered the forsaking of carnal desires as the cause of
acquisition of real knowledge (1995, p.947). This was the reason why he
emphasized that truth should be searched by those who had succeeded to
forsake their carnal desires (ibid, p.796). Also, Saadi introduced a
superficial scholar whose action did not prove his or her knowledge, as
individuals who suffered in vain and made efforts in vain (Alavi 2002,
p.186). Saadi believed that committing crimes and sins by scholars was
much more objectionable than when carried out by others (ibid).

Even, Saadi introduced knowledge as the factor for nurturing religiosity
(ibid, p.214).
Saadi believed that a man was lucky and prosperous if he obtained a
provision from knowledge for himself (1996). Saadi introduced science
and knowledge as the heritage of God’s prophets (Alavi 2002, P.180).

Saadi introduced wise persons as pure gold so that wherever they went
everyone knew their value. While, the ignorant were like counterfeit
jewelry who were isolated and an outsider in their own home (ibid,
p.180).

Saadi strongly emphasized that ‘knowledge’ was the factor for nurturing
‘religiosity’ in humans (Alavi 2002, p.214). Thus, he put emphasis on
the fact that people were not to waste their valuable time learning
superficial sciences, and to appeal to those sciences which led them to
perfection (Saadi, 1374, p.847).

Saadi considered humanity, magnanimity and courtesy as the knowledge, or
the essence of knowledge. Thus, from his viewpoint, if a human being
lacked such characteristics, he was only apparently human, and would
inwardly be like an animal (ibid, p.974).

Saadi had a comprehensive view of education. He considered all kinds of
education as complementary to each other. According to Beheshti, Faqihi
and Abujafari (2001), kinds of education from the viewpoint of Saadi
could be classified as follows:

#### 1. Intellectual Education

Saadi considered intellect as the great gift of God. He believed that if
intellect governed man’s existence and being, then the carnal soul will
have no power to fight with intellect, and man will be able to reach
perfection. It was in this way that a man spoke thoughtfully, avoided
pretentse, took lessons from every happening, swallowed his anger,
quelled his lust and was not avaricious.

Saadi believed that the soul’s purification and deliverance from the
captivity of gluttony and lust was the first step in intellect’s
education. He considered talkativeness, speaking unpretentiously when it
was necessary, and speaking when an event did not deserve speech as the
characteristics of ignorant people.

#### 2. Religious Education

Saadi frequently spoke of God in *Gulistan* and *Bustan*, His greatness,
mercy, forgiveness, kindness, manifestations in creation, the hereafter
and the day of resurrection. He invited people to religion and religious
education. He considered religion and faith as the basis of a man’s
life. He even considered knowledge as the means of nurturing
religiosity. He emphasized knowledge and good deeds in religious
education and recognized religious knowledge as a means for bringing man
to his spiritual purpose. He said that good deeds are the result of that
religious knowledge. Saadi placed emphasis on three points in religious
education - God’s remembrance, lamentation and supplication for
morality, lastly, thinking of the hereafter.

#### 3. Mystical Education

Saadi was aware of mystical thoughts, and he frequently spoke in his
works about mystical education, deep emotion, exaltation, love,
self-sacrifice, approaching God, welcoming hardships for the sake of
God, and annihilation in divine essence. He had allocated the third part
of Gulistan to love, deep emotion and exaltation and said that it was up
to the mystic seeker to start a journey toward the infinite region of
cognition and mysticism by self-refinement and overcoming the carnal
soul, until he gradually reaches a place where there was no trace of his
own name and remembrance.

#### 4. Moral Education

Saadi frequently spoke of moral virtues and high human values such as
forgiveness, chivalry, sympathy, compassion, justice, magnanimity,
goodness, righteousness, and contentment. In Gulistan and Bustan, he
allocated many chapters to moral education. He considered himself an
educator of morality and as an admonisher.

Saadi’s art was in his ability to express skillfully and artistically
the moral virtues and admonishments using beautiful, eloquent, fluent,
and rhythmical statements so that the reader could accept them and did
not become tired of them. Saadi had particularly emphasized moral
education, and had introduced moral education and acquisition of good
morality as the purpose of the mission of the Prophet of Islam and the
aim of the Quran’s revelation.

He considered bad-temper and moral degeneration as factors that would
cause man to fall into a burning Hell and eternal punishment. Saadi
believed that moral education was very difficult and required much time.
He emphasized two fundamental points in moral education.

Saadi was of the opinion that moral education should begin in childhood,
because if a bad habit is positioned in a man’s nature or soul, it
cannot be easily omitted. Secondly, Saadi believed that the success of
moral education was dependent upon a good educator who had virtue and
knowledge, did good deeds, had right speech, and had educated his own
soul before educating others.

Saadi placed much emphasis on the determinative role of inheritance and
heritage on man, to the extent that he said, “An evil root would not
thrive in a goodly shade. To educate the worthless was like throwing a
walnut upon a dome. Though the clouds should pour down the water of
life, you would never gather fruit from the branch of the willow. Waste
not your time
on low people, for we can never obtain sugar from the reed. The wolf’s
whelp would at length turn into a wolf, although it be brought up along
with men. How could anyone form a good sword out of bad iron? O ye
philosophers, it is impossible to convert a worthless wretch into a good
man. The rain, in whose nature there is no partiality, produced tulips
in the garden, but only weeds in a barren soil. A sterile soil will not
yield spikenard, waste not then seed upon it” (Gulistan, chapter I, tale
IV). In another tale, he says, “When nature has given capacity,
instruction will make impression, but if iron is not of a proper temper,
no polishing will make it good” (Gulistan, chapter VII, tale I).

Saadi believes that ‘a capacity without education was deplorable’
(Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LVI). He gave some examples of this,
saying, “the education was the same, but the capacities were different;
although silver and gold were produced from a stone, yet these metals
were not to be found in every stone. The star Canopus shines all over
the world, but the scented leather comes only from Yemen” (Gulistan,
chapter VII, tale VI). Therefore, Saadi concluded that - “an education
without capacity was thrown away” (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LVI). “A
student without inclination was a lover without money; a traveler
without observation, was a bird without wings; a learned man without
work was a tree without fruit; and a devotee without knowledge was a
house without a door” (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LXXI).

In spite of this, Saadi emphasized the role of education during
childhood and believed, “He who was not taught good manners in his
childhood would have no good qualities when he arrived at manhood”
(Gulistan, chapter XII, tale III). Saadi likened a child to a piece of
green wood that could be bent as much as we pleased, but when it dried,
it could not be made straight without fire (ibid).

Saadi believed that good children were so important for their parents
and society that “it was better in the opinion of the wise that a woman
in labor should bring forth a serpent than wicked children” (Gulistan,
chapter VII, tale X). Therefore, it was up to educators to teach wisdom
to their sons.

He counseled, “If you desire your name to be remembered, teach your son
wisdom and judgment” (Bustan, pp. 382-383). Saadi placed so much
emphasis on intellect that he believed that if such a son “lacked both
these assets, you would die, and have no descendants” (p. 383). Saadi
admonished that it was up to the parents and educators to take care of
their sons and bring them with comfort “so that their eyes was not fixed
at others’ hands, because he who showed no care of his offspring will
see him cared for by others and roaming about” (Bustan, year, p. 384).

C. Jean-Jacques Rousseau's Views on Moral Education
---------------------------------------------------

Moral education was so important for Rousseau that he dedicated the
second section of ‘Emile’ to moral education. Rousseau (1973) believes
that we should consider a moral personality for the child from the very
beginning of childhood. Rousseau recommended that one should pay no
attention to the carnal desires of the child, because there were no such
desires and if we ourselves do not create them, he or she would not be
hurt.

In another part of ‘Emile’, Rousseau emphasized that educators should
distinguish the real and natural needs of children from the needs that
were created through carnal desires. Rousseau tried to keep the child
away from all kinds of pretense and nurture compassion in him by sharing
other people’s pains and sorrows. A child should be interested in
goodness, generosity, mercy, magnanimity and other subtle and fair
tendencies, which were naturally desirable for human beings. The child
should avoid greed, jealousy, revenge, and all despicable lusts, which
not only naturalized sensitivity but also had a impacted it negatively
as Rousseau believed that degenerate lusts destroyed the heart.

It is due to such belief that Rousseau recommended that the youth be
kind, truthful, honest and without vanity. They should be able to speak
to people as their conscience let them, without being anxious that their
words had to be praised by others. They should be firm on the road of
truth for upholding what their hearts identified as true, and not be led
astray from that way of stating the right and doing the right because of
self-conceit.

The only important thing was that a human being did his or her duty well
in this world. He should even admonish himself to keep away from
insolence, rectify himself and continue living piously away from corrupt
delusion. Rousseau spoke of changing greed, bad tendencies and attitudes
(Ulich, 1962). He asserted that if the nature of youngsters were not to
be destroyed and led astray, they would ultimately discover the great
moral sensations of love, justice, and obligation. They would attain a
deeper unity with the universe (Ulich, 1962).

Such moral refinement and nurturing of high moral disposition, from
Rousseau’s viewpoint, was not only necessary for those who were being
educated, but was also necessary for educators in order to teach the
children and youngsters with a pure intention. This sprang from
Rousseau’s belief that a human could choose his or her instincts
(Cameron, 1973).

According to Rousseau (1967), it was only the freedom and power of will
that made humans good and beneficent. On the contrary, inability to act
and captivity would have no outcome other than wickedness. Rousseau
believed that man’s nature was good, and it was in the light of moral
education that human’s natural aptitudes and powers would be actualized.

### Paying Attention to Individual Aptitudes and Differences

People have different aptitudes at different ages. Therefore, it was
necessary for educators to pay attention to these aptitudes. Rousseau
asserted that girls were different from boys, and each child was
different from another child; so each child should be considered
differently (Claydon, 1969). Rousseau believed that the best way of
gaining man’s happiness was to give him his particular position.

### Method of Observing the Measure of Individuals’ Aptitude in their Moral Education

This was one of the methods of paying attention to individuals’
aptitudes and differences. Rousseau stated that children and youngsters
should be expected accurately, according to and consistent with their
aptitudes and powers to perform their duties and responsibilities.
Rousseau believed moral things and social relations had no meaning for a
child who had not yet reached puberty. Therefore, we should avoid using
those words around them.

False thoughts caused error and corruption, thus we should pay much
attention to his first period. The only knowledge children possessed
before puberty was of nature and physical events. They did not even know
history, metaphysics, ethics or morality. They knew the relation between
man and things, but did not know about moral relations between people.
The children had little and limited power the formation and
comprehension of abstract concepts and general ideas (Boyd, 1975).

When they reached puberty, their instincts grew. Then they began to
compare themselves with others, begin to understand abstract concepts,
and comprehend deeper secrets of the world. It was necessary to use
history and natural religions for teaching this age group. Thus, the
youngsters would discover the great moral sensations (Ulich, 1962).

Moral education was the most important during adolescence. At fifteen
years of age the person would reach the age of reason and logic. He
possessed the instruments for removing the obstacles to understanding
what he confronted in moral and social fields. Before this period, the
child’s sensitivity was restricted to himself, but now it would extend
to the environment until it achieved creation of emotions, which led to
concepts about good and bad (Chateau, 1990).

We should, keep egoism from children. Rousseau maintained that if a
teacher did not hasten in instruction and education, he would not hurry
up in waiting for difficult works from children or students. Rather, he
would want what was needed in suitable time, in his way. The personality
of children would thus form well, and they would not be raised spoiled.

### Principle of Making Environmental Conditions Sound

Rousseau believed that people were affected by different environmental
conditions. Therefore it was necessary to improve upon these conditions
in order to remove undesirable states and behaviors. These should be
replaced with desirable states and behaviors.

Rousseau asserted that to improve the society, we should start from
improvement of family and not the government. If we wanted to rectify
the general manners, these rectifications should begin with family
manners, and this responsibility belonged to the parents (Chateau,
1990). Rousseau also believed that it is necessary that educated people
stayed away from corrupt people.

### Preparation Method

One of the educational methods for implementing the principle of making
environmental conditions sound was the preparation method. It meant that
Rousseau had paid attention to those environmental conditions and
factors, which increased the probability of appearance of desirable
behaviors and states.

Rousseau asserted that what is told to others was of no influence unless
there would have been a merited preparation before it, as an earth must
be prepared in advance for planting. Also, the seeds of virtues grew
slowly, thus there should have existed a long period of cultivation and
nurturing before they had roots. Therefore, we should not speak to
youngsters about reason and logic even when they reached the age of
reason and logic, unless they had been prepared (Boyd, 1975).

Rousseau himself tried that Emile could learn and understand deep
concepts about the world until the age of twelve (Jarret, undated).
Rousseau, by keeping Emile away from every kind of corruption, tried to
prepare him to learn moral concepts (Chateau, 1990). He deemed it
necessary for children to tolerate harms and hardships in their
childhood so that they were prepared to tolerate greater pains when they
became adults.

### Method of Travel

The second method based which can be extracted from the Rousseau’s works
about making environmental conditions sound was the educational method
of travelling. Rousseau maintained that it was sometimes necessary to
change the place in which one lived in order to enjoy the educational
effects of the new places.

According to Rousseau, the situation of a country influenced its people.
He asserted that human beings were not trees, which had been planted in
a single place forever. Rather, they were meant to move, travel and know
other countries and people. Rousseau said that Emile, in two years,
travelled to many great and small countries of Europe (1973). If the
educator made Emile travel, it was so that his entrance into society
could be carried out in best way, for Rousseau believed that before an
individual chose a position in the social system, he should know what
rank and positions were suitable for him (Chateau, 1990).

### Patterning Method

Patterning method was the third method, which could be extracted from
Rousseau’s works as based on the principle of creating sound
environmental conditions. It meant that the educator had to set an
example for desirable behavior. Rousseau said -

“I would always encourage people towards continence and doing good works
and I would be an example for them as far as it was possible for me. I
would try to manifest religion for them as beautiful and enjoyable. I
would make their faith firm to real theism, doing right and other useful
principles of faith - those things that every person should accept.
(1973, p. 218)

That is why Rousseau said: “O ye teachers, forsake pretention. Be really
pious and good. Your good behavior should first inscribe into your
students minds, and then influence their hearts. I prefer to give alms
in the presence of my student instead of wanting him to give alms”
(1973, p. 82). Rousseau not only recommended all educators to be role
models for their students, but he also encouraged the students to follow
good examples (Ulich, 1962).

### Principle of Responsibility

This principle meant that a person should follow his or her inner
obligations instead of external pressures. Rousseau asserted that we
should hold people responsible for their deeds. Such control and
supervision should spring from knowledge (Boyd, 1975). Rousseau believed
that we should help a child when necessary and be proud when he helped
himself (1973). Rousseau believed that a person had the power to
influence the environment. Therefore, without forcing them, children
could correct their own behavior.

### Method of Confrontation with the Results of One’s Deeds

This is one of the methods that Rousseau suggested on the basis of
principle of responsibility. Rousseau put forward this method so that
his student could become a responsible person by becoming aware of the
results of his action.

Rousseau designed an environment for Emile in which he experienced the
results of his undesirable behavior (Ryan, 1976). For instance, Rousseau
asserted that if a child told lies, he would have to see all of that
lie’s bad results (author, 1973). That’s why Rousseau maintained that
adults should not place any obstacles to children’s tendencies. Children
should overcome only natural and physical obstacles and penalties would
be incurred due to their deeds (Claydon, 1969). In other words, Rousseau
said that instead of punishing children for their lies, educators should
show the children the bad results of telling lies by not believing
anything that they say (Ryan, 1976).

### Method of Bearing Hardship

This was another method which could be extracted from Rousseau’s
writings with due attention to the principle of responsibility. Rousseau
believed that educators taught their students hard lessons (Ryan, 1976).
Rousseau said in this regard:

“If we exempted a person from all kinds of harms which were necessary
for human beings, haven’t we acted against his natural construction?
Yes, I again emphasize that a child should become familiar with small
pains if he wanted to comprehend great bounties and happiness. This was
man’s nature that if the body were in great comfort, his spirit would
become corrupted. The one who didnot know pain and sorrow would not
understand the pleasure of kindness nor would he comprehend the
sweetness of mercy. Did you know what is the most certain for misery of
your child? It is accustoming him to the notion that he could take
everything he wanted by force. The more easily his desires were
accepted, the more his desires will become (1973, p. 62).

Nature showed pain and sorrow to children from the very beginning of
their lives. And, Rousseau recommended that children should not be
protected from hardships (Claydon, 1969). Accepting pain should be the
first lesson of children’s life, and this was what Emile needed more
than anything else (Claydon; Jarret, n.d.). That is the reason why
Rousseau introduces Emile as a diligent person, patient, firm and brave
that few bad things affect him, and he can calmly endures pain (Boyd,
1975).

Rousseau (1987) introduced patience, submission and perfect justice as
the only wealth that a person could take with him from this world. These
were those things that human beings were able to complete until they
reached perfection and happiness. Rousseau (1989) said that God was
just:

“I should suffer, while He knows my innocence. This is all that bestows
me assurance and reliance. My heart and intellect testify that I should
not be disappointed. I should learn that I should suffer in silence; all
things will finally find their suitable and merited place. (1973, p. 61)

Rousseau stressed the fact that if we tried to remove all sorrows from
children’s lives, we would cause more adversities for their future. The
child should be taught to accept the adversities of the world. In
addition, Rousseau believed one could not understand the concept of
other people’s pains so far as he himself had not experienced pain.

### Principle of Showing Affection and Not Showing Affection

Rousseau believed that we should never underestimate affection and that
all social, educational and political relations should be based on
affection (Myer, 1971). According to Rousseau (1973), a child was the
most important person deserving to receive mercy, care and support.

Rousseau considered childhood as the period of giving affection to
children. Therefore, he strongly advised loving children. Rousseau
(undated) considered himself fortunate to have been raised in a loving
environment.

The opposite principle of not showing affection could also be found in
Rousseau’s writings. Rousseau recommended that if we felt that our
loving behavior had no educational impact on a child and he or she
became worse because of that affection, that child should be deprived of
such affection (1973).

### Principle of Not Following Community

Rousseau considered (bad) society and community as a factor that
contributed to moral corruptions and enslavement (Khadivi Zand, 1966).
He believed that all humans were created free and equal. He believed
that in a community one or several persons might be powerful and have
authority over everyone else. What formed the legal basis of power and a
right government were those contracts, which had been satisfactorily
concluded among the members of a community.

Rousseau believed in moral inequality, which was permitted by some laws
and was contrary to people’s natural right. He said that in a society,
the individuals should sacrifice their private benefits for the will and
benefits of all (1969).

### Method of Keeping Children Away from Community

This method can be suggested for the principle of ‘not following from
community.’ Rousseau believed it was necessary to keep children away
from community or society. Rousseau asserted that children, at least for
a short period of their lives, should be exempt from bearing of the yoke
that nature had not imposed on them (i.e. the yoke of community which
had been made by adults). We should not limit children’s natural freedom
(1973).

Rousseau maintained that children did not possess a power for living in
society without being embroiled in its corruptions. The original and
pure nature of a child could lead him to corruption and wickedness
because of living in a society and intercourse with other people
(Claydon, 1969). In other words, Rousseau wanted to nurture the child’s
social attitude away from society.

According to Ulich (1962) nothing else seemed more contradictory than a
child being educated far from society for life in society. Rousseau
wanted a child to become familiar with social problems and people. They
would then enter the society so as to remain be protected from its bad
effects.

### Principle of ‘Following from Nature’

This principle was the basis of many of Rousseau’s educational theories.
Rousseau maintained that all human beings should follow nature and its
rules. Even a man’s aptitudes could be considered a part of human
nature, or in harmony with nature.

Rousseau believed that we should know children’s nature, and formulate
educational plans according to that nature. It was up to educators to
direct children’s growth, and protect them from bad influences. This
caused a child to become a real human being and to serve humanity.
Rousseau considered nature and its performance quite correct, valid and
good (Wise, 1964). He asserted that nature caused the proper growth of
mankind (Claydon, 1969). Rousseau considered following the nature as
following God (1973). According to Rousseau, nature only knew God, and
different religions, which caused differences among people, were the
inventions of society. Thus, we should only be the students of God
(ibid).

Romanticism started with Rousseau. Romantics believed that the
educational environment must be flexible and suitable to let children
reveal their inner goodness, social abilities, and virtues (Kohlberg &
Mayer, 1972). Therefore we should avoid from imposing formal and
predetermined experiences on children (Ryan, 1976). Rousseau maintained
that nature led human beings to higher ranks of development in the light
of properties it had given them.

### Method of Natural Punishment

Rousseau suggested this method based on the principle of following
nature. Rousseau meant that children should never be punished for their
misbehavior; seeing the results of their bad deeds should be their
punishment instead (1973). Rousseau gave the example of an apostate and
a liar. The results of their bad actions would be enough for them, thus,
it was not necessary for educator to lecture children on the bad results
of their actions.

### Method of Negative Education

This was one of the other educational methods based on principle of
following nature. Rousseau believed that if human being was naturally
good, he would remain good as far as he was not corrupted. Therefore,
Rousseau recommended closing the way for evil to enter a person’s heart,
so that the heart might remain pure forever.

Negative education did not teach moral virtues, but rather only defects
(Chateau, 1990). The first education (between birth and age 12) should
be negative; educators should not teach or instruct virtues and truth to
this age group. Their education should consist of keeping the heart from
sin (Boyd, 1975). Rousseau emphasized that we should avoid speaking
about truth to children have not yet come to understand the truth. This
might cause a false opinion in place of truth (Chateau, 1990), or make
children go to church to the extent that they become tired of prayer and
worship (Rousseau, 1973).

Rousseau devoted his Emile to a scheme of domestic education, which
would allow the impulses of children to develop naturally, with as
little interference from their tutors as possible (Mautner, 2005).
Rousseau spoke of the corruption of morals due to the trappings of
culture (Mautner, 2005). He suggested civic religion to which all
citizens should subscribe (Audi, 2001).

Rousseau found a solution to the problems of individuals’ freedom and
interest in the superior from of moral or political action that he
called the general will. The citizen substituted ‘I must’ for ‘I will’,
which was also an ‘I shall’ when it expressed assent to the general
will.

The general will was a universal force or statement and thus was nobler
than any particular will. In willing his own interest, the citizen was
at the same time willing what was communally good. The particular and
the universal were thus united. The individual realized himself in
realizing the good of all (Audi, 2001).

As a moralist, Rousseau attempted to unite the individual and the
citizen through universal political action or consent (Audi, 2001).
According to Rousseau, man was born free and yet, everywhere he was in
chains (Honderich, 2005). In accordance with Rousseau’s philosophy of
nature, true religious faith was more an affair of the heart than head
(Blackburn, 2005).

Rousseau argued that ills of the human condition derived from society,
and that in its natural state, life was free, independent, healthy,
happy, and innocent (Blackburn, 2005). In his later years, after
returning to France, Rousseau found himself more drawn to communion with
nature than with other men. The most lyrical pages of all his writings,
his *Reveries*, expressed the joys of solitude, the raptures of drifting
imagination and the wonders of a natural wilderness uncultivated by
mankind (Mautner, 2005).

In the celebrated section of Book 4 of *Emile*, Rousseau referred to
‘The Profession of Faith - eloquent case against atheism and
materialism’ (Mautner, 2005). According to Rousseau, when Emile matured
and needed to find a place for himself in society he would not try to
control all that was around him. Rather, he would establish relations
grounded in friendship, mutual respect and cooperation.

Our capacity to feel compassion and our acceptance of compassion with
gratitude formed, in Rousseau’s view, the basis of unity among human and
the true explanation of the Golden Rule. Real moral demands were not
imposed upon us from outside, nor were they precepts discovered by
reason. Rather, they were the requirements by which a bond of creative
respect could be sustained between equals (Dent, 1998).

Rousseau held that most men and women were corrupted and their lives
deformed because of their nature and relationships with the civil order.
That man himself was good by nature, but was perverted by society was
the theme of *Emile*. Thus, if people were to live a whole and rewarding
life they must first be protected from such damaging influence and then
be given the resources and the disposition to develop in a creative,
harmonious and happy way once they entered society (Dent, 1998).

Rousseau’s influence remained very great, not only because of his
political writings which have become part of the canon of political
theory, but also because of his effect on sensibility and attitudes. His
love of nature and stress on the value of the simple life, as well as
his far - reaching explorations of his own character and feelings, made
him a central figure in Romanticism. The emphasis in Rousseau’s
educational writings on not coercing the child into performing the
pointless influenced the work of Maria Montessori and A.S Neil. His
place as a major figure in western civilization was secure, even though
he was still controversial (Dent, 1998).

In his controversial writings on religious belief, Rousseau argued that
we knew God not by reason, but through simple feelings and convictions
much deeper and more permanent than any theorems of reason. Such
feelings taught us that the world was animated by a loving and powerful
intelligence of God (Dent, 1998).

D. John Dewey's views on moral education
----------------------------------------

Dewey said that growth itself was the only moral end, and he identified
it as a social process. Our behavior was interpersonal; as such, it was
the source of most of our learning, and our participation with others
was the source of our most profound satisfaction. As a constituent of
growth - shared experience was the greatest of human goods.

The ‘construction of good’ was typically a shared activity, facilitated
by deliberate cooperation. The activity required appropriate conduct,
including communication and cooperation. Above all, Dewey believed, it
required experimental inquiry. Every person had a right to participate
in the formation of goods.

Democratic life implied that individuals should be seriously respectful
of each other’s concerns. It also implied that people communicated with
each other freely and honestly to convey their concerns and to propose
their plans of action. Out of such virtue and discourse, learned with
scientific knowledge, shared proposals for action would thus emerge and
be honored.

It should go without saying that democratic virtue deliberately excluded
antisocial behavior. No philosopher before Dewey had conceived moral
discourse as essentially communicative. The democratic virtue, after
all, was impertinent to the incarnations of the classic tradition
(Gouinlock, 1998). As Dewey conceived it, the moral life was suffused
with innumerable possibilities of enjoyment and happiness, as well as of
disaster.

Ordinary life revolved around familiar attachments, ambitions and fears.
Dewey believed the philosopher’s task was to place at the disposal of
human beings the assumption and methods that would facilitate the
efforts in which they will be engaged in any case (Gouinlock, 1998).
The key insight in Dewey’s critique was that behavior was usually
constructed by cycles of organism/ environment interaction, rather than
sensory - motor interaction (Lachs & Talisse, 2008).

Dewey claimed that democracy was present when personal and community
life were marked with faith in the capacity of human beings to exercise
intelligent judgment and action when the proper conditions were
provided, only with a shared view communicated to provide these
conditions as fully and broadly as possible and a dedication to the
value of this commitment (Lachs & Talisse, 2008, p.194).

For Dewey moral life was experienced as an open-ended but continuous
process in which the past and the future were integral to the present.
Always there were stable elements that we could rely on. The most stable
elements were habits and not the rules or any of the discursive resource
preferred by traditional ethics. Habits resided in the background of
situation, but even they were not fixed and could change in their
application to concrete circumstances.

Dewey did not offer a criterion for right conduct and thus challengedthe
traditional expectations about an ethical theory. Traditional ethical
theories usually assumed that the norm or how reasonable was our
specific moral judgment, was solely derived from a general standard of
right conduct.

Dewey’s ethics does not deny the importance of having, using, and
carrying forward our inherited moral knowledge in from principles,
ideals, and habits. But it held that these will lose their validity and
instrumental capacity the more they were made absolute, that is, when
intelligence did not continue to reexamine them in light of present
conditions. For Dewey the most important instrumentalities for morality,
the ‘cardinal’ virtues were the traits of character that could improve
moral habits and more importantly, assist us better in determining what
morality required here and now (i.e. in a situation).

The broadest possible characterization of Dewey’s normative vision was
that he advocated a moral life that was intelligent, aesthetic, and
democratic. These three adjectives characterized mutually dependent
aspects of a single moral vision (Lachs & Talisse, 2008, P.182). As
Dewey pointed out good, virtue, and duty were all irreducible features
found intertwined in moral situations, they had no common denominator
nor was there a set hierarchy among them.

Dewey’s faith in the instrumentalities of experience was tempered by the
honest realization that the most intense moments of our moral life are
tragic, in the sense that there is an irreducible, and sometimes
irresolvable, conflict between positive moral demands or values. Moral
life is then more than the struggle between good and evil (Lachs &
Talisse, 2008, P.181). For Dewey, moral experience is the proper
starting point of a philosophical inquiring about morality. He
designated those situations that we experience as predominantly moral as
those that demanded of the agent that (s)he discovered what (s)he ought
to do morally amidst conflicting moral forces or demands.

Dewey characterized the generic elements and phases of our moral life as
a process. There were three predominant stages in Dewey’s model of moral
inquiry. First, the agent found herself in a morally problematic
situation. Finally, (s)he arrived at a judgment that resulted in a
choice. Moral deliberation was on experimental, emotional, and
imaginative process that results in a moral judgment - a decision to act
in one way or another. But judgments were not static (Lach & Talisse,
2008, P.181).

Dewey’s ideas about ethics underwent gradual but continual
reconstruction during his 71-year long public career. There was gradual
shift from an ethics of self-realization to a mature pluralistic ethics
that described morality as contextual, experiment, imaginative,
aesthetic, and democratic (Lach & Telisse, 2008, p. 181).

The fundamental aim of education for him was not to convey information
but to develop critical methods of thought (Audi 2001, p. 231). Dewey
maintained that we should be constantly rethinking and reworking our
democratic institution in order to make them ever more responsive to
changing times (Audi 2001, p. 231). Dewey constructed nature as an
organic unity not marked by any radical discontinuities that would
require the introduction of non - natural categories or new
methodological strategies (Audi 2001, p. 230).

Dewey believed that the inherited dualisms had to be overcome,
particularly the one between fact and value in as much as it functioned
to block the use of reason as a guide for human action. On this view
people naturally had beliefs as well (Audi 2001, p. 230). Dewey’s view
was also naturalistic to the degree that it advocated the universal
scope of scientific method. Influenced in this regard by Pierce, he saw
scientific method not as restricted to a specific sphere but simply as
the way we ought to think.

The structure of all reflective thought was future-oriented and
articulation of a felt difficulty, through the elaboration of hypotheses
as possible resolutions of the difficulty, to the stage of verification
or falsification (Audi 2001, p. 230). Dewey’s notion of experience was
intimately tied to his notion of nature. He did not conceive of nature
as ‘the-world- as- it- would-be- independent- of- human- experience’ but
rather as a tripartite distinction between the physiochemical level, the
psychophysical level, and the level of human experience with the
understanding that this categorization was not to be constructed as
implying any sharp discontinuities (Audi 2001, P.230).

Dewey felt that one of the cardinal errors of philosophy from Plato to
the modern period was what he called ‘the spectator theory of
knowledge.’ Knowledge had been viewed as a kind of passive recording of
facts in the world and success was seen as a matter of correspondence of
our beliefs to these antecedent facts. On the contrary, Dewey viewed
knowing as a constructive conceptual activity that anticipated and
guided our adjustment to future experiential interactions with our
environment.

The purpose of knowing was to effect some alternation in the
experiential situation, and for this purpose some cognitive proposals
were more effective than others. This was the context in which ‘truth’
was normally invoked, and instead of this Dewey proposed ‘warranted
assertability’ (Audi 2001, p .229-230). Dewey’s educational goal for
children, as for adults, was ‘growth’ - growth in powers, in capacities
for experience. Growth, he claimed, was really ‘the only moral end’. For
quite plainly, it was not a real end but always a means.

Democracy, Dewey’s other guiding ideal, was likewise both a goal and a
means (Honderich 2005, p. 212). Dewey’s epistemological and moral
fallibility - his view that no knowledge-claim, no moral rule,
principle, or ideal was ever certain or immune from any possible
criticism and revision, was yet allied with an optimistic progressivism.

The realization of progress required, however, the cultivation of
intelligent habits in individuals and the maintenance of social
structures that encouraged continuous inquiry. Thus Dewey focused on the
nature and practical improvement of education, arguing that children
could not be understood as an empty vessel, passively waiting for the
knowledge to be poured in. Rather it had to be seen as active center of
impulse, influenced also by shaping their environment.

Children will develop habits of one sort or another in the course of
their interactions with their social and physical surroundings, so if we
want those habits to be flexible, intelligent, we must do our best to
structure an environment that will allow and indeed provoke the
operations of intelligent inquiry (Honderich 2005, P.211).

Dewey advanced a philosophy interested in the question of how life
should be lived, and he argued that addressing that question required
bridging the gap between moral and science. His logic was a theory of
inquiry, a general account of how thought functions, not in an abstract
or purely formal mode, but in the inquiries of successful science and in
the problem-solving of ordinary daily life. What is required in all
cases is the application of intelligent inquiry, the self- correcting
method of experimentally testing hypotheses created and refined from our
pervious experience (Honderich 2005, p. 211).

Dewey’s work as a psychologist and educational thinker crystallized a
reaction against the excessively formal and rigid educational practices
of the time. Dewey recognized that the child is an active, exploring,
inquisitive creature, so the task of education is to foster experience
infused by skills and knowledge (Blackburn, 2005, P.98).

Dewey was eager to reassure his readers that they were not a drift in a
cold and alien world, and that the comforts of poetry, religion and art
were not private consolations, but as reputable in their own way as
science and mathematics themselves (Mautner, 2005, P.157). According to
Dewey what we are concerned to do is adjust ourselves to our environment
and our environment to ourselves, and Dewey spends much of his time
characterizing the ways in which we do it.

Morality is not a search for ultimate principles by sophisticated
reflection on what we already do (Mautner, 2005, P.157). Dewey believed
that human thinking was essentially a matter of problem- solving;
education was a matter of giving children the widest possible
problem-solving skills. Because Dewey thought that human beings needed a
social setting in order to flourish, these problem- solving skills
included what one might call ‘moral skills’ (Mautner 2005, p. 157).
Dewey’s view was that children neither had a fixed nature such that
teachers could stand back and let them grow nor had such plastic natures
that teachers could simply mould them into anything they liked (Mautner,
2005).

Conclusion
----------

Rumi believed that there was no monasticism or renunciation in Islam. He
introduced unity within a society as the way of attaining growth,
development and perfection. Rumi maintained that membership in a society
made man both valuable and spiritual. This caused man to avoid egoism
and individualism. In this light, we should cultivate compassion,
altruism, patience, trust or good judgment and affection so as to unite
the society.

According to Saadi too, social adjustments led to peaceful coexistence.
This was desirable if we aspire to achieve perfection in a society. He
mentioned justice, humility, peace, benevolence, sympathy and
contentment as the characteristics of an ideal society. Dewey believed
that participation with others was the source of our most profound
satisfaction.

Collective experience was the greatest of human goods that contributed
to growth. Rousseau argued that the ills of the human condition were
derived from the society. He spoke of the corruption of morals arising
from the trappings of culture. According to Rousseau, people must be
protected from damaging influences of a society prior to entering that
society.

Rumi introduced good admonishment or good exhortation as the educational
method that was used by the prophets of God. Saadi believed that
self-cognition, faith, servitude to God, and praising God were necessary
to reach God. The ultimate good of any education was cognition of the
exalted God and devotion to Him. It was impossible to cultivate this
spirit without the purification of the soul and banishing carnal
desires, arrogance, rancor, and power of body. The satisfaction of the
body’s needs is a desirable intermediate goal for the purpose of
worshiping God and rendering one’s service to the people.

Rousseau believed that the first education (between birth and 12 years
of age) should be such that educators must not teach or instruct virtues
and truth to children. The kind of education required at this stage
should comprise of protecting the heart from all sins.

Dewey maintained that no knowledge-claim, no moral rule, principle, or
ideal was ever certain and immune from all possible criticism and
revision. He asserted that moral deliberation was an experimental,
emotional, and imaginative process that resulted in a moral judgment,
which was a decision to act in one way or another. However, these
judgments were not static.

These judgments contributed towards the good in the society. According
to Dewey, every person had a right to participate in the formation of
‘good’ in society. Therefore he said that growth towards this itself was
the only moral end.

According to Rumi, the knowledge of real scholars was not superficial.
Intellect and reason governed their lives. Even their religiosity is
based on knowledge. Rumi complained of a science of imitation in which a
learner did not apply his or her intellect, and did not understand
anything through his own thinking and reflection.

Rumi emphasized upon informal education, in addition to formal
education. He stated that the skies and the earth spoke with the one who
understood. It was up to people and learners to reinforce their power of
thinking and reflection so that they could understand the hidden and
real aspects of every fact. This way they could achieve a very
comprehensive and deep meaning of everything. He believed that one could
be thus delivered from the usual schools, pages of learning material,
and repetition for learning.

Since Saadi believed that the source of knowledge was unlimited, he did
not confine himself to formal and classic textbooks. He placed emphasis
on informal learning, by which the students could take lessons from the
great school of nature and the events of the lives of other people, in
all places and times. In his view, the students for example, should not
only study history books, but must also pay great attention to entire
history and nature.

Saadi encouraged questions and answer sessions. He improved methods of
teaching through lectures. Rousseau stressed active teaching methods
based on discovery and problem solving. Therefore, he paid attention to
those points, which nurtured the senses, intellect and reason. The aim
of education for Dewey was not to convey information, but to develop a
critical method for thinking.

Dewey believed that human thinking was there for the sake of problem
solving and education was a matter of equipping children with the
strongest possible problem-solving skills. He recognized that a child
was an active, exploring, inquisitive creature, so in his opinion, the
task of education was to infuse the child’s experience with skills and
knowledge.

Rousseau maintained that all human beings should follow lessons from
nature and its rules. It was up to educators to avoid undue
interferences in education. He considered following the nature to be
akin to following God. He believed in minimal interference from tutors.

In Dewey’s view, the children neither had a fixed nature such that a
teacher could stand back and let them grow nor they had such plastic
natures that teachers could simply mold them into anything they liked.
Rumi agreed that sound education was based on encouragement and
affection. In spite of this view, he sometimes spoke of punishment when
encouragement or kindness was not effective; however the intention of
teacher should be educational.

Rousseau believed that educational relations between a teacher and
student should be based on affection; but not so if a loving behavior
had a damaging effect. According to him, the children should never be
punished for misbehavior; rather they should see and experience the
outcomes of that behavior.

According to Rumi, the sayings and teachings of the teacher should be in
accordance with the individual differences in abilities of the students.
It was also up to the teacher to consider the spiritual capacity of his
or her students. Rumi believed that educational planning should be
consistent with the rate of comprehension, understanding, intelligence
and aptitude of each student.

Saadi believed that people and students differed from one another
physically, intellectually, socially, emotional and morally. Thus, we
should consider the extent of their abilities and aptitude in the fields
of learning. According to Rousseau, we should expect from children and
youngsters to do their responsibilities according to and consistent with
their aptitude and abilities.

Rumi has referred to the need of human beings for an aware and reliable
educator. Rumi asserted that speeches, deeds and characteristics of
teachers and educators affect their students. Rousseau maintained that
an educator should set a good example for his or her students to follow.
From Rousseau’s viewpoint, moral refinement and nurturing of high moral
disposition was not only necessary for those to be educated, but it was
also up to the educators to educate children and youngsters with a pure
intent.
Rumi maintained one should become free from darkness, material and
worldly attachment, fight against carnal desires, ambition and disgrace,
and destroy all devilish temperaments or dispositions in order to reach
truth and God. Rousseau attempted to keep the child away from all kinds
of pretenses and nurture his compassion, share other people’s pains and
sorrows, and make him interested in goodness, generosity, mercy,
magnanimity and ethereal qualities which are naturally desirable in
human beings to avoid greed, jealousy, revenge and all lusts.

Saadi considered the forsaking of carnal desires as the source of real
knowledge. Such knowledge nurtured religiosity. Rumi considered
acquisition of knowledge and guidance as the goal of creation. The
knowledge and intellect of the people prevented them from evil. Thus,
such knowledge was a main factor in religiosity. He deemed it necessary
to cultivate intellect and thought in spiritual experiences and
intuition, and considered it to be a goal for education.

Storytelling was one of the most frequently used methods by Rumi. Rumi
believed that the past taught many lessons. The educational method of
storytelling utilized by Saadi in both poetry and prose is an epitome of
the teaching methods.

References
----------

Al- Hakimi, M., Al- Hakimi. M. & Al- Hakimi, A. (1991). Al- Hayah, vol.
1. (6th ed). Tehran, Islamic cultural publications Bureau

Alavi, H. R. (2002). Dictionary of Educational and concepts of Sadi’s
Gulistan. Kerman, Vadiat

Amedi, A. N. (1993). Ghorar al-Hekam Va Dorar al Kalem, Tehran: Amir
Kabir.

Audi, R. (2001). The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy. 2nd ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Beheshti, M, Abujaafari, M. & Faqihi, A. N. (2000). Theories of Muslim
Scientists in Education and its Principles, Vol. 2. Tehran and Qom:
Howzeh and University Research Center & Samt.

Beheshti, M, Faqihi. A. N. & Abujafari, M. (2001). Theories of Muslem
Scientists in Education and its Principles. Vol. 4, Tehran and Qom:
Howzeh and University Research Center & Samt.

Blackburn, S. (2005). Oxford dictionary of Philosophy. (2nd ed). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Claydon, F. L. (1969). Rousseau on Education. London: The Macmillan
Company.

Comeron, D. (1973). The Social Thought of Rousseau and Burk. Great
Britain: Willmer Brothers Limited, Birkenhead.

Dent, N. (1998). Rousseau, Jean- Jacques. In Routledge Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. London and New York: Routledge.

Gouinlock, J. (1998). Dewey, John. In Routledge Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. London and New York: Routledge.

Honderich, T. (2005). The Oxford companion to Philosophy. (2nd ed).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jafari, M.T. (1994), Interpretation, Criticism and Analysis of Masnavi
of Jalaloddin Mohammad Moulavi (12th ed), Tehran: Eslami

Jarret, L. J. (undated). Philosophy for Study of Education. California:
Houghton Company.

Kohlberg, L. & Mayer, R. (1972). Development as the Aim of Education.
Harvard Educational Review; 42 (4).

Lachs, J. & Talisse R. B. (2008). American philosophy: An Encyclopedia.
London and New York: Routledge.

Maunter, T. (2005). Dictionary of philosophy. (2nd ed). London: Penguin
Boyd, W. (1975). Emile For Today. The Emile of Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
London: Heinmann.

Mohammadi Rey Shahri, M. (1993), Mizan-al-Hekmah (Criterium of wisdom),
vol. 6 (4th ed.), Qom: Maktab-al-Aalam- al- Eslami

Moulavi (2000), Complete Divan of Shams Tabrizi (14th ed.) Tehran:
Javidan

Rousseau, J. J. (1966). The Fantasies of the Isolationist Rider. Tehran:
Iranmehr Library.

Rousseau, J. J. (1969). Emil or Education, Tehran: Chehr Rousseau, J. J.
(1973). Social Contracte. Tehran, Ganjineh Rumi (Moulavi), J. (2000),
Fih-e-Ma Fih, Explanation by
Dr. Hosein Elahi Ghomshei (7th ed), Tehran: scientific and cultural
publications

Rumi, J. M. (undated). The Gulistan or Rose Garden. Translated by
Francis Gladwin. London: Hoda

Ryan, A. B. (1976). Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Behavior Control: The
Technology for a romantic Behavior. Guelph, Ontario, Canada: University
of Guelph.

Saadi Shirazi, Sh. M. (1996), Bustan, Explanation by Mohammad Ali Naseh,
By effort of Dr. Khalil Khatib Rahbar (4th ed), Tehran: Safi Alishah

Saadi, Sh. M. (2000). The Orchard (Boostan) of Sadi. Translated by
Alaedin Pazargadi. Tehran: Rahnama.

Saadi, Sh. M. (2005). Gulistan of Sadi. Correction and explanation by
Gholamhosein Yusofi. 7th edition. Tehran: Kharazmi.
Saadi. Sh. M. (1995), Divan of poems, Corrected by Mohammad Ali
Forughi, Tehran: Javidan

Saadi, Sh. M. (1976). Gulistan of Sadi. Translated by Edward Rehatsek.
Tehran: Qum

The Glorious Quran (1999), English Translation by: Mohammad Shakir, Qom:
Ansaryan

Ulich, R. (1962). History of Educational Thought. New York: Harvard
University, D. Van Nostrand Company

Wise, E. J. (1964). The History of Education, New York: Sheed and Ward.

[^1]:


