Volume 4: Surah Baqarah, Verses 282-283
=======================================

O you who believe! when you deal with each other in contracting a debt
for a fixed time, then write it down; and let a scribe write it down
between you with fairness; and the scribe should not refuse to write as
Allah has taught him, so he should write; and let him who owes the debt
dictate, and he should be careful of (his duty to) Allah, his Lord, and
not diminish anything from it; but if he who owes the debt is unsound in
understanding, or weak, or (if) he is not able to dictate himself, let
his guardian dictate with fairness; and call in to witness from among
your men two witnesses; but if there are not two men, then one man and
two women from among those whom you approve of the witnesses, so that if
one of the two errs, the (second) one of the two may remind the other;
and the witnesses should not refuse when they are summoned; and disdain
not of writing it (whether it is) small or large, with its fixed time;
this is more equitable with Allah and assures greater accuracy in
testimony, and the nearest (way) that you may not entertain doubts
(afterwards) ; except when it is ready merchandise which you give and
take among yourselves from hand to hand, then there is no blame on you
in not writing it down; and have witnesses when you trade with one
another; and let no harm be done to the scribe or to the witnesses; and
if you do (it) then surely it will be a transgression in you, and fear
Allah; and Allah teaches you; and Allah knows all things (282). And if
you are on a journey and you do not find a scribe, then (there may be) a
security taken into possession; but if one of you trusts another, then
he who is trusted should deliver his trust, and let him fear Allah, his
Lord; and do not conceal testimony, and whoever conceals it, his heart
is surely sinful; and Allah knows what you do (283).

**COMMENTARY
**
QUR’AN: 0 you who believe! when you deal with each other in contracting
a loan...and Allah knows all things:

"at-Tadayun" is to give a loan to another; “al-imlal” and “al-imla”
both mean ‘to dictate’; “al-bakhs” is to diminish, to do justice;
“as-sa’mah” is to be fed up; to disdain; “al-mudarrah” on the paradigm
of “al-mufa‘ilah” from “ad-darar” (harm) means to harm one another;
“al-fusuq” is transgression, refusal to obey; ,”ar-rihan" has also been
recited as ar-ruhun both are the plurals of ar-rahn (the thing
mortgaged, pawned or deposited as security).

“And let him who owes the debt dictate . . . but if he who owes the
debt is unsound in understanding. . ." The whole phrase “he who owes the
debt” has been repeated here instead of using a pronoun. It was done to
remove any possible misunderstanding, as a pronoun could easily be
mistaken to refer to the “scribe” mentioned in the preceding sentence.

"...or (if) he is not able to dictate himself, then let his guardian
dictate..." The manifest and separate pronoun “huwa”( translated here as
“himself”) has been included in the sentence to show that in this
particular case the debtor and his guardian both have the right to
dictate. In the first two situations, when the debtor is deficient in
understanding or is weak (in body or mind), the guardian has total
authority, and the debtor himself cannot deal in his own affairs. But in
this third situation when the debtor is, for any reason, unable to
dictate himself, then the guardian shall have joint authority to do so.
Therefore, this pronoun has given the following meaning to the phrase:
“what such a debtor himself can do, he should do it ; but what he is
unable to do, his guardian shall do it".

“. . . so that if one of the two errs, the (second) one of the two may
remind the other”: In this sentence a word, hadhar is understood before
"an"; together they literally mean, “lest one of the two errs. . .”; the
words, “one of the two” have been repeated in this sentence. While at
first glance it would appear that the second phrase could be replaced by
a pronoun, the fact is that the two phrases do not have the same
significance. The first phrase (if one of the two errs) refers to either
of the two without pointing to a particular woman; the second phrase
(the one of the two may remind. . .) points particularly to the second
who has not erred. That is why we have added the word (second) in its
translation.

“And fear Allah”; The believers should guard themselves against
disobeying the orders and prohibitions promulgated in this verse. “And
Allah teaches you”; it is an independent sentence, not connected with
the preceding one, “and fear Allah”. The sentence describes the grace of
Allah bestowed on the believers. In this respect it is like the words of
Allah in the verse of inheritance: Allah makes it clear to you lest you
err (4:176). Allah in both these sentences shows that He has bestowed
His bounties upon the believers by teaching them the rules of religion
and by instructing them as to what they were allowed to do and what
not.

Some people have said that the sentence, “and fear Allah, and Allah
teaches you”, were connected to each other. According to them, they show
that there is a relation of cause and effect between the two - when
people fear Allah then Allah teaches them.

Comment: The principle mentioned above is correct in itself, and is
supported by other verses of the Qur’an and by traditions. But this
verse has nothing to do with that principle. The second sentence begins
with “and”; if it had wanted to enunciate that principle, the word “and”
would not have been there; the sentence would have been like this: “and
fear Allah, He will teach you”. Moreover, the said interpretation is not
supported by the context; if we accept it then the end of the verse will
be quite irrelevant to the main topic of the verse.

The above-mentioned reconstruction of the verse gives us another
argument against that interpretation. Had that meaning been correct, the
divine name, Allah, would not have been repeated in “and Allah teaches
you”, a pronoun would have been more appropriate.

In these three consecutive short sentences, the divine name, Allah, has
been repeated three times. It was necessary in the first sentence, “and
fear Allah”; it had to be repeated in “and Allah teaches you”, because
it was an independent sentence; and in the last sentence, “and Allah
knows all things”, the name gives the proof of this statement - He knows
all things because He is Allah.

The two verses contain nearly twenty basic rules concerning loan,
mortgage, evidence, etc. There are numerous traditions about these and
related topics. But the proper place to go into these details are the
books of jurisprudence. Therefore, we shall not quote them here.


