Volume 4: Surah Baqarah, Verses 285-286
=======================================

The Apostle believes in what has been revealed to him from his Lord,
and (so do) the believers: they all believe in Allah and His angels and
His books and His apostles; We make no difference between any of His
apostles. and they say: "We hear and obey; our Lord! Thy forgiveness (do
we crave), and to Thee is (our) march" (285). Allah does not impose upon
any soul a duty but to the extent of its ability; for it is (the benefit
of) what it has earned, and upon it (the evil of) what it has wrought;
"Our Lord! do not punish us if we forget or do a mistake; Our Lord! do
not lay on us a burden as Thou didst lay on those before us; Our Lord!
do not im­pose upon us that which we have not the strength to bear; and
pardon us and forgive us and have mercy on us; Thou art our Guardian, so
help us against the unbelieving people" (286).

**GENERAL COMMENT
**

These are the last verses of this chapter. They summarize the details
given in it, and recapitulate its main objective. As we mentioned at the
beginning, the chapter aimed to show that it was an integral part of the
worship of Allah to believe in all that He sent to His creatures through
His apostles, without making any difference between those apostles. It
is this reality which is described in the first of these verses: "The
Apostle believes . . between any of His apostles".

The chapter then gives many stories of the Israelites: How Allah
bestowed upon them His countless bounties, like the Book, the
prophethood, the kingdom, etc., and how they answered it with
disobedience, rebellion, breach of covenant and even infidelity. It is
these stories that are obliquely hinted at in the remaining part of the
first and the whole of the second verse, where the believers are
reported as saying "We hear and obey", and then they go on seeking the
protection, forgiveness and help of Allah.

Thus, these verses connect the end of the chapter with its beginning.
The epilogue is a mirror of the prologue.

Allah opens this chapter by describing the qualities that are essential
for a God-fearing people, and without which they cannot discharge their
duties towards their Lord. He says that His pious and God-fearing
servants believe in the unseen, keep up prayer, spend out of the
sustenance given to them by Allah, believe in that which was revealed to
the Apostle and to the previous apostles and are sure of the life
hereafter (vide verses 2-5 of this chapter). Allah guides them through
the Qur'an; and then He shows the contrast between them and the infidels
and hypocrites.

Then the talk turns to the affairs of the people of the Book and
especially the Jews. It explains how Allah, in His grace, guided them,
and exalted them with His bounties and favors. And what was their
response to all those favors? They became arrogant, disobeyed the
commandments of Allah, and repaid His bounties with ingratitude; they
stood against Allah and His apostles, bore malice against His angels,
and made differences between one apostle and the other, and one book and
the other. As a result, Allah laid on them heavy burdens, like the order
to kill their own people; and imposed upon them that which they had no
strength to bear, like turning them into apes, and sending lightening
and plague from the sky on them.

After going into all these details, Allah recounts in these two verses
the good attributes of the Apostle and the believers who have followed
him; He shows that their condition is /in clear contrast with that of
the people of the Book. They have responded to the divine bounties and
guidance with submission and obedience; they believe in Allah, His
angels, His books and His apostles, without making any difference
between any of the apostles. And they know their own limitations as
powerless mortals, and recognize the all-pervasive power of Allah.
Although they have unconditionally submitted to the Caller towards the
truth, they confess that they cannot do justice to that Call because of
their inherent weakness and ignorance. They are afraid that they may
transgress the limit by forgetfulness or mistake, or that they may fall
short in their duties of divine worship; they are worried lest a sinful
act puts them in disgrace, as happened with the people of the Book
before them. Therefore, they beseech the All-merciful Lord and pray to
Him not to punish them if they forget or make a mistake, not to lay on
them a burden and not to impose upon them that which they have not the
strength to bear; they entreat Him to pardon them, to forgive their
mistakes and to have mercy on them, and to help them against the
unbelieving people.

This is the true place of these two verses in the scheme of this
chapter; they are a sort of resume of the chapter. This observation
should be enough to further repudiate the claims of the commentators

a) that these verses were connected with the preceding one: "and
whether you manifest what is in your souls or hide it, Allah will call
you to account for it";

b) that this preceding verse imposed a duty upon every soul beyond the
limit of its ability;

c) that the first of these verses, "The Apostle believes . . . and to
Thee is (our) march", describes how the companions submitted to, and
accepted, this imposition of duty beyond the limit of their ability;

d) And that the second of these verses, "Allah does not impose . . .
help us against the unbelieving people", abrogated that verse which
imposed such duty.

Moreover, our explanation is in perfect harmony with the reported
"reason of revelation" of this chapter, that it was the first chapter
revealed at Medina. The Prophet emigrated to Medina, and settled
therein; the Medinite believers, that is, the Helpers (ansar), eagerly
accepted the divine religion, and stood up to help the Apostle of Allah
with their properties and lives; the Emigrant believers (muhajirun)
abandoned their properties and homes, and left their families and
children in the cause of Islam, and came to Medina to remain with the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.). That was indeed the time when Allah
should have praised them for their answering the Call of His Prophet
with acceptance and obedience, and thanked them for their submission.

The last sentence "Thou art our Guardian, so help us against the
unbelieving people" also indicates that this prayer was at a time when
Islam had begun its march forward, and when there was danger of attack
from the unbelievers.

This verse contains wonders of elocution; there is generality followed
by specification, and brevity by amplification; it shows the servants of
Allah the perfect way of submission and servitude; and, in short,
contains all the basic elements of perfection and felicity.

**COMMENTARY
**
QUR'AN: The Apostle believes in what has been revealed to him from his
Lord, and (so do) the believers:

This makes known the belief of the Apostle and the believers. The
Apostle has been mentioned separately as the one who believes in what
has been revealed to him from his Lord; then the believers have been
joined to him in this virtue; it has been done to maintain the dignity
of the Apostle. It is the usual style of the Qur’an: On such occasions,
it first mentions the name of the Apostle separately, and there­after
the believers are joined to him. Look, for example, at following verses:
. . . then Allah sent down His tranquility on His Apostle and on the
believers (48:26) ; . . . on the day on which Allah will not abase the
Prophet and those who believe with him . . . (66:8).

QUR’AN: they all believe in Allah and His angels and His books and His
apostles:

This specifies the generality of the preceding sentence: “What has been
revealed” to the Messenger of Allah demands belief in Allah and
acceptance of the truth of the books and apostles and angels who are
Allah’s honored servants. Whoever believes in what has been revealed to
the Messenger of Allah must believe in all those things, in a suitable
manner.

QUR’AN: We make no difference between any of His apostles:

It is the quotation of the believers’ saying, without using the
introductory verb, “They said”. We have explained in the commentary of
verse 2:127 (And when Ibrahim and Isma’il were raising the foundations
of the House; “Our Lord! accept from us; surely Thou art the Hearing,
the Knowing”) the general reason for this type of quotation, and how it
is one of the most elegant styles of the Qur’an. Apart from that basic
reason of portraying the speakers before the eyes and ears of the
imagination there was in this case one particular reason for omission of
the words ‘They said’: this speech depicts the believers’ state of mind;
it does not describe their verbal declaration. Even if we suppose that
they actually uttered these words, each of them must have done so
individually and in his heart; they never said it jointly and together
by their tongues. It was only their shared faith that announced this
belief, not in words but in their state of minds, which spoke louder
than the words.

This verse quotes two sayings of the believers, one after another, but
with different styles: “We make no difference. . .” is without the words
‘They said’; then the sentence is followed immediately by, “and they
say: ‘We hear and obey . . .’ “ which, as we see, is introduced with,
“they say “. Yet both are the believers’ sayings when they answered the
Call of the Prophet.

The reason for this difference is that the first sentence describes the
state of their minds, while the second was actually uttered by them in
words.

The verse begins by describing the belief of all the believers,
“everyone of them” taken separately. Then it turns to plural verbs and
pronouns (We make no difference . . . ), and it continues up to the end.
What was done in this respect by the people of the Book was done by
their whole of their nations. The Jews made a difference between Musa on
the one hand, and ‘Isa and Muhammad on the other; the Christians made a
difference between Musa and ‘Isa on one hand, and Muhammad on the other.
Thus they became divided into many groups and sects, although Allah had
created them one people. Also, they were chastised and heavy burdens
were imposed on the whole of their groups jointly, not separately. And
the prayer at the end of the verse ‘to be helped against the unbelieving
people’ was, likewise, a collective affair. Therefore, all these things
demanded plural words. In contrast to this, “belief “ is a personal and
individual matter, and it was appropriate to describe it in an
individualistic style and a singular number.

QUR’AN: And they say: “We hear and obey; Our Lord! Thy forgiveness (do
we crave), and to Thee is (our) march":

“We hear and obey” is not information; it is the declaration of their
submission to the divine command. To hear allegorically means to accept
and believe in; to obey is used for complying with order. Together these
two words point to the acceptance of the call through believing with the
heart and doing one’s duty with the body. Thus hearing and obeying refer
to perfect belief.

Their declaration to hear and obey is, thus, fulfillment of the rights
Allah has on His servants; it is the sum total of the duties that Allah
has imposed upon them: to hear and to obey. It is the “worship”
mentioned in the following verses: And I did not create the jinn and the
human beings except that they should worship Me. I do not desire from
them any sustenance and I do not desire that they should feed Me
(51:56-57) ; Did I not enjoin you, 0 children of Adam! that you should
not worship the Satan? Surely, he is you open enemy, and that you should
worship Me; this is the right way (36:60-61).

And Allah has decreed on His Own Self a right for His servants, in
consideration of the above-mentioned duty imposed on them, that is,
forgiveness. It is a thing which nobody can do without - right from the
apostles and the prophets to an ordinary believers. Allah promised them
that He would forgive them if they obeyed and worshipped Him. This
promise was the first thing ordained when the shari ‘ah was given to
Adam: We said: Get down you there from all together; and when there
comes to you a guidance from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, no
fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve (2:38). And it is what
forgiveness means.

The believers said “We hear and obey”; their declaration of faith and
obedience was unconditional, they did what was expected of them about
the rights of their Lord. Then they asked the Lord to bestow upon them
His promised grace, that is, forgiveness. They said: “Thy forgiveness
(do we crave), and to Thee is (our) march.” “al-Maghfirah”, and
al-ghufran, both of which are translated as “forgiveness”, literally
mean “to cover”. When Allah forgives the sin of a servant, the due
punishment is averted from him; in other words, Allah covers and hides
his shortcomings. This grace will be bestowed upon the servant when he
reaches His Lord. That is why they said, soon after praying for
forgiveness, “and to Thee is (our) march.”

QUR’AN: Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent of
its ability; for it is (the benefit of) what it has earned, and upon it
(the evil of) what it has wrought:

“al-Wus‘” is ability and power. Originally, the word was used for
dimension, to show the area or capacity of a place or receptacle; then
the power of man was thought of as a receptacle from which his actions
come forth. A man has the ability to do a certain task; it is as though
the said task is accommodated in his ability. On the other hand, a task
which he cannot do is too great for his power and ability. In this way,
the word ‘dimension’ came to mean power and ability.

As mentioned above, it is the sum total of the rights of Allah on man
that he should hear and obey. Obviously, man can say “I hear” only about
that which he can understand; how can he answer by hearing and accepting
what he cannot understand? Also, he can say “I obey” only about that
which can be performed by his faculties and organs directly or through
some tools. Obedience means that man follows the given order, and his
faculties and organs are actuated to perform accordingly. The question
of obedience does not arise about things that cannot be done; for
example, if one is told to hear by his eyes, or to sit in two rooms at
the same time, or that one should be born from his parents a second
time. No such order can be given by any sane person. When the believers
answer the Call of religion with hearing and obedience, it means that
the Call is about such things that are within their power and ability;
and it is these things which man obeys or disobeys, earning for himself
what will benefit him or harm him. The “earning”, mentioned in this
verse, is the best proof to show that what man earns, he earns through
his ability and power.

The words of Allah “Allah does not impose upon any soul . . .” describe
the divinely established system that Allah does not impose upon His
servants what is beyond their power; for example, He does not tell them
to believe in that which is beyond their understanding; nor does He
ordain for them a duty which they cannot do. This is, also, the custom
of all sane persons. It is a sentence that is neither more nor less than
the believers’ declaration “We hear and obey”; it agrees with it
perfectly.

This sentence, that is, “Allah does not impose upon any soul. . .”, is
in perfect harmony with the preceding and the following sentences. It is
related to the preceding one, as it shows that Allah does not impose any
duty except that which the servants can hear and obey, that is, which is
within their ability and power.

And it is related to the following sentences, as it shows that what the
Apostle and the believers prayed for - that Allah should not punish them
if they forget or do a mistake, and should not lay on them burden as He
laid on past nations, and should not impose upon them anything which
they do not have strength to bear - was not an imposition beyond the
extent of their ability, although such things, if imposed, could cause
hardship. When Allah imposes upon a group that which they have not the
strength to bear, it is not the imposition of a duty; it is the
imposition of a punishment for their transgression and rebellion.

Forgetfulness and committing mistakes, per se, are beyond man’s power;
but, more often than not, it is man himself who paves the way for them.
It is possible to prevent these two (forgetfulness and erring) by
desisting from those things which cause them. It is especially true in
cases where one forgets or commits a mistake because of his wrong
choice.

The same may be said about laying on one a burden like that which was
laid upon previous people. It refers to the cases in which Allah imposed
hard rules in place of easy ones, when those people went against those
easy rules. It was not the unwarrantable imposition of duty beyond one’s
ability; it was brought upon them by those people themselves because of
their wrong choice. And such punishing rules are not bad in law.

QUR’AN: Our Lord! do not punish us if we forget or do a mistake:

They first said, “We hear and obey” which showed their unconditional
surrender and obedience. Then they looked at themselves and became aware
of their intrinsically weak and imperfect being. Also, they remembered
what had happened to previous nations. This prompted them to beseech
their Lord for mercy, and they prayed to Him not to take them to task as
He had done with past people. They sought His protection because Allah
had taught them that there was no power or strength except from Allah,
and that nothing can save from Allah’s displeasure except His mercy.

Why did the Apostle prayed to Allah in these words when he was sinless
and protected from mistake and forgetfulness? He did so because his
sinlessness had come from Allah; he was protected from mistake and
forgetfulness by Allah’s protection. Therefore, it was quite in order
for him to include himself in the group of believers to ask from his
Lord what he knew was a grace of the Lord.

QUR’AN: Our Lord! do not lay on us a burden as Thou didst lay on those
before us:

“al-Isr” (burden) is also interpreted as detaining a thing by force.
This is not very far from the first meaning: If a thing is confined and
detained forcefully it puts a heavy burden on it.

“Those before us” refers to the people of the Book and especially the
Jews, because this chapter describes many stories about them; and
because the seventh chapter, inter alia, refers to the Apostle of Islam
in these words: . . . and removes from them (the people of Torah and
Injil) their burden and the shackles which were upon them . . .
(7:157).

QUR’AN: Our Lord! do not impose upon us that which we have not the
strength to bear:

It does not refer to unbearable rules of the shari ‘ah, because reason
does not allow such rules, and Allah has Himself said that He does not
impose any duty beyond one’s limit of ability; and the words of the
believers “We hear and obey” show that Allah’s commandments are within
their ability to understand and act.

This sentence in fact refers to severe punishments meted out to
previous peoples - the imposition of retaliatory hard rules, sending
upon them severe chastisements or transforming them into animals or
insects.

QUR’AN: And pardon us and forgive us and have mercy on us:

“al-Afw” (is to erase the signs of a thing); "al-maghfirah" is to cover
it ; “ar-rahmah" is mercy. From the linguistic point of view, the three,
sentences proceed from branch to root and from particular to general.
The believers beseech Allah first to erase and eradicate the sign of
their sin (by removing its due punishment from them), then they ask Him
to cover and hide the sin (by letting all concerned forget about it
completely) ; lastly they crave for His mercy that will cover the sin
and make them worthy of of His grace.

The three sentences are in conjunction with the previous ones: “Our
Lord! do not punish us if we forget or do a mistake . . . “ The context
shows that the pardon, forgiveness and mercy asked for are in connection
with such sins which they might commit by forgetfulness or mistake.
Therefore, the forgiveness asked for in this verse is in a particular
context; it is not like the forgiveness asked for in the previous verse,
“Thy forgiveness (do we crave) “, which is an unrestricted and
unconditional forgiveness in consideration of the believers’
unrestricted and unconditional acceptance of the Call.

It is clear from the above that there is no repetition of the prayer of
forgiveness, because both are in separate contexts.

In these prayers the word “Lord” has been repeated four times. This was
done to invoke the divine mercy. The name “Lord” by contrast, hints to
the servitude and total dependence of the beseecher.

QUR’AN: Thou art our Guardian, so help us against the unbelieving
people:

It is an independent sentence and a separate prayer. “al-Mawla" means
‘helper’ - not any helper, but that one who looks after the affairs of
the helped one. The root word is al-wilayah (to govern, to rule, to take
charge of). Allah is the Ruler of the believers; therefore, He is their
Guardian in all their affairs. Allah says: ...and Allah is the Guardian
of the believers (3:68); That is because Allah is the Master of those
who believe, and because the unbelievers have no master for them
(47:11).

This prayer of theirs shows that their only desire, after hearing and
obeying the basic religion, was to spread the true faith and to fight in
the way of Allah to establish the word of truth, so that all the nations
could unite in that cause. Allah says: Say: “This is my way: I invite
you unto Allah; with clear sight (are) I and he who follows me; and
glory be to Allah, and I am not of the polytheists” (12:108). To call to
the faith of monotheism is the way of true religion. It involves one in
fighting, enjoining the good and forbidding the evil, and in all the
methods of propagation of religion. This is done to remove the root of
discord from the human species. The importance attached to this endeavor
may be understood from the verse: He has prescribed for you of the
religion what He enjoined upon Nuh and that which We have revealed unto
you, and that which We enjoined upon Ibrahim and Musa and Isa, that
establish the religion and be not divided therein (42:13).

This prayer of the believers (Thou are our Guardian, so help us...)
proves that the first thing that came into their minds after firmly
deciding to hear and obey, was the general call to invite the whole of
mankind to the religion’ of truth. And Allah knows better.

Wa‘l-hamdu li‘llah (And praise and thank be to Allah).

