Volume 4: Surah Baqarah, Verses 244-252
=======================================

And fight in the way of Allah, and know that Allah is Hearing, Knowing
(244). Who is it that will lend to Allah a goodly loan, so He will
multiply it for him manifold, and Allah holds and extends and to Him you
shall be returned (245). Did you not see the chiefs of the children of
Israel after Musa, when they said to a prophet of theirs: "Raise up for
us a king (that) we may fight in the way of Allah.' He said: "May it not
be that if fighting is ordained for you, you would not fight? " They
said: "And what reason have we that we should not fight in the way of
Allah, and we have indeed been turned out of our homes and our children.
"

But when fighting was ordained for them, they turned back, except a few
of them, and Allah knows the unjust (246). And their prophet said to
them: "Surely Allah has raised Talut to be a king over you. " They said:
"How can he hold kingship over us while we have a greater right to
kingship than he, and he has not been granted an abundance of wealth? "
He said: "Surely Allah has chosen him over you, and He has increased him
abundantly in knowledge and physique, and Allah grants His Kingdom to
whom He pleases, and Allah is Ample-giving, Knowing (247). And their
prophet said to them: "Surely the sign of his kingship is, that there
shall come to You the Ark in which there is tranquility from your Lord
and residue of the relics of what the family of Musa and the family of
Harun have left, the angels bearing it: most surely there is a sign in
this for those who believe " (248). So when Talut departed with the
forces, he said:

"Surely Allah will try you with a stream; whoever then drinks from it,
he is not of me, and whoever does not taste of it, he is surely of me,
except he who takes with his hand as much (of it) as fills his hand,"
but with the exception of a few of them they drank from it. So when he
had crossed it. he and those who believed with him, they said - "We have
today no power against Goliath and his forces. " Those who thought that
they would meet their Lord said: "How often has a small party vanquished
a numerous host by Allah's permission, and Allah is with the patient
ones " (249). And when they went out against Goliath and his forces they
said: "Our Lord, pour down upon us patience, and make out feet firm and
help us against the unbelieving people " (250). So they routed them by
Allah's permission and Dawud slew Goliath, and Allah gave him kingship
and wisdom, and taught him of what He pleased. And were it not for
Allah's repelling some men with others, the earth would certainly be in
a state of disorder: but Allah is Gracious to the creatures (251). These
are the signs of' Allah: We recite them to you with truth: and most
surely you are (one) of' the apostles (252).

**GENERAL COMMENT
**
All these verses were obviously revealed together. The connection
between the obligation of fighting, the exhortation of a goodly loan to
Allah and the moral of the story of Talut, Dawud and Goliath needs no
explanation. The import of the verses is to show how fighting in the way
of Allah strengthens the collective life, what the spirit is by which a
nation goes forward in its worldly and religious life, and what gives it
its real happiness and felicity. Allah declares that jihad is obligatory
for the Muslims, calls them to spend in His way, by contributing in
preparation for war so that their military power increases and they are
ready for their enemies. This spending has been called " lending to
Allah" because it is done in His way. Also, it very forcefully exhorts
the hearers to spend in His way to gain nearness to Him. Then comes the
story of Talut, Dawud and Goliath, so that the believers who are told to
fight should take lessons from it. The moral is that the kingdom and
victory belong to faith and piety, even if its adherents be small in
number: and defeat and destruction is the fare of hypocrisy and sin,
even if its followers be numerous. See how the Israelites lived in
disgrace and servitude as long as they remained inert and idle, and were
too lazy to do anything to im­prove their condition. But when they stood
up to fight in the way of Allah and sought help from the word of truth,
Allah helped them to vanquish their enemy, even though only a few of
them were really truthful. Look at the majority of them turning back
when fighting was prescribed for them, and objecting to the appointment
of Talut, and drinking from the stream, and saying that they had no
strength to fight against Goliath and his armies. In spite of all these
shortcomings Allah made them victorious; they vanquished their enemy by
the permission of Allah; Dawud slew Goliath and kingdom was established
in them. They were given a new life and their power and sovereignty came
back to them. It was not but because of a word which faith and piety
made them utter when they stood before Goliath and his forces: "Our
Lord, pour down upon us patience and make our feet firm and help us
against the unbelieving people." Thus should the believers follow in the
footsteps of the good people of previous nations, because they shall
have the upper hand if they are believers.

**COMMENTARY
**
QUR'AN: And fight in the way of Allah:

It makes fighting obligatory and compulsory. Here and everywhere in the
Qur'an, the order of fighting has the stipulation, "in the way of
Allah". It is to forestall any possible misunderstanding that this
important religious duty was ordained to establish the worldly
domination of the Muslims over other nations and to spread the kingdom
of the Muslim's as many modern Muslim scholars think. The proviso, "in
the way of Allah", shows that this order was given to spread the
domination of religion, by which the people could prosper in both
worlds.

QUR'AN: And know that Allah is Hearing, Knowing:

It is a warning to the believers - they should not utter a single word
against any order given by Allah and His apostle, nor should they
dislike in their hearts any such order as the hypocrites do. They should
not be like the Israelites when they first objected about Talut, saying,
"How can he hold kingship over us . . .", and then said, "We have today
no power against Goliath and his forces", and retreated and turned away
when fighting was prescribed for them, and drank from the stream after
Talut had forbidden them to do so.

QUR'AN: Who is it that will lend to Allah a goodly loan, so that He
will multiply it for him manifold:

The meaning of loan is well-known. Allah has named what is spent in His
way as a loan to Himself, to exhort people to spend, and because it is
done in His way, and also because it will surely be returned to them
manifold.

The style has been changed from the imperative mood of previous verse
(And fight in the way of Allah) to the interrogative here (Who is it
that will lend?) to refresh and enliven the mind of the audience - an
order is always received with a feeling of helplessness, but not so an
invitation and exhortation.

QUR'AN: And Allah holds and extends and to Him you shall be returned:

"al-Qabd" is to hold a thing towards oneself. al-bast is its opposite.
"al-Bast" is a rendering of al-bast - \`Sin' of which has been changed
to 'Suad' because it is joined to \`T' ( b ) which is pronounced with a
full voice, and Suad also has a full voice.

This sentence mentions three attributes of Allah: He holds, He extends
and to Him all are to return. It is to remind the Muslims that whatever
they spend, lending it to Him shall not be in vain, nor should they be
surprised at how it will be increased manifold. Because Allah holds and
extends - He decreases whatever He pleases and increases whatever He
pleases; and they are to return to Him, and then He will repay them the
said loan a goodly repayment.

QUR'AN: Did you not see the chiefs of the children of Israel...in the
way of Allah:

al-Mala' is said to mean a group of people having the same opinion. It
is derived from al-mal' (= to fill), because it fills the eyes by its
greatness and prestige. The request, "Raise up for us a king (that) we
may fight in the way of Allah", implies that the king, Goliath by name,
had subjugated them and treated them so badly that they had lost all
traces of a free life, like their homes and children. It happened after
Allah had saved them from the people of Pharaoh by raising among them
Musa and making him their head, and after the rule of the successors of
Musa had come to an end. Then the hardship increased to such an extent
that their slumbering self-respect was awakened by the shock of it, and
their elders went to a prophet of theirs asking him to raise for them a
king to remove their internal differences and unite their power which
had became ineffective because of disunity, so that they could fight
under his command, in the way of Allah.

QUR'AN: He said: "May it not be that if fighting is ordained for you,
you would not fight?":

The Israelites had asked their prophet to raise for them a king, so
that they could fight under him in the way of Allah. But it was not in
the power of the prophet; it was the prerogative of Allah. That is why
the prophet attributed the appointment and the order of fighting to
Allah. But he did not mention the divine name clearly. In their reply he
questioned them about their possible disobedience, and he knew by divine
revelation that they would surely disobey. Therefore, he did not
men­tion the name of Allah clearly, but only indicated that the
authority is from Him and of Him only. How did he indicate it? By using
the word "written" (lit. translation: "if fighting is written on you")
and writing, in the meaning of ordaining, is done only by Allah.

Although, the prophet knew that they would not obey the command of
Allah, he put this matter in the form of a question, so that the proof
might be completed against them by their protests of sincerity, as their
reply showed.

QUR'AN: They said: 'And what reason have we that we should not fight in
the way of Allah, and we have indeed been turned out of our homes and
our children':

Their dispersal from their homes meant that they could not manage their
affairs as they had been sent away from their ancestral abode. Thus
"turned out of our homes" alludes to their inability to look after their
homes and to benefit from them. It is this meaning that justifies the
use of this verb, "turned out of " in connection with children.

QUR'AN: But when fighting was ordained for them, they turned hack,
except a few of them, and Allah knows the unjust: It is an offshoot of
their prophet's question (May it not be that. . . you would not fight?)
and their reply (And what reason have we that we should not fight ?).
The words, "And Allah knows the unjust ", show that the question of the
prophet was based on divine revelation that they would surely turn away
from fighting.

QUR'AN: And their prophet said to them: "Surely Allah has raised Talut
. . . he has not been granted an abundance of wealth?":

The announcement, "Allah has raised" was a reminder to them that they
were mistaken in asking the prophet to raise a king for them so that
they would fight. The prophet attributed this raising to Allah to teach
them that it was a prerogative of Allah.

The declaration about Talut prompted them to protest. In their eyes,
Talut had two defects, which made him unfit for kingship. The first
"disqualification" was alluded to in their words narrated by Allah: "How
can he hold kingship over us while we have a greater right to kingship
than he". They did not think it necessary to elaborate why they were
more deserving; it means that it was an obvious thing. The fact is that
the house of prophethood and the house of kingship were well-known among
the Israelites - the two houses were highly respected because of these
two graces of Allah. And Talut was from neither. That is why they
objected that they - the people of the house of kingship or both
kingship and prophethood - had a greater right to kingship than Talut;
Allah had put kingship in their family, how could they accept its
transfer to someone else?

This objection was a result of their belief that Allah cannot abrogate
or change any of His orders; they said: the hand of Allah is tied up.
(Their hands be shackled!) Their prophet replied to this objection when
he said: "Surely Allah has chosen him over you. "

The second "disqualification" is described in their words, "and he has
not been granted an abundance of wealth". Talut was a poor man. Their
prophet replied to it by saying: "and He has increased him abundantly in
knowledge and physique".

QUR'AN: He said: "Surely Allah has chosen him over you, and He has
increased him abundantly in knowledge and physique ":

al-Istifa' and al-istisfa' means to choose. Its root is as-safw
(clearness, choice) ; al-bastah is expansion and power. These sentences
are the replies to their objections: -

Objection 1: They had a greater right of kingship than Talut because
they were from the chosen family.

Reply : It was a distinction given to their family by Allah. Now that
Allah has chosen someone else, he has a greater right than they; and now
his family will have precedence over theirs and he has become nobler and
higher in rank than they. The superiority follows the choice of Allah.

Objection 2: "and he has not been granted an abundance of wealth".

Reply: Kingship is establishment of supreme authority over a group of
people. Its only purpose is to unite the people under one will and join
them together by creating a relationship with all of them. Everyone
shall progress on the road of perfection without colliding with one
another. No one shall be given prefer­ence without justice; no one shall
be kept behind without justice. In short, kingship was created so that
the ruler should manage the society in such a way that every member
might reach his deserved perfection. To achieve that object, the king
must have two qualities: (1) Knowledge of all that is good for his
people and all that is bad; (2) Physical strength to implement and
enforce what he thinks is good for the people.

Allah points this out in the words, "and He has increased him
abundantly in knowledge and physique". So far as wealth is concerned, to
count it among the necessities of kingship is foolishness.

Then He concisely put all these arguments in one sentence: "and Allah
grants His Kingdom to whom He pleases". The kingdom belongs to Allah
alone; nobody has any right in it, except what Allah bestows from it on
any one. Even then it really belong to Allah only - see how the word
"kingdom" is qualified here by possessive pronoun "His". When you keep
this reality in view, you will know that Allah has full authority to do
in His kingdom as He pleases and as He wills. Nobody has any right to
say \`why' or \`how'. One cannot ask why Allah did this or that, because
He is the Real cause; nor can one enquire how and by which means He did
it, because Allah is the Perfect cause and He does not need any
supplementary causes. Therefore, the Israelites should not have asked
why He transferred the kingdom from one family to another, or why He
gave it to someone who had neither a big family nor abundant wealth.

It is true that Allah bestows His bounty and grace as He wishes and
upon whom He pleases. Still, it is not done at random or without reason.
When we say, "Allah does what He wishes and gives His kingdom to whom He
pleases" we do not mean that Allah does not have any object in view in
His actions. Nor do we say that He acts haphazardly; that if there
occurs any benefit from it, well and good, and if not, then what does it
matter; after all, the kingdom is His, He may do whatever He pleases.
What we actually mean is this : Allah is the final and real cause of
every creation, with matter and without matter. Benefit and usefulness
also, like all other things, are His creation. In view of this, Allah,
in His actions, cannot be governed by any aim and object, as we are;
when He does a work (and whatever He does is good) or creates a thing
(and whatever He creates is beautiful), His action is beneficial to His
creatures. But He is not subservient to any benefit.

The above explanation serves to resolve the apparent contradiction in
this verse: The authoritative declaration, "Allah grants His kingdom to
whom He pleases", seemingly cannot be reconciled with the reasons given
earlier, "He has increased him abundantly in knowledge and physique".
Had there been any discordance between His absolute power to do as He
pleases, and His actions being full of benefit and reason, the two
arguments could not be advanced side by side, let alone be complementary
to each other.

The last sentence of the verse, "and Allah is Ample-giving, Knowing",
makes it even more clear. "Ample-giving" shows that He cannot be
restricted by anyone or anything in bestowing His bounties or in any
other action. "Knowing" shows that all His actions are done by His true
knowledge which is never wrong. In other words, He does whatever He
pleases, and He never does but what is beneficial.

"Wasi' " (translated here as "Ample-giving") is the active participle
of al-wus'ah and as-sa'ah which is the capacity of a body to accommodate
another body, like the capacity of a water pot to hold water, that of a
box for things packed in it, and that of a house to accommodate its
residents. Then it was borrowed for riches: but not for every wealth and
not in all conditions; it is used for riches when the possibility of
spending and giving is taken into consideration. It is as though the
wealth has the capacity to be spent and given. It is this meaning in
which Allah is called al-wasi, that is, the Possessor of wealth who has
power to give whatever He pleases.

QUR'AN: And their prophet said to them: "Surely the sign of his
kingship is that there shall come to you the Ark in which there s
tranquillity":

"at-Tabut"( translated here as "Ark") means chest. It is on the
paradigm of fa'lut from at-tawb (to return). A chest is given this name
because man returns to it every now and then.

**MEANING OF "AS-SAKINAH"
**
as-Sakinah (tranquillity) is derived from as-sukun which is opposite of
movement. as-sakinah is used for tranquillity of the heart. When a man
is of stable mind and is not perturbed in taking a firm decision, he is
said to have as-sakinah. It is a virtue of a wise man who has a strong
will. Allah has made it a characteristic of al-iman (faith) in its
higher degree, and has counted it as one of His most valuable gifts.

Man, according to his nature, bases his action on reasoning. He
arranges logical premises, analyses the benefits of a particular action,
and sees how it will effect the bliss of his life and bring the good of
the society as a whole. Then he decides what to do and what not to do.

When man goes forward on the path of nature in the process of his
reasoning, and his only aim is to gain real benefit and happiness in
life, then his thinking is accompanied by peace of mind and tranquility
of heart without any nervousness and perturbation. On the other hand, if
he clings in his life to the world and follows his low desires, he
becomes confused, and his thought and will-power are distorted by his
unhealthy vision. As a result, he goes astray from the path of truth: or
remains undecided, confused and irresolute in his decisions and cannot
perform any difficult and dangerous task which requires strong
will-power and firm feet.

A believing man, because of his belief in Allah. relies on a firm
support and an unshaken pillar of strength. He bases his life on true
knowledge where doubt and confusion cannot intrude: sets forth in his
actions in the light of divine commandments which he is sure are the
most perfect guide. He knows that his affairs are not in his own hands:
he is, therefore, not afraid of any possible loss: and if any harm comes
to him, he is not sorry about it. He is not puzzled when he has to
distinguish good from evil.

But a disbeliever has no guardian to look after his affairs. His good
and evil are in his own hands. He wanders in the darkness of confusion,
undecidedness and uncertainty, because his thoughts are permeated by low
desires, specters of unreality, and unhealthy feelings.

Allah says:

. . .and Allah is the Guardian of the believers (3:68).

That is because Allah is the Guardian of those who believe, and because
the unbelievers have no guardian for them (47:11).

Allah is the Guardian of those who believe; He brings them out of
darkness into the light; and (as to) those who dis­believe, their
guardians are the Satans who take them out of the light into the
darkness (2:257).

Surely We have made the Satans to be the guardians of those who do not
believe (7:27).

It is only the Satan that frightens his friends . . . (3:175).

The Satan threatens you with poverty and enjoins you to be niggardly,
and Allah promises you forgiveness from Himself and abundance . . .
(2:268).

...and whoever takes the Satan for a guardian rather than Allah, he
indeed shall suffer a manifest lost. He gives them promises and excites
vain desires in them; and the Satan does not promise them aught but (in)
deception . . . (it is) a promise of Allah, true (indeed) ; and who is
truer of word than Allah? (4:119-122).

Now surely the friends of Allah - they shall have no fear nor shall
they grieve (10:62).

These verses, as you see, put all fear, grief, perturbation and
deception on the side of disbelief; and the opposite virtues on the side
of faith.

Even more clear is the verse:

Is he who was dead then We raised him to life and made for him a light
by which he walks among the people, like him whose likeness is that of
one in utter darkness whence he cannot come forth? (6:122).

It shows that the disbeliever gropes about awkwardly in his journey of
life because he has fallen in utter darkness and cannot see any thing.
But the believer has a divine light by which he sees his path and knows
what is good for him and what is bad. It is because Allah has bestowed
upon him a fresh and new life in addition to this material life which he
shares with the disbelievers. That new life accompanies this light which
illuminates its path. Allah says: 0 you who believe! Fear Allah and
believe in His Apostle: He will give you two portions of His mercy, and
make for you a light with which you will walk, and forgive you . . .
(57:28).

Again He says: You shall not find a people who believe in Allah and the
latter day befriending those who act in opposition to Allah and His
Apostle, even though they were their (own) fathers, or their sons, or
their brothers, or their kinsfolk; these are they into whose hearts He
has written (impressed) faith, and whom He has strengthened with a
spirit from Him (58:22).

It shows that this new life is from a spirit from Allah, and is
accompanied by a firm faith deeply impressed into their hearts. These
believers are strengthened by a spirit from Allah, which confirms the
faith into their hearts, gives a new life to their bodies and creates a
brilliant light to lead them forward.

It is easy to see that the import of this verse is similar to that of
verse 4 of chap. 48: He it is who sent down tranquility into the hearts
of the believers that they might have more of faith added to their
faith - and Allah's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and
Allah is Knowing, Wise.

"Tranquility" in this verse corresponds with the "spirit" in the
previous one; and "having more of faith added to their faith" of this
one corresponds with "impressing the faith into their hearts" of the
previous one. This conformity becomes more obvious when we look at the
sentence, "and Allah's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth",
because the Qur'an often uses the term "hosts" for the angels and the
spirit.

Similar in the meaning are the verses: . . . then Allah sent down His
tranquility on His Apostle and on the believers, and made them keep the
word of guarding (against evil), and they were entitled to it and worthy
of it (48:26) ; and So Allah sent down His tranquility upon him and
strengthened him with hosts which you did not see . . . (9:40).

From the above discussion, it may be inferred that as-sakinah is a
divine spirit, or accompanies a divine spirit, by divine command; it
creates tranquility in heart, firmness of purpose and peace of mind.
This does not involve us in far-fetched interpretations which would
remove the word from its real meaning. And the traditions on this
subject should be interpreted in this light.

QUR'AN: And residue of the relics of what the family of Musa and the
family of Harun have left, the angels bearing it...:

"al-Al" of a man means those of his family who are most closely related
to him; and, when used without any condition, it includes also the man
himself. Therefore, the phrase here means Musa, Harun and their most
closely related family-members. "The angels bearing it" shows the state
of the Ark. The words of Allah, "most surely there is a sign in this for
those who be­lieve", like the words at the beginning of the verse, prove
that they had asked their prophet for a proof of the truth of what he
had told them, "Surely Allah has raised Talut to be a king over you. "

QUR'AN: So when Talut departed with the forces . . . they drank from
it:

"al-Fasl" here means to depart from a place; the same is the meaning of
the word in 12:94, "And when the caravan had departed." Sometimes it
means "to cut", that is, to separate two things, as Allah says: And He
is the best of separators (between truth and falsehood) (6:57). Thus,
the verb is used sometimes transitively and at other times
intransitively.

The word "al-jund" signifies a dense concentration of something. The
army is called al-jund, because people are densely concentrated in it.
In this verse, the word is used in plural, and it shows that their
number was very great - and this was after the people had "turned back
except a few of them" (2:246).

The whole talk is a comment on the condition of the Israelites and how
they "fulfilled" the covenant made with Allah. All together they pleaded
that a king be raised for them, and made a very strong covenant to fight
under him, and they were so numerous that when they all turned back
except a few of them, those few were "forces"; and those forces also
were of no avail because they drank from the stream; thus, what was
left, was a residue of the residue, and among them were also those who
had taken a handful of water, and as a result were overcome by cowardice
and hypocrisy. And then Allah declares how a handful of believers, who
were forbearing in the way of Allah, were given victory over the huge
armies of Goliath.

"al-Ibtila' is to test; "al-nahar " is the place in which a stream
flows; "al-ightiraf " and al-gharf is to raise a thing in the hand and
get it, for example, raising water in the hand to drink it.

The position of the exceptional clause in this verse requires special
attention: Allah will try you with a stream; whoever then drinks from
it, he is not of me, and whoever does not taste of it, he is surely of
me, except he who takes with his hand as much (of it) as fills the hand.
It would appear at the first glance that the words, "except he who takes
with his hand . . ." should have come after the sentence, "whoever then
drinks from it, he is not of me". But the fact is that this is not
related at all with those who would drink from the stream. The Qur'an
mentions that those who would drink were not from Talut, and that is
that. Then it changes the word "drink" to "taste" and says, "and
who­ever does not taste of it, he is surely of me". Only then comes the
exceptional clause. Had this clause been put after the first sentence,
"whoever then drinks from it, he is not of me", it would have signified
that he who took only a handful of water was of Talut. This in its turn
would have meant that the whole army from the beginning was of Talut,
and then those who drank from the stream were cut off from him. But the
present sequence, in which two categories have been mentioned - one of
those who would drink and the other of those who would not drink - shows
that the real position of the soldiers of the army was at that time
undecided and unknown. It was only after the test of the stream that the
reality was to be known. Those who would drink from it would be known to
be not of Talut; and those who would not even taste of it would be known
to be of Talut. After these two separate sentences comes the exceptional
clause, which removes those who would take a handful of water from the
first group - but it does not put them in the second one. If there were
only the first sentence, the exceptional clause would have given the
meaning that by taking a handful of water one would not be cut off from
Talut, that is, would remain of him. But now that two separate
categories have expressly been mentioned, removal from one group does
not automatically mean inclusion in the other.

In short, the position of the exceptional clause shows the exist­ence
of three groups: those who were not of Talut, those who were of him, and
the takers of handful of water. After crossing the stream, two later
groups remained with Talut. That is why there appeared so much
difference in their states; one group was forbearing, the other was
restless ; one had full confidence in Allah, the other was perturbed and
troubled.

QUR'AN: So when he had crossed it . . . Allah is with the patient
ones:

"al-Fi'ah" means a group of people. A glance at the verses is
sufficient to show that those who said, "We have today no power against
Goliath and his forces", were those who had taken a handful of water;
and those who replied them were those who had not tasted of it. "Those
who thought that they would meet their Lord" : The "thought" here means
"certainty ", that is, "those who were sure . . .". Also, it may be an
allegorical style to show that in their humility they did not believe
themselves worthy of meeting their Lord. They did not say, "It is
possible for a small party to vanquish a numerous host." Instead they
said, "How often has a small party vanquished . . .". Thus they put
forward a fact as their argument (instead of a theoretical possibility)
to make the reply more convincing.

QUR'AN: And when they went out . . . against the unbelieving people:

"al-Buruz" is to appear. From it is derived "al-baraz" which means to
appear or set forth for battle. "al-Ifragh" means to pour a liquid
material in a mould. In this invocation, they beg Allah to pour down
upon them patience according to their capacity. It is a very fine
alle­gory. "Make our feet firm" is another allegorical expression which
signifies determination, steadiness and firmness in front of the enemy,
so that they do not flee from him.

QUR'AN: So they put them to flight . . . taught him of what He
pleased:

"al-Hazm" means to repel, to drive back.

QUR'AN: And were it not for Allah's repelling some men with others, the
earth would certainly be in a state of disorder; but Allah is Gracious
to the creatures:

It is obvious that the disorder of the earth means the disorder among
those who are on the earth, that is, the disorder in human society. If
society's disorder brings in its wake disorder on the earth's surface,
it would also have to be included in the meaning of this verse, not
because of itself but because of its being a result of society's
disorder.

This verse hints at a philosophical reality, which is as follows:

The felicity and good of the human species is incomplete if there is no
society and no mutual assistance. This factor depends on unity, to a
certain degree, in society, so that various individuals may join
together to form a single group. The group together becomes a single
unit; metaphorically speaking, it becomes as though it has a single body
and a single soul. It acts and reacts like a single individual. Social
unity, and the place in which it occurs, that is, the assembly of human
individuals, is just like unity in creation, and the place in which it
occurs, that is, the universe. We know that unity in this system of
creation results from the action and reaction occurring in the
components of the universe. The various creative causes struggle with
each other, repel, or are repelled by opposing forces, and it is as a
result of this constant action and reaction that various parts of this
system remain connected with each other. Otherwise, the universe would
have ceased to exist.

Likewise, the system of human society is based on action and reaction,
on repulsion and overpowering; otherwise the various members of society
could not remain bound with each other, and society would have ceased to
exist; in short the felicity of the species would have vanished. If we
suppose that there is no repelling each other, in this meaning, (i.e.,
overpowering others and making them obey the victor's will), every
individual member will do what he thinks fit, even if it goes against
the interest of the other members (whether those interests are lawful is
not our concern at this juncture); and those other members will have no
means to prevent him from that course of action. Thus the unity of the
members will cease to exist and society will be finished. We have
described this subject fully under verse 2:213; where it was explained
that the basic factor upon which society is founded is the human
instinct of subjugating others for one's own benefit; and mutual
assistance and civilization is a side product of this instinct, it is a
secondary cause.

This repulsion and overpowering is an overwhelming factor in human
society. Man tries to make others do what he wants, and to repel them
from what he does not like. It is seen in war as well as in peace, in
comfort as well as in discomfort, in ease as well as in hardship. Man
does it instinctively; he becomes conscious of it only when someone
opposes his will, and then he begins the process of the said repulsion
as he thinks necessary. That repulsion has degrees of strength and
weakness. War is one of those degrees.

This natural instinct is seen in action when a believer repulses his
oppressor in defense of his lawful rights; and it is also seen when
someone uses it to protect his unlawful gains. Nature bestows its
bounties on the believers and the unbelievers alike. It is not that a
believer has a nature separate from that of the unbeliever. If this
trait of repelling and overpowering were not present in human nature, no
body would have defended anything, whether it be a lawful right or an
unlawful gain.

It is this natural trait from which man gains so many benefits - first,
society is founded on it, then he makes others follow his own will, and
through it he keeps what he has gained, lawfully or otherwise, and it is
through it that he tries to get back what has been taken from him
unjustly: and lastly it is through this trait that he makes the truth
live after it has died, and tries to keep society on the path of eternal
bliss. In short, it is a natural factor from which man derives many more
benefits than harm.

"Perhaps" it is these things which are referred to in this sentence:
And were it not for Allah's repelling some men with others, the earth
would certainly be in a state of disorder. The next sentence supports
this interpretation: And Allah is Gracious to the creatures.

There are some interpretations which are not so appropriate: Some
commentators have said: The repulsion mentioned here means the repelling
of the unbelievers by the believers, as the context shows. Also, another
verse may be quoted in its support: And had there not been Allah's
repelling some people by others, certainly there would have been pulled
down cloisters and churches and synagogues and mosques in which Allah's
name is much remembered (22:40).

Comment : The meaning in itself is correct as far as it goes; but it is
not the whole meaning. What the verse means by the good of the earth, is
a comprehensive and continuous good which keeps society alive; not any
particular good which appears for a short time and then disappears, like
in the story of Talut and in some other events.

Others have said: This verse refers to the fact that Allah saves the
sinner from perdition and destruction, because of the righteous one.
Many traditions from both Sunni and Shiite chains of narrators mention
this fact : A tradition of Jabir is recorded in Majma'u 'l-bayan and
ad-Durru 'l-manthur, that he said "The Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said:
\`Verily Allah, because of the good of a Muslim man, makes good his
child and the child of his child, and the people of his house, and of
the houses around it; and they remain in the protection of Allah so long
as he remains in them."'

Another tradition, in al-Kafi and at-Tafsir of al-'Ayyashi, quotes
as-Sadiq (a.s.) as saying: "Verily Allah, repels (the mis­fortune) from
that of our Shi \`ahs who does not pray, because of the one who prays,
and if they all unite on neglecting the prayer, all of them would
perish. And verily, Allah repels from that of our Shi'ahs who does not
pay zakat, because of the one who pays it, and if they all unite on its
non-payment, all would perish. And verily, Allah repels from that of our
Shi'ahs who does not perform hajj, because of the one who performs it,
and if they all unite on neglecting the hajj, all would perish."

Comment : The two verses mentioned earlier obviously do not fit the
meaning of these two traditions; although it may be said that these
traditions give examples as to how Allah repels some people by some
others.

Someone has said: The verse means that Allah repels the oppressors with
other oppressors.

Comment : Its absurdity is to obvious.

QUR'AN: These are the signs . . . you are (one) of the apostles:

This verse is a sort of epilogue to conclude the story. Also the last
sentence, "and most surely you are (one) of the apostles", creates a
clear connection with the next verse.

**TRADITIONS
**
'Abdu'r-Razzaq and Ibn Jarir have narrated from Zayd ibn Aslam that he
said: "When the verse was revealed: Who is it that will lend to Allah a
goodly loan, so He will multiply it..., Abu 'a-Dardah came to the
Prophet and said: 'O Prophet of Allah! Do I not see our Lord asking a
loan from us from the same which He has given us for ourselves?! And
verily I have two plots of lands, one in the higher region, and the
other in the lower one; and verily I dedicate the better one as sadaqah
(alms).' And the Prophet used to say: 'How many pampered clusters of
dates Abu 'a-Dardah has got in the Garden!"' (ad-Durru 'l-manthur)

The author says: This tradition has been narrated through numerous
chains.

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "When the verse was revealed: Whoever brings good
deed, he shall have better than it (27:89), the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) said: 'O Allah! Increase for me.' So, Allah sent down the
verse: Whoever brings a good dead, he shall have ten like it (6:160).
The Messenger of Allah (again) said: 'O Allah! Increase for me.' Then
Allah revealed, Who is it that will lend to Allah a goodly loan, so He
will multiply it for him manifold. Thereupon, the Messenger of Allah
knew that "many" from Allah cannot be counted and has no limit.
(al-Ma'ani)

The author says: at-Tabarsi in Majma'u 'l-bayan and al-'Ayyashi in his
at-Tafsir have narrated a similar tradition. And a tradition nearly like
it has been narrated from Sunni chains also.

The words of the Imam, "Thereupon, the Messenger of Allah knew": The
end of the verse hints at it, "and Allah holds and extends", because no
limit can be put on the bounty of Allah; He has said: And the bounty of
your Lord is not confined (17:20).

A tradition of Abu 'l-Hasan (a.s.) recorded in at-Tafsir of al-'Ayyashi
says that this verse is about the gift for the Imam.

The author says: A similar tradition is narrated from as-Sadiq (a.s.)
in al-Kafi, it gives an example of a general rule.

Majma'u 'l-bayan says about the words of Allah, "when they said to a
prophet of theirs" that the prophet was Ushmu'il who is Isma'il in
Arabic.

The author says: Sunni traditions also confirm it. And Ushmu'il is
Samuel of the Bible.

al-Qummi narrated from his father from an-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya
al-Halabi from Harun ibn Kharijah from Abu Ja'far (as.) saying: "Verily,
the Israelites, after the death of Musa, indulged in sins, and changed
the religion of God, and acted arrogantly against the commandments of
God; and there was a prophet among them, who ordered them (to do good)
and forbade them (evil), but they did not obey him. (And it is narrated
that he was the prophet, Armiah1 - may the peace of Allah be upon our
prophet and him!) Thereupon, Allah gave Goliath mastery over them; and
he was a Coptic.2 He humiliated them, and killed their men, and turned
them out of their homes and their properties, and kept their women as
slave girls. Therefore, they resorted to their prophet and said:

'Ask Allah to raise up for us a king, so that we may fight in the way
of Allah. And there was the prophethood in one house of the children of
Israel and kingship and rulership in another house. And Allah had not
kept the prophethood and kingship in one house; that is why they asked
their prophet to 'raise for us a king, so that we may fight in the way
of Allah.' Thereupon their prophet said to them: 'May it not be that if
fighting is ordained for you, you would not fight?' They said: 'And what
reasons have we that we should not fight in the way of Allah, and we
have indeed been turned out of our homes and our children.' And it
happened as Allah said: But when fighting was ordained for them, they
turned back, except a few of them; and Allah knows the unjust. And their
prophet said to them: \`Surely Allah has raised Talut to be a king over
you.

' Then they were enraged by this (appointment), and said: \`How can he
hold kingship over us, while we have a greater right to kingship then he
and he has not been granted an abundance of wealth?' And the prophethood
was in the house of Lawi3, and the kingship in the house of Yusuf; and
Talut was from the house of Benyamin4 , the full brother of Yusuf, and
was, thus, from neither the house of prophethood nor from that of
kingship. Then their prophet said to them: \`Surely, Allah has chosen
him over you, and He has increased him abundantly in knowledge and
physique, and Allah grants His Kingdom to whom He pleases, and Allah is
Ample-giving, Knowing. ' And Talut was the greatest of them in physique,
the most powerful and knowledgeable of them all, but he was a poor man.
So, they vilified him because of his poverty, and said that he had not
been given an abundance of wealth. Thereupon, their prophet said to
them: \`Surely the sign of his kingship is that there shall come to you
the Ark in which there is tranquility from your Lord and residue of the
relics of what the family of Musa and the family of Harun have left, the
angels bearing it.' And it was the chest which was sent by Allah and
Musa's mother put him in it and threw it in the river; and it was among
the Israelites and they sought blessings through it. When Musa was about
to die, he put inside it in the tablets, and his coat of mail and
whatever signs of prophethood he had, and gave it in trust to his
successor, Yusha'5 And the Ark remained in them until they made slight
of it, and the children played with it in the streets. Thus, the
Israelites remained with honor and dignity as long as the Ark was with
them, but when they committed sins and profaned the Ark, Allah took it
away from them. When they asked their prophet, Allah raised Talut as
king over them, and he let them in the fight then Allah returned the Ark
to them, as he said: 'Surely the sign of his kingship is that there
shall come to you the Ark in which their is tranquility from your Lord
and residue of the relics of what the family of Musa and the family of
Harun have left, the angels bearing it.' And he (Abu Ja'far) said: "The
residue is the children of the prophets." (at-Tafsir, al-Qummi)

The author says: The sentence, "And it is narrated that he was the
prophet, Armiah" is another tradition, parenthetically inserted in this
trandition.6

"And it happened as Allah said": It means that a majority of them
turned back and only a small minority of them obeyed the order to fight.
And some traditions say that this minority was sixty thousand souls. It
has been narrated by al-Qummi in his at-Tafsir al-Qummi narrated from
his father from al-Husayn ibn Khalid from ar-Rida, a.s.) and by
al-\`Ayyashi in his at-Tafsir from al-Baqir (a.s.).

"And the prophethood was in the house of Lawi and the kingship in the
house of Yusuf." Some people say that the kingship was in the house of
Yahudha.7 But there is an objection on it : There was no king among the
Israelites before Talut, Dawud and Sulayman. So how can it be said that
"before Talut" kingship was in the house of Judah? This objection is
strengthened by the traditions of the Imams of Ahlu 'l-bayt that the
kingship was in the house of Yusuf, because the kingship of Yusuf is
accepted by all.

"The residue is the children of the Prophets": This sentence is a
conjecture of the narrator. The Imam explained the words, "the family of
Musa and the family of Harun" with the words. "the children of the
prophets" : and the narrator fancied that it was the explanation of the
word, "residue". And this view is supported by the tradition recorded in
the at-Tafsir of al-\`Ayyashi that as-Sadiq (a.s.) was asked about the
words of Allah, "and residue of the relics of what the family of Musa
and the family of Harun have left, the angels bearing it", and he
replied: "The children of the prophets."

Muhammad ibn Yahya narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad from Muhammad ibn
Khalid and al-Husayn ibn Said from an­Nasr ibn Suwayd from Yahya
al-Halabi from Harun ibn Kharijah from Abu Basir from Abu Ja'far (a.s.)
saying in a tradition, inter alia: "And Allah reports the words of Talut
: 'Surely Allah will try you with a stream; whoever then drinks from it,
lie is not of me, and whoever does not taste of it, he is surely of me.'
But all of them drank from it, except three hundred and thirteen men,
among them were those who took a handful of water as well as those who
did not drink at all. When they went out against Goliath, those who had
taken handful of water said, 'We have today no power against Goliath and
his forces'; and those who had not taken it said, 'low often has a small
party vanquished a numerous host by Allah's permission, and Allah is
with the patient ones.' " (al-Kafi)

The author says: That there remained with Talut only three hundred and
thirteen men (equal in number to the Muslim "army" in the battle of
Badr) is mentioned in numerous traditions from Shi'ah and Sunni chains.
The details that those who said: "We have today no power . . ." were
those who had taken a handful of water, and those who said, "Flow often
a small party...were those who had not tasted it at all, may be inferred
from the position of the exceptional clause in the verse, as we have
already explained.

al-Kulayni narrated through his chains from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from Fadalah ibn Ayyub from Yahya al-Halabi from
'Abdullah ibn Sulayman from Abu Ja'far (a.s.) who said about the words
of Allah, surely the sign of his kingdom . . . the angels bearing it:
"They bore it in the shape of a cow." (al-Kafi)

It will have been noted that we have quoted the complete chain of
narrators of this tradition, although generally we do not do so in this
book. We omit the chains where the traditions are in conformity with the
Qur'an, because then there is no need to mention the chains of
narrators. But where the tradition mentions a thing which is not in the
Qur'an, and which cannot be inferred from it, then it is necessary to
quote the complete chain. Still, we write in this book only those
traditions which are correct according to the chains of the narrators,
or are supported by the context or other associations.

al-'Ayyashi writes in his at-Tafsir a tradition from Muhammad al-Halabi
that as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "Dawud had four brothers; and their father
was an old-aged man; and Dawud had remained behind to look after the
sheep of his father. Talut departed with his forces. Dawud's father
called him (and he was the youngest) and said: 'O my son! Take to your
brothers this (food) which we have prepared for them, so that they may
get strength to overcome their enemy.' And he (Dawud) was short of
stature, dark, with very little hair, but pure of heart. So, he went
away, and (by that time) the two forces had reached near to each
other."

At this juncture, another tradition of Abu Basir says that he heard the
Imam saying: "Then Dawud passed by a stone, and it said: 'O Dawud! Take
me and kill Goliath with me, because, verily, I have been created to
kill him.' So he took it and put it in his bag in which he kept the
stones for his sling which he used in the herding of his sheep. On
entering the army camp, he heard them greatly magnifying the affair of
Goliath. So he said to them: 'Why are you so overwhelmed by his affair?
By Allah! If I see him I will kill him.' Thereupon, they started talking
with each other about it till he was brought before Talut. Talut asked
him \`O young man! How much strength do you have? And what experience
have you of yourself?' Dawud said: \`It happens that if a lion attacks a
goat of my herd and catches it; then I overtake him, catch his head,
open his jaws and rescue the goat from his mouth.' (Hearing this) Talut
said: \`Bring me a full-size coat of mail.' It was brought unto him and
he put it in Dawud's neck, and lo! His body filled it completely.
Thereupon, Talut and those Israelites who were present there were
awe-struck by him; and Talut said: 'By Allah! Most probably Allah will
kill him (Goliath) by him.'

"When the morning came and people gathered around Talut, and the people
(of the two forces) stood against each other, Dawud said: \`Show me
Goliath.' When he saw him, he took the stone, and putting it in his
sling, threw it towards him, and it hit him between his eyes, reaching
to his brain; and (Goliath) fell down from his stead; and people cried:
'Dawud has killed Goliath.' Then the people made him their king until
nobody was heard talking about Talut. And the Israelites gathered around
Dawud; and Allah sent down Zabur to him, and taught him the handicraft
of iron, making it soft for him; and ordered the mountains and the birds
to join him in glorifying God." The Imam said: "And nobody was given a
voice like him. Thereupon Dawud lived among the Israelites, hidden from
them; and he was given strength to worship (God ). "

The author says: The Shi'ah and Sunni traditions unanimously say that
Dawud killed Goliath by a sling.

'Ali (a.s.) said: "The tranquility which was in the Ark, was a pleasant
breeze from the Garden; it had a face like that of a human being."
(Majma'u 'l-bayan)

The author says: This meaning has been narrated in ad­Durru
'l-manthur - from Sufyan ibn 'Uyaynah and Ibn Jarir, through the chain
of Salman ibn Kuhayl from \`All (a.s.); - and from \`Abdu 'r-Razzaq and
Abu 'Ubayd and \`Abd ibn Hamid and Ibn Jarir and Ibn al-Mundhir and Ibn
Abi Hatim and al-Hakim (and he has said that the tradition is
"correct"), and Ibn \`Asakir and al-Bayhaqi (in his ad-Dala'il ),
through the chain of Abu al-Ahwas from \`Ali (a.s.).

al-Qummi narrated from his father from 'Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Khalid
from ar-Rida (a.s.) saying: "The tranquility is a breeze from the
Garden, it has a face like that of a human being." (at-Tafsir)

The author says: The same meaning has been narrated by as-Sadiq (as.)
in Ma'ani 'l-akhbar and by al-'Ayyashi in his at-Tafsir from ar-Rida
(a.s.).

These traditions explaining the meaning of as-sakinah (tranquility) are
not mutawatir; yet, if they are accepted as correct, they may be
interpreted in the following way, so as to fit the meaning of the verse
of the Qur'an:­

"The tranquility has a face like that of a human being." It means that
it is one of the stages of spiritual perfection. At that stage, the soul
remains tranquil and at peace with the com­mands and decrees of Allah.
Such expressions, explaining a reality in an allegorical way, are found
in many traditions of the Imams'. According to this interpretation,
tranquility would mean the spirit of faith, and that is the meaning we
have given to it earlier. And it is in this light that the following
tradition of Abu 'l-Hasan (a.s.), mentioned in Ma'ani 'l-akhbar, should
be seen and interpreted: "(Tranquility) is the spirit of God, which
speaks; when they differed among themselves on any matter, it spoke up
and informed them (of truth). . ." Obviously, it means that it is the
spirit of faith and it guides the believer to the truth about which the
people differ.

**FOOTNOTES:
**


1. Jeremiah, in the Bible.

2. Goliath was a Philistine. The area had political connection with
Egypt. Perhaps it is in this sense that he has been called a Coptic.

3. Levi, in the Bible.

4. Benjamin, in the Bible. 3. Joshua, in the Bible.

5. Joshua in the Bible

6. As mentioned in a previous tradition, the prophet was Samuel, and
not Jeremiah

7. Judah in the Bible

