Volume 4: Surah Baqarah, Verses 253-254
=======================================

These apostles, We have made some of them to excel others; among them
are some to whom Allah spoke, and some of them He exalted by degree (of
rank); and We gave clear (evidence) to Isa, son of Maryam, and
strengthened him with the holy spirit. And if Allah had pleased, those
after them would not have fought one with another after clear arguments
had come to them; but they differed; so there were some of them who
believed and others who denied; and if Allah had so pleased they would
not have fought one with another, but Allah does what He intends (253).
0 You who believe! Spend out of what We have given you, before the day
comes in which there is no bargaining, neither any friendship nor
intercession; and the unbelievers - they are unjust (254).

**GENERAL COMMENT
**
These two verses do not differ much in context from the preceding
verses which ordained fighting and spending in the way of Allah. Then
came the story of Talut, in this context, so that the believers might
learn important lessons from it, and that story ended on the words, "and
most surely you are one of the apostles" which are immediately followed
by the opening sen­tence of this verse, "These apostles, We have made
some of them to excel the others." Thereafter, it describes why those
who came after those apostles fought one with another. (In the story of
Talut also, there was a restrictive phrase, "after Musa" to describe
"the chiefs of the children of Israel".) Then it reverts to the
exhortation of spending in the way of Allah before the final day
comes.

All these similarities in context strongly support the view that these
two verses are connected with the previous ones, and that all of them
were sent down together.

The verse purports to remove a common misunderstanding, which is as
follows:­

The apostleship, especially when it was accompanied by clear evidence,
that is, arguments and miracles to prove its truth, should have ended
the scourge of fighting. It could have happened in one of the two ways:
(1) When Allah sent the apostles and gave them clear signs for the
specific purpose of guiding people to their bliss in both worlds, it
would have been proper if He had also prevented them from fighting among
themselves and united them all in the truth. So, why is there so much
fighting going on among the followers of those apostles? This objection
becomes all the more telling after the advent of Islam which counts
unity as one of the pillars of its shari 'ah and the basis of its laws.
(2) The sending of the apostles and the giving to them of the clear
signs was done for the specific purpose of creating faith in peoples'
hearts. Belief and faith is a spiritual characteristic, which cannot be
created by force and coercion. Then what the use of fighting once the
prophets and the apostles had been sent.

We have explained this objection together with its reply in the
commentary of the verses of fighting.

In this verse, Allah gives the following reply: The fighting among the
followers of the apostles occurred because the said followers differed
among themselves. Had they not differed, there would not have been any
fighting among them. The cause of the fighting was, therefore, their
difference. It is true that if Allah so wished, there would not have
occurred any difference; and thus there would not have been any
fighting. Alternatively, He could have disconnected the cause, that is,
the difference, from its effect, that is, fighting; so that even if
there was difference, there would not have occurred any fighting. But
Allah does what He wishes; and He has decreed that the effect will
follow its cause; also, that the people will have freedom of choice, and
that there will not be any compulsion for them to follow a certain
course.

And that is why they differed, and were not prevented from it, and that
is why the said difference caused the fighting.

**COMMENTARY
**
QUR'AN: These apostles, We have made some of them to excel the
others:

It demonstrates the greatness of the apostles and the grandeur of their
status. That is why the demonstrative pronoun "tilka" (those) has been
used, which is meant to point to a distant object. The verse shows the
excellence given by Allah to some of them over others - some of them
have been given more excellence than the others. But all of them are
great, as the apostleship in itself is an excellence, which all of them
share. There is a difference among the apostles, of their grades and
ranks; and there is a difference among their followers, as the verse
describes. But the two types of differences have nothing in common: The
difference among the apostles is only in their ranks and grades, but
they all are one in the basic excellence of apostleship; and the
conflict of the people of the apostles is the one which is found between
belief and disbelief, between affirmation and negation. It goes without
saying that the two differences are quite separate from each other. And
that is why Allah has used separate words for each. The difference in
the rank and grade of the apostles has been named excellence, and it has
been attributed to Allah, "We have made some of them to excel others".
The conflict of the followers of the apostles has been called a
difference, and it has been attributed to the men themselves, "they
differed".

The verse ends on the topic of fighting, and the preceding verses were
also concerned with admonition to fight in the way of Allah, and with a
story about it. It obviously means that the sentences under discussion,
"These apostles . . . with the holy spirit", are a prologue to make the
meaning of the next sentences clearer. It shows that the institution of
apostleship, in spite of all its blessings and good, has not been able
to end fighting among the people, because the said fighting is initiated
by the people themselves.

The apostleship has a high, towering excellence; and its good and bliss
have everlasting freshness; whenever you look at it you will see a new
beauty, and whichever aspect you ponder upon, you will find a new
virtue. This excellent institution. in spite of its brilliant splendor
and awe-inspiring magnificence, in spite of its accompanying clear
evidence and miracle, is not able to eradicate the differences of people
in belief and disbelief. It is so, because this difference is caused by
the people themselves. Allah has mentioned this fact in various verses:
Surely the religion with Allah is Islam; and those to whom the book had
been given did not differ, but after knowledge had come to them, out of
envy among themselves (3:19). Mankind was but one nation.. . and none
differed about it but the very people who were given it revolting among
themselves (2:213).

The fact remains that if Allah had so wished He could have prevented
this difference and the resulting fighting by His creative decree. But
Allah has established a system of cause and effect in the universe, and
difference is the established cause of conflict and fighting. Also, if
He had so wished, He could have forbidden it by His legislative decree;
or He could have refrained from giving the believers the order to fight
in His way. But He gave this order; and made it a criterion of faith,
"so that Allah may separate the impure from the pure”, “and most
certainly Allah will know those who believe and most certainly He will
know the hypocrites”.

In short, fighting among the people of the apostles cannot be avoided,
as there is always the possibility of people differing because of envy
and revolt. The apostleship and its clear evidence are sufficient to
refute wrong beliefs and clear away doubts. But envy, revolt, obstinacy
and other such moral defects cannot be removed and the earth cannot be
purged of them except by fighting in the way of Allah, which will better
the condition of humanity. Experience proves that in many cases
arguments alone were not effective unless they were supported by the
sword. That is why Allah ordered His apostles, whenever necessary, to
stand in support of truth and fight in His way. He so ordered in the
days of Ibrahim and the prophets of the children of Israel, and after
the Apostle of Allah came. More details have already been given under
the verses of fighting.

QUR’AN: Among them are some to whom Allah spoke, and some of them He
exalted by degree (of rank):

In these sentences the pronouns and verbs have been changed from the
first person of the preceding one (We have made some of them to excel)
to the third person. The reason - and Allah knows better - may be as
follows:

Meritorious epithets are of two kinds: First, that which in itself is
enough to show the merit and honor of the person or thing so described;
for example, the clear evidence and the miracle, and being strengthened
with the holy spirit, which has been mentioned in respect of ‘Isa
(a.s.). There is no doubt that these epithets are, per se, splendid and
lofty. Second, that which in itself has no value unless it is related to
a great subject, and its merit and honor depend upon the prestige of the
doer; for example, being spoken to, per se, has no virtue, but if one is
spoken to by a great personality it bestows an honor to the man who is
spoken to. And it carries a very great splendor if one is spoken to by
Allah. Likewise, being raised in rank, per se, has no virtue unless it
is done for example, by Allah.

In this light, we may easily appreciate the great eloquence of the
Qur’an in changing the pronouns in three sentences "among them are some
to whom Allah spoke, and some of them He exalted by degree (of rank);
and We gave clear (evidence) to ‘Isa..." When Allah described the
virtues of being spoken to and being raised in rank, He changed the
pronouns to the third person clearly mentioning the name, ‘Allah’, as
the bestower of these merits. When the epithets reached clear evidence,
etc., which were honored in themselves, the pronouns reverted to the
first person of the starting sentence and said: “and We gave clear
evidence to ‘Isa son of Maryam”.

The commentators advance various opinions as to who is meant by the two
sentences. It is said that “some to whom Allah spoke” refers to Musa, as
verse 164 of chap. 4 says: And We spoke to Musa (directly) speaking (to
him), and as several other verses testify. Also, it is said that it
means the Apostle of Allah, Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), because Allah spoke to
him on the night of the ascension when Allah brought him near Himself to
such a degree that all intermediate links vanished completely, and Allah
addressed to him His revelation directly without any intermediary. He
says: Then he (i.e., Muhammad) drew near, and he became pending (i.e.,
in between the Creator and His creatures) ; so he was the measure of two
bows or closer still. And He revealed to His servant what He revealed
(53:8-10). A third interpretation is that the speaking means revelation
in general, because revelation is a secret speaking, and it has been
termed speaking in the verse, And it is not for any man that Allah
should speak to him except by revelation, or from behind a veil, or by
sending a messenger so that he reveals by His permission what He pleases
(42:51). But this last interpretation does not conform with the
preposition “min” (from, among) which denotes that not all, but only
“some”, of the apostles were given this distinction - and revelation was
not confined to only a few of them, it was common to all.

The most appropriate interpretation is that it refers to Musa (a.s.),
because Allah’s speaking with him was already mentioned in a chapter of
Meccan period (which was revealed long before this chapter 2, which is a
Medinite chapter) : And when Musa came at Our appointed time and his
Lord spoke to him . . . He said: "O Musa! Surely I have chosen you above
the people with My message and with my speech. . . " (7:143-144).
Obviously the fact that Musa was spoken to by Allah had been well
understood when the verse under discussion was revealed.

Likewise, various interpretations have been offered for the sentence,
"and some of them He exalted by degree (of rank)".

It is said that it refers to Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), as Allah raised him
in status and exalted over all the apostles, because He:

- sent him towards all the men -: And We have not sent you but to all
the men... (34:28) ;

- made him a mercy to the worlds -: And We have not sent you but as a
mercy to the worlds (21:107);

- made him the Last of the prophets -: ...but he is the apostle of
Allah and the last of the prophets... (33:40);

- gave him the Qur'an, which is the guardian over all books and
explains clearly everything, and is protected from the alterations of
wrongdoers, and, in short, is a miracle which will last up to the end of
the world - : And We have revealed to you the Book with the truth,
verifying what is before it of the book and a guardian over it (5:48);
And We have revealed the Book to you explaining clearly everything. . .
(16:89); Surely We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be
its guardian (15:9) ; Say: If men and jinn should combine together to
bring the like of this Qur'an, they could not bring the like of it, even
though some of them were aiders of the others (17:88).

- and gave him especially the established and upright religion which is
responsible for all the good of this world and the next -: Then set thy
face upright to the established religion (30:43).

Another interpretation is that it refers to various prophets who were
raised in status in one way or the other. For example, the following
prophets:­

Nuh (a.s.) -: Peace be on Nub in all the worlds (37:79).

Ibrahim (a.s.) -: And (remember) when his Lord tried Ibrahim with
certain words, then he fulfilled them. He said: "Surely I will make you
Imam for mankind. . . " (2:124): And make for me a truthful tongue
(i.e., goodly mention) among the posterity (26:84);

Idris (a.s.) -: And We raised him to a high station (19:57);

Yusuf (a.s.) -: We raise the degrees of whomsoever We please (12:76);

Dawud (a.s.) -: And We gave to Dawud Psalm (4:163); and likewise
various other prophets.

A third interpretation is that the words, “These apostles”, in the
beginning of the verse, refer to those apostles only who have been
mentioned in this chapter of the Cow, like Ibrahim, Musa, ‘Isa, ‘Uzayr,
Armiah, Ushmu’il, Dawud, and Muhammad, the peace of Allah be on them
all. Out of them Musa and ‘Isa have especially been mentioned in this
verse, and from among the rest it is Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) who has been
raised in degrees of rank over the others.

A fourth interpretation: “These apostles” refers to only those who have
been mentioned in the preceding story; and they are Musa, Dawud,
Ushmu’il and Muhammad. Musa’s distinction has been mentioned, and that
is his being spoken to. Then comes the topic of raising the degrees of
rank, and from the above list, no one is more deserving for it than
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.). Probably, that was the reason why ‘Isa had to be
mentioned in this verse by name because in the preceding story he was
not mentioned at all.

But a well balanced interpretation would be as follows:

There is no doubt that the exalted rank of the Prophet, Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.), is included in the meaning of this sentence; but there is no
reason to suppose that the sentence refers only to his excellence or
only to those prophets who are mentioned in the story of Talut or in the
chapter of the Cow, because all such view are arbitrary and without any
justifiable reason. It is quite obvious that the verse is general;
“these apostles” refer to all the apostles sent by Allah, and “some of
them lie exalted by degrees of rank” covers all those apostles who were
exalted by Him in any way.

Someone has said: The context shows that the sentence, “some of them He
exalted . . . “, refers only to Muhammad (s.a.w.a.). The verse gives a
lesson to those nations that fight among themselves, after their
apostles, even though their religion is one - and only three such
nations were present when the verse was revealed: the Jews, the
Christians and the Muslims. Therefore, it was appropriate to mention
their apostles especially; Musa and 'Isa have already been described in
the verse, and it means that the remaining sentence, "some of them He
exalted . .", specifically refers to Muhammad (s.a.w.a.).

Comment : The Qur'an decrees that all the apostle were sent to all of
mankind, as Allah says:. . . We do not make any distinction between any
of them . . . (2:136). The apostles brought them clear signs, arguments
and miracles. This fact in itself should have been enough to cut at the
root of mischief and disorder, and to prevent fighting among their
followers. But those followers differed with one another because of
their rebel­lion, envy and worldly desire. This was the basic cause
which gave rise to the fighting. Therefore, Allah ordains fighting when
the good of mankind depends upon it, so that He may manifest the truth
of what was true by His words, and cut away the root of the
wrongdoers.

This context shows that the verse is not particularly concerned with
any nation; rather its import is general.

A Talk about the Speech of Allah

QUR'AN: And We gave clear (evidence) to Isa, son of Maryam, and
strengthened him with the holy spirit:

In this sentence, the original "first person" pronouns have been used;
and we have already explained the reason for this. A question arises as
to why only 'Isa, and no other prophet, has been mentioned here by name.
The reason is this: What has been mentioned in his excellence - giving
clear evidence and strengthening with the holy spirit - are things
common to all apostles. Allah says: Certainly We sent Our apostles with
clear evidence (57:25); He sends down the angels with spirit by His
commandments on whom He pleases of His servants, (saying) : Give the
warning . . . (16:2).

But these otherwise common factors were found in 'Isa in a rather
special way. All his miracles - raising the dead, creating the bird by
breathing into it, giving sight to the blind, curing lepers and giving
information of the unseen - had a very special relation with the life
and the spirit. Therefore, those factors were mentioned as the special
excellence of 'Isa, and his name was clearly mentioned. Had Allah only
said, "and We gave clear evidence to some of them and strengthened him
with the holy spirit", it would not have pointed especially to 'Isa,
because, as you know, these two factors were common to all apostles. It
was necessary to mention the name to show that these were given to 'Isa
in a rather special way. Moreover, 'Isa himself was a clear evidence of
the power of Allah, as he was born without a father. Allah says: and
made her (Maryam) and her son a sign for the worlds (21:91). Thus, the
son and his mother together were the signs of Allah, and it was their
special distinction.

QUR'AN: And if Allah had pleased, those after them would not have
fought one with another after clear arguments had come to them:

Here Allah again refers to Himself in the third person, because the
context demands a clear declaration that the divine will cannot be
obstructed and His power cannot be foiled. All happenings, in all their
positive and negative aspects, are under divine control and authority.
It is the attribute of godship which emanates unlimited power and
unrestricted authority; and that is why the divine name, Allah, had to
be clearly mentioned to emphasize the fact that if Allah had so willed,
they would not have fought. This force could not be produced by saying,
"if We had so willed . . ." And it is for the same reason that the
divine name, and not the pronoun, has been repeated in the next
sentences, "and if Allah had so pleased they would not have fought", and
"Allah does what He intends".

QUR'AN: But they differed; so there were some of them who believed and
others who denied: We have already described why

Allah attributed the difference to the people, and not to Him­self. He
has declared several times that the difference in belief and disbelief
appeared among people because of their envy, rebellion and evil desire;
and such things cannot be attributed to Allah.

QUR'AN: And if Allah had so pleased they would not have fought one with
another, but Allah does what lie intends:

We have already explained this. If Allah had so wished, le could have
dis­connected the cause, the difference, from its effect, the fighting.
But Allah does what He intends, and He has decided that the difference
will cause the fighting, according to the system of cause and effect
which He has decreed in this world.

In short, the verse says that the apostles sent by Allah are His
servants, very near to Him, above mankind in their excellence: they have
been exalted, some above others, in the degrees of their ranks but they
all equally share the basic excellence of apostleship. They came to
their peoples with clear, arguments and miracles: they clearly
pronounced the truth and unmistakably showed the right path. It might
have been expected that their followers, after them, would not have
abandon the unity, love and mutual regard in the cause of the religion
of Allah. But there was another factor, lurking about, and that was
their envy and rebellion, which divided them up into believers and
non-believers; and this difference spread and affected all aspects of
their lives. If Allah had so wished, He could have taken away the
causative power of this difference, and then it would not have led to
fighting. But He did not wish so, and let the system of cause and effect
take its course; and He brings out what He wishes.

QUR'AN: 0 you who believe! Spend . . . and the unbelievers - they are
unjust:

The meaning is quite clear. The last sentence implies that not spending
in the way of Allah is unbelief and injustice.

**TRADITIONS
**
al-Baqir (a.s.) said about the words of Allah: These apostles “There is
in this (verse) that which may be a proof that the companions of
Muhammad did differ (among themselves) after him, so there were some of
them who believed and others who disbelieved.” (al-Kafi )

Asbagh ibn Nubatah said: “I was standing with the Leader of the
faithful, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) on the day of the Camel.

There came a man and stood before him and said: '0 Leader of the
faithfuls! These people (i.e., the enemies) said takbir (Allahu Akbar),
and we said it ; and they said tahlil (la ilaha illa 'llah) and we said
it ; and they prayed and we prayed. Then, on what (ground) are we
fighting them?' He ('Ali - a.s.) replied: 'On (the basis of) this verse:
These apostles, We have made some of them to excel others; among them
are some to whom Allah spoke and some of them He exalted by degree (of
rank) ; and We gave clear (evidence) to Isa, son of Maryam, and
strengthened him with the holy spirit. And if Allah had pleased, those
after them would riot have fought one with another - so we are those
after them - but they differed; so there were some of them who believed
and others who disbelieved; and if Allah had so pleased they would not
have fought one with another, but Allah does what He intends. So we are
those who believed and they are those who disbelieved.' 'Thereupon, the
man said: 'These people are unbelievers, by the Lord of the Ka'bah!'
Then he attacked and fought them until he was killed; may Allah have
mercy on him!" (at-Tafsir, of al-'Ayyashi)

The author says: This event has been narrated by al-Mufid in his
al-Amali, and by ash-Shaykh in his book of the same name, and by
al-Qummi in his at-Tafsir. This tradition shows that 'Ali (a.s.)
interpreted "disbelief" in this verse in a general sense, which includes
hidden disbelief as well as open disbelief which is termed al-kufr
(infidelity) in Islam and with which Islam deals in a special way. It is
well-known from traditions and history that 'Ali (a.s.) did not treat
his opponents (in the battles of the Camel, Siffin and Nahrawan) like
any group of the unbelievers - they were not dealt with like
unbelievers, whether from the people of the book or others, nor like the
apostates. The only implication of this special treatment is that he
thought them to be unbelievers in their hearts but not openly. And he
(a.s.) used to say: "I fight against them on the interpretation (of the
Qur'an), not on (its) revelation."

The verse clearly supports this meaning. It says that the clear
evidence brought by the apostles did not prevent the fighting of their
followers because they differed among themselves; and such a difference
cannot be removed by those arguments and evidence because it is not
based on reason but on envy and rebellion. The verse thus describes the
phenomenon mentioned in the following verses: -

And people were naught but a single nation, then they disagreed; and
had not a word already gone forth from your Lord, the matter would have
certainly been decided between them in respect of that concerning which
they disagree (10:19).

Mankind was but one people, so Allah sent the prophets ... And none
differed about it but the very people who were given it after clear
signs had come to them, revolting among themselves; whereupon Allah
guided, by His will, those who believed to the truth about which they
differed (2 :213). ...and they shall continue to differ, except those on
whom your Lord has mercy... (11 :118-119).

All this shows that difference about the book, that is, about the
religion, between the followers of the apostles, after the departure of
those apostles, cannot be avoided. Allah says particularly about this
ummah: Or do you think that you would enter the Garden while yet the
like of those who have passed away before you has not come upon you?
(2:214). And He informs us of the complaint of His Apostle on the Day of
Resurrection: And the Apostle cried out: "0 my Lord! surely my people
treated this Qur'an as a forsaken thing" (25:30). In these, and many
other verses, this factor has been explicitly or implicitly mentioned.

And it is a fact that difference in the Muslim ummah started in the
days of the companions. History and mutawatir and near­mutawatir
traditions clearly show that, in the troubles and dis­cords which
started soon after the Apostle, the companions themselves dealt with
each other in this same way. In their own eyes they were treading the
path of the discord and difference mentioned in these verses. And none
of them claimed that he was above any difference on account of 'ismah
(sinlessness) or good tidings given to him by the Apostle, or ijtihad,
nor did anyone say that he was not included in these verses. (We do not
include Ahlu 'l-bayt of the Prophet in the term 'companion'.)

More details of this difference is beyond the scope of this book.

al-Mufid narrates in his al-Amali from Abu Basir that he said: "I heard
Abu 'Abdillah (a.s,) say: 'Allah, Great is His name, was ever Omniscient
in His person and there was nothing to be known; and He was ever
Omnipotent in His person and there was nothing to be ordained.' I said:
'May I be your ransom! Was He then ever Speaking?' He said: 'Speech is
created.' There was Allah and He was not speaking, then He created
speech.' "

Safwan ibn Yahya said: "Abu Qurrah, the traditionalist, asked ar-Rida
(a.s.) and said: 'Tell me, may I be your ransom! About Allah's speaking
to Musa.' He (the Imam) said: 'Allah knows better in which language He
spoke to him.' Abu Qurrah caught his own tongue and said: 'I am asking
you about this tongue.' Thereupon Abu 'l-Hasan (a.s.) said: 'Glorified
is Allah from what you say! And may Allah protect you (from thinking)
that He might resemble His creatures or might speak like they speak;
rather, He, Glorified be He, there is nothing like Him, nor there is any
speaker or doer like Him.' (Abu Qurrah) said: 'How?' (The Imam) said:
'The speech of Allah with His creature is not like the speech of a
creature with another creature; and He does not speak with a mouth and
tongue; rather He says to it : 'Be' and it is. It was by His will He
addressed (His) command and prohibition to Musa without any meditation
in His Self.' " (al-Ihtijaj)

'Ali (a.s.) said in a sermon: "Speaking, not by meditation, Wishing,
not by contemplation." (Nahju 'l-balaghah)

In the same book, he ('Ali - a.s.) says, inter alia, in another sermon:
"He Who spoke to Musa (directly) speaking, and showed him of His great
signs, without limbs and organs and without implements, sound or
uvula."

The author says: The traditions narrated from the Imams of Ahlu 'l-bayt
with this meaning are numerous, and all of them show that the speech of
Allah (to use the terminology of the Qur'an and sunnah) is an attribute
of action, and not an attribute of Person.

