Volume 4: Surah Baqarah, Verses 258-260
=======================================

Did you not see him who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord, because
Allah had given him the kingdom? When Ibrahim said: "My Lord is He Who
gives life and cause to die", he said: "I give life and cause death."
Ibrahim said: "So surely Allah brings the sun from the east, then bring
it (you) from the west." Thus he who disbelieved was confounded; and
Allah does not guide aright the unjust people (258). Or like him who
passed by a town, and it had fallen down upon its roofs; he said: "How
will Allah give it life after its death?" So Allah caused him to die for
a hundred years, then raised him to life. He said: "How long have you
tarried?" He said: "I have tarried a day, or a part of a day. " Said He:
"Nay! You have tarried a hundred years; then look at your food and
drink - years have not passed over it; and look at your donkey; and that
We may make you a sign to men; and look at the bones, how We assemble
them together, then clothe them with flesh." So when it became clear to
him, he said: "I know that Allah has power over all things" (259). And
(remember) when Ibrahim said: "My Lord! Show me how Thou givest life to
the dead. "He said: "What! and do you not believe?" He said: "Certainly,
but that my heart may be at ease. "He said: "Then take four of the
birds, then cut them (into pieces), then place on every mountain a part
of them, then call them, they will come to you flying; and know that
Allah is Mighty, Wise" (260).

**COMMENTARY
**
The three verses describe the Oneness of the Creator and His
Omnipotence. They have, therefore, some connection with the preceding
verses; and possibly these were revealed together with them.

QUR’AN: Did you not see him who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord:

“al-Muhajjah” is to bring a proof against the opposite party’s, to
prove one’s own claim or to refute the other party's argument. The basic
meaning of al-hujjah is intention; now it is generally used for "proof"
by which one intends to prove one's claim. The phrase "about his Lord"
is connected with the verb "disputed". The pronoun in "His Lord" refers
to Ibrahim, as may be inferred from the next sentence, "Ibrahim said:
\`My Lord is He Who gives life and causes to die.' " The man who
disputed with Ibrahim was the king of his time; and according to history
and traditions, he was the Babylonian king, Namrud (Nimrod).

We may understand the nature of this argument and the subject of the
dispute, if we look at the context of the verse and reflect upon the
behavior of mankind in the past as well as in the present.

Man, by his nature, has always remained submissive to the powers about
him which effect, in one way or the other, his life. No student of
anthropology, who has studied the behavior of the ancients, or has
looked at the present generations of various nations, can have any doubt
about it. We have described it in preceding discourses; and also it has
been pointed out that man, by his nature, accepts that there is a
Creator for the universe, Who has brought it into existence, and Who
manages it. Every man, by the dictate of nature, believes this - be he a
monotheist (a follower of the prophets), a polytheist (like an
idol-worshipper) or an atheist (like a materialist). Nature's demand
cannot be negated so long as man is man (although the effect of it may
at times become weaker or dormant).

Primitive man, in his simplicity, thought of every thing in the light
of his own experience. He saw that he performs different acts by means
of his different organs and limbs; and likewise, in society's structure,
various people discharge various duties and functions. And the natural
phenomena in the world happen because of their respective natural causes
which are closely related to them. Yet, his nature led him to believe in
a Creator who had all the affairs of the universe in His hand. Not
surprisingly, he thought that every phenomenon of the world had a
special deity of its own - and all those deities were under the
authority of a Supreme God. Sometimes he named them deities for various
things; for example, the deity of the earth, the deity of the rivers,
the deity of fire, the deity of wind, etc. At other times, he attributed
these functions to the stars, and especially to the planets, the sun and
the moon, ascribing to each various faculties believing that each of
them affected this world of ours in its own way. This belief was held by
the Sabaeans. The next stage was to make images and statues for those
lesser deities. Then he started to worship those idols so that the
particular image might intercede on behalf of the worshipper with its
particular deity, which in its turn was expected to intercede with the
Supreme God - thus ensuring bliss and success for the worshipper in this
life and after death.

That also explains why the idols were made in different shapes in
different tribes. Views and opinions as regards the attributes of
various species and the conceptions of their related deities could not
be the same in two nations; and even in one nation they changed with the
times. Sometimes other considerations and inclinations crept into the
system. Gradually, the idols usurped the place of the said deities, and
even the Supreme God was relegated to obscurity. Worshippers intended to
give their devotion more and more to what was near them, which they
could see and touch, and thus they tended to forget what was beyond
their five senses. In this way, idols took the place of the Creator. All
this happened because initially they thought that those lesser deities
had some influence and control over the affairs of their lives - that
the will of those deities dominated their own will and that those
deities' management prevailed over their own plans and management.

When some powerful personality appeared on the scene and took the reins
of the kingdom in his hands, he often exploited this trend of thought;
he had their affairs and their lives in his hands, and it was easy for
him to claim for himself the status of divinity, declaring himself to be
a god. This is what was done by Pharaoh, Namrud and many others. It is
interesting to note that such people included themselves in the list of
deities, while, like their subjects, they continued to worship the idols
of their nations. But invariably they always ended up by usurping the
dominant position for themselves. In this design of theirs the same
process of thought helped them which had raised the idols' status in
their people's eyes: the king's influence, authority and hold over his
people were more manifest than those of the other deities. Phar­aoh
declared before his people: "I am your most high Lord" (79:24). And he
made this claim of supremacy while continuing to worship the other
deities. Read for proof the words of Allah giving the import of the talk
of the courtiers of Pharaoh with him showing the danger from Musa (a.s.)
: ". . . and to forsake you and your gods?" (7:127). The same was the
claim of Namrud as may be inferred from his assertion: "I give life and
cause death."

The above discourse may easily explain this dispute between Ibrahim
(a.s.) and Namrud. Namrud believed that there was a Supreme God.
Otherwise, he would not have been confounded by the argument of Ibrahim
(a.s.), "So surely Allah brings the sun from the east, then bring it
(you) from the west." If he had not believed in a Supreme God, he could
have said that it was he (i.e., Namrud) or some other deity, who brought
the sun from the east, and not Ibrahim's Allah. Apart from the Supreme
God, he and his people believed in some other deities too. The life
story of Ibrahim provides ample proof that they worshipped the sun, the
moon and the stars, as well as idols. Also read the talk of Ibrahim with
his uncle on the subject of idols, and see how he shattered their idols
(except the big one). All of it shows that Namrud believed in the
divinity of Allah, as well as in other deities, but at the same time
claimed to be a god - indeed the highest god - himself. That was why he
tried to prove his own divinity in this dispute with Ibrahim, and did
not even mention the other, lesser, deities.

Now we should look at the dispute. It was Ibrahim's claim that his Lord
is Allah, and no one else. Namrud said: "No! I am your Lord and the Lord
of everyone else." Ibrahim argued: "My Lord is He Who gives life and
causes to die." Namrud said: "I give life and cause death." He wanted to
show that he held the power which Ibrahim attributed to his Lord;
therefore, Ibrahim should submit to him, and worship him, neither Allah
nor other lesser deities deserved to be worshipped. Note that he did not
add "and" in his reply; he did not say, "and I give life. . ." Why?
Because the conjunctive "and" would have meant that he shared this power
with Allah; and he did not want to admit any such "partnership" he
wanted to be worshipped as the most supreme Lord of the universe. And it
was for this very reason that he did not say either, "and the gods give
life . . ."

He could not honestly refute the argument of Ibrahim; so he resorted to
sophism, fallacy and deception. When Ibrahim mentioned life and death,
he meant life and death as we find them in living things. His argument
was that these living things could only be created by One who was the
source of life. Lifeless nature cannot bestow life on others when it has
no life itself. Nor can other living things give life to others, because
their life is their existence and their death their extinction - and a
thing cannot create or destroy its own self.

If Namrud had interpreted Ibrahim's argument honestly, he could not
have refuted it at all. But he resorted to deception, interpreting life
and death with an allegorical meaning. "To give life" really means, for
example, to create a living fetus; but it may be used equally correctly
(but in metaphorical way) if you rescue someone from an extremely
dangerous situation. Likewise, "to cause to die" really means the act of
God by which a soul departs from a body; but metaphorically it may be
used for murder, etc. Taking advantage of this metaphorical usage,
Namrud ordered two prisoners to be brought before him; one he ordered to
be killed and the other was set free. It was at this stage that he
uttered the words, "I give life and cause death". The courtiers were
taken in by this ruse and accepted the "truth" of the argument. Ibrahim
was not in a position to unmask the fallacy of this reply; he saw how
Namrud has duped the audience with his deception and how blindly they
agreed to his sophism. Nobody would have agreed with Ibrahim even if he
had tried to expose that fallacy. Therefore, he switched to another
clearer argument which his obstinate opponent could not twist in any
way, and said: "So surely Allah brings the sun from the east; then bring
it (you) from the west."

Those people (or some of them) believed the sun to be a deity. (Look at
the story of Ibrahim, concerning the stars, the moon and the sun in the
Qur’an 6:77-78) But they also believed that these sources of light and
their various phases, rising, setting, etc., were ultimately in the
hands of Allah, who, according to them, was Lord of Lords, God of gods.
When a doer does an act by his own free will, he may just as easily
reverse that action if he so changes his intention; the direction of his
action follows his will. Therefore, when Ibrahim put this argument
before Namrud, he was confounded. He could not say: “The rising of the
sun from the east has been, since the very beginning, a matter of
chance; it needs no cause”, because commonsense demands a cause for an
effect. Nor could he say: “This system is not caused or controlled by
Allah”, because he himself professed to believe in the Lord of Lords who
controlled the sun, etc. And he could not say: “It is I who bring it
from the east”; because Ibrahim had already closed this line of argument
by saying, “then bring it (you) from the west”. He was thus
ignominiously humiliated and disgraced. “And Allah does not guide aright
the unjust people.”

QUR’AN: Because Allah had given him the kingdom?

The import of this sentence is like one’s saying: “He mistreated me
because I did good to him.” The speaker wants to say: I did good to him;
it was to be expected that he also would do good to me; instead, he
misbehaved towards me. An Arabic proverb points to this very trait of
human nature: “Be on guard against the evil of him to whom you did
good.” A poet says: His sons rewarded Abu ‘l-Ghaylan, for his old age
and good deeds, as was rewarded Sinimmar.1

In this sentence L (= because) is deleted but understood. It puts a
reason in place of its opposite. This style puts the accusation in a
sharper perspective. The rebellion and transgression of Namrud would
have been understandable if there had been any non-generosity shown
towards him by Allah. But Allah did nothing to him except good and He
gave him the kingdom too. Therefore, this generosity was mentioned as
the cause of his rebellion, to emphasize his ingratitude. In a way, it
is like the verse: And Pharaoh's family took him (Musa) up, so that he
might be an enemy and a grief for them (28:8).

This is one reason why his getting the kingdom has been mentioned here.
There is another reason too: to show that his claim was absurd ab
initio. He claimed to be god because of the kingdom which was given to
him by Allah; he did not own it himself. He had become Namrud, the king,
the mighty and powerful, because, Allah had made him so. Strip him of
this bounty of Allah and what was left of him? Just a common man with no
special quality or attribute. That is the reason why Allah did not
mention him by name; he was described just as the one who disputed with
Ibrahim about his Lord. This was done to show his insignificance and
lowliness.

Why did Allah say that it was He who gave Namrud the kingdom'? In
previous discourses it has been shown that this cannot be objected to.
The kingdom, like all other powers and authorities, is a bounty and
grace of Allah; He gives it to whom He pleases and man has been give the
knowledge of God in his nature, and because of that natural instinct he
inclines towards Him. Now, if he made good use of that kingdom putting
every thing in its place, it would be a bliss and blessing for him, as
Allah says: And seek by means of what Allah has given you the future
abode . . . (28:77). And if he transgressed the limits and deviated from
the right path, it would become a curse and perdition for him, as Allah
says: Did you not see those who changed Allah's favor for ungratefulness
and made their people to alight into the abode of perdition? (14:28). It
has already been explained that every thing is attributed to Allah, but
in a way that is befitting to His majesty, glory and sanctity - from the
view of the good points of that thing, and not from that of its bad
points.

One commentator has erroneously thought that the pronoun, "him ", in
the phrase, "because Allah had given him the kingdom” refers to Ibrahim.
According to him, it means that Namrud disputed with Ibrahim because
Allah had given Ibrahim the kingdom; that it refers to the kingdom of
Ibrahim mentioned in the Qur’an: Or do they envy the people for what
Allah has given them of His grace? So indeed we have given to Ibrahim’s
children the Book and the wisdom, and We have given them a great kingdom
(4:54). According to that commentator, the kingdom in the verse under
discussion cannot refer to that of Namrud, because it was a kingdom of
oppression and sin; it cannot be said that such a kingdom was given by
Allah.

But this assumption is wrong because:

First: The Qur’an attributes such a kingdom and many similar things to
Allah. For example, it quotes the believer from the family of Pharaoh as
saying: 0 my people! Yours is the kingdom this day, being masters in the
land. . . (40:29) ; and the words of Pharaoh himself are quoted (without
any adverse comment) : 0 my people! Is not the kingdom of Egypt mine?
(43:51). And at the same time it declares:. . . to Him (i.e. Allah)
belongs the kingdom . . . (64:1). This verse confines the kingdom to
Allah; there is no kingdom but of Him and from Him. The Qur’an quotes
Musa (a.s.) as saying: Our Lord! Surely Thou hast given to Pharaoh and
his chiefs finery and riches in this world’s life . . . (10: 88); and
Allah says about Qarun:. . . and We had given him of the treasures, so
much so that its keys would certainly weigh down a company of men
possessed of strength. . . (28:76); and He says addressing his Prophet:
Leave Me and him whom I created alone, and I gave him vast riches . . .
(74:11-12) ; there are many similar references.

Second: Such an interpretation does not fit the obvious meaning of the
verse. The verse shows that Namrud was disputing with Ibrahim about the
latter’s belief and monotheism, not that he had any argument with him
about his kingdom. The kingdom was already in Namrud ‘s hands and
Ibrahim had no worldly kingdom for which Namrud could have disputed with
him.

Third: Everything is attributed to Allah, as explained earlier, and
kingdom is no exception. There is no snag in attributing it to Allah.

QUR'AN: When Ibrahim said: "My Lord is He Who gives life and causes to
die":

Life and death are found even in vegetation; but Ibrahim (a.s.), in
this argument, meant the life and death found in animals and human
beings, or he kept in view their general meaning which included human
life and death. The evidence for this meaning may be seen in the reply
of Namrud: "I give life and cause death". Obviously Namrud, by this
claim, did not mean the giving of life to vegetables (through tilling
and farming), or animals (by breeding them and bringing the male and
female together). This type of life giving was not special to him; any
human being could do it. The traditions also support our interpretation:
he had two prisoners brought before him, he freed one and killed the
other, and then he said: "I give life and cause death".

Ibrahim (a.s.) selected for his proof the authority of giving life and
causing death, because nature, having no life or sense itself, cannot
give life to any thing; and more evidently, it cannot be supposed to
give life to animals and humans as it is accompanied by sense and
perception. And the same is the case with death. Such a clear and
indisputable proof failed to convince the people of Namrud. Their
intellectual degradation and mental confusion had sunken far lower than
the level which Ibrahim (a.s.) had credited them with. They thought that
the life and death referred to included the metaphorical meaning of
freeing from prison and killing. Thus, Namrud claimed, and they vouched
that he gave life and caused death.

This talk shows how low the level of intellectual development was in
that time, as far as abstract and non-material ideas were concerned. Do
not be misled by their advanced civilization, signs of which are found
in the archaeological remains of the Babylonia of the Chaldeans and the
Egypt of the Pharaohs. Material advancement is one thing, and progress
in abstract and non­material ideas is something else. We see the same
phenomenon in this world of ours which has made a fantastic advancement
in the material field, and has sunk so terribly low in morality, ethics
and spiritual knowledge.

Ibrahim (a.s.) did not put before them the argument that the whole
universe needed an Omnipotent, Omniscient Originator of the heavens and
the earth. He had used this method in his early days; and Allah quotes
him as finally saying: “Surely I have turned my face, being upright,
wholly to Him Who originated the heavens and the earth, and 1 am not of
the polytheists (6:79). No doubt, those people, forced by natural
instinct, believed vaguely in a Supreme Creator. But their intellectual
capacity was too limited to let them clearly and truly understand about
that Creator. Had Ibrahim (a.s.) put this argument before them, they
could not have appreciated it at all. Look, at what they understood from
his argument: “My Lord is He Who gives life and causes to die! “

QUR’AN: he said: “I give life and cause death “:

Therefore, I am that Lord of yours who, you say, gives life and causes
death.

QUR’AN: Ibrahim said: “So surely Allah brings the sun from the east,
then bring it (you) from the west”:

Thus he who disbelieved was confounded: When Ibrahim (a.s.) saw that
his argument based on giving life and death had been twisted by his
opponent, and that the public had been mislead by that decep­tion, he
thought it would be useless to clarify what he meant by giving life and
causing death. Instead, he switched to another argument. Even then, he
based this second argument on his opponent’s claim in the first
argument. That is why he began the second argument with “So”; it shows a
connection with the preceding sentence, and its import is as follows: If
what you say is correct, and you are my Lord, and the Lord, as we both
accept, manages and looks after this universe, then Allah manages the
sun by bringing it from the east; so show your authority by bringing
from the west. It will clearly prove that you are the Lord, as Allah is
the Lord of everything, or that you are Lord of Lords. Thus, the
disbeliever was confounded.

Ibrahim (a.s.) offered his second argument as an offshoot of Namrud ‘s
claim, to remove the chance of someone thinking that Namrud’s argument
was complete, perfect and irrefutable. And he changed the word “my Lord”
(used in the first argument) to “Allah” (in this argument) because the
opponent had misused that adjective and claimed that it referred to him.
To remove the chance of that, type of sophistry, Ibrahim (a.s.) used the
proper name, "Allah".

It has been described earlier that it was not possible for Namrud to
reply to this argument in any way, and, as a result, he was confounded
and remained silent.

QUR'AN: And Allah does not guide aright the unjust people:

Apparently it gives the reason for Namrud's being confounded, not for
his disbelief. Allah did not guide him, and, therefore, he was
humiliated; had Allah guided him aright, he would have been able to
reply to Ibrahim. It does not say that Allah did not guide him and
therefore he became an unbeliever. Obviously, the talk centers around
his dispute and argument, and is not about his belief.

The word "unjust people" hints at the cause of not being guided. Allah
does not guide them because they are unjust. The same point has been
kept in view wherever such sentences have been revealed. Allah says: And
who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah while he is
invited to Islam? And Allah does not guide the unjust people (61:7); The
similitude of those who were placed under the Torah, then they did not
hold it, is as the similitude of the donkey bearing books; evil is the
similitude of the people who belie the signs of Allah; and Allah does
not guide the unjust people (62:5). "Transgression" is likewise the
cause of not being guided, as Allah says: but when they turned aside;
Allah made their hearts turn aside; and Allah does not guide the
transgressing people (61:5).

In short, injustice is to turn aside from the path of justice, and to
leave aside what should be done, and to do what should not be done. It
diverts man from his intended goal, and leads him to disappointment and
failure in the life hereafter. This fact is made abundantly clear in
many verses of the Qur'an, which puts much emphasis on it.

Good and Evil Deeds vis-à-vis Guidance and Misguidance

QUR’AN: Or like him who passed by a town, and it had fallen down upon
its roofs:

"al-Khawiyah” means empty. The Arabs say khawati ‘d-dar to indicate
that “the house became empty”. “al-‘Urush” is the plural of al-'arsh
(trellis); it is a roof-like structure standing on poles or pillars used
as support for climbing plants, like vines. Allah says: garden trellised
and untrellised (6:141). This word is also used for as-saqf (roof). But
there is a difference. as-saqf is only a roof or house-top which is laid
on the walls: al-‘arsh is the top together with its poles or pillars.
Because of this difference, it is idiomatic to say for a ruined village
that, “hiya khawiyatan ‘ala ‘urushiha” which literally means, “it is
empty in its trellis”: but it would he wrong to say. “empty on its
roof”.

Many explanations have been given by the commentators for the
conjunctive “Or” in “Or like him who. . .” It is said that:

1) It is in conjunction with “him (he) who disputed with ibrahim’”, in
the previous verse; and “K” (= like) is in place of mithl (=like). The
meaning accordingly is, “Or have you seen like him who passed..." This
commentator thinks that the word “like” in this context indicates that
it is a separate proof.

2) The word “like” is extra. The meaning, accordingly will be “Did you
not see him who disputed with Ibrahim...or him who passed..."

3) The conjunction is of meaning, and not of words. The meaning is,
“Have you seen like him who disputed...or like him who passed..."

4) It is the continuation of the argument of Ibrahim in reply to his
opponent’s claim. According to this interpretation. Ibrahim told Namrud
that if he claimed to give life then he should give life like him who
passed by a town...

But you will notice that none of the above explanations is
satisfactory.

The author believes that the conjunction is of meaning, as claimed in
the third explanation, but not in the way described there. Allah had
earlier said: “Allah is the Guardian of those who believe: He brings
them out of darkness into the light: and (as to) those who disbelieve,
their guardians are rebels: they take them out of the light into the
darkness”. It had shown that Allah guides the believers to the truth,
and that He does not guide the disbelievers; instead they are misled by
the guardians whom they have taken for themselves. Now Allah gives three
examples showing three consecutive methods of His guidance. Guidance is
of three types, or, let us say, three stages:-

First: Guidance through reasoning and argument, as is seen in the story
of Namrud who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord. Allah guided Ibrahim
to the truth, and his opponent was misguided by his disbelief. In this
story the guidance of Ibrahim is not mentioned clearly; rather more
attention is given to his opponent’s affairs, and it has thrown light on
a new fact: “Allah does not guide aright the unjust people”.

Second: Guidance through demonstration, as is seen in the story of him
who passed by a town which had fallen down upon its roofs. In it, what
had seemed difficult to him (i.e. “how Allah would make a thing alive
after its death?”) was shown to him actually happening. He was given
death and then made alive. In this way he was guided to the truth
through demonstration.

Third: Guidance by demonstrating the fact and simultaneously unveiling
its cause. It is the most effective method and the highest stage of
guidance. This method was used in the third story, in which Ibrahim, by
the permission of Allah, made the four birds alive.

Let us suppose that a man has not seen cheese and has some doubt about
it. His Doubts may be removed if someone who has seen and tasted it
testifies before him about it. The second and more effective method is
to show him a piece of cheese and make him taste it. The third and the
most effective way of removing the doubt would be to put a pot of milk
before him and make cheese from it before his eyes and then let him
taste it.

The three verses describe these three consecutive stages. Each one
begins in a different style. “Did you not see him who...”, “Or like him
who passed by a town...", "And (remember) when Ibrahim said..." Each of
these styles could have been used to describe the three events. It could
have been said: Allah guides the believers to the truth; have you not
looked at the story of lbrahim and Namrud, or at the story of him who
passed by a town, or at the story of Ibrahim and the birds.
Alternatively, it could have been said: Allah guides the believers to
the truth; either as He guided Ibrahim in his dispute with Namrud (and
it was one way of guidance), or as He guided him who passed by a town
(and it was another way of guidance), or as He did in the event of
Ibrahim and the birds (and it was the third way of guidance).

Thirdly it could have been said : Allah guides the believers to the
truth; remember the episodes which prove it - remember the story of the
dispute, and remember him who passed by a town, and remember when
Ibrahim said: “My Lord! show me how Thou givest life to the dead."

But Allah used a different style for each verse, as it is more
refreshing for the mind, and excites a new interest in each episode.

Now we may revert to the original topic, how this verse is in
conjunction with the preceding one. The conjunctive “or” in “or like
him” joins this sentence with a deleted but understood word in the
preceding verse. The reconstructed sentences would be like this: Either
like him who disputed with Ibrahim...or like him who passed by a town.
Likewise, the conjunctive “and" in the next verse joins it with deleted
but understood words in the preceding two verses. The sentences then
would be like this: Remember the story of dispute . . . and remember him
who passed by a town. . . and remember when Ibrahim said . . .

Allah has not disclosed the identity of him who passed by. Nor has the
name of the town or the people who used to live in it been mentioned.
Nor have those been identified for whom the said passerby was made a
sign. It would appear that their identities should have been disclosed
as it would have removed many doubts. But a far more important
consideration made it necessary to keep all these details vague.

The sign shown, that is, giving life to the dead, was a very compelling
and overwhelming one, as was the guidance resulting from it; also, the
passerby had used words which reflected his thought that it was not an
easy task. Therefore, the norms of eloquence demanded that it be
described as a very insignificant affair, so that the said passerby as
well as the audience of the Qur’an would not be over-awed by it; and so
that they could appreciate that it was not a big task as far as the
power of Allah was concerned. Have you not seen that great people talk
about great affairs and about their great officers and nobles in a very
ordinary manner; they want to emphasize that such affairs or such people
have no greatness for the speakers. The same principle has been applied
here: bare facts have been mentioned, but all details as to who, where
and when have been omitted; it is to show that this affair was not an
important one in the eyes of Allah. It was for the same reason that the
name of the opponent of Ibrahim (in the first story) was omitted, and
the names of the birds and the hills, and the number of pieces the birds
were cut into, and so on, in the third story.

Only the name of Ibrahim (a.s.) has been mentioned in the two stories.
The Qur’an accords him a special honor and distinction. For example: And
this was Our argument which We gave to Ibrahim against his people; We
exalt in dignity whom We please . . . (6:83); And thus did We show
Ibrahim the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and that he might be
of those who are sure (6:75). The same special consideration prompted
mentioning his name in the two stories.

The point mentioned above also explains why Allah mentions the matters
of giving life and causing death, in most places, as a very unimportant
and insignificant thing; as He says: And He it is Who originates the
creation, then returns it, and it is most easy to Him; and His are the
most exalted attributes in the heavens and in the earth, and He is the
Mighty, the Wise (30:27); He said: “0 my Lord! how shall I have a son,
and my wife is barren, and I myself have reached indeed the extreme
degree of old age?” He said: “So shall it be; your Lord says: It is easy
to Me, and indeed 1 created you before, when you were nothing”
(19:8-9).

QUR’AN: he said: ‘How will Allah give it life after its death?”

“It” refers to the “town”; but it metaphorically means “people of the
town”. It is like the words of the Qur’an: And ask the town in which we
were . . . (12:82); that is, “the people of the town".

He uttered these words because he felt that it was a very great thing
and that it manifested the power of Allah as few other things did; not
that he thought life-after-death improbable. That is why he said at the
end of the episode, “I know that Allah has power over all things”. He
did not say, ‘Now I know’, as the wife of the chief of Egypt had said:
Now has the truth become established. . . (12:51) . Further details will
be given later.

Furthermore, the passer-by was a prophet to whom Allah had spoken, and
was a sign sent to the people; and the prophets are sinless. They can
never entertain any doubt or suspicion about Resurrection, which is one
of the pillars of the religion.

QUR’AN: So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him
to life:

The clear meaning is that he was given death by the taking out of his
soul, remained dead for a hundred years, then was made alive by the
returning of his soul to him.

One commentator has given a strange explanation of this verse. He says:
The “death” mentioned in this verse means a coma, that is, a prolonged
loss of consciousness in which the subject remains barely alive but has
no sense or feeling. It may continue for days, months and even years, as
is evident from the story of the Fellows of the Cave and their sleep in
the cave which lasted for three hundred and nine years: then they were
awakened. Allah has used that sleep and re-awakening as a proof of
Resurrection. Therefore. this story too is like that one.

The said commentator goes on to say: The known duration of coma does
not exceed a few years. A coma lasting for a hundred years is an unusual
occurrence, but He who puts a man in a coma for a few years also has the
power to keep him in that condition for a hundred years; and when it
comes to accept what is clearly mentioned in the Qur’an, we believe that
we should only see whether it is possible or impossible: and if it is
possible we must accept it. Allah has offered this episode of keeping
him in a coma for a hundred years and then returning his senses and
feelings to him after such a long period as a proof that life car be
returned to the dead after a gap of thousands of years.

This was his explanation. Let us suppose for the time being that the
Fellows of the Cave were kept in a coma - the word used for them in the
Qur’an is “asleep”, not comatose. But how could their supposed coma
infect this passerby? The Qur’an clearly says: “Allah caused him to
die”. Death means loss of life; and not coma. A commentator has no right
to invent a meaning for a word. He has used analogy where no one has
allowed it, and that is in the matter of finding the meaning of a word.
And if Allah could keep that passer-by comatose for a hundred years when
it is not an usual occurrence, why could not He keep him dead for a
hundred years and then resurrect him? One unusual occurrence is like
another, according to the said commentator. So why invent one meaning
and reject the other which incidentally is the real meaning? The trouble
with him is that, for his own reasons, he thinks that the resurrection
of the dead in this world is impossible - without giving any reason to
support his belief. That is why he has misinterpreted the next
sentences, “and look at the bones, how We assemble them together, then
clothe them with flesh “. We shall comment upon it afterwards.

In short, the meaning of the words: “Allah caused him to die . . . then
raised him to life”, is quite clear, and no doubt can be entertained
about it, especially when we look at the pre­ceding and following
sentences “How will Allah give it life after its death?”: “look at your
food and drink - years have not passed over it”: “and look at your
donkey”: “and look at the bones”.

QUR’AN: He said: “How long have you tarried:? “He said I have tarried a
day or a part of a day”. Said He: “Nay! You have tarried a hundred
years"

“al-Labth” is to tarry, to stay to abide. The uncertainty in the reply,
“a day or a part of a day”, shows that the time of day of his
resurrection was different from that of his death - for example, the
forenoon and afternoon. He thought that he had slept and was now woken,
then he looked at the difference in the time, and was uncertain whether
a night has passed while lie was still asleep. Therefore, he said “a day
“ (if a night has passed), “or a part of a day (if he had woken up the
same day). Allah said: “Nay you have tarried a hundred years.”

QUR’AN: “then look at our food and drink - years have not passed over
it;... then clothe them with flesh":

There are many apparently puzzling things in these sentences: The word.
“look”, has been repeated three times, when, at a first glance, only one
would have been enough; there is mention of food, drink and a donkey,
when apparently there was no need for it: and the sentence, “and that We
may make you a sign to men”, has been written in between, when seemingly
it would have been more appropriate after the next sentence about
assembling the bones and clothing them with flesh. Moreover, what he had
wondered about, the resurrection of bodies after a long gap, after
undergoing all types of deterioration, had been clearly demonstrated by
his own resurrection; then what was the need to tell him to look at the
bones? But if we ponder deeply on the various implications of this
verse, all these doubts will be removed. Let us look at the story, which
is as follows:

The verse make it clear that the passer-by was a virtuous servant of
Allah, who was well aware of divine power and majesty, and followed His
commandments. Not only this, he was a prophet whom Allah had spoken to.
The clear implication of his words: “I know that Allah has power over
all things”, is that he was fully aware of the power of Allah even
before this episode. And the style of the sentences, “then raised him to
life. He said: ‘How long have you tarried?’ “ implies that he was well
accustomed to being spoken to by Allah, and that it was not the first
revelation. Otherwise, the sentence should have been somewhat like this:
‘then when He raised him to life, He said . . .’ See how the first
divine talk with Musa has been mentioned: So when he came to it, a voice
called. 0 Musa (20:11); And when he came to it a voice called from the
right side. . . (28:30).

He had departed from his home for a place which was at some distance
from his town. This is inferred from the facts that he rode on his
donkey, and took food and drink for his provisions. On the way, he
passed by a town which had fallen “on its roofs”. It was not his
intended destination; but as he passed by it, he stood there, seeing in
it a warning lesson for mankind, a town turned into ruins, whose
inhabitants had perished, overtaken by death all together, whose rotten
bones were scattered everywhere in full view of the passers-by. He
pointed to the dead and said: “How will Allah give it life after its
death?” He did not mean “How will this town be populated again?”
Otherwise, he would have used the word “yu‘ammir” (will make populated),
and not “yuhyi" (will make alive) which he did use.

Moreover, a ruined town may become inhabited again, and there is
nothing extraordinary in this development to cause wonder and awe. How
do we know that the bodies and bones were in full view of the
passers-by? Because if they had been buried and he had stood looking at
their graves, Allah would have clearly mentioned the graves, instead of
the town.

Anyhow, he stood taking lessons from the scene before his eyes. He was
over-awed by it and thought about the length of time involved, and the
continuing deterioration of the parts of the body until it turns into
dust. At this stage, he said: “How will Allah give it life after its
death?” This question was based on two factors: The length of time, (How
will Allah give it life after such a long gap since its death?) and the
deterioration of the body (How will it be resurrected when all its parts
and limbs have been scattered and untold number of changes have come
over it?) Therefore, Allah explained both questions together. The first
question was answered by giving him death and resurrecting him after a
hundred years. The second question was answered by giving life to the
bones of his donkey under his own eyes.

Thus, Allah gave him death and then raised him from the dead. The two
things happened at different times of the day, as has been explained
above. Allah asked him: “How long have you tarried?” He replied: “I have
tarried a day or a part of a day”. Obviously, he was given death in the
early part of the day, and resurrected in the afternoon. Had it been the
other way round, he would have said, “a day” without any hesitation.
Allah pointed out to him: “Nay! you have tarried a hundred years.” Thus
he realized that he had thought a hundred years like a day or a part of
a day. This was the reply to his question about the length of time.

Then Allah gave him the proof of his remaining dead for a hundred years
by saying, “then look at your food and drink - years have not passed
over it; and look at your donkey”. As he had not realized that he had
died and had been brought to life after such a long time, the
information that he had tarried a hundred years was liable to be doubted
(not necessarily by him), because his body had not changed at all; and
if a man dies and a hundred years pass over him, his body usually
undergoes innumer­able changes until the bones rot and turn into dust.
To remove this possible doubt, Allah ordered him to look at his food and
drink which had not changed a bit all this time; and to look at his
donkey whose bones had rotted. The condition of the donkey would
indicate the length of time and the condition of the food and the drink
would show him the possibility of remaining in one condition for such a
long period without undergoing any change.

It shows that the donkey had also been given death and had become
rotten. But the Qur’an, in its unsurpassed good style, did not like to
mention the donkey’s death when it had said that the prophet had been
caused to die.

In this way Allah made him realize that his amazement, which was based
on the length of time, was not appropriate. He himself admitted that a
hundred years were to him like a day or a part of a day. It was the same
feeling which the resurrected will show on the Day of Resurrection. Thus
he became aware that the time passed between death and resurrection,
whether short or long, has no effect whatsoever on the power of Allah
Who rules over everything. His power is no subservient to time and
space. Changes, whether big or small, which occur in a body, make no
difference to His power. Giving life to old dead bodes is as easy to Him
as resurrecting new ones. Old and new, far and near, are all equal to
Him. As He says: Surely they think it to be far off, and We see it nigh
(70:6-7) ; . . the matter the Hour is but as the twinkling of an eye or
it is still nearer...(16:77) .

“And mat We make you a sign to men”: The conjunction “and “ signifies
that there was some other purpose also. It means: We did We did so that
We may explain to you certain things and so that We may make you a sign
to men. ‘Thus there were two aims. the purpose of showing him how Allah
assembled the bones and clothed them with flesh was to show him how He
gives life to the dead; and the purpose of causing him to die and to
make him alive again was to demonstrate that fact to him and to make him
a sign for other men. That is why the sentence, “and that We make you a
sign to men”, was written before the mention of the bones and their
being clothed by flesh.

The above discourse also shows why the word “look” has been repeated
thrice in this verse. Each order has a special purpose which is not
shared by the other two.

Allah gave him death and then made him alive. In this way, he himself
experienced what most people will feel on the Day or Resurrection; as
Allah says: And at the time when the Hour shah come, the guilty shall
swear (that) they did not tarry but an hour; thus they used to utter
lies. And those who are given knowledge and faith will say: Certainly
you tarried according to the decree of Allah till the Day of
Resurrection; so this is, the Day of Resurrection, but you did not know
(30:55-56).

Then Allah explained to him the second aspect of his question: How will
the parts and components of the body return to their original shape,
after all those innumerable changes”

So Allah told him to “look at the bones, how We assemble them together,
then clothe them with flesh”. Obviously, it refers to the bones of the
donkey, and not to those of the dead people of the town. Otherwise, not
he alone, but all the resurrected people of the town would have become
“signs” of Allah to the mankind.

The commentator whose misinterpretation of “death” and “life” we have
commented upon earlier explains away this sentence in a strange way as
well. He says that the “bones” refer to the bones in a living body; the
fact that they grow and are clothed with flesh is a proof of
resurrection. The Creator Who gave it life and growth is surely the
Resurrector of the dead; surely He has power over everything. Allah has
argued for resurrection in a like manner by referring to the dead earth
which is made alive again with vegetation.

Such an interpretation is obviously absurd.

The explanation which we have given above show that the whole story
beginning from: “So Allah caused him to die” up to the end of the verse
is one single reply to the prophet’s question, “How will Allah give it
life after its death?” There is no repetition in it at all.

QUR’AN: So when it became clear to him, he said:

“I know that Allah has power over all things”: He returns, after the
demon­stration, to the knowledge which he already had before that. It
seems that when the question as to how Allah could make it alive came
into his mind, he satisfied his curiosity by remembering the
all -encompassing power of Allah. Then Allah made the matter clear to
him by demonstrating how He gives life to the dead. After this
re-assurance, he clearly knew the truth of his previous knowledge, and
spoke to Allah in these words, the import of which is as follows: Thou
hast always guided me aright; and what I had always known about Thy
Omnipotence was not to be doubted; it was the truth which I should
always rely upon.

One may find examples of such re-assurance everywhere. Many are the
times when a man has definite knowledge of a subject, then some thought
occurs in his mind which goes against that, not because of any doubt or
ignorance, but because of some other factors. Thereupon he satisfies
himself about the previous certainty, till the doubt is removed. Then,
he returns to his previous knowledge and says: ‘I know that it is so’.
In this way his knowledge is confirmed and his perplexity is removed.

In short, the sentence, “I know that Allah has power over all things”,
does not mean that before it became clear to him, he was in some doubt
about the power of Allah. Such an inter­pretation would be wrong,
because

First: He was a prophet, who was spoken to by Allah. And the prophets
cannot be ignorant of Allah’s person and attributes; and especially of
His Omnipotence which is an attribute of person.

Second: Had he been ignorant of Allah’s power, he would have said, “Now
I know. . .” or “Now I knew.. .” But he said: “I know”, that is, from
before.

Third: What he had seen was a proof that Allah had power to give life
to the dead. It did not prove that He had power “over all things”. But
he said that he knew that Allah had power over all things. It shows that
this knowledge was not based on that demonstration.

Of course, it is possible that a man of lesser strength of character
would be stunned and bewildered by such a manifestation

of divine power, and would declare, forgetting all other things, that
He Who gives life to the dead has power over all things. But it would be
just a conjecture, based on fear and awe; it would be wiped out as soon
as that fear or awe was removed. Moreover, it would not be acceptable to
him who has not experienced that fear or awe. In any case, such an
illogical conclusion cannot be relied upon. But we see in this verse
that Allah confirms his declaration by putting it under His seal of
approval. It naturally, follows that this knowledge had not come to him
as a result of that manifestation.

In other words, if he had acquired that knowledge through that
manifestation, then all he would have known was that Allah had the power
to give life to the dead. He should therefore not have said that Allah
had the power over all things. Such talk would be wrong in fact, and
would be beneath the dignity of a prophet.

QUR’AN: And (remember) when Ibrahim said: “My Lord! Show me how Thou
givest life to the dead”:

It has been explained earlier that the conjunctive “and” is related to
a deleted (but understood) word, “remember”; and that that deleted word
governs the adverb “when”. Someone has said that the word “when” is
governed by “What! and do you not believe?” But this is patently
wrong.

The plea of Ibrahim, “My Lord ! show me how Thou givest life to the
dead”, proves

First: that he asked for demonstration, not for logical reasoning. The
prophets (and especially a prophet like Ibrahim, the friend of Allah)
are too great to believe in resurrection on the Day of Judgment without
any logical reason. A belief without reason is either blind following,
or also is based on defective intellection. And neither of these two can
be attributed to Ibrahim (a.s.). Moreover, he used the word “how” which
is used to ask about the state and condition of a thing, not about the
thing itself. When you say: “Have you seen Zayd?”, the question is about
the seeing itself. But if you say: “How did you see Zayd?”, the seeing
is already known and accepted; the question is only about the condition
of it and its particulars. When Ibrahim (a.s.) asked, “how Thou givest
life to the dead”, he already knew by logic and reason that Allah gives
life to the dead: now he only wanted to see now it was done.

Second: that the question asked by lbrahim (a.s.) could mean either of
the two following things:

1) How could the material parts of a dead man come to­gether after
being scattered hither and thither, and how could they accept life and
become alive? In other words. how could they be governed by the power of
Allah?

2) How does Allah bestow life on the dead. The first ques­tion is
concerned with the effect arid the result; the second one with the
reason and the cause. This second aspect is in a way the kingdom, which
Allah mentions in the Qur’an: His command, when He intends anything, is
only that He says to it, “Be “, and it is. Therefore, glory be to Him in
Whose hand is the kingdom of all things, and to Him you shall be brought
back (36:82-83).

Which of the two questions did Ibrahim (a.s.) ask? He asked the second
one, and not the first, because:

a) he asked “how Thou givest life”. He wanted to see the action of
Allah. The effect of the action on the dead was not his primary concern;
otherwise he would have asked “how the dead become alive” ;

b) if he only wanted to see how dead bodies respond to life, Allah
could have given life to any dead animal before the eyes of Ibrahim
(a.s.), and there would have been no need to make it happen in Ibrahim’s
hands;

c) if he wanted to see how a dead body comes to life, then the story
should have been ended on something like, “Know that Allah has the power
over all things”, and not on the words actually used, “Know that Allah
is Mighty, Wise.” The Qur’an always uses the appropriate adjectives at
the end of verses. The first meaning of the question concerns the power
of Allah and if that was the purpose of Ibrahim (a.s.) in asking, the
attribute of power should have been mentioned at the end. But Allah used
the attributes of Might and Wisdom which are more appropriate for
bestowing of life, rather than for the acceptance of life by matter,

A commentator has interpreted this verse in a strange way, which is
given hereunder. (Our comments on this interpretation will be given
afterwards.) He says:

When Ibrahim (a.s.) said: “My Lord! Show me. . . “, he only wanted to
“know” how the dead were given life; he did not want to “see” how it was
done. And the reply does not go beyond that information. The said
commentator further says: There is nothing in this verse to show that
Allah ordered him to give life to the birds. Nor that Ibrahim (a.s.) did
as he was ordered. Not every order is intended to be complied with.
Information is often given in the imperative mood. Suppose that someone
asks you how ink is made. You tell him: “Take this and that material and
then mix it in this way, and your ink shall be ready.” You want to
explain to him how ink is made; not that you are ordering him to make
ink then and there, even though you use the imperative mood.

He further says: There are many verses in the Qur’an in which
information has been given in the form of an order. This particular
verse gives just a similitude for the resurrection of the dead. It tells
Ibrahim: Take four birds, make them tame and train them so that they
obey your call. (The birds are the fittest of all animals for such
training.) Then put each bird on a mountain, and then call them. See how
swiftly they come to you, their separation and their distance from you
shall not prevent them from coming to you, flying. The same is the
similitude of the decree of your Lord. When He intends to give life to
the dead, He calls them with the word of creation, “Be alive”, and they
at once become alive. It is the same as was in the beginning of
creation. He said to the heaven and to the earth, “Come both willingly
or unwillingly “; they both said, “ We come willingly “.

The said commentator has given two “proofs” for his interpretation:

First: The word of Allah, “fa-surhunna” according to him means “make
them inclined”. That is, tame them and make them affable towards
yourself. It is because of this meaning that it is followed by the
preposition “ila” (to). The verb sara when followed by ila gives the
meaning of inclination.

He says that it is wrong to say (as commentators have done) that
fa-surhunna means, “then cut them into pieces after killing them.” This
interpretation is not in conformity with the prep­osition mentioned
above.

He further says: Some commentators have said that the preposition is
related to the word “fa-khudh”(then take). and the verse in effect says,
“then take to you four of the birds, then cut them into pieces”. But
such an interpretation is against the clear sequence of the words.

Second: Apparently, the pronouns in the words fa surhunna (make them
inclined), “minhunna (a part of them). “ud ‘uhunna" (call them) and
“ya’tinaka" (they will come to you), all refer to the “birds”. If we
accept the interpretation of the commentators that Ibrahim (a.s.) was
told to cut the birds into pieces and that after mixing their parts, he
was to put portions of them on mountains, and after that he was to call
them, then the pronouns would differ in their meanings: the first two
would refer to the birds, and the third and fourth to the pieces of the
birds. And such a thing is against the apparent meaning of the Qur’an.

The said commentator wrote the above-mentioned two arguments. Another
commentator, who agrees with him, has added three more “proofs”, which
we append below:

Third: What is the meaning of “showing how a thing is created?” Does it
mean demonstrating how the scattered parts and components are joined and
assembled and how they change back to their original living shape? If
yes, then it could not he shown by cutting the birds into pieces, mixing
them together and putting small portions on far away hills. How could
Ibrahim (a.s.) see from such a distance what changes and movements were
occurring in the smallest atoms of the pieces? Or, does it mean showing
him how Allah gives life to the dead? In other words, does it mean
comprehending the reality of the creative decree? But the creative
decree is the divine will which brings things into being; and the Qur’an
openly says, and Muslims agree, that it is impossible for a human being
to comprehend the creative decree of Allah; the attributes of Allah
cannot be subjected to “how”.

Fourth: The words of the Qur’an “then place on every mountain . . . “
point to some delay, and it is in conformity with the idea of taming and
training. The same is the import of the words fa surhunna which should
be translated, “then make them inclined”. The idea of killing the birds
and cutting them into pieces does not conform with the “delay” implied
in “thuma” (= then).

Fifth: If the events occurred as most of the commentators say, then the
verse should have ended on the divine name “Power­ful” and not on
“Mighty, Wise”; because “Mighty” is the one who cannot be
comprehended.

The author’s comments: The above was the interpretation of this group.
But if you ponder on the explanation given by us earlier, you will
realize that none of their arguments are valid. The plea of Ibrahim
(a.s.) begins with the word, “show me” then come the words, “how Thou
givest life . . .”; and the verse goes on describing how this “giving
life” was performed in the hands of Ibrahim (a.s.) himself. Add to it
the words, “then place on every mountain a part of them”; clearly “a
part” refers to a part of the bird, not a complete and alive bird. All
this clearly negates the interpretation offered by these people.

Now let us look at their arguments.

Reply to the first argument: fa surhunn definitely means, “then cut
them into pieces”. The preposition ila (to) is used here to imply
inclination. This implication of it was described in the commentary of
the words “arrafathu ila nisa’ikum (to go into your wives) (in verse 187
of this chapter). Thus, its complete meaning is: cut them into pieces
inclining them towards you.

Reply to the second argument: All the four pronouns refer to the birds.
Now comes the question: how could the pronouns in “call them” and “they
will come to you” refer to the birds, when there was no bird at all,
when only the pieces of those birds had remained? This question arises
because the said commentator does not know the difference between mere
verbal speech and creative speech. See, for example, the verse: Then He
directed Himself to the heaven and it was a vapor, so He said to it and
to the earth: “Come both, willingly or unwillingly” . They both said:
“We come willingly” (41:11). Here Allah addressed the heaven, while it
was non-existent; only its matter was present at that time. Likewise,
Ibrahim (a.s.) was told to call the birds, while they did not exist ;
only their pieces existed at that time. Then there is the verse: His
command, when He intends anything, is only that He says to it, ‘Be’, and
it is (36:82). Here a non­existent thing is addressed by the creative
speech “Be”.

The fact is that verbal speech requires an addressee to exist before
the speech. But the opposite is true in the case of creative speech.
There, the existence of the addressee follows that speech. In this case,
the talk, address or speech means “creation”; and existence is caused by
creation. In the above-mentioned verse 36:82 “and it is” (i.e.,
existence) depends on the creative word “Be” (i.e., creation).

Reply to the third argument: We believe that the second alternative is
correct: that Ibrahim (a.s.) wanted to see how Allah gives life to the
dead; he did not want to see how a dead body accepts life.

The said commentator has argued against this alternative. He says that
it implies comprehension of the will of Allah, which, being an attribute
of Allah, is impossible to comprehend.

But the fact is that the will of Allah is an attribute of action, and
is inferred from divine actions like creating, giving life, and so
forth. What is impossible to comprehend is the Person of Allah, as He
says: . . . they do not comprehend Him in knowledge (20:110).

Will is deduced from action. It is creation accompanied by the
existence of the created thing. It is the word “Be” mentioned in verse
36:82: “. . . that He says to it ‘Be’ and it is”. This word, “Be”, is
the kingdom of everything that is mentioned in the next verse: Therefore
glory be to Him in Whose hand is the kingdom of everything . . .
(36:83). And Allah has said that He had shown Ibrahim (a.s.) the great
kingdom of His creation: And thus did We show Ibrahim the kingdom of the
heavens and the earth, and that he might be of those who are sure
(6:75).

Obviously, among the great kingdom shown to Ibrahim (a.s.) was this
giving life to the birds, mentioned in this verse.

Why are these people so confused? It is because they do not understand
the force behind such miraculous happenings. They think that when
Ibrahim (a.s.) called the birds and they became alive, or when ‘Isa
(a.s.) said to a dead body, “Rise up by permission of Allah” and it rose
up, or when Sulayman (a.s.) ordered the wind to blow and it did so, it
was because of some effective cause which was hidden in those words by
Allah; or because of the thinking process of these prophets which showed
itself in these words (made of letters), as our words lead one to their
meanings. These people do not realize that all this was based upon these
prophets’ spiritual connection with the divine power which can never be
overpowered; and with Allah’s Omnipotence which knows no bounds and
which is the real power that brings everything into being.

Reply to the fourth argument: The delay inferred from the word thumb
(then) is found in cutting the birds into pieces as well, dividing and
mixing the parts and putting them on various mountains. This matter
needs no elaboration.

Reply to the fifth argument: This argument, in fact, goes against the
objector. What he wants to prove is that Allah only explained to Ibrahim
(a.s.), in an academic and theoretical manner, how the things were made
alive; He did not show it to him by demonstration. If that was the case,
then the verse should have been ended on the adjective “Powerful”,
instead of “Mighty, Wise”. We have explained earlier that the adjectives
“Mighty” and “Wise “ are more appropriate for our explanation of the
verse.

Another commentator has interpreted this verse in another wrong way. He
thinks that what Ibrahim (a.s.) wanted to see was how a dead body
accepts life and becomes alive; that his question was concerned with the
effect and the result, not with its reason and cause. His argument is as
follows:

Ibrahim (a.s.) did not ask about any religiously essential matter. He
only wanted to know how the dead become alive, so that he might have
knowledge of it. It is not necessary for true belief to know “how” the
dead are resurrected. Thus Ibrahim (a.s.) wanted to acquire some
knowledge which was not necessary for true belief. This view is
supported by the mode of the question: “how?” This particle is used to
ask about a state or condition. If you say “How does Zayd judge between
people?”, the fact that he does judge between people, is already known
to you. What you want to know is only the condition under which, and the
manner in which, he does this work. On the other hand, if you want to
enquire about the fact of his judging, you would say “Does Zayd judge
between people?” It proves that Ibrahim (a.s.) already knew and believed
that Allah gives life to the dead: he only wanted to know how it was
done. Then why did Allah tell him: “What! and do you not believe?” This
question was asked to remove any possible misunderstanding about
Ibrahim’s faith. The mode of questioning, used by Ibrahim, is mainly to
ask about the state and condition. But it is also used, at times, to
show the disability of the person so addressed. Someone claims that lie
can lift an extremely heavy weight, and you tell him “Well, show me how
you lift it”. This question shows your conviction that he is unable to
do so. As Allah knew that Ibrahim (a.s.) had not meant any such thing in
his question. He put this counter-question to him, so that he might
clarify this point in unambiguous words, and might thus remove any
misunderstanding that the wording of the first question could have
caused. In this way, his pristine faith was clearly confirmed and no
hearer could entertain any doubt about it. The words "but that my heart
may be at ease" mean that Ibrahim (a.s.) wanted his heart not to wonder
hither and thither thinking about various ways in which a dead body
might become alive again. He wanted it to be at ease by seeing it with
his own eyes. That his heart was not at ease before had no adverse
effect on his faith in the power of Allah to give life to the dead. And
when he was shown how the dead were made alive, nothing was added to his
already perfect faith. He just acquired some knowledge which was not
very necessary for the faith.

Then, after a long discussion, he says: This verse shows the excellence
of Ibrahim (a.s.). He was at once shown what he had asked for, was shown
what he wanted to.and that, also, in the easiest way; while ‘Uzayr’ know
after undergoing death for a hundred years.

The author’s comments: Our previous explanation is enough to show that
Ibrahim (a.s.) wanted to know how Allah gives life to the dead and not
as to how the dead accept life. He wanted to see the cause, not the
effect. That is why he said, “how Thou givest life to the dead” (active
voice) ; and did not say, “how the dead are made alive” (passive voice).
Then there is the fact that the whole episode was made to happen through
the activities of Ibrahim (a.s.) himself. If he had wanted to see only
the effect (and not the cause), it would have been enough to show him
any dead body coming alive, as was shown to the one who passed by a town
when it had fallen upon its roofs; Allah told him to “look at the bones,
how We assemble them together, then clothe them with flesh”. There would
have been no need to make everything happen through the agency of
Ibrahim (a.s.) himself. The trouble is that these people measure the
spiritual condition of the prophets with the measure of their own common
spirits, and in this way fail to understand how the prophets receive
divine knowledge and how they perform miracles. They do not appreciate
the difference between showing a prophet how the dead became alive and
making him the active agent to give life to the dead: for them, both
have the same significance! They have lost touch with divine realities,
and fallen into this error. And the more they search for the truth, the
farther they go from it. See how he interprets the “ease of heart”. He
says that Ibrahim (a.s.) wanted his heart not to wonder hither and
thither thinking about the various ways in which a thing might be made
alive. This alleged wondering hither and thither is a nonsense that is
utterly impossible for a prophet like Ibrahim (a.s.).

Moreover, if Ibrahim (a.s.) had wanted to see how dead bodies come
alive, the reply was not an answer to his query at all. He said, "how
Thou givest life to the dead ". The word used in the question is
"al-mawta " (the dead ones); it is plural and general. He might have
meant the dead men, or the dead ones in general, including dead human
beings and all types of animals. But Allah showed him only the
resurrection of four birds.

Then the said commentator has shown, according to his thinking, the
superiority of Ibrahim (a.s.) over \`Uzayr (whom he identifies as the
passer-by, mentioned in the preceding verse). He thinks that the two
stories have the same significance; both men wanted to see how the dead
were made alive and both were shown. But, as we have mentioned earlier,
neither story is con­cerned in any way with that question. And he has
been unable to see the brilliant exposition and deep realities which the
two verses contain.

Lastly, if the verse intended just to explain how the dead come alive,
it would have been appropriate to end it on the adjective "Omnipotent",
or "Powerful", and not on "Mighty, Wise". See, for instance, the
following verses:

And among His signs is this, that you see the earth still, but when We
send down on it the water, it stirs and swells: most surely He Who gives
it life is the Giver of life to the dead; surely He has power over all
things (41:39). As you see, the verse explains "how" the dead are given
life, and it ends on the attribute of Omnipotence.

Have they not seen that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth
and was not tired by their creation, is able to give life to the dead?
Aye! He has surely power over all things (46:33). Here again the "how"
is explained through a simile, and the verse ends on the attribute of
power.

QUR'AN: He said: "What! and do you not believe? " He said: "Certainly,
but that my heart may be at ease ":

\`Bala (certainly) is used to negate a negative question; and thus the
negative of the question becomes positive. For example, Allah asked the
souls: "Am I not your Lord? " They said: "Certainly " (7:172). Had they
replied, na 'am yes), it would have become infidelity. at-Tamaninah and
al-itminan is the quiet of the heart after its being troubled and
agitated. It is derived from the words, itma’annati ‘l-ard (the earth
was depressed) and ardun mutma’innah (low land) which are used when the
earth becomes low, so that if the water comes in, it stays therein and
if a stone falls in, it remains motionless.

Allah said: “and do you not believe?” Had He said, ‘do you not
believe?’, it would have shown that the original question ( “Show me how
Thou givest life to the dead”) was asked because of disbelief; and it
would have become an admonition and reproach. By adding “and", Allah
showed that Ibrahim’s question was quite in order, but it should not be
associated with disbelief in resurrection. “wa” (= and) is a conjunctive
and it joins two words, phrases or sentences. When Allah added it in His
question, it changed the import of the sentence. Now it means: Your
question is in order, but it is associated with disbelief in
resurrection? Without this conjunctive, it would have meant: Do you ask
it because you do not believe? It would have turned it into a censure
and reprimand.

“Belief” mentioned in the divine question is general, it is not used
with any condition or restriction. It signifies that one cannot believe
in Allah if one is doubtful about the resurrection of the dead. No doubt
the question “and do you not believe?” was asked in the context of
giving life to the dead. But the context does not restrict the general
meaning of the word. “Belief”, therefore, retains its unconditional
meaning, and shows that nobody could be a believer unless he believed in
resurrection.

Likewise, the words of Ibrahim (a.s.) quoted by Allah “that my heart
may be at ease” are unconditional. It means that he wanted to acquire
total tranquility and to cut at the roots of all types of fancies and
imaginations. Human imagination is bound to the senses; all its
activities are confined within the circle of the things perceived by
these senses. It shrinks from those things which are known through
reason only, even when a man believes them to be true, like those
principles of metaphysics which are beyond the sphere of matter and
which cannot be known through any of the five senses. The mind resists
those realities even when their premises are sound and certain. There
always remain some vague doubt about the authenticity of those
conclusions. Such doubts and conflicting ideas become strengthened by
inclinations and desires, although the spirit firmly accepts the truth
of those principles and believes in them unconditionally. Thus, belief
and faith should remain firm and intact: the imagination should only
harm it by a slight distress, which we may call pricks. A man sleeps in
a dark room in which is placed a dead body. He knows that the dead
person is just a lump of matter without any sense or will; it cannot
harm anybody in any way. But the imagination refuses to accept this
truth, it goes on thinking fantastic things concerning that dead body;
and it frightens the man to such an extent that it may happen that he
loses the balance of his mind, or even dies because of terror.

This example shows that the existence of some thoughts or fantasies
conflicting with the sure truths, is not always contrary to faith and
belief. But surely it annoys the spirit and robs it of its tranquility
and ease. Such an imaginary distress cannot be removed except by
demonstration or sensual perception. That is what is meant by the
saying: Seeing has an effect which knowledge does not have. For
instance, Allah informed Musa (a.s.), when he was at his appointed
place, that his people had gone astray and were worshipping a calf.
Hearing it, he believed it. Yet, his distress and anger showed itself
only when he returned to them and saw them with his own eyes, in their
idolatry. Then his violent grief reached its highest point; he threw
down the tablets and seized his brother by the head dragging him towards
himself.

From this and the previous explanations it is clear that Ibrahim (a.s.)
had not asked to see a phenomenon which could be perceived through the
senses; that is, he did not want to see how the parts and pieces of a
dead body accept life after death. He wanted to see the action of Allah
in giving life to the dead. But this action could not be seen, although
it was not unrelated to a perceived phenomenon, that is, the acceptance
of life by the pieces of the dead bodies. Thus Ibrahim (a.s.) had in
fact asked for an evident truth and certainty.

QUR’AN: He said: “Then take four of the birds, then cut them (into
pieces), then place on every, mountain a part of them, they will come to
you”:

The word “surhunna” (cut them into pieces) is derived from sara; yasuru
(he cut/he inclined; he is cutting/he is inclining). Another recitation
is sirhunna, derived from sara; yasiru with the same meanings. The
context shows that it means “cut them”. The preposition, “ila" (= to)
gives a hint of inclination, as was explained earlier. The meaning,
then, will be: cut them (into pieces), inclining them towards you; or,
incline them towards you cutting them into pieces.

Anyhow, the above sentences are the answer to the prayer of Ibrahim
(a.s.) when he said: “My Lord! show me how Thou givest life to the
dead.” Obviously, the answer should fit the question. The norms of
eloquence and the wisdom of the speaker leave no room for verbosity; a
wise and eloquent speaker does not allow his speech to be encumbered by
unnecessary words which have no bearing on the intended meaning. This is
especially so with the Qur’an, the best speech, revealed by the best of
speakers to the best of hearers. The story is not as simple as it
appears at first glance. Had it been so, the answer would have been
completed by the giving of life to any dead body in any manner, and the
extra details would have been deemed unnecessary. But the facts tell us
otherwise: Allah included in it many extra particulars and details. It
was decided that the dead to be given life should be from among the
birds; they should be alive, should be four in number, they should be
killed and their parts and pieces be mixed together, then the mixed
matter should be divided into many portions; then every portion should
be placed in places distant from each other like the peak of this
mountain and summit of that hill; then they should be given life through
lbrahim (a.s.), that is, the very man who had asked for it; and thus
they should all gather around him alive and none the worse for their
experience.

All these details and peculiarities must have had some connection with
the aim of the story. The commentators have written many reasons for
these points, which only add to the readers’ confusion (as may be seen
in the more extensive books of exegesis of the Qur’an).

However, these particulars must have been related to the question. We
find that there are two aspects in the question of Ibrahim (a.s.) which
require special attention:

First: His use of the active voice, “how Thou givest life”. He wanted
to see the giving of life, in-as-much as it is an attribute of Allah. He
did not want to see it from the other side, that is, how the various
parts of a dead body accept life after death.

Second: His use of the plural, “dead ones”, which is an added
particular.

Keeping these two matters in view, we find that the answer fits the
question perfectly, there is nothing unnecessary or extraneous in it.

The first aspect was fully answered by making it happen through Ibrahim
(a.s.) himself. The words “then take”, “then cut them” and “then place”,
were all essential for this purpose. Finally Allah said, “then call
them, they will come to you flying”. Their coming to Ibrahim flying,
that is, their life, was caused by Ibrahim’s call. Allah made his call
the cause of the giving of life to the dead birds - and there is no
bestowing of life except by the decree of Allah. The call of Ibrahim, by
order of Allah, had a sort of connection with the decree of Allah which
gives life to all. In this way, Ibrahim saw this bestowing with his own
eyes, and saw how the divine decree creates life. Had the call of
Ibrahim (a.s.) not been connected with the decree of Allah (Who, when He
intends a thing, say to it ‘Be’, and it is), and had it been connected,
like our own talk, with the images in his mind only, it could not create
anything, could not give life to any dead thing.

The second aspect, the use of the plural, “dead ones”, shows that the
multiplicity of the dead had some bearing on the question. The bodies,
after they had died, their components disintegrated, their shapes
altered and their conditions totally changed, could not be recognized,
nor could there remain any connection or attachment between their former
parts; they became lost in the darkness of nothingness, like forgotten
myths that exist neither in reality nor in the imagination. Ibrahim
(a.s.) wanted to see how the life-giving power of Allah would encompass
them when there was nothing to be encompassed.

This same question was asked arrogantly by Pharaoh, and Musa (a.s.)
replied to him by knowledge. Allah says quoting this talk: (Pharaoh)
said: “Then what is the state of the former generation?” He (Musa) said:
“The knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a book; errs not my Lord, nor
does He forget” (20:51-52).

Anyhow, this aspect of the question was answered by Allah when He
ordered Ibrahim (a.s.) to take four of the birds (perhaps, the birds
were chosen for this demonstration because it could be carried out on
them easily and without delay) so that he might observe their ways, see
their distinguishing features and particular shapes, and thus might know
them perfectly. He was then ordered to kill them, chop and mince them,
mixing their small particles completely together. Then he was required
to divide that mixture into portions and put each portion on a separate
mountain, so that there should not remain any chance of recognition.
Then he was to call them, and they would come to him flying. By this
demonstration, he would see that the re-establishing of separate
identities and the bestowal of life follows the call; and that the call
was addressed to their souls. The body follows the soul, it is not the
other way round. The body is a dependant of the soul, and not vice
versa. The body has the same relation to the soul that a shadow has to
the body. The shadow appears when the body exists; it inclines according
to the inclination of the body; and when the body ceases to exist, the
shadow becomes extinct. Likewise, when Allah creates a living thing, or
gives life to a dead animal or man, the creative decree affects,
originally, the spirit, and the material parts follow the spirit and
come into being, because of the special bond created by Allah between
the spirit and its body - the bond which is preserved by Allah and which
we cannot comprehend. In this way, the identity of the body follows the
identity of the spirit, without any gap and without any hindrance. Allah
refers to it in His words, “they will come to you flying”, that is,
without any delay whatsoever.

The same principle has been enunciated in verse 32:10-11, And they say:
“What! when we have become lost in the earth, shall we then indeed be in
a new creation?” Nay! they are disbelievers in the meeting of their
Lord. Say: “The angel of death who is given charge of you causes you to
die, then to your Lord you are brought back. “ We have explained to some
extent this verse while discussing the non-materiality of the soul;
further details will be given in a proper place, God willing.

“Then take four of the birds”: He was given this order so that he might
identify them perfectly. Thus there would be no room for doubt when they
had been made whole and alive again. Also he would observe their
particulars and peculiarities, and then would see how all distinctions
had been lost after death.

“Then cut them (into pieces), then place on every mountain a part of
them”: Kill them, cut them into pieces, mix those pieces all together
and divide the portions on the mountains found in your locality. In this
way, the parts of each bird would be scattered here and there, and they
would not be recognizable.

This order indicate that this event occurred after Ibrahim (a.s.) had
migrated from Babylonia to Syria; because there are no mountains in
Babylonia.

“Then call them”: Call the birds ‘O peacock!, O this!, O that!’ The
pronoun “them” refers to the “four birds”. If Allah had wished Ibrahim
to call the pieces of the birds, He would have said “nadihinna” (cry out
to them), because the pieces were on far away mountains, and not
ud’uhunna (call them) which is used for calling someone nearby. The
order to “call them” indicates that he was to call the birds (i.e.,
their spirits) themselves. “They will come to you flying”. That is, they
will get their own bodies and shapes, and will acquire all their
faculties and powers including flying.

QUR’AN: And know that Allah is Mighty, Wise:

He is Mighty; if a thing ceases to exist, it is not lost to Him. He is
Wise; He does not do a thing but by its proper method. He creates bodies
by creating souls, and not the other way round.

TRADITIONS

About the words of Allah: Did You not see him who disputed with Ibrahim
about his Lord: at -Tayalisi and Ibn Abi Hatim have narrated from ‘Ali
ibn Abi Talib that he said: “He who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord
was Namrud (Nimrod), son of Kan‘an.” (ad-Durru ‘l-manthur)

Abu Ali at-Tabrisi has said: “There is a difference of opinion as to
the time when this dispute occurred. It is said that it was when he
shattered the idols, before he was thrown into fire. (It is reported
from Muqatil.) Also it is said that it was after lie was thrown into
fire, and it had became cool and safe for him. (It is reported from
as-Sadiq - a.s.)” (Tafsiru ‘l-burhan)

The author says: The verse does not say when the dispute had taken
place. But it may fairly be inferred that it was after Ibrahim had been
thrown into fire. The stories written in the Qur’an about the early
period of lbrahim (a.s.) - when he argued with his uncle and other
people and then shattered the idols, give us to understand that he first
met Namrud when he was taken to his court accused of breaking their
idols: and Namrud ordered him to be burnt alive. At that time Namrud was
too busy in sentencing him to have any dialogue with him about his Lord:
whether it was Allah or Namrud. Also, if this event had occurred at that
time, Namrud would have disputed with him on behalf of the idols, and
not for establishing his own divinity.

There are many traditions, narrated by the Sunni and the Shi ‘ite
narrators that the one “who passed by a town and it had fallen down upon
its roofs” was the prophet, Armiah. Other traditions say that he was
‘Uzayr. But both types of traditions are “solitary”, (i.e., not
mutawatir) and one is not bound to accept any of them. Moreover, the
chains of some are weak. The Qur’an too is silent about the passer-by’s
identity, and the Bible does not mention this story.

The story given in those traditions is long, and there are some
differences among them. In any case, those traditions are beyond the
scope of our book. Those wishing to read them should look for them into
other books.

as-Sadiq (a.s.) told in a tradition about the words of Allah: And
(remember) when Ibrahim said: “My Lord! Show me how Thou givest life to
the dead. .. “: “And this verse is allegorical; it means that he
(lbrahim - a.s.) asked about ‘how’?, and ‘how’ is an action of Allah,
Mighty and Great is He; (it is a thing that) if a knowledgeable person
did not know it he cannot be faulted for it nor can any defect be
attributed to his belief in monotheism . . .” (Ma ‘ani ‘l-akhbar)

The author says: The meaning of this tradition may be understood from
our earlier explanations.

‘Ali ibn Asbat says that Abu ‘l-Hasan ar-Rida (a.s.) was asked about
the words of Allah: He (Ibrahim) said: “Certainly! but that my heart may
be at ease. “ “Was there any doubt in his heart?” The Imam said : “No!
but he wanted an increase (in it) from Allah . . .” (at-Tafsir,
al-‘Ayyashi)

The author says: This matter has been narrated in al-Kafi from as-Sadiq
(a.s.) and al-‘Abdu ‘s-Salih (a.s.). Its meaning has been explained
earlier.

al-Qummi narrated from his father from Ibn Abi ‘Umayr from Abu Ayyub
from Abu Basir from as-Sadiq (a.s.) saying “Verily Ibrahim saw a dead
body on a river-bank; aquatic carnivores were eating it, then they
attacked each other and some of them ate the others. Ibrahim was
astonished (to see it) and said: ‘My Lord! show me how Thou givest life
to the dead.’ Allah said: ‘What! and do you not believe?’ He said:
‘Certainly, but that my heart may be at ease.’ Allah said: ‘Then take
four of the birds, then cut them into pieces, then place on every
mountain a part of them, then call them, they will come to you flying;
and know that Allah is Mighty, Wise.’ Thereupon, Ibrahim took a peacock,
a rooster, a pigeon and a crow. Then Allah said: ‘Cut them into pieces
and mix their flesh together and place them separately on ten
mountains.’ Thereafter he (Ibrahim - a.s.) called them and said: ‘Be
alive by the permission of Allah.’ The birds began assembling, the flesh
and bones of each joining together with its head; and they flew towards
Ibrahim. (Seeing it) Ibrahim said: ‘Verily, Allah is Mighty, Wise.’ “
(at-Tafsir)

The author says: al. ‘Ayyashi has narrated it in his at-Tafsir from Abu
Basir from as-Sadiq (a.s.); and it has been narrated through Sunni
chains from Ibn ‘Abbas.

The words of the Imam: “Verily, Ibrahim saw a dead body . . . My Lord!
Show me how Thou givest life to the dead”’, describe the reason why
Ibrahim asked this question: he had just seen the pieces of the body
being disjoined and scattered, and their condition changed. He observed
their dispersal in all directions and the deterioration in their
condition which was to such an extent that nothing of the original body
remained there.

Question: The tradition apparently says that the doubt was that which
is known as the doubt of the eater and the eaten; because it mentions
that the carnivores attacked each other and some of them ate the others,
and that the wonder and question of Ibrahim (a.s.) was based on this
phenomenon.

Comment: There are two doubts: 1) the scattering and dispersal of the
parts of the bodies, the change in their properties and shapes, in
short, their complete extinction so that apparently nothing remained to
accept the life; 2) the parts of one animal become the parts of another
animal; how could the two animals be resurrected whole? The part of one
is also the part of another; whichever is resurrected whole, the other
one will be incomplete. This is called the doubt of the eater and the
eaten.

The answer given by Allah - that the body follows the soul - is
sufficient to remove both doubts. But what Ibrahim (a.s.) was ordered to
do was not related to the doubt of the eater and the eaten; it was
directly concerned with the first doubt dispersal of the parts and total
extinction, even though the basic answer removes both doubts.

What the tradition mentions some of the carnivores eating the others is
not intended to be a part of the explanation of the verse.

The Imam (as-Sadiq - a.s.) has said : “Thereupon, Ibrahim took a
peacock, a rooster, a pigeon and a crow.” Some other traditions say that
the birds were a vulture, a duck, a peacock and a rooster. It has been
narrated by as-Saduq in ‘Uyunu ‘l­akhbar from ar-Rida (a.s.). It has
also been reported from Mujahid, Ibn Jarih, ‘Ata’ and Ibn Zayd. Still
others say that it was a hoopoe, a sparrow-hawk, a peacock and a crow.
It has been narrated by al-‘Ayyashi, through Ma‘ruf ibn Kharabbudh, from
al-Baqir (a.s.) : and is reported from Ibn ‘Abbas too. Another Sunni
tradition quotes Ibn ‘Abbas as saying that the birds were a crested
crane, a peacock, a rooster and a pigeon. There is only one name which
appears in every report: peacock.

The Imam said : “place them separately on ten mountains.” That the
mountain were ten is unanimously mentioned in the traditions of the
Imams of Ahlu ‘l-bayt. Someone has put their number as four; another as
seven.

‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm said : “I was present in the court of
al-Ma’mun and with him was ar-Rida (‘All ibn Musa). al-Ma’mun said to
him: ‘0 Son of the Messenger of Allah! Is it not your belief that the
prophets were sinless?’ He said: ‘Certainly.’ Then he (al-Ma’mun) asked
him (ar-Rida - a.s.) about some verses of the Qur’an, and said to him,
among others: ‘Now tell me about the words of Allah: “My Lord! show me
how Thou givest life to the dead. “He said: “What! and do you not
believe? “He said: “Certainly, but that my heart may be at ease.”
ar-Rida said: ‘Verily Allah, Blessed and High is He!, had revealed to
Ibrahim: “I am going to take from my servants a friend; if he asks me to
give life to the dead, I will grant his prayer.” It came into the heart
of Ibrahim that he was that friend. Therefore, he said; “My Lord! Show
me how Thou givest life to the dead. “Allah said:. “What! and do you not
believe?” Ibrahim said: “Certainly, but that my heart may be at ease
about Thy friendship...”” (‘Uyun ‘l-akhbar)

The author says: We have expressed our views (while discussing about
the Garden of Adam) about ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm and about this
tradition which he has narrated from ar-Rida (a.s.).

However, this tradition throws some light on the fact that the status
of the friendship of Allah brings with it the granting of prayers. The
language supports this too. al-Khallah means ‘need’. The friend is
called al-khalil because when friendship is perfect, one friend
describes his needs to the other friend - and why should one describe
his need if his friend cannot fulfill it?

\* \* \* \* \*

1. Sinimmar, an architect of repute, built the palace, al-Khawarnaq,
for King Nu‘man. When it was completed, he was thrown down from the roof
and thus died. The King gave this order so that he could not build such
a palace for anyone else.

2. ‘Uzayr = Ezra or Ezrah of the Apocrypha. He is known as Esdras in
the Roman Catholic Bible.

