Salafiyyah Interpretation of Ayah 3 of Surah al-Zumar
=====================================================

The Chief Mufti of Saudi Arabia, Shaikh 'Abd al-'Aziz bin Baz, in his
exchange of letters with Iran's Ayatollah Muhammad Wa'iz-Zadeh
Khurasani, has remarked:

The polytheists also testified to the Oneness of ALLAH (SWT) but as the
Holy Qur'an states, they tried to justify their worshipping of idols by
saying:***"...we worship them not but (in order) that they make us near
to God..." (39:3).*** This is similar to the actions of those who
make*tawassul* to those in the graves in order to seek proximity to
ALLAH (SWT).[^29]

Critique
--------

'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Hussein Tabataba\`i responding to such a
reasoning says that according to the books of religions and the
testimony of idol-worshippers, hundreds of millions of whom live in
India, China and Japan, idolatry is based on the theory that the
creation of the universe and even the deities which are worshipped, have
as their source the same Almighty God, but since He is beyond
comprehension there is no other choice but to worship some of His
closest servants such as angels, genies and saints so that they make
intercession (*shafa'at* ) and people may reach the proximity of God
through them. In the opinion of the polytheists, angels are like the
builder to whom the owner of the house has entrusted the building and
hence intercession (*shafa'at* ) is according to His discretion.

But, adds 'Allamah Tabataba\`i, in the Holy Qur'an*tawassul* to the
Prophets is in the manner of an intermediary and is not something
independent, and for this reason it has not been considered as shirk or
polytheism. Similarly, the polytheists have been reproached in the Holy
Qur'an not because of seeking intercession (*shafa'at* ) but because of
worshipping other than God.[^30]


