Salafiyyah Interpretation of Ayah 10 of Surah Yunus
===================================================

Shaikh Bin Baz in his answers to Ayatollah Wa'iz-Zadeh has also cited
the following*Ayah* of the Holy Qur'an as another instance of
non-permissibility of*tawassul* , saying that in his opinion Muslims who
uphold*tawassul* to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) are like idolaters who seek
intercession from objects, which are of no use:

***"And they worship beside Allah which can neither hurt them nor profit
them, and they say: these are our intercessors with Allah..." (10:18)***

Critique
--------

First, this*Ayah* has no connection with Muslims since they do not
worship any thing or object except ALLAH (SWT).

Secondly, as said earlier, addressing the Prophet is not meant to
worship him but to request him for supplication and intercession.

Thirdly, it is a matter of surprise to compare the Prophet to those whom
the Holy Qur'an says "can neither hurt them nor profit them," since the
fact cannot be denied that obedience to the Prophet is to the benefit of
Muslims and disobedience to him, whether during his lifetime or after
his death, is certainly detrimental to them. Similarly, the supplication
and intercession of the Prophet for those who are eligible, whether in
worldly life or in the Hereafter, is profitable for the Muslims as
unanimously confirmed by the 'ulama'.

Fourthly, it is a grave error to equate the belief of the Muslims that
Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) is the intercessor, with the belief of the
polytheists "these (idols) are our intercessors with ALLAH (SWT)," since
God has explicitly rejected their claim as lies.

***"...those who take guardians besides Him, (say) we worship them not
but (in order) that they make us near to Allah; surely Allah will judge
between them about what they differ; surely Allah does not guide the one
who is a liar and an ingrate." (39:3)***

As is clear from the wordings of the Holy Qur'an the polytheists who
make such claims are liars. They are not conscious of God, neither do
they worship Him or prostrate to Him nor have they any faith in their
Unseen Creator:

***"And when it is said to them prostrate you in obeisance to the Rahman
(the Beneficent God), they say: Who is Rahman? Shall we prostrate in
obeisance unto what you bid us? And it (only) adds to their flight (from
the truth)." (25:60)***


