Non-Permissibility of Tawassul to the Dead
==========================================

Another claim put forward by the Salafiyyah is that, on the basis of
evidences*tawassul* to Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) during his lifetime
is acceptable but after his death there is lack of evidence to support
the view that*tawassul* was ever made to him.[^31]

Critique
--------

The contemporary Sunni scholar Dr. Ramadan Buti of the University of
Damascus, rejects this viewpoint of the Wahhabiyyah sect. He
says*tawassul* to Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) and things pertaining to
him is permissible, whether during his lifetime or after his death,
since things or items related to him are not necessarily linked to his
lifetime such as tabarruk (sacred relics) or*tawassul* , as is confirmed
by Sahih al-Bukhari, Chapter on the hair of the Prophet.

No Muslim would ever attribute to other than the One and Only God the
effect of anything related to the person of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.)
during his life or after his death. If a person were to hold the
opposite view that this effect is independent in itself, he would be
considered an infidel. Accordingly, the tabarruk of the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) and*tawassul* to him and to things related to him, does not
mean attributing the blessed effect to his personal influence
independent of God, but is an indication of the fact that as the Last
Divine-Sent Messenger he is the 'Best of Creation' and is the 'Mercy of
Allah' for the entire creation. Therefore*tawassul* to him is a means of
gaining proximity to ALLAH (SWT) and His infinite Mercy for mankind. It
was in this sense that the companions sought*tawassul* to the Prophet
and things related to him. Likewise, it is recommended to seek
intercession (*shafa'at* ) through the pious persons such as the Ahl
al-Bayt (A.S.) of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.).

Sunni authorities including Shawkani, Ibn Qudamah Hanbali, San'ani and
others are unanimous on this issue as was made clear concerning the
request for rain. In view of these facts, Dr. Buti calls it a strange
confusion by the Wahhabiyyah to make difference between the lifetime of
the Prophet and after his death.[^32]

To quote Professor Hasan bin 'Ali al-Saqqaf, polytheism (shirk) is
polytheism either in this world or in the next, whether or not the
person through whom people are seeking*tawassul* to God, is alive. But,
he adds, without the least doubt*tawassul* to Prophet Muhammad
(S.A.W.A.) is supported by the general rules of permissibility, and
includes both his lifetime and after his death as well as in the
Hereafter.[^33]


