Tawassul to the Dead is Addressing the Non-Existent
===================================================

Muhammad bin 'Abd al-Wahhab writes:*Tawassul* to a person who is alive
has no objection, but*tawassul* to the dead is to address the
non-existent and is an absurd, ugly and despised act.

Critique
--------

1. This statement is a clear violation of ALLAH (SWT)'s words in the
Holy Qur'an:

***"Reckon not those who are slain in the way of Allah, to be dead; Nay!
They are alive and are being sustained by their Lord." (3:169)***

2. It is also in contradiction to the saying of Prophet Muhammad
(S.A.W.A.) as recorded in Sahih al-Bukhari, Sahih Muslim and all other
authoritative (Sihah) Sunni works. After the Battle of Badr the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) stood near the well of the same name and addressed the dead
with*ayah* 46 of Surah al-A'raf. When some of his companions objected
that how could the dead hear him, the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) replied: "You
are not more hearing than them."[^34]

3. It is in opposition to the statements of Islamic intellectuals such
as al-Ghazzali who writes in Ihya' 'Ulum al-Din: "Some people think
death as extinction and state of non-existent, and those who hold such
beliefs have no faith and actually mean to deny ALLAH (SWT) and the
Hereafter."

Hafiz al-Nawawi in al-Majmu' fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab which says that
while standing beside the tombs of Prophets, especially the shrine of
Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.), it is recommended to request them to
supplicate to God for our needs, since they are alive and as the Holy
Qur'an says: "are being sustained by their Lord." (3:169)[^35]

Shaikh Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri who states his fatwa and that of 75
'ulama' of different Islamic lands as follows: In our view, Prophet
Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) is alive in his holy tomb and his life is similar to
worldly life but without its duties. 'Allamah Jalal al-Din Suyuti writes
in his book Anba' al-Azkiya' bi-Hayat al-Anbiya' on the authority of
Shaikh Taqi al-Din Subki that the proof of the life of Prophets and
martyrs in their graves is the prayer offered by Prophet Moses in his
own tomb as mentioned in a hadith. In this regard Shaikh Shams al-Islam
Muhammad Qasim has written a booklet titled Ab-i Hayat.[^36]

4. Ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab in answer to Shaikh Ja'far Najafi said that
seeking help from the dead is an absurd act. But how could this be
called shirk since there is no connection between absurdity and
polytheism? And if*tawassul* with fellow humans is considered shirk,
then how could the difference between*tawassul* to the living
and*tawassul* to the dead, be ascertained?

5. Here Ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab has contradicted his own opinion, since as we
saw earlier in this article he believed that Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.)
is alive in his tomb and said that this state of life of the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) is superior than the life of the martyrs. Ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab
also said that the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) hears the voice of those who send
blessings on him.[^37]

6. Farid Wajdi mentions in his encyclopaedia:

In our era God has opened two of the windows of knowledge for us and the
proof of this two windows confirms beyond an iota of doubt that man has
a soul, which without the need of the physical body can lead its own
independent life.[^38]

From the 19th century onwards the science of spiritism or contacts with
the souls of the departed has been discovered and developed upon by the
world's researchers after precise study and experiments in this regard.
In the US and Europe, the summoning of the souls of the departed is part
of the world of science.[^39]

The information which modern scientists have discovered after witnessing
the summoning of souls, is yet another instance of the fact that the
human being has an independent soul outside the physical body that does
not perish with death. The connection of the souls of the departed with
the living is the finest proof of the independence and immortality of
the soul, and most of its capability concerning many works is with the
permission of Almighty God.[^40]

The souls of the righteous and pious persons, which have been released
from the mortal world, have acquired superior perception and
consciousness and in their ascendant journey are free of the limits of
time and space. They penetrate with ease the skies and the depths of the
oceans to observe the grandeur of God's creation.


