Blocking of Means (Sadd-i Dhara'i')
===================================

Some of the Wahhabi 'ulama' such as Dr. Muhammad bin Sa'd Suway'ir who
is one of the deputies of Shaikh Bin Baz, say that*tawassul* and
tabarruk are permissible for 'ulama' who are cognizant of the essence of
faith, but this is forbidden for the common people, who are prone to
drift towards polytheism and who might gradually start believing in the
personal influence of the Prophet and saints in the granting of boons
and prevention of the detrimental things. Therefore, it is obligatory to
stop them from*tawassul* and tabarruk in the name of Blocking of Means.

Critique
--------

Ayatollah Wa'iz-Zadeh rejecting the Wahhabi theory against*tawassul*
says:

When the permissibility or recommendation for this act has been
confirmed with rational proof, it is not permissible to
prohibit*tawassul* for such unfounded fears that the ignorant might give
it the color of polytheism. If such were the case, the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) himself would have prohibited people as a precaution from
seeking blessing, visiting the graves or kissing the sacred black stone
(Hajar al-Aswad) at the holy Ka'bah. On the contrary, judicious measures
for checking possible deviation are for the 'ulama' to exercise greater
control.[^41]

Takfir of Shi’a for Tawassul
============================

Ibn Taymiyyah, despite his extreme and biased approach for
prohibiting*tawassul* , has admitted:

This is a controversial issue and to accuse of heresy those who
make*tawassul* is*haram* and is a sinful act, since no one has said that
a person making*tawassul* to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) after his death is a
kafir. This is an ambiguous issue and there are no certain proofs in
this regard. Kufr is confirmed when a person rejects any of the tenets
of faith deliberately and being fully aware. Therefore, those who accuse
a person of heresy for making*tawassul* deserve the most severe
punishment.[^42]

It is unfortunate that the blind prejudice which the colonial powers had
skillfully exploited to create differences among Sunni Muslims as a
result of the Wahhabiyyah opposition to the issue of*tawassul* , has
been widened to sow discord between Sunni and Shi’a Muslims and to label
the Shi’a as kafir (infidel) or mushrik (polytheist) on the allegation
that they seek their requests from other than God. To quote Ayatollah
Wa'iz-Zadeh, those who do not permit*tawassul* and tabarruk are only a
fraction of a minority among the 'ulama' of the Muslim world, and
despite their efforts over the past seven centuries, have not been able
to convince the upholders of*tawassul* .[^43]

Thus, as should be clear, according to the statement of Ibn Taymiyyah
the issue of*tawassul* is a moral one and does not concern the
principles of faith, since a kafir is the one who rejects any of the
tenets of Islam.


