Extreme Form of Tawassul among the Ahl al-Sunnah
================================================

It is a common sight in many countries to see the Ahl al-Sunnah approach
the graves of pious persons to pray and supplicate for their needs. In
Egypt, Iraq and Turkey, and many other lands --India, Pakistan, Syria,
Central Asia, and North Africa-- it is an accepted practice by the
masses to visit the tombs of saints and holy personages to
make*tawassul* and seek blessings. Dr. Mustafa Mahmud writes that people
in Egypt flock to the tomb of Rifa'i and Ibrahim Dasuqi and cry loudly
with such phrases as: Madad Ya Rifa'i (help me O Rifa'i), Shifa'
bi-Yadika Ya Sayyidi Ibrahim Dasuqi (In your hands lie the remedy, O my
Lord Ibrahim Dasuqi).[^44]

The Egyptians also visit the tomb of Shafi'i, the founder of the
Shafi'ite sect, for*tawassul* , while in Baghdad, the Hanafis do the
same at the tomb of Abu Hanifah. In Turkey, the people seek their needs
at the tomb of the Prophet's eminent companion Abu Ayyub Ansari. It is
also a habit among people in Egypt and other places to send written
petitions to the tomb of Shafi'i, and wail and cry at the graves of
pious persons for things which none except the Almighty God has the
power to grant.

When Wahhabi 'ulama' come across such scenes among the Ahl al-Sunnah
they brand these Muslims as polytheists and follow the same assumption
against the Shiâ€™a, concerning whom they have little or no information,
and sometimes go to extreme by labeling them apostates who should be
killed.


