Purity of Monotheism in Shi’a Supplications
===========================================

The prayers and acts of worship among the Shi’a have the purest form of
monotheism derived from the guidelines of Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.)
and the Ahl al-Bayt (A.S.). For instance, Shi’a do not put their
forehead during prostration on carpet, cloth, plastic or synthetic
material, since Imam Ja'far al-sadiq (A.S.) has said:

Worldly people are slaves of victuals and clothing, hence it is not
right for a person who is in the act of offering his prayer to ALLAH
(SWT) to place his forehead on the deity of the worshippers of the
world.[^45]

Likewise, Shi’a Muslims recite the supplications taught by the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) and his Ahl al-Bayt (A.S.) in which all requests are directed
to Almighty ALLAH (SWT). The Infallible Imams (A.S.) have also dissuaded
people from being distracted by external appearances and losing sight of
the reality and substance of the supplications.

Shi’a 'ulama' have strived to preserve the path of the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) and his Ahl al-Bayt (A.S.). Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Hussein
Burujirdi was averse to prostration being made on a clay tablet having
the outlines of a dome or structure. In their jurisprudential manuals,
both Ayatollah Burujirdi and Imam Khomeini have the following to say
concerning prostration at holy shrines:

It is*haram* to prostrate to anyone except ALLAH (SWT). If the act of
prostration in front of the shrines of the Infallible Imams (A.S.) is a
form of thanksgiving to God, there is no objection, otherwise it
is*haram* .[^46]


