Conclusion
==========

Therefore, in conclusion we can state with authority the following
points, since*tawassul* is an accepted principle in the life of a
sincere and God-fearing Muslim, and whatever disputes that have been
fanned are due to bigotry and lack of proper understanding of Islam:

1.Controversy over the issue of*tawassul* is not a matter of discord
between Shi’a and Sunni Muslims, but it is a difference of opinion
between the Salafiyyah sect and the rest of Muslims.

2.Most of the differences of the Salafiyyah Wahhabis are with the
extremist Sufis who believe in reincarnation, and with the Sunni masses
who often make emotional*tawassul* at graves and seek their needs from
the departed such as Abu Hanifah (and 'Abd al-Qadir Gilani) in Baghdad,
Shafi'i, Rifa'i, Dasuqi and others in Egypt, Idris in Morocco and Abu
Ayyub Ansari in Turkey - as well as Khawajah Mu'in al-Din Chishti and
numerous others in India, and Data Ganj Bakhsh and Sufi saints in
Pakistan.

3.In fact, the Salafiyyah and the Wahhabis have the least differences
with Shi’a Muslims since Shi’a recite the supplications of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A.S.) which contain the purest form of monotheism. However,
because of their non-familiarity with the Shi’a they accuse them of
polytheism and in their ignorance brand them infidels.

4.In all the supplications of the Ahl al-Bayt (A.S.) the addressee is
Almighty ALLAH (SWT) alone, even in the famous Du'a'*Tawassul* , which
the Sunnis say with unanimity was taught by Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.)
to a blind person who subsequently regained his eyesight.

5.Du'a'*tawassul* , where devotion is expressed to the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) and his Infallible Ahl al-Bayt (A.S.), is not exclusively
meant for the Shi’a but was widely popular among the Sunnis until Ibn
Taymiyyah and later Ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab came on the scene with their
weird interpretation. For instance, the poetical composition
of*tawassul* to the 14 Infallibles found in the works of prominent poets
of the Ahl al-Sunnah such as the Persian poet Shaikh Sa'di and the Sufi
Khalid Naqhsbandi -- as well as the famous Spanish Muslim Gnostic and
philosopher Shaikh Muhyi al-Din Ibn al-'Arabi.

6.As part of their misinformation campaign against*tawassul* , the
Salafiyyah attempt to exploit certain*Ayah* s of the Holy Qur'an which
refer to the polytheists who worship idols instead of the One and Only
God and who seek their wants from these lifeless man-made objects.
However, it is clear that equating those who seek*tawassul* to the
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) with the polytheists and infidels is an erroneous
idea, since*tawassul* -seekers, unlike the idolators, address the
Almighty Creator and seek their needs from Him by making the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) a*wasilah* for acceptance of prayer. On the other hand, the
idols have no connection with God and are nothing more than inanimate
objects made by man, while Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) is the manifest
sign of ALLAH (SWT), the Messenger of ALLAH (SWT) and Mercy to the
creation. ALLAH (SWT) has also given him power, both in this world and
in the next, to supplicate and intercede for his true followers. The
Wahhabi contention of the period of Barzakh of the

Prophet (S.A.W.A.) lacks any rational explanation and is against the
view of the 'ulama' of all other sects of the Ahl al-Sunnah.

7.Those who wish to make the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) the intercessor without
being obedient to the Holy Qur'an and the Ahl al-Bayt (A.S.), have been
likened by Shi’a 'ulama' such as 'Allamah Tabataba\`i, to a wishful
person who wants to become the sage of the age without learning or
studying anything.


