Definition of Tawassul
======================

The lexical meaning of*tawassul* is 'nearness' or a 'means' through
which to reach a certain goal. For instance, when it is said wa wassala
ila Allah, it means to perform a certain act for gaining proximity to
God. Accordingly wasil here means being 'desirous of God'.[^1]

According to the prominent Sunni scholar, Sayyid Muhammad Alusi
al-Baghdadi,*wasilah* is a means of imploring in order to gain nearness
to God through good deeds and abstaining from sins. For example when it
is said "wasala ila kadha," it means a thing through which nearness is
gained.

As is clear from the wordings of*ayah* 35 of Surah al-Ma'idah, which we
quoted at the beginning of the article, "fear Allah" is a commandment to
abstain from sin, while "seek an approach unto Him" is an order to
perform worship and acts of devotion.[^2]

Both Raghib Isfahani and 'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Hussein Tabataba\`i
opine that*al-wasilah* means to reach a certain goal through desire,
inclination or willingness, and in fact*wasilah* towards God means
observance of His path with knowledge and worship through adherence to
the Shari'ah. In other words*wasilah* is a means of communication and
spiritual link between mankind and God.

According to a narration*al-wasilah* is a position in paradise, which is
reserved for only one person, and Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) has asked
the ummah to pray that this status be granted to him.[^3]

a) Tawassul to the Prophet and Saints during their Lifetime
-----------------------------------------------------------

In the opinion of the founder of the Wahhabi sect, Muhammad ibn 'Abd
al-Wahhab, and other like-minded 'ulama' of the past, it is permissible
to seek help from fellow humans, as during wars and other affairs, if
the person or the group who is being asked or entreated has the power
and ability to help.[^4]

Alusi believes that appealing to people, making them a*wasilah* or means
and requesting them to supplicate to God is permissible without the
least doubt, provided that the one who is being requested is alive,
whether or not the one who is petitioned is superior than the
petitioner, since the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) used to say to some of his
companions:**"O brother do not forget us in your supplications to ALLAH
(SWT)."**

However, Alusi is of the opinion that if the one who is being petitioned
is not alive, it is not permissible to request him for supplication. But
Alusi adds that it is permissible to supplicate at the shrine of the
Prophet (S.A.W.A.), since the companions of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) used
to stand beside his shrine and supplicate with face towards the Qiblah.

b) Tawassul to the Prophet after his Death
------------------------------------------

The 'ulama' are divided whether or not it is permissible after the death
of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) to make him the means of supplication with
such phrases as Allahumma inni asaluka bi-Nabiyyika (O Allah! I beseech
You through Your Prophet), or bi-jahi Nabiyyika (by the dignity of Your
Prophet), or still bi-Haqqi Nabiyyika (for the sake of Your Prophet). We
come across three different opinions in this regard.

1. Opinion on Permissibility
----------------------------

All jurists including Imami, Shafi'i, Maliki, and later-day Hanafi
scholars as well as others such as the Hanbalis, are unanimous on the
permissibility of this way of supplication, whether it was in the
lifetime of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.), or whether it is after his passing
away.[^5]

The Abbasid caliph, Mansur al-Dawaniqi, once asked Malik ibn Anas the
founder of the Maliki School of jurisprudence whether he should turn
towards the shrine of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) or face the Qiblah for
supplication? Malik answered him:

**“Why do you want to turn away from the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) when he
(Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.)) is the wasilah (means) for you and for
your father Adam, towards ALLAH (SWT) on the Day of Resurrection. Turn
to him (the Prophet) and seek his intercession (shafa'at)”.[** 6]

The Sunni scholar al-Nawawi in describing the manners and etiquette of
making pilgrimage to the shrine of Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.), writes:

The pilgrim should face the shrine of the Messenger of ALLAH, make him a
means (*tawassul* ) towards reaching God and seek his*wasilah* as
intercession (*shafa'at* ), in the same manner as the Bedouin who
visited the Prophet's shrine and standing beside it said: Peace unto you
O Messenger of ALLAH (SWT), I have heard ALLAH (SWT) has said:...Had
they, when they had wronged themselves, come to you and asked Allah's
forgiveness and the Apostle had asked forgiveness for them, they would
certainly have found Allah Most-Propitious, Most-Merciful. (Holy Qur'an
4: 64).Therefore, I have come to you for forgiveness of my sins and
seeking your intercession with ALLAH (SWT).[^7]

Ibn Qudamah Hanbali, defining the manner of pilgrimage to the shrine of
the Prophet (S.A.W.A.), writes in the book al-Mughni:

Stand beside the tomb of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.), and say: I have come to
you for forgiveness of my sins and to seek your intercession with ALLAH
(SWT).[^8]

The Shafi'ite scholar Ghazzali has allotted a special section in his
book Ihya' 'Ulum al-Din concerning the manners of pilgrimage to the
shrine of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) in order to repent and seek forgiveness
from ALLAH (SWT). He writes:

The Prophet should be made the means (*wasilah* ) and the intercessor
(*shafi'* ), and with face turned towards the tomb, the pilgrim should
implore ALLAH (SWT) for the sake and position of the Prophet with the
words: "O ALLAH (SWT), indeed You have said, Had they, who had wronged
themselves, come to you and asked Allah's forgiveness and the Apostle
had asked forgiveness for them, they would have certainly found Allah
Most-Propitious, Most-Merciful (Holy Qur'an 4:64);O ALLAH (SWT), surely
we have heard Your words and we obey Your command, by coming to Your
Prophet to seek his intercession with You for our sins; how burdensome
and heavy (are sins) on our backs! We repent of slipperiness, we confess
our wrongs and our faults, accept our repentance for his sake, make Your
Prophet intercessor for us, and exalt us for the sake of his position
and his rights with You."

Al-Ghazzali adds:

*It is recommended the pilgrim should go daily to the Baqi' Cemetery and
after saluting the Prophet (S.A.W.A.), make pilgrimage to the tombs of
(Imam) Hasan ibn 'Ali, (Imam) 'Ali ibn al-Hussein, (Imam) Muhammad ibn
'Ali and (Imam) Ja'far ibn Muhammad (Allah be pleased with them), and
also perform the Salat in the Mosque of Fatemah (Allah be pleased with
her)* .[^9]

2. Opinion on Aversion
----------------------

***The jurist Abu Yusuf relates from his teacher Abu Hanifah that it is
not right for anyone to call ALLAH (SWT) except through (the Names and
Attributes) ALLAH (SWT), since He says: "And to Allah belong the
beautiful Names, so call on Him thereby." (Holy Qur'an 7:180).***

Abu Hanifah, Abu Yusuf and Muhammad Shaybani also feel averse in
invoking God by means (*tawassul* ) of the Prophet and his position, on
the assumption that the creatures have no right on the Almighty Creator,
and He showers His mercy on whomever He likes.

Ibn 'Abidin, however, says in this regard: True, the creatures have no
right whatsoever upon the Creator, but the Creator through His favors
has given rights to mankind. On this basis, he relates a hadith
concerning the manners of supplication and*tawassul* :

Allahumma inni asaluka bi-haqqi al-sa'ilina 'alayk (O Allah! I beseech
you for the rights that seekers have upon You).[^10]

Except for this narration of Ibn 'Abidin, we find no opinion or view
from either Abu Hanifah or his friend Abu Yusuf in the books of Hanafi
scholars concerning*tawassul* to God through the*wasilah* (means) of the
Prophet (S.A.W.A.).[^11]


