Opinion of Contemporary Hanafi Scholars on Permissibility
=========================================================

Here, we will study the legal opinions (fatwa) of contemporary Hanafi
scholars on permissibility of*tawassul* to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.).

Alusi al-Baghdadi quotes Ibn 'Abd al-Salam as saying that it is
permissible to invoke ALLAH (SWT) for the sake of the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.), since Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) is the leader of the
children of Adam. Alusi bases his reasoning on the hadith (hasan and
sahih) related by both Tirmidhi and Ahmad ibn Hanbal on the authority of
'Uthman bin Hunayf, which says that:

Once when a blind man asked the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) to pray to ALLAH
(SWT) to grant him eyesight, he was told to make wudu' and recite the
following supplication:“O ALLAH (SWT)! I request you and I have turned
to you through Your Prophet, the Prophet of Mercy; O Messenger of ALLAH
(SWT)! I have turned to you as a means towards My God for fulfillment of
this wish of mine; O ALLAH (SWT)! Accept his (Prophet's) intercession
(*shafa'at* ) for me”.

Alusi thus believes that there is no objection in making*tawassul* to
God by means of the dignity (jah) and prime position of the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.), whether it is in his lifetime or after his death, since
dignity here refers to an attribute which is one of the attributes of
Almighty ALLAH (SWT). Alusi also says that*tawassul* by means of dignity
of a person other than the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) is also permissible,
provided that the one who is being considered a*wasilah* has a station
and position of dignity in the sight of ALLAH (SWT).[^12]

The famous Sunni scholar of India, Shaikh Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri in
his book al-Muhannad 'ala al-Mufannid has collected the fatwa or legal
opinions of 75 leading Sunni scholars from different parts of the
Islamic world on the permissibility of*tawassul* to the shrine of
Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.). He writes:

In our opinion and that of our teachers, pilgrimage to the shrine of the
Master of Messengers (my soul be sacrificed for him) is the most exalted
of proximities, the most important of blessings, and the greatest of
means (*wasilah* ) for attaining lofty ranks. It could be said that it
is an enjoinment almost to the degree of obligations, even if it
requires the trouble of a journey to perform it and there is no other
option other than to make efforts with life and wealth.*Tawassul* to the
Prophets, saints, pious persons, martyrs and the righteous during
supplications, whether in their lifetime or after their death, is
permissible in the following manner:Allahumma inni atawassalu ilayka
bi-fulan an tujiba da'wati wa taqdia hajati (O ALLAH (SWT)! I beseech
you by means of so and so a person, accept my supplication and grant my
request).[^13]


