Tawassul in the View of Prominent Imami 'Ulama'
===============================================

According to such prominent Imami 'ulama' as Shaikh al-Ta'ifah Tusi,
Shaikh Amin al-Islam Tabrisi, 'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Hussein
Tabataba\`i, Imam Sayyid Ruhullah Khomeini and others,*wasilah* means
faith, love and reverence for the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and obedience to
him.

'Allamah Tabataba\`i writes in his monumental exegesis on the Holy
Qur'an that the word*al-wasilah* or 'approach' as used in the*Ayah*
***"and seek an approach unto Him" (5:35)*** confirms the reality of
worship and means turning submissively and supplicating to God, with
knowledge and practice serving as the requisite instrument for this
connection.[^14]

Furthermore, elaborating on the narration found in the Tafsir of 'Ali
bin Ibrahim Qummi that the*Ayah* "and seek an approach unto Him" means
seeking ALLAH (SWT)'s proximity through the Infallible Imam (A.S.),
'Allamah Tabataba\`i, says that this refers to obedience or adhering to
the path of the Imam (A.S.) in order to reach ALLAH (SWT).[^15]

It is evident that the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and the Infallible Imams
(A.S.), who are considered the practical models of divine law and the
finest exemplars of morals and etiquette, are the*wasilah* , since it is
through obedience to them and adherence to their path that one can
attain proximity to God. Likewise, as stated by prominent Imami or Shi’a
jurists, the laws of the Shari'ah are the*wasilah* , on the basis of
adherence to which, proximity of Almighty ALLAH (SWT) is attained.
Accordingly, some prominent Imami jurisprudents like Shaikh Hurr
al-'Amili, Ayatollah Abu al-Hasan Isfahani and Imam Khomeini have used
the title*wasilah* for their jurisprudential treatises such as Wasa'il
al-Shi’a,*Wasilah* al-Najat and Tahrir al-*Wasilah* ,
respectively.*Wasilah* al-Najat or the 'Means of Salvation' is the title
of over 40 scientific treatises written by Shi’a 'ulama'.[^16]

Thus, as ascertained by Imami scholars, the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) is
the*wasilah* towards God for Muslims since he is the best exemplar and
is in fact the 'Practical Qur'an'. So also is the Prophet's (S.A.W.A.)
infallible progeny (A.S.), who along with the Book of ALLAH (SWT) (Holy
Qur'an), is the immortal legacy of the Prophet and continuation of his
path as borne out by the Hadith al-Thaqalayn, which is unanimously,
confirmed by both Shi’a and Sunni 'ulama'. Muslims, through the*wasilah*
of these two, hold fast to divine laws and strive to attain ALLAH
(SWT)'s proximity, since good deeds, obedience and adherence to the
Qur'an, the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and his Infallible Ahl al-Bayt (A.S.) are
the basis of*shafa'at* . This is better explained by 'Allamah
Tabataba\`i in his exegesis:

Persons who lack any ability to attain the required perfection are like
the illiterate who wants to become the doyen of scholars merely through
recommendation, since he neither has any basic learning nor has he the
required connection with the one who could intercede. Or they could be
compared to a slave who is disobedient to his master, but without coming
out of this state of insubordination and disobedience wants to be
forgiven through intercession (*shafa'at* ). In none of these two cases
intercession is beneficial, since*shafa'at* is the*wasilah* or means for
accomplishment of a cause and is not a cause in itself to make him a
doyen of scholars in the first

case, and in the second case to avail forgiveness from the master in the
state of disobedience.[^17]

Therefore, as it has been clearly mentioned in the Holy Qur'an, if a
person does not fulfill his obligations and adherence to the path of the
Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and the Infallible Imams (A.S.), he will not be
considered worthy of*shafa'at* , even if the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) were to
intercede on his behalf.

***"Alike it is for them whether you seek forgiveness for them or seek
not forgiveness for them; Never will God forgive them..." (63:6)***

3. Opinion on Non-Permissibility of Tawassul
--------------------------------------------

In the opinion of Taqi al-Din Ibn Taymiyyah and later Hanbali
scholars’*tawassul* to the person of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) himself is
not permissible.*Tawassul* has three concepts, of which two are deemed
correct, and according to Ibn Taymiyyah, whoever rejects these two
concepts of*tawassul* is either an infidel or an apostate.

1)*Tawassul* to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) to reach God is indicative of
faith and love for the Prophet (S.A.W.A.). For example, when it is said
Allahumma asaluka bi-Nabiyyika Muhammad (O ALLAH (SWT)! I beseech you
for the sake of your Prophet, Muhammad (S.A.W.A.)), it means I seek from
You on the basis of the faith and love, which I have for Your Prophet.

The*Ayah* "and seek an approach unto Him", is a means of approaching
ALLAH (SWT) by obedience to Him and His Messenger, as it is said:
Whoever obeys the Prophet has indeed obeyed ALLAH (SWT).

This concept of*tawassul* is permissible in the opinion of all 'ulama'.
Ibn Taymiyyah has considered it a pious act and has supported his views
by citing reports from certain companions of the Prophets, the first
generation of Muslims (tabi'in) and jurists such as Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal.[^18]

2) The concept of*tawassul* as supplication or intercession (*shafa'at*
) of the Prophet, like the supplication of the second caliph, which
reads: "O ALLAH (SWT)! Whenever drought afflicted us we made*tawassul*
to You through our Prophet (tawassalna ilayka bi-Nabiyyina), and now we
make*tawassul* to You through the uncle of our Prophet, Send down rain
for us."

3) The concept of*tawassul* as making an oath or invoking ALLAH (SWT) by
the right of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.). According to Ibn Taymiyyah this
form of*tawassul* was neither done during the lifetime of the Prophet
nor after him by his companions. In this regard contemporary scholars
opposed to*tawassul* have quoted Abu Hanifah as saying: Do not say
asaluka bi-haqqi anbiya'ika (I invoke You by the right of Your
Prophets).[^19]

### Rejection of Ibn Taymiyyah's Opinion

###

1. The claim that the companions of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) never
supplicated in this manner is the understanding and deduction of Ibn
Taymiyyah. How do we know that when the second caliph says "we
make*tawassul* to You through our Prophet" does not mean "for the right
of our Prophet (bi-haqqi nabiyyina)", or is not addressed to the Prophet
himself? Most Sunni 'ulama' have given the latter meaning and from the
wording of the sentence itself the Prophet is being called upon.

2. Suppose none of the companions had made*tawassul* by the right of any
of the divine Prophets, it does not mean*tawassul* is Haram even if some
of the companions were to explicitly prohibit such an act. The opinion
of the companions of the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) is not binding on the Muslim
ummah, except perhaps for a few jurisprudents, unless it is related from
Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) himself.


