Justification of the Salafiyyah on Non-Permissibility of Tawassul
=================================================================

Ibn Taymiyyah in Qa'idah Jalilah, Ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab in Kashf
al-Shubahat and Muhammad Rashid Rida in Tafsir al-Manar, opine that
although during the life of Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.), his companions
would address him for their needs, after his death they never approached
his tomb for their needs. They even forbade those who intended to
supplicate beside the Prophet's (S.A.W.A.) tomb.

Critique
--------

It is interesting to note that a review and analysis of these opinions
brings out different historical facts. First of all, the predecessors,
whether the companions or the first and second generation of Muslims,
never denied*tawassul* to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.), either during his
lifetime or after his passing away. It has been mentioned in the
narrations of the Ahl al-Sunnah even the first created man, Adam,
implored ALLAH (SWT) for forgiveness through*tawassul* to Prophet
Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) with the words:**"O ALLAH (SWT)! for the sake of
Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) I beseech you to forgive my faults."** [^20]

Secondly, prominent Sunni scholars such as Bayhaqi and Ibn Abi Shaybah
as well as Ahmad bin Zayni Dahlan in his Khulasah al-Kalam, have cited a
sahih (authentic) hadith, that during the caliphate of 'Umar ibn Khattab
when a severe famine occurred, Bilal bin Harth approached the Prophet's
(S.A.W.A.) tomb and said: "O Messenger of Allah (SWT), pray to God to
send rains for your ummah, since we are all facing annihilation." The
Prophet then appeared in Bilal's dream and gave him the tidings of
rains.

Similarly during the caliphate of 'Uthman ibn 'Affan, a needy person
approached the Caliph and told him of his needs. 'Uthman asked him to
make wudu, offer prayer in the mosque and then supplicate in the
following manner:

O Lord! through the*wasilah* of our Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.), the
Messenger of Mercy, I turn my face to You. O Muhammad (S.A.W.A.)!
through your*wasilah* I am facing Your Lord and I request you to grant
me my wish. The person attained his goal.[^21]


