Tamassuk in the Opinion of Abu Hanifah
======================================

Ibn Taymiyyah says that taking an oath or invoking by virtue of the
creatures is*haram* according to the creed (madhhab) of Abu
Hanifah.[^22]

Abu Hanifah, the founder of the Hanafi sect, also opines that istidlal
(rational proof) and tamassuk (bond, holding fast) are matters of doubt
or anxiety because of two aspects. Abu Yusuf quoting his teacher Abu
Hanifah says: "It is not right for someone to call upon ALLAH (SWT)
through any other means than ALLAH (SWT). He (Abu Hanifah) was averse to
saying bi-haqqi fulan (by the right of so and so)".

Critique
--------

First, Abu Hanifah has approached this issue with aversion and a purely
personal opinion, as is clear from the inclusion of istidlal and
tamassuk in Bab al-Karahah of Abu al-Hasan Qaduri's Sharh Karkhi. Abu
Yusuf quoting his teacher Abu Hanifah says:

“It is not right for someone to call upon God through any other means
than God. He was averse to saying for the sake of so and so”.

Secondly, a closer look at Abu Hanifah's reasoning reveals that he
himself has tried to resort to rational argumentation in this regard
when he says: "Since the creatures have no rights on the Creator."[^23]

However, Abu Hanifah's analogy falls short of clear proofs, and does not
mean the total negation of any right, since God Himself has considered
the right of the Prophets and that of the righteous believers as binding
upon Him, as is clear from the following*Ayah* of the Holy Qur'an:

***Ultimately We deliver Our Apostles and those who believe, even so it
is binding upon Us that We deliver the believers. (10:103)***

The Hanafis such as Ibn 'Abidin accept this right, but they say that the
creatures have no obligatory right on the Creator.[^24]

This viewpoint, even if it is considered general, is confined to the
followers of Abu Hanifah and cannot be imposed on all schools of Islam.


