Salafiyyah Interpretation of Ayah 18 of Surah al-Jinn
=====================================================

Another reason put forward by the Salafiyyah such as Muhammad Rashid
Rida on non-permissibility of*tawassul* to the Prophet after his death
is that any*wasilah* for proximity to God should be a thing which God
has determined for mankind such as faith, action and supplication. It
was in the middle ages that*tawassul* to the person of the Prophets and
pious men became widespread and they were considered wasa'il ila Allah
(means to Allah) by people who would invoke God by their names and would
supplicate to them at their tombs for their needs, when supplication is
a form of worship as God says in the Holy Qur'an:

***"So call you not anyone with Allah." (72:18)***

***"Surely, those whom you call other than Allah are subservient (to
Allah) like unto your own selves..." (7:194)***

Critique
--------

***In answer to this objection it should be said that every supplication
is not a form of worship or even the spirit of worship, since the root
of du'a' (supplication) is da'wat, a word which along with its
derivatives occurs frequently in the Holy Qur'an. For instance, "...let
us call (nad'u) our sons... (3:61)" and "Make you not the addressing
(du'a') of the Prophet among you like your addressing one another..."
(24:63)***

As could be discerned, in most of the 'Ayas the word du'a' means to call
or address. Accordingly neither every nida' (call) is du'a' nor every
du'a' is 'ibadat (worship). In other words du'a' (supplication) becomes
'ibadat when the rules of worship such as servitude and submissiveness
to ALLAH (SWT) are observed with acknowledgement of the over lordship of
the Almighty Creator. What connection does this have with*tawassul* and
tabarruk to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and the Infallible Imams (A.S.) and
requesting them for help and succor?

Thus, the narration*al-du'a' huwa al-'ibadah* (supplication is among the
acts of worship), does not necessarily mean that every supplication is a
form of worship.[^25]


