Salafiyyah Interpretation of Ayahs 13-14 of Surah al-Fatir
==========================================================

The Salafiyyah also resort to the following*Ayah* of the Holy Qur'an as
part of their attempt to discourage*tawassul* :

***...And those whom you call upon other than Him, own not (even) a
straw. If you call on them they shall hear not your call; and even if
they hear they shall answer you not; and on the Day of Judgment they
will deny your associating them (with Allah); and none can (ever) inform
you as the All-Aware. (35:13,14)***

Critique
--------

This*Ayah* refers to the polytheists who worship idols instead of the
One and Only God and supplicate to these man-made objects in their hour
of need. ALLAH (SWT) says here that these idols do not own even a straw,
so how can they grant anything to those who worship and prostrate before
them? No matter how fervently these idols are called upon, they do not
listen since they are inanimate objects, and suppose even if they were
to listen, they cannot answer since they do not have the tongues.[^26]

As is crystal clear for any discerning person, it has no connection
whatsoever concerning*tawassul* to the Prophet (S.A.W.A.) and the
Infallible Imams (A.S.) or saints.

First and foremost, it is a gross mistake to place those who
seek*tawassul* in the same category as the polytheists, since idolaters
seek their needs from idols and not from the Almighty Creator. But those
who make*tawassul* beseech ALLAH (SWT) for their needs and regard
Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) as a*wasilah* or means for the acceptance of
their supplications, since he is the Messenger of ALLAH (SWT). To quote
Rashid Rida himself, those who seek*tawassul* are like guests who
approach the host for some of their needs, and at times request the
members of the household or friends of the hosts who have been appointed
to serve the guests, since they consider everything to be the favor of
the host.[^27]

Secondly, it is a manifest error to equate with idols the Prophet
(S.A.W.A.) who has been sent by ALLAH (SWT) as a divine sign and is
called Habib-Allah (Friend of God) by all Muslims. Even Ibn 'Abd
al-Wahhab maintains that Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.A.) is alive in his
grave and his life in the intermediary world (barzakh) is superior to
the life of the martyrs, since he hears the voices of those who send
blessings upon him.[^28]


