"touch & Tie" the Child
=======================

An Indian mother sits on the floor with her legs stretched close
together. She lays her baby on her lap with its head resting on her
knees. And the exercise or "ritual" of massaging and caressing of the
entire body of the baby begins with a liberal use of oil, abundant
manifestation of affection and derivation of pleasure; and this goes on
and on. She never seems to tire while the oil lasts -though no spot has
been missed. The baby responds to the caressing and cooing by the
mother - by purring like a kit- ten who has its neck tickled.

This is a common scene in homes in India and Pakistan; and was so in
East Africa too. Whether the traditional massage with "religious
regularity" during the infancy is a culture or a healthcare or both, the
distinct significance and effect of the mother's touch and caress on the
baby cannot be under-estimated.

I would call the culture "Touch & - Tie" for it is believed to have the
effect of tying the baby subconsciously in devotion and loyalty towards
the mother and the family for ) manifestation prominently later in his
adult life.

Touch & Caress.

It should not be viewed as surprising if some of the small children in
an orphanage are on occasions seen leaving their separate beds at night
to join others asleep in their separate beds. The touch of legs or hands
provides the satisfaction of human- warmth and a sense of security when
the touch and caress from their mothers are missing.

Reportedly, patients in hospitals appear to be closer and warmer to
their physiotherapists than their general physicians whose services. on
the other hand, are even more important to them.

The spell of quality-life a person has is during the infancy period of
touch and caress at the time of breast-feeding -without however, being
able to realize or quantify the benefits of its effect on his adult life
later. Fortunately, no one normally misses the spell. What can be
missing is a complimentary benefit from the touch and caress through
massaging during that period.

Oil massage is messy, of course, to that mother who is unprepared for
it; and so is 'cooking', but then the family needs affection and loyalty
as much as the 'daily food'. How interesting! Is it not the mutual
affection and loyalty within the family which also ensures the provision
of daily food for all in the family?


**Let the Child be a Child**

A child was visited at home by his friend. That night the child
declined to sleep in his room. He insisted on joining the parents in
their bedroom. The fear of his room was triggered when the friend asked
the child if he was not afraid to sleep so close to a window when ghosts
and spirits peep directly into the room.

The tactful approach to the situation should have been for the parents
to accede to what the child had pleaded for, at least, for that night
knowing that such fears wear off or become much less the next day.
Instead they thought it a good opportunity to enforce the parental
discipline over the child so that he abandons what was perceived as a
"sissy" trait. The parents, after a peaceful sleep with no sense of
guilt, woke up in the morning fully

pleased with the result of their "putting the foot down". And they
would not ask the child how he slept because that would have undermined
the disciplinary strategy of the night.

Indeed Why?

Needless to say, the child was restless that night because - he was a
human-child, - and if only the parents knew that! "Why believe in a
ghost or spirit when you have seen none and will see none of them ever
in your life"? The father's argument kept ringing in the child's ears;
and he would ask himself: "Indeed why"?

The child was betraying nothing more than a simple natural fear of an
Unseen -never seen before -because he, as human, has been created in the
nature of readily believing in the Unseen that Unseen which basically
includes Allah, Angels, Jinnat (Spirits) and Shaitaan CSatan). No Wonder
that the fundamental teaching in Islam is "AI- Imaan bil Ghaib" that is,
"the Belief in the Unseen".CVerse 2:3).

Therefore, the human nature makes a wood-cutter instinctively cry out
when his axe accidentally falls sharply on his foot, though he is all
alone in the forest. The instinct in its reflex response makes him, the
created, to cry out to his Creator, the Unseen.

Fear -Mental Normalcy.

The subject of "Al-ghaib" reveals one thoughtful aspect for discussion
here. Fear! It is part of the instinct for self-preservation or
survival. It is not something that a child can be made ashamed of. In
fact, manifestation of fear is a welcome sign of a mental normalcy in
him.

The parents should instead keep the mind of the child at rest by making
a joke of their own past embarrassment Over false fears or by cracking a
few jokes on themselves on the subject.

To ask the child to banish fear is like asking him to banish his human
instinct. Remember the wood-cutter? Was his piercing cry of moan in the
lonely forest a waste? No! It immediately comforted him in his pain. The
instinct of Seeking out the Unseen with a cry of moan comes as an
immediate relief to all of us. But we do not pause to ponder.

It is said that fear as part of the human instinct begins even before a
baby is born. Some pregnant mothers are reported to have noticed that a
sudden loud noise or a. sudden let go heavily onto the couch produced
distinct signs of disturbance in the baby in the womb akin to the Signs
of fear.

Fear in Children.

Let us conclude the discussion by the comments on the following
quotation from a good authority on the natural aspect of fear in the
children:

"Another characteristic of the child's personality is the presence of
many fears. These fears result from uncertainty combined with easy
recourse to imagination. The imagination runs toward superlatives and
when a child indulges in fantasy, things are either very attractive or
very threatening."

We can ascribe a reason for this in the context of Islam; Imagination
by the child or his fantasy is a phase of manifestation of his attempt
at perceiving things which are and remain Unseen. The child's negative
fear of the worst" because it is caused by his uncertain of an Unseen
like ghost and spirit itself indicates one impor- tant thing, -the
existence of the natural positive capacity also for "submission to the
best", that is, his Creator, -in the realm of the Unseen -because it is
derived from 'certainty' which is "Al lmaan bil Ghaib".

So let the child be a child under the dictates of a child's nature
while he as a child gropes in the dark for light, that is, knowledge
leading to faith and then conviction, which he attains one after the
other regarding the Unseen later in his adult life.


**Spare the Child from Inferiority Complex (Part 1 of 3)**

A young person enters a crowded mosque or imambara through the front
door a sermon or preaching is going on. Believing that all eyes are on
him, he unconsciously touches his nose once or twice with his hand
before he finds a place This is not an inferiority complex; - only
shyness. - that type which shows.

While shyness is an embarrassment if there is awareness that it shows,
an inferiority complex is an agony. It is not fairly easy to adjust to
if it begins in childhood, mostly cultivated in the child by the parents
unknowingly. It affects the personal' the child when an adult. It is
only fair that parents are advised in detail on the subject, which is
known generally more by its name than substance. The length of
discussion will necessitate presentation to be in three separate
parts.

The complex in a person is not as much a feeling of inferiority or
"seeing onself small" -as believing that others see him so. This belief
is not always true. It take a form of an obsession in rare cases if the
condition is severe originating childhood.

Flattered Let us consider one example: A boy is flattered when a group
of older boys eng in smoking -and to him they are an 'elite group'
because not many of that age s cigarettes -"favours" him with a few
puffs -the first spell in his life -and he tries to suppress the bouts
of coughing attendant with nausea. He finds himself a happy boy without
having to tolerate any more puffs. But then, the elite group who exhibit
the supposed manhood-personality will see him as "inferior" to them.
This presumption braves him for more spells of smoking to set him on the
path of habitual smoking.

As no sane person is perfectly and fully sane; no person is also fully
or entirely free from the condition under discussion. However, the
condition becomes a "complex" and known as such only when It exceeds the
normal level In a person.

The feeling of being "small" is natural and right with a small child
when he finds him- self truly so in size in the family. The family is
his only world and the father the only hero he idolizes. So he likes to
imitate the behaviour and actions of his father (girl with those of the
mother) as his model (hero) to counter the feeling of being small and to
impress himself and others in the family that he is catching up with his
model in behaviour and actions, if not in size.

**A Tale of Slippers**

Let us consider a pertinent example: The father with severe coughing is
alarmed to find that his small child has also started coughing. He is
not only relieved but also amused when assured by the doctor that the
child was imitating him -and what a "natural" actor for his age! Another
example: The small child clumsily walks with a pair of father's slippers
on, and often loses balance. The family seeing his interest and labour
in the use of slippers buy him a pair of his size which he uses for an
hour or longer until the novelty of the new slippers (like a new toy)
wears off.

Then the child ignores the pair of his comfortable size and resumes the
use of his father's -because it is not the slippers f which are the
point of focus for him.

The child therefore expects from the parents nothing less than an
affectionate acknowledgement and approval of his single-minded adoration
of the parents and imitation of their behaviour. He -equipped by his own
trust in himself -trusts them.

With such a position of trust, however, it is often the parents who can
cause unknowingly the rise in the condition gradually and steadily in
the child above the normal level and place the first fateful layer as
the base for an inferiority complex. Once this occurs, the base then
attracts a pile up of more layers, one after the other, from out- side
the home -in school, sports ground, in meetings, debate -and the ugly
edifice of the complex will have been raised.

Normally it is not possible for the parents or others to detect the
condition in a person nor attribute any particular behaviour of the
moment to the influence of the complex. What is worse is that the person
who undergoes the nagging belief that he is being seen small or
unimportant also believes that the condition is normal with others too,
as victims, in the society.

**Sijdah (Prostration}**

However, the condition varies from person to person in traits and also
in degrees (that is, in the number of layers) among those who are
subject. Those who grow learning not to attach undue importance to the
glitters of this transient world instead cultivate the conviction of a
better life in the Hereafter are the persons can very well adjust
themselves in their adult life and wear off the condition.

Sijidah, if its significance is well understood, can, for example,
serve as an antidote. The face, the best visible part of the body is
brought down to the lowest level possible where the leg, accustomed to
dirt, tread; and then intoned is the moving testimony: that "All Glory
to My Lord only - the Exalted" -while all other human beings - His
slaves -are lowly and insignificant except for what He bestows on them
out His Grace. No wonder, there appears no inclination to lift up the
face from the spiritually soothing posture of Sijdah but then for every
next Sijdah the head has to be once again!.

The Bible too mentions about the Sijdah practiced by the previous
Prophets appropriate occasions. How surprising that a person of whatever
station of life c through his profound humbleness to his Lord enjoy a
sense of superiority in the society in that respect and dictate values
in his relation with others on the position strength derived from that
humbleness.

"The nearest position of man's servitude (a bondsman) to Allah is when
he is in t state of prostration (sijdah)". Hadeeth of the Prophet. And
then, the holy Qur'an also repeatedly questions us if we, the mortals,
have n traversed the earth and seen what have remained of those in the
past who thought themselves to be mighty and ever-lasting. and sensed
themselves superior in material terms during their time of pomp in this
life.


