Spare the Child From Inferiority Complex (part 2 of 3)
======================================================

- Behavioural Traits -

CAUTION: The few examples of various shades of the complex catalogued
herein are from such broad general experience as is common in the
society. They have been "framed" only to illustrate the fluid nature of
the behavioural traits.

IMPORTANT: It is important to gain the right perspective of the subject
under discussion through the Islamic point of view which is as follows:
A human being rightly senses his self-importance but he fails to realise
that the feel- ing originates sub-consciously from the fact that the
nature in which he has been created acknowledges that he is the most
dignified as a member of mankind among other creatures (ashraful
makhluqaa) and that too created by the best of the creators (ahsanul
khaliqeen).

However, the mistake man does is by wanting to relate his
self-importance to the human assessment -that is, how best the society
sees him, - and not in his relation to his Creator as to how best He
judges him. Therefore, a complex of inferiority or a sense of
superiority on the basis of a human judgment indicates a serious
weakness of faith -if observed in a Muslim.

8n1all children being human are no different from adults. They too by
nature are concerned with their shades of self-importance. Their family
being the only world they know, they too are made to feel concerned as
to how their parents judge them. They are sensitive to a negative
judgment. Their reaction is however different from that of adults when
they become a subject of an inferiority complex.

**The Catalogue of Examples**

Let us examine first the examples of the traits in adults.

There are those among adults who adjust themselves by adopting an
introvert approach of moving among the close circles they have known for
years. They would not venture into new, unknown or larger circles of
people. But then there are also those who are extrovert in approach and
engross themselves in countering the condition by trying to attract
attention to themselves and register their importance on others.
Frankly, there are no reasons for having to do any of these.

To attract attention to oneself or to want to register one's importance
on others is normal, if it is within reasons and up to a point. For
example, this is common with a younger person who is flattered to be in
a company of the people older in age and. among them, perhaps many with
new or distinguished faces.

It is however, not normal where a person betrays the following traits,
as examples only, in his behaviour while in a company of people or at
meetings. He pays little attention to the chain of discussion going on
because his mind is engaged in wanting to create an opportunity of
saying something or he would abruptly interrupt to introduce anew
subject of his liking; or he would drop names of important persons known
to him while there is no direct relevance to the discussion.

All these are in the attempt to impress his importance so that he is
not seen small or a person of little importance, which he wrongly thinks
he is seen. For more examples; the subject purportedly reveals solemnly
an important and sensitive information, which is exaggerated, if not
false; or he publicises a small honour done to him by 'complaining' that
he did not deserve it but, was pressed into accepting it, or raises the
same small or petty argument, long forgotten, to renew his lame defence.
or goes on defending his opinion or judgment though he knows that it is
glaringly wrong.

What is worse. he misinterprets good intentions towards him. Or he
makes a mountain out of a mole-hill when he is offended unintentionally
or his is a lone opposition to a proposal which is favoured by a large
consensus in a meeting, without an alter- native suggestion from him
because what is important to him is that he spoke -with- out being seen
to toe the lines of those in large majority whom he perceives' falsely
as 'elite' or superior to him. A combination of any of such behaviours
with a degree 7, of consistency indicates the tell-tale signs of the
condition which is above normal, - the complex of inferiority.

An ear-ring!
One more trait which is prevalent among young persons who are affected
is to "borrow from the reflection of the importance"

of celebrities, like musicians, actors, sportsmen, and "proudly" bask
under their infectious reflection. They do so by imitating the trends
set by them in the fashion of clothes, greetings, walking gait or any
aspect of face (or one ear) adornment, or hair-cut - however peculiar or
unconventional they may be for males -in the society. They attempt to
borrow from the reflection of the importance of others because they see
themselves -or believe that others see them -as lacking in their own
individual importance (self-identity).

Imagine, a cricketer, a hero himself to the millions of cricket fans,
revealing such a weak personality. This may be a sign that the complex
originating from his childhood has yet to wear off, if it ever will!


**Spare the Child from Inferiority Complex (Part 3 of 3)**

**Precautions At Home**

Your child returns home seething and mumbling a complaint incoherently.
You touch his hand as a sign of assurance of your concern and love for
him so that he opens up; and this angers him further to worsen the
situation. There can be a valid reason for this, and yet there can also
be one which is not; -it may be connected with a complex of
inferiority.

There are a number of precautions which parents need to take so as not
to cultivate an inferiority complex in the child. The most important one
is for the parents or any member in the family not to make a sneering
reference to any negative aspect of the child's appearance, complexion
or physical handicap which unfortunately is the tendency of a father to
do so in the moments of anger over any incident of mis-behaviour by the
child. It is vicious when the child is a girl and if it comes from the
father; arid worse still, if this is occasioned in the presence of his
siblings or friends.

There is no such thing as an ideal or perfect human appearance. Monkeys
ask among themselves: Is it the ugly face which gives a human-being so
much brain? And that may not be all! Some crawling species of insects
are rarely trampled upon unaware because human-beings are believed to
smell horrible, even from distance. Perhaps, the human speech sounds
most irritating to some animals; music perhaps even f worse!

When a child -who is so viciously subjected to this indignity at the
hands of his parents -meets other students on his day of enrolment in
the school, instead of eyeing the competitive possessions of each
others. like multi coloured pencils. books with flashy covers or even
toys brought stealthily from home. the poor soul appraises the shape and
size of their ears, to see if any pair was matching his as a solace. His
has to be worse anyway because his father sees it so and says it.

**Agony of Funny Name**

Such a child normally for want of sympathy at a child's level. feels
inclined to confide to his new desk-mate the agony of the funny name by
which he is teased at home because of say, the shape of his ears or nose
or head or the wide gap in a front row of teeth. What follows next is
that he becomes known by that very name in the school in a matter of
days only to worsen the agony which is likely to result into a fateful
distaste by the child towards the school and the consequent poor
performances in his entire school life.

Parents should also desist from scolding or insulting or punishing the
child in the presence of others, especially his friends; worse, if the
practice is during the meals time in the presence of the siblings. Apart
from making him feel small, he may reply back only to defend his ego
(self-respect) in their presence and thus create a precedent for such
regular "encounters" in future also.

Besides, the right of the parents to lecture the child over a bad
performance becomes only due if they have the fairness of commending and
praising him also for a good performance as and when the occasions
arise. And when it comes to lecturing him on his poor performances.

his should never be compared with the performances of others by names,
among his friends, relatives or neighbours, to make him feel distinctly
small. He will believe that they too see him as small and "worthless" As
this judgment comes from his parents. it will be disastrous if he
resigns to it as being a fact and that which he thinks is
irreversible.

**Acting Like A Boss**

On the contrary, whatever the ups and downs in the child's graph of
performances, he should be encouraged to invite friends home and allowed
the laxity or latitude of acting like a boss of the house in their
presence, so as to assist him to build up a good commanding image of
himself to impress the friends. This boosts personality. He will talk
about each such occasion for hours after the friends have left.

Parents should restrain themselves from revealing, jovially or in
frustration, to others outside the family, any of the child's behaviours
and habits which are no credit to him. Bed-wetting, obsessive fears
(say. of insects or darkness), hand-feeding, etc. are examples. The
family's friends and neighbours and their children may take the liberty
to tease the child in public. The conditions are temporary and wear off,
but the teasing in public persists. The child should be protected by the
same restraint which the parents exercise to protect each other's own
bad habits from the public knowledge.

And then, the parents should also avoid quarrelling among themselves in
the presence of the child. The family is his world and the parents are
his only heroes (role- models) in his world. The scenes of quarrels will
demolish his perception of his nice world and his good image of the
parents. He would look elsewhere outside his home for a better hero to
idolise and imitate.

The result will be the pin-up pictures of the celebrities pasted on the
walls, dangling of a cigarette from a side of the lips while looking
into a mirror, an ear-ring in an ear, a peculiar hair-cut. baggy or
drain-pipe trousers or the pair with multi- coloured patches -which all
are the signs of borrowing "self-importance" from the reflection of the
importance of others, when his own is made to appear lacking or
shallow.

Children Shoot School-mates.

The incidents of children shooting down fellow-students in the schools
are horrible, but not quite inexplicable. The former are most-likely the
victims of the 1nferiority complex in a society which believes in an
unrestricted freedom for children. The recent (March 2001) examples are
the separate shooting in two High Schools in California. The teenage
gunman in one was said to be "unpopular" among the students. In another
incident, 15 people were killed by a student in a Colorado High School
in April, 1999.

The child agonised by false perception of his unpopularity in the
school reacts abnormally to make himself truly unpopular. He is seen at
home moody, rebellious, depressed or brooding. The unmistakable
tell-tale sign is his outburst strangely against the parents at their
expression of love or concern.

A gun is the means for a sudden command over power and assertion of his
importance over others. The newspapers headlines will flash his name.
The TV media will beam his pictures. He will have "accomplished" what no
one among his peers or any in the elite group could dare. He too is
important. He will have the last laugh!

**Electiveness of Sijdah**

So if the child returns home badly upset and complains falsely over
what appears to be his ego having been offended, which is a Satanic
trait, get him to perform a quick sijdah and teach him to tell himself
while in a sijdah the fact that he and all others who ever walked on
this earth are small and unimportant before Allah, and that he is the
greater than them because he knows that fact. How Allah sees and judges
him is all that he cares for! Perhaps by this way. the parents may undo
whatever they may have done in laying the foundation for the child's
complex at home.

The understanding of the significance of Sijdah is normally minimal to
a child, but it has its impact to last him during his adult life.
Firstly, he will remember his child-hood experience of Sijdah which he
will always connect to the false feeling or perception of being small in
a society. Mind always need a trigger for strength, and what can be a
better one than Sijdah in pertinence to the subject? Secondly, it will
serve to register in his mind that an Inferiority Complex arises in a
person who is weak in mind and faith.

However, the effectiveness of sijdah during childhood depends on the
child seeing the parents also in sijdah while they are performing their
Salaat regularly. And then the importance of regular supplications (dua)
to Allah swt for guidance in raising a good (saleh) child with a stable
mind and strong faith should never be under-rated.


