Intruct the Child Once Only For Better
======================================

**Attention & Compliance**

Many years ago a father, accompanied by his son, visited me for a
professional advice. He introduced himself as a landlord. The son
appeared to be in his late twenties.

On the conclusion of a satisfactory consultation. the father turned
directly to the son and instructed him what to do in the matter. The
father chose to give the instruction in my presence perhaps to ensure
that it was correctly articulated as discussed.

However, as if the articulation was not assuring enough and the time
already taken was not long enough. the father repeated the instruction.
This time he repeated also some words, the planned timing, and the names
and places concerned in the con- tents of the instruction over and over
again much to my concealed disgust and to the visible boredom of the
son.

Now! I got the clue why the son was not so attentive to the instruction
at the first " time. It was obviously because he was well trained since
childhood to wait for a repetition of every instruction given.

And yet one more clue! The father had also kept on repeating to me his
questions to prompt me into repeating my answers during the discussion.
It was obvious that he too was made a victim of this family-trait in his
childhood and he was dutifully pass- Mental Hazard The indications were
that the repetition of the instruction in my office was not going to be
last one from the father to the son.

The full sympathy is for the wife, the work-subordinates or the
employees and the house-servants of such a person, because this type of
a chain of onslaught of boredom can be a mental hazard and therefore, a
cause for parting ways!

With the complexities of the present life as we know of. let us be
conscious of the dictum that: "Time has become a precious commodity;
making and retaining friends an art and to be counted as being among the
per- sons with a polished or refined personality a challenge." Nothing
is more un-nerving than listening to a same piece of information, advice
or instruction repetitively at the same moment. It goes against the
dictum.

For any errand or assignment, have the habit of saying your instruction
once only to the child and surprise yourself with the results. Your
instruction wins his sharp attention and a secured place in his memory
for a perfect compliance -because it was said once, as always! He too
will adopt and pass on this polished culture down in the family.

Another Dimension.

However, there is also another dimension to this unpleasant weakness.
The child who has been made habituated to responding only after a
repeated instruction is likely to grow up as an adult with yet a greater
weakness. While he would show immediate willingness to do a favour upon
a request, he would act only after the request has been repeated even if
the favour was small or simple. There are those amongst us who express a
request only once for a favour. Repeating the request is avoided because
it amounts to begging.

A person makes an inconsiderate spouse in the family; also an unkind
son or a daughter to the aged parents if the person habitually needs a
repetition of almost every small request before he would remember to
oblige. Often the repetition awaited never appears and the request
drifts from the memory as if it never existed. The favour is deemed to
have been denied when the intention was not so.


**The Child's FIrst Participation in a Religious**

**Congregation**

There always comes a time when a child is seen old enough to be taken
for the first time to a mosque. He has some knowledge of tahaarat
(cleanliness) and ehteraam (respect) for the mosque.

Incidentally, that is also the age when the child can be allowed the
benefit of his "first impression to be his lasting one" with regard to
his first experiences that he comes across in his life and the values
attached to them.

Parents need to believe and make the child also believe that his first
participation in a congregational prayer is a momentous occasion for him
and for the family, which indeed is, if only they knew!

The first impact and impression of the child regarding the occasion
will leave lasting imprints in his memory. A person belongs to where his
memories are. Some child- hood memories always survive sharply to create
the desire to relive the occasions. And he later in his adult life
relives the occasion like this sub-consciously by maintaining regularity
in the attendance of daily prayers.

**Planning & Preparation**

But this has to be preceded by an enthusiastic planning and
ostentatious preparation for the child to notice. So the child's
inquisitive nature makes him attentive to the talk going on around him
about certain prior arrangements and time-schedules, and he knows in his
own small way that there is in the air an important occasion out. His
interest however, sharpens with great expectations when he hears the
debate whether he is old enough for his first participation -and if he
is, what smart clothes he can put on.

The child's first attendance inside a mosque should be planned as a big
favour from the parents and accorded an appropriate ostentation and
importance. To register a maximum importance of the occasion on the
child, the day fixed is later than earlier to plunge him into a longer
duration of raised expectations so that he has also time to raise the
subject of the anticipated big day in the family and reveal it in
confidence to the neighbours' children.

**Self-identity**

The plan should provide for an early arrival at the mosque to enable
the child, in his new suitable dress for the occasion, to be taken round
for the inspection of the facilities and general familiarisation so that
he begins to feel "at home". He is introduced to relatives and
family-friends in the mosque before and to some after the congregational
prayer and later to the Imam of the congregation also. The introduction
is by his name to accord him a self-identity and acknowledge his
distinct personality.

What is needed to be avoided however, is the regimental warning of 'dos
and donts' while in the mosque or pointing out to the child his mistakes
in observing the discipline of the congregational prayer, and more
importantly, avoiding the day when there is a sermon and lengthy
proceedings. Children cannot maintain concentration longer at a
stretch.. Spells of boredom are counter-productive.

The first participation in the mosque serves only as a maiden
experience to sink in and not as a start for a regular attendance. The
subsequent attendance should be at intervals, preferably at the child's
own request to be followed by an incentive like a visit to a candy shop
or an ice-cream parlour before returning home.

The child, when adult and himself a parent, will cherish the memory of
such first experience and think very kindly of his parents when they are
deceased. The parents and the mosque become linked for a centre place in
the memory. He cannot belong to the parents when they are no more in
this world, but he belongs to the euphoric memories in which they
feature! In a good Muslim family a child's best and lingering memories
are of the parents taking pain to teach him the obligations in Islam.

**Introduce the Child to the Clock**

An office-messenger who was sent to collect some important papers was
asked to come back for them precisely in 20 minutes because of the
urgency. When he came back in ten minutes instead. he was asked to
return once again in ten minutes. He reappeared much later. He should
have been given the exact time. It would have been easy for him to keep
a track of it by consulting those who kept a wrist watch. He never kept
one and therefore he had never gained a dependable sense of the pas-
sage of time even if it were for a small span of five minutes.

When the messenger is idle and anxiously waiting for a due time for an
assignment, the due-time arrives faster; and when he is busy with
another interim job in the mean- time. the due-time arrives later for
the assignment! If the exact known-time due is in 15 minutes. he would
still ask people for time-information or go to consult the clock about
three times.

There can be no efficient .management of the daily affairs and no trust
earned in the society without a deligent adherence to a time management;
and the time manage- men-t is elusive without mastering the sense and
value of time. Islam also teaches a meticulous observance of time which
has disciplinary variables.

That was with regard to the earthly clock.
Graphic and Vivid. A man of about 80 years of age in the course of a
normal talk was narrating to his son during one leisurely week-end a
family event which had taken place when he was in his twenties and his
own father was the head of the family. His narration to the end was
graphic and vivid and his face-expression lively as if the aged
personthere was a re-enactment of " the event before his eyes. Then
strangely, after remaining quiet and thoughtful for rose from his seat,
stood still thoughtful, and then slowly walked away to retire in his
room.

sometime, It should be easy to guess why the old man suddenly fell into
a deep thought with all r the visible sign of desolation and melancholy.
He felt that the event had taken place " only "yesterday", and there he
was an old person "today" and the relatives will argue at the cemetery
"tomorrow" whether that old weather-beaten grave was indeed his! The
span of some sixty years since the event was now a mere 24 hours to him!
And that is precisely what the Holy Qur'an wants us to remember.

"He will say: How many years did you tarry in the earth? They will say:
We tarried a day or part of a day, but ask those who keep account. He
will say: You did tarry but a little -had you but known (it)" (23 :
112,113,114). Now this is the celestial (heavenly) clock, Time will
tell. Introduce the child to the earthly time-clock in time so that he
later as an adult becomes aware of the celestial clock also in time and
is not caught by a rude shock like the old man. What a great pity when
there are people in the society who were raised and conditioned to be
oblivious to the dictates of both the clocks!

**Sense and Value of Time**

Observe our children. They think of a number of things to do in a day,
more on a holiday, but when asked, they will be seen having no idea at
all of the respective time normally necessary for each of them. The
things are just too many for a day even if sleep is skipped! It means
that the parents have not yet introduced them to the clock. Children
must grow up as adults with a smart sense and value of time.

If the child says that he was going to a certain shop to buy a book,
ask him as if for a mere interest to know, how long that will take him
until he returns home. He will begin to think, estimate -perhaps
wrongly -and then reply. That is a good start if such casual inquiries
are made as a normal practice.

When the child mentions a duration of time for a particular job or
assignment, challenge him that it will take him longer, to make him
conscious of the time. He will try to accomplish it much sooner with an
eye on the clock not only to meet the challenge r but also to impress.
If the child invites friends at home for a small afternoon party, ask
him when will it be over and then teasingly question: why so late, not
because it matters whether late or not.

He will immediately direct his mind to the time-management to explain
and justify why so late, though to te parents it may not be late. All
these are a part of the exercise and practice of time-orientation to
teach the child time-management through a cultivation of a sharp sense
and value of time. This is essential.

Parents should also impress the child, when grown up as a youth, that
only "yesterday" they were young like him and "tomorrow" he will be old
like them. As an adult the child will always know that time is
constantly slipping by "fast" beyond his control according to the
earthly clock and death is always "the same day" -according to the
celestial (heavenly) clock even if it were forty or sixty years hence!


