Smart Shoes and the Child
=========================

A person was leading an aged blind man by hand with a walking pace
which was faster than the latter could conveniently keep up with. As the
person was walking by the side of the blind man, he was not pulling but
seen pushing the handicapped for- ward by his hand to make him maintain
the fast pace together. It was apparent that either both were in a hurry
for their destination or the person was undertaking the assignment not
much to his liking.

The signs were that the person saw himself humbled by the assignment.
It was strange that as the person walked on with the blind man, he
produced sharp tapping noise with the hard tread of his shoes against
the pavement. All this was a curious spectacle in the street. It
appeared that the ostentatiously haughty walking style of the person was
an, attempt to counter his embarrassment of the assignment. It perhaps
meant to convey to other pedestrians in the street that he was different
from the companion or better placed than him. He may have even wanted to
avoid to reveal that the hand capped was his father. ;

In a society where almost all walk softly in the streets, we do come
across some people, though few, who want to attract attention to
themselves or have the feel of being firmer on the ground with the chest
out by the sharp noise of their footsteps. Such persons are mostly well
dressed and not advanced in age. The foot-steps serve to manifest and
satisfy a pride if not arrogance.

Verses Are Enlightening.

The Qur'an is not silent on this aspect of pride. The following
pertinent verses are:

enlightening: "And do not walk about in the land exultingly, for you
cannot cut through the earth nor reach the mountains in height. All
this -the evil of it -is hateful in the sight of your Lord" (17:37, 38);
" nor go about in the land exulting over much; surely Allah does not
love any self-conceited boaster. " (31 :18)

In my schooling days I knew of a certain family which did not permit
their children to use shoes which produced sharp noise while walking
though normally such shoes were not Worn; and I did not know the reason
for it then. If it does somehow give the feel of superiority over others
in the street who walk softly and humbly, then let us prevent Our
children from cultivating the taste for such a feel. Such a false pride
can grow roots and branch out into other spheres or traits.

If children when adults have to lead or escort their aged parents who
happen to be needing such an assistance, the parents would want them to
do so with the pride and the feel of goodness for the parents from the
beats of the heart and not grudgingly with the pride for themselves from
the beats of the regimental (soldier-Iike) foot- steps.


**Childhood Trauma**

The son aged seven was among the small group of relatives. friends and
work-colleagues from a small local community who clustered around the
grave. He was watching as the corpse of his father in a white shroud
visible through the gaps between the wooden planks disappeared from view
by the growing pile of soil. Except for one dim bulb light temporarily
hung from a tree branch near the burial place, the cemetery was engulfed
in darkness.

The young father was in his usual jovial spirit of a hurry for the
work-place that morning when the boy bade Khuda Hafiz to him to catch
the school bus which was to arrive any moment. That was the last time
that he saw the father alive. That death in the family and the burial
was the first experience of the boy in his life.

For the first time, he 'found' how heartless the relatives and friends
of his father were. They took away 'his father' in a hurry to bury him
and that too with well-rehearsed rituals and as promptly they dispersed,
leaving him behind helpless in that awful and dark cemetery while his
mother was wailing uncontrollably in protestation back at home. All this
was as if they all had set themselves ready in advance for him to
collapse and lay dead at the work-place.

Cold And Cruel.

The boy at that tender age saw life as deceitful and betrayer. the
community cold and cruel, and the world therefore bitter and wicked. He
would rather keep his feelings of bitterness against the world to
himself than convey them to his young widowed mother only to add to her
agony of grief. Perhaps the mother too was part of all the wickedness of
the community seeing her trying to make him resign to the sudden
disappearance of his father.

The boy would feel anger well up inside him at the solace being offered
to him by the relatives because he thought them to be cynic or
hypocrites having seen their enthusiasm in the burial. He avoided
contacts. He prolonged his absence in the school. The presence of female
visitors at home gave him the pretext of a somber recluse in his room.

The scenes of the burial would flash vividly to torment him. The
innocent scene of the old person shifting his thick reading glasses back
up to the nose-bridge again and again as he went on with his hoarse
recitation of the burial "talqeen" kept coming back to his mind again
and again. He did not want to wipe the scenes off his mind because by
doing so he would also be wiping off his bitterness which he did not
want to.

All the indications were that the child has developed not depression or
grief -but worse -a typical trauma, which when originating in childhood.
is difficult to erase from one's mind completely even after the reality
of this life becomes clear. It always keeps haunting in the adult life.
It obscures the vision of the goodness of many aspects of, this world.

It rebels at the thought of death being mercy. It becomes less easy to
resign to the reality of this world which is attendant with the
vicissitudes of life some of which are bitter and have to be accepted as
normal. The indications of a trauma vary from person to person who is
afflicted according to the degrees of the stress and the circumstances
which cause it.

Death Is Mercy.

It is essential for the parents to realise that death can visit anyone
of them suddenly and much sooner while their child may not have been
prepared by them in advance about the reality of this world. He has to
be made to understand and accept that this mortal life is a blessing
only because it offers the soul an exit in the form of death to an
eternal blissful life; hence death is mercy to be awaited and embraced.
Death as a subject should not be taboo for discussion with the children
in the family. What a moving saying of the holy Prophet in which he
points out that death itself is an effective preaching (for those
living.)

Apart from the discussion. the most effective preparation is to arrange
for the child to have his first experience of witnessing the gusal (body
washing), kafan (shrouding) and dafan (burial) of a member of the
community, not closely related, under agreeable circumstances while the
father is with him explaining the significance of the series of
rituals.

Hadhrat Ali (a.s) has also said: "People are the enemy of what they do
not know". No wonder that the boy thought the world which is
characterised by the death of near and dear ones is enemy because he was
not let to know about death -as being an avenue of freedom for the soul
from the interim and constrained mortal life to the eternal blissful
life.


**Slip of Expletives in Conversation - As a Habit**

An agent who was supplying certain brands of goods on credit to his
clients based in the interior towns during the colonial rule found that
he could no longer do so. The company which was the sole importer of the
popular brands had cancelled the arrangement for sales on credit to the
agent.

The reason was a misunderstanding with the clerical staff of the
company for which the agent was not to blame. The Sales Manager was a
son of the Managing Director of the family-company. He would not see the
agent who was anxious to clear the misunderstanding.

There was a distinct fear that the agent would lose his clients to
other agents. He therefore confided his problem to a friend with a
request that the friend talks to the Manager.

As the friend did not know the Manager personally, he first made some
discreet inquiries about him. He learnt that the Manager was a graduate,
made decisions on behalf of the Managing Director and was keeping
extremely busy during the office hours. He often referred his visitors
whom he did not know to his subordinates. A call at his residence after
the dinnertime was likely to result in an opportunity of a meeting with
him. It did.

Apologetic Approach.

The pompous set up of the lounge where the agent and his friend were
seated added to the already intimidating atmosphere under which they
were to explain the misunderstanding. Both had decided earlier that
their approach to the subject would be meek and apologetic.

The formal introduction was interrupted by a telephone call to the
Manager, followed by one more after a short interval. It was obvious
that one call was of a business nature involving some hard bargaining
and the other from a friend enthusing the Manager in a friendly jovial
conversation. However, on both occasions of the telephone conversation,
the language of the Manager was punctuated now and then by the slip of
expletives (foul words) from his mouth obviously as a habit -apparently
without his being even aware of the slip.

Encounter And Not Entreaty. .

Suddenly and strangely enough, the haunting effect of the previous
intimidation on the friend disappeared. He gained a sense of
superiority. Encounter instead of entreaty became the impulsive key to
the opening of the talk by the friend when they came down to it.

The weaknesses of the staff in the Sales Department were pointed out to
the Manager without fear. All this was said firmly, however in a
language which was decent and respectful when it came to choice of
words, in contrast to the language used by the Manager in his telephones
conversation. The encounter paid off through the sense of superiority.

The habit of uncontrollable slips of expletives is a liability. A host
of such a loathsome habit can never be also a host of a refined and
polished or a commanding personality' however educated or rich or both
he may be. Such persons are seen small.

This habit begins either in childhood at home by the child seeing his
father deeply smirched in a similar habit or through his bad company of
friends in the school or sports ground while the parents fail to nip it
in the bud when it begins to show up at home. Equally Worse.

There is also a culture, equally worse, of a liberal use of slang words
or phrases I which wrongly appear to be figurative. They are in common
use without the awareness that they can also convey obscene meanings.

Children when adult will be judged also not by who or whose sons they
are but by their habitual language. However, those who drop expletives
by an uncontrollable habit as they speak are not worthy of even being
judged. They fare poorly in a society where the road to recognition,
credibility, matrimony and trust is paved with ethics. A respectable
language is part of ethics. :

c ,~. Watch a disorganised group of boys playing at an open space in a
residential area I during a weekend or a school holiday. Often a quarrel
erupts in the Course of the rivalry in a sports game. Note that while
almost all would shout at one another in heated arguments, only a few
would be seen dragging the arguments later into an exchange of a foul
language if the quarrel remained unresolved and the rest would begin
only to look on in silence with some embarrassment. They are different.
They are culturally not orphaned.

Now if the difference seen in the example of the behaviour among the
boys is bad, it will be much worse if the behaviour is allowed to take
roots as the boys grow up as adults. There will always be a price for
the lack of a polished personality however high their station of life.
The price is bigger if the station of life is low.


