Foster Charitable Nature in the Child
=====================================

A poor widow went to someone's house for a small financial aid. She was
known to the family; and that was not her first visit. However, on this
occasion her small daughter was with her.

A child of the family slightly older than the visitor's daughter
immediately collected his junk of toys and brought them forth to show to
the other child and play them with her. She took great fancy in one
particular piece of his toys. It was not in a good shape though and
should have been thrown away long before. However, the child retrieved
his toy from her hand as the widow stood up to leave with her.

The widow's daughter behaved normally as a small child who craves for
toys and so did the other child who wants to cling to his.

However, the miserly possessiveness of the child in the family was
normal only because the parents had failed to do what was normal on
their part: -to teach him being charitable. He therefore would not let
the toy go when asked for by anyone of his age or told to do so by the
parents. He would however abandon it later with little interest in
it -in this case, after the orphan had left.

Sadakaat (giving alms and charity) even under difficult circumstances
is a sign of nobility of a family. It is also believed to be a good
divine shield against impending calamities. It averts calamities by
divine grace without one being aware that they" were imminent.

When Old and Infirm.

The parents therefore should foster in their child the habit or
character of being charitable and generous. They too will reap its
benefits from the child when he is adult because, if he has been raised
to be compassionate and generous to others, he would be more so to his
parents when they are old and infirm -and perhaps needy also.

There are instead some sad, examples of children witnessing their
parents driving away the seekers of alms or charity without offering
any, or humiliating them while giving it when the holy Qur'an forbids
this. "And as for him who asks, do not chide (him). (93: 10). The
Qur'anic word for "chide" in the verse is "tanhar" which is strong for
admonition as used In the verse 17:23 with regard to scolding aged
parents.

The child can be rooted in the nature of giving charity generously by
their own parents setting examples for emulation, and explaining to him
its obligations as " a duty ordained by Allah " (9:60), and its
spiritual benefits.

The child should be allowed to hold certain small amounts of money for
regular sadakaat under the supervision of the parents. Certain cases of
sadakaat can be arranged through the hands of the child physically. A
child belongs to where his child- hood memories linger. Giving sadakaat
becomes a part of his memories linking his parents after they are
deceased. Portions However Small.

When making donations to charitable or religious institutions, some
portions, how- ever small, of the donations are paid in the name of the
child and the receipts in his name are handed over to him. He may want
to show them off to his friends or the children in the neighbourhood in
the beginning when this tradition is first put into practice.

A conducive environment cannot be created for the child to learn to be
charitable if it is a tradition of the family to be charitable to others
generally but absolutely not to their house-servants, whose welfare is
the religious responsibility of the employer.

A portrayal of such an inexplicable contradiction to the child
undermines the effect of the whole exercise. A worse example for the
child is to see one parent reproving the other for giving alms or
meeting the needs of others in charity. Even still worse as an example
is for a parent to stereotype (generalise) alms seekers as pretenders or
fake or raise doubts about their eligibility for alms.

A person who stretches out his hands for charity or financial aid is
already a victim of a humiliating loss of self-respect, The holy Prophet
wants us not to suffer him a further humiliation by spurning those
hands. The child will surely ponder positively if the parents are
charitable enough to him to explain the strings of humiliation suffered
by the needy -to cultivate sympathy for them, Allah's Wrath.

The holy Qur'an is eloquent about Allah's wrath against those who are
miserly, as shown by the following few verses out of other similar
verses:

"They who taunt those of the faithful who give their alms freely, and
those who give to the extent of their earnings, and scoff at them, Allah
will pay them back their scoffing, and they shall have a painful
chastisement" (9: 79), "And as for him who is niggardly and considers
himself free from need (of Allah); And rejects the best, We will
facilitate for him the difficult end; And his wealth will not avail him
when he perishes, (92 : 8,9, 10, 11 )

"And let not those who are niggardly in giving away that which Allah
has granted them out of His grace, deem that it is good for them; nay,
it is worse for them they shall have that whereof they were niggardly
made to cleave to their necks on the resurrection day""",â€¦," (3:180)
"Those who are niggardly and bid people to be niggardly and hide what
Allah has i given them out of His grace; and We have prepared for the
unbelievers a disgraceful chastisement" (4:37) .

'Behold! you are those who are called upon to spend in Allah's way, but
among you I are those who are niggardly, and whoever is niggardly is
niggardly against his own soul;" (47:38),

Not teaching or wanting to teach their children to be charitable itself
is a sign of miserly (bukhal) on the part of the parents, There are said
to be those in whose proverbial dictionary the word "give" does not
exist while the word "take" is repetitive. If one of them, having fallen
from a roving boat, has to be rescued from drowning, the effective
pleading to him is not: "quick! ! 'give' me your hand" but: "take" my
hand" for his own successful rescue!

Equally important is to reach the child, by setting examples, the
Islamic values of the maintenances of cordial relation with the
relatives, especially those with lesser means despite being at odds
periodically, all the context of benevolence and generosity. Such a
relation often pays off handsomely in one's lifetime in this world also.
Allah swt makes the relatives the cause or agency for the grant of His
grace.


**Childhood Nickname can Stunt Personality**

**A girl**

confided to her friend that a proposal for her marriage had 'been
received by her parents and that she was yet to be consulted before a
decision was made. After congratulating her for the matrimonial
prospects, the friend inquired the name of the suitor and then burst
into a hilarious laughter when it was given to her much to the
embarrassment of the girl.

The boy appeared to be popularly known by a funny nickname which was
attached to his name.

There was nothing that the boy could do about it. It stuck firmly as if
it was stated in his Birth Certificate. The girl could not fancy herself
being known in the community as Mrs. of the husband bearing that funny
nickname. Her children too who were to follow from the marriage and
would include daughters would suffer bearing that funny surname!

Strangely the girl's dislike welled up in her for any boy with that
nickname when she had not even known or met the boy yet. It would
however be silly on her part to give to her parents that silly nickname
as the not-very-silly reason for her refusal of the proposal.

Later when the couple met according to the arrangements made by the
parents for each to assess each other's liking, she felt, or she thought
that she felt. much to her relief, that she did not like him after all,
as she had prayed even before having seen him, though to all others in
the family he was a suitable young suitor with an average likeable
stature and complexion, apart from his other good merits. She tried hard
not to link her dislike of his fair appearance to his funny nickname.

How should the parents of the girl handle the refusal of their daughter
when they take her decision as sincere though surprisingly a wrong one
with regard to such a goodproposal?

Life-long Torture.

The practice of slapping nick-names, though demeaning, is not uncommon
in any community. However, nicknames which are funny or outright
abhorrent are a life-long torture for the victims (bearers) unless they
choose to resign to them in order to get on with their lives. That would
mean accepting and answering to the nick-names when called or
addressed.

Some of the nick-names are the type which is so derogatory that one
would hesitate to repeat, in order to clear the doubt, when the bearers
introduce themselves by their nicknames. Strangely enough" a fair number
of cases of nick-naming originate at home.

One common example is of a tradition which perhaps still exists. The
grandfather or an elderly person in the family fondly allots nicknames
to the small children in the family, such as would befit their
appearance, complexion or other physical peculiarities. They then become
known in the family more by such names, however funny or embarrassing
these may happen to be, than by their real names, and later on in the
community also during their adult life. Such a nickname is likely to
become later in the life a Substitute for the family-surname also or
attached to the surname for the victims and also for their Children to
be borne.

There is yet one more example. Some older children, in rare cases, have
a temporary weakness of bed-wetting. There is a tendency of the parents
slapping a pertinent nickname to such a child in the false assumption
that it will humiliate him and therefore deter bed-wetting. Instead of
sympathising for the weakness, the child is humiliated, as intended, and
agonised further only to prolong the weakness. What is Worse, however,
is that the nickname assumes permanency even after the weakness has
disappeared.

The holy Prophet said: "Give good names to the children". There are
cases where this advice is followed rightly only to be Spurned rudely by
supplanting the very good name with a nickname often by no other than
the parents themselves.

Odd Exception.

A person with an abhorrent nickname sees himself as an odd exception
with regard to his social status. He has the nagging feeling of having
been debased and made odd in the society. It nags him as a slur on his
personality. "i.e however resigns to it because he finds that there is
nothing else he can do about. To resist it is to intensify its agony.

No wonder that the holy Qur'an has specifically prohibited calling
others by nick- names in the verse 49;11; "0 you who believe! and do not
find fault with your own people nor call one another by nicknames; evil
is a bad name after faith, and whoever does not turn (lamm yatub), these
it is that are the unjust". A person is therefore deemed to be sinfully
wronged each time he is addressed or referred to by a nickname which
offends him.

As nick-naming is common in a society which chooses to tolerate the
practice, children have to be taught to be alert not to attract or fall
for it. It is a constant exercise of caution and tact. To ignore a
nickname when it is given is being wise, while to, respond to it is
being stupid. To show anger amounts to offering oneself as a source of
fun to other children and is a guarantee for the nickname to remain
stuck for life-time. There are examples of deceaseds being identified by
their names with-nick- names on the grave's head-stone.

The advice to the parents therefore is not to allow nicknaming at home.
They should also brief the child how to be circumspect to ward off any
such a possibility outside the home; and how to ignore and defeat a
start of any nickname. More importantly, the parents should instruct the
child not to call others by their nicknames.

The extended family should also avoid giving cousins similar names
under a common surname. When a similarity of names exists in a local
community, one child is then distinguished from the other by a
nickname.


**Disciplinarian Parents on the Wrong Footing**

Arguments between father and son are not uncommon in a family. However,
on one such occasion this argument between a father and his adolescent
son was more energetic. The energy was in the form of more 'heat' to
intensify the argument than ht' to pacify it. The argument came to an
abrupt stop when the son suddenly blurted: "You have always showed a
dislike for me - more when I was a child".

The father later questioned the mother of the son whether he was not
affectionate ugh to their son when a child, to buy him things he wanted
by stretching his own limited means, - and whether he did not generally
act as a good father to the son during his childhood.

And then the father asked a very pertinent question: Was he not a good
disciplinarian father out of affection for his child? "Disciplinarian"
he was, but the attempt was discipline not the child but also the nature
in the child over which the child himself j no control, and therefore
the affection for the child was seen by the child as a like for him.
Bundle Of Energy.

A child gains and therefore expends the physical energy more than the
mental one. is virtually a bursting bundle of physical energy. He cannot
keep himself still for I long period of time. When he wants to walk, he
finds himself running. He would instead of walking briskly to the
refrigerator for a can of juice.

He would sprint ahead and then wait for his parents to catch up with
him when they all stroll together- in the street. Even in the state of
sleep, the child shows his bursting energy. He changes his sides quickly
flinging his limbs in the process in his sleep.

While on a pilgrimage, watch the young children who join their parents
in the congregation of salaat-al-sub'h in the haram of Mecca or Medina
when the recitation from the Qur'an during Qiyaam is long. They, though
young for the obligatory prayers, but being from the foreign countries,
join the parents in the prayers. Their hands and legs cannot remain
still while the long recitation from the Qur'an continues. With some
there are also sudden body-jerks as if caused by a prick of a pin. This
is a typical nature of a child; a healthy one.

I Now what can be more hateful to the child than to be made to sit
still and quiet in a corner as a punishment or for want of silence in
the house while the father is entertaining visitors or quietly engaged
in reading news-papers. The father even forgets for some moments the
restraint which he has imposed on the child.

How unkind it is to the child when he is made to sit erect on a chair
with his eyes glued boringly into a book while he can hear his friends,
among the children in the neighbourhood, expending their extra energy by
playing in the backyard of the house, and he is normally with them as
usual at that time of the day or week- end.

Dictates Of His Nature.

,Why should the child be subjected to sitting still and quiet for even
half an hour when his productive concentration even in a lively class in
the school is not that much long, and for good reason. A child may be
watching his favourite programme of sports on the TV, and yet, despite
his intense engrossment,

he would suddenly stand up and go through a solo motion of imitating
the players in short spells of energy-releasing- stunts, only to sit
back and resume watching the programme. Here is a healthy child
responding to the dictates of the nature in him while the parents want
to discipline him against that nature.

When the parents choose to be disciplinarian on the wrong footing, the
likely reaction from the child can be either to rebel against any such
measures of discipline which militate against a child's nature or to
tolerate the measures only to misconstrue, " them as the parents'
dislike or indeed hatred for the child. Both are an unhealthy way of
manifesting parental concern or affection. The memory keeps lingering
when the childhood experiences are emotionally unpleasant.

One more caution. Engaging the child in long sessions of prayers
regularly with adults or like them is most likely' to develop in him a
dislike for the prayers while the intention for such engagement is to
make him to like the prayers. The reason for this is no different from
what has been discussed hereinabove.

So when the child is heard jumping noisily under the shower while also
shouting and splashing in the bath- room, bring on the face not a frown
in silent protest of his heady behaviour. but a broad smile in silent
acknowledgment of his healthy behaviour. Of course, the expression on
the face can be anything but smiling when or if the behaviour exceeds
the acceptable norm of a child's nature. And that is when the
disciplinarian parents are on the right footing with their disciplining
to earn the child' respect and not hatred!

To each of us, childhood isn't a matter of moments but memories. , '


