The Child's "books & Buddies"
=============================

A parent on meeting his next door neighbour, also a parent, in a
communal corridor of the same building thanked him profusely for
devoting some of his leisure time to coaching his child also together
with his own in school lessons after the dinner time. He was pleased
that his child had been showing great improvement in his school work
since his regular visits to the neighbour's apartment.

The neighbour, surprised and also embarrassed, replied that it was
hardly a bother to him to let both the children talk to him about their
work and marks as he cursorily browsed through the pages of their
exercise books and then gave them back with a word or two of
compliments. It did not take him more than five minutes for each of
them.

The neighbour added that he wished he had more time to spare for the
children but then he brought the shop-accounts home for daily posting.
These kept him busy till bedtime.

The visits started when the child found that the neighbour's child
regularly showed to his father his school work and "talked" his marks of
the day with him while his own father showed no similar interest
whenever he wanted to talk his work with him. His father did not want to
be disturbed when he was watching TV programmes which ended when the
child was already fast asleep. So the neighbour's child was moved by
sympathy and made an offer: "Why don't you come over to my place and you
too show your work to my Dad"?

A Word of Compliment.

Regular interest of the parents in the child's work at least by mere
inspection of his books for a few minutes serves as a great boost to the
child's confidence and efforts to do well in the school. A word of
compliment costs nothing but would save a good deal of costs if the
child. so complimented, completed his studies sooner and with higher
ranks.

There will continue to be TV programmes. if that is the lasting
interest of the father, when he is old and cared for by the son when
adult. The son will have become financially fairly settled, through good
education, to facilitate this leisure for his father. If the importance
of inspection of the school books of the child can be appreciated so
should the importance of investigation of the buddies (close friends) of
the child. The importance of the two is linked for a successful
completion of the child's education. It is the bad buddies more than the
good ones who can cast a greater influence on the child. Their
companionship serves as a source of encouragement or prodding for all
that, which is restrained or restricted by the parents; it is therefore,
attractive to the child. The examples are an unbridled liberty of
movement and loafing about, truancy, relaxation in the discipline,
unruly "group behaviour" in the streets and other public places, and.
worse still, immoral inclination. What is even more attractive to that
child who is well under disciplinary control at home and apparently
worthy of the parents' trust is the sense of sharing secrets among the
friends and loyalty to each other with regard to their secrets of
misbehaviour outside home. Collective Adventurism.

In fact, children are tempted to misbehave among their friends out of
collective adventurism for its sake. The adventure of sailing across the
previously unchartered waters of the excitement of permissiveness in a
group. all urging one another to paddle on, is the greater pull than the
products of the adventure. And yet the products can include serious
addictions which hook some of the children to ruin their prospects for
good education and ethics.

It is such an alluring spectrum of friendship which poses the risk of
the child's obedience to his parents to become eroded and subordinated
or tampered by his collective loyalty with other children to their peers
among the friends.

The child may be uncomfortably unwell or indisposed. He would however
not reveal his state of health to his parents for fear of being grounded
at home and missing seeing his friends; or he would still slip out to
meet them against the instruction of the parents which was to take rest.
Parents should have a cause for concern and begin a discreet
investigation if the child's attachment and loyalty to his group of
friends are disproportionately this much excessive.

To have friends and want to be with them almost regularly is not only
normal but also healthy for the child. However, this normalcy imposes a
great responsibility upon the parents. It is essential therefore that
the parents keep a track of the movements and behaviour of the child
outside the home. They should get to knowing closely his friends
individually by inviting them home and maintaining regular contact with
them through the child to the extent that the parents should also show
some interest in knowing their performances and conduct in the school so
as to be reassured and relieved regarding the caliber of the child's
close companions.

What is more important is for the child to be made aware of the
"temporary" phase of the temptation for the adventurism which is
attendant with the risks of the child acquiring certain "permanent"
addictions in result.


**Allow the Child his Moments of Privacy**

The son got married. The lingering display of the henna-dyed decorative
patterns on the hands of his wife continued to proclaim her as the new
bride in the family. The couple were relishing the moments of the
conjugal ecstasy (excessive matrimonial joy). otherwise known as the
period of "honeymoon". They were the moments to be cherished in the
memory and reminisced on the occasion of each anniversary with gratitude
to Allah.

However. the honeymoon at home was not perfect in its setting nor the
period there- after. The couple would want to steal a few short moments
of being together holding hands as and when at leisure and alone in the
privacy of their room during the day time which is normal for a
newly-wed couple. They couldn't.

The mother continued with the old habit. since the childhood of the
son. of appearing suddenly in his room. To her nothing changed nor did
she want anything changed. The son and the room both remained the
same -within her domain -and her right to it remained the same.

Locking the door meant banning her right. She would be the prosecutor.
the jury and the judge in a verdict against the bride as the scapegoat.
There was yet another ramification. For the parents to barge in was to
cause the son to reveal to his wife his annoyance to this habit of the
parents. and consequently he was offering a license to the wife to begin
to develop a dislike for them.

It will be no surprise if the son as a child had and still has the
habit of curling himself in the bed while in the state of sleep. This of
course may not be as much in that fetal (unborn baby in the womb)
posture as he was used to when he was a child.

Curling Posture.

Curling himself in the state of sleep comes about instinctively to a
child, especially the one with a slim physique, when the bedroom is
normally cold or the child has a habitual sub-conscious fear of
insecurity. That posture like that of a coiled reptile exposes the least
possible body-front to a threat to the body.

There is yet one more reason. The instinctive curled posture offers the
satisfaction of some semblance of privacy as the child begins to become
conscious of the need for it. This is normal where a child goes to sleep
early under the glare of light while others around him in the room are
still wakeful robbing him of the privacy for his sleep.

In fact, the curling posture is part of the manifestation of the human
Instinct for self- preservation. The exposure to cold and the fear of
insecurity of the body while in the state of sleep with the lack of
privacy -all seem to trigger this instinctive posture.
The message is simple to the parents. Allow the growing child "his"
moments of privacy "also". Teach him to want his liberty to keep the
door of his room partly closed (ajar) whenever he feels like doing so;
and further teach him to expect his parents to call first or knock
before entering the room.

**Personality**

Teaching the child the enjoyment of his certain convenient moments of
privacy in his room is .one of those factors which determine the extent
to which the child develops his independent personality. The child needs
even more consideration from the parents, especially from the father,
when the child is girl.

Where there is more than one child, the need for their moments of
common privacy will still be the same and should be respected by their
parents all the same.

Besides, teaching the child his own needs of the moments of privacy
will teach him also to respect the parents' moments of privacy which the
holy Qur'an too mentions in the verses 24 : 58, 59. Such training serves
as a mould for the rules of polished decorum within the family and
ensures respect and decency among the members.

Let us remember that the first human experience even before a person is
born is that he is "conscious", ("aware", "exists"), and the first thing
which he is conscious of is the privacy and comfort of the womb. The
human will always prefer his moments of privacy and comfort. Personal
privacy is now considered a human right and there already exists laws
against its intrusion in many countries. Childhood is no excuse for
deprivation of privacy. The excuse is childish!


**Save the Child from Risk of School Antipathy**

It was a primary school. The geography teacher asked for a volunteer
among the pupils in the class. One of them was quick to oblige. He went
to the Atlas Library and brought a canvas roll of Africa map and. as
enthusiastically, proceeded to hang the now spread canvas across the
tripod blackboard. This practice though usual. required some height and
prior experience for any volunteer.

On this occasion, however. the canvass map slipped from the hands of
the pupil and fell onto the floor much to his embarrassment. The mishap
was greeted with a lively roar of laughter in the class. Surprisingly,
the teacher got visibly angry. He thought that the pupil had obliged the
class-

mates with an amusement at the cost of his respect as a teacher.

The teacher asked the pupil to stand to attention in a corner of the
class. The teacher however got further angry at the pupil when he saw
that some of his classmates were making signs of teasing at him for his
punishment as if he was the one who was prompting the spectacle. So the
teacher asked the pupil to go out and wait for him outside the office of
the headmaster while he was continuing with his period. A Real
Dilemma.

The headmaster on the other hand finding the pupil outside his class
missing his les- sons. directed him to return to his lessons. The pupil
seeing himself in a real dilemma decided not to venture back to face the
teacher while he was in that ugly mood. Instead, he moved about in the
lobbies until the period was over and returned to register his presence
outside the office of the headmaster as instructed earlier by the
teacher. .

Later the teacher informed the headmaster that he was not surprised
that the pupil had defied the instruction to return to his lessons
because he was already proving himself a cause of indiscipline in the
class. He recommended punishment and perhaps a note also to his parents.
He was punished. The pupil though already hurt, was relieved of the
apprehension about an additional punishment at home when it appeared
certain to him later that no communication was however sent to his
parents by the school.

Antipathy.

The pupil feigned (pretended) severe headache and absented himself in
the school to avoid the following period of the geography teacher. It
was obvious that he was developing antipathy (a bitter dislike) towards
the school as his only alternative to his emotional reaction to the
injustice and humiliation meted out to him.

Incidents of open injustice and humiliation are normally wrongly
supposed to be accepted as a fair-play and a normal part of the school-
experience by the victims according to the parents' antiquated adage
that: 'the teacher is always right'. It falls upon the victims however
to suffer silently the agony of the memory of the humiliation for long
periods of time while hoping that the news of the incidents do not reach
the ears of their parents. Their avenues for a redress do not exist.

There happens to be also other avenues of injustice which are not
uncommon in the school. Boys are subject to intimidation or punishment
at the hands of "some" teachers when boys cannot help themselves being
boys. Boys tend to be lively. and some even more than others, and this
is often misinterpreted naively as misbehaviour.

Highly Spirited.

A teacher need hardly take it serious if, as an example. a pupil having
raised his hand high chooses to wave it in the air vigorously to seek
preference for answering a question that was directed to the class. To
keep ignoring him purposely for being highly spirited is to be unkind.
To warn him is to question his healthy sense of rivalry. A tactful
response to put an immediate stop to this. if need be. is to announce:
"Those who are not sure of the answer can still raise their hands but
wave them in the air; however. preference will be given to those who
think that they know the answer."

And there was this pupil who was chided and then mentioned in the
assembly hall by the headmaster. His serious misconduct was to be
imaginative and venture into some exercise of creativity. Toying with a
pen. he drew spectacles across the face of a teacher peering from his
picture. The pupil had made a use of his own copy of the monthly school
magazine for the exercise and for his own personal satisfaction of the
moment. He might as well have added beard too to give the face a
distinguished Touch like his father's who sported a beard and wore
glasses. This is again an example of the din created disproportionate to
the cause, if there was a compelling cause!

The Message.

The message to the parents is to understand that such incidents of
unfair treatment, punishment and humiliation are not uncommon in schools
in general, and that they have a disastrous result. The victims develop
antipathy towards the school and also towards his studies to ruin his
aspirations and prospects for a pursuit of good education., and that the
children, however badly hurt, avoid mentioning the incidents to the
parents for fear of additional victimisation.

Parents should therefore discreetly pre-warm the children of such
incidents of injustice. This will encourage the children to reveal these
incidents to the parents for a balanced discussion, which can then be
extended, if need be, with the school management respectfully and fairly
with the assurance that the intention is to assist both, the child and
the school.

Only those who are wrongly punished and hurt will have the confidence
of discussing the incidents with their parents. This will enable parents
to protect their children from the risk of the children developing an
antipathy towards the pursuit of education. At a private picnic of
friends studying in a primary school, there was a game-session of making
up a good story. This is from the author's own experience.

One came up with a spontaneous story in which the bad guys were the
teachers and the heroes the pupils in a fictional plot involving a
school. Bandits had attacked the school to get after the bad teachers.
Obviously, from the tell-tale signs, it is also a story of a victim of a
school-antipathy. He himself never knew that while he was spinning his
fictional story he was revealing the true story of his antipathy which
even he did not grasp. The ending is that he veered his way out while
others found theirs into a secondary school.

The author has reason to be still remembering the fictional story. He
landed in a trouble when he repeated it during the dinner time that
evening at home. That was way back in 1946. Have things changed with
regard to the antipathy…?……Much? Then the author wouldn't be mentioning
the story!


