Introduction
============

Muslim belief in the **Mahdi** is reflected in a vast and complex
literature. While Shi’ite Messianism and the myriad aspects of the
**Mahdi** have been described and analysed in a number of works, the
purpose of this particular study is to explore the Messianic ideas
implicit in the Qur’an in the light of both classical and contemporary
Shi'ite commentaries on the Qur'an.

According to Islamic belief, the Qur’an has a universal character and
its message is the continuation of that contained in the earlier
Revelations made to Abraham, David, Moses and Jesus. It contains a
wealth of information that has served throughout Muslim history as a
basis, or code, of living, intended for mankind in general and Muslims
in particular. The Qur'an embodies God's final Revelation imparted to
mankind through Islam's last Prophet. Moreover, according to the Islamic
faith, and in particular to the Shi'ites, the Qur’an is believed to
contain profound underlying significance, quite apart from its
face-value meaning. Indeed, according to Shi’ite beliefs, only the
Prophet and his Household (his daughter and

the twelve Imams) possess knowledge of both outer (*zahir*) and inner
(*batin*) meanings as well as the deeper underlying significance of the
writings of the Qur’an. According to such beliefs, therefore, the true
science of Qur’anic tafsir and ta’wil lies exclusively within the reach
of these fourteen personages, and it is only through their teachings
that people can find answers and solutions to problems in the Qur’an.

Concerning the **Mahdi**, the Qur’an does not mention him explicitly,
either by name or by description. The time of his reappearance is also
not mentioned. According to the Shi’ites, the reason for this is that
the Qur’an is not a historical or political treatise addressing a
specific readership or community or affecting a particular period in the
history of mankind; rather, it is a universal discourse addressed to the
whole of mankind from the dawn of humanity until the Day of Judgement.
In fact, the Qur’an also makes reference to certain events in the future
and to the end of time: the victory of Good over Evil in the world, and
the coming to power of the Righteous over their oppressors. Also, the
Qur’an alludes several times, albeit indirectly, to the society’s need
for the **Mahdi** and his government. Apart from the hundreds of
*hadith* (traditions) concerning the **Mahdi**, there are many that
provide an exegesis of these verses through both Shi’ite as well as
Sunni chains of transmitters, in order to explain the Qur’anic stand
vis-à-vis belief in *Mahdawiyyah* (*Mahdi*sm). These traditions clearly
state that the verses refer to the **Mahdi**. According to some Shi’ite
scholars, more than one hundred

and twenty Qur’anic verses have been recorded that refer to the
**Mahdi**, as interpreted in the Shi’a traditions.**[1]**

For example, the Qur’an explains that the moral and spiritual
improvement awaited by mankind can become a reality according to the
traditions under the government of the **Mahdi**. Indeed, the Shi’ites
claim that the universe is a harmonious system based on order and
balance, where corruption, oppression and injustice are the consequences
of society's misdeeds. However, these man-made imperfections are
considered as accidents and exceptions, to be erased finally by the
appearance of the **Mahdi**. Also according to the Qur’an, God promises
to restore earthly power to those believers who, although weakened by
injustice, remain praiseworthy and basically sincere. The traditions
(*hadith*) explaining these verses remind that they concern the
government of **Mahdi**. According to the Qur’an, people are not
abandoned to their own devices but God, through His wisdom and justice,
will save Man by replacing unjust governors with pious and just ones.
These verses are said to be about God's Will to put an end to the era of
Satan’s rule, annihilating his partisans, and restoring power to God's
Righteous Servants throughout the universe.

The first chapter of this study will attempt to clarify terms such as
Messianism as generally understood in Islamic belief,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 [1] Seyyed Hashem Bahrani : *Sima-ye Hazrat-e *Mahdi* dar Qur’an,* p.23

and the concept of the eschatological figure of the **Mahdi** in both
Sunnism and Shi’ism.

The second chapter will present a brief survey of the origin, principles
and development of Shi’i *Tafsir* as well as the lives and works of the
commentators dealt with in this research.

The third chapter will be devoted to a limited comparative study between
classical and modern works of Shi’i Tafsir dealing with the specific
subject of the **Mahdi**, in order to see how the *mufassirin* interpret
the presence of the **Mahdi** in the Qur’an. Among modern references,
the works of Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i (*Tafsir al-Mizan*), and Banu
Amin Isfahani (*Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan*) will be used for this
purpose, while the *Tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan* of Shaykh Tabarsi (d.548
AH/1153 AD) will be studied as classical reference.

[![](images/back.gif)](transliteration.htm)

[![](images/index.gif)](index.htm)

[![](images/next.gif)](01.htm)
