Chapter I – Mahdi in Islam
==========================

1-1 Messianism in Islam
-----------------------

According to the New *Encyclopaedia Britannica,* Messianism may be
described in general terms as an ideology consisting of a complex of
ideas, doctrines, attitudes, and expectations which, at a particular
moment in history and as a result of a specific configuration of facts,
has the potential to materialize in a Messianic movement with a markedly
eschatological or Utopian revolutionary character and message.
Messianism, which tends to develop in conditions of frustration, stress
and suffering, includes both a negative evaluation of the present as
well as a hope and expectancy that the time process will bring about a
major change for the better, leading either to the restoration of a past
golden age or to the creation of a new one. Although Messianism both as
ideology and as movement is not necessarily centered upon a Messianic
figure, Messianic movements are usually initiated by a charismatic
personality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] “*Messiah and Messianic Movements*” in the *New Encyclopaedia
Britannica* P.1017-1022

Messianism is a widespread ideology present among people from all kinds
of cultural and religious background. As A.A. Sachedina states: “The
notion of an expected deliverer who is to come... and establish the rule
of justice and equity on earth, is shared by all major religions in the
world. Jews, Christians, or Zoroastrians who at different times were
subjected to the rules of those who did not share their religious
heritage, cherished their traditions concerning a Messiah or Saoshyant
of a divinely chosen line.”**[1]** Also Shari’ati in his *Expectation: a
School of Protest,* acknowledges that the “yearning instinct” for a
saviour is a universal phenomenon in all human cultures and that Islamic
yearning for the *Mahdi* is identical to the expectation in Christianity
of Christ’s second coming and to a universal hope for establishing a
“golden age”.**[2]**

The similarity of this ideology in all religions and the question of its
origin often leads to studies and conclusions on the influence of one
religion on another as regards the Messianism issue. For example, we
find studies about the Jewish influence upon Christian and Islamic
Messianism or Persian and Zoroastrian influence on Jewish, Christian or
Muslim apocalypticism, Messianism and eschatology. In modern
scholarship, these conclusions are a subject of controversy. In fact,
the sheer extent of belief in this ideology

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] A.A. Sachedina, *Islamic Messianism,*P.1.  
 [2] Shari’ati, *Intizar*, p.4s

would seem to reflect the universality and innateness of humanity's hope
for a better future.

In the Islamic context, Messianism is emblemized by the eschatological
figure of the *Mahdi* who, it is believed, will rise to restore the
purity of the faith and to create an ideal religio-political system
under a just social and legal order, a world free from oppression in
which the Islamic Revelation will be the norm for all nations. However,
it is difficult to discuss Messianism as a concept within the Islamic
faith in general without first considering it separately within the two
main branches of Islam, Sunnism and Shi’ism, as the dimensions, the
functions and the importance of this ideology vary between them.

1-2 *Mahdi* in Sunnism
----------------------

Al-*Mahdi*, “The Rightly Guided One”, is the name given to the restorer
of religion and justice who, according to a widely held Muslim belief,
will rule before the end of the world. The term *Mahdi* as such does not
occur in the Qur’an but is derived from the Arabic root *h-d-y* commonly
used in the Qur’an with the meaning of divine guidance.**[1]** During
the Second Civil War, after the death of Mu’awia, the term first came to
be used for an expected ruler who could restore Islam to its original

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] W. Madelung: “al-*Mahdi*” in EI², p.1230

perfection. Among religious scholars, discussions about the *Mahdi* and
his identity can be traced back to that time. These discussions
developed in different directions and influenced later beliefs about the
*Mahdi* to varying degrees.**[1]**

There are a number of differences between the two main branches of Islam
as to the conception of the creed in the final restorer. According to
the *Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam,* the status of the *Mahdi* awaited
by the Sunnites is different from that of the twelfth Imam awaited by
the Shi’ites. The essence of Sunnite Islam is that the Muslim people
will accede to self-rule, attaining a state of truth and certitude
through their own exertions. The idea of an absolute *Mahdi* as an
infallible guide is therefore rejected by Sunni theologians.**[2]** The
Sunnites, in fact, expect the *Mahdi* to be the ultimate Caliph of the
Prophet**[3]** and to spread justice throughout the Earth. They do not
believe in the future restorer as one of the fundamental principles of
faith, as do the Shi’ites.  
 Furthermore, a minority among the Sunnites do not accept that the
Restorer will be called *Mahdi* and, indeed, entertain doubts as to his
existence. The *Encyclopaedia of Islam* asserts that: “Lingering doubts
concerning the *Mahdi* may partly account for the absence of any
traditions about him in the Sahihs of al-Bukhari (810/870 AH) and Muslim
(817/875

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid, p.1231  
 [2] “al-*Mahdi*” SEI, p.311  
 [3] Sachedina, Islamic Messianism, P.14

AH).”**[1]** “There is no mention of the *Mahdi* in either of the two
*Sahih*’s of Muslim or Bukhari”.**[2]**

There are also controversial discussions about whether the idea of
Messianism rightly belongs to Islam or not. Some claim that the idea of
Messianism is not Islamic. The *New Encyclopaedia Britannica* says that
“Islam is not a Messianic religion and has no room for a
Saviour-Messiah.”**[3]** Riffat Hasan supports this thesis and states
that: “Messianism appears to be incompatible with the teachings of the
Qur’an, nonetheless in the Muslim world it is a widespread phenomenon,
playing a pivotal role in the lives of many present-day Muslims from all
segments of society.”**[4]** Also: “Normative Islam as embodied in the
Qur’an does not support the idea of Messianism in any of its forms,
while Messianism is an essential part of religious belief and practice
for almost all Shi’a Muslims. Shi’a Messianism does not fit
theologically or logically into the framework of normative
Islam.”**[5]** Riffat Hasan also relies on Fazlur Rahman’s comments
showing that Messianism was not a part of original Islam. He stated: “As
for Messianism, it was originally adopted in Islam either by Shi’ism or
Sufism, but in any case it came to Sunni Islam through the Sufis or
rather through the precursors of the Sufis

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1]“al-*Mahdi*“, EI², p.1234  
 [2] “al-*Mahdi*” SEI, p.311  
 [3] “Messiah and Messianic Movements”p.1020  
 [4] R. Hasan: “Messianism and Islam”, p.262  
 [5] Ibid, p.267.

– the public preachers of the 2nd/8th century who consoled and satisfied
the politically disillusioned and morally starved masses by holding out
Messianic hopes.” **[1]**

These discussions are ongoing even though the belief in the *Mahdi* is
essentially Islamic and is widely accepted among scholars and ordinary
Muslims. Even though it is not an essential part of the Sunni creed, it
is accorded widespread belief among this community. Indeed, early Sunni
sources record several traditions from the Prophet about the appearance
and attributes of the *Mahdi*. These traditions are designated as
*Mutawatir*, meaning that they have been reported from the Prophet
successively by so many different unbroken chains of transmission and
such a number of narrators in every generation that it would be
virtually impossible to fabricate their existence without such
fabrication becoming known.**[2]** The verses of the Qur’an concerning
the *Mahdi* have also been interpreted by numerous traditions through
Sunni chains of transmission, as will be seen in the third chapter.
There are many other important terms and practices widely accepted by
the Sunnis but that are not explicitly mentioned in the Qur’an. The
authenticity or otherwise of the traditions of classical and
post-classical

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Fazlur Rahman , Islam , p.245  
 [2] Concerning the *Mahdi*, Hafez Abu Abdullah Ganzi Shafei (d. 658
A.H.) reports in his book al-Bayan:  
 تواترت الأخبار و استفاضت بكثره رواتها عن المصطفى فى أمر المهدى  
 (M.R. Hakimi, Khorshid-e Maghreb, p. 81).

collections of *hadith* are open to discussion as regards all fields of
Islamic thought, not only on the subject of the *Mahdi*.

Moreover, despite the absence of the term “*Mahdi*”, both the Qur’an and
the prophetic traditions (*hadith*) in the two Sahihs provide strong
grounds for expecting the appearance of someone who, both through
thought and deed, will represent the long-awaited spiritual “guide”.
Indeed, in different *hadith*s the two *Sahihs* allude to the coming of
a personage at the End of Time, someone whom Jesus will accompany. For
example, let us cite two *hadith*s: The *Sahih of Bukhari* mentions a
tradition reported by Abu Hurayra: “The Prophet said: ‘How will you
react when the son of Mary (Jesus) descends among you while your Imam
will be from among yourselves?’”**[1]** The *Sahih of Muslim* reports a
tradition from Jabir b. ‘Abdullah: “I heard the Prophet saying: ‘A group
of Pure ones from my Community will fight continuously for the Truth
(*Haqq*) until the Day of Judgement.’ He said: ‘Then will descend ‘Isa
ibn Maryam. And your Leader (*Amir*) will tell him: Come and lead the
prayer for us. He will answer: No, for some of you are leaders of
others, that is what God has granted to this Community.’”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] M. ibn Isma’il al-Bukhari, *Sahih Bukhari,* Bab. Nuzul ’Isa ibn
Maryam 49, Vol. 4, p.143:  
 ... عن أبي هريره قال: قال رسول الله (ص), كيف أنتم إذا نزل ابن مريم فيكم
و إمامكم منكم؟  
 [2]Muslim ibn Hajjaj, *Sahih Muslim,* Kitab Al-Iman, num. 247, Vol. 1,
p. 137:

 In the rest of the authoritative collections of traditions, the *Mahdi*
and all that concerns his advent is explicitly mentioned in traditions
from the Prophet, which allows us to think that the idea is not
exclusively Shi’ite. Several compilers of *hadith* like Ahmad ibn Hanbal
(d.241 AH/857 AD), Ibn Madja (d.273 AH/887 AD) , al-Tirmidhi (d.279
AH/892 AD), Abu Dawud al-Sajistani (d. 275 AH/889 AD), Ahmad al-Bazzar
(d.292 AH/904 AD), Abu Ya’lah al-Mawsili (d.307 AH/919 AD), al-Tabarani
(d.360 AH/971 AD), al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (d.431 AH/1040 AD), and
al-Bayhaki (d.1077 AD) have specifically recorded traditions about the
*Mahdi* in their collections. According to the *Encyclopaedia of Islam,*
the *Mahdi* traditions contained in the canonical Sunni *hadith*
collections of Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhi, Ibn Madja and al-Nassa’i as well
as the Musnad of Ibn Hanbal, were numerous enough to provide a solid
basis for the popular belief in the *Mahdi* as well as in the
post-classical collections of *hadith* like those of al-Tabarani,
al-Hakim al-Naysaburi, and al-Bayhaki. The eschatological role of the
*Mahdi* became generally more pronounced, but it never became an
essential part of Sunni religious doctrine and Sunni creed rarely
mentions it. The view that the *Mahdi* would rule the Muslim community
at the time of the descent of Jesus was commonly accepted.**[1]** Ibn
Khaldun (d. 405 AD), who

------------------------------------------------------------------------

... عن جابر بن عبدالله يقول. سمعت النبى (ص) يقول: لاتزال طائفه من أمتى
يقاتلون على الحق ظاهرين إلى يوم القيامه. قال فينزل عيسى ابن مريم (ع)
فيقول أميرهم: تعال صل بنا. فيقول: لا, إن بعضكم على بعض أمراء تكرمة الله
هذه الأمة.  
 [1] “Al-*Mahdi*” in EI², p.1234.

refutes the certainty of the majority of the *hadith* concerning the
*Mahdi*, nevertheless accepts a minority of them.**[1]** In his
*Muqaddimah*, he has summarized the Sunnite position on the question of
the future restorer of the faith in the following terms:

“It has been well known (and generally accepted) by all Muslims in every
epoch, that at the end of time a man from the family (of the Prophet)
will without fail make his appearance , one who will strengthen Islam
and make justice triumph. The Muslims will follow him, and he will gain
domination over the Muslim realm. He will be called the *Mahdi*.
Following him, the Antichrist will appear, together with all the
subsequent signs of the Hour (the Day of Judgement), as established in
(the sound traditions of the *Sahih*)” [authoritative collections of the
prophetic sayings recognized by the Sunnites.] After the *Mahdi*, ‘Isa
(Jesus) will descend and kill the Antichrist. Or, Jesus will descend
together with the *Mahdi* and help him kill (the Antichrist), and have
him as the leader in his prayers.”

In spite of support for the belief in the *Mahdi* by some prominent
traditionists, opposition to the belief in him did not entirely
disappear among the *hadith* scholars.**[3]** In the early period of the
Islamic history, a minor group of Muslim scholars denied the appearance
of the *Mahdi* and claimed that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] A. Amin, al-*Mahdi* wal-Mahdawiyah, p.108.  
 [2] Ibn Khaldun, *The Muqaddimah,* vol. 2, p.156.  
 [3] “*Al-Mahdi* ”, EI², p.1234

only Jesus would come. Ibn Madja reports this *hadith* (“*la Mahdi illa
‘Isa*; there shall be no *Mahdi* except Jesus”) in his Sunan and says
that it was reported by one person only, and that is Idris
Shafi’i.**[1]** Furthermore, Imam Qurtubi states that there are unknown
transmitters in the chain of the narration of this *hadith* and that it
is therefore weak. He also states that this *hadith* contradicts all the
*hadith*s reported by the Prophet about the *Mahdi*, descended from the
Prophet’s family through Fatima.**[2]**

On the other hand, in the middle of the 7th/13th century, several
Sunnite scholars supported the Shi’ite belief that the twelfth Imam was
the expected *Mahdi*, relying solely on Sunnite traditions and
countering Sunnite objections to the *Mahdi*-ship of the twelfth Imam.
Among them, Sibt ibn al-Djawzi, shortly before his death in 654 AH/1256
AD in Damascus, assembled reports from Sunni sources about the virtues
of ‘Ali and his descendants, and at the end affirmed that the Twelfth
Imam was the expected *Mahdi* in his *Tadhkira khawas al-‘umma bi- dhikr
khasa’is al-a’imma.* Support of the *Mahdi*-ship of the Twelfth Imam by
these Sunni authors, as also by later ones, was regularly noted by Imami
apologists.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Madja, Muhammad Ibn Yazid al-Qazwini (207-275 A.H.) *Sunan Ibn
Madja,* Kitab al-Fitan, Bab Shiddat al-Zaman, Vol. 3, p. 434.  
 [2] Imam al-Qurtubi, *Al-Tadhkirah Fi Ahwal al-Mawta wa umur al-Akhira
,* Bab Fi al-*Mahdi*.  
 [3] “*Al-Mahdi*”, EI², p.1237

Regardless of the authenticity or otherwise of the traditions cited on
this question, the ultimate triumph of Good over Evil in the Qur’an and
the universal idea of hope in Islam is embodied in the figure of the
*Mahdi*. The belief in a future Saviour and the Messianic concept has
had a significant social and psychological impact on Muslims. In every
crisis and in times of turbulence, these beliefs served to raise their
hopes.

1-3 *Mahdi* in Shi’ism
----------------------

In Imamite (Twelver) Shi’ism, the belief in the appearance of the
*Mahdi*, the twelfth Imam descended from the Prophet who promised an end
to corruption, has been a central aspect of the faith throughout its
history, in contrast to the beliefs of Sunnism. This is not only a basic
tenet of the creed, but also the foundation on which the entire
spiritual edifice of the Imamite religion rests. The belief in a
temporary absence or occultation (ghayba) of the *Mahdi* and his
eventual return in glory is also common. The idea of the *Mahdi* has a
greater significance and presence in the lives of the Shi'ites than in
any other religion and is the most important factor in the development
of Shi’ism, where unshakeable belief in the advent of the *Mahdi*
continues to be expressed in most of their daily prayers.

In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, with the spread of
Western-style modernism, Messianic and

eschatological aspirations largely disappeared from the mainstream
Sunnite discourse, although important *Mahdi*-st movements emerged in
the mid-nineteenth century to subsist well into the twentieth century in
different parts of the Islamic world. On the other hand, in the Shi’ite
world, the desire to create a true Islamic community with a Messianic
deliverance was more intense than in the Sunni world. In the decade
leading up to the Iranian Islamic Revolution in 1979, there were some
attempts to reassess such themes as the nature of the hereafter, the
coming of the *Mahdi* and the order he is expected to establish. Topics
such as the duties of believers during the Occultation were more
assertively linked to the questions of political legitimacy and clerical
leadership on behalf of the *Imam*. There was a gradual distancing from
the traditional narrative of the apocalyptic end in favour of portraying
the *Imam*’s return as an all-embracing revolution with this-worldly
causes and consequences. According to Shari’ati, Messianism and futurism
in Shi’ite Islam were the outcomes of a “synthesis between the ideals
and the realities” of Islam, an ambition to restore the ideals of Ali’s
just rule... To reconstruct such an idealized past, Shari’ati believed,
the disinherited (*mustad’afin*) of the earth should strive for a
“classless society” in which justice and equality will triumph over
exploitation, imperialism and tyranny.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Shari’ati, *Expectation: a School of Protest,* p. 15

The difference between Sunnism and Shi’ism is a question of political
succession and religious authority. There was the problem of the
succession to the Prophet as leader of the community after his death. A
small group backed Ali whom they believed to have been designated for
this role by appointment (*ta’yin*) and testament. They became known as
his ‘partisans’ (*shi’ah*) while the majority agreed on Abu Bakr on the
assumption that the Prophet left no instructions on this matter; they
gained the name of ‘The people of tradition and consensus of opinion’
(*ahl al-sunnah wa al-jama’ah*). But more generally the Shi’ite of Ali,
in the sense of those who backed and followed him among the Companions,
already existed during the Prophet’s lifetime and there are several
references to them in prophetic sayings. Only with the death of the
Prophet did they become crystallized as a group distinct from the
Sunnis.**[1]** They follow the family and successors of the Prophet
(Twelve Imams) as their source for the understanding of the Qur'anic
Revelation. The Imam is the sustainer of the religious law and the
guarantor of its continuation. The earth can never be devoid of the
presence of the Imam, even if he be hidden or unknown. His duties are
essentially to rule over the community as the Prophet's representative,
to interpret religious science and law to men and to guide people in
their spiritual life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] H. Nasr, *Ideals and realities of Islam,* p.149

Like the Imams before him, the twelfth Imam is said to have had a
miraculous birth. He was born on the fifteenth day of *Sha’ban* in the
year 255 of the *Hijrah*. He came out of his mother’s womb prostrate in
the attitude of prayer, pure and circumcised, raising his voice in the
profession of faith (*shahadah*). His mother, called Narjis (Narcissus),
is believed to be the grand- daughter of the Byzantine Emperor, who
disguised herself as a slave girl, and was captured during a Muslim
expedition against Byzantine territory. Long before her captivity, she
was visited in her dreams by Fatimah, the venerable ancestress of the
Imams and daughter of the Prophet, who instructed her in the Islamic
faith and prepared her for the great role she was to play. Finally, the
Prophets Jesus and Muhammad, with their vicegerents Simon Peter
(Shim’un) and Ali, appeared to the girl. Muhammad asked Jesus for
Narjis's hand, and Ali and Simon Peter acted as witnesses to the
marriage contract. Fatimah and the Virgin Mary also came to bless the
sacred marriage. From that time on, the 11th Imam, Hasan al-‘Askari, the
girl’s future spouse, came to see her every night in a dream. He finally
ordered her to flee her country and allow herself to be sold into
slavery.**[1]** Thus, the twelfth Imam’s lineage combined both royalty
and prophecy. More important is the direct presence of Christianity

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Babuye, *Kamal al-din*, Bab 41 Ma ruwi’ah al-Narjis umm
al-Qa’im, vol.2, p.418-423  
 Majlisi, *Bihar al-Anwar,* Kitab al-*Gh*ayba, Bab wiladatihi wa ahwal
al-ummihi, num. 12, vol. 51, pp.6-7-8.

in the popular concept and history of the Imams in Twelver Shi’ism.
According to Imamite authors, none of the previous Imams had been spied
upon as had the eleventh. Al-Hasan al-‘Askari attempted to hide the fact
of the birth of his son from everyone but his closest friends.**[1]**
The caliph al-Mu’tamid and his entourage, as well as the majority of the
partisans of the Imams, were even convinced that the eleventh Imam had
passed away (in 260 AH/874 AD) without leaving any progeny.

a) *Mahdi* in Shi’ite traditions
--------------------------------

The literature dealing with the *Mahdi*, his birth, concealment and
return is vast and complex. Sachedina states, concerning this
literature, that the primary sources in the study of the doctrinal
evolution of the idea of the *Mahdi* in Imami Shi’ism**[2]** can make an
essential contribution to an understanding of the period in which the
idea of the Hidden *Mahdi* became crystallized in Imamite dogma.**[3]**
M.A.A. Moezzi explains very clearly that the Imams passed on two kinds
of traditions concerning the *Mahdi*: the first category contained
confusing information, where the name of the *Mahdi* is not specified
and was aimed at that large group of disciples who were involved in the
writing down of traditions. In fact, the Imams prohibited the
pronouncing of the latter’s name (*al-nahy ‘an al-ism, al-*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Babuye , *Kamal al-din ,* vol 1, pp.474  
 [2] Imami (or imamate); the Shia who believe in twelve imams.  
 [3] Sachedina, “*A treatise on the Occultation...*” , p.110

*man’ ‘an al-tasmiya*)**[1]** . According to the authors, this
prohibition was maintained in effect up to at least the beginning of the
minor Occultation. A second kind of tradition, aimed only at the closest
of disciples, contained specific information about the identity of the
*Mahdi*. His name was included here, except that, in order to guarantee
the safety of his life, this category of traditions was only to be
transmitted orally until after the beginning of the Occultation; it
could be put into writing only after the life of the son of the eleventh
Imam was out of danger.**[2]**

Among the first Shi’ite compilers of traditions concerning the number of
Imams, the twelfth Imam, his two occultations, his final Return and
Rise, let us cite: Shaykh al-Kulayni, who died in 329 AH/940 AD, the
same year as the beginning of the major Occultation, and who compiled
his *Usul min al-Kafi* during the period of the minor Occultation;
al-Nu’mani Ibn Abi Zaynab (d.circa 345 or 360 AH/956 or 971 AD); Ja’far
al-Qummi (d.369 AH/979 AD); Ali ibn Muhammad al-Khazzaz al-Razi al-Qummi
(d. in the second half of the fourth AH/tenth AD century); Ibn Bâbuye
(d. 381 AH/991 AD) who, especially in his *Kamal(Ikmal) al-din*, seems
to have collected the essentials of all the information from his
predecessors; Ahmad ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Ayyash al-Jawhari (d.401 AH/1101
AD;

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] al-Kulayni , *Usul*, “kitab al-hujja”, bâb fi al-nahy ‘an al-ism ,
*hadith* 1 and 3, vol.1, p.332-333.  
 [2] M.A.A. Moezzi, *The Divine Guide in Early Shi’ism,* p.106

Al-Shaykh al-Mufid (d. 413 AH/1022 AD), author of Kitab al-Irshad; id.
Al-Fusul al-‘ashara fi al-ghayba; Al-Murtada ‘Alam al-Huda (d. 436
AH/1044 AD), a disciple of al-Mufid; Ali al-Karajaki (d. 449 AH/1057
AD), another of al-Mufid’s disciples; and finally Muhammad ibn Al-Hasan
al-Tusi (d.460 AH/1067 AD). All these authors’ works preceded the minor
Occultation.**[1]**

The Twelver Shi’ite doctrine on the Occultation, based on traditions
attributed to the *Imams*, was authoritatively elaborated by Muhammad
ibn Ibrahim al-Nu’mani in his Kitab al-Ghayba, by Ibn Babuya in his
Ikmal al-Din, and by Shaykh al-Tusi in his Kitab al-Ghayba. In Imami
traditions, as in Sunni traditions, the *Mahdi* will rule the world,
with Jesus praying behind him after his descent from heaven. This did
not raise a theological problem as it would in Sunnism, since the
*Mahdi*, like all other Imams, according to prevalent Imami doctrine,
exceeds all Prophets except Muhammad in religious rank.**[2]**

b) The Occultation
------------------

The Occultation (ghayba) is a period of concealment chosen by God for
the Imam who will continue to live in this state as long as God deems it
necessary. Then He will command him to reappear and take control of the
world in order to restore

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] M.A.A. Moezzi, *The Divine Guide in Early Shi’ism,* p.101  
 [2] “*Al-Mahdi*”, EI², p. 1236

justice and equity. The mysterious fate of the son of the eleventh Imam
divided the early Shi’ite family into some eleven to fifteen different
schisms.**[1]** But the idea according to which the twelfth Imam was
alive and hidden and would return at the End of Time, was later adopted
by all Imamites due to the tenacious efforts of authors/compilers like
al-Kulayni, al-Nu’mani and especially Ibn Babuye, who, through the great
mass of traditions surrounding this belief, progressively managed to
convince the population of the faithful.**[2]** In fact, early Imamites
attempted to present the Imamate and *Mahdi*-ism of the Twelfth Imam in
occultation in a logical and rational way.**[3]** According to Imamite
sources, Muhammad ibn Al-Hasan al-‘Askari (*al-Mahdi*) had a first
occultation when he was a child, in 260 AH/874 AD, at the time of his
father’s death, and it lasted nearly 70 years. At Samarra in Iraq,
beside the shrines of the tenth and eleventh Imams, is a mosque under
which there is a cave from where the Imam *Mahdi* is said to have
disappeared**[4]** when he was five years old. This cave was a place of
retreat and meditation for the eleventh Imam and his son, and also a
hiding place from the Abbasid agents.**[5]** During this Occultation,
the Imam

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Cf. A.A. Sachedina, *Islamic Messianism*, pp. 42-55, see also
an-Nawbakhti, *les sectes shiites* (*Kitab Firaq al-shi’a*), pp.109  
 [2] M.A.A.Moezzi, *The Divine Guide in Early Shi’ism,* p.105  
 [3] Sachedina, “*A treatise on the Occultation..*.” , p.111.  
 [4] M. Momen, *An Introduction to Shi’i Islam*, P.161.  
 [5] H. Corbin, *En Islam Iranien*, vol.4, p. 322.

communicated with his faithful via four successive Representatives
(*nâ’ib*):

 

1. Abu ‘Amr ‘Uthman ibn Sa’id al-‘Umari (or al-‘Amri), representative
from 260 AH/874 AD to 267 AH/880 AD.

2. Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn ‘Uthman al-‘Umari (or al-‘Amri), the son of
the above, from 267 AH/880 AD until 305 AH/917 AD.

3. Abul-Qasim al-Husayn ibn Rawh al-Nawbakhti, from 305 AH/917 AD to 326
AH/937 AD.

4. Abul-Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad al-Simarri, from 326 AH/937 AD to
329AH/941 AD.

This was “the minor Occultation” (al-Ghayba al-sughra).

Then, around 329 AH/941 AD, came the beginning of “the major
Occultation” (al-Ghayba al-kubra) after the fourth representative
received a last autographed note from the hidden Imam:

“In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful; Ali ibn Muhammad
al-Simarri, may God increase, through you, the reward of your brothers
[in religion; that is the Shi’ites]; your death will take place in six
days. Prepare yourself and name no one as your successor [as
representative] after your death. This is

the advent of the second Occultation in which there will be no more
manifestation, except if it be with divine permission, and that will
only take place after a long time, when hearts will be hardened and the
earth filled with violence. Among my partisans, some will claim to have
seen me with their eyes. Beware! He who claims to have seen [me] with
his eyes before the raising of al-Sufyani and [the sounding of] the Cry
is a liar and an impostor. Greatness and Power belong to God alone.”

Six days later al-Simarri, on his deathbed, was asked, “Who will be your
successor?” He replied, “From this point on, the matter is in God’s
hands, He will arrange it Himself.” Those were his last words.**[1]**
The major Occultation is still in effect, and will not end until the End
of Time (*akhir al-zaman*) when the *Mahdi* comes back to re-establish
Justice on earth. The Imam is not completely cut off from his followers
but has spokesmen, in the form of learned jurists (*marja’ taqlid*), who
can act on his behalf and guide the Shi’ites in their religious matters.
Imamite traditions give four reasons for the Occultation:**[2]**

 

1. Safeguarding the life of the twelfth Imam

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Babuye, Kamal al-din, vol. 2, ch. 45, p.516, num.44.  
 [2] Al-Kulayni, *Usul*, Kitab al-Hujja, bab nadir fi hal al-Ghayba,
vol. 1 pp. 333-335, bab fi l-ghayba, vol. 2 pp. 132- 45. Ibn Babuye,
*Kamal al-din*, vol. 2 , ch. 44 , PP .479 – 82, num 1, 2, 6, 8.

 

2. Independence vis-à-vis temporal powers; through his Occultation, the
*Mahdi* will owe allegiance to no temporal powers.

3. Putting the Imamites to the test; the Occultation serves as a long
period of trial, a challenge to their faith.

4. Finally, there is a hidden reason for the Occultation, that is said
to be the most important of all, although it will not be revealed until
the Return of the *Mahdi*.

With the major Occultation, the secret life of the Twelfth Imam begins,
whose occult presence has dominated the Shi’ite religious consciousness
for more than ten centuries. The Twelver tradition illustrates this from
as early as the fourth AH/tenth AD century, the hidden Imam living in
his physical body, providentially endowed with a long life. To support
this claim, Ibn Babuye dedicates six chapters of his *Kamal al-din* to
those known for their extraordinarily long lives in the Arabic
tradition. It is also said in the Twelver tradition that the hidden Imam
attends the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, and that he sees people even if
they cannot see him.**[1]** He is visibly present and walks through
their marketplaces and into their

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Babuye, *Kamal al-din,* Bab Dhikr man shahada al-Qa’im wa raâhu
43, vol.2, pp.351, num.8.

homes, and nobody recognizes him.**[1]** In this latter case, he is
compared to Joseph (Qur’an, sura 12, *Yusuf*), seen but not recognized
by his brothers. As in Joseph’s case, God can allow him to be recognized
by some people. The Prophet is said to have stated: “...His faithful are
illuminated by his Light; they profit from his wilaya during his
Occultation, just as one profits from the sun even when it is covered by
clouds.”**[2]** The history of the twelfth Imam during his major
Occultation is constituted of stories and narratives recounted by those
who saw the *Mahdi* in their dreams or in reality.**[3]** The
compilations of al-Kulayni, al-Nu’mani, and Ibn Babuye, to name the
oldest and the best known, and numerous other Shi’ite works throughout
the centuries, contain a number of eyewitness accounts from even
ordinary people who were in great distress or other unfortunate
circumstances and who claim having met the twelfth Imam. “None of these
mysterious appearances to his faithful suspends his Occultation but each
of these appearances suspends for his faithful the common laws of time
and space for Men who do not perceive the occult presence of the
Imam.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Babuye, *Kamal al-dîn* , vol. 2, ch.33, p.341, num.21. also,
al-Kulayni, *Usul*, Kitab al-Hujja, bab Nahi ‘an al- Ism, vol.1, num 1 &
3 , p. 332-333 ; Al-Nu’mani, *Kitab al-ghayba*, p.257.  
 [2] Ibn Babuye, *Kamal al-dîn*, vol.2, ch.43, p.253, num.3.  
 [3] H. Corbin, *En Islam Iranien*, vol.4, p. 304.  
 [4] Ibid, p.306

c) The concept of Intizar
-------------------------

Complementary to the doctrine of the greater Occultation is the notion
of *Intizar*, or the expectation and awaiting of the Hidden Imam's
return. *Intizar* is a state of expectancy for the reappearance of the
Hidden Imam; it is a doctrine of hope and trust that he will one day
reappear and establish an ideal Islamic society. The expectation of
release from suffering, grief and sorrow (*Intizar al-faraj*) is
enjoined upon the believers. The doctrine of *Intizar* has important
connotations for the personal and political lives of the Twelver Shi’ite
faithful during the Occultation of the Imam: their personal duties as
believers vis-à-vis God and their attitude to the question of religious
leadership and earthly government.

The most comprehensive collection of the Twelver Shi’ite narratives on
*Intizar* was made by the Shi’ite scholar Muhammad Baqir Majlisi in his
encyclopaedic work on Shi’ite traditions, *Bihar al-Anwar*.**[1]** The
disappearance of the *Mahdi* and his Occultation are presented in the
traditions as a severe test for the Shi’ite faithful, bringing with it
much hardship and many schisms. The Shi’ites will undergo a process of
sifting in which the unbelievers will be rooted out from the believers.
Several traditions mention the merit of *Intizar al-faraj* without
specifying the nature and cause of suffering. In one tradition, the
Prophet is reported to have said: “The best of all acts

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Majlisi, *Bihar al-Anwar,* Vol. 52, Bab Fazl al-Intizar va madh
al-Shi’a fi zaman al-ghayba, pp. 122-127.

carried out by my people is their expectation of release from suffering,
granted to them by God.”**[1]** Several of the eighty or so traditions
on the excellency of Intizar, class it as the most noble (*afdal*) of
all actions, and in one narrative as synonymous with worship
(‘*Ibada*).**[2]** Acts of worship… must be carried out clandestinely
during the Ghayba, are more meritorious than those performed openly
after the return of the Imam. One must strive to carry out all of the
obligatory duties laid down in the Shari’a, which remain incumbent on
the individual despite the absence of the Imam. The Twelver Shi’ites
during the occultation are superior to those in the company of the
*Mahdi*, for the simple reason that the former must contend with
tyrannical regimes, against which they move neither tongue nor hand nor
sword in opposition.**[3]** The expectation of salvation through the
rise of the twelfth Imam is dominant throughout the Occultation. The
persistent faith in freedom from grief through his appearance requires
the Shi’ites to be on the alert at all times and also to pave the way
for the Imam’s reappearance.

Murtaza Mutahhari, a prominent student of Imam Khomeiny and a teacher of
philosophy, in his essay on the uprising and the revolution of the
*Mahdi*, no longer treated the advent of the Lord of the Age as a
sudden, impromptu event,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Bihar* vol.52, P. 122.  
 [2] *Ibid* . vol.52 p.122.  
 [3] *Ibid* vol.52, p.122

but as the final stage in an ideologically driven revolution to
establish Islam’s “ideal society”. Mutahhari conceived the coming of the
*Mahdi* as the climax of a revolutionary struggle that in its primary
stages requires the believers’ active involvement**[1]** during the
Occultation. Unlike the Marxist theory of revolution, Mutahhari believed
that *Mahdi*’s revolution is divinely inspired and remains contingent
upon the alertness and action of the community. Thus, the establishment
of a just state became for Mutahhari and like-minded activists a
legitimate first step toward the final revolution of the *Mahdi*.

The well-known work *Wilayat-e faqih (authority of the jurist)* was
clearly meant to provide an answer to the most urgent of these concerns.
In this work, Imam Khomeiny advocated the necessity for instituting an
Islamic government in the absence of the Hidden Imam in order to prepare
the terrain for the Rise of the *Mahdi*. He argued that while the Imam
is in Occultation, preserving the essence of Islam and defending its
sacred values should be accomplished by an Islamic government under a
Guardian Jurist to be upheld as the Imam's vicegerent. In support of
this doctrine, Imam Khomeiny cites one of the Hidden Imam’s decrees in
which the ‘*ulama* were upheld as “proofs” (*hujaj*) of the Lord of the
Age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mutahhari, p.5-10

Ali Shari’ati (1933-1977), a major ideologue of revolutionary Shi’ism,
in a pamphlet entitled “*expectation, a school of protest*”, regarded
the End of Time as nothing but an “ultimate revolution” for humanity.
The *Mahdi*’s revolution could not come about without Muslims arriving
at a new understanding of expectation as a way of acquiring social
responsibility, working toward a just and equitable order and rejecting
political oppression and cultural degradation. Complying with the
Shi’ite prophecies, he repeated that the Lord of the Age will come when
the entire lifespan of humanity reaches its lowest ebb of corruption,
but until that time, he recommended that the community of believers
should settle on the leadership of a democratically elected jurist
(*faqih*) to serve as the Hidden Imam's general deputy (*na’ibe ‘aam*).
A true understanding of the End, he stated, will evolve only when
Muslims abandon troubling theological entanglements concerning
circumstances of the resurrection (and in effect, the Occultation) and
instead, develop a perspective conforming to modern social and human
sciences, and based on a sociological analysis of class conflict.
Shari’ati’s ideological dimensions of expectation go so far as to
endorse a Marxist-inspired Islamic revolution. True expectation,
according to Shari’ati, is “believing that in the life of humankind on
this very earth and before death, not in the resurrection after death,
history will bring about the triumph of the oppressed and destruction of
the oppressors”.

d) The Return and the Rise
--------------------------

The future Return and Rise of the *Mahdi* constitutes the most frequent
of the Imam’s predictions and has been described in numerous traditions
from the early times in Imamite history. It is believed that the *Mahdi*
will come to fulfill the mission of all the prophets before him, and
complete the task of Imam Husayn (the third Imam), the great martyr of
Karbala. He shall appear, according to many traditions, on the day of
‘*Ashura*, the day on which Imam Husayn, son of Imam Ali, was
killed,**[1]** showing himself first in Mecca, Islam's holiest city,
where he will be joined initially by 313 believers, the number of the
martyrs of Badr, then he will make his headquarters in Kufah where Imam
Ali was killed and buried. The Return as well as the Rising of the
*Qa’im*, will be preceded by signs. The theme of ‘Signs of the Return’
is one of the most developed of those that occur in collections of
*hadith*, in both Sunnite and Shi’ite literature. Sometimes a number of
chapters are dedicated to the subject.**[2]** The universal sign of the
Return consists in the generalized invasion of the earth by Evil. There
are also a great number of more specific signs listed in the
compilations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mufid, p.341  
 [2] Al-Nu’mani, *Kitab al-ghayba*, ch. 14, 15, 18, 21; Ibn Babuye,
*Kamal al-Din,* ch. 47, 57, 58....

[![](images/back.gif)](00.htm)

[![](images/index.gif)](index.htm)

[![](images/next.gif)](02.htm)
