Chapter Ii - Shi’ite Commentators (mufassirin) and Their Commentaries (tafsir)
==============================================================================

The Sacred Text has been subject to interpretations (*Tafsir*),
hermeneutics (*ta’wil*) and mystical exegesis throughout Islamic
history. The Shi’ite understanding of the Qur’an is founded on the
doctrinal belief that the Shi’ite Imams possess the hidden, esoteric
(*batin*) knowledge of the verses of the Qur’an.

2-1 The principles of Shi’i *Tafsir* and the relation between the *Imams* and the Qur’an
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tafsir* means “interpretation” in general but not always of the Qur’an.
“The most significant usage of the word is its reference to the branch
of Islamic learning concerned with the Qur’an. A *Tafsir* of the Qur’an
is a work which provides an interpretation of the Arabic text of the
scripture. In most cases, a work entitled *Tafsir* will follow the text
of the Qur’an from the beginning to the end and will provide an
interpretation

(*Tafsir*) of segments of the text (word-by-word, phrase-by-phrase or
verse-by-verse) as a running commentary. The major exceptions to this
fundamental characteristic are to be found in the formative and the
contemporary periods of Islam. In the formative period, one finds works
of *Tafsir*, which cover only isolated segments of the text, and in the
contemporary period, thematic tafasir (mawdu’i) have become quite
popular. Different mufassirun have different concerns and goals and this
is reflected in the relative weight they put upon elements such as
history, grammar, law, theology...”**[1]** The commentaries of the
Qur’an are useful for deciphering the message of the Qur’an. Many people
who read the Sacred Book receive no more from it than the literal
message. It is in the commentaries, based on the clarification afforded
by the *hadith* and written by those who are qualified in the true
sense, that man comes to understand explicitly and in more extended form
what is contained often implicitly and in a contracted form in the
Qur’an. **[2]**

### a) The principles of Shi’i *Tafsir*

-The exoteric and esoteric aspects of the Qur’an  
 Among the principles of the Shi’i *Tafsir* is that the Qur’an has an
outer dimension (*zahir*) and an inner dimension (*batin*) and the
simple surface text of a verse unfolds multiple

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] A. Rippin, “*Tafsir*”, EI², p.83-84.  
 [2] H. Nasr, *Ideals and Realities in Islam,* p.58

meanings and exemplifies a feature to be found throughout the
Qur’an.**[1]** Indeed the Qur’an is meant for men and women of any level
of intellect and from any social background, and “since the expounding
of subtle knowledge is not without danger of misinterpretation, the
Qur’an directs its teachings primarily at the level of the common man.
The Qur’an reveals itself in a way suitable for different levels of
comprehension so that each benefits according to his own capacity.” Also
certain verses contain metaphors which indicate divine gnosis far beyond
the common man’s understanding but which nevertheless become
comprehensible through their metaphorical form.**[2]**

These exoteric and esoteric aspects of the Qur’an have also been
identified with the principles of *Tafsir* and *ta’wil* respectively,
*Tafsir* being the explanation of the external aspect and the literal
exegesis of the Qur’an using different fields like Arabic grammar,
poetry, linguistic, jurisprudence or history as references to elucidate
the difficulties of the literal text, and *ta’wil* signifying “to take
back or reconduct something to its origin and archetype (*asl*)”.**[3]**
The basis in any case remains the corpus of teachings and *hadith* of
the Imams who expounded the rules of the plurality of meanings in the
Qur’an.**[4]** In other words, *ta’wil* or symbolic and hermeneutic

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tabataba’i, *The Qur’an in Islam,* p.29.  
 [2] Ibid, p.31-32  
 [3] H. Corbin, *En Islam Iranien*, vol.1, p.212.  
 [4] H. Corbin, *En Islam Iranien*, vol.1, p.214.

interpretation enables penetration into the inner meaning of the Sacred
Text, which in fact entails a reaching back to its Origin. The idea of
penetrating into the inner meaning of things can be seen everywhere in
Islam. But it is particularly in the case of the Qur’an that *ta’wil* is
applied, especially by the Sufis and the Shi’as**[1]**.**[2]**

There is considerable disagreement as to the meaning of *ta’wil*, and it
is possible to count more than ten different views. Tabatabai explains
that *ta’wil* is not in opposition to the actual text but is used to
extend the idea expressed to include a further meaning.**[3]** Also,
sufficient deliberation upon the Qur’anic verses and the *hadith* of the
Imams will show that the Qur’an never uses enigmatic methods of
explanation. “What has been rightly called *ta’wil* or hermeneutic
interpretation of the Holy Qur’an is not concerned with certain truths
and realities that transcend the comprehension of the common run of
men”. In fact, “the whole of the Qur’an possesses the sense of *ta’wil*,
of esoteric meaning, which cannot be comprehended directly through human
thought alone.” Only the Prophet and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] H. Nasr, *Ideals and Realities in Islam,* p.58-59  
 [2] In the fafsir of the Qur'an, the Sunni have mainly depended on the
apparent meaning of the Qur'anic verses, whereas the Shia have depended
on the apparent meaning and the inner meaning of the verses understood
from other verses (for the Qur'anic verses explain each other) and from
the traditions of the Prophet (s.a) and the infallible Imams (a.s) that
explained the qur'an. But as for the Sufis, they have depended on their
personal understanding of the Qur'an, and therefore, most of their
**Tafsir*s* (interpretations) are not accepted by other Muslims,
especially the Shia.  
 [3] Tabataba’i, *The Qur’an in Islam,* p.41

the pure among the saints can contemplate these meanings in this world.
“On the Day of Resurrection, the *ta’wil* of the Qur’an will be revealed
to everyone.”**[1]**

- The abrogating (*nasikh*) and the abrogated (*mansukh*) verses

Abrogating verses are those which are applicable and relevant at all
times and abrogated verses are not relevant and have already been
fulfilled.**[2]**

-The explicit (*muhkam*) and the implicit (*mutashabih*) verses

The verse 7 in the sura 3 of the Qur’an divides the Qur’an into two
parts: the explicit and the implicit, the clear and the allegorical, or
the *muhkam* and the *mutashabih*. The verses, which are explicit and
immediate in their message, are incapable of being misinterpreted. The
implicit verses are not of this nature, but seem to express a meaning
containing a further truer meaning whose interpretation is known only to
God. This view is accepted by both the Sunnite and the Shi’ite scholars;
however, the Shi’ites believe that the Prophet and the Imams of his
family also understood the hidden meanings and maintain that the
ordinary man must seek knowledge of the implicit verses from them (the
Prophet and his family).**[3]** Tabatabai relates from the Imams that
each verse, even if its

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tabataba’i in H. Nasr, *Shi'ism: Doctrines, Thought, and
Spirituality,* p.24  
 [2] M. Ayoub, *“The speaking Qur’an and the Silent Qur’an”*, p.189.  
 [3] Tabataba’i, *The Qur’an in Islam,* p. 33-34

meaning is not apparent or explicit, can be explained by reference to
other verses. Thus, the real meaning of the implicit verses can be found
in relation to the explicit verses and the assertion that no means exist
for understanding the implicit verses is fallacious. He also reports a
prophetic *hadith* (reported by al-‘Amili, in *al-Durr al-Manthur*,
vol.2, p.8): “In truth, the Qur’an was not revealed so that one part may
contradict the other, but rather was revealed so that one part may
verify the other. You understand what you can of it, then, act
accordingly; and that which is unclear for you, simply believe in
it.”**[1]**

### b) The Imams and the *Ahl al-Bayt* in relation to the Qur’an

The Shi’ites have agreed that God revealed to Muhammad both the Qur’an
and its exegesis and appointed him as the teacher of the Book,**[2]**
while the Prophet appointed his progeny to carry on this work after him.
In two places of the Qur’an, (33:33) and (56: 77-79), God has confirmed
the Prophet's declaration that his progeny held real knowledge of the
Book.**[3]** In a long and well-known tradition (*hadith al-Thaqalayn*)
related by both Shi’i and Sunni traditionists, the Qur’an is presented
as the ‘greater weight’ (*al-thaqal al-akbar*) and the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid, P.36.  
 [2] Qur’an : 62 :2  
 [3] Tabataba’i, al-Mizan, p.12

Imams as the ‘lesser weight’ (*al-thaqal al-asghar*). In the presence of
many of his Companions, the Prophet declared: “I am soon about to be
received..... I am telling you before I am taken up that I shall leave
with you, as representatives after me, the Book of my Lord, and my
progeny, the people of my household, the *ahl al-bayt* that the
All-Gracious, All-Knowing, told me that they shall not be separated
until they meet me on the day of Resurrection..... Do not precede them,
for you would go astray, and do not fall behind them, for you would
perish. Do not teach them, for they are of greater knowledge than you.”
**[1]**

Numerous traditions in several chapters describe the knowledge of the
Imams, especially in the *hadith* collection of Kulayni. The Shi’ites
consider the Imams as associates of the Qur’an. The Prophet and Imams
are distinguished by the inheritance of divine knowledge and they alone
know the full meaning of the Qur’an, since it was to them that it was
primarily addressed and through them to the rest of humankind. Also they
possess all the revealed Books of the previous Prophets and knew their
*Tafsir* and *ta’wil* despite the number of languages in which they were
written. Thus, the Imams have a unique relation to the Qur’an that gives
Shi’i *Tafsir* its unique character. It is also believed that the
Qur’an, which Ali wrote down from the dictation of Muhammad with its
true exegesis (*ta’wil*), was passed down from one Imam to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Majlisi, *Bihar al-Anwar*, Bab 7, vol.23, p.108

the next and is now with the hidden Imam who will disclose it and judge
by it when he returns as the expected *Mahdi*.**[1]**

2-2 The historical development and method of Shi’i *Tafsir*
-----------------------------------------------------------

The interpretation of the Qur’an (*Tafsir*) began right at the time of
its revelation and is one of the earliest activities in Islamic
sciences. The first exegetes among the Companions of the Prophet were
Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar, Ubay ibn Ka’b and others.**[2]** People
used to ask the Prophet all sorts of questions as to the meaning of
certain statements in the verses and the Prophet undertook the teaching
and explanation of the Qur’an. The Prophet’s answers were stored up in
the memory of his Companions. After the Prophet's death, a group of his
Companions were occupied with the science of commentary and its
transmission. Just as they had heard the Prophet explaining the meaning
of the verses, they would transmit it orally to other trustworthy
persons.**[3]** Exegesis in those days was confined to the explanation
of literary aspects of the verse, the background of its revelation, and
occasionally interpretation of one verse with the help of another.
Sometimes a few of the Prophet's traditions were narrated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid, Kitab Fadl al-Qur’an, Bab al-Nawadir, vol. 6 , p.474  
 [2] Tabataba’i, *al-Mizan,* p.3  
 [3] Tabataba’i, *The Qur’an in Islam*, p.47

 Followers of these first Companions (Tabi’un), who lived in the first
two centuries of hijra, used the same exegetic style. However, they
relied more on traditions, and even Jewish sayings and dictums to
explain the verses containing details of the previous nations present in
Genesis**[1]** because the *Tafsir* transmission from the Prophet
through the Companions and the Tabi’un did not cover all the verses in
the Qur’an. Some scholars relied on their knowledge of the language and
historical facts of the Prophet's epoch.**[2]** During the time of the
Companions and the Tabi’un, the science of *Tafsir* was part of the
*hadith* and there was hardly any difference between mufassirun and
muhaddithun (traditionists or narrators of *hadith*) until the complete
separation of the two in the early third century,**[3]** when exegesis
became an independent, autonomous science.**[4]** The activity of
*Tafsir* during the first two centuries is reflected by the *Tafsir* of
Ibn Jarir al-Tabari. His collections are said to have contained
materials from various earlier works and his work is evidence of the
general recognition of *Tafsir* in early third century AH. It was the
first attempt to comment on the whole of the Qur’an verse by
verse.**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Mizan, p.4  
 [2] M. Abdul, *The Qur’an: Shaykh Tabarsi’s commentary*, p.47  
 [3] Ahmad Amin, *Duha al-Islam,* II, p.140  
 [4] Ibid p.137  
 [5] M. Abdul, *The Qur’an: Shaykh Tabarsi’s commentary,* p. 52-53.

During the second century A.H., Muslim society split into four groups:
the theologians, the philosophers, the Sufis, and the people of
tradition. This divergence showed itself later in exegesis of the
Qur’an.**[1]** Indeed, after Tabari, the development of *Tafsir* came to
be associated with different fields of knowledge, doctrines and thought,
and scholars attempted to make their field of knowledge a basis for
their commentary in order to support their views from the Qur’an.
Scholars working in the field of philosophy considered philosophy a
basis for their commentaries while scholars in the legal field employ
the *Tafsir* to project the doctrine of their particular school of
thought, and so on.**[2]**

For Tabatabai, all these ways of exegesis are defective because they
superimpose their conclusions on the Qur’anic meanings, making the
Qur’an conform with their ideas. Thus, explanation turns into
adaptation.**[3]** Tabatabai stated that the only correct method of
exegesis is that the exegete explains the verse with the help of other
relevant verses, meditating on them together. The Prophet and the Imams
descended from his progeny always used this method for explaining the
Qur’an.**[4]** Similarly Mutahhari explains that the Qur’an constitutes
a coherent unified structure and some verses need to be explained with
the help of other verses in order to prevent any

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Al-Mizan*, p.5  
 [2] M. Abdul, *The Qur’an: Shaykh Tabarsi’s commentary*, p.55  
 [3] Tabataba’i, *al-Mizan,* p.9  
 [4] Ibid, p.12

misunderstanding about certain problems. If a solitary verse is studied
without placing it in its proper context, it will give a different
meaning from when it is compared with other verses dealing with a
similar subject.**[1]** Also, while Sunni commentators in the early
period of *Tafsir* relied primarily on prophetic traditions and those of
the Companions and their successors, the Shi’ite commentators, in
studying a verse of the Qur’an, viewed the explanation given by the
Prophet as proof of the meaning of the verse, and did not accept the
sayings of the Companions or their followers as indisputable proof that
the tradition came from the Prophet. The Shi’ite commentators only
recognized as valid an unbroken chain of narration from the Prophet
through members of his family. Accordingly, in using and transmitting
the verses concerning Qur’anic commentary, they restricted themselves to
the use of traditions transmitted by the Prophet and by the Imams
belonging to the Prophet’s family.**[2]**

The first generation of Shi’ite commentators and authorities on *Tafsir*
were disciples of the Imams and others close to the disciples, who
learned the traditions directly from the Prophet and the Imams of the
Prophet’s family. Among them were such scholars as Zurarah ibn A’yun and
Muhammad ibn Muslim, Ma’ruf ibn *Kharbudh* and Jarir, who were

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mutahhari, in H. Nasr, Shi'ism: *Doctrines, Thought, and
Spirituality,* p. 27  
 [2] Tabataba’i, *The Qur’an in Islam,* p.50

Companions of the fifth and sixth Imams, or Abu Hamzah al-Thumali (a
special Companion of the fourth and fifth Imams)**[1]**. Their
traditions have been preserved in the works of the second generation of
commentators and compilers of commentaries. These were consecutively:

 

- Furat Ibn Ibrahim al-Kufi, who lived during the Imamate of the ninth
Imam, Muhammad al-Jawad, and might have lived until the first years of
the tenth century A.D. He was one of the foremost authorities in Shi’ite
traditions and one of the teachers of the famous traditionist al-Qummi.

- Muhammad al-‘Ayyashi, a contemporary of Furat Ibn Ibrahim al-Kufi, was
a Sunni scholar who accepted Shi’ism, and became a great Shi’a scholar.

- Ali Ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi (d. 307 AH/919-20 AD), who related traditions
received from his father who had, in turn, learned them from many of the
Imams' disciples.

- Muhammad al-Nu’mani, who survived into the tenth century AD.
Al-Nu’mani (d.360 AH/971 AD) was one of al-Kulayni's students. He left
an important *Tafsir* that he related on the authority of the sixth Imam
Ja’far al-Sadiq. These two generations represent the pre-classical
period of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid, p.50

 

Shi’ite *Tafsir*.**[1]** They avoided any kind of ijtihad or passing of
judgement. The Imams were indeed living among Muslims and available for
questioning for a period of almost three hundred years.

The third generation of Shi’ite commentators extended over a very long
period, well into the sixteenth century AD. They included: al-Sharif
al-Radhiy (d.405 AH/1015 AD) and his well-known brother al-Sayyed
al-Murtadha (d.436 AH/1044 AD); Abu Ja’far al-Tusi (d.460AH/1067AD) who
was a student of al-Murtadha and whose commentary, *al-Tybian fi Tafsir
al Qur’an,* represents an important approach in Shi’i *Tafsir*; and his
disciple Abu al-Fadl Ibn al-Hasan Ibn al-Fadl al-Tabarsi (d.548 AH/1153
AD). They represent what may be considered as the classical period of
Shi’i *Tafsir*. These commentators took a broad approach to *Tafsir*
using Shi’i as well as Sunni traditions and also rejected Shi’i popular
claims regarding the inauthenticity of the ‘Uthmanic recension of the
Qur’an.**[2]** Included, too, were later commentators such as al-Maybudi
al-Gunabadi (sixth century A.H) and his gnostic commentary, Sadr al-Din
al-Shirazi (d.1050 AH/1640 AD), Hashim al-Bahrani (d.1107 AH/1695 AD)
who composed al-Burhan, ‘Abd Ali al-Huwayzi (d.1112 AH/1700 AD) who
composed the *Nur al-Thaqalayn,* and Mulla Muhsin Fayd al-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] M. Ayoub, “*The speaking Qur’an and the Silent Qur’an*”, p. 184  
 [2] Ibid, p.185

Kashani (d.1191 AH/1777 AD) who compiled the work known as
*al-Safi*.**[1]** Other works of Shi’ite gnostics, such as the 8th
AH/14th AD century figure Haydar Amuli, were also included.

The Qur’anic commentaries of Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi, known as Mulla
Sadra “are the most important by an Islamic philosopher or theosopher
(*hakim*) and also the most voluminous by a representative of the
Islamic philosophical tradition” until Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i
(d.1983) wrote the *Tafsir al-Mizan*. “In the same way that Mulla
Sadra’s “Transcendent Theosophy” marks the synthesis of the various
schools of gnosis, theosophy, philosophy and theology within a Shi’ite
intellectual climate, his Qur’anic commentaries mark the meeting point
of four different traditions of Qur’anic commentary before him, the
Sufi, the Shi’ite, the theological and the philosophical.”**[2]**

The final stage of the development of Shi’i *Tafsir* is the contemporary
one. Among modern works, the most important are *al-Mizan fi Tafsir
al-Qur’an* by Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i, *al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an*
by al-Sayyed Abul-Qasim al-Khui, and *Tafsir-e Nemune* by Nasser Makarem
Shirazi, this last being oriented more towards youth readership.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tabataba’i, *The Qur’an in Islam,* p.51  
 H. Nasr, “*The Quranic Commentaries of Mulla Sadra*”, p.45

2-3 Three mufassirin
--------------------

### a) Shaykh Tabarsi

Shaykh Abu Ali Fadl al-Tabarsi was a Shi’ite theologian who produced a
*Tafsir* of the Qur’an which enjoys wide acceptance, even among non
Shi’ite scholars. Al-Dhahabi describes Shaykh Tabarsi as a moderate
Shi’i scholar, who does not indulge in exaggeration and refrains from
cursing any of the Companions.**[1]** Very little has been written about
him and his works by modern scholars and nothing at all by Western
scholars, and even the Encyclopaedia of Islam is silent on his account.
Musa O.A. Abdul seems to be the only author who has dedicated a book in
English to Shaykh Tabarsi and his commentary.

Shaykh Tabarsi was born in 468 AH/1075 AD in Iran during the Seljuq
period. He lived for many years in Mashad where he engaged himself in
public teaching until the year 523 AH/1128-29 AD and wrote many valuable
works concerned with the propagation and defense of the Shi’ite
doctrine, the Imams, their qualities and sayings, theology, ethics,
grammar, etc. He then moved to Sabzawar where, at an advanced age, he
wrote his famous commentary on the Qur’an *Majma’ al-Bayan li ‘ulum
al-Qur’an.* He noted in the preface to *Majma’ al-Bayan* that he began
writing the book when he was over sixty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Muhammad Husayn al-Dhahabi, *al-Tafsir wal-Mufassirun,* II, P.142

He also produced two other minor *Tafsir* works: *al-Kafi al-shafi* and
*Jawami al-Jami.* In Sabzawar, he devoted twenty-five years to teaching
and writing and died there in the year 548 AH/1153 AD.

Shaykh Tabarsi’s fame both as a scholar and as a theologian rests on his
*Tafsir* works, the major one of which is *Majma’ al-Bayan li-‘ulum
al-Qur’an.* In the preface to this work, Shaykh Tabarsi gives the
reasons for his writing it and for his choice of title. He also
describes the methodology used in the commentaries on every verse. At
the time of the work’s preparation, there were already some *Tafsir*
works in circulation, written by both Sunnite and Shi’ite scholars. The
*Jami’ al-Bayan* by Tabari and al-Tibyan by al-Tusi had impressed him
most. Shaykh Tabarsi combined these two titles, both having the same
meaning, and entitled his own *Tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan*. The *Tafsir* was
completed in 534 AH/1139 AD but was not published for the first time
until 1268 AH/1851 AD. Tabarsi divides his commentary on every passage
into five sections: introductory discourse, reading guide, language
discourse, revelation and circumstances surrounding it, and meaning. He
employs *ta’wil* in many cases to deduce the inner or implied meaning of
a verse. When a passage relates to a theological, jurisprudential or
philosophical issue, Tabarsi gives the views of all sides and then gives
his own judgement and standpoint when it differs from that of his school
of thought. Indeed, the originality of Tabarsi’s commentary is that he
gives his readers an

opportunity to see the varying opinions on different issues mentioned in
the Qur’an. He then discusses these views and declares his own stand.

Al-Dhahabi says that his *Tafsir*, apart from what it contains of his
Shi’ite and Mu’tazilite views, indicates the deep penetration of its
author into different branches of knowledge. He draws upon the
statements from his predecessors among the mufassirin and declares his
choice among them.**[1]** His *Tafsir* has a wide coverage of historical
facts, of the statements and opinions of philologists, traditionists,
commentators and poets. There is also a good coverage of the various
schools of thought. It contains many philological studies and references
to ancient poetry. This *Tafsir* is a compendium of all sciences
connected with the studies of Islam and to which specialists from any
field of Islamic sciences can refer. Shaykh Tabarsi’s affiliation to
Shi’i school of thought can be traced in his commentaries but he has
also shown on many issues that he is an independent thinker and
sometimes holds different conclusions from that of the Shi’ites. This
commentary is unanimously accepted by Muslim scholars, Sunnite and
Shi’ite, and some scholars consider it as a leading work on *Tafsir*
even up to the present day due to the richness and variety of its
contents. It is one of the very few works which have enjoyed such wide
acceptance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid, II, P.104

Shaykh Tabarsi has shown interest in many theological issues in his
commentary, such as the issue concerning the *Imamate* of Ali ibn Abi
Talib, the practice of *taqiyyah* (dissimulation of one’s faith), the
infallibility of the Imams, God’s Justice etc. He also discusses the
issue of the *Mahdi*, his advent at the End of Time, the purpose of his
coming and his rule.

### b) Banu Amin

Banu-ye mujtahedeh sayyedeh Nusrat Begum Amin al-Tujjar Isfahani,**[1]**
known as Banu Amin, was born in 1256 Sh/1877 AD in Isfahan and is said
to be descended from Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib through both her parents.
She first went to school at five and started to learn Arabic language
and literature at twelve because of her early interest in Islamic
studies. At fifteen, she married her cousin, Haj seyyed Muhammad Amin
al-Tujjar, who was a famous businessman in Isfahan. Banu Amin had nine
children but eight of them died very young from diseases like
diphtheria, smallpox, typhoid fever, pneumonia or through miscarriage. A
few years after her wedding, at the age of twenty, she started to study
Islamic sciences, such as *Fiqh, Usul, Tafsir, hadith* and *hikma*, with
a private teacher, Ayatollah Mir Muhammad Najaf Abadi, who tutored her
at home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] I made a summary of these three works for the life of Banu Amin: 1-
Tayyebi N., *Banu-ye Irani*, 2- Khalili, Marjan Amu : *Kuwkab-e durri*,
3- Bidhandi, Naser Baqiri, *Banu-ye Nemune*.

She was a strong follower of Molla Sadra Shirazi’s philosophy and was
qualified to gain a profound understanding of Molla Sadra's *Kitab
al-Asfar al-arba’a al-‘aqliya* (*The Book of the Four Journeys*), her
favourite subject of study. Among Islamic works, after the Asfar, she
was much interested in compilations of traditions (*hadith*) and
*Tafsir*, particularly the *Tafsir* work Majma’ al-Bayan by Shaykh
Tabarsi. She later followed Shaykh Tabarsi’s method in her own *Tafsir*
(*Makhzan al-‘Irfan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an*) of the Qur’an. She was, and
still is, the first woman *Mufassir* (commentator) of the entire Qur’an.
The originality of her *Tafsir* was based on the fact that it was a
mixture of exoteric interpretation of the Qur’an and spiritual teachings
of a gnostic journey and pilgrimage (*sayr-o-suluk-e ‘irfani*). Banu
Amin is said to be the founder of this new method of interpretation.

After having spent twenty years of her life studying Islamic sciences,
at the age of forty she produced her first work, *Arba’in Hashemiya*
(*Forty Hashemi Traditions*). This work reached the *howza al-‘ilmiyah*
(traditional religious education centre) of Najaf in Iraq, and was
warmly approved by the *‘Ulama*. Banu Amin thus became famous for the
first time among the *‘ulama* and reached the degree of *Ijtihad*.
Indeed after several written examinations from the greatest *‘ulama* of
Najaf in Islamic sciences such as *fiqh* (jurisprudence), *hadith*
(traditions), or Qur’an, she was given permission of *Ijtihad* (the
application of reason to the solution of legal issues) and

*Istenbat-e ahkam-e shar’i* (deduction of the main rules of conduct).
She was then the only *mujtahedeh* of her time.

After that, Banu Amin devoted herself to writing, teaching and doing
research in the field of the Islamic sciences. Her works, with a brief
description, are as follows in chronological order:

 

1. *Arba’in Hashemiya* (*Forty Hashemi traditions*) in Arabic:

According to *‘ulama* custom, whenever a religious scholar collected
forty authentic and documented *hadith* and was able to teach Usul and
*Ahkam* to believers through these *hadith*, he then earned the
permission of *Ijtihad*. Banu Amin was the first woman to collect and
provide a commentary on forty *hadith* in the field of *Tawhid* and
other attributes of God, *Akhlaq, Ahkam*, with the expression of
philosophy, mysticism and jurisprudence. She published them under the
title of Arba’in *Hashemiya*.

2. *Makhzan al-laali fi Manaqeb Mawla al-Mawali*:

This work is dedicated to Ali ibn Abi Talib and his virtues.

 

3. *Seyr-o-suluk dar ravesh-e awliyah va tariq-e seyr-e So’ada*

This work explains the method and stages of the gnostic in his spiritual
ascent toward God.

4. *Ma’ad ya akharin seyr-e bashar (The resurrection or the last journey
of the Human)*; This work is about life after death.

5. *Ravesh-e khushbakhti va towsiye be khâharan-e imani (The road to
happiness and recommendation to the sisters in Faith)*

6. *Akhlaq va rahe Sa’adat (Ethics and the way to happiness)*:

This work is Banu Amin's translation, with notes and commentary, of the
work of Shaykh Ahmad ibn Maskuyeh, *Tahdhib al-Akhlaq wa Tat-hir
al-A’raq*.

7. *Makhzan al-‘Irfan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an (A wealth of Gnosis in the
Interpretation of the Qur’an)*:

This Tafsir consists of fifteen volumes.

8. *Jami’ al-Shatat* in Arabic:

This work is a collection of all the examination questions of the
*‘ulama* and Banu Amin's replies after becoming *mujtahedeh*.

 

9. *Al-Nafahat al-Rahmaniyah fi al-waridat al-qalbiyah* in Arabic:  
 This work concerns Banu Amin’s personal spiritual and mystical
experience, her visions and dreams.

Her works cover a large part of the Islamic sciences such as Fiqh
(jurisprudence), Usul (fundamentals of religion), Falsafe (philosophy),
Hikma (wisdom), ‘Irfan (Gnosticism), *hadith* (Prophetic traditions,)
Tafsir (interpretation) and Akhlaq (ethics).

Apart from her intellectual activities, Banu Amin also founded a high
school for girls (*Dabiristan-e Amin*) and a religious education centre
(*Maktab-e Fatemeh*). A great number of *‘ulama* used to visit Banu Amin
for the purpose of discussing scientific and spiritual subjects. They
came from Isfahan, Tehran, Qum, and Najaf, and included Allama ‘Abd
al-Husayn Amini (*Kitab al-ghadir*), Ayatollah Haeri Shirazi, Ayatollah
Safavi Qummi, Allama Tabataba’i (*al-Mizan*), etc. Banu Amin died in
Isfahan on June 16, 1983 (1362 Sh/1403 AH).

### c) Allama Tabatabai

Allama Sayyed Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i was one of the great masters of
the traditional sciences in Iran during this century. He was born in
1321 AH/1904 AD into a distinguished family of scholars in Tabriz where
he also

undertook his earliest religious studies. He pursued more advanced
studies in Najaf and then returned to Tabriz in 1353 AH/1934 AD. In
1945, following the Soviet Occupation of Azerbaijan, he migrated to Qum
where he settled until his death in 1402 AH/1981 AD. From this centre of
religious learning, his knowledge began to spread throughout Iran and
even beyond. He soon became recognized as one of the major intellectual
figures of Shi’ism.

He was an extremely prolific author in addition to teaching throughout
the week. He wrote a profusion of books and articles of major
intellectual import. His fame rests on his various works, the most
significant being his great exegesis of the Qur’an *al-Mizan fi Tafsir
al-Qur’an*. He wrote several major philosophical works, such as *Usul-e
Falasafah va Ravesh-e Rialism (The Fundamentals of Philosophy and the
Doctrine of Realism)* in five volumes, a comparative study of Islamic
philosophy and various modern schools of thought, especially Marxism. He
edited the *Asfar* of Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi with his own commentary,
and a selection of commentaries on other masters antecedent to Shirazi,
these last collected in seven volumes. Later he composed two masterly
summaries of Islamic philosophy: the *Bidayat al-Hikam* and the *Nihayat
al-Hikam.*

Meanwhile, Allama Tabataba’i continued to work on his Qur’anic
commentary, *Tafsir al-Mizan,* which he finally completed in his
mid-seventies. This monumental commentary

consisting of more than twenty volumes (written in Arabic and translated
into Persian) is one of the most important Qur’anic commentaries of this
century and bears witness to its author’s mastery in the domain of the
Qur’anic sciences. This commentary, based on the principle of having one
part of the Qur’an interpret other parts (*al-Qur’an yufassiru ba’duhu
ba’dan*), is a *summa* of Islamic religious thought, in which the
sciences of the Qur’an, theology, philosophy, gnosis, sacred history and
the social teachings of Islam, are all brought together. He describes
the method he adopted in the preface to his *Tafsir* of the Qur’an.

Allama Tabataba’i was not only an outstanding scholar but also a person
of great spiritual realization who lived constantly in the remembrance
of God. Allama Tabataba’i was, at one and the same time, one of the
greatest Qur’anic commentators, a leading contemporary Islamic
philosopher in the tradition of Ibn Sina, Suhrawardi and Mulla Sadra,
and a gnostic who was at home in both the metaphysical works of Ibn
‘Arabi and the inebriating poetry of Rumi and Hafiz.

[![](images/back.gif)](01.htm)

[![](images/index.gif)](index.htm)

[![](images/next.gif)](03.htm)
