Chapter Iii - Mahdi in Classical and Modern Shi’ite Tafsir
==========================================================

Shi’ite Messianism and all that concerns the *Mahdi* have, of course,
been studied in a number of works, but this chapter focuses on the
Qur’anic verses reported as concerning the *Mahdi* and their
interpretation according to classical and modern Shi’ite commentators.
Although only a few *mufassirin* are mentioned in this research, three
regularly refer to their predecessors and their opinions, therefore we
will report on these in the translation we will give of their *Tafsir*.
Under each verse, we will only give the opinions and commentaries of the
*mufassirin* as far as they concern the *Mahdi*, and not their
commentary in its entirety, while we will give the relevant verses of
the Qur’an and some of the traditions concerning the *Mahdi* in the
footnotes in Arabic. Subsequently, in the conclusion, we will attempt to
compare the manner in which classical and modern *mufassirin* - experts
in different fields of Islamic thought - view the *Mahdi* in their
*Tafsir* of the same few verses that we will use in this research.

As part of our research in this third chapter, we first studied
separately, within three different *Tafsir* works, the *Tafsir*

*Majma’ al-Bayan, the Tafsir al-Mizan, and the Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan
dar ‘Ulum-e Qur’an (Kanz al-‘Irfan),* examining each one of the 120
verses from the Qur’an which are believed to have been revealed for the
*Mahdi* according to Seyyed Hashim al-Bahrani (d.1107 AH/1695 AD), a
prominent Shi’ite scholar and mufassir, who relied upon the Shi’ite
traditional reports.**[1]**

Results of our research show that:

- In his Majma’ al-Bayan, Shaykh Tabarsi has interpreted as concerning
the *Mahdi* only nine verses from among the 120 verses reported by
al-Bahrani. These nine are the following:

|----------------|-----------------|----------------|
| Qur’an 2 : 3   | Qur’an 4 : 159  | Qur’an 9 : 33  |
| Qur’an 8 : 39  | Qur’an 21 : 105 | Qur’an 11 : 8  |
| Qur’an 24 : 55 | Qur’an 34 : 51  | Qur’an 48 : 28 |

- In his *Tafsir al-Mizan*, Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i has also
interpreted nine verses and eight of them are the same as those
interpreted by Shaykh Tabarsi, although he gives a broader meaning to
the verses of the Qur’an [2: 3], [21: 105] and [24: 55]. His nine are as
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Seyyed Hashim al-Bahrani : Sima-ye Hazrat-e *Mahdi* dar Qur’an, p.23

Qur’an 2 : 3

Qur’an 4 : 159

Qur’an 9 : 33

Qur’an 8 : 39

Qur’an 21 : 105

Qur’an 11 : 8

Qur’an 24 : 55

Qur’an 34 : 51

Qur’an 48 : 28

|----------------|-----------------|----------------|
| Qur’an 2 : 3   | Qur’an 4 : 159  | Qur’an 9 : 33  |
| Qur’an 8 : 39  | Qur’an 21 : 105 | Qur’an 11 : 8  |
| Qur’an 24 : 55 | Qur’an 34 : 51  | Qur’an 41 : 53 |

- In her *Makhzan al-‘Irfan*, Banu Nusrat Amin has interpreted six
verses from among the 120 verses and four of her verses are the same as
those of the above authors:

|----------------|-----------------|---------------|
| Qur’an 2 : 3   | Qur’an 21 : 105 | Qur’an 61 : 9 |
| Qur’an 24 : 55 | Qur’an 34 : 51  | Qur’an 97 : 5 |

Therefore, the *Majma’ al-Bayan*, the *al-Mizan* and the *Makhzan
al-‘Irfan* have four verses in common. The *Majma*’ and the *al-Mizan*
have eight verses in common and in total there are twelve verses
discussed by these three *mufassirin* that we will present below. We may
therefore conclude that these twelve verses are among the most important
ones.

1) Qur’an 21: 105
-----------------

Before this We wrote in the Psalms, after the Message (given to Moses):
My servants, the righteous, shall inherit the earth."**[1]** [Yusuf Ali
21:105]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1]وَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ مِن بَعْدِ الذِّكْرِ أَنَّ
الْأَرْضَ يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِيَ الصَّالِحُونَ

Qur’an 2 : 3

Qur’an 4 : 159

Qur’an 9 : 33

Qur’an 8 : 39

Qur’an 21 : 105

Qur’an 11 : 8

Qur’an 24 : 55

Qur’an 34 : 51

Qur’an 41 : 53

Qur’an 2 : 3

Qur’an 21 : 105

Qur’an 61 : 9

Qur’an 24 : 55

Qur’an 34 : 51

Qur’an 97 : 5

### A- *Tafsir* Majma’ al-Bayan by Shaykh Tabarsi

Concerning the meaning of the first part of the verse “*wa laqad katabna
fi az-*Zabur* mim ba’di adh-dhikr*” (“Before this We wrote in the
Psalms, after the Message (given to Moses)”), Shaykh Tabarsi reports
several views:**[1]**

1- *Zabur* are all the Prophets’ Books. The meaning of the verse is then
'We wrote in all the Prophets’ Books after the Mother of the Books which
is in Heaven'. *Zabur* and *Kitab* (Book) have the same meaning here.

2- *Zabur* are the Books which were revealed after the *Tawrah* (Torah),
and *Dhikr* in this verse means *Tawrah*, so the verse means “after the
*Tawrah*, We wrote in the *Zabur*”.

3- According to Sha’bi, *Zabur* is the Book of the Prophet David and
*Dhikr* is the Book of the Prophet Moses. He also says that *Dhikr* is
the Qur’an and transforms *mim ba’d* (after) to *min qabl* (before).

Concerning the second part of the verse: “*inna al-ardh yarithuha
‘ibadiya as-salihun*” (“My servants, the righteous, shall inherit the
earth”), Tabarsi reports its meaning from several commentators:

1- Some define the word *ardh* as the earth of Heaven. So the verse
means: “My righteous servants shall inherit the earth of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1]* Majma’ al-Bayan*, Vol. 16, p. 170

Heaven”. According to this view, this verse does not concern the
*Mahdi*.

2- Some define the word as the same Earth we are living in and which
will belong to the *Umma* of the Prophet Muhammad. As the Prophet says:
“The Earth was gathered for me, and the Eastern and Western parts of it
were offered to me. And soon the Kingdom of my Community (*Umma*) will
recover all of them.”**[1]** Regarding this verse, Imam Baqir asserts
that these righteous servants are the Companions of the *Mahdi* at the
End of Time. To confirm these statements, there is a tradition that both
the Shi’ites and the Sunnites report as emanating from the Prophet:
“Even if there remains only a day on the Earth, God will prolong it
until He will bring forth a pious man from my progeny so that he will
fill the earth with justice and equity as it was filled with oppression
and tyranny.”**[2]**

After having reported that the verse concerns the *Mahdi*, Shaykh
Tabarsi mentions a tradition which denies the *Mahdi* and gives his own
opinion. He writes that, in his work *al-Ba’th wa an-Nushur*, Imam Abu
Bakr Ahmad ibn Husayn Bayhaki cites several traditions in this regard;
his grandson ‘Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad also reported all of these
in the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] فأريت مشارقها و مغاربها و سيبلغ ملك أمتي ما رؤي لي منها. قال (ص) :
روئيت لي الأرض،  
 [2] قال النبي (ص) : لو لم يبق من الدنيا الا يوم واحد لطول الله ذلك
اليوم حتى يبعث رجلا صالحا من أهل بيتي يملأ  
 الأرض عدلا و قسطا كما قد ملئت ظلما و جورا

year 517 AH, but the tradition reported from Abu ‘Abdullah Hafez from
Muhammad ibn Khaled from Aban ibn Saleh from Hasan from Anas ibn Malek,
claiming that the Prophet said: ‘The people are living in difficulty and
miserliness .... and *Mahdi* is no one but ‘Isa ibn Maryam’**[1]** is
first of all a tradition reported only by Muhammad ibn Khaled, and
secondly both the latter and Abu ‘Abdullah Hafez are unknown. Finally,
declared Tabarsi, there is also disagreement in the Isnad or the
transmissional chain of the *hadith*: once Muhammad ibn Khaled reports
the tradition from Aban ibn Saleh from Hasan from Anas from the Prophet,
and once he reports the tradition from Aban ibn Abi ‘Ayyash (who can be
omitted) from Hasan from the Prophet, and this chain of transmission is
broken.

Tabarsi finally confirms his position, saying: “The traditions which
clearly concern the reappearance of the *Mahdi* have a more trustworthy
chain of narration. In these same traditions, it is reported that the
*Mahdi* is from the Prophet’s progeny. Among them, there is one that
Bayhaki’s grandson reports in his work from Abu Ali Rudbary, from Abu
Bakr ibn Das, from Abu Dawud Sajestani..... from the Prophet who said:
‘Even if there remains only one day on the earth, God will prolong it
until He will bring forth a pious man from my progeny.’ And in some of
these traditions it is reported that the Prophet also

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] قال النبي (ص): لا يزداد الأمر إلا شدة ولا الناس إلا شحا و لا الدنيا
إلا إدبارا و لا تقوم الساعة إلا على أشرار الناس و لا مهدي إلا عيسي ابن
مريم.

said: ‘His name is the same as my name and he will fill the earth with
justice and equity as it was filled with oppression and tyranny.’ Also
he reports a tradition from the Prophet who said: ‘The *Mahdi* is from
my progeny, and from the descendants of Fatimah’.”

### B- *Tafsir* al-Mizan by Allama Tabataba’i

As for the *Zabur*, several meanings are reported by Allama
Tabataba’i**[1]** from different commentators:

1- Apparently, the *Zabur* is the Book which was revealed to the Prophet
Dawud as mentioned in another part of the Qur’an: “*wa aatayna Dawud
Zabura*”.

2- Some commentators believe that this refers to the Qur’an.

3- Some are convinced that it concerns all the Books in general that
were revealed to the Prophets, or that were revealed to the Prophets
after Moses. However, there is no apparent support for this view.

For the word *Dhikr*, Tabataba’i reports that:

1- Some believe it means the *Tawrah* because God used the word *Dhikr*
in two other places of this same chapter, clearly referring to the
*Tawrah*.

2- Some say that it refers to the Qur’an because God used it several
times in the Qur’an with that meaning. If this is so, the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Al-Mizan,* vol. 14, p. 453

fact that the *Zabur* comes after the Qur’an in this verse where the
Qur’an was revealed before the *Zabur* is not a problem because this
order corresponds to the rank of the Books and not to their chronology.

3- *Dhikr* is also said to mean *al-Lawh al-Mahfuz* (the Protected
Tablets), but according to Tabataba’i this is not correct.

For Inheritance (*waratha*), Tabataba’i reports that Raghib says
Inheritance means the donation of goods to someone without any monetary
exchange and that the inheritance of land means in this verse the
transfer of that land from others to the virtuous people as well as the
wealth and abundance of this land which belongs exclusively to them.
This inheritance may be this-worldly or otherwise.

Tabatabai’s view is that the verse here has a general meaning and that
the inheritance to which it refers concerns both this world and the
hereafter, and that those who say that it concerns only the inheritance
in the hereafter are in error. Also, the commentators who believe that
the verse concerns exclusively the inheritance in this world,
interpreting it for the time of the *Mahdi*'s reappearance (about which
there are authentic traditions from the Prophet reported by both
Sunnites and Shi’ites) are also in error. The traditions concerning the
*Mahdi*, even authentic and certain, cannot be applied exclusively to
this verse, according to Tabataba’i. Tabatabai also refers to the
*Tafsir al-Qummi* in which it is written that

the word *Dhikr* means all the divine Books and that the *Zabur*
comprises the predictions, praises and prayers (*du’a*). As far as the
inheritance of land by the virtuous is concerned, it is mentioned that
it refers to the *Mahdi* and his followers.

Tabatabai concludes that the traditions concerning the *Mahdi* and his
advent, whether originated by the Shi’ites or the Sunnites, by the
Prophet or the Imams, are so numerous that they are considered as
*mutawatir*, reported by several unbroken chain of transmitters, and
authentic. It would perhaps be better to refer to the works devoted
specifically to this subject.

### C- *Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan* by Banu Nusrat Amin

Banu Amin**[1]** first reports from several commentators the meaning of
*Zabur* and *Dhikr*. The meaning of *Zabur*:

1- According to some commentators, the *Zabur* means the Book of the
Prophet Dawud (David), as God says in the Qur’an 4: 126 (“*wa aatayna
Dawud Zabura*”) and in the Qur’an 17: 55.

2- Others claim that the *Zabur* refers to the Qur’an.

3- Also, the *Zabur* is said to consist of all the revealed Books or the
Books revealed after that of the Prophet Musa (Moses).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Makhzan al-‘Irfan*, Vol. 10 p. 309

The meaning of *Dhikr*:

1- According to some commentators, it means the *Tawrah*, because God
used the word *Dhikr* several times in the Qur’an when referring to the
*Tawrah*.

2- It is also said to refer to the Qur’an because it was used to
indicate the Qur’an on different occasions. In this case, the fact that
the *Zabur* comes after the *Dhikr* (Qur’an) in the verse does not mean
after in chronological time but in the sense that it comes after the
*Dhikr* because of its lower rank.

3- The *Zabur* is said by some to represent the *al-Lawh al-Mahfuz*.

Banu Amin then briefly reports the commentators’ views concerning the
second part of the verse (“My servants the righteous, shall inherit the
earth"):

1- The meaning of *Ardh* is the earth of Heaven which the virtuous and
pious servants of God will inherit, as we can see in the Qur’an 23: 11
and in the Qur’an 39: 74.

2- *Ardh* is also said to be a sacred land that the Community of the
Prophet will inherit.

3- *Ardh* is the earth and the verse concerns people who have faith in
general.

4- The virtuous members of the Community are being referred to here; it
is said that, at the End of Time, the *Umma*

of the Prophet will conquer the earth and its unbelievers, and will rule
it.

At this point, Banu Amin reports a tradition from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(fifth Imam) concerning the Righteous mentioned in the verse: “These are
the Companions of the *Mahdi* at the End of Time, who will conquer the
Eastern and Western parts of the earth”. She adds that, in confirmation
of this, there is a tradition reported by the Shi’ites and the Sunnites,
according to which the Prophet said: “Even if there remains only one day
on Earth, God will prolong it until He will bring forth a pious man from
my progeny so that he will fill the earth with justice and equity as it
was filled with oppression and tyranny”.**[1]** Moreover, she adds that
the traditions concerning the reappearance of the *Mahdi* and his
descendency from Fatima are numerous among the Shi’ites and the
Sunnites.”

2) Qur’an 24 : 55
-----------------

Allah has promised, to those among you who believe and work righteous
deeds, that He will, of a surety, grant them in the land, inheritance
(of power), as He granted it to those before them; that He will
establish in authority their religion-the one which He has chosen for
them; and that He will

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] The same tradition is reported by Shaykh Tabarsi in his *Tafsir* of
the same verse, see note 5.

change (their state), after the fear in which they (lived), to one of
security and peace: 'They will worship Me (alone) and not associate
aught with Me. 'If any do reject Faith after this, they are rebellious
and wicked.**[1]** [24:55]

### A- *Tafsir Majma’al-Bayan* by Shaykh Tabarsi

Shaykh Tabarsi explains the verse as:**[2]** “God promised to those who
sincerely have faith and are obedient that he will make them heirs of
the ancients and that He will grant them all the Arab and non-Arab
unbelievers’ lands, and will make them inhabitants and governor of these
lands, in the same way as he made the *Bani Isra’il* the heirs of the
ancients and destroyed the tyrant of Egypt, and granted all his goods
and lands to them.” He then reports several views concerning this verse:

1- Some commentators believe that it concerns the Prophet.

2- Some say it concerns the *Umma*.

3- From the sayings of the Imams of the *Ahl al-Bayt,* it is reported
that it concerns the *Mahdi* from the Prophet's descendants. The fourth
Imam once recited this verse and said: “By God, these people are our
Shi’ites about whom God will accomplish all the promises he made in this
verse by the hands

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَى لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُم مِّن بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا يَعْبُدُونَنِي لَا
يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئًا وَمَن كَفَرَ بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ
الْفَاسِقُونَ  
 [2] *Majma’ al-Bayan,*Vol.17 p.161

of a man from among us, who is the *Mahdi* of this Community.” The
Prophet said about him: “Even if there remains only one day on Earth,
God will prolong it until He will bring forth a pious man from my
progeny and who is named as I am, so that he will fill the earth with
justice and equity as it was filled with oppression and tyranny.”**[1]**
The same tradition was reported by Imam Baqir and Imam Sadeq.

Shaykh Tabarsi adds that the expression “*al-ladhina amanu minkum wa
‘amilu as-salehat*” (“those among you who believe and work righteous
deeds”) refers to the Prophet and the Ahl al-Bayt and that this verse
gives them the good news that they will be the Caliphs (governors) and
will seize power in every land and that during the revolution of the
*Mahdi*, they will be made safe. Moreover, he affirms that the meaning
of “*kama estakhlafa al-ladhina min qablihim*” (“as He granted it to
those before them”) is that, before them also, God granted the
governorship (*khilafa*) and power to those who deserved it, such as
Adam, Dawud and Sulayman, as we can see in the following verses:

Qur’an 2: 30; Behold, thy Lord said to the angels: "I will create a
vicegerent on earth." They said: "Wilt Thou place therein one who will
make mischief therein

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] روى العياشي ، بإسناده عن علي ابن الحسين ، أنه قرأ الآيه و قال هم
والله شيعتنا أهل البيت، يفعل الله ذلك بهم على يدي رجل منا و هو مهدي هذه
الأمة و هو الذي قال رسول الله (ص) لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحد لطول
الله ذلك اليوم حتى يلي رجل من عترتي اسمه اسمي يملأ الأرض عدلا و قسطا كما
ملئت ظلما و جورا

and shed blood whilst we do celebrate Thy praises and glorify Thy holy
(name)?" He said: "I know what ye know not.” [2:30] **[1]**

Qur’an 38: 26; O David! We did indeed make thee a vicegerent on earth:
so judge thou between men in truth (and justice): Nor follow thou the
lusts (of thy heart), for they will mislead thee from the Path of Allah:
for those who wander astray from the Path of Allah, is a Penalty
Grievous, for that they forget the Day of Account. [38:26] **[2]**

Qur’an 4: 54; Or do they envy mankind for what Allah hath given them of
his bounty? But We had already given the people of Abraham the Book and
Wisdom, and conferred upon them a great kingdom. [4:54] **[3]**

Finally, concerning the *Mahdi*, Shaykh Tabarsi remarks that consensus
has been reached among all the Imams concerning this subject and their
consensus is a proof (*hujja*) because the Prophet said: “ I am leaving
among you two weighty things: the Book of God and my progeny. They will
never be separated from each other until they meet me again next to the
fountain”.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلاَئِكَةِ إِنِّي جَاعِلٌ فِي الأَرْضِ
خَلِيفَةً قَالُواْ أَتَجْعَلُ فِيهَا مَن يُفْسِدُ فِيهَا وَيَسْفِكُ
الدِّمَاء وَنَحْنُ نُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِكَ وَنُقَدِّسُ لَكَ قَالَ إِنِّي
أَعْلَمُ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ  
 [2] يَا دَاوُودُ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاكَ خَلِيفَةً فِي الْأَرْضِ فَاحْكُم
بَيْنَ النَّاسِ بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا تَتَّبِعِ الْهَوَى فَيُضِلَّكَ عَن
سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَضِلُّونَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ لَهُمْ
عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ بِمَا نَسُوا يَوْمَ الْحِسَابِ  
 [3] أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَى مَا آتَاهُمُ اللّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ
فَقَدْ آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَآتَيْنَاهُم
مُّلْكًا عَظِيمًا  
  

### B- *Tafsir al-Mizan* by Allama Tabataba’i

Tabataba’i explains that this verse constitutes a beautiful promise from
God to the believers who also worked virtuous deeds; He promised to have
them live in a just and virtuous society, to put the earth at their
disposal, to make their religion reign on earth, to replace their fear
by safety so that they will no longer be afraid of the hypocrites and
their tricks or the unbelievers, and so that they will be able to
worship their God freely and in safety. The verse and the promise
mentioned in it is exclusively aimed at those believers (*mu’minin*) of
robust faith but who also carried out virtuous deeds.

According to Tabataba’i, this verse was the subject of strong
disagreement among the commentators. He then reports their different
opinions:

1- Some of them said that the verse was revealed about the Companions of
the Prophet and that God fulfilled the promise He made to them by
putting the land at their disposal, making their religion triumph, or by
replacing their fear by safety. In fact, after the death of the Prophet,
during the time of the Caliphs (*al- Khulafa al-rashidin*), God enabled
Islam to progress and gain dignity, and consequently the Muslims’ fear
of Hypocrites and unbelievers was assuaged. These commentators also said
that the believers' inheritance mentioned in this verse refers to the
inheritance of the four Caliphs after the Prophet or otherwise only to
the first three Caliphs.

2- Other commentators said that the verse is aimed at the Community
(*Umma*) of the Prophet in general. And the meaning of the inheritance
of the Prophet’s *Umma*, the supremacy of their religion, and the
replacing of their fear by safety, is that they inherited the earth in
the same way that the Communities before Islam inherited the earth. Or
it can also refer to the inheritance of the Caliphs after the Prophet in
which case God fulfilled His promise by making the Caliphs triumph over
the unbelievers and conquer cities and countries of the world.

Here Tabataba’i remarks that, according to the two different views
expressed above, this verse is among the predictions of the Qur’an
because good tidings are mentioned that were not fulfilled at the time
the verse was revealed and even the hope of their fulfillment was
absent.

3- Other commentators said that this verse concerns the *Mahdi* whose
reappearance is predicted in numerous authentic traditions,
acknowledging that he will fill the earth with justice and equity as it
was filled with tyranny and oppression. The meaning of “*al-ladhina
amanu minkum wa ‘amelu as-salehat*” (“those among you who believe and
work righteous deeds”) refers to the Prophet and the Imams from his
family (*Ahl al-Bayt*).

Tabataba’i comments on the verse and gives his own opinion: “What we
understand from the verse, leaving aside the many instances of
negligence on the commentators' part, is

that the verse is undoubtedly aimed at some of the people of the
Community (*Umma*) and neither at the Community as a whole nor at some
designated individuals from the Community, and these people are the
people who believe and work righteous deeds as mentioned in the verse.
This meaning is clear in the verse, and there is no evidence, either in
the words of the verse or intellectually, that “the people who believe
and work righteous deeds” are exclusively the Companions of the Prophet,
or the Prophet himself with the Imams from his family, or the Community
as a whole”.

He adds, “The meaning of their inheritance of earth, like the
inheritance of the Communities of the past, is that God will make of
them a virtuous society who will inherit the earth as He did for the
Communities of the past. This inheritance is dependant on their being a
virtuous society and not on particular individuals. Also the
interpretation of this inheritance as the Divine Caliphate or the Divine
Kingdom and authority, like the Kingdom of Dawud, Sulayman and Yusuf, is
highly unlikely, because the Qur’an would not talk about such Prophets
by saying “*al-ladhina min Qablihim*” (“those before them”). Moreover,
this expression appears more than fifty times in the Qur’an and in any
case it is applied to the Prophets.”

Concerning the virtuous society, the author adds that this can only
become a reality in the time of the *Mahdi*: “It is clear in the verse
that God promised to those who believe and work

righteous deeds that He will soon grant them a society that will be
virtuous in all its meanings, that will be purified from blasphemy,
hypocrisy and debauchery, that will inherit the earth and in which the
True religion masters the beliefs and deeds of its people, that will be
in safety and will have no fear from enemies from inside or outside and
that will be free from the oppressors, tyrants, and dictators. Such a
pure and perfect society has never existed in the world. Neither has
such a society existed since the beginning of the Prophet's mission. But
if a society such as this ever becomes a reality, it will inevitably be
during the time of the *Mahdi*, because the traditions reported by
numerous unbroken chains of transmitters (*Akhbar Mutawatira*) from the
Prophet and the Imams of his family concerning the characteristics of
the *Mahdi* and his government mention the creation of such a society.
Of course the people the verse is addressing are virtuous people in
general and not only the *Mahdi* in particular.”

Tabataba’i answers possible objections to this view as follows:
‘According to this point of view, the verse addressed people who
believed and worked righteous deeds at that time, while the *Mahdi* and
anyone from his time did not yet exist’. He then goes on to say: “It is
possible to address people in two different manners: On the one hand, we
can address people while taking into consideration their individual
qualities and characteristics, while on the other hand, we can speak to
the same group without considering them as individuals but rather

as a group with particular qualities. In this second case, designated
individuals are not involved but those in general who possess the
qualities mentioned in the verse are addressed, even though they did not
exist when the verse was revealed. In this verse, the second case is
applied as well as in most of the verses which address either the
believers (*Mu’minin*) or the unbelievers, or in the verses which
criticise the People of the Book, particularly the Jews, not speaking to
them individually but only to those among them who committed such and
such a fault.”

The author adds, “The reality is that, if we really want to give a true
meaning to the verse, it can only be in conformity with a society
founded through the reappearance of the *Mahdi*.” But, says the author,
“if we interpret the verse negligently, then:

- It is possible to say that the inheritance of those who believe and
act virtuously is the inheritance of the whole community. In denying
this view, we can answer that it is overgeneralizing. In fact, it is
like saying that *Shams* (Sun) and *Qamar* (Moon) are the *Shamsayn*
(two Suns), or the *Qamarayn* (two Moons), and so on.

- We can also interpret the supreme reign of their religion, the one
they love, as the fact that God will make them renowned throughout the
world as the Islamic Community (*Umma*), and will consider Islam as
their exclusive religion, and this, even if they divide into
seventy-three different

schisms, and each one of these branches considers the others heretics
and unbelievers or find it permissible to kill the members of other
branches and steal their goods.

- We can also interpret the fact that God will replace their fear by
safety and that they will worship God and nothing else, as the granting
by God of dignity and power to their religion, so that it will spread
throughout the world, and people will then be able to practise their
religion freely, even if among these people themselves, there is no
security, and if the truth has abandoned the inhabitants of the earth.”

Tabataba’i then reports from the *Majma’ al-Bayan,* Shaykh Tabarsi’s
work, concerning this verse, that the commentators have different
interpretations related to the expression “*al-ladhina amanu minkum*”
(“those among you who believe”) and that there are traditions from the
Ahl al-Bayt which attribute it to the *Mahdi* from the family of the
Prophet. He also reports from the *Majma*’ that ‘Ayyashi reported from
Ali ibn al-Husayn (fourth Imam) that when he recited the verse, he said:
“By God these are our Shi’ites, about whom God will fulfill his promises
through a man from us, and he is the *Mahdi* of this Community, about
whom the Prophet said: ‘Even if there remains only one day on Earth, God
will prolong it until He will bring forth a pious man from my progeny
whose name is the same as my name and he will fill the earth with
justice and equity as it was filled with

oppression and tyranny.’” A similar tradition is reported from Abi
Ja’far (fifth Imam) and Abi ‘Abdillah (sixth Imam).

Tabataba’i says: “Traditions are reported from the Imams concerning the
subject that we mentioned previously. Also the *Majma’ al-Bayan*, after
the tradition reported above, mentions that: ‘In consequence,
“*al-ladhina aamanu minkum wa ‘amelu as-salehat*” (“those among you who
believe and work righteous deeds”) are the Prophet and his family.’”
Tabatabai comments: “The reader has understood that the verse is general
and the tradition does not argue more than that. In the work *al-Durr
al-Manthur*, it is mentioned that ibn Abi Hatem and ibn Marduyeh
reported from Bara’ about the interpretation of the verse that he said:
‘It was revealed about us, because we were living in fear and
insecurity’. It appears from this tradition that the meaning of
‘*al-ladhina aamanu* ...’ is the Companions of the Prophet, but the
reader must have realised that the verse does not argue at all in favour
of this meaning.”

### C- *Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan* by Banu Nusrat Amin

Banu Amin**[1]** reports different views concerning this verse from the
work of Shaykh Tabarsi, Majma’ al-Bayan:

1- The verse concerns the Companions of the Prophet.

2- According to ibn ‘Abbas and Mujahid, the verse is general and
concerns the whole Community of the Prophet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Makhzan al-‘Irfan* : Vol. 9 p. 137

3- It is reported from the Ahl al-Bayt that this verse was revealed by
the family of the Prophet about the *Mahdi*, while ‘Ayyashi reports from
Ali ibn al-Husayn (fourth Imam) that the Imam recited the verse saying:
‘By God, those who are described in this verse are ourselves the *Ahl
al-Bayt* and God will fulfill what is said in the verse through a man
from us who is the *Mahdi* of this Community and who is the person about
whom the Prophet said : ‘Even if there remains only one day on Earth,
God will prolong it until He will bring forth a pious man from my
progeny whose name is the same as my name and he will fill the earth
with justice and equity as it was filled with oppression and
tyranny.’”**[1]** A similar tradition is reported from Abi Ja’far (fifth
Imam) and Abi ‘Abdillah (sixth Imam). According to this tradition, we
understand that “those among you who believe and work righteous deeds”
refer to the Prophet and his family, and the verse gives them the good
tidings that during the time of the *Mahdi*’s uprising, He will make
them Governors on the earth and will enable them to live in security.
God also says that they deserve the governorship as did Adam, Dawud and
Sulayman. Also all the Imams have a consensus on this subject and their
consensus is considered as a proof (*hujja*) because the Prophet said:
“I am leaving among you two weighty things: the Book of God and my
Progeny. They will not be separated from each other until they

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See note 5

meet me next to the fountain”.**[1]** Such conditions as those described
in the verse have never occurred in reality for the believers, but they
must occur one day because God never break His promises.

3) Qur’an 2: 3
--------------

Who believe in the Unseen, are steadfast in prayer, and spend out of
what We have provided for them;**[2]** [2:3]

### A- *Tafsir Majma’al-Bayan* by Shaykh Tabarsi

Shaykh Tabarsi**[3]** explains that the verse concerns the attributes of
the virtuous ones guided by the light of the Qur’an. Their first
attribute is their belief in the unseen (*ghayb*). He then gives several
views concerning the meaning of *ghayb* here:

1- it means jurisprudence

2- the Day of Judgement, the Heaven, the Hell (according to Hasan)

3- anything from God (according to ibn ‘Abbas)

4- the Qur’an (according to Zirr ibn Hubaysh)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] قال رسول الله (ص) : إني تارك فيكم الثقلين كتاب الله و عتري أهل بيتي
، فإنهما لن يفترقا حتى يردا علي الحوض.  
 [2] الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ وَيُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاةَ وَمِمَّا
رَزَقْنَاهُم يُنفِقُونَ  
 [3] *Majma’ al-Bayan*,Vol.1 p.60

5- anything that is outside the knowledge of ordinary people (according
to ibn Mas’ud). Here, Shaykh Tabarsi makes a connection between this
verse and the *Mahdi* and says that this view includes what the Imams
said concerning the Occultation (*ghayba*) of the *Mahdi* and the time
of his Appearance since no one but God knows the date of his appearance.

### B- *Tafsir* al-Mizan by Allama Tabataba’i

Tabatabai,**[1]** in his explanation of the term "al-Ghayb" (the
unseen), says that it is the opposite of "the perceived", and that we
cannot perceive through our usual senses. He adds that the term is used
to denote Allah, and His great signs, including the revelation, which is
referred to in the Qur’an 2: 4; **And who believe in the Revelation sent
to thee, and sent before thy time, and (in their hearts) have the
assurance of the Hereafter.[2]** He affirms that it also includes the
hereafter, but in this verse, the belief in the revelation and in the
hereafter have been mentioned separately. Therefore, "the unseen" must
have been used only to mean Allah. In this way the belief in the three
fundamentals of religion becomes complete.

Tabatabai then reports from the *Ma’ani a1-akhbar* a tradition from Imam
al-Sadiq (sixth Imam), who said that: “Who believe in the Unseen” means
those who believe in the rising of *al- Qa’im* (the *Mahdi*) and
consider it as the Truth.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Al-Mizan*: Vol.1, p.68  
 [2] والَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ مِن
قَبْلِكَ وَبِالآخِرَةِ هُمْ يُوقِنُونَ

The author comments that this explanation is given in other traditions
also. But Tabataba’i adds that in order to interpret the verse as
concerning the *Mahdi* in this case implies transforming the general
meaning of the verse to a specific one, the verse having a general
meaning.

### C- *Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan* by Banu Nusrat Amin

Banu Amin**[1]** describes the word *Ghayb* in this verse as something
that is not perceptible through our senses like the sense of hearing or
the sense of sight. She gives as examples, the existence of God, the
Hereafter that we cannot perceive through our usual senses, or the Imam
of the Time who is not visible and hidden from our sight; however, at
the same time she says that he is attentive to the situation of his
Shi’ites. She then explains the superiority of those who have faith and
are living in the time of the great Occultation of the *Mahdi*, which is
the most difficult period in which to preserve one’s faith: the Prophet
in his greatness declared, concerning believers of this time, that he
was impatient to meet them and considered them as his brothers. There
are also traditions, Banu Amin argues, concerning the importance of
those who believe during the period of the Occultation. She adds that if
we can find believers in this time (of the greater Occultation) who
believe intelligently, i.e. after having carried out some research and
not only by imitating their parents, we can say that they are

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan* : Vol.1 p. 91.

even superior to believers at the very beginning of Islam who had an
opportunity to be with the Prophet and to learn directly from him, and
also there were fewer temptations for them of being lead astray from the
truth compared to the temptations of our time.

4) Qur’an 34: 51
----------------

If thou couldst but see when they will quake with terror; but then there
will be no escape (for them), and they will be seized from a position
(quite) near.**[1]** [34:51]

### A- *Tafsir* Majma’ al-Bayan by Shaykh Tabarsi

For this verse, Shaykh Tabarsi reports traditions which interpret the
verse as concerning the fate of the army of the Sufyani.**[2]** Indeed,
Shaykh Tabarsi**[3]** reports from Abu Hamza Thumali who said: “I heard
Ali ibn al-Husayn and Hasan ibn Hasan ibn Ali saying that they are the
army of the desert of Bayda**[4]** where the earth will swallow them
starting by their feet.” He added:“ ‘Amr ibn Marah and Hamraan ibn A’yan

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] وَلَوْ تَرَى إِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلَا فَوْتَ وَأُخِذُوا مِن مَّكَانٍ
قَرِيبٍ  
 [2] Among the signs of the *Mahdi*’s reappearance in the traditions is
the emergence of the Sufyani (a short time before the *Mahdi*’s
appearance) from the region of Syria, who will massacre the Shi’ites,
and whose army will be swallowed up by the earth in the desert on the
way to Mecca where he planned to destroy the *Ka’ba*. See Ali Kurani,
*Asr-e Zuhur,* p.90.  
 [3] *Majma’ al-Bayan*, Vol. 20, p.294  
 [4] a desert between Mecca and Medina

told me that they heard from Muhajir… who said that he heard from Umm
Salama who said that the Prophet said: «He will take refuge in the House
of God, then God will guide an army towards him until they reach the
desert of Bayda’ and get swallowed up by the earth.”

Also Shaykh Tabarsi reports a tradition from Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman that
the Prophet once reminded that: “Discord and unrest between the
Westerner and the Asians will occur, and at that time of war between
them, the Sufyani will come out with a big army from the valley of Yabes
and will reach Damascus. Then he will raise two armies, one toward the
East and the other one toward Medina. They (the army toward the East)
will enter in the land of Babylon next to Bagdad. They will start
killing more than three thousand people, and rape more than a hundred
women, and will kill three hundred people from the nobles of *Bani
al-‘Abbas* (Abbasids). They will then move to Kufa and destroy the areas
of Kufa and will move toward Sham. At the same time, a well-guided army
will come out of Kufa and will reach them and kill them, and they will
not even leave an informant and they will take their captives, goods and
booty. The second army will attack Medina and will pillage the city for
three days and nights. They will finally move toward Mecca until they
enter the land of Bayda’. God will call Jibril (Gabriel) and tell him:
‘O Jibril, Go and destroy them!’ Then Jibril will go and hit the land of
Bayda with his

foot and the army will be swallowed up by the earth and only two men
among them will survive from Juhayneh.”**[1]** The author says that this
tradition is reported by Tha’labi in his *Tafsir* and similar traditions
are also reported by the Shi’ites among the traditions concerning the
*Mahdi* from Abi ‘Abdillah al-Sadiq (sixth Imam) and Abi Ja’far al-Baqir
(fifth Imam).

### B- *Tafsir al-Mizan* by Allama Tabataba’i

The author of al-Mizan**[2]** reports from the work *al-Durr al-Manthur*
a tradition reported from Hakim (who considers the tradition as
authentic) who reported it from Abu Hurayra who says that the Prophet of
God said: “In the future, a man will come out from Damascus who will be
called Sufyani, and the totality of his followers will be from the tribe
of Kalb; he will start to kill and massacre, he will even open the
women’s

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] روي عن حذيفة ابن اليمان عن النبي (ص) : ذكر فتنة تكون بين أهل المشرق
و المغرب قال فبينا هم كذلك يخرج عليهم السفياني من وادي اليابس في فور ذلك
حتى ينزل دمشق فيبعث جيشين، جيشا الى المشرق و آخر الي المدينه حتى ينزلوا
بأرض بابل من المدينة الملعونة يعني بغداد فيقتلون أكثر من ثلاثة آلاف و
يفضحون أكثر من مائة إمرأة و يقتلون بها ثلاثمائة كبش من بني العباس ثم
ينحدرون الى الكوفة فيخربون ما حولها ثم يخرجون متوجهين الى الشام فيخرج
راية الهدي من الكوفة فيلحق ذلك الجيش فيقتلونهم لايفلت منهم مخبر
ويستنقذون ما في أيديهم من السبي و الغنائم و يحل الجيش الثاني بالمدينه
فينتهبونها ثلاثة أيام بلياليها ثم يخرجون متوجهين الى مكة حتى إذا كانوا
بالبيداء بعث الله جبرائيل فيقول يا جبرائيل اذهب و فابدهم فيضربها برجله
ضربة يخسف الله بهم عندها ولا يفلت منهم إلا رجلان من جهينة فلذلك جاء
القول ‍ و عند جهينة الخبر اليقين.  
 [2] Al-Mizan, Vol.16, p.592

wombs, and will assassinate the children, until the tribe of Qays will
rise against him, and he will end up killing Qays, and he will not leave
a place free of his oppression and violence. At that moment, a man from
my Household will come out and will reach Sufyani and will send his army
to suppress Sufyani and his army, and finally he will put him to flight,
defeating him and his army. Sufyani and his followers will then travel
to Bayda and, in that place, they will have an accident and be swallowed
up by the earth and none of them will remain but one person among them
who will describe for people what happened.” Tabataba’i adds: “This
tradition has been reported from the Sunnites many times whether in
detail or briefly, and was reported from several chains of transmitters
from ibn ‘Abbas, ibn Mas’ud, Hudhayfah, Abu Hurayra, the grandfather of
‘Amr ibn Shu’ayb, Umm Salama, Safiyya, ‘Aa’isha, and Hafsa (the
Prophet’s wives), and Nufayra (the wife of Qa’qa’), and also from Sa’id
ibn Jubayr”.

And, concerning the Shi’ite sources, Tabataba’i then reports from the
*Tafsir Qummi* that it is written: “My father reported a tradition to me
from ibn Abi ‘Umayr, who reported it from Mansur ibn Younus, who
reported it from Abi Khalid Kabuli that Imam Abi Ja’far said: ‘ I swear
by God! It is as if I am right now seeing the *al-Qa’im* who is leaning
against the *Hajar* (*al-Hajar al-Aswad* = the black stone) and is
inviting people in the name of God to maintain his Right, and then he is
saying: ‘O people, whoever talks with me about God, I know the best
about Him. O people, whoever talks to me about

Adam, I know the best about him and I am the closest to him. O people,
whoever talks to me about Nuh (Noah), I know more than anyone the best
about him. O people, whoever talks to me about Ibrahim (Abraham), I am
closer to Ibrahim than anyone else is. O people, whoever talks to me
about Musa (Moses), I know the best about him. O people, whoever talks
to me about ‘Isa (Jesus), I am closer to ‘Isa than anyone else is. O
people, whoever talks to me about Muhammad, I am closer to Muhammad than
anyone else is and I know him the best. O people, whoever talks to me
about the Book of God, I am closer to the Book of God than anyone else.’
At that moment, he will get closer to the *Maqam Ibrahim* (sanctuary of
Abraham) and will perform two-*rak’a* prayers and will swear by God as
to his truthfulness.’ Imam Abi Ja’far then said: ‘By God, he is the one
in distress in the Qur’an 27: 62; **Or, Who listens to the (soul)
distressed when it calls on Him, and Who relieves its suffering, and
makes you (mankind) inheritors of the earth? (Can there be another) god
besides Allah? Little it is that ye heed![1]** The first one to pledge
allegiance to him will be Gabriel and then three hundred and thirteen
people; among them, some will do their best to find their way to him and
will finally be successful, and those who will not be able to reach him
in this way will disappear from their beds... and this is also the
meaning of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] أَمَّن يُجِيبُ الْمُضْطَرَّ إِذَا دَعَاهُ وَيَكْشِفُ السُّوءَ
وَيَجْعَلُكُمْ خُلَفَاء الْأَرْضِ أَإِلَهٌ مَّعَ اللَّهِ قَلِيلًا مَّا
تَذَكَّرُونَ

Qur’an 2: 148; **To each is a goal to which Allah turns him; then strive
together (as in a race) towards all that is good. Wheresoever ye are,
Allah will bring you together. For Allah hath power over all things.
[1]’** The Imam continues: ‘The meaning of good deeds (al-khayrat) is
the Love for the Ahl al-Bayt (Wilaya) and also in the verse **‘If We
delay the penalty for them for a definite term, they are sure to say,
"What keeps it back?" Ah! On the day it (actually) reaches them, nothing
will turn it away from them, and they will be completely encircled by
that which they used to mock at!’** [8:11], the meaning of ‘*ummatin
ma’dudah*’ refers to the Companions of the *al-Qa’im* (*Mahdi*) who will
gather together in one place within an hour. When the al-Qa’im reaches
the land of Bayda, the army of Sufyani will stand in rank in front of
him, and then God will order the earth to swallow up their feet and
absorb them.”

### C- *Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan* by Banu Nusrat Amin

Banu Amin**[2]** reports from ibn ‘Abbas the cause of the revelation of
that verse and says: “The verse concerns the people who will sink in the
desert of Bayda’ and who will be eighty thousand from Sufyani’s**[3]**
army and will march from Damascus with the intention of destroying the
*Ka’ba*. When

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] وَلِكُلٍّ وِجْهَةٌ هُوَ مُوَلِّيهَا فَاسْتَبِقُواْ الْخَيْرَاتِ
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلَى
كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ  
 [2] *Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan* : Vol. 8, p. 311  
 [3] See note 17 concerning the Sufyani.

they are close to the desert of Mecca, all of them will be swallowed up
by the earth, and the meaning of “they will be seized from a position
(quite) near” in the verse is that they will be in danger right under
their own feet (which is the closest place to them) and these will be
the people of Sufyani who will live again at the End of Time. Sufyani
will send an army to demolish the Holy *Ka’ba* and among the eighty
thousand people, only two will survive. One of them will bring the news
to the people of Mecca and the other one will go back to inform Sufyani
about the event.”

Banu Amin also reports from the *Minhaj al-Sadiqin* a tradition from
Hudhayfah, who said that: “I heard from the Prophet who said while
giving information about the events of the End of Time: ‘Sufyani will
come out and will send an army from the arid land to Damascus (toward
the East) and another one to Medina. When they (the army toward the
East) reach Babylon, which is located between the lands of Medina and
Bagdad, they will kill more than a thousand people, open up the women’s
wombs and kill three hundred well-known men from the family of the Bani
‘*Abbas*; then they will move toward Kufa and will destroy the whole
area; after that, they will go to Sham while a guided army emerges from
Kufa who will follow them and after two days of traveling they will kill
most of its members, pillaging and taking captives. And Sufyani will
send one of his armies to Medina and for three days and nights, they
will pillage the city, then move to Mecca, and then they will reach
Bayda’, God will send Gabriel

to destroy them. Gabriel will hit the earth with his feet and all of
them will at once be swallowed up by the earth and this is the meaning
of the words of God : “If thou couldst but see when they will quake with
terror; but then there will be no escape (for them), and they will be
seized from a position (quite) near” and among them two people will
survive, Bashir and Nadhir; Bashir will inform the people of Mecca and
Nadhir will frighten Sufyani, informing him of the annihilation of his
people; and both of these survivors will be from Juhayna.’ This
tradition is reported by our Companions from Abi Ja’far and Abi
‘Abdillah among the traditions of the reappearance of the *Mahdi*”

5) Qur’an 9: 33
---------------

It is He Who hath sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion of
Truth, to proclaim it over all religion, even though the Pagans may
detest (it).**[1]** [9:33]

### A- *Tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan* by Shaykh Tabarsi

This verse concerns the reign of Islam over all the religions, and
Shaykh Tabarsi reports several views and traditions which interpret the
verse as a prediction of the return of Jesus and the reappearance of the
*Mahdi*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَى وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ

1- Shaykh Tabarsi**[1]** reports from Dhahhak that the expression
“*liyuzhirahu ‘ala al-din kullihi*” (“to proclaim it over all religion”)
refers to the time of the descent of ‘Isa ibn Maryam on the earth when
the followers of all religions will become Muslims.

2- He then reports a tradition from Imam Baqir (fifth Imam) that this
event will occur during the time of the reappearance of the *Mahdi* from
the progeny of the Prophet when there will be no one left on the earth
who did not accept the message of the Prophet Muhammad.**[2]**

3- The author also reports from Kalbi that there will be no religion
left in the world unless Islam is victorious over it; this event is
certain and the Day of Judgement will not occur until it takes place.

4- He reports from Miqdad ibn Aswad who said: “I heard from the Prophet
who said: ‘There will be no house left in the world unless the word of
Islam enters this house either with dignity or by force.”**[3]**

5- It is also reported from ibn ‘Abbas, says the author, that the
pronoun hu in “*liyuzhirahu ‘ala al-din kullihi*” refers to the Prophet,
which means that God will teach him all the religions

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Majma’ al-Bayan, Vol. 11 p. 73  
 [2] قال أبو جعفر: إن ذلك يكون عند خروج المهدي من آل محمد فلا يبقى أحد
إلا أقر بمحمد  
 [3] قال المقداد ابن الأسود سمعت رسول الله (ص) يقول لا يبقي على ظهر
الأرض بيت مدر و لا وبر إلا أدخله الله كلمة الإسلام إما بعز عزيز و أما
بذل ذليل ...

so that nothing from the world’s religions will remain outside the
Prophet’s knowledge.

### B- *Tafsir al-Mizan* by Allama Tabataba’i

Tabataba’i**[1]** reports from the *Tafsir* Burhan that reported from
Shaykh al-Saduq who reported a tradition from Abi Bassir who said: “Imam
Sadeq said, concerning the interpretation of this verse, that: ‘By God,
the *ta’wil* of this verse has not yet been revealed, and will not be
revealed until the rise of the *al-Qa’im* (*Mahdi*). When he rises,
there will be no disbeliever in God or enemy of the Imams left, unless
they are annoyed at the rise of the Imam (because he will put them up
against the wall so that no one will escape). Even if a disbeliever
hides behind a rock, the rock will say: ‘O believers, there is a
non-believer hiding behind me, break me and kill him.’”**[2]** The
author says: “Such a tradition is also reported by al-‘Ayyashi from Abi
al-Muqaddam from Abi Ja’far (fifth Imam) and also from Sama’ah from Imam
Sadiq (sixth Imam). Shaykh Tabarsi also reported it from Abi Ja’far. In
the *Tafsir al-Qummi* it is reported that this verse was revealed about
the *al-Qa’im ale Muhammad* (*Mahdi*) which means that the rise of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Mizan : Vol. 9 p. 315  
 [2]قال أبو عبدالله في قوله عز و جل: هو الذي أرسل رسوله بالهدى و دين
الحق... الآية, و الله ما نزل تأويلها بعد و لا ينزل تأويلها حتى يخرج
القائم فإذا خرج القائم لم يبق كافر بالله و لا مشرك بالإمام إلا كره خروجه
حتى لو كان الكافر في بطن صخرة قالت : يا مؤمن في بطني كافر فاكسرني و
اقتله (تفسير الميزان، سورة التوبة آية: 33)

the Imam is the *ta’wil* of this verse as we saw in the tradition
reported from al-Saduq.”

The author then reports from the Sunnite sources: “It is reported in the
*al-Durr al-Manthur* that Sa’id ibn Manthur, ibn Manzar, and Bayhaki
reported in their *Sunan* from Jabir who said in the commentary of this
verse: “What is said in the verse will not be realised unless there is
no Jew or Christian or follower of any other religion apart from Islam
left in the world, and also when sheep and wolves, lions and cows or
humans and snakes will live together in peace and safety, and when mice
no longer make holes in food sacks, and when taxes deducted from
non-Muslims are eradicated, and crosses are destroyed and pigs are
killed; and this will occur when ‘Isa ibn Maryam descends from heaven.”
Tabataba’i explains: “The reason for the abolition of taxes deductible
from non-Muslims is that there will be no need for such taxes any more
at that time. There are also other traditions concerning the fact that
there will be no more non-Muslims left in the world. Also there are
traditions which say that during the time of the *Mahdi*, he will
abolish taxes levied on non-Muslims.”

6) Qur’an 4: 159
----------------

And there is none of the People of the Book but must believe in him
before his death; and on the Day of Judgment he will be a witness
against them;**[1]** [4:159]

### A- *Tafsir Majma’al-Bayan* by Shaykh Tabarsi

This verse concerns the Prophet ‘Isa and the People of the Book and as
to whether it is intended to refer to the time of the *Mahdi*’s
reappearance or not. Shaykh Tabarsi,**[2]** after having translated the
verse, reports several interpretations in this regard:

1- According to ibn ‘Abbas, Abu Malek, Hasan, Qatadeh, and ibn Zaid, the
two pronouns *hi* in “*Bihi qabla mawtihi*” (“in him before his death”)
refers to the Prophet ‘Isa. It means that all the Christians and Jews
will accept Islam as their religion, and will believe in him (‘Isa)
before his (‘Isa) death, at which time God, during the time of the
reappearance of the *Mahdi*, will send down ‘Isa for killing the
Antichrist (*Dajjal*) and when all the world's nations will be united
and will come to an agreement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] وَإِن مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ إِلاَّ لَيُؤْمِنَنَّ بِهِ قَبْلَ
مَوْتِهِ وَيَوْم الْقِيَامَةِ يَكُونُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَهِيدًا  
 [2] *Majma’ al-Bayan,* Vol.6 p.137

2- Tabarsi adds that Tabari has also given the above interpretation and
that according to Tabari the verse is intended for the group of Jews and
Christians who are living at the time of the *Mahdi*. The author then
mentions a tradition in favor of this view and says that Ali ibn Ibrahim
reports in his *Tafsir* from Shahr ibn Hushab who reports from Hajjaj
ibn Yusuf**[1]** who said: “This verse surprises me. When I order the
death of Jews and Christians and when their throats are being slit, I
wait for them to say something but I never hear anything from them on
this subject before their death. Their lips do not even move.” I said:
“May God guide the *Amir* (leader), the meaning of the verse is not
this.” He asked: “What is the meaning then?” I said: “‘Isa ibn Maryam
will descend to the earth before the Day of Judgment and will pray
behind the *Mahdi*.”**[2]** He said: “From which source do you state
that?” I said: “Imam Baqir (fifth Imam) related this to me”. Some asked
to Shahr: “What was your purpose in saying this to him?” He said: “I
wanted to irritate him”.

3- Abu al-Qasim Balkhi has also given the same interpretation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Hajjaj Ibn Yusuf al-Thaqafi (d.259 AH/ 873 CE) was the governor of
Iraq designated by the Caliph Abdul Malek. He is known for the massacre
and torture of thousands of people in Iraq.  
 [2]عن باقر بن علي بن الحسين بن علي ابن أبي طالب قال : إن عيسي ابن مريم
ينزل قبل يوم القيامة إلى الدنيا و لا يبقي أهل ملة يهودي أو نصراني أو
غيره إلا و آمن به قبل موت عيسي و يصلي خلف مهدي...

4- Zajjaj considered this view as weak. He says: “Those who remain until
the return of ‘Isa are of a small number and the verse refers to the
faith of the totality of the people of the Book. But it is possible to
say that the totality of the People of the Book say, ‘We believe in that
‘Isa who will come at the End of Time’”.

5- According to ibn ‘Abbas –according to another tradition-, Mujahid,
Dhahhaq, ibn Sirin, and Juwaybir, the pronoun *hi* in “*bihi*” (“in
him”) refers to ‘Isa and the pronoun *hi* in “*mawtihi*” (“his death”)
refers to a book, which means that each and every Jew or Christian who
leave this world believe in ‘Isa before their death, and this is when
there are no longer any duties or obligations and when death is certain.
But this belief does not bring any advantage or benefit to them. The
reason why the Jews and the Christians are both referred to here is
because they are both on the wrong path, the Jews because of their
blasphemy and the Christians because of their exaggeration and excess.

6- The meaning of the verse is that the people of the Book will believe
in the Prophet Muhammad before their death (“*bihi*” then would refer to
Muhammad). Tabari considered this view as weak. He says that if this is
true, then the People of the Book should not be considered as
unbelievers.

To this, Shaykh Tabarsi answers that “Tabari’s comment is not pertinent
because their belief occurs after the obligations and duties of this
life but before death and at a time when it no

longer offers any advantage for them. On the other hand, the weakness of
this view lies in the fact that the name of the Prophet does not occur
in these verses and there is no reason to refer the pronoun hi to the
Prophet when the name of ‘Isa is pronounced in these verses. It is then
reasonable to refer the pronoun to ‘Isa.”

### B- *Tafsir* al-Mizan by Allama Tabataba’i

Tabataba’i**[1]** comments that the word “In” in the beginning of the
verse is an adverb of negation and means “and there is none” and that in
the expression “*min ahl al-Kitab*” (“of the People of the Book”) the
subject has been deleted which was the word ahad (one) and the
expression is then read as “*ahad min ahl al-Kitab*” (“one of the People
of the Book”). He adds that the pronoun hi in “*bihi*” and the verb
“*yakuna*” refers to ‘Isa, but that the pronoun *hi* in “*qabla
mawtihi*” (“before his death”) is the subject of different
interpretations. Therefore, he reports from several *mufassirin* the
following views:

1- Some of the commentators said that the pronoun hi in “*qabla
mawtihi*” refers to the deleted subject ahad (one) and the meaning of
the verse is then “each one of the People of the Book before his death
will believe in ‘Isa” which means that just a moment before his or her
death it will become clear to him or her that ‘Isa was the Prophet of
God and His true Servant. But this faith at the last moment of life will
not have

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Al-Mizan* : Vol.5 , p.219

any benefit and ‘Isa will testify against all of the People of the Book
on the Day of Judgement, either their faith was useful and they believed
in him during their lifetime in the correct manner or their faith was
useless because they started to believe a moment before their death.

2- Other commentators said that the pronoun *hi* in “*qabla mawtihi*”
refers to ‘Isa himself and that the faith of the People of the Book in
‘Isa before the death of ‘Isa will occur at the moment of 'Isa's descent
from Heaven. These commentators give, as an argument supporting this
view, some of the traditions that say the Prophet ‘Isa is still alive
and did not die on the Cross, and that he will return from Heaven at the
End of Time and that all the Jews and Christians existing at that time
will believe in him.

Then Tabataba’i gives his own opinion after having compared the verses
concerning ‘Isa in the Qur’an, and concludes his argument by saying that
the pronoun hi in “*Qabla mawtihi*” refers to ‘Isa and that ‘Isa is not
dead and will not die unless all the People of the Book believe in him
and this is confirmed in the traditions.

Tabataba’i reports from the *Tafsir al-Qummi* in which a tradition is
mentioned concerning this verse: “My father reported from Qasim ibn
Muhammad who reported from Sulayman ibn Dawud, who reported from Abi
Hamza, who reported from Shahr ibn Hushab who said : “Hajjaj told me: ‘O
Shahr, a verse of the Quran is causing me confusion, and I

do not understand its meaning.’ I asked: ‘O Amir! Which verse is it?’ He
said: ‘The verse: “**And there is none of the People of the Book but
must believe in him before his death; and on the Day of Judgment he will
be a witness against them**”. By God, although I would give the order to
slit the throat of a Jew or a Christian and would stand nearby until his
last breath and would attentively look at him to see if he is testifying
the legitimacy of Jesus, the Messiah or not, I would see nothing but his
lips closed until his body would get cold. In such case, how is it that
that verse of the Quran informs us that every Jew, before his death,
becomes a believer in Jesus?’ I told him: ‘May God correct you; the
meaning of the verse is not as you understood it.’ ‘Then what is the
meaning?’ he said. ‘Before the Day of Judgement, Jesus will descend from
Heaven and from all the nations no one will remain, be he Jew or non
Jew, unless he becomes a believer in Jesus before he dies and Jesus will
perform his prayers behind the *Mahdi*.’ When Hajjaj heard these
comments, he was most amazed and said: ‘Wonderful! From whom did you
learn this? From whom are you reporting these comments?’ I replied:
‘Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib related it to me.’
To this, he answered: ‘By God, you obtained this from a pure source.’”

Allama Tabataba’i then reports the same event from the *Tafsir al-Durr
al-Manthur* that ibn Manzar reported from Shahr ibn Hushab who said:
“Hajjaj told me: ‘O Shahr, there is a verse in the Quran that whenever I
recite it, a feeling of

objection rises within myself and it is the following verse: “**And
there is none of the People of the Book but must believe in him before
his death.**” At the same time the captives of war are brought to me and
I usually slit their throats but I never hear anything from them before
their death.’ I told Hajjaj: ‘You did not get the proper meaning of the
verse; when the soul of a Christian leaves his body, the angels slap him
from behind and from ahead and say: ‘O Wicked one! When you were on
earth, you used to believe that either Jesus is God, or is the son of
God or is a third God while he was God’s servant, His soul and His
word.’ When the Christian hears these words, he becomes a believer.
However, at that time, his faith has no benefit. Likewise, when the soul
of a Jew leaves his body, the angels slap and beat him from behind and
ahead and say: ‘O Wicked one! You were the one who believed that you had
killed Jesus! He was the servant and the soul of God.’ Hearing this, the
Jew starts believing in Jesus but at a time when his faith is no longer
of benefit to him. This event occurs continuously for each one of the
Christians and the Jews, until the time of Jesus' descent. In fact, at
that time, each one of the People of the Book, either dead or alive,
will believe in him (Jesus).’ Hajjaj asked: ‘Where did you get that
from?’ I replied: ‘From Muhammad ibn Ali.’ He said: ‘Indeed, you got it
from the fount of knowledge.’ Shahr then added: ‘By God, I never heard
that story except from Umm Salama but in order to make Hajjaj

(who was an enemy of the *Ahl al-Bayt*) jealous, I lied and told him
that I heard it directly from Muhammad ibn Ali.”

The author, in order to confirm that the verse concerns the *Mahdi*,
reported from the same work (*al-Durr al-Manthur*) that Ahmad, Bukhari,
Muslim, and Bayhaki in the Kitab al-Asma wa al-Sifat reported a
tradition in which the narrator said: “The Prophet said: ‘How will you
react when the son of Mary (Jesus) descends among you and your Imam will
be from among yourselves?”**[1]** Again, according to the author, this
is narrated in the same book from ibn Marduwayh who reported from Abu
Hurayra that he said: “The Prophet said: “Soon the son of Mary will
descend among you and will kill the Antichrist and the pigs (that
Christians consider as lawful from a religious point of view)– the
meaning here may be that he will prohibit them from consuming pork - and
he will break the Cross which is one of the Christians' religious
symbols (he will annihilate those symbols) and re-introduce the taxes
(that had been abandoned) among the People of the Book, so that they pay
taxes to the Islamic government; at that time wealth will increase and
only God, the Lord of the Worlds, will be worshipped.” Abu Hurayra then
said: “If you wish, recite the verse: “**And there is none of the People
of the Book but must believe in him before his death**”, which means
‘before the death of ‘Isa’” and he repeated ‘the death of ‘Isa’ three

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] ... عن أبي هريره قال: قال رسول الله. (ص) كيف أنتم إذا نزل ابن مريم
فيكم و إمامكم منكم.

times.”**[1]** Tabataba’i comments that the traditions concerning the
descent of Jesus at the time of the appearance of *Mahdi* are numerous
both from Shi’ite and Sunnite sources, and reported either from the
Prophet or from the *Ahl al-Bayt*.

Allama then reports another view concerning the Prophet apart from the
one mentioned above. He reports from the *Tafsir al-‘Ayyashi*, a
tradition reported from Harith ibn Mugheerah who reported from Imam
Sadiq who said that the following verse “**And there is none of the
People of the Book but must believe in him before his death ; and on the
Day of Judgment he will be a witness against them**” is about the
Prophet. The author comments that although this tradition seems to be in
contradiction with the verses concerning ‘Isa, however it is possible to
say that the aim of these traditions may be to clarify that when the
Prophet was appointed and brought a Book and a Divine Law (Shari’a),
which abrogated the Law brought by Jesus, it became compulsory for the
People of the Book to believe in the Prophet Muhammad as well as in
Jesus and the Prophets who came before Jesus. Also, if one of the People
of the Book lived after the prophetic mission of the Prophet, and at the
moment of his death when the truth is being unveiled, he finds out that
Jesus was the truth, he will obviously at the same time realise the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] عن أبي هريرة قال: قال رسول الله (ص): يوشك أن ينزل فيكم ابن مريم حكما
عدلا يقتل الدجال و يقتل الخنزير و يكسر الصليب و يضع الجزية و يقبض المال
و تكون السجدة واحدة لله رب العالمين و اقرأوا إن شئتم : و إن من أهل
الكتاب إلا ليؤمنن به قبل موته، موت عيسي ابن مريم. ثم يعيدها أبو هريرة
ثلاث مرات.

truthfulness of the prophethood of the Prophet Muhammad. Therefore, the
belief of the People of the Book in Jesus will be considered as true,
only if they also believe in Muhammad. (In other words, they will
understand that during their life, they were supposed to follow the
religion of Muhammad as it is an abrogating religion, whereas the
religion of Jesus is an abrogated one). Therefore, the Prophet who will
be accepted truthfully by the People of the Book and who will bear
witness against them is the Prophet Muhammad, who is the absolute proof
for people living after his prophetic mission, although Jesus had the
same position and there is no contradiction in considering one of the
two Prophets in this verse. In the same book, says the author, it is
reported from ibn Sinan who reported from Imam Sadiq concerning the
commentary of the verse, that: “The faith of the People of the Book is
only valid once they believe in the prophethood of Muhammad.”**[1]**

Again, Tabataba’i reports from the same book that it is reported from
Jabir who reported from Imam Baqir (fifth Imam) that the latter said for
the meaning of the above verse that: “No one from among any of the
religions, from the very first to the very last, will die unless he
contemplates the truthfulness of the Prophet of God (Muhammad) and the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] عن أبي عبدالله في قول الله في عيسى : و إن من أهل الكتاب إلا ليؤمنن
به قبل موته و يوم القيامة يكون عليهم شهيدا. فقال: إيمان أهل الكتاب إنما
هو لمحمد صلى الله عليه وآله.

Commander of the Believers (*Amir al-Mu’minin Ali*)”.**[1]** Concerning
this view, Allama Tabataba’i comments that “It is not sure that the
Imam’s purpose was to give a commentary of the verse or even to adapt
his word to the verse because it is likely that these words were merely
the continuation of other words that the Imam might have said regarding
the verse, and such (fragmented) traditions are numerous.”

He finally reports from the same book, a tradition from Mufadhdhal ibn
‘Umar who said: “I asked Imam Sadiq about the meaning of the verse
“**And there is none of the People of the Book but must believe in him
before his death**”, and he answered: ‘This verse has been revealed for
us, the People of the House; any of the children of Fatima will not die
and leave this world unless they testify in favour of the Imam and his
Imamate in the same way that the children of Ya’qub testified in favour
of Yusuf...”.**[2]** Concerning this tradition, the author comments:
“This tradition is among the traditions that have a unique transmitter
(which is not valid except in Ahkam). Besides, the source of this
tradition is not mentioned.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] عن أبي عبدالله في قوله : و أن من أهل الكتاب إلا ليؤمنن به قبل موته و
يوم القيامة يكون عليهم شهيدا. قال ليس من أحد من جميع الأديان يموت إلا
رأى رسول الله (ص) و أمير المؤمنين (ع) حقا من الأولين و الآخرين.  
 [2]عن المفضل بن عمر قال سألت أبا عبدالله (ع) عن قول الله: و إن من أهل
الكتاب إلا ليؤمنن به قبل موته. فقال : هذه نزلت فينا خاصة, إنه ليس رجل من
ولد فاطمة يموت و لا يخرج من الدنيا حتى يقر للإمام و لإمامته، كما أقر ولد
يعقوب ليوسف حين قالوا: تالله لقد آثرك الله علينا.

7) Qur’an 8: 39
---------------

And fight them on until there is no more tumult or oppression, and there
prevail justice and faith in Allah altogether and everywhere; but if
they cease, verily Allah doth see all that they do.**[1]** [8:39]

### A- *Tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan* by Shaykh Tabarsi

- The author of *Majma’ al-Bayan***[2]** first explains the meaning of
“*Wa qatiluhum, hatta la takuna fitnah*” (“And fight them on until there
is no more tumult or oppression”): “This first part of the verse was
directed at the Prophet and the believers so that they would fight
against the unbelievers and put an end to their provocative
disturbances.”

- He then explains the meaning of “*Wa yakuna ad-dinu kulluhu lillah*”
(“and there prevail justice and faith in Allah altogether and
everywhere”): “This second part means that the people of the Truth and
the Falsehood gather around the True religion and accept correct
beliefs, and because of the acceptance of the True religion by the
people, religion in its entirety belongs to God.”

- The author then reports a tradition from Zurarah who reported it from
Imam Sadeq who said: “The *ta’wil* has not yet been reached. At the
moment of the rise of our *al-Qa’im*, the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] وَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّى لاَ تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ وَيَكُونَ الدِّينُ
كُلُّهُ لِلّه فَإِنِ انتَهَوْاْ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ بِمَا يَعْمَلُونَ
بَصِيرٌ  
 [2] *Majma’ al-Bayan* : Vol. 10, p. 218

people who will then be on earth will see the realization of the
*ta’wil* of this verse and the religion of Muhammad will dominate the
universe, and no polytheists (Pagans) will remain on earth.”**[1]**

### B- *Tafsir al-Mizan* by Allama Tabataba’i

Tabataba’i**[2]** reports from Tabarsi’s work (*Majma’ al-Bayan*) that
Zurarah and others besides him reported from Abi ‘Abdillah (sixth Imam)
that he said: “The *ta’wil* of this verse has not yet been reached. When
our *al-Qa’im* rises, those who recognise him will rapidly see the
*ta’wil* of this verse. And the religion of Muhammad will reach such a
rank that not even one single polytheist will remain on earth”.

The author also says that ‘Ayyashi reported this tradition in his
*Tafsir* from Zurarah who reported it from the Imam, and concerning the
meaning of this verse, there is a tradition in the Kafi (work of Shaykh
Kulayni) reported from Muhammad Ibn Muslim who reported it from Abi
Ja’far (fifth Imam) and also ‘Ayyashi reported a similar tradition from
‘Abd al-A’la Halbi from Abi Ja’far.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] روى زرارة و غيره عن أبي عبدالله(ع) أنه قال: لم يجئ تأويل هذه الآية و
لو قام قائمنا بعد سيرى من يدركه ما يكون من تأويل هذه الآية و ليبلغن دين
محمد (ص) ما بلغ الليل حتى لا يكون مشرك على ظهر الأرض .  
 [2] *Al-Mizan*, Vol. 9 p.114.

8) Qur’an 11: 8
---------------

If We delay the penalty for them for a definite term, they are sure to
say, "What keeps it back?" Ah! On the day it (actually) reaches them,
nothing will turn it away from them, and they will be completely
encircled by that which they used to mock at!**[1]** [11:8]

### A- *Tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan* by Shaykh Tabarsi

Shaykh Tabarsi**[2]** reports several commentators’ views concerning the
meaning of “umma” in this verse:  
 - He reports from ibn ‘Abbas and Mujahid that the term “*umma*” in this
verse has the meaning of “time”, as it appears in another verse also.

- He reports from Ali ibn ‘Isa who said that “umma” means “community”;
the meaning of the verse would then be, “if we delay their punishment
until another community comes after them, one that also keeps insisting
on their blasphemy and no believers would mingle with them… as we did
with the community of the Prophet Nuh.”

- Jaba’i said that the meaning of the verse is that “if we delay their
punishment until the people after them come, who are ordered to perform
duties and who also behave with

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] وَلَئِنْ أَخَّرْنَا عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابَ إِلَى أُمَّةٍ مَّعْدُودَةٍ
لَّيَقُولُنَّ مَا يَحْبِسُهُ أَلاَ يَوْمَ يَأْتِيهِمْ لَيْسَ مَصْرُوفًا
عَنْهُمْ وَحَاقَ بِهِم مَّا كَانُواْ بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ  
 [2] *Majma’ al-Bayan*, Vol. 12, p.12

disobedience, when at this moment the divine wisdom orders their
annihilation …”

- Tabarsi then reports from the traditions of Imam Baqir (fifth Imam)
and Imam Sadiq (sixth Imam) who said: “The meaning of “*ummatin
ma’dudah*” in that verse is the Companions of Imam *Mahdi*, whose number
is the same as the Companions of Badr, who were more than three hundred
and ten people, and like the clouds in autumn, they will gather in
circle around him.”

### B- *Tafsir al-Mizan* by Allama Tabataba’i

Tabataba’i**[1]** explains the expression “*Ila ummatin ma’dudah*” in
this verse and gives several meanings from different *mufassirin*:

1- The word *umma* means “time”

2- It is also possible that “*umma*” means “community”, and in this case
the meaning of the verse would be “and if we delay the punishment of the
nonbelievers until the arrival of a limited community, they would say:
why that punishment did not appear?” “Limited community” would refer to
the believers (*mu’minin*), since God promised that one day He would
grant this religion to a virtuous community, a community that would
never consider anything above the religion of God, and whenever these
people are gathered

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Al-Mizan*, Vol. 10 p.217

together and ready, God would establish for them the religion that is
pleasing to them, as it appears in the Qur’an 5: 54; **O ye who believe!
if any from among you turn back from his Faith, soon will Allah produce
a people whom He will love as they will love Him,- lowly with the
believers, mighty against the rejecters, fighting in the way of Allah,
and never afraid of the reproaches of such as find fault. That is the
grace of Allah, which He will bestow on whom He pleaseth. And Allah
encompasseth all, and He knoweth all things,[1]** and in the Qur’an 24:
55; **Allah has promised, to those among you who believe and work
righteous deeds, that He will, of a surety, grant them in the land,
inheritance (of power), as He granted it to those before them; that He
will establish in authority their religion - the one which He has chosen
for them; and that He will change (their state), after the fear in which
they (lived), to one of security and peace: 'They will worship Me
(alone) and not associate aught with Me. 'If any do reject Faith after
this, they are rebellious and wicked.[2]** And this view is acceptable.

3- Some of the commentators said that the word “*Umma*” means
“community” but a community that would arrive after

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ مَن يَرْتَدَّ مِنكُمْ عَن دِينِهِ
فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِي اللّهُ بِقَوْمٍ يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ أَذِلَّةٍ
عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَعِزَّةٍ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ يُجَاهِدُونَ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَلاَ يَخَافُونَ لَوْمَةَ لآئِمٍ ذَلِكَ فَضْلُ اللّهِ
يُؤْتِيهِ مَن يَشَاء وَاللّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ  
 [2]وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَى لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُم مِّن بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا يَعْبُدُونَنِي لَا
يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئًا وَمَن كَفَرَ بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ
الْفَاسِقُونَ

the non-believers, and would be even worse than the preceding one, and
the members of this community would persist in their blasphemy and lack
of belief. At that time, God would trap them in his punishment, just
like he did at the time of the prophet Nuh.

4- Others said that the word “*Umma*” conveys the meaning of “community”
but a community that will come after the present infidels and that will
persist in sinning against God to the extent that the Day of Judgement
will come because of its members.

However, these last two versions are weak and incorrect because they
rely on a false foundation, which is that those punished are the future
non-believers and not the ones discussed in the verse.

Tabataba’i then reports from the *Tafsir* of al-Nu’mani who, according
to his own source from Ishaaq ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz who himself reported
from Imam al-Sadiq who said regarding this verse: “The meaning of
punishment and penalty (‘*athaab*) is the reappearance of the *Mahdi*
and “*Ummatin ma’dudah*” means the Companions of Badr and those who
participated in that battle.”**[1]** The writer adds that this last
meaning is also reported by al-Kulayni in his *Kafi* and Qummi and
‘Ayyashi in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] في تفسير النعماني عن أبي عبدالله (ع) في قوله: لئن أخرنا عن هم العذاب
إلى أمة معدودة، قال العذاب خروج القائم (ع) و الأمة المعدودة أهل بدر و
أصحابه.

their *Tafsir* works from Imam Ali, Imam al-Baqir and Imam al-Sadiq.

Finally, he mentions that in the *Majma’ al-Bayan,* it is reported that
some commentators said that “*Ummatin Ma’dudah*” refers to the
Companions of the *Mahdi* who number just over three hundred and ten,
the same number as the Companions of Badr, and who will gather around
him on the day of his reappearance within an hour, in the same way as
the clouds in autumn gather. It is said that this meaning was reported
from Imam Abi Ja’far and Abi ‘Abdillah.

9) Qur’an 48: 28
----------------

It is He Who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the Religion of
Truth, to proclaim it over all religion: and enough is Allah for a
Witness.**[1]** [48:28]

### A- *Tafsir* Majma’al-Bayan by Shaykh Tabarsi

For this verse, Shaykh Tabarsi**[2]** explains the expression
“*liyudhhirahu ‘ala al-dini kullihi*” (“to proclaim it over all
religion”) as the fact that he will make Islam, with all its arguments
and proofs, dominate over all the religions. He then reports some views
that he does not reject:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَى وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَكَفَى بِاللَّهِ شَهِيدًا  
 [2] *Majma’ al-Bayan*, Vol. 23, p. 175

- Some of the commentators said that Islam would be victorious over all
the religions by means of propagation and development and success
throughout the lands.

- Some of the commentators said that all this would happen at the time
of the reappearance of the *Mahdi* when no other religion will remain on
earth except Islam.

10- Qur’an 41: 53
-----------------

Soon will We show them our Signs in the (furthest) regions (of the
earth), and in their own souls, until it becomes manifest to them that
this is the Truth. Is it not enough that thy Lord doth witness all
things?**[1]** [41:53]

### A- *Tafsir al-Mizan* by Allama Tabataba’i

Tabataba’i**[2]** explains that “the verse concerns God's promise that
soon He will show the Signs on the horizons and within the people
themselves, so that it becomes clear for everyone that the Qur’an is the
truth. Indeed in “*annahu al-Haqq*” (“this is the Truth”) the pronoun
*hu* seems to refer to the Qur’an. And the Signs which are able to prove
the veracity of the Qur’an will be the Signs from the Qur’an itself,
those which inform the people about events and promises which will soon

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] سَنُرِيهِمْ آيَاتِنَا فِي الْآفَاقِ وَفِي أَنفُسِهِمْ حَتَّى
يَتَبَيَّنَ لَهُمْ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ أَوَلَمْ يَكْفِ بِرَبِّكَ أَنَّهُ
عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ5  
 [2] *Al-Mizan* : Vol.17, p.601

be realised; for example, the verses informing people that God will help
His Prophet and the believers (Mu’minin), will put the earth at their
disposal, will enable their religion to triumph over all other
religions, and will take His revenge on the polytheists from *Quraysh*.”

The author then mentions several possible **Tafsir*s* for the verse:

1- This prediction came to be realised by the victory over the
polytheists in the battle of Badr and the conquest of Mecca by the
Prophet and the believers. Of course, these events are historical and
constitute a sign in favor of the veracity of the Qur’an, because the
Qur’an had predicted these events before their fulfillment, and they
occurred exactly in the way the Qur’an described.

2- It is also possible that the signs by which the truth will become
clear may be applied to the fact that God will soon enable His religion
to triumph over all the religions in its true meaning, so that no one
and nothing will be worshipped but God the Unique. We have already
mentioned this meaning from other verses such as in the Qur’an 24: 55.

Tabataba’i comments that the difference between the two interpretations
given above is that in the first case, the verse addresses the
Polytheists (*Mushrikin*) of Mecca and their followers, and in the
second case, it addresses all Polytheists in general. It is also
possible to consider the two meanings together.

3- The verse can also be applied to the situation of a person in the
last moments of his life, when he has to renounce all his hopes and
claims, when he has not any further choice and nothing is left for him
but God. In this case, the pronoun hu in “*annahu al-Haqq*” refers to
God. The commentators have also given other interpretations for the
verse but we will not go into them here.

Tabataba’i does not himself interpret this verse as regarding the
*Mahdi* but reports traditions from the *Rawdhat al-Kafi* and from the
*Kitab al-‘Irshad,* which interpret the verse as concerning the *Mahdi*
and does not reject these views. He says that in the *Rawdhat al-Kafi,*
it is reported from at-Tayyar from Imam al-Sadiq who said that: “The
meaning of the verse is to sink into the earth, metamorphose and become
a victim of the meteorites.” The narrator adds that he asked the Imam:
“What does “*hatta yatabayyana lahum*” (“until it becomes manifest to
them”) mean?” The Imam answered: ‘Leave this aside for the time being,
it concerns the uprising of the *Al-Qa’im* (the *Mahdi*)’.”**[1]** The
author then reports from the *Kitab al-‘Irshad* of Shaykh al-Mufid: “ In
Mufid’s ‘*Irshad*, it is reported from Ali ibn Abi Hamza, from Abi
al-Hasan Musa ibn Ja’far (seventh Imam) concerning this verse that ‘It
concerns tumult

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] في روضة الكافي بإسناده عن الطيار عن أبي عبدالله (ع) في قوله عز و جل
: سنريهم آياتنا في الآفاق و في أنفسهم حتى يتبين لهم أنه الحق، قال: خسف و
مسخ و قذف . قال: قلت: حتى يتبين لهم ؟ قال: دع ذا، ذاك قيام قائم.

and oppression that will take place on the earth and the transformation
that will eliminate the enemies of the Truth’.”**[1]** He again reports
from the *Rawdhat al-Kafi* a tradition reported from Abi Bassir from
Imam al-Sadiq (sixth Imam) who said that: “The meaning of the Sign
within the people is the transformation, and the Sign on the horizons is
the incompatibility of the time until they see the power of God within
themselves and around them.’ I asked: ‘What does “*hatta yatabayyana
lahum annahu al-haqq*” (“until it becomes manifest to them that this is
the Truth”) mean?’ The Imam answered: ‘It means the uprising of the
*al-Qa’im* (*Mahdi*), because the Truth that is in God’s hand and that
will become clear and obvious for the creation and that will be seen by
everyone, is the *al-Qa’im* (*Mahdi*).’”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] في إرشاد المفيد عن علي بن أبي حمزه عن أبي الحسن موسى (ع) في الآية
قال: الفتن في آفاق الأرض والمسخ في أعداء الحق  
 [2]في روضة الكافي بإسناده عن أبي بصير عن أبي عبدالله (ع) في الآية قال:
يريهم في أنفسهم المسخ و يريهم في الآفاق انتقاض الآفاق عليهم فيرون قدرة
الله عز و جل في أنفسهم و في الآفاق. قلت: حتى يتبين لهم أنه الحق ؟ قال:
خروج القائم هو الحق عندالله عز و جل يراه الخلق.

11) Qur’an 97: 5
----------------

Peace!...This until the rise of morn!**[1]** [97:5]

### A- *Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan* by Banu Nusrat Amin

Banu Amin**[2]** after having translated and explained the verse, says
that the Qur’an has an outer (*zahir*) and an inner (*batin*) meaning
and that both *Tafsir* and *ta’wil* are used to interpret the verses as
they appear in the traditions where the Qur’an has seven inner meanings.
She then asserts that it is consequently permissible to ascribe another
meaning to the verses in addition to the meaning given by other
commentators to this chapter.

Banu Amin then interprets the verse “*Salamun hiya hatta matla’il-fajr*”
(“Peace it is until the rise of morn!”) in two different ways: The
angels and Gabriel (Ruh) send their blessings and greetings to the
Muhammadan soul and body and nature as long as nature and creation exist
and until his pure soul returns from the world of nature to the world of
Light and rejoins the Truth. It is reported in some of the traditions
that the pronoun hiya refers to the Imam of the time, the *Mahdi*. Banu
Amin adds that “this view confirms our interpretation of the verse as
referring to the Prophet

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] سَلَامٌ هِيَ حَتَّى مَطْلَعِ الْفَجْرِ  
 [2] *Makhzan al-‘Irfan,* Vol. 4, p.206

Muhammad, since the Imam of the time is the manifestation, the
incarnation and the representative of the Prophet.”

12) Qur’an 61: 9
----------------

It is He Who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the Religion of
Truth, that he may proclaim it over all religion, even though the Pagans
may detest (it).**[1]** [61:9]

### A- *Tafsir Makhzan al-‘Irfan* by Banu Nusrat Amin

In the interpretation of “liyudhhirahu ‘ala al-din kullihi” (“that he
may proclaim it over all religion”) Banu Amin**[2]** says that there is
no doubt that the pronoun hu refers to the Qur’an and the religion of
Islam which means that Islam will prevail and reign over all the
religions of the world. She adds that we can see that Islam has not yet
reached the whole world but we know that the promise of God is the
Truth, so a time must certainly come when Islam will dominate all the
religions, and this can only be realised with the help of the *Mahdi*'s
reappearance from the Prophet’s offspring, after which no one will
remain unless he pronounces the declaration of faith in Islam
(*Shahada*). She then reports from the *Minhaj al-Sadiqin* and from Ali
ibn Ibrahim Qummi that the *al-Qa’im* from the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَى وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ  
 [2] *Makhzan al-‘Irfan,* Vol. 5, p. 279

from the Prophet’s offspring will complete the religion of God and will
establish it and enable it to reign over all other world religions in
such a way that, apart from God, nothing else will be worshipped, and
this is the meaning of the Prophet’s saying: “he will fill the earth
with justice and equity as it was filled with oppression and tyranny.”

[![](images/back.gif)](02.htm)

[![](images/index.gif)](index.htm)

[![](images/next.gif)](conclusion.htm)
