Introduction
============

John Locke's An Essay Concerning Human Understanding is a classic
statement of empiricist epistemology. Written in a straightforward,
uncomplicated style, the Essay attempts nothing less than a fundamental
account of human knowledge-its origin in our ideas and application to
our lives, its methodical progress and inescapable limitations.

Even three centuries later, Locke's patient, insightful, and honest
reflections on these issues continue to merit the careful study that
this guide is intended to encourage.


**Aims and Methods**

Locke prefaced his masterwork with a rhetorically understated "Epistle
to the Reader." His awareness of the need for a systematic investigation
of the human understanding first arose in the context of a friendly but
unproductive discussion of other issues. (According to another of the
participants in that meeting, they included "the Principles of morality,
and reveald Religion.") Although he drafted a preliminary account that
dealt with many of the central themes of the Essay as early as 1671,

Locke expanded his comments repeatedly before publishing the book
nearly twenty years later and continued to supplement them with
additional material he prepared for four further editions. Claiming only
to be an "Under-Labourer" whose task is to prepare the way for the
"Master-Builders" of science, he encouraged ordinary readers to rely
upon their own capacity for judgment rather than to accept the dictates
of intellectual fashion. [Essay Epistle]

In the daily course of ordinary activity, everyone is inclined to rely
upon a set of simple guidelines for living, and laziness or pride may
encourage us to accept dearly held convictions without ever embarking on
a careful examination of their truth. But this is a dangerous course.

Locke pointed out that blind acceptance of "borrowed Principles"-the
confident pronouncements of putative cultural authorities regarding
crucial elements of human life-often leaves us vulnerable to their
imposition of absurd doctrines under the guise of an innate divine
inscription. [Essay I iii 24-26] Our best defense against this fate is
to engage in independent thinking, which properly begins with a careful
examinination of the function and limits of our discursive capacities.

Attention to specific issues at hand often leads us to overlook the
function of the most noble of our faculties, but Locke believed that the
operations of the human understanding are familiar to us all. We employ
ourselves in thinking, deciding, doing, and knowing all the time. What
we require is not a detailed scientific explanation of the nature of the
human mind, but rather a functional account of its operations in
practice.

For that purpose, Locke supposed, we must pursue the "Historical, plain
Method" of observing ourselves in the process of thinking and acting.
With respect to each significant area of human knowledge, we must ask
ourselves: where does it come from, how reliable is it, and how broadly
does it extend? [Essay I i 1-2]

The last of these questions is arguably most to the point. Locke
realized early on in his epistemological reflections that skeptical
doubts often arise from unreasonable expectations about the degree of
certainty it is possible for us to attain. [King, p. 107] Academic
philosophers have contributed to the problem by demanding demonstrative
certainty of the speculative truth even in instances where we are
unlikely to be able to achieve it.

But their demands for excessive precision in philosophical language
lead only to pointless wrangling over the meanings of their terms, on
Locke's view. The simple truth is that we can't be certain about
everything, and it would be counter-productive to try to expand our
knowledge beyond its natural limits.

Since we are not capable of knowing everything, contentment with our
condition requires a willingness not to reach beyond the limitations of
our cognitive capacities. Our intellectual energy would be most
efficiently employed were we to avoid intractable disputes over matters
beyond our ken and rely instead upon our "Satisfaction in a quiet and
secure Possession of Truths, that most concern'd us." [Essay I i 7] In
ordinary life, we know what we need to know, and expecting more than
that would only lead us to despair.


**The Great Concernments**

After all, Locke argued, we do have what we need most. The practical
conduct of human life doesn't depend upon achieving speculative
certainty about the inner workings of the natural world or acquiring
detailed information about our own natures.

It will be enough if we can secure "the Conveniences of Life" and
recognize what we ought to do. How short soever their Knowledge may come
of an universal, or perfect Comprehension of whatsoever is, it yet
secures their great Concernments, that they have Light enough to lead
them to the Knowledge of their Maker, and the sight of their own
Duties.

Men may find Matter sufficient to busy their Heads, and employ their
Hands with Variety, Delight, and Satisfaction; if they will not boldly
quarrel with their own Constitution, and throw away the Blessings their
Hands are fill'd with, because they are not big enough to grasp every
thing. [Essay I i 5] The pursuit of happiness-the genuine business of
human life, on Locke's view-demands only that religion, morality, and
science be established to a degree that permits practical progress.

Even with respect to such vital matters, Locke supposed, our knowledge
is often limited. The testimony of our senses, together with a natural
inclination to seek pleasure and avoid pain, guides much of our daily
conduct even though sensitive knowledge cannot offer demonstrative
certainty about the existence of an external world. [Essay IV xi 8-10]

It would be foolish indeed to refuse to eat simply because God has not
granted us speculative certainty regarding the nutritional efficacy of
food. Divine provision for the practical needs of human life is
expressed more economically: So in the greatest part of our Concernment,
he has afforded us only the twilight, as I may so say, of Probability,
suitable, I presume, to that State of Mediocrity and Probationership,

he has been pleased to place us in here. [Essay IV xiv 2] The pace of
ordinary life commonly requires all of us to act quickly, on the basis
of little more than our fallible memory of the merely probable evidence
in favor of this course of action, Locke supposed, but awareness of this
common reliance on "our mutual Ignorance" appropriately motivates broad
toleration of the diversity of opinions and practices to which others
may adhere. [Essay IV xvi 3-4]

The great theme of the Essay, then, is that we ought not to expect to
achieve knowledge beyond the relatively narrow confines of what is
necessary or, at least, useful for the practical conduct of human life.
Although speculative knowledge of the essences of God, human beings, and
material things exceeds the capacity of our cognitive faculties,
according to Locke, we have no grounds for complaint. Observation of the
causal regularities in nature enables us to secure our survival and
comfort, "ease, safety, and delight," during this life.

What is more, evaluation of our moral conduct in the light of our
accountability to God for the actions we perform provides amply for our
hope of a better existence beyond this life. Limited though it may be,
Locke supposed, the human capacity for knowledge is sufficient for our
happiness here and hereafter, and since that is that is our primary
concern, it would be pointless to demand that our faculties reach any
further. [King, pp. 86-92]


**A Simple Preview**

A year before the first edition was published, Locke wrote an "Abstract
of the Essay." Translated into French by his friend Jean le Clerc, this
document was published in the Biblioth√®que Universelle in 1688, giving
the European intellectual community a full preview of the work to come.
This presentation of the central themes indicates what Locke himself
regarded as his most significant contributions to the subject.

After a mere mention of the polemic against innate ideas, Locke
explained his own belief that all human thought originates in the simple
ideas of sensation and reflection. He devoted particular attention to
the primary/secondary quality distinction and to the acquisition of
simple ideas of space, time, number, pleasure, and pain. Then he
outlined the account of our formation of crucial complex ideas,
including those of substances, mixed modes, and relations. [King, pp.
365-378]

Noting his own belated discovery of the vital importance of language,
Locke offered a basic statement of his own theory of language, with
special attention to the relation between general terms and abstract
ideas. Drawing the distinction between civil and philosophical uses of
language, he pointed out that difficulties in communication result both
from the natural imperfections of language and from its deliberate
misuse. [King, pp. 378-388]

Finally, Locke defined knowledge and distinguished its several types,
each of which is subject to strict limitations. Arguing in some detail
against the common inclination to rely upon supposedly self-evident
principles, Locke proposed that genuine advances in human knowledge
depend instead upon the proper exercise of good judgment in assenting to
opinions suitable to the ideas with which they are concerned. [King, pp.
388-398]

**Other Philosophers**

Locke rarely commented explicitly on the relation of his own work with
that of other thinkers. Sharing the wide-spread seventeenth-century
scorn for sectarian proponents of scholastic philosophy, he warned that
reliance upon supposed authorities-ancient or modern-more commonly
hinders than helps the pursuit of truth. [Conduct 24] Nevertheless,
Locke wrote with an extensive and thorough knowledge of the
philosophical tradition.

Though he decried the evils of the slavish "Aristoteleans," Locke
himself often relied upon the writings of Aristotle, especially in
matters of logic and ethics. The influence of classical Stoicism,
especially as represented by Cicero, is also evident at many points in
the Essay. Medieval philosophers and theologians seem to have made
rather less of an impression on him, though it is likely he would have
known the work of Augustine, Aquinas,

and Ockham. Locke expressed great respect for Francis Bacon, on whose
discussions of language and logic he relied, but often criticized Thomas
Hobbes, whose analyses of volition and political organization clearly
influenced his own thinking.

Locke's relationship to the French Cartesians is more complex. Although
he obviously respected the fresh initiatives Ren√© Descartes had brought
to seventeenth-century philosophy, Locke had serious reservations about
the success of the Cartesian approach. He explicitly criticized its
identification of body with space under the attribute of extension and
its emphasis on the ontological argument for God's existence.

Although he sometimes presupposed a dualistic account of human nature,
Locke disputed many of its Cartesian corrolaries, including the
continual thinking of the soul and the absence of thought in animals,
and he notoriously suggested the possibility that matter might have the
power to think. In general, Locke disavowed the over-reliance on
mathematical reasoning at the expense of sensory observation in the
pursuit of human knowledge. His letters include several critical
examinations of Gassendi and Malebranche as well.

Among his contemporaries, Locke more clearly admired scientists than
philosophers. Although he knew many of the Cambridge Platonists, Locke
shared few of their convictions, and his attack on innatism may well
have been addressed against them. From his friend Robert Boyle he
gleaned the distinction between primary and secondary qualities, along
with a profound appreciation for the corpuscularian theory of matter.

Of course he reserved high praise for the achievements of Isaac Newton,
though Locke's grasp of Newtonian mathematics often seems rather shaky,
and the letters the two exchanged were most frequently concerned with
biblical interpretation. Locke's own training in the medical sciences
did occasionally provide ready examples for points under discussion in
the Essay.

Despite the modesty with which he offered his epistemological
reflections, Locke showed great interest in the public reception they
received. Publication of the "Abstract" drew ample attention even before
the book itself had appeared, and from that time on, Locke's
correspondence was full of suggestions and complaints from other
thinkers.

Even when he later modified his views, however, Locke rarely
acknowledged this reflected the influence of such criticism, which he
tended to regard as unjustified attacks borne of malicious mis-reading.
He persistently declined to engage in a direct correspondence with
Leibniz; only the hapless Bishop Stillingfleet succeeded in drawing him
into a public debate. On the whole, there is little evidence of the
openness to critical reflection Locke frequently expressed in his
letters to friends like Molyneux, le Clerc, Tyrrell, and Burnett.

¬©1999-2002 Garth Kemerling.Last modified 27 October 2001.Questions,
comments, and suggestions may be sent to: the Contact Page.


