Hedonistic Motivations
======================

In Locke's second-edition treatment of the issue, these causes are
clear: human volition is a mental preference that is invariably
determined by the greatest present uneasiness attendant upon desire. The
presence of pain and the absence of pleasure now, along with the
anticipation of either in the future, induce in us a feeling of
uneasiness that can be satisfied only by removing the pain or achieving
the pleasure.

Although we commonly experience many such desires at the same time,
each proportional to the degree of pleasure or pain and the likelihood
of its production, one among them always overcomes all of the others,
and this most pressing uneasiness is the one that determines the will to
act in such a way as to resolve it. [Essay II xxi 29-32]

If human agents were ever perfectly content in every respect, Locke
supposed, they would have no volition and take no action; lacking
nothing, they would experience none of the uneasiness that expresses
itself in a desire that determines the will to produce a change of
circumstances.

Thus, the recurrent uneasinesses of hunger and thirst are providential
provisions for our survival because they determine our wills toward
eating and drinking. Since each uneasiness is experienced as an obstacle
to the achievement of happiness, desire for its removal determines the
will unless there is another source of uneasiness that overcomes it.
[Essay II xxi 34-36]

According to Locke, the simple ideas of pleasure and pain invariably
accompany all of our other perceptions, as the delight or uneasiness we
experience along with contemplation of every sensory and reflective
object of thought. This is a significant provision for the conduct of
life, since our native desire for happiness and aversion to misery are
thereby guided in determining our wills toward certain thoughts and
actions and away from others. This is why we eat good-tasting food and
don't burn ourselves on hot stoves.

What is more, Locke supposed that our experience of varying degrees of
pleasure and pain not only serves us well in this life but also
engenders our hope of a better life hereafter. [Essay II vii 1-6] It
even provides us with some confidence about the real existence of the
external world, since the immediate perception of pleasure and pain is
the kind of experience whose involuntary insistence communicates most
surely its origin in a source outside ourselves. [Essay IV xi 6-8]

It is from successive compounding of these simple ideas, Locke
supposed, that we frame the complex ideas of human passions of every
sort-love, hate, desire, joy, sorrow, hope, fear, despair, anger, and
envy are all modes of pleasure and pain, considered together with
notions about the specific circumstances of their origin. [Essay II
xx]

On this account of human motivation, the practical efficacy of our
morality of good and evil depends upon their perception as pleasure or
pain. If it is to have any genuine motive force, moral value, like
natural benefit, must ultimately be defined in terms of pleasure and
pain. ["Of Ethics in General" 7-8]

Good and evil generally are to be considered nothing more than
tendencies to produce pleasure and pain, Locke held, and moral good and
evil are nothing other than special instances of this association, the
reward and punishment artificially annexed by a powerful legislator as
the consequences that follow from human actions by virtue of their
conformity with or difference from the dictates of moral law. [Essay II
xviii 5]

The central problem for Locke's hedonism is the human tendency toward a
myopic appreciation of our own welfare. Since only present uneasiness
can determine the will, the future moral consequences of our actions
motivate us only through our present contemplation of the pleasure or
pain that they will produce. All too often, our delight in an immediate
pleasure or our satisfaction with the removal of an immediate pain
override the motive force of remote future consequences. [Essay II xxi
59-64]


**Pursuit of Happiness**

The effort to deal with this problem was central to the second-edition
account of human volition. Locke withdrew his earlier claim that "the
greater Good is that alone which determines the will" in favor of the
view that the uneasiness of desire is the proximate cause of every
volition, and this requires some careful explanation. [Essay II xxi
42]

For readers who might well have preferred the high ground of the
earlier doctrine, Locke emphasized that contemplation of an absent
future good can still have motive force, but insisted that it can do so
only through the mediation of the present uneasiness it induces in us.

The difficulty, then, lies in the failure of a perfect proporionality
between the felt uneasiness and the greatness of the contemplated good:
if it were not so, then mere contemplation of "the infinite eternal joys
of Heaven" would invariably motivate us to act only in the achievement
of that long-term goal, whereas in fact it is commonly overcome by some
trifling yet immediate desire. [Essay II xxi 31-38]

Locke certainly agreed that pursuit of lasting happiness is more
important to human life than merely momentary pleasure, but he noted how
easily it can get lost among the welter of daily human motives. Pain
being felt in the moment always contributes to our present misery, while
contemplation of the deferred gratification we hope to achieve from
future rewards is not always experienced as present happiness. The
onslaught of desires for the more immediate needs of life, as a matter
of practical necessity and acquired habit, commonly leaves little room
for concern about remotely future goods. [Essay II xxi 43-45]

The natural tendency toward determination of the will by the most
pressing immediate uneasiness is not inevitable, Locke proposed, since
human agents possess the further capacity "to suspend the execution and
satisfaction" of their desires. By providing ample opportunity for
reflection upon the relative importance of each desire, this suspencsion
of the will in deliberation is vital for the proper conduct of human
life. [Essay II xxi 46-47]

Like someone who stands still, consults a guide, and then proceeds, we
suspend volition, examine our desires, and permit our wills to be
determined by the result. The free agent's ability to distinguish real
from imagined happiness by due examination therefore rests squarely upon
the capacity to suspend the satisfaction of immeditate desires.

Once we have undertaken the appropriate deliberation during this period
of suspension, Locke held, we have done our duty, and it is right to act
upon the volition to which our wills are determined as a result. [Essay
II xxi 51-53]

Here Locke distinguished two ways in which a motivating uneasiness may
arise in us: either through the immediate effect of an external cause,
or through the more lasting consequences to be gained through deliberate
contemplation of our future rewards. Moral failure, then, results less
often from individual perversity than from excessive haste, which may
prevent us from appreciating the present conditions for our future
happiness or misery.

(Thus, for example, the abstemious Locke supposed that no one would
drink too much if the unpleasant future effects of over-indulgence were
experienced in the present as vividly as the immediate pleasure of
imbibing.) So long as the extent, degree, and certainty of future
consequences are not duly evaluated in the suspended state of careful
deliberation, we will commonly act in ways that confound rather than
produce the happiness we all naturally seek.

Securing our genuine, long-term welfare requires cultivation of the
habit of deliberative judgment, during which we focus upon the
likelihood of suffering the punishments or gaining the rewards attached
to contemplated actions by the moral law. [Essay II xxi 57-70]
Â©1999-2002 Garth Kemerling.Last modified 27 October 2001.Questions,
comments, and suggestions may be sent to:

**Moral Agents**

Three years after the Essay was published, Locke's friend William
Molyneux wrote from Ireland with several suggestions. Although he
greatly admired Locke's achievment, Molyneux proposed recasting it as a
scholastic textbook on logic and metaphysics, with a supplementary
volume dealing more fully with human action and morality. Specifically,
Molyneux invited his friend to "Insist more particularly and at Large on
?terna Veritates and the Principium Individuationis." [Corr. 1609] Locke
and Molyneux clearly shared a conviction that the attribution of moral
responsibility and the justice of moral sanctions depends upon the
persistent identity of the moral agent.

But in the Essay's first edition, Locke had pointed out two significant
difficulties: First, of course, he denied that the personal identity of
moral agents can be known innately. [Essay I iii 3-5] Secondly, he had
argued that Cartesian dualism cannot adequately ground personal identity
on the substantial identity of the soul, the body, or their composite.
[Essay II i 11-12] Now Molyneux demanded that Locke provide an account
of his own, and a few months later, he had prepared a draft of a new
chapter (what would become II xxvii) for the second edition of the
Essay. [Corr. 1655]

**Sortal Identity**

The basic notion of identity (and diversity) arises from the simple
fact that no two things of the same kind can co-exist in the same place;
extended through time, this entails that every individual must have a
spatio-temporal history that is unique among others of its kind. [Essay
II xxvii 1] Thus, Locke held, From what has been said, 'tis easy to
discover, what is so much enquired after, the principium
Individuationis, and that 'tis plain is Existence it self, which
determines a Being of any sort to a particular time and place
incommunicable to two Beings of the same kind.

[Essay II xxvii 3] Of course, we can make intuitive judgments of
identity and diversity only if our ideas of the thing or things involved
are clear, but the crucial insight of Locke's theory of identity is that
it must be applied sortally, with respect to things belonging to a
common kind. No matter what in particular happens to constitute the very
existence of a thing as it is conceived under a sortal term and the
complex idea it signifies, Locke supposed, the identity of that thing
through time just is its continued existence as a thing of this sort.

[Essay II xxvii 28-29] On Locke's view, then: God continuously exists
unchanged in all places and at all times; each finite spirit begins to
exist and continues to exist distinctly from every other thinking thing;
particular bodies must each have their own unique spatio-temporal
histories; non-substantial modes and relations typically persist as
features of one or more substances; and even composite objects derive
their identity from the collection of things that constitute them.
Although any of these varieties of "thing" may coexist with any of the
others, each uniquely occupies its own "space" within the sort of which
it is a member. [Essay II xxvii 2-3]

Although living things similarly comprise a collection of material
particles, Locke carefully noted, their persistence through time depends
less upon the preservation of the same collection than upon the pattern
of organization it exhibits at different times. The full-grown horse is
the same animal as the colt of a few years hence, and the mighty oak is
the same tree as the sapling of a century ago, even though the
particular bits of matter each includes are distinct.

What matters in such cases, according to Locke, is the continuous
(vegetable or animal) "Life" of the thing, the organization of material
parts in a way that creates and preserves its most characteristic
functions in the world. [Essay II xxvii 3-5]

The identity of an individual human being ("Man") rests upon exactly
the same foundation in Locke's theory. Human beings should be defined
not by their rationality (else we be forced to call the rational
Brazilian parrot a man) nor by their presumed annexation to an
immaterial soul (else the same man may exist in different centuries) but
rather as living animals of a particular species, with its
characteristic structure and function.

But then human identity is just animal identity: at any one time, there
is a collection of material parts organized in a fashion suitable for
the support of human life, and that life persists through the
continuation of this pattern of organization even when its particular
material constituents are successively annexed and removed. I am the
same human being as my mother's first-born child, despite the obvious
alterations of a half-century, because my "life"-understood as an
ongoing principle of organization-has been continuous. [Essay II xxvii
6-8]


