Complex Ideas
=============

Although he granted that some groups of simple ideas naturally occur
together in our experience, Locke supposed that most of our complex
ideas are manufactured in the human mind by the application of its
higher powers. Combining joins several simple ideas together in the
formation of a new whole; comparing brings two distinct ideas together
without uniting them, giving rise to the idea of a relation between
them; and abstracting separates some aspect of an idea from its specific
circumstances in order to form a new general idea.

Repeated applications of these powers, Locke supposed, give rise to the
whole variety of ideas human beings are capable of having. [Essay II xii
1-2] If we're going to analyze the epistemic origins our complex ideas,
it will be helpful to consider the ways in which we gradually build up
our supply of them.

On Locke's view, complex ideas are of three varieties: Modes are
invariably conceived as the features of something else, which are never
capable of existing independently. Substances, on the other hand, are
understood to be the existing things in which modes inhere. Relations
are nothing more than mental comparisons in some respect among other
ideas. [Essay II xii 3-7] Complex ideas of all three sorts are
manufactured by the mind from simpler components.

**Modes**

A simple mode is a complex idea all of whose component parts are
variations or combinations of a single simple idea. [Essay II xii 4-5]
Consider, for example, the simple idea of space: acquired initially from
our senses of sight and touch, this idea provides the sole content for a
host of related ideas of our own manufacture.

The notion of one-dimensional length can be "folded" upon itself to
yield those of area in two dimensions and capacity in three; these
notions, in turn, can be modified more subtly to provide our ideas of
shapes and figures. Even the notion of place in relation to other bodies
within a framework Locke believed to be abstracted from the simple idea
of space. [Essay II xiii 2-6]

In similar fashion, Locke supposed that the simple idea of unity,
repeatedly recombined with itself, provides the entire content for the
simple modes of number, including even that of infinity. [Essay II xvi -
xvii] In every such case, the complexity of the simple mode arises only
from an iteration of a single simple idea, upon whose content the
complex idea therefore relies.

Mixed modes, on the other hand, are complex ideas whose components
include several distinct simple ideas, often including those derived
from different experiential sources. Although such ideas can be acquired
through observation of their instances in our experience, Locke supposed
that they are much more commonly manufactured by the mind as complex
ideas before we first apply them to the world. [Essay II xxii 1-2] This
is an important feature of our complex ideas of mixed modes. Among them
are included the conceptions we form of human activities, which
typically involve not only ideas of sensation describing the overt
action but also ideas of reflection regarding the intention with which
it is undertaken.

For Action being the great business of Mankind, and the whole matter
about which all Laws are conversant, it is no wonder, that the several
Modes of Thinking and Motion, should be taken notice of, the Ideas of
them observed, and laid up in the memory, and have Names assigned to
them; without which, Laws could be but ill made, or Vice and Disorder
repressed.

Nor could any Communication be well had amongst Men, without such
complex Ideas, with Names to them: and therefore Men have setled Names,
and supposed setled Ideas in their Minds, of modes of Actions
distinguished by their Causes, Means, Objects, Ends, Instruments, Time,
Place, and other circumstances; and also of their Powers fitted for
those Actions. [Essay II xxii 10]

The idea of stabbing, for example, typically involves a deliberate act
of penetrating flesh without any presumption about the instrument
employed to do so. In such cases, it may be worthwhile for legislative
bodies to conceive of such actions and condemn them as criminal without
having to have experiential evidence of their first occurrence. [Essay
III v 2-6] The only thing that matters for the formation of a mixed
mode, on Locke's view, is the convenience of its use for us.

This clearly varies among distinct cultures, since the frequency with
which we have occasion to notice, denominate, and evaluate actions of
particular sorts often depends upon their social context. Invented
wholly for our own use in matters of moral and legal import, the ideas
of mixed modes have only that specific content we choose to give them.
[Essay II xxii 5-12] As we'll see next time, the freedom with which such
ideas are manufactured renders problematic our ability to use a common
vocabulary in reference to them.

**Relations**

Complex ideas of relations derive from the mental operation of
comparing distinct ideas without thereby combining them together into an
entirely new whole. [Essay II xii 1, 7] Since this comparison considers
each of the ideas in light of its extrinsic conformity with the other,
it is commonly expressed by means of one of a pair of reciprocal
relative terms-"parent"/"child" or "cause"/"effect," for example.

This is not invariably the case, however, so we must be alert to the
possibility that apparently positive terms implicitly signify comparison
with something else: "old" or "imperfect," for example. The tip-off to
such cases, on Locke's view, is that (as in the case of relations of the
other sort) removal of the correlative destroys the relation completely,
rendering the term inapplicable. [Essay II xxv]

Many of our ideas of relations are acquired through sensory experience
of the modes of time, place, and number. The correlative ideas of cause
and effect are a special instance, on Locke's view: observing the
changes produced in one thing by the operation of another, we form a
sensitive notion of the causal relation even though we have no
conception of the underlying mechanism at all. [Essay II xxvi 1-6]

Because language is devised for our convenience in satisfying the needs
of ordinary life, things that are commonly connected in observation give
rise to our complex ideas of natural relations. But we also conceive of
instituted or voluntary relations between things that are corrleated
with each other only by virtue of our own personal or social
agreements.

Among these, on Locke's view, the most important and vital are the
moral relations drawn between the complex ideas of specific human
actions, together with their circumstances and goals, and the moral
rules by reference to which we evaluate them. [Essay II xxviii 1-4]
We'll look at these much more closely later on.


**Substances**

According to Locke, the complex idea of a substance is a collection of
simple ideas that is believed capable of existing independently.
Observing in experience that several features recur together frequently,
we suppose that there must be some common subject that has all of them.
Thus, for Locke, the "Notion of pure Substance in general" is nothing
but the assumption of an unknown support for a group of qualities that
produce simple ideas in us; our only notion of this putative
"substratum" in itself is the confused notion of "that which" has these
features, or "something, I know not what." [Essay II xxiii 1-3]

Locke consistently ridiculed the use of such scholastic terms as
"Inhaerentia" and "Substantia" as pointlessly circular efforts to
provide a positive idea of something for which, in fact, "we have no
Idea of what it is, but only a confused obscure one of what it does."
From this, he supposed, we can infer little of the metaphysical nature
of reality. [Essay II xxiii 17-20]

Nevertheless, just as we combine simple ideas of qualities and powers
to form the complex ideas of individual substances, we also gather many
distinct things under the even more complex ideas of collective
substances-army, world, and universe. [Essay II xxiv 1-3]

To the confused idea of substance in general, Locke held, we add either
the ideas of regularly observed sets of sensory qualities, in order to
form the notion of a bodily substance, or the reflective ideas of
various kinds of mental operation, in order to form the notion of a
spirit or thinking thing. Since the underlying nature of the substrate
is equally obscure in both cases, the "secret and abstract Nature of
Substance in general" is equally unknown to us for substances of either
sort. [Essay II xxiii 4-6]

We do have clear and distinct ideas of the primary qualities of both
bodies (solidity and impulse) and mind (thinking and motivity) even
though our sensation and reflection offer no insight into "the internal
Constitution, and true Nature of things," so that the relation and/or
independence of bodies and minds remains an open question. [Essay II
xxiii 29-32]

Thus Locke argued that even though we are often more familiar with
material objects than with spirits, our ideas of them may be no clearer,
and the customary prejudice in favor of bodily substance is
philosophically indefensible. [Essay II xxiii 15-16]

With respect to bodily substances, the most accurate complex idea we
could form, on Locke's view, would be one that includes the ideas of
those active powers and passive capacities that it exhibits in its
interaction with other things-the magnetism of the lodestone and the
flammability of wood-along with its characteristic weight, color, or
heat.

Since he believed the primary qualities of bodies to reside in the
unobservable texture of their sub-microscopic parts, Locke found it
natural to suppose that we classify distinct kinds of body by reference
to the secondary and tertiary qualities these unknown features produce
in us or other things. [Essay II xxiii 7-10] To express one of Locke's
favorite examples in our own idiom, we were able to identify genuine
pieces of gold for centuries before we had any clue to its atomic
structure.


