Representational Reliability
============================

Several late chapters of Book II are devoted to a detailed discussion
of the success with which ideas of various kinds perform their
representative functions. The point here is that since we use ideas as
signs, it is vital to be aware of the likelihood that they do actually
point beyond themselves to their intended referential objects. The
extent to which they serve these functions will determine the
reliability of any knowledge we try to acquire about those objects.

Locke explained the clarity of ideas by analogy to visual perception:
just as an object is seen clearly when viewed in suitable light, a clear
idea is one of which we have a "full and evident perception," whose
content is present before the mind. An idea is distinct, on the other
hand, when it is perceived to differ from all others. [Essay II xxix
2-5]

Locke had no stake in differentiating sharply between the clarity and
distinctness of ideas. In the Essay's fourth edition, he made a
half-hearted effort to substitute the single adjective "determined" in
place of the customary pair "clear and distinct." His central concern
was with the failure of this representational function, in ideas that
are confused. This occurs most frequently with respect to complex ideas,
whose simple components may be too few or too poorly organized to
determine their content precisely.

The problem, Locke argued, is that we often use words as if we knew
their significance when, in fact, the ideas associated with them are not
fully conceived. [Essay II xxix 7-11] We'll consider this issue more
fully next time, but it's worth noting that Locke believed that many
apparently intractable philosophical disputes arise from a failure to
employ words to signify clear and distinct ideas.

His examples here all arise from the wide-spread failure to hold in
mind a correctly-formed, determined idea in association with the word,
"infinity." [Essay II xxix 13-16]

In Locke's taxonomy, and idea is said to be real (as opposed to
fantastical) so long as there is something that it represents. Notice
that the accuracy of representation is not at issue here at all. Even if
the idea fails to correspond to its object, it is real provided only
that the object does exist. Since simple ideas are passively received in
the mind, for example, they must be caused by something real, even
though-as we've already seen-in the case of secondary qualities they
fail to resemble their causes. [Essay II xxx 1-2]

Because our complex ideas of modes and relations are not supposed to
refer to anything else beyond their own archetypal content, they are all
real as well. Ideas of substances, however, are intended to refer to
existing things and are therefore fantastical if things with the
appropriate combinations of features do not in fact exist. [Essay II xxx
4-5]

An idea is further said to be adequate only if it represents its
intended object fully and perfectly; inadequate ideas convey the nature
of their objects only partially. [Essay II xxxi 1] Locke insisted that
all simple ideas are adequate, though doing so required some fancy
footwork with respect to our ideas of secondary qualities. Properly
understood, he argued, simple ideas represent whatever power it is that
produces them in us, whether or not the idea resembles that power-which,
in the case of secondary qualities, it does not.

As with the reality of ideas, so with their adequacy the vital point
for Locke was the causal process by means of which we acquire them; our
lack of voluntary control over that process forestalls any possibility
of mistake or erroneous judgment. [Essay II xxxi 2, 12] Because complex
ideas of modes and relations are assembled by the mind without reference
to any external archetype, they are their own archetypes, which they
cannot fail to capture adequately.

Although our communication with each other about such ideas (especially
in the case of mixed modes) may falter because we do not agree about the
signification of words we both employ, the ideas themselves are
invariably adequate. [Essay II xxxi 3-5, 14] Once again, it is complex
ideas of substances that are unreliable; such ideas, according to Locke,
have a double intended reference but are inadequate in both respects.

If they are supposed to represent the substantial forms of existing
things, our ideas of substances are inadequate because (on the
corpuscularian theory) these real essences are unknowable. Even when
considered more modestly, as collections of properties that co-exist in
a common substrate, our complex ideas of substances are merely partial
approximations, since it is clear that they include only those features
we have most commonly observed; it always remains possible for us to be
surprised by the discovery of another property that belongs just as
surely in the same being.

[Essay II xxxi 6-11] As always, ideas derived from experience can be no
more adequate than the experience itself, and with respect to natural
things our experience is limited.

Although he maintained that truth and falsity are most properly
regarded as characteristic of propositions, Locke granted that ideas are
sometimes said to be true or false (better: right or wrong) by virtue of
the role they play in the formation or assertion of such propositions.
[Essay II xxxii 1-5]

It is the relation between ideas and the words used to signify them
that matters for this representational criterion. Because of their
familiarity in our experience and the frequency of our discourse about
them, our ideas of natural substances and their qualities are often
truly signified by the common terms we employ to designate them. [Essay
II xxxii 6-10]

It is the ideas of mixed modes, manufactured independently in the minds
of individual thinkers and lacking any external referent, that are most
commonly false in this linguistic sense, because we do not agree on the
signification of their names. [Essay II xxxii 11-13]

On the whole, then, Locke believed that ideas provide a vital but
imperfect foundation for human discourse and knowledge. As we continue
our study with an examination of his philosophy of language and of
knowledge, we'll be reminded of the limitations imposed by the
reliability of ideas of each type.

Â©1999-2002 Garth Kemerling.Last modified 27 October 2001.Questions,
comments, and suggestions may be sent to: the Contact Page.

**Words**

Since the significatory function of words is especially vital for the
achievement and expression of human knowledge, Locke devoted an entire
Book of the Essay to his careful examination of "the Nature, Use, and
Signification of Language." [Essay II xxxiii 19] On Locke's view,
language is the instrument of all human social interaction, for the
employment of which we are provided with three crucial requirements:
First, we have appropriate physical organs with which to form a great
variety of articulate sounds.

Second, we have the capacity for using these sounds as "Signs of
internal Conceptions," with which we communicate our thoughts to each
other. Third, in order to avoid the inconvenience of trying to have
unique names for everything, we have the ability to employ words as
general terms applied commonly to many particular things. [Essay III i
1-3]

Lesser creatures lack the third requisite and superior beings somehow
communicate (in ways we cannot imagine) without the first, Locke
supposed, but human beings rely upon spoken language as a primary
vehicle for communication. Like thought itself, language is designed to
serve the practical needs of human life.

**Language**

The question, then, is how we achieve our communicative goals, and
Locke proposed a deceptively simple theory: words signify ideas. Since
my own ideas are inaccessible to others, I employ the articulate sounds
of human speech as extrinsic sensible objects by means of which to
convey my thoughts to others. The absence of any universal human
language, Locke argued, shows that the connection between each word and
the idea it signifies is not natural but purely conventional, an
association established by "voluntary Imposition." [Essay III ii 1-2]

Frequent repetition renders this association so intimate that some
ideas may be induced more easily by words than by their referential
objects, yet the freedom with which individuals form the requisite
association often makes it difficult for a speaker to be sure that the
appropriate idea has actually been induced in a hearer. [Essay III ii
6-8]

Both the equivocal use of terms and the invention of needless jargon by
the learned, Locke supposed, amount to violations of the conventional
agreements upon which language is properly founded. [Essay III x 5,
11]

There is a fundamental problem here: since ideas differ from person to
person, and even in a single individual at different times, and since
the association of word to idea is purely voluntary, even when secured
by conventional agreement, it follows that the correct signification of
a particular use of any word depends wholly upon the particular idea in
the mind of its speaker, to which the hearer has no access except
through the mediation of the word. [Essay III ii 2-4] On this view of
language,

it is always possible that two people interact with each other verbally
even though they do not achieve genuine communication because they do
not associate similar ideas with the words they employ. In principle, I
can never be sure that the sensory idea you experience in association
with the word "red" is at all like the one I have when I use that
word.

Locke officially granted only two kinds of exception to the general
principle that every meaningful word signifies some idea. The first kind
of exceptional case includes negative terms-"nothing" or "ignorant," for
example. We don't need a distinct idea in mind for each of these words,
Locke held, since we already have the positive idea whose absence each
negative term signifies. [Essay III i 4] The other, more significant,
exception comprises syncategorematic terms, what Locke called
"particles"-such words as "is," "of," and "but."

Such words are not associated with particular ideas, Locke supposed,
but "are all marks of some Action, or Intimation of the Mind." Thus, on
theoretical grounds, these terms are techinically insignificant, but
serve the important role of providing helpful guidance for interpreting
the mental dispositions upon which human reasoning so often depends.
[Essay III vii]

**General Terms**

The use of general terms is one of the most vital features of
linguistic competence. Even though existing things-including words
themselves- are invariably particular, Locke held that three
considerations demand that some words be employed in a general
signification: having a distinct word for each and every particular
thing would exceed our linguistic and intellectual capacities;

unique names for particular ideas would make it impossible to
communicate with others who do not share exactly the same ideas; and the
most significant varieties of knowledge are precisely those that
comprehend many particulars under some general rule. Thus, we have a
natural prejudice in favor of general terms. Only under special
circumstances will the practical needs of life override it in favor of
having distinct names for particular things. [Essay III iii 1-5]

Since the signification of any word is an idea, Locke supposed that the
signification of every general term must be an abstract idea, employed
by the mind in reference to many particular things. General and
Universal, belong not to the real existence of Things; but are the
Inventions and Creatures of the Understanding; made by it for its own
use, and concern only Signs, whether Words, or Ideas. Words are general,
as has been said, when used,

for Signs of general Ideas; and so are applicable indifferently to many
particular Things. [Essay III iii 11] Thus, on Locke's view, the
classification of particular things into sorts or kinds, denominated by
general terms, has no direct foundation in nature; it is, instead, the
end result of our own complex process of abstraction. [Essay III iii
12-14]

Essences are nothing more than abstract ideas formed by the mind to
provide significance for general terms, and their presumed immutability
derives from our own power to retain the precise content of an abstract
idea even in the absence of conforming instances. [Essay III iii 19-20]
Formed by the mind, abstract ideas may differ from person to person,
resulting in disputes over the applicability of the general terms that
signify them. For "ordinary Conversation," however Locke held that minor
variations of this kind may be tolerable, even for instances when one
person's conception happens to be far more comprehensive and accurate
than the other's. [Essay III vi 20, 31]

Even though our urge to classify things into sorts arises from the
observation of genuine similarities among them, then, it is satisfied
only by the provision for practical communication with general terms
that designate abstract ideas. Every distinct abstract idea creates a
distinct species of things by governing the applicability of a distinct
general term. [Essay III vi 38]

As Locke pointed out, this makes it easier for us to classify artifacts
than to discover the presumed genera of natural things. Having devised
the artificial things themselves, we already have a conception of their
structure and operations, and this provides a rich basis for the
abstract ideas by means of which we sort them. [Essay III vi 40-43] It's
easier to be clear about what "clocks" are than it is to decide whether
or not "cardinals" belong to the "finch" family.

In general, Locke denied that human classificatory activity is ever
governed by reference to natural kinds. The species of mixed modes by
means of which we differentiate among human actions, for example, are
devised entirely for our convenience in communication; the abstract
ideas that represent such actions are held together precisely by their
association with the general terms that signify them in ordinary speech.
[Essay III v 9-11]

Even in the case of substances (to which we will return shortly) Locke
argued that a mistaken belief that our classification must be drawn by
reference to natural kinds or substantial forms amounts to an abuse of
language, since it is founded upon a pair of false suppositions: that
there are such natural kinds and that we have knowledge of them. [Essay
III x 20-21] The false expectation that classification is natural can
only lead to profound skepticism about the possiblity of general
knowledge.


**Real and Nominal Essence**

Locke drew a careful distinction between two senses of the word
"essence." Understood etymologically, as the very being of a thing, the
real essence can only be that particular internal constitution from
which all of the perceived qualities of a thing causally flow.
Understood scholastically, as the ground for human classification of
things into species and genera, on the other hand, the nominal essence
is nothing more than the abstract idea, conformity with which justifies
application of the associated general term. [Essay III iii 15]

For both simple ideas and modes, he supposed, these two "essences"
invariably coincide, but for substances they are always different.
Sortal terms for kinds of substances signify abstract ideas whose
content rarely even appears to coincide with an internal stucture or
compositions from which their features might be presumed to flow.

The nominal essence signified by the general term "human being," for
example, would just be the idea by comparison with which we recognize
individual instantiations of our own species, not the unknown (and
perhaps unknowable) genetic structure that generates the development of
a human life. [Essay III vi 1-3]

Locke held out for the possibility that there is some real essence
(perhaps a set of primary qualities) that do in fact generate all of the
observable features (many of them secondary qualities and powers) that
make individual things what they are. But since our knowledge includes
neither a direct awareness of that inner essence nor an understanding of
the causal processes by which it produces ideas of its features in us,

it would be pointless and counter-productive to suppose that such
knowledge is required for the practical task of classifying them. [Essay
III x 17-18] When we try to use general terms to speak about the true
nature of either material or thinking substances in themselves, then, we
are pursuing a fool's errand and must of necessity fail to accomplish
what we set out to do.

The practical use of general terms to sort out varieties of familiar
substances is a different process altogether. Here, Locke supposed, a
speaker observes the natural regularity with which certain features are
observed to occur together, combines and abstracts the ideas of these
features to form the abstract idea of a kind of substance, associates a
general term with this abstract idea, and then applies the term to new
instances of the same experience, without claiming thereby to fathom the
true nature or real essence of such things. [Essay III vi 46-48]

In order to serve our practical communicative needs, Locke supposed,
the process must employ nominal rather than real essences.

We find it convenient to associate a single general term to each
abstract idea, rather than repeatedly generating a tedious list of
specific features. But it follows that the distinction of species is
entirely a product of the human understanding rather than a fixed aspect
of nature itself. [Essay III vi 34-35]

On the one hand, this makes the (nominal) essence genuinely ingenerable
and incorruptible: each general term designates an abstract idea whose
pristine purity is unaffected by the existence or non-existence of any
things that conform to it. [Essay III vi 19-20] On the other hand, it
also makes the distinction of species perfectly arbitrary, framed for
the convenience of human discourse rather than out of any respect for
the real essences of natural things. [Essay III vi 38-41]

For each sort of substances, we choose a few "leading Qualities" as
characteristic marks of such things, to which we commonly add a few
other features-including especially the active and passive powers- that
we have found often to coexist with these marks, forming the nominal
essence by virtue of which we determine the applicability of a general
term. [Essay III xi 19-21] When it comes to the classification of
substances into sorts, it's all about us.


