Simple Ideas and Modes
======================

Although simple ideas carry with them a presupposition of real
existence, Locke held, the names of simple ideas signify both the real
and the nominal essences of the qualities they represent. [Essay III iv
2-3] Like the simple ideas themselves, which are involuntarily received
in perception, the names of simple ideas have non-arbitrary content.

We find it difficult (and, usually, unnecessary) to classify them into
sorts, and when we do so-as, for example, with colors or sounds-it is
typically by reference to their perceptual origins rather than any
supposed ideational similarity. [Essay III iv 16-17] Similarly, because
each simple idea is a uniform perception, easily retained and intended
to conform only to itself as an archetype, our names for simple ideas
are rarely vulnerable to imperfection; the more simple the idea, the
less likely we are to misuse the word that expresses it. [Essay III ix
18-19]

One consequence of all this is that the names of simple ideas are
indefinable. At peril of an infinite regress, the provision of verbal
definitions must ground out on some indefinable terms, and since simple
ideas have no component parts that could be assembled under the
direction of an appropriate definition, their names are perfectly suited
to that role.

Scholastic efforts to offer definition of such simple ideas as motion
or light, Locke argued, are ludicrous precisely because they so patently
fail to produce any new idea in the minds of those who hear them.
Imagine the comparable folly of trying to provide auditory definitions
of visual ideas, or vice versa. [Essay III iv 4-11]

The names of mixed modes, on the other hand, are general terms that
signify abstract ideas governing species of human actions. These names
clearly are definable, since it is always possible in principle to offer
a comprehensive list of those simple ideas which, assembled together by
the mind, would constitute the appropriate complex idea.

That's why we don't need to witness an act of sacrilege or experience
the resurrection of the dead in order to understand what kind of events
those terms would signify. [Essay III v 1-5] Thus, Locke supposed that
the initial formation of the abstract idea (and the stipulation of the
name associated with this mixed mode) can be freely performed without
any possibility of error.

It is only the subsequent use of the same word by other members of the
same language-community that become vulnerable to mistake because they
may fail to associate the word with the already-intended idea. [Essay
III vi 43-45]

Here, even more obviously than in the case of substances, our acts of
naming and classification are purely arbitrary, lacking any natural
foundation. We do not discover the categories of human action (or their
moral significance) as existing patterns of the natural world, but
rather invent them in accordance with our own decisions about how to
pursue practical life amongst one another. [Essay III v 6-9]

The vocabularies of morality, religion, and law are entirely of our own
devising. This renders the use of such terms less problematic, Locke
noted, and makes their misuse and confusion even less excusable.

Â©1999-2002 Garth Kemerling.Last modified 27 October 2001.Questions,
comments, and suggestions may be sent to: the Contact Page.


**Human Knowledge**

Having explained the origin of our ideas and the use of words to
signify them, Locke was prepared to consider the nature of human
knowledge. He began with a simple definition: Knowledge then seems to me
to be nothing but the perception of the connexion and agreement, or
disagreement and repugnancy of any of our Ideas. In this alone it
consists. [Essay IV i 2]

This definition gives rise to an obvious objection: if all human
knowledge were wholly concerned with ideas, then it would lack an
adequate foundation in reality and there would be no difference between
the wise contemplation of philosophers and the fanciful but coherent
imagination of the insane. Locke's response was two-fold: with respect
to general knowledge, he boldly defended its detachment from anything
other than our ideas, but with respect to knowledge of particulars he
tried to show that there is a legitimate cognitive state that "goes a
little farther than bare Imagination." [Essay IV iv 1-2]

Actual knowledge occurs only when we are actually perceiving the
agreement in question, Locke supposed; our inclination to assent to what
we've known in the past but are not presently attending to he called
habitual knowledge. This capacity is clearly important for the
development of learning generally; we can't focus on everything at
once,

and it makes sense to rely upon our memories for general truths we have
mastered on some occasion in the past. [Essay IV i 8-9] Thus, it makes
sense to say that I know (habitually) the multiplication tables even at
moments when I'm thinking about other things, provided that I can, upon
challenge, call to mind the product of 8 and 7. The more crucial issue
about human knowledge is to explain how it occurs in the first place.

**No Knowledge is Innate**

One account Locke unambiguously rejected from the outset is the
supposition that human knowledge is innately inscribed. Noting the
remarkably wide-spread agreement of individual human beings in their
acceptance of both speculative and practical principles, the innatist
argues that universal consent implies an innate origin.

Locke's response was two-fold: He denied the supposed fact of universal
consent, supposing this to demonstrate the falsity of the innatist view.
What is more, Locke argued that if there were any genuine instances of
universal consent, they would more naturally be explained by universal
possession of an intellectual faculty or by acquisition through some
universal experience. [Essay I ii 1-2]

Granting that if general truths about logic were innately know by all
human beings, then they must also be universally accepted, Locke
emphatically denied the consequent. If the innatists were correct, then
children (and mental defectives) would be the most pure and reliable
guides to logical truth; but they are not. [Essay I ii 24-27] Of course
the innatist reply to such counter-examples is to suppose that assent to
innately inscribed principles is delayed until each individual is able
to employ the faculty of reasoning.

But why should this be? Either reason is necessary for the discovery of
such principles, in which case they are not innately known, Locke
argued, or else reason and logic are merely coincidental features of
human development, in which case both seem frivolous. [Essay I ii 6-13]
Surely, in fact, the use of reason is properly concerned with our assent
to general truths.

Locke agreed with the innatists that there is a significant distinction
between truths to which we assent immediately upon first framing them on
the one hand and, on the other hand, truths that require our careful
consideration. But this distinction between self-evident and acquired
knowledge, he supposed, doesn't correspond to the innatist
identification of the most fundamental truths.

We assent to specific instances at an earlier stage of development than
to speculative maxims themselves, and this is most easily explained by
the fact that we acquire the particular ideas involved in the former
long before we have manufactured the abstract ideas required for the
latter. [Essay I ii 14-19] Careful attention to the development of
knowledge in individual cases clearly shows it to involve the gradual
acquisition of the requisite ideas, perception of whose agreement or
disagreement constitutes knowing in each instance.


**Achieving Certainty**

Locke's definition of knowledge as perception of the agreement (or
disagreement) of ideas clearly indicates two fundamental criteria for
acquiring knowledge: first, we have to have the requisite ideas, then we
also have to perceive the connection between them. Failure on either of
these counts will leave us short of the certainty characteristic of
genuine knowlege. [Essay IV iii 1-2]

The extended genetic account of our ideas in Book II of the Essay was
designed to assist in satisfaction of the first criterion, by helping us
to acquire a suitable stock of clear and distinct ideas about many
things. But even where our ideas are amply clear, we may fail to achieve
certain knowledge if we are unable to recognize the ways in which they
are related to each other. [Essay IV ii 15]

Consider, for example, how the two criteria apply to specific areas of
possible human awareness: Our passive reception of simple ideas from
external objects provides only practical assurance of the existence of
the objects themselves, so our knowledge of material qualities and
substances is always limited in certainty.

But non-substantial complex ideas refer to nothing outside themselves,
so any connections we perceive among them are "infallibly certain." For
this reason, as we'll see later, Locke held that all mathematical and
moral reasoning is characterized by perfect certainty. [Essay IV iv
4-8]

What Locke's definition clearly demands is that all knowledge is
relational in structure, or propositional in form; it invariably
involves "the joining or separating of Signs, as the Things signified by
them, do agree or disagree with one another." [Essay IV v 2] But since
both ideas and words are properly understood as signs, Locke believed it
vital in principle, though often difficult in practice, to distinguish
between truth in thought and truth in language.

Ultimately he distinguished between mental propositions in which ideas
are perceived to agree and verbal propositions that affirm the agreement
of words. In both cases, the criterion of truth is that the relation of
the signs conforms to a more fundamental agreement that holds among the
things they signify. [Essay IV v 3-5] Naturally the two kinds of
proposition are connected with each other.

Certainty about the truth of a verbal proposition requires that it
accurately express the agreement of the ideas signified by its terms;
certainty about the knowledge itself further requires that we actually
perceive that agreement among ideas. [Essay IV vi 3]


