Degrees and Types of Knowledge
==============================

Locke distinguished four types of agreement or disagreement that may be
perceived in human knowledge: Knowledge of identity and diversity rests
solely upon our recognition of the distinctness of each idea from every
other; knowledge of relation employs positive, non-identical connections
among ideas; knowledge of co-existence perceives the coincident
appearance of a collection of qualities; and knowledge of real existence
presumes some connection between an idea and the real thing it
represents. [Essay IV i 1] He further supposed that these types of
knowledge can occur in any of three degrees:

Intuitive knowledge is the irresistable and indubitable perception of
the agreement of any two ideas without the mediation of any other. This
is the clearest and most perfectly certain of all degrees of human
knowledge. It accounts for our assent to self-evident truths and serves
as the foundation up-on which all other genuine knowledge must be
established. [Essay IV ii 1] Intuition is most common in our knowledge
of identity and relation among clear ideas, but (following Descartes)
Locke also supposed that each thinking being has an intuitive knowledge
of its own existence. [Essay IV ix 3]

Even when the agreement of ideas is not intuitively obvious, it may be
possible to discover a series of intermediate ideas by means reason
establishes a connection between them. The resulting demonstrative
knowledge of the agreement of the original ideas shares in the certainty
of the intuitive steps by means of which it has been proven, yet there
is some loss of assurance resulting from the length of the chain itself.
[Essay IV ii 2-7]

The success of the entire process depends upon our having clear ideas
at each step of the process of demonstration and upon our ability to
perceive the agreements between them, and both of these conditions are
specific to the nature of human intellectual abilities. [Essay IV iii 4,
26-28]

The most common area of demonstrative human knowledge is mathematics,
where our possession of distinct ideas of particular quantities yields
the requisite clarity, disciplined reasoning helps to uncover the
intermediate links that establish knowledge of identity and relation,
and a perspicuous system of symbolic representation helps us to preserve
the results we have obtained. [Essay IV ii 9-10]

But Locke supposed that we may be capable of demonstrative knowledge of
moral relations as well, provided that we take care in the formation of
abstract ideas of the mixed modes of human action. Our only
demonstrative knowledge of real existence, he supposed, is that we can
have with respect to God. [Essay IV x]

Although only intuition and demonstration offer certain knowledge of
general truths, Locke supposed that sensitive knowledge provides some
evidence of the existence of particular objects outside ourselves.
Although it is not always true that there must exist an external object
corresponding to each of our ideas of sensation, Locke argued that
veracious cases are different enough from illusory cases to warrant an
inference to the real existence of their objects, especially when the
accompanying perception of pleasure or pain serves as a reliable guide
to the practical conduct of human life. [Essay IV ii 14]

Locke had serious reservations about the reliability of our sensitive
knowledge of the natural world, and we'll return later to the chapter of
the Essay he devoted entirely to an analysis of its difficulties. [Essay
IV xi] Â©1999-2002 Garth Kemerling.Last modified 27 October
2001.Questions, comments, and suggestions may be sent to:

the Contact Page.


**The Limits of Knowledge**

One of the most basic themes of Locke's epistemology is that since we
cannot know everything, we would be well-advised to observe and respect
the extent and limitations of human knowledge. Given the basic
definition of knowledge as perception of the agreement of our ideas, it
follows that we fall short of knowing whenever we lack ideas or fail to
perceive their agreement.

Thus, intuition extendes only to the identiy and diversity of ideas we
already have; demonstration extends only to ideas between which we are
able to discover intermediaries; and sensitive knowledge informs us only
of the present existence of causes for our sensory ideas. [Essay IV iii
3-5] Awareness of our limitations, Locke proposed, should forestall
haste, laziness, and despair in our natural search for the truth about
the most vital issues into which human knowers can fruitfully inquire.
[Conduct 39-43]


**Severe Restrictions**

Applying the human faculty of reason to the pursuit of knowledge,
properly defined, reveals the limitiations within which we must work: We
cannot achieve knowledge of things-such as infinity or substantial real
essences-for which we lack clear, positive ideas. Indeed, having ideas
will not be enough to secure knowledge if-as in the case of human
actions-they are obscure, confused, or imperfect. Given faulty memories,
we may also fail to achieve knowledge because we are incapable of
tracing long chains of reasoning through which two ideas might be
demonstrably linked.

In a more practical vein, rational knowledge cannot be established upon
false principles-such as those borrowed from conventional wisdom.
Finally-in the effort to achieve philosophical or scientific
certainty-our efforts to employ reason are commonly undermined by the
misuse or abuse of language. [Essay IV xvii 9-13]

Most particularly, on Locke's view, it is difficult to secure the
reality of human knowledge in any evidence of its conformity with the
nature of things themselves. We readily assume that passively-received
simple ideas must be providentially connected with their objects, and
since complex abstract ideas are of our own manufacture,

it is our own responsibility to ensure their reality by a consistent
use of the names by which we signify their archetypes. But complex ideas
of natural substances are intended to represent the way existing things
are independently of our perception of them, and of this the content of
our ideas never provides adequate evidence. [Essay IV iv] These
difficulties trouble all four types of knowledge.

Since knowledge of identity and diversity involves only a recognition
that particular ideas are distinct, it is immediately evident whenever
we have clear and distinct ideas; such knowledge must be among the
earliest that any of us ever achieve. [Essay IV vii 9-11] Even otherwise
ignorant beings might well be capable of perceiving the disagreement of
ideas at this level, Locke pointed out, so knowledge of "identical
Propositions" of this sort is generally uninformative (or "trifling")

rather than any genuinely instructive contribution to morality or
science. [Essay IV viii 2-3] The general principle of identity merits no
special status among our cognitive states, Locke held, since its
particular instances are all either equally obvious or (because of the
obscurity of our ideas) irredemable without it. [Essay IV xvii 14-19]

Knowledge of relation requires only that we are aware of non-identical
connections among ideas, so (as we'll see in greater detail later) Locke
supposed it possible wherever we have clear ideas, especially among the
simple modes of number in mathematics and the mixed modes of human
action in morality. [Essay IV vii 6] But since general knowledge of
relations can never be derived from experimental observation-upon which
we depend entirely for our knowledge of material things-it follows that
we can never have certain knowledge of relations among substances.
[Essay IV vi 10, 16]

What careful observation does provide is knowledge of the co-existence
of a collection of qualities in a common subject. But because we are
ignorant of the real essences from which observable qualities presumably
flow, our knowledge of co-existence is never demonstrable, except in the
trifling cases where we have already included the ideas of the qualities
in our nominal essence for substances of this sort.

On Locke's view, then, natural science founded firmly upon solid
understanding of the inner constitution and operation of material things
remains impossible. [Essay IV vi 6-10] Even knowledge of real existence
requires some awareness of the connection between the thing and the idea
that represents it, and Locke supposed that we lack this in every case
except that of self and God. [Essay IV vii 7] The extent of our perfect
knowledge of the world and its operations is meager indeed.

Assent and Judgment But perhaps we don't need perfect knowledge very
often. Although Locke emphasized the strict limits within which we can
attain certain knowledge, he also believed that we invariably possess
the cognitive capacities that will provide for the conduct of our
everyday lives.

The Understanding Faculties being given to Man, not barely for
Speculation, but also for the Conduct of his Life, Man would be at a
great loss, if he had nothing to direct him, but what has the Certainty
of true Knowledge. For that being very short and scanty, as we have
seen, he would be often utterly in the dark, and in most of the Actions
of his Life, perfectly at a stand, had he nothing to guide him in the
absence of clear and certain Knowledge. [Essay IV xiv 1] Although we'd
soon starve if we waited for demonstrative certainty about the
nutritional value of food,

none of us forget to eat, since human life in what Locke called the
"twilight . . . of Probability" is providentially supplied with
alternative methods and motives for practical action. Rational proof is
impossible for experimental natural science and uncommon in other
matters regarding which we are too lazy to work through the
demonstrations on our own,

Locke supposed, but in these cases we don't really have to have genuine
knowledge. It is often enough to exercise the faculty of judgment, which
accepts a presumptive agreement between ideas without demanding the
certainty of a clear perception. [Essay IV xiv 3-4]

Functioning properly, this faculty persuades us to assent to
propositions about whose truth we remain ultimately uncertain, whether
our ignorance is the product of incomplete thinking or the secret nature
of the thing itself. [Essay IV xvii 22] Although mathematicians can
demonstrate that the interior angles of every plane triangle sum up to
180 degrees, for example, most of us rely upon their professional
testimony rather than following the train of reasoning for ourselves.

Similar degrees of reliance upon less-than-demonstrative certainty
Locke believed to support most of the propositions to which we commonly
grant our assent. [Essay IV xv 1-2] When we lack demonstrative
certainty, the role of judgment is to guide our actions in all of those
cases regarding which the best we can do (or the best we are willing to
do) is to observe that a pair of ideas often do seem to be related to
each other in some way. [Essay IV xvii 16]

The probable knowledge gained by judgment differs from the
demonstrative knowledge derived by reason in the nature of its evidence:
while demonstration achieves perfect certainty by grounding itself on
the clear, immutable connection of two ideas, probable knowledge merely
guides our judgment with some degree of likelihood or the appearance of
some connection.

Thus, while demonstration yields true knowledge, judgment can provide
only some degree of confidence in our opinion, assent, or belief. [Essay
IV xv 1-3] The great sources of evidence for our confident assurance of
the likelihood of propositions to which we assent by judgment are our
own experience and the testimony of others about what they have
experienced.

Noting that we commonly evaluate the reliability of testimony by
reference to our own experiences anyway, Locke proposed that we can and
should depend more often upon things we have personally observed with
some regularity than upon what could turn out to be nothing more than
the prejudices or false opinions of other people. [Essay IV xv 4-6]


