Probable Knowledge
==================

Although the degree to which we assent to a probable proposition ought
to depend upon the strength of the evidence in its favor, Locke granted
that we often regulate our judgment merely be reference to our faulty
memories of past experience.

It is both natural and (in a practical snese) necessary to rely upon
the retention of past experience rather that developing our beliefs anew
in every moment, it is a dangerous practice, because the propositions we
acquire through exercise of the faculty of judgment are bound to remain
genuinely uncertain.

Since the supposed relation between the ideas is founded only upon our
present estimation of the available evidence, it is always possible in
principle that the discovery of additional information in the future may
lead us to overthrow or abandon a past judgment, as can never happen
with truly demonstrative knowledge.

The difficulty of applying judgment successfully, Locke suggested,
should encourage us to be patient and tolerant of those who disagree
with us on matters about which neither side can claim anything more sure
than probable opinion. [Essay IV xvi 1-4]

The highest possible degree of probable knowledge will occur in cases
where the general consent of all human beings happens to coincide with
my own invariable experience of some particular matter of fact. This,
Locke supposed, will produce a level of assurance virtually
indistinguishible from that of demonstrative certainty, and this
explains our willingness to act without hesitation upon our conviction
that such beliefs truly capture the nature of reality, even though we
remain ignorant of the inner constitution of things themselves.

In cases that exhibit a less striking regularity in my own experience
and that of others, the degree of my confidence in the probable
proposition will be suitable reduced, Locke held, and even in the
absence of any direct observation regularity, I am likely to accept the
unanimous testimony of impartial witnesses with respect to any specific
matter of fact. [Essay IV xvi 6-8]

When experience and testimony do not so clearly agree, Locke supposed,
other methods may serve to guide the dictates of judgment. In legal and
quasi-legal contexts, we develop a great deal of skill in evaluating the
relative merits of conflicting testimony from distinct sources. In the
natural sciences, we commonly employ analogical models in an effort to
comprehend the real essences of which we are constitutionally ignorant.
[Essay IV xvi 10-12]

In addition to all of these legitimate grounds for guidance, the
faculty of judgment commonly falls victim to unworthy and unsupported
claims to its assent. Someone may demand that I assent to the truth of a
proposition only because it is defended by some putative authority, in
the absence of any proof of its falsity, or solely because it agrees
with other opinions I already hold.

But since all of these matters are formally irrelevant to the truth of
the proposition in question, Locke supposed, they should have no bearing
on my assent. The only legitimate grounds for agreeing with someone are
demonstrative knowledge and probable judgment, both of which ultimately
rest only upon "the nature of Things themselves." [Essay IV xvii
19-22]

Â©1999-2002 Garth Kemerling.Last modified 27 October 2001.Questions,
comments, and suggestions may be sent to:

**God**

Like many of his English contemporaries, Locke was deeply interested in
matters of faith and religion. Keenly aware of the theological
controversies of the day, he developed and defended views of his own
that proved influential on the Deists of the next generation. Although
knowledge of God is vital for human life and practical conduct, on
Locke's view, it cannot be grounded legitimately on the supposedly
universal possession of an innate idea. [Essay I iv 8-9]

Although he claimed to demonstrate the existence of God as the only
reasonable explanation for the emergence of thought in an otherwise
material world, Locke warned against an excessive reliance upon
non-rational considerations in the defense of particular religious
doctrines.

**Thinking Substances**

We form our complex ideas of spirits, Locke held, by adding the notions
of a variety of cognitive powers (themselves acquired, as ideas of
reflection, from careful observation of our own mental operations) to
the abstract idea of substance in general. Since this is perfectly
analogous to the way we form complex ideas of bodies from our ideas of
sensation, the results are perfectly comparable: although we are
familiar with both bodies and spirits in our ordinary experience, the
real essences of thinking and moving substances alike remain forever
unknowable. [Essay II xxiii 22-25]

It is easy enough to employ an empiricist version of Descarte's cogito
ergo sum as a demonstration of my own existence, of course. Thinking of
any sort, feeling pleasure and pain, even the act of doubting itself,
are all experiences that carry with them a full assurance of my own
existence as a thinking thing. [Essay IV ix 3] Notice, however, that
Locke declined the further implications of the Cartesian inference to
sum res cogitans.

Thinking, he argued, is merely an activity of the soul, not its
essence; so the continued existence of an individual thinking thing does
not necessarily entail its continuous consciousness. [Essay II i 10-16]
Locke frequently expressed significant reservations about the
demonstrability-if not the very truth-of Cartesian dualism.

Given our widespread ignorance of the inner constitution and operation
of substances generally, Locke notoriously suggested that, for all we
know, the power of thinking could be providentially superadded to an
organic human body as easily as separate thinking and material
substances could be combined. [Essay IV iii 6] But the ultimate origin
of thinking itself is another matter.


**The Existence of God**

According to Locke, the existence of God is an instance of demonstrable
knowledge in any reasoning being. Since I know intuitively that I exist
as a thinking thing, and since nothing can be made to exist except by
something else which both exists and has powers at least equal to those
of each of its creations, it follows that from all eternity there must
have existed an all-powerful cogitative being. [Essay IV x 3-6]

This amounts to a variation on the Aristotelean / Thomistic
cosmological argument for God's existence: there is an instance of
thinking; every thinking thing proceeds from some other thinking thing;
but there cannot be an infinite regress; so there must have been a first
thinking thing, or God.

What most interested Locke in this argument was its emphasis on
thinking. Willing though he was to contemplate the possibility that
individual human beings are animal bodies that have the power to think,
Locke insisted that mere matter-with its primary qualities of solidity,
mass, and motion-could never on its own give rise to cogitative activity
of any kind. Although it may not strictly be inert, matter is most
definitely unthinking. [Essay IV x 9-10]

Materialism can never account for the emergence of thought in a
universe containing only senseless matter. Thus, from the fact that
there is now thinking in the universe, it follows that there always has
been thinking in the universe; the first eternal being from which all
else flows must itself be a thinking thing.

What is more, Locke argued, it is likely (though not, technically,
demonstrably certain) that this first eternal being is actually
immaterial. Whether the original being were a single atom, or an eternal
system of many parts, or whether every material thing thinks, Locke
thought the possibility of a material thinking being at the start
difficult to defend.

On his view, we don't even have respectable grounds for supposing that
a separate material reality is co-eternal with the necessarily
cogitative first being. [Essay IV x 13-18] Locke's insistence on this
point fits nicely with his frequent assertions that atheism amounts to
nothing more than the supposition that matter is itself eternal, an
objection to the views defended by Hobbes.

So God exists, but what is God? Here, as always, Locke depended upon
the formation of ideas on empirical foundations. Although we have no
direct experience of God, we do have ideas of reflection from experience
of our own mental activity, and we have an idea of infinity as a simple
mode derived from the idea of number, indefinitely expanded: put these
together,

and each of us develops an abstract complex idea of God as a being that
possesses all cognitive abilities to an infinite degree. [Essay II xxiii
33-35] In principle, this idea differs from any of our other ideas of
thinking things only in the infinity of the divine attributes. God is
abolutely perfect in every conceivable respect, and this is ample
provision for a deduction of the moral law.

**Faith and Reason**

Locke was also interested in traditional issues about the relation
between faith (assent to revealed truth) and reason (discovery of
demonstrative truth) as alternative sources of human conviction. For
propositions about which the certainty of demonstrative knowledge is
unavailable, our assent may be grounded upon faith in revelation; but
Locke argued that the degree of our confidence in the truth of such a
proposition can never exceed our assurance that the revelation is of
genuinely divine origin, and this itself is subject to careful rational
evaluation. [Essay IV xvi 14]

Since God has provided both avenues of belief for the benefit of human
achievement, Locke supposed, they can never conflict with each other if
properly used. Faith is appropriate, but only with respect to vital
issues that lie beyond the reach of reason; to allow any further extent
to non-rational religious convictions would leave us at the mercy of
foolish and harmful speculations.

In any case where revelation (understood as an extraordinary
communication from God) and ordinary human reason coincide in support of
the same truth, Locke argued, it is reason that provides the superior
ground, since our assurance of the reliability of the revelation itself
can never exceed the perfection of demonstrative certainty. [Essay IV
xviii 4-11]

Divorcing the (properly complementary) resources of revelation and
reason, Locke supposed, is dangerous because it tends to encourage the
promulgation of reckless claims of the revealed origin of otherwise
incredible propositions. "Enthusiasm," as Locke and many of his
contemporaries feared, rests solely upon the emotional strength of
persuasion as grounds for assent, and this is formally independent of
the objective likelihood of its purportedly divine origin. [Essay IV xix
4-9]

In a sense, then, reason emerges from Locke's discussion as the
ultimate arbiter of all legitimate human assent: either it discovers the
demonstrative connections through which the truth of an individual
proposition can be established with certainty, or it plays the most
crucial role in certifying the legitimacy of a revealed proposition as
divine rather than merely delusive. [Essay IV xix 12-16] Even though
faith can play a role in human life, reason remains the most important
basis for genuine human knowledge.

**Morality**

From the early essays on the obligatory force of natural law to the
careful revisions of later editions of the Essay, Locke continually
displayed an intense interest in problems of moral philosophy. The
proper aim of human knowledge, he supposed, lies not in the satisfaction
of attaining abstract speculative truth, but rather in its application
to practical conduct, upon which our happiness in this world and the
next ultimately depends.

[King, p. 86-88] Ethical knowledge is a variety of what he called
Praktikh, The Skill of Right applying our own Powers and Actions, for
the Attainment of Things good and useful. The most considerable under
this Head, is Ethicks, which is the seeking out those Rules, and
Measures of humane Actions, which lead to Happiness, and the Means to
practise them.

The end of this is not bare Speculation, and the Knowledge of Truth;
but Right, and a Conduct suitable to it. [Essay IV xxi 3] Since our
cognitive faculties are best suited for pursuing that knowledge of
ourselves and God that is most likely to lead us toward the dutiful
conduct by means of which we may secure eternal happiness, Locke argued,
morality is the most vital aspect of study for all human agents. [Essay
II xii 11] In what ways do human faculties establish the foundations of
moral knowledge?


