Grounds For Moral Reasoning
===========================

Given their great importance for human life, practical principles would
be among the best candidates for special status as innately provided by
a benevolent creator; but, of course, Locke held that there is no innate
human knowledge. Lists of purportedly innate practical principles-like
the ones noted by Lord Herbert-are in fact neither universally accepted
nor reliably productive of correct conduct.

The open, remorseless disavowal of moral principles in various
cultures, along with the open question for their justification, is ample
evidence that they are not truly innate. [Essay I iii 11-19] Only the
desires to achieve happiness and to avoid misery are both genuinely
universal among human agents and practically effective in guiding their
conduct, Locke argued, so it is only the natural tendency to seek
pleasure and avoid pain that might reasonably be held to be innate.

To the extent that appropriate patterns of human conduct are found to
be in widespread conformity with morality, he supposed, it is only in
virtue of a providential association of moral rectitude with more
short-sighted perception of personal and public welfare. [Essay I iii
3-6] Apart from these general inclinations, he believed, nothing about
human morality is universally acknowledged.

Nevertheless, Locke was no moral relativist. Human moral discourse is
subject to the kind of perfect precision that should yield the
possibility of demonstrable truth. In principle, moral terms-which
describe the varieties of human action and delimit the degrees of their
rectitude in relation to moral law-are all perfectly definable, since
each signifies a mixed mode whose determinate content is secured by its
manufacture in the mind. [Essay III xi 15-17]

Although intellectual laziness, malicious arrogance, and culpable
self-interest often render moral discourse problematic, Locke believed
that careful, dispassionate attention to the complex ideas involved
should produce demonstrable moral reasoning.

The mixed modes of human action are complex ideas derived from
recombination of the simple ideas of thinking, moving, and power, so all
the vocabulary of "Divinity, Ethicks, Law, and Politics" can be derived
ultimately from our simple ideas of sensation and reflection. [Essay II
xxii 10, 12] But notice that these ideas, and the words that signify
them, can be fully formed in the mind independently of their actual
instantiation.

We can know what sacrilege and resurrection would be without
experiencing their occurrence; we choose to define single words for
"murder" and "stabbing" but not for other ideas equally familiar in
experience; but we form abstract ideas of those human actions to which
we most commonly refer, whether or not they frequently occur. [Essay III
v 5-7]

Thus, on Locke's view, such moral ideas as those of obligation,
drunkenness, or lying, are formed by combining simple ideas from the
mental and physical aspects of human nature without ever supposing that
anything conforming to the new composite has ever existed. [Essay II
xxii 1] This detachment from questions of real existence, Locke
believed, is crucial for establishing the demonstrable status of human
morality.

**Demonstrable Rules**

The moral rectitude of actions of a particular sort, Locke held, is
wholly constituted by the demonstrable relation between our clear ideas
of such actions and the equally clear conception of the moral law.
Indeed, this relation is often so obvious-as, for example, in the cases
of "murder" and "theft"-that the moral condemnation comes easily to be
included as a part of our complex idea of the action itself. [Essay II
xxviii 14-16]

Because both my contemplated action and the moral rule can be
abstractly conceived as mixed modes, the applicability of this rule to
that action can be determined with perfect certainty. It is a further
question whether or not the moral rule itself is demonstrably true.

Locke believed that it often is. To be sure, reliance upon an axiomatic
deduction of morality from a fixed set of putatively indubitable first
principles would be neither effective nor intellectually sound. [Essay
IV xii 4-5] Nevertheless, demonstration is possible in principle
wherever we have clear ideas, and Locke was careful to emphasize that
indubitable knowledge of relations does not presuppose perfect clarity
with respect to the relata.

We might know that one automobile is faster than another, for example,
even if we had little information about the mechanical differences that
produce this result. Our awareness of relations commonly rises to a
level of certainty greater than our knowledge of the things among which
they hold. [Essay II xxv 4-8]

What counts toward demonstrability, on Locke's view, is the possibility
of perceiving intermediate links between our ideas. Since the mixed
modes of human action and the concepts of moral rules are both abstract
ideas that serve as their own archetypes, it follows that the relations
between them are fully demonstrable. [Essay IV iv 7-9] In this respect,
at least, morality is on an equal footing with mathematics.

Where there is no Property, there is no Injustice, is a Proposition as
certain as any Demonstration in Euclid: For the Idea of Property, being
a right to any thing; and the Idea to which the name Injusticeis given,
being the Invasion or Violation of that right; it is evident, that these
Ideas being thus established, and these Names annexed to them, I can as
certainly know this Proposition to be true, as that a Triangle has three
Angles equal to two right ones.

Again, No Government allows absolute Liberty: The Idea of Government
being the establishment of Society upon certain Rules or Laws, which
require Conformity to them; and the Idea of absolute Liberty being for
any one to do whatever he pleases; I am as capable of being certain of
the Truth of this Proposition, as of any in Mathematicks. [Essay IV iii
18]

The apparent advantage of mathematical over moral reasoning, Locke
speculated, rests only on the relative ease with which we can represent
mathematical relationships in perspicuous diagrams and the relative
absence of partisan concerns. Were we to approach moral reasoning with
the same degree of objectivity we commonly bring to mathematical
thinking, he argued, we would achieve the same quality of demonstrable
certainty about substantive moral truths. [Essay IV iii 19-20]


**Varieties of Moral Law**

In general, Locke held that the mental comparisons comprising our ideas
of relations are significant for the practical conduct of life. Natural
relations among human beings, like the various degrees of blood-kinship,
for example, commonly carry the presumption of some special obligation
toward other members of our families. Instituted relations based on
social agreement ground the governance of human societies, as we'll see
in detail in a few weeks.

But moral relations are most vital of all, so that the very
descriptions of human action under our ideas of mixed modes commonly
carry with them an implicit reference to the moral law under which they
are commanded or proscribed. [Essay II xxviii 2-4] Moral valuation, on
Locke's view, derives from the demonstrable connections that hold among
the ideas of duty,

law, legislator, and sanction. [Essay I iii 12-13] Since no moral law
could determine human volition and thereby influence human actions
practically without careful provision for punishment and reward as
artificial consequences of disobedience and obedience, it follows that
moral legislation must derive from legislation by intelligent beings
with the power to enforce their dictates by appropriate moral sanctions.
On this basis, Locke distinguished three basic types of moral law by
reference to the legislative source of each: divine law, civil law, and
the law of opinion or reputation. [Essay II xxviii 6-7]

The divine law arises from God's right as creator to dictate morality
to all creatures of his own making, his wisdom and benevolence guiding
them toward what is best, and his power to enforce this law by
distributing in the hereafter punishments and rewards that are both
infinite in extent and eternal in duration. Thus, Locke held that the
resulting distinction between duty and sin is "the only true Touchstone
of moral Rectitude," founded upon the ultimate happiness or misery
attached by God to actions of particular sorts. [Essay II xxviii 8]

Thus, Locke held that denial of God's existence, moral legislation, or
control over eternal life can only be attributed to an irrational hope
of escaping moral law and the divinely ordained consequences of sin,
since no one who professes such outrageous opinions is observed to live
a life in accord with the Golden Rule. [King, p. 90]

In the second edition of the Essay, Locke carefully noted that the
divine law may be known either through revelation or by the manifest
light of natural law. In either case, he supposed, the divine law guides
human conduct so obviously toward genuine happiness and away from
profound misery that even public opinion and private interest commonly
defer to its force: even those who behave badly themselves often praise
or blame others by reference to the genuine criterion. [Essay II xxviii
8, 11]

The civil law derives its force from the legislation of a government to
which its citizens have already consented. Since the commonwealth has
been formed for the purpose of protecting "the Lives, Liberties, and
Possessions" of its citizens, it has the power to take away any or all
of these goods in punishment for the crimes of disobeying its rules of
conduct. [Essay II xxviii 9] Although its penalties are more limited
than the infinite sanctions of divine law, Locke supposed, their
certainty and immediacy provide a secure basis for enforcement of the
civil law.

Finally, the distinction between virtue and vice belongs only to the
law of opinion or reputation and is sanctioned only by the praise or
blame of others. Although public opinion always praises the virtuous,
Locke noted, the standards of virtue and vice vary widely among
different cultures, though some degree of conformity to the rational
dicates of natural law is always to be expected. Although this level of
moral law derives from a source no more significant than what other
people happen to think, the threat of "Condemnation or Disgrace" from
one's fellows is a powerful motivation for many human agents; few of us
willingly invoke the disapprobation of others. [Essay II xxviii 10-12]

The emphasis on punishment and reward in these accounts of moral law
draws attention to an important distinction between the grounds of moral
obligation and the motivation for obeying it, both of which derive from
the legislator. We are morally bound to obey because the creator has a
right to command, but we are practically moved to obey because God has
the power to punish us if we don't.

The practical force of morality-its capacity to determine volition and
influence action-derives from the punishments and rewards that secure
our compliance. Thus, Locke argued, good and evil are nothing other than
pleasure and pain; moral good and evil are just the pleasure and pain
artificially annexed to obedience and disobediance by the decree of the
powerful legislator. [Essay II xxviii 5-6]

Moral motivation requires only that a rational agent consider the
possibility of future pleasure or pain that will result from present
actions, and Locke believed that the prospect of eternal happiness or
misery ought therefore to weigh upon us at least as firmly as more
short-term expectations. [Essay II xxi 70]


**Human Action**

The first edition of the Essay included a brief chapter, "Of Power,"
dealing with the nature of human volition. Despite the admiration of his
friends, Locke expressed both surprise at the direction his thoughts had
taken and confusion about the apparent incompatibility of divine
omnipotence with human freedom. [Corr. 1592] Revisions made for the
second edition made II xxi the longest chapter in the Essay.

Locke boasted about his willingness, as a sincere "Lover of Truth," to
change his views publicly, yet confessed his remaining puzzlement about
the more perplexing aspects of our abilities to think and to move, to
produce changes in other things either by performing direct action or by
forbearing so to do. [Essay II xxi 71-72] Since human action is "the
great business of Mankind" on Locke's view, and since moral
responsibility is commonly taken to presuppose some degree of freedom,
it is vital for his task to seek some clarity on the nature of human
action.


**Freedom and Responsibility**

Development of a basic vocabulary for the issue seems clear enough at
first. The quasi-relational simple idea of power is present as an
element of our observation of any case of change, both as the active
force that produces the alteration and as the passive capacity of that
which is changed. Since bodies most clearly exhibit the passive power to
receive and communicate motion by impulse, our idea of the active power
to initiate action derives primarily from reflection upon our own mental
operations as we think or move ourselves. [Essay II xxi 1-5]

This, Locke held, is the power of volition, or the human will.

The liberty of a moral agent is just its further power either to
perform or to forbear any action of thinking or moving according to its
own mental preference. Clearly thought, volition, and will are all
necessary conditions for having this kind of liberty, but on Locke's
view they are not even jointly sufficient, since genuine liberty always
presupposes the additional possibility of doing otherwise.

Even on those occasions when I do exactly what I want to do, I am not
acting freely if there is something that would make me do this whether
or not I willed it. It makes no difference whether the determinative
force comes from outside me or from the internal operations of my own
body, according to Locke, nor whether in compels me to perform an action
that might be contrary to my volition or restrains me from performing an
action that might be in conformity with my volition. Freedom is the
power to do otherwise if my volition were to change. [Essay II xxi
7-13]

Although he never addressed the issue directly in the Essay itself,
Locke confessed to Molyneux in correspondence that he found it difficult
to reconcile the moral freedom of human agents with the presumed
omnipotence and omniscience of God. [Corr. 1592]

Notice that on this account of liberty, the cause or explanation of the
volition itself is irrelevant, since it is the agent (not the will) that
is free. Human beings act freely just insofar as they are capable of
translating their mental preferences to do or not to do into their
actual performance or forbearance of the action in question. The ability
to do as one wills is all that any moral agent could reasonably expect.
[Essay II xxi 19-21]

Clarity of language, Locke proposed, would forestall the vaunted
philosophical dispute about "free will." Since the will is just a power
to contemplate possible actions in light of our mental preferences
regarding them while liberty is the further power to perform actions in
accordance with these preferences, it would be a category mistake to
attribute one power to the other.

It is only the agent that has the power to will and the power to act,
so it is only the agent that is free, not the will. [Essay II xxi 14-16]
A demand for freedom of the will is therefore not only absurd but
ultimately fatalistic. In particular situations, we must either perform
an action or not, and our freedom in doing so is secured in the power to
do as we will.

If this prior volition were itself another free "action," then it would
have to be preceded by yet another, and so on: freedom would be acting
in accordance with a volition that was itself freely performed in
accordance with a wish that was freely undertaken, etc., etc. . . . ad
infinitum. The vicious infinite regress would render freedom impossible.
[Essay II xxi 22-25]

What is more, free will would be irrelevant to moral responsibility.
Since human liberty is the capacity to act as one wills, agents act
freely even when their wills have been determined, so they remain
morally responsible and may be justly punished for those actions. [Essay
II xxi 56]

In a lengthy correspondence with his Dutch friend Philippus van
Limborch, Locke repeatedly insisted that emphasis upon the supposed
"indifferency" of the will is theologically unsound and morally
mistaken. [Corr. 2925, 2979, 3043, 3192] Only the insignificant actions
of the insane are truly indifferent, on Locke's view, and the
determination of volition is a necessary condition for undertaking any
meaningful human action.

The more surely volition is determined toward pursuit of the good, the
happier the agent will be. (God, for example, is supposed to be
perfectly determined to the good, yet is surely also supposed to be
free.) In the same way, a proper understanding of the causes of human
volition will enhance, not undermine, confidence in our moral
accountability. [Essay II xxi 48-50]


