Introduction: Why Fatimah (as)?
===============================

Her stances were stances for the right, and her sorrow was the sorrow
for the issue (Islam), and her joy was the joy of the message; the depth
of Islam was manifested in the depth of her personality and she amassed
within herself all the Islamic human virtues, since being the Doyenne of
the Women of the World implied that she should be at the highest level,
spiritually and morally.

This is why we are intensely interested in Fatimah al-Zahra' (as)
because when we remember her we remember the message and her role, and
remember Islam and the dynamic issues in which Fatimah (as) was a
central figure; hence we feel that she is with us in all of our concerns
and that she is alive among us. There are people in history who finish
when they die, because their existence is encapsulated in the span of
their lives; there are others who remain alive as long as life exists,
and who continue as long as their message continues and as long as there
are people who are open to their message.

Fatimah (as) is placed at the pinnacle of these people, since you cannot
mention the Messenger of Allah (sawa) without mentioning her. She was
his product and the spirit inside his body; and you cannot mention Ali
(as) without mentioning her as she was his companion in life and
suffering; and you cannot mention al-Hasan, al-Husain and Zaynab (as)
without mentioning her as she was the secret of purity in their
childhood and of their personalities throughout their lives.

This is the secret of Fatimah (as) that obliges us to keep her in our
minds and our hearts as a message and thought, not just the cause of
tears. We cannot but open up to her with our tears, but more important
than that is to open ourselves to her message because she lived all her
tears and all her life for the Message and never for one moment lived it
for her own self. This is the secret of all the members of Ahlul Bayt
(as): they lived for the whole of Islam and gave their lives for Islam
and the Message.

Not an inflation of the past
----------------------------

Talking about Fatimah (as) involves no unwarranted inflation of history.
Besides, with her virtues, she represents the living present and a
bright future. We have seen her in her motherhood as the greatest of
mothers, and we have seen the cruelty imposed by that role on her weak
body, but she withstood all this with an open mind and with patience.
Then we saw her fulfilling her different missionary responsibilities
when she stirred up the conscience of the nation, and presented the
greatest lesson in how to deal with the circumstances following the
death of the Prophet (sawa). She held that stance which has proved
itself over time and stayed valid to the present, and will ever be.

Studying the experience of Fatimah (as) is not a reversion to the past,
and hence a diminution of ourselves within those limitations, but rather
a question of trying to draw lessons from a pioneering experience by an
infallible personality - an experience which has never been confined to
the past but one which shall ever be current and renewed.

A role model for both sexes
---------------------------

When we present Fatimah (as) as a role model, we are not talking about
women only, We present her as a role model for both men and women
because she is a constituent element of Islam and the Muslim people as a
whole, not just of women - even if there was a big role as woman in her
life. Muslim women can take a lot from Fatimah (as) when they know how
to spend their time valuably and how to open themselves up, with all
their powers, to knowledge, spirituality and dynamic attitude, according
to their abilities.

Love versus allegiance
----------------------

Love for the great personalities and individuals with a mission are not
only emotions but a stance. This is the difference between being a
loving person and being a proponent follower: allegiance is a stance
while love is emotion. It is natural that the situation must live the
emotion and move by it, but it should move beyond it to open up to the
whole of the message through opening up to the bearers of the message,
who represent its legitimacy.

Yes! The value of what Ahlul Bayt (as) say and do is that it represents
the whole legitimacy. When a person takes words of knowledge or rulings,
or follows a line of conduct which can be right or wrong, he will be
puzzled as to the legitimacy of what he has seen or heard; but if he
depends on infallible examples who have been purified from abominable
acts, then there can be no place for falsehood, and no place for
injustice. He will have taken the truth from a pure fountain, in which
nothing can muddy its purity.

Imam al-Sadiq (as) said: **'My** ***hadith*** **is the** ***hadith***
**of my father, and my father's is that of my grandfather, and my
grandfather's is that of al-Husain, and al-Husain's is that of al-Hasan,
and al-Hasan's is that of the Commander of the Faithful, and the
Commander of the Faithful's is that of the Messenger of Allah, and the
Messenger of Allah's is the word of Allah the Great and Almighty.'**

His eminence and Fatimah's virtues
----------------------------------

When I started my life, Lady al-Zahra (as) was in my mind, heart and
life. Before I was twenty, in al-Najaf, Iraq, I wrote a poem on the
anniversary of the death of Fatimah (as). I talked about her in
lectures, interviews, dialogues and poems - the talk of spiritual
passion and intellectual love and heartfelt sanctification.... I spoke
of every one of her virtues, merits and spiritual meanings, and then
extended that to analyzing her words, amongst which was her famous
sermon, because I always believed that we had to know Fatimah (as) to
the full - her spirit, heart, thought and attitude, so that she would
become for us 'the pioneer who would not fail his folks' and the role
model whom we should imitate and follow in our Islamic lives, men and
women together.


