Chapter 2:Her Status
====================

In the Holy Qur'an
------------------

Ahlul Bayt (as) are mentioned in the Qur'an in many verses. Here we look
at three verses which mention our Lady Fatimah (as).

### 1- The verse of feeding

This is: **'And they give away food, out of love for Him, to the poor
and the orphan and the captive. We feed you only for God's sake, we
intend not of you any recompense, nor thanks! Verily, we dread from our
Lord, a stern day of distress. So will God guard them from the evil of
that day and cause them to meet freshness and pleasure. And shall
recompense them, for what they endured with patience, with garden and
silk.'** (Qur'an 76:8-12)

Commentators, from different Muslim sects, said that these honourable
verses referred to Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husain (as). In
*al-Kashshaf*, it is narrated by Ibn 'Abbas that 'al-Hasan and al-Husain
got ill and were visited by the Messenger of Allah and the people with
him. They said: O Abul Hasan! Why not make a vow for your sons? So Ali
and Fatimah and Fadda - a servant - vowed that if they (the sons) became
well, they would fast three days. They became completely well, so Ali
borrowed from Simon, the Khaybarian Jew, three measures of barley;
Fatimah grinded one amount and baked five bread discs for the five of
them. When they took it in their hands to break the fast a beggar came
and said: *Assalamu Alaikum Ahla Bayti Muhammad* (Peace be upon you, O
progeny of Muhammad) - a needy from among the Muslims, feed me, and may
Allah feed you from the banquets of Paradise! They favoured him and
spent their night without taking anything but water, and fasted in the
morning. When the evening came and they took the food in their hands, an
orphan came and they favoured him; a captive came in the third night and
they did likewise.

In the morning, Ali (may Allah be satisfied with him) took al-Hasan and
al-Husain to the Messenger of Allah (sawa), who, when saw them trembling
like chicks from great hunger, said: **How hard for me the state which I
see you in**; and he left with them and went to Fatimah in her prayer
niche, and saw her with her back stuck to her abdomen and her eyes
sunken, and was saddened. Gabriel came down and said: **Take it O
Muhammad! Allah congratulates you with your progeny**. And he recited
the chapter for him.'[^1]

This is the secret of Ahlul Bayt (as): they move in all their activities
in life for the sake of Allah, without asking or requesting recompense
or gratitude. This is a great humanistic virtue: a person should give
all that he owns to whoever needs it, without expecting for any
repayment, but waiting only for the mercy of Allah. This is the value of
Ahlul Bayt, and amongst them our Lady Fatimah (as): they have lived the
spirit of donation and giving - in their knowledge, social position,
strength, soul and blood - all for the sake of Allah and in His way.

### 2- The verse of Mubahalah (challenge)

This is: **'And unto him who disputeth with thee therein, after the
knowledge hath come unto thee, Say! 'come ye, let us summon our sons and
your sons, and our women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves
and then let us invoke and lay the curse of God on the liars!'**(Qur'an
3:61)

Here, all commentators agree that our women refers to Fatimah al-Zahra
(as), and that this is as the Messenger of Allah (sawa) wanted it and
showed it practically.

In the story of this dialogue which the Prophet (sawa) commanded with
some Christians, the Prophet (sawa) took a new route to deal with the
situation when the dialogue reached a dead end, and it is this method of
challenging which the verse tells us about.

The narration of the great Ali bin Ibrahim al-Qommi, from Imam al-Sadiq
(as) says that: **'The Christians of Najran came (as a delegation) to
the Messenger of Allah.... They prayed using the bell; the Prophet's
companion objected: O Messenger of Allah! This in your mosque? He said:
Leave them (to pray as they like). When they finished they came to the
Prophet (sawa) and said: To what do you call? He said: To bear witness
that there is no God but Allah and that I am the Messenger of Allah and
that 'Isa (Jesus) (as) is created a slave (of Allah), and eats, drinks
and excretes.**

**They said: Then who is his father? The revelation was then revealed to
the Messenger of Allah (sawa) saying: Say to them - what do you say
about Adam, has he been created a slave (of Allah), eating, drinking,
excreting and marrying? So the Prophet (sawa) asked them and they
replied: yes. He asked them: Then who is his father? They could not
answer, so Allah revealed: Verily, the similitude of Jesus with God is
as the similitude of Adam; He created him out of dust, then said He unto
him BE, and he became' (**Qur'an 3:59) and **'And unto him who disputeth
with thee... let us invoke and lay the curse of God on the liars!' The
Messenger of Allah (sawa) said: So, challenge me: if I am telling the
truth the curse falls unto you, and if I am a liar the curse falls unto
me. They said: You are speaking in justice.**

**They agreed on a date for** ***Mubahalah*** **(challenge). When they
returned to the places they were staying in, their leaders al-Sayyid,
al-'Aqib and al-Ahtam said: If he challenged us with his people, we
accept the challenge for he is not a prophet; but if he challenges us
with his family** **in particular we don't challenge him, for he is not
going to push forward his family unless he is truthful. In the morning,
they came to the Messenger of Allah (sawa) and with him the Commander of
the Faithful, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husain (as), so the Christians
said: Who are those? The people replied: This is his cousin and
successor and son-in-law, and this is his daughter Fatimah, and these
are his sons al-Hasan and al-Husain. So they became** **frightened and
said to the Messenger of Allah (sawa): We give you the satisfaction, so
give us leave from the challenge.'**[^2]

.**'and our women'**: those amongst women who represent the nearest
position to my humanistic and spiritual affiliation in my life, and here
I put forward my daughter Fatimah, the Doyenne of the Women of the
World, who is **'part of me'** and **'Allah becomes angry for her anger
and satisfied for her satisfaction'** in this great challenge so as to
prove that I am absolutely sure about the truth of my call, for man does
not put forward his most beloved people to the places of danger unless
he is certain of safety.

### 3- The verse of Purification (tat-heer)

This is: **'Verily, verily God intendeth but to keep off from you
[*****every kind of*****] uncleanness, O ye the People of the House, and
purify you (*****with*****) a thorough purification.'**(Qur'an 33:33)

Ummu Salamah (the wife of the Prophet) said: The Prophet (sawa) was in
my house and also Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husain; I prepared some
food for them and they ate and went to sleep and he (sawa) covered them
with a robe or cloak and said: **'O Lord! These are the people of my
house; keep off from them all uncleanness and purify them with a
thorough purification.'**

In another narration, Ummu Salamah said that the verse was revealed in
her house and 'I was sitting at the door of the house, and said: O
Messenger of Allah! Am I not from the People of the House? He replied:
**'You are in a good (right) way - you are with the wives of the
Prophet'**. She added: And in the house (then was) the Messenger of
Allah (sawa), Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husain.[^3]

What is the meaning of the *rijs* (uncleanness) in the verses above?

*Rijs* in language means anything unclean which may stick to the body or
other material thing; it can also refer to the non-material side of the
personality. Allah called pork *rijs,* and at the same time called
atheism, polytheism and the consequences of bad deeds *rijs*: **'But as
to those in whose hearts is a disease, it addeth unto them uncleanliness
to their uncleanliness, and they shall die while they are infidels.'
(**Qur'an 9:125) And **â€˜Whomsoever willeth God that He should guide him
aright, He expandeth his breast (*****heart/mind*****) for Islam, and
whomsoever He intendeth to leave straying, He maketh his breast straight
and narrow as though he is climbing into the very skies; thus doth God
lay ignominious chastisement (*****rijs*****) on those who believe
not.'**(Qur'an 8:126)

In light of this, it seems that the word (as used in the verses in
question) refers to the negative moral attributes which represent the
uncleanness of the soul. In addition, the word has another meaning: the
intellectual mistakes in recognizing things that appears to point to
individual infallibility. This is a Divine favour that Allah effects
inside the self to prevent it from false belief and wrong doing, through
the fact that this word also entails a notion of repulsion and
rejection, and the need to abstain from it.

This verse is a clear proof of the infallibility of Ahlul Bayt (as),
because the '*lam*' (corresponding to the sound of letter L) in the word
'*rijs*' (i.e. *a**l**-rijs*) makes it inclusive of all that can cause
shortfall in a person's personality, and all that causes repulsion from
it when it deviates and commits mistakes by it (the *rijs*). Therefore,
it points to the will of Allah to remove all deep causes of deviation or
mistakes. In other words: Allah has stored in Ahlul Bayt (as) the
knowledge and special attributes of sanctity and purity to remove all
*rijs* from them and effect purity in them.

In the hadith
-------------

The Messenger of Allah (sawa) talked about Fatimah (as) and her virtues
a great deal, and described her in a way that he did not do with other
women. As the Prince of Poets Ahmad Shawki said:

He did not wish other than her for offspring

And who begets al-Zahra will not wish any others.

And the Messenger of Allah (as) when he evaluates (someone), he does not
do it out of emotion or desire - God forbid! **'And nor he speaketh of
(*****his own*****) inclination' (**Qur'an 53:3); he speaks by the
tongue of revelation: **'It (*****the wording*****) is naught but a
revelation revealed.'** (Qur'an 53:4)

And here, let us touch on some of his narrations regarding his daughter
Fatimah (as).

### 1- The Doyenne of the Women of the World

Among the most important titles with which the truthful, pure Fatimah
(as) was bestowed was narrated in the famous *hadith* from the Prophet
(sawa): **'The doyenne of the women of paradise.'**[^4]

In another *hadith*: **'The doyenne of the women of the world.'**[^5]

In a third: **'The doyenne of believing women'**; and in a fourth:
**â€˜The doyenne of the women of the nation.'**[^6]

In another *hadith*: **'O my daughter! Are not you satisfied that you
are the doyenne of the women of the world? She said: O father! What
about Mary daughter of 'Imran (then)? He said: She is the doyenne of the
women of her world and you are the doyenne of the women of your world; I
swear by Allah that I have married you to a master in life and the
hereafter.'**[^7]

Now, we should stop to ponder about this. Is this title, Doyenne of the
Women of the World, a mere honorary title?

No! The Messenger of Allah (sawa) does not give titles without a reason,
for when he moves to evaluate people, even if they are his relatives, he
does so according to precise evaluation of the actual capabilities of
the person in question. Otherwise, he would have been speaking out of
desire, while Allah says: **'And nor he speaketh of (*****his own*****)
inclination. It (*****the wording*****) is naught but a revelation
revealed.' (**Qur'an 53:3-4)

Hence, for Fatimah to be the Doyenne of the Women of Paradise means that
He has amassed in her mind, heart and virtues, all the mind, heart and
virtues of the women of paradise, and in fact excelled on them.

And for Fatimah to be the Doyenne of the Women of the World or Believing
Women, this means that all the virtues and attributes of believing and
all the merits of believing women are invested and manifested in her.
Otherwise, how could she be a doyenne of a people if she had not
outshone them or had not acquired the merit with which she would possess
that mastery.

### 2- Fatimah is part of me

In another word by him (sawa), regarding the distinguished position of
being the Doyenne of Women, he said: **'Fatimah is part of me, whoever
makes her angry makes me angry.'**[^8] And: **'Verily my daughter
Fatimah is only (and nothing else) a part of me, what hurts her hurts
me.'**[^9]

In its different forms, this narration which came from the Truthful and
Trustworthy (*al-Sadiq al-Amin*) (sawa), who - as we said before - would
only speak through an Islamic revelation, not through emotion, because
his emotion was that of a human, who would embrace his daughter like any
human would embrace his son or daughter. But when he gives a distinctive
judgement, he gives it through revelation and message, and no one can
ever claim it was not what Allah has said: **'And if (Our Apostle
Muhammad) had fabricated against us any of the sayings. Certainly would
We have seized him by the right hand. Then certainly would We have cut
off his aorta!**' (Qur'an 29:44-46)

These narrations express the spiritual intermixing and deep bond between
him and her. His words **'a part of me'** are not intended to mean the
material side, for this is quite obvious to anyone, but something that
is deeper than that. For someone to be a part of the Messenger of Allah
(sawa) means that they are related to the Messenger of Allah, in a
missionary relationship, as if they are part of his body. This means
that their mind contains some of the mind of the Prophet (sawa), their
soul contains some of the soul of the Prophet (sawa) and their life
contains the purity, spirituality, truthfulness and trustworthiness as
exhibited by the Prophet (sawa).

He (sawa) adds **'whoever makes her angry makes me angry'**. We
recognize that the bearers of the Messages do not become emotional when
people hurt their children; but also that a righteous father will not
get angry and emotional if people rightfully make his son angry, because
he does wrong to them. So, what is the meaning of **'whoever makes her
angry makes me angry'**?

It means that Fatimah is the woman who can never do wrong to anyone, in
words or in deeds, so that people have the right to hurt her or make her
angry. In fact, if Fatimah becomes angry no one will have made her
angry, because she will have become angry only for Allah. For the woman
who can never harm anyone, sin or deviate, whoever makes her angry he is
surely making Allah angry; and she is a person who does not get hurt
unless Allah is disobeyed or people deviate from Allah's way. Therefore
the Messenger of Allah is hurt if she is hurt.

By the same token, his saying as in some narrations **'What satisfies
her satisfies me'** means that she is satisfied only with what satisfies
Allah and His Messenger. Had the Prophet (sawa) not been fully aware of
the depth of the personality of Fatimah (as), and that she was an image
of his soul, thinking, way and message, and that the Message was
imprinted in her personality, and her personality dissolved in the
Message, it would have been incorrect for him to bind his satisfaction
to hers, and his anger to hers. This proves, very clearly, that Fatimah
(as) is infallible, pure and has reached the summit of perfection.

### 3- Allah's satisfaction and hers

In another narration, the Prophet (sawa) said: **'Surely Allah becomes
angry for the anger of Fatimah and becomes satisfied for her
satisfaction/if she is satisfied.'**[^10]

This text is even stronger evidence than its predecessor in proving the
greatness of Fatimah (as) and her elevated position before Allah the
Most High. What does it mean that Allah becomes angry for the anger of a
person, and satisfied for his satisfaction? It means that this person
has lived in all the locations of Allah's satisfaction, and has stayed
away from the locations of his anger. This was what was expressed by
Imam al-Husain (as) when he said: **'The satisfaction of Allah is the
satisfaction of us, the People of the House.'**[^11]

The Muslims
-----------

It is no secret that Fatimah (as) is the main female personality
sanctified by all Muslims. If we read what the Muslim scholars, from
both the Sunnah and Shi'ah, have written and the books and papers on
her, we find that they talk about her with highest respect, love and
glorification; this is because of what her personality contained in
terms of high moral values, spiritual purity and knowledge, all of which
have made her a role model to be followed by Muslims, and also from what
they know about her from the Qur'an and the sayings of the Prophet
(sawa) which have clarified her position and underlined the obligation
to respect, appreciate and glorify her, and avoiding everything that
hurts her and angers her.

'Aisha, the Prophet's wife, described her as the most truthful after her
father. And Anas bin Malik said that there was no one who resembled the
Messenger of Allah (sawa) more closely than al-Hasan bin Ali and
Fatimah.[^12]

And Ibn Mas'ood, Ibn 'Abbas, Ibn 'Umar, Abu Hurayrah, Abu Sa'eed
al-Khudari, Salman al-Farsi and other companions of the Prophet (sawa)
told of her virtues and merits in a lot of narrations and praised her to
the highest.

The same was true for the successors of the companions (*tabi'een*) and
their successors (*tabi'ee al-tabi'een*), including the compilers of
books of *hadith* such as al-Bukhari, Muslim, al-Hakim al-Naysaboori,
al-Baghawi, Ibn 'Abdul Barr, Ibn Hajar and others, who allocated in
their books chapters to narrate what was said in her regard and how
Allah distinguished her from others.[^13]

It was because of the love and sanctification that the Muslim society
had for Fatimah (as), that when they attacked her house to insult her
and threatened to burn the house, the only objection was that inside the
house was Fatimah. They did not say that inside the house was Ali or
al-Hasan and al-Husain or Zaynab, but 'inside it is Fatimah', which
meant that she was living deep within the conscience of the Muslims and
that she had possessed their love. Some of the attackers had their
hearts beating with love for her and this was why they left weeping when
they heard her voice.[^14]

Also, we saw how the Muslims reacted to her sermon which she gave after
the death of the Prophet (sawa) and the usurpation of the caliphate and
confiscating Fadak; they were touched with her speech to the extent that
'People have not seen more men weeping and women weeping like that
day.'[^15]

Infallibility
-------------

Al-Zahra, al-Batool, in her knowledge, worship, faith in Allah and care
for the Messenger of Allah (sawa) and the Commander of the Faithful
(as), reached the position of infallibility, elevated to the degree of
holiness, untarnished by sin, and left for us the highest example as a
woman who lived her life for Allah and closed her eyes to depart from
life, whilst reciting the praise of Allah.

We believe that Fatimah (as) is infallible - free of all wrongdoing,
incorrectness, lack of awareness, or forgetfulness, and that she
committed no sin whatever small.

### (A) The proof on her infallibility

We can deduce her infallibility from three proofs - this is in addition
to the aforementioned *hadith*: **'Fatimah is part of me; whoever makes
her angry makes me angry'**:

*First proof* - If we study her life, from birth to death, her life with
her father, husband, sons and all people, we will find no error or
wrongdoing in thoughts or speech, or uncertainty in deeds; thus her life
has been a manifestation of infallibility in the most comprehensive way.

*Second proof* - She is from the People of the House (Ahlul Bayt), whom
Allah kept from all uncleanness and on whom he conferred thorough
purification, and so the verse of purification includes her when it
includes Ali, al-Hasan and al-Husain (as) - the verse that serves as
proof of their infallibility. The verse of purification is, therefore, a
witness of the truth, which cannot be disputed by falsehood, that
Fatimah is infallible.

When we use the verse of purification to prove her infallibility, this
does not mean at all that before the revelation of the verse she had not
been infallible. Rather, she had been infallible before its revelation,
with an absolute infallibility for which her conduct stands as witness.
The verse of purification merely confirmed this infallibility; it did
not confer it upon her.

*Third proof* - Fatimah al-Zahra (as) is the Doyenne of the Women of the
World, as was confirmed by the famous *hadith* narrated by the two
schools of thought. It is inconceivable that a woman would attain the
position of the Doyenne of the Women of the World without being a person
who lived the whole of truth in her mind and heart, and that falsehood
could ever creep into any of this at all.

### (B) The nature of her infallibility

Our opinion of the infallibility of Ahlul Bayt (as) is that Allah the
Most High has placed in them elements of knowledge and spirit and
holiness which remove all uncleanness from them and confer purity upon
them. He gave them a light by which they move, through their awareness
of all the rays of light and its horizons, and that he gave them
knowledge and spirituality which match the awareness and knowledge of
Allah and an awareness of Islam in its full depth and breadth, so that
they move dynamically with purity and awareness, and away from evil with
awareness.

These elements deepen their awareness and will, but do not move them
automatically and without choice. No one should suggest that the meaning
of formative infallibility (*'ismah takweeniyyah*), as taken from the
verse **â€˜Verily, verily God intendeth...',** means that Allah the Most
High takes away choice from them, so that they become the purified and
free of uncleanness not out of their own volition like a machine without
awareness; this thinking is false. Although we said that Allah was the
One who conferred upon them the virtues of holiness, spirituality and
knowledge, this would not mean that consequently they were deprived of
choice and would become like a machine or a cane in the hands of its
owner, because these virtues would actually deepen the awareness in them
as we said, not deprive them of choice.[^16]

Therefore, Fatimah's infallibility was willful infallibility, and
proceeded from her awareness and from Divine favour, which gracefully
saved her from prostration to idols or committing sins, like he
gracefully saved her husband Ali (as) from prostration to idols before
the start of the Message and after it - this is in contrast to many
Muslim men and women who prostrated to the idols before Islam. As for
Fatimah (as), her prostration was to Allah from the moment she knew
prostration, and her bowing was to Allah from the moment she knew
bowing.

[^1]: Al-Kashshaf commentary, vol. 4, p. 670; Shawahid al-Tanzeel,
al-Hasakani, vol. 2, p. 399; al-Baydawi, vol. 2, p. 526; al-Tha'labi in
al-Kashf wal Tabyan, p. 279.

[^2]: Al-Qummi commentary, vol.1, p. 104; Sahih Muslim, vol. 4, p. 1871;
Sunan al-Turmuthi, vol. 5, p. 638; Shawahid al-Tanzeel, vol. 1, p. 155;
al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, p. 148; al-Kamil fil Tareekh, vol. 2, p. 393.

[^3]: Al-Tabari, vol. 22, p. 5-8; Fada'il al-Khamsah fil Sihah
al-Sittah, vol. 1, p. 214.

[^4]: Sahih al-Bukhari, al-Karmani commentary, vol. 15, p. 4,Musnad
Ahmad, vol. 3, p. 498 and vol.6, p. 542.

[^5]: Musnad Abu Dawood, p. 196, hadith 1373; al-Mustadrak, vol. 3, p.
156.

[^6]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 4, p. 1905; Fada'il al-Khamsah, vol. 3, p.
137-146.

[^7]: Hilyat al-Awliya', vol. 2, p. 42.

[^8]: Sahih al-Bukhari, al-Karmani commentary, vol. 15, p. 5.

[^9]: Sahih Muslim, vol. 4, p. 1903.

[^10]: Ma Rawat-hu al-'Ammah min Manaqib Ahlul Bayt, p. 23; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 43, chapter 8, p. 220.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 367.

[^12]: Musnad Ahmad, vol. 3, p. 642.

[^13]: Ma Rawat-hu al-'Ammah min Manaqib Ahlul Bayt, p. 229; A'yan
al-Shi'ah, vol. 1, p. 307; 'Awalim al-Zahra, p. 48 et seq.; Fada'il
al-Khamsa, vol. 3, p. 122 et seq.

[^14]: Al-Mustarshid, al-Tabari, p. 376; al-Imamah wal Siyasah, p. 13.

[^15]: Commentary to Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadeed, vol. 16, p.
122.

[^16]: For the reader who wants to know his eminence's opinion
(regarding this issue), refer to the book Fiqh al-Hayat, p. 267 which
makes his opinion quite clear; the controversy which has arisen may
perhaps be the result of not referring to his words and being misled by
the term ''ismah takweeniyyah', which has appeared in some of his works.


