Chapter 4: Questions and Answers
================================

**Q1 - The infallibility of the Imams (as) is perhaps because they are
the Imams and leaders for the people. What is the benefit of Fatimah's
infallibility: she is not a prophet or an imam?**

**A** - Fatimah (as) is the mother of the infallibles (as). She gave
them all her effort and virtues, and amongst these is the infallibility
which Allah had given her. However, the question of infallibility is a
human issue which arises from Divine grace. Like the role of the Imamah
as the leadership, which needs infallibility as a must, Allah may give
infallibility to another person, especially the woman who is prepared to
be an Imam, not in the strict sense of the term, but as the example. We
believe that women have reached the level of infallibility as has been
established with Virgin Mary (as) and Fatimah (as); but we may find some
women who have not had a verse revealed regarding their infallibility,
but who have not been distant from infallibility, such as Lady Zaynab
(as) - women can come near to infallibility when they live their
responsibility towards Allah and the people.

In addition, Allah, through his grace to Fatimah (as), wanted to tell
people - men and women - that women can be elevated with Allah's
bestowing and grace to the most exalted positions, and to infallibility.

Moreover, Allah wants to make the woman a role model for all people, men
and women, so that men can be told that, just as they can have an
infallible man as a role model, you can also have an infallible woman as
a role model, because there is no difference between men and women as
far as reaching the level of infallibility is concerned.

**Q2 -** **What, apart from Infallibility, is the difference between
Fatima al-Zahra (as) and all other women?**

**A** - The difference is that Fatimah possessed a degree of spiritual
depth in her personality that made her a manifestation of the message.
Most women with a mission have a commitment to the message which comes
from outside of themselves. By contrast, for Fatimah (as) it came from
inside her mind and heart and soul, because she lived the whole of her
life with the message and under the wing of the Messenger of Allah
(sawa), and then opened herself up to the full vigor of the message in
the House of Ali (as), and moved dynamically in the emotion of the
message with al-Hasan and al-Husain (as). Therefore, she lived the
message. This is the difference between depth and shallowness. You
cannot find anything in her personal life that speaks of leisure or
purposelessness. This is what makes her a role model - the ultimate role
model.

**Q3 - How did she achieve that degree of belief?**

**A** - How and where did Fatimah (as) live? She lived her childhood
with the revelation revealed to her father (sawa) day and night, and so
she was sensing the atmosphere of revelation day and night. She was
living with the Messenger of Allah (sawa) and learning something from
him every day, and living his manners, spirituality and prayers day and
night. She used to accompany her father in his battles, and followed him
in the dynamic movement of his Message, and to take from him kindness
and give him kindness, take from him manners and ways of conduct that
became manifest in her. Hence, in the house of the Prophet (sawa)
Fatimah lived the whole of his Message in spirit and in detail. We know
that she was not taught by another teacher, and so the whole of her
knowledge came from the Messenger of Allah, and she spent the whole of
her upbringing at his side. In addition, Allah has bestowed upon her his
grace and mercy, to complete the picture; so it was by her own effort
that she learnt from the Prophet (sawa) with the grace of Allah.

Hence, we saw that when she moved to the house of Ali (as) that she
lived with him his spirit, intellect, patience and holy struggle.

**Q4 - In dialogue with one Sunni brother, he said: You say that Fatimah
is the Doyenne of the Women of the World while it is in fact - according
to the Qur'an - Mariam (the Virgin Mary)?**

**A** - It is narrated, by both the Sunnis and Shi'ites that Fatimah
(as) is the Doyenne of the Women of the World.[^1]

**Q5 - It was narrated that you said that Fatimah (as) had no right to
Fadak. Is this true?**

**A** - Fadak is a Fatimid fact and an Islamic fact.

**Q6 - Regarding Fadak again: some say that if Fatimah (as) had had a
right in Fadak, Imam Ali (as) would have returned it to its legal
owners, i.e. Ahlul Bayt (as), when he became caliph, because he was
capable of doing that.**

**A** - The issue of Fadak was not, for Ali and Ahlul Bayt (as), a
financial one. How come and Ali was the person who said: **â€˜What do I do
with Fadak and [anything] other than Fadak when the self will, tomorrow,
end up in a grave?'** Rather, for them, Fadak was a symbol of the
usurped caliphate. When Ali (as) became the caliph, he did not see any
benefit in getting it back himself, and did not want to be accused of
using the (power of) caliphate for personal interests. Also, perhaps he
found that getting it back would have created problems from those who
cried out 'O the sunnah of 'Umar' when Ali (as) changed some of the
things which 'Umar introduced in the prayer of *Taraweeh*.[^2]

**Q7 - Fadak again: it is well known that Ahlul Bayt (as) did not care
about worldly things, so why did Lady Fatimah (as) demand that the first
caliph hand Fadak back to her?**

**A** - Fadak was a right for Fatimah (as), a gift from the Messenger of
Allah or an inheritance from him. It is natural for her to demand this
right, without indicating a concern in money and worldly things.
Demanding one's right, through natural needs and familial
responsibilities, is a legitimate pursuit which is commended by Allah.
That is the point.

Secondly, demanding Fadak was a bridge to the caliphate, a legitimate
right of which Fadak was one of its indications. It was told that one
'Abbasid caliph said to Imam al-Kadhim (as): 'I am ready to return Fadak
back to you, so set its boundaries', thinking that it was a mere area in
al-Hijaz. However, the Imam said: **'If I set Fadak's boundaries you
shall never give it to me.'** The caliph asked: 'What are its
boundaries?' He replied to him that the boundaries of Fadak were the
boundaries of all the Islamic countries!

Hence, Fadak was the starting point and not the goal. Ibn Abi
al-Hadeed - as quoted in his commentary on *Nahj al-Balaghah* - asked
his teacher: 'Why didn't Abu Bakr give Fadak to Fatimah (as); if it was
for the Muslims, wouldn't they have given it to Fatimah?' His teacher
replied: 'If she was given Fadak, she would have demanded the caliphate
for Ali, and therefore he decided to stop the matter at the start lest
her demand would stretch to more than that.'

**Q8 - How can we reconcile the stances of Fatimah (as), when she died
quite upset and angry with Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and that of Ali (as) who
gave them** ***bay'ah*** **(oath of acceptance of rule)? There are some
people who are confused by this and would say that Fatimah (as) had been
driven by emotions and that she got angry out of self-interest, while
the stance of Ali (as) was rational?**

**A** - The stance of Fatimah (as) was the stance of Ali (as)! Ali's
stance was negative and rejecting, just as Fatimah's was. Also, who said
that Fatimah's stance was driven by emotion? Had her emotion moved for
the caliphate for Ali, more than Ali's emotion for himself? No, Fatimah
was angry for the right, not for herself, and defended the right just as
Ali (as) did, with all resolve and force.

Hence, when we read in *Nahj al-Balaghah* his speech: **'I swear by
Allah that Ibn Abi Quhafah has put it [the caliphate] on [without
suitability] like a shirt while [at the same time] he knows that my
place regarding it is like the [center] pole in the mill - the torrent
comes down from me, and the bird cannot reach my [high] position.'**[^3]
This speech represented Ali's protest over and rejection of what had
happened.

Yes, after that, Ali (as) saw that Islam's interests lied in
patience**'... So, I was patient, (but) with a speck in the eye and
sorrow in the throat.'**[^4]

Also, he said a wonderful word, explaining his patience and tolerating
the situation, in spite of his rejection of its false claims to
legitimacy. This was in his letter to the people of Egypt, and I would
like every Shi'ite Muslim to read it, to know the approach of Ali (as)
in the Islamic reality when the disturbance (*fitnah*), differences and
problems would arise. He said: **'I was surprised to see the people pour
unto that person to give him** ***bay'ah*****; so I held my hand, until
I saw the people heading backwards and turning from Islam, calling for
the annihilation of the religion of Muhammad (sawa), so I feared that if
I did not support Islam and its people I would see its breakage and
demolition, a disaster for me which would be greater than losing my rule
over you, which was after all only few days long, and that it would
vanish as when a mirage vanishes or the clouds disperse; so I stood up
in those events until falsehood disappeared and perished and the
religion felt secured and comfortable...'**[^5] And he used to say: **'I
shall make peace [with them] as long as the interests of Muslims are
safe and that there is no injustice in it but to me personally.'**[^6]

**Q9 - Fatimah's rib: what is your true position regarding this
matter?**

**A** - Anyone who claims that I have said that Fatimah's rib was not
broken is a liar!

Some people have been talking this nonsense for more than five
years.[^7] Here, I have this to say to you, to clarify the matter: to
start with, I reiterate that I did not say that Fatimah's rib was not
broken, and everyone who claims that I did is a liar. I merely regarded
it as unlikely; I raised a question mark on the basis of historical
analysis. I said: 'I do not react positively with this because the
Muslims' love for Fatimah (as) had been greater than their love for Ali,
and greater than their love for al-Hasan and al-Husain, and greater than
that their love for the Messenger of Allah (sawa). I said that it was
unlikely that anyone would commit such an act, but conceded that bad
intentions were plotted - not to establish the innocence of anyone, but
in fear of agitating Islamic public opinion.

There were many narrations: some said that they entered the house, while
others said they did not. Hence, I said: 'I see that to be unlikely and
I do not react positively to the word itself'. The world roared and
heavens fell on earth, and words began to be fabricated and spread in
some quarters!

This reaction has still not abated in more than one place, and leaflets
are being distributed around the world. It is as if the dangers
confronting the Muslims and all the injustice that we live in have
become nothing, and all that matters is this historical issue!

In fact, this is a symptom of the backwardness which is being practiced
by many in our Islamic arena. This problem still festers among those who
do not care about the dangers which confront Islam, and that the problem
is still alive means that we are not addressing the major issues on the
proper level of awareness.

**Q10 - Much wisdom, lessons and depth lie like concealed treasures in
the narrations of Ahlul Bayt (as). What is the way to open oneself up to
this great grace?**

**A** - We have spoken more than once that our problem with Ahlul Bayt
(as) is that we have contained them in the prison of tragedy only! And
when we opened out their horizons, we did that in the area of miracles
and miraculous favours. As for their thinking, their approach to life,
their authentic prophetic line in life, their comprehensive Qur'anic
approach and all that they have said and moved dynamically in, which can
provide answers to the questions, queries and problems from which our
generation is suffering and future generations will be suffering, there
is no work done that brings it out and explains it satisfactorily. We
have cut them off from the dynamic movement of life and entered them in
the movement of tears, and therefore we have made a wide opportunity
quite narrow!

You have attended, in this season, more than one gathering to mark the
anniversary of Fatimah's death. What have you heard about Fatimah
al-Zahra (as)? I am here speaking in general terms, for amongst the
orators there are those who bear the responsibility of enlightenment in
the ways of Ahlul Bayt (as). However, most have concentrated on the
tragedy and grievance. We emphasize the grievance, but this has been the
grievance in the way of the Message, and not a weeping grievance. Ours
is a grievance which encompasses vigour, strength, enlightenment,
criticism and confrontation.

**Q11 - Is it required from men to be the Messenger (sawa) or Ali (as),
and women to be Fatimah (as), a hundred percent, so that we achieve the
level of a healthy society? Or is the grace of those personalities and
their characteristics more than what is needed for a healthy society,
and so men only need a certain percentage from the Messenger and Ali,
and women a certain percentage from Fatimah (as)?**

**A** - In the world of the role models, you are not expected to reach
the level of the role model, but to regard them as the highest example
of the virtues and values, which have proved their realistic nature by
the fact that the role models are human beings. This was why Allah said:
**'Indeed (there) is for you in the Apostle of God (Muhammad) an
excellent pattern (of conduct) for him who hopeth in God and the latter
day and remembereth God much' (**Qur'an 33:21); and Ali (as) said:
**â€˜Your Imam is content from life with his two pieces of cloth, and from
his food with his** **two pieces of bread; and you cannot bear that, but
help me with God-fearing and hard work, and modesty and good
thinking.'**[^8]

And the poet says:

Imitate them, if you are not [exactly] like them

Surely imitating the virtuous is winning.

The greatest human examples among prophets, Imams and virtuous
individuals are the summits to which we can aspire. Some may come near
the summit, whilst others may stay on the foot of the mountain, but
(whatever the case) we have to proceed to get the happiness through what
they have manifested, because this is the way of Islam. The Messenger of
Allah (sawa) did not have anything apart from the Qur'an and Islam, and
Ali (as) and Fatimah (as) did not have anything other than the Qur'an
and Islam, but the difference between them and us was that they had
manifested the Qur'an and Islam in their conscience using what Allah had
bestowed on them in the knowledge which we could not reach because we
lacked the means.

**Q12 - Is loving Fatimah (as) without a practical attempt to apply the
Qur'anic system as applied by Fatimah (as) sufficient to bring women to
her on the Day of Judgement?**

**A** - Fatimah (as) lived with the Messenger of Allah (sawa), Ali (as),
al-Hasan and al-Husain (as), the conscience of the Imams (as) and all
workers (in the way of Allah). The important thing is that the woman
lives Islam in the obedience of Allah and the call for His religion and
work, in a way that Fatimah (as) did, even if only to a certain
percentage.

[^1]: Musnad Abu Dawood, p. 196, hadith 1373; al-Mustadrak, vol. 3, p.
156.

[^2]: The prayers performed in the nights of Ramadan, which used to be
performed on an individual basis, but which 'Umar transferred to use in
congregation. The translator.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balaghah, the Shiqshiqiyyah sermon.

[^4]: Ditto.

[^5]: Ditto, letter 62.

[^6]: Ditto, sermon 74.

[^7]: This was in October 1997. The translator.

[^8]: Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 45.


