A Call from His Eminence
========================

**Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Muhammad Husain Fadlullah to the Muslims and
the followers of Ahlul Bayt in particular .**[^1]

I say to you, with all love... All of you have listened to me, day and
night, in seminars, lectures and Friday sermons; so, is it reasonable
that some people from this generation do not understand me? I ask you:
who has spoken with you like I have; who has been with you in all issues
like I have; who has worked - and I am honoured - in your service? Is it
acceptable that irresponsible words have come out, and not one voice has
come out to say, silence this wrong?

May I say to you a word in this matter? As far as I am concerned, this
matter is like thin air '**If you have no anger on me, I do not care
[about anything else] then.'**[^2] My concerns, first and last, are not
with you - my concerns are with Allah the Most High - **'O my Lord! If
you bring me down who can elevate me and if you elevate me who can bring
me down?'**[^3]

In this regard, I say to you: I remind you of Allah in the Islamic
situation; I remind you of Allah in the way of Ahlul Bayt (as). Do not
let anyone mess it up; do not let anyone offend (or bring bad image
unto) it, and do not let anyone come up with confusing words in this
regard.

For forty years, I have been saying to the old and young amongst you
that there is no unimportant question and no embarrassing question; fact
is the outcome of dialogue, and I am ready to enter into dialogue with
all people and to answer the young and old, and you know this.
Therefore, do not defend me, but defend your Islamic situation, defend
this reality which you live in, where the entire world is attacking and
aggressive towards you.

Be aware, have political awareness and understand how the enemies
infiltrate the arenas. We do not say that everyone who is involved in
this is working for the enemy, but we say that they exploit points of
weakness.

Therefore, O my beloved, there is no problem (as far as I am concerned)
in this matter. As I told you, had it not been that they had been
muddling and disrupting the Islamic situation and threatening it with
danger I would have said: 'May Allah forgive them!' However, the matter
does not concern me personally, but the Islamic situation. I say: 'I
pray to Allah for their guidance, but if they do not desist, I shall not
forgive them because they have offended Islam and Muslims, and I do not
mean a particular party or a particular person, but the phenomenon and
situation.'[^4]

If some continue to insist - in spite of all our words and frankness in
sanctifying Lady Fatimah (as), glorifying her and explaining her
infallibility, and in spite of our numerous and wide-ranging lectures
for more than fifty years regarding Ahlul Bayt (as) - to fabricate lies
in what we say, and to fabricate false meanings regarding our Lady
Fatimah (as) and her infallibility, or regarding the guardianship of our
master, the Commander of the Faithful (as), which has been laid down and
emphasized by the trustworthy Prophet (sawa) in many locations, the most
distinguished of which is in Ghadeer Khumm, we then pray to Allah to
guide them, if they still have capability for that, otherwise their
judgement shall be with Allah. And we shall have a position to hold with
them on the Day of Judgement, the day on which people stand up in front
of the Lord of the worlds and creation, He who does not miss a small or
a big deed, but has it registered in a book, and the settlement of our
dispute shall be at the presence of our grandfather the Messenger of
Allah (sawa) and our grandfather the Commander of the Faithful (as) and
our grandmother the truthful al-Zahra (as), and we shall see who will
win that day![^5]

[^1]: This call was not issued separately, but was extracted from his
eminence's lectures and speeches. The translator.

[^2]: This was part of the words that the Prophet (sawa) said in prayer,
just following his very bad experience with the people of Ta'if, whom he
went to call to Islam, but they sent their youth after him, who threw
stones at him and wounded his feet. The translator.

[^3]: This is a line from a supplication by Imam al-Sajjad (as). The
translator.

[^4]: The dialogue meeting, al-Jinan hall, 22/10/1997.

[^5]: Al-Zahra (as) al-Qudwah, Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Muhammad Husain
Fadlullah, compiled by Husain Ahmad al-Khashin, Al-Malak publishers,
Beirut, 3rd edition, 2001, p. 173.


