Bibliography
============

The book *al-Zahra al-Qudwah*, excerpts of which had been translated to
form this book, was compiled from numerous lectures and sermons which
were listed in that book as follows:

1. Lecture at Usrat al-Te'akhi society, 9/10/1966.

2. Lecture, 16/12/1992.

3. Lecture entitled '*al-Zahra, a role model for man'*, the Law College
6/12/1993.

4. Lecture at the Islamic Institute, Beirut, the Women *Hawzah*
(college), 10/6/1414H.

5. Lecture at the College of Medicine, Lebanese University, 24/11/1994.

6. Lecture entitled '*The role of Muslim woman in the contemporary
challenges*', birth anniversary of Lady Zaynab (as) and International
Nurses Day, Bednayil, Beqa', 9/10/1994.

7. Lecture in the birth anniversary of al-Zahra (as), Husainiyyat
al-Zahra (as), Sayyidah Zaynab district, Damascus, 19/11/1995.

8. Lecture, 7/10/1995.

9. Lecture, 28/10/1995.

10. Lecture entitled '*How do we live al-Zahra (as)*', Damascus,
26/10/1996.

11. Friday sermon, Beirut, 4/10/1996.

12. Lecture entitled '*Al-Zahra Call: Be for Islam*', al-Murtada
*Hawzah* (college), Damascus, 13/9/1997.

13. Friday sermon entitled '*Al-Zahra, the patient when harmed and
oppressed*', al-Imamayn al-Hasanayn (as) Mosque, Beirut, 19/9/1997.

14. Interview with Dar al-Islam paper, London, issue 11, 1997.

15. Friday sermon entitled '*Al-Zahra, the most perfect example for
Muslim women*', Beirut, 24/10/1997.

16. Lecture entitled '*Fatimah al-Zahra (as), the sacred Islamic symbol
for all Muslims*', al-Murtada *Hawzah* (college), Damascus, 5/9/1998.
(This lecture, along with the next six lectures, is about commentary on
al-Zahra Sermon.)

17. Lecture entitled '*The secrets of Prophethood, Message and Qur'an*',
same as previous venue, 12/9/1998.

18. Lecture entitled 'The secrets/rationale and goals of Islamic
jurisprudence', same as previous venue, 19/9/1998.

19. Lecture entitled '*Justice, the Imamah and other jurisprudence
secrets*', same as previous venue, 26/9/1998.

20. Lecture entitled '*Defending the right and truth*', same as previous
venue, 3/10/1998.

21. Lecture entitled '*The systematic approach to studying and
understanding history*', same as previous venue, 10/10/1998.

22. Lecture entitled '*Depending in dispute on the Qur'an first*', same
as previous venue, 17/10/1998.

23. Lecture entitled '*Al-Zahra infallibility*', same as previous venue,
28/8/1999; printed in Qom under the title '*The Missionary Sorrow*'.

There were also dozens of lectures for which we could not find dates;
some of which were:

24. Lecture entitled '*Al-Zahra, the worshipper, responsible wife*'.

25. Lecture entitled '*How should we live al-Zahra (as)*'.

26. Lecture entitled '*Loving al-Zahra (as)*'.

27. Lecture entitled '*Al-Zahra and defending the right*'.

28. Lecture entitled '*Al-Zahra, the role model for women in Islam*'.

29. Lecture entitled '*The role model, why*'.

30. Lecture entitled '*The missionary role of women on the anniversary
of Lady al-Zahra (as)*'.

32. The book entitled *Fi Rihab (in the courtyards) Ahlul Bayt (as)*,
Dar al-Malak publishers, Beirut, 2nd edition, 1998.

34. Reply of his eminence to the queries forwarded to some of our
religious authorities (*maraji'*) in Holy Qom.


