The Shi'a Attitude
==================

Now we should see how the Shi'as have solved the problem of such
ahadith.

The Shi'as do not believe in the immunity of any writer, commentator or
narrator from mistakes, and, therefore, they do not take any collection
of hadith to be completely valid and correct. The only book which is
completely immune from any mistake is the Qur'an.

There are four early collections of Shi'a ahadith which are together
called "al-Kutub al-Arb'ah" (the four books): al-Kafi of Kulayni, Man la
Yahdhuruhu' l-Faqih of Saduq, Tahdhibu 'l-Ahkam and al-Istibsar of Tusi.
Although these books are held in great esteem, the Shi'as have never
called them "sihah". Consequently, they are not fettered by any hadith
written there simply because it is in one of the four books. Instead,
they subject all ahadith in all these books to strict tests, as to their
narrators (asnad) and dirayah, and examine whether a given hadith
conforms with the Qur'an, the accepted sayings of the Ma'sumin and the
known facts. If a hadith passes these tough test, then it is accepted.
If not, then it is re-interpreted in an acceptable way, failing which it
is rejected outright.

It should be mentioned here that an overwhelming part of traditions
concerning tahrif is defective and weak as far as their chains of
narrators are concerned. Even then, some of those traditions maybe taken
to denote that there has occurred misinterpretation in some verses,
giving them wrong meaning. Another group of traditions may easily be
construed to mention marginal explanatory notes of the reciters.

But there still remain many traditions which cannot be explained in
either way. And our scholars unhesitatingly have rejected them because
they go against the Qur'an and the sunnah, and are contrary to the ijma'
of the ummah that there has never been any addition in or omission from
the Qur'an.

Muhaqqiq al-Kalbasi has said, "All these reports which speak of tahrif
are against the ijma' of the ummah (with exception of a few
insignificant persons)." [^33]

The commentator of al-Wafiyah, Muhaqqiq al-Baghdadi has clearly stated,
by quoting from Muhaqqiq al-Karaki (who has written a complete tract on
the subject) that: "The traditions which speak of omission must either
be reinterpreted or rejected. Any tradition which is contradictory to
the Qur'an, the acknowledged sunnah and the ijma' must be discarded if
it has no room for interpretation or justifiable explanation." [^34]

A tradition, recorded in al-Kafi is quoted here to give an example in
practice of what we mean when we speak of reinterpretation or
justifiable explanation: Abu 'Abdillah [al-Sadiq] (peace be upon him)
said, "The Qur'an which was brought by Jibrail (peace be upon him) to
Muhammad (Mercy of Allah be on him and his progeny) is seventeen
thousand verses." [^35]

Shaykh as-Saduq has written in his Kitabu'l-Itiqaddat, what in my view
amounts to a reinterpretation of this hadith. He writes, "We say that so
much of revelation has come down, which is not a part of the Qur'an,
that if it were to be collected, its extent would undoubtedly be 17,000
verses. And this, for example, is like the saying of Gabriel (a.s.) to
the Prophet (peace be upon him & his progeny): 'Allah says to thee, O
Muhammad, deal gently with My creatures, in the same manner as I do."'

He goes on quoting many such ahadith qudsiyah until he concludes by
saying: "There are many such (ahadith qudsiyah) all of which are
revelations, but do not form part of the Qur'an. If they had been (part
of the Qur'an), they would surely have been included in it, and not
excluded from it." [^36]

If one is not prepared to accept this explanation because the tradition
speaks about "the Qur'an", then we will discard this hadith without
hesitation. Although the number (17,000) given in this tradition is much
smaller than the one given by the 2nd Caliph (one million and twenty
seven thousand letters in the Qur'an), [^37] it is never-the-less three
times bigger than the actual number of the verses (which is some six
thousand two hundred and thirty six verses). [^38]

This is the Shi'a method of resolving the problem of the ahadith on
tahrif. Anyone studying it with unbiased mind and heart would readily
accept it as the only correct solution for such ahadith because it is
based on the method formulated by the Prophet (peace be upon him & his
progeny) and expressed by Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s.) as follows:
"...And so whatever conforms to the Book of Allah, take it; and whatever
is contrary to the Book of Allah, leave it .. " [^39]

[^33] Quoted in al Bayan, p. 253
[^34] Ibid.
[^35] al Kulayni, al Kafi, vol. 2 (Tehran: a; Matba'a al Islamiyya,
1388), p. 463
[^36] Saduq, Kitabu 'l-Itiqadat, p. 63-65
[^37] As-Suyuti, al-Itqan, vol. 2, p. 70
[^38] See Mahmud Ruhani, al Mu'jamu 'l Ihsai (Mashad: 1990) p. 168.
Those who do note take the trouble of counting, go on writing that there
are 6666 verses in the Qur'an. It is one more example of Muslims tragic
carelessness towards the Qur'an.
[^39] al Hurr al Amili, Wasailu 'sh Shiah, vol. 3 (Kitabu 'l qadha: bab
wujuhi 'l jam bayna 'l ahadithi 'l mukhtalifah), p. 380
[^40] Died in 1994.

