Exploitation of Traditions
==========================

As mentioned above, the enemies of Islam had succeeded in circulating
such anti-Qur'an traditions in the Muslim world, attributing them to
famous personalities of Islam, the companions of the Prophet as well as
his Ahlul bayt; and gradually the Muslims unwittingly accepted and
recorded these weak, rather forged, ahadith in their collections of
ahadith. In spite of that, the Muslim 'ulama', Shi'a and Sunni alike,
did not believe that there was any alteration in, addition to, or
omission from the Qur'an. No sensible 'alim of either sect accused the
other sect that it believed in tahrif of the Qur'an.

Of course there have appeared from time to time some 'ulama' on both
sides, who indulged in mudslinging against the opposite sect, not
realizing that presence of a hadith in a book does not necessarily mean
that the people of that group really believed in it. But such traditions
remained more or less buried in the books and usually they were not
propagated for the simple reason that nobody based his belief on them.

Things abruptly changed in February 1979, when the Iranian nation,
under the unparalleled guidance of the late Ayatullah al-'uzma
al-Khomeini succeeded in establishing the first truly Islamic government
on the earth, centuries after the days of the Imams (a.s.).

Had the Iranian Revolution resulted in a satellite government following
the line of the Western or the Eastern ideology, it would have been
gladly accepted-or at least, tolerated-by the self-appointed Guardians
of "democracy". But, contrary to the conventional wisdom, it chose to
follow the line of Islam. Then it raised the slogan of Islamic Unity. By
standing against all un-Islamic "isms", and not bowing before anyone
except Allah, Ayatullah al-'uzma al-Khomeini and the Iranian leadership
gained unsurpassed popularity in the Muslim ummah throughout the world,
from Morocco to the Philippines and from Europe to Americas.
Down-trodden masses saw with their own eyes that unarmed bare hands had
defeated the mightiest war machine in the Middle East. It gave a new
heart to the oppressed people even in non-Muslim countries like South
Africa. This rapidly spreading influence of 'Khomeinism' alarmed the
U.S.A., the paramount chief' of the Western 'tribes'. They started
fighting against Iran, through the proxy war, through news media and in
political fora.

On another front, they made their clients in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait
believe that the call of Islamic Unity was a mortal danger to their
crowns. Ordered by their masters, the Wahhabis started an intensely
hateful propaganda against 'Khomeinism', Iran and Shi'ism. Hired pens
began churning out books, articles and tracts against the Shi'as, saying
that the Shi'a were kafir, they were mushrik, they had their separate
Qur'an, and believed this Qur'an of the Muslims to be altered and
incomplete. Some of their top employees were Ihsan Ilahi Zaheer and
Balighuddeen in Pakistan and Manzoor Ahmad Nu'mani and Abul Hasan 'Ali
Nadwi [^40] in India. The last-named case is interesting. Long before the
Revolution, he posed as a champion of the Islamic Unity. He is the
Chairman of the Muslim Personal Law Board in India with a Shi'a 'alim as
his vice-chairman. But he is also a recipient of the 'Faisal Award' of
the Saudi dynasty. And no sooner was the slogan of "Neither East nor
West, Islam is the Best" 'exported' from Iran, than he aligned himself
with anti-unity forces. He has written in one of his anti-Shi' a
booklets that the Shi'as do not believe in the Qur'an, that is why there
was no hafiz-e-Qur'an in the Shi'as. He goes on writing that once when
he was invited to Iran, the group was taken to Qum where they visited
the house of a Grand Ayatullah. The programme was to start with the
recital of the Qur'an, and the son of the Grand Ayatulah, himself an
'alim, stood up, opened the Qur'an and recited some verses from it. Then
he says: "In our Sunni faith, even a child memorizes one or two small
surahs, but that Shi'a 'alim could not remember even that much. It was
because the Shi'as do not believe in the Qur'an."

[Ed: Contrast this with the feats of the six-year old hafiz from
Iran]

Could anyone expect such childish arguments from such a great person?
But it seems that the sound coming from his mouth is 'his master's
voice' and the Zionism's dagger dipped in Muslims' blood is used for his
pen.

A book written by such agents might be written in Urdu, Arabic or any
other language; but within a few months it is translated in all major
languages of the Muslim world, and made available everywhere as well as
freely distributed to the hujjaj.

Ostensibly, the agents of American Islam are doing it to weaken Iran
and prevent the Iranian Revolution from influencing the "Muslim Youths"
as Abul Hasan Ali Nadvi himself has admitted in the preface of a book.
But is this the actual motive of their Masters-the Judeo-Christian
enemies of Islam? Obviously, not. The manipulators of the American Islam
have exhumed some Shi'a traditions of tahrif buried in the books, with
the sole aim that the Shi'a would retaliate by publicising the similar
traditions found in the Sunni books, and thus the validity of the Qur'an
would be questioned, Muslims' faith in this Last Divine Revelation would
be destroyed and as a result. Islam would lose its power.

One of the Shi'a 'alims, Mirza Husayn Nuri (d. 1320 AH) had written a
book, Faslu 'l-Khitab, in which he had first collected all the
traditions of tahrif from the Sunni sources, then all the traditions
from the Shi'a sources, then drawn his own conclusions which were
against the accepted Shi'a belief. No sooner was the book printed than
its rebuttal was written; and the book, discredited, remained forgotten
and almost unknown even in the Shi'a academic circles. Now, the American
Islam has reprinted Faslu 'l-Khitab, but after removing the chapter of
the Sunni ahadith. They propagate that it is "an authentic Shi'a book"
which proves that the Shi'a have no faith in the Qur'an. If these people
were really honest, they should have printed the whole book; then their
Masters would have been able to "prove" that the entire Muslim ummah did
not believe in this Qur'an!!

This demeaning polemics will provide the Christian missionaries with
effective arms and ammunitions to shake and rattle the Muslims' faith in
the Qur'an. They hope that in this way many Muslims would easily be
persuaded to embrace Christianity, and even those who would not convert,
would not remain truly Muslim, nor would they follow a Book whose
authenticity was doubtful.

Gladstone is reported to have once stood up in the British Parliament
with a copy of the Qur'an in his hand; and declared that as long as the
Muslims followed this Book, the British could not subjugate them. He
advised his people to use every subterfuge to shake the Muslims' belief
in the Qur'an.

That strategy of kufr had succeeded in Turkey, Egypt, Tunis, Algeria
and many other so-called Muslim countries where a special breed of
Muslims has been created which seems to be allergic to Islam and the
Qur'an. It was about to succeed in Iran, thanks to the Pahlavi regime.
But the plan failed because of the religious leaders under the guidance
of the late Ayatullah al-'uzma Khomeini and because of the religiosity
of the Iranian nation. Now the enemies of Islam are using this
propaganda of tahrif to achieve that goal.

This is what they have planned. But Allah, subhanahu wa ta'ala, says:

They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouth, and Allah
will surely perfect His light, though the unbelievers may be averse.
(61:8)


