Translator’s Introduction
=========================

The love of the family of the Prophet Muhammad(s.a.w) and his family,
his *ahl al-bayt*, Allah's peace and blessings be upon them, is
something common amongst all Muslims. After all, Allah commanded His
final Prophet(s.a.w) to tell the Muslims:

***“Say: I ask no reward of you except the love of my near and dear
ones.” (42:23)***

Imam Shaf'i, founder of one of the great schools of jurisprudence said
in commentary on this verse:

*Ahl al-Bayt, your love is a Divine duty on mankind. God revealed it in
His Quran.*

*It is enough among your great privileges that whoever does not bless
you, his prayer is void.*

*If the love of the members of the House of the Prophet is rafdh
(rejection),*

*Let mankind and the Jinns testify that I am a raafidhi (rejector [what
they call the Shi'ah])*[^1]

The family of the Prophet(s.a.w), Imam Ali ibn abi Talib(a.s) chief
amongst them, were raised literally in the lap of prophethood and was
the Muslim who was the longest serving companion and confident of the
holy Prophet. The Prophet's daughter, Fatimah(a.s) was herself a great
scholar and *hafidh* (memorizer) of Quran and spiritual beacon for the
Muslims and all seekers of light and love that is Islam.

Allah distinguished the Ahl al-Bayt of the Prophet(s.a.w) in many ways.
For example, Allah has stated that they only amongst all the Muslims,
were thoroughly purified from sin and misguidance in the noble verse,

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying” (33:33).***

One way that Prophet's(s.a.w) beloved daughter was distinguished was
with a book sent to console her upon her father's death. This book is
called the “*Mushaf* Fatimah.” It is a great honor that the lovers of
Ahl al-Bayt have carried the legacy of this book.

During unstable times for Muslims, when Muslims everywhere are facing
oppression and hardship, we must heed the call to unity, to “grasp the
rope of Allah” and not be divided. The family of the prophet(s.a.w) is
that rope that unites all Muslims. Unfortunately, some Muslims have
taken to accusing the lovers of Ahl al-Bayt, the Shi'ah, of apostasy
with deadly results. One of the reasons for this confusion and claim of
apostasy is the existence of the *Mushaf* Fatimah. Some people have
thought, mistakenly, that it is “another Quran” or a “secret Quran” that
the Shi'ah read.

This small work, thoroughly researched by Mr. Amini, sets to lay to rest
any misconceptions that any Muslims may have had about what the *Mushaf*
Fatimah is. For the sake of Muslim unity, and in obedience of Allah's
command to love the Prophet's family, I offer this small work of
translation to the lovers of light and seekers of peace. I humbly pray
that this effort pleases the noble Lady of Light, Fatimah al-Zahra(a.s)
and is accepted by the One who has no beginning nor end.

Wa salaam,

**Kamyar M. Hedayat, MD**

**7 Ramadan, 1424**

[^1]: Al-Razi, F. D. Tafsir al-Kabir, v. 27, p.166.


