Angelic Discourse With Those Who Are Not Messengers
===================================================

Muhaddathah
-----------

One of the titles of Lady Fatimah(a.s) was *muhaddathah*, that is,
someone with whom the angels have spoken. We have already mentioned that
*Mushaf Fatimah* was written from what was dictated by the Angel
(Jibra'il), but, is it possible that angels would speak to someone not a
prophet?

The Shi'a believe that the prophets and messengers are not the only ones
with who angels have spoken.[^1]) They have also spoken with the Imams
and lady Fatimah(a.s). This is certainly possible for we have a verse in
the Quran which says that revalation is not exclusively for prophets,
that Allah and the angles have spoken to ordinary people. One example is
Maryam(a.s), the mother of Prophet 'Isa(a.s). In Aal-e 'Imran (surah 3),
in the 42nd-45th verses we read, ”'Oh Maryam,' said the angels, 'truly
Allah has chosen you and purified you and chosen you over all the women
of the world'…”

Likewise in Maryam (surah 19), verses 17-21 we read,

So [Maryam] took a veil (to screen herself) from them; then We sent to
her Our spirit, and there appeared to her a well-made man. She said:
Surely I fly for refuge from you to the Beneficent Allah, if you are one
guarding (against evil). He said: I am only a messenger of your Lord:
That I will give you a pure boy. She said: When shall I have a boy and
no mortal has yet touched me, nor have I been unchaste? He said: Even
so; your Lord says: It is easy to Me: and that We may make him a sign to
men and a mercy from Us, and it is a matter which has been decreed.

Among others with whom the angels have spoken are Sarah(a.s), the wife
of prophet Ibrahim(a.s). In Hud (surah 11), verses 71-77 we read,

And his wife was standing (by), so she laughed, then We gave her the
good news of Ishaq and after Ishaq of (a son's son) Yaqoub. She said: “O
wonder! Shall I bear a son when I am an extremely old woman and this my
husband an extremely old man? Most surely this is a wonderful thing.”
They said: “Do you wonder at Allah's bidding? The mercy of Allah and His
blessings are on you, O people of the house, surely He is Praised,
Glorious.” So when fear had gone away from Ibrahim and good news came to
him, he began to plead with Us for Lut's people. Most surely Ibrahim was
forbearing, tender-hearted, oft-returning (to Allah), “O Ibrahim! leave
off this, surely the decree of your Lord has come to pass, and surely
there must come to them a chastisement that cannot be averted.” And when
Our messengers came to Lut, he was grieved for them, and he lacked
strength to protect them, and said, “This is a hard day.”

Also, Prophet Musa's(a.s) mother received revelation, as in noted in
Qisas (surah 28), verse 7 where it says,

“And We revealed to Musa's mothers, saying: Give him suck, then when you
fear for him, cast him into the river and do not fear nor grieve; surely
We will bring him back to you and make him one of the messengers.”

Thus, there is no inherent connection between revelation and
prophethood. In other words, it's possible for angels to converse with
and give revelation to a person who is not a messenger. Imam
al-Sadiq(a.s) says, “Fatimah was called 'Muhaddithah' because the angels
descended from heaven and spoke with her in the same way that they spoke
with Maryam, daughter of 'Imran.”[^2]

In another hadith it says that the angels speak with the Imams. Imam
al-Jawad(a.s) narrates that Imam Ali(a.s) said to ibn Abbas, “I and
eleven of my descendents are all muhaddath.”[^3]

Also, Imam al-Baqir(a.s) said, “Twelve Imams from the house of Mohammad
are all muhaddath.”[^4]

Imam al-Sadiq(a.s) narrates from the Messenger of Allah(s.a.w), “Truly
among my Ahl al-Bayt are twelve people who are muhaddath.”[^5]

Imam al-Sadiq(a.s) says, “A messenger sees and speaks with angels; a
prophet sees them in his dreams. Occassionaly prophethood and
messengership are found in one person.” When that happens, “muhaddath”
refers to that type of person. “A muhaddath is the one who hears the
voice but doesn't see [the angel].”[^6]

Thusly, there is no inherent relationship between speaking with angels
and prophethood, and angels can speak with those who are not prophets.
Therefore it cannot be said that the Shi'a believe that Lady
Fatimah(a.s) and the Imams(a.s) are prophets because they say that the
angels spoke with them.[^7] It's worth mentioning that in the Sunni
books are reports of certain persons who, according to them, spoke with
angles. For example, Abu Bakr,[^8]

'Umar,[^9] 'Imraan bin al-Hasein,[^10] Abu al-Mu'aali al-Saalih,[^11]
and Zakaariyah al-Naaqid,[^12] and…

Did Jibra'il descend (to earth) after the Messenger of Allah's(s.a.w) demise?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In some hadith it has come that after the demise of Allah's messenger,
Jibra'il gave a valediction saying, “My final mission on earth was for
you and I will descend for no one after you.”[^13] In light of this, how
can it be that Jibra'il spoke to Lady Fatimah(a.s)?

Jalaal al-Din Al-Suyuti al-Shafi\`i al-Ash\`ari (d. 911, CE), who is one
of the renouned Sunni scholars,[^14] answered this very question. He is
of the belief that the chain of authority regarding this hadith and
others similar in content are weak in content.[^15] Moreover, Muslim
opinion on this matter is contradictory; all agree that each year
Jibra'il along with other angels alight upon the earth on Laylat al-Qadr
at the end of the month of Ramadan. A second point is that Jirbra'il's
carrying of revelation cannot have been suspended after the demise of
the Prophet(S), for, Jibra'il must, according to Sunni hadith, bring
revelation to Prophet 'Isa(a.s) after he had killed the Dajjal.10,[^16]

Of course, there is no doubt that after the demise of Allah's
Messenger(s.a.w) there will be no revelation in the sense of prophetic
revelation for anyone. Imam Ali(a.s) after the Messenger's(s.a.w)
passing said, “When he died, revelation ended too,”[^17] and, “With your
death, prophethood and the news of heavenly affairs was cut-off like it
never had with the death of other prophets.”[^18]

Likewise, Sheikh Mohammad Husein Aal-e Kaashif al-Ghita says, “The Imams
believe that whoever believes or insists that after Mohammad(s.a.w)
there came a prophet or revelation or scripture is an unbeliever.”[^19]

The Imam's words, and the opinions of the Shi'a scholars means that
prophetic revelation will no longer occur. However, Jibra'il's descent
and conversing with the friends of Allah is not an impossibility. Seyyed
Mohsin Amin in his book, *A'ayaan al-Shi'ah* about this matter writes:

It is not farfetched and there is no doubt that Jibra'il would speak
with Zahra(a.s) and that Ali(a.s) would hear it and scribe it in a bood
we call *Mushaf Fatimah*, because the reliable companions of the Ahl
al-Bayt have related it to us from the Imams themselves.

To the one who cannot accept this matter, who considers it unlikely, who
writes it off as hyperbole, we say, “Do you think that the beloved of
the Prophet(s.a.w), Lady Zahra(a.s), did not merit this munificence? Is
there any doubt that this hadith is correct given that this reliable
narration was transmitted from our Imams? Such a munificence was
bestowed on Aasif bin Barkhiyyah[^20]) and also Prophet Solomon(a.s) who
are not dearer to Allah than the family of Mohammad(s.a.w). We must also
add that the gracious Quran, that divine book, speaks of Musa's mother,
that she too received revelation.”

Ibn Khaldun[^21] says, “It has been narrated that the Prophet(s.a.w)
said, 'There are among you those to whom the prophets speak.” The author
of *Irshaad al-Saari* narrates from one of the companions, “The angels
would speak with me until the point that they began praising me.”[^22]
In fact, some of the pious people had seen Khidr[^23] guiding 'Umar
'Abdul 'Aziz, however others could not see (Khidr). These are all from
(Sunni) sources.

The author of *Sirah al-Halabi*[^24] and some others have said that
there are reasons why Jibra'il came to the Ahl al-Bayt after the demise
of the Prophet(s.a.w) and gave condolences to them.

“Don't all these narrations from the Shi'a and Sunnnis remove all sense
of improbability and doubt about the munificent blood and soul of the
Prophet(s.a.w) (i.e. Lady Fatimah (a.s), mistress of the ladies of all
the worlds and henceforth her pure and purified progeny?”[^25]

[^1]: There are a number of Sunni hadith that suggest the same. Ibn
‘Umar stated that angels spoke to him in dreams (Sahih Bukhari, v.2,
b.21, hadith \#255). ‘Umar bin al-Khattab (Ibn ‘Umar’s father) states
that he, along with other companions, saw and listened to the Angel
Gabriel speak with the prophet Mohammad (Sahih Muslim, v.1, b.1, hadith
\#1

[^2]: Dalaa’il al-Imamah, p. 14.

[^3]: Kulayni, M. Usul al-Kaafi, v.1, p.533; Halbi, Taqrib al-Ma’aarif,
p.132.

[^4]: Khisaal Sadduq, v.2, p.430, hadith \#49.

[^5]: Nu’mani, Mohammad bin Ibrahim, Al-Ghaybah, pp.66-67.

[^6]: Aashub, Abu Ja’far Rashidaddin Mohammad bin Ali bin Shahr,
Al-Manaaqib, v.7, p.776.

[^7]: This is in effect the argument laid out by one ‘Abdullah Al-‘Asimi
in Al-Siraa’ bayn al-Islaam wa al-Wuthniyyah on page 35 of that book. He
states, “Fatimah and Ali bin Abi Talib and their children are prophets
and messengers according to this sect (i.e. the Shi’ah).” If his
conclusion is correct, then it can be said that the Sunnis believe that
the first two Caliphs as well as others were prophets because according
to Sunni beliefs, angels spoke with them.

[^8]: Bukhari, M. Sahih al-Bukhari, v.4, p.241, hadith \#7679.

[^9]: Al-Masaahif, p.6.

[^10]: Al-‘Iraqi, Zaynul Abideen Abu Fadhl ‘Abd al-Rahim bin al-Husein,
Tarah al-tathrib fi sharh al-taqrib, v.1, p.90.

[^11]: Abu Jowzi, Siffat al-Sufuh, v.17, p.72, researched by Ikhwayn
‘Ata, Daar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah publications.

[^12]: Khatib Baghdadi, Taarikh Baghdaad, v.7, p.462, Daar al-Kutub
al-‘Ilmiyyah, Beirut.

[^13]: Sirah Halabi, v.3, p.353, Daar Ahya’ al-Tiraath al-‘Arabi.

[^14]: Suyuti was a renouned Sunni scholar and prolific author with over
700 extent works attributed to him. He was also a Shadhili Sufi. He was
considered to be the foremost authority of hadith and ‘Arabic language
of his day. While he lauded Imam ‘Ali in his work, Al-qawl al-jali fi
fada'il \`Ali (The manifest discourse on the virtues of \`Ali ibn Abi
Talib), he was no friend of the Shi’a. For example, he penned the
polemic, Risala al-sayf al-qati\` al-lami\` li ahl al-i\`tirad
al-shawa'i\` (Epistle of the sharp and glistening sword to the Shi\`i
people of opposition) as well.

[^15]: Sirah Halabi, v.3, p.353, Daar Ahya’ al-Tiraath al-‘Arabi.

[^16]: Dajjal refers to what is commonly referred to as the
“Anti-Christ” in Islamic eschatology. He is a one-eyed person who will
wreak havoc on the earth and destroy many towns. ‘Isa will come back
from heaven, where Allah had taken him to to save him from crucifiction,
and kill the Dajjal, after which, according to Sunni tradtions, he will
receive a revelation. For example, in Sahih Muslim, book 41, chapter 21,
hadith \#7015 reads in part, “[‘Isa] will then search for [Dajjal] until
he catches hold of him at the gate of Ludd and kills him. Then a people
whom Allah had protected will come to ‘Isa, son of Maryam, and he will
wipe their faces and inform them of their ranks in Paradise; it will be
under such conditions that Allah will reveal to Jesus these words: “I
have brought forth from amongst My servants such people against whom
none would be able to fight…”

[^17]: Nahj al-Balaghah v.2, p.16, lecture 133, ‘Aalami edition.

[^18]: Ibid, p.233, sermon 235.

[^19]: Asl al-Shi’ah wa aswahiha, p.20, Mu’assassah Imam Ali
publication, Qom.

[^20]: Aasif bin Barkhiyyah was a companion of the Prophet Solomon(a.s)
and was the one who volunteered (and did) to retrieve the throne of
Bilqis, the Queen of Sheba as is noted in the following Quranic verses,
“One who had the knowledge of the Book said: ‘I will bring [the throne]
to you in the twinkling of an eye.’ Then when [Solomon] saw it settled
beside him, he said, ‘This is of the grace of my Lord that He may try me
whether I am grateful or ungrateful; and whoever is grateful, he is
grateful only for his own soul, and whoever is ungrateful, then surely
my Lord is Self-sufficient, Honored.’”(27:40)

[^21]: Ibn Khaldun was the famous Sunni historian from Tunisia, laid the
foundations for sociology, ethnography, and philosophy of history with
his seminal work, Al-Muqaddimah. in his seminal work, In it he
repudiates the Shi’a, “Ahl al-Bayt have excepted themselves and deviated
by schools (madhahib) innovated by them, and fiqh (jurisprudence)
followed by them alone, and founded it upon their creed (madhhab) based
on censuring some of the Companions” (Chapter on the Knowledge of
Jurisprudence).

[^22]: Al-Qistaani, Mohammad, Irshaad al-Saari li sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari.

[^23]: Hadhrat Khidr is the man who taught the Prophet Musa in the
episode recounted in Chapter 18, verses 60-82 of the Quran.

[^24]: Al-Suyuti. Cf. note 14.

[^25]: A’ayaan al-Shi’ah, v.1, p.714.


