Inquiries regarding the Mushaf
==============================

Why is the content of this Mushaf named after Fatimah al-Zahra?
---------------------------------------------------------------

Explanatory notes:

'Abdullah ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan ibn 'Ali ibn abi Talib
(70/690-145/762) was a descendent of the Prophet (s.a.w) via Imam Hasan
(a.s) (i.e. a Hasani sayyid). Imam Ali(a.s) and Lady Fatimah(a.s) had
two sons survive to adulthood: Hasan (a.s), the eldest son, and
Husayn(a.s), the younger of the two. The Imamate did not continue via
the descendents of (the second Imam) Hasan (a.s) but from (the third
Imam) Husayn (a.s). The fourth Imam, and son of Imam Husayn(a.s), Ali
ibn al-Husayn (a.s), married his first cousin, the daughter of Imam
al-Hassan (a.s). Their son, Mohammad ibn 'Ali (a.s), was the fifth Imam,
“uniting” the Hassani and Husayni lines of Imamate.

'Abdullah ibn al-Hasan tried to put forth his son, Muhammad whom he
referred to as *al-Mahdi* (the rightly guided one) and *Dhu al-nafs
al-zakiyyah* (possessor of the pure soul) appointed Caliph during the
times of the 'Abbasids on the basis of kinship to the Ahl al-Bayt. Both
'Abdullah ibn al-Hasan and the 'Abbasids claimed a right to leadership
based on lineage, the former through Imam Hasan (a.s), the latter
through 'Abbas (a.s), the Prophet's uncle (s.a.w). Imam al-Sadiq(a.s)
knew that nothing would come of Mohammad ibn 'Abdullah's uprising
because nothing was written of his rule in *Mushaf Fatimah*, which
mentioned the names of all future rulers.


