Translator’s note
=================

I have tried to stay faithful to the author's wording where possible
straying in only a few cases. In cases where the Farsi implied but
didn't state something, or, where redundancy would clarify ambiguous
statements for an audience not familiar with certain theological
discourses or verbiage, I inserted words, usually in parentheses.

So as not to prejudice the reader, I have elected not to translate the
word ”*Mushaf*” which is the crux of the entire discussion. As it will
become clear, the word has many meanings. The appropriate meaning of
”*Mushaf*” is the *raison d'être* of this investigation.

The word “hazrat” (Farsi pronounciation of the Arabic, *hadhrat*)
literally means “eminence” or, “presence.” It is a term of respect given
to men and women of great spiritual import and erudition, such as
prophets and Imams as well as living scholars, and the intimate family
(*ahl al-bayt*) of the Prophet Mohammad(s.a.w). However, I elected to
translate the appellation of ”*hazrat-e Fatemeh(a.s)*” as “Lady
Fatimah(a.s)” as this seems to connote in English the respect and
grandeur of personality that the Arabic/Farsi implies. Also, I've
elected to use transliteration corresponding to the Arabic pronunciation
of loan words in Farsi rather than the transliterations of the Farsi
pronunciation, e.g. *Fatimah* (Arabic) vs. *Fatemeh* (Farsi), except
when an original quote, author's name, or title of a book was in Farsi.

Where possible, I have attempted to check all of the references made by
the author and translate *hadith* quoted in Farsi directly from the
Arabic and not from the author's Farsi translation.

All mistakes are mine and I implore Allah's forgiveness for any
shortcomings and errors in my meager efforts.

**K.M.H.,**

**7 Ramadhan, 1424**


