What is Mushaf Fatimah?
=======================

The most prevalent question about this *Mushaf*, the most tumultuous and
confusing issue is, “What exactly does “*Mushaf*” mean?” The assumption
is that this *Mushaf* is a special type of Quran. However, as we will
show in the following sayings (*hadith*) of the Prophet Mohammad(s.a.w)
and the Imams(a.s), this *Mushaf* doesn't contain a single verse
(*ayah*) of the Quran. However, some of the uninformed think that
because it is called a “*Mushaf*” that it must mean “Quran”. In fact,
some Sunnis come to Qom[^1] asking to see the *Mushaf* which they allege
is another Quran. However, when they understand the reality that the
Shiites have none other than and only that very Quran that other Muslims
possess, they are stunned at the accusations made against the Shiites. A
great deal of the *Ahl al-Sunnah* (i.e. Sunnis) thinks that the Shiites
have another Quran—besides the present Quran—at their disposal! They
suppose that *Mushaf* Fatimah is that other Quran! These allegations
even make their way into secular Arab publications. For example, the
Sudanese Newspaper, ”*Aakhir Khabar*” on 6 Rajab, 1416 included an
article claiming that the Shiites have another Quran by the name of
*Mushaf Fatimah*!

It has gotten to the point that some Shiites believe that *Mushaf
Fatimah* is another Quran. In this way they will assume that the
narrations presented in this book have little import (because they are
meant to mislead Sunnis) and doubt the chain of authority of the
narrators. It is amazing in this light to see that such a personage as
Imam Khomeini not only didn't hide or deny its existence, rather, he
took pride in it: “We are honored that . . . *Sahifah Fatemiyyah* (i.e
*Mushaf Fatemah*) which was inspired by God most excellent to Zahra
Mardhiyyah (i.e. Lady Fatimah) is our (heritage).”[^2]

What do such people mean that they are honored or take pride in *Mushaf
Fatimah*? It's because no one had seen its contents[^3] came out after
nightfall and said several times: ‘(There will be) a grumbling and a
moaning and a dark night, and then the Imam (al-Mahdi) will come out to
you wearing the shirt of Adam, and on his hand will be the ring of
Solomon, and the staff of Moses.”[^4].) and it is only through
narrations that we know what the subject matter is. Subsequently, I must
confess that the existence of the *Mushaf Fatimah* has been proven and
the proofs exist, however, we must approach it in a round about way.
Heretofore an independent work has not been published; (other works)
have indirectly mentioned it.

Some of the hadith about *Mushaf Fatimah* have used this very word
“*Mushaf*” in which case the aforementioned thoughts are reinforced.
Mohammad bin Muslim narrates from Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq(a.s), “Fatimah
left a *Mushaf* which is not the Quran.”[^5]

'Ali bin Sa'id narrated from Imam al-Sadiq(a.s), “And it is with us. By
Allah, *Mushaf Fatimah* does not contain a single verse from the Book of
Allah!”[^6] Imam al-Sadiq(a.s) says, “In it is what is like your Quran,
only three times (in size).”[^7],[^8]

Some have conjectured that *Mushaf* is a word exclusively in reference
to the Quran. If it is said that “*Mushaf* Fatimah”, means “Fatimah's
Quran” because the last hadith says “It is like your Quran, only three
times (in size)”, they conclude that the Shiites believe that the
present Quran is inadequate. These people are oblivious to the fact that
the preceding hadith stated emphatically that this *Mushaf* doesn't
contain a single verse of Quran. In any case, now we will start the
discussion with the meaning of “*Mushaf*”.

Connotation of “Mushaf”
-----------------------

That which has the appearance of sheets of text between two covers is
called a “*Mushaf*”. In *Sahah taj al-lughah,* and , *Sahah
al-'arabiyyah* it says, ”*Al jam'e lil suhuf al maktubeh bayn al
dafatayn”*.[^9],[^10] “Suhuf” (صُحُف)

the plural of “sahifeh” (صَحيفة) connotes a leaf or folio on which one
writes. “dafatayn” (دَفَتين) is derived from “dafah” (دَفّة) which
connotes something which is contiguous or adjoining something. ”*daftan
al-Mushaf*” (المصف دفتاً) means the cover on both sides of a book.
[^11],[^12] Consequently, a *Mushaf* has more than one page, not just
one, although it could on occasion have no more than one page; it's
still a *Mushaf* if it's between two covers so that the pages are
contained within it.[^13]

In conclusion, it must be said that “*Mushaf*” connotes a bound book
inclusive to any book and is not exclusive to the Quran, although it
must be said here that that well known meaning of *Mushaf* is “Quran”.
Etymologically speaking, it can be said that *Mushaf* connotes the Quran
(but doesn't denote it—tr.).

There's no doubt that the word *Mushaf* has been used in reference to
the Quran innumerably but can't be said that it is interchangeable with
the word “Quran” even if it is the most common connotation or if it has
been used in the sunnah as referring to the Quran. Take for example this
narration: “The Prophet(S) said, 'Whosoever recites the collected and
bound (*Mushaf*) Quran will have 2000 good things written for
him.'”[^14] He also said, “Grant your eyes a share from your worship.”
They said, “And what is the share for the eyes, oh Prophet of Allah?” He
said, “Looking at the *Mushaf* (i.e. the Quran) and pondering over
it…”[^15]

We can take away from this narration that the Quran had been collected
and bound in the time of the prophet(s.a.w).

The Term Mushaf in the Time of The Companions of The Prophet (s.a.w)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Despite the fact that the Prophet referred to the Quran as a *Mushaf*
(in the above narration collected by a Sunni author—tr.), the Sunni
sources state that the Prophet(s.a.w) absolutely did not use the word
*Mushaf* because its first usage was in the time of Abu Bakr (the first
Caliph). Suyuti[^16] states, “When Abu Bakr had collected the Quran,
[the Muslim community] began searching for a name for it. Some
suggested, “Let's call it the Gospel (*Injeel*).” However, others were
not pleased with that (because it is what the Christians call their
book). Someone said, “Let's call it ”*Sifr*” but again others were
displeased because the Jews (called their book that). Ibn Mas'ud said,
“In Abyssinia, I saw a book which they called “*Mushaf*”. From this
suggestion, they called the bound Quran '*Mushaf*'.”[^17],[^18]

There are three problems with this narration:

This doesn't correspond with the prior narration (in the Sunni canon of
hadith) in which the Prophet (S) referred to the Quran as *Mushaf*.

It opposes the fact that the same narration also demonstrates that the
Quran had been bound during the Prophet's(s.a.w) lifetime.

The word “*Mushaf*” is an 'Arabic word, so it couldn't have been
introduced from Abyssinia.

Imam Ali (A) says, “The heart is the *Mushaf* of the eye.”[^19]

The Connotation of Mushaf among Non-Muslims
-------------------------------------------

Among the multitude of references that demonstrate that *Mushaf* doesn't
exclusively connote the Quran, are those used by non-Muslim 'Arab
writers. For example, ibn S'ad (a Muslim writer) in *Tabaqaat al-Kabari*
conveys the story of one “Sahal the Christian” in which [Sahal] refers
to the Gospel and other holy writings amongst [the Christians] with the
word *Mushaf*[^20] as did 'Arab Muslims. If it were the case that
*Mushaf* only referred to the Quran, they wouldn't have used it for
(their writings). For example, Umm Salamah, the wife of the
prophet(s.a.w) recounts the story of the Abyssinians as such: “They
would unravel their scripture around and about themselves; their
patriarch would begin scribing until that volume was soaked with
ink.”[^21] As well, one “Owzaa'i”, born 33 AH, living 157 years (he died
9 years after the martyrdom of Imam al-Sadiq(a.s)) referred to Byzantine
manuscripts as *Mushaf*.[^22],[^23]

Mushaf According to the Expressions and Lexicon of the Sahabah (Companions)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The companions of the Prophet of Allah(s.a.w) used *Mushaf* to refer to
other than the Quran. For example, the famous companion Abi Sa'id Khudri
in answering some people who wanted him to narrate hadith to them said,
“I won't say a thing for you to write until you've read the *Mushaf* (of
hadith already compiled).”[^24] Also, Uthmaan ibn 'Affan (the third
Caliph) requested of Hafsah,[^25] “Send us the (unbound and fragmentary)
manuscripts (of Qur'an) so that we may compile and make a *Mushaf* of
them (*nunsakha fil masahif*) . . .”[^26]

Mushaf in the Lexicon of the Taabi'een (The Companions Of The Companions Of The Prophet(s.a.w) )
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the same way that the sahabah had used *Mushaf* to refer to other
than the Quran, the taabi'een followed suit. In this regard, there are
commentaries and lexicons; we will site here a sentence from Mohammad
bin Sirin Ansaari: ”'Ali swore to not don his cloak (i.e. not leave his
house) except on Fridays (for public prayers) until he had collected the
Quran into a book (*fi Mushaf*).”[^27]

If the term *Mushaf* in this report meant Quran, it would be redundant.
It would be like saying that he (A) was collecting the book of Quran
into a book. Then, the literal meaning of *Mushaf* is clear. The second
report comes from Rafi' bin Mehraan who narrated, ”[The companions]
collected the Quran into a book (*fi Mushaf*).”[^28]

[^1]: Qom, Iran is one of the oldest Shiite cities, settled in the 2nd
century, AH. It is one of the premiere centers of Shiite theological
learning and the pilgrimage site for the sister of the eighth Imam,
Fatimah al-Ma’sumah (A).

[^2]: Khomeini SRM. Last Will and Testament, page 3.

[^3]: The Imams(a.s) possessed this mushaf, along with the seal of the
Prophet (s.a.w), the staff of prophet Moses(a.s), etc. as proofs of
their vice regency. The twelfth Imam, Al-Mahdi(a.s) (may Allah hasten
his appearance) currently possesses it. For example, in one hadith it
says, “One night, Amir al-Mu’mineen (i.e. Imam ‘Ali(a.s

[^4]: Al-Kafi, v.1, hadith \#619

[^5]: Majlisi MB. Bihar al-Anwar, v.26, p.41, hadith \#73. Darul kutub
al islamiyyah, Tehran, Iran.

[^6]: Majlisi MB. Bihar al-Anwar, v.27, p.271, hadith \#3. Darul kutub
al islamiyyah, Tehran, Iran.

[^7]: Kulaini M. Usul al-Kafi, v.2, p.613.

[^8]: Majlisi MB. Bihar al-Anwar, v. 26, p.39, hadith \#10. Darul kutub
al islamiyyah, Tehran, Iran.

[^9]: Juhari, Sahah taj al-lughah, and , Sahah al-‘arabiyyah, v. 4, p.
1383

[^10]: Zubaydi, Taj al-‘aroos, v. 6, p.161.

[^11]: Fayyumi, Misbah al-munir, p.197

[^12]: Abu Hilaal al-‘Askari, al-furuq al-lughwiyyeh, p.241, Qom,
Basirti Publication

[^13]: Zarqaani, Minahil al-irfaan, v.1, p.384, Beirut, Daaraahiya’
Al-Tiraath Publication, 1412 AH/1994

[^14]: Zarkeshi, Al Burhan fi ‘Ulum al-Quran, v.1, p.546. Beirut, Daar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyeh, 1403 AH/1983

[^15]: Tirmidhi, Navaadir al-Usul, v.3, p.254, Beirut, Daar al-Jeel,
1412 AH/1992

[^16]: Suyuti was a renouned Sunni scholar and prolific author with over
700 extent works attributed to him. He was also a Shadhili Sufi. He was
considered to be the foremost authority of hadith and ‘Arabic language
of his day. While he lauded Imam ‘Ali in his work, Al-qawl al-jali fi
fada'il \`Ali (The manifest discourse on the virtues of \`Ali ibn Abi
Talib), he was no friend of the Shi’a. For example, he penned the
polemic, Risala al-sayf al-qati\` al-lami\` li ahl al-i\`tirad
al-shawa'i\` (Epistle of the sharp and glistening sword to the Shi\`i
people of opposition) as well.

[^17]: Suyuti J, Al-Atqaan, v.1, p.53

[^18]: Kitaabi, Al-Tarteeb al-Aadaariyyeh, v.2, p.231, Daar al-Kitab
al-‘Arabi

[^19]: Ibn Abi Talib A. Nahj al-Balagha, saying \#408

[^20]: Ibn S’ad, Tabaqaat al-Kabari, v.1, p.363, Dar Sadr Publications

[^21]: Ibn Hishaam, Seerah al-Nabi, v.1, p.353, Beirut; Dar al-Fikr
Publications, 1401 AH/1981

[^22]: Ibn S’ad, Tabaqaat al-Kabari, v.7, p.433, Dar Sadr Publications

[^23]: Tahdheeb al-Kamaal, v.17, p.315, Mu’asassah al-Risalah

[^24]: Baghdadi K, Taqyeed al-‘Ilm, p.36, Beirut; Daar al-Sunnat
al-Nabawiyyah, 1974

[^25]: Hafsah was the daughter of ‘Umar ibn al-Khattaab, the second
Caliph. Hafsah was also a wife of the prophet Muhammad (s.a.w).

[^26]: Bukhari M, Sahih al-Bukhari, v.6, book 61, hadith \#4938, p.120,
Beirut; Daar al-Fikr, 1411 AH/1991 (hadith \#510, book 61: Virtues of
the Quran according
tohttp://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/fundamentals/hadithsunnah/bukhari/061.sbt.ht...

[^27]: Sijstani, Al-Musahaf, p.10, Egypt; Rahmaaniyyah publications

[^28]: Sijstani, Al-Musahaf, p.9, Egypt; Rahmaaniyyah publications


