Mushaf in classical writings
============================

*Mushaf* was used by classical writers in their manuscripts in reference
to a bound book. For example the author Jaahidh referred to each section
of his book *Al-Haywaan* as a *Mushaf* and

at the end of each section he would write, “thus ends the first *Mushaf*
and begins the second *Mushaf*. . .”

Also, Sheikh Aba Bakr bin 'Iqaal Saqli in *Fawaa'id* says, “The sahabah
didn't collect the sunnah of the Prophet of Allah(s.a.w) in a book
(*Mushaf*).” [^1]

It's worth pointing out that the word *Mushaf* is mentioned neither in
the Quran itself nor was it counted among the names of the Quran.
Jalaaluddin Suyuti[^2] and Abu Al-Ma'aali al-Saaleh, who was one of the
transmitters of hadith of Islam, counted 55 titles for the Quran and the
word “*Mushaf*” was not among them.

It's interesting to know that no one objected to Seebway's calling his
book *Al-Keetaab*, despite the fact that that was one of the titles of
the Quran, but they object to the book of Lady Fatimah(a.s) being called
“*Mushaf*”.

Mushaf in Contemporary Writings
-------------------------------

Dr. Imtiyaaz Ahmad in his book *Dalaa'il al-towtheeq al-mobakkir lil
sunnah wa al-hadeeth* says that *Mushaf* doesn't just refer to the
Quran, but can refer to (any) book. In order to prove his claim, he
cites several sources.[^3] Also professor Bakir Bin 'Abdullah in his
book *Ma'rifat al-nasakh wa al-sahhaf al-Hadeeth* says, ”'*Mushaf*' is
an idiomatic expression which is inclusive to any collected work used by
speakers.”[^4]

Dr. Nasiraddin Asad in *Masaadir al-shu'ur al-jaahili* writes, “They
called any bound book a “*Mushaf*” and it strictly refers to a book, not
just the Quran.”[^5]

[^1]: Abu Rayhah, Adhwa’‘ala al-sunnat al-mohammadiyyah, p.259,
Al-Batha’ publication.

[^2]: Al-Itiqaan fi ‘ulum al-Quran, v.1, pp.51-52, Beirut; Daar al-Fikr

[^3]: Ahmad I, Dalaa’il al-towtheeq al-mobakkir lil sunnah wa
al-hadeeth, pp.263-269, A. Amin tr., Pakistan; Islamic Research
Publications

[^4]: bin ‘Abdullah B, Ma’rifat al-nasakh wa al-sahhaf al-Hadeeth,
pp.23-31, Jeddah; Daar al-Raayah.

[^5]: Asad N, Masaadir al-shu’ur al-jaahili, p.139, Cairo; Daar
al-Ma’aarif, 1969.


