Other books by Lady Fatimah (a.s)
=================================

Various opinions regarding the Mushaf Fatimah
---------------------------------------------

As far as we know, no Shiite or Sunni scholar has ever gotten their
hands on *Mushaf Fatimah*. Rather, they've gained an understanding of
its scribe and author from the relevant hadith on the subject. In this
respect, there hasn't been a far-reaching or comprehensive research on
the matter. Some have said, “Her *Mushaf* contains parables, edicts,
sermons, historical accounts and miracles and amazing occurrences. Imam
'Ali(a.s) is its author, and he gifted it to her as a consolation after
her father's death”[^1]

Others are of the opinion that this *Mushaf* contains jurisprudence
(*shar'i*), normative and ethical rulings, all future events, and that
Lady Fatimah(a.s) wrote it from all the pronouncements that she heard
from her father (the prophet Mohammad(s.a.w)) and her husband (Imam
'Ali(a.s)).[^2]

Imam Khomeini in his last will and testament said, “Sahifah Fatimah was
inspired to her from the very presense of the Lord most High to Zahra
Mardhiyyah (i.e. Lady Fatimah).”[^3] Sayyid Muhsin Ameen is of the
opinion that this noble Lady (a.s) has two books: one inspired by her
Lord, the other the sayings of the prophet of Allah (s.a.w) to Lady
Fatimah(a.s).[^4]

There reason that there are so many divergent opinions on the content of
this *Mushaf*, as the above quotes point out, is owing to the fact that
the hadith are scattered in various chapters of various books. There are
no analytical or theoretical analyses (of the hadith by the scholars who
had collected the hadith). Because of this, the foundation of the
argument and investigation are narrations that haven't been collected
into one chapter (of a book of hadith), rather, they are in various
books.

Indeed, none of the books that refer to Lady Fatimah (a.s) have hadith
that mention the *Mushaf*'s content mention the same content twice (i.e.
every hadith says that the *Mushaf* contains something different). In
this respect, some have thought that the *Mushaf* is the very one that
the reports mention, this because of the divergent opinions that have
arisen. However, these hadith speak of the books (*kitab*) of Lady
Fatimah (a.s) and not per se of her *Mushaf*. In light of this, it is
fitting to allude to these other books until we can separate them from
and arrive to her *Mushaf*.

1. Book of Ethics
-----------------

Neither the Shi'a or Sunni books of hadith have noted such a book,
rather, its existence has been alluded to in the above mentioned books.
Kharaa'aty (a Sunni) narrates from Mojaahid, “Ubayy bin Ka'b, went to
visit Fatimah (May Allah's pleasure be upon her)—the daughter of
Mohammad(s.a.w). Fatimah took out a a book hidden between the fronds of
a date tree and showed it to him. In it was written, 'Whoever believes
in God and the day of resurrection is kind to his neighbor.'”[^5]

There is another narration which refers to this book. It is clear that
the above hadith is actually a partial narration. Sheikh Kulayni quotes
the full narration in *Usul al-Kaafi* from Imam al-Sadiq(a.s)[^6]. Abu
Ja'far Mohammad bin Jarir bin Rustam Tabari quotes from the scholars of
the fourth (Islamic) century also quotes this hadith—with an even longer
narration—in the book *Dalaa'il al-Imamah*.[^7]

Apparently, the people who said that *Mushaf Fatimah* is about factual
and ethical matters and etiquette had seen this hadith. As we will point
out, *Mushaf Fatimah* does not contain ethical matters. Therefore, there
is no basis for this belief.

2. Book of Precepts and Statutes (ketaab-e tashri'i)
----------------------------------------------------

Such a book has not been recorded in the books of hadith. However, in
responding to the question the representative of Mansur—the 'Abbassid
Caliph—in Medina, Imam al-Sadiq(a.s) made reference to this book.[^8]
From this we can infer that Lady Fatimah(a.s) was in possession of a
book on precepts and statutes.

'Allamah Sayyid Muhsin Amin considered this book to be *Mushaf
Fatimah*,[^9] however it must be said that there are narrations—to be
noted later—that say that the *Mushaf* of this noble Lady did not
contain matters of the permissible and forbidden. If such
jurisprudential rulings were noted, there are other hadith by Lady
Fatimah(a.s) quoting her eminent father, the prophet of Islam(s.a.w)
that say otherwise.[^10]

3. Fatimah's Tablet
-------------------

*Lawh* (لُوْح) refers to wide pages of wood or bone, which in Farsi is
called *taablow* (تابلو), or, *takhteh* (تخته). The existence of this
tablet is noted in a great number of hadith. It contains the names of
the Shi'ah Imams(a.s).

Abu al-Fath Karaajaki (d. 449 AH) firmly believes that all the Shi'ah
(scholars) are unanimous regarding the content of this tablet.[^11] The
content of this tablet have not been reported in one place. It has a
number of various chains of authority. Kulayni, quoting from Jaabir bin
'Abdullah Ansaari says the following,

“I approached Fatimah and in her hands was a tablet. In it were the
names of the executors (of the prophetic trust) (الأوصياء) from her
children, and they numbered twelve.[^12] The last of them was Al-Qaa'im,
three amongst them were (named) Mohammad, three amongst them 'Ali.”[^13]

What [the narrator] meant by “three amongst them were (named) Mohammad”
was Mohammad al-Baqir(a.s) (the 5th Imam), Mohammad al-Jawaad(a.s) (the
9th Imam) and Mohammad ibn al-Hasan al-Mahdi(a.s) (the 12th Imam,
referred to in the hadith as “Al-Qaa'im”). However, the statement that
“three among them 'Ali” doesn't correspond to the number of Imams with
the name of ”'Ali”. There were actually four of them: Imam 'Ali(a.s)
(the 1st Imam), 'Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sajaad(a.s) (the 4th Imam), 'Ali
ibn al-Musa al-Ridha(a.s) (the 8th Imam) and 'Ali ibn al-Mohammad
al-Haadi(a.s) (the 10th Imam). How do we rectify this?

The first answer: the pronoun “amongst them” (مِنهُم) refers to “her
children” (وُلْدِها). In these respect, the meaning of “three amongst
them 'Ali” is the children of Lady Fatimah(a.s) and that's why the
narrator didn't mention the name of Imam 'Ali(a.s) (the husband of Lady
Fatimah(a.s) and father of the Imams(a.s)).

The second answer: The scribe erred (in writing “three amongst them
'Ali”. It was meant to be written as “four amongst them 'Ali”. There is
a hadith from Abi al-Jaarud quoting Imam al-Baqir(a.s) in which the
Imam(a.s) says “four”.[^14]

The third answer is that the pronoun of “amongst them” (مِنهُم) is
referring to [they numbered] “twelve” (اثنى عشر). If the narrator hadn't
said “four ['Ali's] amongst them” (مِنهُم أربع) it was because Imam
'Ali's(a.s) name was not written on the tablet. (Regardless), his title
has been noted in the tablet as we will see in a narration by Abu
Basir.[^15] The (complete) contents of this tablet are mentioned and
verified in *Kamaal al-Din wa Tamaam al-Ni'mah*.[^16]

The contents of this tablet—and in some people's opinions, the tablet
itself—was a gift from Allah to the Prophet(s.a.w) which the
Prophet(s.a.w) had gifted to Lady Fatimah(a.s).[^17]

4. Last Will and Testament
--------------------------

It has been narrated in numerous hadith with multiple chains of
transmission that Lady Fatimah(a.s) left behind a book in which wrote
down her will and testament.[^18] This will and testament was *shar'i*,
regarding the seven orchards[^19] bequeathed to Lady Fatimah(a.s) by the
Prophet(s.a.w); thus it actually contained a political and social
advice.[^20] Among her last desires was that certain people not be
present during her burial, that her place of burial not be revealed,
etc. Her last will and testament contains a plethora of matters that are
also contained in the *Mushaf Fatimah*. Some have said that Imam
'Ali(a.s) found it by her bedside after her demise.[^21]55

5. Mushaf Fatimah]

5. Mushaf Fatimah
-----------------

The existence of this book has been noted, again, by several sources in
numerous narrations. We have already enumerated a number of questions
surrounding this book, to name a few: who dictated this book? Who is its
author? What is it about? Has any alteration in the Qur'an been alluded
to in it? Where is this book now and who possesses it? And…

[^1]: Musawwi, S, Al-Muraaji’aat, p. 521, Iran; Daar al-Kitaab
al-Islaami, no date given.

[^2]: Ma’rufulhasani, H, Seerat al-A’immah al-Ithna ‘Ashari, pp. 96-97.
Beirut, Daar al-Ta’aaruf.

[^3]: Khomeini, R. Vasiyat nameh siyasi-elahi Emam Khomeini, p. 3,
Tehran (no date or publisher given).

[^4]: Ameen, M. “A’ayaan al-Shi’ah, v.1, pp.313-314. Beirut, Al-Ansaaf
publications.

[^5]: Kharaa’ati, Makaarim al-aklaaq wa ma’aaliha, p. 43. Maktabah
al-Islaam al-‘aalamiyyah, Cairo (no date).

[^6]: Bahrani-Isfahaani, ‘Awalim al-‘ulum, v.11, p.533. Tahqiq
mu’assasseh Imam Mahdi, Qom (no date).

[^7]: Tabari, M. Dalaa’il al-Imamah, p.5. A’alami, Beirut (no date).

[^8]: Kulayni, M. Furu’ al-kaafi, v.3, p.705, hadith \#2. Daar
al-Adhwa’, Beirut (no date).

[^9]: Amin, M. A’ayun al-shi’ah, v.1, p.314-315 (no publisher or date).

[^10]: No author, Sirah al-a’immah al-ithnah ‘ashar, v.1, pp.96-97 (no
publisher or date).

[^11]: Karrajaki, A. Al-istinsaar fi al-nafs ‘ala al-a’immah al-athaar,
p.13. Daar al-Adhwa’ publications, Qom (no date).

[^12]: The narrator states that there were 12 Imams, and says that there
are 3 Imams named Mohammad, 3 named ‘Ali. That makes six. There was
another ‘Ali, Imam ‘Ali(a.s), but the narrator was speaking of the Imams
amongst the children of Lady Fatimah(a.s), so, he didn’t count Imam
‘Ali(a.s) as it was self-evident to him as he lived as a contemporary of
Imam ‘Ali(a.s). That makes 7 Imams, and 5 unaccounted for. There were 2
Hasans: Hasan ibn Ali(a.s) (the 2nd Imam) and Hasan ibn Ali
al-‘Askari(a.s) (the 11th Imam), 1 Ja’far: Ja’far ibn Mohammad
al-Sadiq(a.s) (the 6th Imam), and 1 Musa: Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kadhim(a.s)
(the 7th Imam).

[^13]: Kulayni, M. Usul al-Kaafi, v.1, p.533.

[^14]: Sadduq, M. ‘Uyun akhaar al-ridha, v.1, p.47, hadith \#7. Reza
Mashhadi Publications, Qom, 1363/1984.

[^15]: Kulayni, M. Usul al-Kaafi, v.1, p.527, hadith \#4, Sadduq M,
Kaamal al-Din wa Tamaam al-Ni’mah, v.1, p.303, Nashr-e Islaami
Foundation, Qom (no date).

[^16]: Sadduq, M. Kaamal al-Din wa Tamaam al-Ni’mah, v.1, p.311, Nashr-e
Islaami Foundation, Qom.

[^17]: Mufid, M. Kitaab al-‘Irshaad, p.262, Basirati Publication, Qom
(no date); also in, Sadduq, M. Kaamal al-Din wa Tamaam al-Ni’mah, v.1,
p.312, Nashr-e Islaami Foundation, Qom (no date), and in, Majlisi, M.
Bihaar al-Anwaar, v.36, p.201.

[^18]: Tusi M. Tahdhib al-Ahkaam, v.9, p.144, hadith \#50. Daar
al-Adhwa’, Beirut.

[^19]: The seven orchards refer to the area around Fadak which was a war
spoil after the conquest of Khaybar. It belonged to the Prophet(s.a.w)
Mohammad and he bequeathed it to Lady Fatimah(a.s). The Caliphs who took
power after the Prophet’s demise stated that Prophets only bequeath
knowledge, not property, thus they usurped it from that noble Lady(a.s).

[^20]: Majlisi, M. Bihaar al-Anwaar, v.103, p.135-136, hadith \#14.

[^21]: Ibid.


