Reliability of the narrations regarding Mushaf Fatimah
======================================================

Perhaps the most important question about this *Mushaf* is the
reliability of the narrations about it. The other issues can only be
addressed after the determination of credibility of the narrations.
Therefore, we must proceed with this questions first.

-Methods of determining the Soundness of Narrations
---------------------------------------------------

Methods of determining the Soundness of Narrations

There are a number of ways to understand the soundness of narrations. Of
these, three are the most important:

1st: Examining the (credibility and lives of the) men mentioned in the
chain of narrators of a hadith.[^1] If the men are considered to be
reliable (i.e. pious and honest *at the time of the narration*) then the
hadith is reliable.

2nd: There are indications other than the chain of narration that
sometimes, even though there are multiple chains of narration; the
occasion arises that all the narrators possess the necessary
qualifications (of piety), but a single narrator in the chain didn't
apply that hadith in theory or practice. The scholars consider such a
hadith to be weak, otherwise, they wouldn't have disregarded it.
Likewise, there are hadith which are not altogether sound, but there are
indications that reliable scholars accepted and applied the subject,
thus it is considered to be a credible hadith. In such a situation, the
narration is considered authentic (وثق) but not well-documented (ثقة).

3rd: Believability and lack of discrepancy between the legislative,
doctrinal and historical hadith. Regarding the first type, that is to
say, jurisprudential hadith, it is sufficient for the hadith to have a
sound chain of narrators. However, regarding the other two, the
acceptance of and consensus of opinion between scholars is sufficient
(to prove a hadith's reliability).

If you substitute the latter method (believability and consensus of
opinion) for the former (multiplicity of chains of narration), then in
any case, the proof of credibility of a hadith is one's belief in its
credibility without needing to examine who the narrators in the chain
are.

-Mushhaf Fatimah and the ways of determining the soundness and credibility of narrations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mushhaf Fatimah and the ways of determining the soundness and
credibility of narrations

Lo and behold, the moment has come to answer the questions raised so
far. The narrations concerning *Mushaf Fatimah* are sound and reliable
by any of the three methods we have noted. If we want to use the third
method, every single Shi'a scholar has acknowledged the authenticity of
the narrations concerning this *Mushaf*, and we haven't found a single
dissenting scholar (in this regard). This matter strengthens the
determination of authenticity using the second method (multiplicity of
chains). We should mention that some have said, “Is it possible that
Jibra'il(a.s) would descend unto Lady Fatimah(a.s) and impart matters to
her, and that 'Ali(a.s) could hear this and write it down?” Others say,
“But 'Ali(a.s) is superior in virtues to Fatimah(a.s); he(a.s) seems
worthy of such a revelation.”

We will answer these reproaches. For the time being, it suffices to
quote 'Allamah Muhsin Amin who said, “it is neither improbable nor is
there room for doubt to believe that Jibra'il(a.s) would speak to
Zahra(a.s) and that 'Ali(a.s) could hear it. It's recorded in a book by
the name of *Mushaf Fatimah*. What's more, the reliable companions of
the Imams(a.s) have narrated such a thing. To those who doubt this, or
think it to be improbable, or who think it to be exaggerated or lacking
impartiality, I say, 'Do you doubt the power of Allah the most high? Is
Zahra(a.s)[^2], who is of the very essence of the Prophet(s.a.w) not
worthy of this grace? Do you doubt the soundness of a narration despite
the fact that they were uttered from the very Imams of guidance who were
the issue of this noble lady and are totally reliable? Given the fact
that this same honor was bestowed on Aasif bin Barkhiyaa and also
Sulaymaan(a.s), and they certainly not more dear to Allah than the
family of Mohammad(a.s)![^3]

The reliability of the hadith concerning the *Mushaf Fatimah* can also
be demonstrated by the first method. For example, Kulayni in *Al-Kafi*
considered the hadith and narrations about this book to be acceptable
(صحيح).[^4] In one of these hadiths, Imam al-Sadiq(a.s) says,
“Fatimah(a.s) lasted 75 days after the departure of the Prophet of
Allah(s.a.w). Because of her father's (death), she suffered a profound
sadness. Jibra'il(a.s) alighted to her in order to abate her grieving
and to give her something pleasing. He informed her about her father's
(state in heaven) and his (exalted) rank and told her what would happen
to her descendents. 'Ali(a.s) recorded all this (information), and this
is *Mushaf Fatimah*.[^5]

[^1]: This referred to as ‘Ilm al-Rijaal, the science of the narrators
of hadith. It is a field of study on to its own in which the lives and
beliefs of the narrators of hadith are studied.

[^2]: Zahra (the radiant one) is one of the titles of Lady Fatimah(a.s).

[^3]: Amin, H. A’ayaan al-Shi’a, p.314. NB: The author’s son has removed
this quote from the recent edition of the book.

[^4]: Kulayni, M. Usul al-Kaafi, v.1, p.239, hadith \#1; also in,
Majlisi, M. Bihaar al-Anwaar, v.26, p.39, hadith \#70; also in, Rijaal
Najaashi, v.1, p.204-205; and in Rijaal Tusi, p.366.

[^5]: Kulayni, M. Usul al-Kaafi, v.1, p.241, hadith \#5; also in
Majlisi, M. Bihaar al-Anwaar, v.26, p.41, hadith \#72.


