Lesson 9 : the Purity of the Prophets
=====================================

**1. Why must the Prophets be Ma'sum?**

The Wise and Merciful God sent the prophets so that human society may
recognise the right way as opposed to the precipitous way, and may be
able to stride up to the highest peaks of true pride, perfection and
laudable virtues, and stay on that way.

With the same intention, God also made His prophets and messengers
immune from every kind of sin and error, and, in one word, made them
"infallible" (ma'sum), so that they may be able to lead mankind towards
God without any error or mistake.

It is obvious that the very same reason which prompted the need for
prophethood also requires that the prophets be immaculate and immune
from all kinds of sin, impurity, error and fault.

Since the aim and purpose of sending prophets is to lead society
towards God's commands, this aim is to be secured through the
infallibility of the prophets, for it is clear that to do things which
are repulsive or indecent, to sin,

and also to be a source of error and fault is a reason for people to be
averse to and diverted from these things, and thus the aim, which was
the guidance and teaching of society, would be lost.

Of course, we know that no wise person does things against his aim, and
that he takes regard for what is effectual in attaining and reaching his
aim.

For example, someone who wants a number of distinguished individuals to
take part in a celebration in his honour knows that no one without an
invitation can honourably attend. He will never send an invitation to
someone who is averse to him,

rather he will try to send his invitations in such a way that they will
all be accepted, and, if he doesn't do this, his work will not have been
prudent and wise, and it will be regarded as having been unseemly and
unbecoming.

The Merciful and Wise God also takes account of what basically
interferes with the guidance and education of society, and does not want
people to depend on and follow the will of capricious and impure men,
and so to end up far from, and be deprived of their true development.
Therefore, He has sent immaculate prophets so that the guidance and
instruction of society may be in the best possible way.

And now we shall read in more detail why the prophets must be without
fault. â€”

**(A) THE PRINCIPLE OF INSTRUCTION:**

The purpose of sending the prophets was to educate humanity; and we
know that in education, the teacher's behaviour is a more effective
instrument than his speech and verbal instructions.

The character and actions of the teacher can bring about a radical
transformation in man, because, on the basis of the principle of
imitation, man gradually adopts the manner and conduct of his teacher,
and becomes of the same colour so that it is as if he is the clear,
limpid surface of a pool which reflects the image of the sky above
him.

Speech alone cannot play the part of instruction, rather it serves
instruction, and this is the idea of the prophetic mission, that
prophets must possess praiseworthy habits and qualities and be untainted
with sin and error so that they can effectively attract the people of
this world towards the sacred aim.

It is clear that one who has soiled his hands with sin, even though in
secret and without anyone being aware, will never have that unwavering
strength of mind and spirit to bring about a radical transformation in
the area of the human spirit.

For example, a person who taints his lips with wine can never dissuade
others from drinking it, and raise the voice of truth and mobilise his
iron will in combating this act.

The secret of the prophets' success in their mission was the
coordination in their words and deeds, and it is this moral strength
which enabled them to transform the fundamentals of human thoughts and
lead societies towards perfection.

**(B) CONFIDENCE & ACCEPTANCE:**

The greater the degree of faith and confidence that people have in a
speaker, the more their agreement with him increases, and vice versa.

For this reason, the prophets, who divulged the Divine commands and
restrained people from sin and immorality, must, according to this
assertion, be endowed with the greatest, most admirable qualities, and
be free from every kind of sin and indecency, every error and mistake.

This is so that people's confidence and faith in them may be greater
and they may accept their guidance and what they say, and so that people
may strive more assiduously in carrying out the plans and putting into
practice the reformative instructions of the prophets, and understand
from the depths of their hearts their leadership.

Thus the aim of the prophetic mission, that is to say the leading of
the human race to development on all sides, will be accomplished; the
aim of the prophetic mission will not be obtained under any other
circumstances, and that would be very far from the wisdom of God.

This purity and worthiness of the prophets was so extraordinary that
people became devoted to them to such a degree that their followers felt
great love towards them and gave up their lives in following and obeying
them, without heed for the consequences.

However, the question as to how one man can be completely free from sin
and error is a matter to which we shall now turn our attention.

**2. How can a person be Ma'sum? (A) REAL LOVE OF GOD:**

The holy prophets were deeply devoted to God, and why should they not
have been? They, who with their senses and profound insight knew God
better than anyone, who understood His Greatness,

Splendour and Majesty to be above all things, who deem Him alone worthy
of love, devotion and obedience, who had nothing except His Pleasure in
view, who gave their hearts to none but Him, who did everything with
devotion to Him, and who knew Who they were worshipping.

It was for this very reason that the prophets welcomed difficulties and
formidable situations, and also paid attention to God with smiling, open
faces even when they were in the most critical circumstances. And so,
when, in their beloved, true way, they met with difficulties, they
became overflowing with joy.

History has recorded the endeavours of these heavenly, torchbearing men
of guidance, as also the condemnable behaviour of people towards them.
Could steadfastness in these difficulties have had another motivation
apart from love of God and the performance of His command? Surely not.

How can it be imagined that those who are completely engrossed in their
beloved way, and who utter nothing except according to His wish, and in
whose heart,

soul, spirit and thoughts not one corner is empty of remembrance of
Him, can disobey His commands? Or can give themselves up to sin? Rather,
they followed the path of obedience to Him and were devoted to Him.

Someone asked the Prophet of Islam, why he himself indulged in worship
of God to such an extent that he would physically suffer since he was
purified and had no sins.

His answer was that why should he not be a grateful and thankful slave
of God?3 So it was not out of fear of punishment that the Prophet used
to worship God to such an extent, it was out of a sense of gratitude.

Thus we can understand that the perfect knowledge of the prophets and
the deep and true love which they had for God resulted in infallibility
and absolute purity, so that, in addition to precluding sin from their
will and thinking, they withheld themselves from sin.

**(B) THE DEEP & PERFECT INSIGHT OF THE PROPHETS:**

3 Nuru 'th-Thaqalayn, vol. 3. p. 367.

Perceptiveness is not the same in everyone. Someone who is ignorant and
illiterate will never think like a doctor does about microbes and the
contamination of vessels by them. A doctor who has spent years
investigating microbes, has watched them multiply under a microscope,
and has witnessed the fate of those who were infected by them can never
neglect microbes and their dangers.

Thus we see that the ignorant person proceeds to drink water
contaminated with microbes and has no worry, whereas the doctor would
never be prepared to drink such water and would never even entertain the
idea.

The only motive for refraining from drinking is the knowledge and
information which this doctor has concerning the bad effects of
microbes.

So, for example, the illiterate, ignorant person would also keep
himself from eating something filthy, for, in this case, he is aware of
the impurity and harmful effects of it. But a one year old child into
whose reach that filthy thing falls would probably put it into his
mouth.

Another point is that there are some people who attach little
importance to incremental harm, although they fear sudden, unexpected
dangers and avoid them.

For example, someone may be rather lazy about extracting a decayed
tooth and may procrastinate about resorting to a dentist, till such time
as his other teeth become affected, and a great deal more discomfort
comes his way.

The toll for this is that he may be affected by very serious ailments.
However, the very same person, as soon as the pain of appendicitus
appears and there is a possibility of real danger, will entrust himself
into the hands of a surgeon without any delay. Ordinary people take a
superficial view of evil, and do not take sufficient note of its
physical and spiritual, bodily and psychological effects.

However, the prophets, who, with the help of a higher power, have
supremacy in their vision and knowledge over the rest of mankind, who
have a profound and perfect insight into all the effects of evil, and
who, by a secret witnessing, see even those effects of evil which will
materialize in the next world,

will never come under the influence of their own bodily desires and
soil their hands with the contamination of sin; even the thought of it
will never enter their hearts.

In short, remembrance of judgment and the preview of the effects of sin
in the next world was the best way to keep the prophets from sin and
indecency.


