[History of Muslim Philosophers]
================================

History of Islamic philosophy begins from the time of the advent of
Islam in 622 C.E. Revelation of Qur'anic injunctions, appealing to
philosophical interests like, "My Lord! Increase me in knowledge,"1
inviting to God's mathematical ways, "... and He has enumerated
everything in numbers,"2 and emphasizing philosophically, "Call [the
mankind] onto the way of your Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and
reason [argue] with them in the better way,"3 incited intellectual
cognition, leading to philosophical discussions and scientific
investigations, which soon got involved with religion in Islamic
tradition. According to Islam, the faculty of reason in human beings is
an innate ability, so that they may direct their instincts in
subordination to it. Islam maintains that reason is the voice of God and
submission to His voice is submission to reason. The famous Muslim
philosopher of the twentieth century M. M. Sharif in*A History of Muslim
Philosophy* argues in the light of the traditions of the Prophet of
Islam, "God has given man the will to choose, decide, and resolve to do
good and evil. He has endowed him with reason and various impulses so
that by his own efforts he may strive and explore possibilities."4 Many
sayings of the Prophet of Islam, started playing an important role in
inspiring intrigue discussions and complex intellectual cognition by the
scholars of different descent, and thinkers of other faiths and races
who had entered into the mainstream of Islam. Muslim thinkers finding no
contradiction between Islamic faith and the philosophical quest,
considered philosophy as a legitimate approach to understand and
practice the way of Islam. Therefore, soon after the advent of Islam in
the seventh century, many philosophers, scientists, and literary
scholars appeared in the world of Islam between eighth and thirteenth
centuries, which is known the "Golden Period" of Islamic history.

One key factor which initially played a vital role in facilitating the
introduction of philosophical knowledge to Muslim believers whose
knowledge was based on revealed theology, was the perfection of Arabic
language. The Qur'an, which was collected around 633 C.E., is the first
book in Arabic prose form through which the beginning of literary
composition in Arabic language can be traced back. Its perfect grammar
and faultless language, thus exercised a unique influence on the Arabic
language and literature that paved the way for the translation of
philosophical and scientific terminology into Arabic. Oliver Leaman, in
*A Short History of Islamic Philosophy* , remarks:

Since the grammar of the Arabic language is the grammar of the language
which God used in transmitting his final revelation, it was taken to
represent formally the structure of what can be said and how it can be
used. The miracle of the Qur'an lies in the language itself, and one of
the proofs of Islam is taken to be the purity and beauty of the form of
expression of the text itself. It is hardly, surprising, therefore, that
grammar of that language is accorded high status as an explanatory
vehicle.5

In Arabic vocabulary, a meaningful word initially of three Arabic
alphabets known as the root or *makhraj* , with the help of its very
articulate and systematic grammar, is capable of evolving and creating
new words with great ease. Thus the ease, fluency, and richness of the
Arabic language made it possible to coin new words, and translate any
foreign philosophical,

scientific, and medical terminology into literary Arabic. However, in
this venture - before Arabic - the first Semitic language into which the
Greek philosophical, scientific, and literary texts were translated was
Syriac. In 529 C.E., the Roman Emperor Justinian declared Greek
philosophy the knowledge of the pagans, and ordered to close Platonic
schools all over his empire. Many scholars of Classical Greek philosophy
along with their works moved to Persia. Persian emperor Khusro - I
Anushirwan, welcomed them. When Alexander the Great conquered Persia,
Greek knowledge was briefly introduced in Persia by the thinkers
accompanying him, as well as by those who were already settled there.
This was virtually the first penetration of Greek philosophy in the
east. But soon after the death of Alexander, finding unfavorable
attitude of the Zoroastrian Persians towards Greek learning, the
Platonists turned to translate philosophical texts into Syriac which was
an Aramaic dialect, a feature that also made it easy to translate
philosophy into Arabic.

Philosophy and revealed religion may appear for some so discrete in
nature that there cannot be a philosophy of a particular religion. But
regarding the religion of Islam and linguistic suitability of Arabic
tradition, this notion is not that serious. Arabic language of al -
Kindi's time was in the process of constructing and perfecting technical
vocabulary for Greek scientific, medical, and philosophical words.
Philosophy in the Islamic world spread initially through the medium of
Arabic language. Its importance in the lives of meaning seeker Muslims
helped them to standardize an articulate science of Arabic grammar and
lexicography. Preserving faultless and uncorrupted text of their Holy
Qur'an, helped Muslim philosophers to set a higher standard of speech
and expression. Philosophical thought in Islam known as  *falsafah* -
Arabic word for the Greek*philosophia* - emerged as a result of an
intellectual discipline that matured from the philosophical appeal of
the Greek, Persian, and Sanskrit texts translated into Arabic. Islamic
scholars of the seventh century meditated on*falsafah,* which they
defined as knowledge of all existing things of divine as well as human
matters. They identified*falsafah* with the Qur’anic term*hikmah*
(wisdom or organized thought), believing the origin of*hikmah* to be
divine and debated Qur’anic revelation and reason or*kalam* - a term
used as a translation of the Greek*logos* . Above all, an ethical
reverence for seeking knowledge was infused by the Qur’anic appeal to
reasoning and its Prophet’s traditions advising Muslims to pursue
learning, even if one has to go as far as China and acquire knowledge
even from the heathens. This reverence and various other factors
provided the impetus for knowledge. In order to understand why Muslim
thinkers throughout the history of Islamic civilization have viewed
philosophy an important subject of Islamic tradition, it is important to
be familiar with the theological tradition of Islam. William Chittick,
in*The Heart of Islamic Philosophy* , argues:

Like other religions, Islam addresses three basic levels of human
existence: practice, understanding, and virtue; or body, mind, and
heart; or, to use the well known Koranic triad,*islam*
(submission),*iman* (faith), and*ihsan* (doing what is beautiful). These
concerns are patently obvious to anyone who has studied the Koran or the
Hadith (the saying of the Prophet), and Muslims have always considered
the "search for knowledge"

that the Prophet made incumbent on the faithful to pertain to all three
of these domains. Islamic virtue is grounded in the attempt to find God
present at all times and in all places, just as the Prophet found Him
present. Practice pertains to the domain of the body, understanding to
the mind or "intelligence" or "intellect" or "reason" ('*aql* ), and
virtue to the heart (*qalb* ), where one is able to experience the
reality of God without any intermediary.6

In Islamic practice, it is important to first fully understand the
Qur'an and the Hadith (the Sunnah of the Prophet), and investigate the
objects of faith specified in its scripture. However, some thinkers were
doubtful of philosophy's compatibility with Islamic theology, but there
is ample evidence that Muslim interpreters of Greek philosophy were
sincere followers of the Qur'an and Hadith. At the same time it is also
worth considering that Islamic jurists and theologians who would
criticize the philosophers, also attacked each other with rigorous
criticism.

Muslim thinkers' philosophical and scientific achievements, thus, became
a remarkable aspect of Islamic discourses. Whereas, philosophical
thought helped create a golden period of Islamic civilization, religious
criticism amongst the believers, created many factions, different sects,
and disunity, with the consequence that later on philosophy and religion
became separate subjects. Though Islamic theology had stemmed from a
base different from the Greek traditions, the power of Greek philosophy,
in what it could do and explain, proved a temptation hard to resist for
the Muslim thinkers. Thus, using the language and culture of their
religion, Muslims started exploring and explaining ideas and arguments
of Greek thought which were agreeable to Islamic view. Since, doctrine
of Neoplatonism fitted neatly into Islamic theology; it made an overall
impact on Muslim philosophy. Although Neoplatonism does not seriously
affirm the idea of a God creating out of nothing, it does emphasize the
existence of one supreme being out of which everything else emerges in
such a way as not to tamper with the absolute unity of the One God in
Islam.7

By the ninth century, what is known the "Islamic Golden Age," the
Abbasid Caliph al - Ma'mun viewed that reason and faith can be same;
that by fully opening the mind and unleashing human creativity, many
wonders - including peace - can be unleashed. Thus, a great translation
movement of Classical Greek philosophy and sciences, Persian literature,
Indian mathematics and Roman law, came to full swing in Baghdad. Many
important foreign scientific, medical, and philosophical texts were
translated into Arabic. Muslim, Jewish, Christian, and Persian scholars,
translating as well as writing in Arabic, interpreted the philosophical
and scientific inheritance of the Greeks, especially Plato and
Aristotle. Introduction to philosophy and science was initiated by al -
Kindi, al - Farabi, ibn Sina, and many more in Baghdad. In the Arab
Spain philosophical and scientific knowledge came to its peak, with
massive translations and commentaries on Aristotle by Averroes (1126 -
1198) and his contemporary Jewish philosopher Maimonides (1135 - 1204).

Here, it is important to mention some of the early Muslim philosophers,
their views about philosophy, and its compatibility with Islamic
theology. Al - Kindi (801 - 873), in Latin Alkindus, was the first great
Arab philosopher to follow the philosophy of Neoplatonism. He is
considered an

Arab philosopher, but he was more than a philosopher with a strong
theological inclination. He differed from his contemporary the Assyrian
Christian Hunayn ibn Ishaq (809 - 873), in two things: his religion and
his ignorance of Syriac, Greek and Latin languages. Hunayn, who had good
knowledge of Latin, Arabic, Syriac, Greek and Persian languages, played
a very pivotal role as a translator of Greek philosophical, scientific,
and medical treatises available to him during his time. Though he was
originally from southern Iraq, he had studied Greek and became known
among the Arabs as the "Sheikh of the translators." He established such
a method of translation that it was widely followed by all the later
translators which rarely required any correction. The Abbasid
Caliph**al-Ma'mun** **,** in recognition of his unique talent made him
in charge of the**House of Wisdom** , “*Bayt al Hikmah* ” the famous
institution where works of many foreign languages were translated into
Arabic and made available to the scholars.

Whereas Hunayn and his students translated Syriac version of Greek texts
into Arabic, al - Kindi was one of the first benefactors of the
translation movement that became the basic impetus for the Muslim
philosophical tradition. Among al - Kindi's best - known philosophical
works is*On First Philosophy* in which he has given his own definition
of philosophy: "*Philosophy is the knowledge of the reality of things
within man's possibility, because the philosopher's end in his
theoretical knowledge is to gain truth and in his practical knowledge to
behave in accordance with truth* ." He maintained that the noblest part
of philosophy is "first philosophy," which is knowledge of the "first
truth" and the "first cause." Al - Kindi believed in the compatibility,
between philosophy and revelation, and was firmly convinced that he
could co - interpret literal Qur'anic religious doctrines and Greek
philosophical concepts. He held that philosophy and religion correspond
on the basis of three arguments: first, that theology is part of
philosophy; second, that the revelations of the prophets and
philosophical truth conform to each other; and third, that the
theological pursuit is logically ordained. For al - Kindi, supremacy of
the revealed truth is prophet's privilege, who intrinsically posses this
divine science that transcends human capability. He believed in
revelations, creation of world*ex nihilo,* and finally its destruction.

Al - Kindi was followed by many philosophers in Baghdad which reached
its highest point in Islamic literary, scientific, and philosophic
spheres. Following the Greek philosophers, in Islamic tradition,
knowledge of science and philosophy - in some cases theology also - were
merged together in a thinker. Al - Razi (865 - 925), in Latin Razes, a
highly active physician and a passionate rationalist, believed in reason
and reason alone. For him logical reason is the unique criterion of
knowledge and conduct. Although he was a theist believing in God, he was
strongly against prophecy, revelation, and all irrational trends of
thought. He argued that there is no sense in having some humans, like
prophets, guiding the rest of humanity with dogmas. He believed, since
God has given human beings reason in order to gain through it from the
present and future the utmost benefits that mankind can obtain, so
reason sufficiently guides one to God's

existence. For him instead of a prophet, reason is God's best gift to
humankind. He held that human beings are born with an equal inclination
toward knowledge, differing only in the cultivation of their
dispositions. Some, inclined to learning them are directed to everyday
practical ways of life. He rejected al - Kindi's doctrine of creation*ex
nihilo* , believing that the body is created from matter, which has
existed eternally, is made up of indivisible parts or atoms separated by
the void.

After Aristotle the 'first teacher of philosophical sciences,' Al -
Farabi (870 - 950), known in Latin Alpharabius, is generally referred to
in Arabic sources as the 'Second Teacher' of science and philosophy.
Al - Farabi, remaining focused on philosophy, refined Arabic vocabulary
to be used more subtly and with greater ease. In spite of Greek
philosophy's pagan identity, he successfully introduced Aristotle into
Islamic thought, tradition, and culture, and cleared the way to make it
compatible with Islamic theology. His philosophy is established on the
foundation of Aristotelianism, with a superstructure of Neoplatonic
metaphysics. To this he added a political theory benefiting from his
study of Plato's*Republic* and *Laws* He is therefore, regarded as the
first Muslim thinker to have interpreted "Islamic political philosophy."
However, the core of his philosophy is to be perceived in his conception
of the "intellect." For al - Farabi, the only intellect entirely
independent of matter is the "active intellect," which is actualized
knowledge. Thus the "active intellect" is to the possible intellect of
man, what the sun is to the eye.

Translation of Aristotelian logic became the center of great interest in
the Arabic speaking world, mainly because it was useful in debates with
the non-Muslims in their attempt to present the merits of the religion
of Islam through rational argumentation. The distinctive feature of the
development of philosophy in Islam is that Muslim thinkers within their
theological preoccupation remained true to the Classical Greek ideal.
According to William Chittick:

The domain of practice came to be institutionalized in the Sharia
(Islamic Law), whose experts, commonly called the "ulama" ('*ulama* ) -
the "knowers" or "scholars" - were trained in the science of
jurisprudence (*fiqh* ). The domain of understanding developed into
three basic approaches to knowledge, which can be called "*Kalam* "
(dogmatic theology), "theoretical Sufism," and "philosophy (*falsafa* ).
The domain of virtue, the most inward of these domains, stayed for the
most part hidden, but nonetheless it took on the broadest variety of
manifestations. To it belong personal piety, devotion to God, love,
sincerity, "god - wariness" (*taqwa* ), and many other human qualities
bound up with the interior life. The word*adab* , for which we have no
adequate English equivalent, refers to proper and beautiful deportment
and correct behavior, both physical and verbal. It denotes a broad
domain that includes all the little courtesies and politenesses,
observance of propriety and good manners, elegant handling of social
situations, accomplishment in belles letters and poetry recital, skill
in calligraphy and music, care to observe one's social and professional
duties, and perfect harmony between outward behavior and inward
attitude.8

Ibn Sina (980 - 1037), famously known in the West as Avicenna, a thinker
of unique excellence, was a philosopher, physician, and a man of
science. He writes in his autobiography that he read
Aristotle's*Metaphysics* forty times, exploring whether it dealt with
Being or the principles of knowledge. It became clear to him only after
he read al - Farabi's*Intentions*

*of Aristotle's Metaphysics* that Aristotle was arguing on the subject
of Being. Ibn Sina conceived his original argument that universals enter
into human minds from outside, through the active intellect, and that
reflection on specifics may prompt the mind for reception of the
universals. He defined a thoughtful epistemology and psychology that
formed his theory of prophecy, classifying prophethood at four levels:
intellectual, imaginative, miraculous, and sociopolitical. His
philosophy had a great impact in the East as well as the West. As
Avicenna he was known to twelfth century authors at Oxford and Paris. He
attained new fame in modern times in political philosophy through Ernst
Bloch's provocative book*Avicenna und die Aristotelische Linke.*

Introduction to philosophy in Islamic tradition is incomplete without
ibn Rushd (1126 - 1198), known as Averroes in the Latin West. He
produced voluminous and varied philosophical works as compared with
other great philosophers of Muslim world. Three features distinguish him
from al - Farabi and ibn Sina: his methodical commentaries on
Aristotle's texts, his meticulous dealing with philosophy's relation to
religion, and his composition of systematic treatises on*Islamic fiqah*
(Islamic Jurisprudence). He, though declared philosophy the twin sister
of religion, essentially subordinated religion to philosophy. However,
his main contribution to Islamic philosophy, and to that of Jewish and
Christian world, is the message that there are three different routes to
the same truth which are equally acceptable. His commentaries revived
Aristotelianism in Western Europe and were fairly recognized by the Jews
and Christians. His impact on the Latin philosophy is such that Western
thought between the thirteenth and sixteenth centuries is inexplicable
without considering his great conceptual contribution. Ibn Rushd's
presentation of rational and scientific discourses in his works, serve
as a modern foundation for theoretical openness, political freedom, and
religious tolerance in Western thought.

One of the interesting traditions of Muslim thinkers is that they were
not merely the translators or followers of the Greek philosophers, as
Oliver Leaman says, "They [the Muslim thinkers] created a metatheory, a
theory about theories, which is even more radical than the theories
themselves. This metatheory is sometimes called the 'theory of double
truth,' and it argued that the truths of religion and philosophy are so
distinct that there is no way that they can contradict each other."9 The
Arab philosophers understood that religion and philosophy do not come
into conflict, they are about the same truth, but expressed in different
ways.In the history of world philosophies there is a well - recognized
role of Muslim thinkers and philosophers in a successful transmission of
Classical Greek philosophy to the West. They provided the foundation in
the development of Western scholasticism, in the advancement of human
knowledge, in the progression of empirical sciences. Muslim thinkers and
philosophers have played a great role in engendering the Italian
Renaissance, and in delivering an impetus to philosophical speculation
to the Western thinkers from Rene Descartes to the modern time
philosophers and scientists. It is important to understand that the
Muslim philosophers not only played the role of translating Greek
philosophies, but also made their own thoughtful contribution to the

philosophical and scientific knowledge. Peter Adamson and Richard C.
Taylor, the editors of *The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy*
argue that:

Certain philosophers of the formative period, like al - Kindi, al -
Farabi, and Averroes, were interested primarily in coming to grips with
the texts made available in the translation movement, rather than
putting forward a properly "Islamic" philosophy. This is not to minimize
the importance of Islam for any of the figures dealt with in this
volume: even the Aristotelian commentator*par excellence* Averroes, who
was after all a judge and expert on Islamic law, dealt explicitly with
relationship between*falsafa* and Islam. And once Avicenna's philosophy
becomes absorbed into the Islamic*kalam* tradition, we can point to many
self - consciously "Islamic" philosophers. Still the term "Arabic"
philosophy identifies a philosophical tradition that has its origins in
the translation movement.10

When modern philosophical thought in the West began with Rene Descartes,
Muslim philosophy had already penetrated deep into Europe. In the
history of Western philosophy, there is sufficient evidence that most of
the texts written in Arabic as well as in Hebrew had been translated
into Latin and some other European languages. "Adelard of Bath (1116 -
50) speaks of his*studia Arabica/Arabum studia* (in reference to natural
philosophy) and*magistri,* which he probably encountered in southern
Italy and Sicily. Stephen of Pisa (1127), who wrote on cosmology in
Antioch, expresses his debt to 'a certain Arab.'"11 Hebrew translation
of al - Ghazali's*Tahafut al - Falasifa* , was being studied by the
Dominican Raymond Martin. Though Descartes did not acknowledge but he
came to conclude,*I think, therefore, I am* , from al - Ghazali's view
of being,*I will, therefore, I am.* "A Muslim scholar Kamal al - Din ibn
Yunus of Mosul (d. 1242), a great Muslim teacher of his time, becoming a
household member of Frederick II Hohenstaufen's family, wrote a book on
logic for him. Andrea Alpago (d. before 1546) acquired knowledge of
Avicenna's psychology from the Shiite scholar Muhammad ibn Makki Shams
al - Din al - Dimashqi (d. 1531) in Damascus."12 Translations of Islamic
literature and philosophical works of al - Kindi, al - Farabi, ibn Sina,
ibn Rushd, ibn Tufail, Maimonides, and many Muslim and Jewish thinkers
proved helpful in the birth of European Renaissance.

Today, the students and researchers of Muslim philosophy question: What
went wrong with the philosophical and scientific cultures of the Islamic
civilization which transmitted knowledge to Europe, but repudiated
rationalism in its own home? Why the Muslims put an end to ibn Rushd's
threefold system of truth: rhetorical (religious); dialectical; and
philosophical (empirical)? While there is no single answer to the
decline of Islam's early inventive cultures of scientific and
philosophical eminence that for centuries led the world in many areas.
It is tragic, both in an historical and a human sense, but many factors
contributed to the stagnation of rationalism in Islam. In the ninth
century Baghdad,*Bayt al - Hikma* sponsored by the Abbasid caliphs with
many thinkers and students, and faculties of philosophy, psychology,
jurisprudence, medicine, astronomy, and social sciences, was in
actuality a time and a milieu. It was not a physical academy or a
university, but was a great center of cross - cultural intellectual and
scientific production. In the same way the Umayyad Caliphate's
patronized center of knowledge at Cordova was not a university

or an academy type independent institution. A running stream of
knowledge of science and philosophy flowed back and forth between
Baghdad and Cordova. Once the Arab patron - dynasties in Baghdad and
Cordova lost power, their centers of learning were orphaned and finally
died. The abandonment of rationalism is also attributed to al - Ghazali
(1058 - 1111), whose arbitral book,*The Incoherence of the Philosophy*
professed that causality was an illusion and rational philosophy futile.
Ibn Rushd of Cordova, on the other hand rejoined that God has created a
logical universe of cause and effect, and argued; "he who repudiates
causality, actually repudiates reason." Al - Ghazali, though, had
denounced speculative philosophy believing that philosophical skepticism
puts limits on divinity, he did not reject scientific investigations.

One big blow to rationalism in the world of Islam was the fall of Arab
dynasties, both at Baghdad and Cordova. Philosophical and scientific
knowledge was introduced first of all as*falsafah* in Arabic language,
and was patronized by the Arabs, Abbasids in Baghdad and the Umayyads in
Spain as "Arabic Philosophy." The Christians in 1493, conquered Spain
and ending eight centuries of Muslim rule, massacred many Muslims and
Jews, and expelled many of them from Spain, but retained their
philosophical and scientific works. In Baghdad, the crushing impact on
Muslim heartland by the successive waves of invasions, led by the Turkic
Seljuks, the Crusaders, the Ayyubid Kurds, the savage Mongols, and the
Ottomans, gradually destroyed the centers of knowledge. Millions of
books were thrown into the river by the Mongols and libraries were
burned to ashes. Later caliphs, sultans, and monarchs who were to
patronize and support centers of learning, remained involved in
consolidating their positions and fighting battles. In the heartland of
Islam, experiencing turmoil, massacre, and fierce rules of the Mongols
and Temuri Mughals, people in all walks of life looked for solace in
religious thought and spirituality instead of philosophical
argumentation. Muslim lands were now flooded with saints, and miracles
became a part of every - day life. Thus, mysticism, Islamized as Sufism,
become an inclination and a sigh of relief for the pathos of the masses.
Sufism provided a new ideology to the caliphs and monarchs, and instead
of patronizing philosophical learning, they began to patronize Sufi
saints. People instead of asking for their rights from the rulers,
started seeking help from the blessings of the saints who would pray for
them. Belief in collective piety, hope and confidence in God's grace,
triumphed over the earlier concept of Classical Islam, "submission to
God is submission to reason." A wave of individualistic quest for God
engulfed the Muslim community, seeking solace in prayers and in music as
*sama* in the Sufic - inspired services.

Arabic language was replaced by Persian and most of the philosophical
works started appearing in Persian language. Significant philosophical
trends after ibn Sina, were attempts to reconstruct holistic systems
that refine rather than refute a range of philosophical propositions and
religious questions. A new trend in philosophy, second only to ibn Sina,
the "philosophy of Illumination" of Shihab al - Din Suhrawardy (1153 -
1191) appeared. The system defined a new method, the "Science of
Lights," which

maintains that we obtain the principles of science immediately via
"knowledge of presence." About half a century after Suhrawardy's
execution, the philosophy of Illumination was viewed as a more complete
system. Its aim was to expand the structure of Aristotelian philosophy
to include carefully selected religious topics, defending the harmony
between philosophy and religion. This gave rise to Mulla Sadra's (1572 -
1641) theory of the unity or sameness of the knower and the known. The
influence of Sadra's epistemology on Muslim theo - philosophy continues
even today.

In the seventeenth century, when European nations began to colonize the
newly found continents of America and Australia, they acquired immense
wealth from overseas. This enabled them to undertake ventures of
colonialism in Africa, Asia, and the Muslim world. European imperialism
in the Middle East, Iran, Muslim ruled India and Southeast Asia,
impacted the final blow. Colonialism drowned the Muslim world into
economic recession and divided it into nation states with conflicting
borders. Because scientific and educational projects are based on
funding by nation's exchequer, Muslim nations were spending money on
battles, either fighting for their freedom from their European masters
or were involved in disputes with each other. Today in the twenty first
century, Muslim nations are part of the developing world, with many
problems such as poverty, economic stagnation, educational regression,
and above all, political instability.

In the long history of philosophy, philosophers have been arguing and
writing mostly for intellectuals and other philosophers. But now we have
arrived at an epoch in our history where there is a need to adopt and
follow a way of philosophy to be read, understood, and practiced by the
intellectuals and non - intellectuals alike. Many complex conflicting
arguments and multiple contradictions in this task need to be addressed
to achieve a simple and clear intellectual vision for the common man and
his world. The world is moving fast ahead, while the Muslims, still
basking in their past glories are struggling to revive their lost golden
period of philosophical and scientific eminence. Therefore, the struggle
today between the Muslim fundamentalists and the humanists, continues to
dominate the global intellectual and political scene in their own way.
But the way we are instantly connected by a network of information and
knowledge exchange, we are impelled to think and act globally where
philosophy is no more being viewed the "queen of knowledge." Its
historic role as the supreme form of intellectual life, the chronicler
of time and eternity, and the guide of religious or worldly life, has
been demoted to that of a handmaiden of science. Philosophy is now being
understood through science, phenomenology, and linguistic analysis.
Scientific education and research, and the growth of intellectual
consortiums have generated a new form of global interpretation. This
should be seen as an act of progressive transformation of the subject of
philosophy, actualized by the scientific revolution in the West where
philosophy has now attained a place in the scientific areas.13

Modern age is day by day projecting the increasing authority of science
over cultural, religious, and social fields that fall under the
jurisdiction of philosophy. In the West science and technology have
succeeded on account

of their practical utility, becoming more and more a series of easy
techniques and less and less a complicated system by presenting a
practicable outlook than the one found in theoretical philosophy. The
cutting-edge neuroscience research, and the boundless frontiers of
computer science, have enabled transfer of knowledge and power from the
intellectually smart minds, to the average IQ students. Research and
success in neurobiology is amazingly bringing philosophy closer to
science than ever. Consequently many unanswered questions of philosophy
have been answered by science, which enjoy a general consensus, because
it is easy to agree on the application of philosophical concepts within
the scientific system. Therefore, today, instead of looking back to
philosophical analysis and rational enquires, initiated by al - Kindi
and many other Muslim philosophers of ninth century, Muslims need to
understand philosophy through science. Muslims in the past transmitted
philosophical and scientific knowledge to the West; they should not feel
shy in receiving back its modernized version and scientific way of
thinking and reasoning.

NOTES
-----

[^1]:  The Glorious Qur'an, 20:114.

[^2]:  Ibid., 72:28.

[^2]:  Ibid., 16:125.

[^4]:  Sharif, M. M.: A History of Muslim Philosophy, p. 150.

[^5]:  Leaman, Oliver: A Brief Introduction to Islamic Philosophy, p. 6.

[^6]:  Chittick, William:*The Heart of Islamic Philosophy* p. 30.

[^7]:  Ashraf, Mirza I. : Introduction to World Philosophies: A
Chronological Progression, p. 97.

[^8]:  Chittick, William:*The Heart of Islamic Philosophy,* p. 31.

[^9]:  Leaman, Oliver: A Brief Introduction to Islamic Philosophy

[^10]: Adamson, Peter and  Taylor, Richard:*The Cambridge Companion to
Arabic Philosophy* p. 3 - 4.

[^11]: ibid., p. 370.

[^12]: ibid., p. 371.

[^13]: Ashraf, Mirza I. : Introduction to World Philosophies: A
Chronological Progression, p. 308.
