Major Problems of His Holiness Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) in the Time of his Imamate
==============================================================================

Imam al-Ridha‘s (a.s.) Imamate began in 183/799 with the martyrdom of
his noble father and lasted for twenty years, i.e., until 203/818.

During this period, his holiness encountered various problems
proportionate to the time.

At the beginning of his Imamate, the big excruciating problem of
Waqifites (*Waqifiyya*)[^1] happened, which got the Shi‘a community
engaged for a long time.

The First Problem: Waqifites and Imam al-Ridha‘s (a.s.) Struggle against them
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Waqf Sect and the Reason behind its Creation

After the martyrdom of Imam al-Kazim (a.s.), in that sever crisis during
which the then government had martyred the leader of the society and the
Shi‘a community was in a distressing situation, all of a sudden one of
the greatest divine tribulations occurred, i.e., Waqifite misconception
(*shubha*) which caused the deviation, disintegration, and weakening of
many of the Shi‘as.

Severity and expansion of this *shubha* was due to the fact that the
founders of this fabricated school of thought were from among the legal
representatives of Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) and the well-known people in the
Shi‘a community, whom people would refer to during the time when his
holiness Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) was in prison and a lot of the Imam’s
properties were accumulated with them.

After the martyrdom of Imam al-Kazim (a.s.), in order to appropriate the
properties, they claimed that the Imam had not been martyred and that he
was alive and he was in fact the awaited Imam who would rise up after a
while!

Shaykh Tusi (may God sanctify his spirit) said, “The first who
promulgated this school were three people named ‘Ali b. Abi Hamza
al-Bata’ini, Ziyad b. Marwan al-Qandi, and ʿUthman b. ‘Isa. They did
this because of the worldly gains and bought off a group of people such
as Hamza b. Bazi‘, Ibn al-Mukari, and Karram al-Khath‘ami and made them
conform to them.[^2]

Yunus b. ‘Abd al-Rahman said, “When Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) deceased, there
was a lot of property gathered with each one of his administrators;
Ziyad b. Marwan, seventy thousand dinars and ‘Ali b. Abi Hamza, thirty
thousand dinars and this caused the *waqf* (stand still and stop) and
denial of the holy Imam’s martyrdom.

When I got to know the truth and began to call people to Imam al-Ridha
(a.s.), those two (‘Ali b. Abi Hamza and Ziyad b. Marwan) protested to
me and said, ‘If you intend to acquire money, we will make you free from
need.’

They offered me ten thousand dinars to keep me silent, but I told them:
‘It is related from Imam al-Sadiq and Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) that when
innovations (*bid‘a*) appear, it is upon the scholars to surface their
knowledge, otherwise their faith will be taken away from them. [So] I
will not abandon *jihad* in the way of Allah in no way, that is why they
became my enemy.”[^3]

### Most of the Shi‘as Deviated due to the Waqf Misconception

The Waqifite misconception was in the beginning very widespread for the
reason explained above, to the extent that it deviated many of the
Shi‘as and put Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) in a lot of trouble. However, little
by little the extensive endeavors of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and his loyal
companions caused its containment and the Waqifites were exposed.
Unfortunately, many of the dignitaries such as ‘Abd al-Rahman b.
al-Hajjaj, Rifa‘at b. Musa, Yunus b. Ya‘qub, Jamil b. Darraj, Hammad b.
‘Isa, Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Abi Nasr, Hasan b. ‘Ali al-Washsha’, and
others[^4], were among their members, who realized their own mistakes
and woke up to the truth.

Ahmad b. Muhammad said, “Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) told me out loud: ‘O
Ahmad! When the Apostle of Allah (S) passed away, people made great
efforts to put out the light of Allah, but Allah was intent on
perfecting His light through Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (a.s.). When
Abu al-Hasan (Musa b. Ja‘far – a.s.) passed away, ‘Ali b. Hamza and his
comrades tried to put out the light of Allah, but Allah’s intention was
to perfect His light.

Verily, when someone joins the people of Truth, they become glad but
when someone leaves them, they will not show impatience since they are
certain about their faith; however when someone joins the people of
falsehood, they become glad and when someone leaves them they become
impatient because they are doubtful about their own faith. The Exalted
and Glorified Allah says:

***the enduring abode (fa mustaqarr) and the place of temporary lodging
(wa mustawdi‘) [abode].Qurʾan: 6/98.***

And Abu ‘Abd Allah said, ‘*mustaqarr* is the (one who is) enduring (in
faith) and *mustawdi*‘ is the (one whose faith is) temporary;[^5] that
is to say, no one should become shaky and doubtful for the deviation of
the companions of Imam al-Kazim (a.s.), since their faith had been
temporary.

### Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Measures against the Waqifites

His holiness made widespread attempts to fight off this misconception
and confront this deviant and perilous group; sometimes, he would debate
with their chiefs or followers and guided some groups through showing
them certain miracles and sometimes, exposed them and disclosed their
treacheries and lying.

Sometimes, he would prohibit the Shi‘as from associating with them and
other times he would strongly curse and remonstrated them.

### Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Negotiation with the Chiefs of the Waqifites

It is related that three of the Waqifite chiefs by the name of ‘Ali b.
Abi al-Hamza, Ahmad b. Sarraj, and Husayn b. Hashim, also known as Ibn
al-Mukari went to Imam al-Ridha (a.s.).

‘Ali b. Abi Hamza said to the holy Imam: “What happened to your father?”
The Imam answered: “He passed away.” He asked: “Through death?” The Imam
said, “Yes.” He asked: “Who did he sign his last will to?” The Imam
replied: “To me.” Then, he asked again: “So, you are the Imam whose
obedience is made obligatory by God?” The Imam said, “Yes.”

The other two said, “God has given you power.” The holy Imam said, “Woe
on you! What power? Do you want me to go to Baghdad and say to Harun
that I am the Imam whose obedience is obligatory? By God, this is not my
duty.

What I told you was because I was informed that you have disunited; I
wanted that your secret would not get into the hands of the enemies.”
‘Ali b. Hamza said, “You have unveiled something that none of your
forefathers would not have unveiled and uttered.” His holiness said, “It
is not so.

By God, the best of my forefathers, the Apostle of Allah (S) uttered
this when Allah commanded him to warn his close of kin and he invited
forty people of his relatives and told them that he was the messenger of
Allah to them; and the one who denied and attacked him most of all was
his uncle Abu Lahab.

The Prophet (S) told them: ‘If Abu Lahab inflicts a single scratch on
me, I am not a prophet; and this is the first sign of my Prophet hood
that I express to you.’ (Then the holy Imam said) and I also say if
Harun inflicts a single scratch on me, I am not an Imam; and this is the
first sign of my Imamate that I express to you.”

‘Ali b. Abi Hamza said, “We have a *hadith* from your forefathers that
the Imam’s affairs (funeral and burial practices and saying funeral
prayer over the body) is undertaken only by an Imam (meaning: if you
were an Imam, you should have done these things for your father Imam
Musa b. Ja‘far, although you were in Medina and he was in Baghdad).”

The holy Imam said, “Was Husayn b. ‘Ali an Imam or not?” He said, “Yes.”
The Imam asked: “Who was to undertake his affairs.” He said, “‘Ali b.
al-Husayn.” The Imam asked: “Where was ‘Ali b. al-Husayn? Was he not in
‘Ubayd Allah b. al-Ziad’s captivity?” He said, “Yes, but he secretly
came and undertook his father’s funeral practices and returned.

The Imam said, “If ‘Ali b. al-Husayn (who was captive in prison) was
able to come to Karbala and carry out his father’s funeral, the
possessor of this authority – i.e., Imam al-Ridha – is also able to come
(from Baghdad) to Medina and undertake his father’s affairs and return,
although he is not captive in prison.”[^6]

### Commanding to Distance from the Waqifites

Muhammad b. ‘Asim said, “His holiness Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, ‘I was
informed that you are associating with the Waqifite.’ I said, ‘May I be
your ransom! I am associating with them, but I am not of the same
opinion with them.’

The holy Imam said, ‘Do not associate with them; the Almighty and
Glorious Allah says:

***Certainly He has sent down to you in the Book that when you hear
Allah's signs being disbelieved and derided, do not sit with them until
they engage in some other discourse, or else you] too [will be like
them*** ***(Q. 4: 140)***.”[^7]

This noble *hadith* and its like is a lesson for the followers of Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.) to avoid associating with those who oppose religion
and/or the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) and do not attend their sessions.

### Some of the Miraculous Acts of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) for Guiding the Shi‘as

A person named Ibn Abi Kathir said, “After the demise of Musa b. Ja‘far,
people ceased to follow Imam al-Ridha (a.s.). That year, I went on to
Hajj pilgrimage and all of a sudden saw Imam al-Ridha (a.s.); this *aya*
struck my mind:

***Are we to follow a lone human from ourselves?(Qurʾan: 54/24)***

Suddenly Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) came to my side in a flash and (having
read my mind) said, ‘By God, I am the one that you have to follow!’ I
said, ‘I apologize to God and you.’ And he said, ‘You are forgiven.”[^8]

In another instance, ‘Abd Allah b. Mughayra said, “I was an advocate of
the Waqifites while I went on to the Hajj and next to the House of God
and I said, ‘O God! You know what I am after. Guide me to the best
Religion. After that, it came to my mind to go to Imam al-Ridha (a.s.).
I came to Medina, went to his holiness’ house door, and said to his
retainer: ‘Tell him a man from Iraq is at the door.’

All of a sudden, I heard his holiness say: ‘O ‘Abd Allah b. Mughayra!
Come in!’ When I entered, he said, ‘God responded to your prayer and
guided you to His religion.’ I said, ‘I bear witness that you are
Allah’s Authority (*Hujja*) and His Trustee over His creatures.”[^9]

### The Fate of some Followers of the Waqifites in Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Words

Ibrahim b. Yahya said, “Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) told me: ‘What did that
wretched, Hamza b. Bazi‘, do? I answered: ‘He has come.’ The Imam (a.s.)
said, ‘He imagines my father is alive; today, they are doubtful and
tomorrow, they will die in heresy.[^10]

The holy Imam cursed one of the heads of the Waqifites, namely Ibn
Mihran, and said, “May God remove the light of your heart and bring
poverty to your house.”[^11] He also cursed ‘Ali b. Abi Hamza, the head
of the Waqifites and called him a damned infidel.[^12]

Husayn b. ‘Ali al-Washsha’ (who was at first doubtful and later welcomed
the truth by a miraculous act of Imam al-Ridha – a.s.) said, “My master
Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) summoned me in Marv and said, ‘O Hasan! Today ‘Ali
b. Abi Hamza died (in Kufa) and they now laid him in grave; two angels
went down to him and asked: ‘Who is your lord?’

He said, ‘Allah.’ They asked: ‘Who is your Messenger?’ He said,
‘Muhammad (S).’ They asked: Who is your guardian (*wali*)?’ He said,
‘‘Ali b. Abi Talib.’ They asked: ‘After him?’ He said, ‘Al-Hasan.’ They
asked: ‘After him?’ He said, ‘‘Ali b. al-Husain.’

They asked: ‘After him?’ He said, ‘Muhammad b. ‘Ali.’ They asked: ‘After
him?’ They said, ‘Ja‘far b. Muhammad.’ They asked: ‘After him?’ He said,
‘Musa b. Ja‘far.’ They asked: ‘After him?’ His tongue began to tremble.
They asked him again angrily: ‘After him?’ He kept silent. They asked:
‘did Musa b. Ja‘far commanded this to you?’ Then, they beat him with a
fiery club so that his grave is on fire till Resurrection!”

Husayn b. ‘Ali al-Washsha’ said, “I left the presence of the Imam and
wrote down the date of that day. After several days, I received a letter
from Kufa that Bata’ini (‘Ali b. Abi Hamza) had died on that same day
and had been laid in the grave at that same hour that the holy Imam
said.”[^13]

The Second Problem: Delay in Imam al-Jawad’s (a.s.) Birth
---------------------------------------------------------

Among the issues that made Divine trials difficult for the Shi‘as in the
time of Imam Al-Ridha (a.s.) and increased the enemies’ pretext for
their opposition with his holiness and perplexed the simple-hearted was
that the birth of Imam al-Jawad as his first child took place in the
last decade of his noble life, when past forty, namely, over ten years
after his Imamate started at the age of 35.

This led some people to find fault with his holiness for not having a
successor, and therefore the Imam emphasized that God would give him a
child. Kalim b. ‘Imran addressed the Imam: “Ask Allah to grant you a
child.” His holiness replied: “I will be given a child, who will be my
heir.”[^14]

A man asked al-Bazanti (one of the Imam’s companions): “Who will be the
Imam after your master (Imam al-Ridha)?” “Ask it from his holiness.” He
went to the Imam and asked him.

The Imam said, “The Imam (after me) is my son.” Then, he added: “Can
anyone say my son while having no son?” After some time, his holiness
[Imam] al-Jawad (a.s.) was born.[^15]

‘Aqabat b. Ja‘far told Imam al-Ridha (a.s.): “You have reached such an
age but you have no child?” His holiness said, “The possessor of this
authority will not die until he sees his successor.”[^16]

Another person said to Imam al-Ridha (a.s.): “Will your Imamate be
handed over to an uncle?” the Imam said, “No.” “What about to a
brother?” “No.” said the Imam. The man added: “Then, who will it be
given to?” (That is, that you have no son at present.) The Imam
answered: “To my son.” However, he did not have a son that day.[^17]

The Imam was frequently asked in this regard, and he would say: “Allah
will grant me a son.”[^18]

Husayn b. Qiyama who was one of the heads of Waqifites, asked Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.) if he was an Imam. His holiness said, “Yes.” He said, “I
take Allah as witness that you are not an Imam!”

At this moment, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) lowered his head and scratched the
ground with his fingers for a long time; then, he raised his head and
said, “How did you know that I am not an Imam?” he answered: “I heard
from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) that an Imam is not childless, whereas you
have reached such an age and still have no child.”

Again the Imam (a.s.) lowered his head for a longer time than before and
then said, “I take Allah as witness that days and nights will not pass
until Allah will grant me a child.”

The narrator said, “No longer than a year had passed when his holiness
Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) was born.”[^19]

After the birth of Imam al-Jawad and the fulfillment of his holiness
Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) prediction (two reasons proving Imam al-Ridha’s
(a.s.) Imamate), Ibn Qiyama was told: “Is this evidence not sufficient
for you?” he admitted and said, “I swear by Allah that this is a great
sign.”

However, he used a *hadith* as an excuse and refused to retreat from his
deviated opinion.[^20]

That is why the birth of Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) was very crucial for the
Shi‘as; therefore, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) named his son the blessed
newborn.

A man called Yahya al-San‘ani said, “I entered the presence of Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.) in Mecca; I saw his holiness peeling off a banana for
his son to give it to him.

I asked: ‘May I be your ransom! Is he that blessed newborn?’ He said,
‘Yes, O Yahya! This is the newborn that no other newborn has been born
in Islam more blessed for the Shi‘as than he.”[^21]

The author says: “It becomes clear from the questions and the protests
concerning the birth of Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) that most of these people
were not sufficiently aware of their Imams and their programs in
general.

Of course, the inappropriate propagation climate of the time was also
highly effective in this unawareness, otherwise, according to various
traditions, the issue of Imamate of the Imams, their practical programs,
even their names were all determined by God and declared by the Prophet
(S).

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “The issue of succession (*Wasiyya*) –
Imamate – was revealed to the Prophet (S) in writing, despite the fact
that no other issue had been reveled in sealed writing to the Prophet
(S) than this, which was handed over to him by Gabriel so as his
holiness would convey it to ‘Ali (a.s.) and his children.

That writing had some seals and Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (a.s.)
was ordered to break one of the seals and act according to what was
enjoined in it; and he did so. Then, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) did as
instructed and then handed it over to Imam al-Husayn (a.s.); when he
broke the seal, he found it written: ‘Rise up along with a group [of
others]; there is no martyrdom for them but with you; and sell your soul
to the Almighty and Glorious Allah.’

His holiness did so, and handed it over to ‘Ali b. al-Husayn (a.s.).
When he opened it, he saw it written: ‘Cast your head down, keep silent,
sit at home, and worship your God until your death arrives.’ His
holiness did so, and handed it over to his son, Muhammad b. ‘Ali (a.s.).

When he opened it, it read: ‘Recite *hadith* to people and give *fatwa*
(legal judgment) and have no fear of anyone except the Almighty and
Glorious Allah, as no one has access to you.’ His holiness did so and
then gave it to his son, Ja‘far.

When his holiness opened the seal, it was mentioned in it: Recite
*hadith* to people, give *fatwa*, spread about your household’s
sciences, confirm your noble forefathers, and have no fear of anyone
except the Almighty and Glorious Allah; you are in safety and this will
continue for all the Imams until Imam Mahdi (a.s.).

The Third Problem: The Issue of Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Heir Apparency
---------------------------------------------------------------------

The mysterious event that the Abbasid Ma’mun had plotted, was a divine
trial that the Shi‘as were afflicted with; for, not a long time had
passed since so many crimes and suppressions by the Abbasids, in
particular by Harun (Maʾmun’s father) and the massacre of the Prophet
(S)’s children and Shi’a’s, especially the martyrdom of Imam al-Kazim
(a.s.), that Maʾmun’s proposing heir apparency to Imam al-Ridha (a.s.)
bewildered everybody.

The hatred that the Shi‘as in general had towards the despotic ruling
system, in particular Harun al-Rashid, because of the latter’s animosity
with the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) and the crime of killing Imam al-Kazim’s
(a.s.) as a martyr, caused them not to agree with the Imam’s (a.s.)
decision to accept Ma’mun’s proposal, and although his holiness had been
forced to accept it, this unprecedented task sounded extremely
controversial to a group, particularly the deviated Waqifites seized the
opportunity to intensify their propaganda.

That was how the simple-hearted and unaware people began to protest
instead of conceding to their Imam, frequently saying to the holy Imam:
“Why did you enter Ma’min’s court?” And his holiness would answer: “For
the same reason that my forefather, Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali
(a.s.) entered the *Shura*.”[^22]

Once in a response to one of these protesters, the Imam (a.s.) said, “Is
the Prophet *Afdhal* (superior) or the successor?” “The Prophet,” said
the protester. The Imam (a.s.) asked again: “Is a Muslim superior or a
polytheist?”

The man answered: “The Muslim.” The Imam (a.s.) said, “Potiphar was a
polytheist and Joseph was a prophet; Ma’mun is a Muslim and I am a
*wasi* (successor). Joseph personally asked Potiphar (as described in
the Qur’an) to give him *wilaya* (mastership), but I was forced
to.”[^23]

[^1]: Lit: "the ones who stand still" or "those who stop, put an end to
the line of Imams", because they let the succession of Imams end with
Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) and contested the transfer of the imamate to his
son ʿAli b. Musa al-Ridha (a.s.)”

[^2]: Al-Ghayba, p. 42.

[^3]: Ibid, p. 43

[^4]: See Rijali (Biographical) books, such as Rijal of Najashi, Shaykh
Tusi, Ibn Abi Dawud, etc.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 48, p. 261.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 48, p. 261; Ikhtiyar al-Rijal, p. 463.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 48, p. 264.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 38.

[^9]: Ibid, p. 39.

[^10]: Ibid, vol. 48, p. 256.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 48, p. 261.

[^12]: Ibid, p. 257.

[^13]: Ibid, vol. 49, p. 38.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 50, p. 15.

[^15]: Ibid, p. 21; ibid, p. 22, from al-Kafi, and al-Irshad.

[^16]: Ibid, p. 35.

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 50, p. 21.

[^18]: Ibid, p. 35.

[^19]: Ibid, vol. 49, p. 34.

[^20]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 68.

[^21]: Ibid, vol. 50, p. 35.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, nol. 49, p. 140. Shura, (Arabic: “consultation”),
in early Islamic history, the board of electors that was constituted by
the second caliph ʿUmar b. Khattab (12/634–23/644), to elect his
successor.

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, nol. 49, p. 136.


