Plot to Assassinate Imam al-Ridha (a.s.)
========================================

Muhammad b. Zayd said, “When Ma’mun elected Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) as his
heir apparent, one of the Kharijite prepared a venomous knife and said
to his companions: ‘I swear by God that I am going to this man who
claims to be the son of the Messenger of Allah but has entered the
despot’s court, to ask him about the fact of the matter.

If he does not have a convincing reason, I will get rid of him!’ With
this decision, he entered the holy Imam’s house.”

“Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, ‘My answer to your question will be subject
to a condition; do you agree?’ He asked: ‘What condition?’ The Imam
said, ‘If my answer is convincing, break that knife hiding in your
sleeve and put it away!’

“The Kharijite who was perplexed took out the knife on the spot and
broke it. Then, he said, ‘Why did you come to this despot’s court,
although they are disbelievers in your sight and you are the Apostle of
Allah’s son?!”

“The holy Imam answered: “To your opinion, are these more disbelieving
or the Potiphar and the people of that country [Egypt]? Is it not true
that these assume to be Monotheist, but those [Egyptians] were not
Monotheist and did not know God?”

“Was not Joseph son of Jacob (a.s.) a prophet and son of a prophet?! He
said to Potiphar who was a disbeliever (as mentioned in the Qur’an):
‘Assign me to the treasures of the land (Egyptian assets), as I am a
wise guard.’

He associated with the Pharaohs and I am a man from the household of the
Apostle of Allah. They forced me to this and I accepted reluctantly;
what objection or problem do you have with me?” Hearing this definite
answer, the Kharijite said, ‘There is no objection with you. I testify
that you are the son of the Apostle of Allah and that you are
truthful.”[^1]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, nol. 49, p. 55.


