Report about the Tablet and the Names of the Purified Imams (a.s.)
==================================================================

When Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) was in his sickbed, he summoned his son, Imam
al-Sadiq (a.s.) to appoint him as his successor. Imam al-Baqir’s
brother, Zayd b. ‘Ali said, “It would not be unwarranted if you treated
me like al-Hasan and al-Husayn (meaning made me your successor).”

His holiness answered: “Trusts are not tied to examples and caliphates
are not run by customs; rather, they are matters already predetermined
concerning the proofs (*Hujja*) of the Almighty and Glorious Allah.”

Then, his holiness called in Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah Ansari and told him: “O
Jabir! Tell the story of that *Sahifa* (scroll) that you saw.” Jabir
said, “Yes, I went to my lady Fatima (a.s.), daughter of the Apostle of
Allah (S), to congratulate her for the birth of al-Husayn (a.s.). I saw
a scroll radiating in her hand; I asked: “O Chief of the ladies! What is
in your hand?” She said, “There are the names of the leaders and Imams
from among my children in it.” (In another *hadith*, she is quoted as
saying: “This is a tablet that the Almighty and Glorious Allah gave to
His Messenger, and there are in it the names of my father, my husband,
two sons, and the names of the successors from among my children. My
father gave it to me to make me delighted.)

Jabir went on to say: “I asked her to give it to me to see. She said, “I
would give it to you, if it were not forbidden, but nobody except the
Prophet (S), or his successor, or his Ahl al-Bayt would not touch it.
However, you may take a glance inside it.”

Jabir said, “I took a look and saw there was written: Abu al-Qasim
Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Mustafa, whose mother is Amina; Abu al-Hasan
‘Ali b. Abi Talib al-Murtadha, whose mother is Fatima bint Asad b.
Hashim b. ‘Abd Manaf; Abu Muhammad al-Hasan b. ‘Ali al-Birr, Abu ‘Abd
Allah al-Husayn b. ‘Ali al-Taqi, whose mothers are Fatima daughter of
Muhammad (S); Abu Muhammad ‘Ali b. al-Husayn al-‘Adl, whose mother is
Shahrbanu daughter of Yazdgerd[^1]; Abu Ja‘far Muhammad b. ‘Ali
al-Baqir, whose mother is Umm ‘Abd Allah daughter of Hasan b. ‘Ali b.
Abi Talib; Abu ‘Abd Allah Ja‘far b. Muhammad al-Sadiq, whose mother is
Umm Farwah daughter of Qasim b. Muhammad b. Abi Bakr; Abu Ibrahim Musa
b. Ja‘far, whose mother is a female slave (*jariya*) named Hamida; Abu
al-Hasan ‘Ali b. Musa al-Ridha, whose mother is a female slave named
Najma; Abu Ja‘far Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Zaki, whose mother is a female
slave named Khayzuran; Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Amin, whose
mother is a female slave named Susan; Abu Muhammad Hasan b. ‘Ali
al-Rafiq, whose mother is a female slave named Samana whose patronymic
is Umm al-Hasan; Abu al-Qasim Muhammad b. al-Hasan, who is the Authority
of Allah (*Hujjat Allah*), the Upriser (*Qa’im*), whose mother is a
female slave named Narjis – may Allah’s peace and blessings be upon them
all.”[^2]

The author says: the account of the above writing is related in numerous
traditions and some Shi‘a dignitaries such as Shaykh al-Saduq (*ra*),
Shaykh al-Tusi, Shaykh al-Mufid, Shaykh al-Tabarsi (Tabrisi) al-Nu‘mani,
al-Kulayni, and others have reported its content with slight differences
in their own books.

[^1]: Yazdegerd III or Yazdgerd III was the twenty-ninth and last king
of the Sassanid dynasty of Iran and a grandson of Khosrow II (590–628
A.D.). His father was Shahryar, whose mother was Miriam, the daughter of
the Byzantine Emperor Maurice.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, nol. 36, p. 193.


