A Review of the most Important Events during the Imamate of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.)
================================================================================

In 186/799, Imam Musa b. Ja‘far (a.s.) was martyred.

In 184/800, Ahmad son of Harun al-Rashid known as Al-Sabti, who
practiced asceticism in the world and was engaged in worship, passed
away.

In 187/803, Fudhayl b. ‘Ayadh, the ascetic mystic Sufi, died in Mecca.
He was famous for his piety and worship. In his early years, Fudhayl was
an infamous highway robber; he would prowl in the night for victims on
the road from Abiward to Sarakhs.

Between these two cities was a small village in which lived a girl that
Fudhayl was in love with. One night, out of desperation to be with her,
Fudhayl climbed the wall of her home. As he was climbing over it, he
heard a voice recite:

***Is it not time yet for those who have faith that their hearts should
be humbled for Allah's remembrance? (Qur’an: 57/16)***

At that moment, Fudhayl answered, "O my Lord, the time has indeed come."
He returned from where he came and sought refuge near a traveling party
on the main road.

They were busy engaging in a serious discussion. Fudhayl heard one of
them say, "Let us continue our journey now." Another answered, "No, not
until the morning, for Fudhayl is lurking on the road somewhere out
there, just waiting to rob us."

Having heard the entire conversation, Fudhayl thought to him, "I go
around in the night to sin, while a group of Muslims remain here because
they fear me. Indeed I feel that Allah has brought me here to them only
so that I can reform my character. O Allah, I indeed repent to
you...”[^1]

In 188/803, ‘Ali b. Hamza, known as Kasa’i, who is renowned in science
of syntax, philology, and reading [the Qur’an] and Muhammad b. Hasan
Shaybani, the Hanafite jurist, who accompanied Harun in his journey to
Tus, both died in Rey, and Harun said about them: “We buried
jurisprudence and Arabic [language] in Rey.”

According to some traditions, the eulogist of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) and
their accomplished poet, Isma‘il b. Muhammad, renowned as Sayyid Humayri
died in the time of Harun al-Rashid.

However, it is implied from the *ahadith* and traditions that he passed
away in the time of Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.). He made assiduous attempts in
dissemination of the virtues of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) to the extent
that no one among the companions of the Imams (a.s.) surpassed him in
promulgation of Commander of the Faithful and the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.).

He said in Kunasa (a neighborhood of) Kufa: “Whoever relates a virtue of
‘Ali (a.s.) for which I have not composed a poem, I will give him this
horse with all the things on it. The transmitters of *hadith* related
*hadith* and Sayyid recited his poems on the related subjects until a
man related a virtue, about which Sayyid had not said any poems.

He fulfilled his promise, and then composed a poem for that virtue.

In the reign of Harun a large number of the Alawis and Talibis were
killed as martyrs whose names and date of martyrdom were not registered
due their great number, including Idris b. ‘Abd Allah b. al-Hasan
al-Muthanna who had a vast rule in Egypt and Africa and was cunningly
poisoned by Harun.

Similarly, some *Sadat*[^2] such as Yahya b. ‘Abd Allah b. al-Hasan
al-Muthanna and his son Muhammad b. Muthanna, and Husayn b. ‘Abd Allah
b. Isma’il, a descendent of Ja‘far Tayyar, who was killed due to the
wounds of scourge; or ‘Abbas b. Muhammad, a descendent of Imam al-Sajjad
(a.s.), who was clubbed to death by the cursed Harun who called him the
son of an adulterous woman and he retorted that Harun’s mother was
indeed adulterous because she had been a slave girl with whom the slave
dealers had adulterous liaison. Harun got furiously angry and clubbed
him to death.[^3]

All in all, a great number of Alawis were murdered during the rule of
Harun and the story of Humayd b. Qahtaba and the killing of sixty of the
*Sadat* in one night are recorded in history.[^4]

In 189/804, the prosperity star of the Barmakids, who had been given the
authority to run the state, began to die out, and they were wiped out by
Harun, with their condemnatory story being recorded in history as a
lesson for others.

Ma’mun carried out this plot so cunningly that Ja‘far b. Yahya Barmaki
who was Ma’mun’s brother-in-law and very close and dear to him did not
have the slightest idea of what would happen until the night that Harun
ordered his agent to murder him.

When Harun’s agent went to his house for executing the order, he
(Ja‘far) told him: “Ma’mun makes such jokes with me a lot.” Finally, it
was arranged for him to be taken to the back part of the Harun’s tent
and to ask Harun’s view again about his murder.

When he directly heard the order of his murder, he tied his own
handkerchief over his eyes and was beheaded. Surprisingly enough, Harun
told the agent who had beheaded Ja‘far to summon such and such persons,
and when they came in, he told them: “Behead the agent, as I cannot
tolerate to see Ja‘far’s murderer.[^5]

On Saturday 3 Jamadi II 193/24 March 809, Harun died in Tus. He ruled as
a caliph for 23 years and a few months. He was four months past 44 years
old when he died and was buried in the same place that the Holy Shrine
of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) is located now, about which his holiness had
frequently informed.

Sometimes he would say: “You will bury me with him in the same
room.”[^6] At other times he would say: “Tus city will fill the gap
between us.”[^7] Yet at other times he would say: “I and Harun would be
like these two…,” joining his middle and index fingers together.[^8]

In this respect, Diʿbil has some poems the gist of which is as follows:
“There are two graves in Tus, one for the best of the people and the
other for the worst of them; and this in itself is an admonitory lesson;
neither that impure will benefit from that pure one, nor will this pure
be harmed by this impure.[^9]

On Thursday 15 Jamadi II 193/5 April 809, allegiance was secured for
Muhammad Amin, Harun’s son, who was his heir and was in Baghdad when his
father died. His mother, Zubayda, daughter of Ja‘far b. Abi Jaʿfr
Mansur, was among the noble ladies of the Abbasids.

Her monuments, including the construction or the reconstruction of the
city of Tabriz and some wells on the way to Mecca, are famous. She had
one hundred female slaves who knew the Qur’an by heart. The sound of the
Qur’an recitation was heard in her palace like the sound of the bees.
She died in Baghdad in 216/831.

Qadhi Nur Allah has related in his *Majalis al-Mu’minin* that Zubayda
was a devoted Shi‘a, and when Harun found out about her staunch belief,
he divorced her and sent her the bill of divorce. Zubayda wrote on the
back of the bill: “I am thankful to God for the previous situation, and
now that we are separated I am not regretful.”[^10]

Eighteen nights had passed since Muhammad Amin’s rule when he decided to
break his covenant and to dethrone Ma‘mun who was introduced as his
father’s successor during the latter’s reign and to make his son, Musa
Natiq, the caliph. He consulted the viziers and commanders, but no one
except ‘Ali b. ‘Isa b. Mahan deemed it advisable.

Amin proceeded to dethrone Ma’mun and sent a massive army under the
command of ‘Ali b. ‘Isa to fight against Ma’mun in Khurasan. Ma’mun, in
turn, dispatched four thousand troops under the commandment of Tahir b.
Husayn to fight back and the two armies met in battle near Rey.

Being proud of the great number of his troops and having failed to act
with foresightedness, the commander of Amin’s army was defeated and
killed by Ma’mun’s troops. After this victory, Ma’mun deposed his
brother Amin and dispatched Tahir b. al-Husayn to Baghdad along with
Harthamat b. A‘yan.

After fighting for a while and besiege of Baghdad, the people of Baghdad
became exhausted and withdrew from Amin. Also, Tahir made dignitaries
inclined towards Ma’mun by promising gold and silver to them, and they,
in turn, dethroned Amin.

Then, Harthama granted safe-conduct to Amin and they met in a small
boat; he did much honor to the latter but Tahir sent a group of agents
to arrest Amin. They both jumped into the water and the boat got
drowned. Harthama and Amin swam away and rescued themselves; however,
Amin swam to a spot where Tahir’s troops were stationed.

They arrested Amin and before he could meet Tahir, they killed him on
the latter’s order. This event took place on Saturday night, Muharram
25, 198/September 25, 813.

Amin was killed on Muharram 25, 198, at the age of 33. His caliphate
lasted about five years and since he was constantly indulged in feasting
and drinking, debauchery, and playing and diversion, and as for a time
he was sieged by and engaged in war with Ma’mun’s army, he made no
objection to the children of Abu Talib (i.e., descendants of Imam ‘Ali –
a.s.) and therefore no accident befell them.

In 198/813, upon the killing of Amin, people of Baghdad swore allegiance
to Ma’mun.

In the same year, Ma’mun dismissed his brother Qasim b. Rashid from heir
apparency.

In 199/814, Abu al-Saraya Serri b. Mansur Shaybani, who was brave and
skilful in battle, rebelled in Kufa and called people to swear
allegiance to Muhammad b. Ibrahim (Ibn Tabataba) and all the Kufans
swore allegiance to him.

Muhammad thrived in his role as a commander, frequently defeating the
caliph’s troops, until he died and the people swore allegiance to
Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Zayd b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn and he sent his own
governors around.

Eventually, Hasan b. Sahl (brother of Fadhl, Ma’mun’s vizier) dispatched
Harthama to fend him off. He left for Kufa with thirty thousand troops.
A bloody war broke out between the armies of Harthama and Abu al-Saraya
and Harthama’s army was defeated. However, despite Abu al-Saraya’s
warning concerning the ambush by Harthama’s troops while being chased,
his troops were ambushed by five thousand troops of the latter’s army
and once again a battle broke out and Harthama, who had been captivated,
was freed.

He deceitfully approached the Kufans by suggesting: “If you wish the
rule to get out of the hands of the Abbasids, wait until Monday so that
we may talk together; whoever is chosen, we will swear allegiance to
him.”

This trick worked and the Kufan army gave up the war, ignoring Abu
al-Saraya who was repeatedly shouting: “This is a deceit and they are
losing the war; our victory is near; go on fighting.” The Kufans did not
take any actions.

Finally, he angrily quit the war and gave a lecture on Friday, calling
all of them the killers of ‘Ali (a.s.) and deserters of Husayn (a.s.)
and bitterly reproached them for their disloyalty. Although a group of
them became zealous and wanted to take action, but he did not consent
and left Kufa along with some others on Sunday night, Muharram 13th.

On the other hand, Kufa dignitaries asked Harthama for safe-conduct
(*aman*) for the people and he granted it. When the situation calmed
down, Harthama went to Baghdad and finally Abu al-Saraya surrendered
with safe-conduct and was sent to Hasan b. Sahl, but he killed Abu
al-Saraya for his brother’s murder, hanging his head on Western side and
his body on the Eastern side of the city.

In 200/815, Ma’mun commanded to collect statistics of the Abbasid
dynasty, whose number amounted to 33,000.

In the same year, the Abbasid Ma’mun dispatched his chief attendant,
Rajaʾ b. Abi Ḍahhak, to Medina to respectfully bring the Imam (a.s.) to
Marv.

In 201/816, the heir apparency of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) was celebrated in
a great ceremony in which the dignitaries, nobles, *Sadat*, and scholars
were gathered. First of all, Ma’mun ordered his son, ‘Abbas, to swear
allegiance to his holiness; then, other people swore allegiance and he
gave them many prizes and rewards and the orators and poets recited many
lyric poems.

Ma’mun, then, ordered the Abbasids to take out the black garments they
used to wear and put on green clothes, instead.

In 201/816, Hadhrat Fatima Ma‘suma, daughter of Imam Musa b. Ja‘far, set
off from Medina to see her brother, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) in Marv. She
got sick in Sava and inquired how far it was to Qum.

She was told it was ten parasangs. She told her attendant to take her to
Qum. More accurately, the Sa‘d family came to her and asked her to go to
Qum. Musa b. Khazraj, took her camel’s halter, led it into Qum, and
lodged her in his house.

Her highness stayed in Qum for seventeen days and then passed away. She
was buried where her mausoleum is now located in Qum. May Allah’s peace
and blessing be upon her.

In 202/817, Fadhl b. Sahl (Ma’mun’s trainer, vizier, and commander of
army and his energetic servant) was murdered in a bath-house in Sarakhs.

In the same year, Malik b. Anas, the chief of Maliki school, died and
was buried in Baqi‘ cemetery in the mausoleum of the Prophet (S)’s
wives.[^11]

[^1]: See Tadhkirat al-Awliyaʾ, p. 79

[^2]: Plural of Sayyid: Descendants of the Prophet (S)

[^3]: For more information see Maqatil al-Talibiyyin.

[^4]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 88.

[^5]: Muruj al-Dhahab, 3/465.

[^6]: A‘lam al-Hidaya, p. 36.

[^7]: Ibid, p. 36.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Tatimmat al-Muntaha, Khalifat-i Harun.

[^10]: Tatimmat al-Muntaha.

[^11]: The events during the Imamate of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) are adopted
from Muhaddith al-Qummi’s Tatimmat al-Muntaha.


