The High Excellence of Visitation (Ziyara) to Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Holy Shrine
================================================================================

Hamdan b. Ishaq says: “I went to Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) and said, ‘What is
the reward of the one who visits your father [’s tomb] in Tus?’ His
holiness said, ‘Whoever visits my father in Tus, Allah will forgive his
past and future sins’.”

Hamdan said, “After *ziyara* of his holiness, I went on to Hajj
pilgrimage and met Ayyub b. Nuh; he said, Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) told me:
Whoever visits my father’s tomb in Tus, Allah will forgive his past sins
and the ones that follow and will set up a *minbar* (pulpit) across from
the *minbar* of Muhammad (S) and ‘Ali (a.s.), until He is finished with
His judgments on people.

Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Intercession
-----------------------------------

Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (a.s.) said, “A man from among my progeny
will be wrongfully murdered in the land of Khurasan; his name is [the
same as] my name, his father’s name is [like] the name of Musa b,
‘Imran’s name; let it be known that whoever visits him in his
desolation, God will forgive his sins of the past and future, even
though they may be as many as the number of the stars, drops of water,
and leaves of the trees.”

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “Whoever visits me while knowing the right
that the Exalted Allah has made obligatory for obeying me, I and my
forefathers will be his intercessors on the Resurrection Day, and
whoever we intercede, will be redeemed although the sins of man and jinn
are upon him.

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “Soon, I will be wrongfully murdered by
poison; whoever visits me with spiritual understanding (*ma‘rifa* –
admitting my Imamate), Allah will forgive his past and future sins.

Aba Salt said, “I was with Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) when a group of people
arrived in from Qum. They greeted the Imam and his holiness revered
them, and then said, “Welcome! You are our real Shi‘a; there will come a
day that you will visit my grave in Tus; whoever visits me while having
performed *ghusl* (major ablution), will be cleansed of sins as if being
born again.”

The Pilgrim of Paradise
-----------------------

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) said, “Whoever visits my father, the Paradise will
be his abode.” He also said, “I guarantee the Paradise on behalf of God
for the one who visits [the Shrine of] my father in Tus while
recognizing his rightfulness.”

‘Ali b. Asbat said, “I asked Imam al-Jawad (a.s.): What is the reward
for the one who visits your father in Khurasan? He said, Paradise, I
swear by God. Paradise, I swear by God.”

Imam al-Sadiq said, “My grandson will be murdered in the land of
Khurasan in a city called Tus; whoever visits him in Tus while
recognizing his rightfulness, I will take his hand and let him into
Paradise, even though he is a perpetrator of great sins!

It was asked from him: “What is meant by recognizing his rightfulness?”
He answered: “To know that he is the Imam whose obedience is obligatory
(*wajib al-ta‘a*), he is estranged (*gharib*) and a martyr…”

The Apostle of Allah said, “Soon, a part of my body will be buried in
Khurasan, and whoever from among the believers goes there on pilgrimage,
Allah will surely destine them to Paradise, and their body will be
forbidden (*haram*) to the Hell-fire.

Similarly, Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) said, “Whoever makes a pilgrimage to
this son of mine – pointing at Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) – will enter
Paradise.

The Pilgrim of the Prophet (S)
------------------------------

Imam al-Sadiq said in a *hadith*: “Whoever makes a pilgrimage to him
(Imam al-Ridha – a.s.) in his desolation and knows that, after his
father, he is the Imam whose obedience is obligatory, in the sight of
Allah is like the one who has made a pilgrimage to the Apostle of Allah
(S).”

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “There is a *buq‘a* (mausoleum) in Khurasan
and there will come a day when it will become the frequenting place of
the angels; a group will descend from the heaven and another will ascend
to heaven until the Resurrection Day.”

The narrator asked: “What *buq‘a*?” The Imam answered: “In the land of
Tus. By God, it is a garden of the gardens of Paradise; whoever visits
me in that *buq‘a* is like the one who has visited the Apostle of Allah
(S) and God will grant them the reward of a thousand proper Hajj
pilgrimages and a thousand accepted *‘Umra* pilgrimages; and, I and my
forefathers will intercede with Allah on their behalf on the Day of
Resurrection.

Imam al-Musa b. Ja‘far (a.s.) said, “My son, ‘Ali, will be poisoned to
death and buried next to Harun; whoever visits him is like the one who
has visited the Prophet (S).

Reward of the Martyrs
---------------------

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said in a *hadith*: “Whoever visits him – Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.) – while recognizing his rightfulness, the Exalted Allah
will grant them the reward of seventy martyrs from among those truly
martyred in front of the Apostle of Allah (S).

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “By Allah, there is no one among us who will
not be killed or martyred.” Aba Salt asked: “Who will kill you O son of
the Apostle of Allah (S)?”

The Imam answered: “The worst of God’s creatures in my time, and will
bury me in a dark room and a strange land. Know that whoever visits me
in my desolation, the Almighty and Glorious Allah will reward them with
the reward of a thousand martyrs, and a thousand truthful ones, a
thousand Hajj and *‘Umra* pilgrimages, and a thousand combats, and He
will raise him with us and he will be with us in the highest positions
of Paradise.

The Pilgrims of God
-------------------

Imam Musa b. Ja‘far said, “Whoever visits the tomb of my son, ‘Ali, in
the sight of Allah they are like the ones who have performed seventy
proper Hajj pilgrimages.” The narrator asked: “Seventy Hajj pilgrimage?”
The Imam said, “Yes, and seven thousand Hajj pilgrimages.” The narrator
asked surprisingly: “Seven thousand?” The Imam said, “Many are the Hajj
pilgrimages that are not accepted; whoever visits him and stays with him
(near his tomb) for one night, is like the one who visits God in the
Divine Throne (*‘Arsh*).

The Fulfiller of Needs and Remover of Sorrows
---------------------------------------------

The Prophet (S) said, “Soon, a part of my body will be buried in
Khurasan; no sorrowful one would visit him, except that Allah would
remove his sorrow and no sinful person would visit him except that Allah
would forgive their sins.”

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, “Whoever has a request from God, should
perform *ghusl* and visit the tomb of my ancestor al-Ridha (a.s.) and
say two *rak‘a*s of prayer at the upper part of his tomb and ask in the
*qunut*[^1] what they want from God; if they do so, their prayer will be
answered, provided that they do not commit any sins and do not break off
the ties of kinship.

Verily his mausoleum is a chamber of the chambers of Paradise. No
believer would make a pilgrimage to it except that Allah would release
them from the Fire and enters them to a safe place.

Better than Optional Hajj
-------------------------

Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Bazanti said, “I read in a hand-writing by Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.): Convey this message to our Shi‘as that visiting me
(pilgrimage to my tomb) would equal a thousand Hajj pilgrimages in the
sight of Allah.”

Bazanti said, “I said to Imam al-Jawad (a.s.): a thousand Hajj
pilgrimages?” His holiness said, “Yes, by God, reward of a thousand (a
million) Hajj pilgrimages are for the one who visits him while
recognizing his rightfulness.

It is related in another tradition from Imam al-Kazim (a.s.): “Whoever
visits my son’s tomb will be rewarded with seven thousand Hajj
pilgrimages.”

It is related in a tradition from Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) who said, “Allah
would write the reward of a thousand proper Hajj pilgrimages and a
thousand accepted ‘Umra pilgrimages (for my pilgrims).” Yet, in another
tradition he is quoted as saying: “Whoever visits me in my desolation,
Allah will write for him the reward of a thousand Hajj and ‘Umra
pilgrimages.”

I (the author) believe that perhaps this difference in reward is due to
the difference in the pilgrimages in terms of easiness or difficulty,
sincerity and devotion, and the difference in the excellences and
attainments of the pilgrims.

Secure from the Fire
--------------------

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) said, “Between the two mountains of Tus there lies
a piece of land from the lands of Paradise; whoever enters there will be
secure from Fire on the Resurrection Day.

In another tradition he said, “Whoever visits my father’s tomb in Tus,
Allah will forgive his past and future sins and will set up a *minbar*
(pulpit) across from the *minbar* of the Apostle of Allah (S), until He
is finished with His judgments on people.

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “Whoever visits me while being far away from
home, I will come to them on three occasions on the Day of Resurrection
to relieve them from the horrors of that Day: when records of deeds are
giving to the left and right hands; at the *Sirat* (the bridge over Hell
leading to Paradise) and at the *Mizan* (Balance).

Best of Allah’s Guests
----------------------

Imam Musa b. al-Ja‘far (a.s.) is quoted as saying: “When the Day of
Resurrection comes, four people from among the earlier ones and four
people from among the latter ones will be upon the Throne; the four from
the earlier will be: Noah, Ibrahim, Moses, and Jesus (peace be upon
them); and the four from among the latter will be: Muhammad (S), ‘Ali,
al-Hasan, and al-Husayn (a.s.).”

Then, he went on to say: “The pilgrims of the tombs of the Imams (a.s.)
will be with us. Know that the pilgrims of the tomb of my son, (al-Ridha
– a.s.), will enjoy the highest rank.”

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “I will be killed wrongfully with poison and
buried next to Harun. God will make my grave the frequenting place of my
Shi‘as and visitors; whoever visits me in my desolation, I will pay a
visit to them on the Resurrection Day.”

“I swear by the One who honored Muhammad (S) with Prophethood and chose
him over all His creatures that no one of you will perform prayers next
to my grave except that they will deserve forgiveness when meeting with
God.”

“I swear by the One who honored us with Imamate after the Prophet (S)
and gave us superiority in succession that the visitors to my grave are
indeed the best of the Exalted Allah’s guests on the Resurrection Day.”

In the Same Rank as the Imam (a.s.)
-----------------------------------

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “Days and nights will not pass until Tus will
become the frequenting place of my Shi‘as and visitors. Let it be known
that whoever visits me in my desolation, will be in the same rank as me
on the Resurrection Day.”

In another tradition, he stated: “Whoever visits me in my desolation,
will be resurrected in our company and will be our companion in higher
stations of the Paradise.”

The Pilgrim of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and Imam al-Husayn (a.s.)
-------------------------------------------------------------

‘Ali b. Mahziyar said, “I said to Imam al-Jawad (a.s.): May I be your
ransom! Is pilgrimage to Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) more preferable or the
pilgrimage to Aba ‘Abd Allah al-Husayn (a.s.)?

His holiness answered: Pilgrimage to my father is more preferable,
because all (Muslims) make pilgrimage to Aba ‘Abd Allah al-Husayn
(a.s.), whereas no one but the elite among the Shi‘as will make
pilgrimage to my father.”

‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Hasani – may Allah be pleased with him – said, “I said
to Imam al-Jawad (a.s.): I am bewildered between pilgrimage to Aba ‘Abd
Allah al-Husayn’s (a.s.) grave and that of your father in Tus, what do
you suggest?

His holiness stated: Wait here. Then he went in (a room); when he
returned, while tears were rolling down his cheeks, he said, Pilgrims to
Aba ‘Abd Allah al-Husayn (a.s.) are many, whereas pilgrims to my
father’s grave in Tus are few.”

The author says: “By the grace of Allah and the blessing of the Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s.), today the esteemed nation and the lovers of Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.) in Iran turn caringly and enthusiastically around the radiant
mausoleum of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.), displaying their zealous interest in
the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), to the extent that there are fewer mausoleums
today that are rival in grandeur to the Holy Shrine of Imam al-Ridha
(a.s.).

The High Value of Enduring Hardship on the Way to Pilgrimage
------------------------------------------------------------

His holiness, Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) stated: “No one will visit my father,
tolerating hardships such as rain, cold, or heat, except that Allah will
make his body forbidden to the Hell-fire.”

His holiness Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) stated: “The people of Qum and the
people of Abe[^2] are forbidden (have found salvation) because they make
pilgrimage to my great grandfather’s grave; let it be known that whoever
visits him and undergoes suffering as little as a raindrop on his way to
that visitation, Allah will make Hell-fire forbidden to their body.”

Similarly, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) stated: “No believer will visit me while
a raindrop strikes them, except that Allah will make their body
forbidden to the Hell-fire.”[^3]

[^1]: A prayer said after the second rak‘a while both hands are raised.

[^2]: Also known as Aveh, a village near Saveh in central Iran whose
people are Shiʿa (See Muʿjam al-Buldan, vol. 1, p. 56).

[^3]: The traditions on Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) excellences are all
quoted from the noble volume Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 10, chapter 82 up to
chapter 88, Abwab al-Mazar.


