Introduction
============

Islamic Iran is proud to host the blessed body of the Apostle of Allah
(S)’s progeny, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.), the learned of the Prophet’s
household, the source of blessings, and the eighth infallible Imam. Each
year it receives millions of eager and enamored pilgrims who come here
to pay homage to the affectionate and gracious Imam.

With the blessings of this benevolent Imam, divine graces are dispensed
to all devotees of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), especially to the followers and
Shi‘as of his holiness; and this piece of land in Khurasan is a piece of
paradise which prides itself on the world of angels and is ever the
focus of attention to the heavenly cherubim, just as it is a focus of
attention and guidance for the people of the world. Divine angels
frequent around the sacred mausoleum along with his earnest pilgrims.

And what great blessings and graceful effects has the Almighty God
imparted on behalf of this magnanimous Imam and his pilgrimage to his
pilgrims and enthusiasts.

Paying pilgrimage to Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and the torrential presence of
the pilgrims in his heavenly sanctuary does always strengthen religious
spirit and spirituality, and the remembrance of the Hereafter,
concentration on Almighty Allah and His ordinances in the hearts of
people and the Islamic society.

In that pure atmosphere radiating with the light of Imamate and
*wilaya*, the eager pilgrims feel peace and purity of the heart, express
their needs, and enjoy plenty of divine blessings through the noble
Imam.

Thus, in order to provide better and deeper enjoyment of this
pilgrimage, we would draw the attention of the interested pilgrims to a
brief account of that noble Imam’s precious life and attributes so that
they may go on pilgrimage with more knowledge and, thereby, receive more
divine blessings and attention from the Eighth Holy Imam ‘Ali b. Musa
al-Ridha upon whom be thousands of salutations and praises.


