Brief History of Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Life
============================================

**His blessed name:** ‘Ali

**His father’s name:** Imam Musa b. Ja‘far (a.s.)

**His mother’s name:** Najma or Tuktam

**His nickname:** Abu al-Hasan

**His cognomen:** Ridha

**Date of birth:** Dhu’l-Qaʿda 11, 148/Dec 29, 765

**Place of birth:** Holy city of Medina

**Progeny:** His holiness Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.); of course, it is
disagreed whether his holiness has had other children.

**Rulers of his time:** Mansur Dawaniqi, Mahdi ‘Abbasi, Hadi ‘Abbasi,
Harun al-Rashid, Muhammad Amin, Ma’mun ‘Abbasi

**Date of being appointed as heir apparent:** Ramadhan, 201/March, 817,
as imposed by Ma’mun

**Length of life:** 55

**Date of martyrdom:** the end of Safar, 203/September 5, 818

**His murderer:** Ma’mun ‘Abbasi, through poisoning

**His mausoleum:** Holy city of Mashhad, as known worldwide.[^1]

Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Date of Birth
------------------------------------

Well-known scholars of *hadith* have regarded his birth date to be 11th
of Dhu’l-Qaʿda, 148/29th of December, 765, and this is the same year
that Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) departed from this world.[^2] However, some
have regarded his holiness’ birth to be five years after the demise of
Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.).[^3]

Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Noble Mother
-----------------------------------

His noble mother was an honorable lady named Najma or Tuktam, who was
named Tahira – the pure one – after her marriage.[^4]

She was a chaste[^5] and wise lady from among the Persian
dignitaries.[^6]

In a tradition, her highness Tuktam, Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Mother, is
quoted as saying: “Help me out by a wet nurse (to help me with suckling
Ridha). She was asked: “Is the milk reduced?” “No,” She answered, “but I
have *adhkar* and supplications to perform that have been reduced after
his birth.”[^7]

Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Children
-------------------------------

The historians and *hadith* scholars are divided over the number of Imam
al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Children; many, like Shaykh al-Mufid[^8] and Ibn
Shahrashub[^9], regard Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) as the only child of Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.), but some have assumed him to have had other children,
including a daughter named Fatima.[^10]

However, some traditions have confirmed the Imam’s having had only one
child. A man called Hannan b. Sudayr said, I said to Imam al-Ridha
(a.s.): Would an Imam be without a son or a successor? His holiness
answered: No, and know that there would be no more than one child for
me, but God will grant him many children.[^11]

The Auspicious Birth of Shams al-Shumus (the Radiant Sun among all the suns), ‘Ali b. Musa al-Ridha (a.s.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

His holy mother, Lady Najma when pregnant with her son, ‘Ali, said, “I
did not feel any heaviness. When asleep, I heard *dhikr* of God from
within me in a way that I was awe-inspired. After I gave birth to him,
he placed his feet and hands on the ground and, raised his head to the
sky, and moved his lips, as though he was saying something.”

When his holiness, Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s.) saw his son, he said, “O
Najma! Blessed are you for the miraculous gift Allah granted you.” Then,
the baby was wrapped in a white piece of cloth and given to his
holiness, who recited *adhan* into his right ear and *iqama* into his
left ear; he asked for some Euphrates water and touched the baby’s
palate with it [for blessing], and said to his mother: “Take the baby as
he is the remnant of Allah on His earth”.[^12]

After the birth of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.), Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) gave her
mother the nickname Tahira, meaning pure.[^13]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.), Wishing to See Imam al-Ridha (a.s.)
---------------------------------------------------------

Hadhrat Musa b. Ja‘far (a.s.) would say to his children: “This brother
of yours, ‘Ali b. Musa is the learned of the Prophet (S)’s household
[*‘Alim-i Al-i* Muhammad (S)]; ask him about your religion and learn by
heart what he says. I frequently heard from my father, Ja‘far b.
Muhammad, who told me: “The learned of the Prophet (S)’s household is
from among your progeny; I wish I would see him; he has the same name as
Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali (a.s.).[^14]

In numerous traditions related from the Holy Prophet (S), Commander of
the Faithful, ‘Ali (a.s.), and Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) references have been
made to the birth of that magnanimous Imam as well as his tragic
martyrdom, his noble mausoleum in Khurasan, and the great reward for
paying pilgrimage to him, which will be elaborated on in the chapter
concerning his martyrdom.

Why was Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) Named al-Ridha?
--------------------------------------------

Al-Bazanti, one of the dignitaries among the companions of Imam al-Ridha
(a.s.) and Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) said, “I said to Abu Ja‘far Muhammad b.
‘Ali, Imam al-Jawad (a.s.): ‘A group of your opponents presume that
Ma’mun has given the cognomen al-Ridha to your father since he approved
him as his heir apparent.’

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) said, “By God, they are lying and committing a sin;
rather, God, the Blessed and Exalted, named him as al-Ridha since he was
approved by the Almighty and Glorious God in Heaven and endorsed by His
Messenger and the Imams after him on earth.”

“I asked: ‘Were all your forefathers not so?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ I asked:
‘So, why your father from among them was named al-Ridha?’ He answered:
‘Since his opponents approved of him, as did his friends; and this did
not happen to any of his forefathers. That is why he from among them was
named Ridha.”

Confirming this issue, Sulayman b. Hafs said, “Musa b. Ja‘far named his
son al-Ridha and (when he wanted to talk of him) he would say: ‘Call my
son al-Ridha; I said to my son al-Ridha; my son al-Ridha told me so and
so…”[^15]

The Childhood and Adolescence Period of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.)
------------------------------------------------------------

History has largely kept silent about the Imams (a.s.) in their
childhood and adolescent period, as the historians are more interested
in the illustrious events and popular people, rather than the
unpretentious people and those who are far from being boisterous and
raucous, especially in relation to the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) who were
intended by the state to be isolated; and the scholars of the time, out
of their religious dissidence, tried to underestimate their role.

This has caused the latter generations to remain uninformed of the life
of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) before their appointment to Imamate and most
probably of the period after their Imamate.

Concerning what is related in history about how greatly his holiness
al-Ridha (a.s.) was loved by his noble father, one of the companions of
Imam Musa b. Ja‘far (a.s.) named al-Mufadhdhal is quoted as saying: “I
went to visit his holiness, I saw his son ‘Ali was sitting on his lap;
the Imam was kissing him and caressing his face, raising him up to his
shoulder, and pressing him to his bosom and saying:

“May my father be your ransom! How sweet is your scent! How immaculate
is your temperament and how evident your excellence!”

I said, “May I be your ransom! I feel such a love for this child that I
have never felt for anyone else but you.”

His holiness said, “O Mufadhdhal, he is to me like I am to my father;
children,

***some of whom are descendants of the others, and Allah is All-hearing,
All-knowing.*** ***Qurʾan: 3/34***”

I asked: “Will he possess this position after you?” He said, “Yes,
whoever obeys him will attain Truth, and whoever disobeys him will
become an infidel.”[^16]

And sometimes he would say: “My eldest son, ‘Ali, is most of all others
submissive and obedient to me. He looks upon *Jafr* and *Jami‘a* (which
are two significant source books of the Ahl al-Bayt [a.s.]’s knowledge)
along with me, upon which no one but the Prophet and his successors
would look.”[^17]

Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Religious Authority in His Youth
-------------------------------------------------------

In his youth, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) enjoyed such an outstanding virtue
and scholarship that people referred to him as a religious authority.
Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) referred people to him, saying: “My son’s writing
is as my writing; his words are as my words, and his envoy is as my
envoy; whatever he says is the very truth.”[^18]

One day someone said to Imam al-Kazim (a.s.): “I have a question.” His
holiness said, “Ask it from your Imam.” The man asked: “Who do you mean?
I know no Imam except you!” His holiness said, “That is my son, ‘Ali, I
have given my nickname – Abu al-Hasan – to him!”[^19]

Ibn Hajar, a Sunni scholar, said, “*Hadhrat* Ridha (a.s.), when only
twenty and some years old, would give *fatwa* (legal judgments) in the
Mosque of Rasul Allah (S).”

Dhahabi, another Sunni scholars said, “*Hadhrat* Ridha (a.s.) would give
*fatwa* in his youth during the lifetime of Malik b. Anas – one of the
four Sunni jurists.”[^20]

Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) High Status in the Divine Presence
---------------------------------------------------------

Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) said, “One of the companions of Imam al-Ridha
(a.s.) fell sick (lying in his deathbed). His holiness (a.s.) went to
visit him and asked him how he was. The man answered he was desperately
ill, and that he saw death before his eyes.

The Imam said, ‘How did you see death?’ He said, ‘Very hard and
painful.’ The Imam went on to say: ‘It is the beginning; it [death] has
shown you some of its modes. People are of two groups: for one group
dying will be a comfort and for the other [when they die] people will be
comforted. Renew your faith in God and *wilaya* (profession of faith in
God and His Messenger and devotion to Imams), so that you will be
comforted.”

“The man did so, and then said, ‘O son of Rasul Allah (S), now my Lord’s
angels are saluting you with their greetings and blessings and are
standing before you, waiting for your permission to be seated.”

His holiness said, “O angels of the Lord be seated!” “Then the Imam said
to the man: ‘Ask the angels if they are ordered to be standing before
me?”

“The ailing man asked them and they answered: ‘If all the God’s angels
are in your presence they would stand before you out of your respect and
would not be seated until you permit them to sit; God has ordained them
so.”

“Then as the ailing man kept his eyes closed said, ‘Pease be upon you, O
Divine envoy! It is you who are present to me along with the Holy
Messenger (S) and other Imams (a.s.).’ And thus he left his body.”[^21]

### My Son in a Strange Land

Shaykh Saduq (*ra*) relates that a man from among the pious saw the
Prophet (S) in a dream and asked him: “O Rasul Allah! Which of your
[grand] sons should I visit?” His holiness answered: “Some of my sons
come to me poisoned and some killed.” I said, “With such dispersion of
their [burial] places, which one should I visit?”

His holiness said, “The one who is nearest to you and is buried in a
strange land.” I asked: “Do you mean al-Ridha?” The Prophet (S) said,
“Say *sallallahu ‘alayh* (may God bless him), Say *sallallahu ‘alayh*,
Say *sallallahu ‘alayh*!”[^22]

Devotional Sira of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.)
---------------------------------------

Attending to worship and allocating time to devotional acts and special
litanies and supplications during the day and night has been one of the
Ahl al-Bayt’s (a.s.) regular practices, which, despite people’s visiting
them and their teaching and various other preoccupations, they have
never neglected, and this is a great lesson for their followers.

Now, part of the Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) devotional attitude is
introduced as follows:

He would prostrate after his morning prayers and stay in prostration
until sunrise.

When he found a chance and had free time, he would perform a thousand
*rak‘a*s of prayers.

After every prayer he would perform a thanksgiving prostration.

He was so intimate with the Qur’an that all his sayings and replies and
examples were of a Qur’anic nature.

Every three days he would complete the recitation of the whole Qur’an
and say: if I wish I would complete it in less than this, but each *aya*
I recite I deliberate on it to see where and when it was revealed.

He slept little during night and would keep vigil most of the nights.

He would fast a lot, never neglecting the three-days-a-month fasting.

He would recite *salawat* (benediction to the Holy Prophet) in his
supplications and would recite it a lot in his prayers and at other
times.

He would recite the Qur’an in bed at night and when he came to the
verses concerning the Paradise and Hell, he would weep a lot.

All the time he was engaged in remembrance of God and most of all he
stood in awe of his Lord.[^23]

### Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Devotional Schedule in his Journey to Khurasan

Raja*‘* b. Abi Ḍahhak was an administrator of the Abbasid government,
who presided over the high council of tax-collection during the reign of
Ma’mun. [^24] Having been appointed to take Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) to
Ma’mun from Medina to Marv and making sure to choose a route through
Basra, Ahwaz, and Fars, rather than through Qum, he said, “I accompanied
his holiness from Medina to Marv and I swear by God that I did not see
at any time no one like him in piety, excessive remembrance of God, and
so awe-inspired by God. He had the habit to keep sitting on his praying
place after the Morning Prayer and engage in *dhikr* of *Subhan Allah*,
*Alhamdulillah*, *Allahu Akbar*, *La ilaha illa Allah*, and reciting
*salawat* to the Holy Prophet and his progeny until the sunrise; then he
would prostrate himself and remain in prostration well through the
daylight.

Then, he would raise his head and talk to people and preached to them.
Near noon, he would perform ablution again and return to his praying
place, recite *adhan* and *iqama*, and perform his noon prayer after
performing eight supererogatory *rak‘a*s prior to noon prayer – in a
special procedure as quoted in the *hadith*.

After prayer, he would recite *tasbih* (*Subhan Allah* = Glorious is
Allah), *tahmid* (*alhamdulillah* = Praise be to Allah), *takbir*
(*Allahu Akbar* = Allah is the greatest), and *tahlil* (*la ilaha ill
Allah* = There is no deity but Allah) for a while and then he would go
on prostration and recite *hamdan lillah* (praise be to Allah) one
hundred times.

After the sunset, he would perform *wudhu* (partial ablution), say
*adhan* and *iqama*, and perform the evening prayer; after that he would
recite *tasbih*, *tahmid*, *takbir*, and *tahlil* for a time.

He would then perform a thanksgiving prostration and after that and
without talking to anyone he would perform four supererogatory *rak‘a*s
after evening prayer along with two final *salams* (face turned right
and then left) and two *qunuts* (a prayer said after the second *rak‘a*
with hands raised).

Following that, he would engage in after-prayer-supplications
(*ta‘qibat*) for a while and then break his fast.[^25] Almost one third
through the evening, he would stand up and perform his bed-time
(*‘isha’*’) prayer, then while sitting in his place of prayer, he would
say *dhikr* (remembrance of Allah) and recite *hamd* and *la ilaha ill
Allah* for a while and after performing *ta‘qibat* and thanksgiving
prostration, he would go to bed.

Toward the last one-third of the night, he would get out of his bed
while reciting *tasbih*, *tahmid*, *takbir*, *tahlil*, and *istighfar*
(asking for God’s pardon), brush his teeth, perform *wudhu*, and perform
eleven *rak‘a*s of late-night supererogatory prayer (*salat al-layl*) –
in a special procedure as related in the *hadith* – and after prayer, he
would keep sitting to say *ta‘qibat* and near dawn he would perform two
*rak‘a*s of dawn supererogatory prayer.

At dawn break, he would say *adhan* (the call to prayer) and *iqama*
(the declaration of standing for prayer). After performing the final
*Salam* (or *taslim*), he would say *ta‘qibat*; then, he would perform
two thanksgiving prostrations till daybreak.

In any city where he made an intention to stay for ten days he would
fast during daytime and when night fell, he would say prayers before
breaking his fast; and if he did not intend to stay, he would perform
the obligatory prayers in two *rak‘a*s, except for the evening prayer
(which is three *rak‘a*s).

He would never fail to perform the evening supererogatory, late-night
supererogatory, and the two *rak‘a*s of dawn prayer, neither while
travelling nor when staying at home. However, he would give up the
daytime – noon and afternoon – supererogatory prayers while on a trip
and after any shortened (travel) prayer (*salat al-qasr*), he would say
thirty times the four *tasbihat*s (*subhan Allah-i, wa
al-hhamduli’Alla-hi, wa la ilaha ill’Allahu, wa Allahu akbar,*), and
would say: “This is for the completion of *salat*…

On a trip, he would never fast; and in his invocations, he would always
recite *salawat* to the Prophet and his progeny, repeating this
*salawat* during and after his prayers a lot.

At night while in bed, he would read the Qur’an a lot and whenever he
reached a verse in the Qur’an in which Paradise of Hell-fire was
mentioned, he would weep and ask Allah for the Paradise and take refuge
in Him from the Hell-fire.

In all his prayers, his holiness would recite the *bismi’Allah* (the
formula *bi'smillah al-rahmanاal-rahim* [= in the name of Allah; the
most Merciful, the most Compassionate]) in a loud voice.

In any city he entered the people would go to him and ask him about the
principal features of their religion and his holiness would answer them,
quoting many traditions from Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) and the Apostle of Allah
(S) as related through his forefathers.

When I took the Imam (a.s.) to Ma’mun and he asked me for his travel
report, I recounted his holiness' states to him, he said, ‘That is true,
o son of Abi Ḍahhak; ‘Ali b. Musa is the best among the people of the
earth and the most learned and the most devoted among them. Do not tell
anyone what you have seen of him because I want his excellences be told
in my own words.[^26] And I seek for the help of Allah in my intention
to uplift his value.”[^27]

### Imam al-Ridha‘s (a.s.) On-Time Prayers

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) gave great importance to on-time prayer, as it is
the secret of consciousness and religiosity and a Muslim's devotion to
Allah and spiritual matters; and those who are committed to on-time
prayer are usually noble and prominent in faith and spirituality.

In a meeting ‘Umran Sabi, the renowned scholar of the time, was talking
with Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and their discourse had reached a sensitive
point when all of a sudden the Imam (a.s.), stood up and said to Ma’min
– who was watching the debate – that it was time for prayer.

‘Umran said, “My heart is softened (for accepting Islam), do not
interrupt my answer.” The Imam (a.s.) said, “We will say prayer and come
back.”[^28]

In another *hadith*, Ibrahim b. Musa says: “I asked something from Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.) and he promised to fulfill. Then, one day his holiness
set out to visit some of the ‘Alawis. On the way, the time for prayer
came; his holiness dismounted the beast and we were alone. He told me to
call to prayer (chant the *adhan*).

I said, ‘Let's wait for the companions to join us.’ He said, ‘May God
bless you with His forgiveness, do not postpone prayer from its due time
to a later time for no reason; always perform your prayer on time.’ I
chanted the *adhan* and we performed our prayer. After prayer I said to
him: ‘O son of the Prophet! Some time has passed since you made a
promise to me and I am needy.
You are always busy and I rarely have access to you.’ At this time,
Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) touched the ground and picked a gold ingot and
said, ‘Take this! May God bless you, use it and conceal what you just
saw.”

The man said, “That property was so bountiful that I purchased an
equivalent of seventy thousand dinars worth of goods and I became the
most enriched person in Khurasan.”[^29]

[^1]: Adopted from Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 2. Of course, concerning
the birth and martyrdom of his holiness other views have also been
reported.

[^2]: I‘lam al-Wara, 302; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 3.

[^3]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 18; Muruj al-Dhahab,
3/441, Isbat al-Wasiyya, 182.

[^4]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 15.

[^5]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 17.

[^6]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, 12/343 from Yanabi‘ al-Mawadda.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 2.

[^8]: Al-Irshad, vol. 2, p. 263.

[^9]: Manaqib, vol. 4, p. 376.

[^10]: Muntaha al-Amal, vol. 2, p. 352.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 221.

[^12]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 2, p. 250.

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 7.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 100 from I‘lam al-Wara.

[^15]: ‘Ilal al-Sharayi‘, vol. 1, p. 226.

[^16]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 26.

[^17]: Basa’ir al-Darajat, part 3, chapter 14, vol.24, p.20.

[^18]: Usul al-Kafi, 1/312; ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), 1/31;
Al-Irshad, 2/250.

[^19]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, 7/339.

[^20]: Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala, 9/388.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 72, as claimed by Rawandi.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 72, quoted from ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha
(a.s.).

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 90-94, collected from among various
ahadith.

[^24]: Lughatnama-yi Dihkhuda, 23/286.

[^25]: On a trip, he would never fast, but in any city where he made an
intention to stay for ten days he would fast during daytime. - Editor

[^26]: Which is of course a cover-up to conceal his excellences.

[^27]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 2, p. 178.

[^28]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 139.

[^29]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 49; Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 406,
somewhat different and brief.


