The Greatness of Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Personality in the Words of Dignitaries
===============================================================================

Although the status of Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Imamate suffices to become
aware of his sublime position, stating part of the words related in this
respect would make a great impression on the public minds.

Despite his enmity with Imam al-Ridha (a.s.), the Abbasid Ma’mun, who
enjoyed a high status in knowledge and scholarship, has said about Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.): “I do not know anyone superior to this man – meaning
Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) – on the face of the earth.”[^1]

Jamal al-Din Ahmad b. Nassaba, also known as Ibn ‘Inaba, said, “Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.), whose nickname is Aba al-Hasan, was matchless in his
own time among the sons of Abu Talib.”[^2] And Dhahabi, who is famous
for his deviation from Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), said about Imam al-Ridha
(a.s.): “He was chief of Bani Hashim in his own time and the most
forbearing and the wisest of them all…”[^3]

As one of the notables of his time, Aba Salt Hirawi said, “I have not
seen anyone more knowledgeable than ‘Ali b. Musa al-Ridha (a.s.); no
scholar saw his holiness unless he would confirm this same witness of
mine…”[^4]

Abu Nawas was one of the celebrated poets in Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) era.
One day one of his friends protested to him why he had not written
anything about such a personality as Imam ‘Ali b. Musa al-Ridha (a.s.),
despite knowing him. Abu Nawas replied: “I swear by God that his
greatness prevented me from this; someone like me is not able to
eulogize the like of him.”

Then he wrote a poem, the brief rendering of which is as follows:

“They tell me: How come you, who are a matchless orator, fail to
eulogize Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) despite his sublime character? I said, “I
cannot eulogize the Imam to whose father Gabriel was a servant.”[^5]

One day Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) came out while riding a nimble mule. Abu
Nawas approached him, greeted, and said, “O son of the Prophet! I have
composed some poetry; I would like you to hear it.” The Imam said,
“Recite it!” Abu Nawas recited three lines of his poetry, including this
one:

“Whoever is not ‘Alawi in his lineage,

Does not have any honor from his past.”

The Imam (a.s.) said to his retainer: “How much is remained of our
expenditure?” He replied: “Three hundred *dinar*s (every *dinar* costing
a *mithqal* – equivalent to 5 grams).” His holiness told him to give it
to Abu Nawas. When the Imam returned home, he said to his retainer:
“Maybe he would regard that amount as little, take this mule to him, as
well.”[^6]

[^1]: Al-Irshad, 2/261.

[^2]: ‘Umdat al-Matalib, 198. See: A‘lam al-Hidaya, p. 21.

[^3]: A‘lam al-Hidaya, p. 21.

[^4]: I‘lam al-Wara, 2/64. See: A‘lam al-Hidaya, p. 20.

[^5]: Kashf al-Ghumma, 3/158.

[^6]: A‘lam al-Hidaya, p. 22.


