Some Examples of Imam al-Ridha‘s (a.s.) Wise Answers
====================================================

Although the holy Imam's wise sayings and decisive responses are quite
many, we mention some of them here as examples.

Ibrahim b. Muhammad asked the holy Imam: “Why did God drown Pharaoh,
although he came to faith?” The holy Imam answered: “Because he came to
faith upon seeing punishment; coming to faith at that moment is not
acceptable.”[^1]

Aba Salt Hirawi asked: “Why did God drown all people in the time of
Noah, although there were innocents and children among them, too?” His
holiness answered: “There were no children among them, as for forty
years their progeny had discontinued; some perished for their denial and
some for their consent to denial. Whoever is absent from an event but
consents to it, is like someone present perpetrating it.”[^2]

Ibn Sikkit (Ya‘qub b. Ishaq) asked his holiness: “Why did God send down
Moses (a.s.) with a staff and white hand and magic, Jesus (a.s.) with
medicine, and Muhammad (S) with speech?” His holiness answered: “In the
time of Moses (a.s.) magic prevailed, in the time of Jesus medical
needs, and in the time of the Prophet (S) sermons and speeches.”

He went on to ask: “By God, I have never seen the like of you; what is
Allah’s Authority over people now?” The Imam answered: “Intellect, by
means of which the veracious-to-God will be distinguished from the
liar.” Ibn Sikkit said, “By God, this is the true answer to my
question.”[^3]

Hasan b. ‘Ali b. Fadhdhal asked the Imam: “Why did the people distanced
from Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (a.s.) while they knew his
excellence and achievement as well as his relation to the Prophet (S)?”

His holiness replied: “Because ‘Ali (a.s.) had killed their fathers,
forefathers, brothers, uncles, and their near of kin, who battled
against Allah and His Apostle and they were many in number, so they were
vindictive to him and unwilling to be under his guardianship; but others
did not do this in the holy wars (*jihad*), therefore the people
distanced from ‘Ali (a.s.) and inclined toward them.”[^4]

Haytham b. ‘Abd Allah asked his holiness: “Why didn’t [Imam] ‘Ali fight
with his enemies twenty five years after the Prophet (S) but he fought
during his ruling days?” Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “He followed the
example of the Prophet (S) who did not fight with the unbelievers for
thirteen years in Mecca and nineteen years in Medina and the reason was
lack of enough helpers; similarly, ‘Ali (a.s.) gave up fighting with the
enemy because his helpers were few.”[^5]

Hasan b. ‘Ali b. Fadhdhal asked his holiness: “Why is the Prophet’s
nickname Abu al-Qasim?” He answered: “Because he had a son named Qasim.”
The narrator said, “Do you deem me worthy of telling me more?”

The Imam said, “Yes.” He said, “Do you know that ‘Ali is the distributor
of the Paradise and the Hell?” The man said, “Yes.” His holiness said,
“The Prophet (S) is called Abu al-Qasim (the father of the distributor)
because he is [the spiritual] father of (‘Ali, who is) the distributor
of Paradise and Hell.”[^6]

Someone asked Imam al-Ridha (a.s.): “Is it (the *hadith*) true that the
Prophet (S) said, “My companions are like stars, whichever you follow,
you will be guided?” The Imam said, “Yes, what the Prophet (S) means are
those who did not change or transform the way.”

He asked: “How would it become known?” His holiness said, “By means of
the *hadith* related – by the Sunnis – from the Prophet (S) saying: “On
the Resurrection Day some men will distance my companions from my
Fountain just like they distance strange camels from the water.

I say: O Lord! My companions, my companions! I am told: You do not know
what they did after you! And take them to the left. I say: May they be
far! May they be perished!” Then Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “Do you
think this would be for those who remained unchanged and unvaried?”[^7]

[^1]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 2, p. 76.

[^2]: Ibid, p. 74.

[^3]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 2, p. 79 (in brief).

[^4]: Ibid, p. 80.

[^5]: Ibid, p. 80.

[^6]: Ibid, p. 84.

[^7]: Ibid, 86. Some of the dignitaries among Sunnis, such as Bukhari
and Muslim in their Sahihs as well as others have related from various
narrators the hadith about some of the companions’ deviation with
various references and sanads.


