Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Knowledge of Various Languages
=====================================================

Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) scholarly character is not restricted to
religious and intellectual issues and the common sciences; rather, some
manifestations of his Divine knowledge was revealed to the people that
indicated his connection to the unseen world, some examples of which are
pointed out as follows.

1. Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Familiarity with Various Current Languages of the Time
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Aba Salt Hirawi said, “Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) used to speak with people
whose languages were different in their own languages. By God, he was
the most fluent and knowledgeable of all people in any language.”[^1]

One day he said to Imam al-Ridha (a.s.): “O son of the Apostle of Allah!
I am astonished of your mastery of different languages.” His holiness
answered: “O Aba Salt!” I am Allah’s authority (*Hujja*) over His
creatures and Allah never assigns a *Hujja* over a folk whose language
he does not know.

Have you not heard Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) saying that we are
given the clear proof (*fasl al-khitab*) and this is nothing but
knowledge of languages?”[^2]

Someone by the name of Ismaʿil Sindi had come from India to see Allah’s
authority (*Hujjat Allah*). He was guided to Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.)
presence. He said, “I went to the Imam but I did not know Arabic, so I
greeted him in Sindi language, his holiness answered my greeting in my
own language.

I talked to him in my language and he talked back to me in my language.
I told him: ‘I have come to see Allah’s authority in Arabia.’ He
answered: ‘That is me (Allah’s authority) ask whatever you like.’ I
asked my questions and the Imam answered in my own language.

When I wanted to leave, I said, ‘I do not know Arabic; ask God to
inspire Arabic language to me! His holiness rubbed his blessed hand on
my lips, just then I was able to speak Arabic!”[^3]

In Basra, when one of his opponents called ‘Amr b. Haddab wanted him to
prove his claim of knowing any language and speak with the Romans,
Hindus, Persians, and Turks who were in town, the holy Imam said, “Call
them in.”

A number of the speakers of various languages were brought to the
presence of his holiness and he talked to all of them in such fluency
that all admitted to the Imam’s mastery and the people were astonished
at seeing this happening,[^4] because Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) had never had
a teacher in this regard and had never learned various languages with
anyone, nor had he associated with these individuals in Medina so as to
learn to speak so many languages with such fluency.

2. Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Familiarity with the Language of the Birds and Animals
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Various manifestations of Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) knowledge of the
animals’ language is recorded, some of which are pointed out here.
Sulayman b. Ja‘far said, “I was with Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) in the garden
when all of a sudden a sparrow came to his holiness and began to chirp.

His holiness said, ‘Do you know what it is saying?’ I said, ‘No, Allah
and His messenger and his son know best.’ His holiness said, ‘She says a
snake wants to eat her chicks. Take this stick, go to that house and
kill the snake.’ He said, ‘When I entered the house, I saw a snake was
moving around and I killed it.”[^5]

A person called Harun b. Musa says: “I was in a desert with Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.) when his horse neighed and the Imam let go of (the rein
of) the horse; it went away (to a corner) and relieved itself and came
back.

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) – who had noticed my surprise – looked at me and
said, ‘Nothing has been granted to the prophet David (a.s.) except that
more also has been granted to Muhammad (S) and his Household
(a.s.).”[^6] [Implying that the Prophet David knew the animals’
language; so, no wonder we know it, too.]

3. Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Widespread Knowledge in Occult Sciences
-----------------------------------------------------------------

A part of the vast knowledge of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) is manifested in
the occult news reported by his holiness, some of which are mentioned as
follows:

### Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Predictions concerning the Barmakids

His holiness frequently pointed out the annihilation of the Barmakids,
who were the closest people to Harun and very influential in his court.
On his journey to Hajj pilgrimage, when the Imam glanced upon the dusty
face of Yahya b. Khalid Barmaki in the land of Mina, he said, “These
wretched people do not know what is going to happen to them this
year.”[^7]

Muhammad b. Fadhl said, “The same year that Harun toppled the Barmakid
dynasty, I saw Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) standing to pray in ‘Arafat; then he
suddenly cast his head down. When he was asked why he did so, he
answered: “I had prayed God to punish the Barmakids, and today my prayer
was answered.

When Dawud b. Kathir heard Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) that Yahya b. Khalid had
caused Imam Musa al-Kazim’s (a.s.) martyrdom with poisoned dates, he
said to the Imam: “May I be your ransom!

If Yahya b. Khalid is your father's murderer, I will sell my soul to God
and kill him.” His holiness said, “Do him nothing; what is going to
befall him and his children this year will be much more severe than what
you have intended to do.”[^8]

### Harun will do no Harm to me!

His holiness frequently pointed out that no harm would be done to him by
Harun. When the Imam was informed that ‘Isa b. Ja‘far had told Harun and
sworn that he would murder the one who claims Imamate after Musa b.
Ja‘far and that ‘Ali b. Musa al-Ridha has succeeded his father and
claims to be the Imam after him and that Harun has given a negative
answer, the Imam said, “There will be no harm done to me by Harun.”[^9]

And when it was told to the Imam: “You have been recognized as Imam and
popularized as such; blood is dripping from Harun's sword!” The Imam
answered: “My answer is what the Messenger of Allah (S) said.

The Prophet (S) said, “If Abu Jahl hurts me in the slightest, be witness
that I am not a Prophet; I do also say that if Harun hurts me in the
slightest, be witness that I am not an Imam.[^10] It is related in
another *hadith* that when the Imam was warned about Harun, he said, “He
won’t be able to hurt me so much as he tries.”[^11]

### Various Predictions

His holiness informed that ‘Abd Allah (i.e. Ma’mun) would kill Muhammad
(i.e. Amin) and when the narrator [of this *hadith*] asked with
surprise: “Will ‘Abd Allah, son of Harun kills Muhammad, son of Harun?!”
The Imam said, “Yes, ‘Abd Allah, who is in Khurasan will kill Muhammad
b. Zubayda, who is in Baghdad.”

And it happened as the Holy Imam (a.s.) predicted.[^12] When Imam
al-Sadiq’s (a.s.) son revolted against Ma’mun in Mecca, His holiness
said to him: “O Uncle! Do not deny your father and brother; this will
lead you nowhere and will not end. It did happen so and after a while,
he was defeated and disarmed by Maʾmun’s army.”

One day Ja‘far b. ‘Ali ‘Alawi passed by a group of Hashemite youth with
an unfit appearance. They humiliated him for his unfit appearance.

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “You will soon see him with abundant
properties and a large following. Less than a month later he was
appointed as governor of Medina and his condition changed for the
better.[^13]

### Awareness of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) of Children in Mother’s Wombs

Someone said to Imam al-Ridha (a.s.): “When I was coming – from Kufa –
my wife was pregnant, ask God that our baby be a boy child!” His
holiness said, “It is a pair of twins!”

“When I wanted to leave, his holiness addressed me and said, ‘Name one
‘Ali and the other Umm ‘Umar – or ‘Amr (i.e. they are not both boys).’
When I returned to Kufa I found out there were a boy and a girl born to
us.[^14]

Because of Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) advice, I named the boy ‘Ali and the
girl Umm ‘Umar. When my neighbor (who was an adversary) heard about it
said, ‘Now I no longer accept the words of those who say you are a
Rafidhi”[^15]

One day, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) went to visit his uncle, Muhammad b.
Ja‘far, who was in his deathbed. He noticed that his other uncle, named
Ishaq b. Ja‘far, and some other people weeping at his bedside. His
holiness left the room with a meaningful smile, so that those present
were surprised.

His holiness said, “My surprise is because Muhammad b. Ja‘far will
recover and Ishaq b. Ja‘far who is now weeping for him will die and
Muhammad b. Ja‘far will weep for him!” And it happened as the Imam
(a.s.) had stated.[^16]

Someone named Hasan b. Musa, two of whose handmaidens were pregnant,
sent a letter to the Imam asking him to pray for his handmaidens to bear
boy children. His holiness replied in a letter: “All things are in the
Hands of God; if He wills, there will be a boy and a girl born to you.
Name the boy Muhammad and the girl Fatima.” It turned out to happen as
his holiness had predicted.[^17]

Someone else, whose eleven children had died, complained to Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.) about his children not to survive; the Imam lowered his
head and prayed for a long while, then said, “Hopefully two sons will be
born to you, one after another.” The narrator goes on to say: “It turned
out as his holiness had predicted; so, I named the first one Ibrahim and
the second one Muhammad and both of them survived.”[^18]

After the martyrdom of Imam al-Ridha (a.s.), his cunning enemy, Ma’mun,
Said, “I requested something (a prayer) from the Imam for an easy and
safe delivery of the baby that one of my most delightful and favorite
handmaidens was pregnant with, as she had miscarried several times
before.

His holiness said, ‘Do not worry! She will deliver a baby boy who is
most similar to his mother. However, he will have an extra finger on his
right hand and one on his left foot; and it happened as he had
predicted.”[^19]

### Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Knowledge of How he would be Martyred and where he would be buried

His holiness had frequently talked about how he would be martyred by
Ma’mun, which we will recount in detail in the chapter on his martyrdom.
Following are some instances.

Sometimes he said, “I am going on a trip to Khurasan, from which I will
not return.”[^20] The narrator says: “When Ma’mun invited the Imam
(a.s.) to Khurasan from Medina for heir apparency, his holiness went to
the Holy Shrine of the Prophet (S) while weeping loudly.

I greeted him and congratulated him for the heir apparency. His holiness
said, ‘They are taking me away from my grandfather and I will die in a
strange land and will be buried next to Harun.’[^21] That was why he
enjoined people to cry for him, when he was leaving Medina.”[^22]

As Ma’mun ostensibly expressed interest in Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and
defended the Imamate of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) here and there, his holiness
would say to his friends: “Do not let Ma’mun deceive you; by God, no one
but him would kill me; and I have no choice but let what is destined be
fulfilled.”[^23]

Another narrator reports: “I saw Harun, the Abbasid Caliph, leaving
through one of the gates of Masjid al-Haram and Imam al-Ridha (a.s.)
from another. His holiness said, ‘How far is home and how near is the
meeting; [the city of] Tus will gather me and him [in one place].’[^24]
And as we know the Harun’s tomb is next to Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.).”

Sometimes in Medina Mosque, while Ma’mun was lecturing, the Imam (a.s.)
said, “You will see me and him buried in one place.”[^25] On another
occasion he said, “Harun and I would be like these two”, showing his
middle and index fingers. The narrator says: “We did not figure out the
meaning of the Imam’s words until his holiness was buried next to
Harun.”[^26]

[^1]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), 2/27.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Kashf al-Ghumma, 3/91; Al-Khara’ij wa al-Jara’ih, 1/340; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 50.

[^4]: Al-Khara’ij wa al-Jara’ih, 1/341; Al-Thaqib fi al-Manaqib, 186;
Bihar al-Anwar, 49/73.

[^5]: Basa’ir al-Darajat, p. 365; Dala’il al-Imama, p. 343; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 88.

[^6]: Manaqib Al-i Talib, vol. 4, p. 334; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49. P.
57.

[^7]: Al-Irshad, vol. 2/258; Al-Kafi, 1/491.

[^8]: Dala’il al-Imamiyya, 327.

[^9]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), 1/245.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 59; Manaqib Al-i Abi Talib, 4/368.

[^11]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), 2/245.

[^12]: Al-Manaqib, 4/363 (A‘lam al-Hidaya, p. 22).

[^13]: Al-Fusul al-Muhimma, 247.

[^14]: Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 3, p. 98.

[^15]: Al-Thaqib fi al-Manaqib, p. 216; Al-Khara’ij wa al-Jara’ih,
1/361; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 49, p. 54; Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 3, p. 98.
Rafidhi is a name that the Sunnis have given to the zealous Shi’as. By
this term they mean someone who rejects (yarfuduna) Islam, but as
Kulayni quotes from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) it was bestowed on the Shiʿa by
God and is preserved in both the Torah and the Gospels. According to
Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.), there were seventy men among the people of Pharaoh
who rejected their master and chose to join Moses instead. God therefore
called them Rafidha, i.e. those who rejected evil, and ordered Moses to
write this word, in the original Arabic, in the Torah. After Muhammad's
death, when most of the early adherents of Islam began to stray from the
path of truth, only the Shiʿas rejected evil. They thus became the
successors of the original Rafidha. (Kulayni al-Kafi, edit by ʿAli Akbar
al-Ghaffari, 1375-7, Tehran, vol. 8, p.34. – Editor.

[^16]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 223.

[^17]: Ibid, p. 236.

[^18]: Ibid, 240.

[^19]: Al-Ghayba, Shaykh Tusi, p. 52; ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol.
1, p. 241.

[^20]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 233.

[^21]: Ibid, p. 234.

[^22]: Ibid, p. 235.

[^23]: Ibid, p. 199

[^24]: Al-Ittihaf bi Hubb al-Ashraf, 59.

[^25]: Ibid.

[^26]: Ibid.


