Imam al- Ridha‘s (a.s.) Cultural Measures
=========================================

A sound analysis of various measures taken by the dignitaries in
different eras requires an accurate knowledge of the prevailing
conditions of the time and their goals. Without this knowledge, no
theory and conjecture will ever enjoy the necessary precision and
soundness, especially in relation to the purified Imams (a.s.), who,
besides the hidden issues and Divine inspirations, enjoy profound
intelligence and insight and are among the most knowledgeable human
beings.

For one thing, the extant historical reports of the circumstances
prevailing in those eras are insufficient and incomplete in various
aspects so that a researcher cannot depend on them for a reliable and
accurate analysis.

However, fortunately there is no need for historical reports concerning
the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), since we believe that, as it is expedient to the
status of Imamate which connects them to Divine science and wisdom, they
enjoy inspirations and even codified programs and always make the best
and most appropriate decisions in various circumstances.

But all this should not prevent us from touching upon some instances
mentioned in his era in order to familiarize ourselves in more details
with them. Among those we can point out the circumstances prevailing
Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) era which led to the widespread promulgation of
the Islamic teachings and truths.

With reference to the works left behind by Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), we would
find out that after Imam ‘Ali (a.s.), Imam al-Baqir (a.s.), and Imam
al-Sadiq (a.s.) most of these teachings and truths have been left behind
by Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) because of the special circumstances and a good
chance that appeared in his time.

Although the enemy tried to falsify the Imam’s vast knowledge and cut
down his popularity, his period of Imamate, in particular his heir
apparency, provided a great chance for his holiness to proceed with the
dissemination of Islamic sciences and the truths of the Ahl al-Bayt’s
(a.s.) school of thought. Some of these endeavors are as follows:

1. Confrontation with Zealotry and the Zealots
----------------------------------------------

Of the great evils among the followers of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) have been
and are those who regard them much higher in rank than their true status
and hyperbolize them, believing in their lordship, Prophethood, or some
other divine features.

This group of people have always been rejected from among the Shi‘as and
the Imams (a.s.). Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said, “Take heeds of your youths
lest the zealots should corrupt them, as the zealots are the worst of
God’s creatures; they belittle God’s majesty and claim Lordship for
God’s servants. By God, the zealots are worse than the Jews, the
Christians, the Magi, and the polytheists.”[^1]

Therefore, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) proceeded to battle against this group,
who were active in the time of his holiness.

In a *hadith*, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) relates a tradition with its chain
of transmission from his father and forefathers from the Apostle of
Allah who said, “Do not raise me above what I deserve; verily, the
Almighty Allah made me His servant before appointing me as a Prophet.”

Then his holiness recited *aya*s 79 and 80 of Surat Al-i Imran.[^2] He
went on to quote Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) as saying: “Two (persons) will perish
because of me while I am not to be blamed: an extreme lover and an
extreme hater.”

Then, Imam al-Ridha said, “By God, we are averse to the one who
hyperbolizes us and raises us above what we really are, just as Jesus,
son of Mary, was averse to the Christians.” After reciting some verses
of the Qur’an, his holiness said, “Whoever claims Lordship for the
Prophets, Prophethood for the Imams and Imamate for the non-Imams, we
are averse to him both in this world and Hereafter.”[^3]

That is to say, the followers of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) are to be careful
neither belittles the status of the Imams as impressed by the
adversaries, nor raise them to the level of Lordship or Prophethood out
of undue love and prejudice; rather, they should follow intellect and
religious law and what they themselves have stated.

In another tradition, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “Allah’s curse be upon
the zealots (*ghali*s)! Why did they not become Jew?! Why did they not
become Magus?! Why did they not become Christian?! Why did they not
become *Qadari*?! Why did they not become *Murj’ite*?! Why did they not
become *Kharijite*?” (Meaning, why have they attributed themselves to
us?) Then, the Imam (a.s.) said, “Do not associate with them do not
confirm them, be averse to them; may God be averse to them.”[^4]

And when Abu Hashim Ja‘fari asked Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) concerning the
zealots and the people believing in free-will (*Ahl al-tafwidh*), his
holiness said, “Zealots are unbelievers and *Ahl al-tafwidh* are
polytheists; whoever associates with them, eats and drinks with them,
helps them, gets married to them, transacts with them, believes in them,
regards them trustworthy, confirms their sayings, or helps them even
with the fewest words, will be estranged from friendship with the
Almighty and Glorious Allah, friendship with the Apostle of Allah (S),
and the friendship with us the Ahl al-Bayt.”[^5]

When we refer to the narrations regarding the condemnation of the
zealots, we find out that many of those narrations have been quoted from
Imam al-Ridha (a.s.)[^6], which imply that the zealots were widely
active in that era.

One of the zealots told Imam al-Ridha (a.s.): “Yunus b. Ẓabyan – from
among those accused of zealotry – has said, ‘One night I was
circumambulating [around Ka‘ba] when I heard a voice from above telling
me O Yunus, I am Allah and there is no god but me; worship me and
perform prayers to remember me.

When I raised my head, all of a sudden Abu al-Hasan appeared to me.’
Upon hearing such words, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) got so disturbed that he
said to that man: ‘get away from me! May God curse you and everyone who
has told you this and Yunus b. Ẓabyan with a thousand curses followed by
a thousand more curses and may every curse take you deep down into Hell.
I bear witness that it was no one but the Satan who called him.”[^7]

When they told Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) that some of those who regard
themselves as his followers suppose that these – Divine – attributes
belong to ‘Ali (a.s.) and that he is Allah, the Lord of the two worlds,
the Imam began to shake in utter agitation and sweat profusely and said,
“*Subhan Allah*! Exalted is Allah from what the tyrants and wrong-doers
say! Was it not that ‘Ali who ate like other eaters, who drank like
among other drinkers, who got married like other ones who got married,
etc.? Was he not the one who stood humbly and subserviently in prayer
before his Lord and whispered supplications to Him? Is the person who
has such features God?”[^8]

Nowadays that the adversaries are harder than ever seeking pretexts to
assault on the school of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.), it is incumbent upon any
Shi‘a, in particular, the notable scholars – may the Exalted Allah be
pleased with them – to stand up against the extremist and exaggerating
proclaims, especially the unrighteous poems, and defend the Ahl
al-Bayt’s (a.s.) sanctuary.

Similarly, the committed poets and eulogists are to stay away from the
zealots and the deviants, and the people should watchfully warn such
individuals.

2. Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) Struggles against Sufis
-------------------------------------------------

One of the sects created by a man named Abu Hashim Kufi in Islamic
community in the first/seventh century was Sufism, which, under the
cover of asceticism and renouncing the world, created innovations in
religion and had specific beliefs and practices.

From the very beginning they deviated from the school of the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.); and the Imams (a.s.) strongly fought against them and warned
their followers of approaching them.

Similarly, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) cautioned the Shi‘as against the dangers
of this group and said, “No one will believe in Sufism except for
deceiving or misleading or out of foolishness; and it is likely that
some may have all three.”[^9]

He also said, “Those to whom Sufis are mentioned and do not deny them by
their tongues or in their hearts, are not from us; and those who deny
them are like the ones who fought against the infidels in the company of
the Apostle of Allah (S).”[^10]

There are plenty of traditions from the Holy Prophet (S) and the
purified Imams (a.s.) condemning this deviated group. Since the time of
the Infallible Imams (a.s.), the Imami Shi‘as have always been
unanimous[^11] about the invalidity of Sufism and have written many
refutations against them.

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) called Sufis as enemies of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.) and
regarded those inclined toward them as to be resurrected with them and
said, “Soon a group of people who claim to love us will incline toward
the Sufis, assimilate to them, name themselves after them, and justify
their sayings; whoever is inclined towards them is not from us and I am
averse to them.”[^12]

Unfortunately, misusing the spiritual circumstances of the society and
due to the negligence of some of the cultural officials and the silence
of some scholars after the magnificent Islamic revolution of Iran, this
misguided sect has expanded its activities.

It is the duty of people from all walks of life, especially the leaders
of the society and the notable scholars, to prevent this great deviation
and innovation and fulfill their responsibilities in protecting the
spiritual boundaries of religion and people’s beliefs and beware of
propagation of their leaders, books, and words, because in the country
which belongs to the Lord of Time (may Allah *subhanahu wa ta‘ala*
hasten his noble reappearance) and using his holiness’ assets and
properties to propagate for his adversaries would lead to deprivation
from Divine bounties and the Imam’s favors.

3. Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and the Importance of Imam from the Viewpoint of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Among Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) significant cultural measures is the
promulgation of Shi‘i beliefs in relation to Imam and Imamate, since
many of adversaries have such superficial opinions about Imamate that
they reduce the status of the Imam to a level even lower than the
ordinary people and consider no sin to be an obstacle to Imamate or
obeying the Imam.

Thus, his holiness, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) made an endeavor to promote the
Ahl al-Bayt’s (a.s.) opinion in this respect. Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) was
occasionally asked about the necessity of the presence of an Imam on
earth, to which he would answer: “The earth would not be devoid of an
Imam; otherwise it would devour its inhabitants.” He would also say: “If
the earth is devoid of a *Hujja* (Allah’s authority) for even a blink of
an eye, it will devour its inhabitants.”[^13]

As for the signs of the Imam, his holiness said, “The Imam has signs;
that he is the wisest of people, the best judge, and the most pious, the
most patient, the bravest, the most generous, and the most devoted of
people; he is born circumcised.

He is pure and clean; he sees his back as he sees in front of him. He is
more deserving to people than themselves. He is more compassionate to
people than their parents are. He is the humblest of all people to the
Almighty and Glorious God and the most industrious of all in Divine
command (*amr*) and prohibition (*nahy*); his prayers are answered so
much as if he prays that a rock be cleft in two, it would.”[^14]

In another *hadith*, he said, “The Imam is certified by the Holy Spirit;
there is a column of light between him and Allah through which he sees
people’s actions. He is informed about what he wishes by it; sometimes
that light shines on and he knows (what he must know); and sometimes it
is taken away and thus he does not know…[^15]

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “We are Divine Proof on earth and His
vicegerent among His servants and trustees of His Mystery; we are words
of piety and the strongest and most dependable; we are Allah’s witnesses
and His standards among His creatures. It is because of us that Allah
prevents the heaven and earth from falling apart; it is because of us
(or by us) that He sends down rain and spreads out His Mercy. The earth
shall never be devoid of one of us, either to be apparent or concealed;
if it is devoid of Divine Proof even for one day, it will shake and
agitate its inhabitants in such a way that the sea shakes its
content.”[^16]

Most important of all is the detailed statements that Imam al-Ridha
(a.s.) expressed in Marv Grand Mosque on the early days he arrived there
– when he heard about the people’s disagreement about Imamate. His
holiness smiled and said,

“O ‘Abd al-‘Aziz! These people are ignorant and have been deceived
regarding their religion.” Then, stating that the Religion [of Islam] is
perfect, since the Prophet (S) appointed ‘Ali as the standard-bearer of
guidance and the Religion was perfected, he went on to say: “Do they
know the value and status of Imamate among the *umma* so that their
choosing an Imam be acceptable? The status of Imamate is too superior,
its dignity too great, its position too sublime, its access too
difficult, and its depth too profound for the people to perceive it with
their intellects and views or fathom it with their opinions or elect an
Imam.”

“Verily, Imamate is the rank of the Prophets and legacy of the spiritual
heirs; Imamate is the position of vicegerency of God and vicegerency of
the Prophet (S).

It is the position of Commander of the Faithful and inheritance of
al-Hasan (a.s.) and al-Husayn (a.s.); it is the organizer of the
Muslims’ affairs, the good of this world, and honor of the believers.

Imamate is the firm foundation for the dynamic Islam… Imam is like a
radiant sun with whose light the world is illumined, while he is in the
horizon out of the reach of the hands and the eyes…”

“Imam is like a trustworthy companion, fostering brother, caring father,
and a shelter for people in their hardship. Imam is the trustee of God
among people, His proof for His servants and His vicegerent in His
lands. He is the caller to God and the protector of Divine Sanctuary.”

“Imam is purified from sins and free from defects; he is given exclusive
knowledge and is characterized with forbearance; he is the order of the
faith, stronghold for the Muslims, cause of wrath to the hypocrites, and
the perdition of the infidels.”

“Imam is the unsurpassed one in his own time; no learned one is equal to
him, and he has no substitute or match or similar… How is it possible
then for anybody to know the Imam and elect him? Far from it! Far from
it! Intellects are too feeble, thoughts are too astray, wits are too
puzzled, the eyes are too blurry, the great are too small, the wise are
too dazed, the speakers are too mute, the thinkers are too ignorant,
poets are too desperate, the authors are too weak, and the eloquent one
are too wordless to describe a single feature of the Imam’s dignity or a
single excellence of his excellences.”[^17]

4. Imam al-Ridha and Commander of the Faithful (a.s.)
-----------------------------------------------------

The plethora of Imam al-Ridha’s (a.s.) traditions indicate that in many
instances his holiness has tried to introduce Commander of the Faithful
(a.s.) and his excellences to people; some of these traditions are
mentioned in the following:

### Forty Traditions Related from Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) on the Virtues of Commander of the Faithful (a.s.)

1. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “O ‘Ali! Indeed you are
the one who divides the Heaven and Hell; and indeed you are the one who
will knock at the Gates of Paradise and enter it without any
reckoning.”[^18]

2. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “The similitude of the
members of my Ahl al-Bayt among you is like that of Noah’s Ark; whoever
boarded it, was saved, and whoever strayed away from it, was thrown into
the Fire.”[^19]

3. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “God’s wrath and that
of His Prophet (S) encompasses whoever sheds my (offspring’s) blood and
bothers the members of my Household.”[^20]

4. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “It seems that I have
been called in and I have accepted the call; I will depart this life,
but I will leave two weighty things with you, one of which is greater
than the other one; God’s Book that is a rope extended down from the
heavens onto the earth. The other is my *‘Itrat* that is the members of
my household. Therefore, watch and see how you treat these two after
me.”[^21]

5. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn
are the two lords of the youth of the inmates of Paradise, and their
father is even better than they are.”[^22]

6. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Woe be to those who
oppress my Ahl-al-Bayt! It is as if I see their rank to be the same as
the hypocrites in the lowest depths of the Fire.”[^23]

7. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Whoever I am the
master of, ‘Ali is the master of. O God! Like whoever likes ‘Ali and be
the enemy of whoever is ‘Ali’s enemy. Help whoever helps him and
belittle whoever belittles him.”[^24]

8. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “O ‘Ali! Indeed the
Exalted Allah has forgiven you, your household, your followers and those
who like your followers.”[^25]

9. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “O ‘Ali! If you were
not there, the believers after me would not be recognized.”[^26]

10. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “O ‘Ali! You have been
granted three things, which no one has ever been granted before.” ‘Ali
(a.s.) said, “May my father and mother be your ransom! What have I been
granted?” the Prophet (S) said, “You have been granted a father-in-law
like me, a wife like your wife, and sons like al-Hasan and
al-Husayn.”[^27]

11. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “The followers of ‘Ali
are the triumphant on the Resurrection Day.”[^28]

12. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Whoever wishes to be
delighted by looking at and grab the stem of the red hyacinth ruby that
God has planted Himself, should wholeheartedly love (seek as guardians)
‘Ali and the Imams from among his progeny, as they are the ones chosen
by the Almighty and Glorious Allah; they are purified of all sins and
faults.”[^29]

13. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Whoever dies without
following an Imam from among my progeny is regarded as one of those who
died during the Age of Ignorance (*jahiliyya*); his deeds are not
accepted whether he has performed them during the *jahiliyya* or after
the advent of Islam.”[^30]

14. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Whoever likes to grab
the strongest and the most dependable support should resort to loving
‘Ali (a.s.) and the members of my household.”[^31]

15. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “On the Resurrection
Day, this man – namely ‘Ali – and I will be like these two fingers (he
brought together his two fingers) and our followers will be with us; and
anyone who helps any oppressed one from our family will be there with
us.”[^32]

16. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “The Imams are from
among the progeny of Husayn (a.s.). Whoever obeys them it is as if they
have obeyed the Almighty and Exalted Allah. They are the strongest and
the most dependable support and they are the means towards Allah.”[^33]

17. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “I and ‘Ali are made
from the same light.”[^34]

18. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “O ‘Ali! You are the
best of men; no one but the disbeliever would have doubt about it.”[^35]

19. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “The Almighty Allah
will resurrect among the secure ones anyone who loves us (the Ahl
al-bayt).”[^36]

20. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “You (‘Ali) are from
me and I am from you.”[^37]

21. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “O ‘Ali! You will
relieve me of my obligations; and you are my successor over my nation
[after me].”[^38]

22. He related that the Apostle of Allah (S), while holding ‘Ali’s
(a.s.) hand in his, said, “Whoever claims to love me but does not love
‘Ali, is a liar.”[^39]

23. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Only those from among
the Helpers (*Ansar*) with a Jewish descent will despise you.”[^40]

24. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “The first thing that
a servant will be questioned about is the love of us, the Ahl
al-Bayt.”[^41]

25. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Only believers love
‘Ali and only disbelievers despise him.”[^42]

26. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Those who love you
love me, and those who despise you despise me.”[^43]

27. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “I am the city of
knowledge and ‘Ali is its gate.”[^44]

28. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Shut all the doors
from the mosque to the homes (leading people from their houses to the
mosque) except for the one to ‘Ali’s (a.s.) home.”[^45]

29. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying to ‘Ali (a.s.): “When I
die, the enmities hidden in the hearts of some people will show up and
they will unite against you and prevent you from getting what is
rightfully yours.”[^46]

30. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “‘Ali’s (a.s.) hand is
(like) my hand.”[^47] (i.e. whoever pledges allegiance to ʿAli is the
same as one who pledges allegiance to me.)

31. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Soon my *umma* will
treat you with treachery and the good and the bad will all follow this
(treachery).”[^48]

32. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Whoever swears
allegiance to ‘Ali has indeed sworn allegiance to me, and whoever swears
allegiance to me has indeed sworn allegiance to Allah.[^49]

33. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “The center of
Paradise is for me and my Ahl al-Bayt.”[^50]

34. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “I am the treasure of
knowledge and ‘Ali is the Key; whoever wants the treasure should go to
its key.”[^51]

35. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “O ‘Ali! I asked Allah
for you whatever I asked Him for myself, except for Prophet hood, since
there will be no Prophet after me; I am the seal of the Prophets and you
are the seal of the trustees.”[^52]

36. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “O ‘Ali! People have
been created from different trees; I am the root and you are the trunk;
al-Hasan and al-Husayn are its branches; the Shi‘as are the leaves;
Allah will take to Paradise whoever holds onto any of the
branches.”[^53]

37. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as addressing ‘Ali: “Paradise is
eager to see you, and eager to see ‘Ammar, Salman, Abu Dharr, and
Miqdad.”[^54]

38. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying to ‘Ali (a.s.): “Your
similitude is like that of Jesus (a.s.); the Christians loved him so
much as they became disbelievers and the Jews disliked him so much as
they became disbelievers.”[^55]

39. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Al-Hasan and
al-Husayn are the best people on the earth after me and their father;
their mother is the best of the women on the earth.”[^56]

40. He quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “O ‘Ali! You and your
two sons are the best of the chosen creatures of Allah.”[^57]

5. Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and Her Holiness Fatima (a.s.)
------------------------------------------------------

It is understood from various traditions that Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) has
taken upon himself to recount the virtues and excellences of his
grandmother to people. Some of the related traditions are as follows.

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “On the
Day of Resurrection, my daughter, Fatima, shall be raised in such a way
that she will carry clothes smeared in blood and she will be clinging
onto one of the pillars of the Throne and say: “O Allah Dispenser of
Justice! Judge between me and the murderer of my son.”

The Apostle of Allah added: “By the Lord of Ka‘ba, Allah will judge in
favor of my daughter. The Almighty and Glorious God gets angry whenever
Fatima gets angry and is pleased whenever Fatima is pleased.”[^58]

In another tradition, Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) quoted the Apostle of Allah
as saying: “An angel came to me and said, O Muhammad! God sends you
greetings and tells you, ‘I have married off Fatima to ‘Ali and ordered
the *Tuba* tree to bear pearls, rubies and corals. Indeed, all the
residents of the Heaven are happy on this occasion; soon, they will have
two sons who will be masters of the youth of Paradise and the people of
Paradise will be adorned by them. O Muhammad! You are the best of the
first and the last.”[^59]

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “When
the Resurrection Day comes, the harbinger will call out: O groups of
people! Close your eyes so that Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad (S) may
pass by.”[^60]

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “I did
not marry off my daughter Fatima (to ‘Ali) except by Allah’s commanding
me to marry her off.”[^61]

Also, he quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “Verily Fatima was
chaste; therefore, Allah spared her progeny from Fire.”[^62]

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) quoted Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) as saying: “The Prophet (S)
told me: O ‘Ali! Some of the men from Quraysh blamed me regarding Fatima
and said that they asked me to marry her off to them, but I refused them
and married her off to ‘Ali.

I told them: By God, I was not the one who refused you; it was the
Exalted Allah who refused you and married her off to ‘Ali. Gabriel
descended upon me and said, O Muhammad! The Exalted and Almighty Allah
says: Had I not created ‘Ali, there would have been no equal to your
daughter Fatima on the face of the earth from the time Adam
onwards.”[^63]

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “I named
my daughter Fatima because the Almighty and glorious Allah has weaned
(separated) her and those who love her from the Fire.”[^64]

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) quoted the Apostle of Allah (S) as saying: “The
Exalted Allah is angered when Fatima is angered and pleased when Fatima
is pleased.[^65]

6. Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and Imam al-Husayn (a.s.)
-------------------------------------------------

Many traditions have been related from Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) concerning
Sayyid al-Shuhada, Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) denoting his holiness’ special
favor with his ancestor, especially regarding visitation of his shrine
(*ziyara*) and weeping for him.”

Sometimes he quoted the Apostle of Allah as saying: “The murderer of
al-Husayn b. ‘Ali is in a coffin of fire and on him is half of the
torment of the people of the world.”[^66] He also quoted the Prophet (S)
as saying: “The most evil one of the *umma* will kill al-Husayn…”[^67]

Imam al-Ridha said, “When they took the decapitated head of al-Husayn b.
‘Ali to Sham, Yazid (God’s curse on him) ordered that a tablecloth be
laid down. Then, he and his companions started to eat and drink beer;
when they finished eating and drinking, he ordered the head to be put in
a tub in front of his throne and the chess board to be placed over the
tub.

Yazid (God’s curse on him) started to play chess with his companions
while swearing at al-Husayn, his father (a.s.), his grandfather (S) and
making fun of them. Whenever he won the game, he would drink three gulps
of beer, and poured the leftover on the ground next to the tub.

Whoever is our Shi‘a is to abstain from drinking beer and playing chess;
and the Almighty and Glorious Allah will wipe out the sins of whoever
sees beer and a chess board and remembers al-Husayn (a.s.) and curses
Yazid and Al Ziyad, even if his sins be as many as the number of the
stars.[^68]

In another *hadith*, ‘Abd al-Salam b. Salih asked Imam al-Ridha (a.s.):
“What is your opinion about the tradition related on the authority of
Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) saying: ‘When the Qa’im (a.s.) rises up, he will
kill the offspring of the murderers of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.).’

The Imam (a.s.) answered: ‘That is right.’ Then he asked: ‘Then what is
the meaning of the following words of God Almighty?

***No bearer shall bear another's burden. Qurʾan: 35/18***.

His holiness said, ‘God is true in all that He says. However, the
offspring of the murderers of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) will be pleased with
the deeds of their forefathers, and will even be proud of it.

Whoever is pleased with something is like the one who has actually
performed it. If someone gets killed in the East and someone else in the
West is pleased that he was killed, then he will be considered to be a
partner in that crime in the sight of the Almighty and Glorious
God’.”[^69]

### Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and the Visitation (Ziyara) of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.)

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) had specially favored calling people to visit [the
tomb of] *Sayyid al-Shuhada* (a.s.) and to weep over his martyrdom.
Following are some examples in this respect.

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) quoted Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) as saying: “The time
that al-Husayn’s (a.s.) pilgrims spend on *ziyara* is not reckoned as
part of their life.”[^70]

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “Whoever visits (makes a pilgrimage to)
Husayn b. ‘Ali (a.s.) while recognizing his rightfulness, is among those
in companionship with Allah over His Throne.” Then he recited the
following verse:

***Indeed the God wary will be amid gardens and streams, in the abode of
truthfulness with an omnipotent King.*** ***(Q. 54: 54, 55)***”[^71]

Sometimes he would say: “Whoever visits (makes a pilgrimage to) Abi ‘Abd
Allah’s tomb near Euphrates is like the one who has visited God on His
Throne.”[^72]

He would also sometimes say: “Whoever visits (goes on pilgrimage to) Abi
‘Abd Allah’s tomb [is as] they have performed Hajj and ‘Umra.” The
narrator asked him: “Will they be exempt from the obligatory Hajj?”

The Imam (a.s.) said, “No. *Ziyara* of Imam al-Husayn is the Hajj of the
weak until they can afford to go on the Hajj pilgrimage to the Holy
House of God. Don’t you know that everyday seven thousand angels
circumambulate the House of God and when the night falls they go away
and another group comes down to circumambulate the House until morning?

Verily the tomb of al-Husayn (a.s.) is more honorable in the sight of
Allah than the House of God; at any prayer time seven thousand angels,
with disheveled and dusty hair, descend on him so much as they have no
other turn (to come down again) until the Day of Resurrection!”[^73]

He also said, “Whoever is by the tomb of al-Husayn (a.s.) on the day of
*‘Arafa*, Allah would return him with a delighted heart.”[^74]

### Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and the Soil of Sayyid al-Shuhada’s (a.s.) Grave

A man said, “Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) sent me a bundle of clothes from
Khurasan; there was some soil in it. I asked the holy Imam’s emissary:
What is this? He said, It is the soil of al-Husayn’s (a.s.) grave. Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.) never sends clothes or things [to someone] unless he
puts in it some of this soil and says: This soil is for safety, with the
consent of Allah.”[^75]

In another tradition, when someone got some red-colored soil from the
upper part of the Sayyid al-Shuhada’s (a.s.) grave and took it to Imam
al-Ridha (a.s.), his holiness placed it on the palm of his hand, smelled
it, and then cried so much as his tears rolled down his cheeks and said,
“This is the soil of my forefather.”[^76]

### Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) and the Importance of Mourning for Sayyid al-Shuhada (a.s.)

Hasan b. Fadhdhal said, His holiness Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “Whoever
remembers our woes and afflictions and weeps over what has befallen us,
will be in the same rank with us on the Day of Resurrection. And whoever
reminds others of our afflictions and weeps and make them weep, will not
be tearful on the day [when other] eyes pour tears; and whoever sits in
a session in which our instructions are revived, their hearts will not
die on the day when hearts die.”[^77]

### Pouring Tears for Sayyid al-Shuhada’s (a.s.) Afflictions

Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) said, “Muharram is a month in which the people of
*jahiliyya* regarded warfare as unlawful, (but) our blood was considered
lawful in it, we were desecrated, our children and women were taken
captive, our tents were set on fire, our properties were plundered, and
our relation to the Apostle of Allah was disrespected.

Verily al-Husayn’s day (of affliction and murder) made our eyelids sore
(through bitterly weeping), let our tears pour, degraded our dear one in
the land of sorrow and tribulation, bequeathing pain and suffering to us
until the Resurrection Day.

The weepers ought to weep over such a one as al-Husayn (a.s.); verily
weeping for him removes great sins.”

When Muharram would start, no one would see the Imam laugh as he was
overwhelmed with sorrow so long as ten days passed. On the tenth day, it
was his day of wailing and weeping. He would say: “Today is the day
al-Husayn, peace and blessing of Allah upon him, was murdered.”[^78]

### Weeping for Imam al-Husayn (a.s.)

Rayyan b. Shabib said, “I went to see Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) on the first
day of Muharram; he said, ‘O son of Shabib! Are you fasting?’ I said I
was not. He said, ‘Today is the day on which Zechariah prayed.’

Then, he said, ‘O son of Shabib! Muharram is the month in which the
people of *Jahilliya* would regard warfare and oppression as unlawful
out of respect for this month; but this *umma* had neither respect for
this month nor any reverence for their Prophet.

In this time, they killed the Prophet’s grandson, took women captive,
and plundered properties; may Allah not forgive them!”

“O son of Shabib! If you ever cry for any reason, cry for al-Husayn b.
‘Ali b. Abi Talib, whom they beheaded like a ram; with him eighteen men
from his household were killed who were matchless on the face of the
earth.

Heavens and the earth cried for his being killed; four thousand angels
descended for helping him and since they found him dead, they would
remain beside his grave, disheveled and soiled, until Resurrection as
his companions and their motto would be: “O Avengers of al-Husayn!”

“O son of Shabib! If it makes you happy to meet Allah without (having
committed any) sins, make a visitation (*ziyara*) to al-Husayn (a.s.). O
son of Shabib! If it makes you happy to settle in lofty abodes with the
Prophet (S) in Paradise, curse the murderers of al-Husayn.”

“O son of Shabib! If it makes you happy to have the reward of the one
who was killed along with al-Husayn, whenever you remember him say: ‘I
wish I were with him and attained great salvation.”

“O son of Shabib! If it makes you happy to be with us in the high ranks
of Paradise, be sad in our sadness and happy in our happiness and take
it upon yourself our *wilaya* (friendship), since if someone loves a
stone (or takes it as their friend), Allah would muster them along with
that stone on the Resurrection Day.”[^79]

[^1]: Tusi, Amali, see Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 25, p. 265.

[^2]: ﴾It does not behoove any human that Allah should give him the
Book, judgment and prophethood, and then he should say to the people,"
Be my servants instead of Allah." Rather [he would say]," Be a godly
people, because of your teaching the Book and because of your studying
it. And he would not command you to take the angels and the prophets for
lords. Would he call you to unfaith after you have been Muslims?﴿ Qurʾan
3/79-80

[^3]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 2, p. 201; Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
25, p. 134.

[^4]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 2, p. 203.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: See the above narrations in: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 25, chapter on
rejection of zealotry.

[^7]: Kashshi, Rijal, p. 233 – see: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 25, p. 264.
This hadith is also a warning to those who claim intuition and their
followers, because even if they truly hear a voice, it is not clear
whether it is Divine voice or the Satan’s, since Satan is in ambush for
such people and such states.

[^8]: Kashshi, Rijal, p. 193; Tabarsi, Ihtijaj, p. 242; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 25, p. 275.

[^9]: Al-Shaykh al-Mufid, with sound sanad in Al-Radd ‘Ala Ashab
al-Hallaj – see: Al-Ithna ‘Ashariyya, p. 31.

[^10]: Al-Ithna ‘Ashariyya, p. 32.

[^11]: Al-Ithna ‘Ashariyya, p. 44.

[^12]: Ibid, p. 32

[^13]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 212.

[^14]: Ibid, vol. p. 169.

[^15]: Ibid. This hadith and others like this imply that, unlike some
people’s illusion, the Imam’s (a.s.) knowledge is neither innate nor
unlimited; rather, it is subject to Divine providence.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 23, p. 35 from Kamal al-Din. What is related
in this noble hadith and various other ahadith in this content indicates
the deep influence of Imam in the formation of the universe and that the
benefits of the Imam’s presence are not limited to legislative guidance;
for this same reason we can figure out the great benefit of the
existence of his holiness Hadhrat Hujjat, Imam Mahdi (May Almighty Allah
Hasten His Reappearance) during the Occultation.

[^17]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 171.

[^18]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 2, p. 26, h. 9.

[^19]: Ibid, h. 10.

[^20]: Ibid, h. 11.

[^21]: Ibid, p. 30, h. 40.

[^22]: Ibid, p. 32, h. 56.

[^23]: Ibid, p. 46, h. 177.

[^24]: Ibid, p. 47, h. 183.

[^25]: Ibid, p. 47, h. 182.

[^26]: Ibid, p 48, h. 187.

[^27]: Ibid, p. 48, h. 188.

[^28]: Ibid, p. 52. h. 201.

[^29]: Ibid, p. 57, h. 211.

[^30]: Ibid, p. 58, h. 214.

[^31]: Ibid, p. 58, h. 216.

[^32]: Ibid, p. 58, h. 215.

[^33]: Ibid, p. 58, h. 217.

[^34]: Ibid, p. 58, h. 219.

[^35]: Ibid, h. 225.

[^36]: Ibid, h. 220.

[^37]: Ibid, h. 231.

[^38]: Ibid, p. 60 h. 229.

[^39]: Ibid, p. 60 h. 231.

[^40]: Ibid, h. 234.

[^41]: Ibid, p. 62 h. 258.

[^42]: Ibid, p. 63 h. 266.

[^43]: Ibid, p. 63 h. 265.

[^44]: Ibid, p. 66 h. 298.

[^45]: Ibid, h. 302.

[^46]: Ibid, h. 303.

[^47]: Ibid, h. 304.

[^48]: Ibid, h. 307.

[^49]: Ibid, h. 308.

[^50]: Ibid, h. 314.

[^51]: Ibid, p. 73, h. 341.

[^52]: Ibid, p. 72, h. 337.

[^53]: Ibid, p. 72, h. 340.

[^54]: Ibid, p. 66, h. 306.

[^55]: Ibid, p. 63, h. 263.

[^56]: Ibid, p. 62, h. 252.

[^57]: Ibid, p. 59, h. 218.

[^58]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 2, p. 25.

[^59]: Ibid, p. 26.

[^60]: Ibid, p. 31, h. 55.

[^61]: Ibid, p. 59, h. 264.

[^62]: Ibid, p. 59, h. 264.

[^63]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 177, h. 3.

[^64]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 46, h. 178.

[^65]: Ibid, h. 176.

[^66]: Ibid, p. 21, h. 50.

[^67]: Ibid, p. 64, h. 277.

[^68]: Ibid, p. 21, h. 50.

[^69]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 1, p. 212, h. 5.

[^70]: Kamil al-Ziyarat.

[^71]: Ibid, Chapter 54, h. 6.

[^72]: Ibid, Chapter 59, h. 2.

[^73]: Ibid, Chapter 65, h. 6.

[^74]: Ibid, Chapter 70, h. 2.

[^75]: Ibid, Chapter 92, h, 1.

[^76]: Ibid, Chapter 93, h, 11.

[^77]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 278 (from Saduq’s Amali and ‘Uyun
al-Akhbar).

[^78]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 283 from Saduq’s Amali, session 27.

[^79]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 286 from Saduq’s Amali and ‘Uyun
Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.).


