Book Review: An Introduction to Shia Islam, The History and Doctrines of Twelver Shi'ism
========================================================================================

Introduction
------------

The book is an attempt to present a general outline of the doctrines,
practices and history of the Imami Shias, or, according to the title, of
\`Shia Islam'. The author recurringly uses the terms \`Shia Islam' and
\`Sunni Islam', while admitting that the Shi'ah and Sunnis “are much
closer to each other than many Christian sects are”.

Then why, one wonders, we do not find Western writers talk so frequently
about, say, \`Catholic Christianity' and \`Protestant Christianity'. The
answer is that putting into circulation such terms as \`Shia Islam' and
\`Sunni Islam' serves divisive goals and Western political interests; it
is natural that in the West, where strategic priority and academic
curiosity are so closely interlinked, scholars should rally to provide
intellectual ammunition to safeguard the security of imperialist
interests.

The book itself is intended to fill a vacuum and to attend to a field
hitherto ignored by orientalist due to the formerly low strategic
significance of the subject. The paucity of works by Western scholars on
Shia subjects is usually attributed to neglect or their past tendency to
underestimate their importance. But, possibly, it is the revolutionary
potential of those teachings which has forced Western scholars to
suppress their dissemination through apparent neglect. Now the main
problem before the Orientals is to satisfy the curiosity of the Western
audience without becoming propagandists of Shiaism.

His solution lies in partial coverage. That is, through suppressing the
most positive aspects of its teachings and providing only skeletal
details devoid of soul and spirit. This kind of suppressive treatment
has been dealt out in the present book to the Shia and Islamic doctrine
and ideal of justice, for justice, in its most comprehensive sense,
along with Tawhid, is central to the teachings of the Quran, the mission
of the Prophet (S), the function of the Imams, and the ideals of the
Shia creed.1

The author's ambitious introduction to Shiaism begins with “An Outline
of the Life of Muhammad (S) and the Early History of Islam”. The
chapters which follow are:

**1** . Life of Prophet (S)**.**

**2** . The Question of the Succession to Muhammad (S).

**3.** The Lives of the Imams and Early Divisions among the Shias.

**4.** Early History of Shia Islam, A.D. 632-1000.

**5.** Shia Islam in the Medieval Period, A.D. 1000-1500.

**6.** Shia Islam in Modern Times, A.D. 1500-1900.

**7.** The Imamate.

**8.** The Twelfth Imam (ajtf), His Occultation and Return.

**9.** Doctrines, Ritual Practices and Social Transactions.

**10.** Shia Jurisprudence and the Religious Hierarchy.

**11.** Sufism, Irfan and Hikma.

**12.** Schools within Twelver Shiaism.

**13.** The Popular Religion.

**14.** Contemporary Shiaism.

At the end of the book, in the appendices, follow a useful chronology of
political and religious events in Shia history, a list of Shia
dynasties, short biographies of prominent Shia \`Ulama', notes to the
chapters, which mention the author's sources, and then a select
bibliography.

Prophet’s Life
--------------

The chapter on the Prophet's life, despite its brevity, is not free of
speculative hypotheses and legends stated as facts. For instance, the
author, states that among the [pre-Islamic] Arab tribes there were
certain places that were regarded as shrines and each had a sanctuary
around it and that one shrine was the Kaaba in Mecca (p. 2).

This statement, lacking historical evidence, can mislead the reader
about the central importance of the Ka'bah-a shrine built by Abraham and
Ismail, the ancestors of the Arabs-in the Arabia of pre-Islamic times.
He cites the legend of the first revelation to the Prophet (S) on Mount
Hira according to which “he fled in terror at the first revelation” and
had to be comforted and reassured by his wife Khadijah (sa). The Shi'ah
do not subscribe to this tale, it is not mentioned in their books,
and-beside being uncharacteristic of the Prophet (S) is made further
doubtful by the fact that exegetes of the Quran from the earliest times
have disagreed regarding the first passage or surah to be revealed to
the Prophet*(S).* 2

In this chapter, the author mentions the tenets of the Prophet's faith
and the obligatory \`ritual' duties prescribed by it. But in view of the
fact that the Prophet (S) one of the greatest moral teachers of
humanity-also established a state, legislated laws, organized an army,
and fought his enemies, the reader should be told at least something
about the characteristics of his rule and the purpose of his wars.

However, the Western writers in their biographical works on the Prophet
(S) seldom mention the fact that the main characteristics of the
Prophet's state were uncompromising commitment to justice, the supreme
rule of law and the equality of all citizens before law and the
rejection of any privileges based on race, color, or origin.

Justice is so important in Islam that it may not be denied even to
enemies

***Allah has promised to those who believe and do good deeds (that) they
shall have forgiveness and a mighty reward. (5:9)***

In fact the basic aim of God's sending of His prophets to humanity is
held to be that men should uphold justice.

***Certainly We sent Our messengers with clear arguments, and sent down
with them the Book and the balance that men may conduct themselves with
equity; and We have made the iron, wherein is great violence and
advantages to men, and that Allah may know who helps Him and His
messengers in the secret; surely Allah is Strong, Mighty.(57:25)***

Fairness and justice is considered by the Quran to be a part of piety.
Another important teaching of the Quran, which needs special mention by
anyone attempting to introduce Shiaism, is its emphasis on knowledge,
reason, and reflection.

To acquire knowledge is considered a duty in Islam and men of knowledge
are considered to be the truly God-fearing and pious by the Quran
(35:28). The Quran points out again and again that only those who are in
possession of sound reason (*ulu* *al-'albab)* understand the inward and
outward \`signs' of God. In this relation, it refers to the “men
possessed of

knowledge and upholding justice”**(** **أُولُو الْعِلْمِ قَائِمًا
بِالْقِسْطِ** **)** whom it regards, together with the angels, as
witnesses to His Unity:

<p dir="rtl">
شَهِدَ اللَّـهُ أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَـٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ
وَأُولُو الْعِلْمِ قَائِمًا بِالْقِسْطِ لَا إِلَـٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ ﴿١٨﴾
</p>

***God bears witness-and the angels and men possessed of knowledge and
upholding justice-that there is no god but He, the All-mighty, the
All-wise. (3:18)***

If one were asked to put the essence of Shi'ism in a phrase, one may say
that it is “emphasis on knowledge and justice”. Almost everything else
that is characteristic of Shi'ism is either directly related to this
emphasis or derived from it. The phrase**وَأُولُو الْعِلْمِ قَائِمًا
بِالْقِسْطِ** is important to the Shi'ah, because it represents the
Prophet (S) and the Imams (as) as embodiments of knowledge and justice.
A book that does not mention this basic fact neither understand Shiaism
nor Shia history.

Even the doctrine of the Imamate may be said to be a 'corollary of the
principle of basic importance of knowledge and justice. Justice, as
defined by Imam ‘Ali (as) in the*Nahj al-balaghah,* is putting
everything in its right place. Justice, in this sense, is action, and
the most proper way of acting at that.*Din,* or Divine Law, since it
relates to the right way of living, is included injustice. Since one
cannot act rightly without knowing what is the right thing to do in
every case, justice is based on knowledge.

The existence of an Imam is essential because he is, by virtue of his
knowledge and his capacity to uphold comprehensive justice (termed
as*\`ismah,* infallibility), the criterion of knowledge and justice and
so the Proof *(hujjah)* of God for mankind. Without his existence God's
grace to mankind would be incomplete.

We do not, of course, mean to assert that the Shi'ah in particular or
Muslims in general have always and everywhere been committed to the
ideals of knowledge and justice, but it appears that it is impossible to
understand either the rapid expansion of Islam, or the phenomenal rise
of a bunch of backward tribes from the depths of anonymity to the
leadership of human civilization, or the early history of Islam, or the
early history of the Shi'ah, Shiite doctrines, Shia attitudes, or even
such contemporary events as the Islamic Revolution in Iran.

And many such things, without taking note of the fact that Islam has
emphasized justice and knowledge more than any other religious or
secular teaching before or after it. To keep Western readers in the dark
on this issue and to abstain from giving Islam or Shi'ism undesirable
publicity may suit Western interests, but it does not contribute to
understanding, and, ironically, may lead scholarship to deceive itself,
entangling it in the net of its own making.

Succession to the Prophet
-------------------------

***Chapter 2*** , regarding the question of succession to the Prophet
(S), is informative. Here are mentioned ten episodes from the Prophet's
life, reported both by Sunni and Shia sources, indicating, expressly for
the Shi'ah, that the Prophet (S) had designated ‘Ali (as) as his
successor. This is followed by ten ahadith of the Prophet (S), accepted
as authentic both by Sunnis and Shias*,* which are considered by the
Shi'ah to confirm ‘Ali's position as the Prophet's successor.

These are followed by five ahadith of the Prophet (S), reported both by
Sunni and Shia sources, that indicate the preeminent station of ‘Ali
(as), Fatimah (sa), Al-Hasan (as) and Al-Husayn (as) in Islam. Apart
from these, the author cites three traditions reported by Shias about
‘Ali (as). Thereafter he refers to Shia interpretations of two Quranic
verses (13:7, 5:5), which both the Sunni and Shi’ite exegetes agree as
referring to ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as). This is followed by a brief
description of the events of the Saqifah and ‘Ali's (as) attitude during
the reigns of the three caliphs who assumed political leadership after
the Prophet's demise.

Liver of the Imamas
-------------------

***Chapter 3*** gives brief sketches of the lives of the Twelve Imams
(as) and a description of real and imaginary Shia sects based mainly on
the works of heresiographers.

Western Critical Scholarship of Shia History
--------------------------------------------

***Chapter 4*** gives the picture presented by Western \`critical
scholarship' of early Shia history based on three or four incompetent
articles by Watt, Hodgson and Kholberg.3

But before we examine this picture, which is speculative and naive
rather than critical or scholarly, we consider it essential to refer to
an important point. In order to understand early Shia history, it is
necessary to recognize the full implications of the suppression of the
Shi'ah on the one hand and adoption of*taqiyyah* by them on another.

To take up the issue of the suppression of the Shi'ah by state
authorities, it began immediately after the death of the Prophet (S), if
not before it (the Episode of Pen and Paper [reported by Al-Bukhari and
others], which took place in the last days of the Prophet's life, is
considered by the Shi'ah to be the beginning of this suppression; the
Prophet (S) was not only stopped from writing what he wished to write, a
strict prohibition on narrating his words was clamped soon after his
death ).

The Prophet's leadership in his lifetime was comprehensive; it included
spiritual, legal, and political authority, for he was the spiritual
guide, lawgiver and ruler of the community, in addition to his function
of prophecy. The Shia doctrine of Imamate is nothing but the belief in
the continuity of this leadership after the Prophet (S).

Shiaism during the Prophet's time and after him was merely the belief
that this authority was invested in \`’Ali's person. Had the Companions
unanimously accepted ‘Ali's preeminence, the group called Shi'ah would
not have assumed a separate existence. ‘Ali (as), however, was denied
political leadership, and his preeminence was ignored, if not questioned
(for there is much evidence that his legal authority, or at least the
authority of his legal judgements, was revered even by the caliphs who
assumed power before him).

It is not correct to say that the number of those who subscribed to
‘Ali’s claim of right comprehensive leadership was limited to a group of
four: Miqdad, Salman, Abu Dharr and Ammar. In fact the four were the
most daring and steadfast of a significant number of Companions who
stood by ‘Ali's side after the Prophet (S).4

The thirty-five years of ‘Ali's retirement from active public life saw
the dwindling of this number due to deaths of many of the Prophet's
generation and absence of any chances of publicity for \`’Ali's claims.

It was only after he assumed caliphate, in the aftermath of \`Uthman's
assassination, that ‘Ali (as) (and after him Al-Hasan (as), for a short
time) got an opportunity to give publicity to the claims of the Ahl
al-Bayt (as) to comprehensive leadership.5

The efforts of some Muslim historians to cast doubts on the authenticity
of the*Nahj al-balaghah* are nothing but the continuation of the efforts
to suppress those claims.

Perhaps it was the memory of those claims and their renewed public
assertion, more than \`’Ali's just policies, which induced the revolts
against his rule. It was again the persisting threat posed by such
claims that moved Mu'awiyah to purge its supporters (for instance, Hurr
ibn \`Adi and his

companions) mercilessly and to launch a suppressive propaganda campaign
against ‘Ali (as) and the claims of the Ahl al-Bayt, by employing
fabricators of false ahadith aimed to obscure past historical realities.

The doctrine of*Ijma* was developed as a substitute for the*Ismah* of
the Ahl al-Bayt (as), and the consensus of the community was made a
convenient means for bypassing*nass* and legitimizing the authority of
the rulers. An aura of holiness was created retrospectively around the
figures of the Companions, and an alternate channel of religious
authority was created to counteract the claims of the Ahl al-Bayt (as).

Any criticism of the characters or acts of the Companions except ‘Ali
(as) and his supporters was discouraged, as if the*munafiqun* mentioned
recurringly by the Quran never existed. Although ‘Ali (as) was
rehabilitated later, his claim to religio-political authority continued
to be suppressed throughout the Umayyad period, and perhaps more
vigorously during the Abbasid rule.

The Abbasids, seeing the difficulties inherent in recognizing ‘Ali's
claims, changed the basis of their own claim to the caliphate by tracing
it through Al-Abbas instead of through Abu Hashim, Muhammad ibn
Al-Hanafiyyah, Al­-Husayn (as), Al-Hasan (as) and ‘Ali (as), as they had
done earlier.

The distortive propaganda begun by Mu'awiyah-which initially took the
form of fabrication of hadith-and sustained by the Umayyads and the
\`Abbasids, gradually penetrated into all the different branches of
Islamic sciences as they developed tafsir, kalam, and history. Although
many of such fabrications were discovered and discarded by conscientious
Muslim scholars, it was not possible to discover and avoid all of them.

One of the legends, fabricated apparently as late as the late second
century is that of \`Abd Allah ibn Saba', called Ibn al-Sawda' or ibn
al­ 'Amat al-Sawda' (son of black slave woman), and his imaginary sect
of the Saba'iyyah, which was invented, among a plenteous number of them,
by Sayf ibn \`Umar al-Tamimi (d. 170/786).

Allamah Murtada Askari has traced the story of \`Abd Allah ibn Saba' in
Sunni works to four sources: al-Tabari (d. 310/922), Ibn \`Asakir (d.
571/1175), Ibn Abi Bakr (d. 741/1340) and al-Dhahabi (d. 747/1346), all
of whom took it from one single source: Sayf ibn \`Umar and his two
works,*al-Futuh al ­kabir wa al-riddah* and*al-Jamal wa masir 'A'ishah
wa \`’Ali* .6

Sayf is accused of being a liar and a*zindiq* by many scholars
of*rijal,* such as: Yahya ibn Mu’in (d. 233/847), Abu Dawud (d.
275/888), al-Nasa’i (d. 303/915), Ibn Abi Hatim (d. 327/938), Ibn
al-Sukn (353/964), Ibn Habban (d. 354/965), al-Daraqutni (d. 385/995),
al-Hakim (d. 405/1014), al-Firuzabadi (d. 817/1414), Ibn Hajar (d.
852/1448), al-­Suyuti (d. 911/1505), and Safi al-Din (d. 923/1517).7

\`Abd Allah Ibn Saba', a Jew converted to Islam during \`Uthman's reign,
is said to have been a devoted follower of \`’Ali. Travelling from place
to place he is said to have agitated the people against \`Uthman. Said
to be the founder of the sect of the Saba'iyyah and originator
of*ghuluww* , he is considered by \`Allamah \`Askari to be purely a
creation of Sayf, who also

created many imaginary heroes, places, towns, and even Companions of the
Prophet (S).

It was from Sayf that al-Tabari and his contemporary
heresiographers-such as Sa'd ibn \`Abd Allah ibn Abi Khalaf al-'Ash'afi
al-Qummi (d. 301/913) in his*al-Maqalat wa al-firaq,* al-Hasan ibn Musa
al-Nawbakhti (d. 310/922) in his *Firaq al-Shi'ah,* and \`’Ali ibn
Ismail al­'Ash'ari (d. 324/935) in his *Maqalat al-'Islamiyyin* -have
taken the details about Ibn Saba'. \`Allamah \`Askari traces the mention
of \`Abd Allah ibn Saba' in Shi’i works to al-Kashshi's *Rijal.*

Al-Kashshi in this work relates five traditions-all from Muhammad ibn
Qulwayh, who narrates from Sa'd ibn \`Abd Allah al-'Ash'ari
al-Qummi-mentioning \`Abd Allah ibn Saba' to the effect that he believed
in the divinity of \`’Ali (as) and considered himself to be his prophet.
According to two of these traditions, ‘Ali (as) asked him to disavow
that belief, and, on his refusal, burnt him alive (however, according to
what Sa'd ibn \`Abd Allah writes in his book, ‘Ali exiled Ibn Saba' to
Mada'in, where he remained until \`’Ali's martyrdom; thereafter he is
said to have stated that \`’Ali (as) had not died at all and that he
would return again).

Al-Kashshi, after the five traditions relating to Ibn Saba', remarks
that he is alleged by the Sunnis to be the first to have publicly spoken
about \`’Ali's Imamate and the first to have denounced \`’Ali's
enemies.'8

Allamah \`Askari remarks that not only the burning alive of heretics is
against the commands of Islam-both according to the Shi'ah and Sunni
legal schools-such an episode has not been mentioned at all by any of
the famous historians such as Ibn al-Khayyat (d. 240/854), al-Ya'qubi
(d. 284/897), al-Tabari, al-Mas'udi, Ibn al-'Athir, ibn Kathir, or Ibn
Khaldun.

The kind of role ascribed to \`Abd Allah ibn Saba' in the events
preceding \`Uthman's assassination or during \`’Ali's rule has not been
mentioned by the early historians such as ibn Sa'd (d. 230/844),
al-Baladhuri (d. 279/892), or al­ Ya'qubi. Only al-Baladhuri once
mentions his name in his*Ansab al­'ashraf* (Beirut, 1364; vol. 2, p.
383) while relating an incident of \`’Ali's reign, and says: “Hujr ibn
\`Adi al-Kindi, \`Amr ibn al-Hamiq al­Khuza\`i, Hibah ibn Juwayn
al-Bajli al-\`Arani, and \`Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Hamdani-who is ibn
Saba'-came to him [\`’Ali ] and asked him about Abu Bakr and \`Umar
....”

Ibn Qutaybah (d. 276/889) in his*al­ 'Imamah wa al-siyasah (* vol.1,
p.142) and al-Thaqafi (d. 284/897) in his*al-Gharat (* vol. 1, p. 302)
mention the incident. Ibn Qutaybah identifies him as Abd Allah ibn Wahb
al-Rasibi and al-Thaqafi mentions his name as Abd Allah ibn Saba. Sa'd
ibn Abd Allah al-'Ash'ari, in his*al-Maqalat wa al firaq,* mentions the
name of Abd Allah ibn Saba, the imaginary founder of the Saba'iyyah, as
Abd Allah ibn Wahb al­ Rasibi. Ibn Makulah (d. 475/ 1082) in
his*al-'Ikmal* and al-Dhahabi (d. 748/1347) in his*al-Mushtabah,*
explaining the word Saba'iyyah, mention Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Saba’i,
the leader of the Khawarij. Ibn Hajar (d. 852/1448) in his*Tansir
al-mutanabbih* describes the Saba'iyyah as a group of the Khawarij led
by Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Saba’I, Al­ Maqrizi (d. 848/1444) in
his*al-Khitat* gives the name of the legendary Abd Allah ibn Saba' as
Abd Allah ibn Wahb ibn Saba', known as Ibn al-Sawda' al-Saba‘i.9

Allamah \`Askari points out that none of the scholars who have narrated
the legend of \`Abd Allah ibn Saba' give any details of his descent
(*nasab* )-something extraordinary in the case of an Arab who is
supposed to have played an important role in his days. Arab historians
never fail to mention the names of the ancestors, the tribe and the clan
of prominent Arabs of the early Muslim era.

But in the case of \`Abd Allah ibn Saba', supposedly a Yemeni Arab from
San\`a; we are told neither the name of his grandfather, his ancestors
nor the tribe nor clan to which he belonged. \`Allamah \`Askari believes
that Ibn Saba' and the Saba'iyyah (in the sense of the first*ghali*
sect) were a creation of Sayf ibn \`Umar, whom he shows to be the author
of many similar creations.

Apparently, the name of Abd Allah ibn Wahb ibn Rasib ibn Malik ibn Midan
ibn Malik ibn Nasr al-'Azd ibn Ghawth ibn Nubatah ibn Malik ibn Zayd ibn
Kahlan ibn Saba', a Rasibi, Azdi and Sabai, the leader of the Khawarij,
who was killed, with all except a few of his followers, fighting
\`’Ali's army at the Battle of Nahrawan, was picked up by the maker of
the legend to designate an imaginary character who for the first time
publicly proclaimed the doctrine of \`’Ali's Imamate.

He comes out of nowhere to lead an agitation against Uthman, triggers
the Battle of al­-Jamal, proclaims the Imamate of ‘Ali (as) or his
divinity is burnt alive by ‘Ali (as), or is banished by him and outlives
him to declare his divinity and his return, and having satisfied the
purpose of the storyteller he and his gang disappear again into nowhere
only to reappear again in the works of insatiable heresiographers on the
lookout for all kinds of novel and curious heresies.

According to the findings of Allamah Askari, the term Sabaiyyah was
originally used as a general term for southern Arabian tribes of the
Qahtan, who came from Yemen. Later, since most of the supporters of ‘Ali
ibn Abi Talib (as) were of Yemeni origin (such as Amman ibn Yasir, Malik
al-'Ashtar, Kumayl ibn Ziyad, Hujr ibn Adi, Ad'i ibn Hatim, Qays ibn
Sa'd ibn Ubadah, Khuzaymah ibn Thabit, Sahl ibn Hunayf, Uthman ibn
Hunayf, Amr ibn Hamiq, Sulayman ibn Surad, Abd Allah Badil, who were
well-known companions of ‘Ali (as).

The term came to denote those who supported the claims of the house of
‘Ali (as). Thus Ziyad ibn Abih, while drawing up charges against Hujr
and his companions, refers to them derogatorily as Saba'iyyah. With this
change in meaning, the term was also applied to Mukhtar and his
supporters, who came to power through the support of Yemeni tribes.
After the fall of the Banu Umayyah, the term Saba'iyyah is mentioned in
a speech by Abu Al-Abbas Al-Saffah, the first Abbasid caliph, who used
it to refer to the Shi'ah, who questioned the claims of the house of Al
­Abbas to the caliphate.

However, neither Ziyad nor Al-Saffah attributed any heretical beliefs to
the Saba'iyyah, something which at least Ziyad would not have failed to
mention among the charges he drew up against Hujr and his companions had
they held the kind of heretical beliefs ascribed to*ghulat.* A new
meaning was given to the term by Sayf ibn Umar, around the middle of the

second Islamic century, who used it for an early heretical sect imagined
to be founded by the fictitious Abd Allah ibn Saba.

The aim of Sayf's legend was to distort the history of the Shi'ah and
undermine Shiaism by ascribing its origin to the despicable Ibn Saba, A
Yemeni Jew, the son of a black slave woman. As we shall presently see,
some orientalists have come up with a new version of early Shia history.
Their motives also may not be much different from those of Sayf ibn
Umar. While Sayf aimed to distort history by putting fictions into
circulation in the name of history, orientalism floats conjectures in
the name of critical scholarship.

The other side of this matter is the issue of*taqiyyah* , which has not
been fully understood by Western scholars of Shiaism. The doctrine of
the Imamate represented a direct challenge to the legitimacy of the
rulers who, according to the doctrine, had usurped the rights of the
living Imam as the rightful successor to the Prophet's comprehensive
authority. To proclaim this doctrine publicly was equal to inviting
persecution of the Shias and endangering the life of the living Imam.

*Taqiyyah,* in the sense of abstaining from giving open publicity to the
doctrine of Imamate in its*complete* form, was practised even by the
first three Imams, ‘Ali (as), Al-Hasan (as) and Al-Husayn (as), all
three of whom publicly advanced their claim in the form of a principle
of the preeminence of the Ahl al-Bayt (as) with the phrase “Ahl al-Bayt”
left deliberately vague, at least in their public statements.

This deliberate vagueness afforded, on the one hand, the later Imams to
conceal their identity from the general public and the tyrannical rulers
, on the other hand it gave the opportunity to a group to continue their
activism under the leadership of \`dummy' Imams, such as Muhammad ibn
al­-Hanafiyyah, Abu Hashim, Zayd ibn ‘Ali, Yahya ibn Zayd and others. It
is certain that none of the later Imams, from ‘Ali ibn Al-Husayn (as)
onwards, wanted their claims to religio-political leadership to be
publicly known on account of the danger of persecution.

Not only the Imams (as) endeavored to conceal their identity and that of
their successors, they also abstained from proclaiming the doctrine of
Imamate publicly, for public knowledge of that doctrine, based on the
idea of the continuity of Imamate through*nass* (designation), would
have led the rulers to pinpoint the real Imam. Thus it may be said that
all the Imams lived in a state of relative occultation, which was
necessary due to the political circumstances of the Muslim world. Let us
take note of the following ahadith from*al-Kafi* - of al-Kulayni
and*al-Mahasin* of al­-Barqi:

<p dir="rtl">
ابْنُ أَبي عُمَيْر، عَنْ هِشامِ بْنِ سالِم، عَنْ أبي عُمَرَ ألأعْجَمِيّ
قالَ: قالَ لي أبُو عَبْدِ اللهِ (ع): يا أبا عُمَرَ إنَّ تِسْعَةَ أعْشارِ
الدّينِ في التَّقِيَّةِ وَ لا دينَ لِمَنْ لا تَقِيةَ لَهُ و التَّقِيةُ
في كُلِ شَيءٍ إلّا فِي النَّبِيذِ وَ اَلْمَسْحِ عَلَى الْخُفَّيْنِ.
</p>

Al Imam Al-Sadiq (as) said: “O Abu Umar, nine-tenths of*Din* lie
in*taqiyyah,* and one who does not practise*taqiyyah* has no*din.
Taqiyyah* should be practised in all matters, except for drinking
of*nabidh* and performing*mash* (ritual wiping of the feet) with the
shoes on.10

<p dir="rtl">
مُحَمَدْ بْنُ يَحْيى: عَنْ أَحْمَدَ بْنِ مُحَّمَدِ بْنِ عيسى، عَنِ
الْحَسَنِ بْنِ مَحْبُوب، عَنْ هِشامِ بْنِ سالِم عَنْ أَبي عَمْرو
الْكِنانِيّ قالَ: قالَ أبُو عَبْدِ اللهِ (ع): يا أبا عَمْرٍ أَرأَيْتُكَ
لَوْ حَدَّثْتُكَ بِحَدِيثٍ أَو أَفْتَيْتُكَ بِفُتْياً ثُمَّ جِئتَني
بَعْدَ ذلِكَ فَسَألْتَني عَنْهُ فَأَخْبَرْتُكَ بِخِلافِ ما كُنْتُ
أَخْبَرْتُكَ، أَوْ أَفتَيْتُكَ بِخِلافِ ذلِكَ بِإِيِهِما كُنْتَ تَأخُذْ؟
قُلْتُ: بِأحْدَثِهِما وَ أَدَعُ الآخَرَ، فَقال: قَدْ أَصَبْتَ يا أَبا
عَمْرو
</p>

Al-Imam Al-Sadiq (as) said: “O Abu Amr, tell me, if you hear me narrate
a hadith or give a fatwa (publicly), and then you come to me after that
and ask me about the same thing (in private) and I say something
contrary to what I had said earlier, which one of my statements will you
adopt?” Abu Amr said, “I will take the later one and drop the former.”
Al-Imam al-Sadiq (as) replied: “You are right.” 11

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ حَمَادِ بْنِ واقِدٍ اللَّحام قالَ: اسْتَقْبَلْتُ أبا عَبْدِ اللهِ
(ع) في طَرِيقٍ فَأعرَضْتُ عَنْهُ بِوَجْهي وَ مَضَيْتُ، فَدَخَلْتُ
عَلَيْهِ بَعْدَ ذلِكَ، فَقُلْتُ: جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ إِنّي لَألْقَاكَ
فأَصْرِفُ وَجْهي كَراهَةَ أَنْ أَشُقَّ عَلَيْكَ، فَقَالَ لي: رَحِمَكَ
اللهُ وَ لَكِنْ رَجُلاً لَقِيَّني أمْسِ في مَوْضِعِ كَذا و كَذا فَقال:
عَلَيْكَ السَّلامُ يا أَبا عَبْدِ اللهِ، ما أَحْسَنَ وَ لا أَجْمَلَ.
</p>

Hammad ibn Waqid al-Lahham says, “I met Abu Abd Allah (Al-Imam
Al-Sadiq(as)) on the road but I turned my face the other way and passed
by him. Then I went to see him and said to him, May my life be
sacrificed for your sake, I saw you on the way but turned my face the
other way in order not to put you into trouble. He said, God bless you.
The other day I met someone in such and such a place and he saluted me
saying “Peace be upon you, O Abu Abd Allah!” He did not do a good
thing.”'11

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ أَبي حَمْزَةَ عَنْ عَلِيِ بْنِ الْحُسَيْنِ (ع) قالَ: وَدِدْتُ
وَاللهِ أَنِّي افْتَدَيْتُ خَصْلَتَيْنِ في الشّيِعةِ لَنا بِبَعْضِ
لَحْمِ سَاعِدِي: النَّزَقْ وَ قِلَّةَ الْكِتْمَانِ.
</p>

‘Ali ibn Al-Husayn (as) said, “By God, I would give away a portion of
the flesh of my arm to do away with two qualities in our Shi'ah:
recklessness and absence of secrecy.”12

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ عَبْدِ اللهِ بْنِ سُلَيْمان، عَنْ أبُي عَبْدِ اللهِ (ع) قالَ: قالَ
لي: مَا زَالَ سِرُنَّا مَكْتُوماً حَتّى صَارَ في يَدَيْ وُلْدِ كَيْسانَ
فَتَحَدَّثُّوا بِهِ فيِ الطَّريقِ وَ قُرى السَّوادِ
</p>

Al-Imam Al-Sadiq (as) said: “Our secret [i.e. the Imamate] was concealed
until it fell into the hands of the sons of Kaysan [perhaps Al-Mukhtar
is meant here] who proclaimed it in the streets and over the countryside
of the*Sawad”.* 13

<p dir="rtl">
عَنء مُعَلَّى بْنِ خُنَيْس قالَ: قالَ أبُو عَبْدِ اللهِ (ع): يَا
مُعَلَّى اَكْتُمْ أّمْرَنا وَ لا تُذِعْهُ، فإنَّهُ مَنْ كَتَمَ أَمْرَنْا
ولَـمْ يُذِعْهُ أَعَزَّهُ اللهُ بِهِ في الُّدنْيا وَ جَعَلَهُ نُوراً
بَيْنَ عَيْنَيْهِ في الآخِرَةِ، يَقُودُهُ إلَى ألجَنَّةِ، يَا مُعَلَّى
مَنْ أَذاعَ أمْرَنَا وَ لَـمْ يَكْتُمْهُ أَذَلَهُ اللهُ بِهِ في
الُّدنْيا وَ نَزَعَ النُّورَ مِنْ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
بَيْنِ عَيْنَيْهِ فِي الآخِرَةِ وَ جَعَلَهُ ظُلْمَةً تَقُوُدُهُ إلى
النَّارِ، يَا مُعَلَّى إنَّ التَّقِيَّةَ مِنْ دِيني وَ دينِ آبائِي وَ لا
دِينَ لِمَنْ لاَ تَقِيَّةَ لَهُ، يَا مُعَلَّى إنَّ اللهَ يُحِبُّ أنْ
يُعْبَدَ فِي السِّرِ كَمَا يُحِبُّ أَنْ يُعْبَدَ في العَلانِيّةِ، يَا
مُعَلَّى إنَّ الْمُذِيعَ لِأمْرِنا كاَلْجَاحِدِ لَهُ.
</p>

Al-Imam Al-Sadiq (as) said to Walla ibn Khunays, O Walla , keep our
affair secret, and do not divulge it publicly, for whoever keeps it
secret and does not reveal it, God will exalt him in this world and put
light between his eyes in the next, leading him to Paradise. O Walla ,
whoever divulges our affair publicly, and does not keep it secret, God
will disgrace him in this world and will take away light from between
his eyes in the next, and will decree for him darkness that will lead
him to the Fire.

O Walla, verily*taqiyyah is* of my*Din* and the*Din* of my father, and
one who does not keep*taqiyyah* has*no din. O* Mu'alla, God likes to be
worshipped in secret as much as He wishes to be worshipped openly. O
Walla, the one who reveals our affair (the Imamate) is the one who
denies it.14

These ahadith show the great emphasis laid by the Imams on concealing
not only the identity of the Imam but the doctrine of the Imamate
itself. It may be noted that the Imams even abstained from expressly
mentioning their Imamate, which is referred to in a great number of
traditions with deliberately vague words, such as \`*our affair* ', or
\` *this matter* ', and so on.

The indication of his successor by an Imam was usually conveyed to the
confidants in secrecy and then clothed in a language which was
intrinsically vague and unexplicit but was clear and explicit to the
closest followers who understood the meaning of the particular words and
indications.

The Imams (as) took this caution because they knew that their exact
words might be narrated by the confidants to others and might ultimately
reach those who did not deserve similar confidence. Thus in the*Usul*
*al-Kafi* we come across ahadith in which, an Imam, after indicating his
successor to a confidential Shiai, instructs him to let the matter known
only to the trustworthy Shias.15

*Taqiyyah* was so important for the survival of Shiaism until the middle
of the 3rd/10th century that the Imams (as) equated the lack of
restraint or recklessness on behalf of their followers to an attempt of
voluntary murder of their leader:

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ مُحَمَدْ بْنِ سِنَان، عَنْ يُونُسَ بْنِ يَعْقُوبَ عَنْ عَبْدِ اللهِ
(ع) قالَ: مَنْ أذّاعَ عَلَيْنا شَيْئاً مِنْ أمْرِنا فَهُوَ كَمَنْ
قَتَلَنا عَمْداً، وَ لَمْ يَقْتُلْنَا خَطَأً
</p>

Al-Imam Al-Sadiq (as) said: “One who divulges anything of our
matter*(amrina')* is like the one who kills us intentionally not
unintentionally.”16

<p dir="rtl">
عَنْ ابْنِ سِنانٍ عَنْ إسْحاقَ بْنِ عَمَّار قالَ: تَلاَ أبو عَبْدِ اللهِ
(ع) هذِهِ الآيةَ ((ذلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَاتِ
اللَّـهِ وَيَقْتُلُونَ النَّبِيِّينَ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ ذَٰلِكَ بِمَا
عَصَوا وَّكَانُوا يَعْتَدُونَ((
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قالَ واللهِ ما ضَرَبُوهُمْ بأَيْـديهِمْ وَ لا قَتَلُوهُمْ بِأسْيافِهِمْ
وَ لكِنْ سَمِعُوا أَحَادِيثَهُمْ فَأَذاعُوها فَأُخِذُوا عَلَيْها
فَقُتِلُوا فَصَارَ ذَلِكَ قَتْلاً وَاَعْتِداءً وَ مَعْصِيَةً.
</p>

Ishaq ibn Ammar says “Abu Abd Allah recited this verse

***That, because they (the Jews) disbelieved in the signs of God and
slew the prophets unrightfully; that, because they disobeyed, and were
transgressors*** *(2:61),*

Then he said \`By God, they did not strike them with their hands or
swords, but they heard their traditions and divulged them publicly, on
account of which they (the prophets) were caught and killed (by
tyrannical rulers). Therefore, that (their divulging) was regarded as
murder, aggression and sin.17

The following tradition, placed by al-Kulayni in the section of*“Kitab
al­-hujjah”* on the Twelfth Imam, perhaps applied to every Imam during
his lifetime:

<p dir="rtl">
عَنِ ابْنِ رِئابٍ، عَنْ أَبي عَبْدِ اللهِ (ع) قالَ: صَاحِبُ هَذَا
الأَمْرِ لا يُسَمِّيهِ بِاسْمِهِ إلّا كافِرٌ.
</p>

Abd Allah ibn Ri'ab reports Al-Imam Al-Sadiq (as) to have said: “No one
but an apostate would mention the name of the master of this affair
[i.e. the Imam].”18

Perhaps the practice of referring to the Imams in traditions in early
collections only by their*kunyah* (such as Abu Ja\`far for Muhammad ibn
\`’Ali; Abu \`Abd Allah, for Ja'far ibn Muhammad; Abu al-Hasan al­'Awwal
or Abu Ibrahim for Musa al-Kazim, Abu al-Hasan al-Thani for ‘Ali
al-Rida, Abu Ja'far al-Thani for Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Jawad, Abu
al-Hasan al-Thalith for ‘Ali al-Hadi, and Abu Muhammad for al­-Hasan
al-\`Askari) or of referring to him by such titles as*“al-Alim”*
and*“al-\`Abd al-Salih”* or without indicating who the speaker is-as in
the case of ahadith related to the Twelfth Imam (ajtf) also served the
purposes of secrecy.

There are traditions according to which the Imams prohibited their
companions from narrating their ahadith outside the circle of their
confidants*(al-Mahasin, p.* 256) 19

So also most of the time they were prohibited from indulging in polemics
and debates with others. The polemics of Hisham ibn al-Hakam (before he
was stopped by Musa Al-Kazim (as) during al-Mahdi's reign [
158-169/774-785]) revolved mostly about the rational necessity of the
existence of a Divinely inspired leader who could settle religious and
legal differences.

Hisham was not concerned in his polemics with proving the Imamate of any
of his contemporary Imams.20

Most of those debates of Hisham ibn al-Hakam were with Mu'tazili
scholars who, earlier, belonged to the opponents of, Umayyad rule, but
seem to have continued into the early Abbasid period. That Hisham was
accused by some of his Shia contemporaries of being indiscreet- in his
polemics and thus causing the imprisonment of Musa Al-Kazim (as) by
Harun al-Rashid shows how dangerous such debates were considered by them
(however, as reported by al-Shaykh al­-Mufid, in*al-'Irshad,* the
Imamate of Musa Al-Kazim (as) was brought to the knowledge of Harun by
al-'Imam Musa's nephew \`’Ali ibn Isma'il).

Although reports of the claims of Ja\`far al-Sadiq (as) to the Imamate
may not have fully been confirmed by the ruling authorities during the
Umayyad period, the Abbasids, who were themselves a section of the
revolutionaries, it appears, had some inkling of the doctrine of
Imamate, its principal claimant, and the principle of succession
through*nass* and*will (wasiyyah).* This is shown among other things by
the following tradition in which Ja'far al-Sadiq (as) tactically misled
the authorities about the identity of his successor.

Ibn Abi Ayyub al-Nahwi says “Abu Ja'far al-Mansur (the second 'Abbasid
caliph) sent for me at midnight on entering, I saw him seated on a chair
with a candle in front of him and a letter in his hand. When I greeted
him, he threw to me a letter. Weeping as he was, he said to me, this is
a letter from Muhammad ibn Sulayman (his governor at al-Mad'inah)
informing us of the death of Ja'far Ibn Muhammad. After uttering*inna
lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji'un* three times, he said (regretfully),
\`Where can one find anyone like Ja'far.'

Then he said to me, Write down, I wrote the opening of the letter. Then
he said, write if he has appointed a single individual as the executor
of his will (wasi), take him and behead him. The reply came back that he
(Al-Sadiq (as)) had appointed five persons as executors of his will, one
of them being Abu Ja'far al-Mansur himself. The others were Muhammad ibn
Sulayman, Abd Allah, Musa (the real successor of Ja'far al­-Sadiq(as)),
and Humaydah (Abd Allah was the elder brother of Imam Musa
al-­Kazim(as), and Humaydah was Musa's mother).21

<p dir="rtl">
... عَنْ أّبي أَيُّوبَ النَّحْوِيَ قال: بَعَثَ إلَيَّ أبُو جَعْفَر
المَنْصُورُ في جَوْفِ اللَّيل فَأَتَيْتُهُ فَدَخَلْتُ عَلَيْهِ وَ هُوَ
جالِسٌ عَلى كُرْسِيٍّ وَ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ شَمْعِةٌ وَ فِي يَدِهِ كِتْابٌ،
قالَ: فَلَمَّا سَلَّمْتُ عَلَيْهِ رَمى بِالْكِتابِ إلَيَّ وَ هُوَ
يَبْكِي، فَقَالَ لِي: هَذا كِتابُ مُحَّمَدِ بْنِ سُلَيْمانَ يُخْبِرُنَا
أنَّ جَعْفَرَ بْنَ مُحَمَّدٍ قَدْ مَاتَ، فَإنّا للهِ وَ إنَا إلَيْهِ
رَاجِعُونَ- ثَلاثاً- وَ أَيْنَ مِثْلُ جَعْفَرٍ؟ ثُمَّ قالَ لي: أُكْتُبْ
قال: فَكَتَبْتُ صَدْرَ الكِتَابِ، ثُمَّ قَالَ: اكْتُبْ: إنْ كانَ أوْصى
إلى رَجُلٍ واحِدٍ بِعَيْنِهِ فَقَدَّمْهُ وَ اضْرِبْ عُنْقَهُ، قالَ:
فَرَجَعَ إلَيْهِ اَلْجَوابُ أنَّهُ قَدْ أَوْصى إلى خَمْسَةٍ واحِدُهُمْ
اَبُوْ جَعْفَرٍ اَلْمَنْصُورُ، وَ مُحَّمَدُ بْنُ سُلَيْمَانَ وَ عَبْدُ
اللهِ وَ مُوسى وَ حُمَيْدَةُ.
</p>

In another tradition, instead of Muhammad ibn Sulayman and Humaydah two
other names are mentioned, but it adds that on receiving his governors
reply al-Mansur remarked: “There is no way of killing all these persons.
It is possible that the apparent \`dispute' over the Imamate of Isma’il
(al-Imam Al-Sadiq's eldest son) or that of his son Muhammad, or the
\`claim' of Abd Allah al-'Aftah (Al-'Imam Al-Sadiq's second son), were
merely tactics used to confuse the authorities about the identity of the
real Imam.

It is also possible that the*waqifah* or*waqifiyyah* after every
Imam-who reportedly denied the death of a particular Imam or stopped at
that Imam and refused to recognize any further Imam as the successor of
the preceding

one were groups of Shias who played such tactics to conceal the identity
of the living Imam by appearing to maintain that the Imamate had come to
a stop. Such a possibility does not seem remote.

For instance, after the death of Jafar al-Sadiq (as) there were
the*Jafariyyah* or*Nawusiyyah* (who reportedly believed that Ja\`far did
not die), the*Aftahiyyah* (who maintained the Imamate of Abd Allah),
the*Shumaytiyyah (who* apparently asserted the Imamate of Muhammad,
Ja'far al-Sadiq's fourth son), and the*Isma'iliyyah.* Such conflicting
claims must indeed have confused the authorities about the identity of
the real Imam, Musa ibn Ja'far (as).

Perhaps it was due to this confusion that Al-'Imam Musa (as) could spend
the first ten years of his Imamate (148-158/765-774), which overlapped
with the last ten years of al-Mansur's caliphate, relatively without
harassment. Perhaps the so-called sects of the*Kaysaniyyah, Karibiyyah,
Hashimiyyah, Zaydiyyah* (at least initially),*Jafariyyah, Janahiyyah,
Aftahiyyah, Shumaytiyyah, Isma'iliyyah* (also at least
initially),*Musawiyyah, Bashiriyyah, Ahmadiyyah, Mu'allifah,
Muhammadiyyah* or the*Waqifiyyah* at al-'Imam al-Hasan al-\`Askari (as)
were no more than products of diversionary tactics used by the Imamiyyah
Shia is to mislead the authorities about the identity of the true Imam.

Also, the so­ called sects of*ghulat,* such as the*Bayaniyyah,
Mughiriyyah, Mansuriyyah, and* the*Namiriyyah* regardless of whether
they were separate sects with any significant number of adherents or
not-must have helped the Shias and their Imams in confusing the
authorities about the exact nature of the doctrine of Imamate, in
addition to concealing the identity of the Imam.

We are not suggesting that there were no*ghulat* or *waqifah in* the
history of Shiaism, they were bound to be such groups on the fringes of
a religious movement some of whose teachings could not be circulated
publicly and which had to maintain a high degree of secrecy in order to
survive and preserve its leaders and followers.

All that we are suggesting is that most of what were referred to by
later heresiographers as Shia sects might not have had any external
existence, that is, from the fact that such beliefs were circulated in
the past by Shia groups, later writers might have concluded that they
really existed.

Perhaps only in those cases where those beliefs served to propel
activism or seize power did they acquire an independent sectarian
existence as in the case of the Zaydiyyah and the Isma’iliyyah, which
survive to the present day. History shows that most of the so called
\`sects' of the activists-ghulat,*waqifah and* the followers of dummy
\`Imams' from Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyyah to Muhammad ibn \`’Ali (the son
of al-'Imam al-Hadi [as]) died out within some years. They might have
been nothing more than apparitions produced by the tactics used by the
early Shias practising*taqiyyah.*

In the light of this, the attempt of the Western \`critical' scholarship
to find*certain* evidence in Sunni histories about the open claims of
the Shia Imams to the kind of leadership inherent in the doctrine of
Imamate is naive if not ludicrous. In fact, the failure of the Western
scholars to find certain proof of the claims of the Imams in
contemporary extra Shia sources shows only how successful the
practice*of taqiyyah* had been.

Also important in this context is the Shia concept*of bada* which gave
the early Shias the opportunity to conceal the identity*of* the
successor to an Imam whose identity might have been discovered by the
authorities by holding up a dummy successor and claiming that*bada* had
taken place. The notion of*bada,* it seems, was greatly useful in
affording further flexibility to the Shia tactics of*taqiyyah,* because
its basic purpose was to confuse the enemies about the Shia principle of
succession by*nass.* The concepts of*ghaybah* and*rajah* also added
immensely to the flexibility of such tactics of confusing hostile
authorities.

The theory that the religious Shi'ah was the product of a fusion between
the*ghulat* and the political Shias, although imaginative, is not based
on facts. First of all, there are no traces of the concepts of*tanasukh*
and*hulul* among the Arab Muslims of the Hijaz or Iraq until the
beginning of the second century. The Shia population of Kufa was
predominantly derived from immigrants from the Hijaz and Yemen, who, by
the time of the martyrdom of Al-Husayn (as), had spent two generations
under the pervasive influence of Islam.

There is no evidence that any of the ancient religious systems-such as
Zoroastrianism, Mazdakism, Manichaeism, Judaism and various forms of
Christianity had any influence in Kufa or Basra, the main Muslim cities
of Iraq. Even if their ideas had been known to the Kufans, it is fantasy
to propose that such acquaintance would lead to such a rapid
crystallization of those ideas into firm beliefs by the time of Mukhtar
and fill his followers with religious enthusiasm and make them subscribe
so easily to the beliefs in Mahdi (ajtf), the Imamate,*ghaybah*
and*rajah.*

The only sane explanation is that such ideas were drawn from the genuine
teachings of Islam and misapplied at different historical situations to
various figures in order to propel activism. In the light of this, it is
wrong to ascribe the beliefs in the Mahdi (ajtf), the Imamate,*rajah,*
and*ghaybah* to the*ghulat* or to trace their origin to them. The only
ideas we may ascribe to them are of*tanasukh, hulul* and*tashbih,* which
were a remnant of the pre-Islamic religious culture of Iraq and found in
the population outside Kufa and Basra.

The author himself remarks “That the*ghulat* were only loosely attached
to the family*of* \`’Ali(as) is proved by the ease with which such
figures as Abu Mansur and Abu Al-Khattab felt they could transfer the
Imamate from the family of ‘Ali onto themselves and their descendants.”
If we accept that the main characteristic of even the political Shias
was their enthusiastic support of ‘Ali (as) and the Prophet's Family-to
whom the*ghula't* were only loosely attached it is not very consistent
to speculate that*ghuluww* views enjoyed \`widespread acceptability'
among the Muslims of the second century.

To blindly accept the \`Abbasid-Mu’tazili defamation of such eminent
Shia figures as Hisham ibn al-Hakam and Mu'min al-Taq (the first
credited with believing that God has a finite three-dimensional body,
and the latter accused of anthropomorphism with relation to
God-accusations which probably served the purpose of suppressing their
rational arguments in favour of the Imamate by discrediting their
authors) and then to adopt it as

an “indication of the widespread acceptability of*ghuluww* views” during
the second century, may partly suit the purposes of speculative
theorists but has little to contribute to a critical understanding of
history.

The main defect of the Western scholars is that they are not well
acquainted with the bulk of source material available, both Shia and
Sunni besides their partial and perfunctory knowledge of the sources,
they show a strong tendency-exacerbated by their \`critical'
presumptions-to develop fanciful theories and then attempt to fit a mass
of facts and legends into those theories. The result is that those
theories fail to explain all the available facts; as a result an attempt
has to be made to underrate the significance of those facts or to
completely ignore them.

In the case of Shia history, it is alleged that the Shi'ah started as a
purely political movement showing some religious overtones for the first
time during the movement of the*Tawwabun.* Towards the middle of the
second century this political movement became attached to*ghuluww*
speculation, which formed a religious wing to the movement.

The doctrines held by the Shi'ah up to the beginning of the third
century were almost diametrically opposed to the final doctrinal
position of Twelver Shiaism. This drastic doctrinal change came suddenly
indeed almost within a lifetime. It occurred under the influence of
Mu'tazili thought, and Mu’tazili kalam became the basis of Shia
theology, mainly through the efforts of a Mu’tazili-based Shia group
centered on the Nawbakhti family.

The first stage in the change in doctrine seems to have begun in Qum in
the last half of the 3rd/9th century under the leadership of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn \`Isa al-'Ash'ari, between the years 260/873 and 360/970.
The second change, adoption of Mu'tazili kalam, took place in Baghdad
under the influence of al-Shaykh al-Mufid (d. 413/1022), al-Sharif
al-Murtada (d. 436/1044) and Shaykh al-Ta'ifah al­ Tusi (d. 460/1067).

This change involved an almost complete*volte-face* on most issues. From
believing in anthropomorphism with respect to God, the Imamiyyah came to
accept Mu'tazili*tawhid.* From believing in*bada,* they came to
re-interpret it so as to render it identical to*naskh.* From believing
that God creates and determines all men's actions, even sins and acts of
disobedience, they came to accept that men determine and are responsible
for their actions.

From believing that the Quran has been altered, they came to accept that
the present version of the Quran is complete and unaltered. From
believing that God has delegated certain of his functions such as
creation to intermediaries such as the Imams, they came to believe that
only God performs these functions.

The author, after presenting this picture of early Shia history, based
mainly on surmise and conjecture, adds insult to injury by making yet
another preposterous conjecture, he says Indeed, it may be surmised from
the paucity of Shia books of any description surviving from before about
330/941 that the large number of books that are known (from
bibliographical works such as Shaykhu't Ta'ifa's*Fihrist)* to have been
written by Shias all revealed such glaring differences in matters of
doctrine (matters such as the*ghuluww* beliefs discussed above and the
Occultation of the Twelfth Imam) from later Shia orthodoxy that they
were considered

unsuitable for onward transmission and thus became lost, whereas
numerous Sunni works exist from the mid-2nd century/8th century onwards.
(p. 74)

It is obvious that a full criticism of this picture is not possible
here. All that is needed to make a brief misstatement is a good deal of
ignorance or malice or audacity or all three. But to refute it
conclusively on the basis of facts is not so simple a matter. Shi’i
scholars had often to write books running over thousands of pages (such
as the*\`Abaqat al-'anwar* or*al-Ghadir)* to refute misstatements that
could be put in one sentence. Unfortunately, even they are of no utility
when it comes to silencing the ignorant, who would have nothing to do
with books, especially when they run into tens of volumes.

The fact that the political views of the Shi'ah were derived from their
religious viewpoint and not*vice versa is* indicated by the historic
refusal of ‘Ali (as) at the time of the *Shura* formed at the time of
\`Umar's death, to follow the precedents established by the first two
caliphs. As S.H.M. Ja'fari points out, “This intransigent declaration of
‘Ali(as) forms the most important and earliest theoretical point which
ultimately gave rise to the later development of two different schools
of law under the titles of Shia and Sunni. ” 22

‘Ali (as), who had claimed the caliphate all along, turned down the
offer to accept it by refusing to yield on a legal point. The abdication
of Al-Hasan (as) from the caliphate, perhaps a singular event of its
kind in the world history, shows that for him political leadership and
power did not possess the highest priority. The speeches, sayings and
letters of Al-Husayn (as) also bear testimony to his predominantly
religious and moral motives.

The act of Al-Hurr ibn Yazid al-Riyahi and that of the dozens of Kufans
who joined Al-Husayn (as) after fleeing from Kufa and chose certain
death alongside him, also show that purely political motives were not
involved. The author asserts that in the case of Hujr ibn Adi al-Kindi
and his thirteen companions it is difficult to see in the charges drawn
up against them any firm indication that they were partisans of ‘Ali
(as) in any but a political sense. (p. 63).

Such a difficulty may not be the result of blindness, because the
charges drawn against a dissident by a suppressive regime do not always
reflect his motives or those of the authorities. But why should a group
of eminent men lay down their lives for the sake of the political
partisanship of a family whose leader, al-Hasan (as), had, after
assuming the caliphate and with an army under his command, handed over
power to his rival and retired from public life?

And why should a pragmatic politician like Mu'awiyah persecute an
eminent Companion of the Prophet (S) and a man known for his piety and
straightforward nature for his refusal to disavow a rival dead for
fifteen years? Why should he kill a man for the political support of a
family which had voluntarily dissociated itself from the political
leadership and had retired from public affairs?

Basically, political motives are short ­lived and cannot continue for
generations unless they are nourished and kept alive by spiritual and
religious motives. and if, supposedly, Shiaism was a political movement

supporting the political claims of ‘Ali (as), Al­-Hasan (as), and
Al-Husayn (as), why should it have continued to identify itself with a
number of apparently politically quiescent figures from ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn (as) to Al-Hasan Al-Askari (as)?

The theory of drastic doctrinal revision is unacceptable for many
reasons.

**Firstly,** there is no centralized religious authority in Islam, like
the Roman Catholic Church, so as to decide or to bring about any changes
of doctrine without causing convulsive controversies. Even in the case
of the Church, doctrinal differences were not solved by the authority of
the Pope but through ecumenical councils.

In the Shia tradition, in which there were hundreds of eminent scholars
alive at any period (as shown by the books on*rijal* and bibliographical
works), any such attempt by a small group (such as the Nawbakhti family)
would have been immediately frustrated due to the violent controversies
which would have broken out.

**Secondly,** it is easy to bestow divinity, or its qualities, upon men,
but difficult to withdraw it. This is shown by the history of
Christianity in which the divinity of Jesus gradually became so firmly
entrenched in the Christian doctrine that the cult of Jesus became its
predominant characteristic. Had such ideas of the*ghulat* as*hulul* and
incarnation, or belief in the ability of the Imams to create, been
widely accepted among the Shias of the second century (for which there
is no evidence except for some remarks of the opponents about certain
eminent Wills, inspired by Mu’tazili-\`Abbasid propaganda) such a trend
would not have died out so easily and so completely so soon.

**Thirdly,** the theory of drastic doctrinal*volte-face* implies that
Shia hadith is a mass of forgeries and fabrications. This view reduces
one of the richest if not the richest and sublimest collection of
religious teachings to a work of forgery produced by hundreds of
fabricators who could produce an enormous and a highly consistent mass
of literature within a generation and revise the doctrines of a sizeable
community spread over a region extending from Khurasan to Egypt and from
Syria to Yemen without any serious conflict or controversy.

Moreover, the continuity and consistency between the works of the late
or mid 3rd century (such as,*Basa'ir al-darajat* and*al-Mahasin)* and
those produced in the early fourth (such as*al-Kafi* of al-Kulayni and
the works of al­ Shaykh al-Saduq and al-Tusi) belies such a suggestion.

Even the great similarity between such works of the Isma\`iliyyah
as*Da\`a'im al-'Islam* of Abu Hanifah al-Nu'man ibn Muhammad al-Maghribi
(d. 363/973) and such Imamiyyah works as *al-Kafi* and *Man la yahduruhu
al faq'ih* in matters of doctrine and law falsifies such a suggestion,
for the Isma\`iliyyah branched out from the Imamiyyah after the death of
al­ 'Imam al-Sadiq (as) (148/765).

A similar comparison between the ahadith of the Imamiyyah and those
narrated by the Zaydiyyah from Zayd ibn ‘Ali from his ancestors (as)
from the Prophet (S) can throw further light in this regard.

**Fourthly,** the sensitivity of the school of Qumm at the time of Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa to ascription of miracles to the Imams, which they

called*ghuluww,* was rejected by the later Imamiyyah. Al­ Shaykh
al-Saduq who belonged to the school of Qumm was criticized by al-Shaykh
al-Mufid for his defective stand on the infallibility*(ismah)* of the
Prophet (S) and the Imams (as) and for admitting the possibility
of*sahw,* in regard to them. Many traditions which were acceptable to
later Shias might have been regarded as contaminated by*ghuluww* by the
Qummis.

**Fifthly,** Shia kalam and fiqh were derived from and determined by
Shia hadith and both evolved out of the ahadith of the Shia Imams. The
early Shia mutakallimun and fuqaha, until Al-Saduq and before al­ Mufid,
were more closely bound by hadith than those of the Sunni tradition, in
which the development of kalam, fiqh, and usul al-fiqh began much before
the Sunni compendia of hadith were produced.

However, it was with the Occultation of the Twelfth Imam (ajtf) that
Shia books and Shia scholars emerged out of their former secrecy and it
was after this that Sunni scholars began to be acquainted with Shia
thought. Perhaps it was the first glimpses of Shia literature emerging
from secrecy that al-Khayyat and al-'Ash'ari saw as the formation of
what appeared to them a Mu'tazili-based Shia school. The Mu'tazilah
themselves were the product of a ferment produced in Iraq by ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib (as) whose sermons were rich in theological ideas with their
characteristic emphasis on justice and reason.

That the Mu'tazilah stood amongst the ranks of the revolutionary
opponents of the Umayyad regime and could cooperate so closely with the
Talibi activists and later with the Abbasid shows their early nearness
to the Shias. The Mu'tazili emphasis on justice and their conception
of*al-'amr bi al-ma'ruf wa al-nahy \`an al­ munkar,* which justified
armed revolt against tyrannical rulers, also, reflect their close links
with Shia activism.

Moreover, had Mu'tazilism had any deep roots in the Sunni tradition, it
would not have been rejected so suddenly as the basis of the state's
ideology by Al-Mutawakkil and would not have become altogether extinct
with time so soon.

However, with the adoption of Mu'tazilism by Abbasid rulers it came to
enjoy freedom of expression almost a hundred years before Shia thought,
and when the latter emerged in a period which followed the suppression
of the Mu'tazilah it was seer, due to the proximity between the Shia and
the Mu'tazilah on some important theological issues, as
“Shia-Mu'tazilism”.

The Mu'tazilah were speculative theologians who neither produced any
distinct hadith literature of their own, nor founded any independent
legal schools. Their links with the Sunni tradition were feeble, and
when they were severed the Mu'tazilah were lost. Later, after the
suppression of the Mu'tazilah, Shia kalam and fiqh, which were firmly
grounded in the solid foundations of hadith, continued to flourish while
the Sunni tradition having bound itself closely at first with the
Umayyad and later with the Abbasid to the rulers had to turn its back on
justice and reason by adopting Ash'arism and closing the gate of
independent*ijtihad.*

Therefore, it seems, to trace the development of Shia kalam to Mu’tazili
theology is like putting the cart before the horse. Western scholars of
Shiaism have fallen into this trap because they have naively and
uncritically

believed much of the Abbasid-Mu’tazili propaganda against Shias at a
time when Shias could not openly answer their allegations. Such
defamation of the Shias was not confined to the Abbasid period, one
comes across many examples of it even today in many periodicals and
books sponsored by Arab oil money and Wahhabi aid.

The author's surmise based on the paucity of books surviving from before
the fourth century is equally untenable, because most of the early works
were still available when Al-Tusi and Al-Najashi compiled their
bibliographical works at a time when the supposed doctrinal revolution
had already taken place. In respect of doctrine the era of al-Tusi is
not different from later eras.

Had the contents of those early books been at great variance from the
doctrinal positions of the Shi'ah at the time of Al-Tusi and Al-Najashi,
they would not have mentioned those books among the works of the early
Shia scholars and, what is much more important, would have abstained
from express*tawthiq* (confirmation of the reliability) of their
authors. The paucity of early works is not exclusively a problem of the
Shi'ah many early works of Sunni scholars have also been lost and the
number which remains is insignificant in relation to the number of those
that did not survive.

The great advantage enjoyed by Sunni works was that Sunni scholarship
enjoyed the recognition of the state authorities during Umayyad, Abbasid
and Seljuq periods, under tolerant Shia rule, whether Buwayhid or
Isma'ili, it did not face hostile treatment. On the other hand, Shia
scholarship had to work under almost three centuries of suppression
and*taqiyyah,* and Shia works had often to face destruction at the hands
of hostile rulers, conquerors, or crowds.

Before the Seljuq occupation of Baghdad (447/1055) by Toghril, and
destruction of a great number of books and burning of Shia libraries,
great libraries and huge private collections are known to have existed.
Bayt al-Hikmah, a public library founded in 381/991 by Abu Nasr Shahpur
ibn Ardshir, the minister of Baha al-Dawlah, the Buwayhid ruler, is said
to have been inaugurated with a collection of 10,000 books. Dar Al-Ilm,
a library belonging to Al-Sayyid Al-Murtada (d. 436/1044), is said to
have contained 80,000 books.

Some private collections at that time are known to have consisted of
tens of thousands of books. Many of the early works that survived the
catastrophe in Baghdad in the year 447/1055 were later lost. Some works
that survived until as late as the time of al-Majlisi (d. 1111/1699) are
not available today. Moreover, many works that were written after the
third century, or a little before it, have not survived or only parts of
them have survived.

Al-Barqi's*al-Mahasin,* which is ranked with the four main Shia
collections of hadith, is known to have been a great encyclopedic work
with more than 100 parts*(kitab),* of which only 11 parts survive
today.*Madi’nat al-\`ilm,* said to be the greatest work of Al-Shaykh
al-Saduq on hadith, has been lost. Many works on non-legal subjects
might have been lost mainly due to the fact that law and jurisprudence
acquired centrality in Shia scholarship.

Most of the early four hundred Usul did not survive because of lack of
interest in them after the compilation of the major collections of
al-Kulayni, al-Saduq and al-Tusi. Nevertheless, about sixteen of these
have survived to our day. Besides*al-Mahasin,* two other important
collections of ahadith of the middle or late third century that have
survived are*Basa'ir al-darajat* of al-Saffar (d. 290/903) and*Qurb
al-'Isnad* of Abu al-\`Abbas \`Abd Allah ibn Ja'far al-Himyari ( died in
the early decades of the 4th century).

Of the important works of the Imams that have survived are*al-Sahifat
al­ kamilah of* \`’Ali ibn al-Husayn (as), *Misbah al-Shari\`ah of A*
l-Imam Al­ Sadiq (as), *Fiqh al-Rida* and *Sahifat al-Rida of* \`’Ali
Al-Rida (as), aside from their other works which survived in extant
books of others. The most important Shia work, though compiled at the
end *of* the 4th century but whose authentic contents were drawn from
earlier works, is the *Nahj al-balaghah of* 'Imam ‘Ali (as).

*Of* the exegeses written before al-Kulayni, four have survived: that*of
Furat al-Kufi* (d. during late 3rd or early 4th century), Al-Ayyashi (d.
during 3rd century), ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim (d. during the first decade of the
4th century), and the tafsir ascribed to Al-Imam al-Hasan Al-Askari (as)
(d. 260/873). Yet despite the unfortunate*loss of* a great number*of*
works, what has survived*of* the teachings of the Shia Imams (as)
surpasses both in quality and quantity the canonical literature*of* any
other religious tradition*of* the world.
