References
==========

[^1]: Justice, honesty and mercy have been central to the teachings of
all prophets, yet no religious ideal has been treated so unjustly as
justice itself (honesty being part of justice). Christianity, although
it has emphasized the ideals of mercy and charity, has failed to give an
equal importance to justice and honesty. However, the significant
characteristic of the new 'liberation' theology, which has acquired many
adherents in the Christian parts of the Third World, is its emphasis on
justice. The same emphasis is also characteristic of the contemporary
Islamic movement, an emphasis which draws its inspiration and power from
Islam. Yet the Western press in its coverage of this movement seldom
refers to this central ideal of the movement, which has been dubbed
'Islamic fundamentalism' in order to mislead Muslims and Non-Muslims
about its real goals.

Yet, the new Christian theology, which bases its approach on going back
to the historical Christ and rejects classical Christology, although
radically fundamentalist 'in its approach, has been blessed with the
epithet 'liberation'. This unequal treatment of two different religious
movements, inspired by similar goals, by the imperialist press shows
that it is Islam not Christianity which is regarded as the really
serious threat to the unjust international order whose burden lies on
the backs of the poor of the Third World.

[^2]: See Al-Tabarsi, Majma' Al-bayan (Qumm, 1403 H.), vol.5, p. 514,
Al-Wahidi, Asbab al-nuzul (Qumm 1362 H. Sh.), pp. 5-8.

The Kitab al- asnam (Tehran 1348 H. Shamsi, ed. by Ahmad Zaki Basha, the
Arabic with Persian trans. by Sayyid Muhammad Rida Jalali Na'ini) of
Hisham ibn Muhammad Al-Kalbi (d. 204/819) is an important source on
pre-Islamic Arab beliefs and practices. Kitab Al- Asnam gives a great
many details about the various idols worshipped by the different Arab
tribes of the Jahiliyyah. But there is nothing in that work which would
suggest the existence of any pagan shrine comparable in importance to
the Ka'bah among the pre-Islamic Arabs. In fact it is doubtful if there
was any shrine in Arabia of the nature of the Ka'bah. Al-Kalbi does
mention two structures called “ka'bah”, one belonging to Banu al-Harith
ibn Ka'b, in Najrin, and the other to the tribe of Iyad in Sindad, a
village situated in the region between Kufah and Basrah (pp. 44, 45) But
he immediately adds that they are said to be only prominent structures
without any religious significance. Al-Kalbi mentions also the case of
one \`Abd al-Dar ibn Hudayb, a man belonging to Juhaynah, who tried to
persuade his tribesmen to build a place of worship which would compete
with the Ka'bah for the allegiance of the Arabs. His tribesmen rejected
the proposal, considering it sacrilegious. This episode also shows the
special respect in which the Ka'bah was held. Although the Surat al-
Alaq is considered the first surah to have been revealed to the Prophet
(S) in the ahadith of the Ahl al-Bayt, there is no mention there of this
story, which is rejected emphatically by Shia scholars as a fabrication.
Ja'far Murtada al \`Amili, a Lebanese scholar, in his book al-Sahih min
sirat al-Nabi al- Azam (Qum, 1400 H., v. I, pp. 216-238) has discussed
in some detail this spurious story of the first revelation.

Had this story any circulation during the early era of Islam, there
would not have existed early divergence about the first surah to be
revealed to the Prophet (S). The episode, of course, is a favourite with
the Orientalist, who despite their critical leanings, are only too
willing to accept as authentic an image of the Prophet (S) distorted by
filtration through a tradition formed during the degenerate Umayyad and
Abbasid rules. This tradition could not have preserved the true image of
the Prophet (S), which would have been radically destabilizing for the
rulers.

[^3]: Of these writers, W. M. Watt, who has written more on the Shi'ah,
and Shi'ism than the others, seems to be the least competent of them.
His works show an amazing ignorance of Shia sources even such important
Shia sources as Al-Kafi and an equally intrepid readiness to advance
bold conjectures about the origins of Shiaism.

[^4]: Some of the other Companions who are considered to have been Shi’i
are: Khuzaymah Dhu al-Shahadatayn, Abu al-Tayhan, Hudhayfah al-Yaman,
al-Zubayr, al-Fadl ibn al-'Abbas, 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas, Hisham ibn
'Utaybah, Abu Ayyub al-'Ansan, Aban ibn Said, Khalid ibn Said, Ubayy ibn
Ka'b, Anas ibn al-Harth, 'Uthman ibn Hunayf, Sahl ibn Hunayf, Abu Said
al­ Khudri, Qays ibn Sa'd ibn 'Ubadah, Buraydah, al-Bara' ibn Malik,
Khubab ibn al-Art, Rifa'ah ibn Malik al Ansari, Abu Tufayl 'Amir ibn
Wa'ilah, Hind ibn Abi Halah, Ju'dah ibn Hubayrah al ­Makhzumi, his
mother Umm Hani, and Bilal ibn Rabah.

Mullammad al-Husayn Kashif al ­Ghita', in his Asl al-Shi'ah wa usuliha
(Beirut, 1982), p. 24, says that he has found more than three hundred
Shi’is amongst the Companions of the Prophet (S) in al-'Isabah, Usd
al-Ghabah and al 'Isti'ab.

[^5]: ‘Ali's correspondence with Mu'awiyah and his public statements in
the course of his sermons, as recorded in the Nahj al-balaghah and other
sources, are replete with reference to the claim of his own preeminence
and that of the Prophet's Ahl al-Bayt (as). Al-Tabarsi, a Shia scholar
of the 6th/12th century, in his al-'Ihtijaj (Persian translation by
Hasan Mustafawi, vol. 2, p. 188), records an interesting exchange
between ‘Ali (as) and Qays ibn al-Ash'ath. In the episode described,
‘Ali (as) is said to have stated in a sermon delivered in the Mosque of
Kufa

<p dir="rtl">
ألا فإنْي لأَولى النَّاس بِالنَّاس فَمَا زِلْتُ مَظْلُوماً مُنْذُ قُبِضَ
رَسُولُ اْلله (ص).
</p>

Indeed, I am nearer to (or have more authority over) people than they
with respect to themselves. Yet I have been treated unjustly since the
demise of the Apostle of Allah (S).

At this, Qays is said to have remarked: “O Commander of the Faithful,
from the day you have come to Iraq you have not delivered a sermon
without adding this sentence at the end.”

[^6]: See 'Allamah Murtada 'Askari, 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' wa digar
afsanehaye tarikh (Tehran, 1360 H. Sh.) Persian trans. by Muhammad Sadiq
Najmi and Hashim Harisi vol. 1, pp. 46-66; Taha Husayn in al-Fitnat
al-kubra, 8th ed., vol.1, p.131-7, and' ‘Ali wa banuh, 7th ed., pp. 43,
90,152; and Dr. ‘Ali al-Wardi, in Wuaz al-salatin, Persian trans
(Tehran), p. 112, have rejected the story of Ibn Saba' as a legend and
have advanced numerous arguments to support their viewpoint.

[^7]: Ibid. p. 70.

[^8]: Al-Kashshi, Ikhtiyar marifat al-rijal (Mashhad, 1348 H. Sh.) ed.
by Hasan Mustafawi, pp.106-8.

[^9]: 'Allamah \`Askari, op. cit., vol. 3, pp. 193-199.

[^10]: Usul al-Kafi, [Tehran, \`Ilmiyyah Islamiyyah] “bab al-taqiyyah”,
vol. 3, p. 307

[^11]: Usul al-Kafi , “bab al-­taqiyyah,”, vol. 3, p. 310

[^12]: Usul al-Kafi, “bab al-kitman”, vol. 3, p. 314

[^13]: Usul al-Kafi , vol. 3, p. 316

[^14]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 317

[^15]: Usul al-Kafi, Kitab al-hujjah, vol.2, p. 83

[^16]: al-Barqi, al­-Mahasin, “Bab al-taqiyyah', p. 256

[^17]: al-Barqi, al-Mahasin, Bab al-taqiyyah, p. 256

[^18]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 126

[^19]: Al-Naj'ashi cites the case of Muhammad ibn Abi 'Umayr (d.
217/832), a companion of a Imam al-Sadiq (as),al-'Imam al-Kazim (as) and
al-'Imam al-Rida', who was thrown into prison by Harun and al-Ma'mtin.
His books were lost when his sister buried them or concealed them during
the period of his imprisonment. Thereafter he narrated the ahadith that
he remembered without their isnad (which he did not remember), and his
marasil (traditions with break in the beginning of the chains of
transmitters) are considered as authentic by Shi’i scholars. Ibn Abi
'Umayr is considered thiqah (reliable) by Sunni scholars of rijal also.
His case illustrates how Shi’i books were often lost due to conditions
of secrecy. Zurarah, a revered companion of al-'Imam al-Sadiq (as), was
publicly disowned and cursed by him for reasons of taqiyyah; see
al-Kashshi, op. cit., pp. 149, 158-160.

[^20]: Al-Kashshi, op. cit., pp. 258-263, cites the polemic of Hisham
ibn al-Hakam on the Imamate that led Harun to order his arrest.

[^21]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, pp. 86-87

[^22]: Ja'fari, S. H. M., The Origins and Early Development of Shi’ah
Islam, p. 75. Available on line at:
http://www.al-islam.org/the-origins-and-early-development-of-shia-islam-...


