Part 3: Imamate
===============

**Our Doctrines Concerning:**

• **Imamate**

• **Infallibility of the Imam**

• **Attributes and Knowledge of the Imam**

• **Obedience to the Imams**

• **Love for the Ahl al-Bayt**

• **The Holy Imams**

• **Imamate being Decided by Divine Commission**

• **Number of the Imams**

• **Al-Mahdi**

• **The Return (Raj\`ah)**

• **Taqiyyah (Pious Dissimulation)**

Imamate
-------

We believe that Imamate([^1]) is one of the fundamentals of the
religion; one’s faith is imperfect without belief in Imamate. It is also
unacceptable to depend upon one’s fathers, folks, or mentors as regards
the belief in Imamate, no matter how great these individuals might be;
rather it is obligatory upon every individual to investigate and
evaluate the matter of Imamate as exactly as it is obligatory to
investigate the Unity of the worshipped Lord and Prophethood.

Release from one’s liability from religious duties and obligations
depends upon one’s belief in Imamate, as it is then obligatory to obey
the Imam in the performance of one’s religious duties. However, if
Imamate is not accepted as one of the fundaments of religion, it is then
obligatory on account of reason to believe in Imamate to be released
from one’s liability from religious duties and obligations because not
all duties and obligations can be decided with certainty without
sufficient knowledge; therefore, it is necessary to refer to persons who
we believe have achieved such knowledge of religious duties, such as the
Imam, according to the faith of the *Imamiyyah*, and others, according
to each sect’s faith.

Even if man does not believe in Imamate and does not suppose that it is
a fundamental of Islam, he should, examine the concept of Imamate, if
only to absolve himself of responsibility in this matter.

We also believe that Imamate, just like Prophethood, is a necessary
grace of Almighty Allah. As a result, there must be in each age an
*imam* (leader) to represent the Prophet in his missions of guiding and
leading human beings towards the right path that they might achieve
prosperity and pleasure in this world as well as the next. Such a leader
must also enjoy the same authority enjoyed by the Prophet, such as
supreme authority over the people, so that he can manage their affairs
and interests, maintain justice among them and wipe out injustice and
oppression.

Accordingly, Imamate is only a continuation of prophethood, and the
reason for which Almighty Allah sends messengers and prophets is also
the reason why the Prophet must be succeeded by an Imam.

In view of that, we, the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*, state that Imamate cannot
be decided without a commission from Almighty Allah conveyed to us by
the Holy Prophet (s) or the previous Imam (\`a). Imamate is thus not
subordinate to selection or choice by the people, for they are not
authorized to nominate anyone to this position if they desire and to
depose anyone they do not like from this position and thus remain
without an Imam, because:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ مَاتَ وَلَمْ يَعْرِفْ إمَامَ زَمَانِهِ مَاتَ مِيتَةً
جَاهِلِيَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who dies without recognition of the Imam of his time has in fact died
just like the ignorant ones who died before accepting Islam.([^2])

Through uninterruptedly transmitted narrations, reporters quoted the
Holy Prophet (s) as having confirmed the previous decision.

From the above, we conclude that it is impossible that any age can be
devoid of a Divinely commissioned leader, it being obligatory on the
people to obey him (i.e. the Imam), whether they like him or not,
support him or not, obey him or not, or whether he is present or absent
from their sight.([^3])

In the same way as it is acceptable for the Prophet (s) to absent
himself from people’s sights, such as his disappearance from view in the
cave([^4]) or in the col,([^5]) it is acceptable for the Imam to absent
himself from view, be his occultation long or short, according to
reason. Almighty Allah has said in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And there is a guide for every people*****. (13/7)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ مِنْ أُمَّةٍ إِلَّا خَلَا فِيهَا نَذِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***There is not a nation but a warner has passed among them.***
**(35/24)**

Infallibility of the Imam
-------------------------

We believe that an Imam, just like a Prophet, must be infallible from
all vices and defects, whether open or concealed, from childhood up to
death, deliberately or unintentionally.

An Imam must be free from inadvertence, error, or unawareness, because
the Imams, just like the Prophets, are maintainers of the religious law
and they must stand out firm for it. The proofs that have convinced us
to believe in the inerrancy of the Prophets are the same as those that
have convinced us to believe in the inerrancy of the Imams. An Arabic
verse says:

It is not impossible for Allah to unite the whole world in one
person.([^6])

Attributes and Knowledge of the Imam
------------------------------------

We believe that an *imam*, just like a prophet must be the best of all
mankind in attributes of human perfection, such as courage, generosity,
chasteness, truthfulness, decency, prudence, reason, wisdom, and
morality.

The evidence on this doctrine is the same as that which we gave for the
prophet's superiority.

An *imam* receives all Divine knowledge and laws, as well as
information, from the Prophet or the Imam preceding him.

When a new question arises, he must have knowledge of it through
inspiration, which he receives by way of power of sacredness that
Almighty Allah has placed in him. Hence, when he gives attention to
something and wills to know it in actuality, he will neither miss nor
fail to hit it, without reason-based proofs or instructions of mentors.
The knowledge of an *imam* can however be increased and intensified. As
a result, the Holy Prophet (s) used to pray to Almighty Allah saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبِّ زِدْنِي عِلْمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Lord, increase my knowledge! (20:114)*** ([^7])

Psychological studies have proven that each human being passes by an
hour or several hours in his lifetime during which he can have knowledge
of a number of things by intuition, which is part of inspiration, by
virtue of the power that Almighty Allah has granted man to acquaint
himself with such knowledge. This power, however, differs among people;
increase or decrease owing to each man’s nature. During such hours,
man’s mind suddenly gets to know certain things without intervention of
the thought process or instruction of mentors. In fact, each individual
can experience such states many times in his lifetime.

On the grounds of this experimental fact demonstrated by ancient and
recent philosophers, certain people can attain their utmost
inspirational competence.

On the strength of this fact, we can conclude that the Holy Imams (\`a)
hold the highest degree of the power of intuition, especially when we
come to know that they possess the purest minds that are ready to
receive information at all times, in all states, and under all
circumstances. Accordingly and as has been previously maintained, when
the Imam gives attention to something and wills to know it, he will know
it through this holy inspirational power without premeditation,
introduction, or instruction of mentors. Such information will then
manifest itself in the minds of the Holy Imams in the same way as
visible things reflect themselves in mirrors without dimness or
obscurity.

This fact reveals itself very clearly in the history of the Holy Prophet
(s) and Imams (\`a) who never attended the classes of any mentor, nor
received the instructions of any scholar since early childhood up to
maturity. Nobody ever taught them any aspect of science or art,
including reading and writing. History tells us that they were never
reported to have joined elementary schools or studied under a
teacher.([^8]))

In spite of this they never delayed an answer to any question that was
addressed to them. Moreover, their tongues never uttered the statement,
‘I do not know,’([^9]) and they never withheld the answer to a question
so as to consult others or deliberate,… etc.

Unlike the Holy Imams (\`a), biographies of every Muslim jurisprudent,
narrator, or master scholar contains information about the names of
those who educated, taught, and trained them in fields in which they
excelled. Moreover, such biographies contain situations in which such
scholars could not find answers to many questions and doubted many
others. This is indeed ordinary in the lives of human beings in all
places and times.

Obedience to the Imams
----------------------

We believe that the Holy Imams (\`a) are the very men of authority whom
Almighty Allah has ordered people to obey,([^10]) the witnesses over the
nations, the doors opening the way to Almighty Allah, the paths leading
to Him, the signs pointing out to Him, the bearers of His knowledge, the
interpreters of His revelations, the pillars of [the belief in] His
Oneness, and the custodians of His recognition. By virtue of this, they
have always been the cause of security for the inhabitants of the earth
just as the stars are the cause of security for the inhabitants of the
heavens,([^11]) as is expressed by the Holy Prophet (s) who has further
demonstrated their positions by saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ أهْلِ بَيْتِي فِي هَذِهِ الأمَّةِ كَسَفِينَةِ نُوحٍ؛ مَنْ
رَكِبَهَا نَجَا، وَمَنْ تَخَلَّفَ عَنْهَا غَرِقَ وَهَوَى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The likeness of my Household in this nation is the Ark of Noah;
whosoever embarked upon it was saved, but whoever turned away from it
was drowned.([^12])

As for the Glorious Qur'an, it has described them, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ عِبَادٌ مُكْرَمُونَ لَا يَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ وَهُمْ
بِأَمْرِهِ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[They are] honored servants who speak not until He has spoken and act
by His Command.*** **(21/26-7)**

Furthermore, they are those whom Almighty Allah has kept away from
impurity and cleansed with a thorough cleansing.([^13])

Furthermore, we believe that the commandments of the Holy Imams (\`a)
are verily the commandments of Almighty Allah, their prohibitions are
His prohibitions, to obey them is to obey Him, to disobey them is to
disobey Him, to adhere to them is to adhere to Him, and to show enmity
towards them is to show enmity towards Him. It is also forbidden to
reject them, because to reject them is to reject the Holy Messenger (s),
and to reject the Holy Messenger (s) is to reject Almighty Allah.([^14])

It is thus obligatory to submit to them, give oneself over to them, and
accept whatever they say.

Pursuant to this, we believe that the religious laws, commissioned by
Almighty Allah, must not be derived from any resource other than their
salubrious resources, yet it is invalid to take these laws from other
than them, and the religious responsibility of any person who refers to
other than them is not fulfilled. Indeed, such a person must not feel
content that he has carried out the duties imposed upon him by Almighty
Allah unless he carries them out according to the teachings of the Holy
Imams (\`a).

In this tumultuous ocean overcrowded with billows of seditious,
misleading, litigious, and fallacious matters, the Holy Imams (\`a)
represent Noah’s Ark; whosoever embarks upon it will be definitely
saved, but whoever falls behind will be drowned.

In this thesis, we will not seek to prove that the Holy Imams (\`a) were
the legal caliphs (i.e. religious and political leaders of the Muslim
nation) and successors of the Holy Prophet (s), and that they possessed
Divine authority, because proving it will not bring back the circle of
time or restore the usurped rights to their due owners. The most
important point in this thesis is to prove the obligation of referring
to the Holy Imams (\`a) in obtaining the religious laws of Almighty
Allah, and in gaining the directions of the Holy Prophet (s) in their
most accurate forms.

The purpose of this discussion is to verify the fact that to receive the
religious laws of Islam from reporters and scholars who have not derived
them from the Holy Imams’ (\`a) pure resources and have not sought light
from their luminous sources is definitely deviation from the straight
path of religion. Moreover, a Muslim, who learns his religious duties
from any other source besides the Holy Imams (\`a), must not be sure
that he has fulfilled his duties towards Almighty Allah because there is
a great divergence in opinions among the different sects of Muslims
regarding the laws of Islam. An ordinary Muslim faces immense difficulty
in choosing for himself from these divergent sects and schools. He is
required to probe and investigate until he acquires a decisive pretext
before Almighty Allah to follow a certain sect that he believes will
lead him to the actual laws enacted by the Lord and thus, fulfill his
duties toward Him. Generally, a certain engagement with a duty is
required for certain release from it.

Categorical proofs demonstrate that it is obligatory to refer to the Ahl
al-Bayt (\`a) in the learning of the religious laws and that they are
the genuine resources of the Divinely revealed laws of the religion
after the Holy Prophet (s); at least on account of his authentically
reported following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي قَدْ تَرَكْتُ فِيكُمْ مَا إنْ تَمَسَّكْتُمْ بِهِ لَنْ تَضِلُّوا
بَعْدِي أبَداً؛ الثَّقَلَيْنِ، وَأَحَدُهُمَا أكْبَرُ مِنَ الآخَرِ:
كِتَابَ اللهِ، حَبْلٌ مَمْدُودٌ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ إلَى الأرْضِ،
وَعِتْرَتِي أهْلَ بَيْتِي. ألاَ وَإنَّهُمَا لَنْ يَفْتَرِقَا حَتَّى
يَرِدَا عَلَيَّ الْحَوْضَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, I am leaving among you that which shall forever save you from
straying off [the straight path of the religion] as long as you hold
fast to them. They are the Two Weighty Things [*thaqalayn*]([^15]) one
of which is more significant than the other: [first] the Book of
Almighty Allah, which is a rope extending from the heavens to the earth,
and [second] my progeny [*‘itrah*],([^16]) the members of my Household
[*Ahl al-Bayt*]. Verily, they shall never separate from one another
until they join me at the Divine Pond.([^17])

This tradition has been unanimously narrated by both Sunni and Shi\`ite
reporters alike. If you consider this momentous tradition carefully, you
will come across marvelous and persuasive structure and significance.
For instance, how remarkable the following statement is:

I am leaving among you that which shall forever save you from straying
off [the straight path of religion] as long as you hold fast to them.

What the Holy Prophet (s) has left with us is the Two Weighty Things
together, which he has considered one thing and has declared that it is
not sufficient to hold fast to one of them and leave the other; rather,
safety from straying off can be achieved only through holding fast to
both of them.

Another example, very clear is the purport of the following statement:

These two will never be separated from each other until they join me at
the Pond.

Whoever separates these two from one another and shuns holding fast to
both of them shall never touch on true guidance. In view of this fact,
the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) have been the ark of salvation and the security
for the inhabitants of the earth; sinking into the bottomless tumults of
deviation is the unavoidable fate of everyone who fails to join them;
and perdition will be the end result.

To claim that such holding fast to them stands for mere love for them
without accepting their instructions and following their course is
definitely fleeing from the right; a method adopted by the extremists
who deliberately design to ignore the accurate course of interpreting
Arabic words.

Love for the Ahl al-Bayt
------------------------

Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I do not ask for any wages for this
except uncontaminated love and respect for my kinsfolk.*** **(42/23)**

We believe that besides the obligation of holding fast to the Ahl
al-Bayt (\`a), each and every Muslim is under another obligation, which
is to profess themselves to love the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) and hold them
dear. This is because Almighty Allah, in the aforesaid holy verse, has
clearly demanded the people’s love for them.([^18])

The Holy Prophet (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُبُّ أهْلِ بَيْتِي عَلاَمَةُ الإيمَانِ، وَبُغْضُهُمْ عَلاَمَةُ
النِّفَاقِ. مَنْ أحَبَّهُمْ أحَبَّ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ، وَمَنْ
أبْغَضَهُمْ أبْغَضَ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Love for my Household is a sign of belief, and to show enmity towards
them is a sign of hypocrisy.([^19]) Whosoever loves them has in fact
loved Almighty Allah and His Messenger; and whosoever shows enmity
towards them has in fact shown enmity towards Almighty Allah and His
Messenger.([^20])

Indisputably and unquestionably, love for the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) is one
of the necessary fundaments of Islam. This belief is held by all
Muslims, despite their divergent and different opinions, except a few
factions who adopted the enmity of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) and, as a
result, were called ‘*Nawasib*’ (i.e. those who show open hostility to
the Household of the Holy Prophet). Consequently, they are included with
those who reject the decisive form of Islam. As a general rule,
whosoever rejects the established form of the religion, such as the
obligation of prayers and fasting, is decided as having rejected the
origin of the Mission of Islam and the Mission of Islam altogether, as
is confirmed by established proofs, even if one has uttered the
profession of faith (i.e. *shahadah*).

Thus, hostility to the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) is one of the testimonies of
one’s hypocrisy, and to love them is one of the signs of true faith.
Consequently, hostility to the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) is clear hostility to
Almighty Allah and to the Holy Prophet (s).

Almighty Allah has commanded us to love the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) and to
hold them dear because they are worthy of such love and devotion by
virtue of their occupying nearby positions to Almighty Allah, high
levels of eminence, and absolute innocence from polytheism, acts of
disobedience, and whatever drives away from the area of His pleasure.

It is wrong to even imagine that Almighty Allah might impose upon us the
love of someone who disobeys Him or fails to obey Him as He should be
obeyed, because all Almighty Allah’s,creatures, in His view, are His
servants whom He has created equally, the noblest among them, in His
sight, being the most righteous.([^21])

Thus, the person/s whom Almighty Allah imposes upon His creatures to
love and hold dear must be the most righteous and the most virtuous of
all; otherwise, another person would be worthier of such love. It might
also be said that Almighty Allah—far be it from Him—prefers some people
to others unjustly or playfully without these preferred people deserving
such preference!

The Holy Imams
--------------

Concerning our belief in our Holy Imams (\`a), we do not imitate the
Extremists (*ghulat*) and the Immanentists (*hululiyyun*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَبُرَتْ كَلِمَةً تَخْرُجُ مِنْ أَفْوَاهِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***A monstrous word it is, issuing from mouths.*** **(18:5)**

We believe that our Imams are human beings like ourselves, i.e. they
enjoy the same rights that we enjoy and they are required to do the same
obligations that we are required to do; except that they are noble
servants of Almighty Allah Who has granted them special honor and
bestowed upon them His authority, because they occupy the highest ranks
of human perfection, such as knowledge, piety, courage, nobility, and
chastity, as well as all moral standards and nobilities of character.
Hence, no human being can ever attain the peculiarities that they hold.

Accordingly, they have been the worthiest of being leaders, guides, and
authorities after the Holy Prophet (s) in giving instructions,
interpretations and explanations of the religious laws and the Holy
Qur'an as needed by people.

In this respect, our Imam, Ja\`far al-Sadiq (\`a), says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا جَاءَكُمْ عَنّا مِمَّا يَجُوزُ أنْ يَكُونَ فِي المَخْلُوقِينَ
وَلَمْ تَعْلَمُوهُ وَلَمْ تَفْهَمُوهُ فَلاَ تَجْحَدُوهُ، وَرُدُّوهُ
إلَيْنَا. وَمَا جَاءَكُمْ عَنَّا مِمَّا لاَ يَجُوزُ أنْ يَكُونَ فِي
المَخْلُوقِينَ فَاجْحَدُوهُ وَلاَ تَرُدُّوهُ إلَيْنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whatsoever, which is possible for the creatures to hold, is reported to
you about us, but you have had no previous idea about it or you have not
been able to understand it, then you must not deny it; rather, you must
refer it to us. However, if what is reported to you about us is
impossible for the creatures to hold, then you must deny it and you must
not refer it to us.([^22])

Imamate Being Decided by A Divine Commission
--------------------------------------------

We believe that Imamate, like prophethood, cannot be decided by anything
except a commission from Almighty Allah that is declared by His
Messenger or the Divinely commissioned Imam when he nominates his
successor in Imamate.([^23])

Without any difference, Imamate submits to the same laws of Prophethood
in this respect. In plain words, no human being holds the right to
express his opinion about the one whom Almighty Allah chooses as guide
and leader for entire humanity. Similarly, none has the right to
nominate, propose, or select such persons, because this mission needs
one upon whom Almighty Allah has bestowed sacredness from His Sacred
Spirit and who is ready to undergo the burdens of general leadership and
capability to guide all human beings; and such a person cannot be
nominated by anyone except Almighty Allah Who, alone, has the right to
select him.

We also believe that the Holy Prophet, Muhammad (s), did nominate his
successor and representative who would be the leader (i.e. *imam*) after
him. He thus declared his cousin, \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (\`a), to be the
commander of the believers, the keeper of the Divine Revelation, and the
leader of people on many occasions. Moreover, the Holy Prophet (s), on
that day in *Ghadir Khumm* (known as the *Ghadir* Day), appointed Imam
\`Ali (\`a) to the position of the next leadership and ordered the
attendants to pay homage to him as their next leader. He thus said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألاَ، مَنْ كُنْتُ مَوْلاَهُ فَهَذَا عَلِيٌّ مَوْلاَهُ. اَللَّهُمَّ
وَالِ مَنْ وَالاَهُ، وَعَادِ مَنْ عَادَاهُ، وَانْصُرْ مَنْ نَصَرَهُ،
وَاخْذُلْ مَنْ خَذَلَهُ، وَأدِرِ الحَقَّ مَعَهُ كَيْفَمَا دَارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Behold! \`Ali is (now) the master of everyone who has regarded me as his
master. O Allah! (please do) support whoever supports \`Ali; and be the
enemy of whoever incurs the hostility of \`Ali; and aid whoever aids
\`Ali; and forsake whoever forsakes \`Ali; and make the right turn to
any side that \`Ali takes.([^24])

That was not the first occasion; in fact, the first occasion on which
the Holy Prophet (s) declared the leadership (Imamate) of Imam \`Ali
(\`a) was when the Holy Prophet (s) invited his nearest relatives and
members of his clan and declared the following before all of them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ هَذَا أخِي، وَوَصِيِّي، وَخَلِيفَتِي مِنْ بَعْدِي؛ فَاسْمَعُوا
لَهُ وَأطِيعُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, this (\`Ali) is my brother, my successor, and my vicegerent
after me. You must then listen to him and obey him.([^25])

When the Holy Prophet (s) said the above about him, Imam \`Ali (\`a) had
not yet come of age.

On many other occasions, the Holy Prophet (s) repeated the following
statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَلِيُّ، أنْتَ مِنِّي بِمَنْزِلَةِ هَارُونَ مِنْ مُوسَى، إلاَّ
أنَّهُ لاَ نَبِيَّ بَعْدِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O \`Ali! Your position in relation to me is the same as (Prophet)
Aaron’s position in relation to (Prophet) Moses except that no Prophet
is to come after me.([^26])

Besides, many holy Qur'anic verses and traditions have confirmed the
general leadership of Imam \`Ali (\`a), such as the following holy
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Only Allah is your Guardian, and His Messenger, and those who
believe—those who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they
bow.*** **(5/55)**

This holy verse was revealed to speak of Imam \`Ali (\`a) when he gave
his ring as alms while he was bowing in a prayer.([^27])

The purpose for which this thesis has been written does not conduce to
citing or explaining all the holy verses and traditions concerning the
Imamate of Imam \`Ali (\`a).

In the same manner, Imam \`Ali (\`a) declared the Imamate of Imam
al-Hasan (\`a) and Imam al-Husayn (\`a). The latter declared the Imamate
of Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn (Zayn al-\`Abidin) (\`a) and so did every
Imam concerning the next Imam up to the last of them who will be
discussed in an independent chapter of this book.

The Number of Imams
-------------------

We believe that the Holy Imams, who are truly the worthiest of holding
Imamate in its actual sense,([^28]) are our authorities in the religious
laws of Islam and they are twelve in number**(**[^29]**)** who have been
commissioned by Almighty Allah to hold the position of leading the
Muslim nation. The Holy Prophet, Muhammad (s), had referred to all of
them by name([^30]) before each Imam declared the name of the person who
would be the next Imam after him. They are thus as follows, Peace be
upon them all:

1. Abu’l-Hasan, \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, *al-Murtadha* (the Well-Pleased);
BH (before Hijrah) 23 - AH (After Hijrah) 40.

2. Abu-Muhammad, al-Hasan ibn \`Ali, *al-Zaki* (the Pure); AH 2 - AH 50.

3. Abu-\`Abdullah, al-Husayn ibn \`Ali, Sayyid al-Shuhada' (The Master
of Martyrs); AH 3 - AH 61.

4. Abu-Muhammad, \`Ali ibn al-Husayn, Zayn al-\`Abidin (The Adornment of
the Worshippers); AH 38 - AH 95.

5. Abu-Ja\`far, Muhammad ibn \`Ali, al-Baqir (The Ripper of Knowledge);
AH 57 - AH 114.

6. Abu-\`Abdullah, Ja\`far ibn Muhammad, al-Sadiq (The Veracious); AH
83 - AH 148.

7. Abu-Ibrahim, Musa ibn Ja\`far, al-Kazim (The Suppressor of Rage); AH
128 - AH 183.

8. Abu’l-Hasan, \`Ali ibn Musa, al-Ridha (The Amiable); AH 148 - AH 203.

9. Abu-Ja\`far; Muhammad ibn \`Ali, al-Jawad (The Magnanimous); AH 195 -
AH 220.

10. Abu’l-Hasan, \`Ali ibn Muhammad, al-Hadi (The Guide); AH 212 - AH
254.

11. Abu-Muhammad, al-Hasan ibn \`Ali, al-\`Askari (Resident of \`Askar
City); AH 232 - AH 260.

12. Abu’l-Qasim, Muhammad ibn al-Hasan, al-Mahdi (The Well-Guided); AH
256 - …

The twelfth Imam, al-Mahdi (\`a), is Almighty Allah’s argument against
His creatures in the present day. He is the awaited savior who shall
reappear (after occultation) to fill the earth with fairness and justice
as it is filled with injustice and prejudice; may Almighty Allah hasten
his advent and make easy his reappearance.

Al-Mahdi
--------

The Good Tidings of the advent of Imam al-Mahdi (\`a),([^31]) a
descendant of Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' (\`a)([^32]) who will spread
justice and equity throughout the globe after it has been overcome by
injustice and oppression,([^33]) are indisputably reported from the Holy
Prophet (s) by all Muslims who, apart from their various sects and
opinions, have recorded and reported his traditions in this regard.

The belief in the advent of Imam al-Mahdi (\`a) during the last period
of existence of this globe is not an inventive idea that is embraced by
the Shi\`ah alone due to their being oppressed, as is falsely claimed by
some malevolent, mistaken writers. They exert all efforts to rim this
Divine, deep-rooted belief with a baseless frame, alleging that the
belief in the advent of a leader who shall cleanse the earth from the
filths of oppression has been the produce of the dreams of the Shi\`ah.

Among the other unquestionable beliefs that were brought by Islam, the
belief in al-Mahdi (\`a) has been firmly established in the minds of all
Muslims. Their intellects were saturated with it to the extent that
those who claimed Mahdism in the first century after the advent of
Islam—such as the followers of Kaysaniyyah,([^34]) the
\`Abbasids,([^35]) a group of the \`Alawiyyah,([^36]) and many
others—easily deceived the public and used this belief to grab power and
authority. The false claim of Mahdism was thus the surest way to
influence the public and prevail over them.

We, the Shi\`ah, incontrovertibly believe in the religion of Islam as
the truest and the seal of all Divine religions and we do not expect any
other religion to reform humanity. We are witnessing great oppression on
this globe, the dangerous spread of corruption, the Muslims’ retreat
from their religion, the inactivation of the laws and regulations of
Islam in all Muslim countries, and the Muslims’ non-compliance with even
one per mil of the laws of Islam. In spite of all that, it is still
imperative for us to wait for the Relief that will restore Islam’s power
and capability to reform the world that is sinking in the arrogance of
oppression and corruption.

Besides, Islam cannot restore its power and domination over entire
humanity while it is still encountering the current and earlier
diversity of its followers in its laws, regulations and opinions, their
heresies and distortions of its laws and seditious arguments that they
have been attaching to it.

The religion of Islam cannot restore its strength unless a great
reformer appears to lead it, reunify the divergent word of its
followers, refute the distortions of the vain doers, and abrogate the
heresies and heterodoxies attached to it through custody and grace from
Almighty Allah. He will make this reformer a well-guided person enjoying
a momentous position and grant him general authority over human beings
and an extraordinary power to fill the earth with justice and fairness
and root out injustice and oppression.

In short, the current corruptive conditions of humanity, which have
attained their climax in dishonesty and wrong—despite our belief in
Islam as the truest and the sealing of all religions—demand that we must
expect this reformer, namely Imam al-Mahdi, to come and save the world
from its sufferings.

In view of this fact, all Muslim sects and non-Muslims believe in this
expectation; yet the difference between the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* and the
others is that the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* believe that this reformer is a
definite, well-known person who was born in AH 256 (AD 870) and still
alive. He is the son of al-Hasan al-\`Askari (\`a) and his first name is
Muhammad, as has been proven through predictions of the Holy Prophet (s)
and the Holy Imams (\`a) as well as the uninterrupted narrations about
his birth and his concealment from human sight.

It is impossible to suspend Imamate in any age even though the Imam may
be invisible for a certain time before he reappears on a day predefined
by Almighty Allah other than Who none can predict or determine.

It is also believable that the disappearing Imam’s survival for such a
long time is a miracle granted to him by Almighty Allah—a miracle that
is not more marvelous than the miracle of his holding the responsibility
of Imamate while he was just five years old after his father passed away
and moved towards the Supreme Comrade. It is also as marvelous as the
miracle of Prophet Jesus (\`a) who spoke to people as a Prophet while he
was a child in the cradle.

Besides, to live longer than the natural age of human beings, as is
imagined by people, does not contradict or disagree with biological
sciences. Even though modern science has not yet gained access to what
may prolong man’s life, it is undeniable that Almighty Allah has power
over all things and can do whatever He wills. Examples are already
touched on; the Holy Qur'an has informed us about the long life span of
Prophet Noah (\`a) and about the continuous existence of Prophet Jesus
(\`a). However, if we doubt the Holy Qur'an, then we must bid farewell
to Islam!

It is thus very surprising for a Muslim individual who claims absolute
belief in the Holy Qur'an to wonder about the possibility of such an
occultation.

It is worth mentioning and worth remembering in this respect that our
expectation of al-Mahdi (\`a), the savior and reformer, does not mean,
by any means, that Muslims should not lift a hand to support their
religion, restore their rights, strive painstakingly for its sake, act
upon its laws and regulations, enjoin the right, or forbid the evil.
Quite the opposite, Muslims are always required to carry out the
religious duties, act upon the religious instructions revealed by their
Lord, exert all possible efforts to acquaint themselves with these
instructions and duties in their best manners through following the most
accurate ways that lead to them, enjoin the right, and forbid the evil.
Verily, “All of you must be supervisors and all of you are responsible
for your subjects.”([^37])

For that reason, no Muslim individual is allowed to dispense with his
duties under the pretense that he is expecting al-Mahdi (\`a), the
reformer guide, because such unfounded pretense neither releases any
Muslim individual from liabilities nor authorize him to postpone the
doing of a duty.

The Return (raj\`ah)
--------------------

The Imamiyyah Shi’ah, adopting the reported traditions of the Ahl
al-Bayt (\`a), believe that, after the advent of Imam al-Mahdi (\`a),
Almighty Allah will raise some people from the dead([^38]) in the very
forms that they had had before their death so as to honor a group of
them and dishonor others, and to give ascendancy to the right group over
the wrong and restore the rights of the oppressed ones from the
oppressors.

This return will be restricted to those who enjoy supreme ranks of faith
and those who enjoy notorious degrees of corruption. After the return,
they will die again and be resurrected on the Day of Judgment to receive
the reward or punishment that they deserve because of their deeds. This
is understood from Almighty Allah’s information in the Holy Qur'an about
the manners of those who would not take advantage of the first raising
from the dead in this world before they will be again resurrected on the
Day of Judgment. After they incur hatred from Almighty Allah, they will
desire a third resurrection through which they will wish to perhaps act
righteously and make amends. Reporting their desire, the Holy Qur'an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا رَبَّنَا أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ وَأَحْيَيْتَنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ
فَاعْتَرَفْنَا بِذُنُوبِنَا فَهَلْ إِلَىٰ خُرُوجٍ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[They will say:] Our Lord! Thou hast caused us to die two deaths, and
Thou hast given us twice to live; now we confess our sins. Is there any
way to go forth?*** **(40/11)**

As the Holy Qur'an has actually proclaimed the Return to this world,
reported traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) have confirmatively given
details of this belief and the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* have unanimously
agreed upon its authenticity. However, a few Imamite individuals have
interpreted the Return as the restoration of political authority and
power to the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) when the Awaited Imam, al-Mahdi (\`a),
shall come. Yet, they have denied the return of certain personalities
and the raising of others from the dead.

As for Sunni Muslims, they consider the belief in the Return to be so
heretical that to believe in it is hideous atheism. Similarly, Sunni
biographers have decided the belief in the Return as one of the
calumnious and defamatory features due to which a reporter believing in
it is rejected and his reports are declined. Moreover, it seems that
they have regarded the belief in the Return as heterodox as disbelief in
Almighty Allah or even more heretical! As a result, the belief in the
Return has been the most insulting and vituperative feature attributed
to the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*.

Undoubtedly, such sort of evil-intended intensifications were used by
Muslim sects as expedient to vituperate each other and wage campaigns
against each other. Actually, such intensification is unjustified
because the doctrine of the Return taints neither the doctrine of
monotheism nor Prophethood. It rather confirms them, since the Return
bespeaks Almighty Allah’s absolute power to raise the dead and to
resurrect—two extraordinary matters that can act as miracles for our
Prophet, Muhammad, and for his Household, peace be upon them all.

This miracle is similar to Prophet Jesus’ (\`a) miracle of restoring the
dead to life even though the miracle of the Return is more profound,
because it represents the resurrection of dead persons after their
bodies have become dust:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ مَنْ يُحْيِي الْعِظَامَ وَهِيَ رَمِيمٌ قُلْ يُحْيِيهَا الَّذِي
أَنْشَأَهَا أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ ۖ وَهُوَ بِكُلِّ خَلْقٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Says he (man): ‘Who will give life to the bones when they are
rotten?’ Says (Allah): ‘He will give life to them Who brought them into
existence at first, and He is cognizant of all Creation.’***
**(36/78-9)**

Some people have disapproved of the doctrine of the Return, claiming
that it is part of metempsychosis, which is totally in the wrong. In
fact, these people do not have the faculty to differentiate between
metempsychosis and somatic resurrection, while the Return is a sort of
such somatic resurrection. Metempsychosis stands for the transmigration
of the souls or, in plain words, the passage of the soul of a creature
into a new body completely separated from the first creature’s body
unlike the somatic resurrection, which stands for the reformation of the
same body along with its psychological features. The *Raj\`ah* holds the
same definition.

If the Return is considered to be a sort of metempsychosis, then Prophet
Jesus’ restoring the dead to life must have been a sort of
metempsychosis, too; and if the Return is a sort of metempsychosis, then
the somatic resurrection and the final assemblage on the Judgment Day
must be such, too.

In the long run, the issue of the Return can be discussed through the
following two probabilities exclusively:

**First**: the Return is impossible to take place practically.

**Second**: The traditions pertaining to the doctrine of the Return are
untrue.

Supposing that these two probabilities are true, the disbelief in the
Return must not be of such an extreme degree of enormity as depicted by
the rivals of the Shi\`ah.

To tell the truth, the other Muslim sects adopt too many beliefs that
are impossible to believe, or have not been proven by a single authentic
tradition. Nevertheless, these beliefs have not taken them out of the
circle of Muslims nor have they caused them to be charged of atheism.

Too many are the examples of such baseless beliefs: some of them believe
that the Holy Prophet (s) was liable to forget, to be inattentive, or
even to disobey Almighty Allah!([^39]) Others believe that the Holy
Qur'an is as eternal as Almighty Allah!([^40]) Others believe in
Almighty Allah’s (conditional) threat! Others believe that the Holy
Prophet (s) did not nominate a successor!

Nevertheless, the two aforementioned probabilities are false. As already
cited, the Return is a sort of somatic resurrection and the final
assemblage (after death), which is not impossible, and the only
difference between the Return and the Resurrection is that the Return
will take place at a predefined time in this world, and all points of
evidence proving the Resurrection are applicable to the Return.

There is no reason for astonishment except that we have not come across
such raising of the dead during our lifetime and we also ignore the
reasons for or the obstacles against the happening of such Return due to
which we confess or deny it. As a general rule, it is not easy for man’s
imagination to admit something that man has not encountered before,
exactly like those who find strange the resurrection on Judgment Day;
so, they, as the Holy Qur'an demonstrates, wonder:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ يُحْيِي الْعِظَامَ وَهِيَ رَمِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘Who will revive these bones after they rot and become dust?’***
**(36/78)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يُحْيِيهَا الَّذِي أَنْشَأَهَا أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ ۖ وَهُوَ بِكُلِّ
خَلْقٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: ‘He will revive them Who brought them into existence at first,
and He is Cognizant of all Creation.’*** **(36/79)**

In such a situation, where there is no intellectual evidence either to
deny or to prove it, we must have recourse to religious texts, which
stand as the resources of Divine Revelation. The Holy Qur'an, the most
authentic and major source of Divine Revelation, has comprised texts
proving the possibility of the return to the worldly life after death,
such as the miracle of Prophet Jesus (\`a) who restored the dead to
life. In this respect, the Holy Qur'an reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُبْرِئُ الْأَكْمَهَ وَالْأَبْرَصَ وَأُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ بِإِذْنِ
اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[Jesus said] And I heal the blind and the leprous and bring the dead
to life with Allah's permission.*** **(3/49)**

The Holy Qur'an also reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَنَّىٰ يُحْيِي هَٰذِهِ اللَّهُ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا ۖ فَأَمَاتَهُ
اللَّهُ مِائَةَ عَامٍ ثُمَّ بَعَثَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[Uzair wondered] When will Allah give it life after its death? So,
Allah caused him to die for a hundred years then raised him to life.***
**(2/259)**

As has been previously cited, the Holy Qur'an reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا رَبَّنَا أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ وَأَحْيَيْتَنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ
فَاعْتَرَفْنَا بِذُنُوبِنَا فَهَلْ إِلَىٰ خُرُوجٍ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[They will say] Our Lord! Thou hast cause us to die two deaths, and
Thou hast given us twice to live; now we confess our sins. Is there any
way to go forth?*** **(40/11)**

This holy verse cannot hold any reasonable sense unless it is
interpreted to denote the doctrine of the Return (to the worldly life
after death), even though some exegetes of the Holy Qur'an have exerted
overabundant efforts to drive it away from this doctrine, but all their
efforts have been incompatible with the sense of the holy verse.

As for the second aforesaid probability, it is unfounded because the
issue of the Return is one of the necessary subjects on which the Holy
Imams (\`a) have laid great stress through their uninterruptedly
reported traditions.

On balance, it is rather odd that a famous writer, namely Ahmad Amin,
who claims holding considerable knowledge, says in his book of ‘The Dawn
of Islam (*Fajr al-Islam*)’:

Judaism can obviously be seen in Shi\`ism through the belief in the
Return (*Raj\`ah*).([^41])

To answer this claim, Judaism can also be seen in the Holy Qur'an more
obviously through the same doctrine of the Return, which is mentioned on
many occasions in the Holy Qur'an, as has been previously cited.

Moreover, Judaism and Christianity must be seen in many of the doctrines
and laws of Islam, because the Holy Prophet, Muhammad (s), has come
confirming the bygone Divine religions even though he has abrogated some
of their laws. As a result, the emergence of Judaism and Christianity in
some doctrines of Islam is not a fault of Islam, even if it be the
doctrine of the Return, as is claimed by Ahmad Amin.

In any case, the doctrine of the Return is not among the fundaments of
the religion that must be investigated and believed; rather, we have
believed in it corresponding to the authentic traditions reported from
the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) whom we believe to be inerrant.
The belief in the Return is finally one of the unseen matters that we
have adopted because of the information received from our Holy Imams
(\`a) and which is not impossible for Almighty Allah.

Pious Dissimulation (taqiyyah)
------------------------------

Imam al-Sadiq (\`a) is reported to have said in an authenticated
tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّقِيَّةُ دِينِي وَدِينُ أبَائِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Taqiyyah*([^42]) is my belief and the belief of my forefathers.([^43])

He (\`a) also said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لاَ تَقِيَّةَ لَهُ لاَ دِينَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever has no taqiyyah([^44]) has no belief.([^45])

Raised as their motto, the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) used to practice taqiyyah
in order to protect themselves and their followers from harm, prevent
bloodshed,([^46]) enhance the conditions of Muslims, unify their
situations, and reunite their scattered intentions.

*Taqiyyah* is still the distinctive feature of the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*
amongst the other sects and nations. As required by the naïve nature of
sound reason, it is normal for every human being to conceal his beliefs
and guard himself against pitfalls when he anticipates that a danger
will befall him or his property if he proclaims or speaks out his
beliefs openly.

History confirms that the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* and their Imams (\`a)
faced more tyrannical oppression than any other sect or nation.([^47])
Most of the time, the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* had to practise *taqiyyah* to
conceal their actual beliefs from their rivals and hide their doctrines
and private rites in order to avoid persecution in their worldly and
religious affairs. This is why the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*, and none else,
have been known for their abidance of *taqiyyah*.

Mentioned in detail in the books of Shi\`ite jurisprudence, *taqiyyah*
has certain rules and regulations in terms of its obligation or
non-obligation that are defined according to the diversity of the
conditions that bring about anticipated harm.

*Taqiyyah* is thus not obligatory under all circumstances; rather it is
sometimes allowable while on other occasions, it becomes forbidden, such
as in conditions like when support of the religion and serving and
striving for Islam rely upon the open declaration and demonstration of
the truth. In such conditions, neither property nor lives should be
preferred to religion.

Correspondingly, *taqiyyah* becomes forbidden under such circumstances;
killing of innocent people, circulation of the wrong, causing corruption
to religious principles, or serious injuries to Muslims by misleading
them or exposing them to injustice and oppression.

Contrary to the opinion of the rivals of Shi\`ism, *taqiyyah* does not
mean that the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* should form a secret association
purposed for demolition and destruction, nor does it mean that the
religion and its laws become such undiscovered secrets that those who
believe in them must never divulge them. This is definitely untrue,
because books and writings of the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* on various
subjects such as jurisprudence, laws of Islam, theology, and doctrines
are too many to be counted and much more than any other nation or sect.

Our doctrine of *taqiyyah* has been used by rivals of the *Imamiyyah
Shi\`ah* as another reason to kill them. It seems as if nothing will
quench their thirst but that swords find their way to the necks of the
Shi\`ah so as to annihilate them as was done during the rule of the
enemies of the Holy Prophet’s (s) Household, such as the Umayyad,
\`Abbasid, and Ottoman dynasties.

However, if those who vituperate the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* for their
belief and practice of *taqiyyah,* claiming that this practice is
illegal on grounds of religious laws, we must then invite them to listen
to the following points:

**First**: We follow our Imams (\`a) and abide by their instructions,
which represent the most excellent guidance to the truth. These Holy
Imams (\`a) have ordered us to believe in and practice *taqiyyah* and
imposed it upon us to practice it when necessity rules. Moreover, in the
view of our Holy Imams (\`a), *taqiyyah* is part of the religion, as
expressed by Imam al-Sadiq’s previously cited saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لاَ تَقِيَّةَ لَهُ لاَ دِينَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever has no *taqiyyah* has no belief.

**Second**: The legitimacy of *taqiyyah* is proclaimed in the Holy
Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...إِلَّا مَنْ أُكْرِهَ وَقَلْبُهُ مُطْمَئِنٌّ بِالْإِيمَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…not he who is compelled while his heart is at rest on account of his
faith.*** **(16/106)**

This holy verse was revealed to discuss the manner of\`Ammar ibn Yasir
who had to show disbelief in order to save himself from the enemies of
Islam.([^48])

On another occasion, the Holy Qur'an clarifies:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا أَنْ تَتَّقُوا مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…except that when you [have to] guard yourselves against them with
thorough guarding…*** **(3/28)(**[^49]**)**

On a third occasion, the Holy Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَجُلٌ مُؤْمِنٌ مِنْ آلِ فِرْعَوْنَ يَكْتُمُ إِيمَانَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And a believing man of Pharaoh's people who hid his faith...***
**(40/28)** **(40/28)**

[^1]: () Imamate (imamah) stands for belief in the Divinely commissioned
leadership of the Holy Twelve Imam and belief in their inerrancy,
immaculacy, and other affairs discussed in books dedicated to this
subject. [translator]

[^2]: () This tradition has been mentioned in both Sunni and Shi\`ite
reference books of hadith, yet with little difference in expression,
such as: al-Mahasin by al-Barqi (AH 274), 1:92, 154, 155, published by
Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah; Basa'ir al-Darajat al-Kubra by al-Saffar (AH
290), pp. 279, 529, 530; Qurb al-Isnad by al-Himyari al-Baghdadi (AH
300), pp. 351; al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:377, 378, 397, 2:20,
21, 8:146; al-Imamah wa’l-Tabsirah Min al-Hayrah by Ibn Babawayh
al-Qummi (AH 329), pp. 152; al-Ghaybah by al-Nu\`mani (AH 380), pp. 127,
130, 134, 135; \`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381),
1:130; Musnad Abi-Dawud al-Tayalisi (AH 204), pp. 259; Musnad Ahmad ibn
Hanbal (AH 241), 4:96; Musnad Abi-Ya\`li al-Mawsili (AH 307), 13:366, H.
7375; al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir by al-Tabarani (AH 360), 19:388; Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, the Mu\`tazilite (AH 656), 9:155,
13:242; Majma\` al-Zawa'id by al-Haythami (AH 807), 5:225, Section: bab
luzum al-jama\`ah wa’l-nahy \`an al-khuruj \`an al-ummah wa qitlihim
(Holding by the Congregation and Warning Against Separation from and
Fighting Against the Nation); Kanz al-\`Ummal by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (AH
974), 1:103, 208, H. 464, 1038, 1:65, H. 14863; Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah by
al-Qanaduzi al-Hanafi (AH 1249), 3:372, Section No. 91, H. 3.

[^3]: () Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) is reported to have said: لاَ
تَخْلُو الأرْضُ مِنْ قَائِمٍ للهِ بِحُجَّةٍ؛ إمَّا ظَاهِراً مَشْهُوراً
أوْ خَائِفاً مَغْمُوراً، لِئَلاَّ تَبْطُلَ حُجَجُ اللهِ وَبَيِّنَاتُهُ.
“The earth will never be empty of one who maintains Almighty Allah’s
argument (against His creatures); be he known and recognized (by people)
or alienated and unknown, so that Almighty Allah’s arguments and clear
proofs be not ineffective.” See Nahj al-Balaghah, with a commentary by
Muhammad \`Abduh, 4:37, Section: bab al-mukhtar min hikam amir
al-mu'minin (Selected Maxims of Amir al-Mu'minin). This maxim was also
cited within Imam \`Ali’s discourse addressed to Malik al-Ashtar, No.
147. See also Kamal al-Din wa-Tamam al-Ni\`mah by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH
381), pp. 294; Tuhaf al-\`Uqul by Ibn Shu\`bah al-Harrani (the seventh
century of Hjirah), pp. 17 (The English version of this book is entitled
‘Tuhaf al-\`Uqul: Masterpieces of the Intellects, translated by Badr
Shahin, Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 2001.); Khasa'is al-A'immah by
al-Sharif al-Murtadha (AH 406), pp. 106; al-Gharat by al-Thaqafi al-Kufi
(AH 283), 1:153; Manaqib Amir al-Mu'minin by al-Kufi (app. AH 300),
2:96; al-Hidayah al-Kubra by al-Khasibi (AH 334), pp. 362; Dustur
Ma\`alim al-Hikam wa-Ma'thur Makarim al-Shiyam by Ibn Salamah (AH 454),
pp. 84; Nuzhat al-Nazir wa-Tanbih al-Khatir by al-Halwani (the fifth
century of Hijrah), pp. 57; Tarikh Madinat Dimashq by Ibn \`Asakir (AH
571), 14:18, 5:253, 254; Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah by al-Qanaduzi al-Hanafi
(AH 1294), 1:89, H. 34. Many other reference books of traditions have
recorded this maxim, which has been described by Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani
as being one of the most authentic maxims. See Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari by Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani (AH 852), 6:359.

[^4]: () This indicates the Holy Prophet’s absence from view in the Cave
Hara' where he received the first Divine revelation. [translator]

[^5]: () This also indicates his confinement to the Col of Abu-Talib for
a few years after the social boycott imposed upon him and his relatives
by the polytheists of the Quraysh. [translator]

[^6]: () This poetic verse has been composed by Abu-Nuwas, one of the
famous Arab poets. See Mukhtasar al-Ma\`ani by al-Taftazani (AH 792),
pp. 306.

[^7]: () This supplication is part of the holy verse that reads:
فَتَعَالَى اللَّهُ الْمَلِكُ الْحَقُّ ۗ وَلَا تَعْجَلْ بِالْقُرْآنِ مِنْ
قَبْلِ أَنْ يُقْضَىٰ إِلَيْكَ وَحْيُهُ ۖ وَقُلْ رَبِّ زِدْنِي عِلْمًا
“Supremely exalted is therefore Allah, the King, the Truth. And do not
make haste with the Qur'an before its revelation is made complete to
you. And say, ‘O my Lord! Increase me in knowledge.’” (20/114)

[^8]: () It is an accepted fact that the Holy Imam of the Ahl al-Bayt
('a) received perfect knowledge in essence; i.e. without intervention of
a mentor or a teacher. This fact was even declared by the tyrant Yazid
ibn Mu\`awiyah during the following event: After Yazid had killed Imam
al-Husayn ibn \`Ali ('a)—the delight of the Holy Prophet’s (s) eyes—Imam
\`Ali ibn al-Husayn (Zayn al-\`Abidin ('a)) was made captive. He had
been taken from the battlefield, at Karbala', and led to Damascus, the
capital of Yazid. Imam Zayn al-\`Abidin ('a) asked Yazid to allow him to
ascend a pulpit in order to deliver a speech, saying, “Yazid! Allow me
to ascend these pieces of wood and utter a few words that will bring
about Almighty Allah’s pleasure and (Divine) reward for these
attendants.” In the beginning, Yazid refused, but the attendants urged
him to do so, saying, “Amir al-Mu'minin! Allow him to ascend the pulpit
so that we can hear something new from him.” Yazid replied, “If he
ascends the pulpit (and says something), he will not leave it before
begetting scandals for me and for the family of Abu-Sufyan!” One of the
attendants said, “Amir al-Mu'minin! What can such a boy do? Seemingly,
he masters nothing!” Yazid replied, “He is from the Household whose
members have been fed with knowledge without intervention!” However, the
attendants insisted upon Yazid until they compelled him to allow the
Imam to deliver a speech. The Imam ('a) thus ascended the pulpit,
started his speech with words of praise and thanks to Almighty Allah,
and then delivered a speech that was so soul-stirring that all the
attendants could not help weeping. References: Bihar al-Anwar by
al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 45:138; Lawa\`ij al-Ashjan fi Maqtal al-Husayn by
Muhsin al-Amin (AH 1371), pp. 233. A similar narration has been recorded
in al-Futuh by Ibn A\`tham al-Kufi (AH 314), 5:132-133 and Maqtal
al-Husayn by al-Khawarizmi (AH 568), 2:69-71.

[^9]: () Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq ('a) is reported to have said: إنَّ اللهَ
لاَ يَجْعَلُ حُجَّةً فِي أرْضِهِ يُسْألُ عَنْ شَيْءٍ فَيَقُولُ: ’لاَ
أدْرِي!‘ “As He establishes a hujjah (one maintaining Almighty Allah’s
pleas against His creatures) on His lands, Almighty Allah never makes
him answer any question with, ‘I do not know’.” This hadith is reported
in the following reference books: al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:227,
Section: (bab) anna al-a'immata \`indahum jami\`u al-kutubi allati
nazalat min \`indi allahi (The Holy Imam Hold All the Divinely Revealed
Books), H. 1; al-Imamah wa’l-Tabsirah by Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi (AH 329),
pp. 139, H. 159; al-Tawhid by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 275, H. 1,
Section: bab al-raddu \`ala alladhina qalu inna allaha thalithu
thalathatin (Refutation of Those Who Claimed Allah Being One of Three
Gods); al-Fusul al-Muhimmah fi Usul al-A'immah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH
1104), 1:490, Section No. 7, H. 19/691. Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq ('a) is
also reported to have said: إنَّ الأرْضَ لاَ تُتْرَكُ إلاَّ بِعَالِمٍ؛
يَحْتَاجُ النَّاسُ إلَيْهِ وَلاَ يَحْتَاجُ إلَى النَّاسِ، يَعْلَمُ
الحَلاَلَ وَالحَرَامَ. “Verily, the earth shall never be left without a
knowledgeable person whom people need but he needs none, since he has
full acquaintance with what is lawful and what is not.” This hadith is
reported in the following reference books: Al-Mahasin by al-Barqi (AH
274), 1: 366/794, H. 196, Chapter: kitab masabih al-zulam (Lanterns of
Glooms), Section: bab la takhlu al-ardhu min \`alim (The Earth Cannot Be
Devoid Of A Knowledgeable Person); published by the Ahl al-Bayt ('a)
World Assembly; Basa'ir al-Darajat by al-Saffar (AH 290), pp. 156, H. 4,
Section: bab ma \`inda al-a'immati min kutub al-awwalin (The Books Of
The Ancient Generations That Are Held By The Holy Imam ('a)). A similar
hadith has been reported in the following reference books: Basa'ir
al-Darajat by al-Saffar (AH 290), pp. 347, H. 4, Section: bab fi
al-a'immatu warithu al’\`ilma min rasuli allahi (The Holy Imam: The
Inheritors of Knowledge From the Messenger of Allah); pp. 505, H. 8,
Section: bab al-ardhu la takhlu min al-hujjatu wa hum al-a'immatu (The
Earth Cannot be Devoid of Maintainers of Allah’s Plea; Those Are The
Holy Imam); Kamal al-Din wa-Tamam al-Ni\`mah by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH
381), pp. 223, H. 15, Section: bab ittisal al-wasiyyah min ladun adam wa
anna al-ardha la takhlu min hujjati allahi (Attachment of Successorship
Since Adam And The Earth Cannot be Devoid of a Maintainer of Allah’s
Plea).

[^10]: () Explaining the holy verse: يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ “O
you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in
authority from among you.” (4/59) Imam Muhammad al-Baqir ('a) is
reported to have said: الأئِمَّةُ مِنْ وُلْدِ عَلِيٍّ وَفَاطِمَةَ إلَى
أنْ تَقُومَ السَّاعَةُ. “The Imam are from the descendants of \`Ali and
Fatimah until the Hour (of Resurrection) shall come.” See al-Imamah
wa’l-Tabsirah by Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi (AH 329), pp. 133, H. 145. See
also al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:276, H. 1, Section: (bab) anna
al-imama ya\`rifu al-imama alladhi yakunu min ba\`dih (An Imam Knows The
Imam To Succeed Him); \`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH
381), 1:139, Section: (bab) ma katabahu al-ridha lil-ma'mun fi mahdh
al-islam wa shara'i\` al-din (Imam al-Ridha’s Epistle To al-Ma'mun
Concerning The Pure Islam and The Laws Of The Religion), H.14. When
Abu-Basir asked him about the exegesis of the aforementioned holy verse,
Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq ('a) answered: نَزَلَتْ فِي عَلِيِّ بْنِ أبِي
طَالِبٍ وَالحَسَنِ وَالحُسَيْنِ. “This verse was revealed about \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn.” Abu-Basir asked, “People may
ask why the names of \`Ali and his Household were not mentioned openly
in the Book of Allah (i.e. the Holy Qur'an)!” The Imam ('a) taught:
قُولُوا لَهُمْ: إنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ  نَزَلَتْ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلاَةُ وَلَمْ
يُسَمِّ اللهُ لَهُمْ ثَلاَثاً وَلاَ أرْبَعاً حَتَّى كَانَ رَسُولُ اللهِ
 هُوَ الَّذِي فَسَّرَ ذَلِكَ. وَنَزَلَتْ عَلَيْهِ الزَّكَاةُ وَلَمْ
يُسَمِّ لَهُمْ مِنْ كُلِّ أرْبَعِينَ دِرْهَماً دِرْهَمٌ… “You may answer
those as follows: Prayer was revealed to the Messenger of Allah without
mentioning its details and method (as how many units each prayer should
contain); therefore, it was the Messenger of Allah who spelled out its
details. Similarly, the poor-rate (zakat) was revealed to the Messenger
of Allah without mentioning as how much the levy of each item should
be…” See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:286, Section: bab ma nassa
allahu \`azza wa jalla wa rasuluhu \`ala al-a'immati wahidan fa-wahidan
(Texts of Almighty Allah and His Apostle Concerning the Nomination of
Each Imam), H. 1. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir ('a), explaining the holy
verse, وَلَوْ رَدُّوهُ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ وَإِلَىٰ أُولِي الْأَمْرِ
مِنْهُمْ لَعَلِمَهُ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَنْبِطُونَهُ مِنْهُمْ ۗ “And if they
had referred it to the Messenger and to those in authority among them,
those among them who can search out the knowledge of it would have known
it. (4/83)” (Imam al-Baqir) is reported to have said: الأئِمَّةُ مِنْ
أهْلِ بَيْتِ رَسُولِ اللهِ  جَعَلَهُمُ اللهُ أهْلَ العِلْمِ الَّذِينَ
يَسْتَنْبِطُونَهُ، ثُمَّ أوْجَبَ طَاعَتَهُمْ فَقَالَ: أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ
وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ The Imam from the
Household of Allah’s Messengers—Almighty Allah has made them bearers of
knowledge who can think out the matters. Then, Almighty Allah has deemed
it obligatory to obey them. He has thus said, “Obey Allah and obey the
Messenger and those in authority from among you. (4/59)” See Da\`a'im
al-Islam by al-Qadhi (the judge) al-Nu\`man al-Maghribi (AH 363), 1:24.
The dear reader is advised to refer to any of the reference books of
traditions, which are full of such narrations.

[^11]: () The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said: اَلنُّجُومُ
أَمَانٌ لأِهْلِ السَّمَاءِ، وَأَهْلُ بَيْتِي أَمَانٌ لأُمَّتِي. “The
stars protect the inhabitants of the heavens, and my Household (Ahl
al-Bayt) protects my nation.” See \`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha by Shaykh
al-Saduq (AH 381), 1:30, Section: (bab) fi ma ja'a \`an al-ridha min
al-akhbar al-majmu\`ah (Miscellaneous Narrations Reported From Imam
al-Ridha), H. 14. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir ('a) is also reported to have
quoted the Holy Prophet (s) as saying: النُّجُومُ أمَانٌ لأهْلِ
السَّمَاءِ، وَأهْلُ بَيْتِي أمَانٌ لأهْلِ الأرْضِ؛ فَإذَا ذَهَبَتِ
النُّجُومُ أتَى أهْلَ السَّمَاءِ مَا يَكْرَهُونَ، وَإذَا ذَهَبَ أهْلُ
بَيْتِي أتَى أهْلَ الأرْضِ مَا يَكْرَهُونَ. “The stars protect the
inhabitants of the heavens, and the members of my Household protect the
inhabitants of the earth. If stars disappear, the inhabitants of the
heavens will suffer unpleasant matters; and if the members of my
Household disappear, the inhabitants of the earth will suffer unpleasant
matters.” See \`Ilal al-Shara'i\` by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), 1:123.
This hadith can be found, yet in different forms, in many reliable
reference books of Sunni and Shi\`ite authors, some of which are as
follows: al-Amali by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 253, 738; Kifayat
al-Athar fi’l-Nassi \`Ala al-A'immati al-Ithnay \`Ashar by al-Khazzaz
al-Qummi al-Razi (AH 400), pp. 29, 210; Rawdhat al-Wa\`izin by Ibn
al-Fattal al-Naysaburi (AH 508), pp. 199; Manaqib al-Imam Amir
al-Mu'minin by al-Kufi al-Qadhi (app. AH 300), 2:132, 142, 144, 174,
175; al-Mustadrak \`Ala al-Sahihayn by al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405),
2:448, 149, 457; Dhakha'ir al-\`Uqba fi Manaqib Dhawi’l-Qurba by
al-Tabari (AH 694), pp. 17; Nuzum Durar al-Simtayn by al-Zarandi
al-Hanafi al-Madani (AH 750), pp. 234; al-Jami\` al-Saghir by al-Suyuti
(AH 911), 2:680, H. 9313; Kanz al-\`Ummal by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (AH
974), 12:96, 101, 102, H. 34155, 34188, 34189, 34190; al-Sawa\`iq
al-Muhriqah by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami (AH 974), pp. 152; Kashf al-Khafa'
by al-\`Ajluni al-Jarrahi (AH 1162), 2:327.

[^12]: () This hadith is recorded in the following reference books:
Da\`a'im al-Islam by al-Qadhi al-Nu\`man al-Maghribi (AH 363), 1:28, 80;
\`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), 1:30; al-Amali by
Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 342; Kamal al-Din wa-Tamam al-Ni\`mah by
Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 241; Tuhaf al-\`Uqul by Ibn Shu\`bah
al-Harrani (the fourth century of Hijrah), pp. 113; Khasa'is al-A'immah
by al-Sharif al-Radhi (AH 406), pp. 77; al-Mu\`jam al-Saghir by
al-Tabarani (AH 360), 1:139-140; al-Mustadrak \`Ala al-Sahihayn by
al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 2:343, 3:151; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by
Ibn Abi’l-Hadid al-Mu\`tazili (AH 656), 1:218; Majma\` al-Zawa'id by
al-Haythami (AH 807), 9:168; al-Jami\` al-Saghir by al-Suyuti (AH 911),
1:373, 2:532, H. 2442, 8162; Kanz al-\`Ummal by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (AH
974), 12: 94, 95, 98, H. 34144, 34151, 34169, 34170; al-Sawa\`iq
al-Muhriqah by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami (AH 974), pp. 152. The hadith can
also be found in other reference books of hadith.

[^13]: () This is an indication to the following holy verse: إِنَّمَا
يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا Allah only desires to keep away impurity from
you, O people of the House, and to purify you a thorough purifying.
(33/33) See the following reference books: al-«dhah by Ibn Shadhan
al-Azdi al-Naysaburi (AH 260), pp. 170; al-Gharat by al-Thaqafi al-Kufi
(AH 283), 1:199; Manaqib Amir al-Mu'minin by al-Kufi al-Qadhi (app. AH
300), 1:157, 2:132, 152, 161, 505; al-Mustarshid fi Imamat Amir
al-Mu'minin by al-Tabari (the Imamite) (the early years of the fourth
century of Hijrah), pp. 598, 685; al-Amali by Shaykh al-Tusi (AH 460),
pp. 264; Tathbit al-Imamah by al-Hadi al-Zaydi al-Yamani (AH 298), pp.
34; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal (AH 241), 3:259, 4:107, 258, 6:292, 298,
304; Sunan al-Tirmidhi (AH 279), 5:31, 328, 361, H. 3258, 3875, 3966;
Kitab al-Sunnah by \`Amr ibn Abi-\`Asim al-Aahhak (AH 287), pp. 589;
al-Sunan al-Kubra by al-Nassa'i (AH 303), 5:113, H. 8409; Maqatil
al-Talibiyyin by al-Isfahani (AH 356), pp. 33; al-Mustadrak \`Ala
al-Sahihayn by al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 3:172; Shawahid al-Tanzil
li-Qawa\`id al-Tafdhil by al-Hakim al-Hasakani (the fifth century of
Hijrah), 2:103; al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqah by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami (AH
974), pp. 143. For more details, refer to the following books: Ayat
al-Tathir (Verse of Purification) by Muhammad Mahdi al-Asifi
(contemporary), Qum: The Ahl al-Bayt ('a) World Assembly, First Edition,
AH 1417/AD 1996. Ayat al-Tathir Ru'yatun Mubtakarah (A Unique Prospect
On The Verse of Purification) by al-Fadhil al-Lankarani & Shihab al-Din
al-Ishraqi, First Edition, AH 1416/ AD 1995. Ayat al-Tathir: Dirasatun
fi’l-Madalil wa’l-Ahdaf (Verse of Purification: A Survey of Denotations
and Objectives) by \`Abd al-Zahra' \`Uthman Muhammad, First Edition, AH
1414. Ma\`a al-Doctor al-Salus fi Ayat al-Tathir (With Dr. al-Salus on
the Verse of Purification) –No. 16 in the Series of \`Ala Ma'idat
al-\`Aqidah (On the Table of Doctrine) by \`Ali al-Husayni al-Milani.
The reader is also advised to see the major reference books of tafsir
(exegesis of the Holy Qur'an) concerning this holy Verse of Purification
(33:33) as well as the major reference books of Islamic heritage.

[^14]: () At the end of Ibn Hanzalah’s Accepted Narration (maqbulah),
Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq ('a) is reported to have said: الرَّادُّ عَلَيْنَا
رَادٌّ عَلَى اللهِ، وَهُوَ عَلَى حَدِّ الشِّرْكِ بِاللهِ. … To reject
our words is to reject the Words of Almighty Allah, which is as
unacceptable as ascribing partners unto Him. See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni
(AH 329), 1:76, H. 10, Section: bab ikhtilaf al-hadith (Discrepancy in
Narration), 7:412, H. 5, Section: (bab) karahiyyat al-Irtifa\` ila
Qudhat al-Jawr (Discommendation of Submitting before an Unjust Judge);
al-Kafi fi’l-Fiqh by al-Halabi (AH 447), pp. 425; Tahdhib al-Ahkam by
Shaykh al-Tusi (AH 460), 6:218, H. 6, Section: bab man ilayhi al-hukm wa
aqsam al-qudhat wal-muftin (The Authorized for Judgment and the Kinds of
Judges and Muftis), Chapter: (kitab) al-qadhaya wa’l-ahkam (Issues and
Laws); al-Fusul al-Muhimmah fi Usul al-A'immah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH
1104), 1: 538, H. 1, Section No. 20: (bab) wujub al-ruju\` ila ruwat
al-hadith min al-shi\`ah fi ma rawawhu min al-ahkam (The Obligation of
Reference to the Shi\`ite Narrators of Hadith in Laws).

[^15]: () The Arabic word ‘thaqalayn’ is the dual form of the word
‘thaqal’, which, in Arabic, means luggage that is burdened on a
riding-animal. The word has been used in the Holy Qur'an to denote men
and jinn: سَنَفْرُغُ لَكُمْ أَيُّهَ الثَّقَلَانِ فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ
رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ We shall dispose of you, O ye two [weighty]
dependents: man and jinn. (55/31) Men and jinn are called ‘thaqalan’
because they are considered the two poles of the earth, as if they have
burdened it. The Holy Prophet (s), in this famous hadith, has likened
the Holy Qur'an and the Household to two weighty things, because
religion depends upon them in its validity and it lives long in the same
way as the earth lives as long as men and jinn are existent in it.
Al-Zamakhshari (AH 538), in his book of al-Fa'iq fi Gharib al-Hadith,
pp. 150, writes down, “He (i.e. the Holy Prophet (s)) has called these
two (i.e. the Holy Qur'an and the Household) weighty things, because to
abide by them and to act upon them is a weighty (i.e. burdensome) thing.
Each important, precious thing can be called ‘thaqal (weighty)’.
Therefore, he has called them ‘thaqalayn’ owing to their momentous value
and their stately standing.” See also al-Nihayah fi Gharib al-Hadith
wa’l-Athar by Ibn al-Athir al-Jawzi (AH 606), 1:216.

[^16]: () The Arabic word ‘\`itrah’ stands for one’s clan. Originally,
it is the name of a plant that grows in different phyla. See al-Fa'iq fi
Gharib al-Hadith, pp. 150. In one of his sermons, Imam \`Ali ('a) says:
وَكَيْفَ تَعْمَهُونَ وَبَيْنَكُمْ عِتْرَةُ نَبِيِّكُمْ؟ وَهُمْ أزِمَّةُ
الحَقِّ وَأعْلاَمُ الدِّينِ وَألسِنَةُ الصِّدْقِ! فَأنْزِلُوهُمْ
بِأحْسَنِ مَنَازِلِ القُرْآنِ، وَرِدُوهُمْ وُرُودَ الهِيمِ العِطَاشِ.
“…How long shall there be bewilderment and why? Your prophet’s family
(\`itrah), the definite rulers, speakers of honesty and truth, leaders
of religion, are among you: place them up on the best positions, the
Qur'anic positions and turn to them like thirsty camels going to a
watering place.” (Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon No. 87)” Commenting on this
section of the sermon, Ibn Abi’l-Hadid says, “The actual \`Itrah of the
Prophet (s) is his nearest household and progeny. Inaccurate is the
claim of those who say that his \`Itrah is his kinsfolk including those
remote in lineage. As for Abu-Bakr’s saying on the Day of Saqifah (or
after that day), “We are the \`Itrah of Allah’s Messenger (s) and his
egg that brought him,” he has used this expression metaphorically,
because the people of Quraysh can be the \`Itrah of the Prophet (s) in
comparison with other tribes. However, they are not the Prophet’s (s)
\`Itrah in reality. Similar to this, a descendant of \`Adnan (one of the
two ancestors of the Arabs) vies in glory with a descendant of Qahtan
(the other ancestor of the Arabs) saying, “I am the cousin of Allah’s
Messenger (s).” This does not mean that the descendants of \`Adnan are
actual cousins of the Holy Prophet (s); rather, they are so in
comparison with the descendants of Qahtan. Hence, this statement has
been used metaphorically and after the deletion of the many additions of
kinships, such as the son of the cousin of the forefather, and the like.
If we thus consider the deletion of such additions, Abu-Bakr’s intention
might have been true, since one of his forefathers was one day within
the \`Itrah of one of the Holy Prophet’s (s) forefathers. However, the
Holy Prophet (s) declared who the members of his \`Itrah were. He said:
إنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثَّقَلَيْنِ… وَعِتْرَتِي أهْلَ بَيْتِي. “I am
leaving among you the two weighty things… my \`Itrah; my Household.” On
another occasion, he (s) declared who the members of his Household were.
As regarding the following holy verse: إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ
لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ
تَطْهِيرًا Allah's wish is but to remove impurity from you, O Folk of
the Household, and cleanse you with a thorough cleansing. (33/33) When
this verse was revealed to him, the Holy Prophet (s) covered them (i.e.
Imam \`Ali, Lady Fatimah, Imam al-Hasan, and Imam al-Husayn ('a)) with a
cloak and said: اَللَّهُمَّ هَؤلاَءِ أهْلُ بَيْتِي، فَأذْهِبْ عَنْهُمُ
الرِّجْسَ. “O Allah: These are the Folk of my Household; so, (please do)
remove all impurity from them.” One may ask as whom Imam \`Ali ('a)
meant by the aforementioned section of his speech. The answer is that he
meant his two sons and himself. In fact, the Imam ('a) originally meant
himself, because his two sons followed him and their relation to him
during his existence was similar to the relation of stars to the rising
sun. Confirming this fact, the Holy Prophet (s) said: وَأبُوكُمَا خَيْرٌ
مِنْكُمَا. “Your father is preferred to (both of) you.” (Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi’l-Hadid al-Mu\`tazili (AH 656), 6:373-6) Imam
\`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) was once asked to identify the \`Itrah as
one of the two weighty things. He answered: (العِتْرَةُ) أنَا وَالحَسَنُ
وَالحُسَيْنُ وَالأئِمَّةُ التِّسْعَةُ مِنْ وُلْدِ الحُسَيْنِ؛
تَاسِعُهُمْ مَهْدِيُّهُمْ وَقَائِمُهُمْ، لاَ يُفَارِقُونَ كِتَابَ اللهِ
وَلاَ يُفَارِقُهُمْ حَتَّى يَرِدُوا عَلَى رَسُولِ اللهِ حَوْضَهُ. “The
\`Itrah stands for me, al-Hasan, al-Husayn ('a), and the nine Imam from
al-Husayn’s offspring. The ninth of them is their Mahdi, the Riser. They
shall neither leave the Book of Allah nor shall the Book of Allah leave
them until they all join Allah’s Messenger at the Pond.” See \`Uyun
Akhbar al-Ridha by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), 2:60, H. 25, Section: bab
al-nusus \`ala al-ridha bil-imamati fi jumlati al-a'immati al-ithnay
\`ashar (Proofs Of The Divine Leadership Of Al-Ridha Among The Twelve
Imam ('a)).

[^17]: () Hadith al-Thaqalayn (Tradition of the Two Weighty Things) is
one of the uninterruptedly reported traditions by both Sunni and
Shi\`ite reporters. Owing to the significance of this hadith, writers
have dedicated sections and chapters of their books to discussing it.
Other scholars have used this hadith as the title of their works, such
as the following books: Hadith al-Thaqalayn by Muhammad Qiwam al-Din
al-Qummi al-Washnawi; Cairo: Dar al-Taqrib Bayna al-Madhahib
al-Islamiyyah. Hadith al-Thaqalayn Tawaturuhu Fiqhuhu by \`Ali
al-Husayni al-Milani; Qum: The Author, First Edition, AH 1413. Muhammad
wa-Hadith al-Thaqalayn by Najm al-Din al-Sharif al-\`Askari (AH 1390);
Najaf: al-Adab Press; Fourth Edition. For further benefit, let us refer
to the following reference books that have cited the Hadith
al-Thaqalayn: Basa'ir al-Darajat al-Kubra by al-Saffar (AH 290), pp.
432-4, Section No. 17: (bab) fi qawli rasuli allahi inni tarikun fikum
al-thaqalayni kitaba allahi wa-ahla bayti (The Holy Prophet’s Saying: I
am leaving with you the two weighty things; the Book of Allah and my
Household); al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:294, 2:415; al-Imamah
wa’l-Tabsirah by Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi (AH 329), pp. 149-150; Da\`a'im
al-Islam by al-Qadhi al-Nu\`man al-Maghribi (AH 363), 1:28; Kitab
al-Ghaybah by al-Nu\`mani (AH 380), pp. 43, 73; al-Amali by Shaykh
al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 500, H. 686/16, Session (majlis) No. 843/1,
Session No. 79; al-Khisal by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 65, 67; Kitab
al-Irshad by Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 413), 1:176, 233 (The English version
of this book is entitled Kitab al-Irshad, translated by Dr. Howard, Qum:
Ansariyan Publications); al-Amali by Shaykh al-Tusi (AH 460), pp. 255,
548; Rawdhat al-Wa\`izin by al-Fattal al-Naysaburi (AH 508), pp. 273;
al-Ihtijaj by al-Tabrisi (AH 560), 1:75, 191, 221, 391, 407, 2:47, 252;
Dhakha'ir al-\`Uqba fi Manaqib Dhawi’l-Qurba by al-Tabari (AH 694), pp.
16; Musnad Ibn Ju\`d (AH 230), pp. 397; al-Musannaf by Ibn Shaybah
al-Kufi (AH 235), 7:176, Section No. 27, H. 5, 7:418; Musnad Ahmad ibn
Hanbal (AH 241), 3:14, 17, 26, 59, 4:367, 371, 5:182, 190; al-Muntakhab
min Musnad \`Abd ibn Humayd (AH 249), pp. 114, H. 265; Sunan al-Darimi
(AH 255), 2:432; Ma Ruwiya fi’l-Hawdhi wa’l-Kawthar by Ibn Mukhallad
al-Qurtubi (AH 276), pp. 88; Kitab al-Sunnah by \`Amr ibn Abi-\`Asim
al-Aahhak (AH 287), pp. 336-337, H. 754, pp. 629, H. 1551, 1552, 1553,
pp. 630, H. 1554, 1555; al-Sunan al-Kubra by al-Nassa'i (AH 303), 5:45,
H. 8148, pp. 51, H. 8175, pp. 130, H. 8464; Khasa'is Amir al-Mu'minin by
al-Nassa'i (AH 303), pp. 93; Musnad Abi-Ya\`la al-Mawsili (AH 307),
2:297, H. 1021, pp. 303, H. 1027, pp. 376, H. 1140; Sahih Ibn Khuzaymah
(AH 311), pp. 63; al-Mu\`jam al-Saghir by al-Tabarani (AH 360), 1:131,
135, 3:374; al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat by al-Tabarani (AH 360), 4:33;
al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir by al-Tabarani (AH 360), 3: 65, 66, 67, 180, H.
2678, 2679, 2780, 2681, 2683, 3052, 5:153, 154, 166, 167, 170, 182, 183,
186, H. 4921, 4922, 4923, 4969, 4970; al-Mustadrak \`Ala al-Sahihayn by
al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 3:109, 148; al-Sunan al-Kubra by
al-Bayhaqi (AH 458), 7:30, 10: 114; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn
Abi’l-Hadid al-Mu\`tazili (AH 656), 9:133; Nuzum Durar al-Simtayn by
al-Zarandi al-Hanafi (AH 750), pp. 233; Majma\` al-Zawa'id by
al-Haythami (AH 807), 9:163, 164, 10:363; Kanz al-\`Ummal by al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi (AH 975), 1:185, 186, 187, 188, 189, H. 943, 944, 945, 946,
947, 949, 950, 951, 952, 953, 957, 958, 5:289-290, H. 12911, 13:104, H.
36340, 13:641, H. 37620, 14:435, H. 39192.

[^18]: () It has been reported that Imam al-Sadiq ('a), once, asked
Abu-Ja\`far al-Ahwal, “How do the scholars of al-Basrah explain this
verse: ‘Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I do not ask of a wage for this
except love of my kinsfolk’?” He answered, “May Allah accept me as
ransom for you! They say that it includes the relatives of Allah’s
Messenger (s).” The Imam ('a) said: كَذَبوا! إنَّمَا نَزَلَتْ فِينَا
خَاصَّةً: فِي أهْلِ البَيْتِ؛ فِي عَلِيٍّ وَفَاطِمَةَ وَالحَسَنِ
وَالحُسَيْنِ: أصْحَابِ الكِسَاءِ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ. “Liars are they.
It was revealed exclusively for us—the Ahl al-Bayt; namely, \`Ali,
Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn ('a); the Group of the Cloak.” See
al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 8:93. \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas is reported
to have recounted that when the verse involved was revealed, the Holy
Prophet (s) was asked, “Who are your kinsfolk the love for whom has
become obligatory upon us?” He (s) replied, “They are \`Ali, Fatimah,
and their two sons ('a).” See Majma\` al-Zawa'id by al-Haythami (AH
807), 7:103; al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir by al-Tabarani (AH 360), 3:47, H. 2641,
11:351; Faydh al-Qadir Sharh al-Jami\` al-Saghir by al-Mannawi (AH
1331), 1:283, H. 302.

[^19]: () The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said to Imam \`Ali
('a): أبْشِرْ يَا عَلِيُّ! فَإنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ قَدْ عَهِدَ إلَيَّ
أنَّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّكَ إلاَّ مُؤمِنٌ وَلا يُبْغِضُكَ إلاَّ مُنَافِقٌ. “O
\`Ali: Here are good tidings! Almighty Allah has promised me that none
loves you save a believer and none hates you save a hypocrite.”
Reference: al-Amali by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 197. It has been
also reported that the Holy Prophet (s) said to Imam \`Ali ('a): لاَ
يُحِبُّكَ إلاَّ مُؤمِنٌ وَلا يُبْغِضُكَ إلاَّ مُنَافِقٌ أوْ وِلْدُ
زَنِيَّةٍ أوْ حَمَلَتْهُ أمُّهُ وَهِيَ طَامِثٌ. “He who loves you is
certainly a true believer, but he who hates you is nothing but a
hypocrite, or an illegitimate son, or his mother conceived him while she
was menstruous.” Reference: \`Ilal al-Shara'i\` by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH
381), 1:145, H. 12, Section No. 120: bab fi anna \`illata mahabbati ahl
al-bayti tib al-wiladati (Legitimacy of Birth; A Reason Behind The Love
For the Ahl al-Bayt); Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH
1104), 2:319, H. 2243/8, Section No. 24. Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin
('a) is also reported as saying: وَاللهِ، إنَّهُ مِمَّا عَهِدَ إلَيَّ
رَسُولُ اللهِ أنَّهُ لاَ يُبْغِضُنِي إلاَّ مُنَافِقٌ وَلاَ يُحِبُّنِي
إلاَّ مُؤمِنٌ. “I swear by Allah: One of the commandments of Allah’s
Messenger to me was that none would hate me save a hypocrite, and none
would love me save a true believer.” Reference: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal
(AH 241), 1:84; \`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381),
1:65, H. 235. The Holy Prophet (s) is also reported to have said: مَنْ
أبْغَضَ أهْلَ البَيْتِ فَهُوَ مُنَافِقٌ. “He who hates the Ahl al-Bayt
must be a hypocrite.” لاَ يُحِبُّنَا أهْلَ البَيْتِ إلاَّ مُؤمِنٌ
تَقِيٌّ، وَلا يُبْغِضُنَا إلاَّ مُنَافِقٌ شَقِيٌّ. “None loves us—the
Ahl al-Bayt—save a pious believer; and none hates us save a wretched
hypocrite.” Reference: Dhakha'ir al-\`Uqba fi Manaqib Dhawi’l-Qurba by
Ahmad ibn \`Abdullah al-Tabari (AH 694), pp. 18. Narrations of the same
purport have been recorded in various reference books, such as:
al-Gharat by Ibrahim al-Thaqafi al-Kufi (AH 283), 2:520, 946; Manaqib
Amir al-Mu'minin by Muhammad al-Kufi al-Qadhi (app. AH 300), 2:469, H.
963, 2:478, H. 978, Section: bab fi man ahabba \`aliyyan wa fi man
abghadhahu (Those Who Love \`Ali and Those Who Hate Him); al-Khisal by
Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 577, 633; al-Amali by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH
381), pp. 135, H. 131/1, Session No. 18, 197, H.207/1, Session No. 28,
525, H.708/4, Session No. 75; Kifayat al-Athar by al-Khazzaz al-Qummi
(AH 400), pp. 31, 110; Kitab al-Irshad by Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 413),
1:40; al-Amali by Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 413), pp. 62, 308; al-Amali by
Shaykh al-Tusi (AH 460), pp. 78, H.113/22, Session No. 3, 206, H.353/3,
Session No. 8, 258, H.465/3, Session No. 10, 306, H.613/60, Session No.
11, 472, the last hadith of Session No. 16; Rawdhat al-Wa\`izin by Ibn
al-Fattal al-Naysaburi (AH 508), pp. 124; al-Ihtijaj by al-Tabrisi (AH
560), 1:141, 243; al-Thaqib fi’l-Manaqib by Ibn Hamzah al-Tusi (AH 560),
pp. 123, Section Two, Chapter One, H. 9, 10, 11, 236, H.202/3; Musnad
al-Himyari (AH 219), 1:31, H. 58; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal (AH 241),
1:59, 128; Kitab al-«man by Muhammad al-\`Adani (AH 243), pp. 80-81;
Sahih Muslim (AH 261), 1:60; Sunan Ibn Majah (AH 275), 1:42, H.114;
Sunan al-Tirmidhi (AH 279), 5:306, H. 3819/94; Kitab al-Sunnah by \`Amr
ibn Abi-\`Asim al-Aahhak (AH 287), pp. 584, H.1325; al-Sunan al-Kubra by
al-Nassa'i (AH 303), 5:47, 137, H.8153, 8485, 8486, 8487, 6:534, 535,
H.11749, 11753; Majma\` al-Zawa'id by al-Haythami (AH 807), 9:133;
al-Dibaj \`Ala Sahih Muslim by al-Suyuti (AH 911), 1:93, H.131.

[^20]: () The Holy Prophet (s) is reported as saying: إنَّ لِكُلِّ بَنِي
أبٍ عُصْبَةً يَنْتَمُونَ إلَيْهَا إلاَّ وِلْدَ فَاطِمَةَ، فَأنَا
وَلِيُّهُمْ، وَأنَا عُصْبَتُهُمْ، وَهُمْ عِتْرَتِي، خُلِقُوا مِنْ
طِينَتِي. وَيْلٌ لِلمُكَذِّبِينَ بِفَضْلِهِمْ! مَنْ أحَبَّهُمْ أحَبَّهُ
اللهُ، وَمَنْ أبْغَضَهُمْ أبْغَضَهُ اللهُ. “The descendants of all
persons have agnation to which they belong, except the descendants of
Fatimah. I am their guardian and I am their agnation. They are my
progeny; they were created from the same clay from which I was created.
Woe be to those who deny their excellences. Whoever loves them shall be
loved by Almighty Allah and whoever hates them shall be hated by Him.”
Reference: Kanz al-\`Ummal by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (AH 975), 12:98, 103,
104, 116, H.34168, 34194, 34198… The Holy Prophet (s) is also reported
to have said: أنَا سَيِّدُ وِلْدِ آدَمَ، وَأنْتَ يَا عَلِيُّ
وَالأئِمَّةُ مِنْ بَعْدِكَ سَادَةُ أمَّتِي. مَنْ أحَبَّنَا فَقَدْ أحَبَّ
اللهَ، وَمَنْ أبْغَضَنَا فَقَدْ أبْغَضَ اللهَ، وَمَنْ وَالاَنَا فَقَدْ
وَالَى اللهَ، وَمَنْ عَادَانَا فَقَدْ عَادَى اللهَ، وَمَنْ أطَاعَنَا
فَقَدْ أطَاعَ اللهَ، وَمَنْ عَصَانَا فَقَدْ عَصَى اللهَ. “I am the
master of Adam’s descendants. O \`Ali: you and the Imam who shall
succeed you are the masters of my nation. He who loves us has in fact
loved Almighty Allah, and he who hates us has in fact hated Almighty
Allah, and he who acts faithfully to us has in fact acted faithfully to
Almighty Allah, and he who shows enmity towards us has in fact shown
enmity towards Almighty Allah, and he who obeys us has in fact obeyed
Almighty Allah and he who disobeys us has in fact disobeyed Almighty
Allah.” Reference: al-Amali by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), H.658/16,
Session No. 71. For more details, the dear reader is advised to see the
following reference books: Manaqib Amir al-Mu'minin by Muhammad al-Kufi
al-Qadhi (app. AH 300), pp. 481; Sharh al-Akhbar by al-Qadhi al-Nu\`man
al-Maghribi (AH 363), 1:154, H. 98, pp. 233, H. 223, 3:109, H.1044;
Kamil al-Ziyarat by Ja\`far ibn Qawlawayh (AH 368), pp. 335, H. 842/14,
Section No. 107; Man La Yahdhuruhu’l-Faqih by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381),
2:613, 617; al-Amali by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 466, H. 621/11,
Session No. 60; al-Fusul al-Mukhtarah by Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 413), pp.
245; Tahdhib al-Ahkam by Shaykh al-Tusi (AH 460), 6:97, 101; al-Amali by
Shaykh al-Tusi (AH 460), pp. 248, H.437/29, Session No. 9, pp. 309,
H.623/70, Session No. 11; Manaqib Ali Abi-Talib by Ibn Shahr Ashub (AH
588), 2:217; al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir by al-Tabarani (AH 360), 1:319, H.947,
23:380; Majma\` al-Zawa'id by al-Haythami (AH 807), 9:109, 131, 132;
Kanz al-\`Ummal by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (AH 975), 11:610, 622, H.32952,
33024, 13:109, H.36358.

[^21]: () This is an indication to the following holy verse: يَا
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ
عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ O you men!
Surely, We have created you of a male and a female, and made you tribes
and families that you may know each other. Surely, the most honorable of
you with Allah is the one among you most careful of his duty. Surely,
Allah is Knowing, Aware. (49/13)

[^22]: () Mukhtasar Basa'ir al-Darajat by al-Hasan al-Hilli (the ninth
century of Hijrah), pp. 92; Bihar al-Anwar by al-Majlisi (AH 1111),
25:364, H. 1, Section No. 12; Mustadrak Safinat al-Bihar by al-Namazi
al-Shahrudi (AH 1405), 1:199.

[^23]: () For more information in this regard, the reader is advised to
refer to the following book: Al-Muraja\`at: Reciprocal Correspondences
Between Shaykh Salim al-Bishri, the Head of al-Azhar University, and
Sayyid Sharaf al-Din al-\`Amili, Letters No. 20 and on; revised by
Husayn al-Radhi, Qum: The Ahl al-Bayt ('a) World Assembly, First
Edition, AH 1422. ((The English version of this book is entitled
‘al-Muraja\`at: A Sunni-Shi\`i Dialogue, translated by Yasin al-Jiburi,
Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 2000.)) Nazariyyat al-Nass \`Ala al-Imamah
fi’l-Qur'an al-Karim (Conception of the Divine Ordinance of Imamate in
the Holy Qur'an), by Muhsin al-Araki, London: Book Extra, First Edition,
AH 1421/AD 2000. Al-Nass wa’l-Ijtihad by \`Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din
al-\`Amili (AH 1377), revised by Abu Mujtaba, Qum: Sayyid al-Shuhada'
Press, First Edition, AH 1404. (The English version of this book is
entitled ‘al-Nass wel-Ijtihad, translated by Abdullah al-Shahin, Qum:
Ansariyan Publications, 2002.)

[^24]: () This hadith has been recorded in the following reference
books: Basa'ir al-Darajat al-Kubra by al-Saffar al-Qummi (AH 290), pp.
97; Qurb al-Isnad by al-Himyari al-Baghdadi (AH 300), pp. 57; al-Kafi by
al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:287, 294, 295, 296, 420, 4:149, 566, 8:27; \`Ilal
al-Shara'i\` by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), 1:144; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal
(AH 241), 1:84, 118, 119, 152, 331, 4:281, 370, 5:347, 366, 370, 419;
Sunan al-Tirmidhi (AH 279), 5:297; al-Mustadrak \`Ala al-Sahihayn by
al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 3:109, 110, 116, 134, 371, 533. About
the authenticity of the Hadith of Ghadir, Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani (AH
852) says, “As regarding the hadith that begins with, ‘man kuntu mawlahu
fahadha \`aliyyun mawlahu, it has been recorded by al-Tirmidhi and
al-Nassa'i. In fact, this hadith has been reported from very numerous
ways of narration, which have been collected by Ibn \`Uqdah in an
independent book. Most of the series of narration of this hadith are
authentic (sahih) and acceptable (hasan). I have quoted Imam Ahmad (ibn
Hanbal) as saying, ‘We have not received narrations about any of the
Sahabah as many as we have received about \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib ('a).’”
See Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, 7:16. Also, refer to the first
footnote of the chapter No. 22 (The Proof of Islam and the Previous
Religions). For more details about the Hadith al-Ghadir, see the book of
al-Ghadir by al-Amini al-Najafi (AH 1329), Volume One.

[^25]: () Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib ('a) narrated the following: When the
holy verse, ‘And warn your nearest relatives, (26:214)’ was revealed,
the Holy Prophet… spoke, “O sons of \`Abd al-Muttalib! By Allah I swear,
I do not know an Arab man who can bring to his people a matter better
than what I am bearing to you. I am conveying to you the welfare of this
world as well as the Hereafter. Almighty Allah has ordered me to invite
you to this matter. Who will support me in this affair?” I was the
youngest among them when I promptly declared, “I will.” But they began
to laugh at me and left the place and said to Abu-Talib, “Well, he
orders you to listen to and obey your son!” References: Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi’l-Hadid al-Mu\`tazili (AH 656), 13:210 as quoted
from Tarikh al-Tabari. See also Kanz al-\`Ummal by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi
(AH 974), 13:133, H. 36419. For acquainting oneself with more Sunni
reference books of hadith that have recorded this tradition, the reader
is advised to refer to al-Muraja\`at: Reciprocal Correspondences Between
Shaykh Salim al-Bishri, the Head of al-Azhar University, and Sayyid
Sharaf al-Din al-\`Amili, Letters No. 20 & 21; al-Ghadir by al-Amini (AH
1392), 2:278, Title: hadith bad' al-da\`wah fi’l-sunnah wa’l-tarikh
wa’l-adab (The Tradition of the Start of the Promulgation For Islam In
The Sunnah, History, and Literature). A big number of Shi\`ite reference
books of hadith have also recorded this tradition, such as Manaqib Amir
al-Mu'minin by al-Kufi al-Qadhi (app. AH 300), 1:370, Section: tafsir
ayat al-indhar (Exegesis of The Verse of Warning), H.294 and on; \`Ilal
al-Shara'i\` by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), 1:170; Kitab al-Irshad by
Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 413), 1:49; Rawdhat al-Wa\`izin by al-Fattal
al-Naysaburi (AH 508), pp. 52.

[^26]: () Al-Mahasin by al-Barqi (AH 274 or 280), 1:159; al-Kafi by
al-Kulayni (AH 329), 8:107; Da\`a'im al-Islam by al-Tamimi al-Maghribi
(AH 363), 1:16; \`Ilal al-Shara'i\` by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), 1:66,
137, 138, 202, 2:474; \`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH
381), 1:209; Musnad Abi-Dawud al-Tayalisi (AH 204), pp. 28, 29;
al-Musannaf by al-San\`ani (AH 211), 5:406; H.9745, 11:226, H.20390;
Sahih Muslim al-Naysaburi (AH 261), 7:120, 121; Sunan al-Tirmidhi (AH
279), 5:302, H.3808, pp. 304, H.3813, 3814; al-Mustadrak \`Ala
al-Sahihayn by al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 2:337, 3:109, 133;
al-Sunan al-Kubra by al-Bayhaqi (AH 458), 9:40; Majma\` al-Zawa'id by
al-Haythami (AH 807), 9:109-111; Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari by
Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani (AH 852), 7:60, 9:53.

[^27]: () Al-Mi\`yar wa’l-Muwazanah by al-Iskafi (AH 220), pp. 228;
Da\`a'im al-Islam by al-Tamimi al-Maghribi (AH 363), 1:16, 21; Tuhaf
al-\`Uqul by Ibn Shu\`bah al-Harrani (the fourth century of Hijrah), pp.
459; \`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), 2:58; al-Amali
by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 186; Rawdhat al-Wa\`izin by Ibn
al-Fattal al-Naysaburi (AH 508), pp. 102; Jami\` al-Bayan by al-Tabari
(AH 310), 6:388; al-Mu\`jam al-Awsat by al-Tabarani (AH 360), 6:218;
Ahkam al-Qur'an by al-Jassas al-Razi (AH 370), 2:557, 558; Shawahid
al-Tanzil by al-Hakim al-Hasakani (the fifth century of Hijrah), 1:212,
H.221, pp. 216, H.224, pp. 217, H.225, pp. 233, H.236, pp. 234, H.237;
Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi’l-Hadid al-Mu\`tazili (AH 656),
13:277; Nuzum Durar al-Simtayn by al-Zarandi al-Hanafi (AH 750), pp. 86.

[^28]: () The actual sense of Imamate in Muslim terminology is the
leadership of the Muslim nation that is commissioned by Almighty Allah
through His Messenger.

[^29]: () Indubitably, reference books of Muslim heritage have recorded
intricate, authentic traditions corroborating the Holy Imam being twelve
in number. Moreover, some master scholars have compiled independent
books or chapters for the details of this unquestionable fact. Let us
refer to the following as examples: Kifayat al-Athar fi’l-Nassi \`Ala
al-A'immati al-Ithnay \`Ashar (Sufficiency of Traditions Concerning The
Imam Being Twelve) by \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Khazzaz al-Razi (the fourth
century of Hijrah); revised by \`Abd al-Latif al-Husayni al-Kuhkamari
al-Khu'i; Qum: Bidar Publications, AH 1401. Muqtadhab al-Athar
fi’l-Nassi \`Ala al-A'immati al-Ithnay \`Ashar (Summary of Traditions
Concerning Imam Being Twelve) by Ahmad ibn \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Ayyash
al-Jawhari (AH 401); revision, correction, and commentary by Hashim
al-Rasuli; Qum: al-Tabataba'i Library. Al-Istinsar fi’l-NassI \`Ala
al-A'immati al-Athar (Supportive Points Proving the Imamate of the
Twelve Imam) by Abu-Fath al-Karajaki (AH 449); Beirut: Dar al-Adhwa'
Publishers, Second Edition, Ah 1405. Istiqsa' al-Nazar fi Imamat
al-A'immah al-Ithnay \`Ashar (Deep Investigation on the Imamate of the
Twelve Imam) by Ibn Maytham al-Bahrani (AH 679). Kitab al-Ghaybah (Book
of Occultation) by Abu-Zaynab al-Nu\`mani (AH 380); Chapter: ma ruwiya
anna al-a'immata ithna \`ashara min tariq al-\`ammati wa ma yadullu
\`alayhi min al-qur'an wa’l-tawrah (Sunni Narrations About the Imam
Being Twelve and Indications From the Qur'an and the Torah). Turuqu
Hadith al-A'immah Ithna \`Ashar (Ways of The Narration of The Imam
Beings Twelve) by Kazim Al-Nuh (AH 1360); Baghdad: Dar al-Ma\`arif
Publications. Risalatun Mukhtasaratun fi’l-Nusus \`Ala Imamat
al-A'immati al-Ithnay \`Ashar (A Brief Treatise On the Authentic
Narrations Confirming the Imamate of the Twelve Imam) by Jawad al-Mirza
al-Tabrizi. Min Hadith al-Nabiy Yakunu Lihadhihi al-Ummati Ithna
\`Ashara Qayyiman (The Holy Prophet’s (s) Saying: Twelve Custodians
Shall Be In This Nation) by Murtadha al-\`Askari; Beirut: P.O. Box
124/24. Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah Li-Dhawi’l-Qurba by Sulayman ibn Ibrahim
al-Qanaduzi al-Hanafi (AH 1294); revised by \`Ali Jamal Ashraf
al-Husayni, Vol. 3, Section No. 77: Investigations of the tradition,
“After me, there shall come twelve successors.”; Dar al-Uswah
Publishers, First Edition, AH 1416. See also Musnad Ab-Dawud al-Tayalisi
(AH 204), pp. 105, 180; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal (AH 241), 5:86-108;
Sahih al-Bukhari (AH 256), 8:127; Sahih Muslim (AH 261), 6:403; Sunan
Abi-Dawud al-Sajistani (AH 275), 2:309, Section: Kitab al-Mahdi, H.4279,
4280; Sunan al-Tirmidhi (AH 279), 3:340, H.2323, Section: bab ma ja'a
fi’l-khulafa' (Reports About The Successors); al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir by
al-Tabarani (AH 360), pp. 195, 196, 232; al-Mustadrak \`Ala al-Sahihayn
by al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 3::617, 618; al-Kifayah fi \`Ilm
al-Riwayah by al-Khatib al-Baghdadi (AH 436), pp. 95; Sharh Sahih Muslim
by al-Nawawi (AH 676), 12:201; Majma\` al-Zawa'id by al-Haythami (AH
807), 5:190, 191, Section: bab al-khulafa' al-ithna \`ashar (The Twelve
Successors)… etc. Many Sunni scholars have been unable to apply the
actual sense of these narrations to the actual leadership of the Islamic
states throughout history. This is because they have had to submit to
the authenticity of these traditions and their uninterrupted
transmission. Although they assumed innumerable probabilities, they
could not reach a consensual decision. For more information, see the
following reference books: Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari by Ibn
Hajar al-\`Asqalani (AH 852), 13:182 and on; Tuhfat al-Ahwadhi fi Sharh
Sahih al-Tirmidhi by al-Mubarakfuri (AH 1353), 6:391-396, Section: bab
ma ja'a fi’l-khulafa' (Reports About The Successors). However,
al-Qanaduzi al-Hanafi (AH 1294), after recording ten narrations dealing
with this very matter, quotes the following word of a researcher:
“Narrations indicating that the Successors after the Holy Prophet (s)
would be twelve in number have been widely known because they are
reported from various ways of narration. By indications of time, place,
and events, it is concluded that the Messenger of Allah (s) intended the
Twelve Imam from his household and family. It is impossible to apply
this hadith to the Orthodox Caliphs (al-khulafa' al-rashidun) because
they are less than twelve, and it is also impossible to apply it to the
Umayyad kings because they were more than twelve and because they ruled
with notorious injustice and persecution except \`Umar ibn \`Abd
al-\`Aziz and also because they did not belong to Banu-Hashim, since the
Holy Prophet (s), according to the narration of \`Abd al-Malik on the
authority of Jabir, had declared that all the Successors would be from
Banu-Hashim. Confirming this fact, it is reported that the Holy Prophet
(s) uttered this very statement with a low voice, because the attendants
would not welcome the fact that Banu-Hashim would rule after the Holy
Prophet (s). The tradition cannot be also applied to the \`Abbasid
kings, because they were more than the required number and because they
failed to abide by the holy verse, “Say: I do not ask of you any reward
for it but love for my near relatives, (42/23)” as well as the famous
Hadith al-Kisa' (Tradition of the Cloak). In view of the above, this
hadith can only be applied to the Twelve Imam from the Holy Prophet’s
(s) Household and family, because they were the most knowledgeable of
the people of their ages, the most sublime, the most pious, the most
religious, the foremost in high lineage, and the most honored by
Almighty Allah. Their sciences were linked to the sciences of their
fathers who obtained their sciences and knowledge from their
grandfather, the Holy Prophet (s), through heritage, and through
personal competence. Such have they been known by people of knowledge,
investigation, Gnosticism, and high erudition. The famous Hadith
al-Thaqalayn (Tradition of the Two Weighty Things), as well as the
numerous traditions cited in this book and many other books, testifies
and gives evidence and preference to the fact that the Holy Prophet (s),
by foretelling the coming of twelve successors after him, meant the
Twelve Imam ('a) from his household and family.” The Holy Prophet ('a)
said, “This religion will continue to remain in existence until twelve
successors come after me who attain the consensus of this nation.” This
has been explained by al-Qanaduzi al-Hanafi as meaning that the Muslim
nation will unanimously submit to the Imamate of these Twelve Imam at
the advent of the Riser, Imam al-Mahdi—may Allah be pleased with them
all.” See Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah li-Dhawi’l-Qurba by al-Qanaduzi al-Hanafi
(AH 1294), 3:292-293, Secion No. 77: fi tahqiq hadith ba\`di ithna
\`ashara khalifatan (Investigation About the Prophetic Tradition, ‘After
Me, There Shall Come Twelve Successors). The aforementioned tradition
can also be found in Sunan Abi-Dawud al-Sajistani (AH 275), 2:309,
H.4279; Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari by Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani
(AH 852), 13:182 and many other reference books of hadith. \`Allamah
al-Tustari says, “Our Imamiyyah scholars have cited these authenticated
traditions as proofs of the fact that the Twelve Imam ('a) have the
right more than anyone else to succeed the Holy Prophet (s) and lead the
Muslim community in religious and political affairs. As a matter of
fact, except for the Imamiyyah, no other sect has ever claimed the Imam
being restricted to this number (i.e. twelve). Indicated by reason and
traditions, Imamate and successorship (khilafah or Caliphate) of the
Holy Prophet (s) requires that an imam or khalifah must be infallible
and commissioned by Almighty Allah and His Messenger (s). This condition
does not violate the fact that some of the Holy Imam ('a) were unable,
even outwardly, to put their commands into effect. Foretelling this
fact, the Holy Prophet (s) said about Imam al-Hasan ('a) and Imam
al-Husayn ('a): إبْنَايَ هَذَانِ إمَامَانِ؛ قَامَا أوْ قَعَدَا. “These
two sons of mine are Imam whether they will hold (practically) the
leadership or be prevented from it.” To sum it up, the fact that the
Holy Imam were prevented from holding the position of Caliphate—the
position that Almighty Allah had commissioned them to hold—because
others tyrannized over them; cannot act as a point of refutation of our
belief. Similarly, the prophethood of the Prophets ('a) was not injured
or distrusted because their people rejected, turned away from them or
killed them.” See al-Sawarim al-Muhriqah fi Naqd al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqah
by al-Qadhi al-Tustari (AH 1019), pp. 95.

[^30]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:525, 526, H. 1, Chapter:
Kitab al-Hujjah (The Book of Argument), Section: bab ma ja'a fi’l-ithnay
\`ashar wa’l-nass \`alayhim; Kifayat al-Athar fi’l-nass \`Ala
al-A'immati al-Ithnay \`Ashar (Reports About the Twelve Imam and Decrees
About Them) by al-Khazzaz al-Qummi al-Razi (the fourth century of
Hijrah), pp. 53, Section: bab ma ja'a \`an jabir ibn \`abdillah
al-ansari \`an rasul illahi fi’l-nususi \`ala al-a'immati al-ithnay
\`ashar (Narrations Reported From Jabir Ibn \`Abdullah al-Ansari From
Allah’s Messenger About the Twelve Imam), pp. 169, Section: ma ruwiya
\`an al-husayn ibn \`ali \`an rasul illahi fi’l-nususi \`ala al-a'immati
al-ithnay \`ashar (Narrations Reported From al-Husayn Ibn \`Ali From
Allah’s Messengers About the Twelve Imam); Mukhtasar Basa'ir al-Darajat
by al-Hilli (the ninth century of Hijrah), pp. 39, 122-123; Dala'il
al-Imamah by al-Tabari (the early fourth century of Hijrah), pp.
448-449; al-Hidayah al-Kubra by al-Khasibi (AH 334), pp. 375;
al-Ikhtisas by Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 413), pp. 210; Bihar al-Anwar by
al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 36:226-372, Section No. 41: nusus al-rasul (The
Messenger’s Reported Decrees); Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah li-Dhawi’l-Qurba by
al-Qanaduzi al-Hanafi (AH 1294), 3:281 and on, Section No. 76: fi bayan
al-a'immati al-ithnay \`ashar bi-asma'ihim (References to the Twelve
Imam by Names). In his book of ‘Fara'id al-Simtayn’, al-Juwayni has
reported the Holy Prophet ('a) as saying: أنَا سَيِّدُ النَّبِيِّينَ،
وَعَلِيُّ بْنُ أبِي طَالِبٍ سَيِّدُ الوَصِيِّينَ، وَإنَّ أوْصِيَائِي
بَعْدِي اثْنَا عَشَرَ: أوَّلُهُمْ عَلِيُّ بْنُ أبِي طَالِبٍ وَآخِرُهُمُ
المَهْدِيُّ. “I am the master of the prophets. \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib is
the master of the Prophets’ successors. My successors who shall come
after me are twelve in number. The first of them is \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib
and the last one is al-Mahdi.” إنَّ خُلَفَائِي وَأوْصِيَائِي وَحُجَجُ
اللهِ عَلَى الخَلْقِ بَعْدِي الإثْنَا عَشَرَ: أوَّلُهُمْ أخِي
وَآخِرُهُمْ وَلَدِي. “Verily, my vicegerents and successors, who are
Almighty Allah’s arguments against His creatures and who shall come
after me are twelve. The first of them is my brother and the last is my
son.” Having declared this statement, the Holy Prophet (s) was asked, “O
Allah’s Messenger: Who is your brother to whom you have referred?” He
answered: (أخِي) عَلِيُّ بْنُ أبِي طَالِبٍ. “My brother is \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib.” “Who is your son to whom you have referred?” the Holy
Prophet (s) was asked. He answered: (وَلَدي) المَهْدِيُّ الَّذِي
يَمْلَؤها قِسْطاً وَعَدْلاً كَمَا مُلِئَتْ ظُلْماً وَجَوْراً. وَالَّذِي
بَعَثَنِي بِالحَقِّ بَشِيراً وَنَذِيراً، لَوْ لَمْ يَبْقَ مِنَ
الدُّنْيَا إلاَّ يَوْمٌ وَاحِدٌ لَطَوَّلَ (اللهُ) ذَلِكَ اليَوْمَ حَتَّى
يَخْرُجَ فِيهِ وَلَدِي المَهْدِيُّ. فَيَنْزِلُ رُوحُ اللهِ عِيسَى بْنُ
مَرْيَمَ فَيُصَلِّي خَلْفَهُ، وَتُشْرِقُ الأرْضُ بِنُورِ رَبِّهَا
وَيَبْلُغُ سُلْطَانُهُ المَشْرِقَ وَالمَغْرِبَ. “My son is al-Mahdi who
shall fill it (i.e. the earth) with fairness and justice after it would
be filled with injustice and prejudice. I swear by Him Who has sent me
with truth as bearer of good tidings (to the believers) and warner
(about His chastisement), that even if a single day remains from the age
of this world, Almighty Allah will prolong it, so that my son, al-Mahdi,
reappears and the Spirit of Allah- Jesus son of Mary, descends, to
follow him in prayer. The earth shall then shine with the light of its
Lord, and his authority shall cover the east and the west of the earth.”
This hadith has been quoted by \`Allamah al-\`Askari from a manuscript
found in the Central Library of Tehran University under No.
1164/1690-1691, pp. 60. See Book No. 6 in the series of \`ala ma'idat
al-qur’an wa’l-sunnah (On the Table of the Qur'an and Sunnah) entitled
‘min hadith al-nabi yakunu lihadhihi al-ummati ithna \`ashara qayyiman
(The Prophet’s Saying: For This Nation, There Shall Come Twelve
Custodians). For more information about the traditions mentioning the
names of the Twelve Imam ('a), the reader is advised to read the
introduction of the scholar, Shaykh Lutfullah al-Safi al-Gulpaygani, to
the book ‘Muqtadhab al-Athar fi’l-Nass \`Ala al-A'immati al-Ithnay
\`Ashar by Ahmad ibn \`Ubaydullah ibn \`Ayyash al-Jawhari (AH 401).
Moreover, this book comprises many Prophetic traditions that are
uninterruptedly reported by non-Shi\`ite scholars and indicate the
Imamate of the Twelve Imam ('a) belonging to the Holy Prophet’s
Household.

[^31]: () Fore more details in this respect, the reader is advised to
refer to the following books: Kitab al-Ghaybah by Abu-Zaynab al-Nu\`mani
(the third century of Hijrah); Bahth Hawla al-Mahdi by Muhammad Baqir
al-Sadr (AD 1980); al-Mahdi by Sadr al-Din al-Sadr; Mawsu\`at al-Imam
al-Mahdi, Tarikh al-Ghaybah al-Kubra by Muhammad Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr
(AD 1998); Muntakhab al-Athar fi Imamat al-Imam al-Thani \`Ashar by
al-Safi al-Gulpaygani (contemporary); al-Radd \`Ala Shubuhat Ahmad
al-Katib Hawla Imamat Ahl al-Bayt wa Wujud al-Mahdi al-Muntazar by
Sayyid Sami al-Badri (contemporary). Furthermore, there are hundreds of
books on Imam al-Mahdi ('a).

[^32]: () For more details about Imam al-Mahdi ('a) being one of the
descendants of Lady Fatimah ('a), refer to the book of Mu\`jam Ahadith
al-Mahdi by \`Ali al-Kurani (contemporary), 1:137, 138, 189, 566, 3:191.
The author of this book has cited tens of reference books for both
Shi\`ite and Sunni writers confirming Imam al-Mahdi ('a) being a
descendant of Lady Fatimah ('a). For details about Imam al-Mahdi ('a)
being a descendant of Imam al-Husayn ('a), refer to the aforementioned
book, 1:394, 3:15.

[^33]: () For more details about the Prophetic tradition that Imam
al-Mahdi ('a) will spread justice and equity in the globe after it would
be overcome by injustice and oppression, refer to the aforementioned
book, 1:94, 114, 121, 123, 170, 265, 364, 3:11, 12, 40, 61, 202, 307,
318, 323, 4:225, 350, 361, 497, 5:281, 358.

[^34]: () The followers of the Kaysaniyyah faith, one of the Shi\`ah
sects, believe that Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah (son of Imam \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib ('a)) is the Imam, because he, not al-Hasan ('a) or al-Husayn
('a), bore the pennon of his father during the Battle of the Camel
(al-jamal) that took place in al-Basrah. The name ‘Kaysaniyyah’ has come
to this sect from their chief, al-Mukhtar ibn Abi-\`Ubayd al-Thaqafi,
who was surnamed ‘Kaysan’, because his constabulary officer, whose name
was Kaysan and whose appellation was Abu-\`Amrah, was more excessive in
words, deeds, and massacres, than al-Mukhtar. See Firaq al-Shi\`ah by
al-Nawbakhti (the third century of Hijrah), pp. 23.

[^35]: () The \`Abbasids, a dynasty of rulers who ruled the Muslim
nation after the overthrow of the Umayyad dynasty, were the descendants
of al-\`Abbas ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib, the Holy Prophet’s uncle.
[translator]

[^36]: () The \`Alawiyyah were some descendants of Imam \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib ('a) who formed a political front against the ruling
authorities, especially the \`Abbasid dynasty. [translator]

[^37]: () This hadith can be found in the following reference books:
Kashf al-Mahajjah li-Thamarat al-Muhjah by Ibn Tawus (AH 664), pp. 39;
\`Awali al-La’ali by Ibn Abi-Jumhur (app. AH 880), 1:129, H.3 & pp. 364,
H.5; Bihar al-Anwar by al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 72:38, H.36; Musnad Ahmad
ibn Hanbal (AH 241), 2:5, 54, 111, 112; Sahih al-Bukhari (AH 256),
1:215, 2:79, 3:88, 125, 189, 6:146, 152; Sahih Muslim (AH 261), 6:8;
Sunan Abi-Dawud (AH 275), 2:13, 3:24.

[^38]: () For more details about the doctrine of al-Raj\`ah (the
Return), the reader is advised to see the following books: Al-Raj\`ah aw
al-\`Awdah Ila al-Hayat al-Dunya Ba\`d al-Mawt (Return or Restoration to
Life After Death), Book No. 12, Salsalat al-Ma\`arif al-Diniyyah (Series
of Religious Knowledge), published by Markaz al-Risalah, Qum, First
Edition, AH 1418. Al-Raj\`ah by \`Abd al-Karim Al-Najaf (contemporary),
Book No. 7, Salsalat fi Rihab Ahl al-Bayt (Series of In The Space of the
Ahl al-Bayt), Qum: The Ahl al-Bayt ('a) World Assembly, First Edition,
AH 1422.

[^39]: () Fore more details in this respect, the dear reader is advised
to see the following book: al-Sahih min Sirat al-Nabi al-A\`zam by
al-\`Amili (contemporary), 5:175, Section Three: Dhu’l-Shamalayn and the
Prophet’s Inadvertence. In this section, the author has quoted
traditions from Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim.

[^40]: () Due to excessive veneration and honor to the Holy Qur'an, the
Hanbaliyyah and the Ash\`ariyyah believe that it is as eternal as
Almighty Allah. Exceeding all limits, some of them believe in the
eternity of the papers and covers of the Holy Qur'an and they believe
that they share Almighty Allah in essence! See Dirasat fi’l-Qur'an
al-Karim by \`Ali Muhammad al-Asifi, pp. 80.

[^41]: () Fajr al-Islam by Ahmad Amin, pp. 276.

[^42]: () Fore more details about the notion of taqiyyah and its
principles, the reader is advised to refer to the following books:
Al-Taqiyyah fi’l-Fikr al-Islami, Book No. 7 in the series of Salsalat
al-Ma\`arif al-Islamiyyah (Series of Muslim Knowledge), published by
Markaz al-Risalah, Qum, First Edition, AH 1419. Al-Taqiyyah \`Inda Ahl
al-Bayt by Mustafa Qasir al-\`Amili (contemporary), Qum: The Ahl al-Bayt
('a) World Assembly, Second Edition, AH 1415. Waqi\` al-Taqiyyah \`Inda
al-Madhahib wa’l-Firaq al-Islamiyyah Min Ghayr al-Shi\`ah al-Imamiyyah
by Thamir Hashim Habib al-\`Amidi, Qum: al-Ghadir Center for Islamic
Studies, AH 1416/AD 1995. Al-Taqiyyah by Murtadha al-Ansari (AH
1214-1282), Revised by Faris al-Hassun, Qum: Qa’im Al-Muhammad
Foundation, First Edition, AH 1412. Al-Taqiyyah fi Fiqh Ahl al-Bayt, a
thesis by al-Dawari (contemporary), Revised by Muhammad \`Ali
al-Mu\`allim, Qum: The Author, AH 1418, 2 volumes. For further details,
refer to Ajwibat Masa'il Jarullah by \`Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din
al-Musawi (AH 1377), Question No. 10, Revised by \`Abd al-Zahra'
al-Yasiri, Qum: The Ahl al-Bayt ('a) World Assembly, First Edition, AH
1416/AD 1995.

[^43]: () This tradition is cited in the following reference books:
Da\`a'im al-Islam by al-Qadhi al-Nu\`man al-Maghribi (AH 363), 1:110,
160, 2:132; \`Awali al-La’ali by al-Ihsa'i (AH 880), 2:104, H.286. The
same tradition has been quoted in many other reference books, yet with a
little difference, such as al-Mahasin by al-Barqi (AH 274 or 280),
Section: bab al-taqiyyah, 1:397, H. 890 according to the edition of The
Ahl al-Bayt ('a) World Assembly, and 1:255, H. 286 according to the
edition of Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah Publishers; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by
al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 16:210, H.21379, Section: bab wujub
al-taqiyyah ma\`a al-khawf (Obligation of Practicing Taqiyyah At
Situations of Fear), H.4; Mishkat al-Anwar fi Ghurar al-Akhbar by
al-Tabrisi (the seventh century of Hijrah), Ch.11: Taqiyyah, H.1, pp.
87; al-Sirat al-Mustaqim Ila Mustahiqqi al-Taqdim by al-\`Amili
al-Nabbati (AH 877), 3:71. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir ('a) is also reported
to have said: التَّقِيَّةُ مِنْ دِينِي وَدِينِ آبَائِي، وَلا إيمَانَ
لِمَنْ لاَ تَقِيَّةَ لَهُ. “Taqiyyah is part of my religion and the
religion of my forefathers. Faithless is he who does not hold taqiyyah.”
See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:219, Section: bab al-taqiyyah, H.
12; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 16:204, H.21359,
Section: bab wujub al-taqiyyah ma\`a al-khawf (Obligation of Practicing
Taqiyyah At Situations of Fear), H.4.

[^44]: () This means that whoever does not believe in and practice
taqiyyah…

[^45]: () The tradition in this very form has been mentioned in the
following books: Fiqh al-Ridha by Ibn Babawayh (AH 320), pp. 338; Awa'il
al-Maqalat by Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 314), pp. 216; Bihar al-Anwar by
al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 75:347. The most common form of the tradition
reads, “Faithless is he who does not hold taqiyyah.” In addition to the
references mentioned in the previous footnote, see Man La
Yahdhuruhu’l-Faqih by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), 2:128, H.1928; Sifat
al-Shi\`ah by Shaykh al-Saduq, pp. 3 ((The English version of this book
is entitled ‘Qualities of the Shi\`ah’ and it is published together with
two other books of the same author—namely, al-mawa\`iz (The Sermons),
and fadha'il ush-shi\`ah (The Merits of the Shi\`ah)—in one book
entitled al-Mawa\`iz, translated by Badr Shahin, Qum: Ansariyan
Publications, Second Edition, AD 2005)); al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329),
2:217, Section: bab al-taqiyyah, H.2; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr
al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 10:131, H.13033, Section: bab jawaz al-iftar
li’l-taqiyyah (Permissibility of Breaking One’s Fast Due To
Dissimulation), H.3 & 16:210, H.21378, 16:215, H.21394; Mishkat al-Anwar
fi Ghurar al-Akhbar by al-Tabrisi (the seventh century of Hijrah), pp.
89; Kanz al-\`Ummal by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (AH 974), 3:96, H.5665.

[^46]: () Imam Muhammad al-Baqir is reported to have said: إنَّمَا
جُعِلَتِ التَّقِيَّةُ لِيُحْقَنَ بِهَا الدَّمُ، فَإذَا بَلَغَ الدَّمَ
فَلَيْسَ بِتَقِيَّةٍ. “In fact, taqiyyah has been decreed so as to
prevent bloodshed; hence, when a matter reaches the level of bloodshed,
then taqiyyah is no longer effective (i.e. when one is forced to shed
the blood of someone else, he must not practice taqiyyah).” See al-Kafi
by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:220; Tahdhib al-Ahkam by Shaykh al-Tusi (AH
460), 6:172; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 16:234.

[^47]: () Fore more details in this respect, the gentle reader is
advised to see the following books: Al-Shi\`ah wa’l-Hakimun by Muhammad
Jawad Mughniyah (AD 1982), Beirut: Dar al-Hilal Publishers & Dar
al-Jawad Publishers, Fifth Edition, AD 1981. Fi ²ilal al-Tashayyu\` by
Muhammad \`Ali al-Husayni, Kuwait: al-Alfayn Library, First Edition, AH
1403/AD 1983. Many other reference books dealing with the history of the
Holy Imam and their followers have referred to this topic.

[^48]: () See Tafsir al-\`Ayyashi by Ibn \`Ayyash al-Salami
al-Samarqandi (AH 320), 2:272-273, H.76; Tafsir al-Qummi (AH 329),
1:390; Haqa'iq al-Ta'wil fi Mutashabah al-Tanzil by al-Sharif al-Radhi
(AH 406), pp. 76; al-Tibyan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an by al-Tusi (AH 460),
6:428; Majma\` al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an by al-Tabrisi (AH 560),
6:203; Tafsir al-Qur'an by \`Abd al-Razzaq al-San\`ani (AH 211), 2:360;
Jami\` al-Bayan \`an Ta'wil Ay al-Qur'an by al-Tabari (AH 310), 7:355,
14:237; Ahkam al-Qur'an by al-Jassas (AH 370), 3:249; al-Mustadrak \`Ala
al-Sahihayn by al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 2:357; Zad al-Masir fi
\`Ilm al-Tafsir by Ibn al-Jawzi (AH 597), 4:362, as well as many other
book reference of hadith and tafsir.

[^49]: () In this respect, Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) says in one
of his argumentative speeches: … وآمُرُكَ أنْ تَسْتَعْمِلَ التَّقِيَّةَ
فِي دِينِكَ، فَإنَّ اللهَ يَقُولُ: لَا يَتَّخِذِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِنْ دُونِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۖ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ
ذَٰلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللَّهِ فِي شَيْءٍ إِلَّا أَنْ تَتَّقُوا مِنْهُمْ
تُقَاةً ۗ وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللَّهُ نَفْسَهُ ۗ وَإِلَى اللَّهِ الْمَصِيرُ
وَقَدْ أذِنْتُ لَكُمْ فِي تَفْضِيلِ أعْدَائِنَا إنْ ألْجَأكَ الخَوْفُ
إلَيْهِ، وَفِي أظْهَارِ البَرَاءَةِ إنْ حَمَلَكَ الوَجَلُ عَلَيْهِ،
وَفِي تَرْكِ الصَّلَوَاتِ المَكْتُوبَاتِ إنْ خَشِيتَ عَلَى حَشَاشَةِ
نَفْسِكَ الآفَاتِ وَالعَاهَاتِ. فَإنَّ تَفْضِيلَكَ أعْدَائَنَا عِنْدَ
خَوْفِكَ لاَ يَنْفَعُهُمْ وَلاَ يَضُرُّنَا، وَإنَّ إظْهَارَكَ
بَرَاءَتَكَ مِنَّا عِنْدَ تَقِيَّتِكَ لاَ يَقْدَحُ فِينَا وَلاَ
يُنْقِصُنَا. وَلَئِنْ تَبْرَأُ مِنَّا سَاعَةً بِلِسَانِكَ وَأنْتَ
مُوَالٍ لَنَا بِجَنَانِكَ لِتُبْقِيَ عَلَى نَفْسِكَ رُوحَهَا الَّتِي
بِهَا قِوَامُهَا وَمَالَهَا الَّذِي بِهِ قِيَامُهَا وَجَاهَهَا الَّذِي
بِهِ تَمَسُّكُهَا وَتَصُونُ مَنْ عُرِفَ بِذَلِكَ مِنْ أوْلِيَائِنَا
وَإخْوَانِنَا فَإنَّ ذَلِكَ أفْضَلُ مِنْ أنْ تَتَعَرَّضَ لِلْهَلاَكِ
وَتَنْقَطِعَ بِهِ عَنْ عَمَلٍ فِي الدِّينِ وَصَلاَحِ إخْوَانِكَ
المُؤمِنِينَ. وَإيَّاكَ ثُمَّ إيَّاكَ أنْ تَتْرُكَ التَّقِيَّةَ الَّتِي
أمَرْتُكَ بِهَا فَإنَّكَ شَائِطٌ بِدَمِكَ وَدِمَاءِ إخْوَانِكَ،
مُعَرِّضٌ لِنِعْمَتِكَ وَنِعْمَتِهِمْ لِلزَّوَالِ، وَمُذِلٌّ لَهُمْ فِي
أيْدِي أعْدَاءِ دِينِ اللهِ. وَقَدْ أمَرَكَ اللهُ بِإعْزَازِهِمْ
فَإنَّكَ إنْ خَالَفْتَ وَصِيَّتِي كَانَ ضَرَرُكَ عَلَى إخْوَانِكَ
وَنَفْسِكَ أشَدَّ مِنْ ضَرَرِ النَّاصِبِ لَنَا، الكَافِرِ بِنَا. “… I
also command you to practice taqiyyah in the affairs of your religion,
because Almighty Allah says, ‘Let not believers take unbelievers rather
than believers for friends; and whosoever does this shall have nothing
of the guardianship of Allah. Guard yourselves against them, guarding
carefully; and Allah makes you cautious of retribution from Himself; and
to Allah is the eventual coming.’ (3/28) I permit you all to declare
preference of our enemies over us when fear impels you to do so; and [I
permit you all] to speak out disavowal of us when dread drives you to do
so; and [I permit you all] to stop offering the obligatory prayers when
you expect hardships and adversities to befall you. In fact, to prefer
our enemies to us at situations of fear will neither benefit them nor
harm us; and to disavow us before our enemies because of taqiyyah will
neither slander nor belittle us. If you disavow us for an hour with your
tongue while you are loyal to us in your heart to save your life, your
property and your prestige, and save our loyalists and brothers who are
known for their adherence to us, this will definitely be better than
exposing yourself to perdition. If you do not then you will no longer be
able to do a rightful act for your religion or an act bringing about a
benefit for your brethren-in-faith. Do not ever shun practicing taqiyyah
with which I have commanded you, lest you cause bloodshed to yourself
and your brethren-in-faith, expose your own and their livelihood to
loss, and make them subservient to the mercy of the enemies of Almighty
Allah’s religion. Almighty Allah has commanded you to bring them
dignity. If you violate my instruction, you will bring upon yourself and
your brethren-in-faith harm that is worse than the harm expected from
those who incur our hostility and disbelieve in us.” See al-Ihtijaj by
al-Tabrisi (AH 506), 1:354-356; Madinat al-Ma\`ajiz by al-Bahrani (AH
1107), 1:360; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104),
16:229, H.21431, Section: bab jawaz al-taqiyyah fi izhar kalimat al-kufr
(Permissibility of Speaking Out the Word of Atheism As A Practice of
Taqiyyah), H.10; Bihar al-Anwar by al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 10:75, Section
No. 4: ihtijajuhu \`ala al-tabib al-yunani (His Argument Against the
Greek Physician). \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas—may Almighty Allah be pleased
with him—is reported to have said: التُّقَاةُ التَّكَلُّمُ بِاللِّسَانِ،
وَالقَلْبُ مُطْمَئِنٌّ بِالإيمَانِ. فَلا يَبْسُطُ يَدَهُ فَي قَتْلٍ،
وَلاَ إلَى إثْمٍ، فَإنَّهُ لاَ عُذْرَ لَهُ. “Taqiyyah (or tuqah) is to
speak with one’s tongue while the heart is full of faith. However, to
practice taqiyyah does not include the killing of someone or committing
an offense. Such being the case, no excuse is admitted.” See
al-Mustadrak \`Ala al-Sahihayn by al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 2:291;
al-Sunan al-Kubra by al-Bayhaqi (AH 458), 8:209. Other reference books
of hadith have also quoted this saying. Under the title of ‘Sense and
Ruling of Taqiyyah’, Abu-Bakr al-Jassas says: “Almighty Allah says,
‘…but you should guard yourselves against them, guarding carefully
(tuqah)… (3/28)’ This means that if you expect damage of yourselves or
some of your organs, then you should behave with dissimulation
(taqiyyah); that is to show loyalty to them (i.e. the enemies) without
having faith in them. This is the overt sense of taqiyyah as is
necessitated by the word tuqah. This opinion is unanimously adopted by
the majority of scholars. The holy verse denotes the permissibility of
stating disbelief (kufr) under taqiyyah. Similar to this is the
following holy verse: ‘He who disbelieves in Allah after his having
believed, not he who is compelled while his heart is at rest on account
of faith. (16/106)’ Permissibility of practicing taqiyyah under such
circumstances is considered permission granted by Almighty Allah.”
Reference: Ahkam al-Qur'an by Abu-Bakr al-Jassas (AH 370), 2:12.
Concerning the exegesis of the previously mentioned holy verse,
al-Tabari has reported Ibn \`Abbas as saying: “Taqiyyah is practiced by
tongue only. That is to say, one who is compelled to say a word that is
considered disobedience to Almighty Allah may utter that word for fear
of people, while the heart is full of faith. There is no objection to
such a deed as long as taqiyyah must not exceed the tongue.” A similar
narration has been reported from al-Aahhak. Reference: Tafsir Jami\`
al-Bayan by al-Tabari (AH 310), 3:310-311. Al-Qurtubi has reported
al-Hasan (al-Basri) as saying: “Taqiyyah is allowed for men up to the
Day of Judgment. Yet, there is no taqiyyah in matters of murder.”
Al-Bukhari has also reported a similar tradition from al-Hasan al-Basri.
Reference: al-Jami\` li-Ahkam al-Qur'an by al-Qurtubi (AH 671), 4:57;
Sahih al-Bukhari (AH 256), 8:55, Chapter: Kitab al-Ikrah (Compulsion).
For further details, the reader is advised to refer to the exegesis of
the previously mentioned holy verses in the reference books of tafsir.


