Part 4: Teachings of the Ahl Al-Bayt for Their Followers
========================================================

• **Prelude**

• **Supplication** ***(Du\`a’)***

• ***Supplications of al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah***

• ***Pilgrimages to the Holy Shrines***

• ***The Meaning of Shi\`ism According to the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a)***

• ***Oppression and Injustice***

• ***Cooperation with Oppressors***

• ***Holding Offices in Despotic Governments***

• ***Calling upon Islamic Unity***

• ***Mutual Rights of Muslims***

Prelude
-------

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) had already concluded that they
would not assume the political leadership of the Muslim nation (of which
they are worthier than any other person and for which Almighty Allah had
prepared them) so long as they are alive, and that their followers
(Shi\`ah) would suffer under the authority of others who consider it
necessary to persecute the Shi\`ah with all means of violence and
cruelty.

As a result, it was very natural, on the one hand, that the Shi\`ah,
under the commandments of their Imams, adopt *taqiyyah* as their style
of life and technique in the same way as their Imams had practiced it
before them, as long as *taqiyyah* would be the one and only means of
preventing their enemies from shedding their blood and as long as it
would do evil neither to them nor to the religion in general, so that
they would survive the seditious conditions of their ages and the enmity
incurred by the ruling authorities against the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a).

On the other hand, it was necessary for the Holy Imams (\`a), in their
capacity as the Divinely commissioned guides of the Muslim nation, to
devote themselves to teaching their followers the laws of Islam, guiding
them to the path of religiousness and righteousness, and directing them
to a socially useful course so that they would be perfect examples of
decent Muslim individuals.

The present brief thesis cannot comprehend the Ahl al-Bayt’s (\`a)
methodology of teaching, which is present in the huge books of
traditions that comprise much of such religious sciences. However, we
can allude to some doctrines that the Holy Imams (\`a) taught their
followers to ensure they constituted a righteous community, approximated
them to Almighty Allah, cleansed them of the filth of sins and vices,
and gave rise to decency and honesty in their inner selves.

Among such socially useful teachings of the Holy Imams (\`a) is
*taqiyyah*, discussed in the previous chapter. We will therefore mention
some other teachings., discussed in the previous chapter. We will
therefore mention some other teachings.

Supplication (Du\`a’)
---------------------

The Holy Prophet has described supplication (*du\`a’*)([^1]) as the
weapon of true believers, the pillar of the religion, and the light of
the heavens and the earth:([^2])

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلدُّعَاءُ سِلاَحُ المُؤمِنِ، وَعَمُودُ الدِّينِ، وَنُورُ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Supplication has thus become one of the distinctive features of the
*Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* who have excelled all others in this peculiarity. As
a result, they have written down tens of books, both brief and
elaborate, on the merits and etiquettes of supplicating. Such books have
also comprised the prayers and supplications reported from the Holy
Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a), achieving the purpose which the Holy
Prophet (s) and his Household (\`a) aimed at when they urged and aroused
the interests of people to supplicate Almighty Allah through numerous
statements and traditions, such as the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أفْضَلُ العِبَادَةِ الدُّعَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Supplication is the most favorite act of worship.([^3])

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحَبُّ الأعْمَالِ إلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِي الأرْضِ الدُّعَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

For Almighty Allah, supplication is the most desirable act (of worship)
that is done on this earth.([^4])

Moreover, the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الدُّعَاءَ يَرُدُّ القَضَاءَ وَالبَلاَءَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, Supplication may hold off predetermined calamities and
misfortunes.([^5])

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدُّعَاءُ شِفَاءٌ مِنْ كُلِّ دَاءٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Supplication is a remedy for all maladies.([^6])

Narrations have described Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (\`a) as markedly
suppliant.([^7]) A great deal of supplication is expected to be an
outstanding feature of one who is described as the chief of the
monotheists and the leader of the devout.

Like his sermons, Imam \`Ali’s (\`a) supplications, one of which is the
famous Supplication of Kumayl (known as *du\`a’ kumayl*)([^8]), have
been masterpieces of Arabic eloquence. They contain such marvelous
Divine facts and religious directives that provide an advanced program
of education for true Muslims.

If carefully observed, the supplications of the Holy Prophet (s) and
Imams (\`a) contain an excellent pattern of conduct that a Muslim
individual can follow. They arouse the powers of true faith and
conviction, stimulate the spirit of sacrifice for the truth, present the
secrets of worship and the pleasant taste of confidential talk with the
Almighty, and prescribe what one should learn from one’s religion, what
brings one close to Almighty Allah, and what drives one away from
corruption, whims and heresies.

In short, these supplications cover all aspects of morality and
self-discipline as well as all aspects of Muslim belief. Furthermore,
they are the most important references to philosophical views and
scientific research in the fields of Divinity and ethics.

Had all people been able to abide by the points of true guidance that
are introduced in the excellent contents of these supplications, there
would have been no single trace left for corruption on this globe, which
is overburdened with corruption, and these souls enchained with evil
would have soared freely high overhead in the skies of truth.
Nevertheless, how can humanity listen to the words of the reformers and
respond to the calls of the truth after Almighty Allah has revealed
their reality, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ النَّفْسَ لَأَمَّارَةٌ بِالسُّوءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most surely, man's soul is wont to command him to do evil.*** **(12/
53)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَكْثَرُ النَّاسِ وَلَوْ حَرَصْتَ بِمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And most men will not believe though you desire it eagerly.***
**(12/103)**

The pillar of evil in human souls lies in self-conceit, blinking at
one’s faults, and the false fancy that causes man to reckon that all his
deeds are good. Such being the case, man begins to wrong and oppress
others, lie to and deceive others, and give free rein to his lust to
lead him wherever his caprice commands. Even so, man believes that he is
doing exactly what he should do, shutting his eyes to wrongdoing, and
treating too lightly his sins.

These supplications, on the other hand, are focused on teaching man how
to achieve self-seclusion and devotion to Almighty Allah—two matters
that lead man to confess his faults and admit that he is blameworthy and
needs to apply himself solely to Almighty Allah, beg Him for forgiveness
and acceptance of his repentance. Besides, these supplications point out
man’s places of vanity and sinfulness in his inner self, teaching him to
say the following statement, quoted from the famous *Du\`a’ Kumayl*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلهي وَمَوْلاي! أَجْرَيْتَ عَلَيَّ حُكْماً إِتَّبَعْتُ فيهِ هَوى
نَفْسي، وَلَمْ أَحْتَرِسْ فيهِ مِنْ تَزْيينِ عَدُوّي، فَغَرَّني بِما
أَهْوى، وَأَسْعَدَهُ عَلى ذلِكَ الْقَضاءُ؛ فَتَجاوَزْتُ بِما جَرى
عَلَيَّ مِنْ ذلِكَ بَعْضَ حُدُودِكَ، وَخالَفْتُ بَعْضَ أَوامِرِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

My God and my Protector! Thou put into effect through me a decree but I
followed the caprice of my own soul, And [I] did not remain wary of the
adorning of my enemy. So, he deluded me through my soul's caprice and
therein destiny helped him. So, in what was put into effect through me
in that situation, I transgressed some of Your statutes, and disobeyed
some of Your commands.([^9])

Undoubtedly, to reveal such confessions in privacy is much easier than
to reveal it in public in the presence of people although it is also one
of the most difficult admissions made in private. If man tries, it will
contribute greatly to the alleviation of the evil ardors within and
training oneself on seeking goodness.

One who really intends to discipline oneself must achieve such privacy
and call oneself to account. Hence, the easiest method of such
introspection is to repeat these supplications till their contents
penetrate into the depths of the self. For instance, one may repeat the
following statement of the famous supplication known as *Du\`a’
Abi-Hamzah al-Thamali*:([^10])

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيْ رَبّ جَلّلْنِي بِسِتْرِكَ، وَاعْفُ عَنْ تَوْبِيخِي بِكَرَمِ
وَجْهِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my Lord! Cover me with Your protective covering, and overlook
reproaching me out of the Majesty of Your Face.

Pondering over the expression ‘*cover me…*’ shows that it arouses in the
self the desire to conceal all its evils so that one may perceive these
extraneous factors in oneself. The expression then alludes to a
confession of this fact when one reads the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَوِ اطّلَعَ الْيَوْمَ عَلَى ذَنْبِي غَيْرُكَ مَا فَعَلْتُهُ! وَلَوْ
خِفْتُ تَعْجِيلَ الْعُقُوبَةِ لاجْتَنَبْتُهُ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

In fact, if anyone other than You has watched me while committing these
sins, I may not commit them; and had I anticipated immediateness of
punishment, I might have avoided doing them.

This confession of the existence of such extraneous factors and the
necessity of concealing such evils in oneself arouses the desire to pray
for Almighty Allah’s pardon and forgiveness. One does not wish to be
humiliated before people when Almighty Allah decides to punish one in
this world or on the Day of Resurrection because of the evil deeds that
one has done. Just then, one finds the pleasant taste of confidential
conversation with the Almighty and devotes oneself to Him, praising and
thanking Him for being tolerant and pardoning one although He has always
had the power to do otherwise by disclosing one’s faults before people.
The supplication then continues:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ عَلَى حِلْمِكَ بَعْدَ عِلْمِكَ، وَعَلَى عَفْوِكَ
بَعْدَ قُدْرَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hence, all praise be to You, for You act tolerably although You have
full knowledge (of the faults); and for Your pardon even though You have
the absolute authority (to punish).

The next paragraphs of the supplication inspire one with ways of
admitting faults and seeking pardon for past violations on the grounds
of Almighty Allah’s lenience and pardon. The bond that attaches a
servant with his Lord will not break and the servant will realize that
his acts of disobedience to the Lord have not been based on his denial
or belittling of Almighty Allah. So, the supplication continues:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَحْمِلُنِي وَيُجَرّئُنِي عَلَى مَعْصِيَتِكَ حِلْمُكَ عَنّي!
وَيَدْعُونِي إِلَى قِلّةِ الْحَيَاءِ سِتْرُكَ عَلَيّ! وَيُسْرِعُنِي
إِلَى التّوَثّبِ عَلَى مَحَارِمِكَ مَعْرِفَتِي بِسَعَةِ رَحْمَتِكَ
وَعَظِيمِ عَفْوِكَ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is Your forbearance that gives me latitude and makes me dare to break
Your laws; and it is Your concealment of my faults that makes me act
shamelessly in Your presence; and it is my acquaintance with the
broadness of Your mercy and the magnitude of Your pardon that makes me
hurry to violate that which You have forbidden.

In this fashion, supplications pursue the course of confidential talks
that aim at disciplining oneself and pledging obedience to Almighty
Allah and shunning acts of disobedience.

This brief thesis does not allow me to cite more examples of such
sublime supplications.

However, I am inclined to mention some supplications that carry a method
of offering pleas before Almighty Allah for the sake of seeking His
pardon and forgiveness, such as the following paragraph of *Du\`a’
Kumayl*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيْتَ شِعْرِي يَا سَيِّدِي وَإِلَهِي وَمَوْلايَ! أَتُسَلِّطُ
النَّارَ عَلَى وُجُوهٍ خَرَّتْ لِعَظَمَتِكَ سَاجِدَةً؟ وَعَلَى
أَلْسُنٍ نَطَقَتْ بِتَوْحِيدِكَ صَادِقَةً وَبِشُكْرِكَ مَادِحَةً؟
وَعَلَى قُلُوبٍ اعْتَرَفَتْ بِإِلَهِيَّتِكَ مُحَقِّقَةً؟ وَعَلَى
ضَمَائِرَ حَوَتْ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ بِكَ حَتَّى صَارَتْ خَاشِعَةً؟ وَعَلَى
جَواِرحَ سَعَتْ إِلَى أَوْطَانِ تَعَبُّدِكَ طَائِعَةً وَأَشَارَتْ
بِاسْتِغْفَارِكَ مُذْعِنَةً؟ مَا هَكَذَا الظَّنُّ بِكَ وَلا
أُخْبِرْنَا بِفَضْلِكَ عَنكَ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

Would that I knew—my Master, My God and my Protector

Wilt Thou give the Fire dominion over faces that have prostrated
themselves before Your Omnipotence;

over tongues that have sincerely professed Your Unity and given thanks
to You in praise thereof;

over hearts that have acknowledged Your Divinity through verification;

over minds that have gained knowledge of You until they have become
humble;

and, over bodily members that have sped to the places of Your worship in
obedience and begged for Your forgiveness in submission?

No such opinion is held of You! Nor has such been reported -thanks to
Your bounty- concerning You.

Re-read this passage and reflect upon the excellence, eloquence, and
diction of these words of argument. At the same time as these words
inspire the soul to concede its shortcomings in servitude to the
Almighty, they instruct it not to despair of His mercy and kindness.
Looking with a stealthy glance, these words address the souls and remind
them of their primary duties by supposing that all the required duties
towards the Almighty have been carried out, to lay stress on the fact
that man will deserve forgiveness of Almighty Allah only after carrying
out all these duties completely. This style fills man, who has not yet
accomplished these duties, with the desire to review his manners and
then make up for the duties, which he missed.

The following passage of the same supplication is another style of
offering pleas:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَبْنِي، يَا إِلَهِي وَسَيِّدِي وَمَوْلايَ وَرَبِّي، صَبَرْتُ عَلَى
عَذَابِكَ، فَكَيْفَ أَصْبِرُ عَلَى فِرَاقِكَ؟ وَهَبْنِي صَبَرْتُ عَلَى
حَرِّ نَارِكَ، فَكَيْفَ أَصْبِرُ عَنِ النَّظَرِ إِلَى كَرَامَتِكَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then, suppose—O My God, Master, Protector, and Lord—that I am able to
endure Your chastisement, but how can I endure separation from You? And
suppose that I am able to endure the heat of Your Fire, but how can I
endure not gazing upon Your generosity?

These statements draw the attentions towards the necessity of tasting
nearness to Almighty Allah and touching on His honor and absolute power
over all things by bearing love for Him and hankering after what He has
prepared for His loving servants. They also emphasise the fact that such
pleasure must attain such an elevated level that it influences souls
more than chastisement and the heat of fire do. Supposing that man can
stand the heat of Hellfire, he will not be able to stand separation from
Almighty Allah.

Besides, the previously cited passage of the supplication tries to make
us understand that such love and pleasure of gaining the favor of the
worshipped and beloved Lord will be the best means a sinful individual
can find to win His pardon and forgiveness. Undeniably, seeking the
affection and favor of the Lord—the All-generous, All-forbearing, the
Forgiver of sins, and the Acceptor of repentance—are definitely
blessings that He confers upon His servants.

Let us end with a brief, yet comprehensive, supplication that encloses
all nobility of character and demonstrates the praiseworthy features
that each organ in the human body should hold:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ ارْزُقْنا تَوْفيقَ الطّاعَةِ، وَبُعْدَ الْمَعْصِيَةِ،
وَصِدْقَ النِّيَّةِ، وَعِرْفانَ الْحُرْمَةِ، وَأَكْرِمْنا بِالْهُدى
وَالاِْسْتِقامَةِ، وَسَدِّدْ أَلْسِنَتَنا بِالصَّوابِ وَالْحِكْمَةِ،
وَامْلأَْ قُلُوبَنا بِالْعِلْمِ وَالْمَعْرِفَةِ، وَطَهِّرْ بُطُونَنا
مِنَ الْحَرامِ وَالشُّبْهَةِ، وَاكْفُفْ أَيْدِيَنا عَنِ الظُّلْمِ
وَالسَّرِقَةِ، وَاغْضُضْ أَبْصارَنا عَنِ الْفُجُورِ وَالْخِيانَةِ،
وَاسْدُدْ أَسْماعَنا عَنِ اللَّغْوِ وَالْغِيبَةِ، وَتَفَضَّلْ عَلى
عُلَمائِنا بِالزُّهْدِ وَالنَّصيحَةِ، وَعَلَى الْمُتَعَلِّمينَ
بِالْجُهْدِ وَالرَّغْبَةِ، وَعَلَى الْمُسْتَمِعينَ بِالاِْتِّباعِ
وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ، وَعَلى مَرْضَى الْمُسْلِمينَ بِالشِّفاءِ وَالرّاحَةِ،
وَعَلى مَوْتاهُمْ بِالرَّأفَةِ وَالرَّحْمَةِ، وَعَلى مَشايِخِنا
بِالْوَقارِ وَالسَّكينَةِ، وَعَلَى الشَّبابِ بِالإِنابَةِ
وَالتَّوْبَةِ، وَعَلَى النِّساءِ بِالْحَياءِ وَالْعِفَّةِ، وَعَلَى
الأغْنِياءِ بِالتَّواضُعِ وَالسَّعَةِ، وَعَلَى الْفُقَراءِ بِالصَّبْرِ
وَالْقَناعَةِ، وَعَلَى الْغُزاةِ بِالنَّصْرِ وَالْغَلَبَةِ، وَعَلَى
الأُسَراءِ بِالْخَلاصِ وَالرّاحَةِ، وَعَلَى الاُْمَراءِ بِالْعَدْلِ
وَالشَّفَقَةِ، وَعَلَى الرَّعِيَّةِ بِالإنْصافِ وَحُسْنِ السّيرَةِ،
وَبارِكْ لِلْحُجّاجِ وَالزُّوّارِ فِي الزّادِ وَالنَّفَقَةِ، وَاقْضِ
ما أَوْجَبْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنَ الْحَجِّ وَالْعُمْرَةِ، بِفَضْلِكَ
وَرَحْمَتِكَ يا أَرْحَمَ الرّاحِمينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah; (please do) grant us success in obeying (You), remoteness from
disobeying (You), true intention, and identification of sanctity.
(Please do) honor us with true guidance and straight-forwardness.
Dedicate our tongues to truth and wisdom. Fill our hearts with knowledge
and learning. Purify our stomachs from illegally and suspiciously gotten
food. Withhold our hands from oppression and larceny. Turn our sights
away from licentiousness and treachery. Block our hearings against
vainness and backbiting. Bless our scholars with asceticism and good
advice, our learners with hard work and desire (to learn), our listeners
with following and learning (lessons), our Muslim patients with healing
and comfort, our dead Muslims with forgiveness and mercy, our old ones
with somberness and gentleness, our youths with turning (to You) and
repentance, our women with shyness and chastity, our rich with modesty
and generosity, our poor with patience and contentment, our warriors
with triumph and primacy, our prisoners with release and comfort, our
rulers with justice and sympathy, and our subjects with impartiality and
good behavior. (Please do) Bless the pilgrims to Mecca and the visitors
(to the tombs of the saints) with provision and expenditure. Help them
settle the Hajj and \`Umrah that You have made incumbent upon them. [Let
this be] on account of Your grace and mercy; O the most Merciful of all
those who show mercy.([^11])

Seizing this opportunity, I recommend my dear brethren, the readers, not
to miss rehearsing these supplications, yet with full ponderation over
their significances and objectives with presence of heart and devotion,
and supplicate before Almighty Allah with reverence and submission. I
also recommend them to read these supplications as if they are
expressing their personal states, with full observance of the etiquettes
that the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) have instructed us to do while reading them.

It is important to note that reading these supplications with absent
minds and distracted hearts will be no more than shaking of tongues that
neither increase knowledge, nor take man closer to the Almighty, nor his
prayers achieve acceptance. It has been reported that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لاَ يَسْتَجِيبُ دُعَاءً بِظَهْرِ قَلْبٍ
سَاهٍ؛ فَإذَا دَعَوْتَ فَأقْبِلْ بِقَلْبِكَ ثُمَّ اسْتَيْقِنْ
بِالإجَابَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Almighty Allah will not respond to the prayer that is said while the
heart is distracted; therefore, when you pray to Him, your heart must be
present. Only then can you be sure of response.([^12])

The Supplications of Al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah
----------------------------------------------

After the tragic battle of al-Taff([^13]) that took place at Karbala',
and the Umayyad dynasty held the reins of leadership of the Muslim
nation—overstepping all bounds in committing massacres, shedding the
blood of the innocent, and despising all tenets of Islam—Imam \`Ali ibn
al-Husayn (\`a), the Adornment of the Worshippers and the Master of the
Prostrators,([^14]) had no alternative but to confine himself to his
house, dejected and full of sorrow.([^15]) Nobody had the courage to
visit him and he was unable to instruct people on what was obligatory
upon them to do and most proper.

As a result, he had to resort to the style of supplicating which is, as
has been already cited in this book, one of the finest educational
courses of self-discipline. The Imam (\`a) followed this style as a
means of spreading the Qur'anic directives and the Ahl al-Bayt’s method
of education and to teach people the spirit of religiosity, asceticism,
self-discipline and moral ethics.

This was the method of dissemination that the Imam (\`a) adopted to
teach people their religion without arousing the suspicion of the ruling
authorities who kept an eye on his activities, and not provide them with
an opportunity to persecute him. The Imam (\`a), therefore, composed
many such supplications, some of which are in his famous *al-Sahifah
al-Sajjadiyyah*,([^16]) which is also called ‘The Psalms of Islam or The
Psalms of Muhammad’s Household.’

In both style and significance, these supplications occupy the top
position in the list of Arabic literature as well as comprise the
noblest directions of Islam, the finest secrets of monotheism and
Prophethood, and the most accurate method of teaching people the Holy
Prophet’s (s) high moral standards and the ethics of Islam.

Dealing with various topics of religious education, these supplications
become a method of teaching the true religion and morality in the form
of prayers, or prayers in the form of teaching the true religion and
morality.

Coming after the Holy Qur'an and *Nahj al-Balaghah*,([^17]) the
supplications of Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn (\`a) are composed of the
finest diction of the Arabic language. They are also considered the
chief philosophical source of Divinity and Ethics.

**Some of these supplications** teach us how to glorify, venerate,
praise and thank Almighty Allah.

**Others** teach us how to introspect by establishing a confidential
conversation with Him, how to meditate by focusing on Him, and repent by
devoting ourselves to Him.

**Others** clearly explain the significance of praying to Almighty Allah
to shower His blessings upon His Prophet, Messengers and Saints.

**Others** teach us the meaning of kindness to parents.

**Others** classify one’s duties toward parents, duties of fathers
toward their sons, duties towards neighbors, duties toward relatives,
duties toward Muslims in general, and duties of the rich towards the
poor and vice versa.

**Others** call attention to what we should do when we are financially
indebted to others, what we should do concerning our economic and
financial affairs, how we should deal with our mates, friends, and
people in general, and whom we should choose to serve us.

**Others** enumerate all traits of nobility of character; they act as a
perfect course of ethics.

**Others** direct us how to face misfortunes and calamities patiently,
and what to do in both sickness and health.

**Others** present the duties of Muslim armies and the duties of people
toward them.

Striking all chords, these supplications deal with all topics
necessitated by the instructions of the Holy Prophet and the Muslim code
of law. All these topics, and more, have been discussed in one style—the
style of supplication.

However, the supplications of Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sajjad (\`a)
possess some common features that are summarised below:

**First:** These supplications comprise a description of Almighty Allah
and His grandeur and omnipotence over all things in addition to
explaining His inseparable Oneness. The finest scientific expressions
are used in these supplications to introduce the Almighty as too Exalted
to allow us to imagine anything that is incompatible with His Holiness
and Majesty. Indications to these topics are repeated in almost each
supplication said by the Imam (\`a), yet in a different way each time.
For instance, in the first supplication of *al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah*,
we can read the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الأَوَّلِ بِلا أَوَّلٍ كَانَ قَبْلَهُ، وَالآخِرِ
بِلاَ آخِرٍ يَكُونُ بَعْدَهُ؛ الَّذِي قَصُرَتْ عَنْ رُؤْيَتِهِ
أَبْصَارُ النَّاظِرِينَ، وَعَجَزَتْ عَنْ نَعْتِهِ أَوْهَامُ
الْوَاصِفِينَ. اِبْتَدَعَ بِقُدْرَتِهِ الْخَلْقَ ابْتِدَاعاً،
وَاخْتَرعَهُمْ عَلَى مَشِيَّتِهِ اخْتِرَاعاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

All praise is due to Allah, the First before Whom no being preceded, and
the Last after Whom there will be no other; Whom the eyes of those who
see cannot perceive, and Whom our descriptive imaginations cannot
envisage. With His Power, He brought Creation into being out of
nothingness, and made His creatures totally subservient to His Will.

In this passage, there is a subtle explanation of the meanings of ‘the
First’ and ‘the Last’ being among the Attributes of the Almighty. There
is also a reference to the Elevation of Almighty Allah as being
incomprehensible by any sight or imagination. The significance of the
powers of ‘creation’ and ‘making’ of the Lord is also visible in this
passage.

In the sixth supplication of the book, we can read a different style of
presenting Almighty Allah’s absolute power and management of affairs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي خَلَقَ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ بِقُوَّتِهِ،
وَمَيَّزَ بَيْنَهُمَا بِقُدْرَتِهِ، وَجَعَلَ لِكُلِّ وَاحِدٍ مِنهُمَا
حَدّاً مَحْدُوداً وَأَمَداً مَمْدُوداً. يُولِجُ كُلَّ وَاحِدٍ
مِنْهُمَا فِي صَاحِبِهِ، وَيُولِجُ صَاحِبَهُ فِيهِ، بِتَقْدِيرٍ مِنْهُ
لِلْعِبَادِ فِيمَا يَغْذُوهُمْ بِهِ وَيُنْشِئُهُمْ عَلَيْهِ. فَخَلَقَ
لَهُمُ اللَّيْلَ لِيَسْكُنُوا فِيهِ مِنْ حَرَكَاتِ التَّعَبِ
وَنَهَضَاتِ النَّصَبِ، وَجَعَلَهُ لِبَاساً لِيَلْبَسُوا مِنْ رَاحَتِهِ
وَمَنَامِهِ، فَيَكُونَ ذَلِكَ لَهُمْ جَمَاماً وَقُوَّةً وَلِيَنَالُوا
بِهِ لَذَّةً وَشَهْوَةً…
  </p>
</blockquote>

Praise belongs to Allah Who created night and day through His strength,
set them apart through His power, and appointed for each a determined
limit and a drawn-out period. He makes each of the two enter into its
companion, and makes its companion enter into it, as an ordainment from
Him for His servants in that through which He feeds them and with which
He makes them grow. He created for them the night that they might rest
in it from tiring movements and wearisome exertions. And He made it a
garment for them that they might be clothed in its ease and its sleep
that it might bring for them refreshment and strength that they might
gain therein pleasure and passion…

In this supplication, the Imam (\`a) continues to mention the advantages
of day and night and how man is required to thank the Lord for this
grace.

In the seventh supplication of this book, we view another style through
which the Imam (\`a) demonstrates that all affairs are subservient to
Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مَنْ تُحَلُّ بِهِ عُقَدُ الْمَكارِهِ، وَيا مَنْ يُفْثَأُ بِهِ
حَدُّ الشَّدائِدِ، وَيا مَنْ يُلْتَمَسُ مِنْهُ الَمخْرَجُ إِلى رَوْحِ
الْفَرَجِ، ذَلَّتْ لِقُدْرَتِكَ الصِّعابُ، وَتَسَبَّبَتْ بِلُطْفِكَ
الاَْسْبابُ، وَجَرى بِقُدْرَتِكَ الْقَضاءُ، وَمَضَتْ عَلى إِرادَتِكَ
الاَْشْياءُ، فَهِيَ بِمَشِيَّتِكَ دُونَ قَوْلِكَ مُؤْتَمِرَةٌ،
وَبِإِرادَتِكَ دُونَ نَهْيِكَ مُنْزَجِرَةٌ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

O He through whom the knots of detested things are untied! O He through
whom the cutting edge of hardships is blunted! O He from whom is begged
the outlet to the freshness of relief! Intractable affairs yield to Your
power; means are made ready by Your gentleness; the decree goes into
effect through Your power; and all things proceed according to Your
desire. By Your desire, they follow Your command without Your word; and
by Your will, they obey Your bans without Your prohibition…

**Second**: These supplications comprise presentations of Almighty
Allah’s incessant favors on His servants and His servants’ inability to
thank Him for these favors no matter what great extents the servants can
reach in worship, obedience, and devotion to Him. Let us read the
following passage quoted from the thirty-seventh supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إِنَّ أَحَداً لاَ يَبْلُغُ مِنْ شُكْرِكَ غَايَةً إِلاَّ
حَصَلَ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ إِحْسَانِكَ مَا يُلْزِمُهُ شُكْرَاً، وَلاَ
يَبْلُغُ مَبْلَغاً مِنْ طَاعَتِكَ وَإِنِ اجْتَهَدَ إِلاَّ كَانَ
مُقَصِّراً دُونَ اسْتِحْقَاقِكَ بِفَضْلِكَ، فَأَشْكَرُ عِبَادِكَ
عَاجِزٌ عَنْ شُكْرِكَ، وَأَعْبَدُهُمْ لَك مقَصِّرٌ عَنْ طَاعَتِكَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: No one reaches a limit in thanking You without acquiring that
of Your beneficence, which enjoins upon him thanksgiving, nor does
anyone reach a degree in obeying You, even if he strives, without
falling short of what You deserve because of Your bounty. The most
thankful of Your servants does not have the capacity to thank You, and
the most worshipful of them falls short of obeying You.

Because Almighty Allah’s graces and favors that He endows upon His
creatures are endless, man fails to thank Him duly. Naturally, the case
will be worse with those who dare to disobey Him. Hence, whatever such
disobedient persons do after that, they will never be able to make
amends for even a single act of disobedience to Him that they have
committed. The following passage, quoted from the sixteenth
supplication, refers to this fact:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا إِلَهِي! لَوْ بَكَيْتُ إِلَيْكَ حَتَّى تَسْقُطَ أَشْفَارُ
عَيْنَيَّ، وَانْتَحَبْتُ حَتَّى يَنْقَطِعَ صَوْتِي، وَقُمْتُ لَكَ
حَتَّى تَتَنَشَّرَ قَدَمَايَ، وَرَكَعْتُ لَكَ حَتَّى يَنْخَلِعَ
صُلْبِي، وَسَجَدْتُ لَكَ حَتَّى تَتَفَقَّأَ حَدَقَتَايَ، وَأَكَلْتُ
تُرَابَ الأَرْضِ طُولَ عُمْرِي، وَشَرِبْتُ مَاءَ الرَّمَادِ آخِرَ
دَهْرِي، وَذَكَرْتُكَ فِي خِلاَلِ ذَلِكَ حَتَّى يَكِلَّ لِسَانِي،
ثُمَّ لَمْ أَرْفَعْ طَرْفِي إِلَى آفَاقِ السَّمَاءِ اسْتِحْيَاءً
مِنْكَ، مَا اسْتَوْجَبْتُ بِذَلِكَ مَحْوَ سَيِّئَةٍ وَاحِدَةٍ مِنْ
سَيِّئَاتِي!
  </p>
</blockquote>

My God: If I weep before You until my eyelids drop off, wail until my
voice wears out, stand before You until my feet swell up, bow to You
until my backbone is thrown out of joint, prostrate myself before You
until my eyeballs fall out, eat the dirt of the earth for the rest of my
life, drink the water of ashes until the end of my days, mention You
through all of that until my tongue fails, and not lift my glance to the
sky's horizons in shame before You, yet would I not merit through all of
that the erasing of a single one of my evil deeds!

**Third**: Explaining Divine Reward and Punishment and introducing
Paradise and Hellfire, these supplications denote that the entire reward
of Almighty Allah is in fact one of His favors that He confers upon His
servants for we deserve His punishment on account of the least act of
disobedience that we commit audaciously, and Almighty Allah has thorough
evidence of it.

As a matter of fact, all the supplications of *al-Sahifah
al-Sajjadiyyah* constantly strike on this effective chord so as to
convey to the souls the necessity of fearing the punishment of Almighty
Allah and desiring His reward. Through a variety of eloquent styles that
seep into the hearts of those who read them attentively, these
supplications make them fear even thinking of committing an act of
disobedience to Almighty Allah. For instance, let us review the
following passage quoted from the forty-sixth supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُجَّتُكَ قَائِمَةٌ لاَ تُدْحَضُ، وَسُلْطَانُكَ ثَابِتٌ لاَ يَزُولُ.
فَالْوَيْلُ الدَّائِمُ لِمَنْ جَنَحَ عَنْكَ، وَالْخَيْبَةُ الخَاذِلَةُ
لِمَنْ خَابَ مِنْكَ، وَالشَّقَاءُ الأَشْقَى لِمَنِ اغْتَرَّ بِكَ. مَا
أَكْثَرَ تَصَرُّفَهُ فِي عَذَابِكَ! وَمَا أَطْوَلَ تَرَدُّدَهُ فِي
عِقَابِكَ! وَمَا أَبْعَدَ غَايَتَهُ مِنَ الْفَرَجِ! وَمَا أَقْنَطَهُ
مِنْ سُهُولَةِ الْمَخْرَجِ! عَدْلاً مِنْ قَضَائِكَ لاَ تَجُورُ فِيهِ،
وَإِنْصَافاً مِنْ حُكْمِكَ لاَ تَحِيفُ عَلَيْهِ. فَقَدْ ظَاهَرْتَ
الْحُجَجَ، وَأَبْلَيْتَ الأَعْذَارَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

Your argument is established, never refuted. Your authority fixed, never
removed. Permanent woe be to him who inclines away from You. Forsaking
disappointment be to him who is disappointed by You, and the most
wretched wretchedness be to him who is deluded about You! How long he
will move about in Your chastisement! How long he will frequent Your
punishment! How far his utmost end from relief is! How he will despair
of an easy exit! [All of this] as justice from Your decree (You are not
unjust in it!), and equity from Your judgment (You do not act wrongfully
against him!). You supported the arguments, tested the excuses…

Another example is the following passage quoted from the thirty-first
supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ فَارْحَمْ وَحْدَتِي بَيْنَ يَدَيْكَ، وَوَجِيبَ قَلْبِي
مِنْ خَشْيَتِكَ، وَاضْطِرَابَ أَرْكَانِي مِنْ هَيْبَتِكَ، فَقَدْ
أَقَامَتْنِي يَا رَبِّ ذُنُوبِي مَقَامَ الْخِزْيِ بِفِنَائِكَ، فَإِنْ
سَكَتُّ لَمْ يَنْطِقْ عَنِّي أَحَدٌ، وَإِنْ شَفَعْتُ فَلَسْتُ بِأَهْلِ
الشَّفَاعَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: so, (please) have mercy upon my being alone before You, the
pounding of my heart in dread of You, the trembling of my limbs in awe
of You! My sins, O my God, have caused me to stand in the station of
degradation in Your courtyard. If I remain silent, none will speak for
me; and if I seek an intercessor, I will not be worthy of intercession.

Another example is quoted from the thirty-ninth supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّكَ إِنْ تُكَافِنِي بِالْحَقِّ تُهْلِكْنِي، وَإِلاّ تَغَمَّدْنِي
بِرَحْمَتِكَ تُوبِقْنِي. اَللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْتَوْهِبُكَ يَا إِلَهِي
مَا لاَ يَنْقُصُكَ بَذْلُهُ، وَأَسْتَحْمِلُكَ مَا لاَ يَبْهَظُكَ
حَمْلُهُ، أَسْتَوْهِبُكَ يَا إِلَهِي نَفْسِيَ اَلَّتِي لَمْ
تَخْلُقْهَا لِتَمْتَنِعَ بِهَا مِنْ سُوءٍ، أَوْ لِتَطَرَّقَ بِهَا
إِلَى نَفْعٍ، وَلكِنْ أَنْشَأْتَهَا إِثْبَاتاً لِقُدْرَتِكَ عَلَى
مِثْلِهَا، وَاحْتِجَاجاً بِهَا عَلَى شَكْلِهَا. وَأَسْتَحْمِلُكَ مِنْ
ذُنُوبِي مَا قَدْ بَهَظَنِي حَمْلُهُ، وَأَسْتَعِينُ بِكَ عَلَى مَا
قَدْ فَدَحَنِي ثِقْلُهُ. فَصَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ، وَهَبْ
لِنَفْسِي عَلَى ظُلْمِهَا نَفْسِي، وَوَكِّلْ رَحْمَتَكَ بِاحْتِمَالِ
إِصْرِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

If You recompense me with the right, You will destroy me; and if You do
not shield me in Your mercy, You will lay me waste. O Allah, my God: I
ask You to grant me that whose giving will not decrease You, and I ask
You to carry (on behalf of me) that whose carrying will not weigh You
down. My God, I ask You to pardon my soul, which You did not create to
keep Yourself from evil nor to find the way to profit. No, You brought
it forth to demonstrate Your power over (making) its like and to provide
an argument against its matches. I ask You to carry those of my sins
whose carrying weighs me down and I seek help from You in that whose
heaviness oppresses me. So, (please) bless Muhammad and his Household;
and pardon my soul in spite of its wrongdoing, and appoint Your mercy to
carry my burden!

**Fourth**: Through these supplications, the Imam (\`a) intended to make
the supplicants disdain evil and vices so that their inner selves become
pure and their hearts free from filth. The following passage, quoted
from the twentieth supplication, is a good example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ وَفِّرْ بِلُطْفِكَ نِيَّتِي، وَصَحِّحْ بِمَا عِنْدَكَ
يَقِينِي، وَاسْتَصْلِحْ بِقُدْرَتِكَ مَا فَسَدَ مِنِّي… اَللَّهُمَّ
صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ، وَمَتِّعْنِي بِهُدًى صَالِحٍ لاَ
أَسْتَبْدِلُ بِهِ، وَطَرِيقَةِ حَقٍّ لاَ أَزِيغُ عَنْهَا، وَنِيَّةِ
رُشْدٍ لاَ أَشُكُّ فِيهَا… اللَّهُمَّ لاَ تَدَعْ خَصْلَةً تُعَابُ
مِنِّي إِلاَّ أَصْلَحْتَهَا، ولاَ عَائِبَةً أُؤَنَّبُ بِهَا إِلاَّ
حَسَّنْتَهَا، وَلاَ أُكْرُومَةً فِيَّ نَاقِصَةً إِلاَّ أتْمَمْتَهَا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: Complete my intention through Your gentleness, rectify my
certainty through what is with You, and set right what is corrupt in me
through Your power… O Allah: Bless Muhammad and his Household, give me
to enjoy a sound guidance which I seek not to replace, a path of truth
from which I swerve not, and an intention of right conduct in which I
have no doubts… O Allah: Deposit in me no quality for which I will be
faulted unless You set it right, no flaw for which I will be blamed
unless You make it beautiful, and no deficient noble trait unless You
complete it!

**Fifth**: Through these supplications, the Imam (\`a) suggests to the
supplicants that it is necessary to disdain begging people and showing
humility to them. He (\`a) also suggests that one must not provide one’s
need before anyone except Almighty Allah, since to desire what people
possess is one of the lowliest traits of character. An example of these
suggestions can be read in the following passage, quoted from the
twentieth supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَفْتِنِّي بِالإسْتِعَانَةِ بِغَيْرِكَ إِذَا اضْطُرِرْتُ، وَلاَ
بِالْخُضُوعِ لِسُؤَالِ غَيْرِكَ إِذَا افْتَقَرْتُ، وَلاَ
بِالتَّضَرُّعِ إِلَى مَنْ دُونَكَ إِذَا رَهِبْتُ، فَأَسْتَحِقَّ
بِذَلِكَ خِذْلاَنَكَ وَمَنْعَكَ وَإِعْرَاضَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Please) Tempt me not to seek help from other than You when I am
distressed, to humble myself in asking from someone else when I am poor,
or to plead with someone less than You when I fear, for then I would
deserve Your abandonment, Your withholding, and Your turning away.

A similar suggestion is present in the following passage, quoted from
the twenty-eighth supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَخْلَصْتُ بِانْقِطَاعِي إِلَيْكَ، وَأَقْبَلْتُ
بِكُلِّي عَلِيكَ، وَصَرَفْتُ وَجْهِي عَمَّنْ يَحْتَاجُ إِلَى رِفْدِكَ،
وَقَلَبْتُ مَسْأَلَتِي عَمَّنْ لَمْ يَسْتَغْنِ عَنْ فَضْلِكَ،
وَرَأَيْتُ أَنَّ طَلَبَ الْمُحْتَاجِ إِلَى الْمُحْتَاجِ سَفَهٌ مِنْ
رَأْيِهِ وَضَلَّةٌ مِنْ عَقْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: I showed sincerity by cutting myself off from everything but
You. I approached You with my whole self. I averted my face from
everyone who needs Your support. I ceased to ask from any who cannot do
without Your bounty. I see that the needy who seeks from the needy is
foolish in his opinion, and misguided in his intellect.

Another similar suggestion can also be read in the following passage,
quoted from the thirteenth supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ حَاوَلَ سَدَّ خَلَّتِهِ مِنْ عِنْدِكَ، وَرَامَ صَرْفَ الْفَقْرِ
عَنْ نَفْسِهِ بِكَ، فَقَدْ طَلَبَ حَاجَتَهُ فِي مَظَانِّهَا، وَأَتَى
طِلَبَتَهُ مِنْ وَجْهِهَا. وَمَنْ تَوجَّهَ بِحَاجَتِهِ إِلَى أَحَدٍ
مِنْ خَلْقِكَ، أَوْ جَعَلَهُ سَبَبَ نُجْحِهَا دُونَكَ، فَقَدْ
تَعَرَّضَ لِلْحِرْمَانِ، وَاسْتَحَقَّ مِنْ عِنْدِكَ فَوْتَ
الإِحْسَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, he who strives to remedy his lack through what is with You and
wishes to turn poverty away from himself through You has sought his need
in the most likely place and come with his request to the right quarter.
He who turns in his need towards one of Your creatures or assigns the
cause of its being granted to other than You has exposed himself to
deprivation and deserves to miss Your beneficence.

**Sixth**: These supplications teach people that it is obligatory upon
them to respect the rights of each other, help each other, and treat
each other with terms of compassion, sympathy, and altruism so as to put
into practice the meaning of fraternity of Islam. Such teachings can be
read in the following passage, quoted from the thirty-eighth
supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعْتَذِرُ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ مَظْلُومٍ ظُلِمَ
بِحَضْرَتِي فَلَمْ أَنْصُرْهُ، وَمِنْ مَعْرُوفٍ أُسْدِيَ إِلَيَّ
فَلَمْ أَشْكُرْهُ، وَمِنْ مُسِيءٍ اعْتَذَرَ إِلَيَّ فَلَمْ أَعْذِرْهُ،
وَمِنْ ذِي فَاقَةٍ سَأَلَنِي فَلَمْ أُؤْثِرْهُ، وَمِنْ حَقِّ ذِي حَقٍّ
لَزِمَنِي لِمُؤْمِنٍ فَلَمْ أُوَفِّرْهُ وَمِنْ عَيْبِ مُؤْمِنٍ ظَهَرَ
لِي فَلَمْ أَسْتُرْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: I ask pardon from You for a person wronged in my presence whom
I did not help, a favor conferred upon me for which I returned no
thanks, an evildoer who asked pardon from me and whom I did not pardon,
a needy who asked from me and whom I preferred not over myself, a right
of a believer who possesses a right incumbent upon me which I did not
fulfill, a fault of a believer which became evident to me and which I
did not conceal.

This means of apology is one of the most excellent styles that calls
attention to the high Divine morals enjoyed by the servants of Almighty
Allah.

Moreover, the following passage, quoted from the thirty-ninth
supplication, teaches us the necessity to pardon those who mistreat us,
warns us against thinking of revenge, and elevates our souls to the
position of holy individuals:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ وَأَيُّمَا عَبْدٍ نَالَ مِنِّي مَا حَظَرْتَ عَلَيْهِ
وَانْتَهَكَ مِنِّي مَا حَجَرْتَ عَلَيْهِ فَمضَى بِظُلامَتِي مَيِّتاً
أَوْ حَصَلَتْ لِي قِبَلَهُ حَيّاً فَاغْفِرْ لَهُ مَا أَلَمَّ بِهِ
مِنِّي وَاعْفُ لَهُ عَمَّا أَدْبَرَ بِهِ عَنِّي وَلاَ تَقِفْهُ عَلَى
مَا ارْتكَبَ فِيَّ وَلاَ تَكْشِفْهُ عَمَّا اكْتَسَبَ بِي وَاجْعَلْ مَا
سَمَحْتُ بِهِ مِنَ الْعَفْوِ عَنْهُمْ وَتَبَرَّعْتُ بِهِ مِنَ
الصَّدَقَةِ عَلَيْهِمْ أَزْكَى صَدَقَاتِ الْمُتَصَدِّقِينَ وَأَعَلَى
صِلاَتِ الْمُتَقَرِّبِينَ وَعَوِّضْنِي مِنْ عَفْوِي عَنْهُمْ عَفْوَكَ
وَمِنْ دُعَائِي لَهُمْ رَحْمَتَكَ حَتَّى يَسْعَدَ كُلُّ وَاحِدٍ مِنَّا
بِفَضْلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: If any of Your servants should harm me in what You have
forbidden, or violate me in what You have interdicted; and if he should
pass into death with my complaint or I come to have a complaint against
him while he is alive, (please) forgive him what he did to me and pardon
him that through which he turned his back on me! Inquire not from him
about what he committed toward me and expose him not through what he
earned by me! And (please) make my open-handedness in pardoning such
servants and my contribution in charity toward them the purest charity
of the charitable and the highest gift of those seeking nearness to You!
Recompense me for my pardoning them with Your pardon and for my
supplicating for them with Your mercy so that each one of us may gain
felicity through Your bounty.

The last paragraph of this passage is the most brilliant of all. It has
an outstanding impact on those characterized by virtuousness, because it
emphasises the necessity of bearing sound intentions toward all people
and wishing happiness to everybody, including those who wrong or
misbehave with us.

The supplications of *al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah* are full of such Divine
directives that contribute greatly to self-discipline, if only people
take hold of them.

Pilgrimage to the Holy Shrines
------------------------------

One of the practices that distinguish the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* from the
other Muslim sects is that they tend to visit the shrines([^18]) of the
Holy Prophet (s) and the Holy Imams (\`a) on a regular basis,([^19])
build handsome structures on these shrines, and sacrifice everything for
them willingly and faithfully.([^20])

All these practices are carried out by the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* in
compliance with the recommendations of the Holy Imams (\`a) who urged
their followers to visit these tombs and awakened their desire for the
great reward of Almighty Allah that is won when such visits are made.
Such practices are amongst those acts of obedience that draw one near
Almighty Allah after the obligatory acts of worship. Moreover, these
tombs are the best places wherein prayers are answered and pure devotion
to Almighty Allah is achieved.

The Holy Imams (\`a) have also stated that visiting these shrines
accomplishes the fulfillment of our covenants with them. In this regard,
Imam al-Ridha (\`a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ لِكُلِّ إمَامٍ عَهْداً فِي عُنُقِ أوْلِيَائِهِ وَشِيعَتِهِ،
وَإنَّ مِنْ تَمَامِ الوَفَاءِ بِالعَهْدِ وَحُسْنِ الأدَاءِ زِيَارَةَ
قُبُورِهِمْ. فَمَنْ زَارَهُمْ رَغْبَةً فِي زِيَارَتِهِمْ وَتَصْدِيقاً
بِمَا رَغَّبُوا فِيِه كَانَ أئِمَّتُهُمْ شُفَعَاءَهُمْ يَوْمَ
القِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The disciples and followers of every Imam (\`a) are connected to him
with a binding covenant that they must fulfill. Among the items of an
excellent fulfillment of these covenants is indeed the visiting of the
Imams’ tombs. Hence, if one visits their tombs willingly and with the
intention of accomplishing their desire, the Imams will intercede for
him on the Day of Resurrection.([^21])

Besides, visiting the Holy Shrines brings about a good number of
religious and social advantages—a fact that has made our Imams take such
great interest in the matter. Some of these advantages are as follows:

1) Visiting the Holy Shrines strengthens the bond of loyalty and love
for the Holy Imams (\`a) in their followers.

2) It arouses the pictures of the Holy Imams’ (\`a) exploits, morality
and struggle for truth.

3) During the congregational seasons of visits, the scattered groups of
Muslims gather in the same place to know each other and exchange views.

4) It fixes in hearts the spirits of submission to Almighty Allah,
devotion to Him, and compliance with His commands.

### Forms of Ziyarah

Through the eloquent statements—reported from and recommended by the
Holy Imams (\`a)—stated during visits and known as *ziyarah*, the
pilgrims learn the reality of monotheism, the true sacredness of Islam
and the Holy Prophet’s Mission. They also learn their duties of abiding
by high morality, submitting to the Maker of all creatures, and
appreciating His bounties and favors. At this point, the visits to the
holy shrines undertake the same function performed by supplications
discussed in the previous chapter.

Some of these forms of *ziyarah*, in fact, hold remarkable
supplications, such as the *ziyarat* *aminillah*,([^22]) a form of
prayer that Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn (\`a) is reported to have made
during his visit to the tomb of his grandfather, Imam \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib (\`a).([^23])

These forms of *ziyarah* present a clear-cut depiction of the situations
and sacrifices of the Holy Imams (\`a) for the sake of supporting the
right and elevating the influence of religion over all other influences.

They also demonstrate the Holy Imams’ (\`a) dedicating themselves to
obeying Almighty Allah.

In lucid Arabic diction and easy-to-understand statements, these forms
of *ziyarah* contain an excellent expression of monotheism,
supplication, and invocation to Almighty Allah.

In addition to the Holy Qur'an, *Nahj al-Balaghah*, and the
supplications reported from the Holy Imams (\`a), these forms of
*ziyarah* are reckoned among the most sublime religious literature,
because they hold an extract of the Holy Imams’ knowledge in faith and
self-discipline.

The visiting of these holy shrines, recommended by the Holy Imams (\`a),
holds teachings and true guidance that call for the attainment of the
supreme goals of religion, such as spiritual progress of Muslims,
development of the spirit of mutual sympathy among different classes of
the Muslim community and encouraging amicable association, polite
behavior, and social intercourse. This discipline includes practices
before entering the Holy Shrines as well as others during the visit and
after it.

### Etiquettes of Visiting the Holy Shrines

Teachings derived from the etiquettes of visiting the holy shrines are
the following:

1) A pilgrim to the holy shrines must bathe and cleanse himself from
impurities before beginning the visit. The advantage of this instruction
is obvious. Man cleanses himself from dirt in order to avoid many
sicknesses and diseases, save people from stinks,([^24]) and purify
himself from vices.

The sublime goals of this practice as reported (from the Holy
Infallibles) are that a pilgrim, after bathing himself, is advised to
repeat the following supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ اجْعَلْ لِي نُوراً وَطَهُوراً، وَحِرْزاً كَافِياً مِنْ
كُلِّ دَاءٍ وَسَقَمٍ، وَمِنْ كُلِّ آفَةٍ وَعَاهَةٍ، وَطَهِّرْ بِهِ
قَلْبِي وَجَوَارِحِي، وَعِظَامِي وَلَحْمِي وَدَمِي، وَشَعْرِي
وَبَشَرِي وَمُخِّي وَعَظْمِي، وَمَا أقَلَّتِ الأرْضُ مِنِّي، وَاجْعَلْ
لِي شَاهِداً يَوْمَ حَاجَتِي، وَفَقْرِي وَفَاقَتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! (Please) grant me light and purity, and a protective shield
against all maladies and sicknesses, and against all epidemics and
defects. (Please do) purify my heart, my organs, my bones, my flesh, my
blood, my hair, my skin, my brain, my marrow, and all my parts that
stand on the earth. (Please do) provide me with a witness on the day
when I will be poor, needy, and deprived.([^25])

2) A pilgrim to the holy shrines is advised to put on his cleanest
clothes. A pleasant appearance during general gatherings brings about
mutual amicability, makes people approachable, enhances a sense of
honor, and highlights the significance of these gatherings.

It is noteworthy that the Holy Imams (\`a) have not imposed
distinguished or attractive clothes; rather, they have recommended
putting the best clothes one may have, because not all people can have
distinguished or attractive clothes, lest the poor are embarrassed.
Thus, this teaching pays due regard to the condition of the poor.

3) It is good to put on perfume if possible. The advantage of this
teaching is similar to the above.

4) When possible, a pilgrim should give alms to the poor. It is well
known that almsgiving during such seasons of pilgrimage help the needy
and amplify the spirit of sympathy among the pilgrims.

5) A pilgrim of the holy shrines is recommended to proceed towards these
shrines with tranquility and gravity, casting his eyes down. Of course,
such acts demonstrate that the pilgrims respect the visited places, pay
reverence to the visited persons, and direct and devote themselves to
Almighty Allah. Besides, these acts help in avoiding trampling other
pilgrims and annoying them.

6) A pilgrim is recommended to repeat the statement, ‘*allahu-akbar*
(Allah is the Most High)’ as many times as possible. In certain forms of
*ziyarah*, this statement should be repeated one hundred times. The
advantage of this rite is to make the pilgrims feel the supremacy of
Almighty Allah and to learn with certainty that there is nothing higher
than Him, since pilgrimage to the holy shrines is no more than a sort of
worshipping, glorifying, and exalting the Almighty Lord through
activating these rites and supporting His religion.

7) After accomplishing the rites of the visit, a pilgrim is recommended
to offer a two-unit (i.e. *rak\`ah*) prayer, at least, voluntarily, in
order to worship and thank Almighty Allah for the accomplishment of the
visit. A pilgrim then asks the Lord to accept his offering of that
prayer and to consider its reward as a gift from the pilgrim to the
visited person (i.e. the Prophet or Imam).

The supplication recited after the visit to a holy shrine, reveals that
the pilgrim’s prayers and acts are directed to Almighty Allah alone
other than Who none is worth worshipping and that the pilgrimage is but
a sort of seeking nearness to Him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ لَكَ صَلَّيْتُ، وَلَكَ رَكَعْتُ، وَلَكَ سَجَدْتُ، وَحْدَكَ
لا شَريكَ لَكَ، لإَِنَّهُ لا تَكُونُ الصَّلاةُ وَالرُّكُوعُ
وَالسُّجُودُ إلاّ لَكَ، لإَِنَّكَ أَنْتَ اللهُ لا إِلهَ إلاّ أَنْتَ.
اَللّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّد وَآلِ مُحَمَّد، وَتَقَبَّلْ مِنّي
زِيارَتي، وَأعْطِني سُؤْلي بِمُحَمَّد وَآلِ مُحَمَّد وَآلِهِ
الطّاهِرينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! To You alone have I prayed, to You alone have I bowed down, and
to You alone have I prostrated myself. You are the One and Only God Who
has no partner. This is because all prayers, bowing down, and
prostration must be offered to none save You, since You are Allah, there
is no god save You. O Allah! Bless Muhammad and his Household; and
accept my pilgrimage and respond to my requests in the name of Muhammad
(s) and his Immaculate Household (\`a).([^26])

This piece of literature is fully indicative of the actual purposes of
the Holy Imams (\`a) and their followers behind visiting the holy
shrines. It also proves the fallacy of those who claim that the Shi\`ah
visit the holy shrines as a form of worship by seeking nearness to them
and setting up partners to Almighty Allah.

Such false notions attempt to lessen the social-religious advantages of
these gatherings but fail miserably. They have become thorns in the eyes
of the enemies of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a), because it is improbable that
they are ignorant of the purposes of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) behind such
collective visits.

Far be it from the Holy Imams (\`a)—who have worshipped Almighty Allah
faithfully and sincerely, devoted themselves to obeying Him, and
sacrificed everything, including their lives, for His religion—to call
people to set up partners with Him.

8) A pilgrim’s conduct and behaviour must be most proper while on a
visit. For eg., he should speak as little as possible, except in affairs
that benefit Islam, mention Almighty Allah constantly, show reverence,
offer prayers very often, pray to the Lord to shower His blessings upon
Muhammad and his Household. He should keep his gaze lowered, hurry in
helping and lending a hand to those who are in need, and abstain from
entering upon disputatious conversations, committing any forbidden act,
swearing, and engaging in arguments that require taking oaths.

Let us not forget to refer to the main purpose of visiting the holy
shrines, which is to greet the Holy Prophet (s) and the Holy Imams
(\`a), because they are alive and are provided with sustenance from
their Lord.([^27]) They can hear the words addressed to them and respond
to them. Although it is sufficient to address them with simple
statements like, ‘Peace be upon you,” it is more proper to repeat the
statements reported from them by the pilgrims of their holy shrines
(i.e. the *ziyarah*), because they are full of impressive meanings and
religious advantages, in addition to their eloquence and articulation.
These forms of *ziyarah* are superb prayers through which one can get
closer to Almighty Allah.

The Meaning of Shi\`ism According to the Ahl al-Bayt
----------------------------------------------------

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a), after they knew that they would
not hold the (political) leadership of the Muslim nation, dedicated
their lives to disciplining and educating Muslims the way Almighty Allah
wanted. They exerted all their efforts to teach their followers, in whom
they confided their secrets, all the items of the religious laws as well
as the knowledge of the Holy Prophet (s) and their rights and
obligations.

The Holy Imams (\`a), clearly defined a follower (i.e. Shi\`ite) as only
he who obeys the commands of Almighty Allah, forsakes personal whims and
caprices, and accepts and adheres to their (i.e. the Imams) directives
and teachings. Love for the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) is not sufficient to win
salvation and deliverance from one’s duties toward Almighty Allah. It is
a false notion that is chiefly adopted by those who hide themselves
under coverings of serenity and lust and shun obedience to Almighty
Allah under the pretense that their love for the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) would
liberate them from religious responsibilities.

On the contrary, the Holy Imams (\`a) do not consider one’s love for and
loyalty to them as achievement of one’s duties toward the Lord unless
such love and loyalty are firmly supported with righteous acts and noble
traits of character like truthfulness, honesty, piety, and godliness.
Confirming this fact, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (\`a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا خَيْثَمَةُ! أبْلِغْ مَوالِينَا أنَّهُ لاَ نُغْنِي عَنْهُمْ مِنَ
اللهِ شَيْئاً إلاَّ بِعَمَلٍ، وَأنَّهُمْ لَنْ يَنَالوا وِلايَتَنَا
إلاَّ بِالوَرَعِ، وَإنَّ أشَدَّ النَّاسِ حَسْرَةً يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ
مَنْ وَصَفَ عَدْلاً ثُمَّ خَالَفَهُ إلَى غَيْرِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Khaythamah! Inform our adherents that we can be of no avail to them
against Almighty Allah unless they themselves offer (righteous) actions.
They shall not win our admission of their loyalty to us except by means
of piety. Verily, the most regretful on the Day of Resurrection will be
one who instructs righteousness but does not act in accordance with
it.([^28])

Because they believe that practical propagation is more effective than
verbal, the Holy Imams (\`a) desire and expect their followers to act as
heralds of truth and guides of decency and orthodoxy. Hence, Imam
al-Sadiq (\`a) instructs his followers, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُونُوا دُعَاةً لِلنَّاسِ بِالخَيْرِ بِغَيْرِ ألْسِنَتِكُمْ لِيَرَوا
مِنْكُمُ الإجْتِهَادَ وَالصِّدْقَ وَالوَرَعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Act as heralds to goodness among people by means other than your tongues
so that they can feel your perseverance, honesty, and piety.([^29])

Let us now cite a number of instructive conversations of the Holy Imams
(\`a) with their followers to emphasize their concern about their
refined moral behavior among the public: Imam al-Baqir’s (\`a)
conversation with Jabir al-Ju\`fi

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا جَابِرُ! أيَكْتَفِي مَنْ يَنْتَحِلُ التَّشَيُّعَ أنْ يَقُولَ
بِحُبِّنَا أهْلَ البَيْتِ؟ فَوَاللهِ مَا شِيعَتُنَا إلاَّ مَنِ اتَّقَى
اللهَ وَأطَاعَهُ. وَمَا كَانُوا يُعْرَفُونَ إلاَّ بِالتَّوَاضُعِ
وَالتَّخَشُّعِ، وَالأمَانَةِ، وَكَثْرَةِ ذِكْرِ اللهِ، وَالصَّوْمِ،
وَالصَّلاَةِ، وَالبِرِّ بِالوَالِدَيْنِ، وَالتَّعَاهُدِ لِلجِيرَانِ
مِنَ الفُقَرَاءِ وَأهْلِ المَسْكَنَةِ وَالغَارِمِينَ وَالأيْتَامِ،
وَصِدْقِ الحَدِيثِ، وَتِلاَوَةِ القُرْآنِ، وَكَفِّ الألْسُنِ عَنِ
النَّاسِ إلاَّ مِنْ خَيْرٍ. وَكَانُوا اُمَنَاءَ عَشَائِرِهِمْ فِي
الأشْيَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَاعْمَلُوا لِمَا عِنْدَ اللهِ. لَيْسَ بَيْنَ اللهِ
وَبَيْنَ أحَدٍ قَرَابَةٌ. أحَبُّ العِبَادِ إلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
أتْقَاهُمْ وَأعْمَلُهُمْ بِطَاعَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا جَابِرُ! وَاللهِ مَا نَتَقَرَّبُ إلَى اللهِ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى
إلاَّ بِالطَّاعَةِ، وَمَا مَعَنَا بَرَاءَةٌ مِنَ النَّارِ، وَلاَ عَلَى
اللهِ لأحَدٍ مِنْ حُجَّةٍ. مَنْ كَانَ للهِ مُطيعاً فَهُوَ لَنَا
وَلِيٌّ، وَمَنْ كَانَ للهِ عَاصِياً فَهُوَ لَنَا عَدُوٌّ. وَمَا
تُنَالُ وِلايَتُنَا إلاَّ بِالعَمَلِ وَالوَرَعِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Jabir! How come that it is sufficient to declare love for us—the Ahl
al-Bayt—in order to be a Shi\`ite? I swear by Allah that our true
Shi\`ah (followers) are none but those who fear and obey Allah. Their
distinctive features are exclusive modesty, devoutness, fulfillment of
trusts, constant reference to Almighty Allah, (much) observance of
fasting, (much) offering of prayers, kindness to their parents, caring
for the poor, the needy, the indebted, and the orphans from among their
neighbors, truthfulness, (repeated) recitation of the Holy Qur'an, and
holding their tongues except for uttering good. Moreover, they are
always the most trustworthy of the members of their clans for keeping
things.

So, (I recommend you to) fear Almighty Allah and work for winning that
which He holds. None has kinship with Almighty Allah (due to which he
may be favored); rather, the most favorite to Him among His servants are
the most pious and the most abiding in obedience to Him.

O Jabir! I swear by Almighty Allah that we seek nearness to Him through
no means other than obedience to Him. We do not have patents of release
from Hellfire. Nobody has a pretext against Almighty Allah. He who is
obedient to Almighty Allah is our follower while he who is disobedient
to Him is our enemy. Admission to our loyalty can only be attained by
means of good work and piety.

### Imam al-Baqir’s Conversation with Sa\`id ibn al-Hasan

The following conversation took place between Imam al-Baqir (\`a) and
Sa\`id ibn al-Hasan, one of his disciples:

The Imam: Does it happen that one of you comes to his brother-in-faith
and extends his hand to his pocket to take only as much as he needs, but
the other does not push him back?

Sa\`id: I have not noticed such a thing among us.

The Imam: Then, you are nothing. (i.e. you own nothing of Shi\`ism)

Sa\`id: This means that we are exposed to perdition!

The Imam: These people have not been endowed with (judicious) reasons
yet.**(**[^30]**)**

### Imam al-Sadiq’s Conversation with Abu’l-Sabbah al-Kinani

The following conversation took place between Imam al-Sadiq (\`a) and
Abu’l-Sabbah al-Kinani:

Al-Kinani: Great is the extent of harassment we are suffering from
people because of you!

The Imam: What kind of harassment are you encountering from people?

Al-Kinani: Whenever we dispute with someone, he immediately gibes at us,
saying, ‘You are a malicious Ja\`farite! (i.e. following Ja\`far ibn
Muhammad; Imam al-Sadiq)’”

The Imam: So, people are gibing at you because of me!

Al-Kinani: Yes, they are.

The Imam: By Allah I swear; too few are those who follow ‘Ja\`far’ among
you! My followers are only those who show intense piety, dedicate their
deeds to their Creator, and desire for His rewards. These are
exclusively my followers.([^31])

### Aphorisms of Imam al-Sadiq

In this regard, Imam al-Sadiq (\`a) stated many words of truth and
wisdom, some of which are cited here:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ مِنَّا، وَلاَ كَرَامَةَ، مَنْ كَانَ فِي مِصْرٍ فِيهِ مِائَةُ
ألْفٍ أوْ يَزِيدُونَ وَكَانَ فِي ذَلِكَ المِصْرِ أحَدٌ أوْرَعُ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

If one who claims following us lives in a country with a population of
one hundred thousand or more but there is somebody in that country more
pious than he is, then he is definitely not among our followers.([^32])

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّا لاَ نَعُدُّ الرَّجُلَ مُؤمِناً حَتَّى يَكُونَ لَجِميعِ أمْرِنَا
مُتَّبِعاً وَمُرِيداً. ألاَ وإنَّ مِنِ اتِّبَاعِ أمْرِنَا وَأرَادَتِهِ
الوَرَعَ، فَتَزَيَّنُوا بِهِ، رَحِمَكُمُ اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

We do not count one to be among the believers unless one willingly obeys
all our commandments. Indeed, one of the features of obeying our
commandments willingly is piety. Therefore, adorn yourselves with piety;
may Allah have mercy upon you.([^33])

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ مِنْ شِيعَتِنَا مَنْ لاَ تَتَحَدَّثُ المُخَدَّرَاتُ بِوَرَعِهِ
فِي خُدُورِهِنَّ. وَلَيْسَ مِنْ أوْلِيائِنا مَن هُوَ فِي قَرْيَةٍ
فِيهَا عَشَرَةُ آلافِ رَجُلٍ فِيهِمْ خَلَقَ اللهُ أوْرَعَ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He is not one of our Shi\`ah (followers) about whose piety women
secluding themselves to their private rooms do not talk. He is not one
of our disciples who lives in a town in which ten thousand men live but
there is somebody more pious than him living there.([^34])

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّمَا شِيعَةُ جَعْفَرٍ مَنْ عَفَّ بَطْنَهُ وَفَرْجَهُ، وَاشْتَدَّ
جِهَادُهُ وَعَمِلَ لِخَالِقِهِ وَرَجَا ثَوَابَهُ وَخَافَ عِقَابَهُ.
فَإذَا رَأيْتَ أولئِكَ فَأولئِكَ شِيعَةُ جَعْفَرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The real Shi\`ah of Ja\`far (i.e. Imam al-Sadiq) are exclusively those
who chastely avoid the (unlawful) pleasures of stomachs and private
parts, those who strive excessively (to attain Almighty Allah’s
pleasure), and those who dedicate all their efforts to their Creator,
hoping for His reward and fearing His punishment. If you see one
enjoying these features, then (be it known to you that) he is one of the
Shi\`ah of Ja\`far.([^35])

Oppression and Injustice
------------------------

Following the Holy Qur'an, the Holy Imams (\`a) have considered
transgression against others and wronging people to be among the gravest
sins man may commit. As for the Holy Qur'an, it has condemned oppression
and deemed it one of the most appalling sins:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَحْسَبَنَّ اللَّهَ غَافِلًا عَمَّا يَعْمَلُ الظَّالِمُونَ ۚ
إِنَّمَا يُؤَخِّرُهُمْ لِيَوْمٍ تَشْخَصُ فِيهِ الْأَبْصَارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Deem not that Allah is heedless of what the iniquitous do; He is only
deferring them to a day when eyes shall stare.*** **(14/42)**

Likewise, Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (\`a), the most veracious, has
described the atrocity and revulsion of wronging people in such
astounding terms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللهِ، لَوْ أُعْطِيتُ الأقَالِيمَ السَّبْعَةَ بِمَا تَحْتَ
أفْلاَكِهَا عَلَى أنْ أعْصِيَ اللهَ فِي نَمْلَةٍ أسْلُبُهَا جِلْبَ
شَعِيرَةٍ مَا فَعَلْتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

By Allah, even if I am given all the domains of the seven (stars) with
all that exists under the skies in order that I may disobey Allah to the
extent of snatching one grain of barley from an ant I would not do it.

This states the utmost of what man may imagine in the field of
abstinence from wrongdoing.

Imam \`Ali (\`a) would never wrong an ant by snatching even the skin of
one grain of barely from it even if he would be given the seven
continents. This is the situation with Imam \`Ali (\`a); how would it be
with those who shed the blood of Muslims carelessly, usurp the
properties of people and desecrate their honor and dignity? Who can
compare those who commit such heinous crimes with Imam \`Ali (\`a)? What
chance do they have? Indeed, the Imam (\`a) has described the essence of
Divine morality that religion wants human beings to abide by.

Wrongdoing is prohibited in the law of Almighty Allah; therefore,
warning against it, condemning it, and emphasis on its forbiddance have
occupied a leading position in the traditions and supplications of the
Ahl al-Bayt (\`a). Such has been their policy; and such has been their
conduct even with those who transgressed against them and dared to
challenge their position.

For example, the story of Imam al-Hasan (\`a) with a Syrian is
wellknown. This story shows the Imam’s forbearance with a man who
attacked his dignity and railed at him; nevertheless, the Imam (\`a)
treated him with kindness and sympathy until the ignorant man realized
his fault.([^36])

We have already cited passages of Imam Zayn al-\`Abidin’s (\`a)
supplications in which he used a supremely appropriate diction to
express how to pardon those who wrong us and ask Almighty Allah’s
forgiveness for them. This is in fact the utmost hieght of perfection
one can attain.

However, according to the laws of Islam, it is permissible to inflict
injury on those who act aggressively against us, yet in exactly the same
way they inflicted injury on us.

Likewise, to invoke Almighty Allah’s punishment against those who wrong
us is also permissible. Even so, permissibility is something quite
different from pardon, which is one of the qualities of nobility of
character.

Moreover, exaggeration in invoking Almighty Allah’s punishment on
wrongdoers may be considered an act of injustice, in the view of the
Holy Imams (\`a). Expressing this view, Imam al-Sadiq (\`a) is reported
to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ العَبْدَ لَيَكُونُ مَظْلُوماً، فَمَا يَزَالُ يَدْعُو حَتَّى
يَكُونَ ظَالِماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, a servant (of Almighty Allah) may be oppressed; but he may
become oppressor due to excessive invocation of evil upon those who
oppressed him.([^37])

To explain, an oppressed person may exceed the proper bounds of invoking
Almighty Allah against the one who oppressed him, thus changing into an
oppressor.

How sublime this is! Even an oppressed person’s invocation against the
oppressor can be a sort of oppression when it exceeds the just limits!
What will, then, be the condition of those who instigate oppression and
iniquity, act aggressively against people, attack their reputations,
plunder their property, denounce them before the unjust ruling
authorities, deceive them so as to involve them in perils, defame them,
hurt them, or spy on them? What a place can such transgressors find in
the wisdom of the Holy Imams (\`a)?

Truly, such persons are the farthest from Almighty Allah, the most
sinful and the most deserving of the most horrible punishment from Him.

Cooperation with Oppressors
---------------------------

Oppression is the most dangerous of all deeds and the worst in
consequence; therefore, Almighty Allah has warned us against all sorts
of oppression including cooperation with oppressors and inclination
towards them. He has thus stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَرْكَنُوا إِلَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا فَتَمَسَّكُمُ النَّارُ وَمَا
لَكُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مِنْ أَوْلِيَاءَ ثُمَّ لَا تُنْصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And do not incline towards those who are unjust, lest the fire
touches you, and you have no guardians besides Allah, then you shall not
be helped.*** **(11/113)**

This is the directive of the Holy Qur'an from which the Holy Imams of
the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) have derived all their directives. They are
reported to have used the most expressive words in making people realize
the hideousness of inclination towards oppressors, connecting with them,
taking part in any of their deeds, and cooperating with them even by
offering them half a date.([^38])

Indisputably, the gravest misfortune that has beset Islam and Muslims is
their lack of firmness in dealing with oppressors, their connivance with
them, their taking action in their matters not to mention siding with
them and furthering their oppressive acts.

This deviation from the right path is the basic reason that is
responsible for the misfortunes that have befallen the Muslim community
and weakened the religion of Islam to the extent that it was in the
beginning of its advent. Day after day, those claiming being Muslims
lost Divine support and became worthless in the eyes of both their
powerful and weakest opponents, such as the contemptible Jews, and the
powerful Crusaders.

Making every effort, the Holy Imams (\`a) tried to drive their followers
away from cooperating with oppressive rulers and exerted pressure on
their disciples to abandon supporting and helping the wrongdoers and
tyrannical authorities. As confirmed by innumerable traditions, the Holy
Imams (\`a) concentrated on banning any sort of cooperation with
transgressors. For instance, Imam Zayn al-\`Abidin (\`a) is reported to
have written the following epistle to Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Zuhri,
warning him against helping the unjust authorities in furthering their
wrongdoing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أوَلَيْسَ بِدُعَائِهِمْ إيَّاكَ حِينَ دَعَوكَ جَعَلُوكَ قُطْباً
أدَارُوا بِكَ رُحَى مَظَالِمِهِمْ، وَجِسْراً يَعْبُرُونَ عَلَيْكَ إلَى
بَلاَيَاهُمْ، وَسُلَّماً إلَى ضَلاَلَتِهِمْ، دَاعِياً إلَى غَيِّهِمْ،
سَالِكاً سَبِيلَهُمْ؟ يُدْخِلُونَ بِكَ الشَّكَّ عَلَى العُلَمَاءِ،
وَيَقْتَادُونَ بِكَ قُلُوبَ الجُهَّالِ إلَيْهِمْ. فَلَمْ يَبْلُغْ
أخَصُّ وُزَرَائِهِمْ وَلاَ أقْوَى أعْوَانِهِمْ إلاَّ دُونَ مَا
بَلَغْتَ مِنْ إصْلاَحِ فَسَادِهِمْ وَاخْتِلاَفِ الخَاصَّةِ
وَالعَامَّةِ إلَيْهِمْ. فَمَا أقَلَّ مَا أعْطَوْكَ فِي قَدَرِ مَا
أخَذوا مِنْكَ! وَمَا أيْسَرَ مَا عَمَروا لكَ! فَكَيْفَ مَا خَرَّبُوا
عَلَيْكَ؟ فَانْظُرْ لِنَفْسِكَ، فَإنَّهُ لاَ يَنْظُرُ لَهَا غَيْرُكَ.
وَحَاسِبْهَا حِسَابَ رَجُلٍ مَسْئولٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

As the unjust ones invite you, they make you the axis of the hand-mill
of their wrongdoings, the bridge on which they cross to the misfortunes
they cause, and the stairs to their deviation. You become the
propagandist of their temptation when you take their courses. They have
employed you as the means through which they arouse doubts against the
scholars and attract the ignorant. The best one in their government and
the most powerful of them could not have achieved the success that you
have attained for them by presenting their corrupt affairs as honest and
attracting the attention of the celebrities as well as the ordinary
people towards yourself. As for what they have given you, you will find
it too little. Likewise, they have built for you very trivial things
while they have ruined your great things. Look within yourself, for no
one will look within you except you yourself, and judge yourself
impartially, as if you are the criminal.([^39])

How expressive the last sentence is! When man is overcome by personal
whims, he sees himself in the depths of his inner self as a hollow being
that is unworthy of honor. In plain words, man finds himself responsible
for his deeds, looks down upon any act that he commits, and believes
that he is too ignoble to offer any excuse for what he has committed.

The Imam (\`a) intended to draw al-Zuhri’s attention to this interior
consequence, which secretly destroys human beings that are prone to
evil, so that he would not be deceived by any illusions, and ignore his
responsibility towards himself.

The following instructive conversation between Imam Musa al-Kazim (\`a)
and Safwan al-Jammal, one of the trustworthy disciples and reporters of
the Imam’s traditions, depicts the forbiddance of cooperation with
unjust authorities:

Writing the life of Safwan al-Jammal, al-Kashshi records the following
narration:

Safwan said: One day, while I was paying a visit to Imam al-Kazim (\`a),
he said to me, “Safwan: all your manners are acceptable and right except
one thing.”

“May Allah accept me as ransom for you!([^40]) What is that?” I wondered
and asked.

The Imam (\`a) answered, “It is that you hire camels for this man. (i.e.
Harun, the ruler)”

Explaining my situation, I said, “I swear by Allah that I have never
hired him a camel to be used for luxurious, reckless, funny, or hunting
purposes. Rather, I have hired out camels for him so that he would use
it as riding animals on his way to Makkah. Moreover, I do not take
charge of the camels myself; rather, I employ some of my servants to do
so.”

The Imam (\`a) asked, “Do they (i.e. the ruling authorities) pay you for
this hiring?”

“Yes, they do,” answered I.

The Imam (\`a) further asked, “Do you wish that they would survive until
they keep paying you?”

“Yes, I do,” answered I.

The Imam (\`a) stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ أحَبَّ بَقَاءَهُمْ فَهُوَ مِنْهُمْ، وَمَنْ كَانَ مِنْهُمْ
(فَهُوَ) كَانَ وَرَدَ النَّارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Then, he who wishes survival for them is definitely one of them; and he
who belongs to them will definitely be in Hellfire.”

Immediately after that, I sold all my camels.([^41])

Merely *wishing* survival for tyrannical rulers lands one in hellfire.
What then will be the future of those who dedicate themselves to helping
the tyrannical rulers proceed in their wrongdoings, those who support
them in their acts of transgression, those who engage themselves in
their groups, those who imitate them in their oppressive acts, those who
go along with their processions, and those who comply with their orders?
survival for tyrannical rulers lands one in hellfire. What then will be
the future of those who dedicate themselves to helping the tyrannical
rulers proceed in their wrongdoings, those who support them in their
acts of transgression, those who engage themselves in their groups,
those who imitate them in their oppressive acts, those who go along with
their processions, and those who comply with their orders?

Holding offices in Despotic Governments
---------------------------------------

The Holy Imams have intensely warned against cooperating with oppressive
rulers even by handing them over half a date or hoping for their
survival; therefore, the situation will definitely be worse with those
who participate with them in ruling and hold offices in their despotic
governments. Moreover, the matter will be much worse for those who have
a hand in laying the foundations of such despotic governments, play a
major role in activating their authorities, and plunge into fortifying
their power. Giving reasons for such prohibition, Imam al-Sadiq (\`a) is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَذَلِكَ أنَّ فِي وِلايَةِ (الوَالِي) الجَائِرِ دُرُوسَ الحَقِّ
كُلِّهِ وَإحْيَاءَ البَاطِلِ كُلِّهِ وَإظْهَارَ الظُّلْمِ وَالجَوْرِ
وَالفَسَادِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…because to hold an office in the government of despotic rulers wholly
eradicates the right and wholly enlivens the wrong. It also spreads
injustice, oppression, and corruption…([^42])

On the other hand, the Holy Imams (\`a) are reported to have permitted
holding offices in the governments of despotic rulers if this helps
maintain justice, institute the laws of Almighty Allah, and contribute
to treating the believers properly, enjoin the right, and forbid the
wrong. In this respect, Imam Musa al-Kazim (\`a) is reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ للهِ فِي أبْوَابِ الظَّلَمَةِ مَنْ نَوَّرَ اللهُ بِهِ البُرْهَانَ
وَمَكَّنَ لَهُ فِي البِلاَدِ، فَيَدْفَعُ بِهِمْ عَنْ أوْلِيَائِهِ
وَيُصْلِحُ بِهِمْ أُمُورَ المُسْلِمِينَ… أولَئِكَ هُمُ المُؤمِنُونَ
حَقّاً، أولئِكَ مَنَارُ اللهِ فِي أرْضِهِ، أولئِكَ نُورُ اللهِ فِي
رَعِيَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, among the company of the oppressors, there are those through
whom Almighty Allah has made bright His path and given power in
countries to protect His intimate servants and resolve the difficulties
of Muslims. These are indeed the true believers. These are the shining
guides to Almighty Allah in His lands. These are the light of Almighty
Allah among His subjects.([^43])

Concerning this matter, many traditions have been reported to
demonstrate the course that must be adopted by governors and
governmental officials, such as the famous epistle of Imam al-Sadiq
(\`a) to \`Abdullah al-Najashi, the governor of al-Ahwaz[^44]..

Calling upon Islamic Unity
--------------------------

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) are well-known for their calling
upon the observance and maintenance of Islamic aspects, to preserve its
glory, sustain the unity of Muslims, keep them in a ceaseless state of
fraternity, and remove all rancor([^45]) and malice from their hearts.

In this respect, it is unfair to ignore the unforgettable situation of
Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (\`a) with his predecessors to the
Caliphate. Although he was furious at them because he believed that they
had usurped his right, his behaviour with them was full of tolerance.
Moreover, he did not challenge them with the fact that the Holy Prophet
(s) had appointed him as Caliph; and he did not declare this in any
public meeting until the leadership of the Muslim nation eventually
returned to him. Only then did he declare that Divine commandments had
nominated him as the successor of the Holy Prophet (s), calling the
existing companions to testify as witnesses for him that the Holy
Prophet (s) had openly declared him as his successor on that famous day
at Ghadir Khumm.([^46])

Imam \`Ali (\`a) never refrained from offering sound advice in matters
that would benefit the interests of Muslims. Describing this period, he
used to repeat the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَخَشِيتُ إنْ لَمْ أنْصُرِ الإسْلاَمَ وَأهْلَهُ أنْ أرَى فِيهِ ثَلْماً
أوْ هَدْماً تَكُونُ المُصِيبَةُ بِهِ عَلَيَّ أعْظَمَ مِنْ فَوْتِ
وِلايَتِكُمْ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

I then feared that if I did not protect Islam and its people and there
occurred in it a breach or destruction, it would mean a greater blow to
me than the loss of power over you…([^47])

Besides, he did not say any word that would probably tire out their
rulership, weaken their authority, or underestimate their prestige. He
therefore withdrew within himself and confined himself to his house
inspite of which he had to encounter problems because of them.

He had to suffer all that for the sake of protecting the general
interests of Islam lest a breach or fall might occur in the religion.
This situation was so well-known that \`Umar ibn al-Khattab, the second
caliph, used to say the like of the following statements repeatedly:

May Allah never keep me to face a problem while Abu’l-Hasan is not there
to solve it.([^48])

If it were not for \`Ali, \`Umar would have certainly perished.([^49])

It is also unfair to shun reference to the situation of Imam al-Hasan
(\`a) when he decided to enter upon a truce with Mu\`awiyah,([^50])
realizing that insistence on war would injure the major weighty thing
(i.e. the Holy Qur'an) and bring down the state of justice and the name
of Islam forever.It would, further, result in the eradication of Divine
law and annihilate the remaining members of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a).So,
Imam al-Hasan (\`a) preferred saving the aspects and name of Islam over
engagement in war even if the achievement of such would force him to
make peace with Mu\`awiyah, the most vehement enemy of Islam and the
bitter opponent of the Imam and his Shi\`ah. He knew that he and his
followers would suffer oppression and humiliation at the hands of this
man, but Islam’s interests were more important than all lives.

Despite the fact that members of the Holy Prophet’s (s) clan (namely,
descendants of Hashim) and the Shi\`ah had already sharpened their
swords and were willing to fight, Imam al-Hasan (\`a) believed that
achieving the general interest of Islam must be above all
considerations.

As for Imam al-Husayn the martyr (\`a), he revolted against the Umayyad
dynasty because he was forced to announce allegiance to Yazid, the
immodest Ummayyad ruler.He believed that if these rulers continued in
their course of transgression and tyranny without there being anyone to
stop them and reveal their reality before the people, they would
certainly eradicate the name of Islam and demolish its glory. He
therefore aimed at showing everybody for all times to come, the
oppressive and repressive policy of these rulers and unveil their
vicious conspiracies against the law of Islam. What he intended took
place. Had it not been for Imam al-Husayn’s uprising, the religion of
Islam would have been no more than material for history, just like the
other dead faiths.

The reason for the Shi\`ah taking a great interest in commemorating the
uprising of Imam al-Husayn (\`a) in various ways is that they want to
complete the mission of his uprising, that is to struggle against wrong
and oppression and keep his sacrifice alive forever, as has been
commissioned by the Holy Imams (\`a).

Ensuring the continuity of the dignity of Islam by the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a)
even when power was grasped by their most vehement enemies, can be
clearly seen in the conduct of Imam Zayn al-\`Abidin (\`a) during the
oppressive reign of the Umayyad rulers.

These oppressive rulers massacred the household of the Imam (\`a)
violated its sanctity during their reigns; nevertheless, the Imam (\`a),
who was so grieved for what they had done to his father and family
members at Karbala', used to pray to Almighty Allah secretly to grant
the Muslim armies victory over their enemies. As has been previously
cited, supplication was the one and only method to which Imam Zayn
al-\`Abidin (\`a) resorted to spread the genuine teachings and knowledge
of Islam. In this respect, the Imam (\`a) taught his followers how to
pray for victory for Muslim armies. This supplication is famously known
as “*du\`a’ ahl al-thughur* (Supplication for the People of the
Frontiers)”([^51]) in which the Imam (\`a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ؛ وَكَثِّرْ عِدَّتَهُمْ،
وَاشْحَذْ أَسْلِحَتَهُمْ، وَاحْرُسْ حَوْزَتَهُمُ، وَامْنَعْ
حَوْمَتَهُمْ، وَأَلِّفْ جَمْعَهُمْ، وَدبِّرْ أَمْرَهُمْ، وَوَاتِرْ
بَيْنَ مِيَرِهِمْ، وَتَوَحَّدْ بِكِفَايَةِ مُؤَنِهِمْ، وَاعْضُدْهُمْ
بِالنَّصْرِ، وَأَعِنْهُمْ بِالصَّبْرِ، وَالْطُفْ لَهُمْ فِي الْمَكْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: (please) bless Muhammad and his Household; and increase their
number, hone their weapons, guard their territory, defend their midst,
unite their throng, arrange their affair, send them supplies in a steady
string, undertake Yourself to suffice them with provisions, support them
with victory, help them with patience, and give them subtlety in guile!

After invoking Almighty Allah against the unbelievers, Imam Zayn
al-\`Abidin (\`a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ وَقَوِّ بِذَلِكَ مَحَالَّ أَهْلِ الإِسْلاَمِ وَحَصِّنْ
بِهِ دِيَارَهُمْ وَثَمِّرْ بِهِ أَمْوَالَهُمْ وَفَرِّغْهُمْ عَنْ
مُحَارَبَتِهِمْ لِعِبَادَتِكَ وَعَنْ مُنَابَذَتِهِمْ لِلْخَلْوَةِ بِكَ
حَتَّى لاَ يُعْبَدَ فِي بِقَاعِ الأَرْضِ غَيْرُكَ وَلاَ تُعَفَّرَ
لأَحَدٍ مِنْهُمْ جَبْهَةٌ دُونَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, strengthen the People of Islam, fortify their cities, increase
their properties, give them ease from their fighting to worship You, and
from their warfare to be alone with You, so that none will be worshiped
in the regions of the earth but You and no forehead of theirs may be
rubbed in the dust for less than You!([^52])

In this eloquent supplication, which is considered one of his longest
supplications, the Imam (\`a) continues in instructing the Muslim armies
to abide by the required nobility of character and prepare to face the
enemy.

In addition to military instructions of jihad, this supplication shows
the purpose and the benefit of these instructions. It also draws
attention to the scope of caution that they must take against the enemy
and teaches them how to treat and fight against them. It also exhibits
the moral standards that they must maintain, such as devotion to
Almighty Allah, abstinence from His prohibitions, and fighting sincerely
for His sake.

Similar to this situation is the situation of the other Imams (\`a) with
the rulers of their ages. Despite the fact that the Holy Imams (\`a) had
to encounter various sorts of pressure and brutal torture at the hands
of these rulers, they directed all their efforts to teaching people the
genuine and supreme features of the religion, realizing that the
political leadership of the Muslim nation was out of question.

The Holy Imams (\`a) neither advised nor desired all the revolutions
that took place during their ages by the \`Alawites or others; rather,
all these were in evident violation of their commandments and
instructions, because none, including the \`Abbasid rulers themselves,
was more desirous of safeguarding the entity of the Muslim state than
the Holy Imams (\`a). Proving this fact, let us cite the following
instruction of Imam Musa al-Kazim (\`a) to his followers (i.e. Shi\`ah):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَذِلُّوا رِقَابَكُمْ بِتَرْكِ طَاعَةِ سُلْطَانِكُمْ؛ فَإنْ كَانَ
عَادِلاً فَاسْألُوا اللهَ إبْقَاءَهُ، وإنْ كَانَ جَائِراً فَاسْألُوا
اللهَ إصْلاَحَهُ. فَإنَّ صَلاَحَكُمْ فِي صَلاَحِ سُلْطَانِكُمْ، وَإنَّ
السُّلْطَانَ العَادِلَ بِمَنْزِلَةِ الوَالِدِ الرَّحِيمِ، فَأحِبُّوا
لَهُ مَا تُحِبُّونَ لأنْفُسِكُمْ، وَاكْرَهُوا لَهُ مَا تَكْرَهُونَ
لأنْفُسِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not bring forth humility to yourselves by abandoning obedience to the
ruler; if he is just, then pray to Almighty Allah to keep him alive; but
if he is unjust, then pray to Him to guide him to righteousness. Verily,
validity of all your affairs lies in the righteousness of your ruler.
Indeed, a just ruler occupies the same position of a merciful father;
you must therefore love for him all that which you love for yourselves
and hate for him all that which you hate for yourselves.([^53])

To love for the ruler whatever is desired for oneself and to hate for
him whatever is avoided is definitely the most eloquent statement that
expresses the duty of the subjects towards their rulers—furnishing them
with security.

By taking notice of this fact, one can imagine how immense the fallacy
of some contemporary writers is who falsely accuse the Shi\`ah of
representing a secret, destructive association or an indignant
revolutionary faction!

It is undeniable that among the features a follower of the Ahl al-Bayt
(\`a) must possess are aversion towards wrongdoing and oppression,
keeping oneself away from the unjust and the dissolute, and looking at
the supporters and assistants of such wrongdoers with an eye of
revulsion, denunciation, repugnance, and contempt.

These features still persist in the inner selves of Shi\`ite Muslims
which they inherit from their ancestors and transfer to their
descendants; yet, they have never had the habit of cheating and
betrayal, nor have they ever, openly or secretly, betaken themselves to
revolution and uprising against the religious authorities that rule in
the name of Islam. Abiding by the teachings of the Holy Imams (\`a),
Shi\`ite Muslims have never allowed themselves to assassinate or waylay
any Muslim no matter what sect he may follow or what wing he may
support. The Shi\`ah believe that the property, life, and honor of a
Muslim who professes Islam must be protected:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَحِلُّ مَالُ امْرِئٍ مُسْلِمٍ إلاَّ بِطِيبِ نَفْسٍ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is not lawful to take the property of a Muslim individual except
after obtaining his consensual permission.([^54])

In addition, Muslims are brothers of each other in the concept of
Shi\`ite Muslims; each of them enjoys rights and is bound by obligations
towards the others.In addition, Muslims are brothers of each other in
the concept of Shi\`ite Muslims; each of them enjoys rights and is bound
by obligations towards the others.

Mutual Rights of Muslims
------------------------

Fraternization of Muslims with each other, apart from the great variety
of social classes, ranks, or positions, is one of the greatest and most
excellent instructions upon which the religion of Islam is based. On the
other hand, one of the most disgraceful offenses committed by Muslims,
in the present and past ages, has been their negligence of abiding by
the requirements of such Islamic fraternity.

The least requirement of this fraternity, as is expressed by Imam
al-Sadiq (\`a), is that a Muslim should wish for his brother what he
wishes for himself and hate for him what he hates for himself.([^55])

If one looks attentively at this characteristic, which is easy in the
eyes of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a), one will discover that it is the most
difficult matter required from Muslims of this age who are,
unfortunately, far away from the genuine spirit of Islam.

Think carefully about this simple characteristic; if Muslims can
supposedly consider their state fairly, recognize the reality of their
religion, and abide by this characteristic of wishing for others what
they wish for themselves, there shall be no place for wrongdoing,
transgression, theft, dishonesty, backbiting, tale-bearing, false
accusation, slander, insult, or haughtiness.

In plain words, if Muslims can think carefully and apply this
characteristic of fraternity among themselves, there will be no place
for injustice and oppression on this globe, human beings will be as
“brethren, on raised couches, face to face”([^56]) after they attain the
highest levels of social happiness. Moreover, the ancient philosophers’
dream of establishing a utopia will come true. When that day comes,
Muslims, treating each other with mutual love and affection, will be in
no need for governments, courts, police, jails, penal law, or provisions
and infliction of punishment. Had they committed themselves to the
requirements of fraternity, they would not have been colonized, would
not have cringed before despots, would not have been ruled tyrannically,
and the earth would have been totally changed into Paradise and an abode
of happiness.

Furthermore, if the law of mutual love had reigned in the hearts of
humanity as religion had planned to put it into practice through the
teachings of fraternity, the word ‘justice’ would have been removed from
all languages. We would no longer call for justice and its laws as long
as there would be the law of mutual love disseminating decency, peace,
happiness, and felicity among everybody. Of course, man will not need to
use justice, nor will law request for it, except when mutual love flees
from those who are required to treat others fairly. As for those who
exchange love with us, such as our sons and brothers, we treat them
excellently and give up many of our desires for their sake on the
grounds of mutual love and affection, not justice and interests. The
fact is that man is prone to love himself and love what is compatible
with him; it is, therefore, not easy for him to love something or
someone that he is not attached to.

It is also difficult for man to sacrifice his desires and lovable things
for another person whom he does not love or care for except when an idea
more powerful than personal desires overtakes him, such as the goodness
of justice and philanthropy. Only then can man sacrifice desirable
things for others. Even so, such a sacrifice is made for the sake of
fulfilling other desires that are more powerful than the sacrificed
desires, such as his idea about justice, which must be one of his
favorite desires if not a part of his own entity.

The formation of such perfect ideas in man requires spiritual soaring
over materialistic considerations. Only after man fails to form in
himself the feelings of mutual fraternity and sympathy between members
of his kind and himself might he realize the supreme ideal in justice
and philanthropy.

The first step towards Islam is to possess feelings of fraternity for
others. When a Muslim individual fails to do so, owing to the prevalence
of desires and selfishness in personalities, then he must form in
himself an idea about justice and philanthropy through compliance with
the teachings of Islam. However, if he fails to do either, then he will
not be worthy of being called a Muslim although he may claim belonging
to Islam. *“He will be dismissed from the circle of loyalty and
obedience to Almighty Allah Who will not grant him any share of His
custody,” as clearly expressed by Imam al-Sadiq (\`a).*

In most cases, man is overcome by his intense whims; therefore, the most
difficult matter for man may be to accept the idea of justice, not to
mention holding it as the perfect faith.

Therefore, the obligations of religious fraternity have been one of the
most difficult teachings of Islam, especially for those who lack honest
feelings toward fraternity. In view of this fact, Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq
(\`a), on account of his pity for the asker, deemed wise not to mention
the duties towards one’s brethren-in-faith more than the necessary, lest
it would be impossible for the asker, namely al-Mu\`alla ibn Khunays, to
carry out all the duties towards his brethren-in-faith:

Al-Mu\`alla (asking Imam al-Sadiq): What are the duties of a Muslim
towards other Muslims?

The Imam (\`a): A Muslim enjoys seven rights that are incumbent upon
other Muslims to carry out. Each of these rights is absolutely
incumbent. If a Muslim violates any of these rights, he will be
dismissed from the circle of loyalty and obedience to Almighty Allah Who
shall not grant him any share of His custody.

Al-Mu\`alla: May Allah accept me as ransom for you! What are these
rights?

The Imam (\`a): Indeed, I feel pity for you, al-Mu\`alla! I am afraid
lest you will violate these rights and neglect to put them into practice
after you learn of them.

Al-Mu\`alla: There is no power save Allah!

Only then did Imam al-Sadiq (\`a) mention these seven duties the easiest
of which, as is expressed by the Imam (\`a) himself, is to wish for your
brethren-in-faith what you wish for yourself and hate for them what you
hate for yourself.

How astonishing! This is the easiest duty! How can we, Muslims of the
present age, practise this duty on ourselves? Shame on those who claim
being Muslims while they refrain from carrying out the slightest duty
imposed on them towards their brothers.

What is more astonishing is that the current retardation of Muslims is
attributed to Islam; while it is the fault of none except those who call
themselves Muslims but do not carry out the slightest duty instructed by
their religion.

In order to realize our reality as a negligent nation and in order that
history will record this for us, I will mention, hereinafter, these
seven rights as clarified by Imam al-Sadiq (\`a):

(1) You should love for your brother-in-faith what you love for yourself
and you should despise for him what you despise for yourself.

(2) You should avoid his displeasure, pursue what pleases him, and obey
his command.

(3) You should help him with your self, your wealth, your tongue, your
hands, and your feet.

(4) You should be his eyes, his guide, and his mirror.

(5) You should not fill your stomach whilst he is hungry, you should not
quench your thirst whilst he is thirsty, and you should not clothe
yourself whilst he is naked.

(6) If you should have a servant whilst he does not have one, you should
send over your servant to wash his clothes and prepare his food and
bedding.

(7) You should fulfill your vows to him, answer his calls, respond when
he invites you, visit him when he is ill, and accompany his bier; and if
he should have a need, you should rush to fulfill it and not give him
the trouble to ask you for it.

The Imam (\`a) then concluded his words with the following result:

When you have done all these, your friendship unites you
together.([^57])

There are many traditions, reported from our Holy Imams (\`a), bearing
the same purport of the aforementioned one. A big number of such
traditions have been compiled in various sections of the book of
‘*Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah*’.

Some people may conceive that fraternity to which the Holy Imams (\`a)
have referred is dedicated to brotherliness between their followers
(i.e. Shi\`ah) exclusively. However, a glance at their traditions as a
whole cancels out this misconception despite the fact that the Holy
Imams (\`a), on many other occasions, have intensely condemned those who
dissent from their way and reject following their guidance.

In this respect, it is sufficient to read the following narration:

Mu\`awiyah ibn Wahab narrated that he, once, asked Imam al-Sadiq (\`a):
How should we behave with those members of our community and associates
who are not following our sect?

The Imam (\`a): You must imitate your Imams (\`a) whom you follow, and
then do exactly as they do. Truly, they (i.e. the Imams) visit the sick
(among those who are not Shi\`ah), present themselves in their funeral
ceremonies, give upright testimony for or against them, and give them
back their things that they trust with them.([^58])

The kind of fraternity that the Holy Imams (\`a) want from their
followers is actually more refined than the general sense of fraternity
in Islam. In the previous chapter while defining the true sense of
Shi\`ism, we referred to some narrations in this respect. However, it is
sufficient to cite the following dialogue between Aban ibn Taghlib and
Imam al-Sadiq (\`a), as reported by Aban himself:

While I, Aban, was performing the ritual Circumambulating (*tawaff*) in
the company of Imam al-Sadiq (\`a), one of our fellows, who had
previously asked me to accompany him in a mission, appeared before me.
As he signaled to me, Imam al-Sadiq (\`a) saw us, “Aban: Are you the one
intended by that man?” asked the Imam (\`a).

“Yes, I am,” I answered.

“Is he of the same faith as you?” wondered the Imam (\`a).

“Yes, he is,” I answered.

“Then,” the Imam (\`a) instructed, “go with him and break your
circumambulation.”

“Should I do so even if the Circumambulation is obligatory?” I asked.

“Yes, you should,” he answered.

So, I went with that man. When I returned, I visited the Imam (\`a) and
asked him about the duties towards brethren-in-faith.

“Leave the matter. Do not ask me about it,” said the Imam (\`a).

Nevertheless, I repeated the same question insistently until the Imam
(\`a) answered me, saying, “Aban: (the duty towards one’s
brother-in-faith is that) you give him half of your fortune.”

As he looked at me and noticed my surprise, the Imam (\`a) said, “Aban,
you should have known that Almighty Allah has mentioned (with praise)
those who give others preference over themselves?”

“Yes, I knew that,” I answered.

The Imam (\`a) said, “If you give your brother-in-faith half of what you
have in possession, you have not yet given him preference over yourself.
But if you give him from the other half, only then have you given him
preference.”([^59])

Actually, our shameful state of affairs does not encourage us to
consider ourselves true believers. Very remote are we from the teachings
of our Holy Imams (\`a). The same surprise that struck Aban may strike
everyone who reads this tradition, causing him to turn his face away, to
pretend that this tradition is not addressed to him, and avoid “judging
himself as if he is the criminal.”Actually, our shameful state of
affairs does not encourage us to consider ourselves true believers. Very
remote are we from the teachings of our Holy Imams (\`a). The same
surprise that struck Aban may strike everyone who reads this tradition,
causing him to turn his face away, to pretend that this tradition is not
addressed to him, and avoid “judging himself as if he is the criminal.”

[^1]: () For more details about the philosophy, manners, worldly and
religious effects, and reasons for response or rejection of du\`a’, the
reader is advised to refer to the following books: al-Kafi by al-Kulayni
(AH 329), 2:466-595, Chapter: Kitab al-Du\`a’ (Book of Supplication)
–this section comprises an elaborate, comprehensive treatise on du\`a’.
See also al-Du\`a’ \`Inda Ahl al-Bayt by Muhammad Mahdi al-Asifi
(contemporary); al-\`Abd al-Mawla Niqat al-Tamas by Muhammad Kazim
al-Kirmani, an essay issued in Risalat al-Thaqalayn Magazine, Issue No.
19-20.

[^2]: () This hadith can be found in the following reference books:
al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:468, H.1, Section: bab anna al-du\`a’
silah al-mu'min (Supplication: The Believers’ Weapon); \`Uyun Akhbar
al-Ridha by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), 1:40, H.95; al-Mustadrak \`Ala
al-Sahihayn by al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 1:492; Majma\` al-Zawa'id
by al-Haythami (AH. 807), 10:147, Section: bab al-istinsar bi’l-du\`a’
(Seeking Aid By Means of Supplication); Musnad Abi-Ya\`la al-Mawsili (AH
307), 1:344, H.439; al-Jami\` al-Saghir by al-Suyuti (AH 911), 1:655, H.
4258.

[^3]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:466, Chapter: Kitab
al-Du\`a’ Book of Supplication), Section: bab al-du\`a’ wa’l-hathth
\`alayh (Supplication and Urging On It), H.1; al-Mujtana min Du\`a’
al-Mujtaba by Ibn Tawus (AH 664), pp. 5; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr
al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 7:30-31, Section: bab istihbab ikhtiyar al-du\`a’
\`ala ghayrihi min al-\`ibadat al-mustahabbah (The Recommendation of
Preferring Supplication Over Other Recommended Acts of Worship),
H.1/8625. In H.7/8631, it is recorded that the Holy Prophet ('a) is
reported to have said: أفْضَلُ العِبَادَةِ الدُّعَاءُ؛ وَإذَا أذِنَ
اللهُ لِعَبْدٍ فِي الدُّعَاءِ فَتَحَ لَهُ أبْوَابَ الرَّحْمَةِ. إنَّهُ
لَنْ يَهْلِكَ مَعَ الدُّعَاءِ أحَدٌ. “The best of worship is
supplication. If Almighty Allah permits a servant to supplicate to Him,
He opens the doors to (His) mercy before the servant. A suppliant shall
never perish.” See Bihar al-Anwar by al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 90:302, H.
39; al-Mustadrak \`Ala al-Sahihayn by al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405),
1:491, Chapter: kitab al-du\`a’ wa’l-takbir wa’l-tahlil…; al-Jami\`
al-Saghir by al-Suyuti (AH 911), 1:120, H.1281; Kanz al-\`Ummal by
al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (AH 974), 2:64, H.3134.

[^4]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:468, Chapter: Kitab
al-Du\`a’ Book of Supplication), Section: bab al-du\`a’ wa’l-hathth
\`alayh (Supplication and Urging On It), H.8 (In this book, the hadith
is reported from Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin); Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by
al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 7:31, H. 8628; Mustadrak al-Wasa'il by
al-Nuri al-Tabrisi (AH 1320), 5:17, 171, H.5592, 5588; Musnad Ahmad ibn
Hanbal (AH 241), 2:362; Sunan Ibn Majah (AH 275), 2:1258, H.3829;
al-Mustadrak \`Ala al-Sahihayn by al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 1:490,
Chapter: kitab al-du\`a’ wa’l-takbir wa’l-tahlil…; Kashf al-Khafa'
wa-Muzil al-Ilbas by al-\`Ajaluni (AH 1162), 2:169, H.2141.

[^5]: () See Qurb al-Isnad by al-Himyari al-Baghdadi (AH 300), pp. 32.
In this reference book, it is recorded that Imam al-Sadiq ('a) has said:
إنَّ الدُّعَاءَ يَرُدُّ القَضَاءَ، وإنَّ المُؤمِنَ لَيَأتِي بِالذَّنْبِ
فَيُحْرَمُ بِهِ الرِّزْقَ. “Verily, supplication repels predestination.
A believer may be deprived of sustenance due to committing a sin. See
also al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:469; Section: bab anna al-du\`a’
yaruddu al-bala' wa’l-qadha' (Supplication Repels Afflictions and
Predestinations); al-Khisal by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 620; Tuhaf
al-\`Uqul by Ibn Shu\`bah al-Harrani (the fourth century of Hijrah), pp.
110; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 7:36, Section:
bab jawaz al-du\`a’ biraddi al-bala' al-muqaddar wa talab taghyir qadha'
al-su' wa istihbab dhalika (The Permissibility of Supplicating For
Repelling A Predestined Affliction and Praying For Changing Evil
Predestination and Recommendation for That); Kitab al-Du\`a’ by Sulayman
ibn Ahmad al-Tabarani (AH 360), pp. 30; al-Mustadrak \`Ala al-Sahihayn
by al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (AH 405), 3:481; al-Jami\` al-Saghir by
al-Suyuti (AH 911), 1:206, 655, 656, H.1390, 4262, 4265; Kanz al-\`Ummal
by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (AH 974), 2, 62, 63, 69, H.3118, 3120, 3121,
3161, 3162.

[^6]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:470, Section: bab anna
al-du\`a’ shifa' min kulli da' (Supplication: Remedy For Every Malady),
6:413; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 7:45, H.8677,
Section: bab istihbab al-du\`a’ \`inda nuzul al-maradh wa’l-saqam
(Recommendation of Supplications At Afflictions of Sicknesses and
Ailments).

[^7]: () Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq ('a) is reported to have said: كَانَ
أمِيرُ المُؤمِنِينَ  رَجُلاً دَعَّاءً. Amir al-Mu'minin (Imam \`Ali)
('a) was seen frequently supplicating. See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH
329), 2:468, bab al-du\`a’ wa’l-hathth \`alayh (Supplication and Urging
On It), H.8; \`Uddat al-Da\`i wa-Najah al-Sa\`i by Ibn Fahad al-Hilli
(AH 841), pp. 33, 191 (The English version of this book has been
published by Ansariyan Publications under the title ‘The Asset of the
Supplicant’, translated by Dr. Aqili Ashtiyani).

[^8]: () The famous supplication known as du\`a’ kumayl begings with the
following statement: اَللَّهُمَّ إنِّي أسْألُكَ بِرَحْمَتِكَ الَّتِي
وَسِعَتْ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ، وَبِقُوَّتِكَ الَّتِي قَهَرْتَ بِهَا كُلَّ
شَيْءٍ… O Allah, I ask You by Your mercy, which embraces all things; And
by Your strength, through which Thou dominatest all things… This famous
supplication, which is also called ‘du\`a’ al-khadhir, has been reported
by Kumayl ibn Ziyad al-Nakha\`i from Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin ('a).
Laying emphasis on the significance of this du\`a’, Imam \`Ali ('a)
recommended it to Kumayl saying: يَا كُمَيْلُ! إذَا حَفِظْتَ هَذَا
الدُّعَاءَ فَادْعُ بِهِ كُلَّ لَيْلَةِ جُمُعَةٍ أوْ فِي الشَّهْرِ
مَرَّةً أوْ فِي السَّنَةِ مَرَّةً أوْ فِي عُمُرِكَ مَرَّةً تُكْفَ
وَتُنْصَرْ وَتُرْزَقْ وَلَنْ تَعْدِمَ المَغْفِرَةَ. “O Kumayl, if you
memorize this du\`a’, then you are recommended to say it every Thursday
night, or once a month, or once a year, or once in your whole lifetime.
If you do so, you will be granted protection, support and sustenance.
Furthermore, you will never be deprived of forgiveness…” See Iqbal
al-A\`mal by Ibn Tawus (AH 664), pp. 220, Section No.8: fi ma
yata\`allaqu bishahri sha\`ban al-mu\`azzam (Acts Appertained to the
Honored Month of Sha\`ban); al-Balad al-Amin wa’l-Dir\` al-Hasin by
al-Kaf\`ami (AH 900), pp. 265.

[^9]: () See Iqbal al-A\`mal by Sayyid Ibn Tawus (AH 664), pp. 221;
al-Balad al-Amin by al-Kaf\`ami (AH 900), pp. 267, as well as other
books of supplications.

[^10]: () Du\`a’ Abi-Hamzah al-Thamali has been reported from Imam \`Ali
ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-\`Abidin ('a). This supplication, which is
advisably read in the last hours of the Ramadhan nights (sahar), begins
with the following: إِلهِي لا تُؤَدّبْنِي بِعُقُوبَتِكَ، وَلا تَمْكُرْ
بِي فِي حِيلَتِكَ، مِنْ أَيْنَ لِيَ الْخَيْرُ يَا رَبّ وَلا يُوجَدُ
إِلاّ مِنْ عِنْدِكَ؟… “O Allah: Do not discipline me by means of Your
punishment; and do not subject me to Your planned strategy. How can I
attain welfare, O Lord, while it is not found anywhere save with You…”
See al-Sahifah al-Kamilah al-Sajjadiyyah, Supplication No. 116; Muhaj
al-Da\`awat wa-Manhaj al-\`Ibadat by Sayyid Ibn Tawus (AH 664), pp. 208;
al-Balad al-Amin wa’l-Dir\` al-Hasin by al-Kaf\`ami (AH 900), pp. 288.
[This du\`a', as well as many other famous supplications, has been
translated into English and compiled in many different books the most
comprehensive of which is entitled , ‘Rites of Rajab, Sha\`ban, and
Ramadhan’, translated by Badr Shahin, Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 2006.
(translator)]

[^11]: () This supplication is reported from Imam al-Mahdi—may Allah
hasten his advent. See al-Balad al-Amin wa’l-Dir\` al-Hasin by
al-Kaf\`ami (AH 900), pp. 480.

[^12]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:473; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah
by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 7:54, H.8702, Section: bab istihbab
al-iqbal bi’l-qalb halat al-du\`a’ (Recommendation of Heart Presence
While Supplicating); Makarim al-Akhlaq by al-Tabrisi (AH 548), pp. 270;
\`Uddat al-Da\`i wa-Najah al-Sa\`i by Ibn Fahad al-Hilli (AH 841), pp.
126; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi’l-Hadid al-Mu\`tazili (AH 656),
11:229. Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) is reported to have said: إنَّ
اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لاَ يَسْتَجِيبُ دُعَاءَ قَلْبٍ لاَهٍ. “Verily,
Almighty Allah does not receive the supplication coming out of an
inattentive heart.” Reference: al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:437.
Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq ('a) is also reported to have said: إنَّ اللهَ
عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لاَ يَسْتَجِيبُ دُعَاءً بِظَهْرِ قَلْبٍ قَاسٍ. “Verily,
Almighty Allah does not respond to the supplication coming out of a
cruel heart.” Reference: al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:474.

[^13]: () According to Arabic-Arabic dictionaries, the word ‘taff’
stands for the Arab lands including the rural territories of Iraq.
Exclusively, al-taff, which refers to the banks of the River Euphrates,
is a land in the outskirts of al-Kufah on the outer way of the city. In
this land, Imam al-Husayn ibn \`Ali ('a) was slain. Reference: see
Mu\`jam al-Buldan by Yaqut al-Hamawi (AH 626), 4:35.

[^14]: () These two titles are the most famous among the other titles of
honor by which Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn ('a) was known. The first,
namely ‘The Adornment of the Worshippers (Zayn al-\`Abidin) expresses
the Imam’s conspicuous worship, since he was regarded as a consummate
exemplar of obedience to Almighty Allah. The second title, namely, The
Master of the Prostrators (Sayyid al-Sajidin), refers to the custom of
the Imam’s prostrating himself to Almighty Allah, as he was well-known
of spending very long periods prostrating himself before the Almighty
Lord. [translator]

[^15]: () He was such because he had witnessed the astounding tragedy of
Karbala' during which the Umayyad ruler and his constabulary slew Imam
al-Husayn ibn \`Ali ('a), the delight of the Holy Prophet’s eye and
Master of the youth of Paradise, about whom the Holy Prophet (s) said:
حُسَيْنٌ مِنِّي وَأنَا مِنْ حُسَيْنٍ. “Husayn is part of me and I am
part of Husayn.” During that shocking event, Imam Zayn al-\`Abidin’s
('a) father, brothers, cousins, and their supporters were all slain. By
Divine Care, Imam Zayn al-\`Abidin ('a) survived that massacre because
sickness had prevented him from participation in that military combat.
However, he did not shun political combat against them and before the
tyrant, Yazid, while he was in captivity.

[^16]: () The English version of this book is entitled “al-Sahifah
al-Kamilah al-Sajjadiyyah; the Psalms of Islam,” translated by William
C. Chitticks, and published by Ansariyan Publications. [translator]

[^17]: () Nahj al-Balaghah [Peak of Eloquence] is a collection of
sermons, epistles, and aphorisms of Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib compiled by
al-Sharif al-Razi (AH 406/AD 1015). (The English version of this
fabulous book is entitled ‘Peak of Eloquence’, translated by Sayyid
\`Ali Reza (in AD 1971), and published by Ansariyan Publications – Qum,
I.R.Iran. [translator])

[^18]: () For more details about this topic, the reader is advised to
refer to the following book: Ziyarat al-Qubur by \`Abd al-Rahim
al-Musawi (contemporary), Qum: Researches and Refutal of Spurious
Arguments Committee in The Ahl al-Bayt ('a) World Assembly, First
Edition, AH 1422.

[^19]: () Many narrations and traditions have been reported by both
Shi\`ite and Sunni reporters on the merits of visiting the tomb of the
Holy Prophet (s) as well as the tombs of the saints and people of faith.
For instance, Anas ibn Malik reported the Holy Prophet (s) as saying:
مَنْ زَارَنِي مَيِّتاً فَكَأنَّمَا زَارَنِي حَيّاً. وَمَنْ زَارَ قَبْرِي
وَجَبَتْ لَهُ شَفَاعَتِي يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ. وَمَا مِنْ أحَدٍ مِنْ
أُمَّتِي لَهُ سَعَةٌ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَزُرْنِي، فَلَيْسَ لَهُ عُذْرٌ.
“Visiting my tomb after my death is the same as visiting me during my
lifetime. He who visits my tomb will definitely deserve my intercession
(shafa\`ah) on the Day of Resurrection. Not excused is an individual of
my nation who shuns visiting my tomb while having the capacity to do
so.” This hadith is reported by Sam\`an ibn al-Mahdi on the authority of
Anas ibn Malik. Ibn Habban has included Sam\`an with the trustworthy
narrators. Al-Nassa'i has described him as ‘there is no objection found
against him.’ See al-Durrah al-Thaminah fi Fadha'il al-Madinah by Ibn
al-Najjar, pp. 144.

[^20]: () See Hukm al-Bina' \`Ala al-Qubur (Rulings of Building on
Graves) by \`Abd al-Karim al-Bahbahani (contemporary), Qum: Researches
and Refutal of Spurious Arguments Committee in The Ahl al-Bayt ('a)
World Assembly, First Edition, AH 1422; al-Bina' \`Ala Qubur al-Anbiya'
wa’l-Awliya' wa-Ittikhadhuha Masajida wa-Amakina li’l-\`Ibadah (Building
on the Graves of the Prophets and the Saints and Betaking Them As
Mosques and Places of Worship) by Murtadha al-\`Askari (Book No. 8 in
the series of \`ala ma'idat al-qur’an wa’l-sunnah –On the Table of the
Qur'an and Sunnah--), Tehran: Islamic Scientific Assembly, First
Edition, AH 1417.

[^21]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 4:567, Section: bab masjid
ghadir Khumm, H. 2; Kamil al-Ziyarat by Ibn Qawlawayh al-Qummi (AH 368),
pp. 237, H.352; Man La Yahdhuruhu’l-Faqih by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381),
2:577, H.3160; \`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381),
1:292, H. 24, Section: bab fi dhikr thawab ziyarat al-imam \`ali ibn
musa al-ridha (The Rewards of Visiting Imam \`Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha).

[^22]: () Let us quote here selections from this famous ziyarah:
اَلسَّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يا أَمينَ اللهِ في أَرْضِهِ وَحُجَّتَهُ عَلى
عِبادِهِ. اَلسَّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يا أَميرَ الْمُؤْمِنينَ. أَشْهَدُ أَنَّكَ
جاهَدْتَ فِي اللهِ حَقَّ جِهادِهِ وَعَمِلْتَ بِكِتابِهِ… اَللّهُمَّ
فَاجْعَلْ نَفْسى مُطْمَئِنَّةً بِقَدَرِكَ، راضِيَةً بِقَضَائِكَ،
مُولَعَةً بِذِكْرِكَ وَدُعَائِكَ، مُحِبَّةً لِصَفْوَةِ أَوْلِيَائِكَ،
مَحْبُوبَةً فى أَرْضِكَ وَسَمَائِكَ، صابِرَةً عَلى نُزُولِ بَلائِكَ،
شاكِرَةً لِفَواضِلِ نَعْمَائِكَ، ذاكِرَةً لِسَوابِغِ آلائِكَ، مُشْتاقَةً
إِلى فَرْحَةِ لِقَائِكَ، مُتَزَوِّدَةً التَّقْوى لِيَوْمِ جَزَائِكَ…
اَللّهُمَّ إِنَّ قُلُوبَ الُْمخْبِتينَ إِلَيْكَ والِهَةٌ، وَسُبُلَ
الرّاغِبينَ إِلَيْكَ شارِعَةٌ، وَأَعْلامَ الْقاصِدينَ إِلَيْكَ واضِحَةٌ…
“Peace be on you, O trusted guardian, appointed by Allah, to administer
His earth and to maintain His argument against His creatures. Peace be
on you, O Commander of Believers. I testify that you made utmost
efforts, as needed, in the cause of Allah, and acted upon His Book… O
Allah: let me be happy and satisfied with what You consider good for me,
let me agree with what You decide for me, let me passionately remember
You, and invoke You. Fill my heart with love for Your pure and sincere
servants. Let me be well-liked and respected on the earth, and in the
heavens, let me be unruffled and well-composed in the midst of
misfortunes, let me be gratefully thankful in prosperity, let me be
mindful of much and more bounties, let me ardently desire the heart
warming meeting with You… O Allah: verily, the hearts of those who
surrender to You are full of passionate love; the path of those who long
for You is the straight road, the instructions given by those who lean
on You are distinct and precise…”

[^23]: () See Kamil al-Ziyarat by Ibn Qawlawayh al-Qummi (AH 368), pp.
92, H.1, Section No. 11; al-Mazar al-Kabir by Ibn al-Mashhadi (AH 610),
pp. 282, Section: al-ziyarah al-mukhtassah bi-yawm al-ghadir (The
Ziyarah Dedicated to the Ghadir Day); Iqbal al-A\`mal by Ibn Tawus (AH
664), pp. 786, Chapter: fi ziyarat al-amir yawma al-ghadir (Ziyarah of
Amir al-Mu'minin on the Ghadir Day); al-Balad al-Amin wa’l-Dir\`
al-Hasin by al-Kaf\`ami (AH 900), pp. 416; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr
al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 14:359, H.19451.

[^24]: () Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) is reported to have said:
تَنَظَّفُوا بِالمَاءِ وَتَعَهَّدوا أنفُسَكُمْ، فَإنَّ اللهَ يَبْغَضُ
مِنْ عِبَادِهِ القَاذُورَةَ الَّذِي يَتَأفَّفُ بِهِ مَنْ جَلَسَ إلَيْهِ.
Remove bad odors with water and keep your bodies clean, because Almighty
Allah hates His servants to be dirty and give off bad odor that
nauseates their associates. Reference: Tuhaf al-\`Uqul by Ibn Shu\`bah
al-Harrani (the fourth century of Hijrah), pp.110.

[^25]: () This supplication is reported from Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq ('a).
See Kamil al-Ziyarat by Ibn Qawlawayh al-Qummi (AH 368), pp. 345, H.583,
Section: bab man ightasala fi’l-furat wa-zara al-husayn (Washing Oneself
In The Euphrates and Visiting al-Husayn ('a)). However, the author of
this book has reported this supplication with a little difference from
this reference book as well as other reference books. There is a less
different version of the same supplication recorded by Shaykh al-Tusi
(AH 460) in his book of Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 6:45, Section: bab fadhl
al-ghusl li’l-ziyarah (Merits of Washing Oneself Before Visiting the
Holy Shrines).

[^26]: () See al-Mazar by al-Shahid al-Awwal (AH 786), pp. 50; Bihar
al-Anwar by al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 97:288; Manasik al-Mazar by Shaykh
al-Mufid (AH 413), pp. 211, Section: bab ma yaqulu al-za’ir \`an akhihi
tatawwu\`an (Voluntary Utterance of A Pilgrim On Behalf Of A
Brother-In-Faith); al-Mazar by Ibn al-Mashhadi (AH 610), pp. 597,
Section No. 2: ma yaqulu al-za’ir \`an ghayrihi bi’l-ajri wa ma yaqulu
\`an akhihi tatawwu\`an (Utterances of A Pilgrim On Behalf Of Others For
A Wage, And On Behalf Of One’s Brother-In-Faith Voluntarily).

[^27]: () This is an indication to the following holy verse: وَلَا
تَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ قُتِلُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أَمْوَاتًا ۚ بَلْ
أَحْيَاءٌ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ يُرْزَقُونَ And reckon not those who are
killed in Allah's way as dead; nay, they are alive (and) are provided
sustenance from their Lord. (3/169)

[^28]: () This is Imam Muhammad al-Baqir’s communiqué to his followers.
See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:176. The same tradition has been
recorded in other reference books but with little difference, such as in
Musadaqat al-Ikhwan by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 34; Wasa'il
al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 12:7, H.15501; al-Hikayat by
Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 413), pp. 92; Mustatrafat al-Sara'ir by Ibn Idris
al-Hilli (AH 598), pp. 625-626.

[^29]: () This statement is one of Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq’s ('a)
instructions to his followers. See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329),
2:105, H. 10, Section: bab al-sidq wa-ada' al-amanah (Honesty and
Fulfillment of Trusts). A similar tradition is mentioned in 2:77, 78,
105; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 12:162,
H.15955, Section: bab wujub al-sidq (Obligation of Honesty); Mishkat
al-Anwar fi Ghurar al-Akhbar by al-Tabrisi (the seventh century of
Hijrah), pp. 30.

[^30]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:174. A similar tradition
is mentioned in Kitab al-Mu'min by al-Kufi al-Ahwazi (before AH 300),
pp. 44 (The English version of this book is entitled ‘Kitab al-Mu'min:
The Book of the Believer’; Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 2002); Wasa'il
al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 5:120, H. 6090 & 9:428,
H.12406.

[^31]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:77, Section: bab
al-wara\` (Piety), H.6. The last paragraph of the tradition in which
Imam al-Sadiq ('a) mentions the qualities of his real followers are
recorded in al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:236, Section: bab
al-mu'min \`alamatuhu wa sifatuhu (Features and Qualities of Believers),
H.23; Sharh al-Akhbar by al-Qadhi al-Nu\`man al-Maghribi (AH 363),
3:503, H.1445; Ikhtiyar Ma\`rifat al-Rijal by Shaykh al-Tusi (AH 460),
2:525; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 15:244,
H.20398.

[^32]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:78, Section: bab
al-wara\` (Piety), H.10. A similar tradition is mentioned in Sharh
al-Akhbar by al-Qadhi al-Nu\`man al-Maghribi (AH 363), 3:501, H.1437;
Mustatrafat al-Sara'ir by Ibn Idris al-Hilli (AH 598), pp. 639; Mishkat
al-Anwar fi Ghurar al-Akhbar by al-Tabrisi (the seventh century of
Hijrah), pp. 138.

[^33]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:78, Section: bab
al-wara\` (Piety), H.13; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH
1104), 15:243, H.20391, Section: bab wujub al-wara\` (Obligation of
Piety), H.1; Alfu Hadithin fi’l-Mu'min by al-Najafi (contemporary), pp.
261, H.786.

[^34]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:79, Section: bab
al-wara\` (Piety), H.15; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH
1104), 15:246, H.204040, Section: bab wujub al-wara\` (Obligation of
Piety).

[^35]: () See al-Khisal by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 295-296,
Section: bab al-khamsah: khamsun ma athqalahunna fi’l-mizan (The Five
Weightiest Things In the Divine Scale), H.63; Sifat al-Shi\`ah by Shaykh
al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 11; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH
1104), 15:251, H.20425, Section: bab wujub al-\`iffah (Obligation of
Chastity), H.13. Imam al-Sadiq ('a) is reported to have said, “The
Shi\`ah of \`Ali are those who practice chastity as regards their
stomachs… etc.” See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:233, Section: bab
al-mu'min \`alamatuhu wa sifatuhu (Features and Qualities of Believers),
H.9; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 1:86, H.204,
Section: bab ta'akkud istihbab al-jidd wa’l-ijtihad fi’l-\`ibadah
(Confirmation on the Recommendation of Hardwork and Painstakingness in
Worship), H.7; Mishkat al-Anwar fi Ghurar al-Akhbar by al-Tabrisi (the
seventh century of Hijrah), pp. 119. To identify a true Shi\`ite and
loyalist of the Ahl al-Bayt ('a), the reader is advised to see al-Kafi
by al-Kulayni (AH 329), Section: bab al-mu'min \`alamatuhu wa sifatuhu
(Features and Qualities of Believers), H.1 in which Imam \`Ali Amir
al-Mu'minin ('a) mentions about one hundred features of true believers.

[^36]: ()Al-Mubarrad and Ibn \`A'ishah narrated the following: A Syrian
man went on reviling Imam al-Hasan ('a) who was riding an animal. The
Imam ('a) kept silent until the Syrian man finished. He then approached
him and said, with a smile: “Old man! I think you are a foreigner. You
might be wrong. If you admonish us, we will pardon your ignorance. If
you ask us for something, we will give it to you. If you seek our
guidance, we will lead you. If you ask us to load something on your
riding animal, we will assist you. If you are hungry, we will supply you
with food. If you are naked, we will clothe you. If you are needy, we
will satisfy your need. If you are a fugitive, we will provide for you.
I now request you to drive your animal towards our residence so that you
can be our guest until you decide to leave. This will be better for you.
We have a large residence, a remarkable position, and an abundant
fortune.” As he heard the words of the Imam ('a), the Syrian man wept
and said, “It is surely true that Allah knows best who is the worthiest
to convey His message. Previously, your father and you were the most
hated creatures of God for me. But now, you are the dearest.” He then
turned towards the residence of the Imam and was his guest until he
left, filled with awe and affection for the Ahl al-Bayt ('a). Reference:
Manaqib Al Abi-Talib by Ibn Shahr Ashub (AH 588), 3:184. The same story,
yet will little difference in words, is cited in Kashf al-Ghummah by
al-Arbali (AH 693), 2:184.

[^37]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:334, Section: bab
al-zulm (Injustice), H.17; Thawab al-A\`mal wa \`Iqab al-A\`mal by
Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 274. A similar tradition is mentioned in
Makarim al-Akhlaq by al-Tabrisi (AH 548), pp. 332.

[^38]: () See Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104),
17:177, Section: bab ma\`unat al-zalimin walaw bi-maddati qalam wa-talab
ma fi aydihim min al-zulm (Assistance of the Oppressors Even By
Extending A Pen To Them And Desiring For Their Oppression); Mustadrak
al-Wasa'il by al-Nuri al-Tabrisi (AH 1320), 13:122; al-Kafi by
al-Kulayni (AH 329), 5:108, Section: bab \`amal al-sultan wa-jawa'izuhum
(Working With The Rulers And Receiving Their Rewards). The Holy Prophet
(s) is also reported to have said: مَنْ تَوَلَّى خُصُومَةَ ظَالِمٍ أوْ
أعَانَ عَلَيْهَا ثُمَّ نَزَلَ بِهِ مَلَكُ المَوْتِ، قَالَ لَهُ: أبْشِرْ
بِلَعْنَةِ اللهِ وَنَارِ جَهَنَّمَ، وَبِئْسَ المَصِيرُ. “As for those
who hold positions in an unjust government or assist its members, the
Angel of Death will receive them with the following words: ‘Ahead of you
is Allah’s curse and Hellfire: a hapless journey’s end!’” مَنْ دَلَّ
جَائِراً عَلَى جَوْرٍ كَانَ قَرِينَ هَامَانَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ. “He who
guides an oppressor towards an act of injustice shall be the companion
of Haman (Pharaoh’s assistant) in Hellfire.” Reference: al-Amali by
Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 513.

[^39]: () See Tuhaf al-\`Uqul by Ibn Shu\`bah al-Harrani (the fourth
century of Hijrah), pp. 275-276; Bihar al-Anwar by al-Majlisi (AH 1111),
75:132-133, H. 2, Section: bab wasaya \`ali ibn al-husayn wa mawa\`izuhu
wa hikamuhu (Instructions, Sermons, and Aphorisms of \`Ali ibn
al-Husayn); Man La Yahdhuruhu’l-Faqih by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381),
4:483.

[^40]: () This statement, the translation of ‘ju\`iltu fidaka’, was
usually said in the presence of the Holy Imams ('a) to express loyalty
to them. I thus pray to Almighty Allah to grant us the opportunity to
address the Imam of our age, al-Mahdi (may Allah hasten his advent) with
this statement. [translator]

[^41]: () See Man La Yahdhuruhu’l-Faqih by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381),
4:436; Ikhtiyar Ma\`rifat al-Rijal (also called Rijal al-Kashshi) by
al-Tusi (AH 460), 2:740; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH
1104), 17:182, H.22305.

[^42]: () In Tuhaf al-\`Uqul, by Ibn Shu\`bah al-Harrani (the fourth
century of Hijrah), pp. 332, under the title: tafsir ma\`na al-wilayat
(Explanation of Work in Governmental Offices), Imam al-Sadiq’s ('a)
words, from which the aforementioned paragraph is quoted, are as
follows: وَأمَّا وَجْهُ الحَرَامِ مِنَ الوِلايَةِ: فَوِلاَيَةُ الوَالِي
الجَائِرِ وَوِلاَيَةُ وُلاتِهِ؛ الرَّئِيسِ مَنْهُمْ، وَأتْبَاعِ الوَالِي
فَمَنْ دُونَهُ مِنْ وُلاةِ الوُلاةِ إلَى أدْنَاهُمْ باباً مِنْ أبْوَابِ
الوِلايَةِ عَلَى مَنْ هُوَ وَالٍ عَلَيْهِ وَالعَمَلُ لَهُمْ وَالكَسْبُ
مَعَهُمْ بِجِهَةِ الوِلايَةِ لَهُمْ حَرَامٌ وَمُحَرَّمٌ، مُعَذَّبٌ مَنْ
فَعَلَ ذَلِكَ عَلَى قَلِيلٍ مِنْ فِعْلِهِ أوْ كَثِيرٍ، لأنَّ كُلَّ
شَيْءٍ مِنْ جِهَةِ المَعُونَةِ مَعْصِيَةٌ كَبِيرَةٌ مِنَ الكَبَائِرِ،
وَذَلِكَ أنَّ فِي وِلايَةِ الوَالِي الجَائِرِ دُرُوسَ الحَقِّ كُلِّهِ
وَإحْيَاءَ البَاطِلِ كُلِّهِ وَإظْهَارَ الظُّلْمِ وَالجَوْرِ وَالفَسَادِ
وَإبْطَالَ الكُتُبِ وَقَتْلَ الأنْبِيَاءِ وَالمُؤمِنِينَ وَهَدْمَ
المَسَاجِدِ وَتَبْدِيلَ سُنَّةِ اللهِ وَشَرَائِعِهِ. فَلِذَلِكَ حُرِّمَ
العَمَلُ مَعَهُمْ وَمَعُونَتُهُمْ وَالكَسْبُ مَعَهُمْ إلاَّ بِجِهَةِ
الضَّرُورَةِ نَظِيرَ الضَّرُورَةِ إلَى الدَّمِ وَالمَيْتَةِ. To hold an
office with the despotic ruler or with his deputy and his assistants
beginning with the chief down to the novice, and to work with them and
gain earnings from them are prohibited and illegal; and those who hold
such office, be it chief or minor, will suffer punishment. Every act
that is seen as support for the unjust rulers is an act of disobedience
(to Almighty Allah) and a grand sin, because to hold an office in the
government of despotic rulers wholly eradicates the right and wholly
enlivens the wrong. It also spreads injustice, oppression, and
corruption, breaks the laws of the Divine Books, kills the prophets and
believers, destroys mosques, and distorts God’s norms and principles.
For that reason, it is prohibited to work with them, support them, and
seek earnings from them except in cases of necessity that are similar to
the necessity of having blood or meat of corpses. In Bihar al-Anwar by
al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 100:45, Section: bab jawami\` al-makasib
al-muharramah wa’l-muhallalah (General Lawful and Unlawful Revenues),
this narration begins with, “In the government of the unjust ruler, the
good is eliminated…”

[^43]: () In the book of Munyat al-Murid fi Adab al-Mufid wa’l-Mustafid
by al-Shahid al-Thani (AH 966), pp. 164, and Bihar al-Anwar by
al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 72:350, Section: bab ahwal al-muluk wa’l-umara'
(Manners of the Kinds and Emirs) and on page 381, Section: bab al-rukun
ila al-zalimin wa hubbuhum wa ta\`atuhum (Leaning On Unjust Rulers and
Loving and Obeying Them), H.46, this tradition is reported from Imam
al-Ridha ('a) with little difference.

[^44]: See Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili; Section: Kitab
al-Bay\`, Chapter No. 78.

[^45]: () Referring to factors that remove rancor, the Holy Prophet (s)
is reported to have said: حُسْنُ البِشْرِ يَذْهَبُ بِالسَّخِيمَةِ.
“Happy mien removes rancor.” تَصَافَحُوا، فَإنَّ التَّصَافُحَ يُذْهِبُ
السَّخِيمَةَ. “Shake hands with each other, for it removes rancor.”
Reference: Tuhaf al-\`Uqul, by Ibn Shu\`bah al-Harrani (the fourth
century of Hijrah), pp. 45, 55. The Holy Prophet (s) is also reported to
have said: الهَدِيَّةُ تُذْهِبُ السَّخِيمَةَ. “Presents remove rancor.”
Reference: \`Awali al-La’ali by Ibn Abi-Jumhur (app. AH 880), 1:294,
H.181.

[^46]: () There is not enough space in this footnote to mention all the
reference books that have mentioned the famous Hadith al-Ghadir and its
ways of narration, because they are too numerous to be mentioned in such
a brief thesis. However, the reader may kindly refer to the footnotes
written by Shaykh Husayn al-Radhi in the margins of the book of
al-Muraja\`at: Reciprocal Correspondences Between Shaykh Salim
al-Bishri, the Head of al-Azhar University, and Sayyid Sharaf al-Din
al-Musawi al-\`Amili; revised by Husayn al-Radhi, Qum: The Ahl al-Bayt
('a) World Assembly, First Edition, AH 1422. See Letter No. 53 and on,
pp. 179 and footnote No. 2 of chapter 29 of this book. For further
details, refer to Mawsu\`at al-Ghadir (Encyclopedia of Ghadir) by
al-Amini al-Najafi (AH 1392): comprising eleven volumes along with
revision.

[^47]: () See Nahj al-Balaghah, revised by Shaykh Muhammad \`Abduh,
3:119, Letter No. 62.

[^48]: () This saying of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab has been so famous
because it was repeated on various occasions and in different forms such
as the following: “May Allah never keep me alive to face a problem while
Abu’l-Hasan is not there to solve it.” “O Allah: please do not keep me
alive to face a problem while Abu’l-Hasan is not there to solve it.” “I
seek Allah’s protection against my facing a problem while Abu’l-Hasan is
not there to solve it.” “May I never live to face a problem while
Abu’l-Hasan is not there to solve it.” “May Allah never keep me alive
after you.” “I pray to Allah to protect me against any problem while
\`Ali is absent.” Besides, there are numerous similar statements of
\`Umar ibn al-Khattab to Imam \`Ali ('a). See Dala'il al-Imamah by
al-Tabari (the early fourth century of Hijrah), pp. 22; Sharh al-Akhbar
by al-Qadhi al-Nu\`man al-Maghribi (AH 363), 2:317, H.651, pp.565,
H.651; Kitab al-Irshad by Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 413), 1:204; Manaqib Al
Abi-Talib by Ibn Shahr Ashub (AH 588), 1:311, 2:182; al-\`Umdah by Ibn
al-Bitriq al-Asadi al-Hilli (app. AH 600), pp. 257; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah
by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 28:108, H.34333, Section: thubut
al-zina bi’l-iqrar arba\`a marrat (Provability Of Fornication By
Four-Time Self-Confession), No. 7; al-Tabaqat al-Kubra by Ibn Sa\`d (AH
230), 2:239; al-Manaqib by al-Khawarizmi (AH 568), pp. 96-97, H.97, 98;
Tarikh Madinat Dimashq by Ibn \`Asakir (AH 571), 25:369, 42:406; Usd
al-Ghabah by Ibn al-Athir (AH 630), 4:23; Dhakha'ir al-\`Uqba fi Manaqib
Dhawi’l-Qurba by Ahmad ibn \`Abdullah al-Tabari (AH 694), pp. 82;
Tahdhib al-Kamal by al-Mazzi (AH 742), 20:485; Nuzum Durar al-Simtayn by
al-Zarandi al-Hanafi (AH 750), pp. 131-132; al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah by
Ibn Kathir al-Dimashqi (AH 774), 7:397; al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah
by Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani (AH 852), 4:467, No. 5704: Biography of \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib; Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari by Ibn Hajar
al-\`Asqalani (AH 852), 13:286; Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah li-Dhawi’l-Qurba by
al-Qanaduzi al-Hanafi (AH 1294), 1:227; H.57, 58; Faydh al-Qadir Sharh
al-Jami\` al-Saghir by al-Mannawi (AH 1331), 4:470, H.5594. For more
information, the reader may refer to the book of al-Imam \`Ali fi Ara'
al-Khulafa' (Imam \`Ali in the Views of the Caliphs) by Mahdi Faqih
«mani (contemporary), pp. 93 and on. The author of this book has
referred to tens of reference books and ways of narrations in this
respect.

[^49]: () See al-«dhah by Ibn Shadhan al-Azdi (AH 260), pp. 192; Dala'il
al-Imamah by al-Tabari (the fourth century of Hijrah), pp. 22; al-Kafi
by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 7:424, Section: bab al-nawadir (Exceptional
Narrations), H.6; Man La Yahdhuruhu’l-Faqih by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381),
4:36, H.5052; Khasa'is al-A'immah by al-Sharif al-Radhi (AH 406), pp.
85; al-Ikhtisas by Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 413), pp. 111; Kashf al-Yaqin fi
Fadha'il Amir al-Mu'minin by \`Allamah al-Hilli (AH 726), pp. 62;
Fadha'il al-Khamsah min al-Sihah al-Sittah by al-FayruzAbadi, 2:309;
al-Manaqib by al-Khawarizmi (AH 568), pp. 81, H.65; Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi’l-Hadid al-Mu\`tazili (AH 656), 1:18, 141,
12:179, 205, 206; al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah fi Fadha'il al-\`Asharah by
Ahmad ibn \`Abdullah al-Tabari (AH 694), pp. 82; Nuzum Durar al-Simtayn
by al-Zarandi al-Hanafi (AH 750), pp. 130, 133; Kanz al-\`Ummal by
al-Muttaqi al-Hindi (AH 975), 10:300, H.29509; Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah
li-Dhawi’l-Qurba by al-Qanaduzi al-Hanafi (AH 1294), 1:216, 227, 2:172,
3:147; Faydh al-Qadir by al-Mannawi (AH 1331), 4:470, H.5594. See also
al-Imam \`Ali fi Ara' al-Khulafa' by Mahdi Faqih «mani.

[^50]: () For details about this issue, the gentle reader is advised to
refer to Sulh al-Hasan (The Truce of al-Hasan) by Radhi Al-Yasin,
Beirut: al-Nu\`man Foundation, AH 1412, AD 1991.

[^51]: () See al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah by Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn
al-\`Abidin (AH 94), Supplication No. 27.

[^52]: () How magnificent this supplication is! More than any other age,
Muslims in the present day are required to repeat and learn lessons from
this supplication and to entreat Almighty Allah earnestly to unify their
words, unite their lines, and illumine their intellects. [The Author]

[^53]: () See al-Amali by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 418, H.554/21;
Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 16:220, H.21406,
Section: bab wujub ta\`at al-sultan for taqiyyah (The Obligation of
Obeying the Rulers for Taqiyyah); Bihar al-Anwar by al-Majlisi (AH
1111), 72:369, Section: bab al-rukun ila al-zalimin wa hubbuhum wa
ta\`atuhum (Leaning On Unjust Rulers and Loving and Obeying Them).

[^54]: () This famous hadith has been reported in many different forms,
yet similar in meaning. See Man La Yahdhuruhu’l-Faqih by Shaykh al-Saduq
(AH 381), 4:93, H.5151; Tuhaf al-\`Uqul by Ibn Shu\`bah al-Harrani (the
fourth century), pp. 34; \`Awali al-La’ali by al-Ihsa'i (app. AH 880),
1:222, H.98 & 2:113, H.309 & 3:473, H.1, Section: bab al-ghasb
(Usurpation); Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104),
14:572; Bahjat al-Nufus by al-Azdi, 2:134, 4:111; Musnad Ahmad ibn
Hanbal (AH 241), 5:72; Ahkam al-Qur'an by al-Jassas (AH 370), 2:216,
224, 241, 3:415, 433, 434, 589, 599; I\`jaz al-Qur'an by al-Baqillani
(AH 403), pp. 131; al-Sunan al-Kubra by al-Bayhaqi (AH 458), 8:182.

[^55]: () See al-Mahasin by al-Barqi (AH 274 or 280), 1:72, Section: bab
al-Sittah (The Six); Kanz al-Fawa'id by al-Karajaki (AH 449), pp. 141;
al-Amali by al-Shaykh al-Tusi (AH 460), pp. 478, H.1043, Session No. 17,
H.12; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 12:211, 212,
213, H.16111, 16113, 16114, Section: bab ada' haqq al-mu'min wa jumlatun
min huquqihi al-wajibah wa’l-mandubah (Fulfillment of the Believers’
Rights; Some Obligatory and Recommended Rights of the Believers), H.21,
23, 24; Bihar al-Anwar by al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 27:89, H.41 & 71:226,
235, 236, H.16, 17, 32, 36…; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal (AH 241), 1:89,
3:176, 206, 272, 278, 289; Sunan al-Darimi (AH 255), 2:307, Section: bab
la yu'minu ahadukum hatta yuhibba li-akhihi… (One Is Faithless Before
Loving For His Brother-In-Faith What One Loves For Oneself); Sahih
al-Bukhari (AH 256), 1:9, Section: bab min al-iman an yuhibba li-akhihi
ma yuhibbu li-nafsihi (To Love For Brethren-In-Faith What One Loves For
Oneself Is Part Of Faith); Sahih Muslim (AH 261), 1:48; Sunan Ibn Majah
(AH 275), 26:66, Section: bab fi’l-iman (Faith); Sunan al-Tirmidhi (AH
279), 4:76, H.2634; al-Sunan al-Kubra by al-Nassa'i (AH 303), 8:115,
125, Section: \`alamat al-mu'min (Distinctive Features of True
Believers).

[^56]: () This is a metaphorical phrase quoted from the following holy
verse: وَنَزَعْنَا مَا فِي صُدُورِهِمْ مِنْ غِلٍّ إِخْوَانًا عَلَىٰ
سُرُرٍ مُتَقَابِلِينَ And We will root out whatever of rancor is in
their breasts-- (they shall be) as brethren, on raised couches, face to
face. (15/47)

[^57]: () See Kitab al-Mu'min by al-Husayn ibn Sa\`id al-Kufi al-Ahwazi
(before AH 300), pp. 40; al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:172, Section:
bab haqq al-mu'min \`ala akhihi wa ada' haqqih (Rights of Believers Upon
One Another and the Meeting of These Rights), H.2; Musadaqat al-Ikhwan
by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 42, H.4, Section: bab huquq al-ikhwan
ba\`dhuhum \`ala ba\`dh (Reciprocal Rights of Brethren-In-Faith);
Rawdhat al-Wa\`izin by al-Fattal al-Naysaburi (AH 508), pp. 291,
Session: fi dhikr manaqib ashab al-a'immati wa fadha'il al-shi\`ah
wa’l-abdal (Merits of the Holy Imam’ Companions; Merits of the Shi\`ah
and the Substitutes); Mishkat al-Anwar fi Ghurar al-Akhbar by al-Tabrisi
(the seventh century of Hijrah), pp. 47, Chapter Four: fi manzilat
al-shi\`ah \`inda allah wa huququhum wa ma yajibu an yakunu \`alayhi
(The Shi\`ah Position Near Allah and their Rights and How They Should
Be) & pp. 336; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104),
12:205, H.16097, Section: bab ada' haqq al-mu'min wa jumlatun min
huquqihi al-wajibah wa’l-mandubah (Fulfillment of the Believers’ Rights;
Some Obligatory and Recommended Rights of the Believers), H.7.

[^58]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:636, H.4, Section: bab
ma yajibu min al-mu\`asharah (Obligatory Matters of Association);
Mishkat al-Anwar fi Ghurar al-Akhbar by al-Tabrisi (the seventh century
of Hijrah), pp. 134; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104),
12:6, H.15497, Section: bab \`ishrat al-nas (Association With People),
H.3.

[^59]: () See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 2:172, Section: fi anna
al-tawakhi lam yaqa\` \`ala al-din wa innama huwa al-ta\`aruf
(Brotherhood Is Not On Account of Religion Only; Rather It Is
Association), H.8; Musadaqat al-Ikhwan by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 281), pp.
38-40, Section: bab huquq al-ikhwan ba\`dhuhum \`ala ba\`dh (Reciprocal
Rights of Brethren-In-Faith), H.2; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr
al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 12:209, H.16106, Section: wujub ada' haqq
al-mu'min… (The Obligation of Fulfilling the Believers’ Rights), H.16 &
13:384 H.18018, Section: bab jawaz qat\` al-tawaff al-mandub mutlaqan…


