Introduction
============

*In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful*

All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. All peace and
blessings be upon our master and guide, Prophet Muhammad, and upon his
immaculate, infallible Household. Ceaseless curse be upon their enemies.

My interest in researching into this book, has arisen from the
significance of the book itself and the urgent need to release it among
the various milieus of society. The best proof of this fact is the great
interest shown by scholars, translators, publishers, and cultural and
scientific centers in this book, which maybe small in size but is huge
in contents. Confirming this fact, too, are the repeated editions of
this book in various languages. The following is a list of the frequent
editions of this book that I found:

**In Arabic:**

1. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: al-Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha (1322–1384 AH),
with an introduction by Hamid Hafni Dawud; Najaf: Dar al-Nu\`man; Date
of Introduction: 1380 AH; Pocket size (120 x 180 mm); Number of pages:
136.

2. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: al-Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha (1322 – 1384
AH), with an introduction by Hamid Hafni Dawud; Cairo: Al-Najah
Publishers, 1384 AH/1361 CE; Pocket size (120 x 180 mm); Number of
pages: 126.

3. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: al-Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha (1322 – 1384
AH), with an introduction by Muhammad Mahdi al-Asifi and Hamid Hafni
Dawud; Qum: Dar al-Tabligh al-Islami; Date of Introduction: 1381 AH;
Book size: Pocket sixe (120 x 180 mm); Number of pages: 176; second
offset printing.

4. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: al-Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha (1322 – 1384
AH), with an introduction by Hamid Hafni Dawud (with noteworthy
additions); Cairo: Al-Najah Publishers, 1391 AH; Pocket size (120 x 180
mm); Number of pages: 126.

5. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: al-Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha, with an
introduction by Muhammad Mahdi al-Asifi and Hamid Hafni Dawud;
(publisher is not mentioned) 1393 AH, Pocket size (120 x 180 mm); Number
of pages: 135; Offset printing.

6. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: The Reformist Mujtahid Muhammad Ridha
al-Muzaffar, with an introduction by Hamid Hafni Dawud; Qum: al-Sharif
al-Radhi Publishers; Second Edition, 1411 AH, Envelope C5 size (162 x
229 mm); Number of pages: 136.

7. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: al-Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha, (d. 1384 AH)
with an introduction by Muhammad Mahdi al-Asifi and Hamid Hafni Dawud;
Qum: Shukuri Publishers 1371 AHS/1413 AH, Third Offset Edition, Pocket
size (120 x 180 mm); Number of pages: 147.

8. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: The Great \`Allamah (well-versed scholar)
Shaykh Muhammad Ridha al-Muzaffar (1904 – 1964 CE); with revision and
commentary by Muhammad Jawad al-Turayhi; Qum: Imam \`Ali Foundation
(*mu’assasat al-imam \`ali*); First Revised Edition, 1417 AH; Envelope
C5 size (162 x 229 mm); Number of pages: 512.

9. *Bidayat al-Ma\`arif al-Ilahiyyah fi Sharh \`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*:
Commentary and revision by Sayyid Muhsin al-Kharrazi; Qum: Islamic
Publication Center (*markaz an-nashr al-islami*); First Edition; Date of
Introduction: 1366 AHS/1418 AH; Envelope C5 size (162 x 229 mm); 2
volumes: 1st volume: 320 pages; 2nd volume: 281 pages.

10. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: \`Allamah Shaykh Muhammad Ridha
al-Muzaffar; Qum: Doctrinal Research Center (*markaz al-abhath
al-\`aqa'idiyyah*); 1422 AH, Pocket size (120 x 180 mm); Number of
pages: 176.

11. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: The Reformist Mujtahid Muhammad Ridha
al-Muzaffar, with an introduction by Hamid Hafni Dawud; Qum: Ansariyan
Publications; Fourth Reprint, 1422 AH; Number of pages: 135.

12. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: al-Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha (d. 1384 AH),
with an introduction by Hamid Hafni Dawud; Tehran: The Major Islamic
Library (*al-maktabah al-islamiyyah al-kubra*), Be\`sat Foundation (date
is not mentioned); Pocket size (120 x 180 mm); Number of pages: 136.

13. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: al-Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha (date and
publishers are not mentioned), Pocket size (120 x 180 mm); Number of
pages: 136.

14. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*: al-Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha, with an
introduction by Hamid Hafni Dawud; Tehran: Ninawa Modern Library
(*maktabat ninawa al-hadithah*) (date is not mentioned); Pocket size
(120 x 180 mm); Number of pages: 136.

15. *\`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah fi Thawbihi al-Jadid*; Faris \`Ali al-\`Amir;
Qum: al-Sharif al-Radhi Publishers; Second Edition; Envelope C5 size
(162 x 229 mm); Number of pages: 227.

16. *Bidayat al-Ma\`arif al-Ilahiyyah fi Sharh \`Aqa’id al-Imamiyyah*:
Commentary and explanation by Sayyid Muhsin al-Kharrazi; Qum: Islamic
Publication Center (*markaz an-nashr al-islami*); Seventh Edition; two
parts in one volume.

**In Other Languages**:

1. **In English**: *The Faith of Shi\`ah Islam*: al-Muzaffar, Muhammad
Ridha (1904 – 1964); Qum: Ansariyan Publications; 1409 AH/1989 CE;
Number of pages: 89.

2. **In French**: Translated into French by \`Abbas al-Bostani;
commentary by Muhammad Jawad al-Turayhi; Qum: Imam \`Ali Foundation
(date is not mentioned); Number of pages: 270.

3. **In Russian**: Translated into Russian by Translation Department in
the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a) World Assembly 1998; Number of pages: 152.

4. **In Chinese**: Translated into Chinese by Sulayman Hi Khwa; Tehran:
Islamic Culture and Relations League; 1997; Number of pages: 87.

5. **In Urdu**: Translated into Urdu by Muhammad Naqvi Najafi; Revised
by Muhammad Jawad al-Turayhi; Qum: Imam \`Ali Foundation; First Edition;
Number of pages: 340.

6. **In Urdu**: Edited by Ahmad Husayn Naqvi; Qum: Imam \`Ali
Foundation; 1420 AH; Number of pages: 440.

7. **In Farsi**: Translated into Farsi by \`Ali Ridha Masjid-Jami\`i;
Tehran: Ministry of Islamic Culture and Guidance; Publication and
Printing Organization; 1380 AHS; A5 Size (148 x 210 mm); Number of
pages: 368.

8. **In Tajik**: Translated into Tajik by Iqbal Strochni; Tehran:
Islamic Culture and Relations League; 1997; Number of pages: 212.

Because of summing up, we will not mention the other prints of this
book, which have been published by the aforesaid publishers as well as
others.

We would like to express our gratitude and acknowledgement to all those
who have contributed to this cultural project, especially our esteemed
brother, His Eminence Shaykh Dr. Muhammad Jawad al-Turayhi and those who
have collaborated with him in the production of the book’s distinctive
edition of Imam \`Ali Foundation. Our acknowledgement also extends to
the eminent scholar, Ayatullah Sayyid Muhsin al-Kharrazi, whose efforts
to explain and comment on the book are praiseworthy, and the hardworking
scholar, Mr. Faris \`Ali al-\`Amir, who has not only dressed the book in
a new garment but also omitted, added, and re-coined many of the book’s
words and expressions. We thus pray Almighty Allah to lead all of us to
all that which is good for us.

Because the material of this book is rich, agreeable, and fulfills the
requirements and levels of divergent classes of people, this diverse
need is divided between various milieus of society as follows:

A. **Shi\`ite Milieu**: This milieu comprises the juvenile and young
Shi\`ah, including the scholarly youth and teachers, who are at
different levels of schools and universities on the one hand and
seminaries (*hawzah*: institutes of religious studies) on the other. A
Shi\`ite individual strives to acquire materials that enable him/her to
achieve self-education concerning the basics of his/her sect and the
fundaments of his/her faith in an easy and facile way.

B. **Sunni Milieu**: Sunnis generally persevere in gaining knowledge of
the doctrines and beliefs that their Shi\`ite brethren embrace.
Normally, a thirsty person tries to drink from a headspring; therefore,
Sunnis have the desire to become acquainted with the Shi\`ah through the
Shi\`ah themselves, but not through mediators, strangers, or biased
people.

C. **Non-Muslim Milieus**: Non-Muslim milieus who desire to acquaint
themselves with Muslim Shi\`ite beliefs also try to gain such knowledge
from the Shi\`ah themselves through their own words and pens with the
hope of saving time and procuring tranquility.

Among matters that have confirmed the need for turning to studying the
Muslim Shi\`ite doctrines are the events and developments witnessed by
the present age, such as:

(a) the blessed Islamic revolution of Iran,

(b) the collapse of the Soviet Union,

(c) the changes that the extremist radical movements (*salafiyyah*) are
facing,

(d) the eviction of the Iraqi Shi\`ah and their spread all over the
world, and,

(e) the traumatic experiences of the Shi\`ah in countries like Lebanon,
Bahrain, Afghanistan, Iraq, and Azerbaijan.

Having noticed the significance and the need for this book, as well as
the variety of its seekers and their levels, we can now understand the
various methods used in displaying it. It was important to consider the
up-to-date requirements and the prerequisites necessitated by this age.
As is visible in the aforementioned list, you will have noticed that the
book was first published as simply as possible. The second edition
included further remarks and details. The third edition was complemented
by varying additions and commentaries. Similarly, the release of
non-Arabic versions of the book stems from the surrounding circumstances
and the scope of the need for it. Factors that have a hold over the way
of displaying and printing the book depend upon the publishers’ interest
in the scientific, cultural, and artistic issues, in addition to their
taste and financial potentials.

Noticeably, the aforementioned editions of this book, despite their
diversity, do not satisfy its utmost purpose. Some of these editions do
not meet with the multi-aspect modern standards inspite of the
typographical technical improvements they made. Other editions have not
succeeded in meeting the modern scientific needs of indexing and
documenting the quotations from the Holy Qur'an, the Sunnah (i.e. the
Holy Prophet’s (s) reported words and deeds), and other references that
are mentioned in the book; and some editions have not cited the
references completely or accurately.

Moreover, other editions have been originally dedicated to scholarly
purposes; they therefore comprise explanations and theological details.
Although other editions have comprised additional, yet valuable,
information, such additions have been even more than the original
material of the book. Other editions have also included translations of
the book besides its original language.

Undeniably, such explanations, commentaries, additions, and translations
involve many advantages, but, at the same time, they have caused the
book to lose its purpose, as visualized by the author of the book, the
late \`Allamah Muhammad Ridha al-Muzaffar, and the foremost publisher,
the virtuous scholar, Muhammad Kazim al-Katabi.

As is confirmed by the author himself in the introduction of the first
and second editions of the book, their purpose of publishing this book
was to publicize its material. However, the book became restricted to a
certain class of people. On the other hand, the bigger a book the more
expensive and, as a result, its distribution and publishing became
limited. Despite everything, we still believe that there must be variety
and change in the presentation of the book whenever time and age require
it.

In view of that, I have humbly attempted to present this book on the
following lines:

(1) I have committed myself to observing the middle state by manifesting
some points presented by the author and in hinting at some themes,
which, in my opinion, are significant. I have therefore employed brevity
in explaining the doctrines, the concepts, and the fundamentals and
basics mentioned in the book. I have also done my best to avoid
expatiation and elaboration.

(2) I have stressed thesignificance of the principle of proximity
between the followers of the same religion (the followers of the
different sects of Islam), based on the author’s purpose behind writing
this book. A considerable number of reference books trusted by both
Sunni and Shi\`ite Muslims have been used to classify and document the
narrations, quotations, and opinions that are cited in the book to
satisfy the readers of all sects. They also show the similarity of
Muslim doctrines that unite the followers of the School of the Ahl
al-Bayt (\`a) and their brethren of other Muslim sects. When this aim is
achieved, the points of discrepancy between Muslim sects will
automatically diminish and the sources of the genuine heritage of Islam
will shine forth.

(3) I have aimed at making the reader realize that the doctrines of the
*Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* are not extraneous or intrusive to the doctrines of
Islam but in keeping with the instructions of the Seal of the Prophets,
Muhammad, (may peace be upon him and his Household). He clearly dictated
unswerving adherence to the two Weighty Things—the Holy Qur'an and the
Immaculate Progeny of the Holy Prophet—. Had it not been for some
opportunistic elements who wished to gain individual and family
advantages and control the resources of power, domination, and
supremacy, all Muslims would certainly have assembled around the Ahl
al-Bayt (\`a) from whom Almighty Allah removed all impurity and whom He
purified thoroughly and made heir to the knowledge of His Prophet (s).
Very soon shall all Muslims gather under the (Divinely commissioned)
leadership of the Ahl al-Bayt (\`a)at the imminent, expected Advent of
the Guide of all nations, Imam al-Mahdi (\`a), who shall unite all
different opinions and spread justice over the east and the west of this
globe. Such have come the good tidings from his grandfather, the Holy
Prophet (may peace be upon him and his Household).

(4) I have worked on guiding observant readers towards some reference
books that grant them an opportunity to elaborate on the topics that
attract their attention.

(5) I have notified the death-date of the authors (mentioned in the
book) in the margins to facilitate researchers to have an idea about the
historical sequence of the topics under discussion. Repetition of such
information in the margins of the book will allow readers to learn these
dates and, consequently, contribute by teaching Muslims the history of
the personalities and famous individuals of their nation.

(6) I have made every single effort to observe accuracy and honesty in
citing and documenting all information related to the topics under
discussion.

I end with the prayer that Almighty Allah guide our steps towards
genuine prosperity and forgive us our transgression. He is verily the
All-Forgiver and Hearer of prayers.

**\`Abd al-Karim al-Kirmani**
**Rajab 15, 1423 AH**


