Glimpses into the Life of Shaykh al-Muzaffar
============================================

His Family
----------

The family of al-Muzaffar([^1]) has been known as one of the scholarly
and well-versed families of the holy city of al-Najaf since the middle
of the twelfth century (AH). Some of the members of this family settled
in the al-Jaza'ir Quarter in al-Basrah.

Shaykh Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah, the well-versed jurisprudent and father
of the author of this book, was one of the well-known scholars and
religious authorities (*marji\` al-taqlid*) of al-Najaf where he “grew
up and, in the early years of his youth devoted himself diligently to
scholarly education. He dedicated himself to worshipping and teaching
(religious knowledge) until he became an expert in Muslim jurisprudence
(*fiqh*) and was introduced as one of the skilled researchers in this
field. He compiled an estimable encyclopedia on jurisprudence, which
comprised his explanations and commentaries on the famous book of
‘*Shara'i\` al-Islam*.’([^2]) In this book, which he entitled ‘*Tawdhih
al-Kalam*’, Shaykh al-Muzaffar has left no single item of jurisprudence
unexplained.”([^3])

His Birth
---------

Shaykh Muhammad Ridha al-Muzaffar was born on the fifteenth of Sha\`ban,
AH 1322, five months after his father’s demise. Hence, Almighty Allah
did not decide for this infant to see his father nor did He decide for
the father to see his newborn. Shaykh \`Abd al-Nabi, the elder brother
who died in AH 1337, adopted him and provided him with custody and
compassion that compensated for his father’s missed custody and
compassion.

Intellectual Growth
-------------------

Shaykh al-Muzaffar grew up in the religious environment of the holy city
of al-Najaf and moved among its seminars, assemblies, gatherings,
classes, and schools. He attended the seminaries of high studies and was
trained at the hands of major religious authorities and mentors as he
grew up in the house of al-Muzaffar, which was one of the deep-rooted
learned families in al-Najaf and was under the supervision and custody
of his two learned brothers; Shaykh \`Abd al-Nabi and Shaykh Muhammad
Hasan.

Like the other religious students of al-Najaf, Shaykh al-Muzaffar began
his scholarly life by attending the lectures of literature,
jurisprudence, fundamentals of jurisprudence (*\`Ilm al-Usul*) and
intellectual sciences. In the field of literature and *\`Ilm al-Usul*,
he studied under Shaykh Muhammad Taha al-Huwayzi and could distinguish
himself in these fields as well as in poetry. Simultaneously, he studied
the preliminary studies of jurisprudence (*sutuh*) and other fields of
religious studies under other mentors, in all of which he excelled.

Having finished the preliminary stage, Shaykh al-Muzaffar applied
himself to higher studies in jurisprudence, *\`Ilm al-Usul*, and
philosophy. He, along with his younger brother Muhammad Husayn, attended
the classes of his brother Shaykh Muhammad Hasan. He also joined the
classes of Shaykh Agha Aiya' al-Din al-\`Iraqi in the field of *\`Ilm
al-Usul*, and the classes of Shaykh Mirza Muhammad Husayn al-Na'ini in
the fields of jurisprudence and *\`Ilm al-Usul*. He also studied, yet
distinctively, the theses of Shaykh Muhammad Husayn al-Isfahani in the
fields of jurisprudence, *\`Ilm al-Usul*, and supreme theo-philosophy.

In these three fields of knowledge, Shaykh al-Muzaffar was much
influenced by the opinions of Shaykh al-Isfahani, so he imitated his
course of research in his book of ‘*Usul al-Fiqh* in chaptering and
indexing the fundaments of jurisprudence—a fact which the author has
referred to in his introduction to this book. As is noticed from the
accomplished parts of his book of ‘*Usul al-Fiqh*’, Shaykh al-Muzaffar
acted upon his mentor’s private basics of jurisprudence. He also had
great regard for his mentor, al-Isfahani, and showered him with the most
respectful words whenever he would refer to or mention him and show his
love and admiration for him more than any other student who sincerely
admired his mentor.

This feeling towards his mentor and loyalty to him manifests itself to
the reader from his writings in the introductions to his jurisprudential
and philosophic books, theses, and essays, such as the introduction to
his book of ‘*al-Asfar*’.

Shaykh al-Muzaffar also graduated under his mentors in jurisprudence,
*\`Ilm al-Usul*, and philosophy although he had his idiosyncratic views,
inferences, and researches to which his mentors confessed. In the midst
of all that and apart from his remarkable efforts in the schools and
faculties of *Muntada al-Nashr* (Forum of Publishing), he engaged
himself with teaching the highest levels of preliminary and higher
education in the fields of jurisprudence, *\`Ilm al-Usul*, and
philosophy.

As for his clear-cut helping hand in the establishment of *Muntada
al-Nashr*, he dedicated his entire life to developing and building up
this forum in various aspects. He thus taught arts, logic, philosophy,
jurisprudence, and *\`Ilm al-Usul* from the primary to the highest
levels of study, forgetting about his eminent status in the Seminary
(*hawzah*) and his superlative intellectual competence. Many times was
he seen delivering lectures in the primary classes of the schools of
*Muntada al-Nashr*, receiving simple questions of the pupils with
large-heartedness, prompting them to search, study, and think, and
wedging himself in the middle of them as if he was talking to his
classmates, not his pupils. Above all, he was distinguished by
profundity, accurate gesture, good taste, and prescience as is obvious
from his approach in jurisprudence, *\`Ilm al-Usul*, and philosophy.

In the beginning of his scholarly life, Shaykh al-Muzaffar acquainted
himself with the sciences of mathematics, astronomy, physics, and
prosody.

In the early years of his youth, it once happened that Shaykh
al-Muzaffar’s sight fell on an aspect of modern thought he found worth
inspecting, so he attempted to open the way to this new culture with
others who also agreed with him. On corresponding with some scientific
magazines, such as ‘*al-Muqtataf*’, and other publications, he asked for
issues of these papers and copies of books that were engaged in this new
color of thought. Afterwards, Shaykh al-Muzaffar carried on in this
manner, went along with this innovatory intellectual movement, and
received an abundant share of these so-called “modern sciences”. He was
greatly influenced by this tendency besides jurisprudence, *\`Ilm
al-Usul*, and philosophy.

His Scientific Revenue
----------------------

Scientific activities, writings, authorship and publication of
books—these three endeavors form a significant part of Shaykh
al-Muzaffar’s mission and movement. If we add his reformative activities
at both the general and academic levels to these three activities, we
will touch upon the great efforts that he exerted throughout his
lifetime.

In his writings, there is an apparent intermixture of a fine mode of
expression, soundness of performance, faculty of composition, splendor
of display with fecundity of the subject, precision of the idea,
profundity of the theme and gravity of the content. The result is thus a
mixture of literature and scientific material that satiates the
intellect and satisfies the sentiments of the reader.

Just like the flowing of water, Shaykh al-Muzaffar’s hand used to flow
in writing without showing any affectation or artificiality; just like
water flowing down a slope, the readers of his writings drifted along
with him without anything hindering their progress, since the Shaykh
never used useless rhetoric that detracted a reader from the main theme.

Shaykh al-Muzaffar used to deal with purely scientific subjects, such as
the fundamentals of jurisprudence, logic, and philosophy, and it was not
easy for an author to present them in a literary style or a formal mode
of expression. However, Shaykh al-Muzaffar succeeded in combining
excellence of expression with profundity of material. The best example
of such a combination can be seen in his book of ‘*Ahlam al-Yaqazah*
(Daydreams)’ in which he talks to Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi (known as
*Mulla Sadra* or *Sadr al-Muta'allihin*) and discusses his premises
concerning supreme theo-philosophy with him and receives expounding
replies, all penned down in a handsome narrative style.

It is not an exaggeration to say that this book is a big triumph for
philosophical writings because the major problem of philosophy is that
its tools cannot find styles of writing that can express it suitably.
Shaykh al-Muzaffar has thus attempted to make styles of writing submit
to the material of philosophy or make philosophy submit to styles of
writing. He has attempted to bring together these two things in his
book.

Furthermore, the pen of Shaykh al-Muzaffar displays excellence of
communication and coordination in the sense that he attempts to make
each point of discussion occupy its natural place without losing its
private position, which may cause disorder to the areas of discussion
and, as a result, confusion may appear to the points under discussion.
The best example of such coordination can be seen in Shaykh
al-Muzaffar’s book of ‘*al-Mantiq* (Logic)’, in which the topics of the
book follow each other smoothly in a natural sequence without any need
to refer the reader to another topic outside the book or another chapter
inside the book.

In addition to the other two books of ‘*al-Usul* (Fundaments of
Jurisprudence)’ and ‘*al-Falsafah* (Philosophy)’, which have not been
granted the opportunity to be published completely, Shaykh al-Muzaffar’s
book of ‘*al-Mantiq*’ is considered a revolution in the authorship of
books of curricula and a new triumph in this field. We thus pray to
Almighty Allah to guide some people to follow the footsteps of Shaykh
al-Muzaffar in this domain.

In the books of Shaykh al-Muzaffar, a researcher can easily sense the
fecundity of research and analysis, which has become a distinctive
feature of all of his books. This feature is clearly visible in his book
‘*al-Saqifah*’, in which he critically examines the meeting of the
Muslims under the shed (*Saqifah*) of Banu-Sa\`idah and the events that
took place therein. He analyzes the attitudes of the *Muhajirun*([^4])
and the *Ansar*([^5])concerning the question of succession (*khilafah*)
after the Holy Prophet (s), and the situation of Imam \`Ali (\`a) vis a
vis the caliphs.

In his book ‘*al-Mantiq*’, such fecundity in analysis can be sensed when
the author makes use of mathematical signs for the four ratios in his
discussion of ‘Division’. Besides this, excellence of expression and
cohesion of approach is apparent in every part of this book.

His Poetry
----------

In his youth and once in a while, Shaykh al-Muzaffar used to compose
poetic verses, which are marked by substantiality and elegance of style.
The reader of his poetry, published in some books and newspapers, can
point out charming poetic images and meet novel artistic horizons.

However, Shaykh al-Muzaffar turned away from composing poetry to engage
in constructive intellectual affairs.

His Role in Developing Curricula and in Reformation
---------------------------------------------------

Having reached the peak in reformative activities in the holy city of
al-Najaf, Shaykh al-Muzaffar played an effective role in all the
reformative movements that he attended and was the most eminent member
of all of these movements. However, the reformative approach lacked
intelligibility and methodical thought in treatment despite its
effectiveness and its holders’ conviction in the necessity of applying
it to the Seminaries.

Thanks to his extensive experiments, Shaykh al-Muzaffar arrived at a
perfect conception about reformation and the methodology of study and
propagation; and by virtue of the genius and sagacity that he enjoyed
concerning such issues, he arrived at the primary roots of the problem.
He then invited his brothers-in-faith and sons to cure the roots of this
problem.

According to Shaykh al-Muzaffar, the problem needed treatment on two
fronts: study and propagation.

As for study, he noticed that teaching in the Seminary of the holy city
of al-Najaf was ordered in two stages:

(1) The preliminary level (*al-Muqaddimat wa’l-Sutuh*), and

(2) Higher education (*al-Bahth al-Khariji*).

The former level was considered preliminary while the latter was
arranged for specialization in *ijtihad*.([^6]) The problem is that the
nature of the latter stage rejected any transformation or revolution in
its shape and contents and it could not be submitted to any specific
methodical order. In plain words, study in this stage did not adopt any
system and it could hardly compete with the methodical and general
definition of study.

Furthermore, due to the nature of this stage, discussions and research
could not be restricted or regulated to a certain rule nor exams act as
incentives to study and research. Hence, the only stage that could be
reformed and required guidance and ordering was the primary stage.

Shaykh al-Muzaffar also realized that the reasons for the existence of
such problems were shortage of material and weakness of style.

As for material, a primary stage student of the Seminary of al-Najaf was
given lessons that were restricted to studying (Arabic) grammar,
morphology, rhetoric, logic, exegesis of the Holy Qur'an (*tafsir*),
Muslim jurisprudence (*Fiqh*), and fundaments of jurisprudence (*\`Ilm
al-Usul*) although there was some expansion in the study of the last two
subjects.

It is true that these materials played a major role in the composition
and growth of the students’ mental capabilities, but they alone could
not promote all their duties of guidance, propagation, preaching, and
education. Hence, a student could not limit himself to the material that
he received at this stage of study in order to fulfill his duty of
guidance and propagation on a wider scope.

As for style, Shaykh al-Muzaffar noticed that, in addition to
disorganization in the field of research, obscurity and complication
were still prevailing on the curricula given to the student of the
Seminary of al-Najaf at this stage of study. This fact would make the
student exert great effort in order to understand a certain statement
and decode the obscurity and complication that encompassed such
statements.

As for propagation and guidance, Shaykh al-Muzaffar discovered that
oration and writing were the favorite tools of propagation and
propagation for Islam had suffered weakness in these two domains.

As for oration, Shaykh al-Muzaffar pointed out that the current style of
oration in al-Najaf was not satisfactory. A Muslim orator would not be
able to fulfill his Islamic mission unless he had a sufficient idea
about the horizons of modern thought and the methods of experimental
knowledge, in addition to a thorough comprehension of the issues of
Islamic ideology in such fields as jurisprudence, exegesis of the Holy
Qur'an, narration, history, and the like.

As for Islamic writings, Shaykh al-Muzaffar noticed that the religious
status of al-Najaf required greater contribution to the propagation of
Muslim thought than before, and it should ensure all Islamic propagation
by means of writing, authoring, printing and publishing on a much wider
scale. Additionally, the ideological aspect, which was the foundation of
such campaigns of propagation for Islam, needed to carry with it the
principles of faith and reformation in their most obvious shapes to
embrace the entire globe and reach every point in which a human being
might be living. Nevertheless, the Seminary of al-Najaf was in most
cases in no need for materials of writings and research.

On the other hand, it was noticeable that individuality was the feature
that distinguished the writings and research in al-Najaf. In plain
words, theses and research presented by a writer from al-Najaf were the
result of individual efforts more than collective.

A third point is that al-Najaf, at that time, lacked well-equipped
printing machines and publications that would befit the fertile
scientific material that this city could present to the press.

With complete objectivity and comprehension, Shaykh al-Muzaffar had the
opportunity to investigate these conditions in al-Najaf. Meanwhile, he
knew that the presentation of this problem would lead to nothing unless
honest efforts would cooperate in order to meet these needs. He also
knew for sure that negative thinking would be a waste of time and of no
use unless there was an establishment to manage the efforts. He also
concluded that reformative work under such circumstances would also be
worthless unless matched by an objective and comprehensive investigation
of the situation, deliberation upon it and gradual treatment.

Shaykh al-Muzaffar had realized all that and thought of it for a
considerable time. Having embarked upon the practical aspect of the
problem, he pushed himself into the field of performance although he
knew that there would be strenuous obstacles to pass in order to
continue in this path. The first step was to find a conscientious group
of virtuous personalities of the Seminary who understood the surrounding
conditions of life in al-Najaf and comprehended the actuality of the
huge intellectual mission that was imposed on this city.

On the fourth of Shawwal, AH 1353 corresponding to January 10, 1935, a
group of scholars of religious studies, including Shaykh al-Muzaffar,
submitted a statement to the Ministry of Interior demanding the
establishment of a religious association in the holy city of al-Najaf
carrying the name of *Muntada al-Nashr* (Forum of Publishing). Along
with this statement, they submitted a copy of the foundational system of
this Forum. After great effort, the Ministry licensed the establishment
of this Forum.([^7])

Afterwards, attempts were made to organize the study, simplify the
curricula, and expand the books of study. Shaykh al-Muzaffar found that
the first step in this regard would be to methodize the study
irrespective of how important and useful individual study might be. He
suggested that a special system of study must complement the one
prevailing. Thus, Shaykh al-Muzaffar attempted to achieve a part of the
reformation.

In AH 1355, he “put a plan for establishing a high school for religious
studies or a faculty for *Ijtihad*, by starting the first class in which
he taught four fields of religious knowledge; namely, Argumentative
Jurisprudence (*al-fiqh al-istidlali*), Exegesis of the Holy Qur'an
(*tafsir*), Fundamentals of Jurisprudence (*\`ilm al-usul*), and
Philosophy. The latter would be studied in the form of separate lectures
in a plain, easy-to-understand language. Shaykh \`Abd al-Husayn al-Hilli
volunteered to teach the first two materials, and Shaykh \`Abd al-Husayn
al-Rashti to teach the two others.

In fact, these two master scholars’ volunteering to teach these
materials systematically was one of the most important events in the
history of al-Najaf, since it signified such unique sacrifice that
history would record in appreciation and admiration for their
reformative spirits. In the summer holidays, these classes stopped in
order to restart again in the next academic year, but “they refused to
restart and none except some of the members of the board of directors
knew why they stopped; was it due to coquetry, or weariness, or any
other reason that was not expected especially from such master scholars?
How rare moral courage is! When it is terribly needed, it absents
itself!”([^8])

In AH 1376, Shaykh al-Muzaffar finally established the College of
Jurisprudence in the holy city of al-Najaf after numerous attempts and
long-lasting experiments. In AH 1377, the Iraqi Ministry of Education
licensed this college in which the following branches of knowledge were
taught: jurisprudence of the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* sect, comparative
jurisprudence, fundamentals of jurisprudence, exegesis of the Holy
Qur'an and its principles, *hadith* and its principles, education,
psychology, literature and its history, sociology, history of Islam,
Muslim philosophy, modern philosophy, logic, modern history, principles
of teaching, grammar, morphology, and a foreign language.

With sincerity and unprecedented faith, the late Shaykh al-Muzaffar
dedicated his whole lifetime to developing this foundation. He used to
teach Muslim philosophy and manage the other classes when the other
teachers would be absent. At the same time, he worked on preparing the
volumes of his valuable book ‘*Usul al-Fiqh*’ to be taught at the
College of Jurisprudence. Besides, he would undertake the
responsibilities of management, deanship, authorship, and even writing
down the documents of the college. On many occasions, I myself saw
Shaykh al-Muzaffar write on the registers of the students or type some
formal letters on the printing machine. Hence, this foundation came into
being by virtue of the efforts of Shaykh al-Muzaffar who dedicated his
entire life to it, built it with the particles of his heart, and
utilised all his potentials for it.

That was not everything; Shaykh al-Muzaffar also established other
foundations and projects of Muslim culture some of which lasted while
others failed to continue. In addition, his movement of publishing and
writing that he aroused in al-Najaf, such as the publication of
‘al-Badhrah’ and ‘al-Najaf’ magazines, cannot be underestimated.

He was indeed the pivot and founder of the different aspects of such
activities although neither his discourse nor his pen showed any
indication of the huge efforts he undertook, except when the question of
responsibility was brought up. Then he would show himself ready to
declare the responsibility with firm and unshakable faith.

Too many were the occasions on which Shaykh al-Muzaffar delivered
lessons to his fresh students, offered advice and directions, or guided
them in spirituality and simplicity.

For such a long time, he never showed any sign of egoism since he
believed that egoism brings about Almighty Allah’s contempt or causes
one to love something other than Him. Shaykh al-Muzaffar’s spirit was
too great to take in humiliation and too enormous to quarrel or be
hostile. Commenting on his situation vis-à-vis his rivals or, more
accurately, the rivals of the Foundation, he says, “More than anyone
else, I excuse a big group of those who adopted an opposite stance
against our project, especially those whose intentions we trust and who
trust ours.”

Such elevated level of self-sacrifice and self-abnegation for the sake
of one’s faith can hardly be seen among men of intellect.

I would like to end with the following statement of Shaykh al-Muzaffar,
which bespeaks his greatness of character:

“We are ready to offer a new sacrifice and withdraw ourselves from our
project once we find others having the desire to undertake it instead of
us, especially when such people believe that their involvement in this
work will give it publicity. Let them know that we will always be
servants of this project wherever we are and whatever shape we take, and
we do not intend to prove our good will, since it is unnecessary after
all the efforts that we have exerted. The most important point in our
view is that this project progresses in such a way that befits the good
reputation of al-Najaf and it fulfills its duty completely, no matter
how big the price, even if it be our lives. Our lives have no value
unless sacrificed for duty. Very frequently, I have repeated that we
have only stepped forward a short step for the sake of the objectives of
this project.”

Such was the story of a great spirit.

**Muhammad Mahdi al-Asifi**
**Holy Najaf**

[^1]: () This section is quoted from (the book of) ‘Madrasat al-Najaf’
by His Eminence Shaykh Muhammad Mahdi al-Asifi.

[^2]: () An encyclopedic book on Shi\`ite jurisprudence written by
al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli: Abu al-Qasim Najm al-Din Ja‘far ibn al-Hasan
[602-672 AH].

[^3]: () Quoted from ‘Al al-Muzaffar’ by Shaykh Mahmud al-Muzaffar.

[^4]: () Muhajirun (singular: muhajir, migrant) is a title exclusively
given to the people of Makkah who followed the Holy Prophet (s) and had
to migrate to Yathrib (later al-Madinah) because of the persecution they
suffered at the hands of the polytheists of Makkah.

[^5]: () Ansar are the people of Yathrib (al-Madinah) who accepted,
supported, and received the Holy Prophet (s) and the emigrants of Makkah
(Muhajirun).

[^6]: () Ijtihad is a polysemous term in Muslim jurisprudence.
Lexically, it means the exertion of efforts in the attainment of a
matter. In the initial emergence of Ijtihad, it took the meaning of
dependence upon personal views and issuance of personal judgments in
religious affairs even if this would violate the sources of Islamic laws
since such judgment would agree with public interest. In Sunnite
jurisprudence, Ijtihad means the independent or original interpretation
of problems not precisely covered by the Holy Qur’an, the Holy Sunnah,
and the other sources of Islamic law from the viewpoint of Sunnite
scholars, such as analogy (Qiyas), consensus (Ijma\`)… etc. In Shi\`ite
jurisprudence, Ijtihad means the exertion of all possible efforts in the
deduction of religious laws from their sources. To sum it up, the
concept of Ijtihad in Sunnite doctrine is different from Shi\`ite
doctrine. Whilst it stands for personal conclusion in Sunnite doctrine,
it has its definite principles and fundaments that cannot be contravened
and are based upon Divine texts in Shi\`ite doctrine. [translator]

[^7]: () Nizam Muntada al-Nashr (The System of the Forum of Publishing),
AH 1370.

[^8]: () Muntada al-Nashr; Activities and Expectations, pp. 8-9, by
Shaykh Muhammad Ridha al-Muzaffar.


