Foreword
========

**In the Name of Allah, the All-Beneficent, the All-merciful**

It is a big mistake to claim that one can understand the beliefs,
sciences, and literature of the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* through the writings
of their rivals, no matter how skilled and proficient these rivals may
be and how honestly they transfer and comment on texts uninfluenced by
fruitless fanaticism.

I say so with absolute accuracy after I have spent a considerable time
investigating the doctrines of the Twelver([^1]) Shi\`ah in particular
and the Shi\`ah in general. After such a time-consuming study in the
books of Sunni historians and critics, I could not reach anything focal.
Nevertheless, my sincere desire to study these doctrines and comprehend
their most important principles was totally dampened, and increased my
detachment from the truth. This is because investigating from the books
of the rivals of the Shi\`ah—the sect adopted by about half of Muslims
all over the world—has been totally futile.

My great inclination to seek the truth made me turn my scientific study
to the other side, since wisdom must be the object of a believer. I
therefore began to investigate the sect of the Twelve Imams from the
books of its embracers and to get to know the doctrines of these people
from the reference books of their masters and adept scholars and
researchers. It is natural that the master scholars of a sect know more
about their beliefs than their rivals, no matter how eloquent and
persuasive these rivals may be.

In addition, scientific honesty, which is the foremost foundation of
modern scientific methodology—the method that I have chosen for myself
and made my constitution in all my research and writings whenever I
attempt to discover material and spiritual facts—requires complete
verification while quoting texts and investigating them carefully.
Hence, it is unsuitable for a skilled scientific researcher to rely upon
an unfounded basis while investigating the texts appertaining to
Shi\`ism.

This fact provoked me to study the Shi\`ah and Shi\`ism from the books
of the Shi\`ah themselves and to get to know their doctrines from what
they had written and said about themselves without addition or omission,
to avoid the confusion which other historians and critics had fallen
into while judging the Shi\`ah and Shi\`ism. As a rule, a researcher who
investigates a set of facts from other than their primary sources and
original habitats has definitely taken a misleading path and a futile
course. Such a researcher has nothing to do with true knowledge.

Such has been the effort of \`Allamah Dr. Ahmad Amin when he discussed
Shi\`ism in his books. As he attempted to demonstrate some aspects of
Shi\`ism, he wrongfully engaged himself in many Shi\`ite doctrines. For
example, he claimed that Shi\`ism stemmed from Judaism, and except for a
few of them, the Shi\`ah claim that they will not be subjected to
Hellfire, and Shi\`ism follows \`Abdullah ibn Saba', etc. Such claims
and others have been proven false and the Shi\`ah are totally innocent
of such forgeries, since Shi\`ite master scholars have refuted them by
methods of criticism and contestation. The best discussion in this
respect has been presented by \`Allamah Muhammad Husayn Al-Kashif
al-Ghita' in his book of ‘*Asl al-Shi\`ah wa-Usuluha* (The Origin and
Fundaments of Shi\`ism)’.

During my investigations about the resources, fundaments, and original
habitats of Shi\`ism, I was pleased to meet an old friend and a noble
Iraqi publisher, namely Sayyid Murtadha al-Kashmiri, carrying some
masterpieces of Shi\`ite reference books, which he published in Cairo.
One of the books that this publisher gifted to me was the aforementioned
book of ‘*Asl al-Shi\`ah wa-Usuluha*’, and the book of ‘*\`Abdullah ibn
Saba’*’ and some parts of ‘*Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah*’, as well as other
books, which are considered reference books of Shi\`ite doctrines and
jurisprudence.

Today, Sayyid al-Kashmiri has given me a new book written by Mr.
Muhammad Ridha al-Muzaffar, the dean of the College of Jurisprudence in
the holy city of al-Najaf, which he has written on the doctrines of the
*Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*. Sayyid al-Kashmiri, having confirmed his intention
to print and publish this magnificent book, asked me to write down an
introduction and to reveal my plain opinion about the book.

As soon as I skimmed over the book, I was impressed by the author’s fine
compilation and presentation of the *Imamiyyah* doctrines as well as his
lucid performance in the exposition of his ideas. The instant you taste
the flavour of the author’s fine presentation of these doctrines through
the well-ordered outline of the book and its well-sorted chapters, you
will enjoy the splendor of its statements and the elegance of its style.
Furthermore, the book generally combines complete utilization, with
brevity and concentration on the points that the author intends to
convey to the readers, which is the objective of researchers in the
books of the Shi\`ah. Such being the case, this book is a comprehensive
reference that touches on all extremes of the subject matter in a highly
concentrated and brief form.

Through my current writing, I do not mean to praise or honor the author
but to treat the truth fairly and reveal it before the readers of this
magnificent yet small book, since, in my conception, it contains the
primary scientific principles which researchers aim at when they depict
the facts and attempt to put them where they must be. In view of that,
this book will acquaint the readers with some outstanding viewpoints
which the author has presented, then filled it with proofs and points of
evidence and embroidered it with arguments and instances from the Holy
Qur'an, the Holy Prophet’s traditions, or the sayings of the Twelve
Imams, (may Allah’s pleasure be upon them).

Undoubtedly, these outstanding views, which I shall provide the readers,
will definitely strike the sight of the well-informed readers in the
same way as they have caught my eyes, and will attract them as they have
attracted me even if the readers will not peruse my introduction to the
book. The objectives of researchers and readers are usually the same,
because the truth is invariably the same as long as those who
communicate with it and build their conceptions on it judge with their
intellects and brains, not their hearts and personal whims, and, as long
as they act fairly and leave no place for fanaticism in their minds.

*One of these questions that attracts a reader is the question of*
*ijtihad* *in the view of the* *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah.* The view inherited
from Sunni authorities about *ijtihad* is that the door of absolute
*ijtihad* was closed after the four master scholars of jurisprudence;
namely, Abu-Hanifah, Malik ibn Anas, al-Shafi\`i, and Ibn Hanbal.
However, the attempts of *ijtihad* that took place after these four
*imams* at the hands of certain jurisprudents were no more than partial
or inner *ijtihad* that fell under a certain sect or school of Islamic
law [*madhhab*].

Such secondary *ijtihad* in Sunnism scarcely continued until the fifth
century of Hijrah. The *ijtihad* of al-Ghazzali in the fifth century,
Abu-Tahir al-Salafi in the sixth century,\`Izz al-Din ibn \`Abd al-Salam
and Ibn Daqiq al-\`«d in the seventh century, Taqi al-Din al-Sabaki and
Ibn Taymiyah, the heretic,([^2]) in the eighth century, and that of
\`Allamah Jalal al-Din \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi-Bakr al-Suyuti in the
ninth century, were no more than verdicts issued, that had nothing to do
with *ijtihad,* according to modern scientific methodology. More light
has been thrown on this kind of *ijtihad* in my book of ‘*Tarikh
al-Tashri\` al-Islami fi Misr* (History of Islamic Legislation in
Egypt)’.

As regarding the scholars of the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*, they have
authorized themselves to act upon and practice *ijtihad* in all of its
aforementioned forms and insist on practicing it resolutely and never
closed its door in the face of their scholars throughout the past
centuries up to the present day. Furthermore, they make it obligatory
upon the Shi\`ah to obey the verdicts of a living *mujtahid* directly
after the demise of the past *mujtahid* as long as this living one had
derived his *ijtihad*—in its origins and branches—from the past
*mujtahid*s*,* and initially inherited it from the Imams (\`a).

This view and practice of ijtihad in Shi\`ism is not the main point that
has attracted my attention and won my heart; rather, what is new is that
ijtihad in this manner complies with the developments in life, making
Islamic legislation active, vivacious, developing and keeping pace with
the laws of time and space. They are devoid of stagnancy that sows
dissension between religion and life and between doctrine and scientific
progress; the stagnancy that encompasses most of the sects that object
to Shi\`ism.

In my conception, the big numbers of *Imamiyyah* Shi\`ite writings and
the steady increase in the library of Shi\`ism are attributable to the
wide opening of the door of *ijtihad* in Shi\`ism.

*The second view that arouses the attention of the intellectuals and
induces them to follow up the unique features of this sect and delve
into its issues are the discussions on the goodness and evilness of
things:* whether a good thing is good in essence, or by reason of its
nature, or, just because Almighty Allah decided it was good. Similarly,
they discuss whether an evil thing is evil in its essence, or by virtue
of its nature, or just because Almighty Allah has declared it to be
thus.

When you read these discussions and follow up what the author has stated
about the doctrines of the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* in this respect, you will
notice that they adopt the first opinion about both good and evil. In
view of the Shi\`ah in general and the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* in
particular, good and evil are subjective and substantial in things and
they have not held such characteristics due to Almighty Allah’s
enjoining or forbidding things. Indeed, this course engages the
attentions of many researchers and brings about astonishment after long
hours of pondering over and contemplating the question.

As for us, we do not find any astonishment or confusion in the matter,
because the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*, in most of the religious laws, used to
act upon the course of reason in the same amount as their acting upon
the course of narration (i.e. traditions reported from the ancestors).
Hence, their opinion about good and evil of things is the same as the
opinion of the master scholars of the Mu\`tazilah.

There is one question that I should answer here: Did the Shi\`ah act
upon the Mu\`tazilah or the opposite? The majority of researchers
believe that the Shi\`ah acted upon the Mu\`tazilah in their adoption of
the course of reason (i.e. rationalism). However, I can assert that it
was the Mu\`tazilah who acted upon the Shi\`ah, since Shi\`ism, as a
belief, existed earlier than Mu\`tazilism as a belief. Mu\`tazilism was
born and brought up in the laps of Shi\`ism and the heads of Shi\`ism
existed before the master scholars of Mu\`tazilism. I can confirm this
as long as we agree on submitting to historical facts and as long as we
do not doubt the fact that the advanced party of the Shi\`ah began to
appear since the age of the Orthodox Caliphs and, indisputably, expanded
during the caliphate of Imam \`Ali—(Allah may honor his face). No sooner
had the Imam been assassinated wrongfully to move to the Abode of the
Hereafter than the Shi\`ah formed a party opposing all the religious and
political parties that appeared in Islam.

Shi\`ism is not as it is defined by the dotard, pro-Sufyan researchers
who introduce it as a purely traditional sect based on religious mores
that are full of myths, illusions, and Israeli-made fables, or having
derived its principles from \`Abdullah ibn Saba' or the like imaginary
personalities of history. Shi\`ism—in the view of our modern scientific
methodology—is exactly contrary to the claims of its rivals. It is
indeed the first Muslim sect that cared very much for both traditions
and reason-based principles and could find itself a far-reaching,
comprehensive path from among the other Muslim sects. Had it not been
that Shi\`ism is distinctively characterized by coordination between
reason-based principles and traditions, we could not have found such an
up-to-date spirit in fields of ijtihad and time and space developments
in jurisprudence that are not contradictory to the immortal laws of
Islam.

Let me now render a third viewpoint that you might believe to be
contrary to the rational methodology to which I have referred in the
previous paragraph:

The Shi\`ah tend to visit the shrines of the Saints and Imams from the
Holy Prophet’s Household (the Ahl al-Bayt) and they perform acts of
worship (to Almighty Allah) near these shrines, such as offering the
obligatory prayers and holding sessions of (religious) knowledge and
ceremonies of commemorating the Twelve Imams. According to some modern
Muslim rationalists and experimentalists, such acts are meaningless
superstitions. Moreover, some Muslim sects consider such acts to be a
kind of atheism and apostasy, especially the followers of Ahmad ibn
\`Abd al-Halim ibn Taymiyah and the followers of his student, Muhammad
ibn \`Abd al-Wahhab al-Najdi, the founder of the Wahhabiyyah sect, as
well as other contemporaries which I disdain mentioning.

The majority of Sunnis believe as their Imamite Shi\`ite brethren that
neither those Saints and Imams nor anyone else on this globe can provide
you with any help nor ever do any harm to you except that which Almighty
Allah has decided for you. In plain words, these Saints and Imams have
no influence, use, or harm upon somebody but with the permission of
Almighty Allah. On the strength of this fact, the visiting of the tombs
of these elite people is only aimed at following their examples,
patterning after their morals and wonderful feats, and learning lessons
from their life accounts. Such acts are allowable in the view of the two
sects—Sunnism and Shi\`ism.

A fourth viewpoint that has obliged me to express my appreciation and
admiration while I am reading this book is the author’s competence in
explaining the doctrines of the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* in such appropriate
diction that reveals the Shi\`ah’s being influenced by the rationalistic
methodology. As I have previously mentioned, the reason behind such
influence is the Shi\`ah’s deep penetration into rational sciences as
much as transferring the traditions of their Imams. This can in fact
serve as another decisive indication of the substantive relationship
between Shi\`ism and Mu\`tazilism and between the master scholars of
Shi\`ism and those of Mu\`tazilism.

A reference to my book entitled ‘*al-Sahib ibn \`Abbad*’ can obviously
make one notice that master scholars of Shi\`ism were the same as those
of Mu\`tazilism and vice versa except a few exceptions. Such
relationships attained the climax of mutual understanding between the
two sects in the middle of the fourth century of Hijrah in the
personality of al-Sahib ibn \`Abbad who held the leadership of both
Mu\`tazilism and Shi\`ism in the second half of the aforementioned
century during which the Islamic civilization reached its peak.

When the author of this book confers the ‘Unity of Attributes’ upon the
Essence of Almighty Allah, he reminds us of the doctrine of the
Mu\`tazilah who believe in the unity of Attributes. Owing to this
doctrine, they have called themselves ‘*Ahl al-Tawhid* (People of
Monotheism)’. *Hence, both the Shi\`ah and the Mu\`tazilah believe that
the Attributes of Almighty Allah are His very Essence. In plain words,
they both share the same belief that Almighty Allah is Essentially
All-seeing, All-hearing, and so on. They thus do not set any difference
between Almighty Allah’s Essence and His Attributes—a topic that in most
cases confuses intellects and plunges minds into polytheism (ishrak).
Undoubtedly, such belief is the result of the most wonderful pondering
over the meaning of monotheism.*

Shi\`ism and Mu\`tazilism both agree on the meaning of Divine Justice,
as it being incumbent upon Almighty Allah to do only the good and always
avoid the evil. Both the Shi\`ah and the Mu\`tazilah have set such a
principle as one of their beliefs only for purpose of guarding
themselves against attributing wrong to Almighty Allah—Allah forbid!

The *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* interpret the following holy verse of the Holy
Qur'an, which the Sunnis set as evidence on their belief, with a
suitable meaning:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يُسْأَلُ عَمَّا يَفْعَلُ وَهُمْ يُسْأَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He cannot be questioned concerning what He does and they shall be
questioned. 21:23”***

The Shi\`ah do not approve the following poetic verse of Ahmad
al-Dardir, one of the master scholars of Sunnism and Sufism in 12 AH,
when he says:

*One who claims that a good deed is incumbent upon the Lord has in fact
done badly.*

Nonetheless, I completely excuse them because they, believing in such,
have good intentions, which is to avoid attributing wrong to Almighty
Allah, even if such wrong is not wrong in reality.

In truth, the Mu\`tazilah and the Shi\`ah stand together on one side
while the Sunnis and Sufis stand on the other, even though each party
has its own way of extolling the Perfection of Almighty Allah. In other
words, the Mu\`tazilah and the Shi\`ah have adopted the defense of
Divine Justice while the Sunnis and Sufis have adopted to defend Divine
Freedom, which says that Almighty Allah has the freedom to do anything—a
freedom that is not restricted to anything and is not overpowered by
anything. As evidence on such ‘Freedom’, Sunnis and Sufis quote the
following holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يُسْأَلُ عَمَّا يَفْعَلُ وَهُمْ يُسْأَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He cannot be questioned concerning what He does and they shall be
questioned. 21:23”***

In view of the modern scientific methodology, each of these two opposing
parties has its own notion to embrace.

Attached to the above is the author’s opinion about the question of
Predestination and Divine Decree (*al-qadha' wal-qadar*), whether man is
or is not free to choose or, as is termed by the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*,
whether man is compelled to do what he does or has the power to manage
his life.

Although this issue is strongly related to the philosophy of Divine
Justice, which is almost the same between the Shi\`ah and the
Mu\`tazilah, it is noticeable that the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*, specifically
at this point, pursue another path, which is between the two extremes.
They neither believe in absolute fatalism (*jabriyyah*) in which
fatalists, also called *al-Jahmiyyah*, believe, nor in absolute
indeterminism (*mufawwidhah*) in which a group of the Mu\`tazilah,
specifically called *al-Qadariyyah*, believe.

The *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* do not agree with the fatalists because to
believe that all events are predetermined by Almighty Allah negates
man’s freewill and freedom to choose originally and makes man like a toy
in the hands of fate or like a feather in the wind. If so, then Almighty
Allah’s calling man to account for evil things that man has done will be
exorbitant injustice because man has had no choice or will to stop doing
such evil things and had no power to stop falling into sin. Hence, the
*Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* reject such fatality, because it cancels out the
attribute of justice that Almighty Allah enjoys. In plain words, to
punish man for doing things that he had no power to stop is like tying
one’s hands and throwing him in a sea and then ordering him not to get
wet!

The *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* also disagree with those who believe in absolute
power to do things and absolute freedom of choice, because such belief
involves that man’s deeds and words are absolutely independent from
Almighty Allah’s will and power. Such belief of the Indeterminists
involves that man can create his own deeds without intervention of
Almighty Allah’s power. Some critics of doctrines have cited traditions
censuring those who carry such beliefs. For instance, the Imam (\`a) is
reported to have said, “The *qadariyyah* (Indeterminists) are the
Magians of this nation (of Islam).”

In view of that, we can conclude that the fault of the *jabriyyah*
(Fatalists) is that they have canceled the justice of Almighty Allah
since their belief involves that He calls man to account for things that
He has installed in him without giving him freedom to choose. The fault
of the Indeterminists is that they have canceled out Almighty Allah’s
power over His creatures. Hence, both the parties are extremely far away
from truth.

As the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* take up the opinion of Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq
(may Allah be pleased with him) who says, “There is neither (absolute)
fatalism nor indeterminism; rather, it is an in-between matter,” this
means that the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* agree totally with their Sunni
brethren whose master scholars adopt the very same view and state that
there is an optional part in man; so, man is neither absolutely
compelled to do his deeds nor is he the creator of his own deeds. The
most eminent scholar who has adopted this view was Abu’l-Hasan
al-Ash\`ari.

Moreover, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi has attempted to “philosophize” the
harmonization between fatalism and indeterminism; therefore, he is
reported to have said, “Man is compelled intrinsically but enjoys
freedom of choice extrinsically.” In fact, this saying is too precise to
be ignored by the well-versed scholars and those having full
acquaintance with the details of Muslim doctrines.

Let us end this introduction with a fifth viewpoint: the *Imamiyyah
Shi\`ah* believe in bada' which explicitly means to do something and
then cancel it. They have attributed such bada' (changeability) to
Almighty Allah and believed in it so firmly that they are reported as
saying, “The best ever worship is to believe that Almighty Allah may
change an earlier determination.”

Many thinkers have accused the Shi\`ah of idiocy and feeble-mindedness
as they attribute changeability of decisions to Almighty Allah. Changing
(or canceling out) an earlier determination is one of the features of
creatures—since to decide something and then cancel it may indicate
incidental thinking, or reaching at the right decision after practicing
a wrong one, or having knowledge after ignorance (and all these are
impossible for Almighty Allah).

As a matter of fact, the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* are too far above such
accusations that stem from the people’s misunderstanding of bada',
because both the Shi\`ah and the Sunni have unanimously agreed that the
knowledge of Almighty Allah is Eternal and far above changeability,
alteration, or thinking, which are among the features of the creatures.
The Divine decisions that are exposed to changeability and alteration
after determination are those written in the Guarded Tablet (al-lawh
al-mahfuz), as is confirmed by Almighty Allah:

***“Allah erases what He pleases and establishes (what He pleases), and
with Him is the basis of the Book. (13/39)”***

To shed more light on the notion of *bada'* as one of the *Imamiyyah
Shi\`ah* doctrines, let us give the following example:

Unhappiness has been decided for X in the beginning of his lifetime, but
when X becomes forty years old, he repents before Almighty Allah; so, he
is included in the list of the happy people in the Guarded Tablet. In
this example, bada' stands for erasing X’s name from the list of the
unhappy ones and including him with the happy ones. The Eternal
Knowledge of Almighty Allah includes the entire history of this issue,
including the erasing and the establishment of X’s name in the list of
the happy ones after his repentance. To clarify, Almighty Allah has
already known that X would change his behavior and become righteous at
that age when Almighty Allah would lead him to repentance.

The doctrine of *bada'* in which the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* believe is only
the issue of passing judgments according to the apparent aspect of
Almighty Allah’s deeds towards His creatures as it is required by His
Wisdom. In other words, *bada'* is the judgment that is passed on the
basis of the apparent deed as is seen by us. By virtue of this
definition, the wrong judgment that has been aroused by those who have
found fault with the Shi\`ah concerning their belief in this doctrine
has in fact sprung from their false claim that the Shi\`ah attribute
changeability (or *bada'*) to the Eternal Knowledge of Almighty Allah,
not to the records of the Guarded Tablet.

The clear-cut presentation of the reality of bada' as believed by the
*Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*, will enable the reader to comprehend the validity
of bada' as one of the doctrines of the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* and the
profundity of their acceptance of bada'. In my opinion, it means that
Almighty Allah develops His creatures according to the prerequisites of
the environment and time that He creates them in. In fact, bada'
explains the need for repealing (*nasikh*) and repealed (*mansukh*)
verses in the Holy Qur'an. For example, the forbidding of intoxicants
being revealed progressively shows that Almighty Allah wished to treat
the crookedness of the human soul step by step, and then rescue it from
the drastic chains of habit, and help it achieve righteousness. Had
Almighty Allah declared the forbiddance of intoxicants at once, souls
would certainly have suffered much hardship. This is the belief of bada'
that is adopted by the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah*.

I am pleased to inform that I have decided to bring the Muslim sects
closer in a single book in which I hope, by the guidance of Almighty
Allah, that I will be able to clarify the extent of agreement among
these sects in essence and objectives even if they seem to be different
in appearance and methods.

Finally, I do congratulate the author on the success that he has
achieved in combining the reason-based principles with the reported
traditions while presenting the doctrines of the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* and
on the doctrinal culture that he has offered to the readers with great
skill through evidence combined with presentation. This is sufficient
for anyone who thinks and ponders.[^3]

[^1]: () The Twelver Shi\`ah are those Shi\`ites acknowledging twelve
Imam as their orthodox leaders and guides whose Imamate (i.e.
leadership) has been commissioned by Almighty Allah through many Divine
texts.

[^2]: () A big number of Sunni master scholars have decided Ibn Taymiyah
is a heretic, while Sufis have unanimously agreed on it. Many contests
on various aspects of jurisprudence and doctrine used to take place
between Taqi al-Din al-Sabaki and Ibn Taymiyah. Refer to my book,
‘Tarikh al-Tashri\` al-Islami fi Misr (History of Islamic Legislation in
Egypt)’.

[^3]: Dr. Hamid Hafni Dawud: Professor of Arabic Literature in the
College of Languages; Supervisor of Islamic Studies at Aligarah
University, India.


