Preface to the Second Edition
=============================

It is now ten years since this small book was first published.
Throughout these years, I could not find any reason that might prompt me
to change my conviction that this book has come to meet the public need
for demonstrating and corroborating the doctrines of the *Imamiyyah
Shi\`ah*. Furthermore, I have hit upon matters that encouraged me to
republish it, hoping that it had hit its target and fulfilled the
purpose of its publishing, which was an attempt to remove the overcast
that has come between the two major Muslim sects, the Sunnah and the
Shi\`ah, for ages. It was also an attempt to remove the dust from the
scraps of ancient times that concealed the true Islamic doctrines.

I am certain that the idea of approximating the Muslim sects has become
an urgent need and a sublime objective for every Muslim individual who
eagerly intends good for his religion no matter what his sectarian
inclination is and what opinion he carries about the doctrinal
leftovers. Of course, in the domain of approximating the Muslim sects,
there is nothing better than that the adopters of each belief undertake
the mission of clarifying their doctrines and revealing their treasures
and facts.

In my conception, this is the soundest way to give the most accurate
idea about each sect and the nearest to understanding the most accurate
aspects of the notion that each sect carries.

Responding to the desire of my most beloved brother, Sayyid Murtadha
al-Kashmiri, the virtuous who had devoted his life to working for the
sake of Almighty Allah, I have reviewed this thesis and inserted some
corrections and additions as much as my time, that is overcrowded with
problems, has permitted me to do. I have also proofread the first
edition in order to mark and correct the clerical and non-clerical slips
so that I could provide them to the press, hoping that Almighty Allah
would guide me to achieve the pursued objective and arriveon the path of
righteousness and truth. Verily, Almighty Allah is the best Besought of
all.

**The Author**
**Shawwal 21, 1380 AH**


