Prelude:Ijtihad and Taqlid
==========================

Necessity of Seeking Knowledge
------------------------------

We believe that since Almighty Allah has endowed us with the faculty of
thinking and gifted us intellects, He has ordered us to ponder over His
creation, to note with care the signs of His making, and to meditate on
His wisdom and His excellently perfect planning in His signs in the
horizons and in ourselves. He has thus said (in the Holy Qur'an):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَنُرِيهِمْ آيَاتِنَا فِي الْآفَاقِ وَفِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ حَتَّىٰ
يَتَبَيَّنَ لَهُمْ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We shall show them Our signs on the horizons and in themselves, until
it is clear to them that it is the Truth. (41/53)***

Almighty Allah has likewise shown His disapproval of those who blindly
follow the ways of those who were before them. Hence, He says in the
Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا بَلْ نَتَّبِعُ مَا أَلْفَيْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَاءَنَا ۗ أَوَلَوْ
كَانَ آبَاؤُهُمْ لَا يَعْقِلُونَ شَيْئًا وَلَا يَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***..They say: ‘No, but we will do what we found our fathers doing.’
And, what if their fathers had no understanding of anything! (2/170)***

He has also shown His dislike for those who follow their personal whims
and conjectures.

He, the Exalted, thus says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 إِنْ يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا الظَّنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…They follow naught but an opinion… (6/116)***

We believe that it is our intellect that forces us to reflect upon
creation to know the Creator of the universe, as also to examine the
claims and miracles of anyone who claims prophethood. Such being the
case, it will no longer be acceptable to act upon the view of any
person, even if that person has the gift of great knowledge or holds an
esteemed position.

The Holy Qur’an has urged us to reflect upon creation, stick to science,
and acquire knowledge. This urging has come to confirm the natural
freedom of thought, which all sages agree upon, draw the attention to
the human soul’s inclination to knowledge and thinking, and open and
direct the mind towards the functions for which it was created.

It is thus impossible for man to neglect the doctrinal affairs or to
depend upon his mentors or any other persons concerning his beliefs. It
is necessary for man—on account of his natural intelligence that is
confirmed by the Holy Qur’an—to investigate, examine, and come to a
clear understanding of the fundaments of his religion (*usul
al-din*),([^1]) which are:

• Monotheism (belief that there is only one God),

• Prophethood (belief that Muhammad (s) is the Prophet and messenger of
Almighty Allah),

• Imamate (belief in the Divinely commissioned leadership of the Twelve
Imams (\`a)) and,

• Resurrection (belief that there is another life after death).

One who follows the dictates of his forebears or any other person in
these matters has indeed committed a big mistake, strayed off the Right
Path, and made all his acts inexcusable.

The above discussion can be summed up in the following two points:

(a) It is obligatory to investigate and understand the fundaments of our
beliefs, since it is unacceptable to depend upon others’ beliefs in this
respect.

(b) In addition to its being a religious duty, reflection upon the
fundaments of one’s belief is a requirement stemming from reason, i.e.
such knowledge must not be derived from religious texts, which, however,
can act as supportive factors after the exercise of the intellects.

The meaning of reason-based requirement is that we must realize the
necessity of knowledge, the reflection upon the fundaments of one’s
beliefs, and the inference of these beliefs through reason.

Following an Authority in the Secondary Religious Affairs
---------------------------------------------------------

By secondary affairs of the religion, we mean those religious laws which
govern our actions after we have rationally accepted the religious
faith. In such affairs, it is not obligatory upon us to reflect upon
them or apply our personal views. If such secondary affairs are not
among the religious fundaments fixed by decisive texts of religious
laws, such as the obligation of offering prayers, fasting, and defraying
the poor-rate (*zakat*), then an ordinary person is required to do one
of the following three matters:

(a) one may practice *ijtihad* (that is: exert all possible efforts to
extract religious laws from the sources of the Islamic code of laws), by
engaging oneself in the highest levels of studies of jurisprudence, and
then investigating the proofs of the religious laws after qualifiying to
reach such a stage and becoming a *mujtahid*, or

(b) exercise juristic precaution (*ihtiyat*: act according to the views
of the jurisprudents so as to act upon the actual ruling) if one is able
to do so, or

(c) act upon the verdicts of a well-qualified *mujtahid* who must enjoy
decency and rationality in addition to other qualifications. Such a
*mujtahid* according to religious traditions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَائِناً لِنَفْسِهِ، حَافِظاً لِدِينِهِ، مُخَالِفاً لِهَوَاهُ،
مُطِيعاً لأمْرِ مَوْلاَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

…preserves himself against wrongdoing and worldly pleasures, cares for
his religion, opposes the dictates of his desires, and obeys the
commands of his Lord.([^2])

It follows that if one is not qualified enough to practice *ijtihad*, or
to act upon *ihtiyat*, and still refrains from acting upon the verdicts
of a well-qualified religious authority, then all of one’s acts of
worship will be invalid and unacceptable even if one offers prayers,
observes fasting, and performs acts of worship one’s entire lifetime
unless:

(1) Such acts be compatible with the views of the jurisprudent upon
whose verdicts one relies after that,([^3]) and

(2) previous acts were intended to seek nearness to Almighty Allah
(*qurbah*).).

Ijtihad
-------

We believe that *ijtihad* in secondary matters of religion is a
collective duty (*wajib kifa'i*)([^4]) in the ages of occultation (of
Imam al-Mahdi—may Almighty Allah hasten his reappearance).([^5]) In
other words, all Muslims in all ages are under the obligation of
practicing *ijtihad*, but should one of them become proficient in
*ijtihad* thus becoming a well-qualified *mujtahid*, all Muslims will be
acquitted from this responsibility and they will then act upon his
verdicts and refer to him in the secondary affairs of religion.

In all ages, Muslims must consider their religious duty to choose an
authority from among themselves. If they find a volunteer who has gained
the degree of *ijtihad*, which cannot be gained except by those who have
good fortune, and who is qualified enough to be followed by the others,
they may then accept him as their religious authority and turn to him in
getting knowledge of the laws of their religion.

If they fail to find one enjoying such a supreme degree of knowledge,
then they are religiously required to attain the rank of *ijtihad*
individually or to nominate one from among them to obtain this rank when
it is impossible or unfeasible for all to devote themselves to gaining
this rank.

It is impermissible for them to act upon the verdicts of a deceased
*mujtahid*.

*Ijtihad* can be defined as the examination of the sources of the
*shari\`ah* (i.e. the religious code of Islamic laws) to reach knowledge
of the secondary laws which the Holy Prophet (s) has conveyed to his
nation. Of course, these laws are unalterable and cannot be changed when
times or conditions change. It has thus been declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَلاَلُ مُحَمَّدٍ حَلاَلٌ إلَى يَوْمِ القِيَامَةِ، وَحَرَامُهُ حَرَامٌ
إلَى يَوْمِ القِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

What Muhammad (\`a) has made halal (legal) will be halal until the Day
of Judgment, and what he has made haram (forbidden) will be haram until
the Day of Judgment.”([^6])

The sources for religious laws are the Holy Qur’an, the Holy Sunnah
(words, deeds, and confirmations of the Holy Prophet (s) and the Holy
Imams (\`a)), consensus (*ijma\`*) and reasoning (*\`aql*). Details of
these sources are mentioned in the texts of *usul al-fiqh* (fundaments
of jurisprudence).

To attain the position of a *mujtahid* requires many years of study and
acquiring various branches of science that not everyone can attain
except one who works painstakingly and makes every possible effort by
devoting himself to attaining this position. requires many years of
study and acquiring various branches of science that not everyone can
attain except one who works painstakingly and makes every possible
effort by devoting himself to attaining this position.

The Mujtahid
------------

We believe that a well-qualified *mujtahid* is a representative of the
Imam([^7]) during the age of occultation. He is also an absolute ruler
and authority over Muslims and he enjoys the same power that is enjoyed
by the Imam concerning issuance of judgments and administration among
the people.

Hence, to reject such a well-qualified *mujtahid* is to reject the Imam,
and to reject the Imam is to reject Almighty Allah, which does not
differ from polytheism, as is declared in a tradition reported from Imam
Ja\`far al-Sadiq (\`a).([^8])

In view of that, a well-qualified *mujtahid* is not only a competent
authority for issuing verdicts; but he also enjoys general authority
(i.e. in all aspects of life) over people. People should therefore turn
to him in judicature, passing of judgments, and ruling—affairs that are
relegated to him exclusively—since none is allowed to hold these
positions without permission of the well-qualified *mujtahid*.
Similarly, it is impermissible to carry out the religious punishments
and provisions (*hudud*) except by the permission of such supreme
authority.

Moreover, in issues pertaining to finance, it is obligatory to refer to
the well-qualified *mujtahid* as long as such financial items are the
Imam’s rights and responsibilities. Such general authority has been
given to the well-qualified *mujtahids* by the Imam (\`a) so that they
will act as representatives of the Imam (\`a) when the latter is absent.

[^1]: () Not all the doctrines mentioned in this thesis are among the
fundamentals of the religion. In fact, it is not obligatory to believe
or even consider many of the doctrines mentioned in this thesis, such as
al-qadha' wal-qadar (predestination and Divine Decree), al-raj\`ah (The
Return), and others. Moreover, it is permissible to act upon others
whose opinions are decided as valid, such as the Prophets and the Holy
Imam, with regard to such doctrines. My belief in many such doctrines is
based on the acceptably reported traditions of our Holy Imam ('a).

[^2]: () The Holy Qur'an has censured the public of the Jews for they
had followed their rabbis on two occasions: وَمِنْهُمْ أُمِّيُّونَ لَا
يَعْلَمُونَ الْكِتَابَ إِلَّا أَمَانِيَّ وَإِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا
يَظُنُّونَ فَوَيْلٌ لِلَّذِينَ يَكْتُبُونَ الْكِتَابَ بِأَيْدِيهِمْ
ثُمَّ يَقُولُونَ هَٰذَا مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ لِيَشْتَرُوا بِهِ ثَمَنًا
قَلِيلًا فَوَيْلٌ لَهُمْ مِمَّا كَتَبَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَوَيْلٌ لَهُمْ
مِمَّا يَكْسِبُونَ  And there are among them illiterates who know not
the Book but only lies, and they do but conjecture. Woe, then, to those
who write the book with their hands and then say: ‘This is from Allah,’
so that they may take for it a small price; therefore, woe to them for
what their hands have written and woe to them for what they earn.
(2/78-9) Concerning the two holy verses, a man asked Imam al-Sadiq ('a),
“These ordinary Jews had no knowledge of the Book except the amount that
they heard from their scholars. They did not have any other way to learn
the Book. How is it then that the Qur'an censures them from their
following their scholars and adopting their words? Are these ordinary
Jews not exactly like the ordinary people among us (i.e. Muslims) who
only follow their scholars? If it is impermissible for these Jews to
follow their scholars, then it must be impermissible for our ordinary
people to follow their scholars.” The Imam ('a) explained the points of
similarity and difference between the ordinary Jews and their scholars
and the ordinary Muslims and their scholars. He ('a) then added:
وَكَذَلِكَ عَوَامُ أمَّتِنَا إذَا عَرَفُوا مِنْ فُقَهَائِهِمُ الفِسْقَ
الظَّاهِرَ، وَالعَصَبِيَّةَ الشَّدِيدَةَ، وَالتَّكَالُبَ عَلَى حُطَامِ
الدُّنْيَا وَحَرَامِهَا، وَإهْلاكَ مَنْ يَتَعَصَّبُونَ عَلَيْهِ إنْ
كَانَ لإصْلاَحِ أمْرِهِ مُسْتَحِقّاً، وَبِالتَّرَفُّقِ بِالبِرِّ
وَالإحْسَانِ عَلَى مَنْ تَعَصَّبُوا لَهُ، وَإنْ كَانَ لِلإذْلاَلِ
وَالإهَانَةِ مُسْتَحِقّاً. فَمَنْ قَلَّدَ مِنْ عَوامِنَا مِثْلَ هَؤلاَءِ
الفُقَهَاءِ فَهُمْ مِثْلُ اليَهُودِ الَّذِينَ ذَمَّهُمُ اللهُ تَعَالَى
بِالتَّقْلِيدِ لِفَسَقَةِ عُلَمَائِهِمْ. فَأمّا مَنْ كَانَ مِنَ
الفُقَهَاءِ صَائِناً لِنَفْسِهِ، حَافِظاً لِدِينِهِ، مُخَالِفاً
لِهَوَاهُ، مُطِيعاً لأمْرِ مَوْلاَهُ، فَلِلْعَوَامِ أنْ يُقَلِّدُوهُ. It
is the duty of ordinary Muslims not to follow scholars that demonstrate
apparent transgression, intense fanaticism and mad contention for the
degrading and illegal pleasures of this world. They should be wary of
those scholars who humiliate the one with whom they do not agree when he
deserves guidance towards the truth, and they treat the one with whom
they agree with leniency, kindness and favor even when he deserves to be
humiliated and disgraced. If (ordinary) people of our nation follow such
(irreligious) jurisprudents, they will be just like the Jews whom
Almighty Allah has censured, for they too followed the wicked among
their scholars. As for any jurisprudent who keeps himself from sinning,
abides by his religion, opposes the dictates of his own desires, and
obeys the commands of his Master, then it is allowable for (ordinary)
people to follow him… Reference: Tafsir al-Imam al-\`Askari (260 AH),
pp. 300. The following reference books have also cited this tradition,
yet with little difference in the order of the statements. For instance,
some traditions have mentioned the phrase “opposes the dictates of his
desires” in another form but the same purport. Refer to: al-Ihtijaj by
al-Tabrisi (AH 560), 2:263; Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH
1104), 27:131, H. (hadith no.) 33401, H. 20, Chapter: bab \`adam jawaz
taqlid ghayr al-ma\`sum fi ma yaqulu bira’yihi (Illegality of Following
anyone—other than the Infallible—who adopts his own opinions); Bihar
al-Anwar by al-Majlisi (died in AH 1111), 2:88, Ch. 14, H. 12.

[^3]: () As a matter of fact, the acts of such a person are acceptable
if he knows that they are compatible with reality or the verdicts of the
mujtahid who is accepted as marji\` taqlid (i.e. a well-qualified
jurisprudent whose verdicts are acceptable and can act as directions for
the ordinary people). See Minhaj al-Salihin (Verdicts of the Religious
Authority, the Head of the Seminary Sayyid Abu’l-Qasim al-Musawi
al-Khu'i) 1:7, Question No. 2 in Taqlid. Commenting on this topic,
Professor Ayatullah al-Kharrazi says, “Even if the religious duties of
an ordinary person correspond to what is religiously required by chance
and these deeds do not correspond to the verdicts of the one whom he
follows, then his deeds are decided as valid. Such being the case, the
opinion of a mujtahid loses its authority, because it is no more than a
way that leads to the validity of deeds.” See Bidayat al-Ma\`arif
al-Ilahiyyah fi Sharh \`Aqa'id al-Imamiyyah by al-Kharrazi (a
contemporary writer) 1:18 (footnote No. 1). The deeds of an ordinary
person are also decided as valid when he is sure that his performance of
that deed or abandonment of another will not lead to infringing a
religious duty. Such certainty may come from the person’s attainment of
sentimental knowledge or certainty that stems from reason-based
resources, such as common sense or information of a well-versed person.
See Minhaj al-Salihin (Verdicts of the Grand Ayatullah Sayyid \`Ali
al-Sistani) 1:9.

[^4]: () Religious duties are either collective (kifa'i), that is if all
Muslims abstain from performing them, all of them will have committed a
sin, but if only one of them carries them out, then the others will be
acquitted from their religious responsibility, such as the duty of
enjoining the right and forbidding the evil. The other category of
religious duties is the individual (\`ayni) one, that is each Muslim is
required to carry it out individually, such as offering of the
obligatory prayers, observance of fasting in the month of Ramadhan, and
the like. [translator]

[^5]: () This is based on Almighty Allah’s saying in the Holy Qur'an:
فَلَوْلَا نَفَرَ مِنْ كُلِّ فِرْقَةٍ مِنْهُمْ طَائِفَةٌ لِيَتَفَقَّهُوا
فِي الدِّينِ وَلِيُنْذِرُوا قَوْمَهُمْ إِذَا رَجَعُوا إِلَيْهِمْ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَحْذَرُونَ “Why should not then a company from every party
from among them go forth that they may apply themselves to obtain
understanding in religion, and that they may warn their people when they
come back to them that they may be cautious. (9/122)”

[^6]: () Basa'ir al-Darajat al-Kubra by al-Saffar (AH 290), pp. 168, H.
7, S. 13. This hadith is reported from Imam al-Sadiq ('a). In (the book
of) al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:58 Section: bab al-bida\` wal-ra’y
wal-maqayis (Heresies, Opinionism, and Analogy), H. 19, this hadith is
reported in the following form: حَلاَلُ مُحَمَّدٍ حَلاَلٌ أبَداً إلَى
يَوْمِ القِيَامَةِ، وَحَرَامُهُ حَرَامٌ أبَداً إلَى يَوْمِ القِيَامَةِ،
لاَ يَكُونُ غَيْرُهُ وَلاَ يَجِيء غَيْرُهُ. What was deemed halal
(lawful) by Muhammad will remain halal forever up to the Day of
Resurrection, and what was deemed haram (unlawful) by Muhammad will
remain haram forever up to the Day of Resurrection. Nothing will replace
or change it. The hadith has been also reported in a third form in
al-Kafi by al-Kulayni 2:17-18, Section: bab al-Shara'i\` (Religious
Laws), H. 2; al-Mahasin by al-Barqi (AH 274 or 280), 1:420, H. 963/365;
and Kashf al-Ghummah fi Ma\`rifat al-A'immah by al-Arbali (AH 693),
2:414.

[^7]: () By Imam, we mean the twelfth Imam in the sequence of the Imam
of the Ahl al-Bayt ('a), namely Imam al-Mahdi—may Allah hasten his
reappearance—who disappeared from sight during the \`Abbasid reign in AH
329 under certain circumstances and for a Divine logic. He is still
expecting a Divine Command to reappear and establish the global
government of justice. The author of this book will shed more light on
this issue later on.

[^8]: () Muhammad ibn Yahya has reported on the authority of Muhammad
ibn al-Husayn on the authority of Muhammad ibn \`Isa on the authority of
Safwan ibn Yahya on the authority of Dawud ibn al-Husayn that \`Amr ibn
Hanzalah said: I asked Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq ('a) whether it is or it is
not acceptable for two Shi\`ite men, who had disputed in an issue of
debt or inheritance, to summon one another to the judgment of the ruling
authority or the governmental judges. The Imam ('a) answered, “Verily,
to go for judgment to such parties, whether in legal or illegal issue,
is to resort for judgment to false deities (taghut). Whatever is decided
for any party by such judges is considered illegal, even if it was the
right of a party. This is because such party has taken it from the
judgment of the illegal judge. In fact, Almighty Allah has ordered such
false deities to be abjured. He has thus said (in the Holy Qur'an):
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ يَزْعُمُونَ أَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا بِمَا أُنْزِلَ
إِلَيْكَ وَمَا أُنْزِلَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَحَاكَمُوا
إِلَى الطَّاغُوتِ وَقَدْ أُمِرُوا أَنْ يَكْفُرُوا بِهِ وَيُرِيدُ
الشَّيْطَانُ أَنْ يُضِلَّهُمْ ضَلَالًا بَعِيدًا  ‘Have you not seen
those who pretend that they believe in that which is revealed to you and
that which was revealed before you, how they would go for judgment in
their disputes to false deities when they had been ordered to abjure
them? Satan would mislead them far astray. (4/60)’” \`Amr asked, “Then,
what must such parties do instead?” The Imam ('a) replied, “They must
search for one from among themselves (i.e. followers of the Ahl al-Bayt
('a)) who has been reporting our traditions, is acquainted with what is
deemed legal and what is deemed illegal by us, and is familiar with the
laws decided by us. They must then accept him as arbitrator, because I
have appointed him as the judge among you. If he then issues a judgment
compatible to our laws but a party (of a dispute) does not submit to it,
then this party has in fact belittled Almighty Allah’s judgment and has
rejected us. Verily, whoever rejects us has in reality made an objection
to the authority of Almighty Allah, and this is tantamount to polytheism
(shirk).” This hadith can be found in the following reference books:
al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:67, H. 10, Section: bab Ikhtilaf
al-Hadith (Discrepancy of Hadith); 7:412, H. 5, Section: bab karahiyyat
al-Irtifa\` ila Qudhat al-Jawr (Discommendation of Submitting before an
Unjust Judge); Tahdhib al-Ahkam by Shaykh al-Tusi (AH 460), 6:218, H.
514, Section: kitab al-Qadhaya wal-Ahkam (Issues and Laws), No. 6
Chapter: bab man ilayhi al-hukm wa aqsam al-qudhat wal-muftin (The
Authorized for Judgment and the Kinds of Judges and Muftis). S. 87;
6:302, H. 845, H. 52, Section: bab min al-ziyadat fi al-qadhaya
wal-ahkam (Additions in Issues and Judgments), S. 92; al-Ihtijaj by
al-Tabrisi (AH 560), 2:106; \`Awali al-La’ali by al-Ihsa'i (app. AH
880), 3:192, H. 37, Section: bab al-jihad (Jihad); 4:134, H. 231,
Section: bab al-ahadith al-muta\`alliqatu bil-\`ilmi wa-ahlihi wa
hamilihi (Traditions Concerning Knowledge, its People, and its Bearers);
Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 1:43, H. 51, H. 12,
Section: bab thubut al-kufr wal-irtidad bijuhudi ba\`dhi al-dharuriyyat
wa ghayriha mimma taqumu al-hujjatu fihi binaqli al-thuqat (Proving
Atheism and Apostasy Due to Denial of the Essential Beliefs (of the
Religion) and Other Matters Upon Which There Are Proofs Confirmed by
Reports of Trustworthy Narrators); 27:137, H. 33416, H. 1, Section: bab
wujub al-ruju\` fi al-qadha' wal-fatwa ila ruwat al-hadith min
al-shi\`ah (The Obligation of Reference to Shi\`ite Narrators of Hadith
in Issues of Judicature and Verdicts).


