Part 1: Doctrines Pertaining To Divinity
========================================

**Our Doctrines concerning:**

• **Almighty Allah**

• **Divine Unity**

• **Attributes of Almighty Allah**

• **Divine Justice**

• **Commands of Almighty Allah**

• **Predetermination and Divine Decree**

• **Bada'**

• **Religious Ordinances**

Almighty Allah
--------------

We believe that Almighty Allah is One: One and Only; there is nothing
whatever like Him; Eternal: having neither beginning nor end. He is thus
the First of all things and the Last of all things. He is All-knowing,
All-wise, All-just, Ever-living, All-powerful, Self-sufficient,
All-hearing, and All-seeing.

Characteristics that are attributed to His creatures are not
attributable to Him. He is neither body, nor form, nor essence, nor
incident, and he has neither heaviness, nor lightness, nor movement, nor
motionlessness, nor place, nor time. And no one can point to Him.

None is equal to Him and none can match Him. He has no opposite. He has
no wife, no child, and no partner; and there is none comparable to Him.
Vision does not perceive Him, yet He perceives all visions.

Anyone who renders Him as human in form—such as those who claim that the
Lord has a face, a hand, or an eye, or that He descends to the lowest
sky, or that He will appear to the inhabitants of Paradise like a moon,
or any similar anthropomorphic claim—all such persons are of the same
rank of those who disbelieve in Almighty Allah and who ignore the
reality of the Creator Who is too far above any imperfection. In fact,
any form that we can imagine with our senses in its most accurate
meaning must be a created and made thing, just like us, as has been
expressed by Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (\`a). How sagacious a description
and how accurate and profoundly scientific it is.([^1])

Similarly, one who believes that Almighty Allah will be seen by His
creatures on the Day of Judgment is an unbeliever, even though one may
deny that the Lord has corporeality. The bearers of such false claims
have in fact limited their minds to the outer meanings of the words of
the Holy Qur'an or *hadith* and denied the real meaning; hence, they
lack the capacity of interpreting even the extrinsic meanings as exactly
as required by sound reflection, evidence, and rules of metaphor and
figuration. and denied the real meaning; hence, they lack the capacity
of interpreting even the extrinsic meanings as exactly as required by
sound reflection, evidence, and rules of metaphor and figuration.

Divine Unity (Tawhid)
---------------------

We believe that it is obligatory to believe in the Unity of Almighty
Allah (*tawhid*) from all aspects; that is to say, in the same way as we
must, firstly, believe in the Unity of Almighty Allah’s Essence and that
He is necessarily Existent, we must, secondly, believe in the Unity of
His Attributes, that is to believe that Almighty Allah’s Attributes are
the same as His Essence. More light will be shed on this topic later on.

We must believe that there is nothing like Him in His Essential
Attributes; so, Almighty Allah is unparalleled in Knowledge and Power;
He is matchless in creation and providing of sustenance; and He is
peerless in all items of perfection.

Thirdly, it is obligatory to believe in the Unity of Almighty Allah in
worship; it is therefore absolutely unacceptable to worship anyone or
anything save Him by any form of worship and it is unacceptable to
associate anyone or anything to Him through any sort of worship, be it
obligatory or recommended, or be it in offering of prayers or in any
other act of worship.

One who ascribes a partner to Him in worship has committed polytheism,
just like one who pretends to worship Him while in fact one’s intention
is to seek nearness to someone or something other than Him. According to
the laws of Islam, such ostentatious persons are subject to the same
rulings pertaining to those who worship idols, without any difference.

The visiting of graves and holding of ceremonies on the death
anniversaries of the Holy Prophet (s) and Imams (\`a), cannot be
considered as acts seeking nearness to other than Almighty Allah, as
assumed by those who intend to attack the rites of the *Imamiyyah
Shi\`ah* owing to their inadvertence of the reality of such rites. In
fact, such rites are acts seeking nearness to Almighty Allah through
righteous acts, exactly like seeking nearness to Him through visiting
the sick, participating in funeral ceremonies, visiting one’s
brethren-in-faith, and helping the poor.

For example, to visit a sick person is a good act in itself through
which a believer seeks nearness to Almighty Allah. It is thus not an act
aimed at seeking nearness to the sick person to be considered
worshipping other than Almighty Allah or associating others in
worshipping Him. The same thing is applicable to the other
aforementioned righteous acts.

Through Muslim jurisprudence, it is easy to prove that visiting the
graves and holding of mourning ceremonies on the anniversaries of the
deaths of the Holy Prophet (s) and Imams (\`a) are within the righteous
acts recommended by the Islamic code of laws. However, to prove it
requires an independent discussion, which is not suitable in this
thesis.

In brief, these actions are neither expressions of polytheism, as some
people may suppose, nor are they aimed at worshipping the Imams (\`a);
rather, the purpose behind the performance of such rites is only to
revive the memory of these Imams and to renew reference to them and also
to venerate the rites of Almighty Allah through them. In this respect,
Almighty Allah says in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكَ وَمَنْ يُعَظِّمْ شَعَائِرَ اللَّهِ فَإِنَّهَا مِنْ تَقْوَى
الْقُلُوبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever venerates the rites of the religion; that is of the
godliness of their hearts.*** **(22/32)**

It has been demonstrated in the Islamic code of law that these acts are
recommended; hence, if a person offers them with the intention of
seeking nearness to Almighty Allah and asking for His pleasure, then he
will deserve the promised rewards and gifts.It has been demonstrated in
the Islamic code of law that these acts are recommended; hence, if a
person offers them with the intention of seeking nearness to Almighty
Allah and asking for His pleasure, then he will deserve the promised
rewards and gifts.

Attributes of Almighty Allah
----------------------------

We believe that Almighty Allah’s positive, literal, and perfective
attributes, which we call the attributes of beauty and perfection—such
as Omniscience, Omnipotence, Self-sufficiency, Volition, and
Ever-livingness—are identical with His Essence and are not added to Him.
Hence, the existence of these Attributes is the same as the existence of
His essence. For instance, Almighty Allah’s Omnipotence with respect to
His existence is the same as His Ever-livingness, and His
Ever-livingness is as same as His Existence. In plain words, Almighty
Allah is Omnipotent since He is Eternal, and He is Eternal since He is
Omnipotent. Hence, there is no difference between His attributes and His
existence. The same thing can be said about His other Attribute of
Perfection.

Although these attributes hold different meanings and notions, their
realities and existence are the same. If these attributes were different
in existence—and then they were supposedly eternal and necessary in
existence just like His essence—then the Necessary Self-Existent would
be plural and the actual Divine Unity would be blunted. Of course, this
is in violation of the doctrine of monotheism.

All the positive, relative (i.e. supplementary) attributes—such as the
attributes of being Creator, Sustainer, Uncreated, and the First
Cause—in reality belong to one literal attribute, which is
Self-Subsistence for His creatures. From this single attribute, several
attributes can be produced depending upon the variety in effects and
signs.

As for the attributes of non-entity, which are also called the
attributes of Majesty, all of them belong to one non-entity, which is
the dispossession of possibility, which requires, and also means, that
corporeality, form, movement, motionlessness, heaviness, lightness, and
all similar features are not attributed to Almighty Allah. In other
words, deficiencies cannot be attributed to Him.

As a matter of fact, the negation of these possibilities is referable to
the Necessity of His Essence, which is one of His positive Attributes of
perfection. So, the negative attributes of Majesty ultimately go back to
the positive attributes of perfection. Almighty Allah is One in all
aspects; there is no numeration in His Divine existence, and there is
nothing compound in the reality of the One, Self-Independent Lord.

It is not surprising that some people argue that Almighty Allah’s
positive attributes are referable to His negative attributes, because
they have failed to realize the fact that Almighty Allah’s attributes
are the same as His Essence. Accordingly, they have imagined that the
positive attributes are ascribed to negation so that they can assuredly
claim that His Essence is indivisibly One. Nevertheless, they have
fallen in a worse matter when they made the Divine essence—which is the
selfsame existence, the pure Existence, and the free from any defect or
impossibility—the very nonexistence and pure negation. May Allah save us
from the slips of illusion and blunders of the pen.

It is also not surprising that some others argue that Almighty Allah’s
positive attributes are added to His Essence; they have therefore
accepted the plurality of the Eternal Being or the existence of partners
to the Necessary Self-Existent Lord, or they have claimed that the Lord
is compound. Almighty Allah is too Exalted for such false claims.

Our master, Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (\`a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَمَالُ الإخْلاَصِ لَهُ نَفْيُ الصِّفَاتِ عَنْهُ، لِشَهَادَةِ كُلِّ
صِفَةٍ أنَّهَا غَيْرُ المَوْصُوفِ، وَشَهَادَةِ كُلِّ مَوْصُوفٍ أنَّهُ
غَيْرُ الصِّفَةِ، فَمَنْ وَصَفَ اللهَ سُبْحَانَهُ فَقَدْ قَرَنَهُ،
وَمَنْ قَرَنَهُ فَقَدْ ثَنَّاهُ، وَمَنْ ثَنَّاهُ فَقَدْ جَزَّأهُ،
وَمَنْ جَزَّأهُ فَقَدْ جَهِلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The perfection of His purity is to deny His attributes, because every
attribute is a proof that it is different from that to which it is
attributed, and everything to which something is attributed is different
from the attribute. Thus, whoever attaches attributes to Allah
recognizes His like, and whoever recognizes His like regards Him as two,
and whoever regards Him as two recognizes parts for Him, and whoever
recognizes parts for Him has mistaken Him.([^2]))

Divine Justice
--------------

We believe that one of Almighty Allah's positive Attributes of
Perfection is that He is absolutely Just and is never unjust. He never
wrongs anyone through His acts and never treats anyone unfairly through
His judgments. He rewards His obedient servants and has the right to
punish the disobedient. He never takes His servants beyond their scopes
and never punishes them beyond the limits of what they deserve.

We also believe that He, the Exalted, does not omit the good deed when
there is no better deed interfering in the matter and He does not do any
evil deed because He, the Exalted, has the power to shun the evil, since
He has full acquaintance with the goodness and the evilness of an act.
Thus, goodness of good things does not cause Him harm so that He is
required to shun it nor is He in need of evilness so that He is required
to do it.

In spite of all this, Almighty Allah is All-wise; His deeds must be
compatible with wisdom and the most perfect system.

Now, suppose that He treats a creature with cruelty or commits an evil
deed—He is too Exalted to be such—then it must be because of one of four
things:

(1) He is ignorant of the matter and He does not know that it is evil!

(2) He knows about the reality of the matter, but He has been compelled
to do it and unable to desist from it!

(3) He knows about its reality and he is not compelled to do it, yet He
needs to do it! Or

(4) He knows about its reality, and he is not compelled to do it, and he
does not need it; so, His deed will be on account of whim, vainness, and
pastime!

All these probabilities are impossible for Almighty Allah, since they
ascribe imperfection to Him, while He is in reality the Absolute
Perfect. In view of that, we must judge that Almighty Allah is too
Exalted to wrong anyone or to do any evil deed.

Some Muslims, however, have argued that Almighty Allah—Sacred be His
Names—may do evil, may punish the obedient to Him, may allow the
disobedient and even the disbelievers to enter Paradise, may take a soul
beyond its scope, and may impose upon His servants to do what they have
no power to do! In spite of this, He may punish them for they did not do
what they have no power to do! Such Muslims have also argued that
Almighty Allah may treat unjustly, do wrong, lie, and deceive; and that
He may do unwise, aimless, useless, and worthless things! To justify
such corrupt arguments, they have cited the following holy verse as
pretext:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يُسْأَلُ عَمَّا يَفْعَلُ وَهُمْ يُسْأَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He cannot be questioned concerning what He does and they shall be
questioned.*** **(21/23)**

It is the lord of the bearers of such corrupt beliefs who is unjust,
wrongful, foolish or reckless; a deceiver, evildoer, and one shunning
the good. Glory is to Almighty Allah, and High and Great is He beyond
measure above all that they say!

Such false arguments are nothing but clear-cut disbelief.

As for Almighty Allah, He has stated in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا اللَّهُ يُرِيدُ ظُلْمًا لِلْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah does not desire injustice for His servants.*** **(40/31)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ لَا يُحِبُّ الْفَسَادَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah does not love corruption.*** **(2/205)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاءَ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا لَاعِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between
them in jest.*** **(21/16)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنْسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I have not created the jinn and mankind except to serve Me.
(51/56)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا مَا خَلَقْتَ هَٰذَا بَاطِلًا سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ
النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Our Lord! You have not created this in vain! Glory be to You! Save us
then from the chastisement of the Fire*****. (3/191)**

The Holy Qur'an is full of verses denoting the same facts.

Religious Duties
----------------

We believe that Almighty Allah does not command His servants with any
duty before He establishes evidence on them concerning that duty.
Likewise, He never commands them to do something that is beyond their
scope or capability, because it would be unfair to impose upon a weak or
an ignorant person, who has not shown shortcoming in seeking of
knowledge, a duty that is beyond his/her scope.

As for the ignorant, who have made short the seeking of knowledge of
religious laws and duties, they are definitely responsible in the view
of Almighty Allah Who will punish them for their failure to do what
ought to have been done. Actually, each one is required to learn the
amount that one needs from religious laws.

We also believe that it is unavoidable for Almighty Allah to commission
His servants to carry out certain duties and legislate for them a body
of laws that achieve success and prosperity for them, guide them toward
the paths of goodness and permanent happiness, and show them the ways of
probity. Through such duties and laws, Almighty Allah restrains them
from whatever brings about corruption, harm, and a terrible end even if
He already knows that they would not obey Him, because such do's and
don’ts stem from His kindness and mercy to them.

The servants (of Almighty Allah) are usually unaware of most of their
interests. They also do not know how to attain prosperity in this world
and the next. They have no knowledge of much of that which causes them
harm and loss. Almighty Allah is indeed All-compassionate and
All-merciful in His Essence; and these two attributes are parts of His
Absolute Perfection, which is His selfsame Essence and which can never
be separated from Him.

His servants’ disobedience to Him and non-compliance with His commands
and warnings do not cancel out His kindness and mercy.His servants’
disobedience to Him and non-compliance with His commands and warnings do
not cancel out His kindness and mercy.

Predetermination and Divine Decree
----------------------------------

**Predetermination and Divine Decree**[^3]

*The Sect of Mujabbirah* (fatalists) argue that Almighty Allah is
entirely responsible for the actions of His creatures; it is therefore
He Who forces them to do evil and yet punishes them for it; and He
forces others to be obedient to Him and yet rewards them for it! They
have also maintained that the actions of His creatures are in reality
His actions, but these actions are attributed to them figuratively
because they are the locus of His activity. The reason for this view is
that the *Mujabbirah* have denied the natural causation of things (that
take place)([^4]) and that it is Almighty Allah Who is the one and only
Cause of all things.

Of course, those who adopt such a view ascribe injustice to Almighty
Allah. He is far above such false ascription.

Another sect, the *Mufawwidhah* (Indeterminists), argue that Almighty
Allah has given absolute authority to the creatures to do whatever they
do and removed His act and determination from their acts. This is
because these indeterminists believe that to ascribe all actions to
Almighty Allah results in ascribing imperfection to Him; and all
existent beings have their own causes even though all these causes stem
from the Creator of all causes and the First Cause; namely, Almighty
Allah.

As a matter of fact, those who adopt this conception have cancelled out
the full power of Almighty Allah over all things and have decided a
partner to Him in creation!

With reference to this point, we follow what we have received from our
Immaculate Imams (\`a) who have decided that the answer is in reality
between the two extremes and our belief is a middle view between
fatalism and indeterminism. Our belief is not accepted by both groups of
theologians, as some neglect the reality of the matter while others go
to the other extreme. However, after several centuries, science and
philosophy finally came to the same conclusion.

It is not surprising that some of those who have had no familiarity with
the wisdom and maxims of the Holy Imams (\`a) think that the notion of
‘Middle Course’ in this issue has been one of the discoveries of some
late Western philosophers! The fact is that our Holy Imams (\`a), having
founded this principle, preceded all others by about ten centuries.

Our Imam, Ja\`far al-Sadiq (\`a), has demonstrated this ‘Middle Course’
through his famous words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ جَبْرٌ وَلاَ تَفْويضٌ؛ وَلكِنْ أمْرٌ بَيْنَ أمْرَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is neither compulsion (by Almighty Allah on doing things), nor
there is absolute delegation of power (*tafwidh*); rather, it is a
course in the middle of these two courses.([^5])

What a marvelous significance this saying holds! How exact its meaning
is!

To sum it up, this ‘Middle Course’ means that our deeds are, on one
hand, ours in reality, because we are their natural causes and they are
under our power and choice and, on the other hand, they are under the
authority and within the absolute power of Almighty Allah, because He is
the grantor of existence to all things. Almighty Allah has not forced us
to do these deeds; therefore, He will not wrong us when He punishes us
for the acts of disobedience to Him that we committed as long as we had
the power and choice to avoid doing what we did. Similarly, He has not
entrusted us with the making of our deeds; therefore, we are not out of
His absolute power and authority. Indeed, creation, judgment, and
management of all affairs are His; and He has full power over all things
and He encompasses all things.

Anyhow, we believe that predetermination (*qadha'*) and Divine decree
(*qadar*) are within the secrets of Almighty Allah. One must thus
recognize them as suitably as possible by means of neither immoderation
nor negligence. It is not obligatory upon one who fails to recognize
them properly to dedicate oneself to understanding and investigating
them, because improper understanding of such subtle secrets will
definitely lead to missing the reality and corrupting one’s faith. They
are in fact among the most accurate fields of philosophy that none can
realize except a very few people and, as a result, many theologians have
slipped while trying to argue these secrets.) are within the secrets of
Almighty Allah. One must thus recognize them as suitably as possible by
means of neither immoderation nor negligence. It is not obligatory upon
one who fails to recognize them properly to dedicate oneself to
understanding and investigating them, because improper understanding of
such subtle secrets will definitely lead to missing the reality and
corrupting one’s faith. They are in fact among the most accurate fields
of philosophy that none can realize except a very few people and, as a
result, many theologians have slipped while trying to argue these
secrets.

Bada'
-----

The meaning of bada’([^6]) in relation to the affairs of creatures can
be defined as arriving at an opinion about an issue while this opinion
was not present in the past or, in other words, concluding an idea that
was absent until that time. An example of the natural meaning of *bada'*
(i.e. in relation to all things created) is that the opinion of somebody
about a certain act may be changed because he has concluded a result
that he has not known before according to which he must change his
opinion and idea about that act. Therefore, it looks wise to leave doing
that act after learning about the true interest and show regret for the
previous opinion.

*Bada’* in this sense is impossible for Almighty Allah, because it is
part of ignorance and imperfection—two matters that are impossible for
Almighty Allah to hold, as is confirmed by the belief of the *Imamiyyah
Shi\`ah*.

Laying stress on this faith, the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* adhere to the
following rule stated by Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq (\`a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زَعَمَ أنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى بَدَا لَهُ فِي شَيْءٍ بَدَاءَ
نَدَامَةٍ فَهُوَ عِنْدَنَا كَافِرٌ بِاللهِ العَظِيم.ِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever claims that Almighty Allah changes a previous decision (i.e. on
the basis of *bada'*) on account of regret (at a previous action) is
decided by us as having disbelieved in Allah the All-great.([^7])

He is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ زَعَمَ أنَّ اللهَ بَدَا لَهُ فِي شَيْءٍ وَلَمْ يَعْلَمْهُ أمْسِ
فَأَبْرَأُ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed, I disavow anyone who claims that Almighty Allah has changed a
previous decision about an affair because He has come to know about
something that He had not known in the past!([^8])

On the other hand, our Holy Imams (\`a) are reported to have stated some
sayings giving the false impression that *bada'* in the previous sense
might be applicable to Almighty Allah. For instance, Imam Ja\`far
al-Sadiq (\`a) is reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا بَدَا للهِ فِي شَيْءٍ كَمَا بَدَا لَهُ فِي إسْمَاعِيلَ ابْنِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Almighty Allah has not changed a decision about an affair like what He
has done in the case of my son Isma\`il.([^9])

Because of such traditions, some writers of certain Muslim sects have
accused the *Imamiyyah Shi\`ah* of believing in *bada’*([^10]) in the
aforesaid sense so as to defame Shi\`ism and the School of the Ahl
al-Bayt (\`a). They have added this false claim to the other
vituperative campaigns that they lead against the Shi\`ah.

The fact in this regard is that we, the Shi\`ah, believe in *bada'* as
exactly as it is stated by Almighty Allah in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَمْحُو اللَّهُ مَا يَشَاءُ وَيُثْبِتُ ۖ وَعِنْدَهُ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah erases what He pleases and establishes what He pleases, and
with Him is the basis of the Book.*** **(13/39)**

Accordingly, the Imam (\`a) meant that Almighty Allah’s decision in the
case of Isma\`il, the Imam’s son, was unprecedented so none of Almighty
Allah’s other decisions were like it. The Lord took back Isma\`il before
his father to tell people that Isma\`il would not be the Imam after his
father,([^11]) while circumstances led them to believe that Isma\`il,
the Imam’s eldest son, would be the next Imam.

Similar to this meaning of *bada’* is the abrogation (*naskh*) of
previous religious laws by the new code of law brought by our Prophet,
Muhammad (\`a), and even the abrogation of some laws brought by the Holy
Prophet (\`a) himself.) of previous religious laws by the new code of
law brought by our Prophet, Muhammad (\`a), and even the abrogation of
some laws brought by the Holy Prophet (\`a) himself.

Laws Of Religion
----------------

We believe that Almighty Allah has enacted His laws—including religious
duties, forbidden things, and laws concerning other aspects of life—and
made them compatible with the interests of His servants. That is to say,
Almighty Allah has deemed obligatory those, things whose interests are
essential and required by the servants; deemed forbidden other things
that bring about corruption, and deemed recommended things whose
interests are preponderant. The same thing is applicable to the other
laws of religion. Of course, such variety in laws has been due to
Almighty Allah’s kindness and mercy to His servants.

It is necessary that Almighty Allah’s laws cover all events. Hence,
there must be a religious law for every incident, even if the way to get
to know some of these laws may not be possible for some people.

We also believe that it is implausible for Almighty Allah to enjoin us
to do a thing that brings about corruption or to warn us against doing a
thing that is profitable to us. However, the followers of certain Muslim
sects claim that everything forbidden by Almighty Allah must be evil and
everything that He enjoins must be good, since deeds possess neither
advantages nor disadvantages in themselves nor subjective goodness or
evilness. In truth, this argument is in violation of rational necessity.

Others have argued that Almighty Allah may do evil and, as a result,
enjoin us to do an act that may beget disadvantage to us and warn us
against doing an act that may achieve prosperity for us!

As has been previously cited, such false charges carry an awful venture,
because it ascribes ignorance and frailty to Almighty Allah—supremely
exalted is He against such allegations.

In summary, regarding the laws of religion we must believe that when
Almighty Allah commanded us to carry out certain duties and forbade us
to do other things, He did not have private interests or conveniences to
achieve for Himself; rather, these duties bring about advantages to us
and these prohibitions save us from inconveniences if we abide by them.
It is also meaningless to claim that these do’s and don’ts do not
achieve our interests and save us from corruption, because Almighty
Allah never commands us to do something in vain as He never forbids us
to do something aimlessly. Indeed, He is too Self-sufficient to need His
servants.In summary, regarding the laws of religion we must believe that
when Almighty Allah commanded us to carry out certain duties and forbade
us to do other things, He did not have private interests or conveniences
to achieve for Himself; rather, these duties bring about advantages to
us and these prohibitions save us from inconveniences if we abide by
them. It is also meaningless to claim that these do’s and don’ts do not
achieve our interests and save us from corruption, because Almighty
Allah never commands us to do something in vain as He never forbids us
to do something aimlessly. Indeed, He is too Self-sufficient to need His
servants.

[^1]: () See Bihar al-Anwar by al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 66:293; Sharh Usul
al-Kafi by al-Salihi al-Mazindarani (AH 1081), 3:225 who has reported
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir ('a) as saying: كُلُّ مَا مَيَّزْتُمُوهُ
بِأوْهَامِكُمْ فِي أدَقِّ مَعَانِيهِ مَخْلُوقٌ مَصْنُوعٌ مِثْلُكُمْ،
مَرْدُودٌ إلَيْكُمْ. Everything that you can discern with your
imaginations in its finest significance must be created and made, just
like you, and it is relegated to you. Imam al-Sadiq ('a) is reported to
have said: مَنْ عَبَدَ اللهَ بِالتَّوَهُّمِ فَقَدْ كَفَرَ، وَمَنْ عَبَدَ
الإسْمَ دُونَ المَعْنَى فَقَدْ كَفَرَ، وَمَنْ عَبَدَ الإسْمَ وَالمَعْنَى
فَقَدْ أشْرَكَ، وَمَنْ عَبَدَ المَعْنَى بإيقَاعِ الأسْمَاءِ عَلَيْهِ
بِصِفَاتِهِ الَّتِي وَصَفَ بِهَا نَفْسَهُ فَعَقَدَ عَلَيْهَا قَلْبَهُ
وَنَطَقَ بِهَا لِسَانُهُ فِي سَرَائِرِهِ وَعَلاَنِيَتِهِ فَأولَئِكَ هُمُ
المُؤمِنُونَ. He who worships Almighty Allah by means of imagination has
in fact disbelieved in Him. He who worships the Name devoid of the
meaning has also disbelieved in Him. He who worships the meaning by
using the Names to express the Attributes that He (i.e. the Exalted
Lord) has used for Himself, believes in them with his heart, and utters
them with his tongue in public and in secret—he is the true believer.
See al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:87, H. 1, Section: bab al-ma\`bud
(The Worshipped Lord); al-Tawhid by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 220,
H. 12, Section No. 29: bab asma' allahi ta\`ala (The Attributes of
Almighty Allah); al-Fusul al-Muhimmah fi Usul al-A'immah by al-Hurr
al-\`Amili (AH 1104), 1:63, H. 1,2 Section No. 15, Sequence, 95-96.

[^2]: () Nahj al-Balaghah (Sermons of Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin),
compiled by al-Sharif al-Radhi (AH 406); Sermon No. 1 (Creation of Earth
and Sky and Birth of Adam); al-Ihtijaj by al-Tabrisi (AH 560), 1:296;
Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi’l-Hadid (AH 656), 1:72; Bihar al-Anwar
by al-Majlisi (AH 1111), 4:247, 57:176, 74:300, 96:263.

[^3]: () For more details about this topic, the reader is advised to
refer to the following books: al-Insan wa’l-Qadha' wa'l-Qadar (Man,
Predetermination, and Divine Decree) by Murtadha al-Mutahhari;
translated from Farsi into Arabic by Muhammad \`Ali al-Taskhiri; Beirut:
Dar al-Ta\`aruf Publishers, Second Edition, 1420 AH/1981; al-Mukhtar fi
al-Jabr wa’l-Ikhtiyar by Muhammad \`Ali al-Sadiqi al-Husayni; a
commentary on a thesis by Sayyid \`Ali al-Fani; Najaf Press, AH 1375.

[^4]: () Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq ('a) is reported to have said, “Almighty
Allah has insisted on making all affairs take place due to (natural)
causes. He has thus established causes for each and every affair. He has
then established an explanation for each and every cause. He has then
established knowledge for each and every explanation. He has then
established a speaking door to each and every item of knowledge.
However, some will recognize that door while others will reject it.
These doors are the Messenger of Allah and we.” See al-Kafi by
al-Kulayni, 1:183, Section: bab ma\`rifat al-imam wa’l-radd ilayhi
(Recognition of the Imam and Relegation to Him), H.7; Mukhtasar Basa'ir
al-Darajat by al-Hasan ibn Sulayman al-Hilli, pp. 57; al-Fusul
al-Muhimmah fi Usul al-A'immah by al-Hurr al-\`Amili, 1:486.
[translator]

[^5]: () Al-Kafi by al-Kulayni (AH 329), 1:160; al-Tawhid by Shaykh
al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 326, Section: bab nafy al-jabr wa’l-tafwidh
(Negation of Fatality and Indeterminism), H. 8 & pp. 206, Section: bab
asma' allahi ta\`ala (Attributes of Almighty Allah), H. 9; \`Uyun Akhbar
al-Ridha by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), 2:114 ((The English version of
this book is entitled ‘\`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha: Sources of Imam
al-Ridha’s Traditions, translated by Dr. \`Ali Peiravi, Qum: Ansariyan
Publications, 2 volumes, 2006)); al-I\`tiqadat by Shaykh al-Mufid (AH
413), pp. 29, Section: bab al-i\`tiqad fi nafy al-jabr wa’l-tafwidh;
Rawdhat al-Wa\`izin by al-Naysaburi (AH 508), pp. 38; al-Ihtijaj by
al-Tabrisi (AH 560), 2:198, 253. The same hadith has been reported from
Imam \`Ali Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) as is mentioned in Nahj al-Sa\`adah by
al-Mahmudi (contemporary), 1:483 and Kanz al-\`Ummal by al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi (AH 974), 1:349. See also Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari
by Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani (AH 852), 13:410 and Faydh al-Qadir Sharh
al-Jami\` al-Saghir by al-Mannawi (AH 1331), 1:540.

[^6]: () For more information about this topic, refer to the following
reference books: Al-bada' fi Aaw' al-Qur'an wa’l-Sunnah (Bada' in the
Light of the Qur'an and Sunnah) A collection of lectures delivered by
\`Allamah Ja\`far al-Subhani; written by Ja\`far al-Hadi; prepared by
Imam al-Sadiq Foundation, Qum: Foundation of Islamic Publication
(dateless). Al-Bada' (Book No. 8 in the series of \`ala ma'idat
al-qur’an wa’l-sunnah –On the Table of the Qur'an and Sunnah--) by
Murtadha al-\`Askari (contemporary); Beirut: P.O. Box 124/24. Al-Bada'
fi’l-Qur'an al-Karim (Bada' in the Holy Qur'an) by \`Abd al-Karim
al-Bahbahani (The Committee of Researches and Answering the Spurious
Arguments), Qum: The Ahl al-Bayt ('a) World Assembly. Ahl al-Bayt
wa’l-Qur'an al-Karim by Muhammad Hadi Ma\`rifat; Chapter Three: Bada'
(pp. 117-178), Qum: The Ahl al-Bayt ('a) World Assembly, First Edition,
AH 1419.

[^7]: () Al-I\`tiqadat by Shaykh al-Mufid (AH 413), pp. 41.

[^8]: () In Kamal al-Din wa-Tamam al-Ni\`mah by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH
381), pp. 70, the following form of the tradition has been reported:
مَنْ زَعَمَ أنَّ اللهَ يَبْدو لَهُ فِي شَيْءٍ لَمْ يَعْلَمْهُ أمْسِ
فَابْرَؤوا مِنْهُ. “You must disavow anyone who claims that Almighty
Allah may get to know, at this day, something that he did not know
yesterday!”

[^9]: () Al-Tawhid by Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 336; Kamal al-Din
wa-Tamam al-Ni\`mah by Shaykh al-Saduq, pp. 69.

[^10]: () Shaykh al-Saduq, a Muslim master scholar and a Shi\`ite
supreme authority in the fourth century of Hijrah, says, “In fact, bada'
that is ascribed to the Imamiyyah Shi\`ah to be one of their beliefs is
no more than the advent of Almighty Allah’s command. The Arabs use the
word ‘bada'’ to express initiation of a matter. The word has nothing to
do with the sense of regret at all. Exalted be Allah in high exaltation
above what they say.” See Kamal al-Din wa-Tamam al-Ni\`mah by Shaykh
al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 69.

[^11]: () Imam al-Sadiq ('a) is reported as saying: مَا ظَهَرَ للهِ
أمْرٌ كَمَا ظَهَرَ لَهُ فِي إسْمَاعِيلَ ابْنِي؛ إذِ اخْتَرَمَهُ قَبْلِي
لِيُعْلَمَ بِذَلِكَ أنَّهُ لَيْسَ بِإمَامٍ بَعْدِي. Almighty Allah has
not changed a decision about an affair like what He has done in the case
of my son Isma\`il. He took his life before me so that people would
realize that Isma\`il would not be the next Imam. See al-Tawhid by
Shaykh al-Saduq (AH 381), pp. 336, Section: bab al-bada', H. 10; Kamal
al-Din wa-Tamam al-Ni\`mah by Shaykh al-Saduq, pp. 69; Majma\`
al-Bahrayn by al-Turayhi (AH 1085), 1:168 (item: b-d-w).


