Firstly: Providing the Body With Its Different Needs
====================================================

( 10 )

A. Food and Drink: "Let man consider his food.'' Sura Abasa (80:24) One
of Allah's great portents, wonderful procedure and blessings for man is
that his natural food available on the earth, consists of two elements:
The first element are the materials found in nature, such as salts,
vitamins, carbohydrates, etc., available in large quantities to meet the
requirement of all living beings, animals and plants.

The other element which Divine Care added to the human food to suit
man's psychological and mental taste is the attraction to beauty and to
its pleasure and enjoyment. He uses the pleasing, beautiful and
attractive form as encouraging factors assisting him to have agreeable
psychological connection with food and drink. This is of course, besides
feeling the pains of hunger and thirst. Fruits, vegetables, meat, honey,
suger, nuts, water, etc., all appear within an attractive beautiful
frame, with a palatable, and delicious taste, offered to man on a tray
of pleasing charm, and a feeling saturated with pleasure and enjoyment.
There are numerous Texts and Traditions to the effect that man has full
right to food and drink and to avail himself of all delicacies and
amemties, provided by nature.

Imam Ja'far ibn Muiiammed Al-Sadiq (A.S.) 1 said: "The body is built on
bread" 2

He also said:

"Allah the Exalted has created the son of Adam hollow; so he has to
have food and drink." 3 "0 Allah! Bless our bread and do not make
seperation between us, as without the bread we could neither fast nor
pray or perform our duties towards our Lord the Almighty and most High."
4

The Prophet (S.A)5 is stated to have approved meat and olives and
said:

"Meat is the best of food in this world and in the hereafter.'' 6 And
also:

"Eat olive-oil, and anoint with olive-oil, as it is a blessed tree.'' 7
Imani Al-Sadiq (A.S.) used to prompt people to eat honey, cooking utter,
milk, vegetables and assorted fruits, saying: "There is no better cure
for people than honey.'' 8 He also said:

"Butter is the best that enters a stomach, but I hate it for the
aged.'' 9 "Take to milk, as it grows the flesh and strengthens the
bone.''10 "Eating beans increases the marrow of the leg-bones, enlarges
the brain and produces fresh blood.'' 11 Asked about Allah's saying:

"... and let him see what food is purest there and bring you a
provision from it.'' Sure A1-Kahf (18:19) He replied:

"The date is the purest food.''12

"The raisins strengthen the nerves, relieve fatigue, and give good
smell to improve the breath.'' 13 Imam Al- Rida (A.S.) is quoted to have
said:

"Figs cure foul breath, strengthen the mouth and the bone, grow hair,
do away with ailment, so there is no need for medicine.'' 14 "Eat pears,
as they cheer up the heart and calm down stomach pains, by Allah's
permission.''
These are some of the Traditions and Texts. Besides, many authors have
compiled special chapters dealing with food, nourishments and their
utilities, so asto keep the body in proper health.

Islam rejects self-torture by depriving the body from the lawful
pleasures of food and drink -the self - torture that is called for by
those who believe that resisting the natural inclination of the body and
torturing it with hunger, thirst and deprivation would bring up
spiritual strength and improve psychological and moral faculties. The
Qur'an condemns this attitude of the deviationists towards bodily
pleasures and the delicacies Allah has bestowed on His servants. It
says: "Say: Who has forbidden the adornment of Allah which He has
brought forth for His servants, and the good provisions?...'' Sure Al-A
rat (7:32)


**B .Marriage:**

Islam takes care of all aspects of life in an objective and practical
way, giving the body and life their due. Of those bodily and vital
questions, which Islam takes good care of, is that of marriage and
sexual relations to preserve the human species, to provide stability and
spiritual happiness, and to enjoy physical pleasures by man.

Allah the Exalted says: "And of His signs is this: He created for you
mates from yourselves that you might find rest in them, and He ordained
between you love and mercy.'' Sura Al-Rum (30:21)

".... And those of whom ye seek content (by marrying them), give unto
them their portions as a duty....'' Sura Al-Nis8 (4 24)

So, by matrimonial relations the idea of life can be completed, and the
two parts of the physical human system may be united, and the
spiritual

emptiness and loneliness is apt to be filled up. Through this,
matrimonial meeting and the moral and physical sexual unity can reach
completion. Islam encourages marriage, shows it love able, and cherishes
sexual pleasures, so as to provide man with moral comfort, and a happy
feeling of security, and to protect the body against depravity and
tension which often develop into cases of sickness affecting soul and
body. Thus the Qur'an says: "And of His signs is that: He created for
you mates from yourselves that you may find rest in them, and He
ordained between you love and mercy.'' Sura Al-Rum (30:2 1)

psychologically, the Islamic idea of marriage is directed to fill up
moral emptiness, and to produce a feeling of security, amity and mutual
sympathy. It goes without saying that this humane feeling-the feeling of
amity, love and stability - has great effect on the progress of human
life, on human conduct in society, and also soundly protects man's moral
and physical health. This is significant from the importance of its
motives and aims. The Prophet (S.A) said: "I like nothing from your
world except women and perfumes''15 Imam A1-Sadiq (A.S) said:

"I do not think that a man would get better in faith without being more
in love with women.'' 16 "Of Prophets' be haviour is to love women.'' 17
"People have no better pleasure in this world and in the Hereafter than
that obtained from women, according to Allah's saying: 'Beautified for
mankind is love of desires (that come) from women and offspring...''
Sura Al/main (3:14)

The Messenger of Allah (S.A) said:

"The best of your women is the prolific, affectionate, virtuous, dear
to her family, humble to her spouse, displays her charms to her
husband,but chastc to others, listens to what he says, obeys his orders,
offers him whatever he wants from her when alone, but not in an
unabashed way as man"18 Imam Ali (A.S) said:

"Marry, as the Messenger of Allah said: Whoever wants to follow my
Tradition, then my Tradition is marriage" 19

**C. Clothing and Elegance:**

Clothes play a two-sided role in life: On one hand they complete the
natural appearance of the body as the body has a certain degree of
resistance in respect to other natural surrounding circumstances, such
as heat, coldness, humidity, vaporization, etc. So, the clothes are a
protective means which keep the body sound and balances it in respect to
the natural conditions around it. Man resorts to wearing clothes so as
to cover his body and protect it against those natural effects and
factors.

Besides this protective role of the clothes, they play another role,
which is the role of adornment, beautification and covering the genitals
and the ugliness of nudity.. Islam takes care of the clothes and of good
appearance, elegance and beauty. The wise Qur'an does not neglect this
side of the necessities of life and body, and peoples' inclination to
adornment and beautification. In fact, it stresses and confirms this
aspect of life, giving man the right to practice it, as God-given
blessings:

"0 Children of Adam! We have indeed sent down to you clothing to cover
your shame...'' Sura Al-A raf (7:26)

"Say: Who hath forbidden the adornment of Allah which He has brought
forth for His servants...'' Sura Al-A raf (7:32)

"And the cattle He created for you, you have in them warm clothing and
itses, and of them yuu eat. And there is beauty in them for you, when
you drive them bock home, and when you send them forth (to pasture).''
Sura Al- Nahl (16:5&6)

"And He it is Who has constrained the sea to be of service that you may
eat fresh meat from it, and bring forth from it ornaments which you
wear.'' Sura Al- Nahl (16 14)

Thus, religion has given its approval concerning adornment and beauty,
and connected the aesthetic pleasures with the ideological concepts of
faith, asserting that man's enjoying of ornamental and aesthetic
pleasures is but one of Allah's blessings. It makes man content and
happy, and inspires in him love, pleasure and radiance, through a deep
feeling of purity and high evaluation of the meanings and values of
humanity. There is no wonder, then, that the Qur'an takes such an
attitude, because man's inclination towards beauty is an innate feeling
stemming from the soul's native direction towards perfection and quest
for content and happiness.

The Muslim's awareness of aesthetic topics and values is not confined
solely to a sensory feeling and a passing emotional phase. It actually
goes beyond that to awaken inside him the flame of spiritual
illumination, and the conscious feelings which draws the soul from its
physical stagnancy and primitive animal instincts towards the celestial
world and moral guidance. This feeling, thus, I becomes a means of
spiritual development, and moral completion, making enjoyable the
delicacies of life, a bridge connecting man to his Creator. Man is
capable of comprehending all these facts through experiencing an alert
feeling of the aesthetic values and topics-clothing, elegance and good
appearance. When these feelings are reflected on his innerself, they
interact and combine with it to form a living picture of good taste.
Such feelings become a conduct and help human attitudes to stand aloof
from evil and deformed practices which disfigure the spirit of beauty
and establish pictures of ugliness and disgust.

There are so many Traditions stressing the importance which Islam
attaches to clothing. eleganceand good appearance, of which we cite

those uttered by Imam Ta'far ibn Muhammad Al-Sadiq (A.S), quoting Tmam
All ''Allah is Beautiful and loves beauty, and loves to see the signs of
being well-off on His servant.'' 20 Imam AI-Sadiq (A.S.) told one of his
companions:

"The display of prosperity is more liked by Allah than its
preservation. So, take care not to dress except in the best of your
people's fashion.'' One of Lmam Al-Sadiq's companions has narrated that
somebody asked the Imam: "May Allah reform you! you say that Ali ibn Abi
Talib (A.S.) used to wear rough dresses, each bought for four Dirhams or
so, while we see you wearing fine dresses . The Imam told him: "Au ibn
Abi Talib (A.S.) used to do so when that was not denied (The economic
condition of the muslims was not so good). If he wears that now he will
be defamed. So, the best dress for an age is the dress of the people of
that age. But when our Mahdi appears, he will wear like Ali (A.S.) and
will behave like him, too.''21

Another of the Imam's companions says: "I asked Aba Abdullah (the
Imam), if a man had a wafra 22 should he part it or leave it? He said:
"He should part it.''23 The Prophet (S.A.) said: "Whoever grows hair, he
should either take good care of it, or shave it.'' 24 Imam Al - Rida (A.
S.) said:

"Perfume is of the prophets' habits .''25

The Prophet (S. A.) is quoted to have said:

"My friend Gabreal (A. S.) told me: use perfume every alternate day,
but do not leave it on Fridays ·''26 By tallying the Qur'anic verses on
this subject with the concepts of the stated Traditions - in addition to
tens of other Traditions which speak of Islam's point of view concerning
human behaviour, - one may conclude

that Islam encourages the Muslim individual and the Muslim society to
be elegant, neat and of good appearance, so that they may sense the
delicacy of existence, and the spirit of creative beauty. Allah's
innovations inspire their hearts and pull them towards the great
aesthetic truth manifest in the sacred Divine Attributtes which
overwhelm mankind with happiness and divine love, increasing their
rememberance of His blessings, and their thanks to Him.

To prove Islam's respect for beauty, it is sufficient to note that it
has made beauty an encouraging reward, granted to man in Paradise. The
Qur'an speaks of no blessings in the Hereafter unless it emanates them
with illumination of beauty, and never mentions the rewards alloted to
the benevolents without speaking first of the attraction and loveliness
of beauty and the aesthetic pleasure derived from it. A fact which
confirms that the Qur'an regards beauty as one of the most essential
subjects of the existence in man's world, worthy of being presented as a
reward to the excellent prophets, martyrs and saints in Paradise. D.
Rest and Sleep:

The Human body is an active machine which exerts effort and energy to
resist the world around it. Moving and working exhaust a considerable
quantity of its energy and power, and thus, it feels tired because of
the confusion of the balance of the body's powers in respect to the
powers of nature. This sense of fatigue felt by the body is caused by
its continual loss of energy and the effort used.

This loss weakens resistance and forces the body to a hault. It looks
for a rest in a safe and comfortable place, in order to rebuild itself
anew, keeping away the tiring results of movements. It then falls into a
sound sleep. Sleep is not man's invention, nor is it a physical accident
that imposes itself on man. It is a part of the precise system of
existence which has been ordained by the Wise Creator:

"..The handiwork of Allah Who made all things perfectly. Surely He is
aware of what you do ." Sure Al - Naml (27:88)

Had sleep not been a part of the body's system, there would have been a
defficiency in the order of creation and the physical arrangement of
man's body. Therefore, Allah' the All-wise and the - All Knowing,
ordaind that sleep should be a rest and stillness for man: "And of His
signs is your sleeping by night and day..." Sura Al - Rum (30:23)

So, slumber is one of Allah's blessing, needed by the body, as through
a period of temporary absence from feeling the reactions of the outer
world which is tiresome, the body would get a chance to rest, rebuild
and recover the lost energy. The Glorious Qur'an and the Traditions
encourage rest, sleep and stillness at night, and a nap at daytime, so
that man may enjoy comfort and happiness in life, and avoid greed and
covetousness in acquiring wealth through too severe endeavours and
hardship, badly affecting his health and comfort, and exposing him to
diverse physical, and nervous strains, causing him to lose his happiness
and enjoyment in life.

Therefore, the Qur'an prescribes rest and sleep so that man may get his
necessary share of them. It says:

"And He it is who made night a covering for you, and sleep a repose..."
Sura Al - Furqan (25:4 7)

Yet, much as this sleep is essential for man, Islam warns against
sleeping for long periods, except as long as needed, so that he may not
go beyond the limit of the need, and be overcome by laziness and
indolence. To Islam, man should be a mass of activity and production,
and a charge offering good and innovation. He should not be allowed to
remain idle, nor should he be played with. Consequently, Islam dislikes
idleness, aimlessness, wasting of man's time and energy on slumber and
laziness. Imam Al - Sadiq (A. S.) said:

"Too much sleep takes away both religion and the world."27 Imam Au ibn
Musa Al - Rida (A. S.) said:

"Allah the Exalted detests the aimless and the slumberer."28

**E. Physical Exercises:**

Sports train the body through physical movements and exercises, and
give it strength, grace, liveliness and ability, enabling it to endure
hard work and difficulties. They also help him to resist illness and
weakness, and achieve bigger objectives and present better offerings to
life. Sports build up a feeling of power, magnanimity and strength. They
also grow the spirit of patience, bravery and self-confidence. Islam
believes in power, magnanimity and activity, and fights against
irresponsibility, laziness, flabbiness and inactivity. A Tradition says:
"Beware of laziness and boredom, because if you get lazy you will not
work, and if you are bored you will not give one's due ."29 Another
Tradition says:

"Avoid wishes, as they take away the splendour of what you are given,
make you belittle Allah's gifts in your eyes, and result in your grief
over what you had fancied to yourselves."30

"Laziness and impotence merge, as things merge, resulting into
poverty." 31 To these spiritual goals the Qur'an calls its people, and
encourages them, when bringing-up their generations, to implant in them
the spirit of courage and strength. Allah the Exalted says:

"And prepare against them what force you can..." Sure Al-An tel (8:60)
To the same effect comes the Prophet's advice to the Muslims to bring-up
their sons physically strong. He said "Teach your sons swimming, archery
and horseman- ship".

By this invitation to sports and chivalry, the Prophet widely opens the
doors to all sorts of physical training and athletic exercises which
help to build the body and preserve its abilities.

All Traditions and Narratives confirm and encourage sports. They even
speak of the Prophet's participation in tournaments.watching them and
encouraging them.Imam Ali ibn Al-Husayn (A.S.) said:

"The Messenger of Allah (S.A.) raced horses and ordered for the winners
quantities of silver ."32 Lmam Al-Sadiq is quoted to have said:

"The Messenger of Allah (S.A.) raced lean horses from Al-Hayfa to the
mosque of Bani Zorayq, for three date-palms as prizes, giving the first
three winners a cluster of dates each ." 33

He also said, quoting his fore-fathers, the Prophet's progeny, (A.S.):
"Archery is an arrow of Islam ." 34

He quoted The Prophet s explanation of the Jo flowing Qur'anic Verse,
"Make ready for them all thou canst of (armed) force , to have said:
"That is archery ."35 Imam Al-Sadiq (A.S.) said:

"The idolaters raided the pastures of Al-Madina. A caller shouted: What
a bad morning! The Prophet (S.A.) heard the cry, while he was attending
the horses. He jumped on his horse to catch the enemy. The first of his
comrades to overtake him was Abu Qarada. The Prophet's saddle-flaps were
made of palm-fibres, giving no feeling of joy or contentment. They
chased the enemy, but found no body. Others arrived on their horses. Abu
Qatada said: 0 Messenger of Allah! the enemy has gone. How about a race
? The Prophet agreed. They raced, the Messenger of Allah (S.A.) was the
winner. He, then, told them: lam the son of the Awatik36 of Qureish. It
is my horse, Al-Bohr (the Sea)"37


