Seventh Assembly
================

And (this is) from what he dictated on Saturday, the 23rd (of Ramadhan),
and Abul Fawaris, may Allah keep him, heard it. Our great Sheikh
al-Mufid Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man al-Harithy,
may Allah perpetuate His beneficence upon him, said and it was read over
to him:

1. Cleanse and purify your heart before you ask Him
---------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ghalib Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Zurari, may Allah have mercy
on him, reported to me from Abdullah ibn Ja'far al-Himyari, who reported
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, who* *reported from al-Husayn ibn
Saeed, from Muhammad ibn Sinan, from Swaleh ibn Yazid, from Abu Abdillah
al-Sadiq Ja'far ibn Muhammad (A.S.):*

I heard him say: "Dive deep into your hearts, to find if Allah has
cleansed and purified it from all displeasure and fear regarding His
Will. If you find it so, then ask for Him whatever you desire."

2. The four of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) virtues
----------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from Abul
Qasim al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Kufi, who reported from Ja'far ibn Muhammad
ibn Marwan al-Ghazzal, who reported from his father, who reported from
Ubaid ibn Khunais al-Abdi, who reported from Sabbah ibn Yahya al-Muzni,
from Abdullah ibn Sharik, from al-Harith ibn Tha'labah who said:*

Two men left for Makkah and Medina in or before the month, and came upon
a group leaving for Haj. They said: We joined them, and as we rode
forward, we came across a man who seemed to be their leader. He pulled
himself aside from the group, and came to us asking: "You are from
Iraq?" We said: "Yes, we are Iraqis." He said: "You may be from Kufa?"
We said: "Yes, we are from Kufa." He asked: "To which clan do you
belong?" We said: "We are from Banu Kananah." He asked: "Which family of
Banu Kananah?" We said: "We are from the descendants of Malik ibn
Kananah."

He said: "Most welcome, most welcome. I beseech you in the name of the
Holy Revelation and the Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny), did
you ever hear ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) abusing me, or saying that he was
my enemy or that he would fight me?" We said: "No, but we have heard him
say: Be on your guard against the deviations of the pug-nosed." He said:
"There are many who are pug-nosed, but did you hear him grudging against
me by name?" We said: "No.".

(Upon hearing this), he said: "Allah is Great. Allah is Great. I should
have gone astray, and would not be among the rightly guided, if I fight
or be his adversary, (especially) after the four virtues I learned from
the messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, regarding him
{i.e. ‘Ali (as)}. For if I had only one of those four, I would have
valued it more than the whole world and whichever is in it, spending in
it the life span of Noah."

We said: "Mention them to us."

He said: "I did not recall this but for the purpose of mentioning them.
The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, sent Abu Bakr with the
verses of al-Bar'aah (Surah al-Tawbah) to declare them to the infidels
(of Makkah), but when he had travelled for a night or a part of it, the
Prophet sent ‘Ali to Abu Bakr saying: "Take charge of the declaration
from him, and send him back to me." So Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon
him, proceeded, and having taken the charge from Abu Bakr, asked him to
return to the Prophet.

When he arrived before the Prophet, he (i.e. Abu Bakr) wept and said: "O
messenger of Allah! Has anything (untoward) happened about me, or has
any Qur'anic revelation occurred about me?" Then the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, said: "No Qur'anic revelation has come to me
about you, but Jibraeel, peace be upon him, descended upon me with the
divine command, saying: 'No one can discharge this responsibility except
yourself or someone of yourself.' And ‘Ali is of me and I am of him, so
no one will purvey on my behalf but ‘Ali."

We asked: "And what is the second one?"  
 He said: We lived in the mosque of the Prophet, peace be upon him and
his progeny, together with the family of ‘Ali. The family of Abu Bakr,
the family of Umar and his uncles. Then one night, it was announced to
us: "With the exception of the Prophet's family and the family of ‘Ali,
all others must withdraw and quit. So we vacated dragging our bag and
baggage. In the morning, his uncle, Hamzah, came to him and said: "O
messenger of Allah, you evicted us and allowed this young boy to remain?
We are your uncles and the elders of your family." Then the Prophet
said: "I did not ask you to leave, nor did I allow him (i.e. ‘Ali) to
stay. It was by the command of Allah, Most High."  
 We said: "And what is the third?"

He said: The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, appointed Abu
Bakr as a standard bearer and sent him to the fort of Khaybar. He
brought it back. Then he appointed Umar, who also brought it back
(without success). The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, was
deeply disturbed, so he said: "Tomorrow, I shall indeed give the
standard to a man who Allah and His Prophet love, and he (too) loves
Allah and His Prophet. He will be the steadfast one, never running away.
He will not return till Allah blesses (us) with victory upon his hands."

When the next day dawned, we raised ourselves on our knees and toes, but
did not find him calling anyone from among us. He then announced: "Where
is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib?" ‘Ali was brought to him, suffering from
sore-eye. He put his saliva into his eyes, gave him the standard. And
Allah blessed (us) with the victory at his hands."

We aid: "And what is the fourth one?"

He said: The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, left for the
battle of Tabuk, leaving behind ‘Ali in his place. The Quraishites
became jealous of him (i.e. ‘Ali) and said: "The Prophet has left him
behind because he does not like his company." (When ‘Ali heard this), he
followed the Prophet and upon arrival, placed his hand on the stirrup of
the Prophet's camel, saying: "Surely, I will follow you."

The Prophet said: "What has happened to you?" He wept and said: "The
Quraishites believe that you left me behind because you hate me, and do
not prefer my company."

The Prophet ordered an announcement for people to assemble and then
(addressing them) said: "O people, Is there anyone among you who does
not have the closest and most distinctly notable among his relatives."
They said: "Yes, we do have." Then he said: "Surely, ‘Ali, son of Abu
Talib, is the closest to me among my relatives, and is most beloved to
my heart." Then he came to ‘Ali (as) and said: "Does it not please you
to be to me what Haroon was to Musa; except that there is no prophet
after me?" ‘Ali said: "My pleasure is with Allah and His Prophet."

Then Sa'd said: "These are the four virtues, and if you feel inclined, I
may relate to you the fifth one!"  
 We said: "We would like to know it."

He said: "We were with the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny,
in the farewell pilgrimage. When returning (from Haj) he dismounted at
Ghadeer Khumm, and ordered an announcement for all to assemble. Then he
proclaimed: "O people, of whoever I am the master, this ‘Ali also is his
master. O Allah, befriend one who befriends him, and hate one who hates
him. Help one who helps him, and forsake one who forsakes him."

3. ‘Ali (as) forbade initiating the battle
------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi al-Qalanisi reported to
me from Abul Qasim al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan, who reported from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Marwan who reported from his father, who
reported from Ishaq ibn Yazid, who reported from Khalid ibn Mukhtar, who
reported from al-A'amash from Habbah alArani, who said:*

I heard Hudhaifa ibn al-Yaman a year before Uthman ibn Affan was killed,
saying: "As if I see your mother al-Humayra (i.e. Ayesha) on an
expedition, being led on a camel, and you all clinging to the camel's
flank and tail. She is with the people of Azd (a tribe) and is supported
by Banu Dhabbah; may Allah sever their feet."

Then he said: When the battle of Jamal (the Camel) took place, and
people prepared to confront each other, an announcer announced on behalf
of Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, saying: "No one of you shall
initiate the fight without my orders." Then they arrived: their arrows
and hit us. We said: "O Amirul Mu’mineen, we have been hit." He said:
"Withhold." Then again, they hit us and killed some of us. We said: "O
Amirul Mon'mineen, we have been killed." So he said: "Attack! With the
blessing of Allah."

He said: We attached our raised lances and spears to each others', so
close, that if someone were to walk, he could walk over them. Then ‘Ali
(A.S.) announced: "Take to the swords." So we began to strike at their
helmets but our swords bounced off. Then Amirul Mu’mineen said: "Aim at
the feet."  
 He said: We have never seen so many feet chopped off on any one day.
Then I remembered the narration of Hudhaifa when he mentioned Banu
Dhabbah as her helpers, saying "may Allah sever their feet." I knew that
it was a prayer, which had been answered.

Then Amirul Mu’mineen announced: "Proceed towards the camel for it is
surely Satan." One soldier wounded the camel with his spear, and another
one cut off its hand, so it fell to the ground with foam spurring from
its mouth. Then Ayesha uttered a loud cry and her people turned back
defeated. So, Amirul Mu’mineen announced: "Do not attack those who are
fallen with wounds, and do not chase those who have fled. And whoever
shuts his door, he shall be in peace. And whoever lays down his arms he
shall be in peace."

4. We do not say except that which our Lord, Most High, has said
----------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad al-Sayrafi reported to me from
Muhammad ibn Hammam al-Askafi who reported from Ahmad ibn Idrees, who
reported from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa al-Asha'ri, from ‘Ali ibn
No-man, from Fudhail ibn Uthman, from Muhammad ibn Shurayh who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, say:
"Surely, Allah has enforced our authority, and made it obligatory upon
people to love us. By Allah, we do not say anything out of caprice or
our desire, and we do not act according to our views. We do not say
except that which our Lord, Most High, has said."  
  

5. Die in the state of Taharat and you will die a martyr
--------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Walid has reported to
me from his father, who reported from al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn Aban,
from Muhammad ibn Awramah, from Ismail ibn Aban al-Warraq, who reported
from al-Rabee' ibn Badr, from Abu Hatim, from Anas ibn Malik, who
reported that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "O Anas, be always
pure and clean, and Allah will increase your years (i.e. lifetime). And
if you can remain in the state of purity through the day and the night,
then do so; for if you die in the state of purity (Taharat, Wudhoo
etc.), you will die a martyr. And be steadfast on the noon prayers, for
it is the prayers of those who return to Allah with repentance. And
perform as many optional prayers as possible, so that the appointed
keepers (Angels) have affection for you.

And initiate Salaam upon one you meet, so that Allah augments your good
deeds. Greet with Salaam your household, and it will be full of divine
blessings. Show veneration to the elder Muslims, and be kind to their
young ones, so that when you and I arrive on the Day of Judgement, we
come like these two - then he demonstrated by his first two fingers."

6. ‘Ali is my brother, my minister and my successor
---------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Abul Fadhl Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Tusi, who reported from Abu
Abdul Rahman Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Hanbal, who reported
from Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn Abi Saminah, who reported from Ubaidullah
ibn Musa, who reported from Matar al-Iskaf that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Verily, ‘Ali is
my brother, my minister and my successor in the family, and he is the
best of all who survive me, he will repay my debts and fulfil my
pledges."  
  

7. What Jabir said about ‘Ali (as)
----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Abul Fadhl Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Tusi (may Allah bless him with
mercy) who reported from Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who reported
from ‘Ali ibn Hakim al-Awadi, who reported from Sharik, from Uthman ibn
Abu Zara'h, from Salim ibn Abi al-Ja'd that:*

Jabir ibn Abdillah al-Ansari was once asked, (during his old age) when
his eyebrows had fallen over his eyes: "Tell us about ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib, peace be upon him." Jabir lifted his eyebrows with his hands and
said: "He is the best of all creatures, no one hates him but a hypocrite
and no one doubts in him except an infidel."

8. Umar's comments about the Prophet's companions
-------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad al-Sayrafi reported to me from Abu
al-Husayn al-Abbas ibn al-Mughairah al-Jawhari, who reported from Ahmad
ibn Mansur al-Ramadi Abu Bakr, who reported from Ahmad ibn Swaleh, who
reported from Anbasah, who reported from Yunus, from Ibn Shihab, from
Ibn al-Mukhramah al-Kindi that:*

Umar ibn al-Khattab once arrived at an assembly where ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib, peace be upon him, and Uthman and Abdul Rehman and Talha and
al-Zubair were present. So Umar said: "Does everyone of you aspire to
becoming a leader after I have gone?" Al-Zubair replied: "Everyone of us
aspires, and believes to be fit for it. What is that you disapprove?"
Umar said: "May I not tell you what I think about you?" They remained
silent. (Again) Umar said: "May I not tell you about yourselves?" They
kept silent. Then al-Zubair said: "Say, despite our silence."

So he (Umar) said: "As far as you, O Zubair, are concerned, you are at
your best when pleased and content, and you are at your worst when
offended and angry. There is a day when you are a devil, and a day when
you are a man. Tell me, who will be the Caliph on the day you turn to be
a devil?  
 And you, O Talha, by Allah, the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, left this world displeased with you.

And you, O ‘Ali, you are a man of inactivity and frivolity.

And you, O Abdul Rehman, you are best qualified for it if the position
ever comes to you.

But surely among you there is a man whose faith encompasses the faith of
the multitude, and he is Uthman."

9. "My brothers are those who believe in me without ever having seen me" said the Prophet (SAW)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad reported to me from Abu Abdillah
Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Ja'far al-Hasani who reported from Abu Musa Isa
ibn Mahran, who reported from Abu Yashkur al-Balkhi, who reported from
Musa ibn Ubaidah, from Muhammad ibn Ka'b al-Qurzi, from Awf ibn Malik,
that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, once said: "How eager am
I to meet my brothers." So Abu Bakr and Umar said: "Are we not your
brothers? We have believed in you, and migrated with you." The Prophet,
peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "No doubt, you have believed
and migrated, yet I am eager to meet my brothers." Then he repeated the
statement. Then he said: "You are my companions. But my brothers are
those who will come after you have gone. They will believe in me, love
me, help me, and confirm me - without ever having seen me. How I wish to
meet my brothers!"  
  

10. Seek refuge from Allah against the evil of the people of Al-Thatt
---------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Hasan Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Tamimi, who reported from al-Hasan ibn
Behram, who reported from al-Hasan ibn Yahya, who reported from al-Hasan
ibn Hamdoon, from Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Abdillah, who reported from
Sudair al-Sayrafi that:*

I was with Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, and
round him were people from Kufa. Addressing them, he said: "Perform Hajj
before you are prevented from it. Perform Hajj before the land around
you is locked. Perform Hajj before the mosque at Iraqain is demolished,
between the streams and the palm trees.

Perform Hajj before the lotus trees at al-Zawra, whose roots and stem
have grown on the sweet honey of the dates from which Maryam (as)
plucked fresh ripe dates, are cut off. That will be the time when you
will be prevented to go for Hajj; when the fruits will be in want, the
soil will be arid, and you will suffer from the rising costs, the
injustice of the rulers, and inequity and hatred will be rampant among
you, coupled with calamity, epidemic and hunger.

You will be overwhelmed by adversity from all sides. Woe unto you, O
people of Iraq! When the army marches over you from Khurasan and woe
unto the people of Ray from Turk, and woe unto the people of Iraq from
the people of Ray. Woe unto them all, and again so from Al-Thatt."

Sudair asked: "O my master, who are Al-Thatt?" He said: "They are people
with ears as small as those of rats, clad in iron; their utterances like
that of Satan; they will have small, hollow eyesockets, and will have
hairless bodies, with short hair on their heads. Seek refuge from Allah
against their evil. Allah will cause Islam to be victorious at their
hands, and they will be instrumental to the revival of our cause."

11. Allah helps according to the measure of our intentions
----------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ghalib Ahmad ibn Muhammad reported to me from his
grandfather Muhammad ibn Sulaiman, who reported from Abu Ja'far Muhammad
ibn al-Husayn, who reported from Muhammad ibn Sinan, from Hamza ibn
Muhammad al-Tayyar, who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, say: "Allah helps His servants
according to the measure of their intentions. He who has a wholesome
intention receives full help from Allah, and he who has a deficient
intention receives as much less."  
  

12. Knowledge precedes ignorance
--------------------------------

*He said: 'Abu Ghalib Ahmad ibn Muhammad reported to me from Abu Tahir
Muhmmmad ibn Sulaiman al-Zurari, who reported from Muhammad ibn
al-Husayn, from Muhammad ibn Yahya, from Ghiyath ibn Ibrahim, from
Kharijah ibn Mas'ab, from Muhammad ibn Abu Umair al-Abdi, who reported
that:*

Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, said: "Allah did
not take away covenant from the ignorant people for seeking the
expoundings of Knowledge, before He had taken a covenant from the
learned people to expound unto the ignorant people. That is because
knowledge preceded ignorance."

13. Those nearest to the Prophet on the Day of Reckoning
--------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from Abul
Qasim al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan al-Kufi, who reported from Ja'far
ibn Muhammad ibn Marwan, who reported from his father, from Muhammad ibn
Ismail al-Hashimi, from Abdul Mu’min who reported that Muhammad ibn ‘Ali
al-Baqir, peace be upon him, reported from Jabir ibn Abdillah al-Ansari
that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "On the Day of
Reckoning tomorrow, the nearest to me will be those who are most
truthful in their speech and the most ardent in paying back the deposits
entrusted to them, and the most faithful in fulfilling their promises
and the best in their behaviour and the most amiable to the people."


