Eighth Assembly
===============

Met on Monday, the 24th of the month of Ramadhan, heard from him by
dictation, may Allah perpetuate His beneficence on him. Our grand
Sheikh, the honoured one, al-Mufid Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad
al-Noman, may Allah perpetuate His support and beneficence to him, said
today:

1. Benevolence & Tyranny
------------------------

*He said: 'Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reported to me
from Muhammad ibn Musa al-Mutawakkil, who reported from ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn al-Sa'dabadi, from Ahmed ibn Abu Abdillah al-Barqi, from Abdul
Rahman ibn Abi Najran, from Asim ibn Hamid, from Abu Hamzah al-Thumali*
*that Abu Ja'far al-Baqir Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, reported
from his forefathers that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Benevolence is a
good turn, earning the quickest reward, and tyranny is an evil, earning
quickest requital. Enough for ones blemish that one should see faults in
others while condoning the same faults in oneself; or scoff at the
others for an act from which he himself cannot abstain, and hurt ones
companion in matters with which one has no concern."

2. Weeping for ones sins
------------------------

*He said: 'Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammd ibn al-Hasan reported to me from
Abdullah ibn Ja'far al-Himyari, who reported from Ahmad ibn Muhammad,
from ‘Ali ibn al-Hakam, from Hisham ibn Salim from Abu Abdillah, peace
be upon him, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny said: "Blessed is he whom
Allah finds weeping because of his sins, trembling in awe of Allah;
weeping over the sins about which no one knows except himself."

3. Good deeds blot out evil ones
--------------------------------

*He said: 'Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali reported to me from Muhammad ibn
‘Ali, from his uncle Muhammad ibn Abul Qasim from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali
al-kufi, from Muhammad ibn Sinan, from Abu al-Nu’man, that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him told me: "O Abu
al-Nu’man, let no people deceive you about yourself, for what is
destined will reach you without them. And do not spend your day over
petty things, for the One Who records everything is (always) with you.
Always do good deeds, for I do not know of quicker recompense for an old
sin than the new good deed. Indeed, Allah, Most High has said (in the
Qur'an): ***'Surely, the good deeds blot out the evil deeds; this is
reminder for those who remember.' (Hood, 11:4)"***

4. Obedience to the Imam
------------------------

*He said: "Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh reported to me
from Muhammad ibn Yaqoob al-Kulayni, from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, from his
father, from Hammad ibn Isa from Huraiz, from Zurarah ibn A'ayan, who
reported that:*

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (peace be upon them all)
said: "The most important matter, the best, the key, the entrance to all
affairs and the pleasure of the Gracious Lord lie in obedience to the
Imam after have recognized him."

Then he said: Allah, Most High, says (in the Qur'an): "whoever obeys the
messenger, has obeyed Allah. But, whoever turns away: ***'We have not
sent you (Muhammad) as a keeper over them.' (Al-Nisa, 4: 80)"***

5. Uthman and Banu Umayya
-------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Habish al-katib reported to
me from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Za'farani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Lu'Lui, who
reported form Yahya ibn al-Mughairah, who reported from Salmah* *ibn
al-Fadhl, from ‘Ali ibn Sabih al-Kindi, from Abu Yahya, the client of
Muaz ibn Afra' al-Ansari who said:*

Uthman ibn Affan once sent for al-Arqam ibn Abdillah, who was the
treasurer of the Baitul Mal of the Muslims, and said: "Advance me one
hundred thousand Dirham." Al-Arqam said: "May I write a promissory note
in favour of the Muslims for that?" He said: "What does that concern
you, O motherless! You are but a safekeeper!" When Al-Arqam heard that
he hastened towards the people and exclaimed: "O People, protect your
wealth. I believed that I was a treasurer on your behalf and till today
I never knew that I was Uthman's treasurer." Then he left and entered
his house.

When Uthman learnt about that, he convened an assembly, climbed the
Mimbar and said: "O people, Abu Bakr surely gave preference to Banu Teem
over the people, and Umar gave preference to Banu Adi over the people
and by Allah, I gave preference to Banu Umayyah over others. And if I
were to sit at the gate of the Paradise, authorized to shove Banu
Umayyah into it, I would surely do so. Indeed, their wealth is ours, and
we will take from it if we need it inspite of the people."

Then Ammar ibn Yasir, may Allah bless him with mercy, said: "O Muslim
brethren! Be my witness that I do not approve that!" So Uthman said:
"Oh, you are here!" Then he climbed down from the Mimbar and began
kicking Ammar till he fainted and was carried away senseless to the
house of Ummu Salimah. People found it very distressing. Ammar remained
unconscious missing that day's noon and evening prayers. When he
regained his senses, he said: "Praise be for Allah! From times old, I
have been suffering in His way, and for this which has befallen me in my
duty towards Allah, I seek justice between me and Uthman on the Day of
Judgement from the Honourable Judge" (i.e. Allah).

When Uthman learnt that Ammar was at Ummu Salimah's place, he sent for
her and said: "What are these people together with that transgressor
(i.e. Ammar) doing at your house? Evict them." (She said): "By Allah,
there is no one at my place except Ammar and his two daughters. O
Uthman, leave us alone, and use your power wherever else you like. And
this is a companion of the messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, about to die because of what you have done to him."

He said: Upon hearing this, Uthman repented and sent for Talha and
al-Zubair, asking them to go to Ammar and seek his forgiveness. They
came (to Ammar) but he turned them down. So they returned (to Uthman)
and informed him. Uthman said: "O, Banu Umayyah, O bed of fire, and
flies of greed, was it by divine permission that you reviled me and
ganged in on the companion of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny?"

When Ammar recovered from his illness, he proceeded towards the
Prophet's mosque and there a person announced to Uthman the death of Abu
Dharr at Rabzah. He said: "Abu Dharr at Rabzah met a lonely death, and
was buried by the travellers." Uthman said: "To Him we belong, and unto
Him shall we return." And then he added: "May Allah bless him with
mercy." Then Ammar said: "May Allah bless Abu Dharr with mercy on behalf
of everyone of us."

Uthman said: "Again you are here! May you chew your father's genital! Do
you think I am repenting for having exiled him?" Ammar said: "No, By
Allah, I do not think so!"

He (Uthman) said: "You join the place where Abu Dharr was and remain
there as long as we live." Ammar said: "Do so, by Allah, I would love to
be in the company of the wild animals, more than to be near you!" Then
as Ammar prepared to leave, Banu Makhzum came to Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali
ibn Abu Talib (as) requesting him to intervene and to ask Uthman to
cancel the order for Ammar's eviction. He intervened on their behalf
till Uthman responded positively.

6. The lonely martyr
--------------------

*He said: Al-Sharif Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Jawani
reported to me from al-Mudhaffar ibn Ja'far al-Alawi al-Umri, who
reported from Ja'far ibn Muhammad b Masood, from his father, from
Muhammad ibn Hatim, who reported from Suwaid ibn Saeed, who reported
from Muhammad ibn Abdul Rahim al-Yamani, from Ibn Meena, from his father
who reported that Aisha said:*

Once ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) came upon the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny, seeking permission to enter, but he did not permit. So,
he sought permission once again and the Prophet peace be upon him and
his progeny, said: "Enter, O ‘Ali." When ‘Ali entered, the Prophet,
peace be upon him and his progeny, stood up, embraced him and kissed him
between the eyes and said: "May my father be ransom for the martyr; may
my father be ransom for the lonely martyr."

7. Talha and al-Zubair
----------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from Abul
Qasim al Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Kufi, who reported from Ja'far ibn Muhammad
ibn Marwan, who reported from his father, who reported from Ishaq ibn
Yazid, who reported from Sulaiman ibn Qaram, from Abu al-Jahhaf, from
Ammar al-Duhni, who reported from Abu Uthman, the muezzin of Banu Afsa
that he heard ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib say when Talha and al-Zubair advanced
to fight him:*

"What excuse can Talha and al-Zubair have! They swore allegiance to me
of their own accord, without any coercion and they broke off without any
event." Then he recited the verse:

***'And if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your
religion, then fight the leaders of unbelief, for their oaths are
worthless, so that you may restrain them.'*** **(al-Tauba, 9:12)"**

8. The first to enter Paradise
------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad, may Allah have mercy on him,
reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, from Saeed ibn Janah, from Abdullah ibn Muhammad, from
Jabir ibn Yazid, who reported from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir
through his forefathers that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny said: "Paradise remains
forbidden for the Prophets till I have entered in it, and remains
forbidden for all the peoples till the Shi’ahs of us, Ahlul Bayt have
entered."

9. Surprise at the heedless
---------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Muhammad B. Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Kufi al-Nahwi
al-Tamimi reported to me from Hisham ibn Yunus al-Nahshali, who reported
to me from Yahya ibn Ya'la, from Hameed al-A'raj, from Abdullah ibn
al-Harith, from Abdullah ibn Masood that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "I am surprised at
the heedless person who is not without survelance; I am surprised at the
one chasing the world, while death chases him; I am surprised at a
person having a loud, hearty laugh, while he does not know whether Allah
is pleased with him or is displeased."

10. Dying the death of an infidel
---------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Muhammad ibn Ja'far reported to me from Hisham ibn
Yunus al-Nahshali, who reported from Abu Muhammad al-Ansari, who
reported from Abu Bakr ibn Ayyash, from Muhammad ibn Shihab al-Zuhari,
from Anas ibn Malik, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, looked at ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib (as) and said: "O ‘Ali, whoever hates you, Allah shall cause him
to die the death of infidels, and on the day of Judgement, will ask him
to account for his deeds (also)."

11. Befriending for the sake of Allah
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Muhammad ibn Ja'far reported to me from Hisham who
reported from Yahya ibn Ya'la, from Hameed, from Abdullah ibn al-Harith
from Abdullah ibn Masood that:*

The Prophet peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Those who befriend
each other for the sake of Allah, Most High, shall be resting on the
pillars of ruby in the Paradise, supervising the inmates of Paradise.
Whenever one of them comes forth, his splendour shall fill the houses of
the people of Paradise.

Then the people of the Paradise shall say: 'Let us out so that we can
have a glimpse of those who befriended each other for the pleasure of
Allah.' He said: "Then they will be brought out to see them. One of them
will have a face like the full moon, and on their foreheads will be
written: These are the people befriending each other for the sake of
Allah!"


