Tenth Assembly
==============

Met on Wednesday, after the lapse of two nights of Rajab in the year
407. Al-Sheikh al-Mufid Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Nu’man - may Allah perpetuate His support to him - narrated to us in
his mosque at Darb Ribah.

1. Allah reveals to Musa
------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh - may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah,
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa and Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abul
Khattab together, from al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Ibn Sinan, from Abu
Hamzah al-Thumali, that:*

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir, peace be upon him, said: Musa son
of Imran, may Allah bless our Prophet (and his progeny) and him, said:
"O Allah! Who are the sincere, pure servants of Yours among Your
creation?" He said: "One with the generous palms and the bountiful feet.
He speaks truthfully, and walks modestly. They are such that the
mountains may move, but they would not."

He said: "O Allah! Who are the ones who will land in the sacred abode at
yours?" He (Allah) said: "They are the ones whose eyes do not look (at
all) at the world and they do not let out their secrets in faith and
they accept no bribe to attain the authority. Certitude is in their
hearts and truth is on their tongues. They are under My shield in this
world and in the sacred abode hereafter, they will be with Me."

2. Who are those devotees?
--------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Katib, who reported from Ahmad ibn Abu
Khaithamah, who reported from Abdullah ibn Dahir, from al-A'amash, from
Abayah al-Asadi from Ibn Abbas - may Allah bless him with mercy, who
said:*

Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn ‘Ali Talib, peace be upon him, was asked about
the verse in the Qu'ran: ***'Surely, Allah's devotees shall have no
fear, neither shall they grieve.'*** **(Yunus, 10:62).**

He was asked: "Who are those devotees?" So, Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be
upon him, said: "They are the ones who have purified themselves in His
worship and have an eye on the inner core of this world while people
regard its exterior; and so they have recognized its future while others
have been deceived by its transitory benefits. They have forsaken all
that which they know will someday forsake them and have caused to die
all that they know will one day kill them."

Then he said: "O he who has distracted himself with this world and
jumped at its traps, working busily to build up that which will soon be
destroyed by it. Did you not see your forefathers, who are down
decomposing and your descendants, thrown under the stone and earth? How
you tried to treat them and cure them with your hands? The doctors
prescribed for them and the relatives prayed for them. But reliance upon
you, did not help them and your medicines did not have any effect upon
them."

3. ‘Ali's faith and descent
---------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad reported to me from Ahmad ibn
Ibrahim, who reported from Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan, who reported
from al-Husayn ibn Nasr ibn Mazahim, who* *reported from his father, who
reported from Abu Abdil Rahman Abdullah ibn Abdul Malik, from Yahya ibn
Salimah, from his father Salimah ibn Kuhail, from Abu Sadiq who said:*

I heard Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him say: "My
faith is that of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, and my
descent is the descent of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny. So whoever, speaks ill of my faith and my descent, slurs the
faith and the descent of the Prophet."

4. The most important duty Allah has imposed
--------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad reported to me from his father,
from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa from al-Hasan
ibn Mahboob from Hisham ibn Salim, from Zurarah ibn A'ayan (from
al-Hasan al-Bazzaz), that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, said: "May
I not inform you about the most important duty Allah has imposed upon
His creation?" I said: "Please do." He said: "To treat people justly,
equal to yourself, and to grant preference to your brother; and to
remember Allah in every situation. And by remembering, I do not mean
chanting: 'Glory be to Allah' and 'Praise be to Allah' and 'There is no
god but Allah' and 'Allah is great', altogether it is a part of
remembering. But to remember Allah in every situation means to be
invincible in matter of obedience to Allah or sinning against Him."

5. The Prophet seeks forgiveness for all Shi’ahs
------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Basir al-Muqri informed me
from Abu Abdillah al-Asadi, who reported from Ja'far ibn Abdullah ibn
Ja'far al-Alawi al-Muhammadi, who reported from Yahya ibn Hashim
al-Ghassani, who reported from Ghayath ibn Ibrahim, who reported from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his father, from his forefathers that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "I have been
taught (by Allah) the seven verses (i.e. Surah al-Fateha) of two
recitations. And the whole Ummah of mine was presented to me (while in
the clay form), till I was able to see its small and its big; and I
looked at the entire heavens. And when I saw you, O ‘Ali, I sought
forgiveness for you and your followers till the Day of Judgement."

6. "O, Allah! I love ‘Ali, so you also love him"
------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Muqri reported to me from
Abu Abdillah al-Husayn ibn Ubaidullah al-Zurari, who reported from Abu
Abdillah Ja'far ibn Abdullah al-Alawi al-Muhammadi, who reported from
Yahya ibn Hashim al-Ghassani, who reported form Ismail ibn Ayyash, from
Muadh ibn Rafaah, from Shahr ibn Hawshab, who said:*

By Allah, I cannot be stopped by Mu'awiya's authority to speak the truth
about ‘Ali, peace be upon him. I heard the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny, say: "‘Ali is the best among you; and in matter of
religion, he is the most learned jurist among you, and he knows
incisively about my Traditions, more than any of you. And as far the
Book of Allah (i.e. the Qu'ran), he is its best student among you all.
O, Allah! I love ‘Ali, so You also love him; O Allah! I love ‘Ali, so
You also love him."

7. They dispute Prophethood and give away Caliphte!
---------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Basari al-Bazzaz reported to
me from Abu Bishr Ahmad ibn Ibrahim, who reported from Zakariyya ibn
Yahya al-Saji, who reported from Abdul Ja'far, from Sufyan, from
al-Waleed ibn Katheer, from Ibn al-Sayyad, from Saeed ibn al-Musayyab
who said:*

When the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, died, the whole
Makkah was shaken with deep sorrow. Then Abu Qahafa said: "What is
happening?" They told him: "The Prophet has departed." He said: "Who has
assumed authority over people after him?" They told him: "Your son." He
asked: "Did Banu Abd Shams and Banu al-Mughaira approve?" They said:
"Yes."

He said: "No one can prevent that which Allah bestows and no one can
give what Allah takes away. What a surprise! They dispute the
Prophethood and easily give the Caliphate! Surely, this seems to have
been destined."  
  

8. What al-Khidr said to ‘Ali (as)
----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn reported to me from Abu ‘Ali
Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Sawli, who reported from Abdul Aziz ibn Yahya
al-Jaloodi, who reported from al-Husayn ibn Hameed, who reported from
Mukhawwal ibn Ibrahim, who reported from Swaleh ibn Abul Aswad, who
reported from Mahfooz ibn Ubaidullah, from a Sheikh from Hadhramaut,
from Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah - may Allah bless him with mercy, who
said:*

Once, while Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, was
going around the Ka'bah , he came across a man who had clung to the
curtains of the sacred house, saying: 'O, He, Whom one hearing does not
distract from another and O, He, Who is not misled by the seekers, and
O, He, Who is not wearied by the insistent supplication. Grant me the
coolness of Your Pardon and the sweetness of Your mercy."

Amirul Mu’mineen (A.S.) asked him: "Is this your prayer?" The man said:
"So, you heard it?" He said: "Yes". The man said: "Pray this way at the
end of every Daily prayer. By Allah, when a faithful prays with these
words at the end of the Daily prayer, Allah forgives him all his sins
even if they equal the heavenly stars in number, or the pebbles and the
earth in abundance."

Then Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, told him: "I have the
knowledge of it, and Allah is Infinite, Beneficent." The man who was
al-Khidhr, peace be upon him, said: "By Allah, you are right O, Amirul
Mu’mineen. Over everyone endowed with knowledge, there is One Who knows
most."  
 And may Allah bless our master Muhammad, the Prophet and his pure
progeny.


