Eleventh Assembly
=================

Met on Monday, 7th Rajab of the year 407 Hijra. Our grand Sheikh
al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Nu’man - may Allah
perpetuate His beneficence for him, narrated to us in his Mosque at
Rabah, in this month.

1. "Today, it is deed and no account; tomorrow, it will be account and no deeds."
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from
al-Fadhl ibn al-Habbab al-Jamhiy, who reported from Muslim ibn Abdillah
al-Basriy, who reported from his father, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Abdul Rahman al-Nahdiy, who reported from Sha'bah, from Salemah ibn
Kuhayl, from Habbah al-Araniy who said:*

I heard Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, say: "I
fear for you about two things: long ambitions and the submission to base
desire. As for the long ambitions, they cause you to forget the next
world; and as for obedience to your desires, they prevent you from
(following) the Truth. Surely, this world passes with its back turned to
you, and the next world arrives facing you. And they both have their
sons. So, be the sons of the next world and do not be the sons of this
world. For today, it is (your) deed and no account; and tomorrow, it
will be account (for your acts) and no deeds."

2. Allah does for His servants that which is best
-------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan reported to me from
his father, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Malik ibn
Atiyyah, from Dawood ibn Farqad, who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah al-Sadiq Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said:
Among the words spoken to Allah to Musa son of Imran, peace be upon him,
He revealed: "O, Musa! I have not created anything more beloved and
preferred to Me than My faithful, believing servants. And when I try
him, it is for his own good. I take away from him what he desires most,
for his own good; and I grant him for his own benefit.

And I know best what is beneficial for My servant. So, it is for him to
be patient, when I try him, to be grateful when I bless him with My
bounties, and he should remain pleased with My judgement. (Then) I write
his name among My Truthfuls when he acts according to My pleasure and
obeys My orders."

3. The sun returned for ‘Ali (as)
---------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa al-Makki, who reported from
al-Sheikh al-Swaleh Abu Abdil Rahman Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Hanbal,
who reportted from Abdul Rahman ibn Sharik, from his father, who
reported that Urwah ibn Abdillah ibn Qyshayr al-Ja'fiy said:*

(Once) I called upon Fatimah, daughter of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be
upon him, when she was quite advanced in age. She wore beads around her
neck and two bangles on her hands, and she said: "It is abominable for
women to resemble men." Then she said: "Asma ibn Umays reported to me
that, once, the revelation from Allah descended upon His Prophet, peace
be upon him and his progeny, and it overwhelmed him. ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib,
may peace be upon him, covered him (i.e. the Prophet) with his cloth,
till the sun set.

When the revelation ceased, the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, said: "O ‘Ali! Have you offered your Asr prayers?" He said: "No
O, messenger of Allah! My attendance upon you prevented me from that."
Then the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, prayed: "O Allah,
cause the sun to return for ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib". The sun had set, so it
rose again till its rays reached my room and half the height of the
Mosque."

4. The pleasure and displeasure of Fatimah (SA)
-----------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad al-Sayrafi reported to me from Abu
‘Ali Muhammad ibn Hammam al-Katib al-Iskafi, who reported from Muhammad
ibn al-Qasim al-Maharibi, who reported from Ismail ibn Ishaq at Rashidi,
who reported from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali from* *Muhammad b al-Fudhail
al-Azdi, from Abu Hamza al-Thumali, who reported that Abu Ja'far
Al-Baqir Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, reported from his father
and grandfather that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Surely, Allah is
displeased when Fatimah (peace be upon her) is displeased, and He is
pleased when she displays her pleasure."

5. Fatimah (SA) after the khilafat of Abu Bakr
----------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Katib reported to me from
al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Zafarani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Thaqafi, who reported from Abu Ismail al-Attar, from Ibn Luhaya'h,
from Abul Aswad, from Urwah ibn al-Zubayr that:*

When people swore allegiance to Abu Bakr, Fatimah, the daughter of
(Prophet) Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny, came to the door
of her house and said: "Never have I witnessed a day like this. They
have indeed, set a worst record. They left their Prophet, peace be upon
him and his progeny, with his corpse in our midst and preoccupied
themselves with the matter (of succession) without us."

6. Ahlul Bayt, the key to all wisdom
------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad reported to me from his father,
from Sa'd ibnAbdillah, from Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Hasan
ibn Mahboob, from Abu Ayyub al-Khazzaz, from Muhammad ibn Muslim, who
reported that:*

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him said: "People (who have
discarded us) have no truth, nor any propriety, except that which they
have learnt from us Ahlul Bayt. None from them can judge truly or with
justice, unless he has taken its guidance from Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib, peace be upon him, the key, the gate, the path blazer, the
way. And when they are confused in any matter, the fault is theirs if
they commit an error; and if they decide rightly, the credit goes to
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as)."

7. Shaddad ibn Aws and Mu'awiyah
--------------------------------

*He said: Abu al-Tayyib al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Tammar reported to me
at the Great Mosque of Al-Mansoor during Muharram of 347 Hijra, from Abu
Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Qasim al-Anbari, who reported from Ahmed ibn Yahya,
who reported from Ibn al-A'arabi, from Habib ibn Basshar, from his
father, who reported from ‘Ali ibn Asim, from al-Sha'bi who said:*

When Shaddad ibn Aws called upon Muawiyah ibn Abu Sufyan, he honoured
and welcomed him, did not reprimand him for his past lapses and gave him
good promises of reward. Then one day he invited Shaddad at a public
assembly and said: "O Shaddad, stand before people and speak about ‘Ali
and revile his so that I know the measure of your love for me."

Shaddad said: "I beg to be excused, for ‘Ali has already gone to his
Maker and has been rewarded for his deeds. And you have been
sufficiently relieved of your worry about him. Now, the affairs are
under your full control because of your generosity, so do not seek from
people things which do not behove your magnanimity."

Muawiyah said: "You shall indeed rise to speak, otherwise (our)
suspicion about you is established."

Then Shaddad stood up and said: "Praise be to Allah Who made His
obedience obligatory upon His servants and placed His Pleasure with the
people of Taqwa, who preferred His pleasure over the pleasure of those
He created; upon that path have the predecessors gone and upon that path
shall the followers go.

O People, the next world is indeed a true promise, a Day on which the
Omnipotent King shall judge; and this world has a limited tenure, where
every pious and impious eats his share. He who listens and obeys the
truth, fears no judgement against him and he who listens and disobeys,
expects no judgement in his favour. Surely, when Allah intends good for
His servants, He gives them the righteous people to govern them and the
learned jurists to decide among them; and places wealth in the hands of
the generous among them. And when intends evil for them, He causes the
fools to rule over them and the ignorant to decide among them and places
wealth in the hands of the misers and niggardly among them.

And for the rulers, the most befitting thing is to have the righteous
companies around them. O Muawiyah, whoever displeases you for the truth,
he is your good advisor and whoever seeks your pleasure by ways which
are untrue, he deceives you. I have indeed, given you a good advice in
whatever I have said already and I will not deceive you by saying to the
contrary."

Muawiyah said: "Sit down O, Shaddad." So, he sat down. Then Muawiyah
said: "I ordered for you enough wealth to make you self-sufficient. Am I
not among those generous who Allah has blessed with abundance, for the
sake of the welfare of His creation?" Shaddad said: "If the wealth you
possess belongs to you, to the exclusion of what belongs to the Muslims
and (if) you earned and spent it in legitimate ways, after having
amassed it so that it may not be squandered, then, of course, yes.

And if the wealth you have, belongs to you jointly with the Muslims and
you deprived them from having access to it; amassing it in abundance and
then spending it excessively, then Allah, Most High, says: ***'Verily,
the extravagants are the brothers of the Devils' (Al-Isra', 17:27)."***
(Upon hearing this) Muawiyah said: "I believe you have gone mad, O
Shaddad! (Then turning to his people, he said), "Give him what we have
set aside for him, so that he may reach his people before he gets
totally demented."

Shaddad rose on his feet saying: "Someone else, other than me, has lost
his sanity to his desires." He then left, without taking anything from
Muawiyah.

8. Evil consequences of three traits one will see before death
--------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan reported to me from
his father, from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Malik ibn Atiyyah,
from Abu Ubaidah al-Hazza', who reported that:*

Abu Ja'far al-Baqir Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, said: "It is
recorded in the book of Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him: three
traits are such that whoever possess them, would not die before seeing
their evil consequences: injustice, breaking off with blood (womb)
relations and false oath." And the quickest way to earning a reward
(from Allah) is to mend the relations with your kith and kin; for these
are people who transgress, but when they mend their relations with each
other, their wealth grows and they become rich. And false oaths and
breaking off from one's relatives turn the villages into the wastelands.

And may Allah bless our master Muhammad and his progeny, with peace and
salutaions.


