Twelfth Assembly
================

Met on Saturday, 12th Rajab, in the year 407 Hijra, in which the
following was heard. Our grand Sheikh Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad
ibn al-Nu’man, may Allah perpetuate His support to him, narrated:

1. The best act is faith unblemished by doubt
---------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad al-Sayrafi reported to me from Abul
Hasan ‘Ali ibn Mahrawayh al-Qazwini, in the year 302, reporting from
Dawood ibn Suleiman al-Ghazi, that ‘Ali ibn Musa, peace be upon him,
reported from his saintly father Musa ibn Ja'far, from his father
al-Sadiq Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his father al-Baqir Muhammad ibn
‘Ali, from his father Zainul Abideen ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, from his father
al-Shaheed Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, from his father Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib, peace be upon them all, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "The best act in
the estimation of Allah, is to have faith unblemished by any doubt, and
to fight in His way, without being dishonest about the spoils, and to
perform Hajj, which is accepted into the grace of Allah. And the slave
who worships Allah in the best manner, remains sincere to his master and
the one who is chaste, incorruptible and worshipful, will be the first
to enter Paradise."

2. Submiting to those possessing worldly authority
--------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan reported to me from
his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,
from al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Hadeed ibn Hakeem al-Azadi who said:*

I have heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him say:
"Guard yourselves from the sins fearing Allah and protect your religion
with piety. And lend it strength by dissimulation (where necessary) and
by relying solely on Allah for your needs, rather than on those who
possess worldly power.

And know you all, that whoever submits to the one possessing worldly
authority, or to the one who is opposed to his faith, in order to gain
something from his transitory bounties, Allah will weaken his force,
subject him to His utter displeasure and entrust all his affairs to that
person. And, if at all he acquires something from that man, Allah will
not bless that gain with His benediction and will not reward him from
whatever he spends for Hajj, or for freeing a slave or for any good
deed."

3. ‘Ali (as) explains his stand at Jamal
----------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahalabi - may Allah bless him
with His mercy, reported to me on Friday, of the last two days of
Sha'ban, in the year 353, from Muhammad ibn al-Hussain ibn Hameed ibn
al-Rabee' al-Lakhmi, reporting from Suleiman ibn al-Rabee' al-Nahdi, who
reported from Nasr ibn Mazahim al-Munqari, who reported from Yahya ibn
Ya'la al-Aslami, who reported from ‘Ali ibn al-Huzawwar, from Al-Asbagh
ibn Nubatah - may Allah bless him with His mercy, that once a man called
upon Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A.S.) at Basra and said:*

"O Amirul Mu’mineen, between us and these people against whom we are
fighting, the call is one, the Prophet is one, the daily prayer is one,
Hajj is one, then how shall we classify them?"

Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, said: "Classify them the same way
as Allah, Most High, has classified them in His Book. Have you not heard
the verse:

***'Those messengers We excel some above the others, among them is he to
whom Allah spoke, and some He raised in rank, and We gave Jesus the son
of Mary the clear signs and strengthened him with the holy spirit.***

***And if Allah had pleased, those who came after them would not have
fought one against the other, after the clear signs had come to them,
but they fell into variance and some of them believed and some
disbelieved....'(al-Baqrah 2:253)***

So, when the confrontation occurred, we were worthier with Allah, His
faith, the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, the Book and the
Truth. We are the ones who believed and they are the ones who
disbelieved. And Allah willed that we fought against them, so we fought
in accordance with His will, His command and His pleasure."

4. ‘Ali (as) mourns the Prophet (SAW)
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Muqri al-Baseer reported to
me from Abdullah ibn Yahya al-Qattan, who reported from Ahmad ibn
al-Husayn ibn Saeed al-Qarshi, who reported from his father, who
reported from al-Husayn ibn Mukhariq, from Abdul Samad ibn ‘Ali, from
his father, from Abdullah ibn Abbas - may Allah be pleased with him, who
said:*

When the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, passed away, Amirul
Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, together with al-Abbas and al-Fadhl ibn
al-Abbas, washed him. And when they had finished washing him, he (‘Ali)
removed the wrap-cloth from his face and said: "My father and my mother
be your ransom, you have been pure in your life and in your death. With
your passing away, there has been a cessation, which has no parallel in
anyone else's death; the cessation of Prophethood and the Divine
revelations.

You are so exalted that, your death has become a source of solace and
consolation for all other bereavements and (at the same time) your death
has such a common aspect, that all men all equally grieved by it. And,
had it not been that you ordered forbearance and forbade restless grief,
we would have shed incessant tears over you. (But deep sorrow and grief,
both are too trivial to give any consolation on your parting). May my
father and my mother be your ransom, do remember us (well) when you are
in the presence of your Sustainer, and keep us in your mind."

Then he fell over him, kissed his face and drew the cloth over him.

5. What Sham'oon, the successor of Isa said to ‘Ali (as)
--------------------------------------------------------

*Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from ‘Ali ibn
Abdillah ibn Asad al-Ishfahani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Thaqafi, who reported from Ismail ibn Yasar, who reported from
Abdullah ibn Milh, from Abdul Wahhab ibn Ibrahim al-Azdi, from Abu
Sadiq, from Mazahim ibn Abdul Warith, from Muhammad ibn Zakariyya, from
Shoaib ibn Waqid al-Muzni, from Muhammad ibn Sahl, the client of
Sulaiman ibn ‘Ali ibn Abdillah ibn Abbas, from his father, from Qais,
the servant of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, who said:*

Once when ‘Ali, Amirul Mu’mineen was near the mountain at Siffin, the
time for maghrib prayers set in. So he went farther away and called for
the prayers. When he finished the Adhan, a man appeared from near the
mountain, having grey hair and beard, with a bright, white face. He
said: "Peace be upon you, O Amirul Mu’mineen and mercy and blessings
from Allah! Welcome to the successor of the last of the Prophets, leader
of the ones with bright, brilliant faces, (on the Day of Judgement)
magnanimous and protected, excellent one and one who has the reward of
the Truthfuls, master of all the successors!"

So, Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, said: "And peace be upon you,
how are you?" He replied: "I am well, waiting for the holy spirit. I do
not know of any name, which is greater in the estimation of Allah, at
the time of ordeal, than yours, nor of any who has earned more rewards
than you, nor of anyone who has an elevated place higher than yours. Put
up with all that you are in, O my brother, till you meet the al-Habib
(the beloved Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny). Verily, I have
witnessed whatever befall our colleagues in the past at the hands of the
children of Israel. They cut them apart with the saw and carried them
over the bier."

And then pointing towards the people of Syria, he said: "And if these
poor, ugly faces know what chastisement and exemplary punishment awaits
them for fighting against you, they would withdraw." And then pointing
to the people of Iraq, he said: "And if these bright faces knew what
award awaits them for having obeyed you, they would love to be cut by
the scissors. And peace and His mercy and blessings be upon you." Then
he disappeared.

At that time, Ammar ibn Yasir, Abdul Haytham ibn al-Teehan, Abu Ayyub
al-Ansari, Ubadah ibn al-Samit, Khuzaima ibn Thabit and Hashim
al-Marqal, a group from his followers stood up and said: "O, Amirul
Mu’mineen, (for they heard what the man had said) who is this man?"
Amirul Mu’mineen said: "He is Sham'oon, the successor of Isa, peace be
upon him. Allah sent him to me to give me solace for this confrontation
with His enemies!" They said: "May our parents be your ransom, By Allah,
we will help you the way we helped the messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him and his progeny, and none from the al-Muhajir nor al-Ansar shall
desert you, except the unfortunate one." (Upon hearing this), Amirul
Mu’mineen spoke to them kind words."

6. ‘Ali (as) is al-Sadiq al-Akbar among us
------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from Abu
Ahmad al-Abbas ibn al-Fadhl ibn Ja'far al-Azadi al-Makki, in Egypt, who
reported from ‘Ali ibn Saeed Ibn Basheer al-Razi, who reported from ‘Ali
ibn Abdul Wahid, from Muhammad ibn Aban, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Tamam ibn Sabiq, who reported from Amir ibn Sayyar, from Abu al-Sabah,
from Abu Tamam, from Ka'b al-Habr, who said:*

Abdullah ibn Salaam came to the Prophet before he had embraced Islam,
and said: "O Messenger of Allah! What appellation does ‘Ali have among
you?" The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "‘Ali is
*al-Siddiq al-Akbar* among us." Abdullah said: "I testify that there is
no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His Prophet. Surely, we have read
in Torah: Muhammad is the Prophet of Mercy and ‘Ali is the upholder of
Proof."

7. On Free Will and Divine Intervention
---------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Malik al-Nahwi reported to me from
Muhammad ibn al-Fadhl, who reported from Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Ahmed
ibn Ibrahim al-Katib who reported from Yamoot ibn al-Muzarra', who
reported from Isa ibn Ismail who reported from Al-Asma'ee who reported
from Isa ibn Amru that Dhur Rummah, the poet, believed that there was no
divine intervention in the acts. And Ibn al-Ajjaj believed otherwise.
One day, they were together at the governor of Basrah, Bilal ibn Abi
Bardah, who knew of the difference in their beliefs, so he instigated a
debate between them. Ro'bah (i.e. Ibn al-Ajjaj) said:*

"By Allah, a bird does not find out its nesting place and a predator
does not find its victim's hiding place, except by that which has been
destined by Allah." So, Dhur Rummah replied him:"By Allah, it is not
Allah Who guides a wolf to run away with a poor, afflicted man's
milker." Ro'bah said: "Then, did the wolf snatch it away by the will of
Allah or by its own will?" Dhur Rummah said: "Of course, (the wolf
snatched it away) by its own will and desire." Ro'bah said: "That, By
Allah, is a lie imputed against the wolf." Dhur Rummah retorted: "By
Allah, imputing a lie against the wolf is lesser (evil) than imputing a
lie against the Creator of the wolf."

He (i.e. Sheikh al-Mufid) said: Then Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Malik al-Nahwi
recited for me the verses by Mahmood al-Warraq, following the above
narration:

"I am censured (because) I did not commit sins by ignorance,  
 Nor were they the doing of the other, nor mine,  
 And I did not do so because of my insolence towards Allah,  
 Nor because my sensitivity did not get the better of my ignorance,  
 I committed them with favourable expectation of the forgiveness,  
 From the One Who is peerless in His graces and favours,  
 So, if my good expectations are confirmed by Him,  
 Then in that grace is included everyone like me,  
 And if He subjects me to the chastisement,  
 Then that has come to me by way of justice."  
  

8. "Who deserves to be sorry about it?"
---------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Malik al-Nahwi reported to me from
Muhammad ibn al-Fadhl, by his former chain of narrations till
al-Asmaee', from Isa ibn Amru, who said:*

A man once sought help from Abu Amru ibn al-Ala' for his needs and Abu
Amru promised him. But then, it became impossible for Abu Amru to fulfil
the promise. Later, when the man met him, he said: "O Abu Amru, you
promised me something, but never fulfilled it!' Abu Amru said: "Who do
you think deserves to be sorry about it, you or I?"

The man said: "I deserve." Abu Amru said: "No, by Allah, I deserve it."
The man asked: "Why is that so?" Abu Amru said: "Well, I made a promise
to you; so you went away happy with the hope and I remained worried
about its fulfillment. Surely, you must have slept that night peacefully
and with delight while I spent the night, thoughtful and anxious. Then
the circumstances prevented  
 me from reaching my intention, so you meet me while I am ashamed and I
meet you totally humbled."

9. O ‘Ali . . . your enemies are the army of Satan
--------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me on Monday,
when five days of Shaban remained, in the year 353, from Abu Ja'far
Muhammad ibn Abdillah ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Zayd ibn ‘Ali ibn
Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali Abi Talib (peace be upon him) who said: It was
related to me by al-Ridha ‘Ali ibn Musa from his father Musa ibn Ja'far,
from his father Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his father Muhammad ibn ‘Ali,
from his father ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, from his father al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali
from his father Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, Peace be upon them
all, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny said: "O ‘Ali! With you
(all) has Allah begun this matter (i.e. Imamat) and with you (all) shall
He end it. So remain patient, for the good end is for those who guard
against evil, fearing Allha. You are the army of Allah, and your enemies
are the army of Satan. Blessed is he who obeys you and woe unto those
who oppose you. You are the divine authority over His creation and the
strong rope (of Allah). Whoever adheres to it finds true guidance, and
whoever discards it, goes astray. I beseech Allah to grant you Paradise;
no one precedes you in your absolute obedience to Allah, and therefore,
you are worthier for it."

10. An admonisher from your inner self
--------------------------------------

*He said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan reported to me from his
father, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Malik ibn Atiyyah,
from Abu Hamza al-Thumali, who said:*

‘Ali ibnal-Husayn Zainul Abedeen, peace be upon him, used to say: "O son
of Adam, you will always be on the right path as long as you have an
admonisher from your inner self; and as long as you remain concerned
about taking your own account; and as long as the fear of Allah and the
repentance (for your lapses) remain your apparel. You will surely die
one day, to stand before Allah the Most High, (so be ready with your
answers)."

And may Allah bless our master Muhammad, the Prophet and his progeny.


