Thirteenth Assembly
===================

Met on Saturday, 19th Rajab, in the year 407. The grand Sheikh al-Mufid
Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man - may Allah perpetuate
His beneficence upon him, said today:

1. "I fear for my Ummah about three things. . ."
------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad al-Sayrafi reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Mahrawayh al-Qazwini, who reported from Dawood ibn Sulaiman
al-Ghari, who reported from al-Ridha ‘Ali ibn Musa, who reported form
his father Musa ibn Ja'far, who reported from his father Ja'far ibn
Muhammad, who reported from his father Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, who reported
from his father ‘Ali ibn Husayn, who reported from his father al-Husayn
ibn ‘Ali, who reported from his father Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib, peace be upon them all, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "I fear for my
Ummah about three things: Going astray after having recognized the
truth; and being misled by the trials and the ordeals; and the base
desires incited by lust and hunger."  
  

2. On Ramadhan
--------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from
Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn Sulaiman ibn Ziyad al-Maruzi, who reported from
Ubaidullah ibn Muhammad al-Ayshi, who reported from Hammad ibn Salemah,
from Ayyub, from Abu Qalabah, from Abu Hurairah, who reported that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "This is the month
of Ramadhan, a blessed month, in which Allah has made its fasts
obligatory. In it, He opens the gates of Paradise and in it, Satan is
put into shackles. There is a night in it, which is worthier than
thousand months; whoever misses it he is indeed deprived." He used to
repeat it three times.

3. Beware of the company of the sinners
---------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad reported to me from his father,
from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Abu Abdillah al-Barqi, who
reported from Bakr ibn Swalah al-Razi, from Sulaiman ibn Ja'far
al-Ja'fari, who said:*

I heard Abul Hasan, peace be upon him, saying to my father: "How is that
I saw you at Abdul Rahman ibn Yaqoob?" He said: "He is my uncle." So
Abul Hasan, peace be upon him said: "He says appalling things about
Allah, defining Him, while Allah cannot be described. So, you either sit
with him and leave us, or you sit with us and leave him!" My father
said: "Shall I not sit with him even if I do not ascribe to what he
says?"

Abul Hasan, peace be upon him, said: "Do you not fear that a divine
wrath may descend and afflict you all?" Do you not know that there was a
companion of Musa and his father was a partisan of Pharoah (Fira'wn).
When the horses of Pharoah drew near Musa, peace be upon him, that
companion stayed behind to admonish his father.

And Musa saw him and his father engaged in the dispute, till they
reached the sea and both were drowned together. When Musa learnt about
this, he asked Jibraeel about his companion's destiny. He said: "May
Allah have mercy on him, the man drowned and was not in any way
associated with the belief of his father. But when the divine wrath
descends, it grants no defense to those near the sinners."

4. "How is that you are prone to disobedience after I have gone?"
-----------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmed ibn Muhammad al-Hasan ibn al-Waleed reported
to me from his father, from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Abu Jameelah, from
Aban ibn Taghlib, who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him said: The Prophet,
peace be upon him and his progeny, learnt that a group among the Quraish
was saying: "Muhammad thinks that he has firmly connected this matter
(of succession after him) with his Ahlul Bayt, but when he dies, we
shall snatch it away from them and place it among others." The Prophet,
peace be upon him and his progeny, came to them and addressed: "O people
of Quraish, how is that you are prone to disobedience after I have gone?
Do you wish to see me with a detachment of my companions hitting your
faces and necks with the sword?"

Then Jibraeel, peace be upon him, descended and said: "O Muhammad! Your
Sustainer sends you peaceful greetings and commands: "Say, Allah
willing, and ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib." The Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, said: "Allah willing, and ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, who will attend
to that among you."

5. "O ‘Ali! You are the master. . . "
-------------------------------------

*He said: Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me from Abu Bakr
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa al-Makki, who reported from Abdullah ibn
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who reported from Abdul Rahman ibn Swaleh, who
reported from Muhammad ibn Sa'd al-Ansari, who reported from Umar ibn
Abdillah Ibn Ya'la ibn Murrah, from his father, from his grandfather
Ya'la ibn Murrah, who said:*

I heard the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, say to ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib, peace be upon him, "O ‘Ali! You are the master of the people
after I have gone. So whoever obeys you, obeys me; and whoever disobeys
you, disobeys me."

6. ‘Ali (as)'s soul was the first to greet the Prophet (SAW)
------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abu
Abdillah Muhammad ibn al-Qasim al-Muharibi, who reports from Ismail ibn
Ishaq al-Rashidi, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Harith, who reported
from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad, from Muslim al-A'awar, from Habbah al-Arni,
from Abu al-Haytham ibn al-Teehan al-Ansari, who reported that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Allah, Most High,
created the souls two thousand years earlier then the bodies, attached
it to the Throne and ordered them to greet me and obey me. So the first
one among men who greeted me and expressed his obedience to me was the
soul of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him."

7. Miqdad and Uthman
--------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Abdillah al-Ishfahani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Thaqafi who reported from Yusuf ibn Saeed al-Arhabi, who reported
from Ubaidullah ibn Musa al-Abasi, from Kamil, from Habib ibn Ibn Abi
Thabit, who said:*

When the people entered the house for consultation (al-Shura), al-Miqdad
ibn al-Aswad al-Kindi - may Allah bless him with mercy, said: "Allow me
in with you for I am sincere and faithful to Allah and I have something
good for you." They refused. Then he said: "Allow me to enter my head
and listen to me." They refused even that.

Then he said: "If you do not allow me, then (let me advise that) do not
swear allegiance to the one who has not witnessed (the battle of) Badr,
and who was not present at the allegiance of al-Ridhwan and was routed
on the day of Uhud, when the two groups met."

Uthman said: "By Allah, if the authority is given to me, I shall indeed,
send you back to your first lord." And when al-Miqdad was dying, he
said: "Inform Uthman that I am being returned to my first and the last
lord!" When Uthman learnt of his death, he came to his grave and said:
"May Allah bless you with mercy, you were (good), in spite of what you
were (i.e. my opponent)!"

Then he praised him. (Upon hearing this) al-Zubair said (to Uthman): "I
will let you know me (better) after death, when you lament over me,
while during my lifetime, you did not allow me my subsintence."

He (i.e. Uthman) said: "O Zubair, you say this? Do you think I like to
see such a companion of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny,
die while he is resentful against me?"

8. Allah will not accept acts of worship from one who has no love for the authority of Ahlul Bayt
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad reported to me from his father,
from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Hasan
ibn Mahboob, from Hisham, from Murazim who reported from al-Sadiq,
Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, who reported that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "What has happened
to some people in my Ummah, who become cheerful and jubilant when
Ibrahim and the progeny of Ibrahim are mentioned to them; but when I and
my progeny are mentioned, they detest it and frown at it! By He Who sent
me as a truthful Prophet, if a person dies after having performed the
(good) deeds of 70 Prophets, but he has no liking for the authority of
our Ahlul Bayt, Allah will not accept his obligatory or voluntary acts
of worship."

9. Allah protects the righteous
-------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Abdillah al-Ishfahani, who reported from Ibrahim b Muhammad
al-Thaqafi, who reported from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, who reported from
Ibrahim ibn Harasah, who reported from Ja'far ibn Ziyad al-Ahmar, who
reported that Zaid ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, once read the
verse:*

***'And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the town and
there was beneath it a treasure belonging to them; and their father was
a righteous man. So your Sustainer (i.e. Allah) willed that they should
attain their maturity and bring forth their treasure....' (al-Kahf, 18:
82)***

Then he said: "Allah guarded their treasure because of their father's
righteousness; so who is worthier for the best protection than us? The
messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, is our
grandfather and his daughter, the leading lady of the women of Paradise,
is our mother. And the first one to confirm his faith in Allah, His
Oneness, and to offer prayers to Him was our father."

10. On the day when repentance will not benefit
-----------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Malik al-Nahwi reported to me from
Muhammad ibn al-Fadhl, who reported from Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ibrahim
al-Katib, who reported from Yamoot ibn al-Muzarra', who reported from
Isa ibn Ismail from Al-Asmaee', who said:*

Once, I heard a Bedouin, before whom a monarch had been mentioned,
saying: "If they have attained honour in this world by injustice and
tyranny, they will definitely be disgraced by justice in the next world.
They have contented themselves with little, leaving aside plenty, with
insignificant things, setting aside that which is weightier. They will
meet with forfeiture on the day when repentance will not benefit."

And Abul Hasan recited the following couplets by Abu al-Ata'hiya:  
 "Glory to the Master of all Dominions!  
 What a night will it be, which will  
 bear the dawn of the Day of Judgement?  
 If a person were to imagine himself, how he will look  
 on the day of Judgement,  
 he may never glance at it.  
 Allah has destined all man to extinction;  
 Some go earlier and some lay behind."  
 And may Allah bless our master Muhammad, the Prophet and his progeny.


