Fifteenth Assembly
==================

Met on Saturday, 3rd Shaban in the year 407. The grand Sheikh al-Mufid
Abu Abdillah, Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man - may Allah perpetuate
His beneficence to him, narrated to us:

1. The Prophet's contentment
----------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad reported to me from ‘Ali ibn
Mahrwayh al-Qazwini, who reported from Dawood ibn Sulaiman al-Ghazi, who
reported from al-Ridha, ‘Ali ibn Musa, from his father, Musa ibn Ja'far,
from his father Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his father Muhammad ibn ‘Ali,
from his father ‘Ali ibn Husayn, from his father al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali,
from his father ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon them all, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: An angel appeared
to me and said: "O Muhammad! Your Sustainer sends you peaceful greetings
and says: if you so desire, We can turn the entire plain of Makkah into
gold." He said (i.e. the Prophet): I raised my head towards the heavens
and said: "O, my Sustainer! (let it be that) one day, I eat to my fill,
so that I praise You with gratitude and one day, I remain hungry so that
I (experience the pleasure to) seek from You."

 

2. Love for four companions; which ones?
----------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa al-Makki, who reported from Abdullah ibn
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who reported* *from his father, who reported from
al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan, who reported from Sharik, from Abi Raabia'h
al-Ayadi, who was heard narrating even in his old age, from Ibn Buridah,
from his father, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Surely, Allah has
commanded me to love four of my companions; and has revealed to me that
He indeed loves them." We said: "Who are they, O messenger of Allah? And
there is none from us who does not wish to be among them." He, peace be
upon him and his progeny, said: "Be it known that ‘Ali is among them" -
and he repeated this three times - "and al-Miqdad and Abu Dharr
al-Ghifari and Salman al-Farsi."

3. Uthman argues with Ayesha
----------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Katib reported to me from
al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Za'farani, who reported from Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from al-Hasan ibn al-Husayn al-Ansari,
who reported from Sufyan, from Fudhail ibn al-Zubair, who reported from
Farwah ibn Majashe, from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him
that:*

Ayesha called upon Uthman and said: "Grant me what my father and Umar
ibn al-Khattab used to grant me." He (i.e. Uthman) said: "I do not see
any status for you in the Book nor in the (Prophet's) Traditions.
Surely, both your father and Umar ibn al-Khattab, granted you (extra
favours) because of their obliging nature, but I shall not do it."

She said: "Then give me my inheritance from the Prophet of Allah". He
said: "Did you not come to me, with Malik ibn Aws al-Nasri, to give
witness that the messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny,
does not bequeath; till you deprived Fatimah from her inheritance and
nullified her right? How come you are claiming inheritance today from
the Prophet?" She left him and went away.

And when Uthman appeared for the prayers, she raised the Prophet's shirt
on a cane and exclaimed: "Surely, Uthman has contradicted the owner of
this shirt and has abandoned his Tradition."

4. Whoever hates the Ahlul Bayt, Allah shall resurrect him as a follower of Judaism
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Husayn Muhammad ibn al-Mudhaffer al-Bazzaz reported to me
from Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Hasani, who reported from Idris
ibn Ziyad al-Kafrsosi, who reported from Hannan ibn Sudair, from Sudaif
al-Makki who reported from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon hm
(commenting that I have not seen any believer of Muhammad to match his
excellence) who reported from Jabir ibn Abdillah al-Ansari, who said:*

Once, the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, caused an
announcement to be made among the Muhajir and Ansar, so they assembled
with their weapons. The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny,
climbed the pulpit, praised Allah and expressed his gratitude to Him.
Then he said: "O Muslims, whoever hates us, the Ahlul Bayt, Allah shall
resurrect him on the day of Judgement as a follower of Judaism."

Jabir said: I stood up and asked: "O messenger of Allah, will it happen
even if I testify that there is no god but Allah, and that Muhammad is
the messenger of Allah?" He said: "If he testified that there is no god
but Allah, that saved him from his blood being spilled and from paying
the tax submissively and with humility."

Then the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny said: "Whoever hates
us, the Ahlul Bayt, Allah shall resurrect him, as a follower of Judaism
on the Day of Judgement, and if he ever met Dajjal, he would be his
partisan. And, even if he did not meet him (i.e. Dajjal), he would be
resurrected in his grave, so that he believes in him (i.e. Dajjal).
Surely, Allah made the whole of my Ummah appear before me while still in
dust, and taught me their names, the way he taught all the names to
Adam. So, standard bearers passed by me and I prayed for forgiveness, in
favour of ‘Ali and his followers.

Hannan ibn Sudair said: I narrated this Tradition before Abu Abdillah
Ja'far ibnMuhammad, peace be upon him, and he said: "Did you yourself
hear this from Sudaif?" He said: "It is now seventh night since I heard
from him." He (i.e. Abu Abdillah) said: "I never thought that this
narration ever escaped the lips of my father to anyone."  
  

5. ‘Ali (as) address people of Kufa
-----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Muhammad ibn Musa ibn Hammad, who reported from Muhammad ibn Sahl,
who reported from Hisham ibn Muhammad ibn al-Saib, from Abu Mikhnaf Lut
ibn Yahya, from al-Harith ibn Husairah, from Abdul Rahman Ibn Ubaid ibn
al-Kanood, who said:*

Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, returned from
Basrah to al-Kufah on 12th Rajab and proceeded to climb the pulpit. He
expressed his gratitude and praise to Allah and said: "All praise be to
Allah Who has helped His servant, blessed with authority and forsaken
His enemy. He exalted the truthful and just and disgraced the liar and
unjust. O people of the town, it is obligatory upon you to be mindful of
your duties to Allah and to obey those who, from among the Ahlul Bayt of
your Prophet, are obedient to Allah.

They are worthier of your submission; for they, in submission to Allah,
stood firm against the pretentious and our opponents who despite their
dependence upon us for their guidance, fight against us, usurp our
rights and deprive us...They have tasted the evil of their action and
there awaits them a painful chastisement.

Indeed, some of you have held themselves back from helping me and I am
indeed, displeased and disappointed with them. So, you disassociate
yourselves from them and admonish them, so that, they may realize their
misconduct or come to do what we approve."

Then Malik ibn Habib al-Tameemi al-Yarbuee', his police commander, stood
up and said: "By Allah, I believe that simply disassociating and
admonition is two little. By Allah, should you command us, we would kill
them all." Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, said: "O Malik, you are
crossing the bounds and transgressing the limit, engaging yourself in
the extremes." He said: "O Amirul Mu’mineen! Sometimes a little bit of
tyranny and inequity, while dealing with the matters confronting you, is
more suited than being kind to your enemies."

Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him said: "O Malik, that is not the way
Allah has ordained. He Most High, has said: ***'A life for a life'***
**(al-Maidah, 5:45).** So where is the room for a bit of inequity and
tyranny? And then Allah, Most High, has said: ***'And whoever is killed
unjustly, We have given power to his avenger of blood, but let him not
exceed the just limits in killing. Surely, he will be
victorious'*****(Al-Israa', 17:33)."**

Then Abu Burdah ibn Awf al-Azdi stood before him. He was a partisan of
Uthman, having fought against ‘Ali in the battle of *Jama,* but joined
him in *Siffin* with a very weak intention of helping. He said: "O
Amirul Mu’mineen! Did you see the fallen bodies around Ayesha, Talha and
al-Zubair? Why were they killed?" Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him
said: "Because they had killed my followers and my appointed governors.

And (also) because they killed the brother of Rabeeah al-Abdi - may
Allah bless him with mercy, together with a group of Muslims. They had
said: 'We will not break our allegiance the way you did and we will not
revolt the way you have revolted.' So, they were unjustly attacked and
killed. I asked them to submit to me, the names of those who killed my
brethren and there would be the Book of Allah, to decide between me and
them. They refused (to give me the names) and (instead) they rose to
fight me, while they were still in allegiance to me, and the
responsibility of having killed, nearly a thousand of my partisans lay
upon their shoulders. That is why I killed them. Do you have any doubt
about that?"

He said: "I had a doubt but now I have understood and the error of those
people has now become evident for me. No doubt, you are the rightly
guided one."

Then ‘Ali, peace be upon him, prepared to climb down, while some people
rose to speak. But when they saw him climb down, they sat down and did
not utter a word.

Then Abul Kanood said: "In spite of his presence (with ‘Ali) at
*Siffin*, Abu Burdah was insincere to ‘Ali, peace be upon him, and used
to privately correspond with Mu’awiyah. And when Mu’awiyah became the
absolute monarch, he gave a piece of land to him at al-Fallujah and was
quite generous to him."

6. Fatimah(as) on the Day of Judgement
--------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn Musa reported from his
father, who reported from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim, from his father,
from Ibn Abi Umayr, from Aban ibn Uthman, that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said: On the Day of
Judgement, Allah will bring together the first and the last people on
one plane and then He will cause an announcement to be made: "Cast down
your glances and lower your heads, so that Fatimah(peace be upon her),
daughter of Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny, crosses the
Bridge (*al-Sirat*)." He said: "People will cast down their glances and
then Fatimah, peace be upon her, will arrive seated on one of the
highbred animals of Paradise, followed by 70 thousand angels.

Then she will make a distinguished pause at one of the high stations on
the Day of Judgement, dismount and take the blood soiled shirt of
al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali peace be upon him, in her hands, saying: "O Allah!
This shirt belongs to my son, and You know what was done to him."

There will be proclamation from Allah, Most High: "O Fatimah, you have
My pleasure." She will say: "Help me avenge from those who killed him."
Allah will then command a flame from hellfire to leap forth and devour
all the killers of al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, the way a bird
devours a seed. The flame will take them back into the hellpit,
subjecting them to various chastisements. Then Fatimah, peace be upon
her, will ride again and proceed to enter Paradise, accompanied by the
angels following her, her descendants before her and her friends and
partisans on her right and on her left."

7. Be like a honeybee among the birds
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported from Abu ‘Ali
al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Kindi, who reported from Amru ibn Muhammad
al-Harith, who reported from his father Muhammad ibn al-Harith, who
reported from al-Sabah ibn Yahya al-Muzni, from al-Harith ibn Husayrah,
from his father who said:*

Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, told his
followers: Be among people like a honeybee among the birds. For every
quality that a bird has (like flight and speed), it considers the bee as
weak; but if the birds know what blessings the bees carry in their
stomach, they would not have treated them such. Mix up with the people
with your tongues and your bodies (i.e. in appearance), but disassociate
from them with your hearts and your deeds. Every soul shall have what it
earns, and on the Day of Judgement, he will be with the one he loved."

8. O, he who asks about the people bygone, Is there no lesson for you in what you see?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Katib informed me
from Abu ‘Ali Muhammad ibn Hammam al-Iskafi, who reported from Muhammad
ibn Ahmad al-Tirmidhi, who reported from Ubaidullah ibn Umar
al-Qawariri, who reported from Ja'far ibn Sulaiman al-Dhubaee' who
said:*

Once, I came to a deserted graveyard and I heard Malik ibn Dinar say
that:  
 "I have come to the graves and exclaimed,  
 Where are great ones, and where are those who were considered lowly;  
 And where are those who were promptly answered when they summoned,  
 And where is the mighty one, proud of his might?

And where is the one conceited about his authority,  
 And where is the powerful one, who wielded his prowess?"  
 He said: A voice answered me, though I would see no face;  
 "They vied each other for destruction, and there is no sign,  
 they all died, and (with them) the news (about them) died.  
 The earthly insects and worms come and go,  
 and destroy the beauty of those faces,  
 O, he who asks about the people bygone,  
 Is there no lesson for you in what you see?  
    
 And may Allah bless our master Muhammad and his immaculate progeny


