Sixteenth Assembly
==================

Met on Saturday, 10th Shaban, in the year 407 Hijra, the grand Sheikh
al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Nu’man - may Allah
perpetuate his honour, narrated to us:

1. Blessed are those who are detached from this world . . inclined to the next one
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from
al-Husian ibn Muhammad al-Bazzaz, who reported from Abu Abdillah Ja'far
ibn Abdillah al-Alawy al-Muhammadi, who reported from Yahya ibn Hashim
al-Ghassani, from Abu Asim al-Nabeel, from Sufyan, from Abu Ishaq, from
Alaqamah ibn Qais, from Nawf al-Bikali, who said:*

I spent one night at the house of Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib,
peace be upon him, and I saw him coming and going from the house
frequently looking at the sky. Then he entered a normal entrance and
said (to me): "Are you awake or asleep?"

I said: "I am awake, watching you since nightfall, seeing what you do."
He said: "O Nawf, blessed are those who are detached from this world,
inclined to the next one. They have adopted the earth of Allah as a
carpet, the dust He created as a cushion, His Book as the under cover,
and supplications to Him as the outer cover, and His water as the
delicate scent. They relinquish and renounce this world, the way Jesus,
peace upon him, did.

Surely, Allah revealed to Jesus: 'O, Jesus, it is (obligatory) upon you
to follow the path of the predecessors, so that you join the group of
the Prophets. O, brothers of the warners, tell your people not to enter
any of my houses except with pure hearts, clean hands and humbled eyes.
For verily, I do not hear the prayers of a supplicant who has usurped
the right of any of my servants, nor do I answer the prayers of the one
who owes me an unfulfilled duty.'

O Nawf, if you can avoid to be a monitor of the people, or a poet, or a
drummer or a lute player, then do so. For Prophet Dawood, peace be upon
him, came out in one of the nights, looked at various parts of the sky
and then said: By the Sustainer of Dawood, this is the blessed hour
during which if a Muslim servant succeeded to beseech Allah to grant him
good, He would definitely grant it to him, except if he were a monitor
of the people, or a poet, or a drummer or a lute player."

2. Ascetic habits of ‘Ali (as)
------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Malhabi reported to me from
Abdullah ibn Rashid al-Ishfahani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Thaqafi, who reported from Ahmad ibn Shimr, who reported from
Abdullah ibn Maymoon al-Makki, the client of Banu Makhzoon, from Ja'far
al-Sadiq ibn Muhammad al-Baqir, peace be upon them, from his father who
said:*

Once, Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib peace be upon him, was offered
a sweet dish called *Khubais* (mixture of dates, raisins and ghee), but
he refused to eat it. They said: "Do you consider it forbidden?" He
said, "No, but I fear that my heart may become so desirous of it, that I
am forced to come out in its quest." Then he recited the verse:

***'....You have vested all your good deeds,for the enjoyment in the
life of this world....**'**(Al-Ahqaf, 46:20)***

3. The last sermon of the Prophet (SAW)
---------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Katib reported to me from
al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Za'farani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Thaqafi, who reported from Abu Amru Hafs ibn Umar al-Farra, who
reported from Zaid ibn al-Hasan al-Anmati, from Ma'roof ibn Kharrabuz,
who said:*

I heard Abu Ubaidullah, the client of al-Abbas reporting to Abu Ja'far
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, saying: I heard Abu Saeed
al-Khudari say: The last sermon addressed by the Prophet, peace be upon
him and his progeny, was the one addressed to us during the illness in
which he died. He came out leaning upon ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib peace be upon
him, and his maid Maymoonah.

He sat on the pulpit and said: "O people! I am leaving behind among you
two weighty things." Then he remained silent. A man stood up and said:
"O messenger of Allah! What are these two weighty things?" The Prophet
was upset till his face turned red and then it subsided. He said: "I did
not mention them except with an intention to inform you, but you were in
a haste, so I could not. It is a medium whose one end is with Allah, and
the other end is in your hands, with whom you will do such a such thing.
Be it known; they are the Qur'an and the smaller weighty thing, my Ahlul
Bayt."

Then he said: "By Allah, I am saying this to you while I pin more hope
on the unborn progeny of the infidels than upon most of you." And then
he said: "By Allah, whoever loves them, Allah will bless them with a
light on the Day of Judgement, till they arrive near me at the Pool. And
whoever hates them, Allah will keep them away from Him on the Day of
Judgement." Abu Ja'far said: "Surely, Abu Ubaidullah has brought to us
that of which he is aware."

4. Salman's young friend overawed with the fear of divine chastisement
----------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad - may Allah bless him with
mercy, reported to me from Muhammad ibn Abdillah ibn Ja'far al-Himyari,
from his father, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Ibn Abi Umair,
from Umar ibn Yazid, who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him said: "Once, Salman - may Allah be
pleased with him, passed by the iron mongers of Kufa and he saw a young
man who had fainted and people had gathered around him. They told him:
"O Abu Abdillah, this young man has had a fit, perhaps you would come to
recite something in his ears."

He said: Salman came closer to the youth, and when the young man saw
Salman, he gained consciousness and said: "I do not suffer from what
these people think! The fact is that when I passed by those iron mongers
and I saw them strike with the sledgehammers, I remembered what Allah,
Most High, says (in the Qur'an): *'And for them awaits hooked iron
lashes'* (al-Haj:V21). Overawed with the fear of divine chastisement, I
lost my senses."

Salman took him as his brother, and in his heart, entered the sweetness
of affection for the young man, for the sake of Allah. They remained
together; till one day the young man fell ill. Salman visited him and
sat near his head, while the young man was about to die. So he (Salman)
said: "O angel of Death, be tender with my brother." He (the angel)
said: "O, Abu Abdillah, I am tender with all the faithfuls."

5. Establish prayers on time
----------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed Ibn Uqdah, that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Zakariyya reported to them from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, who reported from Abu
Badr, from Amru ibn Yazid ibn Murrah, from Suwaid ibn Ghaflah, from ‘Ali
ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Whoever is
carefully concerned about (praying at) the exact hours of the daily
prayers and about the rising and the setting (hours) of the sun, I
guarantee for him peace at the time of death, relieved of all the griefs
and anxieties, and salvation from the hell fire. Sometimes back, we were
minding the camels, now we mind the sun."

6. Allah hates a person who is unsteady and fickle
--------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Katib reported to me
from Abu ‘Ali Muhammad ibn Hammam al-Iskafi, who reported from Abdullah
ibn Ja'far al-Himyari, who* *reported from Ahmad ibn Abu Abdillah
al-Barqi, who reported from al-Qasim ibn Yahya, from his grandfather
al-Hasan ibn Rashid, from Muhammad ibn Muslim who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah peace be upon him, said: "Be it known to you that Allah
hates a person who is unsteady and fickle. Never slip away from the
truth and its partisans. Whoever, rules and oppresses with the aid of
untruth, and his people shall perish, and shall lose (all that he may
have gained from) this world, and leave the world low and humbled."

7. Doing a good turn to a fool
------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad al-Sayrafi reported to me from Abul
Hasan Ahmad ibn al-Husayn al-Soofi, who reported from Abdullah ibn
Mutee', who reported from Khalid ibn Abdillah, from Ibn Abi Layla, from
Atiyyah from Ka'b ibn al-Ahbar who said:*

"It is written in Torah that whoever does a good turn to a fool, it is
an error which is rendered against himself."

And May Allah bless Muhamamad and his pure progeny and send them
peaceful greetings.


