Seventeenth Assembly
====================

Met on Saturday, the 17th of Shaban in the year 407 Hijra, reporting
from what Abul Fawaris heard alone, and from what I heard together with
Abu Muhammad Abdul Rahman, my brother and al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali
al-Nishaburi, by recitation at our master, the grand Sheikh al-Mufid -
may Allah continue to bless him. The grand Sheikh al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah
Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man - may Allah bless his honour
narrated to us:

1. Fear of Allah . . . a great security
---------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzabani, reported from
Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Hakimi, who reported from Muhammad
ibn Ishaq al-Saghani, who reported from Sulaiman ibn Ayyub, who reported
from Ja'far ibn Sulaiman, from Thabit, from Anas, who said:*

Once, a man from Ansar fell ill, and the Prophet, peace be upon him and
his progeny, visited him when he was about to die. He (the Prophet)
said: "How do you find yourself?" He said: "I see myself hopeful of my
Master's mercy, fearfully concerned about my sins." So the Prophet,
peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "On occasion like this, these
two do not combine in a believer's heart, except that Allah grants him
his hope and secures him from what he fears."

2. What Salman said about ‘Ali (as)
-----------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Hubaish al-Katib reported to
me from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Zafarani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from al-Masoodi, who reported from
Yahya ibn Salim al-Abdi, who reported from Maysarah, from al-Minhal ibn
Amru, from Zarr ibn Hubaish who said:*

Once, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, passed by riding the
Prophet's mule and Salman was present among the people. So Salman - may
Allah bless him with mercy, said: "(O people)! do you not rise to detain
him and ask him questions?

By Allah, Who split the grain and created the breathing creatures, no
one but he (i.e. ‘Ali) will inform you about the secrets of your
Prophet. Indeed, he is the most learned about this earth and its chief
element on which it rests. If you miss him, you will miss the knowledge
and deny the people (its benefit)."

3. People who performed four things and missed the fifth
--------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahalabi reported to me from
Abdullah ibn Rashid al-Ishfahani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Thaqafi, who reported from Ismail ibn Subayh, who reported from Salim
ibn Abu Salim al-Misri, from Abu Haroon al-Abdi who said:*

I held the opinion of the al-Khawarij, accepting nothing else. Then one
day, I sat at Abu Saeed al-Khudari - may Allah bless him with mercy, and
heard him say: "People were ordered to do five things and they performed
four out of them, leaving the fifth." A man asked: "O Abu Saeed, which
are the four things they performed?"

He said: "The daily prayers, the zakat (alms giving), the Hajj and
fasting during the month of Ramadhan." He asked: "And which one did they
leave out?" He said: "The wilayah of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon
him." The man asked: "Was it made obligatory with the first four?" Abu
Saeed said: "Yes, by the Lord of Ka'bah!" The man said: "In that case,
the people have indeed transgressed!" Abu Saeed said: "What is my
fault?"

4. Acts and deeds shall not benefit except when coupled with wilayah
--------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Muqri reported from Abu
Abdillah al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Bazzaz, who reported from Abu
Abdillah Ja'far ibn Abdillah al-Alawi al-Muhammadi, who reported from
Yahya ibn Hashim al-Ghassani, from Muammar ibn Sulaiman, from Laith ibn
Abi Sulaim, from Ata ibn Abi Rabah, from Ibn Abbas who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny said: "Cling steadfastly
to the affection for us Ahlul Bayt. For whoever, meets Allah with our
love in his heart shall enter Paradise by our intercession. By He Who
controls Muhammad's breath, the acts and deeds of a servant shall not
benefit him, except when coupled with our recognition and our love."

5. Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (as) at the Prophet's grave
---------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Waleed - may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah,
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Muhammad ibn Sinan, from Ishaq ibn
Ammar, who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah saying near the grave of the Prophet, peace be upon
him and his progeny: "I beseech (Allah) Who selected and chose you,
purified and guided you and through you guided the people: to bless you;
Surely, Allah and His angels send blessings on the Prophet, O you who
believe, you should invoke blessings on him and peace on him."

6. Isa ibn Abdillah is from us - Ahlul Bayt
-------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad - may Allah bless him with
mercy, reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Musa ibn Talha, from Abu Muhammad brother of
Yunus ibn Ya'qoob, from his brother Yunus, who said:*

I was at Medinah, when Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, met me in
one of its lanes. He said: "O Yunus, go to the door for a person from us
Ahlul Bayt is at the door." He said: "I went towards the door and found
Isa ibn Abdillah sitting there. So, I said: "Who are you." He replied:
"I am from Qum."

He said: "No sooner he said that, then Abu Abdillah appeared on a donkey
and he entered the house riding the donkey. Then attending to us, he
said: "Come through." Then he said: "O Yunus, I believe you were not
prepared to grant when I said that Isa. ibn Abdillah is from us, Ahlul
Bayt?" I said: "It is so, may I be your ransom. For Isa ibn Abdillah is
from people of Qum, how can he be one of you Ahlul Bayt?" He said: "O
Yunus, Isa ibn Abdillah is from us as long as he lives, and he shall be
from us after he has died."

7. The poor shall enter the Paradise first
------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad reported to me from his father,
from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa from al-Hasan
ibn Mahboob, from al-Ula ibn Razeen ibn al-Qalla, from Abdullah ibn Abi
Ya'foor, who reported that:*

Abu Ja'far, peace be upon him, said: "The poor faithfuls shall be moving
about in the gardens of Paradise for forty years before the rich
faithfuls reach there." Then he said: "I will give you an example. It is
just like two ships passing by a tax collector. He sees one and finds
nothing in it, so he allows it to pass by swiftly. Then he looks into
the other, and finds it loaded fully. So he stops it."

8. Do not pry on the faults of the believers and do not revile the Muslims
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad - may Allah bless him with
mercy, reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Muhammad ibn Sinan, from Ishaq ibn
Ammar, from Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "O those who have
submitted with their tongues, but their faith has not reached their
hearts, do not pry on the faults of the believers and do not revile the
Muslims. Surely, he who goes in search for the faults of the believers,
Allah will pry on his faults; and when Allah does that, He exposes him
in the inner most part of his house."

9. Acceptance of wilayah given by the people of Kufa
----------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported from Abul Abbas
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed al-Hamdani, who reported from al-Hasan ibn
‘Ali ibn al-Hasan, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn, from
Muhammad ibn Sinan, from Ubaidullah al-Qasbani, from Abu Basir who
said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, say: "Our
authority is derived form the divine authority, with which every Prophet
was sent. Allah, His Name be glorified, presented our authority to the
heavens, the earth, the mountains and the cities and none gave it the
type of acceptance given by the people of Kufa. Surely, on its one side
there is a grave (i.e. Najaf), whenever an afflicted person visits it,
Allah relieves him of the affliction, answers his prayers and returns
him to his family with happiness and delight."

10. And when death arrives, it does not leave for the Adam's son, any extras or surplus
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Hanzalah Abu Ghassan, who reported from Abu al-Mundhar Hisham ibn
Muhammad ibn al-Saeb, from Muhraz, from Ja'far, the client of Abu
Huraira, who said:*

Once, Artat ibn Suhaiyya, who was then one hundred thirty years old,
called upon Abdul Malik ibn Marwan. Abdul Malik said: "O Artat! What is
now left of your poetry?" He said: "By Allah, O, Commander of the
faithfuls, I do not rejoice, nor do I get angry, nor do I drink. And if
I feel like expressing these sentiments in a poem, then nothing comes to
my mind but the following:  
    
 "I have seen man devoured by the nights,  
 the way iron junk is eaten up by the earth;  
 And when death arrives, it does not leave  
 for the Adam's son, any extras or surplus.  
 And I know that it will continue to come,  
 Till it fulfills its pledge with Abul Al-Walid."

Abdul Malik's kunya was Abul Al-Walid, so when he heard the couplet, he
was terribly shaken. So, Artat said: "I meant myself, O, Commander of
the faithfuls." Because Artat also had the kunya Abu Al-Walid.

Abdul Malik said: "By Allah, whatever happens to you shall happen to me
also."  
 And may Allah bless our master Muhammad the Prophet, the unlearned, and
his progeny.


