Eighteenth Assembly
===================

Met on Saturday, 24th Shaban, in the year 407 Hijra; from what Abul
Fawaris heard alone, and from what I heard together with my brother Abu
Abdul Rahman and what al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali al-Nishaburi heard, from the
utterance of the grand Sheikh. The grand Sheikh al-Mufid Abu Abdillah
Muhammad ibn Muhmmad al-Nu’man - may Allah continue His beneficence upon
him, narrated thus:

1. Believer's tears in the fear of Allah
----------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh - may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah,
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa al-Ashari, from al-Hasan ibn Mehboob,
from Hisham ibn Salim, from Muhammad ibn Marwan, that:*

Abu Ja'far al-Baqir, peace be upon him, said: "There is no eye that gets
filled with tears due to the fear of Allah, except that Allah saves its
whole body from hell fire; and the cheeks upon which the tears stream
down, shall have neither gloom nor disgrace overspreading the face; and
every good deed has a fixed weight and reward, except the tears which
flow due to the fear of Allah, for with every drop, Allah shall put out
oceans of fire of the Day of Judgement. Surely, when one person among a
group of Muslim people (i.e. Ummah) weeps with the fear of Allah, He
blesses that whole Ummah with mercy because of that believer's tears."

2. Before the advent of Hujjat (as)
-----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi - may Allah bless him
with mercy, reported to me from Muhammad ibn Musa al-Hazrami, who
reported from Malik ibn Abdillah ibn Saif, who reported from ‘Ali ibn
Mu'bid who reported from Ishtaq ibn Yahya al-Ka'bi, from Sufyan
al-Thori, from Mansur, from Rab'ee ibn Harash, from Huzaifa ibn
al-Yaman, who said:*

I heard the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, say: "Allah will
distinguish His sincere servants and the pure ones, so that the earth is
cleansed of the hypocrites and of those who have gone astray and their
generations. Till such time, when there could be fifty women meeting a
man, each asking: O servant of Allah, take me as a maid, O servant of
Allah, give me refuge."

3. Whoever doubts the excellence of ‘Ali (as)
---------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from Abu
Abdillah al-Asadi, who reported from Ja'far ibn Abdullah at Alawi
al-Muhammadi; who reported from Yahya ibn Hashim al-Simsar al-Ghassani,
who reported from Abu al-Sabah Abdul Ghafoor al-Wasiti, from Abdullah
ibn Muhammad al-Qarshi, from Abu ‘Ali al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Rasibi, from
al-Dhahhak ibn Muzahim, from Ibn Abbas - may Allah bless him with mercy,
who reported that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny said: "Whoever doubts the
excellence of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, will rise from his
grave on the Day of Reckoning, with a collar of fire around his neck,
having three hundred prongs. On each prong, there will be a Satan
frowning upon him, spitting at his face."

4. The tradition of Ayyub
-------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Katib reported to me from
al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Zafarani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Thaqafi, who reported from Ismail ibn Aban, who reported from Fadhl
ibn al-Zubair, from Imran ibn Mitham, from Abayah al-Asadi, who said:*

I heard ‘Ali, peace be upon him, say: "I am the master of the aged ones.
And in me is the tradition of Ayyub (i.e. his sufferings), and by Allah,
He will gather together my family for me, the way He did for Ya'qooibn"

5. The one who stood on a clear sign from His Sustainer and his witness from Him
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Abdillah ibn Asad al-Ishfahani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from Ismail ibn Aban, who reported
from al-Sabbah ibn Yahya al-Muzni, from al-A'mash from al-Minhal ibn
Amru, from Abbad ibn Abdillah, who said:*

That a person called upon Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, and
asked: "O Amirul Mu’mineen, explain to me the verse of Qur'an in which
Allah says:

***'Is the one who stands upon a clear sign from his Sustainer and a
witness to him follows him ....?' (Hud, 11:17)***

He (‘Ali) said: "The messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, is the one who stood on a clear sign from His Sustainer; and I
am his witness from Him. By He Who controls my breath, Allah has
mentioned in His Book about every group from Quraish. By Him Who
controls my soul, for the people to understand what Allah has destined
for us Ahlul Bayt, through the revelation to His unlearned Prophet, is
more lovable to me than for me to have the whole expanse filled with
gold. By Allah, our example in this Ummah is like Noah's Arc or like the
Gate of Forgiveness for the children of Israel."

6. ‘Ali (as) mobilizing his army for Jihad
------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Hubaish al-Katib reported to
me from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Zafarani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from Muhammad ibn Ismail, from Zaid
ibn al-Muaddal, from Yahya ibn Swaleh, from al-Harith ibn Husairah, from
Abu Sadiq, from Jundab ibn Abdillah al-Azadi, who said:*

I heard Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, say to
his companions, after having urged them for days on end to march forth
for Jihad but in vain: "O people! I have ordered you to march forth, but
you did not, and I have admonished you, but you did not acquiesce. So,
you are like the absentees in spite of your presence and the deaf in
spite of your hearing! I recite unto you words of wisdom and preach to
you beautiful preaching and exhort you to fight your despotic
adversaries; but when I come to the close of my speech, I find you as
disunited as the hands of Saba' (i.e. ten children of a Yamani chief who
were each separated from the other).

And the moment I turn away from you, you return to your meetings,
forming group circles. (There) you set up similitudes, chant poems and
ask each other the news. You have forgotten the art of preparedness for
war, and have occupied your minds with unavailing things. Your hands are
weakened! Rise to fight the enemy before they overwhelm you! By Allah!
Never was a community attacked in its own houses, except that it was
humiliated and vanquished.

And I swear in the name of Allah, I do not see you do it, till they have
done! And I would love to confront them (alone) with my (firm)
determination and vision, (and get killed in the way of Allah) so that I
am relieved of enduring you. For, you are like a hoard of camels, which
has lost its herdsman; no sooner are they herded on one side, than they
fall apart from each other on the other side. By Allah, I can visualize
about you that if the war were to rage on, and the hostilities were to
flame up, you would separate yourselves from ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as
easily as the heads are cut off and) the way a woman shirks as she
delivers (her child)."

At that time, al-Ash'ath ibn Qais al-Kindi stood up and said: "O Amirul
Mu’mineen, why didn't you do what Uthman ibn Affan did?" (i.e. granting
favours for the sake of compromising). He, peace upon him, said: "O,
pusher to the hellfire! Woe unto you! The act of Ibn Affan was a
disgraceful one, even for the one who has no religion, nor any authority
with him; so, how can I, who stands on a manifest proof from my
Sustainer and the rightful authority is in my hand, do that?

By Allah, that man is indeed weak, who himself makes it possible for his
enemy to carve his flesh, crush his bones, tear down his skin and spill
his blood! Such a man is not blessed with a brave heart. If you so
desire, be like him! As far as I am concerned, the least I can give that
enemy is a hit of my sword, which will send the bones of the skull
flying, palm falling together with the arms. Then Allah shall do what He
intends."

Then Abu Ayyub al-Ansari Khalid ibn Zaid, the host of the Prophet, peace
be upon him and his progeny, rose, and said: "O people, surely Amirul
Mu’mineen has conveyed to those who have heeding ears and remembering
hearts. Allah has indeed blessed you with an honour, which you do not
accept in the way you should! He has left with you your Prophet's
cousin, master of all the Muslims after him (i.e. the Prophet). He (i.e.
‘Ali) makes you learned in Religion and calls you to fight against those
who have descended upon you to afflict you. It seems as if you have gone
deaf, hearing nothing. Or that your hearts are impermeably wrapped, so
that you do not understand! Are you not ashamed?

O servants of Allah! Did you not have an era of injustice and hostility
yesterday? (i.e. in the days gone by). An era in which affliction was
common, spread all over the country? When the rightfuls were deprived,
their faces smacked, their bellies trampled upon, hurled down on an open
ground, and borne by the sandstorms.

There was nothing to protect them from heat or cold, from being scorched
by the sun and its glare, except the tattered clothes on their bodies,
or the shaggy old huts.

Till Allah brought unto you Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, who
declared the truth and spread justice, and acted according to the Book
(i.e. the Qur'an). So, O people, be thankful to Allah for the bounty
with which He has blessed you, and do not turn away on your backs. And
be not of those who say "we hear", but they hear not.

Sharpen your swords and prepare to fight your enemies. Respond when you
are summoned and listen and obey when commanded. Let that what you say
happen; and prove yourselves among the truthful by following what you
have been ordered to do."

7. Pray with all your heart and mind. . .
-----------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Walid - may
Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from his father, from Sa'd
ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Hasan ibn
Mahboob, from Ibrahim al-Karkhi who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, say: "When
Allah combines in the heart of a believer the virtues of guarding from
the forbidden evils and renouncing the world, I pray that Allah grant
him paradise."

Then he added: "I love to find a believing person from you standing for
his daily prayers, with all his heart and mind set for Allah; not
digressed by any worldly anxieties. And when a faithful comes to his
Sustainer with all his heart and mind, then Allah turns His attention
towards him; and after He has confirmed His love for him, He fills the
people's heart with His love."

8. Believers are all brothers
-----------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs, Umar ibn Muhammad al-Sayrafi, reported from Muhammad
ibn Hammam al-Katib al-Iskafi, who reported from Abdullah ibn Ja'far
al-Himyari, who reported from Muhammad ibn Isa al-Ash'ari, who reported
from Abdullah ibn Ibrahim, who reported from al-Husayn ibn Zaid, from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his father who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "The believers are
all brothers; each one fulfilling the needs of the other. And because
they help each other when in need, Allah will fulfill their needs on the
Day of Judgement."

And may Allah bless upon our master Muhammad, the Prophet, and upon his
progeny.


