Nineteenth Assembly
===================

Met on Saturday, 1st of Ramadhan in the year 407 Hijra, and attended by
brother Abu Muhammad - may Allah keep him. The grand Sheikh al-Mufid,
Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man - may Allah continue
His beneficence upon him, narrated thus:

1. The two most firm bonds of faith
-----------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid reported to me from
his father, from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Malik ibn Atiyya, from
Saeed al-A'araj, that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq, peace be upon him said:
"Among the most firm bonds of faith is that you love for the sake of
Allah, and hate for the sake of Allah. And you give away for the sake of
Allah, and refuse to give for the sake of Allah."

2. Man is with him who he loves
-------------------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Muqri, reported to me from
Abu Abdillah al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Asadi, who reported from Abu
Abdillah Ja'far ibn Abdillah al-Alawi, who reported from Yahya ibn
Hashim al-Ghassani, who reported from Yahya ibn Tha'labah al-Ansari,
from Asim ibn Abu al-Najood, from Zarr ibn Hubaish from Abdullah ibn
Masood, who said:*

Once, when we were with the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny,
on one of his journeys, a Bedouin shouted at us: "O Muhammad!" The
Prophet said: "What do you want?" He said: "What about a person who has
an affinity and love for a community, but does not follow their acts?"
The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Man is with him
who he loves."

Then he said: "O Muhammad, present to me al-Islam." He (i.e. the
Prophet) said: "Testify that there is no god but Allah, and that I am
His messenger. And establish the daily prayers, give alms (zakat), fast
during the month of Ramadhan and come to the House of Allah for Hajj."
He said: "O, Muhammad, do you take any reward for this?" He (i.e. the
Prophet) said: "None, except the love for the nearest kins." He asked:
"Do you mean my nearest kins or yours?" He (i.e. the Prophet) said: "My
kins." He said: "Extend your hand so that I may give you my allegiance.
There is no good in a person who does not love you and your kinsfolk."

3. "Ask me before you miss me. . ." ‘Ali (as)
---------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Abdillah ibn Asad al-Ishfahani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from al-Qannad, who reported from ‘Ali
ibn Hashim, from his father, from Saeed ibn al-Musayyib who said:*

I heard Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, say:
"There is no verse between the two covers of the Qur'an, except that I
know for whom it was revealed and when it was revealed, and whether on a
plain, levelled land or upon a mountain. Surely, here in my breast is
abundant knowledge! So, put your questions to me before you do not find
me among yourselves, for when you have lost me, you will not find anyone
uttering the words I utter."  
  

4. Disassociating in the matter of the wilayah of Ahlul Bayt
------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad - may Allah bless him with
mercy, reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Muhammad ibn Sinan, from Abdul Karim
ibn Amru and Ibrahim ibn Rahah al-Basri, who both reported from
Mayassar, who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him told him: "What do
you say about a person who does not disobey in what Allah has enjoined
and forbidden, but he disassociates with you and your friends in this
matter (i.e. wilayah of Ahlul Bayt)?" I said: "What can I say in your
presence?" He said: "Say, for I command you to speak." I said: "He will
be in hellfire."

Then he said: "O Mayassar, what do you say about a person who has faith
similar to yours, and has committed sins normally committed by people,
but he refrains from the major sins?" I said: "What can I say in your
presence?" He said: "Say, for that is my order." I said: "He will be in
Paradise."  
 He said: "Perhaps you are hesitating in saying that such a person will
be in Paradise!" I said: "No"  
 He said: "Do not hesitate, for surely, Allah, Most High, says (in the
Qur'an):

***'If you avoid the heinous sins that are forbidden you, We will
expiate your evil deeds and admit you in honourable manner.' (al-Nisa,
4:31)"***

5. "While I was worthiest of them all . . ." ‘Ali (as)
------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Katib reported to me from
al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Zafarani, who reported from Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from al-Masoodi, who reported from
al-Hasan ibn Hammad, from his father, who reported from Razin Bayya'
al-Anmat, who said:*

I heard Zaid ibn ‘Ali ibn Husayn, peace be upon him, narrating from his
father who reported from his father who said: I heard Amirul Mu’mineen,
peace be upon him, addressing the people thus: "By Allah, people gave
allegiance to Abu Bakr while I was worthiest of them all, together with
the attire of mine. But I swallowed my anger, and waited for my
Sustainer's will, keeping my chest low to the ground (i.e. adopting a
low profile).

Then Abu Bakr died, appointing Umar as his successor, though he knew
that I was the worthiest of them all, together with this attire of mine.
But I swallowed my anger and waited for my Sustainer's will. Then Umar
died and made it an agenda for the consultative committee (*al-Shura*).
He appointed me the sixth among the six members, like the share of the
grandmother! And he said: 'Kill the dissenting minority;' and by this he
meant no one but me. But I swallowed my fury, waited for my Sustainer's
will and kept my chest low on the ground.

Then, the dissenting people did what they did after having sworn
allegiance to me; and I had no alternative but either to fight against
them or disobey Allah."

6. ‘Ali's address as Ayesha prepares for Basrah
-----------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawyh - may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from
Ahmad ibn Alawiyyah, from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported
from Muhammad ibn Amru al-Razi, who reported from al-Husayn ibn
al-Mubarak, who reported from al-Hasan ibn Salimah, who said:*

When Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, covered the trail of Talha,
al-Zubair and Ayesha, from Makkah to al-Basrah, he announced a
congregational prayer. When the people assembled, he praised Allah, and
glorified His Name. Then he said: "Surely, when Allah, Most High,
summoned back His Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, we said:
'We are the inmates of his household, his blood relatives, his heirs and
his executors.

We are the worthiest among the whole creation for his affairs, and we
would not dispute his Truth and authority.' While we thought that way, a
group of hypocrites rose to usurp our Prophet's authority from us and
give it into the control of others.

By Allah, because of that, our eyes wept and our hearts lamented; and
our throats choked with grief. And I swear by the name of Allah, had we
not feared that the Muslims would be divided, taking them back to
infidelity and apostasy, we would have done our best to change that
situation. Those rulers were given the control of the affairs and when
they passed on, Allah returned the affairs unto me.

And among those who swore loyalty to me, these two men, Talha and
al-Zubair also swore, but then they proceeded to al-Basrah to create a
friction among your peoples and to bring upon you your misfortune. O
Allah, punish them both for deceiving this Ummah, and for the evil
intentions they nurse for the public."

Then Abul Haitham ibn al-Tayyihan - may Allah bless him with mercy,
stood up and said: "O Amirul Mu’mineen, the Quraish are jealous of you
for two reasons: either their eminent members are jealous of you,
competing for excellouce or wishing to have an elevated position; or the
wicked ones who are jealous, and so Allah has made their deeds fail, and
their burdens heavy.

They were not happy to remain as your equals, as they chose to precede
you; and thus, they missed their goal and fell off in the race. You were
indeed worthier than any Quraish; you were the Prophet's assistant as
long as he lived; and you settled all his liabilities after his death.
By Allah, their insolence is against themselves! We are your helpers and
supporters; so give us your orders". Then he recited the following
couplets:

"The people have rebelled against you, plotted against you  
 and imputed against you ugly things,  
 But the fact is that you have no faults, not even equal to a  
 gnat's wing, nor equal to its tenth;

They saw you blessed with bounties from Allah,  
 and found you a brave master, crushing the horns of a butting ram;  
 They saw you a leader under whom all seek refuge,  
 and they found you a strong rein that tames a capricious horse!  
 They found you a governor, in whose authority Imamah is combined,  
 and a Hashamite who controls the wide valley of Makkah.

They are jealous of what has come to you from Allah!  
 And thereby have inflicted upon their own hearts deep wounds!

There are people there who are vessels of intense hatred  
 against the Truth, niggardly because of their wretchedness,  
 Some of them concealing it behind the veils,  
 others insistently displaying the enmity.

'O Successor of the Prophet, our relation with the Truth  
 is like the delight and joy at the break of dawn;  
 So punish the Aws and a clan from al-Khazraj  
 with the thrust of the spear in war, and with confrontation;

There is none among us who is not a helper  
 in the way Allah, on the path of guidance and success."  
 Then Amirul Mu’mineen prayed for his reward. After that, people stood
up, each speaking the way Abul Haitham spoke.

7. Admonition from Ibliss
-------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawyh - may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported from Muhammad ibn Ya'qoob al-Kulayni, from ‘Ali
ibn Ibrahim, from Muhammad ibn Isa al-Yaqtini, from Yunus ibn Abdul
Rahman, from Sa'daan ibn Muslim, from Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad,
peace be upon him, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny said: "Once, when Musa
ibn Imran, peace be upon him, was seated, Iblis approached him, with a
hooded cloak of motley colours. As he came nearer, he removed the cloak
and greeted Musa. Musa said:" Who are you?" He said: "I am Iblis." Musa
said: "May Allah not bring your abode closer (to anyone)! Why have you
come?" He said: "I have come to greet you for the status that you have
before Allah, Most High." So Musa said: "And what about this cloak?" He
said: "With that, I hijack the hearts of the people!"

Then Musa asked him: "Tell me about the sin which when Adam's son
commits it, you overpower him and get the better of him?" He said: "When
he becomes conceited, and regards his good deeds as too many; and when
his own sins seem small to him."

Then he told Musa: "I give you three advices: O Musa, never be alone
with a stranger woman, or allow her to be with you in privacy, for
either of you do not meet the other without me being in your company,
without my other colleagues! And be careful when you give a covenant or
pledge to Allah! (Fulfil it immediately).

For whenever a man pledges a vow or a covenant with Allah, I intervene
between him and its fulfillment - without my colleagues! And when you
intend giving a charity, give it soon, for when a servant of Allah
intends giving alms, I alone, without my colleagues, sit in between his
intention and the charity, preventing it!"

Then Iblis turned away saying: "O, what a shame, what a grief! I have
taught Musa (a secret) which he will impart to the sons of Adam!"

8. No good is too much, no evil too little
------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibnal-Husayn ibn Babawayh - may
Allah have mercy on him, reported from his father, from ‘Ali ibn
Ibrahim, from Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubaid, from Uthman ibn Isa from
Sama'ah ibn Mehran, who said:*

I heard Abul Hasan Musa ibn Ja'far, peace be upon him, say: "Do not
regard your good deeds as too many, and do not consider your sins as too
few. Surely, sometimes those little lapses gather together to become
many. And be mindful (fearful) of Allah, Most High, in your privacy, so
that you are granted to treat yourselves justly.

And hasten towards obedience to Allah, and be truthful in your speech,
and return the deposits held by you to the rightful owner. These traits
are good for you; and do not get involved in things which are not
legitimate for they will do you harm!"

9. When Allah wishes His servant well
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad - may Allah have mercy on him,
reported to me from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ya'qoob al-Kulayni - may
Allah bless him with mercy, from al-Husayn ibn Muhammad, from Mu'alla
ibn Muhammad, from al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali al-Washha', from Hammad ibn
Uthman, who reported from Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be
upon him, from his forefathers, peace be upon them, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "When Allah wishes
well for a servant, He makes him learned in the Religion (i.e.
Islam)."  
 And may Allah bless our master, Muhammad and his progeny.


