Twentieth Assembly
==================

Met on Saturday, 8th of the month of Ramadhan, in the year 407;
narration heard by Abul Fawaris, by audition from my brother Abu
Muhammad - may Allah keep him, and al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali al-Nishaburi,
among the people attending the session before this. The grand Sheikh
al-Mufid Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man - may Allah
grant him beneficence, said:

1. Do not transgress Divine limits
----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from
Abdullah ibn Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn A'yan al-Bazzaz, who reported from
Zakariyya ibn Yahya ibn Sabeeh, who reported from Khalaf ibn Khalifa,
from Saeed ibn Ubaid al-Taee, from ‘Ali ibn Rabee'ah al-Walibi, from
Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Surely, Allah has
set for you limits, so do not transgress them; and has made certain acts
obligatory upon you, so do not waste them; and has set some traditions
for you, so follow them; and has made sacred some sanctities, so do not
desecrate them; and He has excused you about certain matters as a token
of mercy for you, without forgetting them, so do not burden yourselves
with them."

2. Let no hopes or ambitions digress you
----------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Makki, who reported from Abu al-Ayna, from
Muhammad ibn al-Hakam, from Lut ibn Yahya, from al-Harith ibn Ka'b, from
Mujahid who reported that:*

Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, said: "Be least
interested in this world from which no one from your predecessors ever
benefited, nor will it remain for anyone after you have gone! The path
you are walking on is the same as that of the bygones, totally cut off
and subjected to annihilations, their good deeds forgotten and unknown.

This world warns its inmates of destruction, and its residents of Death.
That which was once sweet from it has become bitter; and that which was
once clear has become turbid. Nothing has ever remained in it except
like the last droplets of water in a vessel, or a few gulps, which if a
thirsty were to suck up, would not be satiated.

So, be prepared for a journey from this abode, whose residents are
destined to perish, and prevented from living forever. They have been
submitted to dying, therefore no life should crave perpetuity. Everyone
here awaits death. Let no hopes and expectations digress you, nor should
you regard it as a long age; and do not be deceived by its promises.

And, if you were to roam about like a camel yearning to find its heifer
and coo like a dove, calling its young one, and raise your beseeching
cry like a worshipful hermit, and come out together with your wealth and
children, so as to seek nearness to Him, and be elevated in His
estimation; or to be forgiven the sins which His angels and scribes have
recorded, it would all be too little to earn His reward which I hope for
you, or to be saved from His wrath which I fear for you. May Allah keep
us and you among the repentents and the worshipping ones."

3. The Prophet's address on the day of Arafah
---------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Abdullah ibn Asad al-Ishfahani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from Abdul Rahman ibn Abi Hashim, who
reported from Yahya ibn al-Husayn al-Bijilli, from Abu Haroon al-Abdi,
from Zadhan, who reported from Salman al-Farsi - may Allah bless him
with mercy, that:*

The messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, once appeared on the day of
*Arafah* and said: "O, people, surely Allah glorified Himself because of
you on this day, so that He may pardon you generally and pardon ‘Ali in
particular." Then he said: "Come near me, O ‘Ali." So ‘Ali drew near.
Then the Prophet took him by his hand and said: "Surely, the blessed,
completely and truly blessed is the one who obeyed you and loved you
after I have gone. And surely, the wretched, completely and truly
wretched is the one who disobeyed you, and showed his hostility after I
have gone."

4. Abu Dharr . . . the fearless
-------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Abdullah al-Ishfahani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Thaqafi, who reported from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, who reported from
al-Husayn ibn Sufyan, from his father, from Abu Jahdham al-Azdi, from
his father who said that:*

When Uthman ordered Abu Dharr al-Ghifari - may Allah bless him with
mercy, into exile from Medinah to Syria, he (i.e. Abu Dharr) used to
stand up everyday admonishing people, exhorting them to obey Allah,
warning them against committing sins. And he used to narrate from the
messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, whatever he had
heard about the virtues and excellence of his Ahlul Bayt, peace be upon
them, enjoining upon them to follow his progeny.

So, Mu’awiyah wrote to Uthman: "Be it known to you that Abu Dharr, at
all times during the day, morning and evening, has a large group of
people around him and to them he says such and such things. Well, if you
have any need of me among the people, then I would send Abu Dharr to
you, for I fear that he will instigate people against you; with
Salaams."

Then Uthman wrote to him: "As this letter reaches you, send Abu Dharr
back to me; with Salaams."  
 Then Moawiyah sent for Abu Dharr and made him read the letter from
Uthman, saying: "Make haste, and go now." Abu Dharr came to his camel
fastened his saddle to set off. The people gathered around him saying:
"O Abu Dharr! May Allah have mercy on you, where are you going?"

He said: "They drove me out to come to you, as they were angry with me,
and now they are driving me away from you to them, messing around with
me. And this will continue as I see it, because of my difference with
them, till the righteous relaxes or is relieved of the wicked one." Then
he left.

As people heard of his departure, they followed him till outside
Damascus and remained in his company till he reached the monastery of
*Murran.* He alighted and with him the people also stopped. He was asked
to lead, so he prayed with them and then he addressed: "O people! I
admonish you about things, which will benefit you, and I do not resort
to speeches and eloquence. All of you praise Allah, Most High."

So they said: "All praise be to Allah." He said: "I testify that there
is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His slave and His messenger."
They repeated what he uttered. Then he said: "I testify that the
resurrection is truth and that the heaven is truth and that the hell is
truth; and I confirm what he (i.e. Muhammad) has come with from Allah.
So bear witness for me over what I have confirmed." And they said: "And
we are among those who testify."

He said: "Whoever among you dies on these tenets of faith, may he have
good tidings of Allah's mercy and honour; as long as he does not support
the wrongdoers, and does not justify the torture of the tyrants nor does
he assist them in anyway.

'O people! Let your daily prayers and fasts be combined with your
displeasure for the sake of Allah, whenever He is disobeyed on the
earth! Do not please your leaders to incur the wrath of Allah. And if
they come up with innovations of which you know not, stay aloof from
them; and remain strong against them, even if you were tortured,
deprived or rusticated, so that Allah may be pleased with you! Surely,
Allah is Most High and it does not behave to displease Him, by pleasing
His creatures. May Allah forgive me and you all. I entrust you to His
care, and sent you greetings and the grace of Allah."

Then people exclaimed: "May Allah greet you with safety and shower upon
you His mercy, O, Abu Dharr; O companion of the Prophet, peace be upon
him and his progeny; we will not send you back if they expel you and we
will not refuse you entry." Abu Dharr said: "Return to your places, may
Allah have mercy upon you; for I am more tolerant of the adversities
than you are. And be careful, never be disunited."

So, he went away till he arrived at Uthman's and upon his arrival,
Uthman told him: "May Allah show no favour to the eyes, which behold
Amru." Upon this, Abu Dharr reported: "My parents did not name me Amr.
But may Allah not favour the one who disobeys Him, acts against His
commands and follows his own base desires."

At that time, Ka'b al-Ahbar stood up against him and said: "You old man!
Do you not fear Allah when you talk back this way to Amirul Mu’mineen?"
Then Abu Dharr raised the stick, which he had in his hands and hit Ka'b
on his head, saying: "O son of the Jewish parents, why do you have to
speak on behalf of the Muslims? For, By Allah, your jewishness has not
come out of your heart yet."

Then Uthman said: "May Allah not unite me with you under one roof! You
have indeed gone senile and you have lost your senses. Get him away out
of my sight, mount him on a bare camel and then hasten the camel to
reach him uncomfortably to Rabdhah. Then drop him there alone, till
Allah may decide his fate." So he was pushed away with humiliation, with
his ribs prodded.

It was declared in advance that no one should bid him farewell. When the
news reached ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, he wept till his
beard was wet with tears and then he said: "Is this the way to treat the
companion of the messenger of Allah? We are for Allah, and unto Him
shall we return!"

Then he stood up, accompanied by al-Hasan, al-Husayn, Abdullah ibn
Abbas, al-Fadhl, Qathum and Ubaidullah and proceeded till they drew
close to Abu Dharr. They continued following him. When Abu Dharr, may
Allah have mercy on him, saw them, he wept in sympathy for them and
said: "May my father be ransom for the faces which remind me of the
Prophet (peace be upon him, and his progeny) when I see them; and mere
sight of them overwhelms me with divine blessings."

Then he raised his hands towards the heavens and said: "O Allah! I love
them; and shall remain steadfast even if I were cut into pieces because
of their love! And that is only for Your pleasure and for the next
abode! Return to your places, may Allah have mercy upon you, and I pray
to Allah that He may keep me in the best relationship with you." Then
they bid him farewell and returned with tears in their eyes.

5. Quickest evil consequences
-----------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Qasim al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan, who reported from Ja'far ibn
Muhammad ibn Marwan, from his father, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Ismail al-Hashimi, who reported from Abdul Mu'min, who reported from
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, that Jabir ibn
Abdullah al-Ansari narrated:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "The quickest evil
consequence is for a man to whom you do a good turn and he pays you back
by evil deeds; and a man with whom you have entered into a covenant
wishing to fulfil it, while he intends to deceive you; and a person to
who you are not insolent, but he persists in his insolence against you;
and a person with whom you mend your blood relationship but he cuts you
off."

6. The prayer of ‘Ali (as)
--------------------------

*He said: Abu ‘Ali Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Suliy reported to me in the
mosque of Baratha, in the year 353, from Abul Aziz ibn Yahya al-Jaloodi,
who reported from Muhammad ibn Zakariyya al-Ghalabiy, who reported from
Qais ibn Hafs al-Daramiy, who reported from al-Husayn al-Ashqar, from
Umar (or Amru) ibn Abdul Ghaffar, from Ishaq ibn al-Fadhl al-Hashimi,
who said:*

"Among the supplications of Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace
be upon him, there was the following:

"O Allah! I seek refuge with you from being hostile to a person who is
Your saint; or from being friendly to one who is Your adversary, or to
choose Your permanent wrath. O Allah! Our blessings be for those You
have blessed, and our curse be upon those You have cursed; O Allah!
relieve us by the demise of one whose death is a relief for us and for
all the Muslims; and grant us in exchange one who is better for us than
he; so that You may show us, by Your acceptance, that which we wish to
realize in our faith and in our lives; O Most Merciful among the
mercifuls."

And may Allah bless our master Muhammad and his progeny.


