Twenty Second Assembly
======================

Meeting of Saturday, 22nd of the month of Ramadhan, in the year 407
Hijrah, heard by Abul Fawaris. The grand Sheikh al-Mufid Abu Abdillah
Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man - may Allah bless him with eternal
providence, narrated:

1. Seek provision from halaal
-----------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar ibn Salim ibn al-Baraa, popularly
known as Ibn al-Ji’abi, may Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me
from Abul Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed al-Hamdani, popularly known
as Ibn Uqdah, who reported from Yahya ibn Zakariyya ibn Shayban, who
reported from Muhammad ibn Marwan al-Dhuhali, from Amru ibn Saif al-Azdi
who said:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad (peace be upon him) told me: "Do not
abandon seeking your subsistence from its legitimate sources, for that
helps you remain on your faith. And fasten your camel (first), and then
entrust (it to) Allah."  
  

2. When prayers are not blessed
-------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad, who reported from Muhammad ibn Abdillah ibn
Ghalib, who reported from al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali ibn Rabah, from Saif ibn
Umairah, who reported from Muhammad ibn Marwan, who reported from
Abdullah ibn Abi Ya'foor that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said: "Allah does
not bless the prayers with acceptance from three persons: From a slave
who has escaped from his masters, till he returns and places his hand in
their hands; from an Imam who leads people (in prayers) while they hate
him; from a wife who passes a night while her husband is displeased with
her."

3. ‘Ali in the night of Prophet's Mi’raj
----------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibnal-Hasan ibn al-Walid
reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, from Bakr ibn Swaleh, from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali, from
Abdullah ibn Ibrahim, who reported from al-Husayn ibn Zaid, from Ja'far
ibn Muhammad, reporting from his father and his grandfather, peace be
upon them, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: The night I was
taken to the heavens, I ended up at *Sidratul Muntaha*, I heard: "O
Muhammad, counsel (your people) good about ‘Ali, for he is the master of
the Muslims, Imam of the people of *Taqwa* (those who guard themselves
from all sins), and leader of the hopping horses with white spots on
their foreheads (leading to the Paradise), on the Day of Judgement."

4. Ten traits of ‘Ali (as)
--------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Katib reported to me from
al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Za'farani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Thaqafi, who reported from Uthman ibn Abi Shaibah from Amru ibn
Maymoon, from Ja'far ibn Muhammad from his father, from his grandfather,
peace be upon them, that:*

Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, once said from
the pulpit of Kufa: "O people, the messenger of Allah, peace be upon him
and his progeny, has awarded me ten traits; and they are dearer to me
than anything upon which the sun shines."

He said to me:  
 ‘Ali, you are my brother in this world and in the next;  
 And on the Day of Judgement, when we stand before the Almighty, you
will be nearest of all to me;  
 Your abode in Paradise will be facing mine, the way brothers in faith
live, with their houses facing each other;  
 You are my heir;  
 You are my executor after me, to fulfil my promises and my affairs;  
 And in my absence, you are the guardian of my family, on my behalf;  
 You are the Imam of my Ummah;  
 You are the one to uphold justice among my subjects;  
 You are my beloved one; and Allah loves who I love;  
 Your foe is my foe and my foe is the foe of Allah.

5. Weeping for the sufferings of Ahlul Bayt
-------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed al-Hamdani, who reported from Ahmad
ibn Abdul Hamid ibn Khalid, who reported from Muhammad ibn Amru ibn
Utbah, from al-Husayn al-Ashqar, from Muhammad ibn Abi Amarah al-Kufi
who said:*

I heard Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, say: "Whoever sheds a
tear over our spilled blood, or over our usurped rights, or over the
dishonour we have suffered, or any of our followers has suffered, such a
person shall be blessed by Allah, Most High, in paradise for a long
period of time."

6. ‘Ali (as) refuses to grant undue preference
----------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Abdillah ibn Asad al-Ishfahani, who reported from Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from Muhammad ibn Abdillah ibn Uthman,
who reported form ‘Ali ibn Abi Saif, from Abu Habab, from Rabee'ah, from
Amarah and others who said:*

When people deserted ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, and fled to
Mu’awiyah seeking worldly gains from him, a group from the companions of
Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, called upon him and told him: "O
Amirul Mu’mineen, spend the wealth and give preference to the noble
clans of Arabs and Quraish over the client tribes and the non-Arabs; and
appease those who you fear may turn against you or run away to
Mu’awiyah."

Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, told them: "Do you counsel me to
enlist help by unfairness? No, by Allah, I shall never do it, for as
long as the sun shines and the stars in the sky twinkle! By Allah, if
their wealth had belonged to me, I would have distributed equally to
them, so how can I discriminate when the wealth belongs to all of them?"

He said: Then Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, remained silent for
some time and then said: "Whoever has wealth, he should be wary of being
spoiled. Surely, when wealth is given to an undeserving person, then it
is a squander and extravagance. And though it makes the giver popular in
this world, it is wasted in the eyes of Allah.

And a person who squanders his wealth wastefully giving to those who do
not deserve, Allah deprives him from their gratitude and causes them to
have affinity towards others! And if at all there are some who are
inclined and grateful to him, it is nothing but flattery and sham. They
wish to ingratiate themselves to him so that they may continue to
receive what they have been receiving before. And if that rich man is
hit by adversity, needing their help or support, you will find them the
worst, taunting friends.

And whoever wishes to do good with what Allah has given to him, he
should use it to mend with his blood relatives; be a generous host,
release the oppressed prisoners, help those who are in debt, and the
wayfarers, the poor and those who fight in the way of Allah. And he
should be patient against adversities and misfortunes. With such
accomplishment, he will attain the high honour in this world and the
virtues in the next."  
   

7. Never humiliate . . .
------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan,
who reported from al-Abbas ibn Amir, from Ahmed ibn Rizq, from Ishaq ibn
Ammar, who said:*

Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, asked me: "O Ishaq, how do you dispose
of the *zakat* or your wealth, when ready?" I said: "People come to my
house and I give them." He said: "I find that you are humiliating the
believers. Be cautious! For Allah says: Whoever humiliates my righteous
servants, he has indeed prepared himself to confront me."

8. Al-Sadiq (as) explains Mu’min's experience after death
---------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh - may Allah bless
him with mercy, who reported from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah,
from Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Hasan ibn Mehboob, from Hannan
ibn Sudair, from his father, who said:*

I was with Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, when discussion about a
Mu’min and his rights took place. Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him,
turned to me and said: "O Abu al-Fadhl, may I not tell you about the
status of a Mu’min in the estimation of Allah?" I said: "Yes, do
enlighten me, may I be your ransom!"

He said: "When a Mu’min dies, his soul is taken up to the heaven by its
angels, who say: O Sustainer, here is Your servant and what a good
servant!" Allah Almighty says: "Descend to the earth near his grave and
continue to laud and magnify My name, confirming My Oneness and My
Greatness and write the reward for My servant till I resurrect him from
his grave."

Then he said: "May I tell you more?" I said: "Yes." He said: "When Allah
will resurrect a believer from his grave, together with him will be an
image who will lead him. Whenever the believer will see anything
frightful from the frightful aspects of the Day of Judgement, the image
will solace him by saying: 'Do not be anxious, nor distressed. Have good
tidings and honour from Allah, Most High.'

And it continues to give tidings of delight and honour, till he stands
before Allah to account for his deeds; and he shall have a lenient
reckoning. Then He orders him to enter the Paradise, with the image in
front of him. Then the believer shall say to the image: 'May Allah bless
you with mercy, you have been a good company emanating from my grave,
giving me good tidings of delight and honour from Allah, Most High; till
it transpired to be that way.

So, who are you?' The image will say: 'I am the delight and joy, which
you caused to your believing brother on earth. Allah has created me thus
from that gesture, so that I may give you good tidings.'"

9. Prayers to soothe pains
--------------------------

*Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad, may Allah bless him with mercy,
reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Ahmed ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Husayn ibn Saeed, from Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr,
from Muhammad al-Ja'fi, from his father who said:*

I always complained about my eyes. Once I complained about it to Abu
Abdillah, peace be upon him, he said: "May I teach you a prayer,
beneficial for your life here and hereafter? And which will also treat
the pain in your eye?" I said: "Yes."

He said: Say after morning and maghrib prayers: "O Allah, I beseech You
in the name of Muhammad and his progeny, to bless Muhammad and his
progeny, and to bestow light upon my eyes and insight upon my faith,
certitude upon my heart, sincerity upon my acts, security upon my self,
abundance upon my subsistence; and grant me to be ever thankful to You
as long as You keep me."  
 And may Allah bless our master Muhammad and his progeny.


