Twenty Third Assembly
=====================

The grand Sheikh al-Mufid Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Nu’man
al-Harithy - may Allah continue to guard him, narrated:

1. Abu Dharr's words of wisdom
------------------------------

*He said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad reported to me from his father Muhammad ibn
al-Hasan ibn al-Walid al-Qummi, from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar,
from al-Abbas ibn Ma'roof, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar from al-Husayn ibn
Saeed al-Ahwazi, from al-Nadhr ibn Suwaid and Ibn Abi Najran together,
from Asim from Abu Baseer from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir,
may Allah bless them both, that Abu Dharr, may Allah bless him with
mercy, used to say:*

"O Seeker of knowledge! Nothing in this world is worthy of mention
except an act which, if good, benefits others, and if bad, harms others,
except those who Allah saves with mercy.

'O Seeker of knowledge! Do not allow family and possessions to occupy
you against yourself. For one day, you will depart from them, like a
guest who stayed with them overnight and left during the day for others.
And this world and the next are like a station where you alight, and
then move towards the next. The time span between death and resurrection
is like a brief sleep, from which you will wake up.

'O Seeker of knowledge! Send beforehand to establish a status in the
eyes of Allah, for you are indeed mortgaged against your deeds. What you
sow, so shall you reap.

'O Seeker of knowledge! Say your daily prayers, before such days and
nights arrive when you are unable to pray! The example of the daily
prayers is that of a person who calls upon a benign monarch, who
patiently listens to his needs till he has finished. So is a Muslim in
his prayers that Allah grants His attention to him till he finishes his
prayers.

'O Seeker of knowledge! Give in charity before you arrive at a situation
where you can neither give nor prevent. The example of one who gives
charity and alms is like a person wanted for having killed and then he
implores: 'Do not kill me, and grant me a prescribed time during which I
may toil to please you.' So is for a Muslim, with the permission of
Allah! Every time he gives in charity, a knot around his neck is undone;
thus, Allah saves people, having been pleased with them. And when Allah
is pleased with someone, He frees him from hellfire.

'O Seeker of knowledge! A heart which has no Truth in it, is like a
ruined house which has no restorer. 'O Seeker of knowledge! This tongue
is indeed a key of good and a key of evil. So set a seal on your mouth,
the way you set a seal on your gold and on your papers.

'O Seeker of knowledge! These are the examples Allah has set forth for
people and none can understand them but the learned ones."

2. The Best Virtues
-------------------

*He said: And with the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn
Mahzyar, from Ibn Abi Umayr, from al-Nadhr ibn Suwaid, from Ibn Sinan,
from Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq, peace be upon them both,
who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, in his address to the
people, said: "May I not inform you about the best virtues in this world
and the next? (They are): to forgive one who wronged you, to make amends
with the kins who severed relations with you, to oblige one who harmed
you, to give to one who refused you. And (remember), hatred and mutual
enmity is a remover, and I do not mean a remover (shaver) of hair; but a
remover of faith."  
  

3. Avoid being deluded
----------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Fadhalah ibn Ayub, from Abdullah ibn Zaid, from Ibn Abi Ya'foor who
said:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon both, told me: "Let not
people delude you against yourself, for that which is your fate shall
reach you in spite of them! And let not the days prevent you from this
and that, for surely, with you is the One Who protects you! And do not
belittle your little good deeds, for you shall see them tomorrow in a
form, which will please you.

And do not underestimate your little evil deeds, for you shall see them
tomorrow in a form, which will grieve you. Do good deeds, for I have
seen nothing quicker in pursuit of an old sin, so as to blot it out,
than the good deed. Surely, Allah says (in the Qur'an):

***'Indeed, good deeds carry away the evil deeds; and that is a reminder
for those who remember Allah.'*****(Hud, 11:114)"**

4. Fulfil your duties
---------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Fadhalah ibn Ayub from Ajlan Abu Swaleh, who said:*

Abu Abdillah, Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon both told me: "Be just
with people in your personal matters and let them have a share in your
wealth. Choose for them what you choose for yourself! And remember Allah
constantly; never be lazy nor feel bored; surely, that is what my father
taught me and that is what his father counseled him.

Similarly, if you feel lazy about the late night prayers, you will not
be able to fulfil to Allah His right. And if you are bored and
discontented, you will not be able to fulfil anyone's obligation. Always
be truthful, guarding against sins and paying back that which you hold
in trust. And do not fail to fulfil a promise when you make one."  
    
  

5. Remain Truthful
------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
‘Ali ibn Hadeed, from ‘Ali ibn Nu’man, from Ishaq ibn Ammar, from Abu
al-Nu’man al-Ajali, who said:*

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon them both, told me, "O Abu
Nu’man, do not support the lies and allegation against us, for that will
distract you from the Straight Path; and do not devour people's wealth
by using our name, for that will earn you nothing but poverty.

O Abu Nu’man, do not push yourself hard to be a head (i.e. leader), for
you may end up being a tail (i.e. following the people rather then
leading them). O Abu Nu’man, you will surely be stopped and asked, and
there is no escape from that! If you remain truthful, we will confirm
your truthfulness; and if you lie, we will confirm that you are a liar.

O Abu Nu’man, let not people delude you, for that which is your fate,
shall reach you in spite of them! And do not let the days prevent you
from this and that for with you there is One Who protects you. Do good
deeds, for I have not seen any quicker expiation in pursuit of the old
sin, than a good deed."

6. Value of Time
----------------

With the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from ‘Ali
ibn Hadeed from ‘Ali ibn al-Nu’man, who has raised the report (without
intervening chain) to ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, who said:

"Woe to the one whose **one** triumphs over his **ten** (meaning the
verse 160, Surah al-Ana'am: ***'Whoever brings one good deed shall have
ten fold the like of it and whoever brings one evil deed shall be
recompensed only the like of it...***')"

And Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him used to say: "A defrauded person is
one whose life is wasted hour by hour."

And ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, said: "Expect nothing from
the others and that is true self-sufficiency, and minimize your needs
from them, for being needful is instant poverty. And be cautious of
doing things for which you may have to offer an excuse; and when you
stand for daily prayers, do so as if you were offering the last and
farewell prayers; and if you can manage to be better today than
yesterday, or tomorrow better than today, then do so."

7. Enjoy good and forbid evil
-----------------------------

*And wilt the preceding chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
‘Ali ibn Hadeed, from ‘Ali ibn al-Nu’man, from Ibn Maskan, from Dawood
ibn Farqad, from Abu Saeed al-Zohari, from one the two (Imams), peace be
upon them, who said:*

"Woe to the people who do not make it their habit to enjoy good and
forbid evil." And then he said: "Whoever professes 'there is no God but
Allah, his utterance does not enter the kingdom of Heaven, till it is
supplemented by one good deed. And he who seeks to be godly while
lending strength to the untruth, such a man has no religion. Similarly,
he who is subservient to a tyrant, has no religion." Then he said:
"Every community has been distracted by rivalry for worldly gain and
abundance, till they visited the graves."

8. Beware of Allah's dominance
------------------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Nadhr, from Ibrahim ibn Abdul Hamid, from Zaid ibn al-Shahham who
said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, say:
"Beware of the dominant power of Allah, during the night and during the
day." I asked: "What is that dominant power?" He said: "When He seizes
you for the sins."

9. The most worshipful servant
------------------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Abu Hamza who said:*

I heard ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, say: "He who obediently
acts according to what Allah has commanded him to do, he is the best of
men on earth! And he who obediently refrains from that which Allah has
forbidden him, he is the most worshipping servant, the most pious. And
whoever is content with what Allah has apportioned to him, is the
richest of all men."

10. Living with the believers and non-believers
-----------------------------------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Muhammad ibn Sinan, from al-Husayn ibn
Mas'ab, from Sa'd ibn Turaif, from:*

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon both, who said: "(Even) if
you meet a hypocrite, talk to him agreeably, and if you meet a believer,
then your love for him should be sincere. And (even) if a Jew sits next
to you, treat him well."

11. Be kind to people
---------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Fadhalah, from Abaan, from Abdul Rahman ibn Sayabah, from al-Nu’man,
from:*

Abu Ja'far, peace be upon him, who said: "He who inquires after the well
being and whereabouts of the others, people inquire after him when they
miss him! And he who does not prepare himself to face the worldly
afflictions with patience, ends up helpless.

And if you have a habit of passing abrasive comments against other
people, then be ready for their remarks. And even if you left them, they
would not leave you!" He said: "Then what shall I do?" He (i.e. Imam)
said: "Keep them away from your honour, and leave it for your Day of
Hunger and Want (i.e. leave it for the Day of judgement)."

12. People are for people!
--------------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
‘Ali ibn Hadeed, from Marazim, who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon both, said: "Always pray
in the mosques and be good neighbours to the people. And always uphold
your trust and covenants and attend the funerals. For surely, you cannot
do without the people! No man's life can go on without needing the
people!

As for us, we attend their funerals, and it is for you to do the way
your leaders do! People have no alternative but to remain dependent upon
each other till death does them apart; then every community will retire
to join those they love."

Then he said: "Always offer your prayers properly and work for your next
world and make the best choice for yourselves. Indeed, a man may be
sagacious in his worldly affairs, till it is said: 'How wise is so and
so!' But surely, the sagacious is one who is wise about the hereafter."

13. Convey the knowledge of fiqh
--------------------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Muhammad ibn Ismail, from Mansur ibn Yunus, from Abu Khalid al-Qammat,
from Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon both, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, addressed the people at
Mina, saying: "May Allah bless the servant who heard my utterances and
heeded them; and conveyed to those who had not heard them. How often a
person carries knowledge without he himself being learned about it, and
how often does a man carry knowledge to the one who knows better than
him!

There are three things over which a Mu’min's heart will never commit a
breach of the trust: Purifying the deeds solely for the sake of Allah;
following the Imams of the Muslims faithfully and remaining steadfast in
their groups. Their call itself protects them from all sides. The
believers are brothers to each other, defending their blood; and they
act as one, single hand against the enemies. And even the smallest of
them tries best to fulfil his responsibility."

14. The best guidance is that of Muhammad (SAW)
-----------------------------------------------

*With the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar from
Muhammad ibn Ismail, from Mansur ibn Abu Yahya, who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, say: Once the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, climbed on the pulpit, and the colour of his
cheek changed; then he approached the people saying: "O Muslims, I have
been sent to you with the Day of Judgement as close in time, as these
two"; then he put together two index fingers. Then he said: "O Muslim,
the best guidance is that of Muhammad and the best narration is the Book
of Allah. And innovations (in religion) are the worst things.

Be it known to you that every innovation leads astray, and that finally
leads to hellfire. 'O People! Whoever leaves behind wealth, he leaves it
for the family and his heirs; and whoever leaves behind weaklings and
poor dependents, they are for me and they are my responsibility."

15. Four admonitions
--------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Rafaa'h who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon them both, said: "The
Torah has four admonitions coupled with the other four. They are: He who
rises in the morning sorrowful about his worldly affairs, he indeed
rises displeased with his Lord!

And he who rises in the morning complaining about the misfortune he has
suffered, he is complaining against Allah! He who calls upon a rich man,
humbling himself so as to gain a share from his wealth, loses two-third
of his faith; And if ever a reciter of the Qur'an in this Ummah enters
hellfire, then he must be among those who take divine signs for a
mockery and play.

And the other four are: Absolute power leads to appropriation; and he
who consults, never repents; and you shall reap what you sow, and
poverty is the greater death."

16. Prayers are the pillars of faith
------------------------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Ismail ibn Abbad, from al-Hasan ibn Muhammad, from Sulayman ibn Sabiq,
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad, from Abdullah ibn Luhaya'h, from Abu al-Zubair,
from Jabir ibn Abdillah al-Ansari, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, once addressed us,
praising and thanking Allah and then said: "O people (after completing
his speech), I recommend to you the daily prayers, I recommend to you
the daily prayers! For it is the pillar of your faith. And make special
efforts for the prayers during the nights and remember him often, that
He may expiate your sins.

Surely, the example of these five daily prayers is that of a flowing
brook near your door; in which you are washed five times a day. So just
as frequent baths clean your body of the dirt, the same way, sins are
washed off by constant prayers, leaving no sin behind.

O men, there is no one of the servants of Allah who is not hit by a
knotty situation. Then when the two-third of a night is over and a third
is left, an angel comes to him, and says: 'Rise and remember Allah, for
the morning is near!' He said: If the servant rises to remember Allah at
that time, his knots would be undone. And if he stood to do the wudhoo
and started the prayers, all his knots would be undone; and he would
enter the dawn with joy in his eyes."

17. Imam al-Sadiq (as) explains Abu Dharr's admonition
------------------------------------------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali from Yunus ibn Ya'qoob, from Shoayb al-Aqrqoofi, who
said:*

I related to Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon them both,
that I heard someone report from Abu Dharr who used to say: "People hate
three things, while I love them. I love death, and I love poverty and I
love ordeals."

He, peace upon him, said: "That is not what he meant. When he said he
preferred death, he meant to say that death in the way of Allah was more
likeable to him then life in sin; and ordeal in the way of Allah was
more agreeable to him then health in sin; and poverty in the way of
Allah was more loveable to him than plenty in sin."  
  

18. Cover your utensils. . .
----------------------------

*And with the preceding chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Ibn Faddhal, from Yunus ibn Yaqub, from Abu Maryam, from Abu Abdillah or
Abu Ja'far, peace be upon them both, from Jabir ibn Abdillah that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said to us: "Cover your
utensils and put a lid over the vessels from which you drink, and shut
your doors tight, and tie down your herds, and send your family members
indoors, as the sun sets till when the darkness of Isha is dispelled.
Surely, the devils do not open the covers, nor do they undo the lids.
And the devils are sent off when the sun sets. And put off your lamps,
for sometimes the rats kindle fire from it setting the whole house on
fire, on its inmates."

19. The good and the bad traditions
-----------------------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration, ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar reported
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad, from Hammad ibn Uthman, who reported that
Ismail al-Jo'fi said:*

I heard Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon them both say:
"Whoever sets a balanced, just tradition, which is then followed by the
people, he earns the reward of everyone who acts accordingly, without
they losing anything from their rewards. And whoever sets an unjust
tradition, which is then followed, he shall bear the burden of those who
act accordingly, without any mitigation in the burdens of the
followers."

20. Kindness to father
----------------------

*And with the preceding chains of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Bakr ibn Swaleh who said:*

My son-in-law wrote to Abu Ja'far the second Imam Muhammad Taqi (as),
peace be upon him, that: "My father is a *Nasibi* and has wretched views
about Ahlul Bayt. And I have experienced a lot of hardship and pressure
from him. I write to request for special prayers for me, may I be your
ransom, and to advise me what should be my line of action. Should I
confront him or comply with his whims?"

He, peace be upon him, wrote back: "I have understood your letter and
what you have mentioned about your father. God willing, I shall never
forget you in my prayers. And it is better to be compliant rather than
resorting to open confrontation. For with every hardship, there is ease.
Be patient, for the end result is always in favour of those who are
mindful of duties towards Allah. May Allah keep you firm on the path of
those who you have accepted as the authority. You and we are all
entrusted in the care of Allah, and with Him, no trust is lost!"

Bakr said: Then Allah caused a change of heart in his father, so that he
in turn became compliant to the son.

21. The descent of Jibraeel at unusual hour
-------------------------------------------

*And with the first chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Hashami, from Abi Hafs al-Attar, who said, I
heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq, peace be upon him,
relating from his father, from his grandfather, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: Once Jibraeel came
to me at an unusual hour and on an unusual day. So, I told him: "O
Jibraeel, you have indeed come to me at an unusual hour and unusual day.
You have struck me with awe!" He said: "O Muhammad, you have no cause of
fear, for Allah has forgiven you your past and future lapse."

I said: "Then what is the message (this time) from your Lord?" He said:
"Your Lord forbids you to worship the idols and to drink any type of
intoxicants and to vilify the people. And there is one more (worth
remembering) here and hereafter; your Lord says to you: O Muhammad, I
have never felt indignation at any container as much as at a filled
stomach."

22. Virtues of a Shi’ah
-----------------------

*And with the first chain of narrations, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from Ismail ibn Abbad, from (Abdullah) ibn Bikair,
from:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon both of them, who said:
"Surely, we love from amongst our Shi’ahs, one who is wise,
understanding, well-versed in religion, tolerant, obliging, patient,
truthful and faithful." Then he said: "Surely, Allah has specially
blessed His Prophets with the noble virtues of good behaviour. So,
whoever has those qualities, should praise and thank Allah for it, and
whoever does not have them, should earnestly entreat and seek from
Allah."

He said: "I asked: May I be your ransom, what are the virtues?" He said:
"Piety, contentment, patience, being grateful, tolerant, modesty,
generosity, jealously, guarding ones honour, beneficence, truthful in
speech and honesty about anything held on trust."

23. The meaning of remembering Allah
------------------------------------

*With the first chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, (from al-Hasan
ibnAli ibn Faddhal), from ‘Ali ibn Uqba, from Jarood ibn al-Mandhar, who
said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him say: 'The
most difficult performance are three: to maintain justice and equity
between yourself and the people, so that you may not prefer for yourself
anything from the people, till you have preferred the same for the
people to have from you; to make your (needy) brother an equal partner
in your wealth; and to remember Allah in all situations. And that is not
just to say: 'Glory be to Allah,' 'Praise be to Allah,' 'there is no God
but Allah,' or 'Allah is Great.' Rather, when anything comes your way,
which Allah has forbidden, you refrain from it."

24. No act with taqwa is small
------------------------------

*And with the first chain of narrations from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Hasan, from Muhammad ibn Sinan, from al-Fudhail ibn Uthman, from Abi
Obaidah, from Abi Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir, peace be upon both,
who said:*

Amirul Mu’mineen (‘Ali) peace be upon him, used to say: "Any act
performed with taqwa is not little. How can that which is accepted (by
Allah) be called little?"

25. Al-Sadiq (as) exhorts Taqwa
-------------------------------

*And with the first chain of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, (from
al-Hassan), from ‘Ali ibn Uqba, from Abi Kahmas, from Amru ibn Saeed ibn
Hilal, who said:*

I requested Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him: 'Guide me.' He said: 'My
admonition to you is to be mindful of your duties to Allah (taqwa), to
refrain from that which is forbidden and to make a strenuous effort (to
win His Pleasure). And you should know that any effort, which is not
coupled with abstaining from that, which is forbidden, has no benefit.

And always look at those who are lower than you, and do not look at
those who are above you. For how often has Allah, Most High, advised His
messenger:

***'So do not be deluded by their wealth and their children',
(al-Tawbah, 9:55),***

and again He said:

***'And do not even look at the wordly wealth. We have let some pairs of
disbelievers to gain, it is only an allurement of the life of this
world....' (Taha, 20:131)."***

And if your passion (or desires) drive you towards any of those things,
then you should be aware that the Prophet, peace be upon him, and his
progeny, had barley for daily subsistence, dates for his sweet dish,
when available, and the source of warmth (firewood, fuel) was from the
branches of the palm tree. And when any calamity befalls you, then
remember how you were tested by the passing away of the Prophet, peace
be upon him; for the people will never face a similar tribulation ever
again."

26. Good deeds prepare for the doers. . .
-----------------------------------------

*And with the first chain of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from ‘Ali
ibn al-Nu’man, from Dawood ibn Farqad, who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon both of them,
say: "Surely, the righteous deeds will go to the Paradise to prepare for
theirs doers, the way a person sends his servant to furnish for him.
Then he recited:

***'And as for those who believe, and do righteous deeds, they prepare
for their own souls'*** ***(al-Rum, 30:44)."***  
  

27. Between fear and hope
-------------------------

*And with the first chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Muhammad ibn Sinan, from al-Husayn ibn Abi Sarah, who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon them both, say:
"A believer does not become a (true and steadfast) Mu’min, till he comes
to a situation of being both, fearful as well as hopeful. And that does
not occur till he starts performing deeds as one who fears and (also)
hopes."

28. The verse of Qur'an interpreted
-----------------------------------

*And with the first chain of narration, from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Qasim ibn Muhammad, from ‘Ali who said:*

I asked Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him about the
verse from the Qur'an:

**'*****And those who strive with righteous deeds to the greatest extent
and their hearts are filled with fear....'*** ***(al-Mu'minoon.
23:60).***

He said: "That is their fear and hope. They fear that their acts may be
rejected because of their sins, and at the same time, hope that they
might be accepted from them."

29. The Prophet (SAW) inspects our deeds
----------------------------------------

*And with the first chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Hasan, from Uthman ibn Isa, from Sama'ah, who said:*

I heard him say (i.e. Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him): "Why do you
cause grief to the Prophet of Allah?" Someone asked: "May I be your
ransom, how do we do that?" He said: "Do you not know that your deeds
are persented before him; when he sees the sins committed, he is
grieved. So do not cause him grief. Make him happy (with good deeds and
obedience)."  
    
  

30. ‘Ali (as) on the pious companions of the Prophet
----------------------------------------------------

*And with the first chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
(Muhammad) ibn Sinan, from Abu Muaz al-Suddiy, from Abi Arakah who
said:*

Once, I prayed behind ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, the morning
prayers in this mosque of yours. Then (after the prayers), he turned to
the right with evident gloom over his face. He stayed that way, till the
sun rose over the lancer long wall of the mosque of yours, which was
then not as high as it is now. Then turning to the people he said:

"By Allah, the companions of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, endured discomfort on such a night, passing it between
prostration and standing for the prayers. As if they heard the roar of
hellfire in their ears'. And in the morning, they rose covered with dust
and pale, with callous skin, resembling the knees of the goat between
their eyes. When Allah was remembered in their presence, they quivered
the way a tree shakes on a windy day, and tears rolled from their eyes
till their clothes were wet."

He said: Then he (i.e. ‘Ali) rose, saying: "By Allah, it seems that
people have now become heedless."

Thereafter, he (i.e. ‘Ali) was not seen in a cheerful temperament, till
the event at the hands of Ibn Muljam took place - may Allah curse him
(i.e. Ibn Muljam).

31. ‘Ali (as) and the traders of Kufa
-------------------------------------

*With the first chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from al-Hasan
ibn Mahboob, from Amru ibn Abi al-Miqdam (from Jabir), from:*

Abu Ja'far, Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir, peace be upon them both, who
said: ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, was among you in Kufa and
he used to come out early in the morning from his residence, visiting
each market of Kufa, one after another, with a whip on his shoulder. It
had two sharp ends and was thus called *al-Sabibah.*

He said: He (i.e. ‘Ali) would stand in every market and say: "O business
people! Seek providence of Allah and earn His bounty by easy trade!
Endear yourselves to the buyers and adorn yourselves with patience. And
do not swear or take oath; refrain from lies and do not associate with
inequity. Come to the rescue of the wronged ones by obtaining justice
for them, and do not deal in usury. Give full measure and weight and do
not diminish for people their things, and do not work corruption on the
earth."

He said: Thus he (i.e. ‘Ali) toured all the markets of Kufa and then
returned to his place for listening to the common people. He said: When
the market people saw him approaching them, exclaiming: "O People!, they
would stop their dealings, listen to him carefully and regard him
respectfully till he finished." Then they would respond: "With all
readiness, we obey you O, Amirul Mu’mineen."

32. ‘Ali (as)'s admonition after Isha
-------------------------------------

*And with the first claim of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Amru ibn Abi al-Maqdam, from Jabir, from:*

Abu Ja'far, peace be upon him, who said: When Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be
upon him, was at Kufa, he would announce three times after people had
prayed their last evening prayers, so that all in the mosque would hear
it: "O people! Be prepared, may Allah bless you with mercy, for the call
for departure has been made. So what is the meaning of clinging to the
world, after the departing call? Be prepared, may Allah have mercy upon
you, and move onwards with the best of supplies you have with you and
that is *Taqwa*.

And be it known to you that your path is the place of Resurrection,
passing over the *al-Siraat*; and the great shock is confronting you.
And in your path, there are mountains difficult to climb and stations
through which you have to pass and also halt, despite its fright and
terror. It will be His Mercy, which will redeem from its fright and save
from its great danger, horrid scenes and from its severe test. And if it
is perdition, then there is no solace after it."

33. Imam Sajjad's book on asceticism
------------------------------------

*And with the first chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Malik ibnAtiyya, from Abu Hamza al-Thumali,
who said:*

"I had not heard of anyone more pious and ascetic than ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn, peace be upon him, till I learnt about ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib,
peace be upon him."

Then Abu Hamza said: "Whenever ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him,
spoke about piety and asceticism and admonished people, he made all
those present weep."

Abu Hamza said: "I read a page which contained ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn's
admonition on piety and asceticism, so I copied from it and brought it
before him. He recognized it and confirmed its content. It said:

In the name of Allah, Most Merciful.

"May Allah be sufficient for us and you to thwart the evil planning of
the oppressors, the rancour of the jealous and the power of the tyrants.
O believers, your main affliction is from the insolents who love this
world, are grossly inclined towards it and are tempted by it. They fall
for it and for that which will soon become lifeless chaff and dead straw
tomorrow. So be aware of what Allah has cautioned you from, and detach
yourselves from things Allah has enjoined you to remain aloof; and do
not incline to worldly things like the one who has taken it as permanent
abode or native place.

And by Allah, the mundane has enough warning pointers for you, to its
(wilting) flourish, to its changing times, to its revolutionary changes
and to its exemplary punishments; and to the way it plays with its
people. Surely, it raises the lowly and cuts down the noble ones, and it
will despatch to hellfire many nations tomorrow. In this, indeed, is a
lesson to draw and a test and a deterrent for the one who is cautious.

Surely, the hearts (and minds) are prevented from awakening (to the
truth) by the events which occur to you every day and night, like the
misleading trials, the unprecedented events, the rampant inequities, the
disasters wrought in every age and era; the fear of the ruling powers
and the whispers of the devils. They distract them from the existing
(divine) guidance and the recognition of the Truth; except a few who
Allah has saved.

And none can understand and appraise the influence of those days, its
capriciousness and the harmful end of its temptation, except those who
have been saved by Allah; those who have walked the path of right
guidance, progressing on the way of temperance, seeking help from Him
through abstinence and renunciation.

Such a person persistently ponders, draws lessons from the happenings
and is so deterred; remains unattended to the fleeting allurements of
the world and its delectations. He is inclined towards the permanent
bliss of the next abode (i.e. hereafter) and works hard for it. He is
ever watchful about death and finds life in the company of the tyrants
most loathsome.

And then he is able to see the world with the sharp, penetrating eyes,
appraising and perceiving the trials and tribulations, the misleading
new events, the darkness of the tyrannical powers. And by my soul, you
have had enough experience from the dark tyrannical order of the bygone
days to guide you to disassociating from the despots, from the partisans
of innovations and torment and from those who unjustly spread corruption
on the earth. So seek help form Allah; return to His obedience and to
the obedience of those who deserve best to be followed and obeyed.

So, take your precautions before (the day of) remorse and distress dawns
and before you are in presence of Allah, standing before Him! By Allah,
whenever a nation proceeded from divine disobedience, it always ended up
in His chastisement; and whenever a nation preferred this world over the
hereafter, evil has been their road and evil has been their final abode!

And Knowledge about Allah and acting in obedience to Him are nothing but
the intimate couple. So, whoever knows Allah, fears Him and that fear
prompts him to act obediently. Surely, the people of (that) knowledge
and their followers have recognized Him, acted for Him and have remained
inclined towards Him; and thus, Allah says (in the Qur'an):

***'Surely, those of His servants who have knowledge fear Allah
alone.'*** **(35:28)**

Do not solicit anything of this world in a sinful manner (or by
transgressing the law of Allah) and engage yourselves in the world His
way. So, take the advantage of its days and work hard in it to gain
salvation tomorrow. Indeed, that is the least which is required of a
true follower, nearest to the excuse (should he lapse) and most hopeful
for salvation.

Therefore, in all your affairs, put forward the command of Allah, His
obedience and of those whose obedience He has made obligatory. And do
not put forward the affairs brought upon you by the despots in the form
of the worldly temptation of this world, before the commands of Allah,
His obedience and the obedience of those who have divine authority upon
you.

Know you all that all of us are slaves of Allah; and He, the Master
Judge, will judge us tomorrow. Before Him, you will be ranged and asked;
so prepare for the answer before the halt, the interrogation and before
presentation to the Lord of all the worlds.

***'On that Day, no souls shall speak except by His leave.'***
**(11:105).**

And know you that on that Day, Allah will not confirm the liars, nor
will He belie the truthful. And He will not reject the justifiable
excuse, not will He excuse the wilful sinner. Rather, He will have the
conclusive authority over His creatures for having sent His messengers
and their successors. So, O slaves of Allah, be mindful of your duties
to Allah (and fear him); meet Him with your reformed selves, in
obedience unto Him and unto those who He made you follow.

Lest there be one who repents (on the day) for having neglected his
duties to Allah, or having wasted the rights of Allah! So, seek
forgiveness from Allah and return unto Him! Indeed, He accepts
repentence and forgives the sins and knows all that you do.

Do not ever be in the company of the sinners, nor helpful to the
oppressors, nor close to the transgressors. Be careful of their
temptations and remain at a distance from their spheres.

And know you all that he who opposes the righteous slaves of Allah and
adopts a way other than His religion, and doggedly follows his own whims
in the face of the guidance given by the righteous slaves of Allah, such
a man is (already) in the bursting flame of fire, which eats up the
bodies which have lost their souls, overwhelmed by their adversities.

They are dead, insensitive to the heat of fire! So, take warning those
who have eyes to see! And praise Allah with gratitude for having guided
you. And know that you cannot get out of domain of His power to any
other! Allah shall soon see your deeds and then you will be gathered to
Him. So, take the benefit of the admonition and adopt the ways of the
virtuous."

34. Entrust your affairs to Allah
---------------------------------

*And with the former chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Hasan, from ‘Ali ibn al-Hakam, from Abu Hafs al-A'asha, from Muhammad
ibn Sinan, from a person from Banu Asad, from Abu Hamza al-Thumali,
that:*

‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, said: Once, I came out till I
reached this wall and stood leaning against it. There, I suddenly saw a
man wearing two white apparels, looking at me. Then he said: "O ‘Ali,
son of al-Husayn, how is that I see you gloomy and distressed? Is it for
the worldly matter? The provision from Allah is readily available for
both; the good and the evil!" I said: "No, I am not sad because of that,
and the fact is as stated by you."

He said: "Then is it because of the hereafter? Then that is a promise by
the Truthful (Allah) and the Almighty will be the judge on that Day!" I
said: "It is not because of that! Though the fact is as you stated." He
said: "Then what greives you?" I said: "I am distressed by the mischief
of Ibn Zubair." He laughed and then said: "O ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, did you
see anyone who fears Allah, not delivered by Him?" I said: "No." He
said: "O ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, did you see anyone who entrusted Him all
his affairs and Allah failed to be sufficient for him?" I said: "No."  
 Then I looked and saw no one before me!

35. When the deeds become heartbreaking anguish
-----------------------------------------------

*And with the former chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahyzar, from
al-Qasim ibn Urwah, from a person, from either of them, peace be upon
them, who explained the verse:*

***'Thus will Allah show them their deeds as heartbreaking anguish for
them....'*** **(2:167).**

He said: "It is parable of a man who amasses wealth but is averse to
spending it in a charitable manner and then he dies, bequeathing it to
the others. And the heirs spend the same wealth for good deeds; so the
man who originally earned the wealth rises on the Day of Judgement to
witness the reward of the good deeds going to someone else's credit."

36. Hasten to do good
---------------------

*And with the former chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahyzar from Ibn
Abi Umayr, from Hisham ibn Salim, that:*

Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, said: "When you are determined to do
something good, then do not delay doing it. For when Allah, Most
Glorious, sees His slave intent upon performing an act according to one
of His commands, He says: 'By My Might and Greatness, I shall never
subject you to any chastisement.' And when you feel inclined to commit a
sin, do not do it, for when Allah, Most Benevolent and High, finds a
slave on the verge of committing a sin, He says: 'By My Might and
Greatness, I will never forgive you.'"

37. Do not delay doing good
---------------------------

*And with the foregoing chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
‘Ali ibn Hadeed, from ‘Ali ibn al-Nu’man, from Hamzah ibn Hamran who
said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, say: "Whenever anyone of you is
determined to do good, then he should not delay doing it. For it might
so be that a slave of Allah offered prayers or kept a day's fast and
then he is told: Do whatever you desire after this, for I have forgiven
you."

38. ‘Ali (as) guides to true reform of oneself
----------------------------------------------

*And with the former chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar (from
‘Ali ibn Hadeed), who reported from Abu Ishaq al-Khorasani, a friend of
ours, that:*

Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, used to say:
"Do not be shaken in your faith, for that will make you a doubter; and
do not be doubters, for that will lead to disbelief. And do not make
yourself cheap falling victim to flattery and adulation; and do not be
sycophant in matters of truth, for that will cause you a great loss.

Firmness lies in becoming more learned in Religion and the sign of true
religious learning is not to be conceited nor deceitful. The most honest
and sincere to oneself among you is the one who is most obedient to his
Sustainer; and the most deceitful to oneself among you is the one who is
most insubordinate to his Sustainer.

He who obeys Him, is secure and guided; and he who disobeys Him, is
disappointed and remorseful. Seek certitude from Allah and set your
hearts inclined to Him, when you are free from all harm; for the best
experience of heart is that of certitude. O people! refrain from lying.
And anyone who expects, proceeds to demand and anyone who fears, flees."

39. Allah's Will and His Power
------------------------------

*And with the foregoing chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar,
raising it up to Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, who said:*

Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, used to say:
"Always consider that which is distant as quite near and that which is
difficult as very easy. And, know that, even if a slave of Allah is weak
in his strategy and having failing in his plans, it will not reduce
anything from what Allah has destined for him. And if he is powerful in
his strategy and forceful in his plan, it will not increase anything in
what Allah has destined for him."

40. ‘Ali (as) refused to corrupt himself
----------------------------------------

*And with the former chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from Ibn
Abi Umayr, from Hisham, from Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, who said:*

Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, used to say to
the people at Kufa: 'O people of Kufa, do you think I am not aware of
what can mend your ways? But I hate to redress your situation by
corrupting myself!"

41. Base desires and long hopes. . .
------------------------------------

*And with the foregoing chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Asim, from Fudhail al-Rassan, from Yahya ibn Aqeel, who reported that:*

‘Ali, peace be upon him, said: "I fear for you two things: following the
desire of soul and being deluded by long hope. As for following the base
desire, it keeps you away from truth, and as for the long hope, it
causes you to forget the hereafter. The next world moves to encounter
you, while this world moves to turn its back! And each has its own
children. So be the children of the next world and do not be among the
children of this world. Today, there are deeds and no account, but
tomorrow there will be account and no deeds."

42. ‘Ali (as)'s admonition
--------------------------

*And with the former chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Fadhalah, from Ismail from Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, who said:*

Amirul Mu’mineen (as) used to say: "Awaken your heart by reflection and
let your side forsake (long) sleep, and fear Allah, your Sustainer (by
guarding against sins and evil)."

43. What Isa (as) told his disciples
------------------------------------

*And with the former chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Wasil ibn Sulaiman, from Ibn Sinan, who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, say that Isa, peace be upon
him, used to say to his disciples: "If you are my friends and my
brothers, then prepare your minds to reconcile with all the hostility
and hatred coming from people. If you are not so mentally prepared, then
you are not my brothers.

I teach you so that you may learn; and I do not teach you to please you.
You will not attain your goal till you renounce your desires and by
forbearance over that which you hate.  
 I warn you against the evil glance, for it sows the seeds of lust in
the heart of the beholder; and that is enough to tempt him.

Blessed is he who beholds with his two eyes the tempting love of lust,
but does not allow his heart to err. How far is that which one has
missed; and how close is that which is to come!

Woe unto those beguiled by vanity, should that which they loathe come to
them too soon, and that which they love dearly depart, and that of which
they had been warned arrive! Indeed, in the creation of these nights and
days, there is a lesson.

Woe unto him whose entire concern is about this world only, and whose
deeds are all evil and sins. How will he stand exposed before his
Sustainer tomorrow!  
 And do not talk much about things other than remembering Allah! Surely,
those who talk much other than remembering Allah, have their hearts
hardened, but they do not know. Do not engage yourselves in looking into
other people's shortcomings and faults, as if you were their spies;
instead, look into ways of freeing yourselves; for surely you are
possessed slaves.

How often does water flow on the mountain, but it does not soften? For
how long have you studied words of wisdom, but your hearts do not soften
for them? Slaves of the evil people and not of the pious! Nor are you
liberated men of honour! Your example is that of oleander whose flower
pleases the beholder, but its taste kills - Peace be with you."

44. Avoid fame
--------------

*And with the foregoing chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Ibn Abi Najran, from al-Hasan ibn Bahr, from Furat ibn Ahnaf, from one
of the companions of Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon
him, who said:*

"Be among the commoner, inconspicuous people and do not make yourself
noticeable; conceal yourself so that you are neither mentioned nor
known. Guard your secret, maintain silence and you will remain in
peace." Then he pointed towards his chest and said: "Thus, you will
please the virtuous and raise the anger of the impious."

45. Be ready to forgive
-----------------------

*And with the first chain of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn Faddhal, who said:*

I heard Abul Hassan (i.e. ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha) peace be upon him
say:  
 "Never did the two warring factions meet to fight except that Allah
helped the one which is more forgiving."

46. When Allah spoke to Musa (as)
---------------------------------

*And with the former chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Hisham ibn Salim, from Habib al-Sajistani,
from:*

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir, peace be upon him, who said: It
is written in Torah that among the revelations from Allah, Most High, to
Musa, peace be upon him, Allah spoke to him thus: "O Musa, be mindful of
Me and fear Me in your private affairs; and I will guard your secrets;
and remember My presence when you are alone, and when tempted to gratify
your pleasures; and I will remember you during your lapses.

And restrain your anger against those you rule and control, and I will
withhold My displeasure against you; and conceal My well-kept secret in
your inner self; and in the presence of My enemy and yours, who I have
created, make a show of repulsion against Me. Do not invite derision and
abuse from them by revealing My well-kept secret, else you will be a
partner to them in the abuse levelled at Me."

47. The meaning of "Imma'ah. . ."
---------------------------------

*And with the foregoing chains of narration from ‘Ali ibn Mahzyar, from
Ibn Mahboob, from al-Fadhl ibn Yunus, from:*

Abul Hasan, the first, peace be upon him said: "Convey that which is
good, and speak that which is good and do not be *Imma'ah*! I said:
"What is Imma'ah?" He said: "Do not have a habit of saying: I am from
the people and I am just like any one of them.

Surely, the messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, said:
O people, there are but two paths: path of good and path of evil. What
is the matter with you that I find the path of evil is more loved by you
than the path of good?"  
 Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds and may Allah bless our master,
Muhammad and his pure progeny, and salutations upon them.


