Twenty Fourth Assembly
======================

Met on Wednesday, 22nd of the month of Ramadhan, in the year 408 Hijrah
and it was the first assembly of this month in which he dictated.
Narrated to us by al-Sheikh al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah, Muhammad ibn
Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man - may Allah guard him, at the Mosque in the
street of Riyah on the dated day.

1. The Prophet (SAW) reminds of the Day of Judgement
----------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ghalib Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Zurariy who reported from
Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abi al-Khattab, from Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Khazzar, from Ghiyath ibn Ibrahim, from Abu Abdillah al-Sadiq, Ja'far
ibn Muhammad, peace be upon both of them, from his father, from his
grandfather, who said:*

Whenever the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny stood to
address, he would praise Allah and thank Him. Then he would say: "Know
you all, that the most veracious and truthful statement is the Book of
Allah (i.e. the Qu'ran) and the best guidance is that of Muhammad. The
worst things are those which are invented concoctions, and every such
innovation is misleading."

Then he would raise his voice, with his cheeks gradually turning red and
remind people of the Day of Reckoning and its dawn, in the manner one
warns of an advancing army of the enemy. He would say: "It dawns with
you every morning and is with you every evening!" Then he would say: "I
have been sent to you with the Day of Reckoning like these two (then he
would join his two forefingers). Whoever leaves behind him wealth, that
will go to its heirs and whoever leaves behind a debt, it is my
responsibility."

2. The Prophet (SAW) spoke to Ummul Fadhl
-----------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Muqri reported to me from
Abdul Karim ibn Muhammad al-Bijilli, who reported from Muhammad ibn
‘Ali, who reported from Zaid ibn al-Muaddil, from Aban ibn Uthman
al-Ajlah, from Zaid ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, from his father, peace be
upon him, who said:*

In his illness, which ended up with his death, the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, laid his head on the laps of Ummul Fadhl, and
then he fainted. Tears from Ummul Fadhl's eyes fell on his cheeks, so he
opened his eyes and said: "What is the matter with you, O Ummul Fadhl?"
She said: "You have told us about your death, so if things are going to
remain in our favour, give us good tidings. And if events will turn
against us, then counsel us." He said, the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny, told her: "You will all be subdued and weakened after I
have gone."

3. Only one sect on the right path
----------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from Abu
Talib Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn al-Bahlool, who reported from Abul Abbas
Ahmed ibn al-Hasan al-Dhareer, who reported from Ahmed ibn Muhammad, who
reported from Ahmed ibn Yahya, who reported from Abu Harun al-Abdi, from
Abi Aqeel, who said:*

Once we were with Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon
him, when he said: "This Ummah will definitely be thrown asunder into
seventy-three factions. And by He who controls my Soul, all the factions
will have gone astray, except the one which followed me and were among
my Shi’ahs."

4. In praise of ‘Ali (as)
-------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reported to me from
his father, who reported from Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar, who reported
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from ‘Ali ibn Al-Hakam, from Hisham ibn
Salim, from Sulaiman ibn Khalid, from Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad
al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, from his forefathers, peace be upon them,
who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, told ‘Ali, peace be upon
him: "O ‘Ali, you are from me and I from you. Your friend is my friend
and my friend is Allah's friend. And your enemy is my enemy and my enemy
is the enemy of Allah.

O ‘Ali, I am at war with the one who fights you and at peace with one
who is at peace with you. O ‘Ali, you have a treasure in the Heaven and
you are the master of its both sides. O ‘Ali, you are the divider of
heaven and hell. None shall enter the heaven unless he has recognized
you, and you have recognized him!

And none shall enter hell unless he has rejected you and you have
rejected him. O ‘Ali, you and your descendants shall be on the heights
(al-A'araaf) on the Day of Judgment, recognizing the sinners by their
marks, and the believers by their signs. O ‘Ali, the believers would not
have been distinguished, after I have departed, if you were not there."

5. If Salman and Abu Dharr fully divulged the secret
----------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim, Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh - may Allah
bless him with mercy, reported to me from his father, who reported from
Muhammad ibn Yahya and Ahmad ibn Idrees together, from ‘Ali ibn Muhammad
ibn ‘Ali ibn Sa'd al-Ashariy, from al-Husayn ibn Nasr ibn Muzahim
al-Attar, from his father, from Amru ibn Shimr, from Jabir ibn Yazid
al-Jo'afi, from Abu Ja'far al-Baqir, peace be upon him, who said:*

I heard Jabir ibn Abdillah ibn Haraam al-Ansari say: 'If Salman and Abu
Dharr, may Allah bless them with mercy, were to divulge (the excellence
of Ahlul Bayt) to these people who claim to be the partisans of Ahlul
Bayt, they would say: "These two are liars." And if these were to see
them, they would say: "These are insane."

6. Man knows best of himself
----------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan reported to me from
his father, from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, from Yunus ibn Abdul Rahman, from Muhammad ibn Yaseen,
who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon both, say: "No
benefit is derived by a slave of Allah who makes a show of being good,
while inwardly he is vicious and evil. Does his inner self not tell him
that he is not what he pretends to be? And (also), Allah, Most High,
says (in the Qu'ran): ***'Rather, man has a keen insight of himself'
(75:14).*** Surely, when the inner self of a person is reformed, his
external self gains strength."

May Allah bless our master Muhammad, the Prophet of Makkan origin and
upon his pure progeny, and salutations.


