Twenty Fifth Assembly
=====================

Met on Monday, 27th of the month of Ramadhan in the year 408 Hijrah. The
grand Sheikh al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Nu’man - may Allah bless him with abilities, reported this.

1. Abu Dharr's admonition
-------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Walid, may
Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from his father, who reported
from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, who reported from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Khalid, who reported from his father, who reported from
Ahmad ibn al-Nadhr al-Khazzaz, from Amru ibn Shimr, from Jabir ibn
Yazid, that:*

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, said: Abu
Dharr al-Ghifari stood near al-Kabah and announced: "I am Jundab ibn
al-Sakan," so people gathered around him. Then he said: "O people, if
someone from you decides to travel, he will prepare to make it
comfortable. Do you not intend to make your journey to the Day of
Judgement comfortable for yourselves?"  
 One man stood up and said: "Counsel us further, may Allah bless you
with mercy."

Abu Dharr said: "To fast on a day of fierce heat is beneficent on the
day of Resurrection; to go on pilgrimage to the Sacred House helps
resolve important matters in life and two Rakats of prayers in the
darkness of the night averts the fright in the graves.

Let your speech be two versions: a good word which you must speak up,
and a bad word you ought to spare. And be charitable to the poor;
perhaps that should save you, O poor soul, on the Day of anguish.

And let your earnings from this world be two Dirhams: one to maintain
your dependents and one to send forward for your next world. The third
one is harmful and not beneficent, so do not covet it. And let your
interest in this world be in two ways: one for earning that which is
lawful and another for your hereafter. The third way is harmful and of
no benefit, therefore do not seek it."

Then he said: "(How strange that) the worries of a day I have not (yet)
seen (i.e. tomorrow) kills me!"

2. Muhammad (SAW) . . . the chosen one
--------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from
Abdul Karim ibn Muhammad al-Bijili, who reported from Uthman ibn Abi
Shaybah, who reported from Muhammad ibn Mas'ab al-Qurqusni, who reported
from al-Awzai, who reported from Shaddad ibn Abu Ammar, from Wathila ibn
al-Asqa, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Allah chose
Ismail from the children of Ibrahim, and chose Kananah from the children
of Ismail, and chose Quraish from the children of Kananah, and chose
Banu Hashim from Quraish and then chose me from Banu Hashim."

3. Sanctity of a believing soul
-------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Sulaiman, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Nahavandi, who
reported from Abu al-Khazraj al-Asadi, who reported from Muhammad ibn
al-Fudhail, who reported from Aban ibn Abu Ayyash, who reported from
Ja'far ibn Iyas, who reported from Abu Saeed al-Khudri who said:*

Once a slain person was found during the days of the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, so he climbed the mimber deeply enraged; and
after praising Allah and thanking Him, he said: "How come a Muslim is
killed and his killer in not known? By Him Who controls my soul, if all
the people of the heavens and the earth were to join hands to kill a
believer, or were pleased with it, Allah will send them to hell.

By Him in Whose hands is my breath, whoever flogs someone wrongfully and
unjustly, he will be flogged the same way tomorrow in hellfire. By Him
in Whose hands is my soul: No one takes us, Ahlul Bayt, as his enemy,
except that Allah will throw him on his face into hellfire."

4. The pillars of faith
-----------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reported to me from
his father, who reported from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Muhammad ibn
al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab, from Muhammad ibn Sinan, from al-Mufaddhal
ibn Umar al-Jo'fi, from Jabir ibn Yazid, from Abu Ja'far, Muhammad ibn
‘Ali al-Husayn, from his father, from his forefather, peace be upon them
all, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, told ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib,
peace be upon him: "O ‘Ali, I and you, and your two sons Hasan and
Husayn and nine descendants of Husayn are the pillars of faith and
buttress of Islam. Those who will follow us will be saved and those who
turn away from us, their way is to hellfire."

5. Mughairah and Ammar
----------------------

*He said: Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Dawood al-Hatmi reported to me by
way of authorization (to report from him) from Abu Bakr Abdullah ibn
Sulaiman ibn al-Asha'th, who reported from Ahmad ibn Muhammad Abdan, who
reported from Ibrahim al-Harbi, who reported from Saeed ibn Dawood ibn
(Abu) Zanbar who said:*

Malik ibn Anas reported to me from his uncle Abu Suhail ibn Malik, from
his father who said: When ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, rose to
leave Madinah for Basrah, I was standing with al-Mughairah ibn Sha'bah,
when Ammar ibn Yasir, may Allah be pleased with him, approached him and
said: "O Mughaira, do you have an intention to do something for Allah,
Most High?" He said: "And where is that for me, O Ammar?"

He (i.e. Ammar) said: "Join this call (to the war) so that you may be
with those who have gone before you, and lead those who are behind you."

Al-Mughaira said: "O Abu Yaqdhan (i.e. Ammar), how about something
better than that?" Ammar replied: "And what is that?"

He (i.e. Mughaira) said: "We enter the (privacy of) our homes and shut
our doors, till the dust settles and the situation is clear. Then we
come out and see. Let us not be like the one who broke the chain so that
he may laugh (happily) and instead, he fell into anguish."

Ammar said: "Far from what you expect! Do you want to act ignorant after
knowing the truth, and resort to blindness in spite of having discerned?
But listen! by Allah, you will not see me, but at the forefront."

He said: Then Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, appeared and he
asked: "O Abu Yaqdhan! What does this one-eyed man tell you? Surely, he
is always busily engaged in mixing the truth with untruth and
misinforms. He has no relation with the religion except in matters,
which conform with the worldly gians. Woe unto you, O Mughairah, this
calls leads everyone who joins to Paradise."  
 Al-Mughairah said: "You are right, O Amirul Mu’mineen. But if I do not
join you, I will never be against you."

6. Intercession by Muhammad (SAW) and his progeny
-------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reported from his
father, who reported from Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar, who reported from
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya, from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Kufi, from
al-Abbas ibn Amir al-Qasbani, from Ahmad ibn Rizq al-Ghamshani,* *from
Yahya ibn Abul Ala', from Jabir, from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn, from his father, from his grandfather, peace be upon them
all, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "On the Day of
Judgement, when the People of Paradise will have settled in their
blissful gardens and the people of hell will be in the fire, there will
be one who spent seventy autumns in the fire, each autumn is equal to
seventy years; then he will beseech Allah, Most High, imploring: "O my
Sustainer, I ask you in the name of Muhammad and the inmates of his
house to have mercy on me."

Then Allah, Most Mighty, will command Jibraeel, peace be upon him:
"Descend to my servant and release him." Jibraeel would say: "How can I
descend into hellfire?" Allah, Most Benevolent, would say: "We have
commanded the fire to be cold and safe for you."

He (Jibraeel) would say: "O my Sustainer! How do I know where he is
located?" Allah would say: "He is in the pit of *Sijjin*." Then Jibraeel
would descend into the fire, find him shackled onto his face, so he will
get him out.

There he (the servant) stands in the presence of Allah, Most High; then
Allah addresses him: "O My servant, for how long have you been in fire,
entreating Me thus?" He would say: "I have no count." Allah, Most High,
would say: "By My Honour, had you not beseeched in the name of those,
who have a status in My estimation, you would have stayed there in a
prolonged humiliation. But, I have ordained for Myself that no one asks
me in the name of Muhammad and the inmates of his household, except that
I forgive him all that is between Me and him. So, I have pardoned you
today." Then Allah will command for him to be taken to the Paradise.

7. Do not waste your time idly
------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reported to me from
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali Majeelawayah, who reported from ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, from
his father, from Muhammad ibn Abu Umair, from Muawiyah ibn Ammar, that:*

Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, said: There was an idle man in Madinah
whose jokes caused laughter among the people. Once, pointing at ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn, peace be upon him, he said: "This man has indeed fatigued me,
for nothing from my talks makes him laugh. I must do some contrivance to
make him laugh."

Then one day, as ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, was passing by,
accompanied by his two attendants, that jester came and pulled his (‘Ali
ibn al-Husayn's) cloak from behind his back. The attendants followed and
retrieved the cloak from him and laid it back on ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn's
shoulders, while he was quite composed, his glance cast on the ground.

Then he asked his attendants: "Who is he?" They said: "He is an idle
jester, causes people of Madinah to laugh by his pranks and jokes, and
thus earn his livelihood."

He said: "Tell him: 'Woe unto you! For Allah, there is a fixed Day on
which the idle, vain doers will be in loss."

And may Allah bless our master Muhammad and his progeny, and send unto
him salutations.


