Twenty Seventh Assembly
=======================

Met on Saturday, 7th of the month of Ramadhan, in the year 409 Hijrah,
from what Abul Fawaris heard alone. Reported to us by the grand Sheikh
al-Mufeed, Abu Abdillah, Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man - may Allah
keep him.

1. Dua at dawn and dusk
-----------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Uman al-Ji’abi reported to me from
Muhammad ibn Mudrik ibn Tamam al-Shaybani, who reported from Zakariyya
ibn al-Hakam Abu Yahya al-Rasibi, who reported from Khalaf ibn Tameem,
who reported from Bakr ibn Hubaish, from Abu Shaibah, from Abdul Malik
ibn Umar, from Abu Qurrah, from Salman al-Farsi, may Allah be pleased
with him, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, told me: "O Salman, when
morning dawns, say: 'O Allah, You are my sustainer and You have no
associate. We have seen this morning - which confirms that all kingdoms
belong to Allah; Who has no associate.' Say this three times. And when
it is evening, say it again, for that will expiate your sins committed
in between."  
  

2. Dua to avert poverty
-----------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn al-Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from
Abul Qasim al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan al-Kufi, who reported from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Marwan, who reported from his father, who
reported from Ahmed ibn Isa, who reported from Muhammad ibn Ja'far ibn
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, from his father, peace be upon them all, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, once missed one of his
companions for a time and then, when he saw him again, he asked: "What
has kept you from us so long?' He said: "O Prophet of Allah, illness and
poverty prevented me." The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny,
said: "May I not teach you prayers which you would recite so that Allah
may keep illness and poverty away from you?" He said: "Yes, may my
parents be your ransom, O messenger of Allah." The Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, said:

Say:

*"There is no might nor power except that by Allah.*  
*I entrust all my affairs unto the One Who lives*  
*for ever and never dies;*  
*All Praise be to Allah, Who begets no son, and*  
*Who has taken no partners in His Dominion,*  
 nor has He any protector. So magnify Him in the  
 most Glorious way."

3. The excellence of the month of Ramadhan
------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu al-Tayyib al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Tammar reported to me
from Ja'far ibn Ahmad al-Shahid, who reported from Abul Husayn Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Abi Muslim, who reported from Ahmad ibn Jalees al-Razi, who
reported from al-Qasim ibn al-Hakam al-Irniy, who reported from Hisham
ibn al-Waleed, from Hammad ibn Sulaiman al-Saddoosi, who reported from
Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Sayrafi, who reported from al-Dhahhak
ibn Mazahim, from Abdullah ibn Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib, who heard
that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, say: "Every year, when
the month of Ramadhan enters, the paradise arrays itself ornately and
beautifies itself.

So when the first night of that month falls, a gentle wind blows from
under the Throne, called al-Mutheerah; and the leaves of the heavenly
trees flap and the door shutters clank, to produce a melodious tune, the
like of which the hearers have never heard.

And then the houris with beautiful eyes appear, standing on the balcony
of the heavenly abode, exclaiming: 'Is there anyone to propose to Allah,
so that He may marry him (to the houris)?'Then they say: 'O Ridhwan,
what night is this?' He answers them in all readiness and say: 'O good
and beautiful ones, this is the first night of the month of Ramadhan.
The gates of Paradise have been opened for those who keep the fasts in
the Ummah of Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny."

(He said): Then Allah, Most High, will say: "O Ridhwan, open the gates
of Paradise. O Malik, shut the gates of hellfire from those who observe
the fasts in the Ummah of Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny. O
Jibraeel, descend to the earth and put every rebellious Satan into the
shackles, fetter them by their necks and throw them into the depth of
the seas, so that they may not spoil the fasts of those from the Ummah
of My beloved."

He said: And then Allah, Most High, will say three times every night in
the month of Ramadhan. "Is there anyone who seeks so that I may bestow?
Is there any repentant, so that I may pardon him? Is there anyone
seeking forgiveness so that I may forgive him? Who is there to lend a
soft loan (alms and charity for the poor) to One Who is Sufficient,
Everlasting and One Who is Just and wrongs no one?"

He said: "In the evening of every day of the month of Ramadhan, Allah
frees a million souls from hellfire at the time of Iftar. And when the
night of Friday and the day of Friday enter, He frees a million souls
every hour. Those were the wretched souls who deserved chastisement. And
when the month of Ramadhan ends, the number of souls freed on that day
equals the total souls released from hellfire by Allah during the whole
month.

And when it is night of Qadr, Allah, Most High and Mighty, commands
Jibraeel to descend to earth, with a phalanx of angels, carrying a green
standard. He fixes it at the rear of al-Ka'bah. And he has six hundred
wings, two of which he never spreads except on the night of Qadr. He
spreads those two wings on that night, till they go beyond the East and
the West. Then Jibraeel disperses the angels in that night, so they
greet everyone who is standing, sitting, praying and chanting
(remembering Allah). They shake hands with them, and say *Amin* to their
prayers, till the day breaks.

And when the day breaks, Jibraeel, peace be upon him, proclaims: 'O
group of angels, it is time to depart.' They say: 'O Jibraeel, how has
Allah responded to the supplications of the believers in the Ummah of
Muhammad?' Jibraeel says: 'Allah has looked upon them in this night and
has forgiven them all except four.' He said that then the Prophet, peace
be upon him and his progeny, said: 'These four are: persistent boozers
of alcoholic drinks, and the one who has incurred displeasure of his
parents, and the one who has severed relations with his consanguinal
kith and kin, and the one whose heart is filled with rancour and bitter
hatred.'

And when the night of al-Fitr enters, the night which is called the
night of rewards, Allah bestows His rewards upon the worshippers,
without measure. And when the day of al-Fitr dawns, Allah sends His
angels to every part of the earth, so they descend and stand at the
opening of every lane, saying: 'O Ummah of Muhammad, proceed towards the
Benevolent Sustainer, for He (Alone) gives in abundance and forgives the
grievous sins.' So when they advance towards the prayers, Allah, Most
High and Mighty, addresses the angels: "O My angels, what is the reward
of a hired one when he has completed his task?" They reply: "O our Lord
and our Master, the reward is to pay him full for his labour."

He said: Then Allah, Most High and Mighty, would say: "Be My witness, O
My angels, that as a reward for their fasts and prayers during the month
of Ramadhan, they have earned My Pleasure and Forgiveness." Then He
would say: "O My servants, seek from Me whatever you wish, for by My
Honour, there is nothing which you will seek for the sake of your
hereafter or for this world, but that it will be granted.

And by My Honour, I shall conceal your shameful parts, the way you
guarded them for My sake. By My Honour, I shall save you and shall not
put you to shame before the people of Eternity. Go, with all your sins
forgiven, for you have indeed pleased Me, and I am pleased with you."

He said: The angels will rejoice and express felicitations to each
other, for what Allah will bless this Ummah, upon breaking the fast.

4. The love of Ahlul Bayt
-------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawalawy al-Qummi - may
Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from his father, who reported
from Sa'd ibn Abdullah, who reported from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,
from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn Faddhal, from Asim ibn Hamid al-Hannat, from
Abu Hamza al-Thumali from Hanash ibn al-Mo'tamar, who said:*

Once I called upon Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon
him, while he was at al-Rahbah, reclining. So I said: "Peace be upon
you, O, Amirul Mu’mineen and His mercy and His blessing, how are you
this morning?" He said: He raised his head and returned the greetings
and then said: "I have entered this morning with love for those who love
us and patience fro those who hate us.

Surely, he who loves us, awaits for repose, happiness and deliverance
every day and night. And he who hates us has built a structure whose
foundation is laid on the edge of a crumbling bank; which tumbles and
tumbles down with him into the fire of hell.

O, Abu Mo'tamar, he who loves us cannot nurse hatred against us in his
bosom and he who hates us cannot love us. No doubt, Allah, Most High,
created the hearts of the slaves with a propensity to love us and has
forsaken those who deviated to hate us. So, those who love us cannot
hate us and those who hate us cannot love us; and our love can never be
combined with the love of our adversaries in one heart. Allah has not
assigned to any man two hearts in his chest - loving one group with this
heart and loving those who are their enemies with the other."

5. ‘Ali (as) condemns varity and snobbery
-----------------------------------------

*He said: Abu al-Tayyib al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Nahwi al-Tammar
reported to me from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan, who reported from Abu Naeem,
who reported from Saleh ibn Abdillah, who reported from Hisham, from Abu
Mikhnaf, from A'amash, from Abu Ishaq al-Sabi'ee, from al-Asbagh ibn
Nubatah, may Allah bless him with mercy, who said:*

One day Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, addressed the people and
praised Allah, and lauded His glory, and invoked His blessings upon the
Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny. Then he said: "O people,
listen to what I have to say and assimilate my speech! Snobbery and
vanity is a kind of tyranny and self-conceit is a type of arrogance! And
Satan is an ever-present enemy, promising you delusion. Be it clear to
you that a Muslim is a brother to his fellow Muslim. So do not defame
each other and do not betray each other! Surely, the laws of Religion
(Islam) are all one, and its ways all head for one goal. He who follows
it reaches, and he who abandons it falls, and he who forsakes it is
destroyed.

When a Muslim is entrusted with something, he never acts dishonestly;
and when he promises, he does not break it and when he speaks, he never
lies.

We are the inmates of mercy; our speech is truth, our acts just. And
from us is the last of the Prophets and from among us are the leaders of
Islam and the custodians of the Holy Book. We call you unto Allah and
His Prophet and to confront His enemies, to struggle strenuously in His
affairs and to seek His pleasure. And we invite you to establishing the
daily prayers, giving alms, performing the pilgrimage to the sacred
House, fasting during the month of Ramadhan and to hasten payment from
the surplus of the spoils of war to its rightful owner.

Be it known that it is most surprising to see Mu’awiyah, son of Abu
Sufyan al-Umawi and Amru ibn al-Aas al-Sahmi, inciting people to avenge
for the blood of their cousin (i.e. Uthman ibn Affan). While I say, with
Allah as my witness, that I never acted against the messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him and his progeny, and I never disobeyed him in any
matter.

I protected him with my soul in situations when the valiants turned on
their heels, and writhed with fear. I did it with the might bestowed
upon me by Allah and all praise is for Him. And the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his progeny) departed from this world, with his head on my
laps, and I arranged to wash him with my hands while the noble angels
helped me to turn him sideways. And I swear by the name of Allah,
falsehood became manifest against truth in the dispute which arose among
the Ummah after its Prophet's death - except that which Allah Wills."

He said: Then Ammar ibn Yasir, may Allah be pleased with him, stood up
and said: "But Amirul Mu’mineen has clearly intimated to you that the
Ummah will not remain steadfast for him." Then people dispersed with
their eyes opened.

6. Ibn Abbas speaks about ‘Ali (as)
-----------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid reported to me from Zaid ibn
al-Husayn al-Kufi, who reported from Ja'far ibn Nujayh, who reported
from Jandal ibn Waliq al-Taghlabi, who reported from Muhammad ibn Umar
al-Mazini, from Abu Zaid al-Ansari, from Saeed ibn Bashir, from Qutadah,
from Saeed ibn al-Musayyib, who said:*

I heard a man ask Ibn Abbas about ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him.
Ibn Abbas told him: "Surely, ‘Ali is the one who prayed towards both the
Qiblas and swore allegiance to the Prophet on both occassions. He never
worshipped an idol nor did he divine by the arrows. He was born a Muslim
and did not associate any partner to Him, even for a wink."

The man said: "I did not ask you that! I want to know from you about the
sword which he proudly carried over his shoulder, came to Basrah and
killed forty thousand. Then he went to Syria, confronted the Arab
leaders, pitting one against the other and then killed them. Then he
came to Nahrawan and killed the Muslims upto the last one."

Ibn Abbas told him: "Who do you think is more knowledgeable, ‘Ali or
myself?" He said: "If I had thought ‘Ali to be more knowledgeable, I
would not have come to you!"

Upon hearing this, Ibn Abbas was enraged and he said: "May your mother
mourn you! ‘Ali is the one who taught me. And his knowledge is from the
Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, and the Prophet received
knowledge from Allah, Most High. So, the knowledge of the Prophet is
from Allah, and ‘Ali's knowledge is from the Prophet and my knowledge is
from ‘Ali. And the knowledge of all the companions of Muhammad, peace be
upon him and his progeny, when compared to ‘Ali's knowledge is just like
a drop in the seven oceans."

7. Draw lesson from the departed ones
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Babawayh - may
Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan
ibn al-Walid, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, who
reported from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab, from ‘Ali ibn
Asbat, from ‘Ali ibn Hamzah, from Abu Basir, that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhmmad, peace be upon him, said: Allah, Most
High, revealed to Isa son of Maryam, peace be upon them both: "O Isa,
give me tears from your eyes, humility from your heart and line your
eyes with the kohl of sorrow, while the idle waste away their days
laughing; stand by the graveside and call them loudly, perchance you may
thus learn from their fate. And then say: Surely, I will soon be joining
them, together with the other joners."

And may Allah bless His Prophet, our master Muhammad and his pure
progeny.


