Twenty Eighth Assembly
======================

Met on Monday, 9th night of the month of Ramadhan in the year 409
Hijrah, heard by Abul Fawaris. Our grand Sheikh, al-Mufid Abu Abdillah
Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man - may Allah perpetuate His
providence to him, narrated.

1. Three Great Sins
-------------------

*He said: Abu Fahs Umar ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Zayyat reported to me
from Ubaidullah ibn Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn A'ayan, who reported from
Mas'ar ibn Yahya al-Nahdiy, who reported from Sharik ibn Abdillah
al-Qadhi, who reported from Abu Ishaq al-Hamdaniy, from his father, from
Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Three sins lead
to immediate punishment and are not deferred till hereafter:- incurring
displeasure of the parents, tyranny over the people, and denying the
divine bounties (by abusing them)."

2. Humility of al-Najashi
-------------------------

*He said: Abul Husayn Ahmad ibn al-Husayn ibn Usamah al-Basriy has
allowed me to narrate that Ubaidullah ibn Muhammad al-Wasitiy reported
form Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Yahya, who reported from Harun ibn Muslim
ibn Sa'dan, who reported from Mas'adah ibn Sadaqah, who reported from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his father, peace be upon them all, that:*

Al-Najashi, the king of Abyssinia, sent for Ja'far ibn Abu Talib and his
companions. When they called upon him, they saw him sitting on the dusty
ground, wearing old clothes. Ja'far ibn Abu Talib said that when we saw
him in that condition, we were taken by fear. But, upon sensing our
concern and the change of colour in our faces, he said: "Praise be to
Allah, Who helped Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny, and thus
cooled and comforted my eyes!

May I not give you good tidings?" I said: "Yes, O king." He said: "Just
now, one of my informers in your lands has come to inform me that Allah
helped His Prophet, Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny, and
destroyed his enemy. And so-and-so has been taken prisoner and so-and-so
has been killed. They had confronted each other at a place called Badr.
As if I see him the way I used to tend my master's cattle there, who was
from Banu Zamrah."

So Ja'far said to him: "O benign king! Why do I see you sit on the dust
wearing the old attire?"  
 He said: "O Ja'far, we read in what has been revealed to Isa, may Allah
bless him, that it is Allah's right over His servants that whenever He
bestows a bounty upon them, they should show humility. So when Allah
blessed Muhammad, His Prophet with the bounty, I profferred this
humility before Him."

He said: When the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, learnt
about this, he said to his companions: "Giving away in charity and alms
increases the wealth of its owner, so give alms, may Allah have mercy on
you. And humility elevates and enhances the stature of the one who
adopts it, so be humble, may Allah elevate you. And to be forgiving
increases the honour of the forgiver. So be forgiving, that Allah may
bless you with honour."  
  

3. The Dua invoked by Imam Zainul Abedeen (as)
----------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Walid
reported to me from his father, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan
al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Harun ibn Muslim from
Mas'adah ibn Sadaqah who said:*

I requested Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him to teach
me prayers which I should invoke in crucial moments. He brought forth
for me some pages from an old book and said: "Make a copy of what is in
there, for it is a prayer of my grandfather, ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, Zainul
Abedeen, may peace be upon him, for crucial moments." So I copied it
down and whenever I felt distressed or landed in crisis, I invoked that
prayer. Allah relieved me of my worry and removed my sorrow and
affliction and granted my need. It is:-

"O Allah! You guided me, but I was diverted by delusion,  
 You admonished me, but my heart was hardened,  
 You blessed me with the best, but I transgressed,  
 You taught but I persisted in ignorance,

Then I realized and sought forgiveness and You pardoned,  
 Then I repeated the sin, and You covered it.  
 So, all praise and thanks to You, O my Lord!  
 I have rushed into the valleys of my destruction  
 and I have paved the ways to my ruin,

So, in it, I am exposed to Your wrath,  
 and by entering there, to Your chastisement.  
 And my only means to Your pleasure is my faith in Your Oneness.  
 And that I never associate any partner to You,  
 nor did I adopt any god beside You,  
 I flee unto You from my self,  
 and unto You do the sinners flee!

And You are the refuge for one who has ruined his fortune!  
 So all praise and thanks are to You, O my Lord!  
 How, many enemies had unsheathed their swords  
 of hostility against me, and sharpened their blades for me?  
 And mixed potions with deadly poisons to kill me,  
 and whetted for me its keen edge.  
 Aiming at me his unfailing arrows!

The enemy's vigilant eyes never ceases to watch me,  
 hiding in his bosom his willful desire to harm me,  
 and to feed me with the distasteful potion!  
 But you saw my weakness against the unbearable adversity,  
 and my inability to defend against the one who intended to fight me,  
 and my loneliness in the midst of numerous adversaries,  
 who had planned such misery against me, of which I had not imagined!

So, You initiated with Your help,  
 and You affirmed my strength with Your power.  
 Then You blunted his sharp blade and made him alone  
 in spite of the multitude.  
 And You raised me above him,  
 Then You caused his own plan to turn against him,  
 You repelled him, but that did not quench his thirst for revenge,  
 nor did it dampen the heat of his anger!

He bit his hands and retreated, alone and deserted.  
 And many a despot wronged me with his intrigue,  
 setting up for me the traps to catch his victims,  
 and appointing agents to investigate and watch me,  
 hiding himself the way wild animals hide for their prey,  
 waiting patiently for an opportunity to pounce.

Then I called upon You, O my Lord, appealing for Your help,  
 with certainty about Your quick response,  
 and the knowledge that whoever seeks refuge under Your  
 shelter, will not be wronged;  
 and whoever seeks refuge in Your bastions  
 will have no fear.

So You fortified me with Your might, against his evil.  
 And many an evil cloud You have dispersed,  
 and many an overwhelming suffering You have relieved,  
 You are not questioned about Your acts!  
 But You were asked and You granted,  
 and (even if) You were not asked, You initiated!  
 And Your bounty was sought and You never turned it down.

You have ordained nothing but good,  
 while I have persisted in breaking through Your injunctions,  
 trespassing the limits set by You and being heedless to Your  
 warning!

So all praise and thanks to You, O my Lord, the Mighty,  
 Who cannot be overcome and, the Patient Who has no hurry.  
 This indeed is the place for one to confess ones default,  
 and to testify against oneself its ruination.  
 O Allah! I seek nearness to You through the

Elevated stature of Muhammad,  
 And I turn my face sincerely unto You, through the  
 shining brightness of ‘Ali,  
 Grant me refuge from evil of that You have created,  
 and from evil of the one who has ill intentions against me,  
 For that does not straiten Your might,  
 and does not make it difficult for You in Your power.  
 And You have power over all things.

O Allah! bestow upon me Your grace by enabling me to  
 avoid all sins, for as long as You allow me to live!  
 And have mercy on me by warding off such burden  
 from me, which do not benefit me!

And bless me with an insight into such acts which please You,  
 and let my heart guard Your Book, just as You have  
 taught it to me, and make me recite it the way You may  
 be pleased with me.  
 Let the Book give light to my eyes and let my ears hear  
 it attentively.  
 And open up my chest by the Book and gladden by it my heart,  
 and grant me free speech by it, use my body in its service,  
 and grant me from Your might and power that which would  
 make it easy for me to do so.

Surely, there is no might or power except by You.  
 O Allah! let my night and day, my life and hereafter,  
 my return and my abode, be free from all ills and  
 evils, coupled with pardon and blessings from You.  
 O Allah! You are my Sustainer, my Lord, my Master, my Hope,  
 my God, my Succour, my Support, my Creator, my Helper, my Trustee and
my Expectation.

My life and my death is for You,  
 And so is my ear and eye!  
 My sustenance is from You,  
 and all my affairs of this world and hereafter repair to You!  
 You owned me by Your Might  
 and controlled me with Your authority,  
 You only have the power in all my affairs,  
 My forelock is in Your hands,  
 None can intervene without Your consent.

Because of Your compassion, I hope for Your mercy,  
 And through Your mercy I hope for Your pleasure,  
 And I do not expect that because of my deeds,  
 For my deeds have frustrated me, how can I expect  
 from that which has frustrated me?  
 I raise my complain to You about my poverty,  
 my weakness, my excesses, and all that comes about  
 from me and about all that You know more than I do,  
 So be my sufficient guard in all of them.

O Allah! make me among the companions of Your beloved Muhammad and Your
friend Ibrahim;  
 And group me among those who are in peace  
 and security on the Day of great fear, so grant me security;  
 And bless me with Your glad tidings  
 And grant me shelter under Your dense shade

And save me from the chastisement of hellfire,  
 And do not subject me to evil nor to disgrace,  
 And deliver me from the temptations herein,  
 and accept my plea on the Day of Judgement,  
 and remind me of Your remembrance  
 and smooth my way for ease,  
 and keep me away from hardship,

and inspire me to pray and to pay alms as long as I live,  
 and help me in worshipping You,  
 and make me serve in the way of knowledge  
 and Your pleasure, and sustain me from Your beneficence,  
 and brighten my face on the Day of Judgement,  
 and grant me a lenient reckoning,  
 and do not put me to shame because of my ugly acts;  
 and guide me with Your guidance and make me hold firm to the Truth in
this life and in the hereafter.  
    
 And endear to me that which You like  
 and make me abhor that which You dislike,  
 And be sufficient for me in all my worries, in this life and hereafter,
and bless my prayers, my fasts, my supplications, my  
 sacrifice, my gratitude, my life here and in the next world;  
 and promote me to the chosen position,

And appoint me for me a strong helper;  
 And forgive my transgression, my ignorance and my  
 intemperance against my own soul.  
 And redeem me from the trials of life and death,  
 and save me from all abominations, open or hidden;  
 And group me on the Day of Judgement among Your friends,  
 and give permanence to all Your endowments conferred upon me, and grant
me satisfaction from things which are lawful,  
 and make good things sufficient for me, rather than the bad ones.  
 And turn to me with Your graceful Face,  
 and do not turn it away from me!

And guide me unto Your straight path  
 and help me do things You like and approve.

O Allah! I seek refuge in You from doing or saying things  
 so as to attract admiration from others, and from  
 grandeur, glorification, conceit, pride and haughtiness  
 and from wantonness, vanity, self-esteem and arrogance,

So, O my Sustainer! save me from those,  
 And I seek refuge in You from incompetence and miserliness  
 and from avarice, jealousy, rivalry and fraud  
 And I seek refuge in You from greed, impurity, restlessness,  
 anxiety, corruption, wickedness and transgression.  
 And I seek refuge in You from dishonesty, hostility and despotism.  
 O my Sustainer! I seek refuge in You from the sins,  
 from breaking off the blood relations, from evils vulgarity  
 and misdeeds.

And I seek refuge in You from iniquities and sins,  
 from things forbidden and made unlawful, from bad things  
 and from all that does not please You.  
 And O my Sustainer! I seek refuge in You from the  
 evil of the Satan and his plans, his wrongs, his oppression,  
 his enmity, his snare, his patrons and his army.

And I seek refuge in You from the evil of all Your  
 creation; the animals, the pests or Jinn and humanbeings  
 and all that moves; and I seek Your protection from the evil of all
that descends from the heaven, and all that ascends to it; and from the
evil of all that is created in the earth, and that which grows from it;

And I seek refuge with You from every soothsayer, sorcerer and swindler;
and also from those who (cheat and) blow into knotted reeds (for
curses).

O my Sustainer, I seek refuge with You from the evil of every envious
person, and from tyrant, oppressor, (ill-intentioned) rival, despot,
transgressor and wrongful person;  
 And I flee unto You from blindness, deafness, dumbness, leprosy and
from doubt and distrust; and I seek Your protection from sluggishness,
from losing courage, inadequacy, remissness, (unnecessary) haste; and
from being wasteful, negligent and procrastinating;

And I seek Your refuge from the evil of all that You have created in the
heavens and the earth and all that is between them, and all that is
under the earth.  
 O my Sustainer, I seek refuge with You from penury, (unfulfilled) want,
privation, and from begging (from others) and being deprived or becoming
a pauper;

And I seek Your protection from paucity and humiliation;  
 And I seek refuge with You from straitened circumstances, and hardships
and from being confined or imprisoned, from being shackled or
incarcerated, and from all such adversities and calamities with which I
can put up. Amin, O Sustainer of the worlds.

O Allah, grant us all that we have asked for, and add to it with Your
favour, measuring up with Your Mightiness and Greatness. (I ask) in Your
name; there is no god but Allah, the Mighty and Wise.

4. A humbling- both ways
------------------------

*He said: Abul Hassan ‘Ali ibn Malik al-Nahwy reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Hamman, who reported from Fadhl ibn Sa'd, who reported from
al-Riyashi, who reported from Muhammad ibn Sallam, who reported from
Shurayh, the Qadhi that:*

"Whoever takes his need to his fellow brother for fulfillment, he
enslaves himself; if that brother fulfils his want, he frees him from
the bondage, and if he does not, then he humiliates him. In fact, both
have been humbles; the giver for not being able to oblige, and the
beggar for having asked."

Then he recited the following verses.  
 "A man who has had to put the honour  
 of his face at stake, cannot be recompensed,  
 And how can he be recompensed, when  
 humility has caused him disgrace."

5. A Tree of Faith
------------------

*He said: Abu Muhammad Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Abhari reported to me
from ‘Ali ibn Ahmad al-Sabah, who reported from Ibrahim ibn Abdullah ibn
Abd al-Razaq, who reported from his uncle Abd al-Razaq ibn Hammam ibn
Nafe, who reported from Hammam ibn Nafe, who reported from Meena, the
client of Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf al-Zohari, who reported from Abd
al-Rahman who said:*

"O Meena, May I not relate to you what I heard from the messenger of
Allah?" I said: "Yes." He said: "I heard him say: I am the tree, and
Fatimah is its branch. ‘Ali fecundates it, and al-Hasan and al-Husayn
are its fruits. And those of my Ummah who love them are the leaves of
the tree. (May Allah shower them all with His pleasure)."

And may Allah bless out master Muhammad, the Prophet and his progeny.


