Twenty Ninth Assembly
=====================

Met on Wednesday, eleventh of the month of Ramadhan, in 409 Hijrah. Our
grand Sheikh al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man,
may Allah bless him with His support, narrated:-

1. Praising Allah
-----------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi al-Qad.hi reported to me
from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim, who reported from Muhammad ibn Abu
al-Ambar, who reported from ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Waqid, from his
father, from Abu Amru ibn al-Ala, from Abdullah ibn Buraidah, from
Bashir ibn Ka'b, from Shaddad ibn Aws, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "The confirmation
of faith by asserting 'there is no god but Allah' fills half of the
scale, and when one expresses praise and gratitude to Allah, the scale
is fully supplemented."

2. How Surah 'Al-Kafirun' was revealed
--------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abu Sheik reported to me with
permission to report from Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Hakimi, who
reported from Abdul Rahman ibn Abdillah Abu Saeed al-Basri, who reported
from Wahab ibn Jareer, from his father, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Ishaq ibn Yasar al-Madani, who reported from Saeed ibn Meena, from more
than one companions, that:*

*A group of Quraish comprising of Utbah ibn Rabeeah, Umayyah ibn Khalaf,
Waleed ibn al-Mughaira and al-Aas ibn Saeed once confronted the
messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, saying:*

"O Muhammad, let us compromise, so that we worship what you worship, and
you worship what we worship, and thus both of us come to an equitable
word in this matter. If the truth is with us, you will have shared it,
and if the truth is with you, we will have our share from it." So Allah
revealed (unto the Prophet):

***'Say, O unbelievers! I do not worship what you worship; nor do you
worship what I worship; nor do I worship what you have worshipped, nor
do you worship what I worship. You have your religion and I have
mine.'*** ***(al-Kafirun,109)"***

Then once Ubay ibn Khalaf came with withered bones and crushed them in
his hands. Then blowing it up, he said: "O Muhammad, do you claim that
your Lord will give life to what you now see?" Then Allah revealed (unto
the Prophet):

***'And he produced an equal for Us, forgetting Our creating him; he
said: Who brings the bones back to life, once they are withered? Say: He
who originated them the first time will bring them back to life, and He
has knowledge of every creation.'*** ***(Yasin, 36:36);***

till the end of the Surah."

3. What ‘Ali (as) said to Kumail
--------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reported to me from
his father, from Muhammad ibn Abul Qasim Majeelawayh, from Muhammad ibn
‘Ali al-Sayrafi, from Nasr ibn Muzahim, from Amru ibn Sa'd, from Fudhail
ibn Khudaij, from Kumail ibn Ziyad al-Nakh'ee who said:*

Once I was with Amirul Mu’mineen in the mosque of Kufa, and when we
completed our late evening prayers (i.e. Isha), he took me by his hands
and came out of the mosque. He did not say a word till we arrived at the
rear part of Kufa. As he entered the desert, he heaved a sigh and said:

"O Kumail, no doubt these hearts (i.e. minds) are containers, and the
best of them are those who retain most. Remember from me what I say;
people are of three categories: the learned men (of piety), the students
on the path of salvation, and (the third one) the riffraff of the
society, following every croak of the crows, bending as the wind blows;
never benefiting from the light of knowledge, nor finding a refuge with
a strong supporter.

O Kumail, knowledge is better than wealth; for knowledge guards you,
while you have to guard wealth; and wealth is diminished when spent,
while knowledge grows and increases when put in use.

O Kumail, to have liking and affinity for a learned man is the best way
to entrench ones faith in Allah, it enables one to be obedient to Him
during lifetime, and to be praiseworthy after one has died.

O Kumail, dividend from wealth disappears with its loss, O Kumail, the
hoarders of wealth have died, while the learned men exist for ever;
their bodies have disappeared but their teachings and wisdom are
ingrained in the hearts."

(And then pointing to his chest, he said): "Here is well-grounded,
plentiful knowledge; I wish it had true recipients and adherents, (I
would have imparted it).

But, unfortunately, some unscrupulous men of understanding have tried to
misuse it, using religion as a weapon to earn the worldly gain, and
seeking undue power by divine authority over Allah's creatures, abusing
His bounties which He bestowed upon them. So the feeble-minded people
accepted them as reliable; or took them as compliant with (divine)
wisdom, discarding the true guardians of truth. (The truth is that) such
people (who they have adopted as their guides) have no insight into its
ramifications; with the result that with the slightest confusion, doubt
enters their minds. Neither of them could be the true carrier of
knowledge.

And then there are those with insatiable lust, easily misled by the
pleasures of flesh, or enticed by accumulating wealth, not at all among
those who care for religion. They very much resemble the grazing cattle.
Thus, knowledge dies with the death of such carriers.

Yet, the earth is never devoid of either a manifest divine power, or the
one in concealment, ensuring that His clear signs are not lost. Surely,
with those fewer people of enormous import, Allah protects His proof,
till they succeed to transmit it further to their likes, and plant it
deep in their hearts. They are the ones overwhelmed by the (true)
knowledge of certitude, and have made it easy for themselves to tread on
the path which men in luxury found difficult. They derive pleasure and
enjoyment from things which repel the ignorant. Though they live on
earth with their bodies, their souls hang onto the higher plane. They
are the (true) representatives of Allah on His earth, and the ones who
invite (people) to His religion.

Alas! How keen I am to have sight of them! And I seek forgiveness from
Allah for me and for you all."

Then he {i.e. ‘Ali (A.S.)} withdrew his hand from mine and said: "You
may leave when you like."

4. Islam begins and ends with the Prophet and Ahlul Bayt
--------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Ishaq al-Makhrami, who reported from Uthman ibn Abdillah al-Shami,
who reported from ibn Luhayah, from Abu Zura'h al-Hadhrami, from Umar
ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, from his father, peace be upon him that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "O ‘Ali! With us
Allah completed His religion, the same way as He initiated it, and with
us He will unite your hearts (in love) after the enmity and hatred."

5. Al-Mazni's verse on patience
-------------------------------

*He said: Abu al-Tayyib al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Tammar reported to me
from Abu Bakr ibn al-Anbari, who said that he heard ‘Ali ibn Haman
recite the following poem by al-Mazani*:

"When I refused to accept from life all that  
 I abhor, I continued my reproach to it;  
 till I started loving it, and so comforting myself led to patience;  
 My affinity for misfortune taught my heart to embrace it,  
 though, before that, at times my heart felt distressed.  
 And as I despaired of the people, I turned hopeful  
 Of the quick reprieve from Allah, from the source I never knew."  
 And may Allah bless our master Muhammad and his pure progeny


