Thirtieth Assembly
==================

Met on Saturday, the 14th of the month of Ramadhan in 409 Hijrah, from
what Abu al-Fawaris heard alone. Our grand Sheikh al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah
Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man, may Allah support him, said:

1. Love each other for Allah
----------------------------

*He said: Abu al-Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Walid, may
Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from his father, who reported
from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,
from Muhammad ibn Marwan, from Muhammad ibn Ajlan, who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah, Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon them both, said:
"Blessed are those who do not change the bounties of Allah by
ingratitude, and blessed are those who create a bond of love among
themselves for the sake of Allah."

2. Hatred of Ahlul Bayt leads to hell
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abdul
Karim ibn Muhammad, who reported from Sahl ibn Zanjalah al-Razi, who
reported from ibn Abi Uways, who reported from his father, who reported
from Hamid ibn Qais, from Ata from Ibn Abbas, who reported that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "O Children of
Abdul Muttalib! I have beseeched Allah to convert the ignorant among you
into learned men, and to make you steadfast in your stand, and to guide
those of you who are gone astray; and to make you brave, generous and
kind. By Allah, if a person were to offer prayers between al-Rukn and
al-Maqam (around holy Ka'bah), but at the same time die with hatred
towards you, O Ahlul Bayt, such a person will enter hellfire."

3. To obey Ahlul Bayt is to obey Allah
--------------------------------------

*He said: Al-Sharif al-Swaleh Abu Muhammad ibn Hamza al-Alawi al-Husayni
al-Tabari, may Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from Muhammad
ibn Abdillah ibn Ja'far al-Himyari, from his father, from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, from Murook ibn Ubaid al-Kufi, from Muhammad ibn Zaid
al-Tabari, who said:*

I was present at the residence of al-Ridha, ‘Ali ibn Musa, peace be upon
him, at Khurasan, and a group of Banu Hashim, including Ishaq ibn
al-Abbas ibn Musa, was present also. So, addressing Ishaq, (al-Ridha)
said: "O Ishaq! I have come to learn that you are telling people that we
consider them as our slaves. I swear by my relation with the messenger
of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, I have never said that!

Nor did I hear to that effect from my forefathers, nor has it been
conveyed to me from them through anyone. Yes, what we have said is that
people are subservient to us in matters of obedience to Allah, loyal to
us in religion. So let those present here convey this to those who are
absent."

4. Imam Al-Ridha on Tawheed
---------------------------

*He said: And with this chain of narration, he said: I heard al-Ridha,
‘Ali ibn Musa, peace be upon him, speak thus on the subject of Oneness
of Allah:*

"The first step toward worship of Allah is to know Him, and the root of
that knowledge is in recognizing His Oneness; And the principle of that
recognition lies in negating all definitions from Him;

Every reason guides to the fact that anything defined is created (and
not the creator), And every created one testifies that it has a creator,
who is not created.

The one, who is not contingent, is the One, timeless in eternity. So he
who ascribes attributes to Him has not (truly) worshipped Him, And he
who knows Him by similitude has not understood His oneness; And one who
compares Him (to anything) has not understood the true essence, nor has
he confirmed Him if he sets any limit for Him; And he who points towards
Him with any of his senses is, in fact, aiming at something other than
Him;

So, he who likens Him (to others) does not actually mean Him, and he who
considers Him a part of the whole, does not actually know Him, and he
who imagines Him is indeed deluded.

Everything, which can be encompassed by knowledge and imagination, is
created, and everything that is dependent upon others for its existence
is an effect.

By His creation, we are guided to His existence, and by reason we
believe in (the necessity of) knowing Him, and by the innate nature (of
human beings) His Proof is established.

His creation is a veil between Him and His creatures, and He is distinct
from them by His disparateness.

His beginning of their creation is the proof that He has no beginning,
for the one who is begun (in time) cannot be a (timeless) beginner; So,
all the names used for Him are mere interpretations, and acts attributed
to Him are meant for common understanding.

Indeed, he who defines or sets a limit to Him, displays ignorance about
Him, and he who tries to encompass Him transgresses the bounds. And he
who makes a surmise of His Being, misses Him (altogether). Whoever says
'How is He?' has indeed invoked His likeness, and whoever asks 'Why?'
has indeed indulged in explaining Him away. And he who says 'When?' sets
a time limit for Him, and he who asks 'In what?' tries to contain Him.
And whoever asks 'Where to?' confines Him, and whoever asks 'Till when?'
indeed fixes (an imagined) goal for Him. Thus whoever fixes a goal for
Him, limits Him, and to set a limit for Him is to disbelieve in Him.

The discrepancy among the creatures does not effect any variation in
Him, and the limitation of the limited ones creates no confine for Him.
He is One but not as number, and He is Manifest but not by was of
associating; He is Evident but not by way of being visible. He is
intrinsic but not by separation, and He is apart but not by distance.

And He is near but not by proximity. He is (truly) subtle, but not in
body, He Exists but not from nothingness. He is the doer but not under
any duress, and He is the assessor but not yielded to pondering; He is
designer without needing any movement. He Wills without being driven by
resolves or determination, He perceives without depending on any senses.
He hears and sees without any organ.

Time does not accompany Him, places do not contain Him, slumber does not
overtake Him, attributes do not define Him, and implements do not
benefit Him. His Existence precedes time, His Being precedes void and
nothingness. His Eternity precedes all beginning.

By His creating similar things, it is established that He has no
likeness, and by His creating dissimilarities among things, it is
evident that He has no contrast. And by equation among things, it is
understood that He has no equal.

He contrasted light with darkness, severe winter with hot wind. He puts
together things which are divergent, and separates things which are
closer to each other. Thus by separating, He guides us to its Separator
and by putting things together, He guides to its Integrator. Allah, Most
High, says (in Qur'an):

***'We have created a pair, that perchance you might
remember.'*****(51:49)**

The meaning of Sustainer applied to Him when there was no one sustained,
and the essence of (all) Divine Power belonged to Him when there was no
worshipper, and He was the Knower when there was nothing knowable.

He did not merit the meaning of being Creator after having created, nor
did He become the Originator after having originated.

He is not caused to be absent by 'since,' nor is He brought nearer by
'indeed.' And 'perchance' does not veil Him, nor is He limited in time
by 'when.' He is not contained by 'then,' nor is He accompanied by
'with.'

Every effect that is seen in the creation does not exist in its Creator,
and all that is contingent in it is not possible in its Maker. Movement
and Stillness do not occur in Him. And how can they occur in Him Who
caused them? How could that which He initiated return to be applied to
Him? In that case, there would have risen discrepancy in His Being, and
the meaning of Eternal would be inapplicable to Him, and the word
Creator would have had its opposite meaning.

If He were bound by rear, He would have been bound by fore also, and if
completeness were solicited for Him, then incompleteness would have been
necessarily conceivable for Him. How could He be worthy of being called
Eternal if He were contingent? How can He initiate things if He Himself
needed to be initiated?

In that case, the signs of being created would be evident in Him, and He
would have changed from being the Indicator into the one indicated. Any
statement contradicting this truth has no proof, nor do the questions
arising therefrom have any answers. There is no god but Allah, Most High
and Most Mighty. (And may Allah bless His Prophet, Muhammad and his pure
Progeny.)"

5. Verses by Al-Mamoon
----------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Malik al-Nahwi recited the following
verses to me from Abu al-Husayn, Muhammad ibn Abdillah al-Ma'mooni, who
said my father recited for me, verses by al-Mamoon:*

"Protect yourself from things you loathe, by patience, for perchance,  
 there may be a day when you will not see anything you detest;  
 Many a times, a man remains hidden, while eyes  
 vie to have a sight of him; but he is concealed;

Many a times, a literate man spares his tongue  
 fearing the answer, and that silence becomes eloquent;  
 Many a times, a dignified man smiles in pain,  
 While his heart groans with its burn."  
 And may Allah bless our master Muhammad, the Prophet, and his pure
progeny.


