Thirty Second Assembly
======================

Met on Wednesday, the 18th of the month of Ramadhan in 409 Hijrah, from
what we all heard. Our grand Sheikh al-Mufid, Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Nu’man, may Allah continuously support him narrated:

1. Piety
--------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh reported to me
from his father, who reported from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, who reported from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Yunus ibn Abdul Rehman, from Kulaib ibn
Mua'waiyah al-Asadi, who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, say*:* "By
Allah, you ought to realize that you are following the religion of Allah
and His angels; so help us to that end by being pious and by (strenuous)
effort (to remain steadfast). It is your duty to always establish
prayers and be worshipping. It is your duty to remain pious."

2. Safiyyah's question to the Prophet (SAW)
-------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from Abul
Qasim al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Kufi, who reported from Ja'far ibn Muhammad
ibn Marwan, who reported from his father, who reported from Masih ibn
Muhammad, who reported from Abu ‘Ali ibn Abu Umrah al-Khurasani, from
Ishaq ibn Ibrahim from Abu Ishaq al-Sabiee', who said:*

We called upon Masrooq ibn al-Ajda and found a guest who we did not
know. They were having their meals; and then the guest observed that he
was with the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, at Hunayn. Just
as he said that, we knew he was a companion of the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny. He said:

Then Safiyyah, daughter of Hay ibn Akhtab (one of the wives of the
Prophet) came to the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, and
said: "O messenger of Allah, I am not like your other wives who have
father, brother and uncle. If anything were to happen to you, to who do
you entrust me?" The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny,
pointing at ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him said: "To him."

Then he said: "May I not relate to you what al-Harith ibn al-A'awar
narrated to us?" We said: "Please do." He said: I called upon ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib, peace be upon him and his progeny, and he asked: "O A'awar,
what brings you here?" A'awar says he replied: "O Amirul Mu’mineen, your
love has brought us." He asked: "Really?"

I said: "Yes, Allah is my witness." He confirmed with me three times.
Then he said: "There is no slave of Allah who He has tested for piety,
except that He finds our love in his heart; such a person indeed loves
us. And there is no slave of Allah upon whom Allah has shown His
displeasure, except that He finds our hatred in his heart, and such a
person indeed hates us.

So, our friends always expect the divine mercy, and the gates of mercy
are open for them. And our enemies are upon the edge of crumbling bank
that will tumble down with them in to the fire of hell. Bounteous is the
mercy for the people who earn it, and perdition is for the people of
hell fire."

3. The Four Riders on the Day of Qiyamah
----------------------------------------

*He said: Abu ‘Ali al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn Fadhl al-Razi reported to me
from Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Bishr al-Askari, who reported from
Abu Ishaq Muhammad ibn Haroon ibn Isa al-Hashimi, who reported from Abu
Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Mahdi al-Ibili, who reported from Ishaq ibn Sulaiman
al-Hashimi, who reported from his father, who reported from Haroon
al-Rashid, who reported from his father al-Mahdi, who reported from
al-Mansur Abu Ja'far Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, from his father,
from his grandfather ‘Ali ibn Abdillah ibn al-Abbas, from Abdillah ibn
Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib, who said:*

I heard the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny say*:* "Four of
us will be the riders on the Day of Resurrection and none other." So
someone asked: "My father and mother be your ransom, who are the
riders?" He said: "I will be riding al-Buraq, and my brother Swaleh will
be mounting the god-sent she-camel which was hamstrung by his people,
and my daughter Fatimah will be on my bright she-camel, and ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib, who will ride one of the she-camels of Paradise, whose bridle
will be of fresh pearls, whose eyes will of ruby, whose stomach will of
green aquamarine; upon the camel will be cupola of translucent pearls,
so that its exterior will be visible from within, and her interior will
be seen from outside. Its exterior will be from the mercy of Allah, and
its interior will be from His grace. She will be fast as she advances,
and also as she retracts. He will be ahead of me.

There will be a crown of light on his head, a crown which will give
light to all assembled. It will have seventy corners, each shining like
a brilliant star in the heaven; and in his hands will be the praised
standard, and he will set forth announcing: 'There is no god but Allah,
and Muhammad is His messenger.'

And he will pass among the angels, they will say: 'He must be from the
sent Prophets.' And as he will pass by the Prophets, they will say: 'He
must be an angel nearest to Allah.' And then it will be announced from
inside the Throne: 'O people! He is neither an angel nearest to Allah,
nor a sent Prophet, nor a carrier of the Throne. He is ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib.'

Then his Shi’ahs will follow, and it will be announced: 'Who are you?'
They will say: 'We are the partisans of ‘Ali.' The answer will come: 'O
partisans of ‘Ali, you are secure; enter the Paradise and be with those
who you loved."

4. Prayers in times of need
---------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Waleed
reported to me from his father, from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Ja'ffar,
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Rayyan ibn al-Swalt who said:*

I heard al-Ridha ‘Ali ibn Musa invoking a prayer, so I memorized it from
him. And whenever I invoked it during hardship, Allah relieved me. It
is:

*"O Allah! You are my Trust in every distress,*  
 and You are my Hope in every hardship;  
 And in all that befalls me, You are my Trust  
 and my Shelter;

How much of grief that weakens the heart,  
 and has but little way of escape,  
 and when the affairs lack any remedy,  
 When the near ones and the distant ones, and the  
 friends let me down, and the enemies taunt,  
 I came unto You and complained to You,  
 inclined to You beside all others,

And You dispelled the grief and relieved the affliction,  
 and became Sufficient for me,  
 So You are the Provider of all bounties, and the Source for  
 all needs, and the Final Refuge for every desire.

So, for You is abundant praise, and to You belongs the  
 plentiful favour. With Your blessings, all righteousness is  
 fulfilled. O One who is known for His Grace, and the  
 One praised for His Grace, bless me with the Grace  
 which would enable me to dispense with kindness from others,  
 I beseech Your mercy, O Most Merciful."

5. A Hyprocrite
---------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from Abul
Qasim al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali, from Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Marwan, from his
father who reported from Ahmad ibn Isa, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Ja'far, from his father Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, from his
forefathers, peace be upon them all, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Two traits never
go together in a hypocrite: the (true) learning about Islam, and the
distinct feature (of nobility) in the face."  
 May Allah bless our master Muhammad and his progeny.


