Thirty Fourth Assembly
======================

Met on Saturday, the 26th of Shaban in the year 410 Hijrah. Our grand
Sheikh al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man, may
Allah continue to protect him, narrated:

1. Deeds coupled with Taqwa
---------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi, reported to me from Abul
Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed Ibn Uqdah, who reported from Muhammad
ibn Haroon ibn Abdul Rehman al-Hijazi, who reported from his father, who
reported from Isa ibn Abul Ward, from Ahmad ibn Abdul Aziz, from Abu
Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, who reported that:*

Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, said: "Any deed
performed with Taqwa is not little. And how can that which is accepted
(by Allah) be little?"

2. Sign on certitude
--------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Muqri reported to me from
Abul Qasim ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, who reported from Abul Abbas al-Ahwas ibn
‘Ali ibn Mardas, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Isa
al-Rawasi, who reported from Sama'ah ibn Mahran, that*:

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said: "Among the
signs of certitude is that you will never please the people by earning
the wrath of Allah, Most High, nor will you blame them if Allah did not
grant you from His favour. Because sustenance is not led by the greed of
the avaricious, nor is it prevented by the aversion of someone grudging.
If anyone from you were to run away from his sustenance, the way he runs
away from death, it would find him out, the way death would."

3. The status of ‘Ali on the Day of Qiyamah
-------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibnAli ibn al-Husayn ibn Babawayh, may
Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from his father, who reported
from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Ayyub ibn Nuh, from Safwan Ibn Yahya, from
Aban ibn Uthman, who reported that:*

Abu Abdullah, Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said: On the Day
of Resurrection, an announcer will announce from inside the Throne:
"Where is the Khalifa of Allah on earth?" So Dawood, the Prophet, will
stand up and the voice from Allah, Most High, will say: "We do not mean
you, although you were Allah's Khalifa."

Then a second announcement will be made: "Where is Allah's Khalifa on
earth?" Then Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him,
will rise. So a voice will come from Allah, Most High: "O people! This
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib is the khalifa of Allah on His earth and His proof
over His slaves. So whoever adhered to his rope while on earth, should
hang on to his rope here (also), so that he may have the benefit of his
light and may follow him in the rising ranks of Paradise."

He said: A group of people will rise who had adhered to his rope during
life on earth, and will follow him into Paradise. Then there will be
announcement from Allah, Most High: "O those who followed a leader while
living on earth, follow him as he goes, and they will go with him." That
will be the time when those who led will dissociate themselves from
those who followed them, and they will see the chastisement, and all
relations between them will be severed.

***'And those who followed will say: if only we had one more chance, we
would dissociate ourselves from them, as they have disowned themselves
from us. Thus will Allah show them their deeds as anguish for them and
never will they come out of the hellfire.' (2:166,167).***  
  

4. Ibn Abbas on Khilafah
------------------------

*He said: Abul Mudhaffar Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Balkhi reported to me
from Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Abul-Thalj, who reported from Abu
Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Hasani, who reported from Isa ibn
Mahran, who reported from Hafs ibn Umar al-Farra, who reported from Abu
Muaz al-Khazzaz, who reported from Yunus ibn Abd al-Warith, from his
father who said:*

Once Ibn Abbas was addressing us from the pulpit at Basrah. When he
turned his face towards the people and said: "O group of people,
bewildered in their religious affairs! If you had given precedence to he
who Allah had given precedence, and put back he who Allah had put back,
and if you had kept the heritage and the authority where Allah had kept
them, no part of divine determinate share would have been unfairly
distributed, and no friend of Allah would have been humiliated, and no
two persons would have differed on the law of Allah. So taste the evil
consequence of your negligence about what you sent forth, and those who
do wrong shall come to know what punishment awaits them."

5. ‘Ali, the best judge
-----------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Abbas Abmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from Ubaid ibn Hamdoon
al-Rawasi, who reported from al-Hasan Ibn Zareef, who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, say:
"Whenever I came across any judgement given by ‘Ali, peace be upon him,
I always found it based on the principle of (Prophet's) tradition." Then
he said: ‘Ali used to say: "If two disputants brought a case to me and I
gave my judgement, and then if they came with the same case to me after
years, I would give the same judgement, because judgement never expires
nor does it disappear."

6. The effect of parents' displeasure
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Baseer al-Muqri reported to
me from Abul Qasim ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, who reported from ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn, who reported from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn Yusuf, from Abu
Abdullah Zakariyya ibn Muhammad al-Mu’min, from Saeed ibn Yasar, who
said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, saying*:*
Once the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, was present at the
death bed of a young man; so he said to him: "Say, there is no god but
Allah." (He said): "The Youth was tongue-tied every time (he tried)."

So the Prophet asked a lady sitting near his head: "Does he have a
mother?" She said: "Yes, I am his mother." He (i.e. the Prophet) asked:
"Are you displeased with him?" She said: "Yes. I have not talked to him
for years." He said: "Then grant him your pleasure." She said: "May
Allah be pleased with him, O messenger of Allah, (together) with your
pleasure."

Then the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said (to the young
man): "Say there is no god but Allah!" And he uttered the words. Then
the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, asked: "What do you
see?" He said: "I see a man with dark face, ugly looks, dirty dress,
evil smelling, now drawing near me and strangling me." The Prophet said:
"Recite: O He who accepts little, and forgives much! Accept from me
little, and forgive me much, for surely, You are Forgiving and
Merciful."

The young man recited the prayers; then the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny asked: "Look, what you see?" He said: "I see a man with
bright face, handsome, good smelling, well-dressed, coming near me; and
I see the man with dark face turning away from me." The Prophet asked
him to repeat, so he repeated. Then he (i.e. the Prophet) asked: "What
do you see (now)?" He said: "(Now) I do not see the man with dark face
(at all) and I see the man with bright face drawn closer to me." Then he
(the young man) died in that state.

7. Predictions by the Prophet
-----------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi, reported to me from Abul
Abbas Ahmad ibn al-Husayn al-Baghdadi, who reported from al-Husayn ibn
Umar al-Muqri, from ‘Ali ibn al-Azhar from ‘Ali ibn Swaleh al-Makki,
from Muhammad ibn Umar ibn ‘Ali, from his father, from his grandfather,
peace be upon him, who said:*

When the following verses were revealed to the Prophet, peace be upon
him and his progeny:

***'When the victory granted by Allah and the conquest comes'***
**(110:1),**

he said to me: "O ‘Ali, surely the victory from Allah and the conquest
has come! So when you see people entering into the fold of religion of
Allah in throngs, then celebrate the praise of Your Lord and seek His
forgiveness, for He is ever Relenting.

O ‘Ali, Allah has ordained for the believers to fight the confusion
created by the dissenters after I have gone, the way He has ordained for
them to fight the unbelievers with me." So I said: "O messenger of
Allah! What is that dissent against which we are ordained to combat?" He
said: "Dissent by a group which will (outwardly) testify that there is
no god but Allah, and that I am His messenger, (but) they will
contradict my traditions, and will be levelling invectives against my
religion."

So I asked: "On what basis should we fight them, O messenger of Allah,
when they will be testifying Allah's Oneness, and your Prophethood?" He
said: "On the basis of their innovation in their religion and departure
from my command, and for consenting to spill the blood of my kinsfolk."

He said: I said: "O Prophet of Allah, you had once promised me
martyrdom. So pray to Allah to hasten it for me." He said: "Yes, I had
promised you martyrdom. So how patient will you be when this will be
dyed by this?" - (and he pointed to my head and my beard). I said: "O
messenger of Allah! When the time you have indicated will dawn, it will
not be an occasion for patience, it will be an occasion of glad tidings
and thanksgiving."

He said: "Well, then prepare for the opposition, for you will have a
dispute against my Ummah." I said: "O messenger of Allah! Guide me about
the (expected) split?" He said: "When you find a group of people turning
away from (true) guidance towards deviation, oppose them. For true
guidance is from Allah, and as from the devil it is only going astray.

O ‘Ali, true guidance is to follow the orders of Allah, without falling
prey to base desires and ones own opinion. It is as if I see you facing
a group of people interpreting the Qur'an the way they like, and
creating (dubious) analogies; so they will make intoxicants lawful by
calling it grape juice, they will pay Zakat to make lawful the wealth
earned by cheating people in weight, they will accept bribery and call
it a gift."

I said: "O messenger of Allah! How do we classify them when they start
doing that? Are they apostates or just rebellious dissenters?" He said:
"They will be the dissenters, blindly wandering in it, till they are
dealt with by justice." I asked: "O messenger of Allah, will that
justice be meted out by us or by others?" He said: "Of course, it will
be by us, for with us Allah has commenced and with us shall He end. It
was by us that Allah united the hearts after it had suffered disbelief,
and it will be by us that He will unite the hearts after the dissent."
Then I said: "Praise be to Allah, for the merit that He has granted us."

8. Shi’ahs of ‘Ali are saved
----------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh, may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported to me from Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Amir,
from Mualla ibn Muhamamd al-Basri, from Muhammad ibn Jamhur al-Ammi, who
reported from Abu ‘Ali al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, who heard from Abu Muhammad
al-Wabishi, reporting from Abu al-Ward who said:*

I heard Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir, peace be upon him, say:
"When the Day of Resurrection will dawn, Allah will gather all people
together on one plane, naked and barefooted, and they will be ranged on
the road to the gathering place, till they will sweat profusely and
their breathing will become difficult. They will be there for as long as
Allah wills, and that is what Allah says in Qur'an:

***'... and you shall hear nothing but whispers.'*** **(20:108)"**

He said: Then an announcer will announce from the Throne: "Where is the
Makkan Prophet?" (He said), the people will say: "You have caused all to
hear, now name him." It will be announced: "Where is the Prophet of
mercy, Muhammad, son of Abdullah?"

Then the messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, will
rise and proceed before the people till he reaches the Pool, its length
equal to the distance between Ayla and Sana; and then your master (i.e.
‘Ali) will be called and he will proceed in front of the people and
stand with him (i.e the Prophet). Then people will be summoned to pass
by.

Abu Ja'far, peace be upon him said: "Among them on that Day, some will
arrive (to stay) and some will be driven away. When the Prophet, peace
be upon him and his progeny, will see that those sent away are from
those who love us the Ahlul Bayt, he will weep and say: "O Lord, these
are partisans of ‘Ali, O Lord, these are partisans of ‘Ali!" He said:
Allah will send an angel who will say: "O Muhammad! What makes you
weep?"

He will say: "Why should I not weep for the fate of those who followed
my brother ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib. I see they are being sent off with the
inmates of hell, and are prevented form being at my Pool?" He said: Then
Allah will say: "O Muhammad, I give them away to you, and pardon them
their sins for your sake, and I will unite them with those who loved
your progeny; I will keep them in your group, and station them at your
Pool, and accept your intercession for them. This is how I have honoured
you."

Then Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn said: There will be
several men and women weeping on that Day, when they witness this,
exclaiming: "O Muhammad, (help us). So no one who is our partisan and
loves us will remain except that he will be in our party and with us,
and will arrive at our Pool."

9. The best and the worst among people
--------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad, may Allah bless him with
mercy, reported to me from Abu ‘Ali Muhammad ibn Hammam al-Iskafi, who
reported from Abdullah ibn Ala, who reported from Abu Saeed al-Adami,
who reported from Umar ibn Abdul Aziz, commonly known as Zohl, from
Jamil ibn Darraj, who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said: "The best
people among you are those who are generous, and the worst among you are
the misers. And the best deed is to treat your brothers well, and to
strive to fulfil their needs, for that is what Satan dislikes; and in
that is salvation from hellfire and entrance into Paradise.

O Jamil, narrate this tradition to your special friends." I said: "Who
are my special friends?" He said: "Those who are kind to their brothers
in the time of hardship and ease." Then he said: "For those who are
blessed with plenty, that is very easy. Indeed, Allah has praised those
who have little. He said (in Qur'an):

***' ... and they prefer others above themselves, even though poverty
may afflict them. And whoever is saved from the greed of his own soul,
those are the ones who prosper.'*** **(59:9)"**

And Allah is Sufficient for us and the Best Trustee, and may Allah bless
our master Muhammad, the Prophet and his progeny.


