Thirty Fifth Assembly
=====================

Met on Saturday, after three nights had elapsed from the month of
Ramadhan in 410 Hijrah. The grand Sheikh al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah,
Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man, may Allah increase his
capabilities, narrated:

1. Allah's decisive argument
----------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh, may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported to me from Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Ja'far
al-Himyari, who reported from his father, who reported from Haroon ibn
Muslim, who reported from Mas'adah ibn Ziyad, who said that:*

When Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, was asked about the verse:
*'To Allah belongs the decisive argument.'* (6:149), he said: When there
will be the Day of Reckoning, Allah will address (His) slave: "Were you
a learned man?" If he says "Yes," Allah will ask: "Did you not act
according to your knowledge?" And if he says: "I was not learned," He
will say: "Why did you not learn?" and so call him to account. That is
the decisive argument of Allah, Most High, against His creatures.

2. Luqman's advice to his son
-----------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh, may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported to me from al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Amir,
from al-Qasim ibn Muhammad al-Ishfahani, from Sulaiman ibn Dawood
al-Minqari, from Hammad ibn Isa, who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said: Among the
admonitions given by Luqman to his son, he said: "O son, in your days,
night and hours, keep some portion for acquiring knowledge. Surely, you
will not find any thing more wasteful than its disregard."

3. ‘Ali's hand of Justice
-------------------------

*He said: Abu ‘Ali al-Hasan ibn Abdillah al-Qattan, reported to me from
Abu Amru Uthman ibn Ahmad, popularly known as Ibn al-Sammak, who
reported from Abu Bakr Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Swaleh al-Tammar, who
reported from Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Razi, who reported from* *Abdullah
ibn Raja, who reported from Israeel, from Abu Ishaq, from Habshi ibn
Junadah, who said:*

I was once sitting with Abu Bakr, when a man came to him and said: "O
Caliph of the messenger of Allah, the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, had promised to scrimp to me three measures of dates." So Abu
Bakr said: "Call ‘Ali for me." ‘Ali, peace be upon him, came, and Abu
Bakr told him: "O Abul Hasan, this man says that the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, had promised to scrimp him three measures of
dates, so give them to him."

He gave him three measures of dates. Then Abu Bakr said: "Count them."
They found out that each measure contained sixty dates. So Abu Bakr
said: "The messenger of Allah spoke the truth. On the night of Hijrah
(i.e. migration) I heard the Prophet as we were on our way from Makkah
to Madinah saying: O Abu Bakr, my palm and ‘Ali's palm are equal to each
other in justice."  
   

4. Love for ‘Ali . . . an Obligation
------------------------------------

*He said: Abu ‘Ali al-Hasan ibn Abdillah al-Qattan reported to me from
Abu Amru Uthman ibn Ahmad, who reported to me from Ahmad ibn al-Husayn,
who reported from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Bassam, from ‘Ali ibn
al-Hakam, from al-Laith ibn Sa'd, from Abu Saeed al-Khudari, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "O people, love
‘Ali because his flesh is my flesh, his blood is my blood. May Allah
curse those people who have reneged from the covenant with me about him,
and forgotten my parting counsel about him; and they have no share (of
blessings) from Allah."

5. The meaning of 'Al-Kawthar'
------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi, reported to me from Abu
al-Abbas Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Baghdadi, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Ismail, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Swalt, who reported from Abu
Kudainah, from Ata, from Saeed ibn Jubair, from Abdullah Ibn al-Abbas,
who said:*

When the verse: *'We have surely blessed you with abundance'*
(Kauthar-108:1) was revealed to the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, asked him: "O messenger
of Allah, what is al-Kauthar?"

He said: "It is a stream with which Allah has honoured me." Then ‘Ali,
peace be upon him, said: "O messenger of Allah, describe for us this
sacred stream." He said: "Yes, O ‘Ali, al-Kauthar is a stream that flows
under the Throne of Allah, Most High. Its water is whiter than milk,
sweeter than honey, softer than cream. Its pebbles are of aquamarine,
ruby and coral. Its weeds are saffron, its dust is sweet smelling musk,
and its basins are under the Throne of Allah, Most High!"

Then the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, struck his hand on
Amirul Mu’mineen's side and said: "O ‘Ali, this stream is for me and
you, and for those who love you after I have gone."

 

6. ‘Ali at Qudaid
-----------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Katib reported to me from
al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn Abdul Karim al-Za'farani, who reported from Abu
Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from Ismail ibn
Aban, who reported from Amru ibn Shimr, who said:*

I heard Jabir ibn Yazid reporting from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali,
peace be upon him, who reported from his father, and from his
grandfather, peace be upon them all, that when Amirul Mu’mineen, peace
be upon him, left Madinah for Basrah to confront the renegades, he
stopped at al-Rabdhah. And then as he left from there, he was met by
Abdullah ibn Khalifa al-Taee, at a place called Qudaid. Amirul
Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, welcomed him.

Then Abdullah said:"Praise be to Allah who restored the right to its
owner and kept it in its rightful place, regardless of whether some
people were pleased or displeased. By Allah, they had hated Muhammad,
peace be upon him and his progeny, resisting and fighting against him.
But Allah turned their guile against them, and made the disaster to
befall them. By Allah, we shall fight by your side in every situation,
protecting (the message of) the messenger of Allah, peace be upon him
and his progeny."

Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, welcomed him and made him sit by
his side, for he was indeed his helper and friend. Then he started
inquiring about people till he mentioned Abu Musa al-Ashari. He said:
"By Allah, I do not trust him, and I do not see you secure against him
if he finds support." Amriul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, replied: "By
Allah, he was neither trustworthy nor a good counsel in my estimation.
But those who preceded me were captured by his fancy and gave him
authority to govern the people. And I had decided to remove him, but
al-Ashtar asked me to confirm him, so I did it reluctantly. Thereafter,
I had to sustain his dismissal."

He said: He (i.e. Amirul Mu’mineen) remained with Abdullah this way,
till a great multitude was seen coming from the mountains of Tay. Amirul
Mu’mineen said: "Look out, who are they?" So, some of the horsemen ran
to find out, and soon came back to report that they were the people of
Tay who had come with their sheep and camels and horses. Some of them
had come with their gifts for ‘Ali, and some intended to go with him to
fight his enemy. So Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, said: "May
Allah reward the people of Tay a good reward, and

**'*****He (i.e. Allah) has a far richer reward for those who fight for
Him than for those who stay at home.*****'(4:95)"**

And when they drew close to him, they greeted him. Abdullah ibn Khalifa
said: "By Allah, I was pleased with what I experienced from their group,
and by their excellent form. They spoke and confirmed their stand. By
Allah, I have not seen a more eloquent speaker than their spokesman."
And Adi ibn Hatim al-Taee stood up, praised Allah and lauded Him and
then said: "I had embraced Islam in the days of the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, and I paid my Zakat (dutifully) in his time,
and after he had departed, I fought the apostates.

I did all that to earn the pleasure of Allah, and indeed, the reward of
one who does good and guards against evil is from Allah. We are informed
that some men of Makkah have reneged on your loyalty, and have turned
against you as aggressors. So we have come to help you on the right
path, and here we are, before you. So command us to do whatever you
wish." Then he recited the following:

*"And we have helped (the cause of) Allah before you,*  
*and you have come to us with truth, so you will be helped.*  
*All of us shall be sufficient for you against them all,*  
*And indeed, of all man, you deserve this most."*

Then Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, said: "May Allah reward you on
behalf of Islam among all living people, and on behalf of all Muslims.
You have indeed submitted voluntarily and fought the apostates, and are
determined to help the Muslims." Then Saeed ibn Ubaid al-Bahtari from
the tribe of Bani Bahtar rose and said: "O Amirul Mu’mineen, some men
are able to say what they have in their minds, while others are unable
to express what they think in their hearts. And if they are forced to do
it, they find it extremely difficult.

And if they keep silent, the grief torments them and makes them
restless. As far as I am concerned, I can not convey to you all that I
have in my mind, but I will try my best to be explicit, and Allah is the
custodian of success! I am surely your best counsellor, privately and in
open, and I will fight by your side in every situation; and I see you
with the Truth, the way I never saw those who preceded you, nor any
other person among your contemporaries! This is because of your merit
and excellence in Islam, and your relation to the Prophet. I shall never
part from you till you win, or I die before you."

Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, said: "May Allah bless you with
mercy, Your tongue has indeed expressed what you conscience has
concealed. I pray to Allah that He may bless you with good health, and
reward you with Paradise."

Then others from them spoke, but I do not remember the speech of any
other but these two men. Then Amirul Mu’mineen decamped, and from them
six hundred followed him till they reached Zuqar. When he arrived there,
he had One thousand and three hundred men.

7. Shi’ahs, the foremost to enter Heavens
-----------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Muqri reported to me from
Umar ibn Muhammad al-Warraq, who reported from ‘Ali ibn al-Abbas
al-Bijilli, who reported from Hameed ibn Ziyad, who reported from Abu
Nuaim al-Fadhl ibn Dakin, who reported from Muqatil ibn Sulaiman, from
al-Dhahhak ibn Mazahim, from Ibn Abbas, who said:*

I asked the Prophet. Peace be upon him and his progeny, about the verse
of the Quran:

 ***'And those foremost in faith, are the foremost, those are the ones
brought near, in the garden of bliss...'*** **(56:10,11,12).**

He said: Jibraeel told me: "That refers to ‘Ali and his Shi’ahs. They
are the foremost towards Paradise, brought closer to Allah, Most High,
by the special honour bestowed upon them."

8. Forgiving, Merciful Allah
----------------------------

*He said: Abu Ghalib Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Zurari, may Allah bless him
with mercy, reported to me from my Uncle Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Sulaiman
ibn al-Jahm, who reported from Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Khalid
al-Tayyalasi, who reported from al-Ala' ibn Razin, from Muhammad ibn
Muslim al-Thaqafi, who said:*

I asked Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, about the verse
(in Qur'an):

***'Those Allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds. Allah is
ever all-Forgiving, Merciful.'*** **(25:70)**

He said: "A believer who will be a sinner will be brought on the Day of
Reckoning, and made to stand for accounting. And Allah (Himself) will be
in charge of his reckoning, and no other men will know about his
reckoning. Then Allah will show him his sins, till when he will confirm
his evil deeds, then Allah will command the recorders: 'Change them into
good deeds, and display them to the people.' Then the people will ask:
'Did this slave not have even single lapse?' Then Allah will order him
to Paradise. This is the true meaning of the verse, and it is especially
for the sinners among our Shi’ahs."

9. Four characteristics
-----------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Waleed, may
Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from his father, who reported
from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,
from Muhammad ibn Abdul Jabbar, from al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Abu
Ayyub al-Khazzaz, from Abu Hamza al-Thumali, who reported from Abu
Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, who said:*

My father ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, used to say that
whoever has four characteristics in him, his faith will be deemed
complete, and he will be purified of his sins, and he will meet his Lord
having earned His pleasure: "He who fulfils his duty towards people for
the sake of Allah, and he who is always truthful with people, and he who
feels ashamed of committing any ugly deed before people and before
Allah, and he who puts on the best behaviour with his family."

10. Verses at Multan
--------------------

*He said: Abu al-Tayyib al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Nahwi, the friend of
Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Qasim al-Ambari, reported to me from Abu Bakr
Muhammad ibnal-Qasim, who reported from al-Abbas ibn al-Husayn
al-Lahabi, who reported from al-Hassan, from Qubaisah al-Lahabi, who
said:*

‘Ali ibn Hafs ibn Umar wrote to Abu Ja'far al-Mansoor that I saw it
written in a khan at Multan that: Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Abdillah ibn
al-Hasan ibn al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali Abi Talib (peace be upon him) says: When
I reached this place, and found myself secure, I said:

"Perchance, the drinking fountain may clear up to quench the thirst,  
 a thirst which has been prolonged because of the turbid water,  
 Perchance, you may be garbed by the unclothed one,  
 and may find help from the lowly and oppressed;  
 Perchance a bonesetter of the broken bone may from his kindness,  
 feel sympathy for the broken bone and set it.

Perchance, Allah may not allow His slave to despair,  
 for all that is lofty and great is indeed negligible in His sight."

Sheikh said: And Abu al-Tayyib al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Tammar recited
to me quoting Abu Bakr al-Arzami, the following:-

"(In this world) I find a (feeble) helpless person known as  
 tough because of his tyranny, (but)  
 had he adopted fear of Allah, his brutality might have been blunted;

And (I find) a chaste person taken as helpless,  
 because of his (virtue of) chastity (and modesty)  
 (though) had it not been for fear of Allah, the ways  
 (of evil) would not have found him powerless;

And (I find) a fool whose affairs are cared for (by others),  
 being appointed a leader by his fellowmen and his relatives,  
 (in spite of the fact that) he has no resoluteness in his affairs,  
 nor are nobility and magnanimity counted among his qualities.

But all that is controlled by Allah, and He grants,  
 So neither this contends him nor that tries to overcome him;  
 (The truth is that) when Allah in His mercy, perfects the wisdom of a
person,  
 his behaviour and all his desires are perfected also."

11. Imam Al-Baqir's advice to his sons
--------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad, may Allah bless him with
mercy, reported to me from Muhammad ibn Hammam, from Abdullah ibn
al-Ala', from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Shammoon, from Hammad ibn Isa,
from Ismail ibn Abi Khalid, who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, say: We
were gathered together by (our father) Abu Ja'far, peace be upon him,
and then he said*:* "O my sons, beware of meddling with the rights of
others, and be enduring when visited by any misfortune, and if people
call you to any matter whose harm to you is more than its benefit, do
not respond."

And may Allah bless our master Muhammad, the Prophet and his pure
progeny.


