Thirty Sixth Assembly
=====================

Met on Saturday, the 10th of the month of Ramadhan, in 410 Hijrah. The
grand Sheikh al-Mufid, Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man, may Allah
support his capabilities, narrated to us:-

1. Month of Ramadhan and the Night of Qadr
------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from
Muhammad ibn Yahya Ibn Sulaiman Al-Muruzi, who reported from Abdullah
ibn Muhammad al-Ayshi, who reported from Hammad ibn Salemah, from Ayyub
from Abu Qulabah, from Abu Hurairah, who reported that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "This is the month
of Ramadhan, the blessed month whose fasts Allah has made obligatory.
The gates of Paradise are opened in this month and the Satans are
shackled in it. In this month, there is a night, which is better than a
thousand months. Whoever preserves its sanctity is indeed saved." The
Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, repeated it three times!

2. Trials begin with Imams and then with Shi’ahs
------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr, Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abu
Al-Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed ibn Ibn Uqdah, who reported from
Ja'far ibn Abdullah, who reported form Sa'daan ibn Saeed, who reported
from Sufyan ibn Ibrahim al-Ghamidy al-Qadhi, who said:*

I heard Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him say: "Tests and trials
begin with us and then with you, and the times of ease begin with us and
then with you. And by the oath of Him where oath is usually taken, Allah
will triumph through you the way He triumphed through the stones (of
clay)." (Refer to Surah al-Fil).

3. The Prophet prayer for rain
------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from
al-Nu’man Ibn Ahmad al-Qadhi al-Wasiti in Baghdad, who reported from
Ibrahim ibn Arfah al-Nahwi, who both reported from Ahmad ibn Rashad ibn
Khuthaim al-Hilali, who reported from his uncle Saeed ibn Khuthaim, who
reported from Muslim al-Ghilabi, who said:*

Once an Arab from the desert came to the Prophet, peace be upon him and
his progeny, and said: "By Allah! We have come to you while we neither
have a shrieking camel nor a snoring sheep."

Then he presented the following verses:  
 "O best of all the creatures, we have come to you,  
 that you may show mercy to us for the hardship we face!

We have come to you while the maiden girls bleed from  
 their breasts (because of hard labour),  
 and the suckling mother is distressed from her baby.

And a young man submits with both his palms,  
 to receive anything bitter or sweet, weakened by hunger.

Nothing that a human can consume is left with us,  
 except the common bitter colocynth and the fluffy saplings,  
 so we have no refuge but with you,  
 and where can people seek refuge but with the Prophets."

So the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, turned to his
companions and said: "This Arab is complaining of shortage of rainfall
and severe famine." Then he rose putting together his clock and climbed
up the pulpit. After praising and lauding Allah thus: "All praise to
Allah Who when He rose to the heavens became exalted, and on the earth
became close - closer to us than the jugular vein."

Then he raised his hands towards the heaven and said: "O Allah, send
upon us rain which would give us relief and which would be savory,
productive, abundant, pervading, immediate, without any delay. Let it be
beneficial without any harm, which would fill the udder and cause the
produce to grow from the earth; it would give life to earth after it had
died." His hands had not come back to his chest when the clouds
encircled Madinah like a crown, and the sky became overcast.

Then the people of the valleys came to the Prophet shouting: "We will
drown, we will drown." So the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny
uttered: "Around us and not upon us." So the clouds in the sky
dissipated. Then the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, smiled
and said: "How good was Abu Talib. Had he been alive, his eyes would
have cooled. Who will recite to us his verses?"

Then Umar ibn al-Khattab rose and said: "O messenger of Allah, perhaps
you mean this verse":-

"No she-camel has carried on her saddle  
 any load, more kind and more dutiful than the  
 person of Muhammad."

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "That was not said
by Abu Talib, that is from Hassan ibn Thabit."  
 Then ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace he upon him, stood up and said: "Perhaps
you meant this, O messenger of Allah!":-

"And the bright one from whose face,  
 the clouds pour forth to relieve the orphans and protect the poor
widows,  
 The one to whom the ruined men from Banu Hashim resort,  
 While he is among them bounteous, and man of many virtues.  
 By the sacred House of Allah, you have lied when you said:  
 'We will surpass Muhammad,'  
 and when you said: 'we will fight him.'

We will indeed protect him till we are knocked down around him,  
 unmindful of our own children and our wives."  
 The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny said: "Yes, that is it."
Then a man from the Banu Kananah stood up and said:

"Praise to you, and all praise to Him Who is All-Rewarding,  
 We were blessed with rain because of the Prophet.  
 He prayed to Allah, His Creator,  
 And turned his eyes unto Him;

And before his glance returned, or  
 quicker, the rain poured forth upon us.  
 Bustling forth in abundance and exuberant,  
 with which Allah succoured the prominent people of Mudhar.  
 So it was the way his uncle had said,

his uncle Abu Talib, a man of exceeding grace;  
 (he said): 'By his face shall Allah pour forth from the clouds,'  
 so this is the witness and that was the information."  
 The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "May Allah lodge
you, O Kanani, for every couplet you have said, in a chamber in
Paradise."

4. Ubaidullah ibn Abbas and Mu’awiyah
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Katib reported to me from
al-Hasan ibn Abdul Karim al-Za'farani, who reported from Abu Ishaq ibn
Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who reported from Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Warraq,
who reported from Abdullah ibn al-Azraq al-Shaybani, who reported from
Abu al-Jahhaf, from Mu’awiyah ibn Tha'labah who said:*

When Mu’awiyah found himself fully entrenched in his rule, he sent Busr
ibn Artat to Hejaz, to hunt for the Shi’ahs of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace
be upon him. At that time, Ubaidullah ibn al-Abbas governed Makkah. He
(i.e. Busr) summoned him, but could not find him. Then he was informed
that Ubaidullah had two infant sons. So he set out to reach them, and
when he found them - they had two (tender) forelocks (shining) like
pearls - he ordered to kill them. When their mother came to know this,
her grief put her on the verge of death. At that moment, she said:

"Ah! Who has heard about my two dear sons,  
 who were like two pearls torn from their oyster!  
 Ah! Who has known about my two dear sons,

who are my ears, my eyes! My heart today feels wrenched.  
 I am informed that Busr (did it),  
 but I cannot believe what they thought (of us)  
 from (what I hear about) their speech and the falsehood they contrived.

So the sharp sword fell on the throat of my two little ones,  
 that indeed is tyranny and immoderation,  
 Who showed love to the two tormented  
 infants who had lost their progenitor."

He said: Then once Ubaidullah ibn al-Abbas met Mu’awiyah while Busr ibn
Artat was present. Mu’awiyah said: "Do you recognize this old man who
killed the two infants?" Busr said: "Yes, I killed them, so what?" Then
Ubaidullah said: "I wish I had a sword." Busr said: "Here is my sword,"
pointing to his own sword.

Mo'awiya scolded him saying: "Woe unto you! What makes you a fool in
spite of your old age! You trust a man whose two sons you killed, and
give him your sword? Perhaps you do not know the courage of Banu Hashim?
By Allah, if you gave it to him, he could kill you first, and then I
would be the next." Ubaidullah said: "On the contrary, by Allah, I would
begin with you (O Mu’awiyah) and he (i.e. Busr) would be the next."

5. The true successors on earth
-------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abdul
Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from Ja'far ibn
Muhammad ibn Marwan, who reported from his father, who reported from
Ibrahim ibnal-Hakam, from al-Masoodi, who reported from al-Harith ibn
al-Haseerah, from Imran ibn Hasim, who said:*

Once Umar ibn al-Khattab and I were present with the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, and ‘Ali, peace be upon him, was sitting by
his side. Then the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, recited
the following verse (from the Qur'an):

***'Or who answers the distressed when he calls upon Him and relieve the
affliction, and has made you successors on the earth?*** ***Is there
another god with Alalh? No indeed. How little do you reflect?'***
**(27:62).**

He said: (Upon hearing this), ‘Ali, peace be upon him, quivered like a
bird. The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Why are you
so worried?" He said: "Why would I not worry, as Allah says He will make
us the successors on earth?" The Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, said: "Do not be anxious! By Allah, none but the (true)
believer will love you, and none but a hypocrite will hate you."

6. The Chosen ones
------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Sulaiman Abul Fadhl, who reported from Dawood
ibn Rushaid, who reported from Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Tha'labi al-Mosili
Abu Nawfil, who said:*

I heard Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, say: "We are the Chosen
ones by Allah among His creation, and our Shi’ahs are His Chosen ones
from the Ummah of Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny."

7. Those three have no religion
-------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ghalib Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Zurari, may Allah bless him
with mercy, reported from his uncle ‘Ali ibn Sulaiman, who reported from
Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Tayalasi, who reported from al-Ala' ibn Razeen,
from Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Thaqafi, who said:*

I heard Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, say: "He who
resorts to the way of obeying those who disobey Allah has no religion at
all, and he who invents lie against Allah has no religion at all, and he
who adopts the way of repudiating anything from the Signs of Allah, has
no religion at all."

8. If one knew of his appointed hour
------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad, popular as Ibn al-Zayyat, reported
to me from ‘Ali ibn Mahrwayh al-Qazwini, who reported from Dawood ibn
Sulaiman al-Ghazi, who reported from al-Ridha ‘Ali ibn Musa, who
reported from is father, Musa ibn Ja'far, who reported from his father
Ja'far ibn Muhammad, who reported from his father Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, who
reported from his father, ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, who reported from his
father al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon them all, who said:*

Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, said: "If a slave of Allah were to
see his appointed time of death, and how quickly it advance towards him,
he would detest all his long hopes and would renounce seeking the
world."

He said: Abul Faraj al-Barqi al-Dawadi reported to me the following
verses which he heard from a saintly old man at Baytul Muqaddas.  
 "One waiting for death is busy every hour,  
 diligently constructing, erecting and fortifying,

He has moments, which are tested by a certain reality, (i.e. death)  
 but his deeds are of those who is not certain.  
 It is manifest yet denied, its knowledge treated as if  
 its ways were unknown to even those who are certain."  
 And may Allah bless our master, Muhammad, the Prophet and his pure
progeny.


