The First Assembly
==================

In the name of Allah,

Most Merciful, Most Beneficent

*All praise be to Allah, the Sustainer of the worlds.*  
*And blessings and peace be upon the noble master, Muhammad ibn
Abdillah, the last of the Prophets,*  
*and upon his progeny, (who are) the straight path,*  
*the infallible Imams.*  
*May peace be upon them all from Allah.*

It met on Saturday, the first of the month of Ramadhan, in the year 404
Hijra, in Baghdad at the location called al-Zayyarain on the Rib'ah
street, at the residence of Dhamrah Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn
Abdul Rehman al-Farsi, may Allah perpetuate his honour, by way of
dictation from his books:

1. Registering Good Deeds
-------------------------

*The grand Shaikh al-Mufid Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn
al-Nu’man, may Allah continue to bless him with His protection and
beneficence today said: Abul Hasan Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn
al-Walid reported to me from his father Muhammad ibn al-Hasan, from
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al Saffar, from Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from
Muhammad ibn Khalid, from Ibn Hammad, from Abu Jamilah, from Jabir ibn
Yazeed that Abu Ja'far Muhammad al-Baqir, peace be upon him, reported
from his father that:*

"Surely, the Angel appointed to the servant (of Allah) records
(everything) in his books of deeds. So, register a good deed at its
beginning and at its end, (so that) Allah may forgive you that which
transpires in between."

2. Condition for the Acceptance of Acts of Devotion.
----------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Al-Zubair al-Kufi reported to
me, with permission to report from Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Faddhal, who
reported from ‘Ali ibn Asbat who reported from Muhammad ibn Yahya, the
brother of Mughallas, from al-Ula ibn Razin, from Muhammad ibn Muslim,
from one of the two (Imams), peace be upon them, saying that:*

I told him: "We see a man deeply engrossed in the acts of devotion,
humble and trying his best (to please Allah), yet he is opposed to you.
Does that benefit him anything?"

He said: "O Muhammad, the similitude of us Ahlul Bayt is like that of a
household among Banu Israel, of whom whoever strived devotedly for forty
nights, his prayer was answered." Among them there was one who
strenuously worshipped for forty nights and his prayer went unanswered.
So he came to Isa, son of Maryam, peace be upon him, complaining about
the situation he was in, and beseeching him to pray for him. So Isa made
ablutions, and prayed.

Allah revealed unto him: "*O Isa, surely, this servant of mine came
through a gate other than the one through which I am reached. He prayed
while his heart had doubts about you. So, (even) if he called upon me
till his neck were severed and his fingers fell apart, I would not
answer him."*

Then Isa approached him and said: "You call upon your Lord while your
heart doubts His Prophet?"  
 He said: "O Spirit of Allah, and His word, by Allah, it was like what
you said. Now, please pray unto Him to remove that from me." Then Isa
prayed (for him) and Allah accepted it from him, and he was again
reverted to his household.

Similar is the case of us Ahlul Bayt. Allah does not accept the acts of
devotion from a servant who doubts about us.

3. Al-Harith Al-Hamadani and ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as)
----------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Zubair reported to me from
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn Mahdi, who reported from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn
Amru who reported from his father, from Jamil ibn Swaleh, from Abu
Khalid al-Kabuli, from al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah who said:*

Al-Harith Al-Hamadani called upon Amirul Mu’mineen (‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib)
with a company of the Shi’ahs, and I was among them. Al-Harith walked
with a bent stature, hitting his walking stick hard on the ground. He
was indeed ill. So Amirul Mu’mineen came close to him and al-Harith had
a good standing in his estimation, and he said: "How do you find
yourself, O Harith?"

He said: "The vicissitude of time has overtaken me, and the dispute
among your companions about you and the three before you, has added to
my anguish and anger. There are those who have gone to the extreme in
their passionate love for you, and those who are yours in moderation,
and those who waver in doubt, not knowing whether to proceed or recoil."

He (‘Ali) said: "Suffice it for you, Oh brother (from) Hamadan! Be it
known that my best followers are the people united on the middle path.
To them should the extremists return, and with them should the hesitants
join."

Then al-Harith said: "My father and mother be your ransom, could you
(further clarify so as to) remove the filth from our hearts, and (to)
make us as sure about our affair as seeing with one's eyes?"

He (peace be upon him) said: "That is enough for you. You are possessed
by confusion. Surely, the religion of Allah is not known (or judged) by
the people, it is recognized by the sign of Truth. Know the Truth, and
you shall know its people. O Harith, surely Truth is the best (and most
sublime) narration, and whosoever utters it is indeed a fighter (a
soldier of Truth). I have informed you the Truth, so lend me your ear
and inform among your friends who have sound judgement.

Be it known that I am a slave of Allah, the brother of His messenger and
his first confirmer. I confirmed his truth when Adam lay between the
spirit and the body. Then, I am his first confirmer truth among you
people. We are the first and we are the last. And we are his special
ones with distinction, and we are his sincere ones. And I am his cousin,
and his successor, and his trustee and possessor of his confidence and
secret. I have been given the understanding of the Book, and (blessed
with) sound judgement and decision, and the knowledge about the
generations and the relations.

And I am entrusted with a thousand keys, each key opens a thousand
chapters, each chapter breaks into a thousand testament. And in
addition, I am supported and especially chosen and helped by the Night
of Qadr, and that continues for me and my descendants who guard against
sins, for as long as the days and the nights subsist, till such time
when Allah shall inherit the earth and all who are upon it. I give you
glad tidings, O Harith, you shall recognize me at the time of death, and
at the Bridge, and at the Pool, and at the time of division."

Al-Harith said: "O my master, what is the time of division?" He said:
"Division at the hell-fire, when I will make a correct separation. I
shall say: This is my friend, so leave him; this is my adversary, so
take him"

Then Amirul Mu’mineen took (al-Harith) by his hand and said: "I hold
your hand the way the Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny), held
my hand and said (when I complained to him about the envious Quraish and
the hypocrites) 'Surely, on the Day of Judgement, I shall hold the rope
of Allah and cling to His safeguard, and you, O ‘Ali, shall hold fast to
my safeguard, and your descendants shall cling to your safeguard, and
your Shi’ahs shall hold fast to the safeguard of all of you.' So what
will Allah do to His Prophet? And what will the Prophet do to his
successor? (The same shall we do to our followers). Take this, O Harith,
the summary of all the details. Yes, you shall be with the one you love,
and for you shall be what you have earned."  
 He said this three times.

Then al-Harith stood up, pulling his cloak behind him, and saying:
"After this, I care not when Death meets me or I meet it."

Jameel B. Swaleh says that Abu Harith Seyyid al-Himyari, may Allah bless
him with mercy, narrated this for me in the following poem:

"The statement of ‘Ali to Harith is marvelous,  
 And how much of marvels did he carry with him?  
 (He said) O Harith of Hamadan, whoever dies shall see me,  
 Be he a believer or a hypocrite, a clear sight before him.  
 His eyes shall recognize me, and I will know him,  
 By his attributes, his name, and by his deeds.  
 I shall quench his thirst with cold water,  
 The sweetness of which will seem to you like that of honey.  
 And when you will stand before hell fire, I shall say,  
 Leave him, and do not be near him,  
 Leave him, and be away from him, for indeed,  
 He has a rope bound with the rope of the Prophet's successor."

4. Four Habits from the treasures of Virtue
-------------------------------------------

*He said: Al Sharif, al-Zahid Abu Muhammad al Hasan ibn Hamza al-Alawiy
al-Husayni al-Tabari - may Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me
from Abu Ja'far, Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Waleed, from Muhammad ibn
al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Bakr ibn
Swaleh, from al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali, from Abdullah ibn Ibrahim from Abu
Abdillah al-Sadiq, Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, who reported
from his father and grandfather, peace be upon them, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Four (habits) are
from the (hidden) treasures of virtue: to keep silent about one's needs,
one's charity, one's indisposition and one's adversity."

5. Helping a needy Mu’min
-------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh, may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported from his father, from S'ad ibn Abdillah, from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Hammad, from Ibrahim ibn Umar
al-Yamnani, from Abu Hamza al-Thumali - may Allah bless him with mercy,
that Zainul Abideen ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, said:*

"He who feeds a hungry Mu’min, Allah will feed him from the fruits of
Paradise; and he who quenches the thirst of a Mu’min, Allah will slacken
his thirst from the pure, sealed nectar (on the day of reward). And he
who clothes a Mu’min, Allah will clothe him with green brocade (of
heaven), and he will remain under the protection of Allah, Most High, as
long as a thread of that cloth remains upon him (i.e. the Mu’min whom he
clothed)."

6. The Place of ‘Ali (as)
-------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn Al-Husayn ibn Babawayh, may
Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from his father who reported
from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,
from ‘Ali ibn al-Nu’man, from Amir ibn Ma'qal, from Abu Hamza
al-Thumali, that Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir (peace be upon
him) said:*

"O Abu Hamza, do not place ‘Ali (A.S.) below the level to which Allah
has raised him, and do not elevate him above the level where Allah has
kept him. It is enough (excellence) for ‘Ali that he is the one who
fought the apostates and he is the one who will pair off the inmates of
Paradise."

7. Dying with the love of ‘Ali (as)
-----------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Maythami reported
to me from Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn al-Mustanir, who reported
from al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Masa'b, who reported from
Abbad ibn Yaqoob, who reported from Abu Abdil Rahman* *al-Mas'oodi, from
Katheer al-Nawa', from Abu Maryam al-Khawlani, from Malik ibn Dhamrah,
that Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A.S.) said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, held my hand and said:
"Whoever dutifully performed the five (daily) prayers, and then died
with your love in his heart, he will have redeemed his pledge. And
whoever died with hatred for you, died a death of ignorance (i.e. the
era before Islam), though he will account for his deeds as ordained by
Islam. And he who lives after you, with your love in his heart, Allah
will end his life with security and faith, till he arrives near me at
the Pool."

8. The most beloved steps by a Mu’min
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Al-Hasan reported to me from
his father, from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, from Safwan ibn Yahya, from Mansoor ibn Hazim, from
Abu Hamza, from ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Zainul Abideen (A.S.) that the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny) said:*

"The most beloved steps in Allah's estimation are two: one taken by a
Mu’min to fill the rank in the way of Allah, another taken by a Mu’min
to mend the relations with a blood relative who had cut off. And the
most worthy swallows in His estimation are two: the swallow of anger by
a Mu’min while reacting to provocation with gentleness, and swallow of
sadness and anxiety, giving a patient response to the trying times. And
the most beloved droplets in His estimation are two: a drop of blood
spilled in the way of Allah, and a drop of tears shed in the darkness of
night, fearing Allah."

9. Witnessing Hearts
--------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad reported to me from his father,
from Sa'ad ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa from Muhammad
ibn Sinan, from Hammad ibn Uthman from Rabe'e ibn Abdillah from
al-Fudhail ibn Yasar from Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be
upon him, that:*

He said: "Look into your heart. If it disowns your friend (or harbours
doubt about him) then either of you must have done something
(improper)."

10. Reconciliation among people
-------------------------------

*He said: Al-Sharif al-Zahid Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Hamza reported to
me from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Waleed, from Muhammad.ibn al-Hasan
al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Muhammad ibn Sinan,
from Amru al-Afraq and Hudhaifa ibn Mansoor that Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn
Muhammad, peace be upon him, said:*

"The charity best loved by Allah is to bring about reconciliation among
people when they are divided by friction and to bring them closer to
each other when they have moved apart."

11. Provision from unexpected quarters
--------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ja'far reported to me from
his father, from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, from Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqi that Hammad ibn Isa
said:*

I requested Abul Hasan Musa ibn Ja'far, peace be upon him, saying: "May
I be your ransom, pray to Allah that He may bless me with a son, and may
not deprive me from Haj as long as I live." He says: "He prayed for me
and Allah gave me this son. And whenever the days of Haj arrived while I
had no means for the expenses, Allah provided from unexpected quarters."

12. On being mindful - not conceited
------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad reported to me from his father,
from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Husayn
ibn Saeed, from Muhammad ibn Abu Umair from al-Harith ibn Behram, from
Amru ibn Jamee' that:*

Abu Abdillah, Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him told me: "Whoever
comes to us seeking Fiqh, Qur'an and its exegesis, let him in. And
whoever comes to reveal such secret (fault of the others) which Allah
(in His Mercy) has concealed, discard him!" Someone said: "May I be your
ransom, may I mention my present situation?" He said: "(Yes), if you so
wish." He said: "By Allah, I am persistent upon sin since long time, and
I intend to transform myself, but I cannot." He said: "If what you say
is true, then Allah loves you, and He does not prevent your
transformation except that you may fear him (more by being mindful, and
not conceited)."


