Thirty Seventh Assembly
=======================

Met on Saturday, 17th of the month of Ramadhan in 410 Hijrah. The grand
Sheikh al-Mufid, Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man, may Allah increase
his capabilities, narrated:

1. Always remember Allah
------------------------

*He said: Al-Muzaffar ibn Muhammad al-Balkhi al-Warraq informed me from
Abu ‘Ali Muhammad ibn Hammam al-Iskafi al-Katib, who reported from
Abdullah ibn Ja'far al-Himyari, who reported from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Isa, who reported from al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Abu Hamza al-Thumali,
from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir, peace be upon him, who
said:*

A believer is in his prayers, as long as he remembers Allah, while
standing, sitting or lying down. Surely, Allah says (in Qur'an):

***'Those who remember Allah, standing, sitting, or lying on their
sides, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth: Our
Lord, You have not created this in vain, glory be to You! So save us
from the chastisement of the fire.'*** **(3:191).**

2. Three Major Sins
-------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh, may Allah be
pleased with him, reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn
Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Husayn ibn Saeed,
from Yasir, from Abdul Hasan al-Ridha, ‘Ali ibn Musa, peace be upon him,
who said:*

"When the rulers utter lies, the rains are withheld. And when the
monarch is oppressive, the country is weakened and when Zakat is
withheld, the livestock (upon which Zakat has been due) suffer death."

3. People will be called by their mother's names
------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi, reported to me from Abu
Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Hasani, who reported from Ahmad ibn Abd
al-Mon'em, who reported from Abdullah Ibn Muhammad al-Fazari, from
Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his father, peace be upon them all. And he
said that Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Hasani reported from Ahmad ibn Abd
al-Mon'em, who reported from Amru ibn Shimr, from Jabir al-Jofi, from
Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, from Jabir ibn Abdillah
al-Ansari, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said to ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib, peace be upon him: "May I not give you glad news? May I not award
you?" He said: "Yes, O messenger of Allah." He (i.e. the Prophet) said:
"Surely, I and you are created from one clay, and from what remained,
our Shi’ahs were created. When the Day of Reckoning will dawn, all
people will be called by their mother's names, except your Shi’ahs, who
will be called by the names of their fathers, confirming their
legitimacy."

4. The fate of those who disown Ahlul Bayt
------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi, reported to me from
Muhammad ibn Abdillah ibn Abu Ayyub at the Syrian coast, who reported
from Ja'far ibn Harun al-Masisi, who reported from Khalid ibn Yazid
al-Qisri, who reported from Umay al-Sayrafi, who said:*

I heard Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibnAli al-Baqir, peace be upon him, say:
"Allah will disown those who disown us, and may Allah curse those who
curse us; and may Allah destroy those who are our adversaries. O Allah!
You know that we are the cause of their guidance, and yet they take us
as their enemies. So You be the sole One to inflict punishment upon
them."

5. The event of advancing Abraha
--------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Bilal al-Mahlabi reported to me from Abdul
Wahid ibn Abdullah ibn Yunus al-Rabée, who reported from al-Husayn ibn
Muhammad ibn Amir, who reported from Mualla ibn Muhammad al-Basri, who
reported from Muhammad ibn Jamhoor al-Ammi, who reported from Ja'far ibn
Bashir, who reported from Sulaiman ibn Samáah, from Abdullah ibn
al-Qasim, from Abdullah ibn Sinan, from Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn
Muhammad, peace be upon him, from his father, from his grandfather,
peace be upon them, who said:*

When Abraha ibn al-Sabbah, the king of Abyssinia, advanced towards
Makkah to demolish the House (of Allah, i.e. Ka'bah), the Abyssinias
hastened to raid it and they captured the grazing camels of Abdul
Muttalib ibn Hashim. Then Abdul Muttalib came to the King, seeking
permission to see him, and he was granted. The king was sitting under a
silken cupola on his throne. He greeted him, and Abraha returned the
greeting, staring at his face.

He was impressed by his (Abdul Muttalib's) grace, handsomeness and
appearance. The king said: "Did your ancestors have the same light as
this which I see in you and the same comeliness?" He said: "Yes, O king,
all my ancestors had this light, comeliness and radiance." So Abraha
said to him: "You have indeed superceded the kings in your glory and
nobility! And you deserve to be the chief of your people."

Then he made him sit with him on his throne, and he sent for the groom,
who looked after his huge elephant. The elephant was white and huge,
having two tusks studded with pearls and gems, and the king prided over
other kings because of it. He said: "Bring the elephant." The groom came
with the elephant, flourished with beautiful adornments. When it came to
face to face with Abdul Muttalib, it bowed before him, and it had never
bowed before the king. And then Allah made it utter in Arabic, so it
greeted Abdul Muttaliibn

When the king saw this, he was disturbed and considered it a magic. So
he said: "Take back the elephant to its place." Then he turned to Abdul
Muttalib and asked: "What have you come for? For I know of your
generosity and your magnanimity, and I have observed your dignified
appearance and comeliness which prepares me to fulfil your need. So ask
of me whatever you wish." He thought Abdul Muttalib would ask him to
return from Makkah.

But Abdul Muttalib said: "Your people have captured my grazing camels
and taken them away. So order them to return them to me." He said: The
king was furious at this and said: "You have fallen in my estimate. You
come to me to ask for your camels, while I am here to destroy your glory
and the glory of your people, and to demolish your distinction, which
distinguishes you from every other people, and that is the House which
people of all lands come for pilgrimage. You did not ask me about it and
your are calling for your camels?"

Abdul Muttalib said: "I am not the Lord of the House, which you intend
to wreck. I am the master of my camels which have been taken away by
your people! I have come to ask for that which I own, and as for the
House, it has a Lord Who is All-Powerful and mightier than all His
creatures, and has more authority over it than others."

The king said: "Return his camels, and attack the House, breaking it
stone by stone." Then Abdul Muttalib took his camels and preceded to
Makkah. The king followed him with his huge elephant and the army to
demolish the House. When they pushed the elephant to enter the sanctuary
(of Kabah) it stopped, and when they left him, it hurriedly drew back.
So Abdul Muttalib told his servants: "Bring me my son." They came with
al-Abbas. He said: "I did not mean him. Bring me my son."

They came with Abu Talib. He said: "I did not mean him, call my son for
me." So they came with Abdullah, the father of the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny. When he arrived, he (i.e. Abdul Muttalib)
said: "O my son, go and climb the mountain of Abu Qubais, and cast your
glance towards the sea, and see what is coming from there and inform
me."

He said: Abdullah climbed Abu Qubais. After a short while, he saw
flights of birds coming, like a storm and darkness of the night, and
descended on Abu Qubais. Then they proceeded towards the House, and
circled around it seven times. Then they came to al-Safa and al-Marwah,
and went to and fro seven times. Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with
him, returned to his father and gave him the news.

He said: "O my son, go and see what has become of those people, and then
inform me." So he went, and saw them directed towards the army of
Abyssinia. He informed Abdul Muttalib about it. Then Abdul Muttalib, may
Allah bless him with mercy, proceeded exclaiming: "O people of Makkah!
Go towards the army and pick up your share of the spoils." He said: They
came upon the army who had become like whittled wood.

And every bird had three pebbles in its beak and hands, killing every
one of the army with every single pebble. As they came to see all of
them, the birds had gone. And nothing like it had ever been seen before
or after. When all had perished, Abdul Muttalib came to the House, and
clinging to its curtains said:

"O One who held back the elephant from al-Mughammas  
 (i.e. a place on the road of al-Taif where Abraha's guide lived),  
 You indeed held it back, as if it were topsy-turvy.  
 In a strait in which men lose their breath."

Then he went away, commenting on the runaway Quraish, and their anxiety
over the invading Abyssinians:

"The Quraishites flew when they saw the army,  
 and I remained alone, finding no one for comfort,  
 and I never heard even a whisper from them  
 except from my honoured and distinguished brother  
 (who was) made a chief and a leader among his people."

6. Things which corrupt
-----------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from
Thawabah Ibn Yazid, who reported from Ahmad ibn ‘Ali al-Muthanna, from
Muhammad ibn al-Muthanna, from Shababah ibn Sawwar, from al-Mubarak ibn
Saeed, from Khaleel al-Farrà, from Abu Al-Mujabbar, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Four things
corrupt the heart; to be alone (in privacy) with women, to listen to
(the advice of) women, and to seek their opinion, and to be in company
of the dead." So someone asked: "O messenger of Allah! What is the
company of the dead?" He said: "To be in company of anyone who leads
astray from the faith and the one who is unfair in the judgements."  
  

7. Give time to those in hardship
---------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi, reported to me from Abul
Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from Abdullah ibn
Kharash, who reported from Ahmad ibn Bard, who reported from Muhammad
ibn Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his father, Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his
father Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon them, from Lababah ibn Abd
al-Munzar, that he went to collect his debt from Abu al-Yasar. He heard
him say:*

"Tell him, he is not here." So Abu Lababah exclaimed: "O Abu Yasar, come
out." He came out. Abu Lababah asked: "What makes you act like this?" He
said: "Hardship, O Abu Lababah." Do you say that in the name of Allah?"
Abu al-Yasar said: "Yes, by His name." Then Abu Lababah said: "I heard
the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny ask: "Who likes to be
sheltered from the outburst of hellfire?" We said: "All of us would like
that, O messenger of Allah." He said: "Then he should give respite to
his debtor - or he should redeem the financial difficulty."

8. A brother in the name of Allah
---------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad al-Zayyat reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Mahrawayh al-Qazwini, who reported from Dawood ibn Sulaiman
al-Ghazi, who said:*

I heard al-Ridha ‘Ali ibn Musa, peace be upon him, say: "Whoever has
been able to acquire a brother in the name of Allah, has indeed found a
house in Paradise." He said: Abul Hasan al-Rahbi al-Nahwi recited the
following verse by Al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf al-Tamimi:

"If a man lives for fifty years  
 then he indeed is quite near the fountain of his return,  
 And when you pass a day of your life, do not say  
 I have passed, but say I have an observer over me!  
 And when a decade elapses in which you lived,  
 and are back to join in an ensuing decade, then you are a stranger."  
 All praise to Allah, and His blessings upon our master Muhammad, the
Prophet, and his pure progeny.


