Thirty Eighth Assembly
======================

Met on Saturday, when six nights were left of the month of Ramadhan in
410 Hijrah. The grand Sheikh al-Mufid Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad
al-Nu’man, may Allah prolong his life, narrated:

1. Three important obligations
------------------------------

*He said: Al-Shareef al-Swaleh Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Hamza al-Alawi,
may Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from Ahmad ibn Abdullah,
from his grandfather Ahmad ibn Abu Abdillah al-Barqi, from his father,
from Yaqoob ibn Yazid, from Ibn Abi Umair, from Hisham ibn Salim, from
Abu Ubaidah al-Hazzá, that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said: "Should I not
guide you to the most important obligations Allah has placed upon His
creatures? To be fair and just with people in their dealings; to be
comforting to the brothers in faith; to remember Allah in every
situation. And when he faces a matter of obedience to Allah, he acts
accordingly and when he comes across any sin, he shuns it."

2. The most helpless man
------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abu
Ja'far Muhammad ibn Swaleh al-Qadhi, who reported from Masrooq ibn
al-Marzban, who reported from Hafs, from Asim, from Abu Uthman, from Abu
Huraira, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "The most helpless
person is the one who renders himself unable to supplicate (to Allah),
and the most niggardly is the one who is miserly with greeting in
salaam."

3. The Prophet prayed for ‘Ali (as) at Khaybar
----------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from
al-Hasan ibn Hammad ibn Hamza Abu ‘Ali from his book, reporting from
al-Hasan ibn Abdul Rehman Ibn Abi Leila, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Sulaiman ibn Abdillah al-Ishfahani, from Abd al-Rahman al-Ishfahani,
from Abd al-Rahman ibn Abu Laila, from ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon
him, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, sent for me while I had
an eyesore. He spat into my eyes, and tied a tight turban around my
head, and then said: "O Allah, relieve him of heat and cold." Thereafter
I was never afflicted with heat or cold.

4. Purity of Ahlul Bayt
-----------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi, may Allah bless him with
mercy, reported to me from Ahmad ibn Isa ibn Abu Musa in Kufa, from
Abdus ibn Muhammad al-Hadhrami, who reported from Muhammad ibn Furat,
from Abu Ishaq, from al-Harith, from ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon
him, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, used to come to us every
early morning saying: "Time for prayers! May Allah have mercy on you.
Verily! Allah intends to remove all abominations from you, O Ahlul Bayt,
and to purify you absolutely."

5. Asma Bint Aqil laments Al-Husayn
-----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad, who reported from al-Hasan ibn Ulail al-Anzi,
who reported from Abdul Karim Ibn Muhammad, who reported from ‘Ali ibn
Salemah, from Abu Aslam Muhammad ibn Fakhar, from Abu Hayyaj Abdullah
ibn Amir, who said:*

When the sad news of al-Husayn's, peace be upon him, martyrdom reached
Madinah, Asma bint Aqil ibn Abi Talib came out with a group of her
ladies and came to the grave of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, and clinging to it, sobbed bitterly. Then, addressing the
Muhajireen and the Ansar, she said:

"What will you say when the Prophet says to you  
 on the Day of Judgement, and the truth will indeed be heard.  
 'You deserted my family members, or were you absent,'  
 and the truth will be brought together before the master.

'You had forsaken them at the hands of the oppressors,  
 so you have no one to intercede on your behalf before Allah.'  
 There was no one (of you) at Kerbala on the day  
 When death crept to them, and none was there to defend them!"  
 He said: "We never saw as many wailing men and women on any other day."

6. Ummu Salemah and Martyrdom of Al-Husayn
------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Marzbani reported to me
from Ahmed ibn Muhammad al-Jawhari, who reported from al-Hasan ibnUlail
al-Anzi, from Abdul Karim ibn Muhammad, who reported from Hamza ibn
al-Qasim al-Alawi, who reported from Abdul Azeem ibn Abdillah al-Alawi,
from al-Hasan ibn al-Husayn al-Arani, from Ghiyath ibn Ibrahim, that:*

Al-Sadiq Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said: Ummu Salemah, may
Allah bless her with mercy, once woke up weeping. She was asked: "What
makes you cry?" She said: "My son al-Husayn has been killed last night.
And that is because I have never seen the Prophet in the dream till last
night. I saw him pale and in profound grief." So I asked: "How come I
see you in this state of grief, O messenger of Allah!" He said: "I have
been digging the graves of al-Husayn and his companions tonight."

7. The Jinns and Al-Husayn
--------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad reported to me from ‘Ali ibn
al-Abbas, who reported from Abdul Karim ibn Muhammad, who reported from
Sulaiman ibn Muqbil al-Harith, who reported from Mahfooz ibn al-Munzar,
who reported from an elder of Banu Tameem, who lived at al-Rabiya.*

He said: I heard my father say that they did not know of al-Husayn's
martyrdom till evening of Ashura. He said: I was sitting at al-Rabiya
with some people from that district, and we heard a voice saying:

"By Allah, I have not come to you till I had seen at Kerbala,  
 the head cut off, with two dusty cheeks!  
 And around him, young men whose throats spurt out blood,  
 and like lamps spreading light in the darkness.

I prodded my camel (to run) so that I could meet them  
 before the reticent ones go to meet the Houris.  
 But the destiny prevented me, and Allah would fulfil it,  
 And the command of Allah was a determined fate.  
 Al-Husayn was a lamp from which light was obtained.

Allah knows that I have never lied,  
 May Allah bless the body, which has been contained  
 by al-Husayn's grave, as a good companion.

In the neighbourhood of the Prophet in the chambers,  
 and of ‘Ali and al-Tayyar, pleased and satisfied."

So we said: "May Allah bless you with mercy, who are you?" He said: "My
father and I are Jinn of Nasibayn. We intended to help al-Husayn, peace
be upon him, and assist him with our lives. So we proceeded from Haj,
but reached him when they had been killed.

8. Zainab bint ‘Ali's address at Kufa
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported from
Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Jawhari, who reported from Muhammad ibn Mahran,
who reported from Musa ibn Abdul Rehman al-Masrooq, from Umar ibn Abdul
Wahid, from Ismail ibn Rashid who reported from Hazlam ibn Sateer, who
said*:

I arrived at Kufa in Muharram of 61 Hijrah as ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn was
departing with the ladies from Kerbala, surrounded by the troops. People
gathered to have a sight of them. When he approached with the ladies
sitting on unsaddled camels, the women of Kufa began weeping and
wailing. I heard ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn say with a feeble voice as he was
exhausted by ailment, and around his neck was a neckband, and his hands
were tied to the neck.

He said: "Beware, (if) these women are indeed weeping - then who killed
us?" He said: And I saw Zainab bint ‘Ali, peace be upon them, and I had
never seen a lady with all her modesty being so eloquent. It seemed that
she spoke in Amirul Mu’mineen's voice." He said: She raised her hand
towards the people to silence them, so the breathing slowed and the
noises were silenced. Then she said:

"All praise be to Allah; and His blessing on my father, the messenger of
Allah. Know you O people of Kufa, O people of chicanery and betrayal.
May your tears never dry, and may your wailing never quieten. Your
example is of ***'the one who unravels her yarn after it is firmly spun.
You take your oaths merely to deceive one another.'*** **(16:98).**

O people! Are there any among you except those suffering from vainglory,
blemished by disgrace, and with bosoms full of hatred? Cowards when
confronted, helpless before the enemies, violators of oath of
allegiance, wasting the responsibilities? Miserable is what you have
forwarded, that has incurred the wrath of Allah upon you. And you will
be in chastisement forever.

So, you are crying? Yes, cry a lot, and laugh a little for you have
earned its disgrace and its infamy; and you will never be able to wash
off the filth stuck to you. You have forsaken and intrigued against the
scion of the seal of the Prophet-hood, master of the youths of Paradise,
refuge of your chosen ones, retreat for the calamities befalling you,
landmark to your destination, the highway of your Proof.

How evil is the burden you bear? Wretched be you and reversed be your
plans! The effort has failed, and hands are full of nothing but dust,
and the bargain has sustained a loss. You are laden with the wrath of
Allah, and humiliation and abasement has been stamped upon you.

Woe unto you! Do you know which liver of Muhammad have you torn apart,
and which blood have you spilled? And which nobility have you struck?

***'Indeed you have come up with a thing abominable and shocking. From
which, the heavens are about to be rent asunder, the earth split and the
mountains fallen to pieces.'*** **(19:89,90).**

What you have committed is foolishness and degradation enough to fill
the heavens and the earth! Are you then surprised if the heavens rain
blood?

***'And the chastisement of the hereafter is even more degrading.'***
**(41:16).**

So do not take these moments of respite lightly - for He is not prompted
by haste nor is it feared that He will miss the reprised. No!

***'Your Lord is ever observant.'*** **(89:14)."**

He said: Then she was silent. And I saw people bewildered, their hands
on their mouths, and I saw an old man weeping till his beard was
drenched and he said:

"Their elderly are the best among the elderly people  
 and their progeny, when any progeny is taken into account,  
 is never wrong, nor discredited."

9. The first elegy on Al-Husayn
-------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzabani reported to me
from Muhammad ibn Ibrahim, who reported from Abdullah ibn Abu Saeed
al-Warraq, who reported from Masood ibn Amru al-Jahdari, who reported
from Ibrahim ibn Dahah, who said:*

The first elegy recited for al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, was
by Aqabah ibn Amru al-Sahmi, from the tribe of Banu Salim ibn Awf Ibn
Ghalib:

"(After the tragedy of Kerbala) when the eye was content  
 (having seen enough) in this life, and (when) you fear in this  
 world, as its light has turned into darkness.  
 I passed by the grave of al-Husayn at Kerbala,

My tears rolled down copiously for him,  
 And I have since not stopped lamenting and weeping in sorrow,  
 my eyes are helped by its tears and the hearing by sigh.  
 And tears were shed, besides al-Husayn, on the group  
 whose graves surround him on both sides,

Salaams on the interred ones at Kerbala,  
 Yet, my salaams visiting them are too little for them,  
 Salaams to them in the evening and during the day,  
 conveyed by the wind blowing on it and by the dust it carries  
 And the groups of people continues to visit his grave,  
 whose musk and aroma exudes fragrance to them."

10. The famous poem by De'bal
-----------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Abdullah ibn Yahya al-Askari, who reported from Ahmad ibn Zayd ibn
Ahmad, who reported from Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn Aktham Abu Abdillah, who
reported from his father Yahya ibn Aktham al-Maruzi, who said: Ma'moon
summoned Débal ibn ‘Ali Al-Khizai, may Allah bless him with mercy, and
granted him safe conduct. When he arrived, I was sitting near
al-Ma'moon. He said:*

"(O Débal), recite to me your major poem." Débal felt restrained and at
first, displayed his ignorance about it. Then Ma'moon told him: "You
will be safe, the same way as you were granted safe conduct." So he
recited:

"My wife regretted when she saw my indifference to women,  
 And considered my maturity a sin unpardonable!  
 She expected youthfulness after her own forelocks had turned hoary,  
 and though her racing horse had already run a round of old age.

O wife, my hoary head teaches me,  
 to remember the Resurrection, and to submit to destiny!  
 Had I been inclined towards the world and its décor,  
 then would I have wept over some of the people gone by.

The world has attacked my family members and ruined them,  
 causing a cleavage like the one hit with a stone.  
 Some stood against it, while some responded to  
 the call of death and the remaining are on the wake.

So those who have remained, I fear their departure,  
 of course, the return of those who have turned away is not awaited.  
 Now, it has so become that I am given the news about  
 my family and my children,  
 like a dreamer relating a dream after remembering it.

Had it not been that my eyes are preoccupied with  
 the (grief of) kinsfolk of the Prophet of Allah, who have gone,  
 I would not have stayed.

(And as you know) Your cheeks have an occupation  
 (of crying) in respect of your friends,  
 preventing it from sleeping because of the lost ones.

How many of their arms lie in Kerbala, cut off from the body,  
 and how many soiled cheeks lie on the dusty plain.  
 They go to where al-Husayn was slain, in the eve and at night  
 and they say: 'This is the master of all men.'

O ungrateful Ummah! You have not rewarded Ahmad  
 (peace be upon him and his progeny)  
 for his heroic struggle in the name of the revealed  
 verses and chapters (of the Qur'an).

When he left the world, you as survivors treated  
 his children, the way a wolf does to save Dhu Baqr."

Yahya said: Then al-Ma'moon ordered me to go out to complete his work, I
rose. When I returned, Débal was completing his poem with following
verses:

"There is no one remaining among the living who we know  
 from the tribes of Yaman, Bakr or Mudhar,  
 except that they have a hand in their blood.

As did the people of Aysar who participated in the massacre,  
 By killing, imprisoning, frightening and by plunder,  
 the way soldiers acted in the lands of Byzantine and Khazar;  
 I find the Umayyad excused if they killed,  
 but I do not see for Banu Abbas any justifiable excuse!

A band of people who they killed first in the name of Islam,  
 till when they seized power, then they allowed it  
 branding them as infidels; (they were)  
 The sons of Harb, Marwan and their families,

the sons of Muit, the rulers of rancour and spite;  
 Pause and see the grave of the pure one at Tus,  
 look at it if you have anything to do with faith!

Alas! Every one is mortgaged to which his  
 two hands do, so take what you wish or leave it."

He said: (Upon hearing this) al-Ma'moon threw his turban on the ground
and said: "By Allah! O Débal, you have spoken the truth."

11. The Prophet's relation continues
------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad, may Allah bless him with
mercy, reported to me from Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Mas'ood, from his
father Abu al-Nadhr al-Ayyashi, who reported from Muhammad ibn Hatim,
who reported from Muhammad ibn Muadh, who reported from Zakariyya ibn
Adi, who reported from Ubaidullah Ibn Amru from Abdullah ibn Muhammad
ibn Aqil, from Hamza ibn Suhaib, from Abu Saeed al-Khudari, from his
father who said:*

I heard the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, say from the
pulpit: "What has happened to the people who say that blood relationship
with me shall have no benefit on the Day of judgement. Yes, by Allah! My
womb relation is linked here and hereafter. And surely, O people, I
shall precede you onto the Pool. When you will arrive. Someone will say:
'O messenger of Allah, I am so and so, son of so and so.' Then I will
answer: 'As for your lineage, I am aware (of it). But after I had gone,
you took to the left side, you retracted your footsteps backwards, on
your heels."

12. ‘Ali (as) divides people of the Paradise and of Hell
--------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Al-Mudhaffar ibn Muhammad al-Warraq reported to me from Abu
‘Ali Muhammad ibn Hammam, who reported from Abu Saeed al-Hasan ibn
Zakariyya al-Basri, who reported from Umar ibn al-Mukhtar, who reported
from Abu Muhammad al-Barsi, from al-Nadhr ibn Suwaid, from Abdullah ibn
Maskan, from Abu Baseer, from Abu Ja'far Muhammad al-Baqir, from his
forefathers, peace be upon them, that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny said: "How will it be for
you O ‘Ali, when you will stand on the brim of hellfire, and the bridge
(Sirat) will be laid, and the people will be told: 'Cross the bridge.'
And you will tell the hellfire: 'This is for me, and this is for you!'
So ‘Ali said: "O messenger of Allah, who will be those with me?" He
said: "They are your Shi’ahs, with you wherever you will be."  
    
  

13. Benefit of meeting others
-----------------------------

*He said: Al-Shareef al-Swaleh Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Hamza, may
Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn
al-Fadhl, who reported from Abu Turab Ubaidullah ibn Musa, who reported
from Abul Qasim Abdul Azim ibn Abdullah al-Hasani, may Allah bless him
with mercy, who said:*

I heard Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn Musa, peace be upon them, say:
"Meeting with the brothers widens your intellect and fertilizes your
wisdom, even if your meeting with them may be very few."  
 And may Allah bless upon our master Muhammad, the Prophet and his pure
progeny.


