Fortieth Assembly
=================

Met on Wednesday, 24th of the month of Ramadhan in the year 411 Hijrah,
Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man, may Allah support his capabilities,
narrated:

1. Admonition from ‘Ali ibn Al-Husayn
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Waleed
al-Qummi, may Allah bless him with mercy, reported to me from his
father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn* *Muhammad ibn Isa from
al-Hasan ibn Mahboob, from Malik ibn Atiyyah, from Abu Hamza al-Thumali,
who reported that:*

‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, used to say: "O son of Adam! You
will always be your best as long as you have an admonishing inner self;
and as long as you are anxious to take your own account; and as long as
the fear of Allah is your norm, and sorrow (over your lapses) is your
garment. O son of Adam! Surely, you will die one day, and you will be
resurrected and made to stand before Allah, Most High, and be
questioned. So prepare an answer."

2. Defend your brother's name
-----------------------------

*He said: Abu Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Jurjurai reported to me from
Ishaq ibn Abdus, who reported from Muhammad ibn Abdillah ibn Sulaiman
al-Hadhrami, who reported from Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Ahmasi, who
reported from Al-Maharibi, from Ibn Abi Laila, from al-Hakam ibn Utaibah
from Ibn Abu al-Darda', from his father who said:*

A man defamed and slandered another man in presence of the Prophet,
peace be upon him and his progeny, so a person from the people present,
refuted him. The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said:
"Whoever defends the honour of his brother, that act will shield him
from hellfire."

3. Sympathy for Ahlul Bayt
--------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh, may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported to me from his father, who reported from Sa'd
ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Abu Abdillah al-Barqi, who reported from
Sulaiman Ibn Salemah al-Kindi, from Muhammad ibn Saeed ibn Ghazwan, and
Isa ibn Abu Mansoor, from Aban ibn Taghlib, who reported that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said: "A person who
sighs in grief over the wrongs meted out to us, that sigh is extolment
of Allah, and his anxiety about us is an act of worship, and to conceal
our secrets is a struggle in the way of Allah". Then Abu Abdillah, peace
be upon him said: "This tradition ought to be written in gold."

4. ‘Ali (as) praises his partisans
----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from Abu Awanah, Musa ibn Yusuf
al-Qattan, who reported from Ahmad ibn Yahya al-Awadi, who reported from
Ismail ibn Aban, who reported from ‘Ali ibn Hashim ibn al-Bareed, from
his father, from Abd al-Razzaq ibn Qais al-Rahbi, who said:*

I was sitting with ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, near the gate
of the palace, till sunlight forced him to seek shelter near the palace
wall. So he hastened to enter, but a man from Hamdan stood up and clung
to his clothes, saying: "O Amirul Mu’mineen, narrate to me a
comprehensive tradition by which Allah may benefit me."

He said: "Are there not enough traditions?" He said: "Yes, but narrate
to me a comprehensive one which would benefit me." He said: "My friend,
Prophet of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, narrated to me
that, I shall arrive at the Pool with my Shi’ahs, with our thirsts
already quenched. Their faces will be bright. And our enemies will
arrive there suffering from thirst, with their faces darkened. Take this
brief one from a long list. (Remember) you are with the one you love,
and for you is what you have acquired. Release me, O brother from
Hamdan." Then he entered the palace.

5. ‘Ali (as) exposes the hypocrite tribes
-----------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Katib reported from al-Hasan
ibn ‘Ali al-Za'farani, from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Thaqafi, from Yusuf
ibn Kulaib, from Mu'awiyah ibn Hisham, from al-Sabah ibn Yahya
al-Muzani, from al-Harith ibn Husayrah, who said:*

A group from the companions of Amirul Mu’mineen reported to me that one
day he said: "Call the fellow from the tribes of Ghunay and Bahilah (and
another tribe they had named), and let them take their shares from the
spoils. By He Who splits the seed and created life, they (actually) have
no share in Islam.

And I am a witness, so is my status at the Pool and the Praised Station,
that they are indeed the enemies in the world and the next. (If I had my
way) I would punish Ghunay, which would terrify the Bahila. And if I am
firm on my feet, I would identify tribes against tribes, and would
falsify six tribes which have no part in Islam."

6. Weeping over Al-Husayn
-------------------------

*He said: Abu Amru Uthman ibn Ahmd al-Daqqaq permitted me to report what
he reported from Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Malik, who reported from Ahmad
ibn Yahya al-Awadi, who reported from Mukhawwal Ibn Ibrahim, from
al-Rabee' ibn al-Munzir, from his father who reported from:*

Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, that he said: "Whoever sheds a
tear from his eyes for us, or fills his eyes with tears for us, Allah
will grant him for that an eternal place in Paradise." Ahmed ibn Yahya
al-Awadi said: I saw al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, in dream and
related to him: "Mukhawwal ibn Ibrahim has reported to me from al-Rabee'
ibn al-Munzir, from his father from you that you said: Whoever sheds a
tear from his eyes for us, or fills his eyes with tears for us, Allah
will grant him an eternal place in Paradise." He said: "Yes." So I said:
"(In that case), the chain of narration between you and me does not
exist any more."

7. The status of Quss ibn Sa'edah
---------------------------------

*He said: Abu al-Tayyib al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Tammar reported to me
from Muhammad ibn al-Qasim al-Anbari, who reported from Abul Hasan Hamid
ibn Muhammad ibn Hamid al-Tameemi, who reported from Abu Abdillah
Muhammad ibn Nuaim al-Abdi, who reported from Abu ‘Ali al-Rawwasi ibn
Abdullah, who reported from Abu Masood Ubaid ibn Samee', from al-Kalbi,
from Abu Swaleh, from Ibn Abbas, who said:*

When the delegation of Ayad called upon the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny, he asked them: "What happened to Quss ibn Sa'edah?"
They said: "O Prophet of Allah! he died." The Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny, said: "May Allah bless Quss ibn Sa'edah with mercy, it
is as if I am looking at him in the marketplace of Ukkaz, seated on the
grey camel. He spoke very pleasently, which I did not try to remember."
A man from the delegation said: "I have memorized it, O, Prophet of
Allah! I heard him say at Ukkaz:

"O people! Hear, listen and remember (me). He who lives must die, and he
who dies loses the opportunity (for acts). And all that is expected will
soon occur. (Ponder upon) the dark night and the heavens full of
constellations, and swelling seas and the gleaming stars and the rains
and the vegetation and the fathers and the mothers, and those who go and
those who come, and the light and the darkness and the good and the
evil, and the clothes and attire and that which you ride, eat and drink!
Surely, there is a heavenly news in the sky, and no doubt there are
lessons to draw from (the events on) the earth.

How come I see men go and never return? Is it because they liked the
place there, therefore they stayed? Or were they left so they fell
asleep? Quss ibn Sae'dah swears by Allah, a solemn oath which has no
blemish. There is no religion, which Allah likes more than the one whose
duration overwhelms you and which covers your period (in all its
aspects). Blessed are those who will find the bringer of that faith and
then follow him, and woe unto him who will find him but reject him."
Then he said:

"The early ones who have gone away  
 since centuries, in them there are examples for us;  
 When I saw that death has departures,  
 with none to be stopped or returned.

And I saw my people going towards it - all,  
 big and small ones.

The bygone does not return to you,  
 nor anyone from ancient times,

I am certain that quite inevitably,  
 I will be gone, the way the people have gone."

Then the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny said: "Allah may
bless Quss ibn Sa'edah with mercy. I hope he will rise on the Day of
Resurrection as a single model (of virtue)." The man from the delegation
said: "O Prophet of Allah! I saw something amazing about Quss." He (i.e.
the Prophet) asked: "What was that?" He said:

One day, as I was standing near a mountain in our district called
Sam'aan, on an extremely hot summer day, I saw Quss ibn Sa'edah standing
under the shadow of a tree, and there was a stream flowing. Around the
stream were several animals that had arrived to drink. There a wild
animal jostled another with its paw. Quss hit him with his hands and
said: "Wait till the one who has come before you has finished drinking."
When I saw him, and the animals around him, I felt frightened. He said:
"You do not have to worry. Do not fear, Allah willing."

Then I came across two graves with a mosque in between. When I became
close to him, I asked about those two graves. He said: "These are of my
two companions who were worshipping Allah here with me. They died, I
buried them here and erected a mosque between them, so that I could pray
in it till such time when I join them." Then he reminisced the old days
with them and talked of what they did. Then he wept and said:

"Rise, O my two friends, You have indeed slept for long.  
 I find that you have still not finished your slumber.  
 Do you not know that I am alone at Sam'aan?

and I do not have anyone who I loved except you two?  
 I shall stand by your graves, not departing,  
 the whole night long, till I hear your voices,

I shall weep over you as long as I live,  
 and who is there to answer to one who laments, weeping?  
 As if you two and death are the two sole objectives  
 for my soul in my grave, the same way as it came upon you.

And if a soul could act as a shield for another soul,  
 I would have offered my soul to be your ransom."

8. Refrain from Jealousy
------------------------

*He said: Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Baseer reported to me from
‘Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Sa'yabah, who reported from Umar ibn Abd al-Jabbar,
from his father, who reported from ‘Ali ibn Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from
his brother Musa ibn Ja'far, from his father Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from
his father, from his grandfather, peace be upon them, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, one day said to his
companions: "Be it known that an evil from the bygone people has crept
into you, and that is envy and jealousy. It does not shave off the hair,
it shaves off the faith. A man can save himself from that if one
controls his hands, spares his speech and does not slander his Mu’min
brother."

And may Allah bless our master, Muhammad, the Prophet and his pure
progeny.


