Forty Second Assembly
=====================

Met on Saturday, the 27th of the month of Ramadhan in 411 Hijrah. Our
great Sheikh al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man,
may Allah help him in his capabilities, narrated to us:

1. The most God-fearing, the richest and the most pious
-------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Al-Mudhaffar ibn Muhammad al-Balkhi reported to me from
Muhammad ibn Hammam Abu ‘Ali, who reported from Hamid ibn Ziyad, who
reported from Ibrahim ibn Ubaidullah ibn Hayyan, who reported from
al-Rabee' ibn Sulaiman, from Ismail ibn Muslim al-Sakooni from al-Sadiq
Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, from his father, from his
grandfather, who said:*

I heard the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, say: "Act
according to what Allah had made obligatory upon you, and you will be
the most God-fearing; and be content with what Allah has apportioned to
you, and you will be the richest of all, and refrain from what Allah has
forbidden, and you will be the most pious, and do good to your
neighbours, and you will be (true) believer, and be a good companion and
you will be a (good) Muslim."

2. Ahlul Bayt: the most suppressed
----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaidullah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Jawhari, who reported from al-Hasan ibn Aleel
al-Anzi, who reported from Abdul Karim ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, who
reported from Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, who reported from* *Muhammad ibn
al-Manqar, who reported from Ziyad ibn al-Munzir, who reported from
Sharjeel, from Umm al-Fadhl ibn al Abbas, who said:*

When the messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, fell
seriously ill in his last days, he once woke up while we were crying
around him. So he said: "What makes you cry?" We said: "O Prophet of
Allah, we are crying helplessly, we cry because you will soon leave us
behind, and the heavenly news will cease to come to us. And we cry over
the fate of the Ummah after you have gone." The Prophet, peace upon him
and his progeny said: "Be it clear to you that you will be suppressed
and weakened after I have gone."

3. ‘Ali (as)'s last narration to Asbagh
---------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abu
al-Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad Saeed al-Hamdani, who reported from Abu
Awanah Musa ibn Yusuf al-Qattan al-Kufi, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Sulaiman al-Muqri al-Kindi, from Abd al-Samad ibn ‘Ali al-Nawfili, from
Abu Ishaq al-Sabeei', from al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah al-Abdi, who said:*

When Ibn Muljam hit the fatal blow to Amirul Mu’mineen, ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib, peace be upon him, we passed by him in the morning, myself and
al-Harith and Swaid ibn Ghaflah and other friends. We stopped at the
door and just as we heard the weeping, we wept also. So al-Hasan ibn
‘Ali, peace be upon him, came to us and said: "Amirul Mu’mineen requests
you to return to your homes." So all except myself, departed.

Again there was intense wailing from inside the house, and I wept also.
Hasan, peace be upon him, came out again and said: "Did I not ask you to
leave?" I said: "By Allah, O son of the Prophet of Allah, my heart does
not allow me to go, and my feet refuse to carry me, till I see Amirul
Mu’mineen, may Allah bless him."

He said: Then he (i.e. al-Hasan) paused and entered. And soon after, he
came out allowing me to enter. As I entered, I saw Amirul Mu’mineen
sitting with support, with a yellow headband tied round his head,
drained of blood and his face pale. I could not discern which one was
more yellow, his face or the headband. So I fell over him, kissed him
and kept on crying. He said: "Do not cry O Asbagh, for it is my way to
Paradise."

So I said to him: "May I be your ransom, I know full well that you are
proceeding to Paradise. I weep because I will terribly miss you, O
Amirul Mu’mineen! May I be your ransom, please narrate to me a tradition
which you heard from the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, for
I fear that I might never chance to hear from you anything after this
day." He said: "Yes, O Asbagh. Once the Prophet, peace be upon him and
his progeny, called me and said: 'O ‘Ali, go to my mosque, climb the
pulpit and summon the people to gather before you. Then, after praising
Allah, Most High, and lauding Him, and invoking abundant blessing upon
me, say:

'O People! I am a messenger from the messenger of Allah to you. And he
says: Curse from Allah, His honoured angels and His Prophets, and from
me befall him who attributes himself to anyone other than his father, or
who acts against his masters, or who unjustly usurps the right of his
employee (or a person he has hired for work).'

So I went to his mosque, climbed upon the pulpit, when the Quraish and
others present in the mosque saw me, they drew closer to me. I praised
Allah and glorified him, invoked abundant blessings upon the Prophet and
then said: "O people! I am a messenger from the messenger of Allah, to
you. And he says to you: 'Curse from Allah, His honoured angels and His
Prophets and from me befall him who attributes himself to anyone other
than his father, or who acts against his masters, or who unjustly usurps
the right of his employee (or a person he has hired for work)."

He said: No one from the people spoke anything, except Umar ibn
al-Khattab, who said: "O Abul Hasan, you have indeed conveyed, but you
have come up with a statement which is not clear." I said: "I will
convey your response to the Prophet." So I returned and informed the
Prophet. He said: Go back to my mosque, climb my pulpit, praise and
glorify Allah and invoke His blessings upon me and then say: "O people!
We do not come to you with anything unless we have its explanation. So
be it known, I am the father, and I am your master, and I am the one
employed (by Allah) for you."

4. Foundation of Islam
----------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh, may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported to me from his father, who reported from Sa'd
ibn Abdilllah, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Hassan ibn
Mahboob, from Abu Hamza al-Thumali, from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali
al-Baqir, peace be upon him, who said:*

"Islam has been founded on five pillars: the daily prayers, giving away
of alms, fasting in the month of Ramadhan, pilgrimage to the Sacred
House, and love of us, Ahlul Bayt."

5. Questions about Four Traits
------------------------------

*And with the same chain of narration, the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny, said:*

On the day of Resurrection, the feet of a slave will not move away from
Allah, Most High, unless He has asked him four things: "How did you
while away your life? How did you earn your wealth? And where did you
spend it? And He will ask him about our love, the Ahlul Bayt." A person
present asked: "And what is the sign of your love, O messenger of
Allah?" He said: "To love him," and then he placed his hand on the head
of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him.

6. Salman introduces ‘Ali
-------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Khalid al-Maraghi reported to me from
al-Qasim Ibn Muhammad al-Dallal, who reported from Ismail ibn Muhammad
al-Muzni, who reported from Uthman ibnSaeed, who reported from ‘Ali ibn
Ghurab, from Musa ibn Qais al-Hadhrami, from Salema ibn Kuhail, from
Ayadh ibn Ayadh, from his father, who said:*

Once ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, passed by a group of people
among whom was Salman, may Allah bless him with mercy. So Salman told
them: "Be attached to this man (i.e. ‘Ali) for no one else will inform
you of the intimate things about your Prophet except he."

7. Al-Sadiq Narrates Directly
-----------------------------

*He said: Al-Mudhaffar ibn Muhammad al-Balkhi reported to me from Abu
‘Ali Muhammad ibn Hammam al-Iskafi, who reported from Abu Ja'far Ahmed
ibn Mabandar, from Mansoor ibn al-Abbas al-Qasbani, who reported from
al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali al-Khazzaz, from ‘Ali ibn Uqbah from Salim ibn Abu
Hafsah, who said:*

When Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Baqir, peace be upon him, died, I
said to my friends: Wait for me till I have been to Abu Abdillah Ja'far
ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, to console him. So I visited him, and
consoled him saying*: "We are for Allah, and unto Him shall we return."*
Then I confirmed: "By Allah, a man who reported from the Prophet
directly, and was never asked about the chain of narrators between him
and the Prophet, has passed away. By Allah, no one like shall ever be
found."

He said: Abu Abdillah remained silent for a few moments, and then said:
"Allah, Most Glorified said: "Surely, someone from My slaves may give
away in charity a piece of date, then I rear it up, the way you rear up
a foal, till I will make it as big as the mountain of Uhud."

When I came back to my friend, I said: "I have not seen anything more
surprising than this. We were thinking highly of Abu Ja'far who reported
from the Prophet directly, but Abu Abdillah has begun by saying: Allah,
Most Glorified, said!"

8. Completion of Faith
----------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim, Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh, may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported to me from his father, who reported from Sa'd
ibn Abdillah, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, who reported from ‘Ali
ibn al-Hakam, from Abu Saeed al-Qammat, from al-Mufaddhal ibn Umar
al-Jo'fi, who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah, Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, saying:
"The faith of a slave (of Allah) is never complete without four traits:
noble character, generosity, sparing of unnecessary speech, and spending
the surplus from ones wealth."

And Praise to Allah, the Lord of Universe. And may Allah bless our
master, Muhammad, the Prophet and his pure progeny.


