The Second Assembly
===================

The Assembly took place on Wednesday, fifth of Ramadhan. The grand
Sheikh al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man, may
Allah bless him with beneficent care, said today:

1. Love of Ahlul Bayt leads to Paradise
---------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Umar al-Zayyat informed us that ‘Ali
ibn Ismail reported to him from Muhammad ibn Khalaf, who reported from
al-Husayn al-Ashqar, who reported from Qais, from Laith ibn Abi Sulaim,
from Abdul Rahman ibn Abi Laila, reporting from Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali,
peace be upon him, that the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny,
said:*  
 "Remain steadfast on our love, the Ahlul Bayt. For he who meets Allah
with our love, will enter the Paradise with our intercession. By He Who
controls my soul, a servant (of Allah) does not benefit from his deeds
except by knowing us (and our stature)."

2. The System of Islam
----------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported from Ishaq ibn
Muhammad, who reported from Zaid ibn al-Muaddal, from Saif ibn Umar,
from Muhammad ibn Kuraib, from his father, from Abdullah ibn Abbas that
the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said:*  
 "Listen and obey those whom Allah has granted the authority - for that
is the system of Islam."

3. Adam, Noah, Ibrahim & ‘Ali (as)
----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar ibn Salim has reported to me from
Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Isa al-Ajaly, who reported from Masood ibn Yahya
al-Nahdi, who reported from Sharik, from Abu Ishaq, from his father
that:*

Once when the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, was sitting
with a group of his companions, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib approached near him.
Then the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Whoever
wishes to look at Adam in his image and nobility, at Noah in his wisdom,
at Ibrahim in his forbearance, he should look at ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib."

4. Mu'awiya's Discussion on Imamah and Khilafa with Abdullah ibn Abbas
----------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ubaiydillah Muhammad ibn Imran al-Marzbani reported to me
from Muhammad ibn Husayn al-Jawhaeri, who reported from ‘Ali ibn
Sulaiman who reported from al-Zubair ibn Bakkaar, who reported from ‘Ali
ibn Swaleh, who reported from Abdullah ibn Mas'ab, from his father that
Abdullah ibn Abbas called upon Mua'wiya ibn Abi Sufyan, who welcomed
him, and then said:*

"O Ibn Abbas, you people wish to restrict Imamat (to yourselves) the way
you have been privileged with Prophethood? By Allah, these two will
never go together. Your argument about the Caliphate has put people in
doubt. You say: 'We are Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet, peace be upon him and
his progeny, then why should the succession to the Prophethood be
outside us?' This creates suspicion, for it has a semblance of truth,
and a touch of justice.

But things are not the way you imagine. The Caliphate has to rotate in
various tribes of Quraish according to the general will of the public
and the consultation of the selected ones. And we do not find people
saying: 'We wish we were ruled by Banu Hashim, for if they did, we would
have been better off here and hereinfter.'

And if you had stayed away from it yesterday the way you claim, you
would have fought for it today. And By Allah, if you had acquired the
rulership, O Banu Hashim, then the ill wind of A'd and the thunderbolt
of Thamood would not have been worse killer of men than you."

So Ibn Abbas replied (May Allah bless him with mercy): "O Mu'awiya, when
you said that we base our argument on the Prophethood to prove our
eligibility for Caliphate, then, by Allah, it is of course as you say.
For if the Prophethood does not provide eligibility to the succession
(Caliphate), what else does?

And when you say that Caliphate and Prophethood do not combine for
anyone, then what would say about the verse in which Allah, Most High,
Says:

**'*****Do they envy the people for the bounty that Allah has given them
by His Grace. Yet We gave the family of Ibrahim the Book, and the Wisdom
and We gave them a mighty sovereignty.'*** **(al-Nisa, 4:54)**

So, the Book is the Prophethood, the Wisdom is the Sunnah, the
Traditions of the Prophet, and the sovereignty is the Caliphate. And we
are the descendants of Ibrahim, and that is why the order remains
applicable for us till the Day of Judgement.

As for your claim that our arguments are dubious, then that is not true.
Our arguments are brighter than the sun, and more luminous than the
moon. The Book of Allah is with us, and the Traditions of the Prophet,
peace be upon him and his progeny, are within us. And you know that very
well, but pride makes you turn away; and you hold your head in
haughtiness because we killed your brother, your grandfather, your
maternal uncle and your father's brother.

Well, do not shed tears over the rotten bones, and upon the souls which
are perished in hell-fire; and do not be vengeful for the blood spilled
in the way of polytheism, made lawful by unbelief, and is debased by the
religion (Islam).

And as for the people who refused to give us preference and turned away
from granting us their consensus, be it clear that what they have lost
from us is greater than what we have lost from them! In every matter,
the truth is established and the untruth is dispelled when the result is
obtained.

And as for your pride in this transitory kingdom to which you have
ascended by trickery, (remember that even) Pharaoh had such kingdom
before you, and Allah destroyed him. O Banu Umayya, what you hold under
rule for a day, we may hold it for two days after you; and what you have
for a month, we may have it for two months, and if for a year, then we
may hold it for two years.

And when you said that if we were the authority, our rule would have
been a worse killer of men than the ill wind of A'd and the thunderbolt
of Thamood, that statement has been belied by Allah, the Most High, in
the Qur'an:

***'And We did not send you but as a mercy to all beings.'***
**(al-Anbiya, 21:107)**

As we are the nearest inmates of the Prophet's household, our mercy over
the creatures of Allah is evident; and the torment of your kingdom over
the people is there for everyone to see. And after you have gone, the
kingdom will be in the hands of your son and your brothers - and that
will be a worse killer of people than the fatal wind. Then Allah will
avenge through His devotees, and the final success is for the pious."

5. Words of Wisdom from Ibn Hanafiyya
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Qarashi reported to me with a
permission to transmit, that ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Faddal reported
from al-Husayn ibn Nasr, who reported from his father, who reported from
Abdul Ghaffar ibn al-Qasim, who reported from al-Minhal ibn Amru who
said he heard Abul Qassim Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, Ibn al-Hanafiyya (may Allah
be pleased with him) say:*

"There is nothing for you in your life except tasteful pleasure which
brings you closer to your death, and nearer to your sleep. Every food
causes a lump and every drink is accompanied by a choke! So ponder over
your affairs; as if you were (already) a lost friend and a dream carried
away! The people of the earth are on a journey, they do not have to
break camp except elsewhere."

6. On Ahlul Bayt (as)
---------------------

*And with the same chain of narration, it is reported from Abul Qasim,
Muhammad ibnAli, Ibn al-Hanafiyya, that the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny, said:*

"He who does not have mercy on our young ones, and shows no reverence to
our old ones and does not recognize our rights, is not from us."

7. Nine Testify to the Wilayah of ‘Ali (as)
-------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Muhammad ibn Muzaffar al-Warraq has reported to me
from Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Abu al-Thalj who said al-Husayn ibn Ayyub had
informed from his book, reporting from Muhammad ibn Ghalib, from ‘Ali
ibn al-Hasan, from Abdullah ibn Jablah, from Zurayh al-Maharibi, from
Abu Hamza al-Thumali who reported from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali,
peace upon him, who reported from his father, who reported from his
grandfather that:*

Allah sent Jibraeel to Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny,
exhorting him to testify the wilayah of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (A.S.) in his
lifetime, and to name him Amirul Mu’mineen before his death. Then the
Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, invited nine leaders (of the
groups) and said: "I have invited you so that you may bear witness upon
the earth in the name of Allah, whether you stand by it or hide it."

Then he said: "O Abu Bakr, Rise and greet ‘Ali as Amirul Mu’mineen (the
Commander of the faithfuls)." He said: "Is this by the order of Allah
and His Prophet?" He said: "Yes". So he stood and greeted him as such
(i.e. Amirul Mu’mineen).

Then he said: "O Umar, Rise and greet ‘Ali as Amirul Mu’mineen." He
said: "Should we name him as Amirul Mu’mineen by the order of Allah and
His Prophet?" He said: "Yes". So he rose and greeted him.

Then he turned to Miqdad ibn al-Aswad al-Kindi: "Rise and greet ‘Ali as
Amirul Mu’mineen." He stood up and greeted him, without repeating what
the earlier two had said.

Then he said to Abu Dharr al-Ghifari: "Rise and greet ‘Ali as Amirul
Mu’mineen." He stood up and greeted. Then he asked Hudhaifa al-Yamani:
"Rise and greet Amirul Mu’mineen." He stood up and greeted. The he asked
Ammar ibn Yasir: "Rise and greet Amirul Mu’mineen." He stood up and
greeted. Then he asked Buraidah: "Rise and greet Amirul Mu’mineen."
Buraidah was the youngest among them, he stood up and greeted.

Then the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "I have
invited you for this matter, so that you are Allah's witnesses, whether
you uphold it or abandon it."

8. Master Herein, Master Hereafter
----------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Muhammad ibn al-Muzaffar reported to me from
Muhammad ibn Jurair, who reported from Ahmad ibn Ismail who reported
from Abdul al-Razzaq ibn Hammam, who reported from Mu'mar, from
al-Zuhari, from Ubaidullah ibn Abdullah ibn Utbah, from Abdullah ibn
Abbas, may Allah bless him with mercy, who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, looked at ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib and said: "(Here is) the master herein, and the master
hereinafter."

9. Supplicate Constantly
------------------------

*He said: Abu Ghalib al-Zurari reported to me from Abdullah ibn Muhammad
ibn Khalid, who reported from Abdul Rehman ibn Abu Najran who reported
from Safwan, from Seif al-Tammar, who reported that Abu Abdillah Ja'far
ibn Muhammad (A.S.) said:*

"Be supplicating constantly, for there is nothing like it to take you
nearer (to Allah). And do not avoid asking for small matters because of
its smallness, for the provider of the small is also the provider of the
big."


