Third Assembly
==============

Met on Saturday the 8th of Ramadhan. Our grand Sheikh al-Mufid Abu
Abdillah, Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man, may Allah perpetuate His
beneficence upon him, said today:

1. Adopting Ignorant Leaders
----------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported from Abdullah
ibn Ishaq, who reported from Ishaq ibn Ibrahim al-Baghvi, who reported
from Abu Qatan, who reported from Hisham al-Dastwai, from Yahya ibn Abu
Katheer, from Urwah, from Abdullah ibn Umar that the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, said:*

"Surely, Allah does not withdraw knowledge from the people by erasing it
from their minds; rather, He does so by taking away the learned people
(from among them). And when there is no learned man around, people adopt
the ignorant men as their leaders, and refer their questions to these
(ignorant leaders), who answer without any knowledge, thus going astray,
and causing others to go astray."  
  

2. Five Prostrations for glad tidings
-------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh (may Allah bless
him with mercy) reported to me from al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Amir,
from Ahmad ibn Alawiyyah, from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Thaqafi, who
reported from Tawabah ibn al-Khaleel, who reported from Uthman ibn Isa
who reported from Abu Abdil Rehman, who reported from Ja'far ibn
Muhammad (A.S.) that:*

Once when the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, was
travelling, he dismounted and then performed five prostrations (Sijdah).
When he mounted again, one of his companions said: "We saw you do
something, O messenger of Allah, which you never did before." He said:
"Yes, Jibraeel came to me and gave me glad news that ‘Ali belongs in
Paradise. So I went into prostration to thank Allah.

When I raised my head, he said: 'Fatimah belongs in Paradise.' I went to
prostrate again to thank Allah. And when I raised my head, he said:
'al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the masters of the youths of Paradise.' So I
prostrated to thank Allah. And when I raised my head, he said: 'And
those who love them belong in Paradise.' So I prostrated to thank Allah.
And when I raised my head, he said: 'And those who love the people who
love them (Ahlul Bayt) belong in Paradise.' (So I prostrated to thank
Allah)."

3. Abu Hanifa acknowledges al-Sadiq's authority
-----------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abu
al-Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed al-Hamadani, who reported from
Ahmad ibn Yahya Zakariyya; and Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn
Salim among the latter ones, both of whom reported from Abdullah ibn
Salim, who reported from Hisham ibn Mehran, who reported from his
maternal uncle Muhammad ibn Zayd al-Attar, who was among the prominent
companions of A'armash, reporting from Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn al-Hasan,
reported from Munzir ibn Jayfar, reporting from Muhammad ibnYezid
Albani, who said:*

I was present at Ja'far ibn Muhammad's (as), when Umar ibn Qays al-Masir
and Abu Hanifa and Umar ibn Dharr, together with a group of their
companions, called upon him. Then they asked him about faith (al-Iman).
He said: The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "An
adulterer (and a fornicator) does not commit that sin at the same time
being a Mu’min, and a thief does not steal at the same time being a
Mu’min, and one does not drink liquor (intoxicant) while being a
Mu’min."

We started looking at each other, then Umar ibn Dharr said: "What shall
we call them?"

He, peace be upon him, said: "Call them the way Allah has called them
because of their deeds. Allah in Qur'an says: *'And for a male thief and
a female thief, cut off their hands'* (al-Maedah V:38) and *'As for the
fornicatress and the fornicator, flog each of them a hundred stripes.'*
(al-Noor V:2)." Hearing this, they stared at each other.

Muhammad ibn Yazid says: Bishr ibn Umar ibn Dharr, who was with them,
reported to me that: When we left, Umar ibn Dharr said to Abu Hanifa:
"Why did you not ask him who had reported from the Prophet?" He (Abu
Hanifa) said: "What can I say to a man who (authoritatively) says: The
Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said."

4. When the Angel came to greet ‘Ali (as)
-----------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad al-Sayrafi reported to me from
Muhammad ibn ldress who reported from al-Hasan ibn Atiyyah who reported
from a man called Israeel, from Maysarah ibn Habib, from al-Minhal ,
from Dharr ibn Jaysh, from Huzaifah who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, (once) said to me: "Did
you see the person who presented himself to me?" I said: "Yes, O
messenger of Allah." He said: "He was an angel who had never descended
before this. He sought permission from Allah, Most High, to greet ‘Ali;
he was granted permission and then greeted him. And he gave me glad news
that al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the masters of the youths of Paradise,
and Fatimah is the leading lady of all the women in Paradise."

5. The Prophet's (SAW) inheritance: Knowledge of the unseen
-----------------------------------------------------------

*He said: I have been informed by al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn al-Mughairah,
who reported from Abu Muhammad Haider ibn Muhammad al-Samarqandi, who
reported from Abu Amru Muhammad ibn Amru al-Kashi, who reported from
Hamdawayh ibn Naseer, who reported from Ya'qoob ibn Yazeed, who reported
from Ibn Abi Umayr, who reported from Ibn al-Mughairah who said:*

Yahya ibn Abdullah ibn al-Hasan and I were with Abul Hasan, peace be
upon him, and Yahya asked him: "May I be your ransom, they think that
you have the knowledge of the unseen (Ilmul Ghaib)." He said: "Glory be
to Allah! Place your hand over my head." When I did that, every hair in
my head and on my body stood on its end. Then he said: "No, By Allah, it
is nothing but what we have inherited from the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his progeny)."

6. Refraining from fault finding
--------------------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan reorted to me from
his father, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, who
reported from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Sinan, from Ibrahim and al-Fadhl - the two Ash'aries - from Abdullah ibn
Bukair, from Zurarah who reported that Abu Ja'far or Abu Abdillah (as)
said:*

"When a servant of Allah befriends someone, under the pretense of
religion, with a motive to find out his drawbacks and errors, so that he
would then taunt that man, he draws himself closest to becoming an
infidel."

7. When sins multiply
---------------------

*He said: Abul Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan reported to me from
his father, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, who
reported from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from al-Husayn ibn Saeed, from
Ibn Abu Umayr, from Ismail ibn Ibrahim, from al-Hakam ibn Utaibah that
Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, said:*

"When the sins of a servant of Allah multiply and grow in number, and he
has nothing to expiate his sins with, Allah tests him with sorrow and
grief, and thus expiate his sins."

8. Events after the battle of Jamal
-----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported from Abul Abbas
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn
Mustawrad, who reported from Muhammad ibn Munir, who reported from Ishaq
ibn Wazir, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Fudhail ibn Ata, the client
of Mazeenah, who reported from Ja'far ibn Muhammad (as), from his
father, who reported that Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, Ibn Hanafiyya said:*

"The standard of the army on the day of the battle of Jamal was with me,
and the worst casualties were suffered by Bani Zabbah. When the people
retreated, Amirul Mu’mineen (as), accompanied by Ammar ibn Yasir and
Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr, may Allah bless them with His Pleasure - came to
the howdah (of Aisha) which looked like the spike of a porcupine because
of the arrows which had pierced it, and he hit it with his stick and
said: 'O, Humayra, you wanted to kill me the way you killed the son of
Affan (i.e. Uthman). Is this what Allah has commanded you?

Or is this the pledge which the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, took from you?' She said: 'You have conquered, so be
forgiving.'

Then he (i.e. ‘Ali {AS}) said to Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr: 'Find out if she
has been hit with any weapon.' He found her safe, except for an arrow,
which had pierced her attire, and grazed her a little. So Ibn Abi Bakr
said: 'O Amirul Mu’mineen, She is safe, except for an arrow, which has
struck her clothes and bruised her a bit.'

So ‘Ali said: 'Convey her to the house of the two sons of Khalaf
al-Khuzai.' And then he ordered an announcer to announce: The wounded
should not be killed, and those running away should not be pursued. And
whoever shuts his door, he will be in peace."

9. "Never confirm the tradition of Ghadeer-e-khumm" said Abu Hanifa
-------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from ‘Ali ibn Al-Husayn
al-Taymali, who said that he saw in his father's book, that Muhammad ibn
Muslim al-Ashja'ee reported to him from Muhammad ibn Nawfil ibn A'ez
al-Sayrafl, who said:*

We were with al-Haitham ibn Habibn al-Sayrafi when Abu Hanifa al-Nu’man
ibn Thabit called upon us. Then we remembered Amirul Mu’mineen ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib (A.) and we discussed about Ghadeer Khumm. Abu Hanifah said:
"I have told my followers: never confirm to them the tradition of
Ghadeer Khumm, for (if you did), they will begin argumentation against
you."

(Upon hearing this), the colour of al-Haitham ibn Habib al-Sayrafl's
face changed, and he said: "Why would they not confirm the tradition? Do
you not have it as an authentic one, O Nu’man?" He said: "Yes, I do have
it as such, and it has been reliably reported to me." He said: "(Then)
why should they not confirm it, while it has been reported to us from
Habib ibn Abu Thabit, from Abu al-Tufail, from Zaid ibn Arqam that at
Rahbah, ‘Ali (as) adjured the people who had heard it." So Abu Hanifa
said: "Don't you see that the discussion had started on the subject,
till ‘Ali had to put people on oath?"

Then al-Haitham said: "So should we call ‘Ali a liar, or reject his
claim?" Abu Hanifah replied: "No, we do not belie him nor do we reject
what he said. But you know that people have gone to the extremes about
him." Al-Haitham said: "The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny,
spoke about him, and (openly) addressed the people about it, while we
fear mentioning it and avoid it, because someone gets to the extreme, or
says what he likes?"

Then someone arrived to interrupt with another question, and the
discussion was disrupted. The discussion became a common knowledge in
Kufa. Then Habib ibn Nizar ibn Hayyan met us at the market and he came
to al-Haitham, saying: "I have come to know what you said about ‘Ali
(as), and the answer given to you." Habib was a client of Banu Hashim,
so al-Haitham told him: "There is more than what meets the eye." And
then the matter was forgotten, till we later went to Haj with Habib, and
we called upon Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad (as), and greeted him.
Then Habib said: "O Abu Abdillah, such and such discussion took place."

The face of Abu Abdillah (as) revealed some displeasure. So Habib said:
"This is Muhammad ibn Nawfil, who was present at the discussion." (At
that time), Abu Abdillah said: "O Habib, restrain yourself. Deal with
the people according to their ways, and distinguish yourselves by your
deeds. For everyone will get that which he earns, and on the Day of
Judgement, one will be with those who one loved. Do not force people
upon yourselves or upon us. Enter into the masses! For there are days of
our rule which Allah will bring in when He wills. Do you understand O
Habib! Do not disobey my order, else you will repent." He said: "I shall
never disobey you."

Abul Abbas says I asked ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan about Muhammad ibn Nawfil. He
said: He was from Kufa. I asked him: "With whom was he affiliated?" He
said: "I suppose he was a client of Banu Hashim, and so was Habib ibn
Nizar ibn Hayyan. And the controversy which occurred between him and Abu
Hanifah coincided with the rise of Banu Abbas, so they could not openly
express themselves about Ahlul Bayt of the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny."

10. The Inner self
------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi has reported to me from
Abul Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad, from Muhammad ibn Salim al-Azadi, from
Musa ibn al-Qasim, from Muhammad ibn Imran al-Bijilli who said:*

I heard Abu Abdillah (as) say: "Whoever has not been blessed by Allah
with an admonishing innerself, he can derive no benefit from the
admonitions of the people."


