Fourth Assembly
===============

(This is) From what he dictated at a gathering on Saturday, the middle
of the month (Ramadhan), when I was not present, but I copied it down
and read it over to him. And my son Abul Fawaris, may Allah keep him,
heard it on Thursday, the 5th of Shawwal, this year. The great Sheikh
al-Mufid, Abu Abdillah, Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Nu’man, may Allah
continue to bless him with beneficent care, reported to us this day,
which was then read over to him:

1. The status of the seeker
---------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Abbas, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed al-Hamadani, who reported from Abu
Musa, Harun ibn Amru al-Majaashei, who reported from Muhammad ibn Ja'far
ibn Muhammad, from his father, who reported from his grandfather that:*

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny), said: "A learned man
among the ignorant people is like a living person among the dead. And
everything, including the fish, the poisonous vermins, the wild beasts
and the cattle pray for the forgiveness of the one who seeks knowledge.
So, seek knowledge, for surely, it is a conducive mean between you and
Allah, Most High. And surely, seeking of knowledge is obligatory upon
every Muslim."

2. A deed performed with taqwa
------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Abbas, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Harun ibn Abdul Rehman al-Hijazi, who reported from his father, who
reported from Isa ibnAbul Ward, from Ahmad ibn Abdul Aziz, who reported
from Abu Abdillah (as) that:*

Amirul Mu’mineen, peace be upon him, said: "A deed when performed with
Taqwa (i.e. being mindful of one's duties towards Allah, and guarding
oneself from sins for the fear of Allah) is not (of) less (importance).
And how can that be less which has been accepted (by Allah)?"

3. Three groups within the Ummah
--------------------------------

*He said: Al-Sharif Abu Abdillah, Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Jawani
reported from Abu Talib al-Muzaffar ibn Ja'far ibn al-Muzaffar al-Alawi
al-Umri, from Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Masood, (from his father), who
reported from Nasr ibn Ahmad who reported from ‘Ali ibn Hafs, who
reported from Khalid al-Qatwai, who reported from Yunus ibn Arqam, who
reported from Abdul Hamid ibn Abu al-Khansa, who reported from Ziyad ibn
Yazid, who reported from his father, from his grandfather Farwah
al-Zifari who reported that:*

I heard Salman, may Allah bless him with mercy, say: The Prophet (Peace
be upon him and his progeny), said: "My Ummah will be divided into three
groups: a group on the absolute Truth, from which falsehood can reduce
nothing. They will love me and my Ahlul Bayt, and their likeness is that
of pure gold, which when put to the (test of) burning fire, increases in
brilliance. And a group upon the false path, where Truth will reduce
nothing. They will hate me and my Ahlul Bayt, and their likeness is that
of iron, which when put to fire, increases nothing but evil. And a group
like the rolling stones, following the path of Samiri. They would not
say: 'Touch me not', they would say: 'No fighting (for the just cause).'
Their leader will be al-Ash'ari. (i.e. Abu Musa al-Ash'ari)."

4. Saints & Nobles
------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr, Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi, reported to me from
Abul Abbas, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from Umar ibn Isa
ibn Uthman, who reported from his father, who reported from Khalid ibn
Amir ibn Abbas, from Muhammad ibn Swaid al-Ash'ari who said:*

Fatr ibn Khalifa and I called upon Ja'far ibn Muhammad (as), and he
presented some dates to us which we ate, and gave some to Fatr. Then he
said to him (Fatr): "What about the tradition which Abu al-Tufail, may
Allah bless him with mercy, narrated to me about the saints?" Fatr said:
I heard Abu al-Tufail say: "I heard ‘Ali, Amirul Mu’mineen say that
Abdal (the saints) are from the people of Sham and the noble ones are
from the people of Kufa. Allah will rally them together on a day which
will be the worst day for our enemies."

Then Ja'far al-Sadiq (as) said: "May Allah have mercy upon you. With us
begins the (severe) test, and then with you, and with us shall begin the
relief and then with you. May Allah bless those with His mercy who
endear us to the people, and do not cause them to detest us."

5. The final Rites for our Prophet (SAW)
----------------------------------------

*He said: ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Qarshi reported to me, by way of
permission (to transmit further) from Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn
Faddhal, who reported from al-Husayn ibn Nasr, who reported from his
father, who reported from Ahmad ibn Abdulla ibn Abdul Malik, who
reported from Abdul Rehman al-Masoodi, from Amru ibn Hurayth al-Ansari,
from al-Husayn ibn Salemah al-Banani, from Abu Khalid al-Kabuli, from
Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali Al-Baqir, peace be upon him, who said:*

When Amirul Mu’mineen finished giving Ghusl, Kafan and Hunoot to the
Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, he allowed people in, and
said: "Enter in the grou of tens for offering your prayers upon him."
They entered, and Amirul Mu’mineen stood between him (i.e. the Prophet)
and them and recited:

***'Surely, Allah and His angels send blessings on the Prophet. O you
who believe, you should also send blessings and peace upon him.'***
**(al-Ahzab, 33:56)"**

People repeated what he said. Abu Ja'far said: "This was the prayer
offered on him, peace be upon him and his progeny."

6. Asserting ones creed (and about Zaid ibn ‘Ali)
-------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ghalib Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Zarari reported to me from
Abul Qasim, Hamid ibn Ziyad, who reported from al-Hasan ibn Muhammad,
who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ziyad al-Attar, from his
father al-Hasan ibn Ziyad who said:*

When Zaid ibn ‘Ali advanced upon Kufa, some reservation entered my mind
about it. He says: Then I went to Makkah, and passed by Madinah to call
upon Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, who was then ill. I found him
lying prone on his bed, with nothing left between his skin and the
bones. I said: "I wish to assert before you my creed." He turned on his
side, and looking at me, said: "O Hasan, I always thought that you did
not need this anymore." Then he said: "Proceed." So I said: "I testify
that there is no god but Allah, and I testify that Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah."

He, peace be upon him, said: "The same with me, also." Then I said: "I
confirm the truth of all that Muhammad ibn Abdillah came with." He kept
silent. Then I said: "And I testify that ‘Ali is the Imam after the
Prophet, and obedience to him is obligatory. Whoever doubts about him is
gone astray, and whoever disputes his authority is an unbeliever." He
kept silent. Then I said: "I testify that al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace
be upon them, have the same position (as ‘Ali)", and then I continued
till I reached his name, and said: "And I testify that you are in the
same position as al-Hasan and al-Husayn and the Imams preceding you."

He said: "Enough. You know exactly what you wish, you wish me to give my
undertaking on this?" I said: "If you do so, then I will have fulfilled
my desire." He said: "I give you my undertaking over it." I said: "May I
be your ransom, I was worried about the uprising." He said: "Why?" I
said: "Because if Zaid and his companions won the battle, then we would
have been in the worst situation. And if Banu Umayya won, we would have
been no better." He said: "Go, no harm will reach you from either."  
  

7. Helping Ahlul Bayt with one's tongue
---------------------------------------

*He said: ‘Ali-Sharif Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Hamza al-Tabari reported
to me from Abul Hasan ‘Ali ibn Hatim al-Qazwaini, who reported from Abul
Abbas Muhammad ibn Ja'far al-Makhzoomi, who reported from Muhammad ibn
Shammoon al-Basri, from Abdullah ibn Abdul Rehanm, reported from
al-Husayn ibn Zayd from Ja'far ibn Muhammad (as) from his father (as)
who said:*

"Whoever helped us with his tongue, against our enemy, Allah will let
him speak out his argument when he will stand before Him (i.e. on the
Day of Judgement)."

8. Love Ahlul Bayt with your heart and help with your hand & tongue
-------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Al-Sharif Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Hamza reported to me from
Ahmad ibn Abdullah, from his grandfather Ahmad ibn Abdullah, who
reported from his father, who reported from Dawood ibn al-Nu’man, from
Amru ibn Abu al-Miqdam, from his father who reported that al-Hasan ibn
‘Ali (as) said:*

"He who loves us with his heart, and helps us with his hands and tongue,
will be with us (in Paradise) at the same lodging. And he who loves us
with his heart and helps us with his tongue will be at a lower level.
And he who loves us with his heart, but does not put his hand and tongue
to use for us, he will be in Paradise." (i.e. in an ordinary station).

9. Spare your speech
--------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar ibn Salim reported to me from Abul
Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from Ahmad ibn Yusuf,
who reported from Muhammad ibn Yazid who reported from Ahmad ibn Rizq,
from Abu Ziyad al-Fuqaymi, from Abu Abdillah, Ja'far ibn Muhammad (as),
from his father (as), from ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (as) who reported that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "When you see a
person not engaging in a purposeless chatter, then that is the sign of
his excellent (understanding of) Islam."


