Sixth Assembly
==============

(This is) From what he dictated on Wednesday, the 19th of it (Ramadhan),
and Abul Fawaris, may Allah keep him, heard it. The grand Sheikh
al-Mufid Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man, may Allah continue His
beneficent care for him, said; and this was read over to him:

1. Similitude of the transitory
-------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reported to me from
Abdullah ibn Ja'far al-Himyari, who reported from Ayyub ibn Nooh, from
Muhammad Abu Umayr, from Jameel ibn Darraj, from Abu Hamza al-Thumali,
may Allah bless him with His mercy, that:*

‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Zainul Abideen (as) once addressed his companions
thus: "O my brothers, I enjoy upon you for the next world, and I do not
enjoy upon you this world of which you all are so greedy, and to which
you are steadfastly stuck. Did you not hear what Isa, son of Maryam (as)
said to his disciples? He said to them: 'The world is like a bridge; you
cross it and do not build upon it. And he said: Whoever among you ever
builds a house on the sea waves? ‘That is the similitude of this worldly
abode, so do not treat it as a permanent place."

2. Adhering to the Ahlul Bayt
-----------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr, Muhammad ibn Umaral-Ji’abi reported from ‘Ali. ibn
Ismail, who reported from Muhammad ibn Khalaf, who reported from Husayn
al-Ashqar, who reported from Qais, from Laith ibn Abi Sulaim, from Abdul
Rehman ibn Abu Layla, from al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib who said:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Adhere yourselves
to our love, the Ahlul Bayt, for surely, whoever meets Allah, having
love for us (in his heart) he shall enter Paradise with our
intercession. And By Him Who controls my spirit, a servant (of Allah)
benefits nothing from his (good) deeds, unless he has recognized our
Truth."

3. Two types of manly virtues
-----------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reported to me from
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Waleed, who reported from Muhammad ibn
al-Hasan al-Saffar, from Ya'qoob ibn Yazeed, from Ibn Abi Umayr, from
more than one source, that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad (as) said: "Manly virtues are of two
types; one in the hometown and another when you are travelling. As for
the virtue in the hometown, it is to recite from the Qur'an, to attend
the mosques, to keep in company of good people, and to ponder over
religious injunctions. And when travelling, the virtue consists of
offering ones provision generously to the fellow travellers, to be
cheerful without indulging in jokes which Allah dislikes, to avoid, as
much as you can, going against the wishes of your companions, and not to
report on them after having parted their company."

4. The master of Arabs
----------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar ibn Salim reported to me from ‘Ali
ibn Ismail Abul Hasan al-Atrush, who reported from Muhammad ibn Khalaf
al-Muqri, who reported from Husayn al-Ashqar, who reported from Qais ibn
al-Rabi', who reported from his father, from Abdul Rehman ibn Abi Layla,
from al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as), that:*

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, (once) said: "O Anas!
Send for the master of Arabs to come to me." He said: "O messenger of
Allah, are you not the master of Arabs?" He said: "I am the master of
all children of Adam, and ‘Ali is the master of Arabs." So, he sent for
‘Ali (as) and when he arrived, the Prophet said: "Ask the Ansar (the
helpers) to assemble." When they arrived, the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny, said: "O people of Ansar, this is ‘Ali, the master of
Arabs, love him for the sake of my love, and honour him for the sake of
my honour. Surely, what I tell you is exactly what Jibraeel has revealed
to me from Allah, Most High."

5. Mahdi (as) will rise after a time of trials & tribulations
-------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abul Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Qawlawayh, may Allah bless
him with mercy, reported to me from his father, from Sa'd ibn Abdillah,
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, from Ibn Abi Umayr, from Abdullah ibn
Maskan, from Bashir al-Kannasi, from Abu Khalid al-Kabuli who said:*

‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, peace be upon him, told me: "O Abu Khalid, there
will come a time of trials and tribulations, (descending) like a piece
of dark night, from which no one will be safe, except the one holding
the covenant of Allah. These people will be the guiding lights and the
sources of knowledge, whom Allah will have saved from all the dark
temptations. As if I see your master, rising above the hill of your
Najaf destined for Kufa, with three hundred and some odd over ten men,
Jibraeel on his right, Mikaeel on his left, Israfil ahead of him, and
with him (is) the Prophet's standard, unfurled, to whichever people he
aims with it, they are destroyed by Allah."

6. The Prophet's (SAW) last assembly
------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs, Umar ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Sayrafl, reported to
me from Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Hasani, who reported from Isa ibn Mehran,
who reported from Yunus ibn Muhammad, who reported from Abdul Rahman Ibn
al-Ghaseel, who reported from Abdul Rahman ibn Khallad al-Ansari, from
Ikrarmah, from Abdullah ibn Abbas who said:*

‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as), al-Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib and al-Fadhl ibn
al-Abbas called upon the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, in
the last days of his illness, and said: "O messenger of Allah, these
Ansar have gathered in the mosque, ladies and men, weeping over you." He
asked: "What makes them weep?" They said: "They fear you might die." He
said: "Hold me by your hands," then he came out, wrapped in his blanket
and headcloth and sat on the pulpit. He thanked Allah and glorified His
name, and then said:

"O people, what makes you feel unusual about your Prophet's death? Have
I not announced death to you and have you not announced deaths among
your own people? If there had been someone before me, and then the angel
of death had come to him later, I would have also remained with you for
that long. Be it known that I am going to meet my Sustainer, and I have
left among you something, if you adhere to it, you will not be lost. The
Book of Allah is with you, read it at dawn and dusk. And do not be each
others' rivals, nor envious, not harbour any enmity against each other.
Remain brothers as commanded by Allah. And then I have left behind my
family, my Ahlul Bayt, and I enjoy upon you about them.

And then I enjoy upon you about these people of Ansar, whose hardship
for the sake of Allah, His Prophet and the believers are known to you.
Did they not widen their houses and distribute equally their fruits? Did
they not prefer others above themselves, though they were afflicted with
poverty? So, whoever from among you is given any worthwhile authority,
enabling him to harm or benefit, he should accept the righteous men from
Ansar, and also forgive their evil-doers."  
 This was the last assembly in which he sat before he met with his Lord.

7. Ibn Abbas's address on Khilafah
----------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad reported to me from Abu Abdillah
Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Hasani, who reported from Isa ibn Mehran, who
reported from Hafs ibn Umar al-Farra, who reported from Abu Muaz
al-Khazzaz from Ubaidullah ibn Ahmad al-Rab'ai, who said:*

While Ibn Abbas addressed the people of Basrah, when he came face to
face with them, he said: "O people who are lost and confused about its
faith, if you had given precedence to him who Allah had preferred, and
if you had kept back him who Allah had kept back, and if you had kept
the inheritance and the authority where Allah had kept them, then the
share (in inheritance) ordained by Allah would not have devolved upon
distant relatives (leaving behind the actual heirs), nor would the Wali
of Allah have been deprived; and no two persons would have ever differed
about a divine order, nor would the Ummah enter into any disputations
about any interpretation of the Book of Allah.

So now, have a taste of the evil consequence earned by your disregard,
and by your own hands. And those who do injustice shall soon come to
know what punishment awaits them."

8. The two who will be in deep anxiety
--------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Hafs Umar ibn Muhammad reported to me from Abu Abdillah
Ja'far ibn Muhammad, who reported from Isa ibn Mehran who reported from
Mukhawwal, who reported from al-Rabee' ibn al-Mundhair, from his father
who said:*

I heard al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) say: "Surely, Abu Bakr and Umar grabbed
away this affair (Caliphate), while the whole of it belonged to us. So
they took it away inspite of us, and apportioned to us the share of a
grandmother (from an estate). (NOTE: According to al-Nasai, Ibn Majah,
al-Tirmidhi, Abu Bakr believed that grandmother's share was nil). By
Allah, on the day where people will yearn for our intercession, these
two will be in deep anxiety because of their action."

9. "I have not known of an assembly of people worse than you...." said Fatimah (as)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abu
al-Husayn al-Abbas ibn al-Mughairah, who reported from Abu Bakr Ahmad
ibn Mansoor al-Ramadi, who reported from Saeed ibn Ufayr who reported
from Ibn Lah'eah, from Khalid ibn Yazeed, from Ibn Abi Hilal, from
Marwan ibn Uthman who said:*

When people swore the allegiance on the hands of Abu Bakr, ‘Ali (as),
al-Zubair and al-Miqdad entered the house of Fatimah, peace be upon her,
and refused to come out. So, Umar ibn al-Khattab said: "Set the house on
fire upon them." Then al-Zubair came out with his sword. So Abu Bakr
said: "Catch this dog." As they advanced towards him, he (al-Zubair)
slipped and fell and the sword fell off his hand.

Then Abu Bakr said: "Hit him with the stone." Zubair hit the stone till
it broke.

‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) left the house from the direction of Aaliyah and
met Thabit ibn Qays ibn Shammas. He said: "O Abul Hasan, what has
happened to you?" He said: "They have resolved on burning down my house,
while Abu Bakr is sitting on the pulpit, receiving allegiance, he
neither prevents them for doing it nor is he condemning it."

Thabit said: "My palm will not leave your hand, till I am killed by your
side." So they moved forward together till they came back towards
Madinah while Fatimah (peace be upon her) stood at her door, and all of
the people had left her house. She was saying: "I have not known of an
assembly of people worse than you; you left the messenger of Allah
unattended, when his corpse lay before us; you resolved about your
affairs among yourselves, refusing to seek our leadership; and you did
to us what you did, and you recognized no right for us."

10. "Keep my cheek on the ground..." the last words of Umar
-----------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Husayn al-Abbas ibn al-Mughairah, who reported from Abu Bakr ibn Mansoor
al-Ramadi, who reported from Sulaiman ibn Harb, who reported from Hammad
ibn Zaid, from Yahya ibn Saeed, from Asim ibn Ubaidullah, from Abdul
Rahman ibn Aban ibn Uthman, from his father, from Uthman ibn Affan who
said:*

I was the last to see Umar ibn al-Khattaibn I called upon him and saw
his head on the lap of his son Abdullah, while he was weary. He told his
son: "Keep my cheek on the ground." Abdullah refused, so he said: "Keep
my cheek on the ground." Abdullah refused, so he said: "Keep my cheek on
the ground, you motherless one." So he kept his (Umar's) cheek on the
ground, and then Umar said: "O my mother! Woe to me, my mother! I am not
forgiven (by Allah)." He went on saying that till he died.

11. Earning the promised blessing one has not seen
--------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reported to me from
his father, who reported from Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar, who reported
from Muhammad ibn Abu Al-Sahban, from Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, from Jamil
ibn Darraj, that:*

Abu Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad (as) who said: The Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, said: "Blessed is he who denounces the
tempting ready desire, to earn the promised blessing he has not seen."

12. About the people who apply analogy
--------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali reported from Muhammad ibn
al-Hasan ibn al-Waleed, who reported from Muhammad ibn al-Hasan
al-Saffar, who reported from Ya'qoob ibn Yazeed, from Hammad ibn Isa,
from Hammad ibn Uthman, from Zurarah ibn A'ayan who said:*

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, peace be upon him, told me: "O Zurarah,
keep away from the people who apply analogy in the matters of religion.
Surely, they have abandoned the knowledge of what was assigned to them,
and entered into unnecessary hair splitting matters, which had already
been decided for them. They interpret the Traditions (the way they like)
and impute lies to Allah, Most High. And as if I see a man among them
who when called from the front, answers to the one behind him, and when
called from behind, he hearkens to the one in front. They wonder
aimlessly on the earth and in religion."

13. Cursed are those who follow analogy
---------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn reported to me from
Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil, who reported from ‘Ali ibn
al-Husayn al-Sadabadi, who reported from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid,
who reported from his father, from Ibn Abu Umayr, from more than one
source, that:*

Abu Abdillah, peace be upon him, said: "Cursed are those who follow
analogy, for they have changed the word of Allah, and the Prophet's
traditions, and they have accused the truthfuls (of lying) about the
religion of Allah, the Most High."

14. Traits of a religion person
-------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from Muhammad ibn Ahmad
ibn Khaqan al-Nahdi, who reported from Sulaim, the servant at the Darb
al-Hubb (probably referring to Sulaim the servant of ‘Ali ibn Yaqteen),
from Ibrahim ibn Uqbah ibn Ja'far, from Muhammad ibn Nadhr ibn Qarwash
al-Nahdi, the camel hirer at Kufa, that:*

Abu Abdillah, Ja'far ibn Muhammad, peace be upon him, said: "A religious
person thinks about his conduct with serenity, and when he submits (to
such) he becomes humble, and when contented, he enjoys sufficiency,
pleased with whatever he has been endowed with, and when he is alone, he
craves no company; he abandons all base desires and thus becomes free.

Being divested of the world, he is protected from the evils, having cast
aside jealousy, he displays and earns love. He poses no threat to the
people, so people are not afraid of him; he does not offend them, so he
is secured from them, and he always censured himself for his own
shortcomings in every matter, till he succeeds and reaches perfection.
He has adopted the ways where lie his well-being and health, and
therefore never regrets."

15. "There is no way, other than my way..." said the Prophet (SAW)
------------------------------------------------------------------

*He said: Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Ali reported to me from his father,
who reported from Sa'ad ibn Abdillah, from Ibrahim ibn Muhammad
al-Thaqafi, from Muhammad ibn Marwan, from (Zaid ibn) Aban ibn Uthman
from Abu Basir, who reported that:*

Abu Ja'far al-Baqir, peace be upon him, said: "When the Prophet, peace
be upon him and his progeny, was nearing his death, Jibraeel descended,
and said to the Prophet: "O messenger of Allah! Would you like to return
to the world?" He said: "No, for I have already conveyed the message of
my Lord." Again he asked: "O messenger of Allah, would you like to go
back to the world?" He said: "No, but I would like to be with the
Friend, Most High."

Then the Prophet turned to the Muslims who had gathered around him and
said: "O people, there surely is no Prophet after me, and there is no
way, other than my way. And whoever claims to be so, his pretence and
innovation is destined for hell-fire. And whosoever claims that, kill
him, and his followers will enter hell. O people revive the law of
retribution, and revive the truth, and do not be divided among
yourselves. Submit (to Allah), incline fully to peace, and you will be
saved. Allah has decreed:

 ***'I and My messenger certainly prevail, Indeed Allah is Mighty,
Potent. '*** **(al-Mujadelah, 58:21)."**

16. Alms given early morning...
-------------------------------

*He said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Ji’abi reported to me from Abul
Abbas ibnMuhammad ibn Saeed, who reported from Ja'far ibn Abdillah, who
reported from his brother Muhammad ibn Abdillah, who reported from Ishaq
ibn Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from Muhammad ibn Hilal al-Mazhaji, who said:*

Your father Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (as) told me: "When you are in
(financial) need, rise early in the day, for the subsistence (Rizq) is
distributed before sunrise. And Allah, Most High, has blessed this Ummah
in its early hours; and give away alms in the early hour; because
adversities do not follow the alms (Sadaqah)."


