Acknowledgements
================

We wish to express our thanks to all who contributed toward making this
book possible: Assadullah ad-Dhaakir Yate , translation; David Elisha ,
editing; Seyyed Vali Reza Nasr, indexing; and Blue Cliff, cover design.
Special gratitude is expressed to Seyyed Hossein Nasr for his
contribution of the foreword to this book.

**Foreword**

Over a quarter of a century has passed since this book was written by
'Allamah Tabataba'i in Persian - with the express purpose of being
translated into English, as part of a trilogy whose aim was to make
Shi'ism better known in the Western world.' Commissioned originally by
Professor Kenneth Morgan of Colgate University in New York, who came to
Iran with the aim of launching the project, this trilogy was written and
assembled in a short period by 'Allamah Tabataba'i in Persian and - in
the case of the sayings of the Imams - Arabic. But it is only now, with
the appearance of this translation, that the goal of the project is
finally achieved, long after the author has left this abode of
transience.

It was our task to collaborate with the 'Allamah, to achieve the
completion of the two works of this trilogy which he had set out to
write himself, namely Shi'ah dar Islam and Qur'an dar Islam. Our role
was to point out to this venerable master the questions which a Western
audience needed to have treated and the types of discussion that such
works needed to consider, while he himself set out to compose these
books in his masterly and at the same time unassuming style. Only after
the composition of these works did he begin to select the sayings of the
Imams, which were to be collected and translated in the anthology.

The completion of Shi'ah dar Islam - after many journeys made by us
between Tehran and Qom, where the 'Allamah resided, as well as meetings
in the cool mountain retreats surrounding Tehran - turned out to be a
major event for the study of Shi'ism, not only in the West but also
within Iran itself Even before we completed the edition and translation
of the work in English, the Persian edition with our humble introduction
appeared in Iran, and soon became one of the most widely read works on
Shi'ism. It seems that a work written with a Western audience in mind
also bore a message of great significance for Shi'ites themselves.

While we were translating and editing Ski 'ilea Islam, 'Allamah
Tabaiaba'i terminated Qur'an dar Islam; on his advice, it was decided to
have this also published in Persian as soon as possible. This work,
likewise, became instantly popular and, like Shi'ah dar Islam, has gone
into numerous editions besides being translated into other Islamic
languages. Meanwhile, we began the translation of Qur'an dar lsl?m soon
as the publication of Ski 'it Islam in both its English and American
editions was accomplished.

Many sessions were spent with the 'Allamah over various questions of
translation, and the work progressed slowly because of both the 'All
amah's busy program and our own crowded schedule Over half of the work
was translated when our library - and with it the manuscript of the
translation - was lost during the events of 1979 It is, therefore,
particularly gratifying finally to see the appearance of the translation
of this work in English and the realization of the goal, which was
intended from the beginning.

The author of this book, 'Allamah Sayyid Muhammad Hussein Tabataba'i -
may God shower His blessings upon his soul - was one of the great
masters of the traditional sciences in Iran during this century. 2 He
was born in 1903 into a distinguished family of scholars in Tabriz,
where he also carried out his earliest religious studies. Like many
Shi'ites scholars, he pursued more advanced studies in Najaf and then
returned to Tabriz. But in 1945, following the Soviet occupation of
Azerbaijan, he came to Qom, where he settled until his death in 1982.
From this center of Shi'ites learning the light of his knowledge and
presence began to disseminate, and continued to spread, among students
not only of that city but also throughout Iran, and even beyond.

From the 1950s onward, his journeys to Tehran became a weekly or
bi-weekly event, and he taught and conducted intellectual discussions
with a small group of students, of which we had the honour of being one.
This activity complemented his teaching activities in Qom. The circle in
Tehran, which included not only such well-known Shi'ites scholars as
Murtacza Mutahhari, but also (during the fall season) Henry Corbin, and
occasionally other Western scholars of Islam, helped to spread the
influence of the 'All amah's teachings further, and soon he became
recognized as one of the major intellectual figures of Shi'ism, at once
master of the religious sciences (especially Qur'anic commentary),
Islamic philosophy and gnosis ('irfin). Despite eye-problems which
continued to hamper his active ties to the very end, 'Allamah Tabataba'i
was ~ extremely prolific author.

In addition to teaching throughout CS the week and training countless
students, he wrote nearly every day, and important books and articles
continued to flow from his pen. After writing such major philosophical
works as Usul-i Falsafay-i Ri'ilism in five volumes, he edited the Asfir
of Sadr al-Din Shir?zi with his own commentary, and a selection of
commentaries on other masters prior to Shir?zi, in seven volumes Later,
at our request, he composed two of masterly summaries of Islamic
philosophy: the Bad4~i' al-Hikam and the Nah4yat al-Hiram.

Meanwhile, parallel with all this activity in the domain of traditional
philosophy and gnosis (about which he wrote less In a direct manner but
alluded to frequently in his philosophical works and certain shorter
treatises), 'Allamah Tabataba'i continued to work indefatigably on his
Qur'anic commentary, Tafsir al-Mizan, which he finally corn- pleted in
his mid-seventies.

This monumental commentary, re Consisting of some twenty-seven volumes
(written in Arabic, 1 but also translated into Persian), is one of the
most important of Qur'anic commentaries of this century and is a
blinding ct witness to the remarkable mastery of its author in the
domain of Qur'anic Sciences. This commentary, based on the principle of
having one part of the Qur'an interpret other parts (al-Qur'an yufassiru
badahu ba 'dan), is a summa of Islamic religious thought, in which the
Sciences of the Qur'an, theology, philosophy, gnosis, sacred history and
the social teachings of a Islam are all brought together.

The present volume is in a sense the synthesis of the venerable
master's life-long study of the Noble Qur'anAlthough the book is written
in a simple language and may appear to be introductory, it is a work of
great depth and synthetic quality It treats many questions concerning
the sacred text, which have rarely been discussed together in a single
work The book, although short, distils many volumes into its pages and
is like the synopsis of a major commentary It brings out the
significances of the Qur'an for the life of Muslims, the features of the
sacred text, which seem enigmatic, the inner and outer levels of meaning
of the Text and the sciences of Qur'anic exegesis It also treats in a
clear and direct manner the Shi'ites understanding of the Qur'an and the
role of the Imams in its interpretation.

It is a veritable prolegomenon to the study of the Sacred Book, and is
perhaps the most accessible introduction available in English to the
study of the Qur'an as traditionally understood by the mainstream of
Shi'ites thought, in fact Islamic exegetical thought in general.

This book reflects, moreover, not only the learning of the author but
also his spiritual qualities 'Allamah Tabataba'i was not only an
outstanding scholar but also a person of great spiritual realization who
lived constantly in the remembrance of God During the twenty years
during which we had the honour of being his student, and observing him
in all kinds of circumstances - from being alone with him in a room, to
sitting at his feet in a mosque filled with hundreds of students - never
did he cease to remember God and invoke Him.

His countenance always reflected a light, which seemed to shine from
the world beyond, while his gentle voice seemed to issue from the other
shore of existence In his presence, one could not but think of God and
the world of the Spirit The reality of the Qur'an, which he had studied
and written about for so many years, seemed to have penetrated into his
very being, enabling him to speak of a knowledge that was always wed to
spirituality and rooted in the sacred.

'Allamah Tabaiaba'i was at once one of the greatest of Qur'anic
commentators, a leading contemporary Islamic philosopher in the
tradition of Ibn Sin?, Suhrawardi and Mull? Sadra, and a gnostic who was
at home in both the metaphysical works of Ibn 'Arabi and the inebriating
poetry of RÃ¼mi and Hafiz.

In him, intelligence, scholarship, piety and the love of God met in a
union, which is encountered rarely in any age, and especially this
period of the eclipse of the Spirit His soul was embellished with the
virtues extolled by the Qur'an and the prophetic Sunnah, while his mind
explored like a soaring eagle the vast expanses of Islamic thought To
have met him was to have met the veritable Islamic scholar (or 'aiim),
and to gain a taste of what traditional Islamic learning must have been
when the whole of the Islamic intellectual tradition was fully alive.

The Qur'an in Islam, as well as the other works by the 'Allamah, should
be read now more than ever before, because the current aberrations
propagated in the name of Islam in general, and Shi'ism in particular,
necessitate an uncompromising and clear statement of the traditional
Islamic perspective, as expounded by such masters as 'Allamah
Tabataba'i. Moreover, the present book marks an important addition to
literature in English on the central theophany of Islam, the Noble
Qur'an May all those interested in the understanding of Islam be able to
benefit from this book, and also come to gain some insight into the mind
and soul of a great contemporary Muslim scholar who lived and died in
constant awareness of God, and who saw in His Word as contained in the
Noble Book at once a guide for life, the basic source of all knowledge,
the sword of discernment between truth and falsehood and a "presence"
whose experience makes possible here a taste of the realities of
paradise.


Seyyed Hossein Nasr Bethesda,
Maryland December 1986

**Introduction**

We are placing before the reader a book, which discusses the
profoundest document of the sacred religion of Islam. Among the themes
of this book are the following: The position of the Glorious Qur'an in
the Islamic world What do we mean when we speak of "the Qur'an?" What
value does the Qur'an hold for Muslims? The Qur'an as a book whose
importance is global and eternal The Qur'an as a revelation from a
divine, not a human, source - The relationship between the Qur'an and
the sciences -The characteristics and features of the Qur'an We are
investigating the importance of a book which Muslims have never ceased
to respect and venerate and whose validity they have never rejected.

They are able to use it to support any claim made in the name of Islam,
despite being troubled by inner conflicts and sectarian splintering, as
are the other major world religions. The purpose of this work is to
define the position of the Qur'an in such a way that the Holy Book
explains itself, rather than merely giving our own opinions concerning
it. There is clearly a great difference between these two ways of
approaching the matter.

In other words, the position we attribute to the Holy Qur'an, through
reason or lack of it, if found to be contrary to the Qur'anic views,
will not be valid. If it were something about which the Qur'an is
silent, in view of the existing differences of opinion among the
Muslims, a unanimous acceptance of such a view would not be possible.
The only position, which may be acceptable, is what the Holy Qur'an
itself denotes. Therefore, in this inquiry and discussion, we must
answer the question as to what the Holy Qur'an says in this connection,
and not what we, who follow a certain school of Islamic law, say about
the Holy Qur'an.

**1-The Value of the Qur'an in the Eyes of the Muslims**

The Qur'an Contains a Pattern of a Complete Way of Life for Man

The religion of Islam is superior to any other in that it guarantees
happiness in man's life. For Muslims, Islam is a belief system with
moral and practical laws that have their source in the Qur'an.

God, may He be exalted, says, "Indeed this Qur'an guides to the path
which is clearer and straighter than any other" XVII: nine. He also
says, "We have revealed to you the book which clarifies every matter"
XVI: 89 These references exemplify the numerous Qur'anic verses
(cityite), which mention the principles of religious belief, moral
virtues and a general legal system governing all aspects of human
behaviour.

A consideration of the following topics will enable one to understand
that the Qur'an provides a comprehensive programmed of activity for
man's life. Man has no other aim in life but the pursuit of happiness
and pleasure, which manifests itself in much the same way as love of
ease or wealth.

Although some individuals seem to reject this happiness, for example,
by ending their lives in suicide, or by turning away from a life of
leisure, they too, in their own way, confirm this principle of
happiness; for, in seeking an end to their life or of material pleasure,
they are still asserting their own personal choice of what happiness
means to them. Human actions, therefore, arc directed largely by the
prospects of happiness and prosperity offered by a certain idea, whether
that idea be true or false Man's activity in life is guided by a
specific plan or programmed. This fact is self-evident, even though it
is sometimes concealed by its very apparentness Man acts according to
his will and desires; he also weighs the necessity of a task before
undertaking it. In this an inherent scientific law promotes him, which
is to say that he performs a task for "he" in fulfilling needs, which he
perceives, are necessary.

There is, therefore, a direct link between the objective of a task and
its execution. Any action undertaken by man, whether it be eating,
sleeping or walking, occupies its own specific place and demands its own
particular efforts. Yet an action is implemented according to an
inherent law, the general concept of which is stored in man's perception
and is recalled by motions associated with that action. This notion
holds true whether or not one is obliged to undertake the action or
whether or not the circumstances are favourable.

Every man, in respect of his own actions, is as the state in relation
to its individual citizens, whose activity is controlled by specific
laws, customs and behaviour. Just as the active forces in a state are
obliged to adapt their actions according to certain laws, so is the
social activity of a community composed of the actions of each
individual If this were not the case, the different components of
society would fall apart and be destroyed in anarchy in the shortest
time imaginable.

If a society is religious, its government will reflect that religion;
if it is secular, it will be regulated by a corresponding code of law.
If a society is uncivilized and barbaric, a code of behaviour imposed by
a tyrant will appear; otherwise, the conflict of various belief-systems
within such a society will produce lawlessness. Thus man, as an
individual element of society, has no option but to possess and pursue a
goal.

He is guided in the pursuit of his goal by the path, which corresponds
to it and by the rules, which must necessarily accompany his, programmed
of activity. The Qur'an affirms this idea when it says that "every man
has a goal to which he is turning, so compete with each other in good
action" 11:148. In the usage of the Qur'an, the word din'(1) is
basically applied to a way, a pattern of living, and neither neither
neither neither neither neither the believer nor the non-believer is
without a path, be it prophetic or man-made.

God, may He be exalted, describe the enemies of the divine din
(religion) as those "who prevent others from the path of God and would
have it crooked" VII: 45 This verse shows that the term Sabil Allah -
the path of God - used in the verse refers to the din of fitrah - the
inherent pattern of life intended by God for man). It also indicates
that even those who do not believe in God implement His din, albeit in a
deviated form this deviation, which becomes Their din is also
encompassed in God's programmed. The best and firmest path in life for
man is the one, which is dictated by his innate being and not by the
sentiments of any individual or society.

A close examination of any part of creation reveals that, from its very
inception, it is guided by an by innate purpose towards fulfilling its
nature along the most use appropriate and shortest path; every aspect of
each part of or creation is equipped to do so, acting as a blueprint for
defining the nature of its existence. Indeed all of creation, be it
animate in or inanimate, is made up in this manner. As an example, we
may say that a green-tipped shoot, ye emerging from a single grain in
the earth, is "aware" of its to future existence as a plant which will
yield an ear of wheat.

By ed means of its inherent characteristics, the shoot acquires he
various mineral elements for its growth from the soil and be changes,
day by day, in form and strength until it becomes a Fully matured
grain-bearing plant - and so comes to the end of lat its natural cycle
Similarly, if we investigate the life-cycle of the walnut tree, of we
observe that it too is "aware", from the very beginning, of: he its own
specific purpose in life, namely, to grow into a big ~ri1I walnut
tree.

It reaches this goal by developing according to its own distinct
inherent characteristics; it does not, for example, no follow the path
of the wheat-plant in fulfilling its goal just as: he the wheat-plant
does not follow the life pattern of the walnut by tree. Since every
created object which makes up the visible world ~at is subject to this
same general law, there is no reason to doubt her that man, as a species
of creation, is not. Indeed his physical) rd capabilities are the best
proof of this rule; like the rest of creation, they allow him to realize
his purpose, and ultimate be happiness, in life.

Thus, we observe that man, in fact, guides himself to Inc happiness and
well-being merely by applying the fundamental 2nd laws inherent in his
own nature. God in the Qur'an, through His of Prophet Moses, confirms
this law when he says, "Our Lord is He who gave the everything its
nature, then guided it" XX: 50.

It is further Explained in LXXXVII: 2-3 as "He who created and
fashioned in balanced proportion and He who measures and guides" As to
the creation and the nature of man, the Qur'an says,By the soul and Him
who fashioned it and then inspired it with wrong action and fear of God;
he is truly successful who causes it to grow and purifies ii and he is a
failure ~ corrupts and Destroys it XCI: seven-1O God enjoins upon man
the duty to "strive towards a sincere application of the din," (that is,
the fitreh of God .

or the natural code of behaviour upon which He has created mankind),
since "there is no changing (the laws of) the creation of God" XXX: 30
Also says that "In truth, the only deen recognized by God is Islam"
111:19 'Here, Islam means submission, the method of submission to these
very laws 'The Qur'an further warns that "the actions of the man who
chooses a din other than Islam will not be accepted" 111:85 The gist of
the above verses, and other references of the same subject, is that God
has guided every creature - be it man, beast or vegetable - to a state
of well-being and self-fulfillment appropriate to its individual
make-up. Thus the appropriate path for man lies in the adoption of
personal and social laws particular to his own fit rah (or innate
nature), and in avoiding people who have become "denaturalized" by
following their own notions or passions.

It is clearly underlined that f1(rah, far from denying man's feelings
and passions, accords each its proper due and allows man's conflicting
spiritual and material needs to be fulfilled in a harmonious fashion.
Thus, we may conclude that the intellect 'aql should rule man in matters
pertaining to individual or personal decisions, rather than his
feelings. Similarly, truth and justice should govern society and not the
whim of a tyrant or even the will of a majority, if that were contrary
to a society's true benefit.

From this we may conclude that only God is empowered to make laws,
since the only laws useful to man are those, which are made according to
his inherent nature. It also follows that man's needs, arising from his
outward circumstance and his inner reality, are fulfilled only by
obeying God's instructions (or laws). These needs may arise through
events beyond man's control or as a result of the natural demands of his
body. Both are encompassed in the plan of life that God has designated
for man For, as the Qur'an says, the "decision rests with God only,"
XII: 40,67 which is to say that there is no governance (of man or
society, of the inner or the outer) except that of God. Without a
specific creational plan, based on the innate disposition of man, life
would be fruitless and without meaning.

We may understand this only through belief in God and a knowledge of
his Unity, as explained in the Qur'an. From here we may proceed to an
understanding of the Day of Judgment, when man is rewarded or punished
according to his deeds. Thereafter, we may arrive at a knowledge of the
prophets and of prophetic teachings, since man cannot be judged without
being first instructed in the matter of obedience and disobedience These
three fundamental teachings are considered to be the roots of the
Islamic way of lifeTo these we may add the fundamentals of good
character and morals, which a true believer must possess, and which are
a necessary extension of the three basic beliefs mentioned above.

The laws governing daily activity not only guarantee man's happiness
and moral character but also, more importantly, increase his
understanding of these beliefs and of the fundamentals of Islam. It is
clear that a thief, a traitor, an squanderer or a libertine do not
possess the quality of innocence; nor can a miser, who hoards money, be
called a generous person. Similarly, someone who never prays or
remembers God cannot be called a believer in God and the Last Day, nor
be described as His servant.

From this we may conclude that good character flourishes when joined to
a pattern of correct actions; morals are to be found in the man whose
beliefs are in harmony with these fundamentals. A proud man cannot be
expected to believe in God nor be humble in respect to the Divine; nor
can the man, who has never understood the meaning of humanity, justice.
Mercy or compassion, believe in the Day of Rising and the Judgment
Chapter XXXV: l0 speaks of the relationship between a sincere system of
belief and a fitting character: Pure speech rises up to Him and He
raises up good deeds still further .In chapter XXX: 1O we learn again of
this relationship between belief and action:

Then evil was the consequence of those who do wrong action because they
denied the signs of Allah and they made a mock of them. To summarize,
the Qur'an is composed of the following Islamic fundamentals which
together form an interlocking whole: a primary system of belief in the
Unity of God, Prophethood and the Day of Reckoning, accompanied by a
second group of beliefs, namely, belief in the Tablet, the Pen (which
delineates the sequence of cosmic events), the rule of destiny and the
decree (without implying pre-determination), the angels, the throne of
the Creator, and, finally, in the creation of the sky, the earth and
everything between them.

Thereafter, we observe that man's well being lies in his character
being in harmony with these principlesThe shari'ah, namely the laws and
code of behaviour explained in the Qur'an and commented upon in every
detail by the model of the Prophet's life, is the means whereby a man
may practice these principles. At this point we should add that the
Prophet's family are his chosen heirs and are entrusted with the task of
exemplifying and explaining further the prophetic message and the
shari'ah after the Prophet's death. The Prophet himself has shown that
the tradition, hadith,(2) known as the ~hadith al-thaqalayn which all
sects of Islam accept, refers specifically to this matter of
succession.

**The Qur'an as a Document of Prophethood**

The Qur'an refers on several occasions to the fact that it is the word
of God that it issues from a divine source in the very words in which
the Prophet received them and which he later transmitted. The divine
nature of the Qur'an is affirmed in several verses. In LII: 33-34 we
read, "or they say that (the Prophet) is inventing it. Indeed they do
not believe. If they are truthful then let them produce words like it".
Likewise in XVII:

88 "Say (0 Muhammad), if all the jinn and mankind were to join forces
to produce something like this Qur'an they could not produce it even if
they, were to help one another. " Again, in XI: 13 "or they say he has
invented it! Say: then produce ten verses like it which you have
invented," and again in X: 38, "or the, say he has invented it.

Say: produce a single chapter like it," we find further proof. The
following challenge is made in Chapter 11:23 "and if you are in doubt
concerning that which we have revealed to our slave then produce a
chapter like ii. " Here it should be noted that the Qur'an is addressing
those who grew up with Muhammad, the man they knew to be unlettered and
untutored in the matters spoken about in the Qur'an. Despite this
knowledge, they still doubt. Another challenge is issued, (to those who
would find contradictions in the Qur'an, but obviously cannot): Will
they not reflect upon the Qur'an? If it had been from other than God,
the, would have found in ii much incongruity IV: 82.

Since everything in the world is in a state of growth and
self-perfection, then the Qur'an would of necessity lack harmony since
it was revealed over a period of twenty-three years; it would lack
harmony that is if we were to suppose that it was the work of a man
rather than of a prophet. The Qur'an, whose messages announces and
confirms that it is the work of God, also teaches us that Muhammad is a
messenger, sent by God, thus confirming the authenticity of the Prophet
In chapter XI1I: 43 God speaks Himself, as on many occasions, confirming
that He is witness and testimony to the prophecy of Muhammad: "Say God
is sufficient witness between you and me.

" The verse refers to disbelievers and defies their disbelief. In
another verse, the testimony of angels is added to that of God's: "But
God testifies concerning that which he has revealed to you; He has
revealed it in His knowledge; and the Angels also testify. And God is
sufficient witness IV: 166.


