2 -the Teachings of the Qur'an
==============================

**The universal import of the Quran**

The Qur'an is not directed towards any one particular nation, such as
the Arabs, or to a particular sect of Muslims, but to non-Islamic
societies as well as the Muslim nation as a whole. There are numerous
references to non-believers and idol-worshippers, to the People of the
Book (namely, the Jews, or The Tribe of Israel, and the Christians),
exhorting each one to Strive towards a true understanding of the Qur'an
and of Islam .

The Qur'an calls each group to Islam by providing proofs and never
stipulates that they are of Arab stock Referring to idol- worshippers,
God says, "if they repent and establish worship and pay the poor-due,
then they are your brothers in religion" IX: 11 Likewise, God talks
about the People of the Book, (Jews, Christians and we include here the
Zoroastrians), without f to them as Arabs:

Say 0 People of the Book come to an agreement between us and you: that
we shall worship none but God and that we shall ascribe no partners to
Him and that none of us shall take others for lords beside God 111:64 It
is true that before Islam spread beyond the Arabian Peninsula, Qur'anic
injunctions were obviously directed towards the Arab nation. From the
sixth year after the hijrah he migration of the Prophet from Mecca to
Medina), when the din of Islam was being propagated beyond the
peninsula, there are references which demonstrate that the Qur'an is
addressing itself to mankind in general; for example, in VI: 19, "this
Qur'an has been revealed to me that I may warn you and whomever it may
reach," and in LXVIII: 52 God says, "it is nothing else but a reminder
to the worlds.

" We read too in LXXIV: 35-36, "In truth this is one of the greatest
signs, being a warning unto men " History has amply demonstrated that
Islam has been embraced by a number of leading members of other
religions, including the idol-worshippers of Mecca, Jews, Christians and
by people from diverse communities, such as Salman of Persia, from the
Roman people, and Bil?l of Ethiopia.

**The Perfection of the Qur'an**

The Qur'an shows man the way to a realization of his goal on earth; it
describes this path in the most complete terms It is a way of correctly
viewing the reality of things; a vision -personal, social and cosmic -
based on a correct manner of behaviour and a precise method of
interaction between men. In XLVI: 30 we read that the Qur'an "guides to
the truth and a right road," meaning the road of right belief and
correct action.

On another occasion, mentioning the Torah and the New Testament, God
says, "We have revealed this Book to you with the Truth, confirming
whatever Book was before it, and We keep watch over it" V: 48 The Qur'an
thus affirms the truth of the ways of guidance taught by the earlier
prophets In chapter XLII: 13, "He has ordained for you that religion
which He commended to Noah and that which We reveal to you (Muhammad)
and that We commended to Abraham, Moses and Jesus," and in chapter XVI:
89, 'and We revealed the book to you as an exposition of all things.

" Thus we understand from these verses that the Qur'an not only
encompasses the meanings and teachings of all divine books revealed
before it, but also adds to and completes them. Every thing, which a man
needs, both in terms of his spiritual and his social life, is contained
and explained in the Qur'an

**The Eternal Quality of the Qur'an**

The perfection and completeness of the Qur'an prove that its validity
is not restricted to a particular time or place, since anything perfect
is in need of nothing to complete it. In chapter LXXXVI: l3-l4 God
confirms that the Qur'an is "a conclusive word" and not a mere
"pleasant7y. " It contains the purest of teachings concerning belief in
life-after-death, together with an exposition of the realities of
existence, while, at the same time, encompassing the fundamentals of
correct human behaviour.

Since laws governing transactions between men are directly linked to
their beliefs, such a book can obviously not be annulled or changed with
the passage of time. As He says in XVII: 105, "We have revealed the
Qur'an with Truth and it has descended with the Truth," meaning that the
revelations and their ongoing validity are inseparable from the Truth.

Thus in X: 32, "After the Truth what is there except error" and in XLI:
4l-42, "In truth it is an UN penetrable book, error may not enter in it
from before it or behind it. " In other words the Qur'an repulses, by
its own perfection and completeness, any attempt to alter it; and
neither now nor later can it be annulled or superseded. Many studies
have been made of the permanence of the validity of the laws given in
the Qur'an.

The reader is advised to consult them if he requires additional
knowledge of the subject; to pursue the matter here, (namely, the
position of the Qur'an in the lives of Muslims and the manner in which
it demonstrates this), would be outside the scope of this book.

**The Qur'an as a Self-Contained Proof**

The Qur'an, being composed of words and meanings like any other book,
explains itself. It does not remain silent when the situation of the
text demands proof. Moreover, there is no reason to believe that
Qur'anic terms mean anything other than the actual words being used.
This means that every man, possessing a certain knowledge of the Arabic
language, may dearly understand the meaning of the Qur'an just as he
understands any other words written in Arabic.

There are many verses, which are directed towards a specific group,
such as the Tribe of Israel, or the Believers, or the non-believers and,
sometimes, man in general; (they are addressed in phrases such as "you
who disbelieve" or " people of the Book" or " tribe of Israel" or "0
Mankind"). The Qur'an discourses with them, offering them proof of its
validity or challenging them to produce a book similar to it if they
doubt it to be the Word of God. Obviously it makes no sense to address
people in terms, which they do not understand, or to demand that they
produce something similar to that, which has no meaning for them.

In Chapter XLVII: 24 we read, "Why do they not reflect upon the
Qur'an," implying that if it was from other than God, people would have
found in it many inconsistencies. It is clearly indicated in the Qur'an
that verses which have a subtlety or particularity of meaning demand
that the reader reflect upon them to remove any seeming differences of
interpretation or incongruities that may appear at first inspection . It
also follows that if the verses themselves contained no apparent
meaning, there would be no point in reflecting upon them in order to
clarify the apparent problem of their interpretation. There are no
indications from other sources, (such as the traditions of the Prophet),
that demand a rejection of the outwardly manifest meaning of the Qur'an.
Some have argued that one should only refer to the commentaries of the
Prophet in elucidating the meanings of the Qur'an.

This argument is unacceptable, however, since the basis of the
Prophet's commentary and of the Imams of his family must be sought for
in the Qur'an. It is difficult to imagine that the validity of the
Qur'an is dependent on the commentaries of the Prophet or the Imams of
his family. Rather, affirmation of prophecy and imamate must be
contained in the Qur'an, which itself is the authentic proof and
document of prophecy.

This does not, however, contradict the fact that the Prophet and the
Imams of his family were responsible for clarifying those details of the
shari'ah law (Divinely revealed law), which were not apparent from the
actual text of the Qur'an. They were, likewise, entrusted with teaching
the knowledge contained in the Book, as seen in the following verse: And
we have revealed to you the Remembrance so that you may explain to
mankind that which has been revealed for them XVI: 44

A similar reflection occurs in chapter LIX: 7 where, in reference to
the code of practice and law brought by the Prophet to mankind, it
states, "And take whatever the messenger gives you. And abstain from
whatever he forbids. " In chapter IV: 64 it says, "We sent no messenger
save that h should be obeyed by God's leave" and, again, in chapter
LXII: 2 "He it is who has sent among the unlettered ones a messenger of
their own, to recite to them His revelations and to make them grow and
to teach them the Book and Wisdom.

" According to these verses, the Prophet is the appointed explainer of
the details of the shari'ah law as well as the teacher of the Qur'an.
Moreover, according to the tradition known as thaqalayn, which was
authenticated by an uninterrupted chain of narrators, the Prophet has
appointed the Imams of his own family as his successors. This is not to
deny that others also, by correctly applying the learning's of sincere
teachers, may understand the meaning of the Qur'an.

**The Inner and Outer Dimensions of the Qur'an**

In chapter IV: 36 God says, "And serve God and ascribe nothing as a
partner to Him "The verse prohibits pre-Islamic Arabs from their worship
of idols, just as chapter XXII: 30 urge them to "shun the filth of
idols, and shun lying speech. " On reflection it becomes clear that an
idol may exist in any form; therefore, idol-worship is forbidden because
it involves submission to an entity other than God. In chapter XXX VI:
60 God treats the devil as an idol when He says, "Did! Did not charge
you, you sons of Adam, that you do ~tot worship the devil. " It also
becomes clear that another form of idol-worship is submission to one's
desires or to the will of others, over and above the will of God; this
is indicated in XLV: 23 which refers to "him who makes his desire his
God. "

Thus it becomes apparent that one should turn to none other for help
than God Himself and not forget Him in any circumstances, since to do
otherwise would be to direct one's attention away from God. To submit to
others is to belittle Him and this is the very essence of idol-worship
Thus, in chapter VII: l79 God says of those who refused to worship him
"Already we have urged into hell many of the jinn and humankind, these
are the neglectful.

" The verse, "ascribe nothing So Him, "clearly forbids worships of
idols; that is to say, man may not, without God's permission, submit
himself to others including his own desires, since any such submission
would render him neglectful of God. In this way, the simple, apparent
text of the verse unfolds multiple meanings and exemplifies a feature to
be found throughout the Qur'an Thus the saying of the Prophet, (related
in the books of hadith and commentary), become clear: In truth the
Qur'an possesses an inner and outer, and the inner Contains seven
dimensions . (3)

The Wisdom Contained in the Two Facets of the Qur'an: The Inner and the
Outer

Man's primary life, namely, the temporal life of this world, is as a
bubble on the immense sea of the material; and since a] his transactions
concern the material, he is throughout his lift at the mercy of the
moving waves. All his senses are occupied~ with the material and his
thoughts influenced by sensor information. Eating, drinking, standing,
speaking, listening like all other human actions, take place in the
sphere of the material and not in the sphere of thought. Moreover, in
reflecting upon such concepts as love, enmity) ambition and nobility,
one comes to better understand them by translating them into language
derived from the senses a from actual material objects; for example, the
magnetic attraction of lovers, a burning ambition, or a man's being mine
of wisdom.

Capacity to comprehend the world of meaning, which vaster than that of
the material, varies from man to man. F one person it may be almost
impossible to imagine the won of meanings; another may perceive it only
in the mo superficial terms and, yet another, may comprehend with ea~
the most profound of spiritual concepts. One may say that the greater a
man's capacity to understand meanings, the lesser he is attached to the
world of the material and its alluring, deceiving appearance.

By his ye: Nature, each person possesses a potential for understanding
meanings and, provided that he does not deny this capacity, may be
cultivated and increased further. It is not a simple matter to reduce
meaning from one level understanding to another without losing its
sense. This particularly true for meanings possessing great subtlety why
cannot be transmitted, especially to ordinary people, witches adequate
explanation. As one example, we may mention t Hindu religion: anyone
reflecting deeply upon the vec scriptures of India and studying the
different aspects of its message will ultimately see that its basic aim
is the worship of one God.

Unfortunately this aim is explained in such a complicated manner that
the concept of oneness reaches the minds of ordinary people in the form
of idol-worship and the recognition of many gods. To avoid such
problems, it becomes necessary to communicate meanings hidden beyond the
material world in a language, which is rooted in the material 1, is and
readily comprehensible world.

Indeed some religions deprive their adherents of rights Life, accorded
to them by the religion itself: women, for example, in ied Hinduism;
Jews and Christians who, in general, are denied ory access to knowledge
of their holy books. Islam does not, deprive anyone of their rights in
the din, and man and the woman, scholar and layman, black and white are
equal in Being accorded access to their religion. God affirms this in
chapter 111:195, "Indeed 1 do not allow the iem work of an, worker, male
or female, to be lost," and, again, in s or chapter XLIX: 13, " mankind!
Truly we have created you male and etic female and have made you nations
and tribes that you may know one Another. Indeed the noblest of you in
the sight of God is the best in conduct. "

In this manner the Qur'an addresses its teachings to for mankind at
large and affirms that every man may increase odd himself in knowledge
and, thereby, perfect his own behaviour. Most In fact, the Qur'an
addresses its teachings specifically to the ease world of man. Since, as
mentioned earlier, each man has a different capacity of understanding
and since the expounding Lder- of subtle knowledge is not without danger
of misinterpreted the lion, the Qur'an directs its teachings primarily
at the level of the common man.

In this manner, the subtlest of meanings can be explained, it and
multiple meanings and ideas expressed, to the ordinary person, by
co-relating them to concrete sensory meanings; meaning, therefore, is
always inherent in the letter of the words. The Qur'an reveals itself in
a way suitable for different levels of comprehension so that each
benefits according to his own capacity. In chapter XLIH: 3-4 God
emphasizes this idea: Truly we have appointed it a lecture in Arabic so
that you may perhaps understand and indeed in the source of the Book,
which we possess, it is sublime, decisive.

God describes the different capacities of man's comprehension in the
following metaphor in chapter XIII: 17 He sends down water from the sky,
so that valleys flow according to their measure; And the Prophet, in a
famous tradition says: "We prophets talk to the people according to the
capacity of their intellects. Another result of the multiple meanings
within the Qur'an is that the verses take on significance beyond their
immediate text. Certain verses contain metaphors which indicate divine
gnosis far beyond the common man's understanding but which,
nevertheless, become comprehensible through their metaphorical form.

God says in chapter XVII: 89, "And indeed We have displayed for mankind
in this Qur'an all kind of similitudes, but most of mankind refuse
everything except disbelief "And again in chapter XXIX: 43 God talks of
metaphors as a means of expression, "As for these similitude: We coin
them for mankind, but none will grasp their meanings except the wise. "
Consequently, we must conclude that all Qur'amc teachings, which deal
with subtle profound knowledge, are in the form of similitudes.

**The Two Kinds of Qur'anic Verses The Explicit and the implicit**

In chapter XI:l God says of the Qur'an, "This is a book whose meanings
are secure. " From this we may draw the meaning to read "whose meanings
are perfected, expanded, firm and strong. " In chapter XXXIX:23, it
reads, God has revealed the fairest of statements (consistent with and
in relation to each other) and arranged in pairs (according to meaning),
which cause the flesh of those who fear their Lord to creep. In chapter
111:7 He says, "He it is who has revealed to you the Book in which are
clear revelations, (that is, verses whose meaning is immediately clear
and which Muslims use for guidance).

They are the substance of the Book and others, which are allegorical.
But those in whose heart is doubt indeed follow the allegorical seeking
dissension by seeking to explain it. None knowest its explanation except
God and those who are of sound instruction say: We believe in it, it is
all from our Lord. The first of the verses describes those sections of
the Qur'an whose meaning is explicit, clear and unambiguous, and safe
from misinterpretation. The second verse refers to all those verses
whose meanings are implicit, and which are considered allegorical.

It then proceeds to indicate that both types of verses, (the explicit,
or clear and the implicit, or allegorical), share certain common
qualities: beauty and sweetness of language, and a miraculous power of
expression, which are present in the entire Qur'an. The third verse
under consideration divides the Qur'an into two parts: the explicit and
the implicit, the clear and the allegorical, or, in Qur'anic terms, the
muhkam and the mutashabih. The ,muhkam and those verses which are
explicit, clear and immediate in their message and, therefore, incapable
of being misinterpreted; the mutashbih verses are not of this nature.

It is the duty of every firm believer to believe in and act according
to the verses, which are muhkam. It is also his duty to believe in the
verses which are mutashbih, but he must abstain from acting upon them;
this injunction is based on the premise that only those whose heart is
corrupt and whose belief is false follow the implicit, mutashbih,
verses, fabricating interpretations and, thereby, deceiving common
people.

The meanings of the Explicit and the Implicit Verses, according to the
Commentators and Scholars.

There is much difference of opinion amongst the Islamic scholars
concerning the meaning of explicit and implicit verses, with almost
twenty different views on the matter. We can, however, conclude from the
views of commentators, ranging from the time of the Prophet to the
present day, that the explicit verses are clear and unambiguous, and
that one is obliged to believe in and act according to them. The
implicit verses, on the other hand, are those, which outwardly seem to
express a meaning, but which contain a further truer meaning whose
interpretation is known only to God; man has no access to it.

However, he is enjoined to believe in them but to avoid acting upon
them. This view is held amongst the Sunni scholars. It is also
maintained y the Shi'ites scholars except they believe that the Prophet
and the Imams of his family also understood the hidden meanings. They
also maintain that the ordinary man must seek knowledge of the implicit
verses from God, the Prophet and the Imams. This view, although held by
most commentators, is in several aspects not in accord with the text of
the verse beginning, He it is who has revealed to you the Book in which
are explicit verses (whose meanings are immediately clear).


