The Method of Guidance and Explanation Used in the Rest of the Qur'an
=====================================================================

This we may attribute, firstly, to the fact that there is no verse
whose meaning is totally obscure since the Qur'an describes itself as a
light, as a guidance and as an explanation. Thus it is not befitting
that there be verses, which fail to reveal their meaning, or to
illuminate the Qur'an as a whole. We should examine again the verse,
Will they not ponder on the Qur'an. If it had been from other than God
they would have found much inconsistency in it IV: eight two.

Thus reflection on the Qur'an would remove all kinds of seeming
inconsistencies making it unacceptable to say, as do most of the
scholars that the implicit verses cannot be totally understood and that
apparent inconsistencies cannot be resolved. Other scholars say that
what is meant by the implicit verses are the letters found at the
beginning of certain chapters.

(These are known as the muqatta'ah-letters, like Alif, Lam, Mim, Alif
Lam Ra, Ha, Mim, whose real meaning is unknown). We must, however,
remember that the implicit verses are so-called when read in relation to
the explicit verses. This denotes that, accompanying the hidden meaning
of the implicit, there is a surface (or literal) meaning whereby the
real and the apparent meanings come together in intricate relationship
with one another.

It should be understood that the letters at the opening of e certain
chapters do not have any literal meaning. It seems that a group of
misguided men use the implicit verses to e mislead people, but never in
Islam has one heard of anyone trying to use the muqatta'ah-letters to do
so. Some commentators say that the meaning of the word mutash?bih, (in
the verse), refers to the famous story (5) of the Jews who wanted to
find an indication of the duration of Islam within the order of the
letters, but the Prophet used to read the letters one after the other
and so confuse their calculations. This view is also without substance
since, even if the story is true, it is neither of sufficient impact nor
conviction to be considered as an interpretation of the implicit
verses.

Whatever the Jews talked, it contained no malice because, even if the
religion, din, of Islam was for a limited period of time (and, thus,
subject to abrogation), their remarks would in no way be a criticism of
the purity and reality of Islam considering that all religions revealed
by God prior to Islam were for a specific period and open to abrogation.
Secondly, this view implies that the word ta'wil (which may be
translated as "interpretation") in the verse refers to a meaning other
than the apparent literal meaning and that it is used only as a
reference to the implicit verses.

This is correct, as we shall see in a later chapter dealing with
exegesis Ta'wil, and revelation, Tanzil (the actual text or letter of
the verse) how exegesis in Qur'anic terminology does not refer to one
meaning but to several, encompassing such terms as realization,
fulfillment, interpretation and explanation. We shall also discuss how
all-Qur'anic verses have a specific interpretation, ta'wil and not just
their explicit and implicit definitions. On examination, the words of
the explicit verses (ayah muhkamah), are seen to describe the phrase
"They are the source of the Book," meaning that the explicit verses
include the most important subjects of the Book, and the theme of the
rest of the verses is secondary and dependent upon them.

This implies that the real point intended to be conveyed by the
implicit verses refers back to the explicit verses. Thus, the meanings
of the implicit are illuminated by referring back to the source (or
explicit) verses. Thus we are left with no verses which have no obvious
indication as to their true meaning; they are either immediately clear
by virtue of their being in the class of explicit verses or, in the case
of the implicit, made clear by the other explicit verses.

As for the muqatta'ah-letters at the beginning of the chapters, they do
not have any apparent meaning since they are not words in the normal
sense and possess no meaning comprehensible to man; thus, they are
outside of the classification of explicit and implicit. Again, we would
refer the reader to an examination of the following verse in order to
emphasize the truth of our view: "And so why do they not reflect upon
the Qur'an or are there locks upon their hearts. " And, likewise, the
verse, "and why do they not reflect upon the Qur'an, of it were from
other than God they would have found much inconsistency in it.

The commentary of the imams of the prophet's family concerning the
Explicit and the Implicit Verses.

It is made clear from the different commentaries of the Imams that
there is always a way to discover the real meaning and aim of the
implicit verses. Each verse, even if it's meaning is not apparent, can
be explained by reference to other verses. Thus the real meaning of the
implicit verses can be found in relation to the explicit verses.

For instance, the verse "The Beneficent, One who is established on the
throne," XX: 5 and again the verse, "And your Lord came," LXXXIX: 22
appear to ascribe bodily characteristics to God, but when compared with
the verse, "Nothing is as His likeness," XLII: 11 it becomes clear that
the "sitting" on the throne or the "coming" of God has a meaning other
than a physical one.

The Prophet, describing the Qur'an, says in truth the Qur'an was not
revealed so that one part may contradict the other but rather was
revealed so that one part may verify the other. So that what you
understand of it then act accordingly and that which is unclear for you
then simply believe in it. (6)The Commander of the Faithful, 'All, said
that one part of the Qur'an bears witness to another and one part
clarifies the other. (7) The sixth Imam said the explicit verse is that
which one acts in accordance with, and the implicit is that which is
unclear only for the man who is ignorant of its real meaning. .

(8)From these narrations, we may conclude that the question of explicit
and implicit is relative; it is possible that a verse may seem explicit
to one person and implicit to another It is said of the eighth Imam that
he considered, "the person who refers to the implicit mutashabih, verses
in the Qur'an to the corresponding clarifying explicit verses," as
having ~found guidance to the right path. "He is also reported to have
said that, in truth in our traditions are recorded implicit verses like
the explicit of the Qur'an, so refer the implicit to its corresponding
explicit verse, or tradition, and do not follow the implicit and go
astray. (9)Thus it is clear from the traditions and, in particular, the
last tradition, that the implicit verse is one which does not contain a
clear meaning without reference to the explicit verse, and not that
there exists no means to understand Its.

**The Qur'an Possesses Revelation and Exegesis**

We shall discuss the word, exegesis, and ta'wil, in relation to three
Qur'anic verses. Firstly, in the verses concerning the implicit
Mutash?bih and the explicit verses: But those in whose hearts is doubt
pursue, in truth, that which is allegorical talking dissension by
seeking to explain it.

None know sits explanation except God 111:7. Secondly, the verses, in
truth we have brought them a scripture which we expound with knowledge,
a guidance and a mercy for a pe6ple who believe Do they await anything
but the fulfillment of it?(Here the word Ta'wil is used connoting the
appearance or clarification of meaning). On the day when the fulfillment
of it comes, those who are forgetful of ii will say: the messenger of
our Lord brought the truthVII: 52-53

Thirdly, the verse and this Qur'an is not such as could ever be
invented .

. but they denied that, the knowledge of which they could not encompass
and the interpretation (Ta'wil) of which had not yet come to them Even
so it was that those before them deny. Then see what was the Consequence
in the wrongdoers. X: 37-39 In conclusion, we should note that the word
exegesis ta'wil comes from the word awl, meaning a return.

As such, ta'wil indicates that particular meaning towards which the
verse is directed. The meaning of revelation Tanzil, as opposed to
ta'wil, is clear or according to the obvious meaning of the words as
they were revealed. The Meaning of Exegesis, According to the
Commentators and Scholars There is considerable disagreement as to the
meaning of exegesis, ta'wil, and it is possible to count more than ten
different views. There are, however, two views, which have gained
general acceptance. The first is that of the early generation of
scholars who used the word exegesis, ta'wil, as a synonyn for
commentary, or Tafsir.

According to this view, all Qur'anic verses are open to ta'wil although
according to the verse, "nobody knows its interpretation (ta'wil) except
God," it is the implicit verses. Whose interpretation (ta'wil) is known
only to God? For this reason, a number of the early scholars said that
the implicit verses are those with muqa (fa'ah-letters at the beginning
of the chapter since they are the only verses in the Qur'an whose
meaning is not known to everyone This interpretation has been
demonstrated in the previous section as being incorrect, a view that is
shared by certain of the late scholars. They argued that since there is
a way of finding out the meaning of any verse, particularly since the
muqatta'ah -letters is obviously not in the same classification as the
implicit verses then the distinction between the two (muqatta'ah and
implicit, mutash?bih) is clear.

Secondly, the view of the later scholars is that exegesis refers to the
meaning of a verse beyond its literal meaning and that not all verses
have exegesis; rather only only God knows the implicit, which's ultimate
meaning.

The verses in question here are those which refer to the human
qualities of coming, going, sitting, satisfaction, anger and sorrow
apparently attributed to God and, also, those verses which apparently
ascribe faults to the messengers and Prophets of God (when in reality
they are infallible). The view that the word exegesis refers to a
meaning other than the apparent one has become quite accepted Moreover,
within the divergence of opinion amongst scholars, exegesis has come to
mean "to transfer" the apparent meaning of a verse to a different
meaning by means of a proof called ta'wil; this method is not without
obvious inconsistencies.

(10) Although this view has gained considerable acceptance, it is
incorrect and cannot be applied to the Qur'anic verses for the following
reasons. Firstly, the verses, Do they await anything but the fulfillment
of it VII: 53 and, but they denied that, the knowledge of which they
could riot encompass and the interpretation of which had not yet come to
them X: 39 Indicate that the whole Qur'an has exegesis, not just the
implicit verses as claimed by this group of scholars.

Secondly, implied in this view is that there are Qur'anic verses whose
real meaning is ambiguous and hidden from the people, only God knowing
their real meaning. However, a book, which declares itself as
challenging and excelling in its linguistic brilliance, could hardly be
described as eloquent if it failed to transmit the meaning of its own
words. Thirdly, if we accept this view, then the validity of the Qur'an
comes under question since, according to the verse, why do they not
reflect upon the Qur'an, if it were from other than? God they would have
found in it many inconsistencies.

One of the proofs that the Qur'an is not the speech of man is that,
despite having been revealed in widely varying and difficult
circumstances, there is no inconsistency in it, neither in its literal
meaning nor in its inner meaning, and any initial inconsistency
disappears upon reflection If it is believed that a number of the
implicit verses disagree with the sound, or muhkam, or explicit, verses
this disagreement may be resolved by explaining that what is intended is
not the literal meaning but rather another meaning known only to God.
However, this explanation will never prove that the Qur'an is "not the
speech of man.

" If by exegesis we change any inconsistency in the explicit, or sound
(muhkam), verses to another meaning beyond the literal, it is clear that
we may also do this for the speech and writing of man Fourthly, there is
no proof that exegesis indicates a meaning other than the literal one
and that, in the Qur'anic verses which mention the word exegesis, the
literal meaning is not intended.

On three occasions in the story of Joseph, the interpretation of his
dream(11) is called ta'wil (exegesis). It is clear that the
interpretation of a dream is not fundamentally different from the actual
appearance of the dream; rather, it is the interpretation of what is
portrayed in a particular form in the dream. Thus Joseph saw his father,
mother and brother falling to the ground in the form of the sun, the
moon and the stars. Likewise, the king of Egypt saw the seven-year
drought in the form of seven lean cows eating the seven fat cows and
also, the seven green ears of corn and the seven dry ears Similarly, the
dreams of Joseph's two fellow-inmates in the prison: one saw himself
pouring wine for the king (in the form of the first pressing of wine),
while the second saw himself crucified (in the form of birds eating from
the bread basket on his head). The dream of the king of Egypt is related
in the same chapter, verse 43 and its interpretation, from Joseph, in
verses 47-49 when he says, you will sow seven yea rest as usual, but
what ever you reap leave it in the ear, all except a little which you
will eat.

Then after that will come a year when people will have plenteous crops
and then they will press (meaning wine and oil). The dream of Joseph's
fellow-inmates in the prison occurs in verse 36 of the same chapter. One
of the two young men says to Joseph, "I dreamt that I was carrying upon
my head bread which the birds were eating. Thus the real meaning of the
implicit verses can be found in relation to the explicit verses.

Joseph relates the interpretation of the dream in verse 41 My two
fellow-prisoners! As for one of you he will pour out wine for his Lord
to drink and as for the other, he will be crucified so that the birds
will eat from his head. In a similar fashion, God relates the story of
Moses and Khidr in the chapter "The Cave" XVIII: 71-82 Khidr made a hole
in the boats; thereafter, killed a boy and, finally, straightened a
leaning wall. After each event, Moses protested and Khidr explained the
meaning and reality of each action, which he had carried out, on the
orders of God; this he referred to as ta'wil. Thus it is clear that the
reality of the event and the dream-picture, which portrayed the
event-to-be, are basically the same: the ta'wil, or interpretation, does
not have a meaning other than the apparent one.

Likewise God says, talking about weights and measures, "Fill the
measure when you measure and weigh with a right balance, that is Proper
and better in the end," (that is, more fitting in the final
determination of the Day of Reckoning) XVII: 35 It is clear that the
word ta'wtl used here in respect to the measuring and weighing refers to
fair dealing in business practices. Thus the ta'wil used in this way is
not different from the literal meaning of the words "measuring" and
"weighing"; it merely deepens and extends the significance of the
mundane to include a spiritual dimension.

This spiritual dimension is of significance for the believer who has in
mind the reckoning of the final day together with his own day-to-day
reckoning in the affairs of trade. In another verse God again uses the
word ta'wil, and if you have any dispute concerning any matter, refer it
to God and the messenger . . . that is better and more fitting in the
end It is clear that the meaning of ta'wil and the referring of the
dispute to God and His messenger are to establish the unity of Society
and to show how each action or event in a community has a spiritual
significance. Thus, the ta'wil refers to a tangible ordinary reality and
is not in opposition to the actual text in the verses, which refers to
the dispute.

In all, there are sixteen occasions in the Qur'an in which the word
ta'wil is used but on no occasion does it have a meaning other than the
literal text. We may say, therefore, that the word ta'wil is used to
extend the idea expressed to include a further meaning which, (as will
be made clear in the next section), is still in accordance with the
actual word ta'wil occurring in the verse. Thus, in the light of these
examples, there is no reason why we should take the word ta'wil in the
verse about the explicit muhkam, and implicit, mutashabih, meanings to
indicate "a meaning basically other than the apparent meaning. "

**The Meaning of Exegesis in the Tradition of the Qur'anic Sciences**

Thus the real meaning of the implicit verses can be found in relation
to the explicit verses. What is apparent from the verses in which the
word ta'wil occurs is that ta'wil does not indicate a literal meaning?
It is clear that the actual words of the dream described in chapter XII,
"Joseph", do not in them selves contain the literal interpretation of
the dream; the meaning of the dream becomes clear from the
interpretation.

And, likewise, in the story of Moses and Khidr, the actual words of the
story are not the same as the interpretation, which Khidr gave Moses.
Moreover, in the verse, fill the measure when you measure and weigh with
a right balance The language does not in itself indicate the particular
economic conditions, which we are intended to understand.

Again, in the verse And if you have a dispute concerning any matter
then refer it to God and the messenger there is no immediate literal
indication that what is meant is the Unity of Islam Thus, although the
words indicate something not essentially different from their literal
meaning, there is, nevertheless, in all the verses the same shifting of
perspective, namely, from the actual words to the intended meaning
Moreover, all the meanings are based on a real situation, an actual
physical event. In the case of the dream, the interpretation has an
external reality, which appears before its actual occurrence in a
special form to the dreamer. Likewise, in the story of Moses and Khidr,
the interpretation that the latter gives is, in fact, a reality, which
is to take place as a result of his action.

Therefore, the interpretation of the event is rooted in the event. In
the verse, which orders man to fair dealing and The Teachings of the
Qur'an measuring, the aspect of the verse is a reality, which appears as
a social benefit. Thus the order is connected to the effect it is
supposed to have in the raising up of society and, in particular, of
trade. In the verse concerning referral of the dispute to God and His
messenger, the meaning is again fixed to reality, namely, the
spiritualization of the life of the community.

To conclude, we may say that interpretation of each verse springs from
a reality; the interpretation looks forward to or, in a subtle way,
actually brings into being the reality it is talking about. Thus it's
meaning both contains and springs from a future or ulterior event. Just
as the interpreter makes the interpretation meaningful, so the
manifestation of the interpretation is already a reality for the
interpreter.

The idea is also present in the form of the Qur'an since this sacred
book has as its source realities and meanings other than the material
and physical or, we may say, beyond the sensory level Thus it expresses
meanings, which are more expansive than those contained in the words and
phrases used by man in the material world Although these realities and
meanings are not contained in the literal explanation of man, the Qur'an
uses the same language to inform man of the unseen and to produce
correct belief and good action.

Thus, through belief in the unseen, in the last day and in the meeting
with God, man adopts a system of morals and a quality of character,
which allows him to achieve happiness and well-being. In this way the
Qur'an produces a spiritual effect, which, in turn, produces a physical
social change, the importance of which will become clear on the Day of
Resurrection and the meeting with God. There is further reference to
this same theme when God says in chapter XLIII: 2-4, By the Book which
makes plain.

Take heed, we have appointed it a lecture in Arabic that perhaps you
will understand. And indeed the source of the Book, which we possess, it
is indeed sublime, decisive. Is It is sublime, in that the ordinary
understanding cannot fully comprehend it, and decisive in that it cannot
be faulted. The relationship of the last part of the verse to the
meaning of exegesis ta'wil (as we have discussed above) is clear. It
says, in particular, "perhaps you will understand," implying that one
may or may not understand it; it does not imply that one will understand
the book fully, merely by studying it.

As we have seen in the verse concerning the explicit muhkam and the
implicit mutash?bih, knowledge of exegesis ta'wil, particular to God;
moreover, when in this same verse corrupt men are blamed for following
the implicit mutashabih, verse and for intending to sow dissension and
conflict by searching for an exegesis, ta'wil, or special
interpretation, it does no state that they necessarily find it The
exegesis of the Qur'an is a reality, or several realities, which are to
be found in the Source Book, the Book of Decree with God; the Source
Book is part of the unseen and far front the reach of corrupters.

The same idea is treated again ii chapter LVI: 75-80 when God says,
Indeed I swear by the places of the Stars - And truly that is surely a
tremendous oath ~f you but knew - that this is indeed a noble Qur'an, in
a book kept hidden, which none touch except the purified, a revelation
from the Lord of the Worlds. It is clear that these verses ~establish
for the Qur'an two aspects, namely the position of the hidden book
protected from being touched and the aspect of revelation which I
understandable by the people. What are of particular interest t us in
this verse is the phrase of exception, "except tire purified According
to this phrase, we can arrive at an understanding the reality of the
exegesis of the Qur'an.

This positive view of man's capability to understand the Qur'an does
not conflict with the negation of the verse, "An no one knows its ta'wil
except God. " Since the comparison of the two verses produces a whole,
which is independent, an harmonious.

Thus we understand that God is alone understanding these realities, yet
one may come to know these truths by His leave and teaching Knowledge of
the unseen is, according to many verses, the special domain of God but
in chapter LXXII: 26-27, those who are worthy are excepted from this:
"He is the knower oft unseen and He reveals to no one His secret, except
to every messenger whom He has chosen. " Again we conclude that
knowledge of the unseen is particular to God and that it is fitting for
no or except Him and for those he gives leave to.

Thus the purified amongst men take the verse concerning the "purified
ones" as leave to enter into contact with the reality of the Qur'an. In
a similar way we read in chapter XXXIII: 33, "God's wish is but to
remove uncleanliness from you, people of the Household, and clean you
with a thorough cleaning. " This verse was revealed, (according to a
sound tradition with an unbroken chain of transmission), specifically
with regard to the family of the Prophet.

**The Existence of Abrogating and Abrogated Verses in the Qur'an**

Among the verses in the Qur'an containing orders or laws, there are
verses that abrogate verses previously revealed and acted upon. These
abrogating verses are called nasikh and those whose validity they
terminate are called mansükh. For example, at the beginning of the
Prophet's mission, Muslims were ordered to cultivate peace and
friendship with the people of the Book, "Forgive and be indulgent
(towards them) until God gives command," 11:109. Some time later,
fighting was allowed and the order to establish peace was abrogated:
Fight aga. XI: 29 The common notion of abrogation, that is, a cancelling
of one law or code by another, is based on the idea that a new law is
needed because of a mistake or shortcoming in the previous one. It is
clearly inappropriate to ascribe a mistake in law making to God, Who is
perfect, and whose creation admits of no flaws.

However, in the Qur'an, the abrogating verses mark the end of the
validity of the abrogated verses because their heed and effect was of a
temporary or limited nature. In time the new law appears and announces
the end of the validity of the earlier law. Considering that the Qur'an
was revealed over a period of twenty-three years in ever-changing
circumstances, it is not difficult to imagine the necessity of such
laws. It is in this light that we should regard the wisdom of abrogation
within the Qur'an: And when we put a revelation in place of (another)
revelation and God knows best what He reveals - they say: you are just
inventing it. Most of them do not know. Say: The Holy Spirit (Gabriel)
has revealed it from your hand with truth and as a guidance and good
news for Those who have surrendered (to God) XVI: 101-102.

**Applicability and Validity of the Qur'an**

Bearing in mind that the Qur'an is valid for all times, the verses
revealed in special circumstances informing Muslims c their specific
duties are also valid for those who, in future experience the same
circumstances. Similarly, those verse which praise or reproach certain
qualities, and prom~ reward or threaten punishment accordingly, are
applicable all ages and places. Thus the meaning of a verse is not limit
to the circumstances or the times of its revelation. Similar
circumstances occurring subsequent to the revelation of a verse are to
be followed; this is known in Qur'anic Science as jary, or
applicability. The fifth Imam said, "we; a verse after its revelation to
pass away with the passing away of Mi people, then nothing would have
remained of the Qur'an. " As long the heavens and the earth exist, there
are verses for eve: People, wherever they be, which they may read and
act upon for the benefit or reject at their loss. (12)


