Qur'anic Commentary, Its Advent and Development
===============================================

Commentary on the words and expressions used in ii Qur'an began at the
time of the first revelation. The Prophet himself undertook the teaching
of the Qur'an and d explanation of its meanings and intent. Thus, in
chapter XVI: 44 God says, "And we have revealed you the Remembrance that
you may explain to mankind that which I been revealed for them.

" And He says in LXII: 2, "He it is Whole sent among the unlettered
ones a messenger of their own, to recite to the His revelations and to
make them grow and to teach them the Scripture and wisdom. "At the time
of the Prophet a group of men, on his order were instructed to read,
record and learn the Qur'an by heat When the Prophet's companions passed
away, other Muslim took over the responsibility of learning and teaching
the Qur'an; and so it has continued until the present day.

**The Science of Qur'anic Commentary and the Different Groups of
Commentators**

After the death of the Prophet a group of his companions, including
Ubayy ibn Ka'b, 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'üd, Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah a1-An~?ri,
Abü Sa'id al-Khudri, 'Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar,
Anas, Abü Hurayrah, Abü MUs?, and, above all, the famous 'Abd Allah ibn
'Abb?s, were occupied with the Science of Commentary. Just as they had
heard the Prophet explaining the meanings of the verses, they would
transmit it orally to other trustworthy persons.

The traditions specifically concerned with the subject of Qur'anic
verses number over two hundred and forty; many were transmitted through
weak chains of transmission and the texts of some have been rejected as
incorrect or forged. Sometimes the transmission would include
commentaries based on personal judgments rather than on a narration of
the actual sayings, hadith, from the Prophet. The later Sunni
commentators considered this kind of commentary as part of the body of
Sayings of The Prophet, since the companions were learned in the science
of Qur'anic commentary. They argued that these companions had squired
their knowledge of this science from the Prophet himself and that it was
unlikely they would say anything, which they themselves had invented.
There is, however, no absolute proof for their reasoning.

A large proportion of these sayings, or traditions, about the reasons
and historical circumstances of the revelation of verses do not possess
an acceptable chain of narration. It should be noted that many of the
narrators like Ka'b al-Akhb?r, were learned companions who had belonged
to the Jewish faith before accepting Islam. Moreover, it should not be
overlooked that Ibn Abbas usually expressed the meanings of verses in
poetry.

In one of his narrations over two hundred questions of Nafi' ibn
al-Azraq are replied to in the form of poetry; al-Suyüti in his book,
al-Itqin, related one hundred and ninety of these questions. It is
evident, therefore, that many of the narrations made by the commentators
amongst the companions cannot be counted as actual narrations from the
Prophet himself; therefore, such additional material related by the
companions must be rejected.

The second group of commentators was the companions of the followers
(t?bi'ün), who were the students of the companions. Amongst them we find
Muj?hid, Sa'id ibn Jubayr, 'Ikrimah and 1?ahb?k. Also from this group
were Hasan a1-Basri, 'Ata' ibn Abi Rabab, 'Ata' ibn Abi Muslim, Abü
al-'Aliyah, Muhammad ibn Ka'b al-Qurazi, Qatadah, 'Atiyah, Zayd ibn
Aslam, Ta'us al-Yamani13) The third group were comprised of the students
of the second group, namely, Rabi' ibn Anas, 'Abd al-Rahm?n ibn Zayd ibn
Aslam, Abü Salib al-Kalbi and others.

(14)The tabi'ün sometimes narrated the commentary on a verse as a
tradition of the Prophet or of the companions and, sometimes, they
explained its meaning without attributing a narrator to the source, this
they did especially when there was any doubt as to the identity of the
narrator. The later commentators treat these narrations as of the
Prophet, but count them as mawq4f in their science of the levels of
hadith (that is as a tradition whose chain of narration does not reach
back to the Prophet).

The fourth group comprised the first compilers of commentaries, like
Sufyan ibn 'Uyaynah,(15) Waki' ibn al-Jarrah, Shu'bah al-Ilajjaj and
'Abd ibn I3umayd; others from this group include Ibn Jarir al-Tabari,
the author of the famous Qur'anic Commentary. (16) This group recorded
the sayings of the companions and the followers of the companions with a
chain of narrators in their works of commentary; they avoided expressing
personal opinions except, perhaps, Ibn Jarir al-Tabari who sometimes
expressed his views by indicating his preference when discussing two
similar traditions. The basis of the work of later groups may be traced
to this group.

The fifth group omitted the chain of narrators in their writings and
contented themselves with a simple relation of the text of the
traditions. Some scholars regard these commentators as the source of
varying views in the commentaries by connecting many traditions to a
companion or a follower without verifying their validity or mentioning
their chain of narration. Consequently, confusion has arisen allowing
many false traditions to enter the body of traditions, thus undermining
the reputation of this section of hadith literature. Careful)
examination of the chains transmission of the traditions leaves one in
doubt as to the extent of the deceitful additions and false testimonies.
Many conflicting traditions can be traced to one companion or follower
and many traditions, which are complete fabrications, may be found
amongst this body of narrations.

Thus reasons for the revelation of a particular verse, including the
abrogating and abrogated verses, do not seem to accord with the actual
order of the verses. No more than one or two of the traditions are found
to be acceptable when submitted to such an examination.

It is for this reason that Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who himself was born
before this generation of narrators, said, "Three things have no sound
base:

military virtues, bloody battles and the traditions pertaining to
Qur'anic commentary. " Imam al-Sh?fi'i relates that only about one
hundred traditions from Ibn 'Abb?s have been confirmed as valid. The
sixth group consists of those commentators who appeared after the growth
and development of the various Islamic Sciences and each undertook the
study of Qur'anic commentary according to his specialization: al-Zajj?j
studied the subject from the grammatical point of view; al-W?hidi and
Abü Hayy?n(17) investigated the verses by studying the inflection of the
verbs, the vowels and the diacritical points.

There is also commentary on the rhetoric and eloquence of the verses by
al-Zamakhshari(18) in his work entitled alKo4uhaf. There is a
theological discussion in the "Grand Commentary" of Fakhr al-Din
al-R?zi. (19) the gnosis of Ibn al-'Arabi and 'Abd al-Razz?q
al-K?sh?ni(20) treated in their commentaries. Other narrators, like
al-Tha'labi, record the history of transmission of the traditions(21)
.

Some commentators, among them al-Qurtubi, (22) concentrate on aspects
of feqh (jurisprudence). There also exists a number-of commentaries
composed of many of these sciences, such as Ruh al-bayan by Shaykh
Ism?'il Haqqi, (23) Ruh al-ma'?ni by Shih?b al Din Mahmüd al Alüsi
al-Baghdadi (24) Ghari'ib al-qur'an by Ni; ?m al-Din al-Nis?büri (25)
This group rendered a great service to the Science of Qur'anic
commentary in that it brought the Science out of a state of stagnation
(characteristic of the fifth group before it), and developed it into a
Science of precise investigation and theory.

However, if one were to examine closely the precision of this group's
research, one would see. That much of its Qur'anic commentary imposes
its theories onto the Qur'an rather than allowing the content of the
verses to speak for themselves.

**The Methods Used by the Shi'ites Commentators and their Different
Groupings**

All the groups mentioned above are Sunni commentators. Their method,
used in the earliest commentaries of this period, was based on ijtihad,
that is, the reports of the companions and the followers of the
companions were examined according to certain rules in order to reach an
acceptable understanding of the text. This resulted in varying opinions
amongst those making ijtihad, and caused disorder, contradiction and,
even, fabrication to enter into the body of the traditions.

The method employed by the Shi'ites commentators, however, was
different, with the result that the patterning of the groups was also
different. The Shi'ites commentators in their study of a verse of the
Qur'an, viewed the explanation given by the Prophet as proof of the
meaning of the verse, they did not accept the saying of the companions,
or the followers, as indisputable proof that the tradition was from the
Prophet. The Shi'ites commentators only recognized as valid an unbroken
chain of narration from the Prophet and through members of his family.
Accordingly, in using and transmitting the verses concerning Qur'anic
commentary, they restricted themselves as to the use of traditions
transmitted by the Prophet and by the Imams of the Prophet's family.
This has given rise to the following groups:

The first group comprises those who have learned these traditions from
the Prophet and from the Imams of the Prophet's family, studying and
recording them according to their own method but not in any particular
order. Among them we may mention such scholars as Zar?rah, Muhammad ibn
Muslim, Ma'rüf and Jarir who were companions of the fifth and sixth
Imams (26) The second group comprises the first compilers of the
commentaries, like Fur?t ibn Ibr?him al-Küfi, Abü Hamzah al-Thumali,
Muhammad al-'Ayy?shi, 'All ibn Ibrahim 'S al-Qummi and al-Nu'm?ni who
lived between the second and fourth centuries after Hjjrah. (27the
method of this group was similar to that of the fourth Sunni group of
Commentators.

Thus, they avoided any. Kind of ijtih?d or passing of judgment. We
should remember that the Imams of the Prophet's family were living
amongst Muslims and available for questioning (on matters of commentary,
for example) for a s. period of almost three hundred years. Thus the
first groups us were not divided chronologically but rather according to
their he relationship with the Imams.

There are very few who recorded the tradition without a rig chain of
transmission. As an example, we should mention one of the students of
aI-'Ayyashi who omitted to record the of chains of transmission. It was
his work, instead of the original f aI-'Ayyashi which came into common
use.

The third group comprises masters of various sciences, like he
al-Sharif al-Rezi(28)who provided a commentary concerned with Qur'anic
language and Shaykh al-Tusi who wrote a en commentary and analysis on
metaphysical matters. (29) Included, too, is sadr al-Din al-Shir?zi's
philosophic work,(30)s al-Maybudi al-KünAbAdi's gnostic commentary (31)
and 'Abd . 'All al-Huwai's commentary Nur al-thaqalayn.

(32) Hashim Alan Bakir?ni composed the commentary al-Burhdn(33) and
al-Fayd tgh al-Kashani compiled the work known as al-Safl (34) There
were others who brought together many different themes to their
commentaries, like Shaykh al-Tabarsi who in his Majma' al-bayan (35)
researches different fields of language, rise grammar, Qur'an
recitation, gnosis of death, after-life and paradise, and knowledge of
the traditions.

**How Does the Qur'an Lend It self to Interpretation?**

The answer to this question is contained in the previous section where
we discussed the eternal validity of the Qur'an: It speaks to, instructs
and guides man now as it did in the past. As we have seen, the whole
text of the Qur'an is a challenge to mankind and particularly to the
enemies of Islam in that the Qur'an itself is proof of its own argument;
it announces itself as a light, an illumination and an explanation of
all things.

Thus a document, which states and demonstrates that it is
self-illuminating, hardly needs others to illuminate it. As proof that
it is not the speech of man, the Qur'an says that it is a harmonious
speech, without the slightest inconsistency and any seeming
inconsistency may be removed through reflection on the Qur'an itself. If
it were not the word of God, the Qur'an would not be as clear as it
is.

Moreover, if such speed needed something or someone else to explain its
meaning and purpose, it would neither be the proof nor the absolute
authority that it is so obviously is. This clarity is absolute, even if
a seemingly contradictory passage becomes the object of dispute; it
could be understood by cross-reference to the text of the Qur'an For
instance, at the time of the Prophet, such matters could be referred to
him since his knowledge of the Qur'an was perfect and he did not need to
refer to other verses for clarification. Those who insisted on
disagreeing, or disbelieving in the Prophet's fallibility, were not
satisfied.

Therefore, commentaries, which solve problems of interpretation by
quoting the commentaries of the Prophet, without giving proofs from
other Qur'anic verses, are useful only for those who believe in
Prophethood and the Prophet's infallibility. These people do not go
unmentioned in the Qur'an; we are familiar with the following verse, if
it had been from other than God then they would have found many
inconsistencies in it. This is a clear argument against those who would
seek for inconsistencies in the Qur'an and find fault with the Prophet
.

The Qur'an itself declares that the commentary and explanation of the
Prophet is valid while the Prophet himself has confirmed the validity of
the Qur'anic commentary of the Imams. We may summarize this by saying
that in the Qur'an some verses may be explained by comparison with other
verses and some by using the instructions and teachings of the Prophet
and the Imams. The latter commentaries are not, of course, different
from the explanation, which is produced by comparing and analysing
different verses.

**Conclusion**

There are three roads open to us when making commentary upon the
Qur'an. Firstly, by using knowledge that one already possesses.
Secondly, with the help of the sayings of the Prophet or Imams Thirdly,
by using a combination of methods: by reflection and analysis, or by
allowing the verse to become clarified by comparing it to other verses,
or by use of the sayings of the Prophet and the Imams, whenever
possible. The third way is the one, which we have outlined in the last
section and it is this way, which the Prophet himself and the Imams of
his family indicate in their teachings. (36) as we have seen, the
Prophet said that, "The verses were revealed to confirm each other," and
Imam 'Ali said that "One part of the Qur'an explains another and one
part witnesses to the other.

"It is, moreover, clear that this method of commentary is other than
that warned against by the Prophet when he said, "Whoever makes a
commentary upon the Qur'an according to his own opinion prepares for
himself a place in the Fire. (37) this method uses the Qur'an to explain
itself and is not based merely on explanation arising from whim or fancy
The first method is unacceptable and exemplifies commentary based on
opinion, except in cases where it agrees with the third method. The
second method is the one used by the early scholars and for many
centuries afterwards, and is still in use amongst both Sunni and
Shi'ites scholars of the traditions of the Prophet.

This method is limited, considering the vast nature of the subject and
the countless number of questions, (both general and particular),
arising from over six thousand verses. Where, one asks, is the answer to
such questions? Where is the solution to so many intricate and
perplexing questions? Or, should we refer to the body of tradition
concerning the verses? Let us not forget that the total number of
traditions of the Prophet accepted and transmitted by the Sunni scholars
number no more than two hundred and fifty; we should also remember that
many of them are weak and some even totally unacceptable.

It is true that the traditions of the Prophet and the Imams transmitted
by the Shi'ites scholars number a thousand and that amongst them are to
be found a considerable number which are fully trustworthy.
Consideration of these traditions is not enough, however, given the
countless questions, which arise, and the many Qur'anic verses that are
not even mentioned in this body of traditions. Should one refer in such
matters to the appropriate verses? As we have explained, this is not
acceptable according to the method under consideration here.

Should one simply abstain from investigation and imagine that the need
for knowledge is non-existent? In this case, what is one to understand
by the verse, and we reveal the Book to you as an exposition of all
things, XVI: 89 Which is clear proof that the Qur'an itself is not a
mystery but rather explains, among other things, itself, by its own
light? Chapter IV: 82 contains the injunction, "Will they not ponder on
the Qur'an. " Similarly, in chapters XLVII: 24 and XXXVIII: 29 "(This
book) is a Book that we have revealed to you, full of blessing, that you
ma, ponder its revelation and the men of understanding may reflect "
Likewise in Chapter XXIII: 68, "Have the, not pondered the word, or has
something come to them which did not come to their forefathers.

" What are we intended to understand by these verses? How are we to act
in the light of the totally trustworthy traditions of the Prophet and
the Imams in which they advise us to refer to the Qur'an itself in case
of problems of interpretation and discordance of opinion? According to
many well-known traditions of the Prophet, transmitted in unbroken
chains of transmission, one is obliged to refer the tradition to the
Book of God; if the tradition is in accordance with the Book, then it is
accepted and used in commentary and, if in disagreement, it is
rejected.

It is clear that the meaning of these traditions is applicable when one
discovers through the Science of Commentary that the inner meaning of
one verse is contrary to what is contained in another verse. In this
case, one must reject what one has discovered through the study of
commentaries. These traditions are the best proof that the Qur'an, like
speech or writing in general, has meaning and will always have meaning,
even when studied independently of the traditions. Thus it is the duty
of the commentators to take into account and reflect upon the traditions
of the Prophet and Imams concerning Qur'anic verses but only use those
traditions, which are in accordance with the verse under scrutiny.

**An Example of Commentary on the Qur'an with the Aid of the Qur'an**

On four occasions in the Qur'an God says, "Allah is the creator of all
beings," XXXIX: 62. The meaning is clear on each occasion; God is
stating that everything man may possibly imagine in the world has been
created by him and is sustained by Him. However, one should not ignore
the fact that in hundreds of verses the Qur'an affirms the existence of
cause and effect and attributes the action of every doer to the
immediate cause.

Thus the effect of the burning of fire is a direct result of the fire
itself, the growing of plants, the action of the plants, the falling
rain caused by the state of the sky; the actions which man chooses to
undertake are, according to the Qur'an, the result (and consequent
responsibility) of man. We may also say that the doer of any action is
the one responsible for that action, but God is the giver of existence,
the Creator of deeds and the owner of deeds. Keeping in mind this
general relationship between the Creator and His creation, we may read
in chapter XXXII: 7 "Who made all things beautiful and good which we
created.

" When we join this verse to the previous one we see that beauty and
goodness necessarily accompany His creation and so anything, which has
existence in the cosmos, is also good and beautiful. We should not
forget, however, that in many verses, the Qur'an affirms the existence
of good and its opposite, evil, useful things and harmful things, beauty
and ugliness; and it enumerates many bad actions, wrong doers and bad
events These are all, however, negative aspects of the human character
and are mentioned as a measure of man; they are relative and not
intended as proof that the creation of man basically bad.

For example, the snake or the serpent harmful but only to man and
animals who suffer the effects its sting; to stones and earth it is
harmless. Bitter taste ar foul smell is unpleasant, but only to the
human sense of task and smell, not to all animals. Certain behaviour may
at time~ appear wrong but this is often the result of observing human
behaviour in relation to one particular society of men; i another
society or circumstance it may not be considered wrong.

Indeed, if we dispense for a moment with those negati~ aspects of man's
character which are secondary or relative I the miracle and perfection
of His creation, we witness only it beautiful symmetry and proportion of
the cosmos in ii entirety and the amazing beneficence of the Creator.

Word is not able to describe this beauty since they themselves ai part
of this world of beauty. In reality the above-mentioned verses awake man
to a awareness of the relative nature of beauty and ugliness; the invite
him to a comprehension of absolute beauty and prepaid him for an
understanding of creation as a whole. In fact, their are Qur'anic verses
which explain or comment upon it different aspects of creation in the
universe, either as isolate individual examples or as groupings and
classes.

Each creation, whether a single manifestation or joined to a large~
structure and patterning, is a sign and indication of Which ever way we
regard creation, it all points to existence of God. This way of
understanding or seeing the universe and its signs, leads to an
appreciation of the stupendous beauty which encircles the whole world
and allows us to realize that it is H beauty, emanating from the domain
of His power, and made visible in the signs of the skies and the earth.
Each aspect the cosmos lends beauty and dimension to everything
surrounding it, yet at the same time it is insignificant in relation to
the whole.

The Qur'an affirms in other verses that perfection and beauty manifest
himself from the domain of his power thus He says in chapter XL: 65 "He
is the Living One. There is god save Him," and in 11:165 ". power
belongs completely God," and in IV:l39, "Truly all power belongs to
God," and "I am the knower, the All-Powerful " On another occasion we
read "And He is the Hearer, the Seer," and in XX: eight, "Allah! There
is no god save Him. His are the most beau4ful names. " We realize from
these verses that the beauty, which manifests itself in the visible
world, has its reality in the domain of His power and grandeur. All
other beauty, all other power, is illusory or metaphorical of His power.
In affirmation of this explanation, the Qur'an states that the beauty
and perfection created by man is limited and temporal but that of God
boundless and eternal. God emphasizes that all creation is from Him and
under His power. In chapter LIV: 49, "Truly we have created everything
by measure" and in the chapter XV: 21, "And there is not a thing with us
but there are stores of it. And we do not send it down except in
appointed measure.

" Careful observation reveals that the Book itself declares its own
perfection and beauty, that it encompasses all aspects of creation and
the Creator, and that there is no fault or shortcoming in it. Such is
the perfection of the Qur'an, which itself is one of the signs of God,
that it makes the reader forget himself in rapturous appreciation of its
beauty.

This we read in 11:165 "Those who believe are stauncher in their love
of God. " Love, of its very nature, demands the self and the giving over
of the self to God. It demands the handing over of one's affairs
completely to Him and allowing Him to be one's Lord: "And Allah is the
protecting Friend of the believers," 111:68 This idea is also contained
in 11:257, which declares, "God is the Protecting Friend of I/rose who
believe. He brings them out of darkness into light," and also in VI:
122, "Is he who was dead and We have raised him to life and set for him
a light in which he walks among men . . .

"Likewise, we read in LVIII: 22, "As for such, He has written faith
upon their hearts and has strengthened them with a spirit from Him. "
This spirit, this new life and light, is given by God to the i~~an who
perceives reality and truth and who understands the path of happiness
and well being in society. In another verse in LVII: 28, He explains the
effect of such light: "0 you who believe! Be mindful of your duty to God
and put faith in His messenger. He will give you twofold of His mercy
and will appoint for you a light in which you shall walic. " Again, in
another verse, He makes a commentary on "faith in the Prophet" by
explaining it as submission and obedience to Him; chapter 111:31, "Say
(0 Muhammad, to mankind): If you love God follow me; God will love
you.

" The nature of this path is explained in chapter VII: 157, Those who
follow the messenger the Prophet, who can neither read nor write, whom
they will find described in the Torah and the Gospels (which are) with
them. He will rejoin in them that which is right and forbid them that
which is wrong. He will make laulul for them all good things and
prohibit for them only the foul; and He will relieve them of their
burden and the fitters they used to wear. Still more vividly, the path
is explained in another verse, which is also a commentary on the
previous verse XXX:

30, So let your purpose (0 Muhammad) for the din (of Islam) as a man by
nature upright - the nature of God on which he has created man. There is
no altering God's creationThat is the right way of life, but most men to
not know. ."The right way of life, or din refers to the correct path for
society to follow for its well-being and happiness. According to this
verse, the way of Islam is also the way desired by the Creator for
man.

In other words, the legislative framework given to man by God is the
very framework, which is appropriate for the creature man. This divine
law is in complete harmony with the nature of man, living a life of
piety and obedience. God says in another verse XCI: 7-8, "And a soul and
Him who perfected it. And inspired it (with conscience of) what is wrong
for it and (what is) right. " The Qur'an is the only revealed book,
which equates the happiness and well being of man with a pure and
sincere way of life. Moreover, unlike other religions, Islam does not
separate worship of God from the actual programmed of living; it
establishes the word din to mean not only religion but also life in
general as well, the actual day to day routine of man, both on a
personal and social level.

The Qur'an establishes a programmed of living which is in accord with
the functioning and the reality of the cosmos, and the Qur'an mentions
many of the benefits and virtues to be expected by the man of God and
the lovers of Truth, including a certainty of faith and tranquility of
the heart.

**The Validity of the Commentary of the Prophet and the Imams From**

an indication in the Qur'an itself, the commentary of the Prophet and
the Imams, (as discussed in the previous sections), is established as
being absolutely true. Authentication of the sayings of the Prophet and
the Imams is clearly established by the existence of fully trustworthy
chains of transmissions. A tradition may not, however, be recognized as
totally acceptable if it has been transmitted by one chain of narration
only. The validity of the tradition may be disputed amongst the Muslim
Scholars of Commentary:

amongst the Sunni's a tradition of a single chain of transmission,
classified in their terms as ~a/jih (sound), must be accepted and acted
upon; among the Shi'ites scholars a tradition with a single undisputed
chain of transmission is also accepted as a proof. However, in the laws
of the shari'ah it is not valid and must be investigated and checked
before use as a proof. Author's Note: The previous section has been
specifically about the use of commentary or explanation in order to
arrive at the true meaning of a verse. This includes study of the
literal meanings and those hidden in metaphor. It does not include an
explanation or a discussion of the linguistic and literal aspects or the
science of Qur'an recitation since these do not affect the meaning.


