3-the Revelation of the Qur'an
==============================

**General Beliefi of Muslim's concerning the Revelation of the
Qur'an**

More than any other revealed book, especially the Torah and the New
Testament, the Qur'an describes the details of the revelation, the
transmittance and even accounts of the experience of the revelation. The
general belief of Muslims concerning the revelation, based on the
Qur'an, is that the text of the Qur'an is the actual speech of God
transmitted to the Prophet by one of His chosen angels.

The name of this angel, or heavenly being, is Gabriel or the Faithful
Spirit. He transmitted the word of God over a period of twenty-three
years to the Prophet. He would bring the divine instructions to the
Prophet, who would relate them faithfully to the people using the same
words in the form of a verse.

The Prophet thus used the meaning of the verses to call the people to
an understanding of faith, of belief, of social laws and of individual
duties. These instructions from God to His messenger are known as the
Prophecy, or the message; the Prophet transmitted this message without
making any addition to or detraction from it in any way.

**The View of Contemporary Non-Muslim Writers concerning the Revelation
and Prophecy**

Most contemporary writers who take an interest in different religions
and ideologies adopt the following view of the Qur'an: they say the
Prophet was a social genius who appeared to save society from the throes
of decline into savagery and to raise it up in the cradle of
civilization and freedom. They claim also that he called men to his own
ideas of pure and sincere behavior by giving them a comprehensive
religious form and order. They affirm that he had a pure soul and
tremendous ambition; that he lived in a particularly dark And ignorant
age, where only the law of force and foolish singing of verse, social
chaos and selfishness, stealing, marauding and savagery were to be
seen.

They describe how he was troubled by witnessing such things and,
sometimes when overcome by the pain of such sights, he would withdraw
from men and pass days alone in the cave in the Tih?mah mountains; he
would marvel at the sky and its shining stars, the earth, the mountains,
the sea, the desert and all the precious means placed at the disposal of
man by the Creator; he would be grieved at the bad behaviour and
ignorance of those around him, who had thrown away a life of well-being
and happiness for a tormented succession of bestial habits.

This feeling was always present with the Prophet; he bore this pain and
vexation up to his fourtieth year when, according to these contemporary
non-Muslim writers, he formed a plan to save his fellow-men from their
miserable state of nomadic wandering, rebellious independence,
selfishness and lawlessness This plan, called the religion of Islam, was
the most suitable one for the times.

The Prophet being of pure and sincere character, realized that his
chaste thoughts were the Word of God and Divine Revelation which were
infused in him through his virtuous nature. His good will and benevolent
spirit, from which his thoughts exuded and established peace in his
heart, was called the Spirit of Trustworthiness and Gabriel, the angel
of revelation Furthermore, according to this contemporary view of
Muhammad, he perceived the forces of good and happiness in nature as
Angels and all the forces of bad as Satan and the finn (invisible
entities).

He called his own task, which he had undertaken according to his own
conscience, Prophethood and himself, the deliverer of the divine
message. This explanation, however, comes from those writers who affirm
the existence of God or at least some kind of nature-force, and attach a
certain importance to the religion of Islam, albeit in the name of just
and unbiased assessment. Those, however, who deny outright the existence
of a Creator see Prophecy, revelation, divine duties, reward and
punishment, the fire and the garden as mere religious politics, a lie in
the name of religion to further one's own ends.

They say that the prophets were reformers who brought about social
change in the name of religion. They argued that since men of past ages
were drowned in ignorance and superstitious worship the prophets
contained the religious order within a framework of superstitious
beliefs about the origin of Creation and the day of reckoning in order
to further their prospects of reform.

**What the Qur'an Itself Says concerning this Matter**

Scholars who explain the power of revelation and prophecy using the
above explanation, attach great importance to the Science of nature and
the visible world, and claim that everything in the world works
according to the laws of nature. They view historical events, right up
to the present-day, as the developing and constantly changing face of
nature.

Likewise, they view all revealed religions as social manifestations.
Thus they would agree that if one of the geniuses of history, like
Cyrus, Darius or Alexander, had announced himself as having been chosen
by God as an executor of divine commands, their explanation would have
been no different than that given above.

We do not intend here to establish the existence of the unseen, of the
world beyond the visible world of nature; we are not saying to other
scholars or scientists that any one science may only be discussed by
remaining within the strict limits of that particular science. We are
not suggesting that the modern sciences which investigate the properties
and effects of the material world, (whether or not they be positively or
negatively disposed to the creation), do not have the right to enter
into an investigation of the metaphysical.

What we are saying is that any explanation they propose must be in
accordance with the explanation of society, existence, nature and the
cosmos given by the Qur'an The Qur'an is an authentic document of
prophecy and is the basis of all social, metaphysical and scientific
discussion; the explanation of the Qur'an contain proofs against their
arguments which we can enumerate and reflect upon. These proofs arc
connected to different Qur'anic verses discussed below.

**Divine Revelation**

According to the explanation of modern non-Muslims and atheists, the
Prophet's nature was pure through which came to him the word of God,
meaning that the divine system of thought was alive in his own thoughts;
the idea of divinity manifested itself in his thoughts because he was
pure and holy; it was natural (in the minds of these Scholars) for
prophets to attribute these thoughts to God for, in this way, they
ennobled and exalted their own task.

The Qur'an, however, strongly and convincingly denies that it is the
speech or the ideas of the prophet or, indeed, of any other man. In
chapters X: 38 and XI: 13 the Qur'an declares that if it is the word of
man then detractors of Islam should produce similar words about every
subject treated in the Qur'an, namely, belief in the after-life, morals,
laws, stories of past generations and other prophets, wisdom and advice
The Qur'an urges them to seek help anywhere if they do not realize that
it is the word of God and not of man, but adds that even if jinn and man
joined forces together they would not be able to produce a Qur'an like
it.

In chapter 11:23 the Qur'an challenges those who consider it merely the
speech of Muhammad to produce a book similar to it or even just one
chapter like it. The force of this challenge becomes clear when we
realize that it is issued for someone whose life should resemble that of
Muhammad, namely, the life of an orphan, uneducated in any formal sense,
not being able to read or write and grew up in the unenlightened age of
the j?hiliyah period (the age of ignorance) before Islam.

In IV: 82 the Qur'an asks why no inconsistencies or changes appeared in
the verses considering that neither the wording nor the meaning of the
verses has altered despite being revealed over a period of twenty-three
years. If it were the word of man and not the word of God, then it would
have certainly been affected by change like all other things in the
temporal world of nature and matter.

It is clear that this challenge and these explanations are not mere
empty words of exultation; rather they present the Qur'an for what it
is, namely the word of God.

The Qur'an establishes its own miraculous nature in hundreds of
verses.

This miracle is still unexplained by normal literacy standards used to
"grasp" a text.
Indeed successive prophets established their prophet hood through
similar verses revealed by God.

If prophecy was merely the call of an individual conscience or the
inspiration of a pure and sincere soul, then there would be no sense in
claiming it as divine proof or seeking help in its miraculous nature as
the Prophet, in fact, did.

Some writers interpret the many miracles of the Qur'an in terms of
undisguised mockery.

When we investigate the subject of their mockery we inevitably discover
that the Qur'an means something other than that which they have
understood. It is not our intention to try and prove the miraculous
nature of the Qur'an nor to demonstrate the soundness and authenticity
of its narration; rather, we would point out that the Qur'an clearly
describes the miracles of the past prophets, like Salib, Abraham, Moses
and Jesus. The stories related in the Qur'an can only be 'understood and
interpreted in the light of miraculous guidance.

Why, we may ask, if the prophets were mere men, inspired by the purity
of their character, was it necessary to establish the existence of this
miraculous guidance?

**The Angel Gabriel**

According to the explanation of the above-mentioned writers, the
prophet referred to his own pure soul as the "Faithful Spirit" or the
giver of revelation.

The Qur'an, however, does not support this view and names Gabriel as
the deliverer of the verses.

God says in chapter 11:97, "Say (0 Muhammad, to mankind): Who is an
enemy to Gabriel!for it is he who has revealed (this book) to your heart
by God's permission. " This verse refers to Jews who wanted to know who
had revealed the Qur'an to the Prophet.

' He replied that it was Gabriel. They said, "We are enemies of Gabriel
as he it was who gave us (the tribe of Israel) the laws and legal
punishments and as we are enemies to him, we do not believe in the book
which he has brought.

" Thus God replies to them in the verse that Gabriel revealed the
Qur'an to the Prophet by God's permission. God further says that the
Qur'an is to be believed in, and that it is not the speech of Gabriel.

It is important to note that the Qur'an, in the words of the above
verse was revealed "to the heart" of the Prophet Muhammad by Gabriel.

In another verse XXVI: 193-4 we read that it was transmitted by the
Faithful Spirit, "which the Faithful Spirit has brought down upon your
heart. " By comparison of these two verses it becomes evident that it is
the angel Gabriel who is meant here by the words, "Faithful Spirit " In
chapter LXXXI: 19-23 God describes the transmittance of revelation:

That this is in truth the word of an honoured messenger (Gabriel),
Mighty established in the presence of the Lord of the Throne, one to be
obeyed and trustworthy and your comrade (the Prophet) is not mad. Surely
he saw him on the clear hori?~on. These verses show that Gabriel was one
of the intimates of God, possessing great power and trust. Again in
chapter XL: 7 we read, "Those who bear the power, and all who are around
Him, praise their Lord and believe in Him and ask forgiveness for those
who believe " Such characteristics as belief in God and seeking
forgiveness from him are only to be expected from independent, sentient
creatures.

In chapter IV: 172-173 we read, The Messiah will never disdain to be a
servant of God, nor will the favored angels. Whoever disdains His
service and is proud, He will gather them all to Himself, then as for
those who believe and do good, He will pay them fully their rewards and
give them more out of His grace, and as for those who disdain and are
proud, He will punish them with a painful doom And they will not find
for themselves besides Allah a guardian or a helper. It is clear that
although the Messiah, Jesus, and the favored angels do not disobey the
commands of God they are, nevertheless, warned of a painful punishment
on the day of reckoning if they were to commit a wrong.

The possibility of neglect of their duties or committing wrong action
is necessarily dependent on their being sentient beings, possessed of
free will and entrusted with the task of transmitting the revelation of
God Thus we learn from the Qur'an that Gabriel is the Faithful Soul: he
is trustworthy and to be obeyed because he is obeyed by angels in his
task. An indication of these obedient angels comes in the. Verse, But
truly it is a warning - so let whoever will pay heed to it, on honoured
leaves exalted, purified (set down by scribes) noble and righteous LXXX:
11-16

**The Angels and the Devils**

According to the explanation of contemporary non-Muslim writers, angel
is the name given to forces in nature which represent goodness, and
happiness and devils are forces in nature representing evil and
unhappiness What we understand from the Qur'an, however, is that they
are beings existing beyond our sense-range, which possess feelings and
an independent free will. To the verses above, (indicating that angels
possess independence and free will), may be added many other verses,
which confirm these same qualities.

The refusal of Satan to prostrate himself before Adam and the dialogue
between Satan and God occurs several times in the Qur'an. Satan, after
having been expelled from intimacy with God, says in chapter XXXVIII:
82-83, "1 surely will lead every one of them astray except your sincere
slaves among them " And God replies "1 shall fill hell with you and with
those who follow you, together" XXXVIII: 85 It is clear that punishment
can only take place if the punished understand the reason for the
punishment. God in chapter XXXIV: 20, says in confirmation of Satan's
warning to man, "And Satan indeed found his calculation true concerning
them, for they follow them, all except a group of true believers

" Likewise, we read in chapter XIV; 22, "And Satan said when the matter
had been decided: Indeed! Allah promised you a promise of truth; and I
promised you and failed you. And / had no power over you except that I
called to you and you obeyed me. So do not blame me but blame
yourselves. " Blame is a matter, which can only be associated with those
who possess the power of reason and free will We quote these verses to
show that Satan, like the rest of the angels, is a thinking independent
being rather than a force in nature.

Just as verses occur in the Qur'an concerning the angels And the
devils, there also are verses which clearly and vividly describe the
jinn (elemental spirits or invisible beings, either harmful or helpful).
In chapter XLVI: 18 reference is made to those who, invited to believe
in Islam, spurn it as just another ancient fable or superstition: Such
are those in whom the word concerning nations of the jinn and mankind,
which have passed away before them, has effect Indeed they are the
losers.

We may understand from this verse that the finn, the invisible
entities, like mankind, live in different nations, pass a period of time
in their different societies and finally die.

In the same chapter, verses 29-32 we read, and when we inclined toward
you (Muhammad) certain of the jinn who wished to hear the Qur'an and
when they were in its presence said, listen! And, when it was finished
turned back to their people warning. They said: 0 our people! Truly we
have heard a book, which has been revealed after Moses, confirming that
which was before it, guiding to the truth and a right road. 0 my people!
Respond to God's Summoned and believe in Him He will forgive you some of
your wrong actions and guard you from a painful doom. And whoever does
not respond to God's Summoned he can in no way escape in the earth, and
you (can find) no protecting friends instead of Him. Such are in clear
error.

These verses clearly confirm that the jinn, like men, live in grolsps,
are thinking individuals possessing free will and charged with duties,
Moreover, there are other verses dealing with the day of rising which
affIrms these same qualities in the jinn.

**The Call of Conscience**

According to the explanation of certain modern writers, Prophethood is
the rising up of a man from amongst his people in order to undertake
social reform in accordance with the call of his conscience. The Qur'an,
however, gives a different meaning to the Prophethood. In XCI:7-8 we
read, "And a soul and Him who perfected it, and inspired ~t (ui/h
conscience of~ what is wrong for it and (what is) ijght for it " In this
verse God demonstrates that each individual perceives from his own
conscience and God-given nature the difference between good and bad
action; and, that the potential for reform and the bettering of one's
self is contained within each person; some listen to their conscience
and act correctly while others pay no heed and so act wrongly.

Thus in the following verses of the same chapter God says: "He is
indeed successful who causes it to grow and he is indeed a failure who
stunts it. " If Prophethood manifests itself as a result of the
conscience, which everyone possesses, then everyone in theory may become
a prophet. God, however, has reserved this duty for certain men only.
Thus He says in chapter VI:124, "And when a sign comes to them, they
say: we do not believe until we are given that which God's messengers
are given. God knows best with whom to place His message.

**The Reality of the Prophet's Mission**

we should repeat at this point that we do not intend to prove or
disprove here the truth of Islam or the validity of the Prophet's
invitation of the people to Islam Rather, we simply want to state that
the second of the modern non-Islamic explanations is also not in
accordance with the explanation given in the Qur'an. According to it,
the prophet succeeded in convincing people to believe in a set of
superstitions framed in a politico-religious framework; he was aided in
this, so they say, by the fact that his own people were tribesmen,
having no advanced culture of their own In the name of public good and
the well being of society harsh punishments were promised to those who
did not obey the religious laws; the Prophet instilled a fear of the Day
of Reckoning and promised rewards for those who obeyed.

Thus fervour for the promised paradise and fear of the Day of Reckoning
created a society based on a religious foundation. The history of the
lives of other prophets has, for the most part, been lost in time, but
the life of the Prophet Muhammad is well documented. Anyone who
researches into it will not be left in the least doubt that he had total
faith and inner certainty in his mission If religious beliefs were mere
Superstition or a means to unify and subdue a society, then all the
proofs expounded in the Qur'an concerning the hereafter, the existence
of a Creator of the World, Divine Unity, His attributes, belief in a
prophecy and the reckoning of a man's actions after death would have
absolutely no meaning.

**What the Qur'an says about the Meaning of Revelation and Prophecy**

The Qur'an clearly states that it is a book revealed to the Prophet and
that revelation is a kind of divine utterance beyond the understanding
or communication of the material world; revelation is unperceived by
sense or intellect but apprehended by other faculties which, by God's
will, are present in certain individuals. Through revelation
instructions from the unseen are received and their acceptance and
implementation is called Prophethood. To clarify this matter we may make
the following points.

**Man's innate Nature**

In the beginning of this book we explained that each created entity,
whether mineral, plant or animal, is endowed with an inherent force,
which enables it to develop in accordance with its own innate design and
nature. Thus we read in chapter XX:50, "Our Lord is He who gave
everything its nature, then guided is correctly," and again in chapter
LXXXVII:2-3 "Who creates, then disposes, who measures then guides. " We
also know that man is not excluded from this general law, that is, he
has a direction and an aim towards which he develops, having been
endowed with faculties which allow him to fulfill this aim. All his
happiness lies in achieving this aim; his sorrow, grief and misfortune
are the result of his failure to achieve this aim. His Creator guides
him to this special purpose.

As God says in chapter LXXV 1:3, "Indeed, we have shown him the way
whether he be grateful or disbelieving. " Likewise we read in chapter
LXXX: 19-20, "From a drop of seed, He creates him and proportions him.
Then makes the way easy for him .


