Man's Path in Traversing the Road of Life
=========================================

The difference between the animal and plant kingdoms and man is that
the former react according to their inherent knowledge or instinct,
while man, also possessing an inherent knowledge, is equipped with an
intellect and the capacity to use or recognize wisdom. Even if man is
capable of undertaking a certain action, he weighs the good or the bad,
the benefit or harm, contained in that action and implements it only if
he estimates that the benefit outweighs the harm.

Thus he follows the instruction of his intellect in every action; the
intellect dictates the necessity of an action. The intellect causes one
to abandon an act if it is likely to bring with it an unacceptable
degree of trouble and hardship; it not only instructs one on the
feasibility of an action, but it also takes into account the dictates of
sentiment and feeling.

Indeed the perception of sentiment with regard to the relative good or
bad in matter is so closely connected with the decision of the intellect
as to be considered one and the same thing.

**Man as a Social Being**

No one would deny that men are social beings who co-operate with each
other to better meet their daily needs. We may wonder, however, whether
men desire this co-operation from their natural feelings; are they
naturally inclined to undertake an action with others and share an
interest in something as a social project~ On one-level, man's needs,
feelings and desires cause him to act for his own benefit and without
regard for the needs and wishes of others.

Man uses every means to fulfill his own needs: He uses every kind of
transport to reach his destination; he uses the leaves, stems and fruit
of plants and trees; he lives upon the meat of animals and their
products, and takes advantage of a multitude of other things to
complement his own deficiencies in certain respects.

Can man, whose state is such that he uses everything he finds to his
own ends, he expected to respect another human being? Can he extend his
hand to another in co-operation and turn a blind cc to his own desire
for the sake of mutual benefit? The answer in the first instance must be
no It is as a result of man's countless needs, which can never he
fulfilled by Himself alone, that he recognizes the possibility of
fulfilling them through the help and co-operation of others.

Similarly, he understands that others also share his own strengths,
desires and wishes, and just as he defends his own interests so others
defend theirs. Thus, out of necessity, he co-operates with the social
nexus and gives a certain measure of his own efforts to fulfill the
needs of others; in return he benefits from the efforts of others in
order to fulfill his own needs.

In truth he has entered into a market place of social wealth, always
open to traders and offering all the benefits obtained by the collective
work of the society. All these factors are placed together in this
marketplace of pooled human resources and each person, according to the
importance society attaches to his work, has a share in these benefits
Thus man's first nature incites him to pursue the fulfillment of his own
needs using others in the process and taking advantage of their work for
his own ends. It is only in cases of necessity and helplessness that he
lends a hand to co-operate with society.

This matter is clear when we observe the nature of children: Anything a
child wants he demands in an extreme way; he emphasizes his demand by
crying. As he grows older, however, and becomes a part of the social
fabric, he gradually puts an end to his excessive demands. More evidence
for the truth of this may be seen when a person accumulates power that
exceeds that of others and he rejects the spirit of cooperation and its
restrictions of society; such an individual uses people and the fruits
of their labours for himself without giving anything back in return God
refers to the necessary spirit of natural cooperation in society in
chapter XLIII:32, "We have apportioned among them their livelihood in
the life of the world, and raised some of them above others in ran/c
that some of them take labour from others.

. " This verse refers to the reality of the social situation in which
each individual has a different capacity and different talents: those
who are superior in one domain engage the cooperation or employ of
others for their eventual mutual benefit. Thus all members of society
are linked together in the ways and wants of the fabric of one single
social unit. Those who do not see the obvious necessity of mutual
cooperation are Condemned by God in chapter XIV: 34, "Truly man is
surely a wrong-doer, (a tyrant)" and, in chapter XXXIII: 72, "Indeed he
has proved a tyrant and a fool. " These verses refer to man's natural
instinct, which, unless checked, drives him to take advantage of his
fellow men and in doing so to overstep the rights of others.

**The Manifestation of Social Differences and The Necessity of Law**

Man in his dealings with his fellow men is obliged to accept a social
life based on cooperation; in doing so he effectively forgoes some of
the freedom enjoyed within his own sphere of work. Merely taking part in
a society based on injustice and gaining social differences is not
enough to satisfy the basic needs of the average man. In such a society,
taking advantage of the efforts of others leads to corruption and a loss
of the original purpose of removing glaring differences between men and
bettering their lives.

It is clear that a framework of laws, understood and respected by all,
must govern the different members of society. If there are no clear laws
governing even the most basic of transactions (like buying and selling),
transactions will cease to function correctly. Laws are necessary to
preserve the rights of individuals The power and wisdom of the Creator,
who has guided man towards his well being and happiness, has also
guaranteed the success and happiness of society.

Guidance in the form of social law is mentioned by God in LXXX: 19-20,
"From a drop of seed He creates him and proportions him. Then makes the
way easy for him. "This making of life easy for him is an indication of
the social guidance which he has given to man in the form of laws and
instructions.

**The intellect is not Sufficient in Guiding Man Towards Respect of the
Law**

The guidance we are considering here is that which emanates from the
wisdom of the Creator; this wisdom has created man and allotted him his
goal of well-being just as it has assigned a path and goal to all
creation. This goal of happiness and well being is the path of
self-fulfillment based on correct behaviour in a social setting. It is
clear that, of necessity, there can be no inconsistencies or
shortcomings in the work of the Creator If, at times, one cannot discern
His aim or it seems hidden from normal perception, it is not through
lack of reason or cause on the part of God, but rather that the cause is
linked to other causes, which obscure the one in question.

If there were no hindrances to a clear perception of the causal chain
of events, two given actions would never appear inconsistent or
contradictory to the harmony of creation.

Nor would the work of the Creator appear (as it sometimes does to those
whose perception is hindered by the intricacy of the causal chain of
events), inconsistent and imperfect Guidance towards the law, whose
function is to remove differences and conflict between individuals in
society, is not a matter for the intellect since it is this very
intellect, which causes man to dispute with others. It is the same
intellect, which incites man to profit at the expense of others and to
preserve, first and foremost, his own interest, accepting justice only
when there is no alternative.

The two opposing forces, one causing difficulties and one doing away
with them, are qualities of man's character; they do not obviously exist
in the Creator: the countless daily transgressions and violations of the
law, in effect, all result from those who use their intellect
incorrectly; they themselves are the very source of their own
difficulties If the intellect was truly a means of removing wrong action
from society and was itself a trustworthy guide to man's well being, it
would recognize the validity of the law and prevent man from violating
it.

The intellect's refusal to willingly accept what is obviously given for
the well being of man is confirmed when we realize that its acceptance
of a Society based on just laws is only out of necessity.

Without this compulsion, it would never accept to know the law Those
who transgress the law do so for many reasons: some oppose it without
fear, because their power exceeds that of the law; others, because they
live outside the reach of the law, through deceit or negligence on the
part of the authorities; others are able to invent reasons which make
their wrong actions appear lawful and acceptable; some make use of the
helplessness of the person they have wronged. All, however, find no
legal obstacle in their wrong aims; even if an obstacle Appears, their
intellect, rather than guiding them to an acceptance of the law, renders
the obstacle right and ineffective.

From these examples we are left in no doubt that the intellect, far
from controlling, restricting or guiding man, merely uses its influence
to its own purpose We must include, therefore, that it is incapable of
guiding man towards a social law, which guarantees the rights, freedom
and well being of all the members of society. God says in chapter XCVI:
6-7 "Indeed man truly rebels whe~i he thinks himself independent. "The
independence referred to here includes the independence of those who
imagine that they can claim their rights through other than the path of
legality.

**The Only Way to Guidance is that of Revelation**

Man, like the rest of creation, naturally seeks his own well-being and
happiness as he lives out his life Since, by his very make-up, he has a
variety of natural needs, he has no alternative but to live in society
in order to fulfill these needs; his own well-being and search for the
fulfillment of his natural character takes place in the wider framework
of society's well-being. Thus the only acceptable pattern of existence,
regulated by a comprehensive law common to all people, is the one, which
guarantees both the well being of society and of the individual in a
balanced and just fashion. It is also clear that man, like the rest of
creation, must endeavour to achieve his well being and undertake
whatever preparation is necessary for achieving this by allowing himself
to be guided by his Creator.

It is but a logical next step in our analysis to say that any guidance
from the Creator must be towards this comprehensive law, common to all
and, at the same time, in accord with the individual's well being.
Intellect is not enough to guide man to the~ law since it does not
always decide in favour of cooperation with others nor in favour of the
common good.

The path, the way, which fits perfectly the requirements of man is the
way taught by the Prophets and messengers of God It is the way brought
to them by God through revelation and established as undeniably true and
valid, by the example of their own lives and their intimate knowledge
and contact with God.

In chapter 11:213, God says, "Mankind was one community and God sent
(to them) prophets as bearers of good news and as warners and revealed
to them the book with the truth that it may judge between mankind
concerning that in which they differed. " Here we understand "one
community" to mean a society at peace, its members living without
dispute or difference. After a period of time, men differed with one
another and as a result God sent the prophets.

Again He says in IV: 163-165, "Indeed we have inspired you as we have
inspired Noah. Messengers of good news and a warning in order that
mankind might have no argument against God after the Messenger. "
Intellect alone does not make man accountable to God and this is why he
must be awakened to the reality of his inner condition by other means.
The first of the above-mentioned verses recognizes the way of revelation
and prophecy as the only way of removing differences between men. The
second shows revelation and prophecy to be the complete and absolute
proof to mankind of the truth of God's message.

**Some Questions Answered**

Question: By using the premise that the intellect cannot prevent
violation of the law and the wrong action of man in general, you are
declaring the necessity of imposing a law or, as you say, "guidance"
towards his own well-being; that is, you are demanding that we place our
trust in revelation and in Prophethood rather than in the intellect. The
truth is, however, that the laws and instructions of revelation are also
ineffective in that they cannot prevent violation of the law, of the
Shari'ic law or divine code; in fact, man's acceptance of this code is
even less than his acceptance of the civil code. What can you reply to
this? Answer: To point out the way is one thing and to follow it is
another.

The Creator has taken upon himself to guide mankind to a law under
which he can achieve his well being; He has not taken upon himself to
stop mankind from infringing upon the law nor of compelling men to
follow the law. We have investigated above the problem of man's
infringement of the law, not to prove that the intellect is deficient or
incapable of preventing wrong action but, rather, to show that it
usually does not decide in favour of the law or of cooperation with
society As we have pointed out, the intellect only follows the law out
of necessity; if it perceives that obeying the law and restricting one's
personal freedom brings less benefit than disobedience,

then it will not follow the law nor stop others from transgressing. The
acceptance of the way of the revelation, however, always brings~ with it
an obedience to the law. By accepting the code of behaviour revealed by
the prophets, one entrusts one's judgment to God who, with his boundless
power and knowledge, constantly watches over man; only He can reward
good deeds or punish bad ones in an absolutely just and unbiased way.
God says in chapter XII: 4~0, "The decision rests with God only," and in
chapter XCIX: 7-8, "And whoever does an atom's weight of good will see
it then and whoever does an atom's weight of bad will see it then.

" Likewise, He says in XXII: 17, "Indeed God will decide between them
on the day of Rising, Indeed! God is witness over all things," and in
11:77, "Are they unaware that God knows that which they keep hidden and
that which they proclaim " In XXXIII: 52 we read: "And God is watcher
over all things. " From these verses it is clear that the divine din of
Islam, which has been given to man through revelation, is not capable of
preventing transgression of the law any more than the civil law drawn up
by men. The machinery of the civil law appoints officials and employees
to control and inspect the action of man and also imposes a system of
punishment for his offences; this method only works when the law is
strong and the crime is discovered.

The divine din is superior to man-made laws or social orders in that
control over man is carried out in a very special way, namely, through
the vigil of the angels. Moreover, the divine din obliges in every man
and woman to enjoin the right and forbid the wrong All men, without
exception, are instructed to watch over the action of their fellow men
and to be guardians of the law. It is only belief in a divine order,
which contains and defines action outside the limits of good and bad and
within the reality of the Day of Reckoning to come. Most importantly,
the Lord of the world and of the entire unseen world is aware of Man's
every action and is present with him everywhere at every moment.

Like the civil codes drawn up by man, there is also in the divine code
a corresponding system of punishment for every sin, both in this world
and on the day of reckoning after death. Unlike the civil code, however,
the divine law guarantees that no man will escape from judgment and
punishment, if punishment is warranted. As proof, the reader is urged to
follow what is written in chapter IV: 59, "Obey God and obey the
messenger and those of you in authority" and, in XI: 71, "And the
believers, men and women are protecting friends one to another; they
enjoin the right and forbid the wrong.

Likewise, we may study LXXXII: 10-12 when God says, "Indeed there are
guardians above you, generous and recording, who know (all) that you do"
and, also in XXXIV: 21, "Andy our Lord (0 Muhammad) takes note of all
things. A Second Question: It has been argued that the intellect does
not always decide in favour of respect for the law. Is this not
inconsistent with what is contained in the saying of the Imams which
states that God has given two proofs to his servants, the outward and
obvious one being that of His Prophet, and the inner and hidden one
being that of the intellect of man? How are we to understand this
statement in the light of how the intellect has been described? Answer:
Without exception, man's intellect is concentrated on securing benefit
and avoiding harm.

Whenever it accepts to cooperate and share in society's activity, it
is, as we have seen above, seeking its own benefit. Those who wish to
profit from others or seek to control others by using their wealth often
feel this need. For such men there is nothing prohibiting them from
pursuing their illegal action; their intellect will pot decide in favour
of the law nor forbid transgression of the same law.

If, however~, the source of compulsion (as is understood in the light
of divine revelation) is from God, then the effect on man is totally
different. God's watching over man's action, His punishment or reward of
bad or good action, admits of no negligence, ignorance or incapacity.

**The intellect, which recognizes the existence of God, cannot refuse
the law**

It will always decide in favour of that which revelation demands of
man. Thus the intellect of a believing man will recognize the importance
of the revelation over any personal matter. God say in XIII: 33 "is He
who is aware of the deserts of every soul as he who is aware of nothing;
"and, in LXXXVI: 4, "No human soul bu1 has a guardian over it" and,
LXXIV: 38, "Eve!, soul is a pledge for, its own deeds. "

**The Path of Revelation is Protected Against Mistakes
**
The path of revelation is part of the Creator's programmed. He never
makes mistakes, neither in His Creation nor in the system of belief and
the laws of the shari'ah, which are delineated for man through
revelation. God says in LXXII: 26-28, (He is) the knower of the Unseen
and he reveals His secret to no one except to every messenger He has
chosen and He makes a guard go before him and a guard behind him, that
He may know that they have indeed conveyed the message of their Lord. He
surrounds all their doings and He keeps count of all things From this we
understand that the prophets and messengers of God must be infallible
both in receiving the revelation and in preserving it against alteration
and attack. They are as instruments at the disposal of the Creator's
wisdom.

Were they to make an error in receiving or teaching the message of the
revelation or be led astray by the whispering of evil persons, were they
themselves to commit wrong or deliberately change the message they had
to deliver, then the wisdom of God would be unable to perfect its
programmed of guidance. God confirms in chapter XVI: 9 that He is in
total control of man's guidance by means of his messenger, "And God's is
the direction of the way, and some (words) do not go straight.

**The Hidden Reality of Revelation**

the reality of revelation is hidden from us What is clear is that the
aim of the programmed of life, outlined for man by the Creator, cannot
possibly have been put together by the intellect; there must be another
way of understanding, of perceiving, (other than through reflection and
thought), by which man learns of the duties incumbent on him and his
Fellow men. The path of revelation may only encompass this
understanding. There are, however, only a limited number of men who
possess this kind of understanding since receiving revelation requires
an understanding based on purity, sincerity and freedom from all
corruption and bad thoughts. It requires men whose spiritual qualities
do not change; men who are psychologically balanced in their judgments
and who possess real depth of understanding.

It must be admitted that these qualities are rarely to be found amongst
men. The Prophets and messengers mentioned in the Qur'an are men of
precisely these qualities.

The Qur'an does not mention their number; it only names a few (namely
Adam, Nub (Noah), Hüd, Salib (Methuselah), Abraham (Abraham), Lilt
(Lot), Isma'ili (Ismael, Ishmael), Alyasa' (Elisha), Dhü al-Kifi
(Ezekiel), Ilyas (Elias), Yünus Uonah) Idris (Enoch), Ishaq (Isaac),
Ya'qub (Jacob), Yüsuf (Joseph), Shu'ayb, Müsa (Moses), Harün (Aaron),
Da'üd (David), Sulayman (Solomon), Ayyüb (Job), Zakariy? '(Zacharias),
Yahya (John), Isma'il Sadiq al-We'd, 'Isa (Jesus) and Muhammad; others
are indicated but not named).

We, as ordinary men, do not share at all their qualities and so we
cannot taste the reality of their perception Prophecy, as an experience,
remains unknown for us. Moreover, few of the past revelations have
reached us and we have only a limited view of the reality, which is
revelation and prophecy. It may be that what has reached us in the form
of revealed books is exactly as the revelation we are familiar with,
that is the Qur'an. Nevertheless, it is possible that other revelations
(completely unknown to us) may have contained information and
instructions of which we have no knowledge.

**How the Qui 'an was Revealed**

Qur'anic revelation, according to the Qur'an itself, is an utterance on
behalf of God to His Prophet; the Prophet received the speech of God
with all his being, not just by way of learning. In XLII: 51-52 God
says, and it was not to be for any man that God should speak to him
unless (it be) by revelation or from behind a veil or (that) we send A
messenger to reveal what He will by His leave. Truly He is exalted,
wise. And thus we have inspired in you (Muhammad) a spirit of Our
Command You did not know what the Book, nor what the Faith was. But we
have made it a light whereby we guide whom we will of our slaves.

And truly you surely guide to a right path. On comparison of these two
verses we discover three different ways of divine utterance. Firstly,
God speaks without they're being any veil between Him and man. Secondly,
God speaks from behind a veil: like the tree on the Tür mountain from
behind which Moses heard God speaking. Thirdly, God's speech is brought
to man by an angel who had previously heard the revelation from Him.

The second of the two verses above show that the Qur'an has reached us
by means of the third of three possible ways. Again God says in XXVI:
192-5, "(A revelation) which the Faithful Spirit (Gabriel) has brought
down upon your heart, that you may be (one) of the warmers, in plain
Arabic Speech," and in chapter 11:97 "Who is an enemy to Gabriel! For it
is he who has revealed (this book) to your heart " From these verses we
understand that the Qur'an was trans.

matted by way of an angel named Gabriel, or the "Faithful Spirit", and
that the Prophet received the revelation from him with all his being,
all his perception and not merely by listening. The verse says "on your
heart," which in Qur'anic terms means perception or awareness. In LIII:
1 0-I 1 we read, "And He revealed to His slave that which He revealed.
The heart did not lie (in seeing) what it saw;" and in XCVIII: God's
messenger indicates two reception of the revelation as a reading of
"pure pages".

Notes, Because both verses relate the dissension of the Qur'an before
the Holy Prophet. It says, "Upon their hearts" and not "their hearts"
and the heart, in the usage of the Holy Qur'an is the soul because in
several places, understanding and awareness comes from the soul and is
related to the heart. XXVI: 193-195


