4-the Relationship of the Qur'an To the Sciences
================================================

**Praise of Knowledge and the Stimulation of the Desire to Study**

No other revealed book praises and encourages science and knowledge as
does the Qur'an and it is for this reason that the Qur'an names the age
of the desert Arabs, together with their pagan cultures, before Islam as
the "age of ignorance. " In over a hundred verses reference is made to
science and knowledge in a variety of ways; and many of these verses
praise the value of scientific knowledge. In XCVI: 5 God indicates the
favour he has done man by bringing him out of his state of ignorance "He
teethes man what he did not know.

" Likewise, we read in LVIII: 11, "God will exalt those who believe
among you and those who have knowledge to high ranks," and in XXXIX: 9
God says, "Are those who know equal to those who do not?" Besides the
many verses in the Qur'an concerning knowledge, there are also countless
traditions of the Prophex and the Imanu on this subject which rank
second only in importance to the Qur'an.

**The Sciences, which the Qur'an Invites Men to Study**

in verses too numerous to mention, the Qur'an invites one to reflect
upon the signs of creation: the heavens, the shining stars and their
astonishing celestial movements, and the cosmic order ~'hich rules over
them all. Similarly, the Qur'an urges one to reflect upon the creation
of the earth, the seas, the mountains, the desert, and the wonders
contained below the surface of the earth, the difference between night
and day and the changing cycle of seasons. It urges mankind to meditate
on the extraordinary creation of the plants and the order and symmetry
governing their growth, as well as the multiplicity of the animal
kingdom.

The Qur'an invites one to witness the interdependence of beings and how
all live in harmony with nature. It calls upon. Man also, to ponder on
his own make-up, on the secrets of creation, which are hidden within
him, on his soul, on the depth of his perception, and on his
relationship with the world of the spirit. The Qur'an commands man to
travel in the world in order to witness other cultures and to
investigate the social orders, history and philosophies of past people.
Thus it calls man to a study of the natural sciences, mathematics,
philosophy, the arts and all sciences available to man, and to study
them for the benefit of man and the well-being of society.

The Qur'an recommends the study of these sciences on the condition that
it leads to truth and reality, that it produces a correct view of the
world based on an understanding of God. Knowledge, which merely keeps a
man occupied and prevents him from knowing the reality of his own
existence, is equated with ignorance.

God says in XXX: 7, "They know only some appearance of the life of one
world and are heedless of the Hereafter," and in chapter XLV: 23, "Have
you seen him who makes his desire his goal, and God sends him astray
purposely and seals u~ his heart and sets a covering on his heart. Then
who will lead him after God (has condemned him). "

The Qur'an not only stimulates the desire for study but also is itself
a complete system of education of divine knowledge; it provides, too, a
model for human behaviour and thought. This complete way of life is
called Islam, the way of submission.

**The Sciences Particular to the Study of the Qur'an**

There are many sciences devoted to the study of the Qur'an itself. The
development of such sciences dates from the first day of Qur'anic
revelation; over a period of time they were unified and perfected. Today
countless books are available on these sciences, fruit of the labour of
different researchers over the centuries.

Some of these sciences investigate the language and vocabulary of the
Qur'an, and some the meanings. Those concerned with language are the
sciences of correct Qur'anic pronunciation and reading (tajwid and
Qur'an). They explain the simple changes, which certain letters undergo
when occurring in conjunction with others, the substitution of Letters
and the places prescribed for breath~paUsit1g, and other similar
matters. They also study the different ways the Qur'an has been written
down and the several generally accepted ways of recitation, together
with the three lesser-known ways and the rarer modes of recitation.

Other works enumerate the number of chapters and their verses, while
others relate these numbers to the whole Qur'an. They discuss the
tradition of Qur'anic calligraphy and how it differs from the normal
Arabic script.

They research, too, into the meanings of the Qur'an and the general
division of subject matter, such as the place and circumstance of
revelation, the interpretation of certain verses, the outward and inner
meanings, the mul. zkam (clear) or the mutashtibih (ambiguous), and the
abrogating and the abrogated verses. Others study the verses containing
the laws (which, in fact, are part of what is known as Islamic feqh or
jurisprudence). Others specialize in the commentary of the meanings
(already seen in a previous section of the book). Specialists in each of
the different have published numerous works on each subject.

**The Sciences, which Developed because of the Qur'an notes**

The sciences of the din of Islam came into being at the beginning of
the Prophet's mission and the revelation of the Qur'an, including laws
governing the behaviour and transactions of Muslims. Study of these
sciences developed in the first century after the Hajar although
initially, not in any formal way. Since the Caliphs had prohibited the
writing down of the tradition, they were handed down by word of mouth by
the companions and their followers. A small number of Scholars wrote on
jurisprudence and on the science of the traditions at the beginning of
the second century when the prohibition was lifted1, allowing Scholars
to record the traditions.

It was at this point that a number of disciplines came into being
including the Science of Traditions and the Science of establishing the
authority and sincerity of those men who transmitted it; the Science of
analysis of the text of the traditions; the Science of the foundations
ofjurisprUde1~~ and jurisprudence itself; the Science of belief in the
judgement After death and the after-life. Even philosophy, which entered
the Islamic arena via the Greek, and remained there for some time in its
original Greek, took on the colour and beliefs of the people after a
time.

Changes in the subject matter and the structure of disciplines took
place such that today, amongst Muslims, all subject matter concerning
divine gnosis is supported by proofs and reasons taken from the Qur'an
and the traditions. All these subjects were also studied as an integral
part of the Arabic language: mastery of the science of verb declension,
grammar, meanings of words, commentary and explanation, the art of
metaphors and good style, and the philosophy and science of derived
meanings allowed greater precision and clarity in the study of the
Islamic Sciences as a whole. Indeed what stimulated scholars to record
and arrange coherently the laws of the Arabic language was the sense
that they were serving God; love of Him drew them to a clarity and
sweetness of style which in turn generated the Science of correct speech
and composition.

It is thus related that Ibn 'Abb?s, who was one of the commentators
amongst the companions, explained the meanings of verses by taking
examples of the vocabulary in question from Arabic poetry. He advised
people to collect and learn Arabic poetry saying, Poetry is the court of
the Arabs (meaning the place where the finest language may be heard).

The famous Shi'ites scholar KhaIil ibn Ahmad al-Far?hidi wrote the book
al-'any on the subject of language and also iescribed the science of
poetic rhyme. Many others also wrote on the same subjects. The subject
of ~history was initially derived in Islam from stories of the lives )
prophets, in particular that of the Prophet Muhammad, tnd the
description of the course of past nations. To this basic naterial was
added an account of the events during the period rnmediately following
the appearance of Islam. All this was enveloped into a history of the
world in the writings of such rein as al-Tabari, aJ-Mas'Ã¼di, al-Ya'qubi
and al-Waqidi.

The original reason the Muslims translated and transmit, d the natural
Sciences and mathematics from other cultures nd languages into Arabic
was the cultural stimulation given to them by the Qur'an. Many different
Sciences were translated from Greek, Syrian and Sanskrit into Arabic.
Access to these sciences was at first available only to the Caliph (who
was at that time leader of only Arab Muslims). Gradually they were made
available to all Muslims and improved upon as research methods,
s~ructUriflg, classific3~ tion and ordering of the subjects developed.

One of the main reasons the civilization of Islam, which formed after
the death of the Prophet, came to include a large part of the inhabited
world (and which today numbers over six hundred million inhabitants),
was the Qur'afl. We as Sbi'ahs, however, deny that the caliphs and the
kings who followed them bad legitimate claim to the guardianshiP and
execution of the law even though they expanded Islamic civilization, and
do not fully agree with the way they explained the realities of Islam.

Indeed the light of wisdom, which illuminated the world, was from the
light of the miracle of the Qur'an. The apppearaflce and diffusion of
the revelation caused a change in the direction of history and generated
a chain of important events resulting in the progress and development of
the culture of man.

**5-The Order of the Qur'an Revelation and the Growth of the Qur'anic
Sciences**

The Order in which the Verses of the Qur'an were revealed

That the chapters and verses were not revealed in one place but rather
in stages over a period of twenty-three years during the Prophet's
mission is authenticated not only by historical evidence but also from
evidence from the various verses, in XVII: 106 we read: "And it is a
Qur'an I/tat we have divided that you may recite it to mankind at
intervals and we have revealed it by (successive) revelations. " As
further proof there are abrogating and abrogated verses, which are
directly, related to events from different periods and circumstances and
which obviously were not revealed at one time. At this point we should
note that the chapters and verses were not revealed in the order in
which they are set out; that is the first chapter "al-F?tikiah" (The
Opening) was revealed after "The Cow", "The Family of 'Imr?n," "Women,"
and "The Table Spread. " This is true also for the order of the verses,
which do not necessarily follow chronologically.

The content of a Qur'anic text may for example show that the content of
some chapters and verses concord with the first period of the Prophet's
mission - like the chapters "The Clot," and "Nun," but are recorded at
the end of the Qur'an. Many chapters and verses which correspond to the
time after the migration like "The Cow," "The Family of 'Imam," "Women,"
"The Spoils" and "Repentance" have been placed at the beginning of the
Qur'an. The contents of the chapters and verses are thus directly
related to the events, circumstances and different needs of the period
of the Prophet's mission: the chapter and verses which only deal with
the calling of the polytheists to belief in God's oneness and the
struggle against the idol-worshippers correspond to a time before the
migration when the Prophet was inviting the people to Islam in Mecca.

The verses dealing with battles and those dealing with social laws were
revealed after the events and circumstances associated with the,
establishment and progress of the Islamic society in Medina.

**Conclusions to be Drawn**

We may divide the chapters and Qur'anic verses according to the place,
time and circumstance of their revelation: Some of the chapters and
verses are Meccan and some Medinan; usually those revealed before the
Prophet's migration arc counted as Meccan. The majority of the chapters,
and especially the shorter ones, are of this type. Those revealed after
the migration are counted as Medinan even though they may have been
revealed outside Medina or even in Mecca.

Some chapters and verses were revealed while the Prophet was traveling
and some while he was resident in a place. The verses are also divided
according to whether they were revealed by day or by night, in peace or
in war, or when the Prophet was on earth or in the heavens, or whether
he was alone or with others. In the light of these different
classifications we may study the reasons for the revelations.

Some chapters were revealed more than once such as the chapter
"al-F?tibah," which was revealed once in Mecca and once in Medina. Some
verses were revealed several times like, "Which is ii of the favour of
your Lord do, you deny," in the chapter "The Beneficent" which is
repeated thirty times, and the verse, "And indeed your Lord He is truly
the Mighty, the Merciful," which is repeated eight times.

Sometimes one verse occurs in more than one chapter such as "they say:
when is the fulfillment of promise, if, you are truthful. " We find,
too, that a sentence appears as a complete verse in one chapter and as
part of another verse elsewhere; for example, the sentence, "Allah!
There is no God save Him, The Alive, The Eternal," is a complete verse
in the beginning of "The Family of 'Imam," Yet, in "The Cow" it is part
of the "al-Kursi" verse. Most chapters and verses, however, were
revealed in one place at one time and do not recur in the Book.

Similar verses appear in different places in the Qur'an because of
certain subjects, which demand repetition. One of the significant
features of the Qur'an is the difference in the length of the chapters.
We may compare "Abundance" (the shortest chapter) and "The Cow" (the
longest). Likewise we may compare the length of verses, with the
shortest being the single Arabic word "mudhdmmatn" (dark green with
foliage) and the longest, composed of thirty sentences being the two
hundred and eighty-second verse of "The Cow" (whose subject concerns
debt).

All these differences are in accordance with the demands of the
revelation. Sometimes it happens that two verses are closely connected
in meaning but differ greatly in length; for example, the thirtieth and
thirty-first verses of "The Cloaked One", the first being a single
sentence and the second more than eleven sentences.

We should not forget that most of the shorter verses like "The Dawn"
and "The Night" are Meccan, and those whose subject matter is treated in
greater length and detail are Medinan. The first verse to be revealed to
the Prophet was during the revelation of the first five verses of "The
Clot" and the last to be revealed was verse 281 of "The Cow": "And guard
yourselves against a day in which you will be brought back to Allah.

Then every soul will be paid in full that which it has earned and they
will not be wronged " The Reasons for the Revelations many of the verses
are connected with events and circumstances which took place as the
Prophet called the people to Islam, for example "The Cow" (38) Other
chapters, like "The Tribe", refer to the exile of the Banu al-Nadir and
the chapter "The Coursers" was revealed for the Bedouin Arabs of the Dry
Valley and other tribes.

Some chapters or verses were revealed because of the need to explain
the laws and directions of Islam; for example, the chapter "Women" which
defined marriage and the inheritance of women, "The Spirits" which
explains how to deal with the prisoners-of-war captured as booty and,
the chapter "Divorce" which was revealed, as its name suggests, to
explain divorce. (39) The circumstances leading to the revelation of
these chapters are called "reasons for revelation" and there are
countless traditions on this subject.

Amongst the Sunni's there are many traditions, which deal with the
reasons for revelation; several thousand narrations may be enumerated
(although in the Shi'ah School only a few hundred may be counted). Many
of these are without a chain of narration and are not accepted as fully
trustworthy; moreover, a considerable number are classified as weak.

The dubious nature of the majority of these may be ascribed to the
following reasons. Firstly, it is obvious from the form of many of these
sayings that the narrator had not learned them through oral transmission
but rather based on his own judgment, that the revelation of a certain
verse was connected with certain events. Thus the narrator links a
certain event to a verse of suitable meaning mentioned in the
tradition.

This is a subjective view, carried out through ijtih?d or personal
reflection upon the matter, and not the actual reason for revelation
learned orally through transmission from the Prophet. As proof of this
argument, we may cite many inconsistencies amongst these traditions.
There are verses, for example, recorded as having several conflicting
"reasons for revelation" which are totally unconnected with each other.
Ibn 'Abb?s, for example, who is not alone in this practice, relates
several "reasons for the revelation" of one single verse. The existence
of such conflicting reasons is because many have been arrived at through
subjective deliberation rather than transmitted directly from the
Prophet. This results in one narrator attributing a certain verse to a
particular event while another narrator attributes it to another
event.

On other occasions a narrator relates two different reasons for the
revelation of one verse and thus implicates himself in two conflicting
views; then he rejects the first view in favour of the second. We are
led to conclude, moreover, that most of these narrations are
fabrications or deceitfully transmitted under the pretence of
trustworthy narrators. Such doubt concerning the validity of many of
these traditions greatly endangers their credibility.

Secondly, it has been related with certainty that the early Caliphs
strictly prohibited the recording and writing down of the narrations
and, whenever a sheet of paper or tablet was found on which a saying had
been written, it was burned. This Proh,bit10~ lasted until nearly the
end of he first century after Hyrak, that is, for a period of about
ninety years.

The effect of this prohibition was that the narrators and scholars of
sayings were free to make small additions or changes during oral
transmission of the saying. These additions gradually accumulated until
the original meaning of the saying was lost. This becomes very clear on
investigation of an event or subject, which has been related by two
different narrators; one may come across a saying, which describes an
event, and see the same event described in a different way by another
narrator. False sayings were not only' introduced by attributing them to
respected narrators but also by the hypocrites. Their sayings soon
became part of the main body of sayings and this further undermined the
credibility of this particular section of the Science of tradition.


