The Gathering of the Qur'an Into One Volume (before the Death of the Prophet)
=============================================================================

The influence of the Qur'an, which was revealed in separate chapters
and verses, increased day by day. Its eloquence and miraculous clarity
transfixed the Arabs who attached great importance to fine language;
they came from far and wide to hear and learn a few verses from the
Prophet. However, the notables of Mecca and the leaders of Quraysh, who
were idolators and bitter enemies of the Prophet and of Islam, tried to
prevent the people from getting close to the Prophet; they tried to
frighten off the Arabs by telling them the Qur'an was magic. Despite
this people came, unknown to friends, family and servants, in the dark
of night to a place near the Prophet's house and listened to the Prophet
reading the Qur'an.

The efforts of the early Muslims in listening to, memorizing and
recording the Qur'an were stimulated by another motive: they valued the
Qur'an as a sacred document, being the word of God; they were also
obliged to read the chapter "a!F?tihah" and a portion of another part of
the Qur'an during their prayers.

It was also the Qur'an through which the Prophet had been commanded to
instruct people in the laws of Islam This study and devotion to the
Qur'an became more ordered and comprehensive after the Prophet emigrated
to Medina and formed an independent Muslim community He ordered a
considerable number of the companions to recite the Qur'an and to learn
and teach the laws which were being revealed daily So important was this
activity that, according to special permission granted by God in chapter
"Repentance," verse 122, these scholars were relieved of their
obligation to fight jihdd (so called Holy War) Since most of the
Prophet's companions, (in particular those who had emigrated from Mecca
to Medina), were unable to read or write, the Prophet ordered them to
learn from the Jewish prisoners-of-war the simple writing of the time.

Thus a group of the companions gradually became literate Those of this
group who engaged in the recitation of the Qur'an, learning by heart the
chapters and verses were called qurth'; it was from amongst this group
that forty (some report seventy) died as martyrs in an accident called
Bi'r Ma'Ã¼nah The Qur'an was recorded, as it was revealed,

on tablets, bones and the wide flat end of the date palm fronds There
is no doubt that most chapters were in use amongst early Muslims since
they are mentioned in numerous sayings by both Sunni and Shi'ah sources,
relating the Prophet's use of the Qur'an as a call to Islam, the making
of prayer and the manner of recitation Similarly, one comes across names
of chapters in traditions which describe the time when the Prophet was
still alive, namely the very long chapters and "al-F?tibah"

**After the Death of the Prophet**

After the death of the Prophet, 'All who, (according to a tradition of
absolute authority), was more knowledgeable of the Qur'an than any other
man, retired to his house and compiled the Qur'an in one volume in the
order corresponding to its revelation Before six months had elapsed
after the death of the Prophet,

the volume was completed and carried by camel to show to other people
Just about a year after the death of the Prophet The war of Yam?mah took
place in which seventy of the Reciters were Killed and the Caliphs
conceived the idea of collecting the different chapters and verses into
one volume They feared that should a future battle take place and the
rest of the qurrd' be killed, the whole Qur'an would disappear with them
Thus, on the orders of the Caliph, a group of the qurni' from amongst
the companions including Zayd ibn Th?bit, collected the chapters and
verses (written on tablets, bones and date palm fronds and kept in the
Prophet's house or the houses of reciters),

and produced several hand-written copies of the complete Book They then
sent copies of this compilation to all areas of the Muslim domain After
a time, during the rule of the third Caliph, it came to the attention of
the Caliph himself that differences and inconsistencies were appearing
in the copying down of the Qur'an; some calligraphers lacked precision
in their writing and some reciters were not accurate in their recitation
Since the word of God seemed threatened with alteration, the Caliph
ordered that five of the qurrd' from amongst the cornpanion~, (one of
them being Zayd ibn Th?bit who had compiled the first volume), produce
other copies from the first volume which had been prepared on the orders
of the first Caliph and which had been kept with Haf~ah, the wife of the
Prophet and daughter of the second Caliph.

The other copies, already in the hands of Muslims in other areas, were
collected and sent to Medina where, on orders of the Caliph, they were
burnt (or, according to some historians, were destroyed by boiling) Thus
several copies were made, one being kept in Medina, one in Mecca, and
one each sent to Sham (a territory now divided into Syria, Lebanon,
Palestine and Jordan), Kufa and Basra.

It is said that beside these five, one copy was also sent to Yemen and
one to Bahrein. These copies were called the Imam copies and served as
original for all future copies. The only difference of order between
these copies and the first volume was that the chapters "Spirits of War"
and "Immunity" were written in one place between "The Heights" and
"Jonah. "

**The Importance Muslims Attached to the Qur'an**

As we have pointed out above, the verses and chapters of the Qur'an
were in oral use amongst Muslims at the time of its first and second
compilation into one volume. They were extremely careful in preserving
what they had learnt by heart. Moreover, a large group of companions and
their followers were engaged only in recitation and learning the Qur'an
by heart.

The collecting together of the Qur'an into one volume took place under
their scrutiny. They all accepted, without objection, the volume when it
was given to them and then made copies of it. It happened that when some
men tried to record verse 34 in "Repentance," "And those who hoard up
gold and silver" without the "and" in the 'Uthmanic (second compilation)
volume, they were prevented from doing so. The companion Ubayy ibn Ka'b
swore that if anyone left out the "and" he would fight him with the
sword.

As a result, the word "And" was recorded. One day the second Caliph,
during the time of his own caliphate, read the verse, and the first to
lead the way of the Muhdjirun and 4n. ~dr and Those who follow them in
goodness IX: 100 Without the word "and"; he was opposed and forced in
the end to read it with the "and".

The Qur'an that had been compiled by 'All was rejected by several
people when he showed it to them. Despite this, Au made no objection or
resistance and accepted the Qur'an in circulation for as long as he
lived, even during the time of his own Caliphate. Likewise, the Imams of
the Prophet's family, the successors and sons of the Prophet did not
mention their objection to the Qur'an to the intimates amongst their
Shi'ah followers. The always referred to the Qur'an in common use and in
their commentaries and ordered the followers to recite it as the people
did.

Au's silence in the matter of the difference of order between the two
volumes was in keeping with the preference of the Shi'ah Imams for
commentary of the Qur'an by the Qur'an; for them the order of the
Medinan and Meccan chapters has no influence on the meanings of the
Qur'an; commentary of each verse is made by comparing it to another
group of verses Moreover the Qur'an is eternal and valid for all times
and places; such local and temporary particularities as this time, place
and circumstances of revelation can have no effect on the higher scale
of meanings contained in the Qur'an.

It is true that there are benefits to be gained by knowing certain
details of revelation; they help one to discern the development of
divine wisdom, social laws or stories of the past prophets and nations;
also an understanding of the reasons for revelation show how the call to
Islam progressed during the twenty-three years of the Prophet's
mission.

We would like to make clear, however, that it was in order to preserve
the unity of the Muslims that caused the Shi'ites to be silent in this
matter.

**The Quran ' is Protected from any Alteration**

The transmission of the Qur'an, from the day of its revelation up to
the present day, is flawless The chapters and verses have been in
constant use amongst Muslims and have been passed on perfectly intact
from one generation to the other The Qur'an we know today is the same
Qur'an, which was revealed to the Prophet some fourteen centuries ago.

The Qur'an does not stand in need of historical proof for its identity
or authenticity, (although history too confirms its validity). Since a
book, which claims to be the actual unalterable word of God and attests
to this in its own text, does not need to resort to others to prove its
authenticity. The clearest proof that the Qur'an we have with us today
is the same that was revealed to the Prophet and that no alteration has
taken place in its text is that very superiority which the Qur'an
claimed for itself at the time of its revelation and which still
exists.

The Qur'an says that it is a book of light and guidance, a book which
shows man the truth and reality of existence; it says that it explains
all things, that is, everything necessary for man to live in accordance
with his own natural character; it says that it is the word of God and
challenges man and jinn to produce similar words; it invites them to
find someone like the Prophet, who could neither read nor write and grew
up in an age of ignorance as an orphan without instruction; the Qur'an
challenges them to find any inconsistency in its method, Sciences, or
laws, such as one might find in any ordinary book.

They obviously cannot for the superiority of the Qur'an remains after
its revelation. Likewise, the guidance for man contained in the Qur'an
is still valid; it still expounds a complete worldview, which is in
accord with the purest of intellectual proofs and is the source of man's
well being in this world and in the next. By the benevolence and care
shown by the Creator for His creation in the Book, it still invites man
to belief. The Qur'an cares for the needs of man by giving him a vision
of reality based on Divine Unity. All knowledge and belief spring from
this view of reality At no point does the Qur'an fail to explain in the
most comprehensive fashion the reality of this oneness.

It devotes much attention to explaining the behavior and transactions
expected of the individual in society and shows how correct action is
that which accords with the natural character and capability (fitrah) of
man The Qur'an leaves the detailed description of man's behaviour to the
Prophet whose daily life was an example of how man was to apply what was
contained in the Qur'an Together the Book of God and the example (or
Sunnah) of the Prophet delineated an astoundingly comprehensive
life-pattern for man, namely, the way of living in tune with the
reality, which is Islam.

The Qur'an deals precisely with all aspects of individual and social
life and, despite having been revealed in another age, does not contain
the slightest inconsistency or incompatibility even today It describes a
din, a comprehensive way of life, which's programmed of living is beyond
the imagination of the world's most capable lawyers and sociologists.
The miracle of the Qur'an has in it clarity and eloquence, rooted, as it
is, in the language of a nation famed for the purity and power of its
language.

The Qur'an is a miraculous sun whose light shines far brighter than the
finest poetry of the time, indeed of any age. During the Islamic
conquests of the first century after Hijra, the resulting admixing of
non-Arabic words with the Arabic lessened the purity of Arabic language
used in the Qur'an causing it to disappear from the every-day speech of
the people. The Qur'an does not merely challenge man by the use of its
language but . also by the depth of its meaning. Those familiar with the
Arabic language (both prose and verse writings) are reduced to silence
and astonishment when they attempt to describe it.

The Qur'an is neither poetry nor prose but rather seems to draw
qualities from both; it is more attractive and dazzling than poetry and
clearer and more flowing than prose. A single verse or phrase from the
Qur'an is more illuminating, more penetrating, and more profound than
the complete speech of most eloquent speakers. The profundity of meaning
in the Qur'an remains as miraculous as ever; its complex structure of
beliefs, morals and laws stands as proof that the Qur'an is the word of
God. Man, and in particular someone who was born and raised in
circumstances similar to those of the Prophet, could never have created
such a system; the Qur'an is a harmonious whole despite having been
revealed during twenty-three years in greatly varying circumstances.

God Himself confirms that the Qur'an has been preserved from change; in
chapter XV: 9 He says, "Indeed We, even we, reveal the Reminder and
indeed we are truly its guardian, "and in chapter XLI: 41-42 He says,
'7or indeed it is an unassailable Book. Falsehood cannot cur - 'it it
from before or behind it. (It is) a revelation from the Wise, the zer of
Praise. " Only a divine Book could remain preserved for fourteen
centuries in a world where the enemies of truth and of Islam are
numerous.

The Recitation, Memorization and Transmission of the Qur'an There were
a number of Reciters engaged in learning and teaching the Qur'an In
Medina Anyone learning from one of them would transmit that individual's
particular style of recitation when he transmitted it to others as a
tradition. Various ways of recitation occur. One may attribute this,
firstly, to the fact that the script used at the time was the kufic
style and had no diacritical points; each word could be read in various
way Secondly, most people were illiterate and, when learning the Qur'an,
had no alternative but to commit it to memory and transmit it orally.
This method continued to be used for many generations.

**The Different Groups of Reciters**

the first group of Reciters was those companions who were engaged in
learning and teaching the Qur'an during the time of the Prophet Among
them was a group which mastered the whole Qur'an; one of this group was
a woman by the name of Umm Waraqah bint 'Abd Allah ibn H?rith Study was
also undertaken by four of the Ansars (or helpers, that is Medians who
became Muslim and welcomed the Muslims from Mecca)

They learned the whole Qur'an by heart but were not concerned with the
ordering of the verses and chapters; other scholars were responsible for
memorization of the order Some traditions say that the position of each
verse and chapter was defined at the orders of the Prophet himself but
this is generally refuted by the rest of the traditions According to
some later scholars, (namely al-SuyÃ¼ti in his book al-Izqdn, in the
chapter dealing with the qualities of the men responsible for
transmission), several of the qurr?' became famous, among them 'Uthm?n,
'All, Ubayy ibn Ka'b, Zayd ibn Th?bit, 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'Ã¼d and AbÃ¼
MÃ¼s? al-Ash'arl

The second group of Reciters was the students of the first group They
were generally t?bi'Ã¼n (followers of the companions of the Prophet) and
the more famous amongst them had centers of recitation and teaching in
Mecca, Medina, Kufa, Basra and Sham The 'Uthmanic volume was used in
these five places In Mecca were 'Ubayd ibn 'Amir and 'At?' ibn Abi
Rab?ti, Ta'us, Muj?hid, 'Ikrimah ibn Abi Mulaykah and others In Medina
were Ibn Musayyib, 'Urwah, S?lim, 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, Sulayman ibn
Yas?r, 'At?' ibn Yas?r, Mu'?dh al-Qari', 'Abd Allah ibn al-A'raj, Ibn
Shih?b al-Zuhri, Muslim ibn Jundub and Zayd ibn Aslam

In Kufa were 'Alqamah, al-Aswad, MasrÃ¼q, 'Ubaydah, 'Amr ibn Shurakibil,
H?rith ibn al-Qays, 'Amr ibn MaymÃ¼n, AbÃ¼ 'Abd al-Raiim?n al-Sulami, Zarr
ibn Hubaysh, 'Ubayd ibn Naflah, Sa'id ibn Jubayr, al-Nakha'l, al-Sha'bi,
AbU aJ-'Aliyah, AbÃ¼ al-Raj?' Nasr ibn al-'Asim, Yahy? ibn Ya'mur, Hasan
a1-Basrl, Ibn Sirin, Qatadah, Mughirah ibn Abi Shih?b, 'Uthm?n, Khalifah
ibn Sa'd, AbÃ¼ Dard?'

The third group lived during the first half of the second century after
HUrah; it included a number of Imams famous for their Qur'anic
recitation who received this knowledge from the second group

In Mecca were 'Abd Allah ibn Kathir (one of the seven qurrd'), Humayd
ibn Qays aI-A'raj and Muhammad ibn Abi Muhaysin In Medina were, AbÃ¼
Ja'far Yazid ibn al-Qa'qa', Shaybah ibn Nass?h and Nafi ibn Nu'aym (one
of the seven qurra') In Kufa were Yahy? ibn Wathth?b, 'Asim ibn Abi
al-NajjUd (one of the seven qurrd'),

Sulaym?n aI-A'mash, Hamzah (one of the seven qurrd') and al-Kis?'i
(also one of the seven reciters) In Basra were 'Abd Allah ibn Abi Ishaq,
'Isa ibn 'Umar, AbÃ¼ 'Amr ibn al-'Al?' (one of the seven reciters), 'A~im
al-Jabdari and Ya'qub al-Hadrami In Sham 'AbcI Allah ibn 'Amir (one of
the seven reciters), 'Atiyah ibn Qays al-Kall?'i, Ism?'il ibn 'Abd Allah
ibn Muh?jir, Yahya ibn H?rith and Shurayh ibn Yazid al-Hadrami

The fourth group consisted of the students of the third group, like Ibn
'Ayy?sh, Hafs and Khalaf and many of the most famous may be classed in
the next section The fifth group comprised those concerned with academic
research and writing including AbÃ¼ 'Ubayd Qasim ibn Sal?m, Ahmad ibn
Jubayr al-KUfi and Ism?'il ibn Ish?q al-M?likl from the companions of
QalÃ¼n al-R?wl Included also are AbÃ¼ Ja'far ibn Jarir al-Tabari and
Muj?hid The field of research was widened after them by men like a)Dani
(44) and al-S h?tibi(45) who wrote a great number of books on poetry The
Seven Reciters

Seven members of the third group achieved considerable celebrity; they
became a focus of learning for others
Each of the reciters appointed two narrators who each propagated a
particular style of recitation
The following is a list of these seven: First Ibn al-Kathir, (46) whose
narrators were Qanbal and al-Bazzi, with only one intermediate relator
in the chain from Ibn 'Abb?s from the leader of the Faithful, 'Ali
The second was Nafi" (47) and his narrators QalÃ¼n and Warsh
The third was 'Asim"(48)and his narrators were AbÃ¼ Bakr Shu'bah ibn
al-'Ayyash and Hafs: the Qur'an recitation which is in common use among
Muslims today is according to the reading of 'Asim by a narration of
Hafs
The fourth was Hamzah,(49) and his narrators were Khalaf and Khalld
The fifth was al-Kis?'i(50) and his narrators were al-Dawn and AbÃ¼ 'All
al-ljrith
The sixth was AbÃ¼ 'Amr ibn al-'Ala(51) and his narrators al-Dawn and
al-SÃ¼si with one intermediate narrator
The seventh was Ibn 'Amir(52) and his narrators were Hish?m'(53) and
Ibn Dhakw?n with one intermediary narrator
Following the seven famous recitations are the three recitations of AbÃ¼
Ja'far (54) , Ya'qÃ¼b'(55) and Khalaf'(56) The majority of Scholars
recognize the seven types of recitation as mutawitir, that is, as having
been related in unbroken chains of transmissions
One group of narrators have equated the tradition that the Qur'an was
revealed in seven jarf (literally, "word" in Arabic), with the seven
different recitations; this tradition is well known amongst Muslim
scholars in general but is not recognised as being trustworthy
(57) Al-Zarkshi(58) says in his book al-Burh?n, "It is true that these
seven recitations from the seven reciters have come to us via unbroken
chain of transmission but their chain of transmission from the Prophet
are open to inspection, since the chains of transmission of the seven
reciters are all of the type of single transmission, that is , related
by one single man to another single man

Al-Makki says in his book, "Anyone who imagines that the recitation of
such men as Naji' and 'Aiim are the same seven 'harf mentioned in the
saying of the Prophet is committing a grave mistake

" Moreover, the implication of this saying is that recitations, other
than these seven, are not correct; this also is a grave mistake since
early Islamic Scholars like AbÃ¼ 'Ubayd al Qasim ibn Sal?m and AbÃ¼ H?tim
al-Sijist?ni, AbÃ¼ Ja'far al-Tabari and Ism?'il al-Qacli have recorded
several other recitations besides these seven At the beginning of the
second century {A.H} the people of Basra used the recitation of AbÃ¼ 'Amr
and Ya'qÃ¼b and in Kufa the recitations of Hamzah and 'Asim

In Sham they used that of Ibn 'Amir and in Mecca that of Ibn Kathir In
Medina that of Nafi' was used This situation remained unchanged until
the beginning of the third century A H when Ibn Muj?hid removed the name
of Ya'qub and put the name of al-Kis?'i in his place The reason why
scholars paid so much attention to the seven reciters, despite there
being many others of equal or better standing, was that the number of
recitations had multiplied so quickly that they lost interest in
learning and recording all the traditions about recitation Thus they
decided to choose several of the recitations which complied with the
orthography of the Qur'an and which were easier to learn and record Thus
for the five copies of the Qur'an which 'Uthman had sent to the towns of
Mecca,

Medina, Kufa, Basra and Sham, five reciters were chosen from the five
areas and their recitations were then used Ibn Jubayr writes about these
five recitations from the five forms Ibn Mujhid records a tradition
which asserts that 'Uthmn sent two other copies to Yemen and Bahrain,
that the number of 'Uthm?n copies thus numbered seven and that they
chose seven narrators Since precise information about this tradition
(which states that copies were sent to Yemen and Bahrain) was not
available,

they added two of the reciters of Kufa; to make up the number they had
previously chosen, to seven Others who had no knowledge of the matter
then used this number, which corresponds with the above-mentioned saying
and affirmed that the Qur'an was revealed in seven recitations\> They
mistakenly supposed that what was meant by the seven harf which the
Prophet spoke of,

was the seven recitations The only trustworthy recitations are those
whose text is sound and whose meaning corresponds to what is written in
the Qur'an Al-Qurab says in his al-Shafi, "We should too/c for the seven
recitations amongst the qurra' not from among others " This view is
neither tradition nor sunnah but rather it originated from some of the
later Scholars who collected the seven recitations These seven
recitations became so well known that people imagined that other
recitations should not be used This however, has never been claimed

**The Number of Verses in the Qur'an**

The enumeration and delineation of the verses date from the time of the
Prophet In a saying the Prophet mentions ten verses from the "Family of
'Imran," seven in the chapter "al-F?tiliah" and thirty in the chapter
"The Sovereignty There are six views concerning the total number of
verses in the Qur'an, as related by al-Dani Some have said that the
total is 6,000, some 6,204 and some 6,219 From these six estimations,
two are from the reciters of Medina and four from the other areas to
which the 'Uthmanic copies were sent, namely, Mecca, Kufa, Basra and
Sham All these scholars support their claims by traditions reaching back
to the companions and thus not directly linked, in a chain of
transmissions, to the Prophet

Such traditions are called mawquf in the science of the traditions From
Medina, those who specialized in enumeration and delineation of the
verses, were Abu Ja'far Yazid ibn aI-Qa'qa', Shaybah ibn Nass?h, Ism?'il
ibn Ja'far ibn Abi Kathir al-Ans?ri, Ibn Kathir, Muj?hid, Ibn 'Abb?s,
Ubayy ibn Ka'b, Ijamzah, al-Kisa'i, Khalaf, Ibn Abi Layl?, AbÃ¼ 'Abd
al-Rabm?n al-Sulami, 'Ali, 'Asim ibn al-'Ajj?j al-Jabdari, Ibn Dhakw?n,
Hish?m ibn 'Amm?r The reason for the different opinions concerning the
total number of verses is related to the method of delineation and
separation of the verses and letters

**The Names of the Chapters**

The division of the Qur'an into chapters, like its division into
verses, is mentioned in the Qur'an itself In several places God uses the
actual words surah and ayat In (XXIV:!) He says "(Here is) a surah which
we have revealed," in "Repentance", verse 86, "And when a surah is
revealed," in "The Cow" verse 23, "Then produce a surah like it and
other similar verses

The name of the chapter is sometimes derived from a name or form
occurring in the chapter or from a subject treated by the chapter; for
example "The Cow", "The Family of 'Imran", "The Night Journey" and "The
Unity" We may note here that in the old Qur'ans it is usual to observe
the following at the beginning of each chapter: "The surah in which the
Cow is mentioned" or "the surak in which the family of Imran is
mentioned

" Sometimes the chapter becomes known by its first phrase; take for
example, the chapter "Read in the name of your Lord" (or "the Clot") or
the chapter, "Truly we revealed it" (The Night of Power) or the chapter
"Those who disbelieve" (also called "The Clear Proof")

Sometimes the chapter becomes known by a certain position or quality it
possesses; thus the chapter "The Opening of the Book" or "The Mother of
the Book" or "The Seven Oft-repeated verses" (all describing the first
chapter, or the "al-Fatibah") The chapter "The Unity" is also called by
the name 'a1-Ikhl?s" (meaning that it describes the absolute unity of
God) or by the name Nisbat aI-Rabb" (meaning the chapter which describes
the divine nature of the Lord in relation to the slave)

This method of naming the chapters was also used in the early days of
Islam and is attested to by the traditions There are traditions, whose
chains of authority reach back to the Prophet, which assert that the
name of such chapters as "The Cow", "The Family of 'Imr?n", "HÃ¼d" and
"The Event" were used by the Prophet himself

We may conclude from this that many of these names came into being at
the time of Prophet as a result of being in common use Calligraphy,
Orthography and Diacritical Marks Used in the Qur'an

The first and second copies of the Qur'an were written in Kufic script
at the time of the Prophet The very basic nature of the script, without
diacritical marks, was suitable for the reciters, relators and scholars
who had learned the Qur'an by heart, since only they knew the precise
pronunciation of the words

Others found great difficulty if they opened the Book and tried to read
correctly It was for this reason that at the end of the first century
after Hrah AbÃ¼ al-Aswad al-Du'a11(59), one of the companions of 'All,
with the guidance of the latter, wrote out the rules of the Arabic
language and on the orders of the Umayyad Caliph 'Abd al-Malik produced
a Qura'nic text with diacritical marks

This, to a certain extent, removed the difficulty of reading the Kufic
script Several difficulties remained, however; the diacritical marks for
vowels, for example, were for a time only points Instead of a fathah, a
point was placed at the beginning of the letter and, instead of kasrah,
a point below and, for a dammah, a point above at the end of a letter
This led to ambiguity. It was not till Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Far?hidi set
about explaining the maddah , i e the lengthening of certain words, the
doubling of letters, the diacritical marks of vowelling and the pause,
that ,the difficulty of reading the script was finally removed


