Introduction
============

Praise is due to Allah who made the House a pilgrimage for man and a
place of security. Greetings of Allah be upon Muhammad; the chosen
messenger whom Allah has sent as witness, bearer of good tidings,
warner, and to *“call people to Allah, with His permission, and the
bright lamp.”* And greetings be upon the members of his household from
whom Allah kept away the uncleanness and purified a thorough purifying.

In this materialistic world, man’s spiritual assets are being plundered.
The sublime spiritual virtues, being the only source of man’s dignity
and a criterion for humanity, have lost their values and are gradually
being removed from man’s life. A beastly atmosphere is turning the world
into a quagmire.

The freedom-fighting and hearty human beings are naturally living in
depression under such circumstances. Like taking breath in a polluted
environment, living has become painful for them. Hence, they are always
looking for a chance to hear a heavenly and divine call amidst the
mammonists’ yellings so that it will remove fatigue from their lives and
depression from their hearts, take them to a world above this boring
one, and satiate them with the elixir of affinity with God, prophets,
and saints. That is the call of the Hajj pilgrimage and the call of
Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham) (as)[^1], which generates much enthusiasm in
the ummah –Muslim community- with the coming of the Hajj rites.

Enthusiasm in the hearts and spirits of the believers who rush to the
Kaaba[^2]—the House of their Beloved, fills Mecca’s plain and mountain
with *Labbayk Allahumma labbayk* (Yes, here I am, O Lord, here I am).
Bare-footed, they shed off all worldly attachments and signs of
distinction, reach for the House of their Beloved, embrace it,
circumambulate it, voice their love from the bottom of their hearts,
confide their grievances with God, hear the soothing answer of the Lord
of the House, and return home with a spiritual joy.

The Kaaba is truly a spiritual sanctuary for human society in this
stormy world. Those believers who have been fed up with the automated
life and the wearisome account of mammonists’ profit and loss, those who
are desperate for a happy life for themselves and others, by seeking
refuge in the Kaaba, will find such tranquility that all problems will
be made easy for them. With their heart at rest and an expanded breast
as a result of relying on God’s imperishable power, the unleveled paths
of life will become smooth for them, hence, they are prepared for
fighting the hardships and creating an ideal life for human beings.

Nevertheless, attaining the life-giving impact of religious acts in
general and the Hajj rite in particular depends on full attention to the
philosophy of these great heavenly instructions, or an act devoid of
spirit will evidently not yield any sublime socio-humane result. Perhaps
one can assert that the main reason we, Muslims, are deprived of the
effects of our religious instruction is lack of attention to the spirit
of divine laws.

We are only content with their external forms. We notice that certain
Muslims go to perform Hajj and Umrah. They know the Hajj rites very well
but, amazingly, there is neither revolution in them in terms of
evolution of spirit and connection with God nor have they been
disciplined from the viewpoint of social relations and rights of human
beings.

In the same way, they are deprived of spiritual effects of such other
religious acts as prayer, fasting, visiting the holy shrines, mourning
for Imam Husayn (as) and holding sessions or learning the Holy Qur’an
and other religious rites.

Having the greatest intellectual and spiritual assets, this deprivation
of sublime human virtues is regrettable, for it has no justification
other than failing to know the truth of Islam and the spirit of the
Qur’anic teachings. It is regrettable to see that Muslims work hard to
learn about issues related to prayer, the rules of reciting the Holy
Qur’an but fail to learn about the spirit of prayer and the aim behind
this divine injunction to nourish their soul in the light of those
injunctions, to make their heart turn into a mirror to reflect God’s
manifestations and to purify their individual and social life from the
filth of all vices thanks to prayer.

It is seen that Muslims perform prayer, take part in congregational
prayers, invoke, and supplicate, but remembrance of and spiritual
attention to God and abstinence from indecency and evil, which are the
ultimate goal of prayer, are missing in most worshippers. The prayer of
most people is mixed with wrongdoing and is not different from ignoring
God and not praying attention to Him. This is because we have failed to
understand the ultimate goal of prayer as part of our religious program.
Rather, we consider the ritual prayer and its external form as criterion
for being religious.

The same detrimental negligence is seen in Hajj pilgrimage but more
conspicuously. Those who intend to go on Hajj pilgrimage do not forget
to take with them the smallest things they may need during the trip nor
fail to learn some of the rites related to the state of Ihram,[^3]
Tawaf,[^4] Sa’y[^5] and Ramy.[^6] Nevertheless, they are so ignorant of
the spirit of Hajj and the ultimate goal of this divine journey that
they will never discuss with anyone nor consider it as default.

Getting to know that truth and materializing those objectives in their
hearts and on the scene of action is not part of the Hajj rites. The
only thing the performer of Hajj has been asked to do seems to be to
wrap himself in two pieces of cloth, to say *Labbayk*,[^7] to go round
the House, to walk between Safa and Marwa, to shave his head, to offer
sacrifices, to throw pebbles at Satan, and to return home with trunks
filled with gifts! It is for this reason that among those who have
performed Hajj Umrah and those having visited the shrines of the Holy
Prophet (saw)[^8] and the Imams (as), many deviations, impious acts, and
undisciplined behavior, which have no conformity with the spirit of Hajj
rites, are seen. It therefore becomes evident that most of those who
have gone to Mecca have failed to understand the spirit of Hajj and the
aim behind it. Hence, they are engaged in contradictory acts.

We, Muslims, are duty-bound to submit ourselves to the sublime Qur’anic
teachings and try to comprehend the humane objectives of those wise and
heavenly injunctions far more than the externals of religion.
Elaborating on the sublime objectives of the Hajj rites, Imam Sajjad
(as) while meeting a man who had performed Hajj rites posed the
following questions:

Were you thinking of abandoning sin and living a pious life until the
end of your life when you got into the state of Ihram and saying
*Labbayk*?

Did you pay attention to the aim of the act you were doing?

Were you such and such in Tawaf, Wuquf, al-Mashar, Ramy, and Mina while
you were shaving your head and offering a sacrifice?

The man’s answer was ‘No’. Then the Imam (as) said:

Since you have not performed those acts to materialize their objectives,
actually you have not performed Hajj, that is to say, the results of the
Hajj rites have not been obtained. In this case, you neither reached
Mina, nor did you throw these pebbles on Satan, nor did you shave your
head, nor did you perform the rituals of the Hajj, nor did you offer
prayer in Kheif Mosque, nor did you perform Tawaf al-Ifadha, nor did you
offer sacrifice for the Lord. Go back, you did not perform Hajj.”[^9]9

Therefore, every Muslim who intends to go on Hajj is duty-bound to pay
full attention to its inner objectives in addition to learning about the
externals of this great religious duty according to the jurisprudents’
–*fuqaha*- decrees found in practical laws of Islam –*Risala*-, so that
the visitation of God will leave an indelible impression on his hear
that has turned into God’s House and a center for His remembrance.

In this relation, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا قَضَيْتُمْ مَنَاسِكَكُمْ فَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَذِكْرِكُمْ
آبَاءَكُمْ أَوْ أَشَدَّ ذِكْرًا فَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَقُولُ رَبَّنَا
آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا وَمَا لَهُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنْ خَلَاقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when you have performed your devotions, then laud Allah as you
lauded your fathers, rather a greater lauding. (2:200)”***

This book, which consists of quotations from the Holy Qur’an, the hadihs
of the Holy Prophet and the immaculate Imams (as), the decrees of the
religious authorities as well as my own opinion on Hajj, is dedicated to
Imam Mahdi (may Allah expedite his reappearance).

**Sayyid Muhammad Zia Abadi**

[^1]: (as) stands for ‘peace be upon him/her/them’

[^2]: The Kaaba is the square-shaped building in the centre of the Great
Mosque in Mecca, in the direction of which Muslims must face in doing
the obligatory prayer.

[^3]: Ihram, being one of the rites of Hajj, is (1)The sacred state into
which a Muslim must enter before performing a pilgrimage (Hajj), during
which sexual intercourse, shaving, cutting one's nails, and several
other actions are forbidden, and, (2) the costume worn by a Muslim in
this state, consisting of two lengths of seamless usu. white fabric, one
worn about the hips, the other over the shoulders or sometimes only over
the left shoulder.

[^4]: Tawaf, being one of the rites of Hajj, is the circumambulation of
the Kaaba—the Holy House of God.

[^5]: Sa’y, being one of the rites of Hajj, is the running between Mount
Safa and Mount Marwa.

[^6]: Ramy, being one of the rites of Hajj, is throwing seven stones,
thrice, on an emblem representing Satan.

[^7]: Labbayk –or Labbaykah- is the talbiya –one of the pillars of the
Hajj- the obligation of which is a matter very much discussed by the
ulema, yet they did not reach consensus. Labbayk, however, means: Here I
am at your service.

[^8]: (saw) stands for ‘peace be upon him and his family’

[^9]: See Mustadrak al-Wasaail; vol. 2 p.186, Section 17, Hadith 5


