The Purpose of the Acts of Worship
==================================

The purpose of acts of worship is to draw man’s attention to the
privilege he has in the universe. That purpose is achieved by fully
recognizing the Creator of the universe, having a spiritual journey
towards Him, shedding off of all kinds of material pollutions from
oneself, being illuminated with God’s light, and being absorbed in
infinite joy as a result of affinity with God Who is Absolute Beauty and
Infinite Perfection.

This requires belittling the worldly pleasures against the pleasure of
affinity with God hence being indifferent to fortune and misfortune in
the world. In this relation, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِكَيْلا تَأْسَوْا على ما فَاتَكُمْ ولا تَفْرَحُوا ِبما آتاكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So that you may not grieve for what has escaped you, nor be exultant
at what He has given you… (57:23)”***

This is the virtue of being pious and detached from the world, which is
the outcome of getting to know God and man’s full attention to a
metaphysical world.

The Islamic piety is not against the principles of everyday life
----------------------------------------------------------------

When the topic of piety and detachment of the world comes up and
quotations from the Holy Qur’an or the Imams (as) are mentioned, a kind
of misunderstanding is created in the minds of certain people. They will
say to themselves that these two contradict each other. Islam—the
perfect religion, while inviting people to be pious and detached from
the world, has taken every aspect of human life into consideration.

It is against seclusion, irresponsibility to social undertakings, and
indifference to the events happening in the human society. Islam equally
blames the oppressors and the oppressed as the agents behind the spread
of oppression and corruption. They are both entitled to punishment. The
Hoy Qur’an depicts the assembly of the two groups in hell:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلَّما دَخَلَتْ أُمَّةٌ لَعَنَتْ أُخْتَها، حَتّى إِذا ادَّارَكُوا
فِيها جَمِيعاً قَالَتْ أُخْراهُمْ لأُولاهُمْ رَبَّنا هَؤُلاءِ
أَضَلُّونا فَآتِهِمْ عَذاباً ضِعْفاً مِنَ النَّارِ، قَالَ لِكُلٍّ
ضِعْفٌ ولَكِنْ لا تَعْلَمون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whenever a nation shall enter, it shall curse its sister, until when
they have all come up with one another into it; the last of them shall
say with regard to the foremost of them: our Lord! These led us astray;
therefore give them a double chastisement of the fire. He will say:
every one shall have double but you do not know. (7:38)”***

Piety, meaning lack of interest in the worldly affairs in one’s mind and
hear and abstinence from pleasure seeking in practice, is the outcome of
a kind of enlightenment in one’s soul in a way that man sees the world
as transient and subject to decline. As a result of such an insight, man
considers his personality as one created for eternal life hence finding
himself too dignified to have tendency towards a mortal, material life.
The leader of the pious, Imam ‘Ali (as), in sermon No 32 of *Nahjul
Balagha,* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلبِئسَ المَتْجَرُ أنْ تَرى الدُّنيا لِنَفسِكَ ثمَناً ومِنْ مَالَكَ
عِندَ اللهِ عِوَضاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*How bad is the transaction that you allow, (the enjoyment of) this
world to be a price for yourself as an alternative for what there is
with Allah for you*”

That is to say, man’s human personality and the eternal life of the
Hereafter is so sublime that if he loses the two but gains the whole
world, it would be a bad transaction. The pious man finds his prosperity
and his ultimate goal in the illuminated world of affinity with God and
His pleasure. In this relation, Imam Sajjad (as), in the eighth part of
the Whispered Prayed of the Devotees, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَدِ انْقَطَعَتْ إلَيكَ هِمَّتي وانْصَرَفَتْ نحْوَكَ رَغْبَتي،
فَأنتَ لا غَيرُكَ مُرادي ولكَ لا لِسِواكَ سَهَري وسُهادي، ولِقاؤكَ
قَرَّةُ عَيني وَوَصْلُكَ مُنى نفسي... ورِضاكَ بُغْيَتي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*For my aspiration has been cut off from everything but You and my
desire has turned toward You alone, You are my object, none other; to
You alone belongs my waking and my sleeplessness. Meeting You is the
gladness of my eye, joining You is the wish of my soul. Toward You is my
yearning, in love for You my fervent craving. Your good pleasure is the
aim I seek*.”[^1]10

Quoting Imam Sajjad (as), Abu-Hamza ath-Thumali, says:

**  
**

مَولايَ، بِذِكْرِكَ عاشَ قَلبي وبمُناجاتِكَ بَرَّدْتُ ألم الخوفِ عنِّي

“*O Master Lord, in Your remembrance my heart takes delight, with
prayers I hold communion with You, it freezes the pain of fear that
torments me*.”[^2]11

A pious man is not one who does not possess anything but one who is not
slave of anything.

Therefore, a pious man is a sublime soul released from the humiliating,
materialistic captivity and soaring in the infinite space seeking God.
Such a man has become familiar with supernatural pleasures. His joy and
sorrow depends on that type of pleasure, not on worldly pleasures, which
are little provision and exposed to rapid annihilation.

Therefore, when a man reaches that stage of spiritual perfection to find
himself above the world and its desires, he will never become captive of
carnal desires. He neither violates other people’s rights nor allows
them to violate the rights of other human beings. Acting on the basis of
his religious duty, such a man is steadfast in preserving his own rights
and those of others in defending justice, and will not spare his life in
the path of God.

The vivid lives of the Imams (as), and at the top of them the life of
Imam ‘Ali (as), is good examples. Being at the zenith of piety and
detached from the world both physically and spiritually, Imam ‘Ali (as)
displayed to the world the highest degree of respect for other people’s
rights, defense of social justice, and proved consistency of piety with
living a social life and a sound way of living.

### Summary

A spiritual virtue, which makes man’s real personality outstanding and
in the light of which man’s Hereafter and worldly life becomes
meaningful is piety, an outcome of man’s heart being illuminated with
the light of God’s cognition and man’s affinity with God. This is not
possible except by worshipping Him ad performing what is known as
religious duties. The present decadence is due to man’s failure to know
himself.

The reason why corruption has spread throughout the world, the human
society has been entangled in the bottleneck of a bestial life, and
there is no way out is because man has failed to recognize his own
stand. He has been deviated from acts of worship and God seeking path,
which is his special task. Man’s big sin is failure to get to know
himself, which will lead to knowledge of God.

Being A Servant of God Is Man’s Dignity
---------------------------------------

The fact that God has assigned acts of worship for human beings is a
sign of God’s grace towards man. By calling man to His House and by
giving him the honor of being called the servant of Allah, God has made
man distinct from other creatures. If human beings could only understand
what dignity this title gives, they would ignore all the worldly titles
and would not think of anything other than qualifying for that title.

When man becomes servant of God, his heart will be put at rest. He will
neither feel sad about any misfortune nor rejoice at any fortune. When
he passes away, he will receive God’s mercy, will enjoy the everlasting
bliss, and will associate with the prophets and the Imams, that is a
great victory.

Impact of Worship at Soul
-------------------------

God-seekers believe that acts of worship and religious duties are
different from one another in terms of leaving a certain impact on soul
and its perfection. Some of them have the quality of purification while
others adorn the soul; some of them remove darkness from the soul while
others illuminate man’s soul. For example, charity purifies man’s heart
from the evil of love for wealth. In this relation, the Holy Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذْ مِنْ أمْوالِهِمْ صَدَقَةً تُطَهِّرُهُمْ وتُزَكِّيهِمْ بِها
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Take alms out of their property, you would cleanse them and purify
them thereby. (9:103)”***

Observing fast –*Sawm-* strengthens one’s will and power of resistance
against carnal desires, leading to piety and immunity. In this relation,
the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أيّها الّذينَ آمَنُوا كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الصِّيامُ كَما كُتِبَ عَلى
الّذينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you, as it was
prescribed for those before you, so that you may guard against evil.
(2:183)”***

The virtue of prayer is to illuminate man’s soul with the light of the
heavens and the earth. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِمِ الصّلاةَ لِذِكْري
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Keep up prayer for My remembrance. (20:14)”***

Nevertheless, Hajj has a double purpose—it has the quality of
purification and it is ornament as well. They both remove darkness of
mammonism from heart and bring about illumination of God’s remembrance.

Almsgiving, being far from one’s family, having no ease and comfort of
one’s home, one’s business and jobs, tolerating the sufferings of a
trip, having to put up with short-tempered co-travelers, sunburn,
insufficient sleep, performing rather unfamiliar acts are not pleasant
by the norms of the superficial intellect.

Yet, throwing pebbles at Satan in Mina, waling at fast pace, getting out
of one’s normal clothes, and shaving one’s hair are extremely useful in
purifying man’s heart from the evil of arrogance, egotism and in taming
the haughty and the disobedient souls. This is party of the purifying
quality of Hajj.

As for the ornamental virtue of Hajj, it is both moral and spiritual.
Hajj congregation leads to Ummah’s supremacy among other nations.

Hajj, A Lively Act
------------------

Hajj, which is full of meaning and spirit, can be inspiring and bring
about such ritual effects. Ceremonial rites devoid of truth are not
expected to bring about prosperity or dignity. In this relation, the
Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ في ذلِكَ لَذِكْرى لمَنْ كَانَ لَهُ قَلْبٌ أوْ ألْقى السَّمْعَ
وهُوَ شَهيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely, there is a reminder in this for him who has a heart or
he gives ear and is a witness. (50:38)”***

Beyond doubt, like healing medicine, religious duties are composed of
ingredients with divine formula, which will leave great effects on the
human societies. Nevertheless, susceptible temperaments are needed to
manifest those effects.

Hajj of most people is devoid of spirit
---------------------------------------

Unfortunately, most people who go on Hajj have neither a heart to
understand the meaning of Hajj nor give an ear to those who have a heart
so as to perform the Hajj rites which are full of spirit.

They would rather perform the Hajj rites hastily, get out of the state
of Ihram and restriction, and then engage in taking photos, buying
souvenirs, or doing business. They think they have achieved the ultimate
goal of Hajj and return home purified like when they were born of their
mother!

Hajj Devoid of Spirit Has No Living Effects
-------------------------------------------

Hajj devoid of spirit cannot possibly purify man’s heart from vices and
adorn it with virtues nor can it turn human beings divine. Socially too,
it cannot give dignity to the ummah nor can it give supremacy or world
leadership to the ummah.

A clear proof of Muslim’s Hajj being abortive in our times is the fact
that this great religious duty is performed every year with much glory
but, unfortunately, does not produce the intended result. Its radiant
effects, including purification of the soul and the ummah’s supremacy,
some of the inevitable results of Hajj as mentioned in the Holy Qur’an
and Sunnah, are not noticeable.

[^1]: See as-Sahifat al-Kamila as-Sajjadiyya

[^2]: See Duaa Abu-Hamza ath-Themali


