Spiritual Philosophy of Hajj
============================

God’s favor to man
------------------

Indisputably, God has created man of earth in order to nurture him
during his worldly life with the heavenly teachings of the prophets,
remove pollutions from him, make him pure, and promote him to the
highest stage of affinity with Himself.

Since an earthy man is not worthy of affinity with God, and if such a
man is left to himself, he will be drowned in the quagmire of lusts, God
Who has made man evolutionize from the stage of mineral to plant and
from plant to animal and then to human, can promote man to a stage
making him unison with the angels.

God does not withhold His favor from man and protects him with His
special kindness and mercy. To prepare man to ascend to a metaphysical
world, God has made a house of stone and mud in this world calling it
His House and inviting his helpless and shelterless servants to shower
them with His special blessings.

God has called all servants on the earth to make pilgrimage to Mecca,
circumambulate His House, and link their hearts to the Lord of the House
so as to gradually prepare themselves for visiting the Lord of the
universe. God says (in a Hadith Qudsi[^1]):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لم تَسَعْني أَرضِي ولا سَمائِي وَوَسِعَني قَلبُ عَبدِيَ المُؤمِنِ
اللّيّنُ الوادِعُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I am not contained in the earth nor in the heavens, but I am contained
in the soft and tranquil heart of My believing servant.”[^2]50

Whoever goes to Mecca on foot will circumambulate the Kaaba, but whoever
goes there with his heart present, the Kaaba will circumambulate him.

The King Makes A Palace in A Ruined Village
-------------------------------------------

What a great favor God has done to human beings to choose a House for
Himself on the earth! What need does God have for a house in a ruined
village? To fondle the villagers and to shower them with favor, God has
chosen a house of the village as His to invite the helpless people to it
once a week, a month, or a year calling them His guests and bestowing
gifts on them so that they will improve their living conditions, learn
manners, obtain knowledge and gnosticism, come to the city from the
village and come to the capital city to be worthy of being received by
the king and become his favorites.

God is too Great to be contained in a ruined village and take a house
there. But the favor He has done to the villagers had made them feel
dignified in a way to say that we are so much respected by the King that
He has made a house among us and we have a link with Him. He is near us
and we seek the settlement of our need from Him.

What a favor it is that God Who is free from any defect and need has
been so kind as to make a house of stone and mud for Himself making Him
a neighbor of the servants to imply that ‘I am with you; ask Me for
everything.’ He has also appointed all mosques as His Houses making
Himself available to His servants.

God has not said: You have necessarily to come to the heavens to seek
help from Me or you have to come to Mecca to visit Me. I accept any
corner you choose in My Name as My House and will receive you. I
consider any hour in day or night you stand for prayer at home in the
direction of My House as pilgrimage to My House and will answer your
call and attend to your needs. Therefore, glorify Allah, the Merciful
King, there is no god but He; the Lord of the universe.

Hajj, A Display of Man’s Spiritual Journey
------------------------------------------

The external acts of Hajj symbolize the spiritual stages of the prophets
and the Imams. Hajj is a display of the spiritual journey of the
devotees and the stages of servitude. The essence of worship is the
journey towards God and the external acts of Hajj, devoid of presence of
the heart, are not considered as worship. The Holy Prophet (saw) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنمَا فُرِضَتِ الصّلاةُ وأُمِر بِالحَجِّ والطّوافِ وأُشْعِرتِ
المَناسِكُ لإقَامَةِ ذِكْرِ اللهِ، فإِذا لم يكُنْ في قَلبِكَ
لِلمذكُورِ الّذي هو المَقصُودُ والمُبتَغى عَظَمَةٌ ولا هَيبَةٌ فَما
قيمَةُ ذِكْرِك؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The daily prayer, Hajj, circumambulation, and the other rites are aimed
at remembering Allah. But when there is no remembrance of Him in your
heart, what value will your oral remembrance have?”[^3]51

The Holy Qur’an has blamed the heedless worshippers

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَيْلٌ لِلْمُصَلِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ صَلَاتِهِمْ سَاهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So, woe to the praying ones who are unmindful of their prayers.
(107:4, 5)”-,***

and forbidden offering prayers while being drunk –

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَقْرَبُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَأَنْتُمْ
سُكَارَىٰ حَتَّىٰ تَعْلَمُوا مَا تَقُولُونَ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Do not go near prayer when you are intoxicated
until you know what you say. (4:43)***

Genuflection and prostration are worthy if they indicate humbleness of
soul and broken heart. The spiritual path too is real only when it is
manifested in the form of bodily acts. As long as man continues to live
in this world, his soul and body are not separate.

Man’s body is a manifestation of his soul and the acts of the body are
manifestations of his inner feelings. In the same way that physical acts
represent spiritual acts, the physical acts push the soul towards
spiritual journey.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِليهِ يَصْعَدُ الكَلِمُ الطّيِّبُ والعَمَلُ الصّالِحُ يَرْفَعُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To Him do ascend the good words; and the good deeds life them up.
(The Holy Qur’an 35:10)”***

Physical prostration that symbolizes humbleness and a broken heart is
true only when it illuminates man’s inner being, making the soul ascend
to the heavens to sit with the angels, otherwise prostration based on
hypocrisy, pretense, and habit will have no spiritual effect on the
soul.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحاً مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَى وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيِّبَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever does good whether male or female and he is believer, We will
most certainly make him a happy life. (The Holy Qur’an; 16:97)”***

Reflect on the following Hadith in which God spoke to the Holy Prophet
(saw) on his Midnight Ascension –*israa and Mi’raj*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَن عَمِلَ بِرضَائِي أُلزِمْهُ ثلاثَ خِصالٍ: أُعَرِّفُهُ شُكْراً لا
يُخَالِطُهُ الجَهلُ وَذِكْراً لا يُخَالِطُهُ النّسْيانُ ومَحَبّةً لا
يُؤثِرُ على مَحَبّتي المَخلُوقِين. فَإِذا أَحَبّني أَحْبَبْتُهُ
وأَفتَحُ عَينَ قَلبِهِ إلى جَلالِي فلا أُخْفِي عَلَيهِ خَاصَّةَ خَلقِي
فَأُناجِيهِ في ظُلَمِ اللّيلِ ونُورِ النّهارِ حتّى يَنقَطِعَ حَديثُهُ
مع المَخلُوقِينَ ومُجالَسَتُهُ مَعَهُم وأُسْمِعُهُ كَلامِي وكَلامَ
مَلائِكَتي وأُعَرِّفُهُ السّرَّ الّذِي سَترْتُهُ عَن خَلْقِي
وأُلبِسُهُ الحَياءَ حتّى يَستَحيِي مِنهُ الخَلقُ كُلُّهُم ويمْشِي في
الأرضِ مَغفوراً لهُ وأَجعَلُ قَلبَهُ واعِياً وبَصِيراً ولا يَخفَى
عَلَيهِ شَيٌء مِن جَنَّةٍ ولا نارٍ وأُعَرّفُهُ ما يمُرّ عَلى النّاسِ
في يَومِ القِيامَةِ منَ الهَولِ والشّدَّةِ وما أُحاسِبُ بهِ الأغنِياءَ
والفُقَراءَ والجُهّالَ والعُلَماءَ وأُنوِّرُ في قَبرِهِ وأُنزِلُ
عَليهِ مُنكَراً ونَكيراً حتّى يَسأَلاهُ ولا يَرى غَمَّ المَوتِ
وظُلْمَةَ القَبرِ واللَّحْدِ حتّى أَنصُبَ لهُ ميزانَهُ وأَنشُرَ لهُ
دِيوانَهُ ثُمَّ أَضَعُ كِتابَهُ في يَمِينِهِ فَيَقرَأَهُ مَنشُوراً
ثُمّ لا أَجعَلُ بَيني وبَينَهُ تَرجُماناً. فهذِهِ صِفاتُ المُحِبّين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever tries to win My pleasure, I will commit him to three
characteristics; I will acquaint him with an approach of gratitude that
is free from ignorance, a form of (continuous) remembrance of Me that is
free from oblivion, and a kind of love with which he will never prefer
the love for any creature to Mine.

When he loves Me, I will love him and will then open the eyes of his
heart to My Glory making him so intimate to Me and will confide him with
supplication to Me in the heart of nights and daylight to the degree
that he will stop speaking and associating with people. I, too, will
make him hear My own words and those of the angels and reveal to him the
invisible facts that I hide from My creatures. I will garb him with the
uniform of prudency that all My creatures will act modestly towards him.

He will walk on the earth guiltlessly, I will cause his heart to be
cognizant and discerning, and he will be acquainted with all the affairs
of Paradise and Hell. I will reveal to him the hardships of the Day of
Judgment, including the way how I will settle account with the rich,
poor, ignorant, and scholars.

I will light up his grave, ask Munkar and Nakeer –the two angels in
charge of the interrogation in graves- to interrogate him, he will
neither experience the agony of death nor the darkness of the grave
until the Balance –of his deeds- will be deposited for him and the
registry –of his deeds- will be opened and the book of his deeds will be
finally put into his right hand and he will read it peacefully and there
will be no interpreter between Me and him. These are the characteristics
of the lovers of Allah.”[^4]52

From Qur’anic Verses and Hadiths it is inferred that it is in the inner
part of man that spiritual journey takes place and it is in the light of
the physical acts that man’s soul becomes so illuminated that it will
see no other being as real but God. In this connection, the Holy Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَنُرِيهِمْ آياتِنا في الآفَاقِ وفي أَنفُسِهِمْ حَتّى يَتَبَيَّنَ
لهُمْ أَنَّهُ الحَقُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We will soon show them Our sings in the universe and in their own
souls until it will become quite clear to them that it is the truth.
(41:53)”***

It is in the state that a godly man is so plunged in the sea of
knowledge and God’s love that he will hear, see, and recognize
everything with the light of God and he will become manifestation of
God’s Attributes and recipient of God’s Mercy. In this relation, the
Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَمَنْ كَانَ مَيْتاً فَأَحْيَيْنَاهُ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُ نُوراً يَمْشِي
بِهِ في النَّاسِ كَمَنْ مَثَلُهُ في الظُّلُمَاتِ لَيْسَ بِخَارِجٍ
مِنْهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is he who was dead then We raised him to life and made for him a
light by which he walks among the people like him whose likeness is that
of one in utter darkness whence he cannot come forth? (6:122)”***

Worship is the journey of the soul and a continued spiritual life in
divine light. Since there is unity and interaction between man’s body
and soul, the journey of the spirit will be naturally manifested in
body, and physical acts in prayer too will influence the soul’s
spiritual life. Since spiritual journey is found in the prophets and the
Imams in its highest degree, their spiritual lives are said to be
presented to man in the form of prayer, fasting, Hajj, almsgiving, and
other religious duties. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لقَدَ كَانَ لَكُمْ في رَسُولِ اللهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly, you have in the Apostle of Allah an excellent exemplar.
(33:21)”***

In this Qur’anic Verse, the Messenger of God has been introduced as
excellent exemplar, and people are duty-bound to adapt their deed and
ethical lives to those of the Holy Prophet (saw). Addressing the Holy
Prophet (saw), the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ اللهُ
وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: if you love Allah, then follow me; Allah will love you and
forgive your faults. (3:31)”***

In this Qur’anic Verse, adherence to the Holy Prophet (saw) through
journey towards God, affinity, and being loved by Him has been
mentioned.

The Imams; the Truth of the Religion and Religious Duties
---------------------------------------------------------

Many Hadiths testify that the purpose of prayer, fasting, Hajj,
almsgiving, and the other acts of worship mentioned in the Holy Qur’an
is the Imams (as) as interpreted by the exegetes of the Holy Qur’an:

Dawud ibn Kathir quotes Imam Sadiq (as) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا داوُدُ، نحنُ الصّلاةُ في كِتابِ اللهِ ونحنُ الزّكاةُ ونحنُ الصّيامُ
ونحنُ الحَجُّ ونحنُ الشّهرُ الحَرامُ ونحنُ البَلدُ الحَرامُ ونحنُ
كَعبَةُ اللهِ ونحنُ قِبلَةُ اللهِ ونحنُ وَجهُ اللهِ - قَالَ تعَالى:
فَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللهِ – ونحنُ الآياتُ ونحنُ
البَيّناتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O Dawud, we are (the purpose of) the prayer in the Book of Allah, we
are the (meaning of) almsgiving, fasting, Hajj, Sacred Month, the Sacred
City, the Kaaba, Kiblah, and the Face of Allah Who says: ***“Whither you
turn, thither is Allah’s Face. (The Holy Qur’an; 2:115)”*** We are the
clear signs of Allah.[^5]53

Al-Mufazzal ibn Umar quotes Imam Sadiq (as) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمّ إِني أُخبِرُكَ أنَّ الدّينَ وأَصلَ الدّينِ هُو رَجُلٌ؛ وذلِك
الرّجُلُ هو اليَقينُ والإيمانُ وهو إِمامُ أُمَّتِهِ أو أهْلُ زَمانِهِ
فَمن عَرِفَهُ عَرِفَ اللهَ ودِينَهُ ومَنْ أَنكَرَهُ أَنكَرَ اللهَ
ودينَهُ ومَن جَهِلهُ جهِلَ اللهَ ودينَهُ ولا يُعرَفُ اللهُ ودينُهُ
وحُدودُهُ وشَرائعُهُ بغَيرِ ذلِك الإمامِ فَذلِك معنى أَنّ معرِفَةَ
الرّجالِ دينُ اللهِ... - الى أن قال عليه السلام -  وأُخبرُكَ أَنّي لو
قُلتُ أنّ الصّلاةَ والزكَاةَ وصومَ شهرِ رَمَضانَ والحَجَّ والعُمرةَ
والمسجِدَ الحَرامَ والبيتَ الحرامَ والطّهورَ والإغتِسالَ مِن الجَنابةِ
وكُلَّ فريضَةٍ كان ذلِك هو النبيَّ الذي جَاء به مِن عندِ ربِّهِ
لَصَدقْتُ لأنّ ذلك كُلّهُ إنمَا يُعرَفُ بالنّبيِّ ولولا معرِفةُ ذلِك
النبيِّ والإيمانُ بهِ والتّسليمُ له ما عُرفَ ذلِك. فهذا كلّهُ ذلِك
النبيُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Let me inform you that the religion and the root of the religion is a
man; a man of faith and certainty. He is the same Imam of the ummah and
the Imam of his time. Whoever knows him has known Allah and the religion
of Allah, whoever denies him has denied Allah and His religion, and
whoever keeps ignorant of him has kept ignorant of Allah and His
religion. Except through that Imam, no one can understand Allah, His
religion, and the religious laws. This is the meaning of ‘the religion
of Allah is the cognition of men.’

…I inform you that I have told the truth if I say that the prayer,
almsgiving, fasting, Hajj, the Sacred Mosque, the House of Allah,
ablution, ritual washing, and all the religious duties are the same
prophet who has brought all these precepts from Allah. Getting to know
these religious duties is the only way for getting to know the Prophet.
If you cannot get to know, believe in, and submit to the Prophet, you
cannot get to know the truths. Therefore, the purpose of all these
truths is the prophet.”[^6]54

The Imam is the criterion of the belief, ethics, and deeds
----------------------------------------------------------

The criterion of the truth of man’s belief, ethics, and deeds in the
world and the Hereafter is the Imam. Sheikh as-Saduq quotes Husham ibn
Salim as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَأَلتُ أبا عبدِاللهِ عليهِ السلامُ عَن قولِ اللهِ تعَالى: "وَنَضَعُ
المَوازِينَ القِسْطَ لِيَومِ القِيامَةِ فَلا تُظلَمُ نَفسٌ شَيئاً."
قال: هُمُ الأنبياءُ والأوصِياءُ. –وفي رواية أخرى عنهم عليهم السلام: -
نحْنُ المَوازينُ القِسطُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I asked Imam Sadiq (as) about the meaning of the Qur’anic Verse, ***‘And
We will set up a balance on the Day of Resurrection; so, no soul shall
be dealt with unjustly in the least. (21:47).’*** He (as) answered:
“They are the prophets and their successors. -According to another
narration related to the Imams (as):- “We are the balance of
justice.”[^7]55

### The Imam, the straight path of god

As he was asked about the meaning of ‘the straight path’ in the Qur’anic
Verses, Imam Sadiq (as) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هوَ واللهِ عَلِيٌّ. هوَ واللهِ الصّراطُ والمِيزانُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By Allah, it is ‘Ali. He is the Straight Path and the Balance.”[^8]56

Sheikh Saduq says: As Imam Sadiq (as) was asked about the ‘Straight
Path’, he answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هوَ الطّريقُ إلى معرِفةِ اللهِ عزَّ وجلَّ وهُما صِراطانِ: صِراطٌ في
الدّنيا وصِراطٌ في الآخِرةِ. وأمّا الصِّراطُ في الدّنيا فهُو الإمامُ
المُفتَرَضُ طاعتُهُ؛ مَن عرِفَهُ في الدّنيا واقتَدى بِهُداهُ مَرَّ على
الصِّراطِ الّذي هو جِسرُ جَهَنَّمَ في الآخِرةِ ومَن لم يَعرِفْهُ في
الدّنيا زلّتْ قَدَمُهُ عَن الصِّراطِ في الآخِرةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is the path to the knowledge of Allah, Glorified and Majestic is He.
They are two paths; one is in the world and the other in the Hereafter.
The path in this world is the Imam the obedience to whom is obligatory.
Whoever knows him and follows his guidance will pass the Bridge of the
Requital in the Hereafter. But whoever does not know him in this worldly
life will stumble and fall into Hell.”[^9]57

Imam Sadiq (as) also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصِّراطُ المُستَقيمُ أميرُ المؤمِنينَ عليه السلامُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Straight Path is Amir ul-Mu’mineen (The Commander of the Faithful;
namely Imam ‘Ali).”[^10]58

Imam ‘Ali (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنا صَلاةُ المُؤمِنينَ وصِيامُهُم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I am the prayer and the fasting of the believing men.”[^11]59

Some people however have misinterpreted the above-mentioned Hadith,
claiming that when one recognizes his Imam, he is not obliged to perform
the religious duties, for the recognition of the Imam is considered as
prayer, fasting, Hajj, almsgiving, and jihad. They invoke the Hadith,
‘When you reach the stage of cognition, do as you wish.’

Rejecting this idea, Imam Sadiq (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَهُ مَن كَانَ يَدينُ بِهذِه الصّفةِ التي كُتِبَت فهُو عِندي مُشرِكٌ
بِاللهِ بَيِّنُ الشِّركِ لا شكَّ فيهِ. لم يبعثِ اللهُ نبِياً يدعو إلى
مَعرفَةٍ ليسَ معَها طاعَةٌ في أمرٍ ونهيٍ فإِنما يَقبلُ اللهُ منَ
العبادِ العملَ بالفَرائضِ الّتي افترضَها اللهُ على حُدودِها مع معرِفةِ
مَن جاءَهُم بهِ مِن عندِهِ ودعاهُم إليهِ فأوّلُ ذلِك معرفةُ مَن دَعا
إليهِ ثمّ طاعتُهُ فيما يقرّبُهُ إليهِ مِن الطاعةِ لهُ وأنّه مَن عرِفَ
أطاعَ ومَن أطاعَ حرّم الحرامَ ظاهرَهُ وباطنَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He who believes in such matter is, in my sight, evidently polytheist.
Allah has not ordained any prophet to invite people to cognition without
obeying the commandments and prohibitions being accompanied by
cognition.

Allah has asked His servants to act to all religious duties but after
getting to know the one who has brought those commandments and calls
people to Allah. Therefore, cognition is of primary and obedience is of
secondary importance. Whoever reaches cognition will become obedient and
whoever becomes obedient will consider disobedience as sin.”

Muhammad ibn Marid reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلتُ لأبي عبدِاللهِ عليهِ السلامُ: حَديثٌ رُوِيَ لنا أنّك قُلتَ "إذا
عَرفْتَ فَاعمَلْ ما شِئتَ؟"
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 فقالَ (عليه السلام): قدْ قُلتُ ذلكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قلتُ: وإِنْ زَنوا أو سَرقوا أو شرِبوا الخَمرَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 فقالَ  (عليه السلام) لي: إِنا للهِ وإِنا إليهِ راجِعونَ! واللهِ ما
أنصَفونا أَنْ نكُونَ أخَذنَا بالعَملِ ووُضِعَ عنهُم. إنمَا قلتُ إذا
عرِفتَ فاعملْ ما شِئتَ من قَليلِ الخَيرِ وكثيرِه فإنّه يُقبلُ مِنكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I asked Imam Sadiq (as) whether he has actually said the hadith, ‘When
you reach the stage of cognition, do as you wish,’ that is related by
some people. The Imam said: “I have said it.”  
 I asked: “Even such doings are adultery, theft, or drinking of wine?”

He (as) answered: “Surely, we belong to Allah and to Him we will
return.[^12] By Allah, it is not fair that we are obliged to perform
religious duties and they are free! I have said that when you reach the
stage of cognition (of Allah), do good deed a little or as much as you
can, for it will be accepted by Allah.”[^13]61

### Summary

To sum it up, the external feature of the Hajj rites represents
spiritual journey of a perfect man who has gone through different stages
of servitude, detached from worldly ties and ornaments, and rescued from
darkness and entered into the illuminated kingdom of God. Therefore, a
true Hajj is an evolution in soul. It is not a plaything or
entertainment as some ignorant people think, for their performance is
more like a game than worship.

Malik ibn Anas says:

One year, I accompanied Imam Sadiq (as) in the Hajj pilgrimage. Being on
the back of his horse and in the state of Ihram, the Imam (as) was
trying to utter ‘Labbayk’ but his voice stuck in his throat. He
therefore rode off his horse.  
 I said: *“O son of the Messenger of Allah! Say ‘Labbayk’, you have to
say it.”*  
 He (as) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا بنَ أبي عامِر، كيفَ أجسِرُ أنْ أقولَ: لَبّيْكَ اللّهمَّ لَبّيكَ،
وأخْشى أنْ يَقولَ عزّ وجلّ لا لَبّيكَ ولا سَعْدَيكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O son of Abi-Amir, how dare I say it? I fear that Allah will not answer
me nor let me in.”[^14]62

Hajj, Spiritual Journey Not Physical Acts
-----------------------------------------

The Imams’ sayings act as warning to the ignorant ones that Hajj is the
journey of soul, not distance. If a man’s soul gets into the state of
Ihram, reaches the House of God, touches the Black Stone[^15] with the
hand of the heart, stays on Mount Arafat with full heart, stops in
al-Mash’ar al-Haram with full soul, sacrifices the sheep of the carnal
desires with the knife of certitude and submission (to the Lord), he has
performed a true Hajj.

The Hajj of Prophet Ibrahim (as), A Spiritual One
-------------------------------------------------

Prophet Ibrahim (as) reached such a stage of contentment and submission
(to the Lord) inspired by God that he was ready to sacrifice his son for
his Lord. He rolled up his sleeves without hesitation, laid down his
endeared son, put the sharp knife on his throat, and thought of nothing
but carrying out God’s order. Such a degree of cognition of God is the
result of his true spiritual journey.

He truly visited God’s House and out of sincerity took off the garment
of pleasure and worldly inclinations from his soul and put on a garment
of submission to God and said ‘Labbayk’ from the bottom of his heart,
entered into the sanctuary, stayed in the lap of the mountain of
cognition, immersed his senses in divine thoughts, and saw world
ornaments as worthless pebbles. He took his son to the altar and put the
knife on his throat in Mina saying to himself, ‘I turn my face to the
direction of the One Who originated the heavens and the earth.’[^16]64

Reaching such a state requires traversing different stages including
giving up pleasures, forgetting one’s desires, and throwing pebbles at
the alluring Satan to a degree that God’s pleasure is considered above
the life of even the endeared son.

Content, Not Form, Is Important
-------------------------------

It is strange to see that people in everyday life look for truth and
reality but when the religion and the Hereafter is concerned, they
become content with form and external feature rather than true meanings.
We never expect a sugarless piece of cake to taste sweet, but consider a
prayer without the presence of heart as perfect, complaining to God that
we have offered our prayer but we have not seen a positive effect!

A nourishing food or a trip of leisure leave certain effects, how is it
then that a month-long fasting and being guest of God do not leave any
effect on souls? How is it acceptable that we do not benefit by the
supplications while we have the household of the Prophet -the Ahl
ul-Bayt- (as) as the best spiritual food and the means for purification?
How is it that a weak-long trip to the seaside changes our complexion,
but seven-fold circumambulations of the Kaaba, visiting the graveside of
the Holy Prophet (saw) and the Imams (as) do not change our souls?

As a matter of fact, if we take the title of Hajji off most of those who
have been to Mecca, what emblem of Mecca, circumambulation, or touching
the Black Stone do we see in them?

Where Are the True Feature of Islam and the Effect of Prostration?
------------------------------------------------------------------

Do Muslims not have, according to the Holy Qur’an, a special feature
making them distinct from others, and that is the marks of prostration,
humbleness, and submission to God?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِيمَاهُمْ فِي وُجُوهِهِمْ مِنْ أَثَرِ السُّجُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Their marks are in their faces because of the prostration. (The
Holy Qur’an; 48:29)”***

The effect of prostration alone in the face of a Muslim is not a sign of
servitude; rather it should be seen in his business, culture, and all
aspects of life. Regrettably, what is not seen in the life of the ummah
is the true feature of Islam and the marks of prostration. In certain
cases, the feature of unbelievers is seen in Muslims’ lives.

Read the Following Reports and Get To Know the Feature of A Shiite Muslim
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُويَ عَن أميرِ المُؤمنِينَ عليهِ السلامُ أنّهُ خرجَ ذاتَ ليلةٍ منَ
المسجِدِ – وكانتْ ليلةً قَمراءَ- فَأمَّ الجَبّانةَ ولحِقَهُ جماعةٌ
يقفُونَ إِثرَهُ، فَوقفَ عليهِم ثمّ قال : مَن أنتم؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالوا : شيعتُكَ يا أميرَ المُؤمنِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 فَتفَرّسَ في وجُوهِهِم ثمّ قال : فَما لي لا أَرى عليكُم سِيماءَ
الشّيعةِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قالوا : وما سِيماءُ الشّيعةِ يا أميرَ المُؤمنِينَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قال : صُفرُ الوجوهِ من السَّهرِ، عُمشُ العيونِ من البُكاءِ، حُدبُ
الظّهورِ من القِيامِ، خُمصُ البطونِ من الصّيامِ، ذُبلُ الشِّفاهِ من
الدُّعاءِ، عليهِم غَبَرَةُ الخاشِعينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It was narrated that, once, during a moonlit night, Imam ‘Ali (as),
coming out of the mosque, headed for wilderness. The crowd following him
reached there. He asked about their identity, and they answered, ‘O Amir
ul-Mu’mineen, we are your Shiites (followers). The Imam cast a deep look
at them, saying, ‘How is it that I do not see any mark of Shiism on your
faces?’

‘What are the marks of a Shiite Muslim?’ they asked, and the Imam (as)
answered:

‘Those who are pale of keeping vigilance, weeping out of fear of Allah,
bent out of too much standing for prayer, hungry due to fasting,
dry-mouthed because of supplications, with marks of prostration in their
faces.’[^17]65

This is another narration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبي عبدِاللهِ عليهِ السلامُ قالَ: كَانَ علِيُّ بنُ الحُسينِ عليهِ
السلامُ قاعِداً في بيتِه إذ قَرعَ قومٌ عليهِ البابَ، فقالَ : يا جاريةُ
انظُري مَن بالبابِ، فَقالوا : قَومٌ مِن شيعتِكَ. فَوثبَ عجلانَ حتّى
كادَ أن يَقعَ، فَلمّا فتحَ البابَ ونظَر إليهِم رَجعَ وقال: كذِبوا
فأَينَ السَّمْتُ في الوجوهِ ؟ أين أثَر ُالعِبادةِ؟ أينَ سِيماءُ
السّجودِ؟ إنّما شِيعتُنا يُعرَفونَ بعبادتِهِم وشَعَثِهِم؛ قَد قَرِحتْ
منهُم الآنافُ، ودَثرَت الجِباهُ والمَساجدُ. خُمصُ البُطونِ، ذُبلُ
الشّفاهِ، قد هيّجَتِ العبادةُ وجوهَهُم، وأَخلَقَ سهرُ اللّيالي وقَطعُ
الهَواجرِ جُثَثهُم، المُسبِّحونَ إذا سَكَتَ النّاسُ، والمُصَلّونَ إذا
نامَ الناسُ، والمحَزُونونَ إذا فَرِح النّاسُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Sadiq (as) narrated: As he was sitting in his house, a group of
people knocked the door at Imam Sajjad (as). He asked his slave girl to
see who it was. They shouted, ‘It is a group of your Shiites.’ The Imam
(as) jumped so hurriedly that he was about to fall down. When he opened
the door, he took back and said, ‘They must be lying. Where is the mark
of Shiism on their faces? Where are the marks of prostration on them?

Our Shiites are known of fear of the Day of Judgment, their foreheads
having the marks of prostration, being thin due to fasting, and
dry-mouthed because of supplications. The prayer makes their faces
wrinkled, keeping vigilance, and fasting on hot days make their bodies
exhausted. When (other) people are at rest, they (the true Shiites)
glorify Allah, when people are asleep, they are in prayers, and when
people are merry making, they are sad.’[^18]66

### Note

The same God-fearing, enlightened people, in their love for the
Hereafter, have fought the enemies of God throughout the history of
Islam. They considered martyrdom in the way of God as the highest degree
of happiness and the best means for affinity with God.

We therefore realize that a true Shiite is pious and heedless of the
worldly ornaments but does not live the life of a recluse. He stands
against the oppressing powers with his strong faith and steadfastness.
Describing such people, the Holy Qur’an says:

***“Those who fight in His way in ranks as if they were a firm and
compact wall. (61:4)”***

Therefore, no one can say that the school based on piety, detachment
from this world, prostration, and prayer fails to nurture heroes.

Nevertheless, we stand in prayer with our heart full of love for this
world without God’s remembrance. We fast with a soul polluted with sins.
We go on Hajj pilgrimage with illegally gotten money, abandon what is
obligatory but do what is praiseworthy and expect the positive effects
on our lives and wish to be among the angels at the same time!

Addressing to Jesus (as), God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عِيسَى، قُل لِظَلَمَةِ بني إسْرائِيلَ: لا تَدعُوني والسُّحْتُ تحتَ
أَحضَانِكُم والأصْنامُ في بُيوتِكُم، فإِني آلَيتُ أنْ أُجيبَ مَن
دَعانِي وأَنْ أجعَلَ إِجابَتي إيّاهُم لَعناً حتّى يَتفرَّقوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Jesus, tell the Israeli wrongdoers not to call upon Me while they
have illegal riches under their arms and keep idols at home, for I have
sworn I will answer one who calls upon Me. My answer to the call for
these wrongdoers is to curse them until they part from one
another.”[^19]67

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عِيسَى، قُل لهُم قَلِّموا أَظفارَكُم مِن كَسْبِ الحَرامِ وأَصِمُّوا
أَسماعَكُم مِن ذِكْرِ الخَنى وأَقبِلوا عَلَيَّ بِقلوبِكم فإِنّي لستُ
أُريدُ صُورَكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Jesus, tell them: Take your nails off illegal business, cover your
ears from obscenity, and come to Me with full heart, for I certainly do
not want your external faces.”[^20]68

A religious report says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن حَجَّ مِن غَيرِ حِلِّهِ ثمّ لبّى قالَ اللهُ عزّ وجلّ له: لا
لَبّيكَ ولا سَعدَيكَ حتّى تَرُدّ ما في يَديكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whoever goes on Hajj with illegal money when saying Labbayk, Allah will
say: I will not accept your ‘Labbayk’ until you return the money to its
owner.”[^21]69

Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*“How much wailing and how few devoted hajjis are!”*[^22]*70*

(In other words, the noise of the performers of Hajj is extremely loud
but, unfortunately, real performers of Hajj are very few.)

What Is the Cause of Skepticism
-------------------------------

Skepticism about religious laws made by certain individuals has
different motivations. Part of it is by prejudiced and malevolent
individuals aimed at diluting Muslims’ ideology so as to carry out their
destructive plots in the Islamic society and to attain their satanic
goal.

Another part arises from ignorance of the truth and philosophy of the
heavenly teachings. These skeptics see the external face but they are
unaware of the philosophy behind them. These people are ignorant,
arrogant, egotist, and unwilling to understand the philosophy of the
religion.

The Skepticism of A Materialist Thirteen Centuries Ago
------------------------------------------------------

Ibn-Abi’l-Aujaa was unbeliever. He was an abusive orator whom scholars
avoided for his sharp tongue. It was Hajj season when he was sitting
with a group of unbelievers in the Sacred Mosque looking at pilgrims
mockingly. In another corner of the Mosque,

Imam Sadiq (as) was sitting surrounded by the Shiites who benefited by
his heavenly knowledge. The unbelievers turned to Ibn-Abi’l-Aujaa
saying: *“How good it is to debate with the man sitting there surrounded
by his devotees making him ashamed!”*

Ibn-Abi’l-Aujaa who was too proud of himself said: *“I will go right now
and make him helpless.”* Entering into the Imam’s assembly,
Ibn-Abi’l-Aujaa said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أبا عبدِ الله، إنّ المجالسَ أماناتٌ ولا بُدّ لكُلِّ مَن كان به
سُعالٌ أن يسعلَ، فتأذنُ لي بالسؤالِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Abu-Abdullah, assemblies are safe. (He was afraid of being killed by
the believers.) Everyone having phlegm in his chest has to cough it out.
(i.e. one who has a question has to ask it.) Can I ask you a question?”

The Imam (as) gave him permission. Ibn-Abi’l-Aujaa bared his heart
shamelessly of his atheistic ideas in an enchanting rhymed prose, mocked
the Hajj rites, and insulted the pilgrims, adding:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى كمْ تدُوسونَ هذا البَيدرَ وتلوذُونَ بهذا الحَجرِ وتعبُدونَ هذا
البيتَ المرفوعَ بالطّوبِ والمدَرِ وتُهروِلونَ حولَهُ هروَلَةَ البعيرِ
إذا نفرَ؟ مَن فكّر في هذا وقدّرَ علِمَ أنهُ فِعْلُ غيرِ حكيمٍ ولا ذي
نظرٍ. فقُل فأنتَ رأسُ هذا الأمرِ وسَنامُهُ وأبوكَ أُسُّهُ ونِظامُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Till when will you work in this threshing-floor, seek refuge to this
stone, worship this house made of mud and stone, and go round it like
frightened camels? Anyone reflecting on the matter will find out that it
is unwise act. Give me the answer, you who are at the top, a prominent
personality, and a person whose fathers set up and maintained this
religion.”

Even nowadays such a question is asked by some of the so-called
intellectuals!

However, Imam Sadiq (as) who was the propagator of the monotheistic
school of Islam and had trained students in his mystical sessions,
uttered sentences that exposed the evil intention of Ibn-Abi’l-Aujaa and
his co-thinkers and bewared them of the sinister fate awaiting them. He
(as) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنّ مَن أضلّهُ اللهُ وأعمى قلبَهُ استَوخمَ الحقَّ ولم يستعذِبْهُ
وصارَ الشَيطانُ وليَّهُ وربَّهُ ويورِدُهُ مناهِلَ الهَلَكَةِ ولا
يُصدِرُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whomever Allah causes to go astray and to be blind in heart will find
the truth bitter and will have Satan as guardian and lord, and will be
damned to perdition from which there is no return.”[^23]71

The Imam (as) then made statements the summary of which is as follows:
This Kaaba is the House that God has appointed as a means to test His
servants making them duty-bound to respect and visit and to be a balance
from man’s devotion and obedience to God. Through the Kaaba, the devoted
believers are made distinct from hypocrites.

This House is the resting-place for the prophets, Kiblah of worshippers,
and a means to please God. Therefore, the aim of Hajj is to worship
God—the Creator of the heavens and the earth and the human soul and
body—, not the stone. Kissing or caressing the Black Stone, too, is
aimed at carrying out God’s order.

Why Was God’s House Not Built in A Pleasant Area?
-------------------------------------------------

Imam ‘Ali’s sermon known as ‘al-Khitba al-Qassiya –Sermon of
Disparagement-’ answers the above and similar questions. A part of the
sermon, which is related to the Holy Kaaba, will be quoted hereinafter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلا تَرَوْنَ أَنّ اللهَ سُبحانهُ اخْتبَرَ الأوّليِنَ مِن لَدُنْ آدَمَ
صَلواتُ اللهِ عَليهِ إلى الآخِرينَ مِن هذا العالمِ بِأحْجارٍ لا تَضُرّ
ولا تَنفَعُ ولا تُبصِرُ ولا تَسمَعُ فَجَعلها بَيتَهُ الحَرامَ الّذي
جَعَلهُ اللهُ لِلنّاسِ قِياماً ثُم وَضَعهُ بِأوْعَرِ بِقاعِ الأرْضِ
حَجَراً وأَقَلَّ نَتائِقِ الدّنيا مَدَراً وأَضيَقَ بُطونِ الأَودِيَةِ
قُطْراً بَينَ جِبالٍ خَشِنَةٍ ورِمالٍ دَمِثَةٍ وعُيونٍ وَشِلَةٍ وقُرىً
مُنْقَطِعَةٍ لا يَزكُو بِها خَفٌّ ولا حافِرٌ ولا ظِلْفٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثمّ أَمَر آدَمَ عليهِ السلامُ ووِلدَهُ أن يُثْنوا أَعطافَهُم نحْوَهُ
فَصارَ مَثابَةً لمُنْتَجَعِ أَسفارِهِم وغايَةً لمُلقَى رِحالهِم تَهوي
إِليهِ ثِمارُ الأفْئِدَةِ مِن مَفاوِزِ قِفارٍ سَحيقَةٍ ومَهاوي فِجاجٍ
عَميقَةٍ وجَزائِرِ بحارٍ مُنقَطِعَةٍ حتّى يَهُزّوا مَناكِبَهُم ذُلُلاً
يُهَلِّلونَ للهِ ويَرمُلونَ عَلى أقْدامِهِم شُعْثاً غُبْراً له، قَد
نَبَذوا السّرابِيلَ وَراءَ ظُهورِهِم وشَوَّهوا بِإِعفَاءِ الشُّعورِ
محَاسِنَ خَلقِهِمُ ابْتِلاءً عَظِيماً وامْتِحاناً شَديداً واخْتِباراً
مُبيناً وتمْحِيصاً بَلِيغاً جَعَلهُ اللهُ سَبَباً لِرحْمَتِهِ
وَوُصْلَةً الى جَنَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلوْ أَرادَ سُبحانَهُ أَنْ يَضَعَ بَيتَهُ الحَرامَ ومَشاعِرَهُ
العِظامَ بَين جَنّاتٍ وأَنهارٍ وسَهْلٍ وقَرارٍ جَمِّ الأشْجارِ دانِي
الثِّمارِ مُلْتَفِّ البُنَى مُتَّصِلِ القُرى بَينَ بُـرَّةٍ سَمْراءَ
وَرَوضَةٍ خَضْـراءَ وأَريَافٍ مُحْدِقَةٍ وعِراصٍ مُغدِقَةٍ وزُروعٍ
ناضِرةٍ وطُرُقٍ عَامِرَةٍ لَكانَ قدْ صَغَّرَ قَدْرَ الجَزاءِ عَلى
حَسْبِ ضَعْفِ البَلاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولَو كَانَ الأَساسُ المَحْمُولُ عَلَيها والأَحْجارُ المَرفُوعُ بِها
بَين زُمُرُّدَةٍ خَضْراءَ ويَاقُوتَةٍ حَمْراءَ ونُورٍ وضِياءٍ لخَفَّفَ
ذلِك مُصارَعَةَ الشَّكِّ في الصُّدورِ ولَوَضَعَ مُجاهَدَةَ إِبليسَ عَن
القُلوبِ ولنَفى مُعتَلَجَ الـرَّيبِ مِن النّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولَكنَّ اللهَ يَخْتَبِرُ عِبادَهُ بِأنواعِ الشَّدائِدِ ويَتَعَبّدُهُم
بِأنْواعِ المجَاهِدِ ويَبتَلِيهِم بِضُرُوبِ المَكَارِهِ إِخْراجاً
لِلتَّكَبُّرِ مِن قُلوبِهِم وِإمْكَاناً لِلتَّذَلُّلِ في نُفوسِهِم
ولِيَجعَلَ ذلِكَ أَبواباً فُتُحاً إلى فَضْلِهِ وأَسبَاباً ذُلُلاً
لِعَفْوِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do you not see the Allah, the Glorified, has tried all the people among
those who came before, beginning with Adam up to the last ones in this
world with stones which yield neither benefit nor harm nor see nor hear.
He made those stones into His sacred house, which He made a standby for
the people. He placed it in the most rugged stony part of the earth and
on a highland with least soil thereon, among the narrowest valleys
between rough mountains, soft sandy plains, springs of scanty water, and
scattered habitants, where neither camels not horses nor cows and sheep
can prosper.

Then, he commanded Adam and his sons to turn their attention towards it.
In this way, it became the center of their journey in seeking pastures
and the rendezvous for meeting of their carrier-beasts, so that human
spirits hasten towards it from distant waterless deserts, deep and
low-lying valleys and scattered islands in the seas.

They shake their shoulders in humbleness, recite the slogan of having
reached His audience, march with swift feet, and have disheveled hair
and dusted faces. They throw their pieces of cloth on their backs; they
have marred the beauty of their faces by leaving the hair uncut as a
matter of great test, severe tribulation, open trials, and extreme
refining. Allah has made it a means to His mercy and an approach to His
Paradise.

If Allah, the Glorified, had places His Sacred House and His great signs
among plantations, streams, soft and level points, plenty of trees, and
abundance of fruits, a thick population, close habitats, golden wheat,
lush gardens, green land, watered plains, thriving orchards, and crowded
streets, the amount of recompense would have been decreased because of
the lightness of the trial.

If the foundation on which the House is borne and the stones with which
it has been raised had been of green emerald and red rubies, and there
had been brightness and effulgence, then this would have lessened the
action of doubts in the breasts, would have dismissed the effect of
Satan’s activity from the hearts, and would have stopped the surging of
misgivings by means of different troubles, wants them to render worship
through hardships and involves them in distress, all in order to extract
out vanity from their hearts, to settle down humbleness in their
spirits, and to make all this an open door for His favors and an easy
means for His forgiveness (for their sins).[^24]72

Why Do Hajj Acts Not Please the Intellect and Temperament?
----------------------------------------------------------

It is noteworthy that the religious duties have various categories.
Some, while being performed for God, have physical pleasure with them
too, and man is naturally inclined toward them, such as marriage,
eating, and sleeping. They can be both godly and means for satisfying
one’s nature. Other religious duties are not accompanied by physical
pleasure but logically desirable, such as acquisition of knowledge,
benefaction, helping the poor, and guiding those who have gone astray.

Although such acts are not sought by desire, they are logically
desirable, and if they are done for the sake of God, their godly aspects
will be mixed with their logical aspects. Hence, it is difficult to
acquire devotion in them. Therefore, man cannot claim that his
motivation for doing such acts has been God or another factor. If man
carefully looks at most of these acts performed as religious duties, he
will realize that the share of logic and desire in these acts is more
than that of God, and the religious aspect has been naturally
overshadowed by the aspect of logic and desire. Hence an effective
weapon has not been used for suppressing the concupiscence. In these
acts, Satan pollutes man’s pure intention with pretense, love of fame,
and other desires rendering the good deeds worthless.

Other religious duties have neither sign of physical pleasure nor
logical benefits. A series of acts are neither desirable by temperament
nor logic, such as taking off one’s normal clothes and putting on
clothes of Ihram (two pieces of unstitched clothes) making one’s head
and feet bare, quitting many of everyday habits, going round a house of
stone, kissing a black stone installed in the corner of the Kaaba,
sevenfold shuttle between two mountains—Safa and Marwa, compulsory stay
in specified times on the plain of Mina, Arafat and al-Mash’ar and
throwing pebbles, which are desirable neither for temperament nor
intellect.

It is God’s order that persuades a Muslim to do these acts without
expecting to get a physical pleasure or intellectual benefit. This is
because Islam is the only factor ensuring the prosperity and perfection
of a Muslim who has been trained in the school of monotheism and
inspired by the Holy Qur’an.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِنْدَ اللهِ الإِسْلامُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The true religion with Allah is Islam. (The Holy Qur’an; 3:19)”***

Islam means to be submissive to God. Even if there are no
socio-political as well as hygienic and economic benefits in enjoining
the good and forbidding the evil, the virtue of being submissive to God
alone is enough to encourage a wise man to do religious duties and to
abstain from committing sins

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ يَتُوبُ اللَّهُ مِنْ بَعْدِ ذَٰلِكَ عَلَىٰ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۗ
وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and best of all is Allah’s pleasure. (The Holy Qur’an; 9:72)”***

A believing Muslim does not care whether a religious duty has a benefit
or not. What is important to him is the pleasure of God. Since most of
us do not pay attention to the great impact of devotion and do not know
what a great blessing devotion is, we look at it dubiously not knowing
that the best acts are those done for the satisfaction.

We should note that those acts not having physical or logical
motivation, which are merely done for God, are extremely positive in
generating devotion and submission, making man devoted servant of God.
We all get married but it is not known who does it for the sake of God
and who does it for satisfying his instincts. We all study but it is not
known who studies with the intention of promoting the Name of God and
who does it for pursuing worldly goals. We all help the poor but
hypocrites are not distinct from the God-seekers. In this relation, the
Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ دِيناً مِمَّنْ أَسْلَمَ وَجْهَهُ للهِ وَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And who has a better religion than he who submits himself entirely
to Allah? (4:125)”***

The Holy Qur’an further says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَهْلِكَ مَنْ هَلَكَ عَنْ بَيِّنَةٍ وَيَحْيَى مَنْ حَيَّ عَنْ
بَيِّنَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…That he who would perish might perish by clear proof, and he who
would live might live by clear proof. (8:42)”***

God’s Trial Is Difficult
------------------------

God’s commandments are aimed at revealing man’s submission to the
Creator. But, unfortunately, man being unaware of the secret behind
those commandments keeps on asking about the benefits of the Islamic
laws and their socio-economic effects, which have their roots in
materialism. This way of thinking is not limited to a specific period.
All prophets have been asked such questions with sinister results.

Failure of People of Sabbath in God’s Trial
-------------------------------------------

According to the Holy Qur’an, a Jewish tribe was living in a town near
the sea and their job was fishing. On God’s order, the Jewish tribe was
duty-bound to keep the Sabbath, that is, to be engaged in prayer and not
to catch fish on that day.

Since God’s trial is always accompanied by difficulty, it so happened
that fish would come to the surface of water abundantly on Saturdays,
which was the Sabbath, but were scarce on other days. The abundance of
fish on the Sabbath was so alluring that refusal to catch all those
fishes was painful for the Jewish tribe.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانْتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ فَأَغْرَقْنَاهُمْ فِي الْيَمِّ بِأَنَّهُمْ
كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا وَكَانُوا عَنْهَا غَافِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Thus did we try them because they transgressed. (The Holy Qur’an;
7:163)”***

Finally, avarice overcame faith and pushed the mammonists to sin. So
they tried to catch fishes on Saturday with the tricks that Satan had
taught them. Hence, God sent tribulation upon them. In this relation,
the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا عَتَوْا عَمَّا نُهُوا عَنْهُ قُلْنَا لَهُمْ كُونُوا قِرَدَةً
خَاسِئِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“ Therefore, when they revoltingly persisted in what they had been
forbidden, we said to them: Be (as) apes, despised and hated.
(7:166)”***

Trial of Talut’s Army
---------------------

Talut (Saul) whom the Holy Qur’an admires as worthy king had a strong
physique and great knowledge. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنَّ اللهَ اصْطَفَاهُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَزَادَهُ بَسْطَةً في العِلْمِ
والجِسْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“ He said: Surely, Allah has chosen him in preference to you, and He
has increased him abundantly in knowledge and physique. (2:247)”***

This strong man was appointed by the prophet of that time to be the
leader of the Israelis to fight their enemies. Talut mobilized a great
army to fight Jalut (Goliath) the tyrant, who oppressed the Israelis. He
(Saul) said to his soldiers: Be careful, for God will test you through a
river on your way; he who will not drink from it though he might be very
thirsty will be (considered as) obeying God and will be among my helpers
and entitled to God’s grace. But anyone who will drink from it is not my
follower and will be deprived of God’s assistance.

It was hot, the land was dry, and thirst prevailed. Suddenly, the river
came into sight and the thirsty soldiers saw a river flowing with limped
water before them. It requires great patience and strong faith to resist
desire to pass by a river and not quench one’s thirst for the sake of
God. The river was a great test for the army of Talut.

Satan began to tempt them as what the philosophy of suffering from
thirst is while being near to a river. Why water, a source of life,
should be banned. No, one must drink from it, feel fresh, and fight the
enemies; not knowing that man’s number one enemy is his concupiscence
which disobeys God’s orders.

First of all, one must fight this inner enemy and then be sure that
after suppressing it, God’s help will come. Finally, the pleasant sight
of the river and Satan’s temptations weakened their will. Except for 313
soldiers, the entire army whose number was 80,000 drank from the river
and revealed their weak faith against physical desires.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا فَصَلَ طَالُوتُ بِالجُنُودِ قَاَل إِنَّ اللهَ مُبْتَلِيكُمْ
بِنَهَرٍ فَمَنْ شَرِبَ مِنْهُ فَلَيْسَ مِنِّي وَمَنْ لَمْ يَطْعَمْهُ
فَإِنَّهُ مِنِّي ِإلاّ مَنِ اغْتَرَفَ غُرْفَةً بِيَدِهِ، فَشَرِبُوا
مِنْهُ ِإلاّ قَلِيلاً مِنْهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So, when Talut departed with the forces, he said: Surely, Allah will
try you with a river; whoever then drinks from it, he is not of me, and
whoever does not taste of it, he is surely of me, except he who takes
with his hand as much of it as fills the hand; but with the exception of
a few of them, they drank from it. (The Holy Qur’an; 2:249)”***

Another trial of the children of Israel
---------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قُلْنَا ادْخُلُوا هَذِهِ القَـرْيَةِ فَكُلُوا مِنْهَا حَيْثُ
شِئْتُمْ رَغَداً وَادْخُلُوا البَابَ سُجَّداً وَقُولُوا حِطَّةٌ
نَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ خَطَايَاكُمْ وَسَنَـزِيدُ المحُسْنِينَ. فَبَدَّلَ
الّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا قَوْلاً غَيْرَ الّذِي قِيلَ لَهُمْ فَأَنْزَلْنَا
عَلَى الّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا رِجْزاً مِنَ السّمَاءِ بِمَا كَانوُا
يَفْسُقُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when we said: Enter this city, and then eat from it a plenteous
(food) wherever you wish and enter the gate making obeisance; and say,
forgiveness. We will forgive you your wrongs and give more to those who
do good.***

***But those who were unjust changed it for a saying other than that
which had been spoken to them, so We sent upon those who were unjust a
pestilence from heaven, because thy transgressed. (The Holy Qur’an; 2:
58-9)”***

The unyielding tribe of the Israelis, due to the dignity of Prophet
Moses (as) was entitled to God’s grace. So, they had the impression that
they became really honorable in the sight of God and became God’s
favorites and the most devoted servants. To test them and to make them
subject to curse and punishment, God appointed certain duties for them.

The prosperous land of Damascus was envisaged for their settlement
provided that they, first, would enter the city through a specific gate,
they, second, would enter the city while bowing as sign of humbleness to
God, and, third, they would say, ‘forgive us,’ so that God would pardon
their wrongdoings. But they said to themselves, ‘why should we enter the
city through a narrow gate while there were wider ones?’ They entered
the city not only without bowing but also with their backs forward; and
instead of saying, ‘forgive us,’ they said indecent words. The result
was a pestilence from heaven.

Prophet Ibrahim and God’s Strange Trial
---------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا بَلَغَ مَعَهُ السَّعْيَ قَالَ يَا بُنَيَّ إِنِّي أَرَى في
المَنَامِ أَنِّي أَذْبَحُكَ فَانْظُرْ مَاذَا تَرَى، قَالَ يَا أَبَتِ
افْعَلْ مَا تُؤْمَرُ سَتَجِدَنِي  إِنْ شَاءَ اللهُ مِنَ الصَّابِرِينَ.
فَلَمَّا أَسْلَمَا وَتَلَّهُ لِلْجَبِينِ. وَنَادَيْنَاهُ أَنْ يَا
إِبْرَاهِيمُ. قَدْ صَدَّقْتَ الرُّؤْيَا إِنَّا كَذَلِكَ نَجْزِي
المُحْسِنِينَ. إِنَّ هَذَا لَهُوَ البَلاَءُ المِبينُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when he attained to working with him, he said: O my son, surely
I have seen in a dream that I should sacrifice you; consider then what
you see. He said: O my father, do what you are commanded; if Allah
please, you will find me of the patient ones. So when they both
submitted and he threw him down upon his forehead, and We called out to
him, saying: O Ibrahim, you have indeed shown the truth of the vision;
surely thus do We reward the doers of good. Most surely, this is a
manifestation trial. (The Holy Qur’an; 37:102-6)”***

This is a strange scene and a strange duty! A handsome youth, much loved
by an elder father has to be sacrificed for God. What a strange order
and what a difficult duty! How can a kind father throw down his son and
put a sharp knife on his throat with his own hands? This act is approved
neither by temperament nor common sense. But here neither man’s
intellect nor does his common sense have any saying, for it is the realm
of love of God Who is the Only Beloved in the world. The love for others
is subject to His permission and pleasure.

Prophet Ibrahim (as) then prepared himself for carrying out God’s order
without any delay. He told the story to his son to know both his duty
and to test the devotion of his son. The son, too, asked his father to
do what he had been commanded and asked God to make him patient. What
devotion it is! May God bless this stage of submission forever. Both
father and son submitted. The father threw him down ready to cut his
throat. A shocking scene amazed the whole world against the power of
faith and love for God. Therefore, God praised the devotion of these two
devoted monotheists. This is sufficient to indicate their greatness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفَدَيْنَاهُ بِذِبْحٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice. (The Holy Qur’an;
37:107)***

To acknowledge this devotion, God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلامٌ عَلَى إِبْراهِيمَ. إِنَّهُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا المُؤْمِنِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Peace be upon Ibrahim. Surely, he was one of Our believing servants.
(The Holy Qur’an; 37:109, 111)***

To sum it up, if we look at the acts commanded in God’s trial, we will
not see any benefit or advisability. In certain cases, there is harm,
too, like the ban on catching fish on the Sabbath, which entailed
economic loss, or the ban on drinking water from the river in the story
of Talut, Ibrahim’s dream to sacrifice his son, and the Israelis’
entering into Damascus. In none of these cases, logical and tangible
benefits could be seen.

The best advantage of the said acts lies in God’s commandments and the
inhibitions themselves to be followed by obedience and submission, the
result of which is affinity with God and attaining His pleasure.

Since certain religious duties are based on devotion to God without
having social, economic, political, or hygienic benefits, certain acts
related to the Hajj rites are aimed for revealing man’s devotion and
submission to God.

One of the advantages of Hajj is that its aspect of devotion is more
evident than other religious duties. Throwing pebbles at Satan is
extremely effective, for he is attempting to prevent man from obeying
God by skepticism and raising questions in man’s mind. For example,
Satan through temptations makes man ask himself if Prophet Ibrahim’s
wife; Hagar, shuttled seven times between Mount Safa and Mount Marwa in
search for water, why should be do the same and in search of water?

Or when Prophet Ibrahim (as) was in Mina for completing his mission and
Satan appeared on his way trying to prevent him from obeying God’s
order, Prophet Ibrahim (as) drove him away by throwing stones at him,
what is he doing in Mina now? Has he, too, seen Satan on his way to
throw stones at him? A devoted servant of God finds out that Satan is
always on the way to steal faith. Hence, he gets ready to expel the
satanic temptations from his heart. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا إِذَا مَسَّهُمْ طَائِفٌ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
تَذَكَّرُوا فَإِذَا هُمْ مُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“ Surely, those who guard against evil, when a visitation from the
Satan afflicts them, they become mindful, then lo! They see. (7:201)”***

I, too, as I have learnt lessons of devotion in the school of the
prophets, take God as my Guardian and consider myself devoted servant of
Him. I do not care whether certain act is beneficial or not. What I do
is for obtaining God’s pleasure. If I am told to shuttle between Safa
and Marwa all my life for the pleasure of God, I will do it
whole-heartedly.

### Summary

The Hajj rites, consisting of apparently unjustifiable acts, are means
of trial of men’s devotion to God. Hajj makes those who follow ‘self’
and superficial intellect distinct from those following God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أُمِرُوا إِلاّ لِيَعْبُدُوا اللهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they were not enjoining anything except that they should serve
Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience. (The Holy Qur’an; 98:5)”***

Questions of Practical Laws of Islam
------------------------------------

Perhaps it would not be out of place to discuss the practical laws of
Islam here, for questions have been raised in this relation. For
example, it is asked why Sura of al-Fatihah and Sura of at-Tawhid must
be recited in undertone in the Dhuhr (Noon) and Asr (Afternoon)
–obligatory- Prayers and recited aloud in the Maghrib (Evening) and
Eshaa (Night) Prayers. Why are men banned to wear gold rings?

Why is it banned to use golden and silver vessels? Why is it religiously
unlawful to have the meat of pork? What is the philosophy of Hajj? When
does it become necessary to perform the Tayammum (Dry Ablution)? Why is
it forbidden for a Muslim to marry two sisters at the same time?

Many whys and for what reasons are answered correctly or incorrectly and
on many occasions the answers increase the asker’s amazement.

Note
----

The first and most important requirement of one who asks such questions
is his belief in the acknowledged principles of Islam, that is, belief
in One God, prophethood, God’s justice, Day of Judgment, and Imamate. In
the meantime, the degree of his belief in the aforesaid principles has
to be taken into consideration so as to discuss with him the ideology of
Islam in case of his imperfect knowledge about it.

Evidently, it is waste of time to discuss the secondary precepts of
Islam with an unbeliever or someone whose belief is imperfect. How
absurd it is to speak about the Ascension of the Holy Prophet (saw) and
the moon’s split for him or the life span and occultation of Imam Mahdi
(as) with a materialist who does not believe in the absolute power of
God. To debate with a Twelver[^25] who does not firmly believe in the
sinlessness of the prophets and Imams is also useless, for he needs to
perfect his ideology first. Incidentally, most of the individuals who
are skeptic of the practical laws of Islam are those who are weak in
their beliefs.

The Aim of Questioning the Philosophy of the Practical Laws of Islam
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Generally speaking, questions about the philosophy of the practical laws
of Islam are raised for two reasons:

To understand the philosophy of the divine laws, and to get more
interested in doing religious duties, this is the result of getting to
know the philosophy of the divine laws.

As for someone who wishes to understand the logic of the divine laws, we
should say that he is in error. Such a person needs to perfect his
knowledge of the religion, get to know the prophet and the revelation as
well as come to realize that the position of a prophet is above that of
ordinary human beings.

He should, also, realize that what the prophets say do not come from
themselves, but they are inspired by the Creator of the heavens and the
earth. So, we come to the conclusion that the Holy Book and the
religious laws are of the same Source. In other words, it is the
All-knowing and All-wise God Who has prescribed what is lawful and what
is unlawful and revealed it to the heart of His Messenger.

Why Are We in Need For A Divine Revelation?
-------------------------------------------

Since we, human beings, do not have comprehensive knowledge about life
and the Afterlife, and since the only One being aware of all the details
of the universe is God, we are in need for guidance and religious laws,
which is the same as revelation received by the prophets.

We have no option but to submit to the religious instructions. To
practice the religious duties is to practice what the prophets and God
have said. That is to say that I, considering myself as Muslim, obey God
and His Messenger not because I have come to know about the philosophy
of the religious laws, but I obey Him and His Messenger regardless of
the harms and benefits that accompany certain religious acts.

What Is Religious Obedience?
----------------------------

Muhammad ibn Sinan wrote a letter to Imam Ridha’ (as) saying, ‘Some
Muslims have the impression that the dos and don’ts in Islam are not
based on people’s interest or disadvantages and that there is no reason
for them save obedience and devotion to God.’ Responding to this letter,
Imam Ridha’ (as) wrote:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَد ضَلَّ مِن قال ذلكَ ضَلالاً بَعيداً. وَوجَدْنا المحُرّمَ مِن
الأشْياءِ لا حاجَةَ لِلعبادِ إليهِ ووجدناهُ مُفسِداً داعِياً إلى
الفَناءِ والهَلاكِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whoever has such impression of the religious precepts is in gross
error, for we realize that what Allah has forbidden is not only
unnecessary for human life but also it is a source of corruption pushing
man to perdition.”

Sheikh Saduq, may his soul rest in peace, relates that a person went to
Imam Baqir (as) asking, ‘Why has God forbidden drinking wine and eating
carrion and pork as well as blood?’ The Imam (as) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّ اللهَ تبارَكَ وتعَالى لم يُحَرّمْ ذلكَ على عِبادِهِ وأَحلَّ لهُم
ما سِوى ذلكَ مِن رَغبَةٍ في مَا أَحَلَّ لهُم ولا زُهدٍ في مَا حَرّمَهُ
عليهِم. ولكِنّه عزّ وجلّ خَلَقَ الخَلقَ فَعلِم ما يَقومُ بهِ
أَبدانُهُم وما يُصلِحُهُم فَأَحَلَّهُ لهُم وأَباحَهُ وعَلِمَ ما
يَضُرُّهُم فَنَههاهُم عنهُ وحَرّمَهُ عليهِم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah has not made certain things lawful or unlawful because He Himself
likes or dislikes them, for neither the lawful nor do the unlawful
benefit or harm Him. Since Allah has created man and known what is good
or bad for him, He has enjoined or forbidden certain things.”[^26]74

From these sayings of the Imams (as) it is inferred that devotion is not
strict adherence like an inferior’s obedience to the orders of a
superior. Obedience in religion is that when a human being realizes that
his intellectual power is limited and that the religious precepts with
all their benefits have their source in God’s infinite knowledge, he
will naturally feel duty-bound to submit to God’s commandments.

The Holy Prophet of Islam (Saw) Says:
-------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عِبادَ اللهِ أنتُم كالمَرضَى ورَبُّ العَالمِينَ كالطّبِيبِ،
فَصَلاحُ المَرضَى في ما يَعمَلُهُ الطّبِيبُ وتَدبِيرِهِ بِه لا في ما
يَشتَهِيهِ المَريضُ ويَقتَرِحُهُ، ألا فَسَلِّموا للهِ  أَمرَهُ
تَكُونوا مِن الفَائزِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O servants of Allah, you are like patients and the Lord of the worlds
being like a physician. Therefore, the interest of the patient is in
what the physician prescribes for him, not in what he –the patient-
likes. Therefore, submit to Allah so as to be delivered.”[^27]75

It is true that the prophets are like us, human being, but they receive
divine revelation. Addressing the Holy Prophet (saw), God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَناْ بَشَرٌ مِثْلُكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: I am only a mortal like you; it is revealed to me. (The Holy
Qur’an; 18:110)”***

To sum it up, religious obedience is not a blind following devoid of
logic, rather it is submission of a human being with limited knowledge
to the All-encompassing Authority.

As for the second question about the philosophy of the practical laws of
Islam, if it is aimed at getting more familiarity with the benefits of
God’s commandments, to purify one’s self and society, to ensure a sound
economy, to see their compatibility with the scientific researches, to
highlight the value of the religious precepts, the sayings of the Imams,
the scientific miracles of the Holy Prophet (saw) and the Holy Qur’an,
to add to one’s tranquility and peace of mind, it is welcome! In the
Holy Qur’an, most of the verses express the philosophy of the
commandments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الّذِينَ آمَنُوا كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الصِّيامُ...
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe, fasting is prescribed for you… so that you many
guard (yourselves) against evil. (2:183)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِمِ الصَّلاةَ لِذِكْرِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… Keep up prayer for My remembrance. (20:14)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْأَلُوهُنَّ مِنْ وَرَاءِ حِجَابٍ ذَلِكَ أَطْهَرُ لِقُلُوبِكُمْ
وَقُلُوبِهِنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… And ask of them (women) from behind a curtain; this is purer for
your hearts and for their hearts. (33:53)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَذِّنْ فِي النَّاسِ بِالحَجِّ... لِيَشْهَدُوا مَنَافِعَ لَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And proclaim among men the pilgrimage… that they may witness
advantages for them. (22:28)”***

To sum it up, the necessity to act according to the religious precepts
is to follow the divine revelation and not necessarily to understand
their philosophy. The value of the acts of worship lies in devotion and
man can have devotion when he has no motivation other than pleasing God.
Then, he will become a true servant of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِجَالٌ لا تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلا بَيْعٌ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Men whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the
remembrance of Allah… (The Holy Qur’an; 24:37)”***

The aim of the religion is to make the earthly man ascend to heaven.
Being the most perfect religion, Islam has a double vision, that is, it
sees both this world and the Hereafter; it cares for the welfare of man
and his moral education as well as spiritual perfection.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ طُوبَى لَهُمْ وَحُسْنُ
مَآبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for those who believe and do good, a good final state shall be
theirs and a goodly return. (The Holy Qur’an; 13:29)”***

Now, instead of this discussion and instead of trying to justify all the
heavenly laws with scientific theories, we should consolidate the spirit
of getting to know God, the prophet, and the Imams in the hearts of the
youths. It is only then that the young generation will naturally feel
duty-bound to follow the Messenger of God and to obey Him with
contentment and will never look for benefits in serving God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَاذَا بَعْدَ الحَقِّ ِإلاّ الضَّلالُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… What is there after the truth but error? (The Holy Qur’an;
10:32)”***

Imam Sajjad (as) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنّ دِينَ اللهِ لا يُصابُ بِالعُقولِ النّاقِصةِ والآراءِ الباطِلَةِ
والمَقاييسِ الفاسِدةِ، ولا يُصابُ إلا بالتّسليمِ فَمَنْ سَلَّمَ لنا
سَلِمَ ومَن اهتَدى بنا هُدِيَ ومَن دانَ بالقِياسِ والرّأْيِ هَلَكَ
ومَن وَجَدَ في نفْسِهِ شَيئاً ممّا نَقولُهُ أو نَقضي به حَرَجاً كَفَرَ
بالذي أَنزَلَ السّبْعَ المَثانِي والقُرآنَ العَظيمَ وهُو لا يَعلَمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely, the religion of Allah cannot be comprehended with imperfect
intellects, wrong opinions, or immoral criteria. Hence, there is no way
to get to know the truth of the religion other than submission. Whoever
submits to us will be safe from deviation, and whoever is guided in our
path will be truly guided. Whoever makes religion with his own
conjecture will find perdition and one who is heavy-hearted with our
orders has disbelieved in the One Who revealed the Holy Qur’an.”[^28]76

God Is in No Need For Our Obedience
-----------------------------------

It is worth mentioning that obedience to God’s commandments and
performance of the divine laws do not add to God’s glory and greatness,
and man’s disobedience to God does not reduce from His authority. In
this relation, Imam ‘Ali (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإِنّ اللهَ سُبحانهُ وتَعالى خَلَقَ الخَلْقَ حِينَ خَلَقَهُمْ غَنِيّاً
عَن طَاعَتِهِمْ آمِناً مِن مَعْصِيَتِهِم لأنّه لا تَضُرّهُ مَعصِيَةُ
مَن عَصاهُ ولا تَنفَعُهُ طاعَةُ مَن أَطاعَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Now then, Allah, the Glorified the Sublime, created (the things of) the
creation; He created them without any need for their obedience or being
safe from their sinning, because the sin of anyone who sins does not
harm him nor does the obedience of anyone who obeys Him benefit
Him.”[^29]77

The fate of those who disobeyed God is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الأَرْضِ فَيَنْظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ
الّذِينَ كَانُوا مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ، كَانُوا أَشَدَّ مِنْهُمْ قُوَّةً
وَآثَاراً فِي الأَرْضِ فَأَخَذَهُمُ اللهُ بِذُنُوبِهِمْ وَمَا كَانَ
لَهُمْ مِنَ اللهِ مِنْ وَاقٍ. ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانَتْ تَأْتِيهِمْ
رُسُلُهُمْ بِالبَيِّنَاتِ فَكَفَرُوا فَأَخَذَهمُ اللهُ إِنَّهُ قَوِيٌّ
شَدِيدُ العِقَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have they not traveled in the earth and seen how was the end of
those who were before them? Mightier than these were they in strength
and in fortifications in the land, but Allah destroyed them for their
sins; and there was not for them any defender against Allah. That was
because they came to them their apostles with clear arguments, but they
rejected them; therefore, Allah destroyed them; Surely He is Strong,
Severe in retribution. (40:21-2)”***

Jesus Christ (as) is quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلم تَعلَموا أنّه مَن شَمَخَ بِرأسِه الى السّقفِ شَجَّهُ ومَن خفَضَ
بِرأسِه عَنه استَظلَّ تحتَهُ وأكَنَّهُ، وكَذلكَ مَن لم يَتواضعْ للهِ
خَفَضَهُ ومَن تواضعَ للهِ رَفَعَه
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do you not know that anyone who raises his head so high that it touches
the ceiling, the ceiling will break his head? But one who lowers his
head, the same ceiling will serve as a canopy to give him shelter and
comfort under its shade. Likewise, one who is not humble before Allah
will be degraded, whereas one who is humble before Allah will be
promoted.”[^30]78

As long as the human society obeys the divine laws under the heavenly
canopy, it will enjoy welfare and receive God’s mercy, but if it
disobeys God and becomes arrogant, God will say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, We have revealed the Reminder and We will most surely be its
guardian. (The Holy Qur’an; 21:32)”***

The devils can never infiltrate into this guarded canopy and any time
the followers of Satan have attempted to transgress, they have been
badly defeated and become examples for others.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَحَادِيثَ وَمَزَّقْنَاهُمْ كُلَّ مُمَزَّقٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So, We made them stories and scattered them with an utter
scattering. (The Holy Qur’an; 34:19)”***

Have a look at history and see what God has done to those who fought
against the heavenly canopy:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرّحْمنِ الرّحِيمِ. أَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ فَعَلَ رَبُّكَ
بِأَصْحَابِ الفِيلِ. أَلَمْ يَجْعَلْ كَيْدَهُمْ فِي تَضْلِيلٍ.
وَأَرْسَلَ عَلَيْهِمْ طَيْراً أَبَابِيلَ. تَرْمِيهِمْ بِحِجَارَةٍ مِنْ
سِجِّيلٍ. فَجَعَلَهُمْ كَعَصْفٍ مَأْكُولٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In the Name of Allah the Most Compassionate the Most Merciful. Have
you not considered how your Lord dealt with the possessors of the
elephant? Did He not cause their war to end in confusion, and send down
to prey upon them birds in flocks casting against them stones of baked
clay; so, He rendered them like straw eaten up? (The Holy Qur’an;
105:1-5)”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ فَعَلَ رَبُّكَ بِعَادٍ. إِرَمَ ذَاتِ العِمَادِ.
الّتِي لَمْ يَخْلَقْ مِثْلُهَا فِي البِلادِ. وَثَمُودَ الّذِينَ
جَابُوا الصَّخْرَ بِالوَادِ. وَفِرْعَوْنَ ذِي الأوْتَادِ. الّذِينَ
طَغَوْا فِي البِلادِ. فَأَكْثَرُوا فِيهَا الفَسَادَ. فَصَبَّ
عَلَيْهِمُ رَبُّكَ سَوْطَ عَذَابٍ. إِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَبِالْمِرْصَادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you not considered how your Lord dealt with Ad; the people of
Ihram and the possessors of lofty buildings, the like of which were not
created in the other cities; and with (the people of) Thamud who hewed
out the rocks in the valley, and with Pharaoh, the lord of hosts; who
committed inordinacy in the cities; so, they made great mischief
therein? Therefore, your Lord let down upon them a portion of the
chastisement. Most surely, your Lord is watching. (The Holy Qur’an;
89:7-15)”***

In the Holy Qur’an; Sura of al-Ankabut –the spider-, after speaking
about the painful fate of the former nations afflicted with heavenly and
earthly tribulations, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُلاًّ أَخَذْنَا بِذَنْبِهِ فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِ
حَاصِباً وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ أَخَذَتْهُ الصَّيْحَةُ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ
خَسَفْنَا بِهِ الأَرْضَ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ أَغْرَقْنَا، وَمَا كَانَ اللهُ
لِيَظْلِمَهُمْ وَلكِنْ كَانُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So, each We punished for his sin; of them was he on whom We went
down a violent storm, and of them was he whom the rumbling overtook, and
of them was he who We made to be swallowed up by the earth, and of them
was he who We drowned; and it did not beseem Allah that he should be
unjust to them, but they were unjust to their own souls. (29:40)”***

For thousands of years, those who disobeyed God have tried to transgress
the bounds of decency with their lusts and arrogance but they have been
defeated with humiliation. Nevertheless, the prophets’ laws have
survived and the pleasant call of ‘I bear witness that there is no god
but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah,’ is heard at dawn,
noon, and in the evening forever:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَفَعْنَا لَكَ ذِكْرَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We exalted for you (Prophet Muhammad) your esteem. (The Holy
Qur’an; 94:4)”***

Speaking about what earns people and what is worthless, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا الزَّبَدُ فَيَذْهَبُ جُفَاءً وَأَمَّا مَا يَنْفَعُ النَّاسَ
فَيَمْكُثُ فِي الأَرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then as for the scum, it passes away as a worthless thing; and as
for that which profits people, it tarries in the earth. (The Holy
Qur’an; 13:17)”***

In the same way that the sun shines upon the decayed bodies of the
unjust tribes of Ad and Thamud whom were chastised by God, it will shine
upon our dead bodies. The earth keeps on going round the sun forever.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللَّهُمَّ مَالِكَ المُلْكِ تُؤْتِي المُلْكَ مَنْ تَشَاءُ
وَتَنْزِعُ المُلْكَ مِمَّنْ تَشَاءُ وَتُعِزُّ مَنْ تَشَاءُ وَتُذِلُّ
مَنْ تَشَاءُ بِيَدِكَ الخَيْرُ إِنَّكَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ.
تُولِجُ اللَّيْلَ فِي النَّهَارِ وَتُولِجُ النَّهَارَ فِي اللَّيْلِ
وَتُخْرِجُ الحَيَّ مِنَ المَيِّتِ وَتُخْرِجُ المَيِّتَ مِنَ الحَيِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: O Allah; Master of the Kingdom, Thou givest the kingdom to
whomsoever Thou pleasest and take away the kingdom from whomsoever Thou
pleasest and Thou exaltest whom Thou pleasest and abasest whom Thou
pleasest; in Thine hand is the good. Surely, Thou hast power over all
things. Thou makest the night pass into the day and Thou makest the day
pass into the night, and Thou bringest forth the living from the dead
and Thou bringest forth the dead from the living. (The Holy Qur’an;
3:26-7)”***

To sum it up, the divine laws are invincible and unchangeable:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَنْ تَجِدَ لِسُنَّةِ اللهِ تَبْدِيلاً وَلَنْ تَجِدَ لِسُنَّةِ اللهِ
تَحْوِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For you shall not find any alteration in the course of Allah; and
you shall not find any change in the course of Allah. (The Holy Qur’an;
35:43)”***

It is the disobeying man who will come to perdition.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَتَعَدَّ حُدُودَ اللهِ فَقَدْ ظَلَمَ نَفْسَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… Whoever goes beyond the limits of Allah indeed does injustice to
his own soul. (The Holy Qur’an; 65:1)”***

For what we have said we come to the conclusion that God neither needs
our obedience to Him nor does He fear our disobedience to Him, and that
neither our obedience to Him benefit Him nor does our disobedience to
Him harm Him.

Rather it is we, human beings, who are strongly in need for God. We,
human beings, are obliged to be humble for Him. If God has accepted our
servitude and submission, it is a favor on His part, for if we thank Him
all the time, we have done little of what we should do.

[^1]: The Hadith Qudsi is the words of Almighty God reported by the
Prophets and their successors.

[^2]: See al-Mahajjat ul-Beidhaa; vol. 5

[^3]: See Jami’us-Sa’aadat; Vol. 3 p.322

[^4]: Quoted from ad-Deilami’s Irshad ul-Quloub

[^5]: See Mir’aat ul-Anwaar

[^6]: See Mir’aat ul-Anwaar; the introduction, p. 13

[^7]: See Kelimat Meknuneh Faiz; 159

[^8]: See Kelimat Meknuneh Faiz; 161 (as quoted from Bassa’ir
ud-Darajaat)

[^9]: See Kelimat Meknuneh Faiz; 160

[^10]: See Kelimat Meknuneh Faiz; 161 and Tafsir al-Mizan; vol. 1 p. 39

[^11]: See Qadi Saeed Qummi’s Asrar ul-Ibadat, p. 6

[^12]: This statement is an expression of grief.

[^13]: See Usul al-Kafi; vol. 2 p.464

[^14]: See Sheikh Saduq’s al-Khissal; vol. 1 p. 160 Hadith 189

[^15]: Black Stone is the sacred reddish-black stone built into the
outside wall of the Kaaba

[^16]: In the Holy Qur’an, God has related this statement to Prophet
Abraham.

[^17]: See Safinat ul-Bihar; vol. 1 p.130

[^18]: See Safinat ul-Bihar; vol. 1

[^19]: See Tuhaf ul-Uqoul; 369

[^20]: See Tuhaf ul-Uqoul; 371

[^21]: See al-Mahajjat ul-Beizaa; vol. 2 p.210

[^22]: See Safinat ul-Bihar, Vol. 2 p.71

[^23]: See Bihar ul-Anwar; Vol. 10 p.210

[^24]: See Nahjul Balagha; sermon 192

[^25]: Twelvers are the Shiites acknowledging twelve Imams beginning
with Imam ‘Ali and ending with Imam Mahdi (as).

[^26]: See Ilal ush-Shara’ie; vol. 2 p.169

[^27]: See Collection of Waram, Vol 2 p.117

[^28]: See Bihar ul-Anwar; Vol. 2 p.303

[^29]: See Nahjul Balagha; sermon No. 184

[^30]: See Tuhaf ul-Uqoul; sermons of Jesus Christ


