Stages of Hajj
==============

Beginning of the journey and going through different stages
-----------------------------------------------------------

After we have become familiar with the philosophy of Hajj and its
sublime goals, we should go on two parallel journeys, namely the journey
of body (the physical journey) and the journey of soul (the spiritual
journey). We should be keen about the inner state, the spiritual effect,
and its acceptance.

Stage One: Pure Intention
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذا أرَدتَ الحجَّ فجَرِّدْ قَلبَكَ للهِ تَعالى مِن كُلِّ شاغِلٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When you intend for Hajj, purify your heart from what keeps you away
from Allah.”[^1]79

Men of heart and pilgrims of the House of God, after getting to know the
meaning of Hajj and before taking provisions with them, purify their
hearts and see whether their motivation in this journey is godly or not.
The aim of Hajj is to express the submission to God. Hence, a pilgrim
must keep away from physical desires and aims at obeying God, obtaining
the rewards of the Hereafter, and escaping from the punishment of the
Hereafter.

If Hajj is made for fun, amusement, business, social prestige, and
escape from people’s blame, its true aim—devotion is lost. To test his
pure intention, a pilgrim should see whether he wants to perform Hajj
for the above-mentioned purposes or he goes on Hajj for sake of God
alone.

If, for instance, a jurisprudent dissuades him from going on Hajj by
telling that the money should be spent on a more urgent case, it should
not be painful for him. But if he sees that not going on Hajj is painful
for him; that he feels ashamed before people, then his intention of Hajj
in not pure, and he must ask forgiveness for the same.

Stage Two: Repentance
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ اغْتَسِل بماءِ التَّوبةِ الخالِصةِ مِن الذنوبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Then purify yourself of sins by water of repentance.”[^2]80

Beyond doubt, the impure have no place among the pure. Purification is a
prerequisite for the beginning of the Hajj pilgrimage in the same way
that prayer is not valid without purification. Hajj, too, which is the
circumambulation of the Kaaba and prayer being a part of it, requires
purification that, too, with water of repentance from defaulted duties
and violation of people’s rights.

People’s rights, if financial like religious tax, atonement, and
personal debts must be fully paid, and for adventitious rights like
backbiting, slander, dishonor, and nuisance, one must beg pardon for
every right that people have to him would be like a debtor who asks him:
Are you going to God’s House while you have ignored His instructions at
home?

He must seek the pleasure of his parents, relatives, and neighbors, too.
He must also repent for the faults he has had so as to enter into the
company of the purified:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ يُحِبُّ التَّوَّابِينَ وَيُحِبُّ المُتَطَهِّرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, Allah loves those who turn much to Him, and He love those
purify themselves. (The Holy Qur’an; 2:222)”***

It is appropriate for him to do repentance according to the instructions
reportedly coming from the Holy Prophet (saw) as mentioned in the book
titled *Mafateeh ul-Jinan*.

Stage Three: Detachment From What Is Not Godly
----------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ووَدِّعِ الدّنيا والرّاحَةَ والخَلْقَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Say farewell to the world, comfort, and people.”[^3]81

One of the requirements of Hajj being a journey towards God is the
detachment from what is non-godly. It must be assumed that one will
never return from this journey. It is unwise for a pilgrim who wishes to
visit God’s House to be preoccupied with his business, home, wife, and
children.

He must write his last will and testament so that if he passes away
during the journey, his financial affairs will be clear and trouble no
one. In the same way that he takes with him a provision for the journey
and a means of transportation to Mecca, in the journey of death, too, he
needs provision and means of transportation to the grave.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آهٍ آهٍ مِن قِلَّةِ الزّاد وطُولِ الطّريقِ وبُعدِ السّفَر
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Alas! The provision is little, the way is long, the journey is far and
the goal is hard to reach.”[^4]82

Then he entrusts his family to the true Guardian.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاللهُ خَيْرٌ حَافِظاً وَهُوَ أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But Allah is the best Keeper, and He is the Most Merciful of the
merciful ones. (The Holy Qur’an; 12:64)”***

Imam Sajjad (as) used to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أُبالِي إِذا قُلتُ هذهِ الكلِماتِ لَو اجتَمَعَ عَلَيَّ الإنسُ
والجِنُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When I recite these words (of supplication), I am not afraid of
anything even if jinn and men are banded together against me.”[^5]83

These words are:

*“In the Name of Allah, with Allah, from Allah, to Allah, and for the
sake of Allah. O Allah, to You I have yielded myself, to You I have
turned my face, and to You I have submitted all my affairs; so, guard me
with the guard of faith from ahead of me, from beyond me, from my right
side, from my left side, from above me, and from beneath me. And protect
me with Your power and might—surely, all power and might belong to You
alone. You are the Most High, the Most Great.”*

Choosing A Co-Traveler
----------------------

Another important point to be observed is to choose a co-traveler in
this spiritual journey. In the same way that any cause of preoccupation
in this journey is harmful, any cause of remembrance of God, attention
to the philosophy of Hajj, and a spiritual state is extremely useful for
a pilgrim. Hence, he must choose a co-traveler who is truly reminder of
God and keeps him in a permanent spiritual state. A pilgrim should
refuse to associate with those who, during this spiritual journey, which
might happen only once a lifetime, think of eating, sleeping, and joking
all the time. A pilgrim should stop complaining about the quantity and
quality of the food as well as spending time in shopping.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنتَهزوا الفُرصَ فإِنها تمرُّ مَرَّ السّحابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Seize the opportunities, for they are like transient clouds.”[^6]84

Good Temperament
----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأَحسِنِ الصُّحبَةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Keep good company.”[^7]85

Good temperament is recommended but during Hajj, it is more
praiseworthy, for the journey is towards God and all pilgrims are God’s
guests. To honor the guests is to honor the host. Imam Sadiq (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الخُلُقَ الحَسَنَ يُميثُ الخَطيئَةَ كما تُميثُ الشّمسُ الجَليدَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Good temperament diminishes the sins in the same way as the sun thaws
ice.”[^8]86

Having good temperament means not only to avoid nuisance to anyone but
also to tolerate other people’s bad behaviors and to serve them with
respect. A pilgrim should be careful not to utter an indecent word. He
should know that whatever he does is for the sake of God. Only then all
hardships will be easy for him to tolerate.

[^1]: See Misbah ul-Shariah; chapter 21

[^2]: See Misbah ul-Shariah; chapter 21

[^3]: See Misbah ul-Shariah; chapter 21

[^4]: See Nahjul Balagha; maxim 77

[^5]: See Taraa’if ul-Hikam; Vol. 2

[^6]: See Safinatol-Bihar, Vol. 2

[^7]: See Misbah ul-Shariah; chapter 21

[^8]: See al-Mahajjatol Beizaa; vol. 3


