


1. Terminology
Before embarking on this examination of being it may be helpful to
provide a brief discussion of the terminology used for "being" by
al-Kindi and his translators. I will be examining passages from three
main sources: first, the aforementioned*Book on the Pure Good* or*Liber
de Causis* ;7 second, the Arabic paraphrase of Plotinus produced in
al-Kindi's circle;8 and third, al-Kindi's best-known work, entitled*On
First Philosophy* (hereafter FP). Part of the purpose of such texts was
to establish technical terms for use in philosophy. Toward this end
neologisms were invented, often for use in rendering Greek technical
terms in Arabic. This is the case with three terms we find used to mean
"being":*anniyya* ,*huwiyya* , and*ays* .

Of these three, the one that has received the most attention is*anniyya*
. Even in medieval times Arabic scholars speculated on the derivation of
the word, offering sometimes fanciful etymologies.9 Though my argument
does not turn on any particular etymology, the most likely derivation
seems to be that suggested by Gerhard Endress: it is a substantification
of the Arabic*anna* , which means "that" (as in "it is true*that*
al-Kindi is a philosopher").10 It makes its first appearance in Arabic
literature at the time of al-Kindi's circle, and is prominent in the
Arabic Plotinus and the*Liber de Causis* . The same goes for the
word*huwiyya* , which later acquires a different, technical meaning in
al-Farabi and Ibn Sina, but in our texts is treated as a synonym
for*anniyya* . (The exception is a passage in the Arabic Plotinus
where*huwiyya* is used to translate Plotinus's*tautotes* , "identity."11
This led the scholar Geoffrey Lewis mistakenly to render*huwiyya* as
"identity" throughout his groundbreaking translation of the Arabic
Plotinus.12 ) In the plural both*huwiyyat* and*anniyyat* are used as
synonyms of the Greek*onta* , "beings."13 These terminological**[End
Page 299]** features are carried over into al-Kindi's own works, so
that*huwiyya* and*anniyya* seem to be accepted technical terms for the
Greek*einai* and*on* in all the texts we will be considering.14

The term*ays* is more unusual, and to my knowledge appears at this time
only in al-Kindi's own writings and in the translations produced within
his circle. 15 Al-Kindi seems to have coined the word by imaginatively
splitting the Arabic *laysa* , "is not," into *la* ("not") and *ays*
("being"). He also uses *lays* as a noun meaning "not-being." Like
*anniyya* and *huwiyya* , the neologism *ays* can refer to a particular
existent, with *lays* meaning a non-being (this usage appears repeatedly
in a long passage to be examined below, FP 123.3-124.16 [RJ 41.3-43.7]).
But like *anniyya* and *huwiyya* , *ays* can also signify being
abstractly considered; as we will see below, for al-Kindi a thing can go
from *lays* , non-being, to *ays* , being. 16


