His Companions And The Narrators of His Traditions
==================================================

The Abbasid government did not allow *‘Ulama’* and jurisprudent to
communicate with Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) lest his virtues and vast
knowledge would be spread among people everywhere, as then people would
be affected by him and would turn their backs to the Abbasids. In spite
of all the severe procedures the Abbasids took to separate the imam from
people, some *‘Ulama’* and narrators communicated with him and narrated
his traditions. Here we mention the companions and narrators in brief
because this completes the research on the personality of Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.).

1. Ibrahim bin Abu Hafs Abu Isaaq al-Katib
------------------------------------------

An-Najashi said about him that he was a sheikh from Imam Abu Muhammad
al-Askari’s companions. He was a reliable and notable man. He had
written a book refuting the excessive and Abul Khattab.[^1]

2. Ibrahim bin Khasib al-Anbari
-------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions.[^2]

3. Ibrahim bin Abdah
--------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s and Imam
al-Askari's companions.[^3] We have mentioned in a previous chapter the
letters of Imam al-Askari (a.s.) to him that showed his reliability and
high position.

4. Ibrahim bin Ali
------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions.[^4]
He was unknown.

5. Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin Faris an-Naysaburi
----------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s and Imam
al-Askari's companions.[^5] Once, al-Kashshi asked Abu an-Nadhr
al-Ayyashi about some men among whom was Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin Faris,
and he said, ‘As for Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin Faris, he is not bad.’[^6]

6. Abu Isaaq Ibrahim bin Mahziyar al-Ahwazi
-------------------------------------------

He had written a book called “al-Bisharaat”.[^7] Isaaq bin Muhammad
al-Basri narrated that Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Mahziyar said to him,
‘When my father (Ibrahim) was about to die, he gave me some money and
gave me a certain sign. No one knew about this sign except Allah the
Almighty. He said to me, ‘Whoever shows you this sign, you have to give
him this money.’ I went to Baghdad and stopped at an inn. On the
following day, someone came and knocked the door. I asked the servant to
see who he was. The servant said, ‘An old man at the door.’ I said, ‘Let
him come in.’ The old man came in, took a seat and said, ‘I am al-Umari.
Give me the money that is with you which is so-and-so.’ He showed me the
sign and I gave him the money.’[^8] Al-Umari was the agent of Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.).

Ibrahim bin Mahziyar narrated from Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.), Imam
Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.), Ibn Abu Umayr, and others. Ahmad bin
Muhammad, Sa’d bin Abdullah, Abdullah bin Ja’far al-Himyari, and others
narrated from him.[^9]

7. Ibrahim bin Yazid
--------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions. He
also mentioned his brother Ahmad bin Yazid as one of Imam al-Askari’s
companions.[^10]

8. Ibrahim bin Isma’yl bin Dawud bin Hamdun al-Katib an-Nadim
-------------------------------------------------------------

He was the master of linguists. He narrated from Imam Abu Muhammad
al-Askari (a.s.) and from his father.[^11] An-Najashi said, ‘He was the
close companion of our master Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) and of his
father Abul Hasan (al-Hadi) (a.s.) before him.’

He had written some books like “The names of mountains, watercourses,
and valleys”, “Bani[^12] Murrah bin Owf”, “Bani an-Namr bin Qasit”,
“Bani Aqil”, “Bani Abdullah bin Ghatafan”, “At-Tayy”, “The poetry of
al-Hujayr as-Saluli”, “The poetry of Thabit bin Qutnah and his craft”,
“Bani Kulayb bin Yarbu’”, “The poetry of bin Murrah bin Hammam”, and
“Nawadir al-A’rab: rarities of the nomads”.[^13]

9. Abu Hamid Ahmad bin Ibrahim al-Muraghi
-----------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions. Ibn
Dawud said about him, ‘He is highly praiseworthy.’[^14] Ahmad narrated,
‘Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Ja’far al-Qummi al-Attar wrote to the
imam (peace be on him) describing us to him. The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘I
read that which you described Abu Hamid (may Allah honor him by His
obedience) with and understood his state. May Allah take him to the best
end and not cease His favors on him, and may Allah be his
guardian.’[^15]

10. Ahmad bin Idris al-Qummi al-Mu’allim
----------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^16] An-Najashi said, ‘He was a reliable jurisprudent from
among our companions. He was trustworthy in his many narrations. He had
written a book on rarities. He died in 306 AH on the way from Mecca to
Kufa.’[^17]

11. Ahmad bin Isaaq bin Abdullah bin Sa’d bin Malik bin al-Ahwas al-Ash’ari al-Qummi
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

He was the deputy of the people of Qum. He narrated traditions from Abu
Ja’far the Second (Imam al-Jawad) and from Abul Hasan (Imam al-Hadi)
(peace be on them). He was from the close companions of Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.). He had written some books such as “Ilal as-Sawm: causes
of fasting” and “Masa’il ar-Rijal: questions of men” which he had
collected from Abul Hasan the Third (Imam ar-Redha) (a.s.).[^18]

Sheikh at-Toosi said he was one from those who had met Imam al-Mahdi
(a.s.).[^19]

Muhammad bin Ahmed bin as-Salt al-Qummi wrote a letter to ad-Dar (to the
imam) and mentioned in it the story of Ahmed bin Isaaq al-Qummi and his
companionship. He mentioned that he wanted to perform Hajj and needed
one thousand dinars. He said in the letter, ‘If my master sees that he
orders to lend him this amount and get it back from him in his country
when he comes back, I shall do it (give him the money).’ The imam (a.s.)
replied, ‘It is a gift from us to him and when he comes back, he will
get another gift from us.’[^20] This story showed his faith and the
respect of the imam (a.s.) towards him.

Abdullah bin Ja’far al-Himyari said, ‘Once, Sheikh Abu Amr (may Allah
have mercy on him) and I met Ahmad bin Isaaq, who signaled to me to ask
Abu Amr about the Successor (Imam al-Mahdi). I said to him, ‘O Abu Amr,
I want to ask you about something that I have no doubt about.’ He said,
‘Ask about what you want!’ I said to him, ‘Did you see the Successor
after Abu Muhammad (a.s.)?’ He said, ‘By Allah, yes.’[^21]

Anyhow, this man was reliable and had a high position near the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.).

12. Ahmad bin al-Hasan bin Ali bin Fadhdhal
-------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s and Imam
al-Askari's companions.[^22] It was said that he was Fatahite[^23] and
he was reliable in narration. He had written some books such as
“Prayer”, and “Wudu”. He died in 260 AH.[^24]

13. Abu Ali Ahmad bin Hammad al-Mahmudi
---------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi and Imam
al-Askari's companions.[^25] Al-Kashshi mentioned that Muhammad bin
Mas’ood said, ‘Abu Ali Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Hammad al-Mahmudi
al-Marwazi said, ‘Abu Ja’far (a.s.) wrote to my father (as mentioned
earlier) in a chapter of his book,…*(and every soul shall be paid in
full what it has earned, and they shall not be wronged)*.[^26] As for
this life, we are tried in it with misfortunes, but whoever loves his
friend and believes in his beliefs shall be with him even if he is far
from him. And as for the afterlife, it is the abode of eternity.’

Al-Mahmudi said, “The imam (a.s.) wrote to me after my father’s death,
‘Your father has passed away, may Allah be pleased with him and with
you. He is still praiseworthy to us. And you shall not be far from this
state.’”[^27]

This praise of the imam shows that he was a trustworthy and good man.
Al-Kashshi mentioned other traditions narrated by this man.

14. Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yasar
--------------------------------

Al-Barqi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions.[^28]
Al-Najashi said about this man, ‘He was from the clerks of Abu Tahir at
the time of Abu Muhammad (a.s.). He was known as as-Sayyari. He was weak
in narrations and of bad beliefs as al-Husayn bin Abdullah told us. His
narrations were not regarded significant. He narrated mursal[^29]
traditions. He had some books like “Thawab (reward of) al-Qur’an”,
“Medicine”, “Recitations”, “Rarities”, and “al-Gharat (raids)”.[^30]

Al-Kashshi mentioned that Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin Hajib said, ‘I read
in a paper with al-Jawad (a.s.) that he informed someone, who asked
about as-Sayyari, saying, ‘He was not as he claimed for himself. Do not
give him anything (of traditions).’[^31] Scholars accused him about his
beliefs. He died while still on his wrong beliefs.

15. Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Marwan al-Anbari
-------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^32]

16. Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Musshir
----------------------------------

He narrated from Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.), and Ali bin Abu Khulays
narrated from him. Sayyid al-Khu’i said, ‘Nothing was mentioned that
might prove the reliability or the praiseworthiness of this man. As for
the saying of Sheikh as-Saduq about him that he was “the companion of
Abu Muhammad (a.s.)”, it does not mean he was reliable or good. How is
that, whereas there were bad men among the companions of the Prophet
(a.s.), so what about those who accompanied the imam?!...’[^33]

17. Ahmad bin Muhammad al-Hudhayni
----------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^34]

18. Ahmad bin Hilal al-Abrata’iy
--------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^35] He was of bad beliefs and no one considered his
narrations significant.[^36] The imam (a.s.) dispraised him and declared
that he was free from him. He wrote to al-Qassim bin al-Ala’, ‘Our order
has come to you about the liar ibn Hilal, may Allah have no mercy on
him. He - may Allah neither forgive his sins nor may He pardon his
slips - often interfered in our affairs with no permission or
satisfaction from us. He was opinionated and he refrained from giving
our dues. He did not carry out our orders except of what he liked and
wanted. May Allah take him to the fire of Hell. We were patient with him
until Allah cut off his life after our prayer. We had informed some
people of our followers about him at that time - may Allah have no mercy
on him. There are some people who do not leave him. Make al-Issaqi - may
Allah keep him and his family safe - know what we have informed you
about the status of this sinner, and make whoever asked about him from
the people of his village and other villages know that. And tell the
same to whoever deserves to know that. He shall not be excused even by
our followers for making dubious what our reliable companions have
narrated from us…’

This tradition shows that this man was deviant. He died in 267 AH.[^37]

19. Isaaq bin Isma’yl an-Naysaburi
----------------------------------

He was reliable. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam
al-Askari's companions.[^38] The imam (a.s.) prayed Allah for him in one
of his letters.[^39]

20. Abu Ya’qub Isaaq bin Muhammad al-Basri
------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^40] Al-Kashshi said he was from the heads of the
excessive.[^41]

21. Isma’yl bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Isma’yl al-Hashimi al-Abbasi
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^42]

22. Jabir bin Suhayl as-Sayqal
------------------------------

He was the agent of Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.), Imam Abu Muhammad
al-Askari (a.s.), and Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.).[^43]

23. Abul Qassim Jabir bin Yazid al-Farisi
-----------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^44]

24. Ja’far bin Ibrahim bin Noah
-------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^45]

25. Al-Hasan bin Ahmad al-Maliki
--------------------------------

He was from the companions of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.). He narrated from
his father, and Ali bin al-Husayn bin Babwayh narrated from him.[^46]

26. Al-Hasan bin Ishkeeb al-Marwazi
-----------------------------------

He lived in Samarqand. He was a theologian, scholar, and an author.
Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^47]

27. Al-Hasan bin Ja’far
-----------------------

He was known as Abu Talib al-Faghani. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as
one of Imam al-Askari's companions.[^48]

28. Al-Hasan bin Ali bin Nu’man al-Kufi
---------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^49] Al-Najashi said, ‘He was the mawla of bani Hashim. His
father Ali bin an-Nu’man was trustworthy of true traditions. He had a
very useful book on rarities.[^50]

29. Al-Hasan bin Muhammad bin Baba al-Qummi
-------------------------------------------

He was excessive. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam
al-Askari's companions without adding “al-Qummi” to his name. al-Kashshi
said, ‘Abul Fadhl bin Shathan mentioned in one of his books that ibn
Baba al-Qummi was one of the famous liars.’

Sa’d said that al-Ubaydi said to him, ‘Once, (Imam) al-Askari wrote to
me saying: I am free before Allah from al-Fihri and al-Hasan bin
Muhammad bin Baba al-Qummi, and you also should be free from them. I
warn you and all my followers of them. I curse them. The curse of Allah
be on them. They extort the monies of people in our name. They are
mischievous and harmful. May Allah harm them and plunge them into
mischief. Ibn Baba pretends that I have sent him as a prophet and that
he is a “bab”.[^51] The curse of Allah be on him. Satan has mocked at
him and deceived him. Allah curses whoever accepts that from him. O
Muhammad, if you are able to split his head with a rock, you do so. He
has harmed me. May Allah harm him in this life and in the afterlife.’

This letter shows that the imam (a.s.) was so angry at this man who had
denied his religion and gone too far in deviation.

30. Al-Hasan bin Musa al-Khashshab
----------------------------------

An-Najashi said about him, ‘He was from our notable companions. He was
famous in knowledge and Hadith, and had written some books such as
“Refuting the Waqifites” and “the Rarities”. It was said that from his
books there were the books of “the Hajj”, and “the Prophets”. Sheikh
at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions.[^52]

31. Abu Own al-Hasan bin an-Nadhr al-Abrash
-------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^53]

32. Al-Hasan bin an-Nadhr
-------------------------

It was he who was carried to the Sacred District “Surra Man Ra’a” after
the death of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.). The Imam (a.s.) had given him two
garments. He died in Ramadhan and was enshrouded in these two garments.
He was from the people of Qum, and from those who met Imam al-Mahdi
(a.s.) other than his agents and saw his miracles.[^54] Sayyid al-Khu’i
thought he was but the very man mentioned above and not another
one.[^55]

33. Al-Husayn bin al-Hasan bin Abban
------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions and
said, ‘He met the imam (a.s.) but we do not know whether he narrated
from him or not. Ibn Qoulwayh said he was from the relatives of
as-Saffar and Sa’d bin Abdullah but he was before them because he
narrated from al-Husayn bin Sa’eed but they both did not.’[^56]

34. Hafs bin Amr al-Umari
-------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^57] He was one of the best companions of the imam (a.s.).
Isaaq bin Isma’yl had a letter from Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) saying, ‘Do
not leave the country until you meet al-Umari. May Allah be pleased with
him for my pleasedness with him. You greet him, be acquainted with him
and make him be acquainted with you, because he is pure, loyal, chaste,
and close to us. Everything that is carried to us from countries comes
to him at last so that he brings it to us. Praise be to Allah
exceedingly.’[^58]

This shows that he was reliable, good man, and close to the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).

35. Abu Sa’eed Hamdan bin Sulayman an-Nayshaburi
------------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi’s companions at one
time, and another time as one of Imam al-Askari's companions.[^59] He
was a reliable person from the notables of the Shi’a.

36. Hamza bin Muhammad
----------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^60] He narrated the tradition of “the cause of the
legislating of fasting”, and Isaaq bin Muhammad narrated from him.[^61]

37. Dawud bin Abu Zayd
----------------------

He was a reliable, truthful, religious man from Nayshabur. Sheikh
at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi and Imam al-Askari's
companions.

38. Dawud bin Aamir al-Ash’ari
------------------------------

He was from Qum. Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam
al-Askari's companions,[^62] and so did al-Barqi.[^63]

39. Dawud bin al-Qassim
-----------------------

He was known as Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari. He was one of the eminent Muslims
and one of the famous scholars in religion. Here we talk in brief about
this great personality.

### His lineage

His lineage belonged to the eternal martyr in Islam Ja’far bin Abu Talib
at-Ţayyar. He was the son of al-Qassim bin Isaaq bin Abdullah bin
Ja’far,[^64] and there was no lineage more noble than this lineage.

### His allegiance to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)

Abu Hashim was very loyal to the infallible imams (a.s.). He met Imam
ar-Redha, Imam al-Jawad, Imam al-Hadi, and Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
al-Askari (peace be on them). He devoted himself to them. He composed
good poetry in their praise.

### His position near the Imams

Abu Hashim had a high position near the imams with whom he was
contemporary. Once, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said to him, ‘O Abu Hashim,
which blessing of Allah you want to be grateful for? Allah has endowed
you with faith that saves your body from Fire, endowed you with
soundness that helps you in obedience, and endowed you with satisfaction
that keeps you away from degradation.’[^65]

### His social status

All classes of the society highly regarded Abu Hashim. Biographers said
about him, ‘He was preferred by rulers. He was pious, devoted, ascetic,
knowledgeable, and active. No one of the Talibites[^66] at his time was
like him in his high lineage.’[^67]

### His courage

Abu Hashim was so courageous that he did not fear any ruler. He
announced the truth even in the most critical environments. Historians
said that when the head of Yahya, the great rebel, was brought to
Baghdad, the people of Baghdad went to Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Tahir,
who killed Yahya, congratulating him on the victory!! Abu Hashim was
among those people. He said to the emir, ‘O emir, I have come to you
congratulating on something that had the messenger of Allah (a.s.) been
alive, he would be consoled on.’

All present people became silent and no one answered him with
anything.[^68] He left angrily while reciting the following verses of
poetry:

“O Family of Tahir, eat it harmfully,

for the flesh of the Prophet is not edible.

A revenge such that its seeker is Allah,

Definitely it will be taken.”[^69]

### His death

He died in Jumadi al-Oola[^70] in 261 AH,[^71] a year after the death of
Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.).

40. Sa’d bin Abdullah al-Qummi
------------------------------

He was contemporary with Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.). Sheikh at-Toosi said
that he did not know whether Sa’d had narrated from the imam (a.s.) or
not.[^72] An-Najashi said, ‘He was the chief, jurisprudent, and notable
of this sect (the Shi’a). He heard many traditions from the public. He
traveled around seeking traditions. He met al-Hasan bin Arafa, Muhammad
bin Abdul Malik ad-Daqiqi, Abu Hatim ar-Razi, and Abbas at-Tarqufi, and
he met our master Abu Muhammad (a.s.)…He compiled many books like
“Mercy”, “Wudu”, “Prayer”, “Zakat”, “Hajj”, besides many other books
written by him.’[^73]

He died in 301 or 299 AH.[^74]

41. As-Sindi bin ar-Rabee’
--------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions and
added that he was a reliable narrotor from Kufa.[^75]

42. Abu Sa’eed Sahl bin Ziyad al-Aadami ar-Razi
-----------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^76] An-Najashi said, ‘He was weak in narration and
undependable. Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Eesa accused him of excessiveness
and lying and he exiled him from Qum to ar-Riyy where he lived before.
He wrote to Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) through Muhammad bin Abdul
Hameed al-Attar… He had a book on rarities.’[^77]

43. Shahwayh bin Abdullah al-Jallab
-----------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^78]

44. Salih bin Abu Hammad
------------------------

An-Najashi said, ‘Salih bin Abu Hammad Abul Khayr ar-Razi met Imam Abul
Hasan (al-Hadi) (a.s.). He was an ambiguous narrator, since some people
knew him while others denied him. He had some books like “The speeches
of Ameerul Mu’minin” and “Rarities”.[^79] Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him
as one of Imam al-Askari's companions.[^80]

45. Salih bin Abdullah al-Jallab
--------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^81]

46. Abdul Adheem al-Hasani
--------------------------

This noble master belonged to the pure progeny of Imam al-Hasan (a.s.)
the grandson of the messenger of Allah (a.s.). He was the son of
Abdullah bin Ali bin al-Hasan bin Zayd bin Imam al-Hasan (a.s.). Sheikh
at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions.[^82]
An-Najashi mentioned that Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Khalid al-Barqi said,
‘Abdul Adheem came to ar-Riyy escaping from the ruler. He lived in a
vault in a house of one of the Shi’a in Sikkat al-Mawali. He worshipped
Allah in that vault; fasting during the day and spending the night in
praying and supplicating. He went out in disguise to visit the tomb that
was opposite his (future) tomb. He said that it was a tomb of one of the
sons of Imam Musa bin Ja’far (a.s.). He remained living in that vault
and his news moved from one to another of the Shi’a until most of them
knew him. Once a man from the Shi’a saw in sleep that the messenger of
Allah (a.s.) said to him, ‘A man from my progeny shall be carried from
Sikkat al-Mawali and buried near the apple tree in the garden of Abdul
Jabbar bin Abdul Wahab’ and he pointed to the place. The man went to buy
the tree and its place from its owner. The owner asked him, ‘What for do
you want to buy the tree and its place?’ The man told him about his
dream, and then the owner of the tree remembered that he also had seen
such a dream and entailed the place of the tree and the entire garden on
the Sharif and the Shi’a to be buried in. Abdul Adheem became ill and
then died (may Allah have mercy on him). When he was to be washed, a
piece of paper was found in his pocket, written in it was his noble
lineage.’[^83]

This noble man was a knowledgeable jurisprudent. Abu Hammad ar-Razi
said, ‘Once, I went to Ali bin Muhammad (al-Hadi) (a.s.) in Surra Man
Ra’a. I asked him about some questions of halal and haram and he
answered me. When I wanted to leave him, he said to me, ‘O Hammad, if
some thing of your religion is dubious to you, ask Abdul Adheem bin
Abdullah al-Hasani about it and give him my best regards!’[^84]

47. Abdullah bin Ja’far al-Himyari al-Qummi
-------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions,[^85] and so did al-Barqi.[^86] An-Najashi said, ‘Abul Abbas
Abdullah bin Ja’far bin al-Hasan bin Malik bin Jami’ al-Himyari al-Qummi
was the chief and a notable of the people of Qumm. He went to Kufa after
290 AH. The people of Kufa heard from him many traditions. He compiled
many books such as “al-Amanah: deposit or fidelity”, “ad-Dala’il:
proofs”, “al-Adhamah wet-Tawhid: greatness and monotheism”, “al-Ghaybah
wel Heerah: occultation and confusion”, “Fadhl al-Arab: preference of
the Arabs”, “at-Tawhid wel Bada’ wel Iradah wel Istita’ah wel Ma’rifah:
monotheism, bada’[^87], will, capability, and knowledge”, “Qurb al-Isnad
ila (close attribution to) Abu Ja’far bin ar-Redha”, “Ma Bayna (between)
Hisham bin al-Hakam and Hisham and al-Abbas”, “al-Arwah wel Jannah wel
Nar : souls, Paradise, and Fire”, “al-Hadithayn al-Mukhtalifayn: the two
different traditions”, “Massa’il ad-Dajjal: the questions of the
imposter”, “Mukatabat Abul Hasan ath-Thalith: correspondences of Abul
Hasan the Third”, “Massa’il li (questions of) Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin
Ali ala yad (through) Muhammad bin Uthaman al-Umari”, “Qurb al-Isnad ila
Sahib al-Amr (the man of the matter)”, “Massail Abu Muhammad wa
Tawqi’atuh (handwritings)”, and the book “at-Tibb: medicine”. These
different books show his vast knowledge and his specialization in
different sciences.

48. Abdullah bin Hamdwayh al-Bayhaqi
------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^88] He was from the best Shi’a. Once, the imam (a.s.) wrote
a letter in which he prayed Allah to have mercy on him. We have
mentioned this letter in a previous chapter.

49. Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Khalid at-Tayalisi al-Kufi
--------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^89] An-Najashi said, ‘He was trustworthy, benevolent man
from our (Shi’a) companions, and so was his brother Abu Muhammad
al-Hasan. He had a book of rarities.[^90] Muhammad bin Mass’ood said
about him, ‘As for Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Khalid at-Tayalisi, I have
not known about him but for him being good and trustworthy.’[^91]

50. Abu Muhammad Abdullah bin Muhammad ash-Shami ad-Damashqi
------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions, and
added that he narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin ‘Isa and others.[^92]

51. Abu Amr Uthman bin Sa’eed al-Umari az-Zayyat
------------------------------------------------

He was also called as as-Samman. He was one of the great faithful and
pious Muslims. As if religion was a part of him. We shall talk in brief
about him.

### The Imams praising him

The Imams, whom al-Umari was contemporary with, praised and highly
regarded him. Ahmad bin Isaaq bin Sa’d al-Qummi said, ‘‘One day, I went
to Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad (Imam al-Hadi) (blessings be on him) and
said to him: O my master, some times I am here and some times I am not.
I cannot come to you at every time. Whose sayings do we accept and whose
orders do we follow?’

He said, ‘This is Abu Amr the trustworthy, the faithful. Whatever he
says to you is from me and whatever he informs you of is in behalf of
me.’

When Abul Hasan (a.s.) died, I referred to his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) and asked him one day as I had asked his father before.
He said to me, ‘This is Abu Amr the trustworthy, the faithful. He is the
trust of the formers and my trust in life and death. Whatever he says to
you is from me and whatever he informs you of is in behalf of me.’[^93]

Ahmad bin Isaaq also said, ‘I asked Abul Hasan (a.s.): with whom shall I
deal and from whom shall I take (religious rulings), and whose saying
shall I accept? He said to me, ‘Al-Umary my trust; whatever he informs
you of is on behalf of me and whatever he says to you is on behalf of
me. Listen and obey him, for he is trustworthy and reliable.’[^94]

This is a clear proof of his faith, piety, and religiousness.

### His agency to Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.)

He assumed the agency in the Holy District (Surra Man Ra’a) for fifty
years.[^95] The Shi’a offered their questions to him and he offered them
to the imam (a.s.).

### His death

Historians said that he had dug a grave for himself. Everyday, he went
down into the grave and recited a part from the Holy Qur'an and then he
came up. He died in Jumadi al-Oola in 304 or 305 AH. He had predicted
the day of his death. His tomb is in Baghdad and he is known by the
Baghdadis as ash-Sheikh al-Khilafi.[^96]

52. Urwah al-Wakil al-Qummi
---------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^97]

53. Al-Akmari bin Ali bin Muhammad al-Bawfaki an-Nayshaburi
-----------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions, and
added that he bought some Turks in Samarqand for (Imam) al-Askari.[^98]

54. Ali bin Bilal
-----------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi and Imam
al-Askari's companions.[^99] An-Najashi said, ‘He was a Baghdadi and
then he moved to Wasit. He narrated from Abul Hasan the Third (a.s.). He
had a book.’[^100] In a letter from Imam al-Askari (a.s.) to Isaaq it
was mentioned, ‘O Isaaq, read our book to al-Bilali, may Allah have
mercy on him, because he is trustworthy and reliable, and he knows what
he has to do.’

Al-Kashshi said, “I found a book written by Jabra’il bin Ahmad that
Muhammad bin Eesa al-Yaqtini said to him, ‘Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) wrote a
letter to Ali bin Bilal in 232AH saying in it, ‘‘I praise Allah and
thank Him for His might and mercy, and pray that He sends His blessing
and mercy on Muhammad the Prophet and on his progeny. I have appointed
Abu Ali in place of al-Husayn bin Abd Rabbih and entrusted him with that
position for the knowledge that he has, such that no one is preferred
over him. I know you are the chief of your district and so I wanted to
honor you by writing this letter on that to you. You have to obey him
and deliver to him all the dues that are with you. You have to inform my
followers and recommend them of that, for this will support and suffice
him, and save us efforts and please us. Doing this, you will have the
reward of Allah, and Allah gives whomever He likes. He is the Giver, Who
rewards with His mercy and you are in the trust of Allah. I have written
this letter with my handwriting and I praise Allah much.’”[^101]

This letter shows that he was trustworthy and relied on by the imam
(a.s.).

55. Ali bin Ja’far bin al-Abbas al-Khuza’iy
-------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^102]

56. Ali bin Ja’far al-Humani al-Barmaki
---------------------------------------

Al-Barqi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi and Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^103] Sheikh at-Toosi said, ‘He was a good, benevolent man
from the agents of Abul Hasan and Abu Muhammad (peace be on
them).’[^104]

Abu Ja’far al-Umari said, ‘Once, Abu Tahir bin Bilal went to perform the
hajj and he saw Ali bin Ja’far spending money excessively. When he went
back, he wrote to Abu Muhammad (Imam al-Askari) (a.s.) about that and
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied to him: ‘We have ordered to give him one
hundred thousand dinars and then another one hundred thousand dinars but
he refused to take them so that we would keep them for people… He went
to Abul Hasan (a.s.) and he ordered to give him thirty thousand
dinars.’[^105]

Al-Kashshi mentioned that Yusuf bin as-Sakht said, ‘Ali bin Ja’far was
one of the deputies of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). One day, he was betrayed and
al-Mutawakkil threw him into prison. He remained in prison for a long
time and he could not bear this any longer. Therefore, he asked an agent
of the Abbasid government to intercede for him to be set free and he
would give him three thousand dinars for that. The agent went to
Ubaydillah, who had a good position near al-Mutawakkil, and asked him to
intercede with al-Mutawakkil for Ali bin Ja’far. Ubaydillah responded to
him and interceded with al-Mutawakkil to set Ali bin Ja’far free, but
al-Mutawakkil refused and said to him, ‘If I doubted you, I would say
you are a Rafidhi (Shi’a). This is a deputy of Abul Hasan al-Hadi and I
have determined to kill him.’

Ubaydillah regretted his intercession and told his friend (the agent)
that al-Mutawakkil had determined to kill Ali bin Ja’far and there was
no chance for setting him free. Ali bin Ja’far became so distressed and
wrote a letter to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) saying to him, ‘O my master,
please do something for me! I fear I may lose my faith.’ Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) replied to him, ‘Since the matter has reached this point with
you, I will pray Allah for you.’

Al-Mutawakkil became seriously ill and his fever increased. Therefore,
he ordered his men to set free all prisoners and gave a special order to
set Ali bin Ja’far free. Al-Mutawakkil ordered Ubaydillah to set Ali
free and to beg him to forgive him (al-Mutawakkil) for what he had done
to him. Ali was set free and went to live in Mecca as Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) had ordered him.’[^106]

Al-Kashshi mentioned in the biography of Faris bin Hatim al-Qazwini that
there was a dispute between Ali bin Ja’far and Faris, and that Ibrahim
bin Muhammad wrote to Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) telling him about that and
asking him to show him which of them he should follow. Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) replied to him saying, “It should not be asked about one like
this man and he should never be doubted. The position of Ali bin Ja’far
is so great to us. May Allah please us with him. He is far above others
to be compared with them. Go to Ali bin Ja’far to satisfy your needs,
and fear Faris and do not let him interfere in your affairs. Let you and
those who follow you from the people of your country do that. I have
been informed of what he (Faris) misrepresented to people. Do not pay
attention to him insha’Allah!’[^107]

This letter shows that this man was so faithful that the imam (a.s.) had
appointed him as an authority for the Shi’a.

57. Ali bin al-Hasan bin Fadhdhal al-Kufi
-----------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^108] An-Najashi said, ‘He was the best jurisprudent of our
companions in Kufa and one of the notables there. He was trustworthy and
the most aware of Hadith among them. Our companions listened to and
obeyed him. Many traditions were heard from him. No fault was found in
him and he was accused of nothing. He seldom narrated from a weak
narrator. He was Fatahite[^109] and did not narrate from his father any
tradition. When I was eighteen years, I discussed his books with him,
but at that time I did not understand traditions and did not permit
myself to narrate them before him. He narrated from his two brothers who
narrated from their father.

He had written many books such as the book of “Wudu’”, “Haydh and Nafas;
menstruation and puerperium”, “Salat; prayer”, “Zakat and Khums”,
“Fasting”, “Manasik (rituals of) al-Hajj”, “Divorce”, “Nikah; marriage”,
“al-Ma’rifah: knowledge”, “at-Tanzil min al-Qur’an wet Tahrif: the
revelation and distortion”, “az-Zuhd: asceticism”, and many
others.’[^110]

He was at the head of the scholars of his time, and his many books
proved his vast knowledge.

58. Ali bin Sulayman bin Dawud ar-Riqqi
---------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^111]

59. Ali bin ar-Rayyan bin as-Salt al-Ash’ari al-Qummi
-----------------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^112]

60. Ali bin Ramees
------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Hadi and Imam
al-Askari's companions, and said that he was from Baghdad and was
weak.[^113]

61. Ali bin Zayd bin Ali al-Alawi
---------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^114]

62. Ali bin Shuja’ an-Naysaburi
-------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^115]

63. Ali bin Muhammad as-Saymari
-------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^116]

64. Ali bin Muhammad bin Ilyas
------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^117]

65. Umar bin Abu Muslim
-----------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^118]

66. Amr bin Suwayd al-Mada’ini
------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^119]

67. Al-Fadhl bin al-Harith
--------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^120] Al-Kashshi mentioned that al-Fadhl said, ‘I was in
Surra Man Ra’a at the time of the departure of my master Abul Hasan
(al-Hadi) (a.s.).

We saw Abu Muhammad walking later, tearing his clothes out of sorrow for
his father. I was astonished at his gravity and at his color and
expressions. I felt pity for his tiredness. When night came, I saw him
in my sleep and he said to me, ‘The color that you were astonished at
was the trying of Allah of His creatures. He tries with it as He wills.
It is a lesson for those who have sight. There is no blame in it on the
tried one, and we are not like other people to be tired as they are. We
ask Allah to fix us on faith and to make us ponder on His creation… Know
that each of us in sleep is like each of us in wakefulness.’[^121]

68. Al-Fadhl bin Shathan
------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^122] He was at the head of the eminent scholars of his
time. He wrote books on different sciences and arts. He had written one
hundred and eighty books.[^123] Some of his books were admired by Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.). He said about one of them, ‘This is true and must
be acted upon.’[^124] Once again, he read one of the books and said, ‘I
envy the people of Khurasan for the position of al-Fadhl bin Shathan,
and his being among them.’[^125]

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) glorified and highly regarded al-Fadhl. He
prayed Allah to have mercy on him three times.[^126] Al-Kashshi
mentioned some traditions dispraising him, but those traditions were
fabricated against him by the opponents who had spite against him.

69. Qassim bin Hisham al-Lu’lu’iy
---------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions, and
said that he narrated from Abu Ayyub.[^127] An-Najashi said that had a
book of rarities.[^128]

70. Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Mahziyar
-------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^129]

Muhammad bin Ya’qub narrated that Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Mahziyar
said, ‘After the death of Abu Muhammad (a.s.) I was in doubt. Much money
was accumulated with my father. He carried the money and rode on the
ship. I escorted him. He felt severe pain and said to me, ‘Take me back!
It is death.’

And then he said to me, ‘Fear Allah in this money!’ He made his will and
died. I said to myself, ‘My father would not recommend of anything that
is not right. Let me take this money and go to Iraq. I shall rent a
house at the bank of the river and I shall not tell anyone about
anything. If some thing becomes clear to me as it was clear during the
time of Abu Muhammad, I shall spend the money, and otherwise I shall
enjoy myself with it.’

After some days, a messenger came to me with a letter, and written in it
was: “O Muhammad, there is so-and-so with you in so-and-so…’ He
mentioned to me all that which I possessed, even that which I did not
know. I gave it to the messenger and felt ashamed for some days. I was
very sad, but then a letter came from the imam (a.s.) saying, ‘We have
appointed you in place of your father, so thank Allah!’[^130] This means
that Ibrahim had a respectable position and a high standing.

71. Muhammad bin Abul Sahban
----------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions,[^131] and so did al-Barqi.[^132]

72. Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Ja’far al-Qummi al-Attar
---------------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions and
said he was his agent. He had met Imam Abul Hasan al-Hadi (a.s.).[^133]

73. Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Mutahhar
-----------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^134]

74. Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Na’eem bin Shathan an-Naysaburi
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^135] As-Saduq mentioned that Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Shathan
said, ‘Some money came to me for al-Qa’im (Imam al-Mahdi), peace be upon
him. It was five hundred lacking twenty dirhams. I hated to send the
meager amount so I added twenty dirhams from my money and sent the
amount to Muhammad bin Ja’far without mentioning my money. The receipt
came to Muhammad bin Ja’far (from the imam) saying: “Five hundred
dirhams were received. Twenty dirhams from them are yours.”

Imam al-Qa’im (a.s.) said about him, ‘As for Muhammad bin Shathan bin
Na’eem, he is a man from our Shi’a, we the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).’[^136]

75. Muhammad bin Ahmad al-Ja’fari al-Qummi
------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions and
said he was his agent, and that he had met Imam Abul Hasan (a.s.).[^137]

76. Muhammad bin Bilal
----------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions and
said he was trustworthy.[^138]

77. Muhammad bin al-Hasan bin Shammun
-------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions and
said he was excessive man from Basra.[^139] An-Najashi said, ‘He was a
Waqifite[^140] and then he turned excessive. He was too weak (in
traditions) and of bad beliefs. Some traditions on Waqifism were
ascribed to him. It was mentioned that he had said, ‘I heard Imam Musa
bin Ja’far (s) saying, ‘Whoever tells you that he has nursed me, washed
me (after death), enshrouded me, put me in a coffin, buried me and shook
dust off his hand, do not believe him. Whoever asks about me, tell him
that I am alive, and praise be to Allah.’[^141]

Al-Kashshi mentioned from him his saying, ‘I wrote to Abu Muhammad (Imam
al-Askari) complaining of poverty and then I said to myself: has Abu
Abdullah (Imam as-Sadiq) (a.s.) not said, ‘Poverty with us (the Ahlul
Bayt) is better than wealth with our enemy, and being killed with us is
better than living with our enemy.’ The reply to my letter came saying,
‘Allah the Almighty tries our followers, when their sins increase, by
poverty, and He may forgive many (of sins), and it is as your self said
to you: poverty with us is better than wealth with our enemy. We are a
shelter for whoever resorts to us and a light for whoever seeks light,
and preservation for whoever resorts to us. Whoever loves us will be
with us in the highest position, and whoever deviates from us will be in
Fire.’[^142]

78. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar
-----------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions and
said he had some doubts about him.[^143] An-Najashi said, ‘He was
eminent notable among our companions of Qum. He was trustworthy, highly
respectable, preferred, and of little mistaking in narration. He had
some books like “Prayer”, “Wudu”, “Funerals”, “Hajj”, “Marriage”,
“Divorce”, “the Freeing of Slaves”, “Correspondence”, “Management”,
“Trades”, “Gains”, “Hunting and Slaughtering”, “Penalties”, “Blood
money”, “Obligations”, “Inheritance”, “Du’a: supplication”, “the
Shrine”, “Refuting the excessive”, “Drinks”, “Magnanimity”,
“Asceticism”, “Khums”, “Zakat”, “Witnesses”, “Battles”, “Precautionary
Dissimulation”, “the Believer”, “Oaths and Vows”, “Defects”, “Insights
of Degrees”, “what has been narrated about the children of the imams”,
“what has been narrated in Sha’ban”, “Jihad”, and “the Value of the
Qur'an”.’[^144] This noble sheikh died in 290 AH.

79. Muhammad bin al-Husayn bin Abul Khattab
-------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^145] An-Najashi said, ‘He was an eminent notable from our
Shi’a companions. He was trustworthy. He narrated many traditions and
his narrations were relied on. He had compiled good books such as
“Monotheism”, “Knowledge and Bad’a’”, “Refuting the Fatalists”,
“Imamate”, “The Pearle”, “the recommendations of the imams”, and
“Rarities”.’[^146] Ibn Shahrashub considered him as one of the close
companions of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.). He died in 262 AH.

80. Muhammad bin Ja’far al-Umari
--------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^147] Al-Kashi said that his father, Hafs, was an agent of
Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.).

81. Muhammad bin ar-Rabee’ bin as-Suwayd as-Sa’iy
-------------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^148]

82. Muhammad bin Ziyad
----------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him with this name as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions adding nothing else.[^149]

83. Muhammad bin Salih al-Armani
--------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^150]

84. Muhammad bin Salih bin Muhammad al-Hamadani
-----------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^151] Sheikh as-Saduq said, ‘He was one of those who saw the
miracles of the Awaited Imam (a.s.).’[^152]

85. Muhammad bin Salih al-Khash’ami
-----------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^153]

86. Muhammad bin Abdul Hameed bin Salim al-Attar al-Kufi
--------------------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^154] An-Najashi said: He was a trustworthy narrator from
our Kufi Shi’a companions. He had a book on rarities.’[^155]

87. Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Uthman al-Umari
-------------------------------------------

He was trustworthy and loyal. He and his father were agents of Imam
al-Mahdi (a.s.). Many traditions were mentioned about his loftiness and
high position. Once, Ahmad bin Isaaq asked Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.),
‘With whom shall I ideal, from whom shall I take (religious rulings),
and whose saying shall I accept?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said, ‘Al-Umari (he meant Uthman) and his son
(Muhammad)! They are trustworthy. Whatever they tell you they tell on
behalf of me.’[^156]

A letter came from Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) to Muhammad bin Uthman al-Umari
comforting him on the death of his father Uthman in which he said, ‘May
Allah reward and comfort you with the best. You are afflicted and we are
afflicted. His departure distressed you and distressed us. May Allah
please him in his final abode. It was from his perfect happiness that
Allah had given him a son like you to succeed him after his death,
replace him, and invoke the mercy of Allah on him. I say: praise be to
Allah for souls are pleased with you and with what He has put in you and
given you. May He assist, strengthen, and make you successful, and be
your Guardian, Keeper, and Sufficer.’[^157]

Sheikh as-Saduq mentioned that Abdullah bin Ja’far al-Himyari said,
‘Once, I asked Muhammad bin Uthman al-Umari whether he had seen the Man
of the Matter (Imam al-Mahdi), peace be on him, and he said, ‘Yes, the
last time I had seen him was in the Inviolable House of Allah (the
Kaaba) while he was saying: “O Allah, carry out to me what You have
promised me!’ Muhammad bin Uthman also said, ‘I saw him clinging to the
curtains of the Kaaba in al-Mustajar (resort) while saying: “O Allah,
avenge on Your enemies!”’[^158]

Muhammad bin Uthman died in 305 AH.[^159]

88. Muhammad bin Ali bin Bilal
------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^160] He was trustworthy, but later on he robbed the monies
of the imam (a.s.) that were with him and he refused to deliver them to
the Imam’s agent Muhammad bin Uthman claiming that he himself was the
agent. After this, the Shi’a rejected him and announced they were free
from him.[^161]

89. Muhammad bin Ali at-Tasturi
-------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions,[^162] and so did al-Barqi.

90. Muhammad bin Ali az-Zari’
-----------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions.

91. Muhammad bin Ali al-Qasri
-----------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^163]

92. Muhammad bin Ali al-Katib
-----------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^164]

93. Muhammad bin ‘Isa bin Ubayd al-Yaqtini
------------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^165] An-Najashi said, ‘He was lofty, trustworthy notable
from the Shi’a. He had narrated many traditions and compiled some good
books. He narrated traditions from Abu Ja’far the Second (Imam al-Jawad)
through letters and orally.

Muhammad bin Ja’far ar-Razzaz said that Muhammad bin ‘Isa lived in Suq
al-Attash and had written and compiled a good collection of books.[^166]

94. Muhammad bin Musa as-Saree’iy
---------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions and
said he was excessive.[^167] Al-Kashshi said, ‘He and Muhammad bin Musa
ash-Shurayqi were from the disciples of Ali bin Hasaka. They are cursed,
may Allah curse them.’[^168] Some narrators narrated from Abu Muhammad
at-Talla’kabri that Abu Ali Muhammad bin Humam said, ‘As-Saree’iy was
surnamed as Abu Muhammad…he was from the companions of Abul Hasan Ali
bin Muhammad (al-Hadi) and al-Hasan al-Askari (peace be on them). He was
the first one who claimed a position that Allah had not made for him and
he did not deserve it. He fabricated lies against Allah and against His
authorities (peace be on them). He ascribed to them what did not fit
them; therefore, the Shi’a cursed and disavowed him. Then a book came
from the imam (a.s.) cursing and disavowing him…and then disbelief and
atheism appeared in his sayings.’[^169]

95. Muhammad bin Musa an-Naysaburi
----------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^170] Once, the imam (a.s.) sent a letter with him to
Ibrahim bin Abdah.[^171]

96. Muhammad bin Musa bin Furat
-------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^172]

97. Muhammad bin Yahya bin Ziyad
--------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^173]

98. Muhammad bin Yahya al-Mu’athi
---------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^174]

99. Muhammad bin Yazdad
-----------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^175]

100. Harun bin Muslim bin Sa’dan
--------------------------------

He was from Kufa, and then he moved to Basra, and then to Baghdad.
Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^176] An-Najashi said, ‘He was a trustworthy notable. He had
a school in “compulsion” and “Tashbih: comparing Allah to the created”.
He met Abu Muhammad and Abul Hasan (peace be on them). He had some books
like “at-Tawhid: monotheism”, “al-Fadha’il: virtues”, “al-Khutab:
sermons”, “al-Maghazi: battles”, and “ad-Du’a”. He had questions with
Abul Hasan the Third (al-Hadi) (a.s.).’[^177]

101. Yahya al-Basri
-------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^178]

102. Ya’qub bin Isaaq al-Barqi
------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^179]

103. Ya’qub bin Manqush
-----------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^180] Sheikh as-Saduq mentioned that Ya’qub bin Manqush
said, “One day, I went to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) and asked
him, ‘O my master, who will be the man of this matter (imamate)?’ He
asked me to lift a screen there and I did. A young boy of eight or ten
years came out to us…he sat on the thigh of Abu Muhammad (a.s.). Then,
Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said to me, ‘This is your man.’ The boy jumped
and Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said to him, ‘O my son, go in until the
prescribed time!’ The boy went in while I was looking at him. Abu
Muhammad (a.s.) said to me, ‘O Ya’qub, go in to see who there is in the
house!’ I went in, but found no one.’[^181]

104. Yusuf bin as-Sakht
-----------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^182] Ibn al-Ghadhayiri said, ‘He was weak, and of
unreliable speech. The people of Qum excluded him from the “rarities of
wisdom”.’[^183]

105. Abu Khalaf al-Ijli
-----------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions, and
said that Ali bin al-Husayn bin Babwayh narrated from him from Imam Abu
Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.).[^184]

106. Abu Muhammad Ali bin Bilal al-Iskafi
-----------------------------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's
companions.[^185]

107. Abul Bakhtari
------------------

Sheikh at-Toosi mentioned him as one of Imam al-Askari's companions, and
said he was the teacher of al-Hajjaj’s children.[^186]

[^1]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^2]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^3]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^4]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^7]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^8]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^9]: Mu’jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.1 p.169.

[^10]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: Bani means ‘the family or the tribe of’.

[^13]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^14]: Rijal ibn Dawud.

[^15]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^16]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^17]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^18]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^19]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^20]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^21]: Usool al-Kafi, chap. of al-Hujjah.

[^22]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^23]: A sect believing that Abdullah al-Aftah the son of Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (s) was the imam after his father.

[^24]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^25]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^26]: Qur'an, 3:25.

[^27]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^28]: Rijal al-Barqi.

[^29]: A mursal tradition is the tradition that is narrated while one or
two of the chain of narrators are missing.

[^30]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^31]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^32]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^33]: Mu’jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.2 p.329.

[^34]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^35]: Ibid.

[^36]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.4 p.367.

[^37]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol. 2 p.367.

[^38]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^39]: We have mentioned it in a previous chapter.

[^40]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^41]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^42]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^43]: Ibid.

[^44]: Ibid.

[^45]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^46]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.4 p.293.

[^47]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^48]: Ibid.

[^49]: Ibid.

[^50]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^51]: In early Shiism “bab” denotes the senior authorized disciple of
the imam.

[^52]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^53]: Ibid.

[^54]: Ikmal ad-Deen.

[^55]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith.

[^56]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^57]: Ibid.

[^58]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^59]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^60]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^61]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith.

[^62]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^63]: Rijal al-Barqi.

[^64]: Al-Kuna wel Alqab, vol.1 p.174.

[^65]: The life of Imam al-Hadi by Baqir Sharif al-Qurashi.

[^66]: The progeny of Abu Talib.

[^67]: Al-Kuna wel Alqab, vol.1 p.176.

[^68]: Maqatil at-Talibiyeen, p.164.

[^69]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol.11 p.9.

[^70]: It is the fifth month in the Islamic year.

[^71]: Al-Kuna wel Alqab, vol.1 p.176.

[^72]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^73]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^74]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith.

[^75]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^76]: Ibid.

[^77]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^78]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^79]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^80]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^81]: Ibid.

[^82]: Ibid.

[^83]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^84]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.10 p.53.

[^85]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^86]: Rijal al-Barqi.

[^87]: The alteration of Allah’s purpose, the emergence of new
circumstances, which cause a change in an earlier ruling.

[^88]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^89]: Ibid.

[^90]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^91]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^92]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^93]: Al-Ghaybah by Sheikh at-Toosi.

[^94]: Usool al-Kafi.

[^95]: Al-Kuna wel Alqab, vol.3 p.267.

[^96]: Ibid., p.268.

[^97]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^98]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^99]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^100]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^101]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^102]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^103]: Rijal al-Barqi.

[^104]: Al-Ghaybah.

[^105]: Ibid.

[^106]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^107]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^108]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^109]: A sect believing that Abdullah al-Aftah the son of Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (s) was the imam after his father.

[^110]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^111]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^112]: Ibid.

[^113]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^114]: Ibid.

[^115]: Ibid.

[^116]: Ibid.

[^117]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^118]: Ibid.

[^119]: Ibid.

[^120]: Ibid.

[^121]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^122]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^123]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^124]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^125]: Ibid.

[^126]: Ibid.

[^127]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^128]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^129]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^130]: Usool al-Kafi.

[^131]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^132]: Rijal al-Barqi.

[^133]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^134]: Ibid.

[^135]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^136]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith.

[^137]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^138]: Ibid.

[^139]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^140]: The waqifites were a group of people who believed in the imamate
of the first seven imams, from Imam Ali (a.s.) to Imam Musa bin Ja’far
al-Kadhim (a.s.), but did not believe in the remaining five imams.

[^141]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^142]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^143]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^144]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^145]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^146]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^147]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^148]: Ibid.

[^149]: Ibid.

[^150]: Ibid.

[^151]: Ibid.

[^152]: Ikmaluddeen.

[^153]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^154]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^155]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^156]: Usool al-Kafi, vol.1 chap. al-Hujja.

[^157]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.16 p.310.

[^158]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.2 chap. of “rarities of the
hajj”.

[^159]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.16 p.310.

[^160]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^161]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.16 p.350.

[^162]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^163]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^164]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^165]: Ibid.

[^166]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol. 17 p.126.

[^167]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^168]: Rijal al-Kashshi.

[^169]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.17 p.323.

[^170]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^171]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith.

[^172]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^173]: Ibid.

[^174]: Ibid.

[^175]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^176]: Ibid.

[^177]: Rijal an-Najashi.

[^178]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^179]: Ibid.

[^180]: Ibid.

[^181]: Ikmaluddeen.

[^182]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^183]: Mu'jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol.20 p.200.

[^184]: Rijal at-Toosi.

[^185]: Ibid.

[^186]: Rijal at-Toosi.


