The Age of the Imam
===================

The study of the age that Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) lived in is no longer
a kind of luxury or ornamentation for the book, rather it is a necessity
that the modern scientific research requires. Studying an age has become
one of the methodical studies that a researcher cannot leave aside,
because it reveals the reality of the general life which that certain
person lives in, and also it sheds lights on the events that takes place
during that age which naturally have a great influence on the behavior
of that person. Sociologists say that the social life affects and is
affected by the people living in that age.

Anyhow, we objectively shall offer several sides of the general life of
the age that Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) lived in.

The Economical Life
-------------------

Before we shed light on the economical life of the age of Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.), we would like to show that Islam has paid extreme
attention to the developing of the economy of the nation, the growth of
individual income, and the prosperity of general life. Islam has
considered poverty as a destroying disaster which must be removed by all
means. Islam has compared disbelief to poverty, and as disbelief must be
removed due to the Islamic Shariah, poverty must be removed from society
as well. Islam has ordered Muslim rulers and leaders to spare no effort
to save Muslims from the dangers of poverty and wretchedness which are
the reasons behind the intellectual and moral deviation among people.

of the creative methods that the Islamic economy is based on is that the
Sharia has limited the authorities of rulers and officials. They are not
permitted in any case to play with the treasury of the state, because it
is for all Muslims and not for one person. The wealth of Muslims must be
spent on Muslims, and neither the ruler nor any member of his government
has the right to extort from the treasury to spend on himself or his
kin, for this is treason against Allah and against Muslims.

The Abbasid rule, during all its ages, followed a special economical
policy that was opposed to the true Islamic system, and it was too far
from the laws Islam has legislated to control the wealth of the Islamic
state. We shall discuss here in brief the general economical system in
the Abbasid age.

Incomes of The State
--------------------

The majority of the state income was collected from land taxes and zakat
which ranged in the millions of dinars. Historians said it was about
three hundred and sixty million dirhams a year,[^1] and it was about
five hundred million dirhams in some years.[^2] In that age a dirham had
a good value. It equaled the price of a sheep, a jar of honey, or a jar
of oil, whereas a dinar equaled the price of a camel.[^3]

Unfortunately, these abundant monies were not spent to develop the
scientific, medical, and economical life as Islam wanted, but they went
to the pockets of rulers who spent them on building high palaces, as
al-Mutawakkil did, and on singers, dancers, drinking companions, and
other fields of debauchery and pleasures.

Violence In Collecting The Land Tax
-----------------------------------

Violence, oppression, and punishments were common methods in collecting
the land taxes during most of the Abbasid ages. People suffered
exhausting kinds of oppression from the publicans, who had no bit of
mercy and kindness in their hearts. They imposed taxes according to
their desires and greed, and whoever refused or delayed to pay the
imposed taxes his fate would be either be the grave or prison.

Al-Jahshiyari said, ‘The people of kharaj (who did not or could not pay
the land tax) were punished severely with different kinds of torment
like being thrown to beasts of prey and bees.

Muhammad bin Muslim was a close companion to al-Mahdi (the Abbasid
caliph). When al-Mahdi became the caliph and found that the people of
kharaj were tortured severely, he consulted with Muhammad bin Muslim who
said to him, ‘O Ameerul Mu’minin, this is a situation that can be
changed. They are debtors of Muslims and must be treated as debtors.’
Then the caliph ordered to stop punishing them.’[^4]

During the reign of ar-Rashid, people criticized al-Fadhl bin Yahya
al-Barmaki who was the wali of Khurasan. They complained a lot about him
til ar-Rashid deposed him and appointed in place of him Ali bin ‘Isa,
who killed many notables from the people of Khurasan and farmed great
monies. Once, he sent to ar-Rashid ten million dirhams in a sack made of
silk.[^5]

The people of Mosul also suffered terrible oppression because of the
farming of the kharaj (land tax). The wali, appointed by ar-Rashid, on
them was Yahya bin Sa’eed. He ordered them to pay him the kharaj of past
years, and he whipped most of them.[^6]

Islam has bound walis to be kind to their subjects and to improve their
economical conditions. People must not meet any pressure from rulers in
farming the kharaj and zakat, but most Abbasid kings paid no attention
to that, and rather, they subjected the nation by violence and
oppression in collecting the kharaj.

Increasing The Kharaj
---------------------

The officials of the Abbasid governments often asked people to pay more
than the legal taxes and they took the extra amounts for themselves.
When Abu Ubaydillah bin Yasar became the vizier of al-Mahdi, he made the
kharaj on date palms and trees, and it continued so after him.[^7]

Egypt suffered different misfortunes and distresses because of the
kharaj. Its wali, Musa bin Mus’ab, doubled the kharaj on every acre, and
he imposed taxes on the people of markets and on cattle. He took bribes
in judgment.

People revolted against him because of his oppression.[^8] Ibn Taghri
said, ‘He pressed on people in farming the kharaj. He doubled the tax on
every acre unlike what had been before him. People met distresses from
him. He was bad to people. He took bribes on judgments…soldiers hated
him. They caused him trouble and often opposed him because he was an
oppressive tyrant.’[^9]

These doings were too far from the essence and reality of Islam. Those
men were but a gang of thieves and highwaymen who went far into crimes
and sins. Umar bin Ubayd said to al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi, the Abbasid
caliph, ‘Behind your door there are fires flaming because of oppression.
Behind your door are performes actions that are neither from the Book of
Allah nor the Sunna of His messenger.’[^10]

Appropriating The Wealth of The State
-------------------------------------

The Abbasids misappropriated the wealth of the nation and took for
themselves and for their kin, as they liked. The income of Muhammad bin
Sulayman al-Abbasi a day was about one hundred thousand dirhams.[^11]
When he died, he left a great inheritance from which ar-Rashid took
sixty thousand dirhams. Historians say, ‘Great monies came to
al-Khayzuran (the mother of Harun ar-Rashid) until her wealth became
about one hundred million and sixty thousand dirhams. Some writer says
that this amount equaled the half of the revenue of the state at that
time and two thirds of the revenue of Rockefeller in this [20th]
century.

It was found with the wife of al-Mutawakkil (an Abbasid king) one
million and eight hundred thousand dinars. The mother of al-Muqtadir (an
Abbasid king) was also excessively wealthy.[^12] Ibn al-Jawzi said about
her, ‘She had a great wealth that was beyond counting. She got from her
lands one million dinars every year.’[^13]

The Abbasid kings gifted their relatives with great monies. Ar-Rashid
distributed among his uncles and relatives monies that no caliph before
him had ever distributed.[^14] Al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi assigned one
million dirhams to each one of his uncles.[^15] The Abbasid family grew
until they were, at the reign of al-Ma’mun, about thirty-three thousand
persons.[^16] This family, that had no any preference to the rest of
Muslims, misappropriated the wealth of the nation and enjoyed the great
monies, while the rest of Muslim peoples were sunk into poverty,
deprivation, and wretchedness.

Great Gifts To Bondmaids
------------------------

The Abbasid kings were excessive in gifting the bondmaids and
songstresses. Once, ar-Rashid gave his bondmaid Dananir, at the night of
an eid, a necklace of thirty thousand dinars.[^17] Al-Muqtadir gave to
one of his concubines the three weights Orphan Pearl.[^18] Abul Faraj
al-Isfahani said that Hamwayh hired for his bondmaid some jewels from
some jeweler for twelve million dinars. When ar-Rashid saw the jewels,
he admired them. He bought them and offered them as a present to the
bondmaid.[^19] Al-Muqtadir played with money. He effaced coins and then
gave them to women and bondmaids.[^20] Al-Mutawakkil had a bondmaid
called Fadhl. She sat on a chair and argued with poets in his presence.
He asked her when he bought her, ‘Are you a poet?’

She said, ‘So claims he who bought and sold me.’

Al-Mutawakkil laughed and asked her to recite him some verses of her
poetry. She did, and he admired her poetry and ordered to give her fifty
thousand dirhams.[^21]

Al-Muqtadir had a village-like statue made of silver. It was very
expensive. He donated it to one of his servants just because one of his
bondmaids asked him to do that.

These are just few examples on the wasting of the Abbasid caliphs who
spent the wealth of the nation on their pleasures paying no attention to
the welfare of the society or to the development of the general life.

Abundant Gifts To Poets
-----------------------

Poets were the only media in that age. They supported the Abbasid rule
and spread fabricated virtues ascribed to the Abbasid kings. They
preferred those kings to the Alawids who were the propagandists of
social justice in Islam. The Abbasids endowed poets with abundant monies
and made them extremely wealthy.

Once, Abul Shibl al-Barjami al-Kufi praised al-Mutawakkil with a
thirty-verse-poem and al-Mutawakkil gave him thirty thousand dirhams for
that.[^22]

When al-Mutawakkil held a general meeting for people to pay homage to
his three sons al-Muntasir, al-Mu’tazz, and al-Mu’ayyad as the heir
apparents after him, as-Sawli recited a poem on the occasion and
al-Mutawakkil gave him one hundred dirhams, and so did each one of his
sons.[^23]

Once, Ibrahim bin al-Mudbir recited a poem praising al-Mutawakkil who
was pleased with the poem and gave the poet fifty thousand dirhams and
asked his vizier Ubaydillah bin Yahya to find him a good job.

Marwan bin Abul Janub was one of the poets who got abundant monies from
al-Mutawakkil. He was very interested in praising al-Mutawakkil. Once,
he got from him fifty thousand dirhams after a poem. On the occasion of
the homage to his three sons, al-Mutawakkil gave the poet one hundred
and twenty thousand dirhams, fifty garments, a mule, a horse, and a
donkey.[^24] For another poem, al-Mutawakkil gave him one hundred gold
dinars.

Al-Buhturi, who was the emir of poets at that time, prepared all his
talents to praise al-Mutawakkil who gave to him high titles and good
epithets besides great wealth.

Al-Mutawakkil gave abundant wealth to Ali bin al-Jahm and invited him to
his meetings after praising him and declared his enmity towards the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). He dispraised the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) bitterly and
preferred over them the Abbasids who had no virtue save seizing of the
rule and leading the nation towards dark abysses of oppression.

This wasteful spending on poets scattered an important part from the
wealth of the nation that had to be spent on the public and to satisfy
all needs of the nation.

Palaces
-------

The Abbasids were very excessive in building palaces. They spent
incredible amounts on building their palaces and decorating them with
wonderful decorations the like of which no one had ever seen in history.
Al-Mutawakkil built a palace called al-Burj. It was the most beautiful
building of al-Mutawakkil. He constructed in it large statutes of gold
and silver, and a wide pool with plates of gold and silver. Beside the
pool there was a tree of gold with birds that whistled. It was adorned
with jewels. A big throne of gold, with two big lions and a drawer
having statues of beasts and eagles, was made for him there with other
things as the throne of Prophet Solomon (a.s.) had been described. The
walls were covered from inside and outside with mosaic and gilded
marble. He spent on the building and decorating of this palace about one
million and seven hundred thousand dinars. He ordered that no one should
enter this palace except in clothes of embroidered silk. He brought
dancers, singers, musicians, and drinking companions into the palace.
When he sat in this paradise, his vizier Yahya bin Khaqan said to him,
‘O Ameerul Mu’minin, I hope that Allah will thank you for building this
palace and reward you with the Paradise.’ Al-Mutawakkil asked, ‘What
for?’ Yahya said, ‘You have filled people with desire of the Paradise by
this palace, for this will lead them to do good deeds in order to be in
Paradise.’ Al-Mutawakkil became delighted at hearing that.[^25]

From the other palaces that al-Mutawakkil had built was al-Ja’fari. The
cost of building and decorating this palace was more than two million
dinars. When the palace was completed, he brought singers, dancers, and
clowns and gave each of them two thousand dirhams.[^26]

Anyhow, we have mentioned the great expenses that al-Mutawakkil had
spent on all his palaces in our book “the Life of Imam al-Hadi” which
showed the economical imbalance in that time where the Abbasid family
appropriated the revenue of the state and spent it on their pleasures
and lusts.

The Luxury of The Abbasid Women
-------------------------------

The greater part of the state revenue was spent on the ladies of the
Abbasid palace. They lived in absolute luxury and bliss. Lady Zubayda
(Harun ar-Rashid’s wife) was interested in expensive embroidered clothes
that one dress of hers cost fifty thousand dinars.[^27] This luxury was
not limited to the Abbasid ladies only, but it also included the ladies
of viziers. Utabah, the mother of Ja’far al-Barmaki had one hundred
bondmaids and each one of them put on jewelry and ornaments different
from the other.[^28]

The Wretchedness of The Public
------------------------------

It was natural that the majority of the Muslim peoples suffered poverty
and wretchedness after they had been deprived from the state treasury,
since that was spent on the pleasures of the kings, viziers, and the
media, whereas poverty spread among most of people.

Once, al-Asma’iy saw a poet cling to the curtains of the Kaaba while
reciting,

*“O my Lord, I am asking as You see,*

*wearing two (ragged) clocks as You see,*

*and my old wife is sitting there as You see,*

*and my stomach is hungry as You see,*

*so what do You see about what You see?”*[^29]

Many other poets described in their poetry the miserable life of
sufferings they lived. It was very difficult for them (and for most of
people) to find a bit of food and a piece of cloth for their hungry,
naked children.

The miserable life that some poets, who had no relation with the Abbasid
palace, lived, led them to beg through their poetry viziers, judges and
other officials, and made their poetry as a means for gaining. Abu
Fir’own as-Sasi was in utmost need, and when he was unable to bear any
more, he went to al-Hasan bin Sahl the vizier of al-Ma’mun and praised
him in a poem. In the same poem he expressed his bad condition and the
wretchedness of his children.

Poverty stung Abu Fir’own severely and this time he went to one of the
judges of Basra begging his help. It was shame to those kings who had
the treasures of the world in their hands but left their peoples
suffering neediness and deprivation.

From the poets, who suffered poverty, was Abush Shamaqmaq who went to
the king begging him after he saw his children writhe with hunger and
pain.

These poets represented the lives of their peoples and their sufferings
of hunger, pain, and loss. The economical life was not sound and right,
but it was confused and paralyzed. The Abbasid governments did not
achieve ease for people, and did not provide a good life for them. The
revenue of the state was spent on the Abbasid family, the viziers, and
the prominent statesmen, whereas the majority of people lived in poverty
and wretchedness and could not obtain even the least necessities of
living.

The Imam’s Condition
--------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) represented the front of opposition to the
Abbasid rule. He often criticized the rulers for appropriating the
wealth of the nation and extorting the livelihood of people.

From the notable forms of the opposition that Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
followed was that he prohibited himself from communicating or
cooperating with those kings who took the wealth of Allah as theirs and
the people of Allah as their slaves. They spared no effort to join the
imam (a.s.) to their retinues but they could not, and then they treated
him with absolute severity. They fought him in the means of his living
and caused him to be in pressing neediness. They prevented monies to
come to him from his Shi’a followers, but one of the Shi’a sent jars of
oil to the imam (a.s.) and he put money inside them[^30] which decreased
the pressure of that blockade.

Anyhow, Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sided with the poor and the deprived
who were the victims of those kings who robbed the wealth of the nation
and left the state in economical imbalance.

[^1]: Tareekh at-Tamaddun al-Islami (the history of the Islamic
civilization), vol.5 p.79.

[^2]: Al-Wuzara’ wel Kuttab (viziers and clerks), p.288.

[^3]: The life of Imam Musa bin Ja’far.

[^4]: Al-Wuzara’ wel Kuttab, p.142.

[^5]: Ibid., p.268.

[^6]: Al-Kamil fit-Tareekh, vol.6 p.268.

[^7]: Al-Fakhri, p.164.

[^8]: Al-Wulat wel Qudhat (walis and judges), p.125-126.

[^9]: An-Nujoom az-Zahirah, vol.2 p.54, al-Khutat by al-Maqrizi, vol.2
p.94.

[^10]: Al-Akhbar at-Tuwal, p.384.

[^11]: Al-Wuzara’ wel Kuttab, p.250.

[^12]: Nashwar al-Muhadharah, vol.1 p.293.

[^13]: Al-Muntadham, vol.6 p.253.

[^14]: An-Nujoom az-Zahira, vol.2 p.65.

[^15]: Al-Kamil fit-Tareekh, vol.6 p.319.

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: Al-Mustadhraf min Akhbar al-Jawari by Salahuddeen, p.28.

[^18]: Tareekh al-Khulafa’ by as-Sayouti, p.384.

[^19]: Al-Aghani, vol.16 p.226.

[^20]: Samt an-Nujoom al-Awali, vol.3 p.354.

[^21]: Nisa’ al-Khulafa’ (the caliph’s women) by ibn as-Sa’iy, p.86.

[^22]: Al-Aghani, vol.14 p.193.

[^23]: Al-Aghani, vol.14 p.193.

[^24]: Al-aghani.

[^25]: Uyoon at-Tawareekh, vol.6 p.170.

[^26]: Mir’at az-Zaman, vol.6 p.158.

[^27]: Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.2 p.366.

[^28]: Al-Wuzara’ wel Kuttab, p.192.

[^29]: Al-Mahasin wel Masawi’, p.585.

[^30]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol.2 p.158.


