Political Life
==============

The political life in the age of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was very bad
and unstable. Oppression, injustice, and seditions prevailed everywhere,
and many revolts broke out. That, as I think, was due to the domination
of the Turks over the reins of government, and their absolute control
over all affairs of the state, though they were expert neither in
politics nor in administration. They oppressed people, transgressed the
rules, and spread terrorism. The other reason behind this was the
ignorance of the Abbasid kings, their indulging in pleasures and lusts,
and their inadvertence to the interests of people, which caused many
political crises at that time.

Oppressing the Alawids
----------------------

The Alawids were severely tried and extremely burdened during most
periods of the Abbasid rule. The Abbasid kings officially oppressed the
Alawids, and pursued and punished them severely. They imposed on them
economical blockade until they were in utmost neediness.

Historians say that during the reign of al-Mutawakkil, the Alawids
suffered neediness and deprivation so bitter and horrible that could not
be described. They had nothing but one cloak, and whenever an Alawid man
or an Alawid woman wanted to go out, he or she put it on. People
refrained from associating with them for fear of the tyrannical
government. One day, Muhammad bin Salih (bin) al-Husayn asked Ibrahim
bin al-Mudbir (to be as a mediator) to ask ‘Isa bin Musa al-Jarmi’s
daughter’s hand. The father of the girl refused and said to the
mediator, ‘I just tell you the truth. By Allah, I do not know one nobler
or more honorable than him, but I refused him just because I fear from
al-Mutawakkil and his sons after him for my life and wealth.’[^1]

Muslims refrained from contacting the Alawids, and even from greeting
them, because the Abbasid governments punished severely whoever showed
any kind of respect and regard towards the Alawids.

The worst period the Alawids underwent was the reign of al-Mutawakkil
who poured all his rage and spite on them. They ran away to all towns
and villages[^2] for fear that the government might arrest and lead them
either to graveyards or prisons.

The Imam’s Amulet
-----------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) suffered different kinds of oppression and
cruelty during the reign of al-Mutawakkil and other Abbasid kings whom
the imam was contemporary with. Therefore, he resorted to Allah to
protect him from their plots and save him from their evils. He armed
himself with this du’a:

“I have charmed myself with the charm of Allah; the light by which He
has hidden from eyes, and taken precaution for my self, family,
children, properties, and all that under my charge by the name of Allah,
the Beneficent, the Merciful, and sought refuge for myself and all that
from what I fear and beware of with Allah Who *(there is no god but Him,
the Everliving, the Eternal. Slumber does not overtake Him nor sleep;
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is His, who is
he that can intercede with Him but by His permission? He knows what is
before them and what is behind them, and they cannot comprehend anything
out of His knowledge except what He pleases, His knowledge extends over
the heavens and the earth, and the preservation of them both tires Him
not, and He is the Most High, the Great)*,[^3] *(And who is more unjust
than he who is reminded of the signs of his Lord, then he turns away
from them and forgets what his two hands have sent before? Surely We
have placed veils over their hearts lest they should understand it and a
heaviness in their ears; and if you call them to the guidance, they will
not ever follow the right course in that case)*,[^4] *(Have you seen him
who makes his desire his god, and Allah sends him astray purposely, and
seals up his hearing and his heart, and sets on his sight a covering?
Then who will lead him after Allah (has condemned him)? Will ye not then
heed?)*,[^5] *(These are they on whose hearts and their hearing and
their eyes Allah has set a seal, and these are the heedless ones)*,[^6]
*(And when you recite the Qur’an, We place between you and those who do
not believe in the hereafter a hidden barrier. And We have placed
coverings on their hearts and a heaviness in their ears lest they
understand it, and when you mention your Lord alone in the Qur’an they
turn their backs in aversion)*,[^7] and may Allah have blessings on
Muhammad and on his pure progeny…”[^8]

This du’a shows the extent of the fears the imam (a.s.) felt from the
Abbasids, and therefore, he resorted to Allah to save him and his family
from their (the Abbasids’) oppression and plotting.

He also charmed himself against the oppression of the Abbasids by this
du’a:

“O You, my means at my distress, O You, my succor at my grief, O You, my
relief at my loneliness, guard me by Your eye that does not sleep, and
shield me by Your shelter that is unreachable.’[^9]

Persecuting The People of Qum
-----------------------------

The Abbasids persecuted the people of Qum and treated them with
oppression and terror. They appointed Musa bin Yahya, who was wicked and
unjust, as wali over them. He was impolite, immoral, and inhuman, and
people desisted from him. He treated people in a very bad way and
excessively oppressed them until the notables of Qum resorted to Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) complaining to him about what that tyrant did to
them.

The imam prayed to Allah the Almighty to save them from the evil of that
mean, oppressive wali, and taught them this du’a and asked them to
recite it in the qunut of their prayers so that Allah might relieve them
from this calamity:

“Praise be to Allah as gratefulness to his blessings, calling for His
abundance, imploring His livelihood, being loyal to Him and not to other
than Him, and refraining from disbelieving in Him and denying His might
and exaltedness, a praise of one who knows that all the blessings he has
are from his Lord, and the punishments that afflict him are for the
wrongs his hands have committed, and the blessings of Allah be on
Muhammad His slave and messenger, and the best of His creation, and the
means of believers towards His mercy, and (blessings be) on his pure
progeny who are his guardians.

O Allah, You have called (Your people) for Your favor, and ordered
(them) to supplicate You, and You have insured response to Your people.
You have not disappointed whoever resorted to You with a wish and turned
to You with a need. You have not let any asking hand come back empty
from Your gift or desperate of Your donation. Was there any traveler who
traveled to You and did not find You near, or a comer who came to You
and You put obstacles between You and him?! Was there any insister on
asking You that the flow of Your favor did not include him…?

O Allah, I come to You with my wish, the hand of my request knocks at
the door of Your favor, my heart invokes You with the reverence of
submission, and I found You the best intercessor for me with You. You
know my request before it comes to my mind or gets in my imagination. O
Allah, so complete my du’a by Your response to me and meet my request by
the satisfying of my wish!

O Allah, the aberration of seditions has included us, the haze of
confusion has overcome us, meanness and lowness have fought with us, the
untrustworthy on Your religion have ruled over us, the wicked, who have
annulled Your rule, have extorted our affairs and tried to damage Your
people and corrupt Your land.

O Allah, our wealth is appropriated after it was distributed (among
all), and our rule has become domination after it was shura
(consultation) and monarchy after it was the nation’s option; amusements
and musicals have been bought by the shares of orphans and widows,
non-Muslims rule over the believers, and sinners have been entrusted
with their (people’s) affairs, and no protector protected them from a
danger, and no guardian looked at them with the eye of mercifulness, and
no kind one satisfied the thirsty hearts from a famine, and so they are
weak and hungry in a home of loss, captives of wretchedness, inheritors
of melancholy, meanness…

O Allah, the plant of falseness has come to harvest, reached its full,
its stick has become firm…its branches have gone high and fixed.

O Allah, bring, from the truth, its reaper to reap it, break its stock,
smash its branches, cut off its hump, and amputate its extents, so that
falseness, with its ugly picture, disappears, and truth, with its
beautiful dress, appears.

O Allah, leave no pillar of oppression, but You tear it down; no shield,
but You expose it; no unity, but You separate it; no heavy force, but
You slight it; no high rank, but You make it low; no post of a banner,
but You turn it over; and no lively thing, but You perish it.

O Allah, cover his[^10] sun, put out his light, efface his mention, hit,
by the truth, his head, scatter his armies, and frighten the hearts of
his people!

O Allah, do not leave a remainder of him, unless it is annihilated, nor
a structure unless it is torn down, nor a unity unless it is broken, nor
an arm unless it is disabled, nor a boundary unless it is violated, nor
a flagpole unless it is overthrown!

O Allah, show us his supporters scattered after affinity, separate after
unity, and disgraced after their domination over the nation!

O Allah, bring us the day of justice, and show it to us eternal with no
darkness in it, and pure light with no pollutant in it, and make its
goodness fall down on us, and its blessing come down on us, and avenge
on his[^11] opponent, and support him over his enemy!

O Allah, show the truth,[^12] and make it shine in the dusk of darkness,
and ambiguity of confusion!

O Allah, enliven by it the dead hearts, unite by it the separate desires
and different opinions, establish by it the annulled penalties and
neglected rulings, satiate by it the hungry stomachs, relieve by it the
weak and tired bodies, as You made us mention it, and put into our mind
Your supplicating, made us successful in calling for it, and keeping the
people of ignorance away from it, house in our hearts its love, and
eagerness to it, and expecting it to establish its ceremonies!

O Allah, give us complete certainty about it, O You, the Achiever of
good wills, the Attainer of delayed hopes. O Allah, refute the
fabricators who fabricate against You in it, and confute the suspicions
of the desperate of Your mercy and desperate of it!

O Allah, make us a means of its means, a figure of its figures, a fort
of its forts, and brighten our faces with its brightness, honor us by
its support, and make our intention good…

O Allah, You have made us know our selves, and see our defects that we
fear not to be able to respond to You, while You favor those who do not
deserve it, and bestow on requesters before they request, so give us due
to Your generosity and favor, for You do what You like, and determine as
You want, and we have resorted to You, and repented of our sins.

O Allah,…and the caller for You, the doer of justice from Your people,
the poor to Your mercy, and the needy of Your help on Your obedience…You
have given him your blessing, dressed him with the dresses of Your
honor, thrown on him the love of Your obedience, fixed his love in the
hearts, made him successful to do Your command that the people of his
time are indifferent of, made him a resort of the wronged of Your
people, and a support to those who do not find a supporter save You, and
a restorer of what has been annulled of the verdicts of Your Book, and a
builder of what has been ruined of the laws of Your religion, and the
rulings of Your Prophet, Your blessing, peace, and mercy be on him and
on his progeny. O Allah, make him safe from the plotting of enemies…and
take him to the best that You have taken the doers of Your justice from
among the successors of prophets. O Allah, degrade by him whoever does
not turn back to Your love, and whoever bears enmity against him, and
shoot by Your deadly stone whoever incites against Your religion by
degrading him and scattering his power…

O Allah, as he has made himself a target to the far for the sake of You,
and sacrificed his soul to defend the believers, and resist the evil of
suspicious apostates until he shall remove the spread of disobediences,
and show what *Ulema* [scholars] have left behind their backs, whereas
they have covenanted to declare it for people and not to conceal it, and
he shall call for the obedience of You alone, without ascribing a
partner to You from Your creation that his command may be over Yours…O
Allah, assist him by Your victory, enable him in what he is unable in,
increase his power from Your assistance…

O Allah, honor him with the doing of Your command to see the standing of
Reckoning as it is, delight Your Prophet (Your blessings be on him) by
seeing him and whoever follows him in his mission, reward him with the
best for doing Your command, take him closer to You in his life, and
pity our wretchedness…O Allah, make him safe from what is feared for
him, drive away from him the arrows of plotting that the people of
grudge throw at him, and at the participant in his matter, and his
assistants on the obedience of Allah whom You have made as his fort,
resort, and comfort, and who leave their families and children and
country, give up comfortable beds and ease, stop their trades, harm
their livings…and rejected the transient pleasures of this world. O
Allah, keep them in Your safety and protection, defend them against
whoever has enmity against them from Your people, suffice them and
provide them with Your help, assistance, and victory. Defeat, by their
right, the falseness of whoever wants to put out Your light. O Allah,
fill by them every horizon and every country with justice, fairness,
mercy, and virtue, and thank them due to Your generosity and bounty with
what You have bestowed on the doers of justice from Your people, and
saved for them from Your reward that might raise in degrees. You do
whatever You like, and determine whatever You want…’[^13]

Oppression and Tyranny of Viziers
---------------------------------

Most viziers of the Abbasid rulers were tyrannical and oppressive. They
were disdainful of people and were excessive in subjugating and harming
them. One day during the reign of al-Muntasir, his vizier Ahmad bin
al-Khasib went out riding on a horse. Some man approached him
complaining, and he (the vizier) took his leg out of the stirrup and
kicked the man in his chest and killed him.[^14]

Muhammad bin Abdul Malik, the vizier of al-Wathiq, made an oven and put
nails into it to torture people in it.[^15]

In addition to that, the viziers embezzled the wealth of the state.
Uthaman bin Imarah, who was the wali of Sajistan during the reign of
Harun ar-Rashid, was put into prison for five thousand dirhams.

Those viziers just imitated their masters the Abbasid kings who extorted
the wealth of Muslims and left them in terrible poverty. Historians say,
‘Al-Mansur took from people until he left nothing with them. What he had
taken from them was about eight hundred million dirhams.’[^16]

Internal Revolts
----------------

It was natural for the Muslim peoples to struggle and rebel against the
Abbasid governments that ruled unjustly and appropriated the wealth and
the economical powers of those peoples. Many local revolts took place
aiming at getting rid of enslavement, oppression, and persecution. Here
we mention some of those revolts to prove our saying that the political
life at that age was unstable, confused, and lacking security.

The Revolt of Yahya
-------------------

The great martyr Yahya bin Umar at-Talibi rebelled against the Abbasid
rule calling for the achievement of social justice and the distribution
of Muslims’ wealth among the poor and the needy. The deprived and all
other classes of people joined him because of his real and true aims of
improving the general life of the nation. He occupied Kufa and set free
all the wronged and oppressed people from its prisons. However, later
on, the Abbasid government was able to overcome and kill him. His head
was taken to Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Tahir one of the tyrants of that
age who took the head to the tyrant caliph al-Musta’een. The head was
hung in Samarra’ to be as a lesson for whoever might think to rebel.
Opportunists went to Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Tahir congratulating him
on that victory! Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari as well went to this emir but
said to him, ‘O emir, you are being congratulated on the killing of a
man that if the messenger of Allah (a.s.) was alive, he would be
consoled on.’

All present people became silent and no one answered him with
anything.[^17] He left angrily while reciting the following:

*“O Family of Tahir, eat it harmfully,*

*for the flesh of the Prophet is not edible.*

*A revenge such that its seeker is Allah,*

*Definitely will be taken.”*

The killing of Yahya was one of the disasters that afflicted Muslims at
that age and caused a great loss. Poets composed many poems elegizing
this great revolutionary leader.

The Revolt of The Negroes
-------------------------

From the revolts that dazed the Abbasids in that age was the revolt of
the Negroes led by Ali bin Abdurrahim from bani Abdul Qays who claimed
that he was Alawid. He claimed that his lineage belonged to the eternal
martyr Zayd bin Ali bin al-Husayn, so that the public might join him and
support his revolt.

Anyhow, Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) denied the claims of Ali bin Muhammad
the leader of this revolt and said, ‘The man (leader) of the Negroes is
not from us the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).[^18] The details of this revolt have
mentioned in all books of history.

The Revolt of Sham
------------------

In Sham[^19], Al-Mutawakkil appointed a wolf from among his agents and
mercenaries who turned the life of people there into hell, but then they
free rebelled against him and drove him away. When al-Mutawakkil found
out about that, he sent an army of seven thousand horsemen and three
thousand infantrymen, and authorized the general leader to ravage
Damascus for three days as Yazeed bin Mo’awiya had done to the town of
the Prophet (a.s.) Medina before.[^20]

The Domination of the Turks on the Rule
---------------------------------------

From the prominent factors of the political and administrational
corruption in the body of the Abbasid government at the age of Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.) was the domination of the Turks over the government and
their playing with the destinies of the state. The Abbasid throne was
under their will and desire. They appointed and deposed whomever they
liked. All constitutional authorities were in their hands, and the king
was but in name, for he was deprived of all his administrational
authorities and all things else except amusement and lusts.

Al-Mu’tamid was disabled by the Turks to a degree that he was prevented
from spending any money whereas the entire world was under his throne.
The Turks had control over everything.

Some poet said about al-Musta’een the Abbasid caliph,

*“A caliph in a cage,*

*between Waseef and Bugha.*

*He says whatever they say to him,*

*As a parrot does.”*[^21]

When al-Mu’tazz assumed the caliphate, some of his companions sent for a
diviner and asked him how long the caliph would sit on the throne and
how long he would live. A humorous man from among the attendants said,
‘I know that.’ They asked him to tell them and he said, ‘The matter is
in the hands of the Turks. They decide how long he rules and how long he
lives.’ The all burst into laughter.[^22]

[^1]: Maqatil at-Talibiyeen, p.604.

[^2]: Ibid., p.615.

[^3]: Qur'an, 2:255.

[^4]: Qur'an, 18:57.

[^5]: Qur'an, 54:23.

[^6]: Qur'an, 16:108.

[^7]: Qur'an, 17:45-46.

[^8]: Muhaj ad-Da’awat, p.44-45.

[^9]: Muhaj ad-Da’awat, p.45.

[^10]: The unjust ruler.

[^11]: The awaited savior.

[^12]: He meant by “the truth” the savior who would rule with justice,
and remove all kinds of oppression.

[^13]: Muhaj ad-Da’awat, p.63-67.

[^14]: Lectures on the History of the Islamic nations, p.270.

[^15]: Al-Mahasin wel Masawi’, p.531, al-Fakhri, p.214.

[^16]: Tareekh al-Ya’qubi, vol.3 p.125.

[^17]: Maqatil at-Talibiyeen, p.164.

[^18]: Hamish (footnote or margin) al-Kuna wel Alqab, vol.2 p.402.

[^19]: Nowadays Damascus, but then, Sham encompassed the present Syria,
Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine.

[^20]: Mir’at az-Zaman, vol.6 p.169.

[^21]: Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.61.

[^22]: Al-Fakhri, p.181.


