To the Better World
===================

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) spent his short life in sufferings and
distresses. The Abbasid kings spared no effort in oppressing him. They
moved him from a prison to another. They subjected him to confinement
and imposed on him economical blockades.

They prevented him from meeting with his followers as they prevented
*‘Ulama’* and scholars from contacting with him to take away from the
fountain of his sciences. And this, as I think, was the worst distress
the imam suffered. They tried more than once to assassinate him but
Allah protected him from their plots.

There were some reasons that made the Abbasids bear a grudge against
Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.). Here are some of them:

First, the Abbasids feared the Awaited Imam whom the Prophet (a.s.) had
brought good news about and told that he would be the greatest reformer
that mankind had never seen like him throughout all stages of history.
The Prophet (a.s.) told that the Awaited Imam (a.s.) would spread
political, social justice all over the world, would do away with all
kinds of injustice and oppression, and defeat all tyrants and oppressive
powers in the world.

He would do away with polytheism and atheism, and raise the banner of
faith and truth. He would revive the annulled laws of Allah. Therefore,
the Abbasids tried to kill Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) to be sure he would
not leave any offspring. Imam Abu Muhammad said about that, ‘They
claimed that they wanted to kill me in order to cut off my offspring,
but Allah falsified their saying, and praise be to Allah.’[^1]

Second, the Abbasids bore envy towards Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) for his
popularity and the great respect that all classes of society showed him,
whereas the authority was in the hand of the Abbasids who received
nothing of respect or honor from people. Therefore, they plotted day and
night to do away with him.

Third, the Alawids rose in many revolts against the Abbasid rule since
its beginning, aiming at achieving the political justice of Islam and
applying its economical and social programs in life. Those revolts were
supported by great masses of people in the different Muslim communities
that harmed the dignity of the rule and shook its throne and were about
to overthrow it.

Those revolts filled the hearts of the Abbasids with hatred and grudge
against the Alawids, and so they ordered their policemen to chase every
Alawid. It was naturally that Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) suffered the
bitterest distresses from the Abbasids because he was the master and
chief of the Alawids and the imam of Muslim at that time.

Now, let us come back to the last days of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.).

Appointing Imam Al-Mahdi as the Next Imam
-----------------------------------------

Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) is the hope, not only for Muslims, but for all
oppressed human beings who suffer slavery, oppression, and subjection.
He is the Savior who will free the will of man and save peoples and
nations from the oppression of the corruptive regimes who have turned
this world into unbearable hell.

Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) was and is a great miracle in Islam. Allah
concealed his birth, as he had concealed the birth of Prophet Moses
(a.s.), because the Abbasid government looked for him… and in his
remaining alive (in occultation) throughout the long stages of life is
also a miracle for Islam, and in his reappearance and announcing the
pure principles of Islam is another miracle too.

The following are some of the traditions transmitted from Imam Abu
Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) concerning the Imamate of his son
al-Mahdi (a.s.).

1. Ahmad bin Isaaq bin Sa’eed al-Ash’ari said, “Once, I went to Abu
Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) intending to ask him about the
successor after him. He said to me before I asked him, ‘O Ahmad bin
Isaaq, Allah the Almighty did not deprive the earth since He created
Adam, and He will not deprive it until the Day of Resurrection, of an
authority over His people. By him (the authority) distresses are pushed
away from the people of the earth, by him rain falls down, and by him
the blessings of the earth are emitted.’

I said to him, ‘O son of the messenger of Allah, who is the imam and
successor after you?’ He got up hastily and went in the house. Then, he
came out holding a three-year-old boy, whose face was (bright) like a
full moon, on his shoulder and said, ‘O Ahmad, were it not for your
honor near Allah the Almighty and near His authorities, I would not show
you my this son. He was named and surnamed like the messenger of Allah
(a.s.). He will fill the earth with justice and fairness after it has
been filled with injustice and oppression. O Ahmad, he, in this nation,
is like al-Khidhr (Elijah) and Thul Qarnayn. By Allah, he will hide in
an occultation, during which no one shall be saved except one whom Allah
fixes on the belief in his imamate and supplicating Allah to hasten his
deliverance.’ I said, ‘Is there any sign so that I may be sure?’ The
young boy said, ‘I am the representative of Allah in His earth and the
avenger on His enemies. Do not look for a sign after a proof!’

I left delightedly. On the following day, I came back to him and said,
‘O son of the messenger of Allah, my delight was so great for what you
favored me with. Would you please tell me what norm with al-Khidr and
Thul Qarnayn was?’

He said, ‘Long occultation.’

I said, ‘O son of the messenger of Allah, shall his (Imam al-Mahdi’s)
occultation last long?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said, ‘Yes, by my Lord, until many of those,
who believe in this matter (occultation and reappearance), shall
apostatize, and no one shall remain (believing) except those whom Allah
has taken from them a covenant on our guardianship, fixed faith in their
hearts, and supported them with a mercy from Him. O Ahmad, this is a
command from Allah, a secret from the secrets of Allah, and an unseen
matter from the unseen (matters) of Allah. Take what I told you, and be
from the grateful; you shall be with us in Illiyin.[^2]”[^3]

2. Muhammad bin Uthman al-Umari narrated that his father said, “Once, I
was with Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (al-Askari) when he was asked
about the tradition transmitted from his father that the earth would not
be empty from an authority from Allah over His people until the Day of
Resurrection, and that whoever died without knowing the imam of his age
would die as an unbeliever. He said, ‘This is true as day is true.’

Someone asked him, ‘O son of the messenger of Allah, then, who shall be
the authority and imam after you?’

He said, ‘My son Muhammad is the imam and the authority after me.
Whoever dies without knowing (acknowledging) him shall dies as an
unbeliever. He will be in an occultation where the ignorant will be
confused, deniers will perish, and daters[^4] will tell lies. Then, he
will reappear, and as if I see white flags fluttering over his head at
the hill of Kufa.’”[^5]

3. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said, ‘Praise be to Allah Who did not take
me out of this life until He made me see the successor after me. He is
the most similar in shape and morals to the messenger of Allah (a.s.).
Allah will protect him in his occultation and make him reappear to fill
the earth with justice and fairness after it will be filled with
injustice and oppression.’[^6]

4. Musa bin Ja’far al-Baghdadi narrated that he had heard Imam Abu
Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali al-Askari (a.s.) saying, ‘(It is) As if I see
that you will disagree after me on my successor. Surely, he, who
believes in the imams after the messenger of Allah (a.s.) but denies my
son, is like one, who believes in all prophets and messengers of Allah
but denies the prophethood of the messenger of Allah (Muhammad) (a.s.),
because the obedience of the last of us is like the obedience of the
first of us, and one, who denies the last of us, is like one who denies
the first of us. My son will have an occultation where people will be in
doubt about it except those whom Allah preserves.’[^7]

The Imam Comforts Himself
-------------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) perceived from behind the unseen that he would
leave this life and go near his Lord. He said to his mother, ‘In the
year two hundred and sixty I shall suffer bad fever from which I shall
be afflicted…’

She was distressed, and sorrow overcame her. She began crying. Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.) calmed her down saying, ‘The fate of Allah must take
place. Do not worry…!’

In the year two hundred and sixty, he died as he had predicted.[^8]

Assassination of the Imam
-------------------------

Al-Mu’tamid, the Abbasid tyrant, could not bear Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
any longer, for he saw and heard people every when and everywhere
glorify the imam and prefer him to all the Alawids and the Abbasids.
Finally, he made up his mind to do away with the imam. He assassinated
him by poisoning him.[^9] The poison reacted on his body, and he began
suffering bitter and severe pains, while being patient, resorting to
Allah.

The Government’s Confusion
--------------------------

The Abbasid government was very confused when Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
became seriously ill. Al-Mu’tamid ordered five of his trusted statesmen,
among whom was Nahrir, to remain in the imam’s house and report to him
about every new happening. He also ordered a committee of physicians to
test the imam’s health day and night. After two days, he ordered the
physicians not to leave the imam alone because his state was very
grievous.[^10]

To The Best of Abodes
---------------------

The imams’ health got worse, and the physicians were despondent of his
recovery. Death began approaching him quickly. At those last moments of
his life, Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.), mentioned Allah, glorified Him, and
prayed Him to take him nearer to Him. His lips were busy reciting verses
from the Holy Qur'an. He turned towards the Qiblah, and after not long,
his pure soul flew towards the Heaven surrounded by the angels of the
Beneficent Lord.

It was the greatest loss Muslims suffered in that age. They lost their
leader, reformer, and instructor who loved and helped their weak, poor,
and orphans.

The imam’s body was (ritually) washed, enshrouded, put in the coffin,
and carried to be prayed on by Muslims. Eesa son of al-Mutawakkil led
the prayer by al-Mu’tamid’s order. After the prayer, he uncovered the
imam’s face before the Hashemites, the Abbasids, army leaders,
government clerks, state officials, judges, and physicians and said to
them, ‘This is al-Hasan bin Ali bin Muhammad bin ar-Redha (peace be on
them). He died a natural death in his bed. So-and-so of Ameerul
Mu’minin’s (al-Mu’tamid) servants and trusted men, So-and-so of judges,
and So-and-so of physicians were present with him.’ Then he covered his
holy face.[^11]

The painful news spread everywhere in Samarra’. It was a great shock for
Muslims who hurried up to the imam’s house while crying and weeping.
Government offices and all markets were closed. It was like the Day of
Resurrection in Samarra’.[^12]

Samarra’ had never witnessed before, a day of escorting like this. Waves
of human beings and flowing masses of people from all classes and
societies came to escort the holy corpse of this pure imam (a.s.) while
mentioning his virtues and favors and talking with great sorrow and
regret about the great loss they were afflicted with.

In His Last Abode
-----------------

The pure corpse was brought under a halo of takbir and tahlil[^13]
towards the last abode. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was buried in his house
beside the tomb of his father Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).

Samarra’ had two imams from the twelve imams and leaders of Muslims, and
it became one of the chief holy places in the Muslim world. It received
and still receives thousands of visitors from everywhere in the world
who came to visit the two holy shrines of Imam al-Hadi and Imam
al-Askari (peace be on them).

Once, an-Nasir Lideenillah, the Abbasid caliph, visited the holy shrines
of these two infallible imams to be blessed and close to Allah. His
vizier suggested to him that he might visit the tombs of his fathers of
the Abbasid kings and he agreed. When he reached there, he found the
graves dark and miserable where sweepings were accumulated and crows
gathered. The vizier asked the king to take care and pay money to
rebuild these graves, but the Abbasid king said,

‘How far! That is of no use.’

The vizier asked, ‘why, O Ameerul Mu’minin?’

He said, ‘Did you see the flourishing tombs of the pure imams?’

The vizier said, ‘Yes.’

The king asked, ‘Do you know the secret behind that?’

The vizier answered, ‘No.’

An-Nasir Lideenillah said, ‘My fathers associated with Satan, and these
masters associated with Allah, and all that which is for Allah remains,
and all that which is for Satan perishes and disappears.’[^14]

The Alawids, the Abbasids, and Ja’far, Imam Abu Muhammad’s brothers
stood at the tomb and the masses of people began consoling them for this
painful affliction.

The Date of His Death
---------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) left to the better world on the
eighth of Rabee’ul Awwal[^15] in the year two hundred and sixty of
hijra,[^16] while he was twenty-eight years old and still in the prime
of youth.[^17]

[^1]: Kifayat al-Athar.

[^2]: Illiyin is the highest position in the Paradise.

[^3]: Ikmaluddeen by Sheikh as-Saduq, p.216-217.

[^4]: Those who defines certain dates for the reappearance of the
awaited imam (a.s.).

[^5]: Kifayat al-Athar.

[^6]: Kifayat al-Athar, Ikmaluddeen, p.228.

[^7]: Kifayat al-Athar.

[^8]: Muhaj ad-Da’awat, p.274.

[^9]: Al-Irshad, p.383.

[^10]: Al-Irshad, p.383.

[^11]: Al-Irshad, p.383.

[^12]: Al-Irshad, p.383, Encyclopedia of al-Bustani, vol.7 p.45.

[^13]: Takbir is the saying “Allahu Akbar-Allah is great” and tahlil is
the saying “la illaha illallah-there is no god but Allah”.

[^14]: Kashf al-Ghummah.

[^15]: Tareekh Baghdad, vol.7 p.366.

[^16]: Mir’at al-Jinan, vol.2 p.462, Tareekh al-Khamees, vol.2 p.343,
Tareekh ibn al-Wardi, vol.1 p.325.

[^17]: Jami’ al-Akhbar, p.42, Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.117, al-Irshad, p.389.


