The Ziyarah of Imam Al-Hasan Al-Askari
======================================

*Translated by: Badr Shahin*

Shaykh al-Tusi has reported through a considerable series of narrators
that Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) said, “My grave will be in
Surra-man-Ra’a (currently Samarra). It will be shelter for both the
parties.” Explaining this saying, Shaykh al-Majlisi says that ‘both the
parties’ means the Shi’ah and the Sunnah. This means that the virtue of
the Imam (a.s.) includes both his adherents and his enemies. Similarly,
the holy tomb of Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) and Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) is
shelter for the people of Baghdad.

Sayyid Ibn Tawus says that once you intend to visit the holy tomb of
Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), you may do the following in the
beginning:

Once you arrive in Samarra, you may wash yourself (traditionally, this
bathing is called ‘the bath of Ziyarah’), put on the cleanest of your
clothes, walk with gravity and tranquility to the tomb, and when you
reach at the gate of the holy mausoleum, you may say the following as a
form of seeking permission to enter:

O the Prophet of Allah; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Nabiyyal-Laah(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا نَبِيّ اللّهِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O the Commander of the Believers; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Ameeral-Mu\`Mineen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا أَمِيرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Fatimah al-Zahraa, the Leader of the women of the world; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Faat’imataz-Zahraa\`U Sayyidata Nisaa\`Il-‘Aalameen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا فَاطِمَةُ الزّهْرَاءُ سَيّدَةَ نِسَاءِ الْعَالَمِينَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, al-Hasan ibn Ali; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Mawlaaya Al-H’asanubna ‘Aliyy(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَوْلايَ الْحَسَنَ بْنَ عَلِيّ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, al-Husayn ibn Ali; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Mawlaaya Al-H’usaynubna ‘Aliyy(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَوْلايَ الْحُسَيْنَ بْنَ عَلِيّ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, Ali ibn al-Husayn; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Mawlaaya ‘Aliyyubnal-H’usayn(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَوْلايَ عَلِيّ بْنَ الْحُسَيْنِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, Muhammad ibn Ali; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Mawlaaya Muh’ammadubna ‘Aliyy(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَوْلايَ مُحَمّدَ بْنَ عَلِيّ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, Ja’far ibn Muhammad; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Mawlaaya Ja’farubna Muh’ammad(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَوْلايَ جَعْفَرَ بْنَ مُحَمّدٍ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, Musa ibn Ja’far; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Mawlaaya Moosabna Ja’far(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَوْلايَ مُوسَى بْنَ جَعْفَرٍ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, Ali ibn Musa; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Mawlaaya ‘Aliyyubna Muh’ammad(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَوْلايَ عَلِيّ بْنَ مُوسَى؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, Muhammad ibn Ali; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Mawlaaya Muh’ammadubna ‘Aliyy(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَوْلايَ مُحَمّدَ بْنَ عَلِيّ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, Abu’l-Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Mawlaaya Yaa Abal-H’asani ‘Aliyyibni Muh’ammad(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَوْلايَ يَا أَبَا الْحَسَنِ عَلِيّ بْنَ مُحَمّدٍ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O my master, Abu-Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Ali; may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Mawlaaya Yaa Abaa Muh’ammadinil-H’asanibni ‘Aliyy(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَوْلايَ يَا أَبَا مُحَمّدٍ الْحَسَنَ بْنَ عَلِيّ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

O the angels of Allah whom are assigned to manage this holy mausoleum;
may I enter?

*A’adkhulu Yaa Malaa\`Ikatal-Laahil-Muwakkaleena
Bihaadhal-H’aramish-Shareef(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَدْخُلُ يَا مَلائِكَةَ اللّهِ الْمُوَكّلِينَ بِهذَا الْحَرَمِ
الشّرِيفِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then, you may enter the holy mausoleum with your right foot and when you
stop near the tomb facing it and giving your back to the kiblah
direction, you may repeat the following one hundred times:

Allah is the Greatest

*Allaahu Akbar(U)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألله أكبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then, you may say the following form of Ziyarah:

Peace be upon you, O my Master:

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Mawlaay(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا مَوْلايَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu-Muhammad al-Hasan son of Ali;

*Yaa Abaa Muh’ammadinil-H’asanib-Ni ‘Aliyy(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا مُحَمّدٍَ الْحَسَنِ بْنَ عَلِيّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The guide, the well-guided

*Al-Haadil-Muhtadee*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْهَادِي الْمُهْتَدِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah’s mercy and blessings be upon you.

*Wa Rah’matul-Laahi Wa Barakaatuh(U)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَحْمَةُ اللّهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the intimate servant of Allah and the son of
Allah’s intimate servants.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Waliyyal-Laahi Wabna Awliyaa\`Ih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا وَلِيّ اللّهِ وَابْنَ أَوْلِيَائِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the decisive Argument of Allah and the son of
Allah’s decisive Arguments.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa H’ujjatal-Laahi Wabna H’ujajih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا حُجّةَ اللّهِ وَابْنَ حُجَجِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the elite of Allah and the son of Allah’s elite
ones.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa S’afiyyal-Laahi Wabna As’fiyaa\`Ih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا صَفِيّ اللّهِ وَابْنَ أَصْفِيَائِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the representative of Allah, and the son of Allah’s
representatives and the father of His representative.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Khaleefatal-Laahi Wabna Khulafaa\`Ihee Wa Abaa
Khaleefatih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا خَلِيفَةَ اللّهِ وَابْنَ خُلَفَائِهِ وَأَبَا
خَلِيفَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O son of the Seal of the Prophets.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yabna Khaataman-Nabiyyeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا بْنَ خَاتَمِ النّبِيّينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O son of the Chief of the Prophets’ Successors.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yabna Sayyidil-Was’iyyeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا بْنَ سَيّدِ الْوَصِيّينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O son of the Commander of the Faithful believers.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yabna Ameeril-Mu\`Mineen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا بْنَ أَمِيرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O son of the leader of all women of the world.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yabna Sayyidati Nisaa\`Il-‘Aalameen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا بْنَ سَيّدَةِ نِسَاءِ الْعَالَمِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O son of the guiding leaders.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yabnal-A\`Immatil-Haadeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا بْنَ الائِمّةِ الْهَادِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O son of the orthodox successors (of the Prophets).

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yabnal-Aws’iyaa\`Ir-Raashieen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا بْنَ الاوْصِيَاءِ الرَّاشِدِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the shelter of the pious ones.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa ‘Is’matal-Muttaqeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا عِصْمَةَ الْمُتّقِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the leader of the winning party.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Imaamal-Faa\`Izeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا إِمَامَ الْفَائِزِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the haven of the (true) believers.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Ruknal-Mu\`Mineen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا رُكْنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the relief of the aggrieved ones.

*Assalaam ‘Alayka Yaa Farajal-Malhoofeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا فَرَجَ الْمَلْهُوفِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the heir of the Prophets—the chosen ones.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Waarithal-Anbiyaa\`Il-Muntajabeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا وَارِثَ الانْبِيَاءِ الْمُنْتَجَبِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the keeper of the knowledge of the successor of
Allah’s Messenger.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Khaazina ‘Ilmi Was’iyyi Rasoolil-Laah(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا خَازِنَ عِلْمِ وَصِيّ رَسُولِ اللّهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O he who invites to the judgment of Allah.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Ayyuhad-Daa’ee Bih’ukmil-Laah(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ أَيّهَا الدَّاعِي بِحُكْمِ اللّهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O he who speaks with the Book of Allah.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Ayyuhan-Naat’iqu Bikitaabil-Laah(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ أَيّهَا النَّاطِقُ بِكِتَابِ اللّهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the prime Argument of all the arguments (of Allah).

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa H’ujjatal-H’ujaj(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا حُجّةَ الْحُجَجِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the guide of all nations.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Haadil-Umam(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا هَادِيَ الامَمِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the source of all bounties.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Waliyyan-Ni’am(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا وَلِيّ النّعَمِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the store of knowledge.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa ‘Aybatal-‘Ilm(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا عَيْبَةَ الْعِلْمِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the ark of forbearance.

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Safeenatal-H’ilm(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا سَفِينَةَ الْحِلْمِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the father of the Awaited Imam:

*Assalaamu ‘Alayka Yaa Abal-Imaamil-Muntaz’ar(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا أَبَا الامَامِ الْمُنْتَظَرِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whose claim is evident for the rational people;

*Az’-Z’aahirati Lil-‘Aaqili H’ujjatuh(Oo)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الظَّاهِرَةِ لِلْعَاقِلِ حُجّتُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whose recognition is fixed in the most certain things;

*Wath-Thaabitati Fil-Yaqeeni Ma’rifatuh(Oo)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالثَّابِتَةِ فِي الْيَقِينِ مَعْرِفَتُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Who is concealed against the eyes of the oppressors;

*Al-Muh’tajabi ‘An A’yuniz’-Z’aalimeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُحْتَجَبِ عَنْ أَعْيُنِ الظَّالِمِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Who is hidden from the regimes of the faithless authorities;

*Wal-Mughayyabi ‘An Dawlatil-Faasiqeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُغَيّبِ عَنْ دَوْلَةِ الْفَاسِقِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And through whom our Lord shall renew Islam again after it will be
effaced,

*Wal-Mu’eedi Rabbunaa Bihil-Islaama Jadeedan Ba’dal-Int’imaas(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُعِيدِ رَبّنَا بِهِ الاسْلامَ جَدِيدًا بَعْدَ الانْطِمَاسِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And He shall recover the Qur’an fresh over again after it will be
eradicated.

*Wal-Qur\`Aana Ghad’d’an Ba’dal-Indiraas(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْقُرْآنَ غَضًّا بَعْدَ الانْدِرَاسِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

O master: I bear witness that you did offer prayers,

*Ash-Hadu Yaa Mawlaaya Annaka Aqamtas’-S’alaa(Ta)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَشْهَدُ يَامَوْلايَ أَنّكَ أَقَمْتَ الصّلاةَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And you did defray the Zakat,

*Wa-Aataytaz-Zakaa(Ta)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآتَيْتَ الزّكَاةَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And you did enjoined the right,

*Wa-Amarta Bil-Ma’roof(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَرْتَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And you did forbid the wrong,

*Wa Nahayta ‘Anil-Munkar(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَهَيْتَ عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And you did call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and goodly
exhortation,

*Wa Da’awta Iaa Sabeeli Rabbika Bil-H’ikmati
Wal-Maw-‘Iz’atil-H’asana(Ti)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدَعَوْتَ إِلَى سَبِيلِ رَبّكَ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ
الْحَسَنَةِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And you did worship Allah sincerely until death came upon you.

*Wa ‘Abadtal-Laaha Mukhlis’an H’attaa Ataakal-Yaqeen(U)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَبَدْتَ اللّهَ مُخْلِصًا حَتَّى أَتَاكَ الْيَقِينُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

I thus beseech Allah in the name of the rank that you enjoy with Him,

*As\`Alul-Laaha Bish-Sha\`Nil-Ladhee Lakum ‘Indah(Oo)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْأَلُ اللّهَ بِالشّأْنِ الّذِي لَكُمْ عِنْدَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

That He may accept my visit to you,

*An Yataqabbala Ziyaaratee Lakum*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْ يَتَقَبّلَ زِيَارَتِي لَكُمْ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And He may receive my efforts with thanks,

*Wa Yashkura Sa’yee Ilaykum*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَشْكُرَ سَعْيِي إِلَيْكُمْ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And He may respond to my prayers through you,

*Wa Yastajeeba Du’aa\`Ee Bikum*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَسْتَجِيبَ دُعَائِي بِكُمْ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And He may include me with the supporters, the followers, and adherents
to the right

*Wa Yaj-‘Alanee Min Ans’aaril-H’aqqi Wa Atbaa’ihee Wa Ashyaa’ih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَجْعَلَنِي مِنْ أَنْصَارِ الْحَقّ وَأَتْبَاعِهِ وَأَشْيَاعِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

As well as with the devotees and the lovers of it.

*Wa Mawaaleehi Wa Muh’ibbeeh(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَوَالِيهِ وَمُحِبّيهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah’s mercy and blessings be upon you.

*Was-Salaamu ‘Alayka Wa Rah’matul-Laahi Wa Barakaatuh(Oo)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسّلامُ عَلَيْكَ وَرَحْمَةُ اللّهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You may then kiss the holy tomb, put your right and then you left cheek
on it, and say the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم قبّل ضريحه وضع خدّك الأيمنِ عليه، ثم الأيسر وقل:
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: (please do) send blessings upon our master Muhammad and upon
his Household,

*Allaahumm S’alli ‘Alaa Sayyidinaa Muh’ammadin Wa Ahli Baytih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ صَلّ عَلَى سَيّدِنَا مُحَمّدٍ وَأَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And send blessings upon al-Hasan, son of Ali, who guides to Your
religion,

*Wa S’alli ‘Alal-H’asanibnin ‘Aliyyinil-Haadee Ilaa Deenik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَصَلّ عَلَى الْحَسَنِ بْنِ عَلِيّ الْهَادِي إِلَى دِينِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Who calls to Your way,

*Wad-Daa’ee Ilaa Sabeelik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالدَّاعِي إِلَى سَبِيلِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The sign of true guidance

*‘Alamil-Hudaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَمِ الْهُدَى،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The lantern of true piety

*Wa Manaarit-Tuqaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنَارِ التّقَى،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The essence of rationality

*Wa Ma’dinil-H’ijaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَعْدِنِ الْحِجَى،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The resource of reason

*Wa Ma\`Wan-Nuhaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمأْوَى النّهَى،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The raining cloud over mankind

*Wa Ghaythil-Waraa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَغَيْثِ الْوَرَى،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The cloud of wisdom

*Wa Sah’aabil-H’ikma(Ti)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَحَابِ الْحِكْمَةِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The ocean of admonition

*Wa Bah’ril-Maw’iz’a(Ti)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَحْرِ الْمَوْعِظَةِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The heir of the Imams

*Wa Waarithil-A\`Imma(Ti)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَارِثِ الائِمّةِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The witness over the (Muslim) community

*Wash-Shaheedi ‘Alal-Umma(Ti)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالشّهِيدِ عَلَى الامّةِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The sinless, the well-mannered,

*Al-Ma’s’oomil-Muhadhdhab(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَعْصُومِ الْمُهَذّبِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The virtuous, the favorite (by Allah),

*Wal-Faad’ilil-Muqarrab(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْفَاضِلِ الْمُقَرّبِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The purified against filth

*Wal-Mut’ahhari Minar-Rijs(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُطَهّرِ مِنَ الرّجْسِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The one whom You have given the knowledge of the (Holy) Book in
inheritance,

*Alladhee Warrathtahoo ‘Ilmal-Kitaab(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الّذِي وَرّثْتَهُ عِلْمَ الْكِتَابِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And You have given clear judgment,

*Wa Alhamtahoo Fas’lal-Khit’aab(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَلْهَمْتَهُ فَصْلَ الْخِطَابِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And You have appointed him as the leading sign for those who follow the
direction You have decided,

*Wa Nas'abtahoo ‘Alaman Li-Ahli Qiblatik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَصَبْتَهُ عَلَمًا لأَهْلِ قِبْلَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And You have decided the obedience to him to be attached to the
obedience to You

*Wa Qaranta T’aa’atahoo Bit’aa’atik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَرَنْتَ طَاعَتَهُ بِطَاعَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And You have imposed the love for him upon all Your creatures.

*Wa Farad’ta Mawaddatahoo ‘Alaa Jamee’i Khaleeqatik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفَرَضْتَ مَوَدّتَهُ عَلَى جَمِيعِ خَلِيقَتِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: on account of the fact that he always turned to you with
excellent sincerity in Your Oneness,

*Allaahumma Fakamaa Anaaba Bih’usnil-Ikhlaas’i Fee Tawh’eedik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ فَكَمَا أَنَابَ بِحُسْنِ الاخْلاصِ فِي تَوْحِيدِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And he always argued and defeated those who anthropomorphized You

*Wa Ardaa Man Khaad’a Fee Tashbeehik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَرْدَى مَنْ خَاضَ فِي تَشْبِيهِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And he always defended those who faithfully believed in You;

*Wa H’aamaa ‘An Ahlil-Eemaani Bik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَامَى عَنْ أَهْلِ الايمَانِ بِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, O my Lord, (please) cover him with Your blessings due to which he
joins the rank of those who behave humbly towards You,

*Fas’alli Yaa Rabbi ‘Alayhi S’alaatan Yalh’aqu Bihaa
Mah’allal-Khaashi’eeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلّ يَارَبّ عَلَيْهِ صَلاةً يَلْحَقُ بِهَا مَحَلّ الْخَاشِعِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And due to which he surmounts to the rank of his forefather—the Seal of
the Prophets,

*Wa Ya’loo Fil-Jannati Bidarajati Jaddihee Khaatamin-Nabiyyeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَعْلُو فِي الْجَنّةِ بِدَرَجَةِ جَدّهِ خَاتَمِ النّبِيّينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And (please do) convey to him greetings and compliments from us,

*Waballigh-Hu Minnaa Tah’iyyatan Wa Salaamaa(N)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَلّغْهُ مِنَّا تَحِيّةً وَسَلامًا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And (please do) grant us favor and benevolence from You, on account of
our loyalty to him

*Wa Aatinaa Min Ladunka Fee Muwaalaatihee Fad’lan Wa Ih’saanaa(N)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآتِنَا مِنْ لَدُنْكَ فِي مُوَالاتِهِ فَضْلاً وَإِحْسَانًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And also grant us forgiveness and gratification,

*Wa Maghfiratan Wa Rid’waanaa(N)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَغْفِرَةً وَرِضْوَانًا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

For You are, most certainly, the Lord of enormous favor and huge bliss.

*Innaka Dhoo Fad’lin ‘Az’eemin Wa Mannin Jaseem(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنّكَ ذُو فَضْلٍ عَظِيمٍ، وَمَنّ جَسِيمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You may then offer the (two-Rak’ah) Ziyarah Prayer and say the following
thereafter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم تصلّي صلاة الزيَارة فإذَا فرغت قل:
  </p>
</blockquote>

O All-eternal Lord, O All-everlasting,

*Yaa Daa\`Imu Yaa Daymoom(U)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا دَائِمُ يَا دَيْمُومُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Ever-living, O All-subsisting,

*Yaa H’ayyu Yaa Qayyoom(U)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا حَيّ يَا قَيّومُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Reliever of agonies and griefs

*Yaa Kaashifal-Karbi Wal-Hamm(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا كَاشِفَ الْكَرْبِ وَالْهَمّ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Soother of anguishes,

*Wa Yaa Faarijal-Ghamm(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا فَارِجَ الْغَمّ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Appointer of the Messengers,

*Wa Yaa Baa’ithar-Rusul(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا بَاعِثَ الرّسُلِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Truthful to what He promises,

*Wa Yaa S’aadiqal-Wa’d(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا صَادِقَ الْوَعْدِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Ever-living, there is no deity save You

*Wa Yaa H’ayyu Laa Ilaaha Illaa Ant(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا حَيّ لا إِلهَ إِلا أَنْتَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

I beg You in the name of Your two dear ones: Muhammad

*Atawassalu Ilayka Bi-H’abeebayka Muh’ammad(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَوَسّلُ إِلَيْكَ بِحَبِيبِكَ مُحَمّدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And his successor, Ali—his cousin and the husband of his daughter,

*Wa Was’iyyihee ‘Aliyyinibni ‘Ammihee Wa S’ihrihee ‘Alabnatih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَصِيّهِ عَلِيّ ابْنِ عَمّهِ وَصِهْرِهِ عَلَى ابْنَتِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

By both of whom You have sealed Your laws

*Alladhayni Khatamta Bihimash-Sharaa\`I’(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الّذِين خَتَمْتَ بِهِمَا الشّرَائِعَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by both of whom You have opened interpretation and Your pioneering
ordains,

*Wa Fatah’ta Bihimat-Ta\`Weela Wat’-T’alaa\`I’(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفَتَحْتَ بِهِمَا التّأْوِيلَ وَالطّلائِعَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, (please do) send upon both of them blessings that are witnessed by
the ancient and the coming generations,

*Fas’alli ‘Alayhimaa S’alaatan Yash-Hadu Bihal-Awwaloona
Wal-Aakhiroon(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلّ عَلَيْهِمَا صَلاةً يَشْهَدُ بِهَا الاوّلُونَ وَالآخِرُونَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And by which the intimate servants and the righteous ones are saved,

*Wa Yanjoo Bihal-Awliyaa\`U Was’-S’aalih’oon(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَنْجُو بِهَا الاوْلِيَاءُ وَالصَّالِحُونَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I also beg You in the name of Fatimah the Luminous, the mother of
the well-guided Imams,

*Wa Atawassalu Ilayka Bi-Faat’imataz-Zahraa\`I
Waalidatil-A\`Immatil-Mahdiyyeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَتَوَسّلُ إِلَيْكَ بِفَاطِمَةَ الزّهْرَاءِ وَالِدَةِ الائِمّةِ
الْمَهْدِيّينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the Leader of all women of the world,

*Wa Sayyidati Nisaa\`Il-‘Aalameen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَيّدَةِ نِسَاءِ الْعَالَمِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Who shall be allowed to intercede for the followers of her immaculate
descendants,

*Al-Mushaffa’ati Fee Shii’ati Awlaadihat’-T’ayyibeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُشَفّعَةِ فِي شِيعَةِ أَوْلادِهَا الطّيّبِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, (please do) send upon her blessings that are as endless as ages

*Fas’alli ‘Alayhaa S’alaatan Daa\`Imatan Abadal-Aabideen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلّ عَلَيْهَا صَلاةً دَائِمَةً أَبَدَ الآبِدِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And as endless as times.

*Wa Dahrad-Daahireen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدَهْرَ الدَّاهِرِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I also beg You in the name of al-Hasan—the pleased,

*Wa Atawassalu Ilayka Bil-H’asanir-Rad’iyy(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَتَوَسّلُ إِلَيْكَ بِالْحَسَنِ الرّضِيّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The infallible, and the pure—

*At’-T’aahiriz-Zakiyy(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الطَّاهِرِ الزّكِيّ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And in the name of al-Husayn—the oppressed, the pleased, the pious, and
the righteous—

*Wal-H’usaynil-Maz’loomil-Mard’iyyil-Barrit-Taqiyy(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْحُسَيْنِ الْمَظْلُومِ الْمَرْضِيّ الْبَرّ التّقِيّ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

(they both are) the masters of the youth of Paradise,

*Sayyiday Shabaabi Ahlil-Janna(Ti)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيّدَيْ شَبَابِ أَهْلِ الْجَنّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The two virtuous and infallible Imams

*Al-Imaamaynil-Khayyiraynit’-T’ayyibayn(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الامَامَيْنِ الْخَيّرَيْنِ الطّيّبَيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The pious, the pure,

*At-Taqiyyaynin-Naqiyyayn(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التّقِيّيْنِ النّقِيّيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The immaculate, the martyred

*At’-T’aahiraynish-Shaheedayn(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الطَّاهِرَيْنِ الشّهِيدَيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The oppressed, the slain;

*Al-Maz’loomaynil-Maqtoolayn(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَظْلُومَيْنِ الْمَقْتُولَيْنِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, (please do) send upon them blessings whenever the sun rises and
sets;

*Fas’alli ‘Alayhimaa Maa T’ala’at Shamsun Wa Maa Gharabat*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلّ عَلَيْهِمَا مَا طَلَعَتْ شَمْسٌ وَمَا غَرَبَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Blessings that are consecutive and successive.

*S’alaatan Mutawaaliyatan Mutataaliya(Tan)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلاةً مُتَوَالِيَةً مُتَتَالِيَةً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I also beg You in the name of Ali son of al-Husayn—the chief of the
worshippers,

*Wa Atawassalu Ilayk Bi-‘Aliyyibnil-H’usayni Sayyidil-‘Aabideen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَتَوَسّلُ إِلَيْكَ بِعَلِيّ بْنِ الْحُسَيْنِ سَيّدِ الْعَابِدِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the concealed for fear of the oppressors—

*Al-Mah’joobi Min Khawfiz’-Z’aalimeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَحْجُوبِ مِنْ خَوْفِ الظَّالِمِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And in the name of Muhammad son of Ali, al-Baqir (i.e. the one who
splits knowledge), the pure,

*Wa Bimuh’ammadibni ‘Aliyyinil-Baaqirit’-T’aahir(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِمُحَمّدِ بْنِ عَلِيّ الْبَاقِرِ الطَّاهِرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The glowing light.

*An-Nooriz-Zaahir(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النّورِ الزَّاهِرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(they both are) the two Imams and masters,

*Al-Imaamaynis-Sayyidayn(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الامَامَيْنِ السّيّدَيْنِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The keys to blessings,

*Miftaah’ayil-Barakaat(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِفْتَاحَيِ الْبَرَكَاتِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the lanterns in the murk.

*Wa Mis’baah’ayiz’-Z’ulumaat(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِصْبَاحَيِ الظّلُمَاتِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, (please) send blessings upon them whenever night comes,

*Fas’alli ‘Alayhimaa Maa Saraa Layl(Un)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلّ عَلَيْهِمَا مَا سَرَى لَيْلٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And whenever daylight rises,

*Wa Maa Ad’aa\`A Nahaar(Un)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَضَاءَ نَهَارٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Such ceaseless blessings.

*S’alaatan Taghdoo Wa Tarooh’(U)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلاةً تَغْدُو وَتَرُوحُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I also beg You in the name of Ja’far son of Muhammad—

*Wa Atawassalu Ilayka Bi-Ja’faribni Muh’ammad(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَتَوَسّلُ إِلَيْكَ بِجَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمّدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The truthful in what he conveys from Allah,

*As’-S’aadiqi ‘Anil-Laah(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّادِقِ عَنِ اللّهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The spokesman of Allah’s knowledge—

*Wan-Naat’iqi Fee ‘Ilmil-Laah(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالنَّاطِقِ فِي عِلْمِ اللّهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And in the name of Musa son of Ja’far,

*Wa Bimoosabni Ja’far(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِمُوسَى بْنِ جَعْفَرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The self-righteous servant (of Allah),

*Al-‘Abdis’-S’aalih’i Fee Nafsih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْعَبْدِ الصَّالِحِ فِي نَفْسِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the well-whisher successor (of the Prophet).

*Wal-Was’iyyin-Naas’ih’(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْوَصِيّ النَّاصِحِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

(They both are) the two guiding and well-guided Imams,

*Al-Imaamaynil-Haadiyaynil-Mahdiyyayn(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الامَامَيْنِ الْهَادِيَيْنِ الْمَهْدِيّيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The two adequate, right Imams.

*Al-Waafiyaynil-Kaafiyayn(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْوَافِيَيْنِ الْكَافِيَيْنِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, (please) send upon them blessings whenever an angel glorifies You

*Fas’alli ‘Alayhimaa Maa Sabbah'a Laka Malak(Un)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلّ عَلَيْهِمَا مَا سَبّحَ لَكَ مَلَكٌ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And whenever a planet moves.

*Wa Tah’arraka Laka Falak(Un)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَحَرّكَ لَكَ فَلَكٌ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Such increasable and growing blessings

*S’alaatan Tunmaa Wa Tazeed(U)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلاةً تُنْمَى وَتَزِيدُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

That neither end nor stop.

*Wa Laa Tafnaa Wa Laa Tabeed(U)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَفْنَى وَلا تَبِيدُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I also beg You in the name of Ali ibn Musa, the well-pleased

*Wa Atawassalu Ilayka Bi-‘Aliyyibni Moosar-Rid’aa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَتَوَسّلُ إِلَيْكَ بِعَلِيّ بْنِ مُوسَى الرّضَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And in the name of Muhammad son of Ali, the well-contented—

*Wa Bimuh’ammadibni ‘Aliyyinil-Murtad’aa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِمُحّمَدِ بْنِ عَلِيّ الْمُرْتَضَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

The two purified and selected Imams,

*Al-Imaamaynil-Mut’ahharaynil-Muntajabayn(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الامَامَيْنِ الْمُطَهّرَيْنِ الْمُنْتَجَبَيْنِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, (please) send upon them blessings whenever morning glows and
endures,

*Fas’alli ‘Alayhimaa Maa Ad’aa\`A S’ubh’un Wa Daam(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلّ عَلَيْهِمَا مَا أَضَاءَ صُبْحٌ وَدَامَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Such blessings that take them up to the rank of Your pleasure in the
highest level of Your gardens of Paradise.

*S’alaatan Turaqqeehimaa Ilaa Rid’waanika Fil-‘Illiyyeena Min Jinaanik*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلاةً تُرَقّيهِمَا إِلَى رِضْوَانِكَ فِي الْعِلّيّينَ مِنْ جِنَانِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

I also beg You in the name of Ali son of Muhammad, the orthodox,

*Wa Atawassalu Ilayka Bi-‘Aliyyinibni Muh’ammadinir-Raashid*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَتَوَسّلُ إِلَيْكَ بِعَليّ بْنِ مُحَمّدٍ الرَّاشِدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And in the name of al-Hasan ibn Ali, the guide;

*Wal-H’asanibni ‘Aliyyinil-Haadee*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْحَسَنِ بْنِ عَلِيّ الْهَادِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

(The two Imams) who supervise the affairs of Your servants,

*Al-Qaa\`Imayni Bi\`Amri ‘Ibaadik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْقَائِمَيْنِ بِأَمْرِ عِبَادِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

(the two Imams) whom are also tested by unbearable ordeals,

*Al-Mukhtabarayni Bil-Mih’anil-Haa\`Ila(Ti)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُخْتَبَرَيْنِ بِالْمِحَنِ الْهَائِلَةِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And who acted patiently against the swerving enmities.

*Was’-S’aabirayni Fil-Ih’anil-Maa\`Ila(Ti)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالصَّابِرَيْنِ فِي الاحَنِ الْمَائِلَةِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, (please do) send upon them blessings that are suitable enough to be
the reward of the enduring people,

*Fas’alli ‘Alayhimaa Kifaa\`A Ajris’-S’aabireen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلّ عَلَيْهِمَا كِفَاءَ أَجْرِ الصَّابِرِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And that are worth being the prize of the winners,

*Wa Izaa\`A Thawaabil-Faa\`Izeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِزَاءَ ثَوَابِ الْفَائِزِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Such blessings that pave for them the way to exaltation.

*S’alaatan Tumahhidu Lahumar-Rif’a(Ta)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلاةً تُمَهّدُ لَهُمَا الرّفْعَةَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I also beg You, O Lord, in the name of our Imam,

*Wa Atawassalu Ilayka Yaa Rabbi Bi-Imaaminaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَتَوَسّلُ إِلَيْكَ يَا رَبّ بِإِمَامِنَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The rising in our ages,

*Wa Muh’aqqiqi Zamaaninaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمُحَقّقِ زَمَانِنَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The promised day,

*Al-Yawmil-Maw’ood(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمِ الْمَوْعُودِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The witnessed observer

*Wash-Shaahidil-Mash-Hood(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالشَّاهِدِ الْمَشْهُودِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The luminous light

*Wan-Nooril-Az-Har(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالنّورِ الازْهَرِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The bright illumination

*Wad’-D’iyaa\`Il-Anwar(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالضّيَاءِ الانْوَرِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The supported by means of awe

*Al-Mans’oori Bir-Ru’b(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَنْصُورِ بِالرّعْبِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the triumphant with happiness.

*Wal-Muz’affari Bis-Sa’aada(Ti)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُظَفّرِ بِالسّعَادَةِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, (please) send upon him blessings that are as many as the number of
fruits

*Fas’alli ‘Alayhi ‘Adadath-Thamar(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلّ عَلَيْهِ عَدَدَ الثّمَرِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And as many as the leaves of trees,

*Wa Awraaqish-Shajar(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْرَاقِ الشّجَرِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And as many as townspeople

*Wa Ajzaa\`Il-Madar(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَجْزَاءِ الْمَدَرِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And as many as hairs of people and animals

*Wa ‘Adadash-Sha’ri Wal-Wabar(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَدَ الشّعْرِ وَالْوَبَرِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And as many as all things that Your knowledge encompasses

*Wa ‘Adada Maa Ah’aat’a Bihee ‘Ilmuk(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَدَ مَا أَحَاطَ بِهِ عِلْمُكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And You Book counts,

*Wa Ah’s’aahu Kitaabuk(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَحْصَاهُ كِتَابُكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Such blessings due to which all the ancient and the last generations
envy him.

*S’alaatan Yaghbit’uhoo Bihal-Awwaloona Wal-Aakhiroon(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلاةً يَغْبِطُهُ بِهَا الاوّلُونَ وَالآخِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: (please do) include us with his group,

*Allaahumma Wah’shurnaa Fee Zumratih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ وَاحْشُرْنَا فِي زُمْرَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And cause us to keep on obeying him,

*Wah’faz’naa ‘Alaa T’aa’atih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاحْفَظْنَا عَلَى طَاعَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And guard us through his state

*Wah’rusnaa Bidawlatih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاحْرُسْنَا بِدَوْلَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And confer upon us with the loyalty to him,

*Wa At-H’ifnaa Biwilaayatih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَتْحِفْنَا بِوِلايَتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And give us victory over our enemies as a result of his power

*Wans’urnaa ‘Alaa A’daa\`Ihee Bi-‘Izzatih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَانْصُرْنَا عَلَى أَعْدَائِنَا بِعِزّتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And include us, O Lord, with those who turn to You constantly,

*Waj-‘Alnaa Yaa Rabbi Minat-Tawwaabeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْنَا يَا رَبّ مِنَ التّوَابِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O the most Merciful of all those who show mercy.

*Yaa Arh’amar-Raah’imeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: surely, Iblis, the rebel, the accursed,

*Allaahumma Wa Inna Ibleesal-Mutamarridal-La’een(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ وَإِنّ إِبْلِيسَ الْمُتَمَرّدَ اللّعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Asked You to grant him respite so that he would mislead Your creatures,
and You granted him so,

*Qadis-Tanz’araka Li-Ighwaa\`I Khalqika Fa-Anz’artah(Oo)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدِ اسْتَنْظَرَكَ لاِغْوَاءِ خَلْقِكَ فَأَنْظَرْتَهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And he asked You to reprieve him so that he would misguide Your
servants, and You reprieved him,

*Wastamhalaka Li-Id’laali ‘Abeedika Fa Amhaltah(Oo)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتَمْهَلَكَ لاِضْلالِ عَبِيدِكَ فَأَمْهَلْتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

This is because he carried a good idea about You.

*Bisaabiqi ‘Ilmika Feeh(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسَابِقِ عِلْمِكَ فِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

He thus nested and gave birth to many hosts.

*Waqad ‘Ashshasha Wa Kathurat Junooduh(Oo)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ عَشّشَ، وَكَثُرَتْ جُنُودُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, his armies have been overcrowding,

*Wazdah’amat Juyooshuh(Oo)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَازْدَحَمَتْ جُيُوشُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And his propagandists are widespread in all the corners of this earth,

*Wantasharat Du’aatuhoo Fee Aqt’aaril-Ard’(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَانْتَشَرَتْ دُعَاتُهُ فِي أَقْطَارِ الارْضِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And they have mislead Your servants,

*Fa-Ad’alloo ‘Ibaadak(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَضَلّوَا عِبَادَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And deformed Your religion,

*Wa-Afsadoo Deenak(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَفْسَدُوَا دِينَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And displaced the words from their right places,

*Wa H’arraful-Kalima ‘An Mawaad’i’ih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَرّفُوَا الْكَلِمَ عَنْ مَوَاضِعِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And made Your servants indule in diverse revelries,

*Wa Ja’aloo ‘Ibaadaka Shiya’an Mutafarriqeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلُوَا عِبَادَكَ شِيَعًا مُتَفَرّقِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And rebellious parties.

*Wa Ah’zaaban Mutamarrideen*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأَحْزَابًا مُتَمَرّدِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And You promised that You would demolish his (i.e. Iblis) edifice,

*Waqad Wa’adta Naqd’a Bunyaanih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ وَعَدْتَ نَقْضَ بُنْيَانِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And You would tear out his matters,

*Wa Tamzeeqa Sha\`Nih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَمْزِيقَ شَأْنِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, (please do) deaden his sons and armies,

*Fa Ahlik Awlaadahoo Wa Juyooshah(Oo)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَهْلِكْ أَوْلادَهُ وَجُيُوشَهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And purify Your lands from his inventions and fabrications,

*Wa T’ahhir Bilaadaka Minikh-Tiraa’aatihee Wakh-Tilaafaatih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَطَهّرْ بِلادَكَ مِنِ اخْتِرَاعَاتِهِ وَاخْتِلافَاتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And relieve Your servants from his factions and analogies,

*Wa Arih’ ‘Ibaadaka Min Madhaahibihee Wa Qiyaasaatih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَرِحْ عِبَادَكَ مِنْ مَذَاهِبِهِ وَقِيَاسَاتِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And make the disaster of evil surround them,

*Waj-‘Al Daa\`Iratas-Saw\`I ‘Alayhim*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْ دَائِرَةَ السّوْءِ عَلَيْهِمْ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And extend Your justice

*Wabsut’ ‘Adlak(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَابْسُطْ عَدْلَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And give victory to Your religion,

*Wa Az’-Hir Deenak(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَظْهِرْ دِينَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And give strength to Your intimate servants,

*Wa Qawwi Awliyaa\`Ak(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَوّ أَوْلِيَاءَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And weaken Your enemies,

*Wa Awhin A’daa\`Ak(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْهِنْ أَعْدَاءَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And make Your intimate servants inherit the lands of Iblis and those of
his fans,

*Wa Awrith Diyaara Ibleesa Wa Diyaara Awliyaa\`Ihee Awliyaa\`Ak(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْرِثْ دِيَارَ إِبْلِيسَ وَدِيَارَ أَوْلِيَائِهِ أَوْلِيَاءَكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And make the fans of Iblis stay forever in the blazing Fire

*Wa Khallid-Hum Fil-Jah’eem(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخَلّدْهُمْ فِي الْجَحِيمِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And make them taste from the painful torment,

*Wa Adhiq-Hum Minal-‘Adhaabil-Aleem(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَذِقْهُمْ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ الالِيمِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And make the curses of You that are kept in the evil part of the
creation and in the deformed part of the nature surround them forever,

*Waj-‘Al La’aa\`Inakal-Mustawda’ata Fee Manaah’isil-Khilqati Wa
Mashaaweehil-Fit’rati Daa\`Iratan ‘Alayhim*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْ لَعَائِنَكَ الْمُسْتَوْدَعَةَ فِي مَنَاحِسِ الْخِلْقَةِ
وَمَشَاوِيهِ الْفِطْرَةِ دَائِرَةً عَلَيْهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And control them,

*Wa Muwakkalatan Bihim*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمُوَكّلَةً بِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And strike them every morning and evening

*Wa Jaariyatan Feehim Kulla S’abaah’in Wa Masaa\`(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَارِيَةً فِيهِمْ كُلّ صَبَاحٍ وَمَسَاءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And every single minute.

*Wa Ghuduwwin Wa Rawaah’(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَغُدُوّ وَرَوَاحٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Our Lord: (please do) grant us goodness in this world

*Rabbanaa Aatinaa Fid-Dunyaa H’asana(Tan)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدّنْيَا حَسَنَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

And goodness in the world to come,

*Wa Fil-Aakhirati H’asana(Tan)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي الآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

And save us, out of Your mercy, from the torment of Fire.

*Wa Qinaa Birah’matika ‘Adhaaban-Naar(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِنَا بِرَحْمَتِكَ عَذَابَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

You are surely the most Merciful of all those who show mercy.

*Yaa Arh’amar-Raah’imeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You may then pray to Him for yourself and your brethren-in-faith.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم ادع بمَا تحبّ لنفسك ولاخوَانك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Common Ziyarah of Imam al-Hadi and Imam al-Askari
-----------------------------------------------------

Peace be upon you (both); O the representatives of Allah!

*Assalaamu 'Alaykumaa Yaa Waliyyayil-Laah(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكُمَا يَا وَلِيّيِ اللّهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you (both); O the Arguments of Allah (against His created
beings)!

*Assalaamu 'Alaykumaa Yaa H'ujjatayil-Laah(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكُمَا يَا حُجّتَيِ اللّهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you (both); O the Light of Allah in the murk of the earth!

*Assalaamu 'Alaykumaa Yaa Noorayil-Laahi Fee Z'ulumaatil-Ard'(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكُمَا يَا نُورَيِ اللّهِ فِي ظُلُمَاتِ الارْضِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you (both); O the two whom Allah has decided on you!

*Assalaamu 'Alaykumaa Yaa Yaa Man Badaa Lil-Laahi Fee Sha\`Nikumaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السّلامُ عَلَيْكُمَا يَا مَنْ بَدَا لِلّهِ فِي شَأْنِكُمَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have come to you visiting your tombs and recognizing your right,

*Ataytukumaa Zaa\`Iran 'Aarifan Bih'aqqikumaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَيْتُكُمَا زَائِرًا، عَارِفًا بِحَقّكُمَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And incurring the hostility of those who antagonize you and declaring my
friendliness to those who adhere to you,

*Mu'aadiyan Li-A'daa\`Ikumaa Muwaaliyan Li-Awliyaa\`Ikumaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُعَادِيًا لأَعْدَائِكُمَا، مُوَالِيًا لأَوْلِيَائِكُمَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And believing in whatever you believed in and disbelieving in whatever
you disbelieved,

*Mu\`Minan Bimaa Aamantumaa Bihee Kaafiran Bimaa Kafartumaa Bih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُؤْمِنًا بِمَا آمَنْتُمَا بِهِ، كَافِرًا بِمَا كَفَرْتُمَا بِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And deeming right all that which you deemed right and deeming wrong all
that which you deemed wrong.

*Muh'aqqiqan Limaa H'aqqaqtumaa Mubt'ilan Limaa Abt'altumaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحَقّقًا لِمَا حَقّقْتُمَا، مُبْطِلا لِمَا أَبْطَلْتُمَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

I thus beseech Allah, my and your Lord, that He may decide that the
rewards of my visit to you to be His sending blessings upon Muhammad and
his Household

*As-Alul-Laaha Rabbee Wa Rabbakumaa An Yaj-'Al H'az'z'ee Min
Ziyaaratikumas'-S'alaata 'Alaa Muh'ammadin Wa Aalih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْأَلُ اللّهَ رَبّي وَرَبّكُمَا أَنْ يَجْعَلَ حَظّي مِنْ
زِيَارَتِكُمَا الصّلاةَ عَلَى مُحَمّدٍ وَآلِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And that He may grant me the favor of accompanying you both in the
gardens of Paradise with your righteous fathers,

*Wa An Yarzuqanee Muraafaqatakumaa Fil-Jinaani Ma'a
Aabaa-Ikumas'-S'aalih'een(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ يَرْزُقَنِي مُرَافَقَتَكُمَا فِي الْجِنَانِ مَعَ آبَائِكُمَا
الصَّالِحِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And I beseech Him that He may save me from Hellfire,

*Wa As-Aluhoo An Ya'tiqa Raqabatee Minan-Naar(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَسْأَلُهُ أَنْ يُعْتِقَ رَقَبَتِي مِنَ النَّارِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And that He may grant me your intercession and your company,

*Wa Yarzuqanee Shafaa'atakumaa Wa Mus'aah'abatakumaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَرْزُقَنِي شَفَاعَتَكُمَا وَمُصَاحَبَتَكُمَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And that He may introduce me to you

*Wa Yu'arrifa Baynee Wa Baynakumaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُعَرّفَ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And that He may never take out my love for you and my love for your
righteous fathers from my heart

*Wa Laa Yaslubanee H'ubbakumaa Wa H'ubba Aabaa-Ikumas'-S'aalih'een(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يَسْلُبَنِي حُبّكُمَا وَحُبّ آبَائِكُمَا الصَّالِحِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And that He may not make this time the last of my visits to you,

*Wa An Laa Yaj-'Alahoo Aakhiral-'Ahdi Min Ziyaaratikumaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ لا يَجْعَلَهُ آخِرَ الْعَهْدِ مِنْ زِيَارَتِكُمَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And that He may include me with your group in Paradise, out of His
mercy.

*Wa Yah'shuranee Ma'akumaa Fil-Jannati Birah'matih(Ee)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَحْشُرَنِي مَعَكُمَا فِي الْجَنّةِ بِرَحْمَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: (please do) grant me love for them, and make me die following
their course.

*Allaahummar-Zuqnee H'ubbahumaa Wa Tawaffanee 'Alaa Millatihimaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ ارْزُقْنِي حُبّهُمَا، وَتَوَفّنِي عَلَى مِلّتِهِمَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: (please do) curse and punish those who usurped the right of the
Family of Muhammad.

*Allaahummal-'An Z'aalimee Aali Muh'ammadin H'aqqahum Wantaqim Minhum*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ الْعَنْ ظَالِمِي آلِ مُحَمّدٍ حَقّهُمْ وَانْتَقِمْ مِنْهُمْ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: (please do) curse the past and the coming generations of those
people

*Allaahummal-'Anil-Awwaleena Minhum Wal-Aakhireen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ الْعَنِ الاوّلِينَ مِنْهُمْ وَالآخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And apply to them two folds of torture,

*Wa D'aa'if 'Alayhimul-'Adhaab(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَضَاعِفْ عَلَيْهِمُ الْعَذَابَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And send them, as well as their fans, their adherents, and the
followers, to the deepest area of Hellfire.

*Wablugh Bihim Wa Bi-Ashyaa'ihim Wa Muh'ibbeehim Wa Muttabi'eehim Asfala
Darakin Minal-Jah'eem(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَابْلُغْ بِهِمْ وَبِأَشْيَاعِهِمْ وَمُحِبّيهِمْ وَمُتّبِعِيهِمْ
أَسْفَلَ دَرَكٍ مِنَ الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, You have power over all things.

*Innaka 'Alaa Kulli Shay-In Qadeer(Un)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنّكَ عَلَى كُلّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: (please do) hasten the Relief of Your representative and the
son of Your representative,

*Allaahumma 'Ajjil Faraja Waliyyika Wabni Waliyyik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ عَجّلْ فَرَجَ وَلِيّكَ وَابْنِ وَلِيّكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And cause our relief to accompany his relief; O the most Merciful of all
those who show mercy.

*Waj-'Al Farajanaa Ma'a Farajahoo Yaa Arh'amar-Raah'imeen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْ فَرَجَنَا مَعَ فَرَجِهِ يَا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Prayer for Imam al-Hasan al-Askari
----------------------------------

O Allah: (please do) send blessings upon al-Hasan, son of Ali, son of
Muhammad,

*Allaahumma S’alli ‘Alal-H’asanibni ‘Aliyyinibni Muh’ammad(In)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمّ صَلّ عَلَى الْحَسَنِ بْنِ عَلِيّ بْنِ مُحَمّدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The upright, the pious,

*Al-Barrit-Taqiyy(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْبَرّ التّقِيّ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The honest, the faithful,

*As’-S’aadiqil-Wafiyy(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّادِقِ الْوَفِيّ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The brilliant light

*An-Nooril-Mudhee\`(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النّورِ الْمُضِيءِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

The keeper of Your knowledge,

*Khaazini ‘Ilmik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَازِنِ عِلْمِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the reminder of Your Oneness,

*Wal-Mudhakkiri Bitawh’eedik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُذَكّرِ بِتَوْحِيدِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Your representative,

*Wa Waliyyi Amrik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَلِيّ أَمْرِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the successor of the leaders of the religion—the guide, orthodox
ones—

*Wa Khalafi A\`Immatid-Deenil-Hudaatir-Raashideen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخَلَفِ أَئِمّةِ الدّينِ الْهُدَاةِ الرَّاشِدِينَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the Claim against the inhabitants of this world.

*Wal-H’ujjati ‘Alaa Ahlid-Dunyaa*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْحُجّةِ عَلَى أَهْلِ الدّنْيَا،
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, O Lord: (please do) send blessings upon him,

*Fas’alli ‘Alayhi Yaa Rabb(I)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلّ عَلَيْهِ يَا رَبّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the best manner that You have ever sent blessings upon any of Your
elite servants,

*Afd’ala Maa S’allayta ‘Alaa Ah’adin Min As’fiyaa\`Ik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفْضَلَ مَا صَلّيْتَ عَلَى أَحَدٍ مِنْ أَصْفِيَائِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And Your Claimants, and the descendants of Your Apostles,

*Wa H’ujajika Wa Awlaadi Rusulik(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحُجَجِكَ وَأَوْلادِ رُسُلِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O the God of the Worlds.

*Yaa Ilaahal-‘Aalameen(A)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا إِلهَ الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


