Introduction
============

**In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent The Merciful**

(1)

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali al-Askari (a.s.) is the eleventh imam
of the infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). The blessed and pious
Imams carried the banner of Islam, undertook the goals of the religion,
sacrificed their lives into its way, and accustomed themselves to face
disasters, difficulties, and hardship to spread the high values and
goals of this religion. Indeed, just how many favors have they bestowed
upon Muslims!

This great imam had intellectual, scientific talents, and abilities that
made him without dispute an intellectual genius among men. He was one of
the heroes of history by his resisting the various challenges and
standing up against the deviate and oppressive Abbasid rule. He rebelled
against the corruptive regimes and spared no effort in achieving truth
and justice among people.

(2)

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was like his fathers in his tendencies and
aims. Indeed, they all were like each other in reaching the highest
ranks of virtue and perfection.

Historians have claimed he was the most knowledgeable one in the
religious verdicts and affairs and that all scholars and *‘Ulama’*
(scholars) of his age were in need of him to ladle from the fount of his
knowledge and sciences.

He was the most devoted, pious worshipper of all people of his time. He
preferred the obedience of Allah to everything. He was the most patient
and forbearing one. He suppressed his anger and pardoned whoever wronged
him. He was the most generous, the kindest to the poor, and the most
charitable to the needy. He appointed agents in many countries of the
Islamic world entrusting them with the distributing of the legal dues,
which came to him, among the poor and the weak of Muslims to get them
out of their poverty and deprivation, whereas he himself lived like the
poor. He paid no attention to the pleasures and desires of this life,
like his fathers who turned their backs to this world and turned
completely towards Allah and the after-world.

(3)

Historians mention that all people glorified and honored Imam al-Askari
(a.s.), and acknowledged his virtue and preference to all of the Alawids
and the Abbasids at his time. When the imam (a.s.) came to the Abbasid
royal palace, every one of the attendants stood up and bowed glorifying
him. Viziers, clerks, army leaders, and all statesmen regarded him so
highly. Al-Fatah bin Khaqan, the prime minister of al-Mutawakkil,
preferred Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) to all eminent scholars and
*‘Ulama’*, and acknowledged that no one had the virtues and qualities
that the imam (a.s.) had at that time.

(4)

It was natural that the nation, with all classes, regarded and glorified
Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) for they saw his guidance, piety,
righteousness, asceticism, loyalty to the truth, and devotedness to
Allah. They were certain that he was the caliph of Allah on Earth, and
the only representative of his grandfather the great Prophet (s.a.w.w.).
In addition to that, Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) undertook the fatal
issues of the Islamic nation, and defended the rights of Muslims. He
criticized the rulers of his time for wronging people and disregarding
their rights. Therefore, the nation glorified him and acknowledged his
necessary leadership.

(5)

The Abbasid kings became displeased when they saw and heard that the
masses glorified Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), and that great numbers
of Muslims believed in his Imamate and thought that he was worthier of
the caliphate than the Abbasids who had no quality that might make them
fit for the Islamic caliphate. Spite against the Imam (a.s.) filled the
hearts of the Abbasid rulers who took severe procedures against him.

They imposed an economic blockade against him, and put him under house
arrest in Samarra’. They surrounded him with policemen and detectives to
watch his every breath. They subjected every one who contacted him to
severe penalties. This was - as I think - the reason for why only a few
narrators narrate traditions from him, and so not many maxims,
literatures, and religious rulings were transmitted from him.

(6)

There was another very sensitive reason that led the Abbasids to watch
Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) strictly. It was that Imam al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) was the father of Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi (a.s.), the
awaited savior and reformer who would fill the world with justice, and
would destroy oppressors and oppression.

The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and his guardians gave good tidings about him,
and told the nation that this savior would spread political and social
justice on Earth, and all Muslims of different traditions believed this.

Therefore, the Abbasids were afraid of this savior, and thought that he
would remove their rule and authority. They released spies on Imam
al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) to know of the birth of this son. They sent
female spies to see which of his wives would give birth to a male baby,
so that he may be taken away. But Allah the Almighty made the pregnancy
and the birth of Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) an unknown matter, just as He had
made the birth of Prophet Moses (a.s.) unknown to the Pharaoh.

(7)

This book studies the age of Imam al-Askari (a.s.) and all its events.
The study of the age is necessary because it sheds lights on the
intellectual, social, economical, political life of that age. Naturally,
it has direct influence on the life of one who lives in that very age.
Besides that, it uncovers the dimensions of his life and personality,
and the extent of the influence of the events of that age on him.

(8)

The book features the economic life of that age which was neither sound
nor stable but confused and paralyzed. The Abbasid governments at the
age of Imam al-Askari (a.s.) did not create ease for people, nor did
their rule result in the creation of the noble life that Islam wanted
for the nation. Excessive wealth was accumulated in the possession of
the members of the Abbasid family, statesmen, and their agents. They
spent lavishly. They appropriated the treasures of the earth while the
majority of the Muslim peoples suffered poverty and deprivation, besides
the pains, sufferings, and subjugation they faced from the government
officials in collecting the land tax and other taxes.

(9)

We have also presented a study on the kings of the age of Imam al-Askari
(a.s.). Most of those kings were insignificant and ineffective. They
submitted to their lusts and desires and were fond of maids and
songstresses. Their red nights were full of sin. They were indifferent
to what Allah had ordered the guardians of Muslims to do in order to
better the general life of the nation, to offer the necessary services
for people, and to find equivalent opportunities for all citizens.

Most of the Abbasid kings did nothing of that sort - rather they
appropriated the wealth of Allah for themselves and took the people of
Allah as their own slaves. They ran the nation violently and
oppressively. They entrusted the Turks, who were harsh, ignorant, and
unaware of administration and politics, with absolute authority over the
nation, and they sank the nation into seditions and disasters.

(10)

Many historical facts and events were mixed together, distorted, or
fabricated because some historians intended to overlook the clear errors
of some kings and rulers. They tried to praise them with noble epithets
and good qualities that they did not possess, whereas, in reality, those
kings and rulers were the worst of tyrants who threw the nation into an
abyss of oppression and corruption, and exploited the economy of the
state for their own pleasures and fancies, and afflicted the public with
poverty and wretchedness.

It is neither fidelity nor truth to regard those tyrants with the eye of
holiness and sacredness and to trust in them as ideal personalities. It
is very necessary to study Islamic history thoughtfully, impartially,
and aloof from any fanaticism. Authors must write just for the truth and
the good of the nation.

(11)

Also, in this book, we have mentioned a group of jurisprudents,
scholars, and narrators who narrated traditions from Imam Abu Muhammad
al-Askari (a.s.) and took from his knowledge and sciences. This is
necessary - as I think - because it completes the research on the noble
personality of the imam (a.s.) for it shows the extent of his
association with the men of knowledge and their association with him at
that critical period where the Abbasid government put the imam under
severe watch, and punished whoever associated with him.

This confinement affected the imam (a.s.) and caused him much pain,
because nothing would be more painful to an intellectual powerhouse than
preventing them from expressing their knowledge and sciences and
transmitting their opinions and ideas to others.

(12)

And here, I find it from gratefulness and loyalty to the great efforts
of the grand scholar my brother, Sheikh Hadi Sharif al-Qurashi, who went
through some reference books concerning the subject of this book, as
well as his useful directions and valuable instructions. I pray for
Allah to reward him with the best of His rewards that He rewards His
loyal people with.

Holy city of Najaf  
 Baqir Sharif al-Qurashi


