The Imam’s Noble Lineage
========================

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) was from the heart of the
prophetic family, by which Allah had honoured the Arabs and Muslims. It
was the holiest family that had undertaken the issues of truth and
justice among all peoples of the earth. There is no lineage in this
world like the noble lineage which Imam al-Askari (a.s.) belonged to.

He was the son of Imam al-Hadi bin Imam Muhammad al-Jawad bin Imam Ali
ar-Redha bin Imam Musa al-Kadhim bin Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq bin Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir bin Imam Ali Zayn-al-Aabidin (as-Sajjad) bin Imam
al-Husayn bin Imam Ali bin Abu Talib (peace be on them). These were the
infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) whom Allah had kept
uncleanness away from and purified a thorough purifying, and whom the
Prophet (a.s.) had made as the boat of rescue and safety for people.

His Father
----------

His father was Imam Ali al-Hadi (a.s.), the tenth imam of the Shi’a
faith. He was from the masters of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and the most
knowledgeable, pious, and virtuous of all people at his time.

His Mother
----------

His mother was the best of women at her time in her chastity, purity,
and piety. Historians say she was from the good knowing women.[^1] Imam
al-Hadi (a.s.) praised her by saying, ‘Saleel (her name) was purified
from error, defect, and impurity.’[^2]

She was a bondmaid[^3] from an-Nawbah.[^4] It did not harm her that she
was a bondmaid, for man in the view of Islam is exalted by his guidance,
piety, and propriety, and he is degraded by deviation from the right
path.

Historians disagreed on her name. Some of them said her name was Saleel,
which is the most valid assertion according to the previous tradition of
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). Some said she was called Sawsan.[^5] Others said
her name was Hadithah,[^6] and others said Hareebah.

The Great Newborn Child
-----------------------

The birth of the newborn boy, Hassan Al-Askari who was the descendant of
prophethood, and the remainder of the Imamate, made the world shine and
Samara bloom. This great newborn was the continuity of the life of his
infallible fathers who lit the intellectual life in the world of Islam.
Delight and joy filled the hearts of the prophetic family for they knew
that he would be the imam after his father, as Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) had
told them.

Some historians said he was born in Medina,[^7] and some others said in
Samarra.[^8] Historians also gave different dates for his birth. It was
said that he was born in Rabee’ al-Awwal[^9] 230AH,[^10] or 231,[^11] or
232,[^12] or 233.[^13]

Ceremonies of Birth
-------------------

After the birth of this blessed son, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) recited the
call to prayer in his right ear, and the Iqamah, the call to start
prayer in his left ear. This was the first hymn that this blessed
newborn boy met life with; “Allah is great, there is no god but Allah”.

On the seventh day after birth, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) cut the hair of his
newborn child, and gave silver or gold as much as the weight of his
son’s hair to the poor as charity.

His Name And Surname
--------------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) named his blessed newborn child “al-Hasan” like the
name of his great uncle, the master of the youth of Paradise. He
surnamed him as Abu Muhammad,[^14] and Muhammad was the name of the
awaited Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.), the great reformer and saviour of
humanity, and the sought-after hope of the deprived and the disabled in
the earth.

His Epithets
------------

His epithets expressed his high and noble qualities. He was called:

1. Al-Khalis (the pure)[^15]

2. Al-Hadi (the guide)[^16]

3. Al-Askari (of the military);[^17] he was called so because the city
(Samarra’) he lived in which was a military camp.

4. Az-Zakiy (pure, chaste, righteous)[^18]

5. Al-Khass (peculiar),[^19] that Allah had distinguished him with
virtues, and with responding to his supplications

6. As-Samit (silent),[^20]: he was silent and he spoke just wisdom,
knowledge, and the mention of Allah

7. As-Sires (lamp),: that he was as a lamp lighting the way and guiding
the deviant to righteousness

8. At-Taqiy (pious)[^21]

His Mien
--------

Ahmad bin Ubaydillah bin Khaqan said about Imam al-Askari (a.s.), ‘He
was brown with big eyes, fine stature, beautiful face, and good body. He
had gravity and solemnity.[^22] And it was said he was between brown and
white.’[^23]

His Upbringing
--------------

Imam Al-Askari (a.s.) grew up in the house of guidance and the center of
Imamate and general authority of Muslims. He was from the noble house
whose people Allah had kept uncleanness away from and purified
thoroughly.

Ash-Shabrawi says regarding this exalted house, ‘What an honourable
house it is and what a glorious lineage it is! It is the house of pride
and exaltation. They are all equal in the noble root, in the good
inners, and in glory like the teeth of a comb.

How exalted a house it is! It has all qualities of perfection to the
extent that it is not excepted by limitations such as “other than” or
“except”. These imams have been ordered in glory like the order of
pearls, and harmonized in honor that the first of them equals the next.
Many were those who strove to degrade this house but Allah exalted and
still exalts it, and many were those who spared no effort to separate
the unity of this house but Allah gathered and gathers it. How many
rights of this house were lost but Allah does not ignore or lose…’[^24]

Scholarly studies note that one’s household has great influence on the
forming of man’s behavior and the building of his personality. The good
or bad scenes he sees inside the house are impressed upon him and adhere
to him throughout his life. In the light of this fact, Imam Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) obtained the best scenes of the purest education. He grew up in a
house that Allah had purified and exalted … the house that raised the
Word of Allah high in the Earth and offered dear sacrifices for the sake
of Islam.

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) grew up in the house of the Qur'an and the
heart of Islam. His father Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) fed him with guidance and
ideals to be the continuity of the mission of Islam.

God-Fearing
-----------

The distinct aspect in the childhood of Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) was the fear of Allah. He was God-fearing since his
early years. Historians mentioned that one day some man passed by Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) and saw him cry while he was with his fellow
children. The man thought that this child cried for the toys in the
children’s hands and that he could not participate in their playing. The
man told the child that he would buy him what he might play with.

The child said,

‘No! We have not been created for play.’

The man was astonished and said, ‘Then, what for we have been created?’

The child said, ‘For knowledge and worship.’

The man asked the child, ‘Where have you got this from?’

The child said, ‘From this saying of Allah *(**What! Did you then think
that We had created you in vain**)*[^25].’

The man was astonished and confused. He said to the child, ‘What has
happened to you while you are still a guiltless little child?’

The child said, ‘Be away from me! I have seen my mother set fire to big
pieces of firewood, but fire is not lit except with small pieces, and I
fear that I shall be from the small pieces of the firewood of the
Hell.’[^26]

Faith in Allah was a part of, and a distinguishing element of Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.). He did not fear but Allah, and this trait remained in
him until the last moment of his life.

With His Father
---------------

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) spent a part of his life with his
father Imam al-Hadi (a.s.). He did not part with him even in his
travels. He saw in his father a true picture of the morals of his
grandfather the messenger of Allah (s.a.w.w.) who had been preferred to
all prophets, and saw in him the spirits of his fathers, the infallible
imams (a.s.).

On the other hand, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) saw in his son the natural
continuity of the great Imamate and general authority of the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.), and therefore he cared much for him. He praised him saying,
“My son Abu Muhammad is the best of the progeny of Muhammad (blessing be
on him and on his progeny) in nature, and the most trustworthy in
authority. He is the eldest of my children, and he is my successor and
the recipient of the handholds of Imamate and its governance.”[^27]

of course, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was far above flattering or submission to
emotions. He did not praise his son and announce his virtue unless he
saw in him all noble aspects and high qualities. And it was so, because
Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) had all these virtues and nobilities.

Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) kept to his father Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)
and saw what he suffered from the Abbasid kings, especially
al-Mutawakkil who spared no effort in oppressing Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).
This tyrant was excessive in harming the Imam. He house-arrested him in
Samarra’ and surrounded his house with policemen and detectives to watch
him, and to prevent the *‘Ulama’*, jurisprudents, and the rest of the
Shi’a from associating with him.

Al-Mutawakkil also oppressed Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in his living affairs,
and ordered his men to search the house of the imam from time to time
and take him to al-Mutawakkil in whatever state he was. It was
al-Mutawakkil himself who had prevented officially the visiting to the
holy shrine of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.), and ordered the shrine to be
destroyed. All those terrible events took place before the eyes of Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) while he was yet in the early years of his youth.
His heart was filled with pains and sorrows during the period he lived
with his father.

The Death of His Brother
------------------------

Muhammad Abu Ja’far, the brother of Imam al-Askari (a.s.), was a
wonderful example of the infallible imams and a true picture of their
thoughts and principles. He was very intelligent, with high morals and
possessed vast knowledge, to the extent that many of the Shi’a thought
that he would be the imam after his father Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).

Al-Aarif al-Kilani said about Abu Ja’far, ‘I accompanied Abu Ja’far
Muhammad bin Ali since he was young. I saw no one purer nor more
honorable than him. Abul Hasan al-Askari (Imam al-Hadi) left him in
Hijaz while he was a child and then he came to him a young. He kept to
his brother Abu Muhammad (a.s.)[^28] who educated him and fed him with
his knowledge, wisdom, and morals.’

Abu Ja’far became seriously ill, maybe because of being poisoned by the
Abbasids. He remained in this state for some days, suffering intolerable
pains while his brother Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.), who loved him much,
was with him all this time. However, after not long, Abu Ja’far departed
to the better world, but Imam Abu Muhammad’s heart was broken and he was
very sorrowful and distressed over the loss of his dear brother.

With His Brother Al-Husayn
--------------------------

Al-Husayn bin Ali al-Hadi (a.s.) was a pure man of great knowledge and
high morals. He was always with his brother Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) and they were called “as-Sibtayn”[^29] like their two
grandfathers Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn (a.s.). They were famous for
this title at that time.

Abu Hashim said, ‘One day, I rode on my sumpter and said: ‘*(**Glory be
to Him Who made this subservient to us and we were not able to do
it**)*.[^30]

One of as-Sibtayn heard me say that and said to me, ‘You have not been
ordered of this, but you have been ordered to remember the blessing of
your Lord on you when you ride on it (on the sumpter).’[^31]

The Loss of His Father
----------------------

Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) suffered the great loss of his father,
and it was the heaviest calamity he had ever faced in his life.

The Abbasid tyrant al-Mu’tamid assassinated Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) by
adding poison to his food,[^32] when he saw all people talk prevalently
about the virtues and vast knowledge and the high position of the imam.
He was very angry and was filled with envy against Imam al-Hadi (a.s.).
Then, he committed this terrible crime against him.

After being poisoned, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) suffered terrible pains and
retired to bed. The Shi’a and high statesmen visited him. Some poets
visited him like Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari who composed a sorrowful poem on
him. Abu Du’amah visited him and when he wanted to leave, the imam said
to him,‘O Abu Du’amah, you have a right on me. Do I tell you a tradition
that shall delight you?’

Abu Du’amah said, ‘I am in utmost need of that O son of the messenger of
Allah.’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘My father Muhammad bin Ali told me from his
father Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far from his father Ja’far bin Muhammad from
his father Muhammad bin Ali from his father Ali bin al-Husayn from his
father al-Husayn bin Ali from his father Ali bin Abu Talib that the
messenger of Allah (a.s.) said to him, ‘Write down!’ Ali said, ‘What
shall I write down?’ The messenger of Allah (a.s.) said, ‘Write down:
“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. Faith is that which
hearts acknowledge and deeds prove, and Islam is that which tongues
witness and marriage becomes lawful with.’

Abu Du’amah said, ‘O son of the messenger of Allah, I do not know which
of them is better; the tradition or the narrators!’

Ali al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘It is a book written down by the hand of Ali
bin Abu Talib and the dictation of the messenger of Allah (a.s.) that we
inherit one from the other.’[^33]

Before his death, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) announced that the imam after him
would be his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). He appointed
him as the general authority for the Shi’a and entrusted him to prepare
his corpse (after death), offer the prayer on him, and bury him. He
entrusted him with other affairs too.

To The Paradise
---------------

The poison reacted inside the body of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and he grew
weaker and weaker. Death approached him hastily, and when he felt his
end, he turned towards the Qiblah and began reciting some Surahs
(chapters) from the Qur'an. His pure soul went high to the heaven
surrounded by angels while his lips and heart were busy mentioning
Allah. The earth shook for the terrible disaster. The leader, the
instructor, and the father of the weak and the deprived died! A bondmaid
went out of the Imam’s house crying out, ‘It was terrible that which we
have met on Monday before and now!’[^34]

The women’s eyes were filled with tears after this alarming cry, and
their memories went back to that Monday where the meeting of
as-Saqifah[^35] was held and since then disasters and misfortunes were
poured over the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) washed the pure corpse of his father, and
enshrouded it. Then he offered the prayer on his father while his heart
was full of sorrow and pain for the great loss.

Samarra’ shook for the terrible affliction, and people of all classes
hurried to escort the pure corpse of their imam. Stores, markets, and
state offices were closed. Viziers, *‘Ulama’*, judges, high officials,
and the rest members of the Abbasid family were before the bier while
mentioning the virtues and high qualities of the imam and talking about
the great loss that afflicted the Muslim nation. Historians said that
Samarra’ had never seen such escorting throughout its history.

Under a halo of the call “Allah is great" and before masses of human
beings who were like waves in the sea, Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was placed by
his son Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari, whose tears were flowing
over his cheeks, into his last abode.

When Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) died, Imam al-Askari (a.s.) was twenty[^36] or
twenty-three years old.36 He assumed the Imamate and the general
religious authority over Muslims while he was yet too young.

All elements of piety and righteousness, all virtues of this world,
manners of prophethood, and qualities of Imamate were gathered in Imam
Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), compared to whom there was none
better in his time. Here we talk in brief about his worship:

His Worship
-----------

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) was the best worshipper among all
people of his time. He spent the night with praying, prostrating, and
reciting the Book (Qur’an). Muhammad ash-Shakiri said, ‘The imam sat in
the mihrab and prostrated. I slept and awoke while he was still in
prostration.’[^37]

His Prayer
----------

In his prayer, he turned with all his heart and feelings towards Allah,
the Creator of the universe and the Giver of life. He felt or paid
attention to nothing of the affairs of this life while he was in prayer.
His soul clung to Allah devotedly and totally.

His Qunut
---------

In his prayer during the Qunut[^38], Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) recited
this du’a:

“O You, Whose light covers darkness, O You, by Whose holiness rugged
mountain passes are lit, O You, to Whom all the inhabitants of the earth
and the heavens submit, O You, to Whom every insolent tyrant surrenders
with obedience, O You the Aware of hidden consciences, You are Merciful
to everything and Aware of everything, forgive those who repent and
follow Your path, protect them from the torment of Fire, give them soon
Your victory that You have promised them of and You do not fail the
promise! Devastate the people of evil and take them to the worst abode
in the worst punishment and the ugliest retreat.

O Allah, You know the secrets of creatures, and are aware of their
consciences. You are in need of nothing except that You carry out what
You have promised of. You do not uncover the hidden secrets of Your
people. O my Lord, You know what I conceal and what I show of my
behaviors, movements, and all my emotions. O my Lord, You see the
sufferings of the people of Your obedience and what they meet from Your
enemies, and You are generous and not stingy in Your blessings, and the
more efforts require more reward. You have ordered Your people of
supplication if they turn to You sincerely and this requires the more of
Your favors.

These forelocks and necks are submissive to You subserviently
acknowledging Your deity, invoking on You with their hearts, and looking
forward to Your prompt rewarding, and what You willed took place and
what You will shall take place. You are the called upon, the hoped for,
and the asked that no taker whatever great he is shall decrease You
(i.e., Your favors), and no seeker whatever he insists and invokes shall
weary You. Your kingdom shall not come to an end, and Your eternal glory
shall remain forever, and nothing in the ages is out of Your will a bit.
You are Allah, there is no god but You, the Merciful, the Mighty. O
Allah, assist us by Your assistance, suffice us with Your protection,
and give us what You give those who hold fast by Your rope, who shade
themselves under Your shade…’[^39]

His Du’a in the Morning
-----------------------

“O You, Who are greater than every great thing, Who have no partner and
no vizier; O You, the Creator of the sun and the lighting moon, the
shelter to the resorting fearful, the Liberator of tied captives, the
nourisher of young babies, the setter of broken bones, the Merciful to
the old, the light of light, the Manager of affairs, the Resurrector of
those in graves, the Healer of chests, the Maker of shadow and heat, the
One Aware of what is in chests, the Revealer of the Book, the light, the
great Qur'an, and the Book of Psalms.

O You, Whom angels glorify in the morning and night; O You, the
Permanent and Eternal, the Bringer forth of plants in the early morning
and afternoon, the Enlivener of the dead, the Resurrector of decayed
bones, the Hearer of sounds, the Everlasting, the Dresser of bones that
decay after death!

O You, Whom nothing distracts from any other thing, Who do not change
from a state to another, Who do not need to move or advance, Whom no
affair prevents from any other affair, Who cancels for charity and
supplication what has been determined and affirmed in the Heaven of bad
judgement, Whom no place can include or encompass, Who puts remedy in
what You like of things, Who keeps alive from serious disease with the
least of nourishment, Who removes by the least of remedy the worst of
diseases.

O You, Who, if promises, fulfils, if threatens, pardons; O You, Who
possesses the needs of requesters, Who knows what is there inside the
consciences of the silent; O You, the Most Magnificent, the Generous in
pardoning.

O You, Who have a face that never becomes old, Who have complete
sovereignty, Who have the inextinguishable light, Whose throne is over
everything, Whose authority is over the land and the sea, Whose wrath is
in Hell, Whose mercy is in Paradise, Whose promises are true, Whose
favors are uncountable, Whose mercy is wide.

O You, the Helper of the callers for help, the Responder to the call of
the compelled, O You, Who are in high esteem while Your creation is of
low esteem, O You, the Lord of the mortal souls, the Lord of the worn
bodies, the most perceptive of seers, the most hearing of hearers, the
most prompt of accounters, the wisest of judges, the Most Merciful of
the merciful, the Giver of gifts, the Releaser of captives, the Lord of
glory, the One of piety and forgiveness.

O You, Whose limit cannot be perceived, Whose number cannot be counted,
Whose aid does not cease, I bear witness, and the witness to me is honor
and supply, and from me obedience and submission, and by which I hope
deliverance on the day of sighing and regret, that You are Allah; there
is no god but You alone with no partner, and that Muhammad is Your slave
and messenger, Your blessing be on him and on his progeny, and that he
has informed and carried out on behalf of You what was his duty to You,
and that You always create, provide with livelihood, give, deny, exalt,
humble, enrich, impoverish, disappoint, help, pardon, show mercy,
forgive, overlook what You know, do not wrong, straiten, enlarge, omit,
fix, initiate, reproduce, enliven and deaden; have mercy on Muhammad and
the progeny of Muhammad and guide me from You, give me from Your favor,
spread on me from Your mercy, and send down to me from Your blessings,
for You often have accustomed me to good and favor, given me too much,
and uncovered my ugly deeds.

O Allah, send blessings on Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and
hasten my deliverance, forgive my slips, pity my loneliness, take me to
the best of Your worships, gift me with health from my illness, plenty
of my supplies, inclusive soundness in my body, insight in my religion,
and help me to ask you for forgiveness before death comes and hope ends,
and help me bear death and its distress, the grave and its loneliness,
the scales and their lightness, the sirat[^40] and its slip, the Day of
Resurrection and its terror.

I ask You for the acceptance of deeds before death, and ask You for
strength in my hearing and sight for the doing of the best of that You
have taught and made me understand. You are the lofty Lord, and I am the
humble slave, and how great the difference between us! O You,
Compassionate, Benefactor, of Glory and Honor, have blessings on
Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad the good, the pure!”[^41]

His Ideals
----------

He was ideal in faith, morals, and psychology. He inherited all the
perfections of his fathers who had been created for virtue and honor. We
refer here to some of his perfections:

His Knowledge
-------------

Historians unanimously mentioned that Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.)
was the most knowledgeable and the best of the people of his age, not
only in religious affairs and laws, but in all fields of knowledge.
Bakhtshou’ the Christian physician said to his disciple Batriq about the
imam, ‘…and he is the most knowledgeable of all those under the sky in
our day.’[^42]

If the Abbasid tyrants had given way to the imams of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) and not subjected them to strict chase and confinement, they
would have filled the world with their knowledge and sciences, and
humanity would have received kinds of knowledge and intellectual
development that it had never obtained throughout all ages and times.

The Abbasids perceived that if they did not prevent the people of
knowledge and intellect from associating with the infallible imams, they
(the imams) would spread powers of knowledge and culture and open new
horizons not only in the fields of sciences but also in the political
and social fields which would show to people the ignorance of the
Abbasids, and their being distant from Islamic values. of course, this
would shake their thrones, and therefore they tried their best to
separate the nation from its real leaders.

His Patience
------------

Imam al-Askari (a.s.) was from the most patient people. He always
suppressed his anger and treated whoever wronged him with kindness and
forgiveness.

The Abbasid government arrested and put him into prison while he was
patient, saying nothing. He did not complain to anyone about what he
suffered, but he entrusted his case to Allah the Almighty. This was from
the signs of his patience.

His Strong Will
---------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was distinguished by his strong will. The
Abbasid rulers tried to involve him into the government body and spared
no effort to subject him to their desires, but they failed. The imam
(a.s.) insisted on his independence and keeping away from them. The
Abbasids considered him as the only representative of the opposition
against their policies that were based on subjugation and oppression.

He resisted all the seductions that the Abbasid government offered to
bring him into its way. He preferred the obedience of Allah and the
satisfaction of his conscience to everything else.

His Generosity
--------------

No one was more generous than him among all people of his time. He
appointed agents in most of the Muslim countries, and entrusted them to
receive the legal dues and spend them on the poor and the deprived, to
reconcile between people, and in other ways of the general welfare.

From that which historians mentioned about his generosity was that
Muhammad bin Ali bin Ibrahim bin Imam Musa bin Ja’far al-Kadhim (a.s.)
said, “We were in utmost need. My father said, ‘Let us go to this man
(Imam Abu Muhammad). It is said he is generous.’

I said, ‘Do you know him?’

He said, ‘No, and I have never seen him at all.’

We went to him. On our way, my father said, ‘How much we need! May he
order to give us five hundred dirhams; two hundred for clothes, two
hundred for flour, and one hundred for spending!’

I said to myself, ‘Would that he order to give me three hundred dirhams;
one hundred to buy a donkey, one hundred for spending, and one hundred
for clothes so that I can go to the mountain!’

When we stopped at his (Imam Abu Muhammad’s) door, his servant came out
and said, ‘Let Ali bin Ibrahim and his son Muhammad come in.’

When we came in and greeted him, he said to my father, ‘O Ali, what made
you not visit us all this time?’

My father said, ‘I felt shy to meet you in this case.’

They (Ali and his son) stayed with the imam for some time and then came
out. The servant of the imam came, gave Ali bin Ibrahim a pouch of money
and said, ‘These are five hundred dirhams; two hundred for clothes, two
hundred for flour, and one hundred for spending.’ He gave Muhammad a
pouch of three hundred dirhams and said to him, ‘Spend one hundred for
buying a donkey, one hundred for clothes, and one hundred for spending,
and do not go to the mountain but go to Sawra!’ Muhammad went to Sawra
and became one of the wealthy Alawids.[^43]

Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari said, ‘Once, I complained to Abu Muhammad the
distress of imprisonment and the pains of ties. He wrote to me, ‘You
shall offer the Dhuhr (noon) Prayer in your house today.’ I was set free
(from prison) at noon and I offered the prayer in my house as the imam
said. I was in need and I wanted to ask him for help (but I did not) in
the letter I had sent to him. When I arrived in my house, he sent one
hundred dinars to me and wrote to me, ‘If you need something, do not
feel shy or refrain from asking. Ask and you shall get what you like,
insha’Allah (God willing).’[^44]

Historians mention many stories of his generosity that show his love and
kindness to the poor and the deprived.

High Morals
-----------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was nonesuch in his very high morals. He met
friends and enemies with his noble character. He inherited this nature
from his great grandfather the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) whose high morals
included all people equally.

His high morals affected his enemies and opponents, and they turned to
be his loyal lovers. Historians say that he was imprisoned during the
reign of al-Mutawakkil who was the bitterest enemy to the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) and the progeny of Imam Ali (a.s.). The caliph ordered the imam
to be punished very severely, but when he communicated with the imam and
observed his high morality and piety, he was confounded. After that, he
did not raise his eyes before the imam as a kind of respect and
glorification. When the imam left him, he praised the imam with the best
words.[^45]

Infallibility
-------------

The Twelver Shi’a consider infallibility as an attribute of their imams.
They mean by infallibility that it is impossible for an imam to make a
mistake, whether intentionally or unintentionally. Because of this, the
opponents of the Shi’a waged violent attacks against them by claiming
that there was no difference between the imams and the rest of people in
committing sins and disobediences. However, this claim does not hold any
The serious studies of the lives of the imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
demonstrate that they were infallible, and none of them had ever erred
or committed a mistake since birth until their last breath. Imam Ali
(a.s.) said, ‘By Allah, if I am given the seven districts with all that
under their skies to disobey Allah to the extent of the husk of a grain
of barley, that I deprive it of a mouth of a locust, I will never do
it.’ Is this not infallibility?!

The truth in its brightest pictures and aspects appeared in the lives of
the imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Whoever reads their biographies can
neither find a slip in their doings nor in their sayings, but he only
finds true faith, piety, and high morality. And we do not mean by
infallibility except these meanings.

[^1]: Uyun al-Mu’jizat.

[^2]: A’yan ash-Shi’a, vol.3 p.289.

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi.

[^4]: Sirr as-Silsilah ath-Thahabiyyah, p.39. An-Nawbah is a wide area
in the south of Egypt. The Prophet (a.s.) praised the people of
an-Nawbah by saying, ‘Whoever has no brother, let him take a brother
from an-Nawbah.’

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.50 p.37.

[^6]: Al-Irshad, p.315.

[^7]: Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.117, Bahr al-Ansab, p.2, Tuhfat al-Imam, p.86,
Ilal ash-Sharayi’.

[^8]: Jawahir al-Ahkam.

[^9]: The third month in the Islamic calendar.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.50 p.35, Tareekh Abul Fida’, vol.2 p.48, Ilal
ash-Sharayi’.

[^11]: An-Nujoom az-Zahirah, vol.3 p.32, Sirr as-Silsilah al-Alawiyyah,
p.39.

[^12]: Bahr al-Ansab, p.2, Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.117, al-Ittihaf Bihubil
Ashraf, p.86, al-Kamil, vol.5 p.373.

[^13]: Encyclopedia of al-Bustani, vol.7 p.45.

[^14]: Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.117, Bahr al-Ansab, p.2, Tuhfat al-Anam, p.86,
an-Nujoom az-Zahirah, vol.3 p.32.

[^15]: Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.117, Bahr al-Ansab, p.2.

[^16]: Bahr al-Ansab, p.2.

[^17]: Ibid.

[^18]: Tuhfat al-Anam, p.87, Bihar al-Anwar, vol.50 p.236.

[^19]: Tuhfat al-Anam, p.87.

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Safinat al-Bihar, vol.1 p.259.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.50 p.326.

[^23]: Ibid., p.238, Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.117.

[^24]: Al-Ittihaf Bihubil Ashraf, p.68.

[^25]: Qur'an, 23:115.

[^26]: Jawharat al-Kalam, p.155, the Encyclopedia of al-Bustani, vol.7
p.45.

[^27]: A’yan ash-Shi’a, vol.3 p.295.

[^28]: Al-Mujdi fin-Nasab (manuscript).

[^29]: The two grandsons.

[^30]: Qur'an, 43:13.

[^31]: Safeenat al-Bihar, vol.1 p.259.

[^32]: Al-Manaqib, vol.4 p.401.

[^33]: Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.171.

[^34]: Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.171.

[^35]: It was the day of the prolonged and acerbic negotiations which
preceded the nomination of Abu Bakr as the successor of the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) who died just then and was not buried yet at the time of that
meeting.

[^36]: Bahr al-Ansab, p.2.

[^37]: Dala’il al-Imama, p.227.

[^38]: Qunut is a supplication recited in prayers.

[^39]: Muhaj ad-Da’awat, p.62-63.

[^40]: Sirat means “way” or “path” but in the Islamic terminology, it
means the bridge that dominates the Hell.

[^41]: Muhaj ad-Da’awat, p.277-278.

[^42]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.50 p.261.

[^43]: Kashf al-Ghummah, vol.3 p.200.

[^44]: Kashf al-Ghummah, vol.3, 202.

[^45]: Kashf al-Ghummah, vol.3 p.204.


