Impressions About Him
=====================

The scholars and men of intellect, who were contemporary with Imam
al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), glorified him, and acknowledged his virtue
and preference to all others for his talents, geniuses, vast knowledge,
and piety. Here we quote some words said by some of those men about him:

1. Imam Al-Hadi
---------------

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) praised the high position of his son Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) by saying, ‘My son Abu Muhammad is the best of the progeny of
Muhammad in nature, and the most trustworthy in authority. He is the
eldest of my children, and he is my successor and the recipient of the
handholds of imamate and its governance …’[^1]

2. Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari
------------------------

Abu Hashim associated closely with Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and Imam al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.). He loved them excessively and composed many poems in
their praise. He said in one of his poems:

“He (Allah) gave him all signs of imamate,

like Moses, and the cleaving of the sea, the hand, and the staff.”[^2]

3. Bakhtshu’ the physician
--------------------------

He was the most famous physician at the age of Imam al-Askari (a.s.) and
he was the special physician of the royal family. One day, the imam
needed a physician to phlebotomize him, and so he asked Bakhtshu’ to
send him one of his disciples. Bakhtshu’ sent for his disciple Batriq
and ordered him to go to treat the imam. He said to him, ‘The son of
ar-Ridha asked me to send him someone to phlebotomize him. You go to
him. He is more knowledgeable than every one under the sky. Beware not
to object to him in all what he orders you of…’[^3]

4. Ahmad bin Ubaydillah Bin Khaqan
----------------------------------

One of the famous statesmen and politicians at the time of Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.) said about the imam,

‘I have neither seen nor known in Surra Man Ra’a a man from the Alawids
like al-Hasan bin Ali bin Muhammad bin ar-Redha, nor have I heard the
like of his guidance, faith, chastity, nobility, and generosity near his
family and near the rulers, among all the Hashimites who preferred him
to their important and old men, and also near the leaders, viziers,
clerks, and all classes of people…’[^4]

5. Ubayd bin Khaqan
-------------------

He was one of the important politicians at that time. He said about Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.),

‘If the caliphate is removed from the Abbasids, no one from the
Hashimites will deserve it except this man (he meant al-Hasan bin Ali
al-Askari). He deserves it by his virtue, chastity, guidance, gravity,
asceticism, worshipping, good morals, and righteousness…’[^5]

Ubayd did not believe in imamate. In fact, he was contrary to that, but
the bright reality of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) made him declare that the
imam was the worthiest of the caliphate for the high qualities he had.

6. Sheikh al-Mufid
------------------

Sheikh al-Mufid said, ‘The imam after Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad
(al-Hadi) was his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali for he had all high
qualities and virtues and he was preferred to all people of his age. He
deserved imamate and leadership for his incomparable knowledge,
asceticism, perfect mind, infallibility, courage, generosity, and the
many good deeds that took him close to Allah…’[^6]

7. Ibn as-Sabbagh
-----------------

Ali bin Muhammad al-Maliki known as ibn as-Sabbagh said, ‘The qualities
of our sire Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari show that he is a master,
and a son of a master, that no one ever doubts or suspect his imamate.
Know that if a good quality was sold, the seller was other than him and
he was the buyer…. He was unique in his time with no equal, and he was
the one with no like. He was the master of the people of his time and
the imam of the people of his age. His sayings were true and his deeds
were praiseworthy. If the good people of his time were as a poem, he
would be the main verse of that poem, and if they were organized as a
necklace, he was the unique, middle pearl. He was the knight of
knowledge with whom it was not possible to keep pace with, and he was
the explainer of mysteries with whom it was not possible to argue. He
was the revealer of facts by his true thinking, and the discloser of
minutes by his sharp reason. He was the informed one in secrecy of the
unseen. He was the high-born, of high soul and high essence…’[^7]

8. Bin Shaharshub as-Sarawi
---------------------------

Abu Ja’far Rasheedudeen Muhammad bin Ali bin Shahrashub as-Sarawi said
about the imam, ‘He was al-Hasan bin Ali the guide, the subjugator of
difficulties…. He was pure, free from any fault, trustee of the unseen.
He was the essence of gravity with no blemish, humble, with a liberal
hand, modest, true to his word … of little food, of much smiling,
patient, the father of the (awaited) successor…’[^8]

9. Ibn Shadqam
--------------

Ibn Shadqam, the genealogist, said, ‘Al-Hasan al-Askari was a guiding
imam, exalted master, and a pure guardian.’[^9]

10. Ibn al-Jawzi
----------------

Ibn al-Jawzi said, ‘The highest feature and characteristic that Allah
had distinguished him (Imam al-Askari) with, and made unique to him, and
as eternal aspect that time would not wear out and tongues would not
forget reciting and repeating was that Muhammad al-Mahdi (peace be on
him) was his offspring that was created from him, and his son that was
ascribed to him…’[^10]

11. Ruknuddeen al-Husayni
-------------------------

Ruknuddeen al-Husayni al-Musili said, ‘Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari…his
virtues, qualities, and charismata were uncountable…the highest quality
that Allah had distinguished him with was that al-Mahdi (peace be upon
him) was his son…’[^11]

12. Al-Yafi’iy
--------------

Al-Yafi’iy said, ‘Sharif al-Askari Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali bin
Muhammad bin Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far as-Sadiq was one of the twelve
imams as the Shi’a believed and he was the father of the awaited imam
(peace be on him)…’[^12]

13. Yusuf an-Nabahani
---------------------

Yusuf bin Isma’yl an-Nabahani said, ‘Al-Hasan al-Askari was one of the
imams of our masters, the great Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), and one of their
noble chiefs (may Allah be pleased with them). Ash-Shabrawi mentioned
him in his book “al-Ittihaf Bihubil Ashraf” but he abbreviated his
biography and mentioned no charm of his.

However, I myself witnessed a charm to him. In the year 1296 AH I
traveled to Baghdad from Kooy Sanjaq, one of the Kurd villages, where I
was a judge, but I left it before I completed the specified period
because of the high costs and drought which prevailed in Iraq that year.
I travelled by a kalak, which was a means of water transportation.

When the kalak reached Samarra’, which was the capital of the Abbasid
caliphs, we liked to visit (the shrine of) Imam al-Hasan al-Askari. When
I came to his holy tomb, something spiritual happened to me that nothing
like it had ever happened to me…it was his charm. Then I recited, as
many as I possibly could, verses from the Qur'an, supplicated Allah with
some du’as, and left.’[^13]

14. Al-Arbali
-------------

Allama Ali bin Eesa al-Arbali said about the imam, ‘He was the knight of
knowledge that was not possible to keep pace with him, and he was the
explainer of mysteries that it was not possible to argue with him. He
uncovered the facts by his true viewing, the discloser of minutes by his
piercing insight, the knower - by the will of Allah - of the secrets of
creatures, the informer - by the will of Allah - about the unseen, the
informed - by Allah - about what had happened and what would happen, the
inspired with the unseen matters, the noble in origin and soul and
essence, the man of proofs, signs, and miracles …

The interpreter of verses, the confirmer of traditions, the heir of the
good masters, the son of the imams, and the father of the awaited one.
So look at the branch and the origin and think again and be sure that
they were more brilliant than the sun, and brighter than the moon. If
branches are good, surely the fruit will be good. Their (the imams’)
features and traditions are the eyes of history, and the headlines of
conducts.

By Allah, I swear that whoever deems Muhammad as grandfather, Ali as
father, Fatima as mother, the imams as fathers, and al-Mahdi as son is
worthier of reaching the heaven with his highness and honor…. How can I
count his virtues and news whereas my tongue is short and my eloquence
is tired? So my tongue and eloquence come back tired from his high rank,
and dwindle because of failure and inability…’[^14]

15. Al-Bustani
--------------

Al-Bustani said, ‘Al-Hasan al-Khalis bin Ali al-Hadi… they mentioned
about him many characteristics that were well-known in the people of
this house of the Talibites[^15]… perception and wisdom appeared in him
since his early childhood…’[^16]

16. Khayruddeen az-Zarkali
--------------------------

He said, ‘Al-Hasan bin Ali al-Hadi bin Muhammad al-Jawad al-Hashimi: Abu
Muhammad the eleventh imam to the Twelver Shi’a… he was paid homage as
the imam after the death of his father. He was like his good ancestors
in piety, asceticism, worshipping…’[^17]

17. Al-Abbas bin Nooruddeen
---------------------------

Al-Abbas bin Nooruddeen al-Mekki said, ‘Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
al-Askari… his lineage is more renowned than the moon in its fourteenth
night. He and his father are known as al-Askari. As for his virtues,
tongues cannot count…’[^18]

[^1]: A’yan ash-Shi’a.

[^2]: A’lam al-Wara, p.372.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.50 p.261.

[^4]: Ibid., p.325.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.50, p.327.

[^6]: Al-Irshad.

[^7]: Al-Fusool al-Muhimmah, p.272.

[^8]: Manaqib Aal Abi Talib, vol.4 p.421.

[^9]: Zahrat al-Maqul…, p.63.

[^10]: Tathkirat al-Khawas.

[^11]: Bahr al-Ansab, p.17.

[^12]: Mir’at al-Janan, vol.2 p.172.

[^13]: Jami’ Karamat al-Awliya’, vol.1 p.389.

[^14]: Kashf al-Ghummah, vol.3 p.223-224.

[^15]: Derived from Abu Talib the father of Imam Ali.

[^16]: Encyclopedia of al-Bustani, vol.7 p.45.

[^17]: Al-A’lam, vol.2 p.215.

[^18]: Nuzhat al-Jalees, vol.2 p.184.


