His Letters
===========

Some letters of the imam disclose an important side of the religious
life which was confused at that age. The following are some of his
letters to his adherents:

1. To Isaaq An-Naysaburi
------------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent a letter to Isaaq bin Isma’yl an-Naysaburi
saying in it,

“May Allah protect us by His protection, and take care of you in all
your affairs by His favor. I understood your letter, may Allah have
mercy on you. We, praise be to Allah and by His blessing, are people of
a house who pity our followers and feel delighted for the succession of
the favors of Allah on them, and feel happy for every blessing that
Allah the Almighty endows them with. O Isaaq, may Allah endow you with
all blessings, and endows the same on whoever is like you whom Allah has
had mercy on and given insight like yours…. And may He determine
Paradise for you….

And I say: Praise be to Allah as the best praise He has ever been
praised with, and forever, for His mercy on you, His saving you from
perishment, and smoothing your way from the obstacle. By Allah, it is an
insurmountable, impassable, difficult obstacle with great distresses
that had been mentioned in the first Books. At the time of the deceased
(Imam al-Hadi), peace be on him, and at my time you had done some things
that neither I was satisfied with you nor were you right in them.

O Isaaq, know well that whoever comes out of this world blind will be
blind in the After-world and more astray. O Isaaq, it is not the eyes
that become blind but the hearts that are in the chests. Allah says
about the unjust, *(He shall say: My Lord! why hast Thou raised me blind
and I was a seeing one indeed? He will say: Even so, Our revelations
came to you but you neglected them; and thus you shall be forsaken this
day)*.[^1] Is there a sign greater than the excuse of Allah on His
creation, His trustee in His earth, and His witness on His people .…
after those who had abandoned his first fathers the prophets and his
last fathers the guardians (peace and blessings of Allah be on them
all). So where do you go astray and where do you go like beasts? You
deviate from the truth and believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the
blessings of Allah. Are you from those who believe in a part of the Book
and disbelieve in the other? So what is the reward of him who does that,
either you or other than you?

It is but meanness in this life and eternal torment in the Afterlife. By
Allah, it is the great disgrace! When Allah imposed on you, by His favor
and mercy, the obligations, He did not impose them on you because He was
in need of you, but out of His mercy on You - there is no god but Him -
to distinguish the good from the bad, and to try what there was in your
chests, and test what there was in your hearts so that you would compete
for the mercy of Allah and that your positions in His paradise would be
one better than another. He imposed on you Hajj, Umrah (minor hajj),
prayer, zakat, fasting, and the following of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). He
made to you a door by which you open the doors of the other obligations
and as a key to His way. Except for Muhammad (blessings of Allah be on
him), and the guardians from his progeny, you would be confused like
beast knowing nothing of the obligations. Is a town entered except from
its gate?

When Allah favored you by appointing the guardians after your prophet,
He said, *(This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed
My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion)*.[^2] He imposed
on you rights for His guardians and ordered you to carry them out so
that your wives, properties, foods, and drinks would be lawful to you.
Allah said, *(Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my
near relatives)*,[^3] and know well that *(whoever is niggardly, is
niggardly against his own self; and Allah is Self-sufficient and you are
the needy)*.[^4] There is no god but Allah, and my speech has become too
long on what was for you, and what was required from you.

Except for that Allah wanted to complete his favor on you, you would
neither see a line from me nor would you hear a word after the leaving
of the deceased (Imam al-Hadi), peace be upon him, while you are in
inadvertence to your end, and after my appointing Ibrahim bin Abdah to
you, and after my book that Muhammad bin Musa an-Naysaburi had brought
to you, and Allah is He whose help is sought in any case. Beware of
being unmindful towards Allah so that you shall be from the losers! Away
with him he who turns his back to the obedience of Allah and does not
accept the advice of His guardians! Allah has ordered you to obey Him,
to obey His messenger, and to obey those in authority among you. May
Allah have mercy your weakness and inadvertence, and make you patient
with your affair. What has beguiled man from his Lord?! If mountains
understood some of that which was in this book, they would crack and
split because of the fear of Allah, and turn back to the obedience of
Allah. Do whatever you like *(so Allah will see your work and (so will)
His Messenger and the believers; and you shall be brought back to the
Knower of the unseen and the seen, then He will inform you of what you
did)*.[^5] Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and His blessings
be on Muhammad and all his progeny.”[^6]

2. His letter to the people of Qum and Abeh
-------------------------------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent a letter, some parts of which were lost,
to his Shi’a from the people of Qum and Abeh (Aveh) saying to them,

“Allah the Almighty with His generosity and kindness has favored His
people with His prophet Muhammad (a.s.) as a bearer of good tidings and
a warner, and has made you succeed in accepting His religion, granted
you with His guidance, and planted into the hearts of your past
ancestors (may He have mercy on them) and your living offspring (may He
suffice and make them live long) the love of the pure progeny (of the
Prophet). They, who had left, left on the way of righteousness, and the
path of truth and success, and they went to the place of successors, got
the fruits of what they had sowed, and found the result of what they had
done previously.…

Our intention is still firm, and our selves are satisfied with your good
thoughts. The fixed relation between us and you is firm. It is a will
that our ancestors and your ancestors had recommended, and a covenant
that had been entrusted to our youth and your old men. They are still on
their faith, and Allah has gathered us in close relationship, and close
kinship. The Alim (peace of Allah be on him) said, ‘A faithful is a
brother of a faithful from his father and mother…”[^7]

3. His letter to Ali bin al-Husayn bin Musa bin Babwayh al-Qummi
----------------------------------------------------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent a letter to the famous jurisprudent Abul
Hasan Ali bin al-Husayn bin Musa bin Babwayh al-Qummi, the distinct
among the Shi’a, and the prominent personality in Hadith, jurisprudence,
and the rest of the Islamic sciences. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said in
his letter,

“Praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds, and the end is for the
righteous, the Paradise is for the monotheists, the Hell is for the
atheists, and there should be no hostility except against oppressors,
and there is no god but Allah the best of creators, and blessing be on
the best of His creation Muhammad and his pure progeny.

O my sheikh, trustee, jurisprudent Abul Hasan Ali bin al-Husayn
al-Qummi, may Allah be satisfied with you, and make from your progeny
good children. I recommend you to fear Allah, offer prayers, and give
zakat because no prayer is accepted from one who does not give zakat. I
also recommend you to pardon others, suppress anger, continuously
associate with kin, comfort brothers and try to carry out their needs at
difficulty and ease, be patient, learn religion, be certain of things,
undertake the (recitation of) Qur'an, behave with good morals, enjoin
the good, and to forbid the wrong. Allah says, *(There is no good in
most of their secret counsels except (in his) who enjoins charity or
goodness or reconciliation between people)*.[^8] I recommend you to
avoid all sins and vices.

You are to keep on offering Night Prayer, for the Prophet (a.s.) had
recommended Ali saying to him, ‘O Ali, you are to keep on the Night
Prayer.’ He repeated that three times. Whoever disregards the Night
Prayer is not from us. Act according to my recommendation and order my
Shi’a to act according to that. Wait for deliverance, for the Prophet
(a.s.) said, ‘The best deed of my nation is the waiting for
deliverance.’ Our Shi’a shall be still in sorrow until my son, whom the
Prophet (a.s.) brought good news about, shall appear. He will fill the
earth with justice and fairness after it has been filled with injustice
and oppression. O my sheikh, be patient and order all my Shi’a to be
patient; *(Surely the earth is Allah's. He gives it as inheritance to
whom He will and the end is (best) for the righteous)*.[^9] Peace,
mercy, and blessings of Allah be on you and on all our Shi’a, and Allah
is sufficient for us; the best Protector is He, the best Patron, and the
best Helper.”[^10]

4. His letter to one of his followers
-------------------------------------

One of the Shi’a wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) telling him about the
disagreement between the Shi’a. The imam replied to him in this letter,

“Allah has addressed reasonable people… concerning me, people are in
different classes; a discerning one is on the way of deliverance,
keeping to the truth, clinging to the branch of the origin without being
doubtful or suspicious, and finding no resort other than me. There is
another class of people who do not take the truth from its owners; they
are like a traveler in the sea. They are in turmoil whenever the sea
waves are in turmoil, and are calm whenever the sea calms. Another class
of people are those who have been overcome by Satan. They just resist
the people of truth, and fight truth by falsehood out of envy. So let
alone whoever goes right or left, because when a shepherd wants to
gather his sheep, he gathers them with the least effort. Beware of
showing off and panting after authority because they lead to
perishment…’[^11]

5. His Letter to Another one of his Followers
---------------------------------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent a letter to one of his followers
expressing his grief for some rabble of the Shi’a who had deviated from
the right path. He said,

“No one of my fathers had been afflicted like what I have been afflicted
with the suspicions of this group… if this matter (imamate) was a matter
that you had believed in and kept on it until a certain time and then
stopped, then suspicion would be warranted, but if it (imamate) is
continuous as long as the affairs of Allah are continuous, then what is
the meaning of this suspicion?...’[^12]

6. His letter to Abdullah al-Bayhaqi
------------------------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) sent the following letter to Abdullah bin
Hamdwayh al-Bayhaqi:

“I have sent Ibrahim bin Abdah so that the (other) districts and the
people of your district pay my dues on you to him, and I made him my
trust and agent before my followers there. Let them fear Allah and pay
the dues and they have no excuse in not doing that or delaying it. May
Allah not distress them for disobeying His guardians and may He have
mercy on them and on you through my mercifulness to them, and Allah is
Ample-giving, Generous.”[^13]

7. His letter about Ibrahim bin Abdah
-------------------------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.) had appointed Ibrahim bin Abdah as
his agent to receive the legal dues and to spend them on religion and on
the needy, and given him a letter mentioning in it his reliability and
high position. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was asked whether this letter
was written by him or not, and he replied,

“My letter that came to Ibrahim bin Abdah on appointing him as my agent
to receive my rights from our followers there… yes, it was my letter
written by my hand to him. I have appointed him to them in their
country. It is true and not false. Let him fear Allah as He should be
feared, and let them take out my rights and give them to him, for I have
permitted him to do with them as required. May Allah give him success
and save him from failure.”[^14]

8. His Letter to his Followers
------------------------------

He sent this letter to some of his followers:

“May Allah gift you with asceticism in this life and success as He
pleases, assistance for His obedience, protection from disobedience,
guidance from deviation, and may He gather for us and for our followers
the good of the two abodes (this life and the afterlife).

I was informed of the disagreement of your hearts, and the divergence of
your desires, and the incitement of Satan until he caused separation
among you, disbelief in religion, attempting to destroy what your
ancestors had built in the religion of Allah and proved the rights of
His guardians. He (Satan) took you to the way of deviation, and away
from the path of the truth, and so many of you receded as if you had not
read the Book of Allah and not understood any of His commands and
prohibitions.

I swear that if your fools rely on their delusions and fabricate false
traditions, they shall deserve torment, and if you are satisfied with
that from them and do not deny it by your hands, tongues, hearts, and
intentions, you shall be participants with them in what they have
fabricated against Allah, His messenger, and the guardians after him. If
it was not so, the people of az-Zabad would not lie in their claim, nor
al-Mughirah in their disagreement, nor al-Kaysaniyyah on their man, nor
other liars and the deviants who have turned away from us. Indeed, you
are worse than them… and most of them were obliged to submit to the
command of Allah, except some groups that if I want, I shall mention by
their names…. Satan has overcome them and made them forget the
remembrance of Allah, and whoever forgets the remembrance of Allah,
Allah will throw him into Fire, and it shall be an evil abode.

This letter of mine is an authority on them, and an authority for your
absentees on those of you present, except one who is informed and
carries out his duty. I pray to Allah that He gathers your hearts on
guidance, protect you by piety, and make you do what pleases Him, and
peace, blessing, and mercy of Allah be on you.’[^15]

9. His Letter to one of his Adherents
-------------------------------------

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said in this letter to one of his followers:

“Every predestined thing would come true. Rely on Allah the Almighty and
He will suffice you, and trust in Him and He will not disappoint you.
You have complained against your brother. Know well that Allah does not
help in the disrupting of relations, and Allah is above any oppression
of every oppressor. Whoever is oppressed surely Allah will help him, and
Allah is Strong, Mighty. You have asked me to pray for you. May Allah
the Almighty keep you safe, and be your helper and protector. I pray
that Allah the Generous, Who has made you know His right and the right
of His guardians, (the guardians) whom those besides you were ignorant
of, that He does not remove from you any blessing He has endowed you
with. He is the Patron, worthy of all praise.’[^16]

10. His letter to one of his Shi’a adherents
--------------------------------------------

One of the Shi’a wrote a letter to the imam complaining against an
oppressor who oppressed and did him wrong. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
replied to him:

“We content ourselves with (turning to) Allah, the Almighty, this day
against every oppressor, wrongdoer, and envier. Woe unto whoever says
something that Allah knows its opposite. How terrible is that which he
shall meet from the Master of the Day of Judgment! Surely Allah the
Almighty is the Helper and Assistant to the oppressed. Trust and rely on
Him and He will relieve your distress and save you from the evil of
every evildoer. May Allah do that for you and favor us with you; He is
powerful over everything. May Allah overcome every oppressor this
moment! No one, who wrongs and oppresses, shall be successful. Woe unto
whoever is taken by the fingers of the oppressed! Do not be distressed
but trust in Allah and rely on Him, and He will bring your deliverance
soon. Surely Allah is with those who are patient and who do good to
others.’[^17]

[^1]: Qur'an, 20:125-126.

[^2]: Qur'an, 5:3.

[^3]: Qur'an, 42:23.

[^4]: Qur'an, 47:38.

[^5]: Qur'an, 9:105.

[^6]: Tuhaf al-Uqool, p.484-486, Bihar al-Anwar, vol.78 p.374-377, Rijal
al-Kashshi, p.354-357,.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar.

[^8]: Qur'an, 4:114.

[^9]: Qur'an, 7:128.

[^10]: Rawdhat al-Jannat, vol.4 p.273-274.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.78 p.370.

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.78, p.372.

[^13]: Rijal al-Kashshi, p.358.

[^14]: Rijal al-Kashshi, p.358.

[^15]: Ad-Durr an-Nadheem, p.224.

[^16]: Ad-Durr an-Nadheem.

[^17]: Ad-Durr an-Nadheem, p.225.


