His Traditions and Jurisprudence
================================

Historians agreed unanimously that Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was the
richest scientific personality in his talents at his time, and no one
was ever comparable to him in virtue and knowledge. Historians said, ‘He
was the highest authority for jurisprudents in taking the rulings of the
Shariah and the principles of religion. They put forward to him books of
Hadith and jurisprudence, and if he permitted these books, they would
act according to them. Once, a book written by Ahmad bin Abdullah bin
Khanibah was offered to him. He read it and then said to his companions,
‘It is true. Act according to it!’[^1]

The Interest of The ‘Ulama’ In His Traditions
---------------------------------------------

*‘Ulama’* and narrators paid a lot of attention to his traditions, for
they were the truest narrations of his time. And at the same time they
were from the definite Sunnah that must be followed according to the
belief of the Twelver Shi’a. The following are some of the traditions
transmitted from Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.):

1. Al-Hafidh (memorizer) al-Balathari narrated from his companions
saying, ‘Al-Hasan bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali bin
Musa, the imam of his age for the Shi’a, narrated from his father
Muhammad bin Ali al-Mahjub, from his father Ali bin Musa ar-Redha, from
his father Musa bin Ja’far al-Murtadha, from his father Ja’far as-Sadiq,
from his father Muhammad bin Ali al-Baqir, from his father Ali bin
al-Husayn as-Sajjad (Zaynol Aabidin), from his father, al-Husayn bin
Ali, from his father Ali bin Abu Talib the master of guardians, from
Muhammad bin Abdullah the master of prophets, from Gabriel the chief of
the angels that Allah said, ‘It is Me, Allah that there is no god but
Me. Whoever acknowledges monotheism to Me shall enter into My fort, and
whoever enters into My fort shall be safe from My torment.’[^2]

2. Ibn al-Jawzi said, ‘He (Imam al-Hasan al-Askari) referred this
tradition to his father from his pure fathers. My grandfather showed him
a tradition in his book called Tahrim al-Khamr (prohibition of wine). I
quoted this tradition and I swear by Allah that I heard him saying: I
swear by Allah that I heard Abu Abdullah al-Husayn bin Ali saying: I
swear by Allah that I heard Abdullah bin Ata al-Harawi saying: I swear
by Allah that I heard Abdurrahman bin Ubayd al-Bayhaqi saying: I swear
by Allah that I heard Abu Abdullah al-Husayn bin Muhammad ad-Daynawari
saying: I swear by Allah that I heard Ahmad bin Abdullah ash-Shi’iy
saying: I swear by Allah that I heard Abu Muhammad bin Ali bin Muhammad
saying: I swear by Allah that I heard my father Ali bin Musa ar-Redha
saying: I swear by Allah that I heard my father Ja’far saying: I swear
by Allah that I heard my father Muhammad saying: I swear by Allah that I
heard my father al-Husayn bin Ali saying: I swear by Allah that I heard
Ali bin Abu Talib saying: I swear by Allah that I heard Muhammad (a.s.)
saying: (I swear by Allah that I heard Gabriel saying:) I swear by Allah
that I heard Michael saying: I swear by Allah that I heard Israfel
saying: I swear by Allah… that I heard Allah saying: “A drinker of wine
is like a worshiper of idols.”

Abu Nu’aym al-Fadhl bin Dakeen said, ‘This is a true tradition narrated
by the pure progeny and narrated by some men from the messenger of Allah
(a.s.).’[^3]

Traditions On Religious Rulings
-------------------------------

Narrators narrated many traditions on religious questions that Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.) was asked about. Worth mentioning is that these
traditions came through letters which showed the great pressure that the
imam was surrounded with by the Abbasid government, where *‘Ulama’*
could not associate with him except through correspondence. The
following are some of those questions:

1. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
asking him about the specified quantity (of water) that a dead one
should be washed with. It was narrated that a junub[^4] should wash with
six rotls of water, and a menstruating woman with nine rotls, so what
would be the limit of water for a dead person to be washed with?

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘A dead should be washed until he
would be pure, insha’Allah.’

Abu Ja’far as-Saduq said, ‘This reply is with me among a collection of
replies by his handwriting (peace be upon him) in a book.’[^5]

This reply shows that there is no limit in the water that a dead person
should be washed with, but he should be washed until he becomes pure.

2. Ibrahim bin Mahziyar wrote to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan (a.s.) asking him
about offering prayer in (clothes dyed with) kermes and saying that his
companions refrained from offering the prayer in it. Imam Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) replied, ‘There is no problem in it at all, and praise be to
Allah.’[^6]

3. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
bin Ali (a.s.) asking him, ‘A man died and he had ten days of qadha[^7]
fasting that he had to perform before his death. He left two successors
(children). Is it possible for each one of his successors to fast for
five days?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘His elder successor is to fast for ten days,
insha’Allah.’[^8]

4. Ibrahim bin Mahziyar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.): “O my master,
your mawla[^9] Ali bin Mahziyar had recommended the hajj to be performed
on behalf of him from (the revenue of) a garden… twenty Dinars every
years, and since the way of Basra was blocked, costs became doubled for
people so that twenty dinars were not enough (for the hajj). Some others
of your mawlas recommended two (performances of) hajj instead.’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘You make (the costs of) three seasons of hajj
in two, if wills Allah the Almighty.’[^10]

5. Ali bin Muhammad al-Hudhayni wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
saying, ‘My cousin has recommended a hajj to be performed on behalf of
him with fifteen dinars every year, and this is not enough. What do you
order me to do?’

The imam (a.s.) replied to him, ‘You make (the costs of) two (seasons
of) hajj in one. Allah is Aware of that.’[^11]

6. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Is the witness of the execution of a dead person
accepted when he claims that the dead person has a debt on some one if
there is another reliable witness?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘If another reliable man witnesses
with him, then the claimer has to take an oath.’

In replying to another letter like this, the imam (a.s.) said, ‘Yes,
after taking an oath.’[^12]

7. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
saying, ‘Some man made a will to his children, some of whom are adults
and some are young children. Is it possible for the adults to execute
their father’s will and pay his debts before the young children come to
age?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘Yes, the adults have to pay their
father’s debt and not to delay it for that (until the others come to
age).’[^13]

8. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah be pleased with him) wrote
to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some man guards caravans in
frightening places without the permission of the ruler. They (the men of
the caravans) agree with him to give him a certain amount. Is it
permissible for him to take (wage) from them?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘If he hires himself for a specified wage, he
can take his right, insha’Allah.’[^14]

9. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah have mercy on him) wrote
to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some one bought a house, and
there was another house (floor) on this house. Would the upper house be
included in the lower house?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘He could not possess except what he
had bought with its limits and conditions, insha’Allah.’[^15]

The jurisprudents of the Twelver Shi’a gave a fatwa that if some one
sold a house, its land, upper and lower building would be with it,
except if the upper floor was independent in its entry and exit, because
that might be a reason to exclude it from the sold house. They depended
in this fatwa on this tradition.

10. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah have mercy on him) wrote
to the imam, “Some man said to two men: ‘Bear witness that my house in
the so-and–so place with all its limits and all the furniture in it is
(sold) to so-and-so.’ It is not known what furniture there is in the
house.”

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘It is alright if the buying has
included all that, insha’Allah.’[^16]

11. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah have mercy on him) wrote
to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.), ‘Some man had some pieces of land in a
village. It was time for him to go to Mecca (to perform the hajj). The
village was somewhat far from his house and he had not enough time to
define the boundaries of his land. He defined the four boundaries of the
village and said to the witness: ‘Bear witness that I have sold to
so-and-so the entire village whose boundaries are so-and-so.’ In fact,
he just had some pieces of land in the village. Would that be right for
the buyer or he would possess just a part from the village though the
seller had acknowledged to him the whole village?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘It is not permissible for one to sell
what he does not own, and the buyer can possess only what the seller
owns.’[^17]

12. Muhammad bin al-Hasan wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) about a man
who asked him to bear witness that he had sold a farm to another but he
did not know the limits of the farm at the time when he asked him to
witness. He said to him, ‘When they tell you the limits, you acknowledge
them.’ Was it permissible for him to bear witness?

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘Yes, it was, and praise be to
Allah.’[^18]

13. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.),
‘Some one took an oath that he would be free from Allah the Almighty or
from the messenger of Allah, but then he broke his oath. What should his
repentance and penance be?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘He should feed ten poor people with a mudd of
food (about 750 gr.) for each, and pray Allah to forgive him.’[^19]

15. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.),
‘There is some woman whose husband has divorced her and he does not pay
her the specified expenditure, though she is in need. Is it permissible
for her to go out and spend the night out of her house to work and
satisfy her need?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘There is no objection to that if
Allah knows that she is true (in her going out to work and satisfy her
needs).’[^20]

A woman, who is divorced in revocable divorce, remains as one’s wife as
long as she is still in the iddah.[^21] The husband must pay her
expenditure and she must obey him. It is not permissible for her to get
out of his house without his permission. However, if the husband does
not spend on her, it is permissible for her to go out for work as Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) has said.

16. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.),
‘Some woman undergoes the iddah after the death of her husband. She is
in need and has no one to spend on her. She works for people. Is it
permissible for her, during her iddah, to get out and spend the night
away from her house for work and necessary needs?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘There is no objection to that,
insha’Allah.’[^22]

17. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah be pleased with him)
wrote to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some man made his will
(to bequeath) for two persons. Is it permissible for one of them to do
alone with half of the inheritance and the other one with the other
half?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘They should not contradict the dead one’s will
and they should do as he has ordered them to do.’[^23]

If someone bequeaths to two persons, neither of them should do alone
with the half of the inheritance, but they should discuss the matter
together. Neither of them has the right to do with the inheritance
according to his own opinion, and without the permission of the other as
the tradition says.

18. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some man willed to bequeath a third of his properties
to his children that the share a female would be like the share of a
male. Would the male have the shares of two females from the will?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘It is permissible for the dead one as he has
willed.’[^24]

This tradition shows that a Muslim is free to do with the third of his
properties as he likes. He can gift it with same shares to his male and
female children, and he can give one more than the other. He can order
the third of his properties to be spent on charitable organizations as
well.

19. Sahl bin Ziyad al-Aadami wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.), ‘Some
man had male and female children. He acknowledged that a farm would be
for his children but he did not mention that it would be divided among
them due to the shares and commands of Allah. Male and female children
were the same in this will.’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘They should execute their father’s will as he
had specified. If he did not specify anything, they would divide the
inheritance according to the Book of Allah the Almighty,
insha’Allah.’[^25]

20. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar (may Allah be pleased with him)
wrote to Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some man was the
executor of someone who died. This executor appointed another one as the
executor instead of him. Would this (second) man be obliged to execute
the will of that man whose executor was that (first) man?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘He would be obliged to his right if he had
some right with him (with the dead man), insha’Allah.’[^26]

This tradition shows that an executor is not permitted to ask another
one to execute what he himself has been ordered to execute except when
he has a right with the man of the will. In this case he has the right
to appoint another one to take his right back. Jurisprudents say that an
executor has the right to appoint another executor after him if he has
been permitted by the man of the will to do that.

21. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
asking him about entailment, and what had been transmitted from his
fathers (a.s.) about it. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) replied, ‘Entailments
should be dealt with as their owners have entailed them on,
insha’Allah.’[^27]

22. Muhammad bin al-Hasan as-Saffar wrote to Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
bin Ali (a.s.), ‘Some man died and left behind a grandson and a full
brother. To whom would the inheritance belong?’

The imam (a.s.) replied, ‘The inheritance would be for the closest

one, insha’Allah.’[^28]

[^1]: Falah as-Sa’il.

[^2]: A’yan ash-Shi’a, vol.4 p.308-309.

[^3]: Mir’at az-Zaman, vol.6 p.192.

[^4]: A ritually impure person.

[^5]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.1 p.86, al-Istibsar, vol.1 p.195,
at-Tahthib, vol.1 p.122.

[^6]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.1 p.171.

[^7]: Qadha’ means the performing of obligations out of their specified
time, whereas ada’ is the performing of obligations within their times.

[^8]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.2 p,98, at-Tahthib, vol.1 p.402,
al-Istibsar, vol.2 p.108.

[^9]: Mawla is an adherent to some person, or a freed slave who is still
adherent to his master. Mawali is the plural form.

[^10]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.2 p.272.

[^11]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.2 p.272.

[^12]: Ibid., vol.3 p.44.

[^13]: Al-Wassa’il, rulings of will.

[^14]: At-Tahthib, vol.2 p.115, Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.3 p.106.

[^15]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.3 p.153, at-Tahthib, vol.2 p.158.

[^16]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.3 p.153, at-Tahthib, vol.2 p.159.

[^17]: At-Tahthib, vol.2 p.159, Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.3 p.153.

[^18]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.3 p.153.

[^19]: At-Tahthib, vol.2 p.332, Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.3 p.237.

[^20]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.3 p.322.

[^21]: A prescribed period that a woman has to pass after divorce or
after her husband’s death before her remarriage.

[^22]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.3 p.328.

[^23]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.4 p.151.

[^24]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.4, p.196.

[^25]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.4 p.155.

[^26]: At-Tahthib, vol.2 p.393, Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.4 p.168.

[^27]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.4 p.176, At-Tahthib, vol.2 p.371.

[^28]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol.1 p.169.


