The Raid of Dhu Amarr
=====================

This was followed by the raid of Dhu Amarr, which the Prophet undertook
after remaining in Medina for the months of Dhu 'l-Hijjah and Muharram
(the last and first months of the Muslim calendar, which are also sacred
months). He set out on this mission after hearing that a group of men of
the tribe of Ghatafan had assembled to launch a raid against the suburbs
of Medina. They were led by a man called Du'thur ibn al-Harith ibn
Muharib. The Prophet set out with four hundred and fifty men with a
number of horses. But these Bedouins fled before him to neighbouring
mountain peaks. The Prophet then encamped with his men in the spot of
Dhu Amarr. It rained heavily while they were in that place. The
Messenger of Allah went out to answer the call of nature across the
valley from the camp. He took off his clothes and hung them on a tree to
dry out, having been soaked by the rain. He lay down under the tree,
while the Bedouins watched intently his every movement.

One of the men said to Du'thur, who was their chief and the bravest man
among them: "See now, Muhammad has given you control! He has separated
himself from his Companions, so that if he were to cry out for help,
they would not hear him. Go and kill him!" He thus chose a sharp sword
and hastened until he stood at the head of the Apostle of Allah with his
sword outstretched. He then exclaimed: "O Muhammad, who shall protect
you against me today?" "Allah", he answered. Gabriel struck the man in
the chest so that he fell back, dropping the sword from his hand. The
Messenger of Allah took up the sword and, standing at the man's head,
asked: "Who shall protect you against me now?" The Bedouin replied: "No
one! But I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, and that
Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah! By Allah, I shall never again join any
group against you! " The Messenger of Allah returned his sword to him.
The man turned to go, but then turned back and said: "By Allah, you are
a better man than me!" The Messenger of Allah replied: "I am indeed
worthy of that."

When the man returned to his people, they questioned him: "Where is all
your talk now - he was unprotected before you, and you had a sword in
your hand!" He replied: "By Allah, this was the case! But I saw a bright
and tall man who struck me in the chest, and I fell flat on my back. I
knew that he was an angel. Thus I bore witness that Muhammad is the
Apostle of Allah ! By Allah, I shall never add to the number of any
group that would assemble against him." The man then began to invite his
own people to Islam. Then Allah sent down the verse: O you who have
faith, remember the bounty of Allah towards you, when some people
intended to stretch out their hands against you; yet He restrained their
hands from harming you [Qur'an 5 :111 ] .

**The Raid Of Al-Qaradah**

This was followed by the raid of al-Qaradah. The Messenger of Allah
sent Zayd ibn al-Harithah with a detachment, six months after his return
to Medina from Badr. At the well called al-Qaradah, Zayd and his men
came upon a caravan of the Quraysh led by Abu Sufyan, who had much
silver. After the Battle of Badr, the Quraysh [of Mecca] did not feel
safe taking their usual route to Syria. They therefore travelled the
Iraq road, having hired as a guide a man of the tribe of Bakr ibn Wail
called Furat ibn Hayyan. Zayd ibn al-Harithah was able to capture the
caravan, but the men eluded him and escaped. According to the report of
al-Waqidi [^48] the caravan was led by Safwan ibn Umayyah. The Muslims
captured one or two men, whom they brought with the caravan to the
Messenger of Allah. Furat was himself a captive. But he accepted Islam,
and was thus spared.

The reprisal against the tribe of Banu Qaynuqa\` for this action took
place on Saturday, in mid-Shawwal, twenty months after the Migration.
The Messenger of Allah assembled the people of the tribe in their market
and warned them saying: "Beware lest Allah afflict you with the same
punishments as those with which He afflicted the people of Quraysh!
Enter into Islam, for you know well the grace with which Allah has
favored me, and you recognize my characteristics, which are in your
scriptures." They answered: "O Muhammad, be not deceived by the fact
that you met your own people in battle and defeated them. Yet if we were
to wage war against you, you would, by Allah, know that we are not like
them! " They nearly came to blows. It was concerning the people of
Qaynuqa\` that the verse: There was a sign for you (the Muslims) in the
two groups which encountered one another: the one fighting in the way of
Allah, the other rejecting faith . . . [Qur'an. 3:13] , was sent down.

It is reported that the Messenger of Allah besieged them for six days
until finally they surrendered to him. \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy came to him
and interceded on their behalf saying: "O Apostle of Allah, these are my
allies and clients who have defended me against the black and the red
(that is, against all kinds of people). They were three hundred armoured
soldiers and four hundred without armour. Would you now cut them down
all in one morning? By Allah, I can then find no security; rather I
dread the turns of fortunes!" The people of Banu Qaynuqa\` were allies
of the Khazraj tribe only, and not of the Aws. \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy
persisted in his entreaties until the Prophet relented and granted him
their blood. But seeing the humiliation which they had suffered, the
people of Banu Qaynuqa\` left Medina altogether and settled in Adhri'at
in Syria. Then Allah sent down concerning \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy and
others of the Khazraj tribe: O you who have faith, take not the Jews or
the Christians as patrons . . . [Qur'an. 5 : 51- 52] .

**The Battle Of Uhud**

Then the Battle of Uhud followed, a year after that of Badr. The leader
of the Associators in that battle was Abu Sufyan ibn Harb. The
Companions of the Apostle of Allah were on that day seven hundred and
the Associators numbered two thousand.

The Messenger of Allah set out for the battle after consulting with his
Companions. Although his own opinion was that the men should engage in
street fighting, while those who were not strong enough for fighting
should shoot arrows from the rooftops, yet they insisted on going out to
meet the Quraysh in the battle. But on the way they changed their minds
and asked to turn back. He refused saying: It is not fit for a prophet
to turn back once he has decided to set out to engage a group in the
battle." They were actually a thousand men. On the way, however,
\`Abdullah ibn Ubayy deserted with a third of the men. They said in
justification of their decision, "By Allah, we know not for what are we
going to kill ourselves, while the enemy are his own people! " The men
of Banu Harithah and Banu Salmah likewise were at the point of
deserting. However, Allah, be He exalted, restrained them, as He says:
When two groups of you had nearly lost heart; yet Allah was their Master
. . . [ Qur'an. 3 :123 ] .

The Messenger of Allah woke up next morning ready for fighting. He
charged 'Ali with the banner of the Immigrants, and that of the Ansar,
Sa'd ibn \`Ubadah. The Messenger of Allah joined the banner of the
Ansar. He then went to inspect the archers, who were fifty men led by
\`Abdullah ibn Jubayr. He admonished them and reminded them of their
duty saying: "Fear Allah and be steadfast. Even if you see us snatched
by wild birds, do not leave your spot until I send you a word." The
Prophet then stood at the top c: the valley. At first the Associators
were clearly defeated, so that the Muslims slew them with the sword.

The archers under the leadership of \`Abdullah ibn Jubayr, seeing this,
cried out, \`The booty! Your people have vanquished the enemy; what are
you waiting for!" \`Abdullah said to them, "Have you forgotten the words
of the Messenger of Allah? As for me, I shall never abandon the spot
which the Apostle of Allah assigned to me." But they disregarded his
command and disobeyed him, when they saw what they had desired. They
thus hastened to the spoils of war. Khalid ibn al-Walid, who lay in
ambush with other men of the Associators, rushed out at them, and Khalid
came to \`Abdullah and killed him.

The Muslims were put to the sword as men rushed at them from behind.
Satan cried out, "Muhammad has been slain!" In the meantime, the
Messenger of Allah called out to them as they turned back, "O people, I
am the Apostle of Allah! Allah has promised me victory; why are you
fleeing?" They heard the voice, but did not turn around. The outcry of
Satan went on until it was heard in the houses of-Medina. Thus Fatimah
raised the wail; nor was there any Hashimite or Qurayshite woman but
that she placed her hand upon her head, wailing.

It is related on the authority of the sixth lmam Ja'far as-Sadiq that
as people deserted the Apostle of Allah, he was filled with rage.
Whenever he became angry, sweat dripped from his face and forehead like
pearls. He looked around, and there was \`Ali by his side. He asked him:
"Why did you not run to the sons of your father?" 'Ali answered: "O
Apostle of Allah, should I reject faith after I have become a Muslim!
Rather, I shall stay with you and endure your fate." "If it be so", the
Prophet said, "then spare me the evil of these men! " 'Ali rushed out at
them, and as he struck the first man he encountered, Gabriel exclaimed:
"This -is indeed true consolation, O Muhammad! " "He is of me, and I am
of him", said the Apostle of Allah. Gabriel added " I too am of you."

A group of men then turned to the Messenger of Allah and gathered
around him. Seventy men of the Muslims were slain. Of these, four were
of the Immigrants: Hamzah ibn \`Abdi 'l-Muttalib, \`Abdullah ibn Jahsh,
Mus'ab ibn \`Umayr and Shammas ibn \`Uthman ibn ash-Sharid; the rest
were of the Ansar.

It is reported that at that time Ubayy ibn Khalaf came on his horse to
the battlefield saying: "So this is the son of Abu Kabshah (meaning the
Prophet)! Turn back with your own misdeeds! May you never be saved, even
if you are spared (this time)." The Messenger of Allah was standing
between al-Harith ibn as-Simmah and Sahl ibn Hunayf, leaning upon them.
Ubayy rushed to attack him, but Mus\`ab ibn \`Umayr shielded him with
his body. Ubayy thus stabbed Mus'ab and killed him. The Messenger of
Allah then took a lance which was in the hand of Sahl ibn Hunayf and
struck Ubayy with it above the collar of his armour. Ubayy fell over his
horse embracing it, and ran to his camp lowing like a bull. Abu Sufyan
said to him: "Woe to you, what is it that frightens you? It is only a
scratch; it is nothing! " He answered: "Woe to you O son of Harb, do you
know who stabbed me? It was Muhammad who stabbed me! He said to me in
Mecca, \`I shall kill you'. I thus knew that he would be the one to kill
me. By Allah, if all the people of the Hijaz were to suffer what I am
suffering, it would finish them all! " The accursed man continued to
moan until he went to the Fire.

It is reported in the book of Aban ibn \`Uthman [^49] that when Fatimah
and Safiyyah (the Prophet's paternal aunt) came to the Messenger of
Allah, he said to \`All, "As for my aunt, keep her away from me, but let
Fatimah come." When Fatimah came close to the Apostle of Allah and saw
that he had been wounded in the face, and that blood was gushing out of
his mouth, she began to wipe away the blood, weeping and saying: "May
Allah's wrath rage against those who caused the face of the Messenger of
Allah to bleed!" The Messenger of Allah took in his hand the blood that
ran down his face and threw it up in the air, and not one drop returned
to earth. The sixth Imam as-Sadiq is said to have declared: "By Allah,
if one drop of that blood had come down to the ground, severe punishment
would have come down to earth." Aban ibn \`Uthman said: "This was told
to me on his authority by as-Sabbah ibn Suyyabah. I asked him, "Were his
upper interior teeth broken, as these people claim?' He replied: \`No,
by Allah, Allah always protected him from all disfigurement. It was
rather that he was wounded in the face.' I asked: \`What about the cave
on Mount Uhud to which they claim that the Apostle of Allah fled?' He
answered: \`By Allah, he did not move from his spot.' "

Someone said to the Prophet, "Would you not invoke Allah against them?"
He said: "O Allah, guide my people aright, for they do not know." Ibn
Qami'ah threw a stone at the Messenger of Allah which hit him on the
palm so that the sword fell from his hand. The man exclaimed: "Take it
from me, for I am the son of Qami'ah ! " The Messenger of Allah replied:
"May Allah humiliate and bring you low!" \`Utbah ibn Abi Waqqas struck
the Prophet with a sword so that blood gushed out of his mouth, and
\`Abdullah ibn Shihab threw a stone at him, hitting him on the wrist. No
one of these died a natural death. As for Ibn Qami'ah, a ram came to him
while he was sleeping in Najd and struck its horns in his stomach. The
man cried out with pain until the ram penetrated him with its horns to
the neck.

Wahshi (the man who killed Hamzah) reported: "Jubayr ibn Mut'im, whose
slave I was, said to me, \`All you know that \`Ali killed my uncle
Tu'aymah in the Battle of Badr. If you therefore kill Muhammad,
Muhammad's uncle, or Muhammad's cousin, you shall be free.'

I thus went with the army of Quraysh to Uhud with a lance, only seeking
freedom. I wished for nothing else, nor did I wish to kill Muhammad. I
said to myself, \`Perhaps I will meet with 'Ali or Hamzah at whom I
would throw my lance', I never missed in throwing lances, an art I
learnt in Abyssinia. Hamzah used to rush out on his attacks, after which
he would return to his spot." Abu \`Abdillah (the sixth Imam) reported
that Wahshi struck Hamzah in the chest. He fell, and the men rushed at
him and killed him. Wahshi went to Hamzah and splitting his stomach,
took his liver and ran with it to Hind daughter of \`Utbah (and wife of
Ab6 Sufyan), who took it and began to chew it. But the flesh became as
hard as a knee bone, so that she spat it out.

It is reported that al-Halls ibn \`Alqamah saw Abu Sufyan on a horse
stabbing Hamzah's corpse in the mouth with a spear. al-Halls exclaimed:
"O people of Ban& Kinanah, look at this man who claims to be the chief
of Quraysh - look at what he is doing to his cousin who has become dead
flesh!" Abu Sufyan repeated as he did so, "Taste death, you rebel! " He
then said to al-Hails: "You are right; it is a grave fault which I have
committed. Keep it a secret."

Abu Sufyan stood up and called out to some of the Muslims: "Is Ibn Abi
Kabshah (that is, the Prophet) still alive? As for ( \`Ail) ibn Abi
Talib, we see him still standing in his spot." 'Ali replied: "Yes, by
Him Who sent him with the truth, he hears your words!" Abu Sufyan said:
"In this battle with you, some mutilation has taken place. By Allah, I
neither ordered it nor did I prevent it. Our next appointment with you
shall be the time of Badr, next year." The Messenger of Allah said to
\`Ali, "Say yes." "Yes," \`Ali repeated. Abu Sufyan then said to \`Ali:
"Ibn Qami'ah told me that he had killed Muhammad. But you are more
truthful and righteous in my sight." He then went back to his Companions
and said: "Take the night as your camel (that is, travel without
stopping) and depart."

The Messenger of Allah then called \`Ali and said to him, "Follow them.
See where they are going. If you see them riding their horses and
leading the camels, it means that they will go to Medina. But if they
are riding their camels and leading the horses, that means that they are
going to Mecca." It is also reported that the Prophet sent Sa'd ibn Abi
Waqqas, who returned and said: "I saw the horses beating around with
their tails tied behind and being led by camels, and the men all riding
on camels" [i.e., readying for travel and not for war]. The Muslims were
glad to see their enemies gone, and scattered about to look for their
dead. Every corpse was mutilated except that of Hanzalah ibn Abi \`Amir
whose father was with the Associators; thus he was spared for him. They
found Hamzah with his stomach split open, his nose and ears cut off and
his liver taken away. When the Messenger of Allah saw him in this
condition, he was choked with tears and said: "I shall mutilate seventy
men of Quraysh ! " But Allah sent down: If you punish, then punish in
the same manner as you were punished [Qur'an. 16:126] . The Prophet then
said: "I would rather be patient." He then asked: "Who is that man whom
the angels are washing on the side of the mountain?" They answered:
"Here is his wife", and she said: "He left the house impure through
sexual intercourse." This was Hanzalah ibn Abi \`Amir, who was known
thereafter as \`the washed one'.

Aban reported further on the authority of Abu Ja'far (the fifth Imam,
Muhammad al-Baqir - a. s.) who said: "A man called Quzman ibn al-Harith
al-\`Absi (the Hypocrite concerning whom the Messenger of Allah said,
\`Allah shall strengthen this religion with a reprobate man') was
mentioned to the Apostle of Allah, who said, \`He is of the people of
the Fire.' Someone came to the Messenger of Allah and told him that
Quzman was martyred. He observed: \`Allah does whatever He wills.'
Again, someone came and told him that Quzman had killed himself. The
Prophet exclaimed: \`I bear witness that I am the Apostle of Allah.' "

It is reported that Quzman fought valiantly and killed six or seven of
the Associators. When he was finally incapacitated by his wounds, he was
carried to the quarter of the tribe of Zafar. The Muslims said to him:
"Be of good cheer, O Quzman for you have done well today! " He replied:
"Of what do you bring me such glad tidings? By Allah I did not fight
except for the sake of my people's noble genealogies; had it not been
for this, I would have never fought! " Thus, when his wounds had become
too painful to bear, he took a sharp arrow from his quiver with which he
killed himself.

It is also reported that a woman of the Banu'n-Najjar whose father,
husband and brother were killed with the Apostle of Allah, approached
the Messenger of Allah while the Muslims stood all around him. She asked
a man: "Can I greet the Messenger of Allah and gaze upon him?" "Yes", he
answered. The people made room for her, and she came close to him and
said: "Every calamity is light since you have returned safe and sound;"
having said this, she went away.

After burying the dead, the Messenger returned to Medina. As he passed
the quarters of the \`Abdu'l-Ashhal and Zafar tribes, he heard the women
mourning their dead. The eyes of the Messenger of Allah were filled with
tears. He wept saying: "But there are no women mourning for Hamzah
today! " When Sa'd ibn Mu'adh and Usayd ibn Hudayr heard this, they
said: "Let no woman mourn over her loved one until Fatimah comes and
aids her." Thus when the Messenger of Allah heard the wail raised for
Hamzah, as he stood by Fatimah at the door of the Mosque he addressed
the women saying: "Return, may Allah have mercy upon you. You have
indeed consoled us with your grief."


