The Battle of Hamra'u'l-asad
============================

The Battle of hamra'u'l-Asad [a place about eight miles distance from
Medina] took place immediately after that of Uhud. Aban ibn \`Uthman
reported that the day after the Battle of Uhud, the Messenger of Allah
called upon the Muslims to prepare for battle. They all responded, even
though they had suffered much pain and many wounds in the previous
battle. 'Ali preceded him with the banner of the Immigrants until they
reached Hamra'u'l-Asad. But they all returned to Medina without
fighting. These were :

Those who answered the call of Allah after they had been afflicted with
wounds [Qur'an. 3:172] .

Abu Sufyan departed and came to a place called ar-Rawhd', where he
remained intending to return and again attack the Messenger of Allah. He
said: "Now that we have killed their great warriors, if we return we
shall be able to exterminate them!" He met a man called Ma'bad
al-Khuza'i, whom he asked: "What news have you, O Ma'bad?" He answered:
"By Allah, I left Muhammad and his people burning with the passion of
war against you! 'Ali ibn Abi Talib has come leading the men. All those
who deserted him before have now rejoined his forces. This has inspired
me to compose some verses." Abu Sufyan asked: "What did you recite?" "I
recited: ", Ma'bad answered.
My mount came, nigh collapsing from all the clamor,When the ground was
covered with flocks of warring vultures.You shall fight with noble
lions, not cowards,In the confrontation of battle; nor are they hollow
men who fled!This caused Abu Sufyan and those who were with him to
change their minds.

Then a small caravan belonging to the people of the tribe of
\`Abdu'l-Qays passed by on their way to Medina for trade. Abu Sufyan
said to them: "Go and tell Muhammad that I intend to return to his
Companions in order that I might exterminate them. As for you, I would
fill your loading sacks with raisins when you come to the Market of
\`Ukaz (in Mecca)." The men conveyed the message to the Prophet and the
Muslims with him in Hamra'u'l-Asad, and they all exclaimed: "Allah is
sufficient for us; He is the best trustee." The Messenger of Allah then
returned to Medina on Friday.

It is reported that when the Messenger of Allah went for the raid of
Hamra'u'l-Asad, a lewd woman of the tribe of Khatmah called al-\`Asma'
Umm al-Mundhir ibn al-Mundhir went around the assemblies of the Aw,, and
Khazraj tribes reciting verses inciting people against the Prophet.
There was then only one Muslim in the tribe of the Banu Khatmah, called
\`Umayr ibn \`Adiyy. When the Messenger returned, \`Umayr went to the
woman and killed her. He then came to the Messenger of Allah and said:
"I have killed Umm al-Mundhir because of the invective poetry which she
recited." The Messenger of Allah struck his shoulders, exclaiming "This
is a man who lent support to Allah and His Apostle in his absence! By
Allah, not even two rams shall butt one another concerning her (i.e., no
two men shall fight over her blood)." \`Umayr ibn \`Adiyy said: "I
passed by her home the next day while she was being buried; no one
stopped me or spoke to me."

**The Battle Of Ar-Raji\`**

After this came the Battle of ar-Raji\`. The Messenger of Allah sent
Marthad ibn Abi Marthad al-Ghanawi, who was Hamzah's ally, Khalid ibn
Bukayr, \`Asim ibn Thabit ibn al-Aflaj, Khubayb ibn \`Adiyy, Zayd ibn
Dathnah, and \`Abdullah ibn Tariq, all under the leadership of Marthad,
with a delegation of the tribes of \`Adl and ad-Dish who came requesting
that some Muslims go with them to teach them the Qur'an and the
fundamentals of the faith. They travelled with the people until they
reached the depression of ar-Raji\`, a spring of water belonging to the
tribe of Hudhayl. Some men of one of the quarter of Hudhayl called Banu
Lihyan then killed the entire company.

Aban reported that the people of Hudhayl, when they killed \`Asim,
wanted his head to sell to Sulafah daughter of Sa'd, she had vowed after
he had killed her son in the Battle of Uhud that if she were able to
obtain his head, she would drink wine in his skull. They were, however,
prevented from cutting off his head by wasps. As they were unable to
approach \`Asim's corpse, they agreed to leave it to the night, when the
wasps would have left it. At night, however, Allah caused a heavy
rainfall, so that the valley was flooded and the waters carried the
corpse away. This was because \`Asim had made a covenant with Allah that
he would never touch an Associator, nor an Associator touch him all his
life. Thus Allah protected him after death against that which he had
protected himself during his life.

**The Raid Of Ma'nnah**

Four months after the Battle of Uhud, the raid of Ma\`unah took place.
This was when Abu Bara' Amir ibn Malik ibn Ja'far, nicknamed
\`Muld'ibu'l-Asinnah' (the welder of spears) came to the Messenger of
Allah in Medina and accepted Islam. The man then suggested to the
Prophet that he send men to the people of Najd to call them to Islam. "I
hope," the man continued, "that they will answer your call." The Prophet
answered: "I fear lest the people of Najd do you harm." But Abu Bard'
insisted saying: "I have a pact of protection with them." The Messenger
of Allah sent al-Mundhir ibn \`Amr with twenty some men. It is also
reported that they were forty, or seventy men of the best Muslims. Among
them were al-Harith ibn as-Simmah, Haram ibn Milhan and \`Amir ibn
Fuhayrah, Abu Bakr's client.

They all travelled until they reached the well of Ma'unah, which was
located between the land of the Banu \`Amir and the plain of the Banu
Sulaym. From there, they sent Haram ibn Milhan with a letter from the
Messenger of Allah to \`Amir ibn at-Tufayl. But \`Amir did not take the
time to look at the letter before he rushed at Haram and killed him. He
then cried out: "Allah is Most Great; I have achieved victory, by the
Lord of the Ka'bah! " He called the men of Banu \`Amir to aid him in
fighting against the Muslims, but they refused saying: "We shall not
betray the covenant of Abu Bard'." He then called upon some of the clans
of the tribe of Sulaym: \`Asiyyah, Ri'l and Dhakwan, who answered his
call. These were the people against whom the Prophet invoked Allah's
curse. They surrounded the Muslims as they sat around their goods.
Seeing this, the Muslims took up their swords and fought with them until
they all died.

\`Amr ibn Umayyah ad-Damri had taken out the animals of the Muslims to
pasture along with a man of the Ansar. They were so close to the
battlefield that they could see birds flying over the fighters. They
said to one another: "No doubt these birds mean something." When they
went to see, they found the men lying dead in their blood. The man of
the Ansar asked \`Amr: "What do you suggest?" He answered: "I suggest
that we go immediately to the Messenger of Allah and tell him what
happened." But the man of the Ansar replied: "I would not save myself
and leave a place where al-Mundhir ibn \`Amr is." He thus fought against
the enemies of the Muslims until he was killed.

\`Amr returned to Medina and related to the Messenger of Allah what had
happened. The Prophet said: "This was the deed of Abu Bard'; I did not
wish to engage in it." When Abu Bard' heard the news, he was angry with
\`Amir for betraying his covenant of protection, and for what had
happened to the people of the Messenger of Allah. Abu Bard', however,
died soon after. His son Rabi\`ah attacked \`Amir ibn at-Tufayl,
stabbing him as he sat in the assembly of his people. He missed killing
him, and instead stabbed him in the leg. \`Amir said: "This must be the
deed of my uncle Abu Bard'. If I die, my blood belongs to my uncle, and
no one should demand it from him. But if I live, I shall decide what to
do about it."

**The Battle Against The Banu 'N-Nadir**
These events were followed by the battle against the Jewish tribe of
Banu 'n-Nadir. This happened when the Messenger of Allah went to Ka'b
ibn al-Ashraf to ask for a loan. The man welcomed him saying: "You are
welcome to our home, O Abu 'l-Qasim! " When the Messenger of Allah and
his Companions had settled down, Ka'b got up as though to prepare some
food for them. But he thought to himself that he should kill the Apostle
of Allah. Gabriel came down and told him about the treacherous
intentions which the people had for them. The Prophet, therefore, went
out as though to answer a call of nature, knowing that they would not
kill his friends while he was alive.

He thus took the road to Medina where he met with a group of Ka\`b's
people on whom Ka'b had called to help him against the Messenger of
Allah. Ka'b was informed of what had happened, and the Muslims got up
and left quickly for their homes. Then \`Abdullah ibn Suriya, who was
the most learned for the Jews, said: "It was his Lord, by Allah, who
informed him of the treachery you had planned for him. Soon, by Allah,
the emissary of Muhammad shall come to you commanding you to migrate,
all of you. Obey me, therefore, in two things, for there is no good in
any third - either you accept Islam and thus be secure in your homes and
properties, or depart when a man shall come to order you to leave your
homes." They replied: "The second is preferable to us." Ibn Suriya then
said: "The first is surely better for you. Had I not wished not to
disgrace you, I would have myself accepted Islam.

The Prophet soon sent Muhammad ibn Maslamah to them ordering them to
vacate their homes and properties and depart. He instructed him to give
them only three days respite.[^50]

**The Battle Against The Tribe Of Lihyan**

The next battle was that against the tribe of Lihyan. It was the battle
during which the Prophet offered salatu'l khawf (the prayer of fear,
which is usually attenuated and hurriedly offered in times of war) in a
place called \`Asfan, near Medina, where he then received revelation
from Allah informing him of what the Associators were intending. It is
reported that this battle took place after that of the tribe of Banu
Qurayzah (6 /627) .

After this the raid of Dhatu'r-Riqa' took place, [two months after that
of Banu'n-Nadirl. (al-Bukhari reported that it was after the Battle of
Khaybar 7/ 628.) The Prophet met a group of men of the tribe of Ghatafan
in a place called Dhatu'r-Riqa', but there was no fighting between them.
This was because both groups feared the other. The Prophet offered
salatu'l khawf and departed with his people. It is reported that the
place was so called because it was a mountain with red, black and white
patches (riqa'). It is also reported that the reason was that the skin
of men's feet began to crack, so that they were obliged to cover them
with patches of cloth.

The Prophet stood at the side of a valley and his Companions on the
other side. In the meantime the valley filled with water, so that he was
separated from his men. A man of the Associators called Ghawrath saw him
alone. He said to his people: "I shall kill Muhammad for you!" He thus
took his sword and came to the Prophet saying: "Who shall save you now
from me, O Muhammad!" "My Lord shall save me! ", the Prophet answered.
The man fell flat on the ground. The Prophet took the sword from him,
and sitting on his chest, asked: "Who shall save you from me now, O
Ghawrath?" He answered: "Your clemency and generosity, O Muhammad! " The
Prophet let him go. He stood up repeating: "You are more generous and
more noble than I ! "

Then came the second journey to Badr in Sha'ban of that year, in
response to the challenge of Abu Sufyan of the previous year after the
Battle of Uhud. He remained at the well of Badr for eight days. Abu
Sufyan came to meet him with the people of Tihamah (that is, the
district of Mecca), but when the two groups met, Abu Sufyan decided to
turn back. The Messenger of Allah and his Companions, however, stayed on
for the market, where they traded and made good profit.

**The Battle Of The Trench (Al-Khandaq )**

This was followed by the Battle of the Trench (Khandaq), also known as
the Battle of the Confederates (al-Ahzdb). This was during the month of
Shawwal in the 4th year of the hijrah (March, 626). Huyayy ibn Akhtab,
Kinanah ibn ar-Rabi\`, and Sallam ibn Abi 'l-Huqayq with a group of
their fellow Jews came to Mecca. They were accompanied by other men of
the Quraysh, Kinanah and Ghatafan tribes. They all went to Abu Sufyan
and others of the chiefs of Quraysh to call them to wage war against the
Messenger of Allah. They promised them: "Our hands shall be with your
hands, and we shall fight together with you until we exterminate them
utterly." They also went to the tribe of Ghatafan and called them to war
against the Messenger of Allah. They assured them of the agreement of
Quraysh; they thus all prepared for war. The fighters of Quraysh were
led by Abu Sufyan. The leader of the men of Ghatafan was \`Uyaynah ibn
Hisn of the Fazarah clan. Leading the tribe of Banu Murrah was al-Harith
ibn \`Awf. Mis'ar ibn Rukhaylah ibn Nuwayrah ibn Tarif led his people,
the men of the tribe of Ashja\`. These together were -the
Confederates.

The Messenger of Allah heard their coming, and thus went out to meet
them after consulting with Salman, the Persian who suggested that a
trench be dug. In this action there were clear signs of the Prophethood
of Muhammad. One of these signs was that reported by Jabir ibn
\`Abdillah. He said that the men encountered a hard rock in the trench
which they could not break. They complained of this to the Apostle of
Allah, who then had a vessel filled with water and brought to him. He
expectorated in the water and prayed silently to Allah, then sprinkled
the water on the rock. An eye-witness reported: "By Allah Who sent him
as a prophet with the truth, no sooner had he done this, than it became
like sand, repulsing neither axe or shovel."

Another miracle, also reported by Jabir, was the feeding of a large
multitude of people on a small quantity of food. We have already
recounted this event. A third miracle was that reported by Salman the
Persian who said: "As I was digging in one corner of the trench, the
Messenger of Allah turned towards me, as he was standing nearby. Seeing
me exerting myself in a hard spot, he came down and took the pick-axe
from my hand and struck a rock. A spark, as though of lightning, shone
forth from beneath the pick-axe. He struck a second time, and another
spark shone forth. A third time he struck, and again a spark glittered.
I asked in amazement \`O Messenger of Allah, may my father and mother be
a ransom for you, what is this I see?' \`As for the first', he replied:
\`It is a sign that Allah shall grant me conquest of Yemen. The second
is a sign that Allah shall grant me Syria and the West (that is, North
Africa and Southern Spain). As for the third, it is a sign that Allah
shall grant me victory over the East (that is, the Asian domains of
Islam).' " When the Confederate armies came to meet the Prophet in
battle, the Muslims were troubled and afraid. They encamped at one side
of the trench, where they remained for twenty some days. No actual
fighting occurred between them and the Muslims except with arrows and
stones. Finally, some fighters of the Quraysh came out calling for
single combat.

Among them were \`Amr ibn \`Abd Wadd, \`Ikrimah ibn Abi Jahl, Hubayrah
ibn Wahb and Dirar ibn al-Khattab. They made ready for fighting and rode
their horses to the edge of the trench. When they looked at it they
said: "By Allah, this is a trick which the Arabs never before
practised." They then came to a narrow spot of the trench and spurred
their horses on, so that they in fact jumped over it. The horses,
however, galloped aimlessly with them in a salty marsh between the
trench and a mountain on the edge of Medina called as-Sulay\` (or
Sal').

\`Ali ibn Abi Talib went out with a few men and blocked that breach in
the trench which had been penetrated, so that they were unable to go
back. \`Amr ibn \`Abd Wadd came forth and challenged the Muslims for
single combat. 'Ali came out to meet him, and slew him. (We shall return
to this event in greater detail later, if Allah wills.) [^51] When
\`Ikrimah and Hubayrah saw \`Amr dead, they fled. The Commander of the
Faithful composed verses concerning this event, some of which are:

He (\`Amr) foolishly lent support to stone idols,But I have wisely lent
support to Muhammad's Lord.I thus struck him and left him,Hugging the
earth like a dry branch between quick sands and hills.His rich garments
I did not pillage,Even though he would have pillaged my garments, were I
the one killed.

Think not that Allah shall abandon His religion,Nor abandon His
Prophet, O people of the Confederates!

Then Ibnu'l-\`Araqah shot an arrow which hit Sa'd ibn Mu'adh in the
medial vein of the arm. He exclaimed: "Take this from me, for I am
Ibnu'l-\`Araqah!" Sa'd retorted: "May Allah cause your face to sweat in
the Fire!" Sa'd went on: "O Allah, if you will that war shall continue
between us and the Quraysh, then preserve me, if only for the sake of
this war; for there is no people against whom I desire to wage war more
than those who have rejected your Apostle and driven him out of your
sanctuary (haram). O Allah, if you so will that war shall end between us
and them, then let this (injury) be the cause of martyrdom for me. Yet,
do not cause me to die until you grant me the satisfaction of
(defeating) the tribe of Banu Qurayzah." The Messenger of Allah had him
brought to him, and there the man spent the night on the ground.

Aban ibn \`Uthman reported on the authority of a man who heard Abu
\`Abdillah (the sixth Imam) say: "The Messenger of Allah one dark and
cold night stood on the hill on which now stands Masjidu'l-Fath (the
mosque named after the conquest, \`Fath' of Mecca). Addressing his
Companions, he said: "Who shall go and bring us news of the (fighters)
and have Paradise for a reward? " He repeated this a second and a third
time, but no one came forward. Finally, Hudhayfah ( a man well-known for
his strict moral and spiritual discipline) arose. The Prophet said to
him: "Go and listen to their words and bring me news of them." As
Hudhayfah set out, the Prophet prayed: "O Allah, watch over him in the
front and in the back, on his right and on his left until you bring him
back to me." The Prophet said further: "Do not do anything until you
return to us."

When Hudhayfah departed, the Apostle of Allah rose up and prayed, then
cried out with a most sorrowful voice: "O You Who hear the cry of those
who are in sorrow, You Who answer the prayers of those who are in
distress, remove my sorrow and distress, for You see my state and the
state of those who are with me!" Gabriel came down to him and said: "O
Messenger of Allah, Allah, be He exalted, has heard your cry and
answered your prayer! He shall spare you dread of those who have allied
themselves against you and opposed you." The Messenger of Allah then
knelt down on his knees and let his eyes shed tears. He cried out again:
"All thanks be to You for sheltering me and those who are with me! "
Gabriel then said: "O Apostle of Allah, He has indeed granted you
support, for He has sent against them a wind from the heaven of this
world carrying pebbles, and another wind from the fourth heaven carrying
stones."

Hudhayfah reported: "As I reached the place, I saw the fires. of the
people put out and utterly extinguished. This was because the first army
of Allah had come - a strong wind blowing pebbles. Thus it left no fire
of the enemy but that it extinguished it, a tent but that it blew it
away, or a spear but that it broke it. This went on until they had to
shield themselves from the pebbles, and I heard the clatter of the
pebbles against the shields. Then the greater army of Allah came! Abu
Sufyan rushed up to his mount and cried out: \`Save yourselves, save
yourselves! '\`Uyaynah ibn Hisn did likewise, and so also did al-Harith
ibn \`Awf. Thus the Confederates went away." Hudhayfah then returned to
the Apostle of Allah and recounted to him what had happened. Then Allah
sent down to His Apostle: Remember the favor of Allah towards you when
great hosts came against you, and We sent against them a wind and hosts
whom you did not see [Qur'an 33 :9].

The Messenger of Allah presented himself early next morning before the
Muslims of Medina, and Fatimah his daughter prepared water to wash his
head (in special celebration of the occasion). But suddenly Gabriel came
to him on a mule, his face covered with a white turban and clad in a
garment of brocade adorned with pearls and rubies. He was, however,
covered with dust. Thus. the Messenger of Allah rose and wiped away the
dust from his face. Gabriel exclaimed: "May your Lord have mercy upon
you; you have laid down your arms, yet the denizens of heaven have not
laid theirs down! I have pursued them until they reached ar-Rawha.' "
Gabriel continued: "Rise now against their brethren of the People of the
Book, for by Allah, I shall crush them as would an egg be crushed
against a rock! "

The Messenger of Allah then called \`Ali and ordered him, saying:
"Carry the banner of the Immigrants against the tribe of Banu Qurayzah."
He further ordered his Companions: "I charge you not to offer the
mid-afternoon prayers except in the quarters of Banu Qurayzah." 'Ali
arose with the Immigrants, the men of the Banu \`Abdi 'lAshhal and those
of Banu'n-Najjar all of them; not even one was left behind. The Prophet
continued to send men to assist \`Ali. Some of the men did not pray the
mid-afternoon prayers until after the time for the night prayers.

The people of Banu Qurayzah came out to 'Ali and cursed him, saying:
"May Allah curse you and your cousin (that is, the Prophet)." But 'Ali
stood in his place and did not answer them. When the Messenger of Allah
arrived with the men of faith all around him, the Commander of the
Faithful met him saying: "Do not come near them, O Apostle of Allah, may
Allah make me a ransom for you! Allah shall surely punish them." The
Messenger of Allah knew that they had insulted 'Ali. Thus he said: "If
they see me, they will say nothing of what they said against you." He
thus approached them and said: "You brothers of the apes! [^52] Thus have
we come to the quarters of a people to warn them, evil be the morning of
those who are warned! O servants of Satan, be you humbled, may Allah
humiliate you! " They (Banu Qurayzah) cried from right and left: "O Abu
'l-Qasim (that is, Muhammad), you have never been a lewd man; what has
happened to you? " as-Sadiq reported that a lance which he was holding
fell from his hand, and his outer garment fell off behind him. He began
to walk backward, ashamed of what he had said to them.

The Messenger of Allah besieged them for twenty-five days until they
agreed to abide by the judgment of Sa'd ibn Mu'adh which was that their
men be slain and their women and children be taken as slaves. He further
decreed that their homes and lands be given to the Immigrants, and their
wealth divided among the Muslims. The Prophet said to him: "You have
judged them according to Allah's judgment, which issues from above, from
the seven heavens."

When the captives were brought, they were imprisoned in a house. Ten
were brought out, whom the Commander of the Faithful beheaded. Another
ten were brought out whom az-Zubayr beheaded. A man of the Companions of
the Messenger of Allah said: "Would it not be better to kill one or two
men at a time?"

The wound which Sa'd had suffered in his arm suddenly opened and the
blood continued to gush out until he died. The Messenger of Allah took
off his outer garment (as an expression of grief ) and walked with his
funeral without an outer garment. He then sent \`Abdullah ibn \`Atik to
Khaybar (another Jewish settlement) where he killed Abu Rafi\` (Sallam)
ibn Abi ' l-Huqayq (one of the chiefs of the Banu Qurayzah).


