The Conquest of Mecca
=====================

The Battle of Mu'tah was followed in Ramadan of the same year (8 AH. =
December, 629) by the Conquest of Mecca. When the Messenger of Allah
agreed on the truce of Hudaybiyyah, the Khuza'ah tribe entered into a
pact of alliance with the Prophet, and the Kinanah tribe established a
similar pact with the Quraysh. After two years had elapsed, a man of the
Kinanah sat relating disparaging tales about the Messenger of Allah. A
man of Khuza'ah objected saying: "Do not say such things." The man
asked: "What is it to you?" He threatened, "If you repeat this, I will
revoke our covenant." As the man dared him and repeated his words, the
man of Khuza'ah struck him with his hand. Both men cried out to their
people for support. The men of Kinanah were more numerous, so they beat
the others back until they forced them into the Sacred Mosque, even
killing some of them. The people of Quraysh aided the men of Kinanah
with arms and horses.

\`Amr ibn Salim (a man of the Khuza'ah tribe) rode to the Messenger of
Allah with the news and recited the following verses:

No matter, but I have come to remind Muhammad, of the old alliance
between him and us.
The people of Quraysh have broken their promise to you; they have
indeed revoked your binding covenant,They killed us while we were
kneeling and prostrate at prayer!The Messenger of Allah answered: "You
have said enough O \`Amr ! " He then immediately arose and, entering the
chamber of his wife Maymunah, ordered water to be brought to him. He
began to wash himself and repeat, "No, may I never be given support if I
do not come to the aid of the people of Ka'b (i.e., the Khuza'ah)." Thus
the Apostle of Allah resolved on going to Mecca. He prayed: "O Allah,
remove all spies of the Quraysh, so that we might surprise them in their
own home."

A man called Hatib ibn Abi Balta'ah wrote a letter to the people of
Quraysh which he sent with Sarah, a servant of Abu Lahab, telling them
that the Messenger of Allah would come to punish them on such and such a
day. The woman set out, avoiding the main road, and going instead to the
left across the Harrah district. But Gabriel came down and told the
Prophet. He called 'Ali and az-Zubayr and said to them: "Go overtake her
and seize the letter from her!" 'Ali and az-Zubayr set out, not stopping
to speak to anyone until they reached Dhu 'l-Hulayfah (a place outside
Medina on the way to Mecca). The Prophet had previously set guards over
Medina, headed by al-Harithah ibn an-Nu'man. 'Ali and az-Zubayr asked
the guards if they had seen the woman, but they said that they had seen
no one. They then met a woodcutter and asked him; he said, "I saw a dark
woman who turned down towards al-Harrah." Thus they caught her; 'Ali
took the letter from her and took her back to the Messenger of Allah.

The Prophet called Hatib and said to him: "See what you have done! "
The man answered: "By Allah, I have faith in Allah and His Apostle. I
have never doubted, but I am a man who has close relatives and family in
Mecca. I therefore wished to do the people of Quraysh a good turn in
order that they in turn act kindly towards my family." \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab said: "Let me cut off his head, O Apostle of Allah; for-by
Allah, he has acted hypocritically!" The Prophet replied: "He is of the
people of Badr, whom Allah has looked kindly on and forgiven." He then
commanded: "Expel him from the Mosque!" As men began to push him cut, he
turned and looked at the Messenger of Allah, hoping that he would show
mercy towards him. The Prophet at last ordered that he be brought back,
and said to him: "I have pardoned your crime. Seek forgiveness of your
Lord, therefore, and do not commit such an act again." Allah then sent
down: D you who have faith, do not take my enemies and your enemies as
allies . . ., and so on to the middle of the surah [see Qur'an 60:1 et
seq.].

Aban related on the authority of Abu \`Abdillah (as-Sadiq) that when
Abu Sufyan learnt of what the people of Quraysh had done to those of
Khuza'ah while he was in Syria, he went to the Messenger of Allah and
said to him: "O Muhammad, stop the blood of your people from being shed!
Allow that pacts of protection (jiwar) be established among the people
of Quraysh, and give us longer respite! " The Prophet replied: "But you
have committed treachery, O Abu Sufyan." "No", Abu Sufyan answered. The
Prophet then declared: "We remain committed as we have been." Abu Sufyan
met Abu Bakr soon after he left the Prophet. He requested him to grant
protection to the people of Quraysh. Abu Bakr objected: "Alas for you,
can anyone grant protection against the Messenger of Allah?

" Abu Sufy5n then met \`Umar and repeated to him the same request. He
then went to Umm Habibah, wife of the Prophet, and went to sit on a
mattress she had on the floor. Umm Habibah, however, quickly folded the
mattress and took it away. Abu Sufyan asked: "O daughter, would you
consider me unworthy to sit on this mattress?" "Yes", she retorted,
"this belongs to the Messenger of Allah. You ought not to sit on it
while you are an abominable Associator! " He then went to Fatimah and
addressed her saying: "O daughter of the Apostle of Allah and master of
the Arabs, would you offer protection to the people of Quraysh and
extend our period of truce, and thus be the noblest lady among the
people? "

She answered: "My pact of protection is that of the Apostle of Allah."
He begged again: "Would you order your two sons to offer protection to
the people?" "By Allah", she said: "my sons would not know to whom of
the people of Quraysh they should offer protection." Abu Sufyan then met
'Ali and said to him: "You are the closest in kinship to me. Matters
have become difficult for me; find a way out for me." \`Ali answered:
"You are the chief elder of Quraysh. Stand, therefore, at the door of
the mosque and establish pacts of protection among the men of Quraysh.
Then ride out and go to your people." "Do you consider this to be of
benefit to me?" Abu Sufyan asked. "I do not know", 'Ali answered. Abu
Sufyan did as \`Ali suggested and cried out: "O people, I hereby declare
a covenant of protection (jiwar) among the people of Quraysh ! "

Abu Sufyan then mounted his camel and went to his people. They asked:
"What news have you?" He replied: "I went to Muhammad and spoke to him,
but by Allah, he gave no answer to me. I then went to Ibn Abi Quhafah
(Abu Bakr), but I found no good with him. I likewise went to \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab, but to no avail. I went to Fatimah, but she did not answer
me. I finally met \`Ali, and he advised me to declare a covenant of
protection among the people, and they accepted. The men of Quraysh
asked: "Did Muhammad allow it?" "No", he answered. "Alas for you", they
retorted, "the man (that is, \`Ali) is playing tricks on you, while you
declare covenants of protection among the people of Quraysh! "

The Messenger of Allah set out for Mecca on Friday after the
mid-afternoon prayers on the second of Ramadan (9/630), leaving Abu
Lubabah ibn \`Abdi 'l-Mundhir as his representative in Medina. He then
summoned the chief of every tribe and asked him to call his people to
arms. It is reported on the authority of (the fifth Imam) al-Baqir that
the Messenger of Allah set out for the Battle of Conquest observing the
fast along with the people until they reached a place called
Kura'u'l-Ghamim, where he broke his fast. The people also broke their
fast except a few who were then called \`the rebellious ones'. He
journeyed on until he reached a place called Marru'z-Zahran. He was
accompanied by around ten thousand men and four hundred horsemen, but
the people of Quraysh did not learn of his coming.

On that night Abu Sufyan, Hakim ibn Hizam and Badil ibn Warqa' set out
wondering if they would hear any news. al-\`Abbas ibn \`Abdi 'l-Muttalib
had previously gone out to meet the Messenger of Allah, accompanied by
Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith and \`Abdullah ibn Abi Umayyah. He met him at a
spot called Niqu'l-\`Iqab. The Messenger of Allah was sitting under a
canopy guarded by Ziyad ibn Usayd. Ziyad met them and said: "As for you
O Abu 'l-Fadl, you may go to the canopy. But as for the two of you, you
must go away." al-\`Abbas went to the Messenger of Allah and greeted him
with the salutation of peace, and said: "May my father and mother be a
ransom for you, here is your cousin (that is, Abu Sufyan) and your
maternal aunt's son (that is, \`Abdullah ibn Abi Umayyah) coming to you
repentant." He answered, "I have no need of them. My cousin has violated
my family's honour. As for the son of my aunt, he is the one who says in
Mecca: \`We shall not believe you until you cause a cool spring to gush
forth for us from the earth"' [Qur'an 17:90] . When al-\`Abbas left, Umm
Salamah (the Prophet's wife) pleaded with him saying: "May my father and
mother be a ransom for you, here is your cousin coming to you repentant!
Let him not be the most wretched of men through you. Here also is the
brother of your aunt's son, and brother to your son-in-law; let him not
be wretched through you! " Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith then called out to
the Prophet:

"O Apostle of Allah, say to us what Allah's righteous servant (Joseph)
said to his brothers: \`There is no blame on you"' [Qur'an 12:92 ] . The
Prophet then called both Abu Sufyan and \`Abdullah ibn Abi Umayyah and
accepted their repentance.

al-\`Abbas commented: "If the Messenger of Allah had entered Mecca as a
conqueror, it would have been the destruction of Quraysh to the end of
time." He continued: "Thus I mounted the Messenger of Allah's white mule
and went out of the city looking for a woodcutter or shepherd that I
might send to the people of Quraysh and convey my advice that they ride
to the Apostle of Allah and beg for a promise of security (aman). On the
way I met Abu Sufyan, Badil ibn Warqa" and Hakim ibn Hizam, just as Abu
Sufyan was asking Badil, \`What are these fires?' He answered, \`They
must belong to the tribe of Khuza'ah.' Abu Sufyan answered, \`The
Khuza'ah are too few for these to be their fires. They must rather
belong to either the Taym or Rabi'ah tribe.' "

al-\`Abbas went on: "I recognized Abu Sufyan's voice, and called out,
\`Is that Abu Hanzalah?' He answered: \`Here I am; who are you?' I
answered, \`I am al -\`Abbas.' Abu Sufyan asked, \`To whom do these
fires belong?' \`This is the Messenger of Allah with ten thousand of the
Muslims', I replied. He asked further, \`What is to be done?' I said,
\`You must ride behind me on this mule and come with me that I may beg
the Messenger of Allah for a promise of security for you.' I thus put
him behind me and rode with him (to the Prophet). Whenever we passed by
an assembly of men, they rushed at him. But as they saw me, they turned
back saying, \`This is the uncle of the Apostle of Allah; let him go.'
When I reached \`Umar's door, he recognized Abu Sufyan and exclaimed,
\`Here is the enemy of Allah; praise be to Allah Who brought you into my
hands!' The mule, however, galloped on until we all gathered at the
entrance to the canopy.

\`Umar went in and said (to the Prophet), \`Here is Abu Sufyan; Allah
has brought him into your hands without him having any covenant or
agreement of protection. Let me, therefore, strike off his head.' "

Al-\`Abbas continued his narrative. "I sat at the feet of the Apostle
of Allah and begged him, saying: \`Here is Abu Sufyan whom I have taken
into my protection.' He answered, \`Bring him in.' Abu Sufyan stood
before him, and the Prophet asked, \`O Abu Sufyan, is it not time for
you to bear witness that there is no god but Allah, and that I am the
Apostle of Allah?' Abu Sufyan exclaimed, \`May my father and mother be a
ransom for you! How noble and kind to your next of kin you are, and how
clement! By Allah, had there been any other god beside Him, he would
have assisted on the days of Uhud and Badr. But as for the fact that you
are the Messenger of Allah, I still have some doubt in my heart
concerning it.' " al-\`Abbas warned him saying: "He will strike off your
head right now unless you bear witness that he is the Apostle of Allah!
" Abu Sufyan finally exclaimed: "I bear witness that there is no god but
Allah, and that you are indeed the Apostle of Allah." He barely mumbled
it with his lips. Abu Sufyan asked al -\`Abbas, "What shall we do with
al-Lat and al-\`Uzza (the two goddesses of Mecca)?" "Defecate on them!"
\`Umar retorted: Abu Sufyan said: "Fie on you, how lewd you are! What
makes you intervene in a conversation between me and my cousin?" The
Messenger of Allah asked Abu Sufyan, "With whom will you spend the
night?" "With Abu 'l-Fadl", he replied. The Prophet said: "Take him, O
Abu 'l-Fadl, and let him sleep at your home tonight, and bring him back
to me in the morning."

Next morning, Abu Sufyan heard Bilal raising the call to prayer. He
asked: "Who is that calling out, O Abu 'lFadl?" al-\`Abbas answered: "He
is the mu'adhdhin of the Messenger of Allah. Rise, therefore, perform
your ablutions and offer your prayers." "How shall I perform my
ablutions?" Abu Sufyan enquired. al-\`Abbas then taught him how.

It is reported that Abu Sufyan looked at the Prophet performing his
ablutions, while the Muslims placed their hands beneath his head so that
not one drop fell on a man but that he rubbed his face with it. He
exclaimed in astonishment: "O Abu 'l-Fadl, by Allah, I have never seen
the like of this day in the courts of Kisra (the Emperor of Persia) or
Qaysar (the Emperor of Byzantium)! " After Abu Sufyan had performed his
prayers, al-\`Abbas took him to the Messenger of Allah. Abu Sufyan
addressed him, saying: "O Apostle of Allah, I wish that you would permit
me to warn your people (that is, the Quraysh of Mecca) and invite them
to the Messenger of Allah." He was granted permission.

Abu Sufyan asked al-\`Abbas, "What shall I say to them? Advise me of a
way in which they would be pleased." The Prophet answered: "Say to them,
\`Anyone who says there is no god but Allah alone, having no associate,
and that Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah, and also restrains his hand
(that is, from fighting against the Muslims), shall be granted security.
Anyone who lays down his arms and sits by the Ka'bah shall have safety.'
" al-\`Abbas said: "O Apostle of Allah, Abu Sufyan is a man who loves
boasting. Would you, then, grant him a special favour?" The Prophet then
added: "Whoever enters the house of Abu Sufyan shall be safe." Abu
Sufyan enquired, again with astonishment, "Do you mean my house?" "Yes,
your house", the Prophet answered. He went on: "Anyone who remains in
his home and shuts his door, shall be safe."

When Abu Sufyan left, al-\`Abbas said: "O Apostle of Allah, Abu Sufyan
is a man who behaves perfidiously, and he has observed the disunity
prevailing among the Muslims. The Prophet replied: "Pursue him and keep
him in the narrow passes of the valley until Allah's legions overtake
him."

It is reported that al-'Abbas pursued Abu Sufyan and called out to him:
"O Abu Hanzalah." Abu Sufyan called back: "Is it treachery that you
intend against me, O sons of Hashim? " "Treachery is not our custom, as
you shall know", al-'Abbas replied, "but stay here till the morning so
that you might see the legions of Allah." al-'Abbas reported that Khalid
ibn al-Walid passed first, and Abu Sufyan said: "This is the Messenger
of Allah." "No", answered al-\`Abbas, "this is Khalid ibn al-Walid
coming with the first ranks." Then az-Zubayr passed by leading the
tribes of Juhaynah and Ashja\`. Abu Sufyan exclaimed: "O \`Abbas, this
is Muhammad! " "No", he answered, "this is az-Zubayr." Thus legions
followed past him one after the other until the Messenger of Allah came
leading the legion of the Ansar. Then Sa'd ibn \`Ubadah came up to Abu
Sufyan, bearing in his hand the standard of the Messenger of Allah, and
said: "O Abu Hanzalah, today is the day of war! Today shall womenfolk be
taken captive! O men of the Aws and Khazraj, today is the day of your
revenge for the day of the mountain (that is, for those who were killed
in the Battle of Uhud)."
When Abu Sufyan heard these words from Sa'd, he left al-'Abbas and made
his way through the crowds and under the spears of the men, until he
stood by the Messenger of Allah. He took hold of his stirrup and kissed
it. He then addressed him saying: "May my father and mother be a ransom
for you; do you hear what Sa'd is saying? " He then repeated Sa\`d's
words to the Prophet. The Prophet answered: "Nothing of what Sa'd has
said will happen." He then turned to 'Ali and said: "Go to Sa'd and take
the banner from him and carry it gently into Mecca." 'Ali carried it
thither as the Prophet had commanded.

It is reported that on that day Hakim ibn Hizam, Badil ibn Warqa' and
Jubayr ibn Mut\`im accepted Islam. Abu Sufyan ran hastily to Mecca. Even
though a thick cloud of dust appeared over the mountains, the people of
Quraysh knew nothing of what was taking place: Abu Sufyan came running
up the valley. The men of Quraysh met him and asked the reason for his
excitement, and the meaning of the dust which they saw. He said: "Here
comes Muhammad with the multitudes! " He then cried out: "O people of
Ghalib, run to your houses! Whoever enters my home, he shall be safe! "
When Hind learnt of what was happening, she began to expel the people
(from Abu Sufyan's home). She then cried out: "Kill the wicked old man
(meaning the Prophet). May Allah curse such a leader, coming at the head
of such a people! " Abu Sufyan retorted: "Hold your peace, woe to you! I
saw the men of horns (that is, the Byzantines, descendants of Alexander
the Great who was known as Dhu 'l-Qarnayn, the man with the two horns) -
I saw the noble sons of Persia, the King of Kindah (an important Arab
tribe) and the young men of Himyar (a large tribe of Yemen) - I saw them
all accepting Islam at the end of the day (of battle). Hold your peace;
alas for you, Truth has come, and calamity is near! "

The Messenger of Allah had previously bound the Muslims with a promise
that they would kill in Mecca only those who might fight against them,
except a few men who used to insult the Prophet - Miqyas ibn Subabah,
\`Abdullah ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh, \`Abdullah ibn Khatal and two singing
girls who used to sing songs denigrating the Messenger of Allah. He
commanded the Muslims, saying: "Slay them, even if you find them holding
on to the curtains of the Ka'bah." \`Abdullah ibn Khatal was indeed
found holding on to the curtains of the Ka'bah. Said ibn Hurayth and
\`Ammar ibn Yasir ran to him, but Said overtook \`Ammar and slew him.
Miqyas ibn Subabah was killed in the market place.

'Ali killed one of the two singing girls, but the other escaped. 'Ali
also killed al-Huwayrith ibn Naqidh ibn Ka'b. He learnt that Umm Hani
daughter of Abu Talib had given shelter to some men of the Makhzum
tribe, among whom were al-Harith ibn Hisham and Qays ibn as-Sa'ib. 'Ali
went to her house heavily clad with iron armor. He cried out: "Bring
forth the men you have sheltered!" The men began to urinate on
themselves in fear of him. Umm Hani came out to him, not knowing who he
was, and said: "O servant of Allah, I am Umm Hani, cousin of the
Messenger of Allah and sister of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib ! Go away from my
house." 'Ali, however, insisted: "Bring them out!" She answered: "By
Allah, I shall accuse you before the Apostle of Allah! " But as he took
the helmet off his head, she recognized him. She thus ran and embraced
him, saying: "May I be a ransom for you! I have sworn by Allah that I
would accuse you before the Apostle of Allah." "Go and fulfill your
oath", 'Ali replied, "there he is at the head of the valley."

Umm Hani related: "I came to the Messenger of Allah as he was under a
canopy bathing, while Fatimah stood sheltering him. When the Messenger
of Allah heard my words, he exclaimed: \`Welcome to you, O Umm Hani!' I
replied, \`May my father and mother be a ransom for you, I have endured
much from 'Ali today.' He answered: \`I shall grant protection (jiwar)
to anyone you have taken into your protection.' Fatimah added: \`So you
come to accuse \`Ali in that he frightened the enemies of Allah and His
Apostle.' I said to the Prophet: \`Bear with me, may I be a ransom for
you.' The Messenger of Allah replied: \`May Allah accept well his
effort! As for me, I shall grant protection to anyone in Umm Hani's
protection because of her relationship to 'Ali ibn Abi Talib.' "

Aban reported on the authority of (the sixth Imam) Abu \`Abdillah that
when Mecca was conquered, the Apostle of Allah asked: "Who has the key
(of the Ka'bah)?" They answered: "It is with Umm Shaybah." He thus
called Shaybah and said to him: "Go to your mother and ask her to send
the key." She said to her son: "Tell him, \`You have killed our
fighters; do you now wish to seize our honour!' " Shaybah threatened:
"You either send the key, or I shall kill you!" She finally placed it in
the hand of the youth, who took it to the Prophet. The Prophet then
called \`Umar and said: "This is the fulfilment of my dream which I
had." He then rose and opened (the Ka'bah) with the key and hung a
curtain over its door. From that day on, it has become custom to cover
it. The Prophet then called the youth, spread his garment, placed the
key in it and said: "Take it back to your mother."

It is reported that the valiant men of Quraysh entered the Ka'bah
thinking that they would not be spared the sword. The Messenger of Allah
came to the House, and taking hold of the two posts of the door,
exclaimed: "There is no god but Allah; He fulfilled His promise, granted
His servant victory, and He alone defeated the Confederates (al-Ahzab)."
Then, addressing the people of Quraysh, he asked: "What do you think,
and what have you now to say?" Suhayl ibn \`Amr answered: "We think well
and say good: \`A noble brother and a cousin.' " The Prophet replied: "I
say to you what Joseph said to his brothers, \`There is no blame on you
today; may Allah forgive you, for He is most merciful' [ 12:92] . Let
every wealth (wrongfully seized), every blood (wrongfully shed), and
every revenge to be exacted belonging to the days of jahiliyyah be
trampled under my foot, except the guardianship of the Ka'bah and the
bearing of water at the time of the pilgrimage (siqayatu 'l-hajj); they
shall be returned to their people.

Behold, the sanctity of Mecca (that is, against any kind of violence),
was made inviolable by Allah. It was never allowed to be violated by
anyone before me, nor was it made violable for me except for one hour of
one day. It shall henceforth remain inviolable until the coming of the
Hour. Its herbs shall not be cut off, nor shall its trees be cut down.
Its animals shall not be hunted, nor will any valuable (thing) be picked
up except by one wishing to identify it and its owner." He then said:
"Bad hosts indeed you were to the Prophet! You have rejected, expelled,
forcefully driven out and beaten (the Muslims). Yet, you were not
satisfied until you came to me to fight against me in my own home. No
matter - go, for you are free! " The people went out as though they had
been raised up from the tomb, and they all entered into Islam.

It is reported that the Messenger of Allah entered Mecca without being
in the state of consecration (ihram). This is because the Muslims had
entered Mecca with their arms. He likewise entered the House neither
performing the greater or lesser pilgrimage. He went in at the
mid-afternoon hour, and ordered Bilal to go up to the roof of the Ka'bah
and raise the call to prayer. \`Ikrimah (ibn Abi Jahl) exclaimed: "By
Allah, I hate to hear the voice of Ibn Rabah (that is, Bilal) braying on
the roof of the Ka'bah." Khalid ibn Usayd said: "Praise be to Allah Who
favored Abu \`Attab today in not letting him see Ibn Rabah standing on
the Ka'bah." Suhayl ibn \`Amr objected saying: "It is Allah's Ka'bah,
and He sees all things. Had He willed otherwise, He would have altered
(the situation)." It is reported that Suhayl was the most sober among
the men of Quraysh. Abu Sufyan said: "As for me, I shall say nothing. If
I were to speak, by Allah, these walls would, I think, inform Muhammad
of what I say! " The Prophet did, in fact, send for them and tell them
what they had said. \`Attab confessed: "By Allah, we did say all that, 0
Apostle of Allah. We therefore beg Allah's forgiveness and repent to
Him." He thereafter accepted Islam and sincerely lived by it. The
Messenger of Allah set him over Mecca as governor.

Mecca was conquered thirteen nights into Ramadan. Three Muslims were
martyred. They were left alone at the lowest district of Mecca; they
thus lost their way and were killed.

The Messenger of Allah then sent detachments of men all around Mecca
calling people to Allah, but he did not command them to fight. He sent
Ghalib ibn \`Abdillah to the tribe of Mudlij; they said: "We are neither
against you, nor are we with you." The people said: "Attack them, O
Apostle of Allah! " He answered: "They have a magnanimous and prudent
chief. Many a fighter of the Banu Mudlij shall be a martyr in the way of
Allah."

The Prophet sent \`Amr ibn Umayyah ad-Damri to the tribe of Banu
'l-Hudhayl to call them to Allah and His Apostle, but they vehemently
refused his call. The people again said: "Attack them, O Apostle of
Allah! " He answered: "Their chief shall now come to you. He has become
a Muslim. He shall say to them, \`Become Muslims', and they will answer,
\`Yes, we shall.' " Then the Prophet sent \`Abdullah ibn Suhayl ibn
\`Amr to the tribe of Banu Muharib. They accepted Islam, and a group of
them came back with him to the Messenger of Allah.

The Prophet also sent Khalid ibn al-Walid to the tribe of Judhaymah ibn
\`Amir. During the time of jahiliyyah they had captured some women of
the tribe of Banu'I-Mughirah, and killed Khalid's paternal uncle. They
thus received him in full armour saying: "O Khalid, we have not raised
arms against Allah and against His Apostle, for we are Muslims. If the
Apostle of Allah has sent you as an emissary, then there are our camels
and sheep; go at them." Khalid, however, insisted, "Lay down your arms."
They answered: "We fear that you will attack us because of a feud left
over from the time of jahiliyyah. Yet, Allah and His Apostle have
declared such feuds dead." He and the men who were with him then left
them and encamped nearby. Still he attacked them with horses, slaying
some and capturing others. He then ordered his men, "Let every one of
you kill his captive." Thus they killed the captives. The emissary of
the tribe then went to the Messenger of Allah and told him what Khalid
had done. On hearing this, the Prophet lifted his hands to the heaven
and exclaimed: "O Allah, I dissociate myself from that which Khalid has
done!" He wept, and called for 'Ali and said to him: "Go to them and
look into their affair." He also gave 'Ali a sackful of gold. 'Ali did
what the Prophet commanded him to do, and pacified them.

