Foreword Prologue
=================

In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate

Praise be to Allah, the One and only God: The eternal refuge, who did
not beget, nor was He begotten. Nor is there anyone equal to Him
[Qur.112] . Far exalted is He over having mate or offspring, or being
subject to number and effort. Sanctified over resemblances is His
essence. His greatness transcends the minds of men, and His majesty has
baffled the subtleties of human reason. Through clear testimony does His
proof shine forth, and His wisdom is manifest in all things. He
established truth, and made clear His proofs and elucidations through
the beacons (that is, the Imams) and the clear evidences which He raised
up. He destroyed falsehood, as He utterly refuted its errors.

Allah's blessings be upon His chosen servant and Prophet, the most
excellent of prophets and messengers, and of people who have come and
those who are yet to be - the bearer of glad tidings who invited men to
Allah by His leave, the luminous lamp [see Qur'an. 33:45-6] and master
of the masters of the Arabs and non-Arabs - Muhammad ibn \`Abdillah ibn
\`Abdi 'l-Muttalib.

Peace be upon his vicegerents, the rightly guided Imams, who are
satisfied with Allah's pleasure: they who are the chosen of Muhammad's
fragrant shoot; who are the guardians of his sacred law; they who are
protected [by Allah] from all impurity and abomination; they who are
chosen over all humankind and the jinn. Through them anyone promised
good by Allah shall receive His promise; nor will anyone be able to
traverse the sirat [^1], except by their permission. They are the cushion
of the middle course [upon which all must lean] [^2]. Anyone who seeks to
precede them shall go astray, and he who turns away from them shall
perish. Yet he who abides with them shall achieve his goal. They are
like the gate of forgiveness [bab hittah] [^3], and like the Ark of
Noah - he who enters it shall be saved, arid he who abandons it shall
drown and perish. They are the elect of the Apostle and the chosen of
his descendants. Allah linked their knowledge to knowledge of the
Prophet, and made love for them as binding as love for him. They are the
foundations of Islam: the Imams of humankind and the proofs of the
Guardian, the [Lord of ] Peace [see Qur'an. 59:23 ] . They are lamps in
the darkness and guides to every desire. The best of blessings and peace
be upon them, so long as lightening flashes, clouds pour down their rain
and gardens adorn themselves with fruits and herbage.

[The author] has thus determined to write a book containing the names
of the guiding Imams: the masters of authority, the people of command,
the people of remembrance [see Qur'an. 4:59 and 16:43 ] and the people
of the household of revelation from whom Allah has removed all impurity,
and purified with a great purification [see Qur'an. 33 :33] . It shall
contain their biographies: the times of birth, and the spans of their
lives and reports of their private lives and righteous deeds. It shall
present proof texts supporting the truth of their imamate, as well as
the signs which Allah manifested concerning them and which testify to
their exalted status over all others.

The author contemplated all this, pondering it well, then said to
himself: "If indeed the Apostle of Allah is the tree of which the Imams
are the branches, the garden of which they are the flowers, the
wellspring of knowledge of which they are the repositories, the essence
of wisdom of which they are the treasurers, the legislator of the
religion of which they are the keepers, and the recipient of the Book of
which they are the bearers; he would then be more worthy to be first
mentioned. The miracles which bespeak his apostleship, the signs
pointing to the truth of his Prophethood, his great miracles and
incontrovertible proofs, must all be set forth. He thus sought Allah's
aid in beginning and completing such a work, and entitled it " I\`lamu
'l-wara bi a A\`lami 'l-huda ".

He divided it into four parts: the first deals with the Messenger of
Allah; the second concerns itself with the Commander of the Faithful,
'Ali ibn Abi Talib; and the third deals with the Imams of his
descendants, beginning with al-Hasan ibn 'Ali and ending with al-Hasan
al-\`Askari (the eleventh Imam), peace be upon them. The fourth and
final part discusses the imamate of the twelve Imams, as well as the
twelfth Imam. Each part is in turn divided into different chapters and
sections, rich with precious knowledge and wisdom, each separately and
all together. For in this book I have brought forth a brilliant pearl
for the hearts of the faithful, and the noblest sounds to be poured upon
the ears of the people of certainty. Allah the Exalted grants support;
He guides to the right course and to wise counsel. In Him do I trust,
and to Him do I turn.

**Notes:**

[^1]. 'Sirat' means path or way. It is the way of Islam (submission) to
God, or iman (faith) in God. This is clearly intended in the opening
surah of the Qur'an, verses 6 and 7. The sirat is also said to be a
bridge stretched over Hell, which all creatures traverse. The imams, and
especially the first Imam 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, have often been identified
in Shi'i tradition with the sirat. See Ayoub, M., The Qur'an and its
Interpreters (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1983), vol. I,
p. 48.

[^2]. The phrase 'middle cushion' (an-numriqatu'l-wusta) is here used
metaphorically to signify that the imams are the 'cushion', or source of
justice, to whom all creatures must turn in all their affairs. (Editor's
Note.)

[^3] See Qur'an 2:58 and 7:161. See also Ayoub, M., The Qur'an and its
Interpreters, pp.106-107. This is related on the authority of the fifth
Imam al-Baqir, who said: "We are the gate of your hittah." See
al-'Ayyashi, Abu 'n-Nadr Muhammad ibn Mas'ad as-Sulami as-Samarqandi,
Tafsiru'l-Ayyashi, 2 vols. (Tehran: al-Maktabatu'lIslamiyyah, n.d.),
vol. l, p. 45.


