Chapter 2 :concerning His Resplendant Signs and Miracles
========================================================

These signs fall into two categories: those which occurred before his
apostleship and those which occurred after. Among those which took place
prior to his prophetic mission, and which are reported in great detail
in the hadith, is that when his mother gave birth to him she saw a great
light which illuminated the palaces of Syria. She also reported that she
was told when she conceived the Messenger of Allah: "You have conceived
the master of this community! When he shall fall on the ground, say: \`I
seek refuge for him in the One God from the evil of every envious
person'. The sign of this is that a great light shall come out with him,
which will fill the palaces of Basra in Syria. When he is born call him
Muhammad. His name in the Torah is Ahmad (most praised), for all the
inhabitants of the heavens and earth shall praise him. In the Gospel his
name is Hamid (greatly praised); all the inhabitants of the heavens and
earth shall praise him. His name in the Furqan (the Qur'an) is
Muhammad." She said: "Thus I called him Muhammad."

Abu Umamah related that the Prophet was asked: "O Messenger of Allah,
what is your status?" He answered: "I am the answer to the prayer of my
father Abraham, and the fulfilment of the prophecy of Jesus [see Qur'an.
2:129 and 61:6] . My mother also dreamt that a light would proceed from
her which would illuminate the palaces of Syria."

The great scholar Abu Said \`Abdu'l-Malik al-Kharkushi [^12] related
that on the night in which the Messenger of Allah was born, the palace
(Iwan) of Kisra (Khusraw) was so shaken that twenty-four of its terraces
fell. The sacred fires of Persia, which had not been extinguished for a
thousand years before, died. Lake Sawah disappeared into the ground. The
Mu'badhan (chief Zoroastrian priest) dreamt that strong camels were
leading Arab horses. They crossed the River Tigris and spread about in
its lands. When Khusraw awoke next morning, he was frightened and
despondent. Nevertheless he decided not to hide the matter from his
ministers and notables. He gathered them and recounted what had
happened. As they were all assembled, a letter came announcing the
extinguishing of the sacred fire. The priest also related his dream of
the night before. The King asked him: "What is the meaning of all this?"
He answered: "A great event shall take place in the land of the Arabs."
The King wrote to his vassal an-Nu'man ibn al-Mundhir, King of the
Arabs, saying: "Send me herewith a man of great learning whom I can
question [concerning some important matters]." an-Nu'man sent
\`Abdu'l-Mash ibn \`Amr [ibn Hayyan] ibn Buqaylah al Ghassani. The King
related what he had seen, and the man answered: "Knowledge of the
meaning of this is with my maternal uncle who lives in eastern Syria.
His name is Satih." The King thus ordered him to go and come back with
the interpretation of these portents.

When \`Abdu 'l-Masih arrived, he found Satih on his death-bed. He
greeted him, but received no answer. \`Abdu l-Masih told him what he had
seen, in verse. Satih then opened his eyes and exclaimed in rhymed
prose - " \`Abdu'l Masi\`h comes wandering on a camel to Satih. Yet
Sati\`h is near the grave. The Sasanid King has sent you because of the
shaking of his palace, the extinguishing of the fires and the dream of
the priest. He saw strong camels leading Arab horses which crossed the
River Tigris and spread all around in its lands. O \`Abdu'l-Masih, when
recitation [of the Qur'an] shall increase, and the man of the staff
appears; when the Samawah Valley (near Kufah) shall be flooded; when
Lake Sawah shall disappear and the sacred fire be extinguished; then
Syria, shall no longer be Syria for Sati\`h. Among them (Muslims), kings
and queens shall rule, who are as numerous as the terraces (of Khusraw's
palace). For all that is to be shall indeed come to pass." Sati\`h then
breathed his last. \`Abdu'l-Masih returned to Khusraw and related to him
what Sati'h had said. The King said: "But this shall be only after the
reign of fourteen of our kings! " Events followed one another, and ten
kings ruled in four years; the reign of the rest lasted only till the
time of \`Uthman.

'Ali ibn lbrahim [ al-Qummi] (a well-known Shi\`i traditionist) related
from his father that there was in Mecca a Jew called Yusuf. One night he
saw stars moving and meteors falling. On that night the Prophet was
born. Yusuf exclaimed: "A prophet was born this night! For we find
written in our books that when the last of the prophets shall be born,
devils will be stoned (with meteors) and prevented from approaching
heaven." In the morning, he went to the assembly of Quraysh and asked:
"Was there a child born among you last night?" They answered: "A child
was born to '\`Abdullah ibn \`Abdi 'l-Muttaiib last night." "Show him to
me", he said. Thus, they all went to the door of Aminah's house and
demanded that she bring her son out to them, and he was brought out in
his swaddling clothes. Yusuf looked into his eyes and uncovered his
back. He saw a black mole between his shoulders, covered with a few soft
hairs. When the Jew saw him, he fell down unconscious. The people of
Quraysh laughed at him. But he said: "Do you laugh, O people of Quraysh?
Shall he not soon come to destroy you? Prophethood shall, moreover, now
depart from the Children of Israel to the end of time." Everyone went
his way still discussing what the Jew had told them.

The Prophet Moses referred to Muhammad in the Torah. A man whom I trust
told me that Muhammad's appearance from the progeny of Ishmael and his
character are depicted in the Torah in these words: "I have heard the
prayers of Ishmael and have blessed him. I shall increase him and
multiply his numbers through a descendant of his called Muhammad. The
numerical value of the letters of his name is ninety-two. I shall bring
forth from his progeny Twelve Imams, who shall be rulers. I shall grant
him great multitudes of followers." [^13]

Another of his signs is what the Trusted One [perhaps the sixth Imam]
said that he read in the Gospel: "I am God the Everlasting who shall
never cease to be. Believe in the unlettered prophet, the man of the
camel, woollen garment and of the crown (which is the turban) and the
two sandals and the staff (which is the rod). He is a man of large eyes
and broad forehead, bright complexioned with narrow nose and parted
teeth. His neck is like a silver pitcher, and it is as though gold runs
down the two sides of his neck. A thin and fine line of hair runs from
his chest to his navel, but he has no hairs on his stomach and chest. He
is of a dark colour. He shall have large hands and feet. When he turns
to look, he turns altogether. When he walks, it is as though he is
pulled out of a rock, or comes out of a hard stone (i.e., he walks with
confidence). When he walks with people, he overtakes them. The sweat on
his face is like pearls, and the fragrance of musk shall emanate from
him. No one like him was ever seen before, or will ever be seen after
him. His breath is fragrant. He shall marry many women, yet he shall
have few children. His descendants shall come from a blessed woman (that
is, his daughter Fatimah), who has a mansion prepared for her in
Paradise. In him there shall be neither clamor nor vanity. He shall be
her guardian in the last days as Zechariah was the guardian of your
(Jesus's) mother. [^14] She shall have two young ones (that is Hasan and
Husayn) who shall be martyred. His speech shall be the Qur'an, and his
religion shall be Islam; for I am (the Lord of) Peace. Blessed (tuba) is
he who shall see his time, witness his days and hear his words." [^15]

Jesus asked: "My Lord, what is tuba?" He answered: "It is a tree in
Paradise which I planted with my own hand. Its shade covers the gardens
(of Paradise). Its roots are of ridwan (this term is generally used as
the name of the guardian angel of Paradise, but here it is used to mean
Divine Pleasure). Its water is of tasnim (a river running down from a
mountain in Paradise nearest the Throne). Its coolness is like that of
kafur and its taste is like that of zanjabil (paradisial aromatics
frequently mentioned in the Qur'an). Anyone who drinks once of that
spring shall never be thirsty." Jesus said: "O God, give me to drink of
it." He answered: "It is forbidden the prophets to drink of it until
that Prophet first drinks of it; it is forbidden the nations to drink
until the community (ummah) of that Prophet first drinks of it. I shall
take you up to me [^16], and send you down at the end of time to see
wonders from the community of that Prophet, and that you might assist
them against the accursed Dajjal. (the Antichrist). I shall send you
down at prayer time that you may pray with them, for they are indeed a
community favored with mercy." [^17]

Another tradition is the account of Salman al-Farisi, who continued to
rove from one savant to another and from one jurist to another seeking
ancient texts and reports. Thus, he waited for four hundred years for
the appearance of Muhammad, the master of those who lived in former
times and those who are yet to come. When at last he was told of his
birth, and was filled with certainty that relief (faraj) was near at
hand, he sat out for the Tihamah (Mecca), but was captured.

Still another tradition is that of King Tubba\` [a semi legendary
Jewish King of ancient Yemen], who said: "A prophet shall appear in
Mecca, whose place of migration shall be Yathrib." King Tubba\` then
moved sortie people from Yemen to Yathrib and made them settle with the
Jews in order that they might support Muhammad. These were the two
tribes of Aws and Khazraj. The King then declared:

I bear witness concerning Ahmad that he is a messenger from Allah, the
Creator of souls.
Were my life to last until it joined with his, I would be a minister to
him and a cousin.
I would be a scourge against the Associators, giving them the cup of
fear and sorrow.

In yet another tradition, it is related that Ibn \`Abbas said: "A
special cushion used to be placed for \`Abdu 'lMuttalib in the shade of
the Ka'bah, whereupon, in reverence for him, no one dared sit. His sons
used to sit around that cushion until \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib came out. The
Messenger of Allah, however, while still a child, used to come and sit
on the cushion. His uncles would hasten to remove him, but \`Abdu
'l-Muttalib would say: \`Leave my son alone, for by Allah, he shall have
a great future. I see that a day shall come upon you when he will be
your master. I see his forelock as one that will exercise authority over
men.' Then he would take Muhammad up and place him beside him, fondly
pat his back and kiss him. As he did so, he would explain, \`I have
never seen anyone before him so sweet and pure as he.' He then would
turn to Abu Talib, who had the same mother as \`Abdullah, the Prophet's
father, and say: \`O Abu Talib, this child will have great significance.
Guard him well, therefore, and care for him, for he shall be unique. Be
to him like a father who would never let anything that may disturb him
come near.' \`Abdu'l-Muttalib would then carry Muhammad on his neck and
circumambulate the Ka'bah seven times. Because \`Abdu'l-Muttalib knew
that Muhammad hated al--Lat and al-\`Uzza (the two goddesses of Mecca),
he never brought him near them."

At the end of his sixth year, his mother Aminah died in al-Abwa', a
place between Mecca 'and Medina. She had brought him there to visit his
maternal uncles of the tribe of \`Adiyy. Thus the Messenger of Allah
became an orphan, having neither father nor mother. This increased the
love and care of \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib for him, and he continued in this
manner until he was on his death-bed. He then sent for Abu Talib, who
came and saw him embracing Muhammad close to his breast. As he lay in
the grip of death, he wept and said: "O Abu Talib, take care that you be
a protector for this child who is left alone, neither smelling the odour
of his father, nor tasting the love of his mother. Be sure, O Abu Talib,
that he be as precious as your heart to your body. I have bypassed all
my sons and put him in your trust because you are the son of his
father's mother. O Abu Talib, if you live to see his days (that is, the
time of his call to Prophethood), know that I was the most informed
concerning him, and the most caring of men towards him. If you are able
to follow him, do so. Support him with your tongue, hand and wealth.
Soon he shall exercise authority and dominion, the like of which no one
of his forefathers attained. O Abu Talib, I know no one among the Arabs
whose father died in the state in which he was when his father died, or
one whose mother died in the state in which he was when his mother died.
Protect him, therefore, as he has no one. Do you accept my trust? "
"Yes", Abu Talib answered: "I accept, and Allah shall be my witness."
\`Abdu 'l-Muttalib then said: "Give me your hand!" He put out his hand,
and \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib struck it with his own (as a sign of binding
agreement), saying: "Now death has become easy for me." Finally, he
embraced Muhammad and exclaimed: "I bear witness that I have never
kissed anyone of my children who is of sweeter fragrance than you, or of
more beautiful countenance." He then fervently wished that he could live
to witness his time.

Thus, \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib died when the Prophet was eight years old.
Afterwards Abu Talib took him into his home. He never left him, even for
an hour, day and night. He went so far as to have him sleep in the same
room with him until he reached adulthood, not trusting anyone with
him.

The account of Sayf ibn Dhi Yazan concerning Muhammad's Prophethood,
reported on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas, is another well-known
tradition. It was two years after the birth of the Prophet that a group
of the Quraysh, among whom were: \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib ibn Hashim, Umayyah
ibn \`Abd Shams, \`Abdullah ibn Jud'an, Asad ibn Khuwaylid and Wahb ibn
\`Abd Manaf, went to Ibn Dhi Yazan. When they arrived, he was in a
palace called Ghumdan, concerning which Umayyah ibn Abi 's-Salt
recited:

Drink in good health, reclining with a crown upon your head;while you
sit at the top of Ghumdan in good fortune and prosperity.

They asked permission to enter, and went in. After talking at length,
the King sent for \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib and said to him: "O \`Abdu
'l-Muttalib, I am about to disclose a secret to you which I know and
would not disclose to anyone but you. This is because I see that you are
one who is worthy of keeping it; so I shall relate it to you. Let it
remain a secret until Allah permits that it come to pass. I find it in
the hidden book and treasured knowledge which we have kept only for
ourselves. For it is a great and momentous secret which others would not
be able to bear. There is in it for all men - but especially for your
kinfolk and you personally - honor in this life and virtue in the
hereafter."

\`Abdu'l-Muttalib enquired: "Only a man like you, O King, can impart
glad news and words of amity - what is it that you wish to say? May all
the people of the desert be a ransom for you, one group after another!"
The King continued: "When a child shall be born in Tihamah (Mecca)
between whose shoulders there is a mole (that is, the seal of
Prophethood), then to him shall belong the imamate, and through him you
(the clan of Hashim) shall enjoy leadership till the Day of
Resurrection." \`Abdul-Muttalib answered: "May you never be cursed! I
shall return with news, the like of which no traveler has ever received.
Had it not been for the great awe, majesty and high honor of the King, I
would have asked him to tell me more of his secrets, that my happiness
might increase." Ibn Dhi Yazan then said: "This is the time in which he
is to be born, or perhaps he has already been born. His name shall be
Muhammad. Both his father and mother shall die, and his grandfather and
uncle shall care for him. His birth shall be a secret, but Allah shall
send him (with the apostleship) openly. He shall grant him helpers from
our people. Through him Allah shall honor his friends and dishonour his
enemies. With him and his people Allah shall smite many men, and with
them He shall pillage the best portions of the earth. He shall break the
idols, and extinguish the fires (that is, of Persia). Then will the
All-merciful be truly worshipped, and Satan be expelled.

His word shall be decisive, and his judgement just. He shall command
the good and himself perform it, and shall forbid indecency and destroy
it." \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib exclaimed: "O King, may your status be forever
honoured, may your power prosper, and may your reign last forever! Has
the King any advice to give me? For he has stated the matter with some
clarity." Ibn Dhi Yazan said: "By the House with curtains (i.e., the
Ka'bah), and the signs on stone idols, you \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib are his
grandfather without a lie!" \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib then fell prostrate. But
the King said to him: "Lift up your head! May your breast be cooled
(that is, be happy and without weariness); may your status be uplifted.
Do you see anything in what I say?" He answered: "I had a son with whom
I was pleased, and towards whom I was compassionate. I therefore had him
married to a noble woman from among the best of my people, whose name
was Aminah daughter of Wahb. She gave birth to a male child whom I
called Muhammad.

His father and mother died and his uncle took charge of him." Ibn Dhi
Yazan answered: "This is what I have told you. Guard well your son.
Beware of the Jews, for they are his enemies - but Allah will not permit
them to do him any harm. Keep what I have told you hidden from the men
who are with you. This is because I am afraid that they may be filled
with envy if he is to have leadership. They would then seek to conspire
against him and set up obstacles in his way. They, or their sons, shall
do that without any doubt. Did I not know that death would strike me
before his call, I would gather my men and horses and go to Yathrib
(Medina), the city of his dominion, for I find in the \`speaking book'
and ancient knowledge that Yathrib shall be the house of his dominion.

In it shall his affair be confirmed; in it shall be his supporters, and
the spot of his tomb. Had I feared that hardships would befall him, or
that infirmities would afflict him, I would have even as a youth
announced all concerning him. I would have made all the leaders of the
Arabs follow him. But I shall leave that to you, for I shall not be
inhospitable toward any guests who are with you." Then the King ordered
that each of the men be given ten slaves and ten slave girls, two silk
garments, a hundred camels, five weights of gold and ten of silver, and
a skinful of amber. He ordered that \`Abdu'l-Muttalib be given ten times
what was given to his companions. He then said to him: "When a year will
have passed, come. back to me" - but Ibn Dhi Yazan died before the year
had elapsed.
\`Abdu'l-Muttalib used to repeat often: "O people of Quraysh, no man
among you should envy me, no matter how much wealth you might bestow
upon me, for it shall be exhausted. Rather envy me for what remains for
me and my descendants after me of its fame, pride and honor." When it
was said to him: "What shall this thing be?", he would answer: "You will
know the truth of what I say, even if it be after a time."

Another proof of Muhammad's Prophethood is the account of the monk
Bahira'. Thus Ibn Ishaq reported that Abu Talib went with a caravan to
Syria. As he was about to set out, the Messenger of Allah stood up and,
holding on to the halter of his she-camel, said: "O uncle, in whose care
would you leave me, since I have neither father nor mother!" Abu Talib
felt compassion towards him and said: "By Allah, I shall take him with
me and we shall never be separated from one another." He thus took him
along with him. The caravan arrived at Basra in Syria, where a monk
lived called Bahira'. He was the most learned of the Christians. Often
did they pass by his cell, but he had never spoken to them. This time,
however, when they came to rest near his cell, he prepared food for
them. It is claimed that this was because of something which he saw from
his cell in that caravan. It was a white cloud shading the Prophet alone
of all the people. The caravan alighted beneath a tree near the monk,
where he again saw the white cloud moving until it shaded the tree,
whose branches bent over the Messenger of Allah so that he sat in its
shade.

When Bahira' saw this, he came out of his cell and ordered that food be
prepared. He then sent word to them, saying "I have prepared food for
you, O people of Quraysh. I invite you all, young and old, slaves and
freemen." A man said to him: "O Bahirah', it is something strange you do
today! You never did' that in the past. Often did we pass by you; why is
it that you do this today?" Bahira' answered: "You tell the truth, it is
as you say. Yet you are guests; I wish, therefore, to treat you with due
hospitality. I have prepared food for you, and I ask that you all eat of
it."

Thus they all gathered around him, but the Messenger of Allah because
of his youth stayed behind with the caravan under the tree. As Bahira'
looked around, he did not find the characteristics he sought in anyone.
He thus said: "Let no one of you stay away from my banquet." They
answered: "No one who should have come is absent, except a youth, the
youngest of us. He remained to guard the caravan." But Bahira' declared:
"You ought not to have done that, call for him." A man of Quraysh
exclaimed: "By al-Lat and al-\`Uzza, it is shameful for us that the son
of \`Abdu 'I-Muttalib be absent from our banquet." He then went and
brought Muhammad over and seated him among the people.

When Bahira' saw him, he examined him intently, looking for signs which
he knew to be on his body. After they had all eaten and dispersed,
Bahira' approached the Prophet and said: "O youth, I adjure you by
al-Lat and al-\`Uzza that you inform me concerning the things I wish to
ask you." Bahira' swore by these two gods because he had heard the
people of the caravan do so. The Messenger of Allah answered: "Do not
adjure me by al-Lat and al-\`Uzza, for I despise nothing more than I
despise them." Bahira' then said: "I adjure you by Allah that you inform
me concerning the things I wish to ask you." The Prophet answered: "Ask
whatever you wish." The monk began to ask him some things about himself,
his sleep, his appearance, and other matters. The Messenger of Allah
answered his questions, all of which agreed with the description which
Bahira' had read concerning him in his ancient books. He then looked at
his back and saw the seal of Prophethood between his shoulders, exactly
in the spot where he knew it to be.

When at last Bahira' was done with him, he came to his uncle Abu Talib
and asked: "Who is this youth?" "He is my son", he answered. "No", the
monk said, "he is not your son. The father of this youth must not be
living." Abu Talib then said: "He is my brother's son." "What happened
to his father?" asked Bahira'. Abu Talib answered, "He died while his
mother was pregnant with him." The monk then counselled him, saying:
"Return with your nephew to his home, and beware of the Jews, for by
Allah if they see him and discover in him what I know, they would surely
seek to do him harm. Your nephew will be a man of high status. Hasten,
therefore, with him back to his country." His uncle thus quickly
finished his trade in Syria and hastened back with the Prophet to
Mecca.

It is said that a few men of the People of the Book noticed some signs
in the Messenger of Allah when they saw him with his uncle on that
journey. They wished to seize him, but Bahira' restrained them. He
adjured them by Allah not to do so, reminding them of what they had
found in their scriptures concerning him and his characteristics. He
also told them that even if they were to attempt all together to do
whatever they had intended to do to him, they would not be able to do
him any harm. He thus continued to admonish them until they were
convinced; they finally believed him and went away. Concerning this
event Abu Talib said in his poem which rhymes with the letter dal (\`d
') : -

Surely the Prophet Muhammad, son of Aminah,Is for me like my own
child.When he held on to the halter of my camel, I felt compassion for
him,Even as the white camels were being loaded,Copious tears flowed from
my eyes -Tears like scattered pearls.I treated him kindly as befits a
close relative,And guarded well the trust of his forefathers concerning
him.I ordered him to ride among paternal uncles,With white faces, brave
swordsmen.

They travelled to the furthest known station -Far indeed was the
station where their camels lay down!When at last the people of Busra saw
him,They met a learned monk who was keeping close watch.He related to
them a true account concerning him,And thus turned back the people of
envy.

A group of Jews also saw what he saw:The shade of a white cloud and the
glory of a close relative (Muhammad).They went seeking to kill Muhammad,
and he restrained them,And thus engaged in the best of struggle.

