Supplement 2
============

His signs-in foretelling unknown and future events are beyond number.
Allah says in the Qur'an: He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance,
and the religion of truth, in order that He make it prevail over all
religion even though the Associators may detest it [Qur'an. 9:33]. It is
related on the authority of Ubayy ibn Ka'b (a well-known Companion, one
of the scribes of revelation and an important authority on Qur'an
exegesis) in reference to this verse, that the Messenger of Allah said:
"Convey to this community glad tidings of glory, exaltation, Divine
support and a firm standing in the earth. Anyone of them who performs
the work of the life to come only for the sake of this life, shall have
no portion in the hereafter." It is also reported on the authority of
Buraydah al-Aslami (one of the Companions) that the Prophet said:
"Armies will be dispatched to war. Be among those who go to Khurasan,
and dwell in the city of Maru. This is because it was built by the man
of the two horns [^23], who blessed it and said: \`No evil shall befall
its inhabitants."' Abu Hurayrah reported that the Messenger of Allah
said: "The Day of Resurrection will not come until Khuzistan and Kirman
(two provinces in Iran) are vanquished by a group of non-Arabs, with red
faces, snub noses and small eyes. Their faces are like shields."

Anas ibn Malik (a well-known Companion and traditionist) reported that
the Messenger of Allah related that one night he dreamt that he was in
the house of \`Uqbah ibn Rafi\` (one of the Companions) and that dates
of high quality were brought before them. The dream was interpreted by
the Prophet to me: "Exaltation shall belong to us in this world and good
health in the world to come, and our religion has prospered."

Accounts of other miracles are those which deal with the Prophet
predicting what was to happen to his community (ummah) after him. Thus,
he is reported to have said: "Do not turn to be rejecters of faith
(kuffar) after me, beheading one another." It is also related on the
authority of Sahl ibn Hunayf that the Prophet said: "I shall be the
first to get to the hawd; [^24] whoever. comes shall be given to drink,
and whoever. drinks shall never thirst. Then groups of people shall come
to me; I know them and they know me. But they shall be prevented from
coming to me." Abu Hazim (the transmitter of this tradition) said:
"an-Nu'man ibn Abi \`Ayyash heard me relating this tradition to the
people. He asked: \`Did you hear Sahl say that?' \`Yes', I answered." He
continued: "I bear witness that Abu Said al-Khudri [a very well-known
Companion and traditionist] heard the Prophet say further: \`These are
my community, but it will be said to me, "You do not know what they did
after you!" Then will I say: "Perish those who deviated after me." ' "
Qays ibn Abi Hazim also reported that when \`A'ishah (the Prophet's
wife) arrived at al-Haw'ab [^25], she heard the barking of dogs. She
said: "I am sure that I will return. For I heard the Prophet say to us,
\`At whom among you shall the dogs of al-Haw'ab bark?"' az-Zubayr said
to her, "Perhaps Allah will make peace through you among the people."

It is reported that one day az-Zubayr met 'Ali at the Saqifah of Banu
Sa'idah, [^26] where the Prophet was present. The Prophet asked
az-Zubayr, "Do you love him?" az-Zubayr answered: "What prevents me from
so doing?" The Prophet then said: "How would it be then if you were to
fight against him, and you are the wrongdoer?" Abu Jarw al-Mazini
reported that he heard 'Ali say to az-Zubayr (on the day of the Battle
of Camel): "I adjure you by Allah that you tell me, did you not hear the
Messenger of Allah say to you that you shall fight with me and that you
shall be doing me wrong?" "Yes, but I forgot", said az-Zubayr.

It is also related by Muslim in his as-Sahih [^27] that the Prophet said
to \`Ammar ibn Yasir: "You shall be killed by a transgressing group of
people." Abu ' l-Bakhtari has reported that \`Ammar was brought a drink
of milk. He smiled; when asked why, he answered: "The Messenger of Allah
told me that it shall be the last drink I have before I die."

Still another of Muhammad's prophecies was what he said concerning
al-Khawarij (\`the seceders', a group of zealous men who left \`Ali's
camp during the Battle of Sniffing) "There shall be a group in my
community who speak good words, but act wickedly. They shall call others
to the Book of Allah, but they themselves have nothing to do with it.
They shall recite the Qur'an, but their recitation will not penetrate
further than their throats. They shall slip out of the faith as would an
arrow slip out of its bow. They shall no more return to the faith than
would an arrow, after being shot, return to its bow. They are the most
evil of character among men. Blessed is he whom they shall slay, and
blessed is he who shall slay them. Anyone slaying them would be more
worthy (of obedience) to Allah than they." People asked: "O Messenger of
Allah, what are their distinguishing marks?" He answered: "Shaved
heads."

Another of the Prophet's signs is his saying to the Commander .of the
Faithful ('Ali): "This community shall betray you after me." He also
said to him: "You shall fight after me against those who shall violate
their covenant (nakithin), those who shall deviate from the truth
(qasitin) and those who shall abandon their faith altogether
(mariqin).

Among his prophecies is his foretelling of the slaying of Hujr ibn
\`Adiyy and his companions by Mu'awiyah. It is related that Mu'awiyah
went to see \`A'ishah, who asked: "What made you slay the people of
\`Adhra' [^28], Hujr and his companions?" He answered: "O mother of the
faithful, I considered their death to be for the good of the community,
while their remaining alive would have been evil for the community." She
said: "I heard the Messenger of Allah say: \`Some people shall be killed
in \`Adhra' for whom Allah and the inhabitants of heaven will be filled
with wrath.' " It is also related that 'Ali said: "O people of Iraq,
seven men of \`Adhra' shall be slain. They shall be like the people of
the Trench." [^29] This was a reference to the slaying of Hujr ibn
\`Adiyy and his companions.

Still another prophecy was the Prophet's- foretelling of the martyrdom
of al-Husayn ibn 'Ali, peace be upon them both. It is related on the
authority of Umm Salamah [one of the Prophet's wives] , that the Prophet
one day lay down to sleep and woke up disturbed. He lay down again and
woke up less disturbed than the time before. A third time he lay down to
sleep, but when he awoke this time, he held some red soil which he began
to turn over in his hand. "I asked", Umm Salamah said: " \`What is this
soil, O Messenger of Allah?' He replied: 'Gabriel has informed me that
this one (and he pointed to al-Husayn) shall be killed in the land of
Iraq. I said: "O Gabriel, show me the soil of the spot on which he shall
be slain," and this is its soil.' "

Anas ibn Malik reported that the angel of rain one day asked permission
to visit the Messenger of Allah, and it was granted him. The Prophet
said to Umm Salamah: "Keep the door closed, so that no one comes in to
disturb us." al-Husayn ibn 'Ali, however, came and forced his way in. He
began to throw himself on the Prophet's back. The angel asked: "Do you
love him?" "Yes", replied the Prophet. The angel continued: "Your
community shall kill him. I will, if you wish, show you the spot on
which he shall be slain." The angel then showed him some red soil, which
Umm Salamah carefully wrapped up in the end of her garment. She
concluded: "Thus we always knew that al-Husayn would be slain in
Karbala'."

Another of the Prophet's signs was that he foretold the martyrdom of
the people of his household. al-Hakim Abu \`Abdillah al-Hafiz reported
on the authority of the \`Master of all worshippers', 'Ali ibn al-Husayn
(the fourth lmam), who related from his father on the authority of his
grandfather (\`Ali), who said: "The Messenger of Allah visited us one
day, and we made for him a meat dish. Likewise, Umm Ayman brought him
another meat dish and a bowlful of dates. The Messenger of Allah ate,
and we ate with him. Then he performed the prayer ablutions, rubbing his
head and face with his hand. He then turned towards the qiblah
(direction of prayer) and invoked Allah as he willed. He then fell on
his face, with copious tears running down his cheeks like rain. We stood
in too great awe before the Messenger of Allah to ask him the reason for
his weeping. But al-Husayn jumped up, and, throwing himself over the
Messenger of Allah, said: \`O father, I see you act as you never did
before.' He answered: \`My son, I was never as happy before as I was
today with you. But my beloved Gabriel came to me and told me that you
shall be slain, and that your deaths shall be in diverse places; this
caused me great sorrow. Thus, I prayed Allah that He be gracious toward
you.' al-Husayn asked: \`But who shall make pilgrimage (ziyarah) to us,
scattered and far apart as our tombs shall be?' The Messenger of Allah
replied: \`A group of my community, wishing by this only to show
kindness and love to me. When the Day of Resurrection shall come, I will
myself visit them and take them all by the shoulders to save them from
its fears and calamities.' " [^30]
His prediction of the massacre of the people of al-Harrah (a district
of Medina strewn with volcanic rocks, known as al-harrah) was yet
another sign of Muhammad's Prophethood. It is related on the authority
of Ayyub ibn Bashir who said: "The Messenger of Allah went one day with
his Companions on a journey. As he passed by Harrah of Zuhrah, he
stopped and exclaimed: \`To Allah do we belong, and to Him we shall
return!' [Qur'an. 2 :156] . Those who were with him were troubled,
thinking that this was concerning their journey. \`Umar ibn al-Khattab
asked: \`O Messenger of Allah, what was it that you saw?' He answered:
\`This does not concern your journey.' \`What is it then, O Messenger of
Allah?' they asked. He answered: \`In this Harrah the best of my
community after my Companions will be slain.'"

Anas ibn Malik said: "On the day of the Battle of al-Harrah seven
hundred men, all Qur'an reciters, were slain. Among them were three of
the Prophet's Companions." al-Hasan (son of \`Ali and grandson of the
Prophet) used to say: "In the Battle of al-Harrah, the people of Medina
were slain; hardly anyone escaped. Among those who were slain were the
two sons of Zaynab, a foster-daughter of the Messenger of Allah. They
were her sons by Zam'ah ibn al-Aswad. The Battle of al-Harrah took place
on Wednesday, three days before the end of Dhi'l-Hijjah, 63 A.H.
(August, 683)."

The Prophet also foretold that Ibn \`Abbas would lose his sight in old
age, and that he would be granted great knowledge. Likewise, he said to
Zayd ibn Arqam (a well-known Companion), after the latter had suffered a
serious illness: "No harm shall befall you in your illness. But what
would you say if you were to grow old after me and become blind? " Zayd
answered: "I shall take Allah as my sufficient trust, and endure it
patiently." "Then you will enter Paradise without reckoning", the
Prophet assured him.

The Prophet also foretold that al-Walid ibn Yazid was to be an evil
man, as he indeed turned out to be. It is reported that Said ibn
al-Musayyab (an important traditionist) said: "A male child was born to
a half-brother of Umm Salamah, whom they named al-Walid. The Prophet
reproached them saying: \`So you give the names of your Pharaohs (that
is, oppressive rulers) to your children! Change his name and name him
\`Abdullah. This is because a man shall be born in my community called
al-Walid, who shall be more wicked towards my community than Pharaoh was
towards his people.' Thus people thought that he meant al-Walid ibn
\`Abdi 'l-Malik, but then we found out that it was al-Walid ibn Yazid
(an Umayyad ruler)."

Another prophecy was the Prophet's saying concerning Banu Abi 'l-\`As
and Banu Umayyah, as related on the authority of Abu Said al-Khudri :
"When the number of the children of Abu 'l-\`As shall reach thirty men,
they shall use the religion of Allah as means of corruption, the
servants of Allah as slaves and Allah's wealth as a commodity among
themselves." In another tradition, related on the authority of Abu
Hurayrah, it is forty men.

Ibn Murhib reported: "I was with Mu'awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan when Marwan
(ibn al-Hakam, the first of the Marwanid rulers) came in to talk to
Mu'awiyah about a matter that concerned him. He pleaded: \`Grant me my
need, for by Allah, my burden is heavy - I am the father of ten, the
uncle of ten and the brother of ten.' When Marwan turned to go,
Mu'awiyah turned to Ibn \`Abbas, who was sitting with him on his couch,
and said: \`I bear witness before Allah, O Ibn \`Abbas - do you not know
that the Messenger of Allah said that when the sons of al-Hakam (that
is, Marwan's father) shall reach the number of thirty men, they will use
Allah's wealth among them as a commodity; that they will oppress His
servants as their own slaves, and will use Allah's religion as cause of
corruption? When, however, their number will reach four hundred and
ninety-nine, their destruction will come more quickly than it takes to
chew a date.' Ibn \`Abbas replied: \`By Allah, yes.' Marwan left without
having his need granted. His son \`Abdu'l-Malik came to Mu'awiyah to
discuss the matter further. When he left, Mu'awiyah again turned to Ibn
\`Abbas and said: \`I ask you in the name of Allah, O Ibn \`Abbas, do
you not know that the Apostle mentioned this man and said that he shall
be the father of four tyrants?' Ibn \`Abbas again answered: \`By Allah,
yes.' "

A man called Yusuf ibn Mazin ar-Rasibi related that a man reproached
al-Hasan ibn \`Ali (a. s.) saying: "You have indeed brought dishonour
upon the people of faith." al-Hasan said: "Do not reproach me, may Allah
have mercy upon you! The Messenger of Allah foresaw the sons of Umayyah
delivering speeches upon his pulpit one man after another, and that
displeased him. Thus, Allah revealed to him: We have surely given you
al-kawthar (abundance) [Qur'an. 108: 1] , which is a river in Paradise.
He also sent down: We have surely sent it (the Qur'an) on the night of
determination (laylatu'l-qadr). Would that you knew what the night of
determination is! The night of determination is more excellent than a
thousand months [Qur.97:1-3] .This means the thousand months reign of
the sons of Umayyah. We counted the months of their reign, and it was
neither more no less."
The signs belonging to this category are too many for this book to
contain. What we have here reported must thus be sufficient for people
of understanding.

**Notes:**

[^12] That is, al-Kharkushi, Abu Said (or Sa'd) 'Abdu 'l-Malik Muhammad
ibn Ibrahim an-Naysaburi, a well-known mystic who died in Nishapur in
406/1015 -16, or in 407/1016. The reference is certainly taken from his
book, Sharafu 'n-Nabiyy (alternate titles of the work are: Sharafu
'l-Mustafa, Dala'ilu 'n-Nubuwwah and Sharafu 'n Nubuwwah ). The work was
apparently quite popular, and was also translated into Persian, probably
in the late twelfth century. Both the Arabic and the Persian, however,
remain unpublished. See C. A. Storey, Persian Literature, A
Biobibliographical Survey (London: Luzac and Co., 1927), vol.l,
pp.175-6; and Sezgin, Fuat, Geschichte des Arabischen Scrifttums, Band I
(Brill: Leiden, 1976), pp. 670 - 1.

[^13] The author quotes quite accurately in Hebrew Gen. 17:20. The
Arabic rendering of this verse is, however, purposely modified to
support Shiite prophetology.

[^14] See Qur'an 3:37.

[^15] See Qur'an 59:23. See also as-Saduq, Abu Ja'far, Muhammad ibn 'Ali
ibn al-Husayn Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi, Ikmalu 'd-Din wa Itmamu 'n-Ni'mah
fi' Ithbati 'r-Rajah, ed. Muhammad Mahdi Hasan al-Musawi al-Khirsan
(Najaf: al-Matba'ah al-Haydariyyah, 1389/1970), pp. 157 - 8.

[^16] See Qur'an 3:55.

[^17] The descent of Jesus to earth is alluded to in the Qur'an (43:61
and 4:157-9), and figures prominently in the hadith. See Muslim, vol.18,
pp. 68ff. This tradition is quoted in Ibn Shu'bah, Abu Muhammad ibn
Hasan ibn \`Ali ibn Shu'bah al-Harrani, Tuhafu '1\`Uqul' an Ali
'r-Rasul, ed. Muhammad al-Husayn al-A'lami (Beirut:
Mu'asassatu'l-A'lami, 1394/1974), pp.368-72.

[^18] See Qur'an 33 : 22. See also al-Bukhari, vol. 5, pp. 44 - 49.

[^19] See al-Kulayni, Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ya'qub ibn Ishaq, al-Kafi,
ed. 'Ali Akbar al-Ghifari, 3rd ed., 8 vols. (Tehran: Daru'l-Kutub
al-Islamiyyah, 1388), vol. 8: ar-Rawdah mina'l-Kafi, p. 263.

[^20] See Ibn Hisham, Abu Muhammad \`Abdu'l-Malik, as-Sirah
an-Nabawiyyah, ed. Muhammad Muhyi'd-Din \`Abdi'l-Hamid, 4 vols. (Beirut:
Daru'l-Fikr, n. d.), vol. 2, pp. 102 - 4. Ibn Hisham reports that
Suraqah's horse tripped three times, and not that its legs sank into the
ground. In English see Guillaume, A., The Life of Muhammad (Karachi:
Oxford University Press, 1970), pp. 225 - 6.

[^21] See Qur'an 3 :123 - 4.

[^22] See Qur'an 54:1. See also al-Qummi, vol. 2, pp. 340 - 1.

[^23] See for the account of Dhu'l-Qarnayn, Qur'an 18 : 83 - 98.

[^24] See al-Bukhari, vol. 8, pp. 86 - 87.

[^25] al-Haw'ab is a place between Mecca and Basrah in Iraq. Shi'i
tradition has made much of this incident. See ash-Shaykh al-Mufid, Abu
\`Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn an-Nu'man al\`Ukbari al-Baghdadi,
Kitabu'l-Ikhtisas (Qumm: Maktabat Basirati, n. d.), pp. 113-5.

[^26] The Saqifah of Banu Sa'idah was a roofed area where the Immigrants
and Ansar met immediately after the Prophet's death to elect a
successor. 'Ali was absent, as were most of the men of the Banu Hashim.
Thus Abu Bakr was elected, in spite of the sharp disagreement between
the two groups. See below in this book.

[^27] See Muslim, vol. 18, p.41.

[^28] \`Adhra' is a town near Damascus. See al-Mas'udi, Muruju'dh Dhahab
wa Ma\`aaini 'l-Jawhar, ed. Charles Pellat, 7 vols. (Beirut: Librarie
Orientale, 1970), vol. 3, pp. 188 - 9.

[^29] See Qur'an 85 : 4 - 9. See also at-Tabrisi, Abu \`Ali al-Fadl ibn
alHasan ibn al-Fadl, Majma'u 'l-Bayan fi Tafsiri 'l-Quran, 6 vols.
(Beirut: Dar Maktabatu'l-Hayat, 1380/1961), vo1.6, part 30, pp. 88 -
91.

[^30] See Naysaburi, vol. 3, pp. 176 -7. Shi'i sources have related this
tradition in a number of versions. See for example: Ibn Qulawayh, Abu
'l-Qasim Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Ja'far ibn Musa al-Qummi, Kamilu
'z-Ziyarat, ed. Mirza \`Abdu 'l-Husayn al-Amini at-Tabrizi (Najaf:
Murtadawiyyah, 1356/1937), pp. 255ff.

