The Quraysh Admit the Miraculous Qualities of the Qur'an
========================================================

The Messenger of Allah never ceased to insult the gods of the
Associators, nor did he cease reciting the Qur'an to them. But they used
to say: "This is only the poetry of Muhammad." Some of them also said:
"It is rather oratory discourse."

There was an old man called al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah who was a judge
among the Arabs, whom they brought difficult cases. They likewise used
to recite their poems to him in order that he might judge among them.
Whatever he judged to be good, that was chosen by all. He had many sons,
who never left Mecca. He also possessed ten slaves, every one of whom
had one thousand dinars to use as capital in trade. At that time he
alone owned a qintar, [the skin of a bull filled with gold]. al-Walid
was one of those who mocked the Messenger of Allah and he was the uncle
of Abu Jahl ibn Hisham.

The people went to al-Walid and asked: "O Abu \`Abd ash-Shams, what is
this which Muhammad is uttering? Is it magic, soothsaying, or oratory?"
He replied: "Let me hear his words." He thus came to the Messenger of
Allah while he was sitting in the Ka'bah and said: "O Muhammad, recite
for me some of your poetry! " He answered: "It is not poetry, but rather
the word of Allah, with which He sent His prophets and apostles."
al-Walid insisted: "Recite some of it to me." The Messenger of Allah
then recited: "In the name of Allah, the All-merciful, the
Compassionate. " When al-Walid heard the name ar-Rahman (the
All-merciful), he mockingly said: "Do you call us to follow a man of
Yamamah who is called ar-Rahman?" The Prophet answered: "No, rather I
call men to Allah, Who is the All-merciful, the Compassionate." He then
recited the beginning of "Ha mim: as-Sajdah ", (Surah 41) until he
reached verse (13)

But if they turn back, say: "I have warned you of a great catastrophe
like the catastrophe of Ad and Thamud. " When al-Walid heard this, he
trembled and every hair on his head and in his beard stood on end. He
then rose and went to his home, and did not return to the people of
Quraysh. The people said to Abu Jahl, "O Abu 'l-Hakam, (that is,
al-Walid) has abandoned his religion for the religion of Muhammad! Do
you not see that he has not returned to us? He must have, therefore,
accepted his claim and gone to his home." The people of Quraysh became
exceedingly saddened by this. Abu Jahl went to al-Walid the next day and
said: "O uncle, you have brought low our heads and disgraced us!" He
answered: "How have I done that, O son of my brother?" "Have you turned
to the religion of Muhammad?" he asked. "No", answered al-Walid, "I did
not do so. Rather, I stand by the religion of my people and my
forefathers. I have, however, heard great words which cause skins to
shudder." Abu Jahl asked: "Is it poetry?" "No, it is not poetry",
answered his uncle. Abu Jahl asked further: "Is it oratory discourse?"
al-Walid answered: "No, for oratory discourse is of connected rhymed
prose; yet this is free prose whose different parts do not resemble one
another. It is possessed of great beauty." Abu Jahl insisted: "So it is
oratory." "No", answered his uncle. Abu Jahl asked: "What is it then?"
al-Walid said: "Let me think about it for a while."

The next day, the people asked al-Walid: "O Abu \`Abd ash-Shams, what
do you say?" He answered: "Say it is magic, for it has truly attracted
the hearts of the people." Thus, Allah sent down concerning him in the
Qur'an - Leave me to deal with him whom I have alone created, and whom I
have granted great wealth and sons, constantly present with him . . .
and so on to Allah's saying: Over it (that is, Hell) stand nineteen
(angels) [Qur.74:11-30].

In a tradition related by Hammad ibn Zayd on the authority of \`Ikrimah
(a slave and pupil of Ibn \`Abb5s and a well-known traditionist), he
reported that al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah came to the Messenger of Allah
and asked him to recite some verses of the Qur'an. He recited: "Allah
surely commands justice and doing good, and giving (of one's wealth) to
near relatives. He likewise forbids lewdness, indecency and insolence.
He thus admonishes you, that perhaps you may remember" [Qur'an. 16:90] .
al-Walid said: "Recite the verse once more!" He did, and al-Walid
exclaimed: "By Allah, it indeed is possessed of great sweetness and
adorned with great beauty. Its top is indeed fruitful, and its bottom is
like a palm-tree laden with fruits! Nor can any mortal utter such
speech."

**How Allah Protected Muhammad Against The Mockers**

It is related that those who mocked the Messenger of Allah were five:
al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah, al-\`As ibn Wail as-Sahmi, al-Aswad ibn
al-Muttalib, who was also known as Abu Zama'ah, al-Aswad ibn \`Abd
Yaghuth of the tribe of Zuhrah and al-Harith ibn at-Tulatilah
al-Khuza\`i. It is said that al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah passed one day by
the Messenger of Allah, while the angel Gabriel was with him. Gabriel
addressed the Prophet, saying: "Here comes al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah, who
is one of the mockers." "Yes", he answered. Then al-Walid passed by a
man of the tribe of Khuza'ah, sharpening his arrows at the door of the
mosque. He accidentally stepped on some of them, a silver went into the
bottom of his foot, and blood gushed out. Gabriel pointed to that spot,
and blood continued to flow until it stained the bed of his daughter.
Frightened, the girl cried out: "O maid, the mouth of the water skin has
come untied! " "This is not the water of the water skin", said al-Walid,
"it is the blood of your father. Call together for me my sons and the
sons of my brother, for I am about to die." When they all gathered, he
made his will, and immediately breathed his last.

Al-Aswad ibn al-Muttalib passed one day by the Messenger of Allah.
Gabriel pointed to his eyes and he became blind, and soon after died.
al-Aswad ibn \`Abd Yaghuth also passed by the Prophet one day; Gabriel
pointed to his stomach, and he drank so much water that his belly
swelled until it burst. al-\`As ibn Wail passed also by the Prophet, and
Gabriel pointed to his foot. Soon a splinter went into the bottom of his
foot and came out of the top. His foot swelled up, and soon he died.
at-Tulatilah passed by the Prophet, and Gabriel spat in his face. The
man then went out into the Tihamah mountains (in the vicinity of Mecca),
where he was hit by a burning sand storm. He was burnt and turned black.
When he returned home. his family would not let him in, saying, "You are
not of this family." He went away and was afflicted with great thirst.
He thus drank until his stomach burst, and he died. All this happened in
fulfilment of Allah's saying: We have surely protected you against the
mockers [Qur'an. 15:95].

**The Migration To Abyssinia And An-Naiashi's Assent To Muhammad's
Prophethood**

When the people of Quraysh intensified their harsh treatment of the
Messenger of Allah and his Companions, he ordered some of his Companions
to migrate to Abyssinia. He delegated Ja'far son of Abu Talib to take
charge of them, and he set out with seventy men until they took to sea.
When the people of Quraysh knew of their departure, they sent \`Amr ibn
al-\`As as-Sahmi and \`Umarah ibn al-Walid to an-Najashi (Negus) .of
Abyssinia, requesting him to return the men to the people of Quraysh.
They were also instructed to tell the King that these men had gone
against the wishes and traditions of their people.

\`Umarah was a handsome and wealthy man. \`Amr ibn al\`As set out with
his wife. When they boarded the ship, they became intoxicated with wine.
\`Umarah then said to \`Amr ibn al-\`As : "Tell your wife to kiss me!"
The latter answered: "Glorified be Allah! Is this possible?" \`Umarah
waited until \`Amr got drunk, then he pushed him overboard. \`Amr was on
the edge of the ship; thus he held on to the edge, and people rushed to
his rescue. When \`Amr saw what \`Umarah had done to him, he said to his
wife, "Kiss him! ", which she did.

When they reached Abyssinia, they went straight to an-Najashi bearing
presents for him. \`Amr addressed him saying: "O King, these people have
gone against our religion and sought refuge with you. Return them,
therefore, to us! " The King sent for Ja'far and said to him: "These men
are requesting that I return you all to them." He answered: "O King, ask
them, are we their slaves?" "No", answered \`Amr, "rather they are free
and noble men." "Ask them," Ja'far continued, "do we then owe them debts
which they have come to claim from us?" \`Amr answered: "They owe us no
debts which we have come to claim." Ja'far continued:

"Have they come then to avenge any blood of theirs that we had
wrongfully shed?" \`Amr answered: "They have shed no blood for which we
come to exact vengeance or blood money." Ja'far asked: "What then do you
want from us?" \`Amr said: "They have opposed us in our religion and the
religion of our forefathers and insulted our gods. They have corrupted
our youths and spread dissension among us. Return them to us, therefore,
that our unity might be restored." Ja'far then addressed the King
saying: "O King, we have opposed them in order to follow a prophet whom
Allah has raised among us. He commands us to repudiate equals to Allah,
and that we abandon chance games by means of arrows. He enjoins prayers
and almsgiving upon us. He has prohibited wrongdoing, oppression and the
unlawful shedding of blood. He has prohibited adultery, usury, and
eating the flesh of dead animals which have not been properly
slaughtered, as well as eating blood. He has enjoined decency and good
works upon us, and that we show kindness to near relatives. He forbids
grave immorality, indecency and insolence."

The King said: "It is with such (teachings) that Allah also sent Jesus
son of Mary! " Then addressing Ja\`far, he continued: "Do you know by
heart any of the revelations which Allah sent down to your prophet?"
"Yes", he answered. "Recite then! " the King demanded. Ja'far recited
the Surah of Maryam (Surah 19). When he reached the words - Shake down
towards you the branch of the palm-tree, and it shall drop down before
you ripened dates ready to be picked. Eat and drink, therefore, and be
of good cheer [Qur'an. 19 : 25 - 26 ] - an-Najashi wept and exclaimed:
"By Allah this is the truth!" \`Amr protested: "O King, this man has
abandoned our religion; give him to us that we may take him back to our
country! " an-Najashi lifted his hand and slapped him saying: "If you
utter any evil against him, I will kill you!" \`Amr finally said: "O
King, if this is what you say, then we shall not interfere with him."

A young maid stood by an-Najashi keeping flies away from him. She kept
her eyes on \`Umarah ibn al-Walid, as he was a handsome young man. When
they went to their lodgings, \`Amr said to him: "Why do you not send a
message to the King's maid?" \`Umarah sent a message to her, and she
answered him. \`Amr said: "Tell her to bring you with her some of the
King's perfumes. She did so, and \`Amr ibn al\`As took the perfume. He
had kept in his heart what \`Umarah had done to him when he attempted to
throw him overboard. Thus, he took the perfume and went to an-Najashi,
and said to him: "O King, it is fitting that we take cognition of the
King's honour and magnanimity toward us, and that we do not betray him
in his own realm. Yet, my companion who is with me has sent messages to
your maid and tempted her. She even brought him some of your perfumes."
He then showed the King the perfume. an-Najashi was exceedingly angry
and was about to kill \`Umarah. But he changed his mind and said: "It is
not right that I kill him, for they entered our realm under a pledge of
protection." He thus called his magicians and said to them: "Do
something to him that would be worse than death! " They took him and
injected mercury into his generative organ. He lost his mind, so that he
lived with the wild beasts and shunned human company. [^33]

The people of Quraysh sent men to bring \`Umarah back home. The men lay
in wait for him until he came with wild beasts to drink at a spring.
Thus they caught him, but he continued to struggle and scream in their
hands until he expired. \`Amr, however, returned to the people of
Quraysh and recounted to them his story.

As for Ja'far, he remained in Abyssinia enjoying the best of
hospitality and honour. He remained there until he heard that the
Messenger of Allah had established a truce with the people of Quraysh
and that peace had prevailed between them and the Muslims. He then
returned with a large company of people. He arrived to find that the
Messenger of Allah had conquered Khaybar (a Jewish settlement near
Medina).
A son was born to Ja'far by Asma', daughter of \`Umays. an-Najashi also
had a son, whom he called Muhammad. Asma' gave an-Najashi's son of her
own milk to drink (thus making him a nursing brother of her own son).
Abu Talib recited these verses urging an-Najashi to support the Prophet
and his followers:

Know, O King of the Ethiopians, that Muhammad is a prophet like Moses
and Jesus son of Mary.
He came with guidance such as they brought, for each of them was by
Allah's command well -protected.
Concerning him, you recite verses in your own scriptures; a true
account it is, not a fantastic tale.
Do not, therefore, set up equals with Allah; rather become Muslims, for
the way of truth is not obscured in darkness.

The traditionist Abu \`Abdillah (al-Bayhaqi) transmitted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ishaq that the Messenger of Allah sent \`Amr
ibn Umayyah ad-Damri to an-Najashi regarding Ja'far ibn Abi Talib and
his Companions. He sent a letter with him which read thus:

"In the name of Allah, the All-merciful, the Compassionate - From
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah to the Negus, the King of Abyssinia - I
convey to you the praises of Allah the King, the Holy, the Accepter of
Faith, the Guardian [Qur.59:23]. I furthermore bear witness that Jesus
son of Mary is the Spirit of Allah and His Word, which He sent down to
Mary [Qur'an. 4 : 171) , the pure and chaste virgin who then conceived
Jesus, whom Allah created of His Spirit which he breathed into him -just
as he created Adam with His Hand and breathed of His Spirit into him. I
thus call you to the worship of the One and only Allah alone Who has no
associate, and that you obey Him, follow me and believe in me and the
message which was vouchsafed me. For I indeed am the Messenger of Allah.
I have, moreover, sent to you my cousin Ja'far with a company of the
Muslims. When they come to you, show hospitality to them and do not be
arrogant. I call you and your hosts to Allah! I have conveyed my message
to you and given good counsel. Peace be with those who follow true
guidance."

An-Najashi wrote in answer to the Messenger of Allah:
"In the name of Allah, the All-merciful, the Compassionate - to
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah - from the Negus al-Ashamah ibn Abhar:
peace be upon you O Prophet of Allah and Allah's mercy and blessings -
there is no god but He Who guided me to Islam. I have received your
letter, O Messenger of Allah, concerning the importance you give in the
case of Jesus. By the Lord of the heaven and earth, Jesus does not
exceed what you have mentioned concerning him. We acknowledge what you
have written to us, and have thus shown hospitality to your cousin and
Companions. I bear witness that you are the Messenger of Allah truly and
that you tell the truth. I have, therefore, given allegiance (bay \`ah)
to you and your cousin. I have accepted Islam to Allah, the Lord of all
beings at his hands. I have sent to you, O Messenger of Allah, Arijan
ibn Ashamah ibn Abhar, I have-indeed no authority except over myself
alone. If, therefore, you wish that I come to you, I would come, O
Messenger of Allah. For I bear witness that what you say is the
truth."

An-Najashi then sent presents to the Prophet. He sent him also Mariyah
the Copt, the mother of the Prophet's son Ibrahim. He sent him much
clothing and aromatics, and a mare. He also sent him thirty learned men
to hear his words and observe his conduct. When they arrived in Medina,
the Messenger of Allah called them to. Islam, and they accepted Islam
and returned to the Negus. Jabir ibn \`Abdillah al-Ansari reported that,
"When an-Najashi died, the Messenger of Allah prayed over Ashamah, the
Negus."

**The Prophet Is Persecuted By The Associators And Hamzah Accepts
Islam**

The people of Quraysh redoubled their efforts in troubling the
Messenger of Allah. The harshest of men toward him was his uncle Abu
Lahab. One day the Prophet was sitting in the precincts of the Ka'bah,
when the people sent for a birth sack of a sheep and threw it at him.[
According to al-Jazari, the well-known lexicographer and traditionist,
this happened while the Prophet was praying. (ed. )]

The Messenger of Allah was greatly saddened by this, and went to Abu
Talib to complain, saying: "O uncle, how is my status among you?" Abu
Talib asked: "What is the matter O son of my brother?" He replied: "The
people of Quraysh threw a birth sack at me." Abu Talib then said to
Hamzah: "Take up the sword!" The people of Quraysh were assembled in the
Mosque. Both Hamzah and Abu Talib went in with their swords. Abu Talib
ordered Hamzah, saying: "Rub the birth sack over their moustaches, and
if anyone resists, cut off his head!" But no one moved while he rubbed
the birth sack over their moustaches.. He then turned to the Messenger
of Allah, and said: "O son of my brother, this is your status among
us!"

In the book Dala'ilu'n-Nubuwwah (of al-Bayhaqi) [^34], it is reported on
the authority of Abu Dawud who reported from Shu'bah who reported from
Abu Ishaq (as-Sabi\`i), who heard \`Amr ibn Maymun relate on the
authority of \`Abdullah (ibn Mas'ud), who said: "While the Messenger of
Allah was prostrating in prayer one day, with some men of Quraysh
sitting all around him, and the birth sack of a she-camel lying around,
some dared others men saying: \`Who would take this birth sack and throw
it at his back?' A man called \`Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'ayt took up the birth
sack and threw it at the Prophet's back. Fatimah (the Prophet's
daughter) came and took the camel's birth sack off the Prophet's back,
and cursed those who did that to him." \`Abdullah continued: "I never
saw the Messenger of Allah invoke Allah against them except on that day.
He said: "O Allah, I leave to you the people of Quraysh! O Allah to you
do I leave Abu Jahl ibn Hisham, \`Utbah ibn Rabi \`ah, Shaybah ibn Rabi
\`ah, \`Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'ayt, Umayyah ibn Khalaf or Ubayy ibn Khalaf
(Shu'bah was confused). The Prophet enumerated seven men in all."
\`Abdullah went on: "I saw them all slain in the Battle of Badr and
thrown into a well. Umayyah ibn Khalaf, however, was a very fat man. His
body disintegrated as it was dragged along before reaching the well.' "
[^35]

It is related on the authority of Khabbab (a well-known Companion), who
said: "I came one day to the Messenger of Allah, while he lay in the
shade of the Ka\` bah using his mantle as a pillow. We had endured much
suffering at the hands of the people of Quraysh. Thus I asked: \`O
Messenger of Allah, would you not invoke Allah on our behalf?' He sat
up, red in the safe, and said: \`Those who were before you -often were
their flesh and nerves scraped with sharp iron combs. Yet they did not
turn away from their faith. A man would be sawed in half from his head
down, yet he would not be turned away from his faith. But Allah shall
indeed bring this affair to fruition, so that a horseman would travel
all the way between San'a and Hadramawt fearing no one but Allah, or the
wolf that may attack his sheep.' " [^36]

It is also related on the authority of Jabir (son of the famous
Companion, \`Abdullah al-Ansari) that the Messenger of Allah passed one
day by \`Ammar ibn Yasir and his family while they were being tortured
for Allah's sake. He said: "Be of good cheer, O family of \`Ammar, for
you shall soon enter Paradise! " It is reported on the authority of
Mujahid [ ibn Jabr] (a well-known traditionist of the second generation)
that the first martyr in Islam was Sumayyah, the mother of \`Ammar, whom
Abu Jahl stabbed in the heart.

'Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi reported that Abu Jahl met the Messenger of
Allah one day and spoke harsh words to him. All the men of the Hashimite
clan angrily assembled. Hamzah had just returned from hunting, when he
saw the crowd and enquired about the commotion. A woman called down to
him from one of the roof-tops saying: "O Abu Ya'la, \`Amr ibn Hisham
(i.e., Abu Jahl) confronted Muhammad and insulted him." Hamzah enraged,
went to Abu Jahl hit him with his bow on the head and picked him up and
beat him hard against the ground. People crowded around them, and it was
feared that great conflict might ensue. People then asked Hamzah: "O Abu
Ya'la, have you then turned to the religion of your nephew?" "Yes", he
answered: "I bear witness that there is no god but Allah and that
Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah." He said this only as a result of
anger and feeling of support for his nephew. When, however, he returned
to his home, he regretted his decision. Thus he went to the Messenger of
Allah and asked: "O son of my brother, is what you say the truth?" The
Messenger of Allah recited to him a Surah of the Qur'an, and Hamzah saw
the truth and stood firm in the faith of Islam. The Messenger of Allah
was exceedingly happy. Abu Talib also was glad to learn of Hamzah's
Islam, and recited the following verses:

Be steadfast, O Abu Ya\`la in the faith of Ahmad;Show forth your faith;
may you be strengthened in your resolve!Follow the footsteps of him who
came with true' faith from his Lord; Do not, O Hamzah, be a rejecter of
faith!It made me glad when you said that you are a man of faith; Be then
a true supporter of the Messenger of Allah in Allah's cause.

Call openly the people of Quraysh to that which youyourself have been
given; Proclaim to them that Ahmad is indeed not a magician!

