The Prophet's Night Journey To Jerusalem and His Hiding in a Ravine Belonging To Abu Talib
==========================================================================================

The Messenger of Allah was transported by Allah from Mecca to
Jerusalem, (see Qur'an. 17 :1) . Gabriel carried him thither on al-Buraq
(a celestial horse), and showed him the prayer chambers of the prophets
before him. After the Prophet had led them all in prayer, Gabriel
brought him back to Mecca. On his way back, the Prophet passed by a
caravan belonging to the people of Quraysh. They had with them water in
a vessel, from which he drank, and poured out the rest. They also lost
one of their camels and went out in search of it.

Next morning Muhammad recounted to the people of Quraysh: "Allah
transported me by night to Jerusalem where He showed me the signs and
stations of the prophets. I have also passed by a caravan in such and
such a place, where they lost one of their camels. I drank from a vessel
of water which they had, and poured out the rest of the water." Abu Jahl
said: "You have now an opportune moment; ask him, therefore, how many
columns and lamps are in Jerusalem! " They thus said to him: "O
Muhammad, here is someone who has been to Jerusalem! " Describe for us
its columns, lamps, and prayer chambers! " Gabriel came and suspended an
image of Jerusalem before the Prophet's eyes, and he told them whatever
they wished to know about the holy city. When he had informed them, they
said: "Let us wait until the caravan returns and we question the people
about what you have told us:" "The sign of the truth of what I have said
is that the caravan will appear at sunrise led by a red camel carrying
two white sacks", the Prophet said.

Next morning, they went out looking towards the hill outside the city
and saying: "The sun shall soon rise." As they were thus wondering, the
caravan appeared, led by a red camel, just as the disk of the sun was
becoming visible. They asked the men with the caravan about the things
which the Messenger of Allah had told them. The men answered: "It is
true, it was as he said. We lost a camel in such and such a place; we
left water by night, but when we woke up next morning, the water was all
poured out." Yet, all this only increased the people of Quraysh in their
stubbornness.

They then all gathered in their assembly hall and prepared a written
pledge neither to share food with the sons of Hashim, nor to speak to
them. Nor would they transact any trade with them, or intermarry with
them. They would not even socialize with them in any way, until they
turned Muhammad over to them that they might kill him. They agreed to be
as one hand against Muhammad, either to assassinate him, or kill him
openly.

When Abu Talib learned of all this, he gathered the sons of Hashim,
forty men in all, and went into a secret ravine. Abu Talib swore to them
by the Ka'bah, the haram, the rukn and the station (maqam of Abraham)
that if even a thorn was to prick Muhammad, "I will steadfastly fight
against you all, 0 sons of Hashim." Abu Talib fortified the ravine and
set up guards over it night and day. At night he kept guard himself with
his sword, while the Messenger of Allah slept. Then he had him get up
and sleep in another spot, guarded by his own sons and the sons of his
brother. They watched over the Prophet during the day as well.

In the end, they endured much hardship. Thus it was that no one of the
Arabs entering Mecca dared buy from or sell anything to the family of
Hashim, for fear that his wealth would be seized. To that end, Abu Jahl,
al-\`As ibn Wail as-Sahmi, an-Nadr ibn al-Harith ibn Kaladah and \`Uqbah
ibn Abi Mu'ayt used to go out to the roads leading to Mecca, and anyone
they saw carrying goods, they forbade to trade with the sons of Hashim.
Otherwise they threatened to seize his wealth. Khadijah, however, had
much wealth, which she spent in caring for the Messenger of Allah while
he was in the ravine. Mut'im ibn \`Adiyy ibn Nawfal ibn \`Abdi'lMuttalib
refused to sign the pledge, saying: "This is wrongdoing." The document
was, nonetheless, sealed with forty seals, representing all the notables
of Quraysh. They then hung it in the Ka'bah. Abu Lahab also concurred
with them in this action.

During the special seasons (when fighting was banned), the Messenger of
Allah would go around the Arab tribes and plead with them: "If you would
protect me, I would recite to you the Book of my Lord, and your reward
with Allah shall be Paradise." Abu Lahab would follow close behind him
and say: "Do not accept his offer! He is my brother's son. He is a
magician and a liar." Thus it went on, and the sons of Hashim remained
in the ravine for four years, having no security except during special
seasons, nor could they buy or sell anything except during these
seasons. There were two seasons held in Mecca every year: that of the
\`umrah (lesser pilgrimage) during Rajab, and the pilgrimage season in
Dhi'l-Hijjah (the 7th and 12th months respectively). Hence, only when
either of these two special seasons come did the sons of Hashim leave
their ravine to buy and sell. Then no one of them dared venture out till
the next season. They therefore suffered much hardship and hunger.

The people of Quraysh sent a message to Abu Talib, saying: "Turn
Muhammad over to us that we may kill him; then we would make you king
over us." In response, Abu Talib recited a long poem, in which he
says:

When I saw that these people had no love,having cut off all ties and
means of friendship;(I said): Do you not know that we do not regard our
son as a liar,Nor does he utter vain words.Pure is he, that for the sake
of his face prayers for rain are answered;Generous towards orphans is
he, and a protection for widows.The errant of the clan of Hashim crowd
around him;For with him they find bounty and generous gifts.You lie, by
Allah's house! We shall never abandon Muhammad;Rather we shall wield the
sword and strive to protect him.

We shall never betray him, until we fall slain before him;For his sake
we shall neglect our sons and wives.By my life! I have been charged with
great affection for Ahmad!I loved him with the love of a faithful
lover.I have sacrificed willingly my soul for him and protected him;I
have defended him with all that is precious,Even the bones of my
breast!He remains an object of beauty in this world for its
inhabitants;A harsh match to anyone showing enmity toward him is he, and
the ornament of every assembly.

He is clement, wise, unwavering and not foolish;Friend of the Lord of
Truth, never indulging in vain disputation.Thus the Lord of human
servants has strengthened him with His victory;He caused a religion to
prevail whose truth knows no falsehood.When they heard this poem, they
despaired of convincing Abu Talib.

Abu 'l-\`As ibn Rabi', who was the Messenger of Allah's son-in-law,
used to bring by night camels laden with wheat and dates to the entrance
of the ravine and call out loudly to them, so that they would rush in,
and the sons of Hashim would have provisions. The Messenger of Allah
used to say: "Abu 'l-\`As has established a tie of marriage with us and
has honoured well this marriage relation. He brought laden camels to us
when we were besieged and delivered them to our ravine by night."

When the Messenger of Allah had spent four years in the ravine, Allah
sent against the hostile document of the Quraysh an earthworm which
licked clean all words of unkindness to next of kin, and all wrongdoing
and oppression. It only spared the name of Allah.

Gabriel came down to the Messenger of Allah and told him about it. The
Messenger of Allah then told Abu Talib, who went to the men of Quraysh
as they assembled in the mosque. When they saw him they said: "Abu Talib
has finally given in; he has now come to turn his nephew in." He drew
near and greeted them with the salutation of peace. They all rose up and
received him with deference. They then said: "O Abu Talib, we know that
you wish our friendship and return to our society! You will turn your
nephew over to us." He answered: "No, by Allah, it is not for this that
I have come to you. Rather my nephew tells me - and he utters no lies -
that Allah has told him that He sent an earthworm against your hostile
document, which ate every word of unkindness to next of kin, of
wrongdoing and oppression. It only spared the name of Allah. Bring your
document, and if what he says is true, then fear Allah and abandon your
wrongdoing, oppression and unkindness toward blood relations. If, on the
other hand, what he says is false, I will turn him over to you. If you
wish, you may kill him, or if you wish you may spare his life." They
brought the document down from the Ka'bah, still bearing forty seals.
When it was brought before them, every man saw his seal. When, however,
they .opened it, they found no letters except the phrase: \`in your
name, O Allah.' Abu Talib then pleaded with them saying: "O people, fear
Allah and desist from what you are doing! " But the people dispersed,
and no one spoke a word. Abu Talib then returned to the ravine and
recited his poem rhyming with the letter \`b' and which begins as
follows:

Who shall endure standing on guard till night's end,Or the retreat
which your divided people have decreed.In the document there was indeed
a lesson;Anyone knowing about it would surely marvel.Allah had Himself
erased from it their rejection of faith and insolence,As well as their
hostility toward him who proclaimed the truth openly.Thus what they said
came to nought,For anyone inventing falsehood only tells lies.Yet the
son of Abdullah has been truthful among us,in spite of our people's
wrath.

Do not think that we shall betray Muhammad; For neither our honour nor
fidelity would permit it!A strong Hashimite hand shall protect him;He
whose deeds among men are the best of deeds.

Then some of the sons of \`Abd Manaf and the sons of Qusayy, as well as
other men of Quraysh who were born to women of the sons of Hashim -
among whom was Mut'im ibn \`Adiyy ibn \`Amir ibn Lu'ayy, an old man of
great wealth and many children, and Abu 'l-Bakhtari ibn Hisham and
Zuhayr ibn (Abi) Umayyah al-Makhzumi and other of their notables - said:
"We dissociate ourselves from this document." Abu Jahl likewise said:
"This is a matter which was decided in the dark." Thus the Prophet and
those who were with him were able to leave the ravine.

Two months later, Abu Talib died. Khadijah also died soon after. These
were two grave occurrences which the Messenger of Allah had to endure,
and he was greatly saddened. He went in to see Abu Talib while he was
breathing his last. He said: "O uncle, you cared for a child until he
grew up. You supported him when he was a grown man, and cared for him as
an orphan. May Allah, therefore, reward you on my behalf with the best
reward. Give me a word (that is, the shahadah) that I may intercede with
it on your behalf with my Lord." Abu Talib replied: "O son of my
brother, were I not to fear the reproach of people after me, I would
have gladdened your heart." Saying this he died.

Muhammad ibn Ishaq reported that Khadijah daughter of Khuwaylid, and
Abu Talib died in the same year. [^37] Thus afflictions followed one
another for the Messenger of Allah after the death of Khadijah and Abu
Talib - for she was a true helper (wazir) to him in Islam, and he found
comfort in her. Abu \`Abdillah ibn Mandah reported in the
Kitabu'l-Ma\`rifah that Khadijah died three days after Abu Talib. [^38]
al-Waqidi claimed that they all left the ravine three years before the
Migration. In that year Khadijah and Abu Talib died within the space of
thirty-five nights.

**The Prophet Offers Himself To Neighboring Arab Tribes. The Allegiance
Of The Ansar To Him, And The Event Of Al-\`Aqabah**

It is reported in the book entitled Dala'ilu'n-Nubuwwah [^39] on the
authority of az-Zuhri (a well-known traditionist), that the Messenger of
Allah used to offer himself as a prophet to the Arab tribes every year
during the pilgrimage season. He used to speak to the chief of every
tribe, requesting only that they give him shelter and protection. He
said: "I shall not ask anyone of you to do anything he does not wish to
do. For anyone of you who accepts what I have come to call you to, it is
well. But I shall not compel anyone who would refuse. I only ask that
you protect me from those who wish to kill me, so that I might convey
the messages of my Lord - and Allah decrees what He wills for me and
those who will follow him." Yet no one of them accepted him. Everyone he
spoke to of these tribes would say: "The people of this man know best
his claims. Do you think that a man can reform us when he has corrupted
his own people, and who have therefore, abandoned him? "

When Abu Talib died, trials increased greatly as never before for the
Messenger of Allah. He thus turned to the tribe of Thaqif in the city of
at-Ta'if in the hope that they might give him shelter. He sought three
men, who were the notables of Thaqif in those days. They were brothers:
\`Abd Yalayl ibn \`Amr, Habib ibn \`Amr and Mas'ud ibn \`Amr. He offered
himself to them and told them of the trials that had afflicted him at
the hands of his people. One of them exclaimed: "I swear that I would
even steal the curtains of the Ka'bah, if Allah had truly sent you with
anything! " The other said: "Could not Allah send someone other than
you?" The third exclaimed: "By Allah, I shall never speak to you
henceforth. By Allah, if you are truly the Messenger of Allah, you would
be of too great honour for me even to speak to you. If, on the other
hand, you lie concerning Allah, you would be too evil for me to speak to
you." They mocked him and revealed to their people their conversation
with him.

The men then placed people in two lines in his way. When the Messenger
of Allah passed between the two lines, he did not lift his feet or put
them down but that they pelted them with stones. They repeated this
until his feet bled. He escaped from them with his feet gushing blood,
and ran to one of their gardens and took shelter under a tree, sad and
suffering much pain.

\`Utbah ibn Rabi \`ah and Shaybah ibn Rabi \`ah were in the garden. He
therefore did not wish to remain with them, as he knew their great
hostility to Allah and His Messenger. When they saw him, they sent to
him a servant of theirs called \`Addas who was of the people of Naynawa
(Nineveh), with grapes. When \`Addas came to him, the Messenger of Allah
asked: "From which land are you?" He answered: "I am of the people of
Nineveh." He said to him: "So you are from the city of the righteous man
Yunus (Jonah) son of Mitts (Matthew)." \`Addas asked him: "How do you
know who Yunus was? " The Messenger of Allah, who never looked down at
anyone so much as not to convey to him the message of his Lord,
answered: "I am the Messenger of Allah. Allah, exalted be He, informed
me of the account of Yunus ibn Mitts." When he had told him what Allah
had revealed to him concerning Yunus ibn Mitts, \`Addas fell prostrate
before Allah and began to kiss the Prophet's feet while they continued
to gush blood. When \`Utbah and Shaybah saw what their servant was
doing, they kept silent. But when he returned to them they asked: "Why
did you prostrate yourself before Muhammad and kiss his feet, while we
never saw you do so to any of us?" He answered: "He is a righteous man
who told me things which I recognized concerning a messenger whom Allah
had sent to us, whose name was Yunus ibn Mitts." They laughed and said
"Let him not tempt you away from your Christianity, for he is a
deceitful man." The Messenger of Allah then returned to Mecca.

\`Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim (al-Qummi) reports that when the
Messenger. of Allah returned from the city of at-Ta'if and approached
Mecca with the intention of performing the \`umrah (lesser pilgrimage),
he did not wish to enter Mecca where he had no protector. He saw a man
of the Quraysh who had secretly embraced Islam and said to him: "Go to
al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq and tell him that Muhammad asks you to protect him
until he performs the circumambulations ( tawaf , around the Ka'bah) and
the running (sa\`i) between the two hills of as-Safa and al-Marwa, for
he has come to perform the \`umrah." The man went to al-Akhnas and
conveyed to him what the Messenger of Allah had said. al-Akhnas
answered: "I am not of the Quraysh, but only an ally, and an ally cannot
offer protection. I fear that they would violate my protection, and that
would be an insult." The man returned to the Messenger of Allah and told
him. The Messenger of Allah was hiding in the ravine of Harra' with Zayd
ibn al-Harithah. He said to the man: "Go to Suhayl ibn \`Amr and ask him
to protect me only until I circumambulate the House (that is, the
Ka'bah) and perform the sa\`i (running between as-Safa and al-Marwa)."
The man went and told Suhayl, but he answered: "No, I will not." The
Messenger of Allah sent the man to Mut'im ibn \`Adiyy (ibn \`Amir) to
make the same request. When the man went to him he asked: "Where is
Muhammad?" The man, however, did not wish to tell him where the Prophet
was. He rather answered: "He is nearby." Mut'im said: "Go to him and say
that I shall give you protection. Come, therefore, and circumambulate
and run as you wish."

The Messenger of Allah entered the city. Mut'im said to his sons, his
sister, and to his brother, who was called Tu'aymah ibn \`Adiyy: "Take
up your arms, for I have offered Muhammad protection! Stay around the
Ka'bah until he performs the circumambulation and running." There were
ten men in all who took up arms. Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, then
came in to the mosque. Abu Jahl saw him and said: "O people of Quraysh,
here is Muhammad alone. His supporter has died; do with him, therefore,
as you please." Tu'aymah ibn \`Adiyy said to him: "O uncle, do not
speak, for Abu Wahb (that is, Mut'im) has offered Muhammad protection."
Abu Jahl went to Mut\`im and asked: "Are you a protector, or one who has
abandoned his religion for another?" He answered: "I am only a
protector." Abu Jahl said: "In that case your protection will not be
violated."

When the Messenger of Allah had finished his circumambulation and
running, he came to Mut'im and said: "O Abu Wahb, you have protected and
done well! Release me now from your protection." Mut'im replied: "What
would prevent you from remaining in my protection?" He answered: "I
detest remaining in the protection of an Associator for more than one
day." Mut'im then exclaimed: "O people of Quraysh, Muhammad has released
himself from my protection! "

'Ali ibn Ibrahim (al-Qummi) reported that As'ad ibn Zurarah and Dhakwan
ibn \`Abd Qays, both of whom were of the Khazraj tribe of Medina, came
to Mecca during one of the pilgrimage seasons. At that time a state of
war, which had already lasted for a long time, existed between the Aws
and Khazraj (both of which were Medinan tribes). The people did not lay
down their arms by day or night. In the last engagement between them on
the day of Bu'ath [^40], the Aws tribe had prevailed over the Khazraj.
As'ad ibn Zurarah and Dhakwan came to Mecca for the \`umrah of the
sacred month of Rajab seeking an alliance against the Aws tribe. As'ad
ibn Zurarah was a friend of \`Utbah ibn Rabi \`ah. He thus came to him
as a guest and said: "A long period of war has prevailed between us and
our people. We have come, therefore, seeking alliance against them."
\`Utbah answered: "Your dwellings are far from ours, and we have an
important preoccupation which prevents us from undertaking any other."
As'ad asked: "What is your preoccupation, when you live securely in your
sacred city? " "A man has appeared among us who claims that he is the
Messenger of Allah", answered \`Utbah. He continued: "This man has
declared our minds foolish, and insulted our gods. He has also corrupted
our youths and dissolved our unity." "Who is he?" As'ad asked. \`Utbah
replied: "He is the son of \`Abdullah son of \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib. He is
of a family that is of high honour and status among us." As'ad and
Dhakwan as well as all the people of the Aws and Khazraj tribes used to
hear from the Jews of an-Nadir, Qurayzah and Qaynuqa' - who lived among
them - that: "The time has come when a prophet shall appear in Mecca,
whose migration shall be to Medina. With him we shall slay you all, O
people of the Arabs! "

When As'ad heard all this from \`Utbah, the things which he had heard
from the Jews came back into his mind. He thus asked: "Where is he?"
\`Utbah answered: "He is sitting in the Ka'bah. They do not come out of
their ravine except during the pilgrimage season. As for you, do not
listen to him or speak to him, for he is a sorcerer who would bewitch
you with his words." All this took place at the time when the men of
Hashim were besieged in the ravine. As'ad said: "What shall I do when I
have come for the \`umrah and it is necessary for me to circumambulate
the House? " He answered: "Plug your ears up with cotton."

As'ad then went into the sanctuary, having stuffed his ears with
cotton. He circumambulated the House while the Messenger of Allah was
sitting in the sanctuary with some of the men of Hashim. He looked at
the Prophet and passed him by. As he passed by, however, performing the
second circumambulation, he said to himself: "Truly, there is no one
more foolish than I ! Should all this occur in Mecca, and I know not
what it is so that I might go back to my people and tell them? " He thus
took the cotton out of his ears, threw it away and addressed the
Messenger of Allah, saying: "Have a happy morning!" This was the
greeting of the Arabs before Islam. The Messenger of Allah turned to him
and said: "Allah has given us another greeting instead which is better
than this one; it is the greeting of the people of Paradise: \`as-Salamu
\`alaykum' [peace be upon you] ." As'ad said: "You must have come
recently to this! What do you call men to, O Muhammad?" He replied: "To
the witness (shahadah) that there is no god but Allah, and that I am the
Messenger of Allah! I enjoin upon you that: \`You associate nothing with
Him, and that you act kindly towards your parents.

Do not kill your children for fear of poverty, for We shall provide
both for you and them. Do not come near vile transgressions, be they
disclosed or hidden, and do not kill a soul, which Allah has made
unlawful except with justice. With all this you have been charged that
perhaps you may understand. Do not come near the wealth of an orphan
except in the fairest manner, until he reaches the age of discretion.
Give full and just measure and weight. Yet We do not charge a soul
except in accordance with its capacity. When you speak, speak justly,
even if it be against one who is nearest of kin. Fulfil Allah's
covenant. You are enjoined to all this, that perhaps you may recollect.'
" [^41]

When As'ad heard this, he exclaimed: "I bear witness that there is no
god but Allah alone, having no associate, and that you are the Messenger
of Allah! O Messenger of Allah, may my father and my mother be a ransom
for you! I am of the city of Yathrib (Medina), of the Khazraj tribe. All
relations between us and our brothers of the Aws tribe are cut off. If
Allah were to re-establish them by means of you, I would find no one
more honoured than you. Another man of my people is accompanying me. I
trust that he too will enter into this matter, and that Allah will set
our affairs right through you. By Allah, 0 Messenger of Allah, we often
heard reports of you from the Jews. They used to announce to us your
coming forth and inform us of your characteristics. I trust that our
abode shall be the abode of your migration, and that with us shall be
your dwelling. The Jews have informed us of this. Praise be to Allah Who
led me to you! By Allah, I came only to seek some alliance against our
opponents. Yet Allah has given us something better than the purpose for
which I came."

Dhakwan then came, and As'ad told him: "This is the Messenger of Allah
whom the Jews announced and of whose characteristics they informed us.
Come, therefore, and declare your Islam." Dhakwan thus accepted Islam
and said: "O Messenger of Allah, send with us a man who would teach us
the Qur'an and call the people to your message." The Messenger of Allah
sent Mus'ab ibn \`Umayr, a youth who had lived in luxury with his
parents, who preferred him over all their other children, and who had
never left Mecca. But when Mus'ab became a Muslim, his parents disowned
him, and he remained with the Messenger of Allah in the ravine until the
signs of exhaustion were visible on his changed face. The Messenger of
Allah ordered him to go with As'ad, as he had learned much of the
Qur'an. Dhakwan then left for Medina with As'ad accompanied by Mus'ab
ibn \`Umayr.

When As'ad and Dhakwan came to their people, they told them about the
Messenger of Allah and his message. From every family one or two men
accepted Islam. Mus'ab lived with As'ad ibn Zurarah, and every day he
would go around the assemblies of the men of Khazraj calling them to
Islam, but only the youths would accept his call. There was a man called
\`Abdullah ibn Ubayy who was a notable of the Khazraj tribe. They all
agreed to appoint him as king over them because of his honourable status
and generosity. They had made a crown for him which they then presented
to him, seeking by this mediation in their long hostilities, for he had
not fought on the side of his people of the Khazraj in the war of
Bu'ath, nor had he supported them against the Aws tribe. He had said,
rather, "You commit wrongdoing towards the Aws tribe, and I will not
support wrongdoing." Thus both the Aws and Khazraj accepted him.

When As'ad returned, \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy did not like what he and
Dhakwan brought back with them. He was, for this reason, indifferent.
As'ad then said to Mus'ab: "My maternal uncle Sa'd ibn Mu'adh is one of
the chiefs of the Aws tribe. He is a wise and honourable man, and is
well respected among the people of \`Amr ibn \`Awf. If he were to enter
into Islam, our cause would triumph. Let us, therefore, go to their
dwellings." Thus, Mus'ab went with As'ad to the quarter of Sa'd ibn
Mu'adh and sat at one of their wells. A number of their youths gathered
around him (Mus'ab), while he recited the Qur'an to them. When Sa'd ibn
Mu'adh learnt of this, he said to Usayd ibn Hudayr, who was also one of
their notables: "I have heard that Abu Umamah, As'ad ibn Zurarah has
returned with a man of Quraysh to corrupt our youths. Go, therefore, to
him and order him to desist." Usayd ibn Hudayr went to them, and As'ad,
looking at him, said to Mus'ab: "This is an honourable man, and if he
joins our cause, I have hope that it will be strengthened. Exert
yourself with him in the cause of Allah."

When Usayd came near them, he said: "O Abu Umamah, your uncle says that
you should not come to our assembly, nor should you corrupt our youths.
Beware of the men of the Aws, for your own safety! " Mus'ab said: "Would
you not sit down that we may put before you a cause, which you may join
if you so wish; otherwise, we shall remove from you anything you may
dislike." He sat down, and Mus'ab recited to him a Surah of the Qur'an.
Usayd asked: "What do you do when you join this cause? " Mus\`ab
answered, "We purify ourselves, wear two clean garments, proclaim the
profession of faith (shahadah) and pray two rak'ahs. Usayd threw himself
with his clothes into the well; he came out, he wrung his garments and
said: "Put it before me!" Mus'ab thus taught him the profession of faith
that, "There is no god but Allah, and Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah." Usayd repeated the shahadah and offered two rak'ahs of prayers.
He then said to As'ad: "O Abu Umamah, I shall now send your uncle to
you; I shall use every persuasion to make him come to you." Usayd then
went back to Sa'd ibn Mu'adh, and when the latter looked at him, he
said: "I swear that Usayd has returned to us with a different face from
that with which he left us."

Sa'd ibn Mu'adh then went to them, and Mus'ab recited to him: Ha mim, a
revelation from the All-merciful, the Compassionate [Qur'an 41:1- 2] .
"By Allah," the two men exclaimed, "we saw Islam in his face even before
he uttered a word! " He sent for two clean garments from his home; he
proclaimed the two shahadahs and offered two rak'ahs of prayer. He then
rose, took Mus'ab by the hand and took him to his home. He said to him:
"Declare your cause and do not fear anyone!" Then Sa'd went and stood
before the people of \`Amr ibn \`Awf and exclaimed: "O people of \`Amr
ibn \`Awf, let there be Do man, woman, virgin or married woman, neither
old man, nor youth but that they should come forth; this is not a day of
hiding or seclusion! " When they had all gathered, he said: "What is my
status with you?" With one voice they said: "You are our master who is
obeyed among us, nor shall we-oppose you in anything! Command us then to
do whatever you wish." He said: "It shall be unlawful for me to speak to
your men, women or children until you bear witness that, \`There is no
god but Allah, and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.' Praise be to
Allah Who has honoured us with that (faith). He (Muhammad) is the one of
whom the Jews informed us." There was not a house of the people of \`Amr
ibn \`Awf but that a man or woman of its inhabitants then accepted
Islam. He then said to Mus'ab ibn \`Umayr: "Declare your cause and call
the people openly to it." Thus, Islam spread widely in Medina. All the
notables of the two tribes (that is, the Aws and Khazraj) entered into
Islam, because of what they remembered of the reports of the Jews.

The Messenger of Allah was then informed of the coming of the Aws and
Khazraj into Islam, for Mus'ab had written to him concerning this
matter. But anyone of the Quraysh who had accepted Islam was beaten and
tortured by his people. For this reason the Messenger of Allah ordered
all such people to migrate to Medina. They used to escape secretly one
man at a time and when they arrived in Medina, the people of the Aws and
Khazraj opened their homes to them and received them with hospitality
and kindness.

It is reported that when the people of the Aws and Khazraj came to
Mecca (for the pilgrimage), the Messenger of Allah came to them and
pleaded: "Would you protect me so that I may recite to you the Book of
your Lord, and that your reward with Allah be Paradise? " "Yes, O
Messenger of Allah", they answered. "You shall have whatever you wish
for yourself and your Lord." He then said to them: "Your appointment
with me shall be at the \`Aqabah (a place outside Mecca) on the middle
night of the nights of tashriq (that is, the three days following the
Day of Sacrifice, which concludes the pilgrimage rites)." After they had
performed the pilgrimage rites, they returned to Mina (one of the
stations of the pilgrimage), many of them having accepted Islam, but the
majority still adherents of their old religion. Among them on that
journey was \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy. The Messenger of Allah said to them on
the second day of the days of tashriq, "Gather all of you in the house
of \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib, which is in the \`Aqabah. Let each one come alone
stealthily so that you wake up no one who is asleep."

The Messenger of Allah was staying in the house of \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib
along with Hamzah, \`Ali and al-\`Abbas. Forty men of the people of the
Aws and Khazraj gathered together with him at the house of \`Abdu
'l-Muttalib. When they had all settled down, the Messenger of Allah
repeated his former plea: "Would you protect me so that I may recite to
you the Book of your Lord, and that your reward with Allah be Paradise?"
As'ad ibn Zurarah, al-Bard' ibn Ma'rur and \`Abdullah ibn Hizam all
answered: "Yes, O Messenger of Allah, lay upon us whatever conditions
you wish for yourself and your Lord." The Messenger of Allah went on:
"You shall protect me as you would protect yourselves, and protect my
family as you would your families and children." They enquired: "What
shall be our benefit from all this?" He answered: "You shall have
Paradise. You shall also rule over the Arabs and non-Arabs in this
world, and you shall be kings." "We accept", they all concurred.

Then al-\`Abbas ibn Nadlah of the Aws tribe arose and spoke to the
people thus: "O people of the Aws and Khazraj, do you know full well
where are you going? You are indeed headed for warfare with peoples both
red and white (an expression indicating great scope and variety), as
well as with the kings of this world! If you think that you will abandon
him whenever calamity befalls you, then do not imperil him. For even
though the people of the Messenger of Allah have opposed him, still he
lives here in security and honour." \`Abdullah ibn Hizam, As'ad ibn
Zurarah and Abu 'l-Haytham ibn at-Tayyihan said: "Why should you be
dismayed by such words, O Messenger of Allah? Rather, we shall ransom
your blood with our blood and your soul with our souls. Lay down,
therefore, whatever conditions you wish both for yourself and for your
Lord! "

The Messenger of Allah demanded: "Appoint for me twelve chiefs from
among you who would guarantee all this for me, just as Moses took from
among the Children of Israel twelve chiefs. [^42] They said: "Rather,
choose them yourself if you so wish." Gabriel pointed them out to him.
Thus the Prophet, chose nine -of the Khazraj pointing to each man: As'ad
ibn Zurarah, al-Bard' ibn Ma'rur, \`Abdullah ibn Hizam, Abu Jabir ibn
\`Abdillah, Rafi\` ibn Malik, Sa'd ibn \`Ubadah, al-Mundhir ibn \`Amr,
\`Abdullah ibn Rawdhah, Sa'd ibn ar-Rabi\` and \`Ubadah ibn as-Samit. Of
the Aws tribe, he chose: Abu'lHaytham ibn at-Tayyihan - who was a man
from Yemen and an ally of the people of \`Amr ibn \`Awf - Usayd ibn
Hudayr and Sad ibn Khaythamah.

When they had all come together to pledge allegiance to the Messenger
of Allah, Satan cried out among the people of Quraysh saying: "O people
of Quraysh and all you Arabs, behold Muhammad and the apostates with him
at \`Aqabah pledging their allegiance to him that they may wage war
against you! " His voice was so loud that it was heard by all the
pilgrims who were in Mina. The people of Quraysh were greatly stirred up
so that they rushed to arms. The Messenger of Allah heard the clamour,
and ordered the Helpers (al-Ansar) : "Disperse!" But they all said: "O
Messenger of Allah, if you were to command us to rush at them with our
swords, we would do so." The Messenger of Allah replied: "I was not
commanded to do this. Allah has not permitted me to wage war against
them." They persisted, saying: "O Messenger of Allah, would you then
come out with us? " "I must wait for Allah's Command", he answered.

All the people of Quraysh to the last one came forth, heavily armed.
Hamzah went out with his sword, accompanied by 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, and
stood at the \`Aqabah. When they saw Hamzah, they asked: "To what
purpose have you all gathered together?" He answered: "No, we have not
gathered together; nor is there anyone here. By Allah, no one shall go
through this \`Aqabah, but that I shall smite him with my sword! " They
thus turned back and went to \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy and said: "It has
reached us that your people have pledged allegiance to Muhammad that
they will wage war with him against us! " But \`Abdullah swore to them
that his people had done nothing of the sort, that he had no knowledge
of it and that they had not informed him of any such intention. The
people of Quraysh believed him; the Ansar went their way, and the
Messenger of Allah returned to Mecca.

