6. Tawaf of Nisa’ (women) and Its Prayer
========================================

**Article 667**- It is obligatory to circumambulate round the house of
Ka’ba with the intention of Tawaf of Nisa’ after Halq or Taqsir and to
perform two Rak’at prayer with the intention of prayer of Tawaf of Nisa’
behind Maqam of Ibrahim.

**Article 668**- Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer has no difference with
Tawaf of Umrah and its prayer except in Niyyah (intention); therefore,
this Tawaf should also be started from al-Hajar al-Aswad and be finished
to that, and Ka’ba to be in the left side during Tawaf and to observe
the conditions which have been said for Tawaf.

**Article 669**- Tawaf of Nisa’ is obligatory for man and woman, old and
young, married and single and even discriminating or indiscriminating
children, and without that woman doesn’t become Halaal for man and man
doesn’t become Halaal for woman, and it is a precaution for guardian of
indiscriminating children to perform Tawaf of Nisa’ with them if they
are bought to Umrah and have become Muhrim.

**Article 670**- If a pilgrim renounces Tawaf of Nisa’, whether
deliberately or because of ignorance or forgetfulness then his/her Umrah
is not invalidated and at has no atonement, but spouse is Haraam for
him/her until returns and performs Tawaf. And if it is impossible to
return or it is hard then takes a proxy, and if this person dies then
his/her guardian performs Ghazaa of his/her Tawaf.

**Article 671**- If a person has renounced several Tawafs of Nisa’ then
one Tawaf of Nisa’ is enough for all of them, and there is no difference
between men and women and children in this ruling (renouncing Tawaf of
Nisa’), because of Tawaf of Nisa’ is necessary for everyone and spouse
doesn’t become Halaal for the person without that.

**Article 672**- Tawaf of Nisa’ is not obligatory in Umrah of Hajj
al-Tamattu’, but Tawaf of Nisa’ is obligatory in Umrah al-Mufradah.

**Article 673**- Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer are not principles and
renouncing them deliberately doesn’t cause invalidation of Hajj,
although performing them is obligatory in Umrah al-Mufradah, and if a
person doesn’t perform that then spouse doesn’t become Halaal for
him/her; and suiting or witnessing the marriage is not also permitted as
a precaution.

**Article 674**- Whenever a woman who has not performed Tawaf of Nisa’
menstruates and has to leave Mecca before becoming pure (like when
caravan doesn’t wait for her to become pure) then it is necessary for
her to take a proxy for performing Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer (also
others who are not capable of performing Tawaf or Sa’y because of
illness or another excuse should take proxy).

**Article 675**- If a person forgets Tawaf of Nisa’ and returns from
Umrah then he/she should return personally and performs that if it is
possible, and if it is not possible or has severe hardness then takes a
proxy, and after that proxy performs Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer man
becomes Halaal for woman and woman becomes Halaal for man.

**Article 676**- Whenever a person forgets obligatory Tawaf (including
Tawaf of Umrah or Tawaf of Nisa’) and returns his/her hometown and
performs sexual intercourse with his/her spouse, if it has been
performed because of forgetfulness and ignorance about the issue the it
has no atonement, but if it the person knew about the issue and has
performed deliberately then he/she should pay the atonement, and its
atonement have been mentioned in Muharramat of Ihram, and should act
according to previous article.

**Question 677**- Is it obligatory for proxy to perform Tawaf of Nisa’
for himself/herself moreover Tawaf of Nisa’ which he/she performs with
the intention of delegator?

**Answer:** It is not obligatory?

**Question 678**- How is the intention of proxy in Tawaf of Nisa’?

**Answer:** It is a precaution to make the intention of “ ما فی الذمّه”
(Thing that is upon him/her to do), although he/she can perform with the
intention of delegator.

**Question 679**- Is it permissible to perform Tawaf of Nisa’ some days
after Sa’y and Taqsir, or it should be performed immediately after Sa’y
and Taqsir?

**Answer:** Delaying Tawaf of Nisa’ doesn’t have problem.

**Question 680**- A man told his wife: “My duty is to perform Tawaf of
Nisa’ (women), but you should perform Tawaf of Rijal (men)”! And woman
performed Tawaf with this intention. Does it suffice?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem, because his purpose has been to
perform the duty which is related to Hajj (although there is nothing
called Tawaf of Rijal).

**Question 681**- A person doubts after returning from Mecca that
whether he has performed Tawaf of Nisa’ of Umrah al-Mufradah or not.
What is his duty?

**Answer:** If he has known about the necessity of Tawaf of Nisa’
totally then says that I have performed, and if he didn’t have known
about its necessity then it is obligatory precaution to perform Tawaf of
Nisa’, and if he can not perform it personally then takes a proxy.

**Question 682**- A person has performed foreplay with his wife before
performing Tawaf of Nisa’ and has touched with sexual desire. Does it
have atonement?

**Answer:** It has atonement as obligatory precaution, but it doesn’t
have atonement in case of forgetfulness or ignorance about the issue.

**Question 683**- If a proxy doesn’t perform Tawaf of Nisa’ then is only
spouse Haraam to him/her or he/she has something upon that even if
he/she dies then Ghazaa of that should be performed on behalf of
him/her?

**Answer:** He/she has something upon him/her; and he/she should perform
it personally during his/her life and it he/she cannot then he/she
should take proxy.

**Question 684**- Is Tawaf of Nisa’ obligatory for old men and women who
are not conventionally capable of sexual intercourse and do not
performed marriage, also effeminate persons?

**Answer:** Everyone should perform.

**Question 685**- A man and his wife went to Mecca and performed
rituals, but woman renounced Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer because she
didn’t like her husband and her husband didn’t perform them either and
they returned their hometown. What is the ruling of this couple about
being Mahram and living in one house?

**Answer:** This husband and wife cannot only have sexual tasks and
pleasures until they return and perform Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer
and if they cannot then they should take a proxy; which means ask people
who go to Mecca to perform Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer as their proxy.

**Question 686**- You highness say that “woman doesn’t become Halaal to
man and man doesn’t become Halaal to woman without Tawaf of Nisa”. Is
your purpose sexual intercourse or does it include other sexual
pleasures?

**Answer:** It also includes other pleasure.

**Question 687**- If a person who has renounced Tawaf of Nisa’ performs
sexual intercourse with his wife and they have a child then does this
child legitimate and inherit them?

**Answer:** Their child is legitimate anyway and inherits them.

**Question 688**- A person who has not performed Tawaf of Nisa’ has
married a woman in this condition, is their marriage correct?

**Answer:** Their marriage in invalidated and if he had knowledge about
the issue then that woman become Haraam for him forever.

**Question 689**- If a person who has not performed Tawaf of Nisa’ of
Umrah al-Mufradah performs Hajj al-Ifrad after that then does Tawaf of
Nisa’ of Hajj al-Ifrad suffice?

**Answer:** Yes, it suffices.

**Question 690**- A person has forgotten Tawaf of Nisa’ of Umrah
al-Mufradah and has become Muhrim for Umrah al-Tamattu’. Should he/she
perform foresaid Tawaf before performing Umrah al-Tamattu’ or after
that?

**Answer:** This person can perform that after performing the acts of
Umrah al-Tamattu’. And if delays that then Tawaf of Nisa’ of Hajj is
enough.

Rulings of Masdood and Mahsoor
------------------------------

**Article 691**- “Masdood” is a person who is prevented of performing
the rituals after the Ihram of Umrah or Hajj by another person (enemy of
government agents), and “Mahsoor” is a person who cannot perform the
rituals of Hajj or Umrah because of illness or limb fracture or getting
injured and like them.

**Article 692**- A person who wears Ihram of Umrah or Hajj should finish
Umrah or Hajj and if he/she doesn’t perform then he/she remains in
Ihram, but if Muhrim becomes Masdood or Mahsoor then he/she should act
to future orders for exiting Ihram.

**Article 693**- A person who becomes Muhrim to Ihram of “Hajj” or
“Umrah” and enemy or another person like government agents or thieves or
other than them prevent him/her from going to Mecca and has no other way
for going there, or if there is another it costs, sacrifices in that
place and exits the state of Ihram and it is a precaution to sacrifice
with the intention of exiting from the state of Ihram. Also it is a
precaution to shorten the hair of the head and if he/she cannot find
sacrifice then makes the intention of exiting Ihram in that place and it
is a precaution to perform fasting for ten days (as it has been
explained before) instead of sacrifice, and if he/she cannot perform in
that place in that way then performs all of that after return.

**Article 694**- If a person enters Mecca with Ihram of Umrah and enemy
or another person prevents him/her from performing the acts then he/she
has the ruling of previous article.

**Article 695**- Whenever a person goes to prison because of debt or
another accusation or by oppression then has the ruling of previous
article.

**Article 696**- If after Ihram they ask for money for going to Mecca or
issuing the permission for performing the acts, if he/she has
affordability then he/she should pay, unless it causes severe hardness
for him/her and if the person doesn’t have affordability or there is
hardness then has the ruling of “Masdood”.

**Article 697**- If a way is blocked and there is another way to go and
Muhrim also has its costs then remains in Ihram to go through that way.

**Article 698**- It is a precaution to wait for Masdood if he/she hopes
for removing the obstacle; but if he/she doesn’t think that obstacle may
be removed then he/she can act according to the order that has been said
for “Masdood”.

**Article 699**- “Mahsoor” is a person who cannot perform the acts of
Umrah or Hajj because of illness, getting injured or fracture of limbs
and like them if he/she is Muhrim to Ihram of Umrah al-Mufradah and has
to return home because of illness or like that or should be hospitalized
in that place, and anyhow cannot perform Umrah. Such a person should
send the cost of one sacrifice two Mecca and arrange with his/her
friends to sacrifice for him in a specific day and hour in Mecca and
then performs Taqsir in that specific time and exits Ihram and
everything becomes Halaal to him/her except spouse, until he/she heals
and performs Umrah al-Mufradah, and if he/she gets well and cannot
perform Umrah then takes a proxy and if there is no one to sacrifice for
him in Mecca then performs sacrifice in place that he/she is and exits
Ihram and if this is not possible either then sacrifices after returning
hometown.

**Article 700**- Whenever ill person heals after sending sacrifice or
its cost, in the way that he/she can go toMecca, then should go to Mecca
and performs the acts.

**Article 701**- Persons who are not ill but cannot go to Mecca after
Ihram because of another excuse (like the person whom his/her waist or
leg is broken, or is very week because of bleeding) have the ruling of
ill persons.

**Question 702**- Is accident in the state of Ihram includes under the
title of Mahsoor, and the person who has the accident should perform
rulings of Mahsoor?

**Answer:** Yes, whenever conditions of “Hasr” (restriction) occurs then
ruling of Mahsoor applies to that.

**Question 703**- If a person recites the invocation of “Shart”
(condition), which is Mustahab to recite while making the intention of
Ihram, and places the condition of exiting from Ihram by occurring an
obstacle then does ruling of Masdood and Mahsoor applies to him/her if
he/she become Masdood or Mahsoor or exits from Ihram immediately by
occurring these two conditions without sacrifice?

**Answer:** This person can exit the state of Ihram, but sacrifice is
obligatory for him/her and the effect of condition appears in other
aspects.

**Question 704**- A person gets injured in medina. Others bring him to
Masjid al-Shajarah and become Muhrim. Is Ihram of such person correct?
In case of correctness, if he cannot perform rituals of Umrah then what
is his duty?

**Answer:** His Ihram is correct. If he can perform Umrah, although by
help from proxy in Tawaf and Sa’y then his Umrah is correct, and if he
cannot perform then it is a precaution to act according to the ruling of
Mahsoor.


