Miscellaneous Issues
====================

Attending Congregation Prayer of Ahl -e- Sonnat
-----------------------------------------------

**Article 705**- When congregation prayer attends at “Masjid al-Haraam”
or “Masjid al-Nabi” believers should not exit those holy places and
shouldn’t renounce congregation prayer. But they should perform prayer
with other Muslims.

**Article 706**- Big and caravan-arranged congregation prayers in motels
and hotels of Mecca and medina by Shiites has problem if they can attend
congregation prayers of Haramein, but congregation prayer by some
persons doesn’t have problem.

**Article 707**- A person who has performed his/her prayer in circular
condition in the way that has been stood in front of Imam or in his
right or left side, his/her prayer is correct and there is no need to
repeat that, on the condition that Imam stands closer to Ka’ba according
to the circle.

**Article 708**- Observing the connection of rows in congregation prayer
with Ahl -e- Sonnat is necessary, therefore whenever a group of them
stands with distance, you go for the group that is connected to Imam.

**Article 709**- Persons who go to mosques of Mecca and medina for
attending their congregation prayers of sunset or noon can perform their
Isha’ or afternoon prayers individually after congregation prayer.

**Article 710**- Prayers that attends accompanying other Muslims by Imam
of Ahl -e- Sonnat are correct and doesn’t need to be performed again
even when there is enough time available.

**Article 711**- Whenever observing connection of rows needs to
prostrate on carpet and insisting on prostration on floor of the mosque
causes disconnection of rows then connection should be observed,
although person prostrates on carpet.

**Article 712**- Whenever a person attends late to the congregation
prayer, in the way that Muslims has started their prayers and there is
no valid connection of rows according to Shi’aa and it is not possible
to pass the rows and going to the place that connection is established
or agents doesn’t permit this act, then performs Iqtida (following Imam
in congregation prayer) in that place which is possible, and this prayer
is enough and there is no need to perform again.

**Article 713**- Congregation prayers that attend on the roof of Masjid
al-Haraam or Masjid al-Nabi because of congestion of crowd are not
enough and should be performed again.

**Article 714**- Friday prayer with Ahl -e- Sonnat suffices for noon
prayer and performing that again is not necessary, and these are the
orders that pure Imam (a.s.) has given us for keeping the unity of
Muslims.

**Article 715**- Whenever believers reach to mosque when congregation
prayer has finished but rows are not disordered yet then Azan and Iqama
don’t be recited and it doesn’t have difference with Shiites
congregation prayer in this aspect.

**Article 716**- Performing Ghazaa prayer with congregation prayer of
Ahl -e- Sonnat doesn’t have problem.

**Article 717**- According to the matter that if Ahl -e- Sonnat d r o p
behind Imam one Rak’at they don’t perform Tajafi (don’t sit up
partially), then performing this act is not necessary for Shiites.

Place of Prostration
--------------------

**Article 718**- Prostration is permitted on all kinds of stones,
whether it is marble, black mine stones or chalkstone before that it is
baked. Therefore, prostrating on all cobbles of Masjid al-Haraam and
Masjid al-Nabi which are from these kinds doesn’t have problem.

**Article 719**- Prostration on carpets of Masjid al-Nabi and other
mosques of Mecca and Medina doesn’t have problem, but placing Mohr is
not permitted, but if performer can easily access to the place that is
covered with carpet and is suitable for prostration and doesn’t arise
the sensitivity of brothers of Ahl -e- Sonnat then that place is
preferred, but it is affirmed to abstain any act that causes indignity
and becoming noticeable, but prostration on carpet is not permitted in
hotels.

**Article 720**- Prostration on mats which are used by Iranian and
non-Iranian Hajjis in Mecca andMedina and are mixed with cotton doesn’t
have problem, on the condition that it doesn’t cause indignity or
becoming noticeable.

**Article 721**- If Hajji performs his/her prayer in the way it is not
recognized that is even according to Ahl -e- Sonnat, for example to
prostrate on back of prayer-performers of front row (like some of Sonni
commons do when crowd is congested), or doesn’t observe connection of
rows, then his/her prayer should be performed again.

**Article 722**- Prayers of a person who has thought that prostration on
cobbles of Masjid al-Haraam or Masjid al-Nabi is not correct and has
prostrated on back of his/her hand are not correct, unless he/she is
defaulter ignorant.

**Article 723**- Hajji has the option to choose to perform prayer in the
place that has lots of blessings and benefits (like the pure Rawzah of
Masjid al-Nabi) but he/she has to prostrate on carpet or the place that
has less benefit but he/she can prostrate on stone.

**Article 724**- Respected Hajjis who perform congregation prayer among
Ahl -e- Sonnat on wheelchair or chairs bow during Rokoo’ and bow a
little more during prostration and their prayer is correct, and it is
not necessary to take of their shoes or place Mohr on the forehead.

Prayer of Traveler
------------------

**Article 725**- Travelers have the option to choose between complete or
shortened in Masjid al-Haraam and Masjid al-Nabi and all of Mecca and
Medina city, and complete prayer is better and there is no difference
between old and today Mecca and Medina.

**Article 726**- According to the fact that intention of staying for ten
days should be made in one place or two close places (for example with
three or four kilometers distance), respected Hajjis cannot make the
intention of ten days including days of staying in Arafat, Mash"ar and
Mena, but if they make the intention of staying in Mecca for ten days
and go to Arafat, Mash’ar or Mena after ten days or change their mind
after performing a four Rak’ats prayer and go to those sacred places
then their prayers are complete in all these places. Because in present
conditions the distance from Mecca to Arafat is not equal to religious
lawful distance.

**Article 727**- Whenever manage of caravan announces that we stay for
ten days, considering that he knows that stay of pilgrims in Mecca or
Medina is less tan ten days, and pilgrims perform their prayers complete
and perform fasting by trusting to his expression, and move from there
before ten days then prayers and fasting of pilgrims are correct; but
caravan manager shouldn’t lie.

**Article 728**- A person who has made the intention of staying until
the end of the day of Tarwiyah (the eighth of Dhu’l-Hijjah) in Mecca,
and has performed his/her prayer complete assuming that from his/her
arrival day until the eighth of Dhu’l-Hijjah is ten days, and ten has
recognized that he doesn’t stay for ten days should perform prayer
shortened and perform Ghazaa of those that are performed complete.

Mustahab Fasting
----------------

**Article 729**- Hajji can perform fasting for three days in Medina in
order to get his/her needs and these days are preferred to be Wednesday,
Thursday and Friday.

**Article 730**- Performing Nazr of fasting doesn’t have problem during
travel but if a person performs Nazr then it is a precaution to fulfill
his/her Nazr.

Time of Prayer and Fasting
--------------------------

**Article 731**- Performing prayer with Azan of Ahl -e- Sonnat in dawn
and noon prayer doesn’t have problem if certainty or considerable
assumption for entering the time is achieved; but about sunset prayer it
is a precaution to wait until redness of the sky disappears. This is for
the time when pilgrims want to perform prayer in their living place
individually, but if they perform prayer with them (Sonnies) observing
this precaution is not necessary and their Azan is enough.

**Article 732**- Persons who gain the opportunity of performing Umrah
al-Mufradah in the month of Ramadan, whenever they go to Masjid
al-Haraam or Masjid al-Nabi for performing prayer at the beginning of
the time, others insist them to break their fasts (Iftar) before
disappearance of redness of the sky, they are permitted to perform Iftar
and their fasting is correct and there is no need to perform Ghazaa of
that.

Announcement of Eid (festivity
------------------------------

**Article 733**- Whenever it is announced by the judge of Ahl -e- Sonnat
that a day is the day of Eid of Qurban, and we don’t have certainty
against that, then following them is permitted. Also if we are certain
against that (which often such a certainty doesn’t achieve) then we
should also follow and there is no need to observe the precaution and
Hajj is correct.

Hajj and Khums
--------------

**Article 734**- If a person pays the costs of Hajj of another person
and the person who has bestowed the money doesn’t pay his/her religious
payments, if there is no certainty about applying Khums on foresaid
money then his/her Hajj doesn’t have problem, and if the pilgrim is
certain about applying Khums of that money then it is necessary to pay
its Khums.

**Article 735**- Whenever a person goes to Umrah or Hajj without paying
the Khums of his/her properties and recognized his/her mistake after
return then his/her Hajj or Umrah is correct, but he/she should purify
his/her properties as soon as possible.

**Article 736**- A person who has no Khums accounting should check
his/her properties when he/she wants to go to Hajj. If the person knows
the date of his/her first income, all properties and assets that one
year is passed them according to the date of the first income have
Khums, and if he/she doesn’t know the date of the first income then all
the things that have been with him/her during that year have Khums, and
those which are doubtful doesn’t have Khums; and paying the Khums of
clothing of Ihram does not suffice and Khums of all costs of Hajj or
Umrah should be paid. And it is so proper that respected Hajjis who has
not paid the Khums of all of their properties yet take this divine
opportunity and pay the Khums of them in order to fulfill their
obligatory duty and to include in divine blessings and benefits.

Luqtah (lost property) of Haram
-------------------------------

**Article 737**- Whenever Hajji finds a thing in Haram it is obligatory
precaution not to take that.

**Article 738**- If Hajji takes Luqtah (lost property) of Haram then
he/she can own and use that if the price of that thing is less than one
dirham1, and if doesn’t own and doesn’t neglect then he/she is not
responsible, but if he/she keeps that with him/her without the intention
of owning and neglected or wasted then he/she is responsible, and if
he/she wants to own that thing and before using that its owner is found
then he/she should return that to its owner.

**Article 739**- Whenever a pilgrim takes Luqtah of Haram which costs
more than one dirham, if it is possible, he should give it to a trustful
person in order to look for its owner and announce for one year2, and
pays that as alms after one year that its owner is not found and there
is no hope for finding its owner, but if after paying that as alms its
owner is found and is not satisfied of paying the alms them then it is
obligatory precaution to pay him/her the price of that thing, and anyway
owning such Luqtah is not permitted, and if a person owns that then
he/she doesn’t become the owner and is responsible of that, and if the
person has no hope of finding its owner from the beginning then he/she
can pay it as alms ob behalf of its main owner immediately.

**Article 740**- Whenever pilgrims find Saudi money in Mecca or Medina
and don’t know that it is owned by Iranian or non-Iranian pilgrims, if
they have no hope of finding its owner then it is obligatory precaution
to pay it to a poor as alms on behalf of its owner.[^1]

Esteftas Related to Issues of Umrah
-----------------------------------

**Question 741**- A person who was not Muqallid (follower in religious
rulings) of any of respected Maraji’, now wants to Taqlid (following in
religious rulings). He has also gone to Mecca. Are his worships correct?

**Answer:** Whenever his acts are according to fatwa of Marja’ which is
presently follow then they are correct.

**Question 742**- There are Qur"ans in Masjid al-Haraam which on some of
them is written “وقف لله تعالی” and on some of then this sentence is not
written. Please two following question about foresaid Qur"ans:

**A)** It famous among Hajjis that taking Qur"ans without the foresaid
sentence is permitted. Is this expression true?

**Answer:** Taking those Qur"ans is not permitted without the permission
of related authorities, and those who have taken them should return.

**B)** Sometimes, authorities of Masjid al-Haraam give Qur"ans with this
sentence as a gift to Hajjis. It is permissible to take such Qur"ans?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem.

**Question 743**- Is it permissible to take a par of stone of Safa and
Marwah, or Mash’ar desert for blessing?

**Answer:** Taking stone from Safa and Marwah hills is not permitted;
and it is a precaution to renounce taking from Mash’ar.

**Question 744**- Sometimes, it can be seen that some of respected
Hajjis take some of the soil of Baqi cemetery for blessing and bring it
to Iran. Is this act correct according to religious law? If it is not
permitted then what is their duty now?

**Answer:** It is not permitted and it is a precaution to return that.

**Question 745**- Last year, one of my friends who had gone to Hajj
brought me two pieces of stone from Hera cave as a gift. I have placed
those stones in a proper place and I kiss and pilgrimage them once in
some days for blessings. Is this act considered as polytheism?

**Answer:** This act is not essentially Haraam; but abstain this act
because it may become the source of false comprehension by malignant
people or heresy.

**Question 746**- Is it permissible to use meat and fish conserves which
are available at market of Muslims in Mecca and Medina?

**Answer:** If you don’t know that from where is it imported or it is
imported from Islamic countries then it doesn’t have problem, and if you
are certain that it is imported from non-Islamic countries then you are
permitted to use only if its importer is Muslim and assuming that he/she
observe the Islamic ritual slaughter and has distributed among Muslims,
or the phrase “Ritually Slaughtered” or “Halaal Food” is written on it.

**Question 747**- What is the ruling if a person gives some foreign
currency to a person and takes Iranian money in exchange?

**Answer:** If it is not against the rules and it is done by
satisfaction of both parties then it doesn’t have problem.

**Question 748**- When a part of Masjid al-Haraam become Najis (impure)
then staff purifies that place in the following method: first, they
remove the impure thing, then pour Qaleel water on that place, and in
third part remove the poured water. According to this method or
purification a person gains certainty about impurity of all of Masjid
al-Haraam. Is it permissible to prostrate on foresaid stones in the
condition of question?

**Answer:** Knowledge about impurity of the entire mosque is not
achieved and should not pay attention to the doubt; and this is also a
kind of purification.

**Question 749**- If a person becomes Muhtalim in Masjid al-Haraam or
Masjid al-Nabi then what intention should he make for performing
Tayammum?

**Answer:** He should exit the mosque immediately and performs Tayammum
instead of Ghusl of Janabat for exiting the mosque, unless the time of
exiting is less than the time of making the intention that in this case
exits immediately.

**Question 750**- Is it permissible for the persons in the state of
Janabat or menstruation to move in the extended parts of Masjid
al-Haraam and Masjid al-Nabi?

**Answer:** It is not permitted, and there is no difference between the
new and old parts.

**Question 751**- What is the purpose of severe hardness or discomfort
that you have pointed to them in some of articles? Is personal hardness
and discomfort should be considered or typical?

**Answer:** The purpose is personal hardness and discomfort.

**Question 752**- Does making the intention of invalidating Umrah or a
part of that (without continuing the act while making the intention of
invalidation) cause invalidation of that?

**Answer:** Intention of invalidation doesn’t invalidate.

**Question 753**- How long is Ghusl of Ihram, pilgrimage and like them
valid? And which things invalidate them?

**Answer:** It is valid for one day; and if minor Hadath happens then
the person repeats that with the intention of Rija’ (hoping for the
goodness of the act), but it is not obligatory.

**Question 754**- Is it permissible to ask mercy for the founders,
keepers and servants of Masjid al-Haraam and Masjid al-Nabi who bear
lots of difficulties?

**Answer:** Ask guidance for them.

**Question 755**- Some of Hajjis bring their portion of food and
consumer goods (like drinks, banana, orange, apple, cheese, fruit juice,
soap, shampoo etc.), which have not used during travel back to Iran.
What is the ruling of this act? Is it permissible to use them?

**Answer:** If they are their portion for real then it doesn’t have
problem; but if they are only free for use then they have the right to
use them in thee but taking them is not permitted.

**Question 756**- How is performing Hajj with Haraam property or
property that is doubtful of being Haraam?

**Answer:** It is not permitted with Haraam property; but it the
property is doubtful of being Haraam and the person is not certain that
it is Haraam then he/she can use it for Hajj, on the condition that
seemingly it is considered Halaal, which means it has been gained in
seemingly Halaal way.

**Question 757**- What is the ruling of doubt in the acts of Umrah?

**Answer:** Whenever the pilgrim doubts after beginning the next act
then doesn’t pay attention, whether in performing or correctness of
that.

[^1]: One dirham has about 2.4gr silver coin which its present price is
about 400 tomans. If it is announced every day for one week from the day
that it is found and every week for one year in the place of
congregation of people then it is enough.


