Introduction
============

**Article 1-** Umrah al-Mufradah is one of the best acts and it has lots
of benefits. It has been quoted from holy Prophet (s.a.) that said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْعُمْرَةُ کَفّارَةٌ لِکُلِّ ذَنْب
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Umrah is the atonement of all sins”[^1]

**Article 2-** Umrah can be performed in any month of the year; but it
is the best to perform it in the month of Rajab[^2], and it has been
affirmed a lot about that in Islamic news.

**Article 3-** Umrah has two kinds like Hajj: obligatory and Mustahab.

**Article 4-** A person who has the capability of performing only Umrah
al-Mufradah it is obligatory precaution to perform that; although he
doesn’t have Istita"ah (having affordability and physical ability) of
Hajj and it is obligatory only once in a lifetime, therefore persons who
perform Hajj by proxy it is obligatory precaution to perform Umrah
al-Mufradah for themselves after the deputization.

**Article 5-** Any person who wants to enter Mecca it is obligatory for
him/her to enter with Ihram, and for Ihram he/she should have the
intention of Umrah or Hajj, and if it is not the time of Hajj it is
obligatory to perform Umrah al-Mufradah. But persons who resort to Mecca
because of their occupation (like car drivers, and caravan staff) are
excluded from this ruling. Also if persons who have performed Umrah
exits Mecca and returns in Mecca in the same month then it is obligatory
for them to perform Ihram and Umrah again.

**Question 6-** Is it permissible to perform Umrah al-Mufradah in months
of Hajj before Umrah al-Tamattu’? Is there any difference in this issue
between Sarurah (a person who has not performed the obligatory Hajj) and
non-Sarurah?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem and there is no difference between
the person who is performing Hajj for the first time or other than that.

**Question 7-** If a person becomes Muhrim of Umrah al-Mufradah with the
intention of Rija’ (hoping for the goodness of the act) then should
he/she say the word “Rija’” in intentions of all acts of Umrah or this
is not necessary?

**Answer:** It is enough that he/she has the intention of Rija’ in
his/her mind for all acts of Umrah and there is no need to repeat the
word “Rija’”.

**Question 8-** If a woman thinks of the possibility of her menstruation
and the matter that she cannot enter Masjid al-Haraam then can she
become Muhrim for Mustahab Umrah and if he menstruates then take a proxy
for performing Tawaf and prayer? Also if an ill person presumes that
he/she cannot perform the acts of Umrah al-Mufradah then can he/she do
the same?

**Answer:** it doesn’t have problem, and if she has to take the proxy
then she takes a proxy for Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf and performs the
rest of acts herself by observing the order.

**Question 9-** Can a person who recites his/her prayer incorrect and
has no time for correcting the recitation perform Mustahab Umrah
al-Mufradah?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem.

**Question 10-** Is it permissible to perform Umrah al-Mufradah after
finishing Umrah al-Tamattu’ and before beginning the acts of Hajj
al-Tamattu’?

**Answer:** Umrah al-Mufradah should not be performed and if it is
performed then its correctness is in doubt but it doesn’t harm Umrah and
Hajj al-Tamattu’.

[^1]: Wasael al-Shi’aa, vol. 8, page 66, chapters of necessity of Hajj,
chapter 38, Hadith 7, and vol. 10, page 240, chapters of Umrah, chapter
3, Hadith 7.

[^2]: There are lots of cabbalas about this matter that it has been
quoted sixteen cabbalas only in the book Wasael al-Shi’aa, vol. 10, page
239, chapters of Umrah, chapter 3.


