Valid Time between Two Umrahs al-Mufradah
=========================================

**Article 11-** If a person who has been in Mecca for more than one
month and the same time is passed from his/her previous Umrah
al-Mufradah, goes to Jeddah and returns without Ihram has done nothing
wrong according to religious law and should return to Miqat and become
Muhrim and perform Umrah al-Mufradah; because by passing lunar month a
person who enters Mecca should perform another Umrah.

**Article 12-** Persons who has performed Umrah in the month of Sha’ban
(for example) and go to Arafat (for visit) in Ramadan, noticing that
they exit the boundaries of Haram they should perform another Umrah
al-Mufradah in return to Haram.

**Article 13-** Repeating Umrah is Mustahab like repeating Hajj but it
is not possible to perform more than one Umrah in each lunar month.

**Article 14-** As it has been said one Umrah is Mustahab in each lunar
month, therefore if a person enters Mecca at the ends of month of Rajab
and performs Umrah al-Mufradah and then the month of Sha’ban begins then
he/she can perform Umrah al-Mufradah again but in the same month
performing two Umrahs al-Mufradah has problem, and if a person wants to
perform more than one Umrah in one month performs that with the
intention of Rija’; which means with the intention that this act has
been accepted by Allah (not as a certain order) but it is better that
respected pilgrims perform Tawaf instead of these repeated acts that its
legality is certain.

**Article 15-** If the month of Rajab is passing the person can become
Muhrim for having the benefits of Umrah in this month and performs the
acts in the month of Sha’ban but he/she cannot perform another Umrah in
the moth of Sha’ban. Therefore if such a person goes to Arafat for visit
then there is no need for new Ihram in return.

**Question 16-** You have said that: “It is not possible to perform more
than one Umrah in each lunar month” is there any difference in this
issue between two Umrahs that the person performs one or both of them as
a proxy?

**Answer:** There is no difference.

**Question 17-** Whenever a person performs two Umrahs al-Mufradah in
one lunar month when the second Umrah is performed by deputization then
can proxy takes wage for performing that? And if Umrah al-Mufradah has
become obligatory for delegator then does such an Umrah suffice?

**Answer:** It is necessary to observe precautions and if the proxy take
the wage by informing the delegator it doesn’t have problem; but
sufficing such a Umrah as the obligatory Umrah is in doubt.

Question 18- As you have permitted performing Umrah al-Mufradah before
Umrah al-Tamattu’ even in the same lunar month, is it permissible to
perform Umrah al-Mufradah in the same lunar month after Umrah
al-Tamattu’ and before Hajj or should it be performed with the intention
of Rija’?

**Answer:** It has problem.

**Question 19-** Sometime the place for distribution of goods in holy
Mecca is one kilometer after Masjid al-Tan"eem. What is the duty of
staffs who should resort to that place for taking the portion of
caravan?

**Answer:** In Umrah al-Mufradah, whenever the person exits and returns
before that the month which he/she has performed Umrah in that is passed
repeating Umrah is not necessary; but if he/she returns in the next
month then he/she should become Muhrim from Masjid al-Tan"eem and
performed Umrah except that his/her occupation is to resort out of
Haram.

**Question 20-** Some of Faqihs say: “Staffs who want to exist Mecca
don’t need to become Muhrim for returning to Mecca if they want to go
only to Jeddah, but if they want to go to Medina they should become
Muhrim again in Masjid al-Shajarah for returning to Mecca and then
return to holy Mecca with Ihram”, what is your opinion?

**Answer:** If they return in the same lunar month that they have exited
then repeating Ihram is not necessary, and if it is in the next month
then they should become Muhrim again and perform the act.

**Question 21-** Whenever staffs of caravans have performed the act of
Umrah al-Mufradah, should they become Muhrim when returning to Mecca
each time that they exit Mecca and go to Jeddah (for example) for doing
the tasks of caravan?

**Answer:** It is not necessary to become Muhrim, except that they
return in the next month (another lunar month).


