2. Tawaf
========

**Article 318**- Second obligatory act of Umrah is Tawaf; Tawaf means
circumambulating the house of Allah seven rounds.

Quintet Conditions of Tawaf
---------------------------

### First: Niyyah (intention)

**Article 319**- If pilgrim renounces Tawaf indeliberately then he/she
should perform it whenever he/she remembers, and if the pilgrim has
returned home and cannot return to Mecca or this act causes him/her
severe hardness then he/she should take a reliable person as proxy.

**Article 320**- Tawaf should be performed with pure intention for
Allah; because Tawaf is one of worships and it is not correct without
the intention of closeness to Allah.

**Article 321**- It is not necessary for Muhrim to express the intention
by words or through the heart; but noticing that he/she intends to
perform Tawaf and keeps this attention until the end of Tawaf is enough.
In the other hand, intention in worships is like the intention in daily
tasks; as the person (for example) drinks water or walks with intention,
if he/she performs worships in this way then the intention has been
performed; only having the intention of closeness to Allah is necessary
in worships.

**Article 322**- If pilgrim performs Tawaf or other acts of Umrah or
Hajj with hypocrisy (which means perform them for expressing
himself/herself and showing his/her act very good) then that act is
invalidated, and he/she has performed a great sin adding to the
invalidation of his/her act.

**Article 323**- If pilgrim considers the satisfaction of another person
in performing worship and that act not to be performed purely for Allah
then that is hypocrisy and invalidated.

**Article 324**- It is enough to perform an act “for Allah”, “for
obeying the order of Allah”, “for saving from the divine punishment”,
“for reaching the heaven” or “for gaining spiritual benefit and
blessing” in order that act to be correct.

**Article 325**- Whenever a pilgrim performs hypocrisy after finishing
Tawaf or other worships then that worship is not invalidated, although
he/she had performed a false act.

**Question 326**- A pilgrim who is another person’s proxy doubts in the
second round that did he made the intention of Tawaf for that person or
for himself. Now, what is his duty?

**Answer:** It is a precaution to finish the Tawaf with the intention of
that person who has deputized him and performs prayer of Tawaf and then
performs Tawaf and its prayer again.

**Article 327**- The purpose of “purity from Hadath” is that Muhrim
should be pure from Janabat, menstruation and lochia and have performed
ablution for prayer.

### Second: Purity from Hadath

**Article 328**- “purity from Hadath” is a condition of obligatory Tawaf
and it is not a condition in Mustahab Tawaf, although it is better to be
pure, therefore if the pilgrim is in the state of Janabat, menstruation
or lochia and has forgotten and has performed Tawaf in this way then
his/her Mustahab Tawaf is correct, but if he/she has knowledge and
awareness about the matter then his/her Tawaf is not correct because it
is Haraam for a Jonob person to stay in Masjid al-Haraam, but performing
Mustahab Tawaf without ablution for prayer doesn’t have problem.

**Article 329**- Whenever a pilgrim who has not performed ablution for
prayer or has not been pure from Janabat, menstruation of lochia has
performed Tawaf then his/her Tawaf is invalidated although it has been
performed because of negligence, forgetfulness or ignorance about the
issue.

**Article 330**- Whenever Muhrim doesn’t have water available or cannot
use water also cannot wait until his/her excuse removes then it is
obligatory to perform Tayammum instead of that; it can be Tayammum
instead of Ghusl or instead of ablution for prayer and then he/she
performs Tawaf.

**Article 331**- If Muhrim performs Tayammum instead of Ghusl and then
performs one of invalidators of ablution then there is no need to repeat
Tayammum instead of Ghusl and performs Tayammum instead of ablution, and
until one of causes of Ghusl is not happened and his/her excuse is still
remained then that first Tayammum instead of Ghusl is enough.

**Article 332**- If he/she hopes that his/her excuse will be removed
then it is obligatory precaution to wait until the last opportunity, and
if his/her excuse didn’t removed then performs Tayammum.

**Article 333**- If Muhrim was pure and has doubt that whether Hadath
has been happened or not then don’t pay attention to his/her doubt and
it is not necessary to perform Taharah (purity) again.

**Article 334**- Whenever Muhrim is certain that Ghusl has become
obligatory to him/her or his/her ablution is invalidated and then doubts
that whether he/she has perform Ghusl or ablution or not then he/she
should perform the duty of Ghusl or ablution for prayer.

**Article 335**- Whenever Muhrim doubts after performing Tawaf that
whether he/she has performed that with ablution or Ghusl then his/her
Tawaf is correct; but he/she should perform that for later acts (which
needs ablution or Ghusl).

**Article 336**- If Muhrim doubts during Tawaf that whether he/she has
performed ablution or not and doesn’t know his/her previous condition
about ablution and Hadath, if it is after finishing the fourth round
then he/she leaves Tawaf and performs ablution and continue the rest
from that point and then performs it again as a precaution, and if it is
before the fourth round his/her Tawaf is invalidated.

**Article 337**- Whenever Muhrim doubts during Tawaf that whether he/she
has performed a Ghusl which was obligatory him/her or not, he/she should
exit Masjid al-Haraam immediately and return after perform Ghusl, then
if he/she has at least finished four rounds then continues from the
point and it is a precaution to perform that again after finishing
Tawaf; and if it was before the fourth round then starts from the
beginning.

**Article 338**- Women can delay their menstruation by using pills and
perform Tawaf and Umrah and it doesn’t have problem for their Umrah.

**Article 339**- Whenever women sees blood d r o ps after using pills
and this doesn’t continue for three days then it doesn’t consider as
menstruation. They perform ablution and their acts are correct.

**Article 340**- Whenever a woman sees blood d r o ps in other than
menstruation days, and performs Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf considering
that that was not menstruation bleeding, and sees blood in the night
after Tawaf which has all conditions of menstruation bleeding, if she is
certain that after seeing blood d r o ps (in the night before Tawaf)
blood was inside and has not been discontinued then those d r o ps have
the ruling of menstruation and her Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf is
invalidated but her Umrah is correct. But she should performs Tawaf and
prayer of Tawaf again (after finishing menstruation and performing
Ghusl), but if she has doubt or is certain that d r o ps have been
discontinued for a while (and this is new blood) then it doesn’t have
the ruling of menstruation and her acts are correct.

**Article 341**- Whenever a person is performing obligatory Tawaf and
his/her ablution becomes invalidated then renews the ablution and
returns. If he/she has completed four rounds then performs the rest and
if it was less than four rounds then starts from the beginning; and if a
women menstruates during Tawaf then she should exit Masjid al-Haraam
immediately and her ruling is the same after becoming pure.

**Article 342**- If a Muhrim stops Tawaf because of necessity that is
happened for one of religious brothers or sisters then he/she should act
according to the previous article.

**Article 343**- Whenever Muhrim becomes severely ill during Tawaf in
the way that he/she cannot continue Tawaf then he/she stops Tawaf, and
after healing if he/she has completed four rounds then performs the rest
and if it was less than that then starts Tawaf again, and if illness
continues and he/she couldn’t perform Tawaf personally then others carry
him/her performing Tawaf and if he/she couldn’t perform Tawaf in this
way either then takes a proxy.

**Article 345**- Sitting doesn’t have problem during Tawaf for removing
tiredness, but it is obligatory precaution to observe the conventional
sequence (it means to perform Tawaf without long pauses and in
sequential rounds).

**Question 346**- A person notices after performing Taqsir that he/she
didn’t have ablution during Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf, or his/her
ablution was invalidated, now what is his/her duty? Is it necessary to
wear clothing of Ihram again and performs Tawaf?

**Answer:** He/she should perform Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf again and
his/her Umrah is correct and there is no need to wear clothing of Ihram.

**Question 347**- Ablution of one of Hajjis invalidated during the last
round of Tawaf. He completed Tawaf with that condition and then
performed ablution and started Tawaf again from the beginning and
performed prayer of Tawaf and Sa’y and Taqsir after that. Is his act
correct?

**Answer:** Second Tawaf and acts after that are correct; although he
could completed Tawaf and suffices to that.

**Question 348**- A person performs Umrah al-Mufradah as the proxy of
his father and the next day wears Ihram as the proxy of his mother and
during second Umrah recognizes that he had performed Tawaf and prayer of
Tawaf of the first Umrah without ablution. Now, what is his duty?

**Answer:** He performs Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf of first Umrah again
and continues second Umrah with the intention Rija’ (Attention that it
is not permitted to perform more than one Umrah in one lunar month,
except with the intention of Rija’, which means hoping for the goodness
of the act not absolutely).

**Question 349**- A person, who had to perform Jabirah ablution and
Tayammum, has performed acts of Umrah without Tayammum because of
ignorance about the religious rulings. What is his duty?

**Answer:** Tawaf and its prayer should be performed again and it is a
precaution to also perform the acts after Tawaf and its prayer again.

**Question 350**- We reached Masjid al-Haraam at the time of dawn
prayer. Caravan administrator said: “Wait a while; we perform Tawaf
after the dawn prayer”. I went to sleep because of tiredness and because
I didn’t find water available I performed Tayammum and performed Tawaf
and prayer with Tayammum. Are my acts correct?

**Answer:** If it was possible for you to perform ablution, although by
going to station and performing the acts (for example) in the next day
then Tayammum was not correct. Your duty is to perform Tawaf and its
prayer again, and if you cannot do that then take a proxy.

**Question 351**- A person feels that his/her clothing has become impure
(Najis) during obligatory Tawaf but doesn’t pay attention and performs
Tawaf and the acts in that condition, then checks the clothing and finds
out for certain that it has gotten impure during Tawaf, and returns home
without compensation of the acts. Now, what is his/her duty? Is he/she
still in the state of Ihram?

**Answer:** If the person was not certain that his/her ablution is
invalidated and his/her clothing has become impure (although has gained
certainty after the acts) then he/she has exited from the state of
Ihram, but should perform Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf again, and if he/she
cannot perform that personally then should take a proxy.

**Question 352**- A woman is more than fifty solar years and it is one
and a half year that she doesn’t menstruate; but has seen blood during
Ihram. Is it possible to have doubt about her menopause? What is her
duty?

**Answer:** Whenever it doesn’t have the conditions and features of
menstruation then it has the ruling of Istihaza (undue menstruation) and
her Hajj and Tawaf is correct by performing the duties of a woman in the
state of Istihaza.

**Question 353**- Whenever Sayyeda women see blood that has all
conditions of menstruation after sixty and non-Sayyeda after fifty then
what should they do for Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf?

**Answer:** It has the ruling of menstruation by having all condition of
menstruation. Also in our environment, Sayyeda women doesn’t have the
ruling of women of Quraish and they also enter the state of menopause
after fifty lunar years (about 48.5 solar years), which means any
suspicious blood that they see has the ruling of Istihaza.

**Question 354**- A woman has the state of minor Istihaza during Tawaf.
What is her duty?

**Answer:** If it is after completing the fourth round then finishes
Tawaf after renewing the ablution and purifying the body and clothing,
and if it is before the fourth round then starts Tawaf from the
beginning after renewing the ablution and purifying.

**Question 355**- A woman in the state of Istihaza performs Tawaf after
performing Ghusl and ablution, but she sees blood d r o ps during Tawaf.
What is her duty?

**Answer:** If she is bleeding continuously and she had perform her duty
and has prevented bleeding as much as possible then she has no other
duty to perform, but if bleeding has stopped completely and he performed
Ghusl and after that bleeding has started again then it has the ruling
of new Hadath.

**Question 356**- A woman in the state of Istihaza who has to perform
Ghusl and ablution for prayer and by performing these acts her acts are
delayed which sometimes this delay is long, like returning station for
Ghusl. Does this delay have problem?

**Answer:** As it has been said before, when a woman in the state of
Istihaza performs the duty of Ghusl for prayers then she is pure and
there is no other Ghusl necessary for performing Tawaf and prayer of
Tawaf.

**Question 357**- A woman in the state of Istihaza performed Ghusl or
ablution and started Tawaf. During Tawaf the noon prayer began and she
paused her Tawaf and performed the prayer. After the prayer, she
continued Tawaf with that Ghusl or ablution for prayer. Was her Tawaf
correct?

**Answer:** Whenever a woman in the state of major Istihaza performs
Ghusls of prayers in time then there absolutely no other Ghusl
obligatory to him for performing Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf.

**Question 358**- Some of women eat pills for preventing menstruation
especially for performing the acts of Hajj; nevertheless they see few
blood d r o ps during Ihram. Does it harm their acts?

**Answer:** If these d r o ps don’t continue for three continuous days
then they have the ruling of Istihaza and don’t harm the acts of Hajj,
and the person should act according to the acts of Istihaza and if she
saw only few drops and they had not continued then only ablution is
obligatory and Ghusl is not necessary.

**Question 359**- What is the duty of a woman who has seen blood after
Tawaf of Umrah about the next acts? Is it possible that it is
menstruation and stops by eating pills?

**Answer:** If she assumes that this bleeding stops by eating pills then
she performs prayer of Tawaf and Sa’y ad Taqsir and Tawaf of Nisa’ by
purifying and performing ablution and Ghusl and the duties of woman in
the state of Istihaza, and if it is recognized that she has performed
the acts in the state of menstruation then she performs prayer of Tawaf
and Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer again after becoming pure and if she
has certainty about menstruation then goes out of the mosque and
performs prayer of Tawaf and the following acts after becoming pure and
if there is no time left then she takes a proxy for performing Tawaf of
Umrah and Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer.

**Question 360**- If a woman who has fixed menstruation days and for
examples menstruation lasts for seven days becomes pure in the seventh
day and performed Ghusl and then performs the acts of Hajj, but sees
blood d r o ps after that, then how are her acts?

**Answer:** If her acts have been performed while she was pure then they
are correct.

**Question 361**- The order of menstruation of some women is disordered
because of eating contraceptive pills in the way that the see blood and
blood d r o ps for a long time. What is the duty of this group of women
is Hajj?

**Answer:** If bleeding continues for three days and it happens in the
menstruation days, although in the way that purity is inside for three
days after beginning, then it has the ruling of menstruation. Unless, it
has the ruling of Istihaza.

**Question 362**- A woman doesn’t menstruate; but she sees secretions
and blood d r o ps for two or three days every two months. What is her
duty?

**Answer:** If bleeding wasn’t continuously, although inside, for three
days then it has the ruling of Istihaza.

**Question 363**- A woman has performed Ghusl with the intention of
Ghusl of Janabat after become pure from menstruation because of
ignorance about religious rulings and because she thought that she was
in the state of Janabat, and has performed the acts with this Ghusl.
What is the ruling of her Umrah?

**Answer:** If her purpose was to perform Ghusl for menstruation and
called that Janabat then her act is correct.

**Question 364**- A person recognizes after performing the acts that
Ghusl of touching the dead body was obligatory to him and he has not
performed that yet. Is his Umrah correct?

**Answer:** If he has performed another obligatory of Mustahab Ghusl
then it is enough and his acts are correct and now he has no other duty
to perform; although his Umrah doesn’t have problem, but it is
obligatory to perform Tawafs and prayers again and if he cannot then he
should take a proxy.

**Question 365**- A single girl has become Jonob (person in the state of
Janabat) at the beginning of her adolescence; but she has not performed
Ghusl of Janabat yet, but she has performed other Ghusls like Ghusl of
menstruation and Ghusl of Friday and has performed Umrah in this
condition. Please tell that:

1- What is the condition worships that she has performed after that
state until now?

2- Is she still in the state of Ihram and are all prohibited acts of
Ihram Haraam to her?

3- What is the ruling of her Umrah, and what is her duty now?

**Answer:** If she has performed another Ghusl then it is enough;
therefore, the acts that she has performed after Ghusl of Friday or
menstruation including her Umrah are correct, but she should perform
Ghazaa of prayers that she has performed after Janabat and before the
first Ghusl gradually, and if she has not performed any Ghusl until
Umrah then she should perform obligatory Tawafs and their prayers again
and if she cannot then she should take a proxy, and she should abstain
from fragrance, marriage and prohibited acts that become Halaal by
performing Tawaf of Nisa’ as a precaution until performing these acts
again.

**Question 366**- Whenever a Muhrim become Jonob and water harms him and
the there is also not enough time, is performing Tawaf and its prayer
with Tayammum enough or should he also take a proxy?

**Answer:** It is enough and it is not necessary to take a proxy.

**Question 367**- A woman performs Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf assuming
that she has become pure and starts Sa’y. She recognizes during Sa’y
that she has not become pure yet, what is her duty? What is her duty if
she recognizes after performing Sa’y?

**Answer:** In the first condition, she stops Sa’y and performs Tawaf
and prayer of Tawaf and Sa’y after becoming pure and in the second
condition performing Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf again is necessary and
also performs again as a precaution.

**Question 368**- If a woman become Muhrim with the intention of Umrah
al-Mufradah and menstruates after that, and her menstruation continues
all the days that she is in Mecca, what should she do for Umrah
al-Mufradah? What is her duty if she has return to Iran without
performing the acts of?

**Answer:** In the conditions of the question, she should take a proxy
for performing Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf and performs the rest of the
acts by herself, and if she has returned to Iran then she should go back
and perform her acts, and if she cannot then she should take a proxy for
the acts of Umrah, but she should perform Taqsir personally and observe
the order of Taqsir and the other acts and she remains in the state of
Ihram until she performs the acts of Umrah.

#### Ruling of Masloos

**Question 369**- What is the duty of Masloos (incontinent in urinating)
for Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf?

**Answer:** If the illness reduces in a period of time in the way that
person can perform Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf with pure body and clothing
in that time then he/she should perform them in that time, and if there
is no such a time available if it is not so hard then the person should
renew the ablution each time that his/her ablution is invalidated and if
this causes severe hardness then the person performs one ablution for
Tawaf and one ablution of prayer and taking the proxy is not necessary.

**Question 370**- A person has had a surgery and presently a sack is
tied to him that urine enters that sack continuously either from urethra
or place of surgery. Is this person considered as Masloos?

**Answer:** Yes, he has the ruling of Masloos that its ruling mentioned
in the previous answer.

**Question 371**- A Muhrim who is incontinent in excreting colic and
maybe one or two months in the year his illness is reduced, and his
ablution becomes invalidated in one or two minutes, what is his duty?

**Answer:** If he cannot perform ablution during Tawaf or this act
causes him severe hardness then he can suffice to one ablution for Tawaf
and performs another ablution for prayer of Tawaf, although his ablution
become invalidated during Tawaf and prayer and there is no need to take
the proxy.

**Question 372**- There is an old man who is incontinent in urination
and doesn’t keep himself from contaminating his clothes and the mosque
for Tawaf and don’t pay attention to guidance of others; can he take a
proxy for Tawaf?

**Answer:** He should take a proxy.

#### Ruling of Mabtoon (incontinent in defecating)

**Question 373**- It is a while that I am Mabtoon because of an illness
and surgery and don’t feel the excretion. Therefore I use an especial
sack and act according to Risalah for ablution and prayer. What is my
duty about Hajj considering that, god willing, I will go to pilgrimage
of the house of Allah the next year?

**Answer:** If there is a time that it is possible to perform Tawaf and
prayer of Tawaf without defecation then you should choose that time and
perform your acts, and if there is no such a time and you don’t feel
defecation at all then perform Tawaf with one ablution and prayer of
Tawaf with another ablution.

### Third: Purity from Najasat (impurity)

**Article 372**- The body and clothing of Tawaf-performer (whether in
obligatory or Mustahab Tawaf) should be pure of any impurity, even some
of impurities which have been forgiven for prayer (like blood less than
one dirham) are not forgiven in Tawaf, but about blood of injuries, if
washing them causes severe hardness then it doesn’t harm Tawaf

**Article 375**- If small parts of clothes like socks, hat or coin bag,
which are not enough to cover private parts solely are impure then it
doesn’t have problem.

**Article 376**- If purifying the blood of injuries causes severe
hardness then washing them is not necessary, but it is obligatory
precaution to purify the body and change clothes as much as possible and
in amount that doesn’t causes hardness.

**Article 377**- If it is possible to purify the body and clothing by
delaying Tawaf then it is a precaution to do that on the condition that
there is enough time.

**Article 378**- Whenever clothing or the body is impure and the pilgrim
doesn’t know or he/she knew but now has forgotten, if recognizes the
matter after Tawaf then Tawaf is correct, and if recognizes the matter
during Tawaf then he/she should change that clothing and continue Tawaf
with pure clothing and if he/she doesn’t have pure clothing with him/her
then stops Tawaf and rinses clothing or the body and then performs the
rest of Tawaf and his/her Tawaf is correct, whether it happens before
completing the fourth round or after that.

**Article 379**- If Muhrim has doubt about the purity of his/her body or
clothing then he/she can perform Tawaf in that condition, whether knows
that they were pure before or not, but if he/she is certain that it was
impure before and doesn’t know that did he/she purify that or not then
cannot perform Tawaf in that condition, and should purify first and then
perform Tawaf.

**Article 380**- If the body or clothing of Muhrim becomes impure during
Tawaf then he/she pauses Tawaf and rinses the body or clothing then
continues Tawaf from the place that he/she had paused and his/her Tawaf
is correct, whether it is before completing the fourth round or after
that.

**Article 381**- If Muhrim sees an impurity on his body or clothing
during Tawaf and assumes that it is happened during Tawaf then acts
according to the previous article.

**Question 382**- A person saw an impurity on his body in the sixth
round of Tawaf and was certain that it has happened in previous rounds,
but completed Tawaf without noticing this matter and performed Tawaf
again after purifying his body, and then performed other acts of Umrah.
Is his Umrah correct?

**Answer:** His act doesn’t have problem.

**Question 383**- A person recognizes some blood on his nose. Cleans
that with handkerchief and continues Tawaf. Is this Tawaf correct?

**Answer:** If his/her nose has become Najis then he/she should rinse
that and completes Tawaf, and if he/she doesn’t perform this act then it
is a precaution to complete Tawaf after purifying and performs prayer
and then performs Tawaf and prayer again.

**Question 384**- What is the ruling of infants who urinate in their
diaper during Tawaf or Sa’y?

**Answer:** Their Hajj is correct; god willing.

### Fourth: Circumcision for Men

**Article 385**- Whenever a man has not circumcised then his Tawaf is
invalidated and it is obligatory precaution for underage children to be
also circumcised.

**Article 386**- If uncircumcised child is forced to Ihram or made him
Muhrim then his Ihram is correct; but all of his Tawafs have problem.
Therefore, this person remains in Ihram and exiting from the state of
Ihram will become hard for him, except that he circumcises and then
performs Tawaf or carry him to perform Tawaf.

**Article 387**- If a person is born circumcised then his Tawaf is
correct.

**Article 388**- Whenever a person performs Tawaf uncircumcised
deliberately, because of forgetfulness or ignorance about the issue then
his Tawaf is invalidated.

**Question 389**- What is the duty of a person who has been circumcised
incompletely and has performed the acts of Hajj?

**Answer:** it is obligatory precaution to perform Tawafs and prayers of
Tawaf again after complete and correct circumcision and if he cannot go
to Mecca then he should take a proxy.

**Question 390**- If a person is circumcised incompletely in the way
that the top of his organ is not shown, but it is shown when it is
erected then is he considered as circumcised person and his Tawafs are
correct? If the answer is negative and he should circumcise again and he
is ashamed of this act because of his age then what is the ruling of the
matter?

**Answer:** It is obligatory to perform Tawaf and its prayer again after
circumcision, and shame doesn’t make any sense in these issues. He can
refer to an aware physician secretly and perform circumcision and this
is very easy in our times.

### Fifth: Covering Private Parts

**Article 391**- Covering private parts is obligatory for
Tawaf-performer, and it is necessary to cover his/her body in the way it
is not called naked.

**Article 392**- It is obligatory precaution to observe all condition of
clothing of prayer-performer during Tawaf.

Tawaf with Clothing that Khums Applies to That
----------------------------------------------

**Question 393**- A person has bought clothing of Ihram with
unpaid-Khums money and has become Muhrim with that clothing and has
performed Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf. Now what is his/her duty?

**Answer:** If it isn’t done deliberately or knowingly then his/her Hajj
and Umrah is correct but if he/she is a neglected ignorant then it is
obligatory precaution to perform Tawaf and its prayer again.

**Question 394**- If Muhrim brings unpaid-Khums money with him/her then
does his/her Tawaf have problem?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem for his/her Tawaf.

Limit of Covering in Tawaf
--------------------------

**Question 395**- Is veil of Muhrim women during Tawaf is like the veil
of women during prayer or is there any difference?

**Answer:** There is no difference; in prayer, covering top and bottom
of the feet is excluded, but it is a precaution to cover those parts
during Tawaf (wearing socks). Also, wearing mask is not permitted in
Tawaf but it doesn’t have problem in prayer.

**Question 396**- What is the ruling of Tawaf of a Muhrim women if some
of her hair or another part of her body, which should be covered, is
showing?

**Answer:** Her Tawaf is correct, although she has performed a sin.

**Question 397**- Some of women wear thin white clothing for Ihram that
their body is showing from beneath clothing in normal condition or when
they perspire. How are their Tawaf and prayer?

**Answer:** Clothing should cover the body and prayer and Tawaf is
invalidated when body is showing.

**Question 398**- Women who knows that a part of they arm is showing
when they raise their hands in front of Al-Hajar al-Aswad or when they
take prayer book in their hands, how is their Tawaf if they perform this
act knowingly?

**Answer:** If they perform that knowingly and deliberately then their
Tawaf is invalidated.

**Question 399**- When chest or arms of men is showing, what is the
ruling of that?

**Answer:** It doesn’t harm Tawaf but it is better to cover them in
presence of non-Mahram persons.

Heptad Obligatory Acts of Tawaf
-------------------------------

### First and Second: Beginning from al-Hajar al-Aswad and Finishing to That

**Article 400**- Muhrim should begin Tawaf from “Al-Hajar al-Aswad” and
should end to “Al-Hajar al-Aswad” and it is enough that it can be said
he/she has begun from Al-Hajar al-Aswad and has ended to that, and it is
not necessary to notice that parts of the body to be parallel to
al-Hajar al-Aswad; but it is obligatory precaution to begin a little
before all-Hajar al-Aswad and to end a little after that in order to
gain certainty about complete seven rounds.

**Article 401**- In Tawaf, Muhrim should begin like any Muslim and
abstain from notices of scrupulous persons about being parallel to
al-Hajar al-Aswad and it is not necessary to stop in front of al-Hajar
al-Aswad in the next rounds, and Muhrim should continue without stopping
until completing seven rounds in order not to disturb other
Tawaf-performers.

**Article 402**- Sometime, it can be seen that ignorant persons stop in
each round of Tawaf and move forward and backward in order to observe to
be parallel to al-Hajar al-Aswad; this act is not necessary at all and
even sometimes it is Haraam.

**Question 403**- A person has begun Tawaf from al-Hajar al-Aswad and
has ended to Rukn Yamani the fourth corner of the Ka’ba), which is
before al-Hajar al-Aswad, and has wended the distance between Rukn
Yamani and al-Hajar al-Aswad without intention, and has made intention
again from al-Hajar al-Aswad and has ended to Rukn Yamani and has
performed seven rounds of Tawaf in this way. What is the ruling of his
Tawaf?

**Answer:** This Tawaf is invalidated and should be performed again.

**Question 404**- If a person begins Tawaf before al-Hajar al-Aswad and
ends to that place then is this Tawaf invalidated?

**Answer:** this Tawaf is invalidated.

**Question 405**- What is the duty of a person who has begun Tawaf from
Rukn Yamani and has ended to the same place and then has performed
prayer of Tawaf and has noticed his/her mistake after that? If this
person recognizes his/her mistake during Tawaf and ends Tawaf to
al-Hajar al-Aswad then does this extra distance harm his/her Tawaf?

**Answer:** this person should perform Tawaf and its prayer again and
performing again in the second condition is a precaution.

**Question 406**- What is the duty of a person who is certain that Rukn
Mustajar (Rukn Yamani which is situated before al-Hajar al-Aswad) is
al-Hajar al-Aswad and begins Tawaf from that place and end to that and
recognizes his/her mistake after that?

**Answer:** The foresaid Tawaf is invalidated as obligatory precaution
and should be performed again.

### Third: The House of Ka'ba to Be on the Left Side of Tawaf-Performer

**Article 407**- It is obligatory for Muhrim to perform Tawaf in the way
that house of Ka’ba to be on the left side (counterclockwise) as it is
common among Muslims.

**Article 408**- It is not obligatory that the face of Tawaf-performer
to be forward, and the person can look the right and the left side and
even turn and look back.

**Article 409**- It is not necessary that left shoulder always to be
parallel to Ka’ba, and it is enough to circumambulate the house of Ka’ba
normally like other Muslims, and it doesn’t have problem to face the
Ka’ba and continue his/her way.

**Article 410**- It is not necessary at all to keep the left shoulder
always parallel to Ka"ba like commons do (especially when reaching Hijr
Ismael); and if this act vilifies the religion then it is nor permitted,
and it is better to observe presence of the heart in all conditions
instead of these unnecessary cautions and circumambulate the house of
Ka’ba like other Muslims.

**Article 411**- Sometimes, it can bee seen that some ignorant persons
ask others to circumambulate them as a precaution in the way that they
have no more control over themselves. Although this act doesn’t
invalidate Tawaf but undoubtedly acts of these persons are very bad and
forbidding.

**Article 412**- Whenever some of Tawaf is performed in opposite way
because of congestion of crowd, for instance if performer’s body place
forward or backward to Ka"ba or he/she walks a little backward and
continues Tawaf then he/she should perform that distance again and if it
is not possible to return then he/she should circumambulate with crowd
without the intention of Tawaf until he/she reaches that place and makes
the intention in there and continues Tawaf.

**Article 413**- If people move the performer involuntarily because of
congestion, if performer has entered Tawaf noticing this matter and
voluntarily then it doesn’t harm his/her Tawaf.

**Article 414**- Tawaf-performer can perform Tawaf in any manner; he/she
can perform fast or slow, ride or afoot or even running, but it is
better to walk normally and with calmness and pray to Allah.

**Question 415**- A person has kissed Ka’ba during Tawaf and he assumes
that he has walked some steps in that condition, and this doubt has been
happened after Tawaf. What is the ruling of his Tawaf?

**Answer:** His Tawaf is correct because the doubt is after Tawaf.

**Question 416**- A person has detoured his way during Tawaf because of
kissing and touching Bait Allah al-Haraam and doesn’t know that whether
he has continued Tawaf in return from that place or not, now what is his
duty?

**Answer:** If his doubt was after Tawaf then his Tawaf is correct,
unless he should start from the beginning.

**Question 417**- One of Hajjis thought that he has performed a part of
the round because of pressure of crowd but he is not certain about this
matter, and he has performed the rest of the round with the intention of
Rija’ and as a precaution (in order that if that round is invalidated
then it doesn’t include in Tawaf and if it is correct the it doesn’t
consider extra to Tawaf) and then he has performed seven rounds and
didn’t include that round. What is the ruling of this Tawaf?

**Answer:** This Tawaf is correct as a precaution.

**Question 418**- A person has moved some steps forward because of the
pressure of crowd, and then has left that distance and has performed
another round instead of compensating that amount, that in this way
he/she has totally performed seven complete rounds and one incomplete
round. Is this Tawaf correct?

**Answer:** this Tawaf has problem and it should be performed again.

**Question 419**- If Muhrim knows that he/she will performed all or a
part of Tawaf involuntarily because of congestion of crowd then can he
make the intention that the amount of moving by crowd include in Tawaf
and is considered as ride Tawaf?

**Answer:** This Tawaf is correct and doesn’t have problem.

**Question 420**- A person reaches one of Tawaf-performers who has fell
on the ground in his way and helps him to stand. It is possible that he
walks some steps in this way without attention to Tawaf. In result, he
doesn’t know that has he performed some of Tawaf without the intention
or not, what is his duty?

**Answer:** If he had the intention of Tawaf, even totally, then it is
enough.

**Question 421**- A person gains certainty in the fifth round that
he/she has performed five meters of the first also the second round
involuntarily. What is his/her duty?

**Answer:** If he/she has made the intention to place himself/herself
among Tawaf-performers and circumambulate with them from the beginning
then it is included in Tawaf and correct.

### Fourth: “Hijr Ismael” to Be Included in Tawaf

**Article 422**- It is obligatory to include “Hijr Ismael” in to Tawaf,
which means to circumambulate Ka’ba from outside Hijr Ismael. Therefore,
if a Muhrim circumambulates from inside “Hijr Ismael” then he/she
shouldn’t count that round and begins from al-Hajar al-Aswad again (but,
by considering the fact that returning backward in these conditions is
hard because of congestion of crowd then it is better to continue that
round with Tawaf-performers without intention until he/she reaches
al-Hajar al-Aswad and then makes the intention and continues that
round).

**Article 423**- Whenever a person performs Tawaf from inside Hijr
Ismael deliberately then it has the ruling of deliberate invalidation of
Tawaf which its ruling has been mention at the beginning of issues of
Tawaf.

**Article 424**- If a person recognizes after performing the acts of
Umrah that he/she has performed some rounds of Tawaf from inside Hijr
Ismael involuntarily then his/her Umrah is correct, but he/she should
complete that Tawaf and then performs prayer of Tawaf again.

**Article 425**- If a person performs Tawaf in some rounds on the wall
of Hijr Ismael then it is enough to perform that amount again and
performing all of Tawaf again is not necessary (albeit no one goes on
the wall of the Hijr in present condition).

### Fifth: Tawaf to Be Performed Out of the House of Ka'ba

**Article 426**- Tawaf should be performed out of the house of Ka’ba.
Therefore, it is not permitted to perform Tawaf inside the house of
Ka’ba.

**Article 427**- It is not permitted to perform Tawaf in that part of
side of Ka’ba which is called “Shadherwan”. Although, today Shadherwan
has been built in the way that practically performing Tawaf on that is
not possible.

**Article 428**- Putting the hand on the wall of house of Ka’ba or the
wall of Hijr Ismael or putting the hand on Hijr Ismael doesn’t harm
Tawaf, although it is Mustahab precaution not to put the hand on the
wall of Ka’ba in that side which Shadherwan is situated.

**Article 429**- Whenever a pilgrim enters the house of Ka’ba during
Tawaf then his/her Tawaf is invalidated and should be performed again,
and if he/she performs from inside Hijr Ismael then he/she performs that
round (as it has been mention above) again from al-Hajar al-Aswad; but
if pilgrim performs Tawaf on the wall of Hijr Ismael or Shadherwan then
performing that amount again is enough.

### Sixth: Boundary of Area of Tawaf

**Article 430**- It is famous among a group of Faqihs that Tawaf should
be performed in the distance between Maqam of Ibrahim and the house of
Ka’ba1 and this distance should be observed from each side. Therefore,
from the side of Hijr Ismael Tawaf zone is less than three and a half
meter because the size of Hijr Ismael (that is totally ten meters)
subtracts from the whole distance, but it is the right that Tawaf to be
permitted to perform in all parts of Masjid al-Haraam, although it is
Mustahab to observe the precaution when crowd is congested. It means
that if performing Tawaf in foresaid distance is not hard then performer
doesn’t exit that.

**Article 431**- Connection of rows of Tawaf-performers is not the
condition.

**Article 432**- Performing Tawaf in upper levels when crowd is very
congested and for ill persons who are not permitted to perform Tawaf
from the ground doesn’t have problem, and taking proxy is not necessary.

**Question 433**- A woman is not capable of performing Tawaf without
help of the others. She should be circumambulated on a carrier out of
Tawaf zone or a non-Mahram person carries her on his back. What is her
duty?

**Answer:** Considering that according to our fatwa Tawaf zone doesn’t
have definite boundary then she can be circumambulated on a carrier from
behind Maqam of Ibrahim.

**Question 434**- A person who was not aware of boundaries of Tawaf zone
has performed Tawaf and has doubted after that whether he had been in
Tawaf zone or not. Is his Tawaf correct?

**Answer:** As it has been mention above his Tawaf is correct anyway
because Tawaf has no definite boundary.

**Question 435**- If Muhrim is certain that will contact a non-Mahram
man or woman during Tawaf in defined zone then is it still necessary to
perform Tawaf in defined zone?

**Answer:** We said that Tawaf has no definite boundary. Moreover
contacting over clothes without any especial intention doesn’t have
problem.

**Question 436**- Sometime, person has to go further from Tawaf zone,
distance between Maqam of Ibrahim and Ka’ba, whether it is because of
cleaning services or some repairs around Ka’ba, also persons who perform
Tawaf with wheelchair or those who are circumambulated with carrier and
like them. Are these Tawafs correct?

**Answer:** As we have said before, Tawaf has no definite boundary
according to our opinion and it is permitted to go further than the
distance between Maqam of Ibrahim and Ka’ba voluntarily.[^1]

### Seventh: Sequence

**Article 437**- Conventional sequence is a condition of Tawaf; which
means to circumambulate seven continuous rounds around the house of
Ka’ba and less than seven rounds if not enough; but sequence is not a
condition of Mustahab Tawaf.

**Article 438**- Whenever a pilgrim stops Tawaf deliberately (for
resting, drinking water etc.) but doesn’t exit the mosque and returns
before passing of the sequence and continues from the place that he/she
has stopped then his/her Tawaf is correct; whether it has been performed
less than four rounds or more?

**Article 439**- Whenever the time of obligatory or supererogatory
(Nafilah) “Vitr” prayer comes during obligatory Tawaf then the performer
can leave Tawaf, performs the prayer and then returns and continues the
rest of Tawaf, whether it is before the completion of four rounds of
after that.

**Article 440**- If a person is performing Tawaf and the time for
obligatory prayer is short then it is obligatory to leave Tawaf and
perform prayer, then if he/she has left after four rounds then continues
from the same place unless he/she should perform from the beginning as a
precaution.

**Article 441**- Stopping Tawaf for reaching congregation prayer or the
preferred time of obligatory prayer is permitted and even it is
Mustahab. And pilgrim continues Tawaf from the place that he/she has
left and it is Mustahab precaution to act according the previous article
(notice that this issue is about congregation prayer).

**Article 442**- If a pilgrim stops Tawaf without any excuse and
performs an act which is against Tawaf like delaying a long time and
conventional sequence is passed then it is a precaution that if he/she
has performed four rounds then completes Tawaf and then performs that
again; but it has no problem to start Tawaf from the beginning.

**Article 443**- Whenever the excuse of a person who has left Tawaf
continues until the time of performing Tawaf gets short then others
should bring him/her to Masjid al-Haraam and circumambulate him/her if
it is possible and if it is not possible then they should take him/her a
proxy.

**Article 445**- If a pilgrim remembers during Sa’y of Safa and Marwah
that he/she has performed Tawaf incomplete then he/she should return and
perform Tawaf from the place that he/she has left and then performs the
rest of Sa’y and his/her Tawaf and Sa’y are both correct. But it is
obligatory precaution to complete Tawaf and then performs that again if
it was less than four rounds. Also if he/she has performed Sa’y less
than four times then completes that and performs that again and the
pilgrim can leave Sa’y and Tawaf in both cases and start them from the
beginning.

**Article 446**- Hajji can leave Tawaf, kisses the house of Ka’ba, and
then returns and continues from the place that he/she has left, but it
is better not to perform this act.

**Question 447**- A person was performing the first round of Tawaf that
congregation prayer started. Therefore, he stopped Tawaf and performed
prayer. Then he started Tawaf from the beginning after the prayer and
performed seven complete rounds. Is his Tawaf correct?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem.

**Question 448**- A person leaves Tawaf because of any reason and starts
Tawaf from the beginning. Is his/her Tawaf correct? What is his/her duty
if he/she has performed the next acts?

**Answer:** Tawaf and the next acts are correct anyway.

**Question 449**- Some of pilgrim of the house of Allah was performing
Tawaf that cleaning personnel started cleaning and Tawaf-performers had
to leave Tawaf. It passed a while and they thought that conventional
sequence is passed; therefore they started Tawaf from the beginning.
What is the ruling of Tawaf if passing the sequence is doubtful?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem anyway.

**Question 450**- A person leaves the first round that had been
performed incomplete and performs six other rounds and then performs the
first round again. Is his Tawaf correct?

**Answer:** If his intention has been to perform obligatory legal Tawaf
totally then it doesn’t have problem.

**Question 451**- A person makes the intention of Tawaf in his heart and
moves for performing Tawaf. He/she thoughts that the intention of Tawaf
should be said by words, therefore he/she leaves that round and returns
and started Tawaf from the beginning. Is his/her Tawaf correct?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem.

**Question 452**- A person disorders his Tawaf and begins another Tawaf.
Then he disorders that and begins the third Tawaf and completes that.
What is his duty now?

**Answer:** His last Tawaf doesn’t have problem, but it is proper that
believers abstain from these acts as much as possible.

**Question 453**- A person cannot continue Tawaf in the sixth round
because of tiredness. Therefore, he stops Tawaf and rests and takes a
proxy to perform the rest of Tawaf then he performs prayer of Tawaf
personally. Afterward, he recognizes that resting doesn’t disorder
Tawaf. Now, what is his duty?

**Answer:** He performs the rest of Tawaf personally and then performs
his prayer again.

**Question 454**- A person fainted during Tawaf and couldn’t continue
that and recovered after some hours. Can he/she continue his/her Tawaf
from the same place that it has been stopped and then performs rest of
the acts?

**Answer:** If his/her Tawaf has been stopped before the completion of
the fourth round then he/she performs ablution and then starts Tawaf
from the beginning, and if it has been after the fourth round then
continues from the same place after performing ablution.

**Question 455**- If a person, who has the duty of completing and
performing Tawaf again, completes his/her incomplete Tawaf and his/her
Tawaf stops again during performing the first Tawaf again then should he
also complete this Tawaf and perform that again?

**Answer:** Yes, there is no difference.

**Question 456**- In cases that person should completes Tawaf as a
precaution, and then performs prayer of Tawaf and performs Tawaf and
prayer of Tawaf again after that, is it enough to perform one Tawaf with
the intention of whole and completing Tawaf (it means that if the
performed amount is invalidated then has the intention of all seven
rounds, and if it is correct the has the has the intention of the rest)
and then performs two Rak’ats of prayer of Tawaf?

**Answer:** It is better to leave the first Tawaf and begins another
Tawaf, because it is Mustahab precaution.

**Question 457**- Is order necessary in cases that pilgrim completes and
performs Tawaf and Sa’y again?

**Answer:** Yes, it is a precaution to complete Tawaf first and performs
prayer and then performs Tawaf and its prayer again and goes for Sa’y
after that.

**Question 458**- In cases that Tawaf and prayer should be performed
again, is it necessary to be with clothing of Ihram?

**Answer:** It is not necessary.

Rulings of Tawaf
----------------

### Incapability of Performing Tawaf

**Article 459**- Whenever Muhrim cannot perform Tawaf because of illness
until the time gets short, if it is possible, others should bring
him/her and circumambulate in a way (although circumambulate Muhrim
pickaback or on wheelchair or carrier. Albeit by observing the
conditions and rulings of Tawaf as much as possible) and if it is not
possible in this form then they should take him/her a proxy.

### Forgetting to Perform Tawaf

**Article 460**- if Muhrim starts performing Sa’y between Safa and
Marwah and then remembers that he/she has not performed Tawaf then
he/she should leave Sa’y and perform Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf and
performs Sa’y again after that.

**Question 461**- What is the duty of Muhrim if he/she recognizes that
he/she has forgotten to permit Tawaf or his/her Tawaf is invalidated
after Taqsir?

**Answer:** He/she should perform Tawaf and its prayer gain but it seems
that he/she has exited Ihram and has no atonement.

**Question 462**- What is the duty of Muhrim if he/she recognizes after
Tawaf and its prayer that he/she didn’t have performed one or two rounds
of Tawaf?

**Answer:** This person should perform the missing amount and performs
prayer of Tawaf again.

### Decreasing or Increasing Tawaf

**Article 463**- it is not permitted to decrease of increase Tawaf.
Whenever a person adds an amount to seven rounds deliberately or because
of ignorance then his Tawaf is invalidated; and if decreases obligatory
Tawaf then his/her Tawaf is correct if he/she returns before that
conventional sequence is passed unless his/her Tawaf is invalidated and
should start it from the beginning.

**Article 464**- It is permitted to stop obligatory or Mustahab Tawaf
and to start from the beginning (this ruling is a solution for many
problem of Tawaf; because performer can leave that and start it from the
beginning).

**Article 465**- Whenever Muhrim performs Tawaf more than seven rounds
deliberately then his/her Tawaf is invalidated, whether he/she has the
intention of adding to the rounds from the beginning or makes this
intention after the seventh round, and whether the extra amount is one
round or more or less. But if Muhrim doesn’t perform the extra amount
with the intention of Tawaf, for instance moves with crowd for one round
at the beginning in order to become familiar with Tawaf and then make
the intention when he/she reaches al-Hajar al-Aswad then this act
doesn’t have problem. Also, if Muhrim cannot exit the circle of Tawaf
immediately after finishing seven rounds because of congestion of crowd
then it doesn’t have problem to move a distance with people without the
intention of Tawaf and then exits.

**Article 466**- Whenever Muhrim performs Tawaf more than seven rounds
involuntarily, then if the extra amount is less than one round leaves
that and his/her Tawaf is correct, and if it is one round or more then
it is a precaution to add to that amount until seven rounds in order to
complete that as Mustahab Tawaf and then performs two Rak"ats of prayer
of obligatory Tawaf and after Sa’y (when it is obligatory) perform to
other Rak’ats for Mustahab Tawaf. And it is not necessary to make the
intention that the first Tawaf is obligatory and the second one is
Mustahab, and it is enough to perform with the intention closeness to
Allah.

**Article 467**- Whenever Muhrim leaves obligatory Tawaf incomplete, if
it is after finishing four rounds then returns and completes Tawaf
(whether sequence is passed or not) and if it is before four rounds then
he/she can return and complete if sequence is not passed unless should
start from the beginning.

**Article 468**- Whenever a person recognizes after returning hometown
that his/her Tawaf has been left incomplete then it is a precaution to
return and complete that according to the foresaid method and if he/she
cannot return then he/she should take a proxy. And it is a precaution to
sacrifice a sheep inMecca and if it is not possible then sacrifice in
his/her city.

**Article 469**- If Tawaf-performer make the intention of performing
more or less than seven rounds from the beginning deliberately then
his/her Tawaf is invalidated, although complete to seven rounds.

**Article 470**- It is obligatory precaution to perform Tawaf again if
Tawaf-performer performs less or more than seven rounds because of
ignorance about the issue, forgetfulness or negligence.

**Article 471**- If Muhrim changes his/her mind about the intention of
seven rounds during Tawaf (whether makes the intention for less or more)
then his/her Tawaf is invalidated from the moment of changing the mind,
and it is a precaution to complete Tawaf with correct intention and then
performs that again, and if he/she performs Tawaf more than seven rounds
with this intention then Tawaf is totally invalidated.

**Article 472**- If a person assumes that it is Mustahab to perform one
round of Tawaf as it is Mustahab to perform complete Tawaf and makes the
intention of performing seven rounds for obligatory and one round for
Mustahab Tawaf following that or performs eight rounds with this
intention then his/her Tawaf is correct, but that extra round is
useless, because Tawaf is not less than seven rounds.

**Question 473**- A person has ruined some meters of a round and because
he didn’t know the exact place then he has left that and has started
another round from al-Hajar al-Aswad and has finished to that. If his
intention is to perform the ruined amount in the correct way, and extra
amount before and after that is preliminaries for familiarity then what
is the ruling of his Tawaf?

**Answer:** His Tawaf is correct, except that he has continued the rest
after ruining that round that in this case Tawaf had problem.

**Question 474**- An underage child has become Muhrim with the
permission of his father and has left Tawaf incomplete assuming that
this much is enough and has performed Sa’y from the upper level. Now,
what is his duty?

**Answer:** His Sa’y and Tawaf are invalidated. He should perform Tawaf
and prayer and Sa’y again and then performs Taqsir.

**Question 475**- A person performs two extra rounds after completing
Tawaf with the intention of precaution for compensating possible loss.
Does this act harm his/her Tawaf?

**Answer:** His/her Tawaf doesn’t have problem.

**Question 476**- A person recognizes during Sa’y between Safa and
Marwah that he/she has performed more than seven rounds. What is his/her
duty?

**Answer:** It is a precaution to complete Sa’y and then performs Tawaf
and prayer of Tawaf and Sa’y again and performs Taqsir after that.

**Question 477**- If a person performs a distance with the intention of
including in Tawaf while exiting the place of Tawaf after the seventh
round then what is the ruling?

**Answer:** If performs deliberately then Tawaf is invalidated and if
performs involuntarily then should stop and Tawaf is correct.

### Qiran (closeness) in Tawaf

**Article 478**- “Qiran” means to perform two Tawaf after each other
without performing prayer between them, which if it happens for
obligatory Tawaf it is Haraam but the first Tawaf is not invalidated
except that performer had such intention from the beginning which in
this case correctness of his/her first Tawaf is hard to accept.

**Article 479**- “Qiran” is Makrooh for Mustahab Tawaf but it is not
invalid and Haraam.

**Article 480**- if Muhrim adds one round or more or less than that to
Tawaf with the intention that extra amount doesn’t include in that Tawaf
then it has the ruling of “Qiran” between two Tawafs which is Haraam,
but the first Tawaf is not invalidated.

**Question 481**- A woman starts Tawaf accompanying her husband, who has
performed one round of his Tawaf, and after completion of Tawaf of her
husband which is her sixth round, starts Tawaf from the beginning and
circumambulates seven other rounds. What is the ruling of first and
second Tawafs of this woman?

**Answer:** her second Tawaf is correct.

**Question 482**- Does “Qiran in Tawaf”, which is Haraam, also
invalidates Tawaf?

**Answer:** If Muhrim had the intention of Qiran from the beginning or
during the first Tawaf then it is a precaution to perform that again,
and if he/she has made the intention of Qiran after completing the first
Tawaf then his/her first Tawaf is not invalidated.

**Question 483**- A person says to himself: “this Tawaf didn’t satisfy
me” after performing seven rounds of Tawaf of Umrah al-Mufradah,
therefore performs other seven rounds of Tawaf without performing prayer
and then performs Sa’y and Taqsir. Is his act correct?

**Answer:** His act is correct, although he has entered in to Haraam
Qiran unknowingly.

### Doubt in Tawaf

**Article 484**- If Muhrim doubts in number of rounds of Tawaf or
conditions of Tawaf like ablution and other conditions after finishing
Tawaf then he/she doesn’t pay attention to that doubt.

**Article 485**- If performer doubts after reaching al-Hajar al-Aswad
that whether he/she has performed seven rounds, eight rounds or more
then he/she shouldn’t pay attention to that and his/her Tawaf is
correct. Also, if Muhrim doubts during a round that whether this is the
seventh round or more then finishes that round and his/her Tawaf is
correct.

**Article 486**- If Tawaf-performer doubts at the end of round or in the
middle of round that whether he/she has performed six rounds or seven
rounds then it is obligatory precaution that his/her Tawaf is
invalidated and he/she should leave that and start from the beginning.
Also it is the same when one of two sides of doubt is less than seven
rounds, but in Mustahab Tawaf consider it as the lower number and
complete Tawaf and his/her Tawaf is correct.

**Article 487**- A person who doubts a lot and doubts several times in
Tawaf should not notice to his/her doubt and take the more proper
number. For example if this person has doubt between five and six then
take six and if he/she has doubt between seven and eight then consider
it as seven.

**Article 488**- Guess and mistrust in previous articles are also like
doubt and Tawaf-performer should act according to the ruling of doubt.

**Article 489**- It doesn’t have problem to trust on a friend or
accompany in order to count the rounds of Tawaf (if the person is a
trustworthy person).

**Article 490**- Some people start the invocation of Tawassul
(intercession) and like that for keeping the rounds of Tawaf until they
reach the seventh infallible. This is not a proper act, especially if it
is recited with loud voice. It is better to use other invocations.

**Question 491**- What is the duty of a person who doubts in different
matters in each Tawaf (in number of rounds, invalidation, purity, to be
pushed by others)?

**Answer:** Whenever a person considers as a person who doubts a lot
then he/she should not pay attention to his/her doubt.

**Question 492**- What is the ruling if a person doubts in correctness
of the previous round of some of this round which is performing and its
time is passed? For example, he is performing the fourth round and has
also passed Hijr Ismael but has doubt in correctness of the third round
or has doubt about the fourth round that whether has performed from
inside Hijr or outside of that. Now, what is his duty?

**Answer:** His Tawaf is correct.

**Question 493**- A person doubted in number of rounds while performing
Tawaf, and considered one side of the doubt as true because he was
assuming that as true more. After completion of Tawaf gained certainty
abut correctness of Tawaf. Is his Tawaf correct?

**Answer:** It is correct.

**Question 494**- If Hajji doubts in number of rounds of Tawaf or Sa’y
while performing Tawaf or Sa’y, and continues his/her act in this
condition and then gains certainty about one side of the doubt and
finishes the act, is this act correct?

**Answer:** If he/she continues Tawaf or Sa’y with the hope of
performing religious duty and afterwards gains certainty about it
correctness then his Tawaf and Sa’y is correct.

**Question 495**- Sometimes, a person doubts that whether he has
performed a round of Tawaf correct or not? Is it permitted to perform
another round after Tawaf as a precaution and then performs prayer of
Tawaf?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem with foresaid intention.

**Question 496**- A person leaves one of the rounds of Tawaf at its ends
and rest for a while. When he returns for completing that he doubts that
whether he was performing fifth or sixth round. Pleas tell his ruling.

**Answer:** It is obligatory precaution to leave that Tawaf and starts
from the beginning.

**Question 497**- What is the criterion of being a person who doubts a
lot?

**Answer:** Being a person who doubts a lot is a conventional matter;
which means people say that he doubts a lot.

**Question 498**- What is the duty of a person who performs Tawaf with
caravan and his/her accompanies say that seventh round is passed but
he/she thinks that he/she has performed six rounds or vice versa?

**Answer:** If performer doesn’t gain certainty from the words of others
then should act according to his/her own certainty, but if he/she doubts
by words of others then his/her Tawaf is invalidated.

### Deputization in Tawaf

**Article 499**- Circumambulating a person who can perform Tawaf
personally by wheelchair or carrier doesn’t have problem.

**Question 500**- Should people who are not capable of performing Tawaf
take a proxy? Or it is necessary to be circumambulated by wheelchair or
carrier, although carry them out of the zone or in upper levels?

**Answer:** Deputization is not necessary and Tawaf in foresaid method
is correct and Tawaf from upper levels doesn’t have problem in cases of
necessity.

**Question 501**- Is it permissible to take a proxy for a part of Tawaf
that the person is not capable of performing that personally?

**Answer:** If it is possible, carry them by wheel chair and like that
unless takes a proxy for all of Tawaf.

**Question 502**- Can an incapable person who cannot take a carrier for
performing Tawaf on that because of expensiveness of carrier and like
that take a proxy?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem.

**Question 503**- Is it permissible for Muhrim to perform Tawaf as a
proxy of an incapable person before his/her obligatory Tawaf?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem.

**Question 504**- Is it necessary for a person who is a proxy for
performing only Tawaf and Sa’y to wear clothing of Ihram?

**Answer:** It is not necessary.

### Other Questions of Tawaf

**Article 505**- Talking and laughing during Tawaf and even eating a
thing doesn’t invalidate Tawaf, but it is better not to say other than
invocation of Allah and pray (Mustahab or obligatory Tawaf) and to
perform this great worship with presence of the hearth and to abstain
from any act that reduces the presence of the heart.

**Question 506**- What is the duty of a person whom his Tawaf, prayer of
Tawaf or Sa’y has been invalidated in Umrah because of a reason and he
has performed Taqsir without paying attention to this matter and has
exited the state of Ihram and then has recognized invalidation of
foresaid act?

**Answer:** He should compensate the invalidated act but it seems that
he has exited the state of Ihram and has no atonement.

**Question 507**- A person has performed his Tawaf of Umrah incorrect,
also has performed several other Tawafs as a proxy in that way after
that. What is his/her duty about foresaid Tawaf?

**Answer:** If it has been performed in this way because of
forgetfulness or involuntarily then his Umrah is correct, but if it has
been performed deliberately or because of ignorance then his Umrah has
problem. Other deputized Tawafs also have the same ruling.

**Question 508**- Whenever Muhrim takes clothing of Ihram off and
performs the acts of Umrah like Tawaf and Sa’y with sewed clothes
because of ignorance or knowingly then what is the ruling of his/her
acts?

**Answer:** Foresaid Tawaf and Sa’y are correct and foresaid Umrah is
rewarded, but it has atonement if it has been performed deliberately.

**Question 509**- During Tawaf, some of personalties of Tawaf-performers
like watch, ring, clothing of Ihram, comb and like them fall on the
ground because of congestion and pressure of crowd and go under the
steps of other Tawaf-performers which taking them is dangerous. Some of
Tawaf-performers walk on them. Doesn’t this act harm their Tawaf?

**Answer:** It doesn’t have problem, but they shouldn’t put their feet
no then deliberately.

**Question 510**- If a person puts his/her feet on others’ clothing of
Ihram and knows that this act disturbs those persons then what is the
ruling of this Tawaf.

**Answer:** It doesn’t harm Tawaf but Muhrims should not perform this
act deliberately.

**Question 511**- Sonni Hajjis raise theirs hand when they reach
al-Hajar al-Aswad and say Labbayks loudly and then continue their Tawaf.
Is this act also advised according to Shiite scholars?

**Answer:** This act has not been advised.

**Question 512**- Sometimes, during Tawaf our bodies contact with bodies
of non-Mahram persons, does it harm Tawaf?

**Answer:** Tawaf doesn’t invalidate and has no atonement, even if it is
performed deliberately, absit omen! but we should always be aware of
traps of Satan.

**Question 513**- According to the importance of acts of Hajj,
especially Tawafs and their prayers, some of Hajjis perform some of the
acts of Hajj several times as a precaution although seemingly their acts
have no defect. What is the ruling of this matter?

**Answer:** We should not let ourselves to be affected by monomania; but
performing an act as a precaution without scrupulosity doesn’t have
problem.

[^1]: This distance is less than thirteen meters.


