Introduction
============

The remembrance of Allah is the greatest deed of the human being. It
elevates his life, brings him peace and happiness, and enables him to
fulfill the real mission of his life in this world. When Allah describes
believers in the Holy Qur’an, He says; *Those who believe and whose
hearts are set at rest by the remembrance of Allah,*

 ***now surely by Allah’s remembrance are the hearts set at rest.***
**(13:28).**

The Holy Prophet (s) has said: *There is no action more beloved to
Allah, and nothing that saves man so well from the evil of this world
and the Hereafter, than the remembrance of Allah.*

Among the ways of remembering Allah is waking up at night for Salatul
Layl. As explained in the following pages, the Holy Qur’an and Hadith
have much to say about this very important part of the worship of a
believer. Its merits and effects are tremendous. One who recites Salatul
Layl regularly is following the path of the Prophets and the Ma’sumeen
(a).

Salatul Layl has a basic method which is explained in this book. It also
has many du’as that can be recited with it, some of which are included
in this book. These are beautiful du’as with profound meaning. Although
it is difficult to have time to recite all these du’as, it is possible
to recite some of them at some times. Even portions of these du’as may
be read.

The du’as have been divided into:  
 a) Basic Du’as - du’as that are recommended to be recited often during
Salatul Layl.  
 b) Additional Du’as - even more du’as recited by Ma’sumeen (a) in
Salatul Layl are included in this section for recitation if time
permits.

There is no doubt that these du’as, if recited with understanding and
reflection, can greatly enhance our experience of reciting Salatul Layl.

May the Almighty help us to recite Salatul Layl in the way it should be
recited.


