Holy Qur’an on Salatul Layl
===========================

There are many verses of the Holy Qur’an which talk about the importance
of Salatul Layl. These verses describe it as the practice of the pious
people, and the means to attain closeness to Allah. Those who wish to
attain this nearness forego a part of their sleep, and wake up early to
seek forgiveness from Allah. They sacrifice their sleep and comfort for
the pleasure of reciting Salatul Layl.

In many verses of the Qur’an, Allah enjoins the rising by the night for
glorification and worship of Allah. He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَسَبِّحْهُ وَإِدْبَارَ النُّجُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And in the night, give Him glory too, and at the setting of the
stars*** **(52:49)**

He also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَاسْجُدْ لَهُ وَسَبِّحْهُ لَيْلًا طَوِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And during part of the night adore Him, and give glory to Him (for a)
long (part of the) night*** **(76:26)**

Allah says about those who rise at night:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانُوا قَلِيلاً مِّنَ اللَّيْلِ مَا يَهْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِالْأَسْحَارِ هُمْ يَسْتَغْفِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They used to sleep but little in the night. And in the early part of
the morning they asked forgiveness. (51: 16-17)***

In another verse He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَتَجَافَى جُنُوبُهُمْ عَنِ الْمَضَاجِعِ يَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُمْ خَوْفًا
وَطَمَعًا وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنفِقُونَ فَلاَ تَعْلَمُ نَفْسٌ مَّا
أُخْفِيَ لَهُم مِّن قُرَّةِ أَعْيُنٍ جَزَاءً بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Their sides draw away from (their) beds, they call upon their Lord in
fear and in hope, and they spend (benevolently) out of what We have
given them So no soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will
refresh the eyes; a reward for what they did.*** **(32: 16-17)**

Therefore, the reward for those who rise by night to glorify Allah
cannot be described. As the Holy Prophet (s) has said: *There is no good
deed except that its reward has been outlined in the Qur’an, except
Salatul Layl. Almighty Allah has not specified its reward due to its
greatness with Him.*

In yet another verse Allah describes the effect of reciting Salatul Layl
for the believer. He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَّكَ عَسَى أَن يَبْعَثَكَ
رَبُّكَ مَقَامًا مَّحْمُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And during a part of the night, pray Tahajjud beyond what is
incumbent on you; maybe your Lord will raise you to a position of great
glory*****. (17:79)**

In this verse Almighty Allah describes the extraordinary spiritual
effects of reciting Salatul layl. It raises the human being to *Maqame
Mahmood*, a position of glory and praise. It is an elevated position
with Allah, one that few people can attain.

During the day numerous affairs occupy the time and mind of the human
being. In the midst of all this preoccupation, it is difficult to have
the peace of mind and heart so necessary for good worship. But at night
when it is dark and silent, when the demands of the material world are
quiet for a while, the human being can acquire a tranquil state which
allows him to be in harmony with his Creator.

It is at this time that the human being acquires a special state of mind
and energy which is very conducive to increasing his spirituality and
strengthening the connection with his Creator. That is why the friends
of Allah, and those who seek nearness to Him, always make the most of
the last part of the night. They purify their souls, enliven their
hearts, strengthen their will, and perfect their sincerity, through
worship at this special time.

Salatul Layl is thus one of the most effective ways of achieving
closeness to Allah. That is why Allah says in Sura al-Muzammil (\#73):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ نَاشِئَةَ اللَّيْلِ هِيَ أَشَدُّ وَطْءًا وَأَقْوَمُ قِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely the rising by night is the firmest way to tread and the best
corrective of speech.*** **(73:6)**


