Hadith on Salatul Layl
======================

There are many hadith that emphasize the importance of Salatul Layl.
Some of them are as follows.

1. *Three things bring happiness to the heart of a believer:*  
 a) *Meeting brethren in faith*

b) *Breaking the fast*

c) *Waking up in the later part of the night for Salatul Layl*

Holy Prophet (s)

2. *Jibrael continued to advise me about staying up at night until I
thought that the virtuous ones of my Ummah do not sleep.*  
 Holy Prophet (s)

3. *The honor and greatness of a believer lies in his praying at
night.*  
 Imam as-Sadiq (a)

4. *I* *detest that a man who has recited the Qur’an, wakes up at night
but does not rise until the morning when he wakes up for Salaat of
Subh.*  
 Imam as-Sadiq (a)

5. *Allah says; “Wealth and children are an ornament of the life of this
world” (18:46), but the eight raka’ats recited by a servant at the end
of the night are an ornament of the Hereafter.*  
 Imam as-Sadiq (a)

6. *Two raka’ats of prayer recited in the darkness of the night are more
beloved to me than the world and all that is in it.*  
 Holy Prophet (s)

7. *The rising by night is healthy for the bodies*.  
 Imam Ali (a)

8. *Salatul Layl brightens the faces, makes the night pleasant, and
attracts sustenance*.  
 Imam as-Sadiq (a)

9. *When the servant of Allah turns to his Lord in the middle of the
dark night, and whispers to Him, Allah establishes His light in his
heart . . . then He tells the angels: O my angels, look at my servant.
He has turned to Me in the middle of the dark night while the false ones
are playing, and the heedless ones are sleeping; bear witness that I
have forgiven him.*  
 Holy Prophet (s)

10. *Whoever has been granted the chance to recite Salatul Layl, a male
servant or a female one, and he(or she) rises for Allah sincerely, does
proper wudhu , prays salaat for Allah with a true intention, a sound
heart, a humble body and a tearful eye, Allah will place behind him nine
rows of angels. The number of angels in each row cannot be counted
except by Allah. One side of each row is in the East, and the other is
in the West. Then when he completes his prayer, he gets the reward of
all of the angels in the rows.*  
 Holy Prophet (s)

11. There is no good deed except that its reward has been outlined in
the Qur’an, except the Salatul Layl. Almighty Allah has not specified
its reward due to its greatness with Him. He says (about the reward of
those who recite Salatul Layl):

***So no soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will refresh
the eyes; a reward for what they did.*****(32:17)**

Holy Prophet (s)

12. A man came to Imam Ali (a) and said: *I have been denied the chance
to recite Salatul Lay*l. The Imam replied: *Your sins have prevented
you.*

13. *Whoever tells himself he will wake up for Salatul Layl but sleeps
through the time, his sleep will be charity and the reward of what he
intended will be written for him.*  
 Holy Prophet (s)

14. *Do not disregard the reciting of Salatul Layl, for the one who is
denied Salatul Layl is in a great loss.*  
 Imam as-Sadiq (a)


