Salatul Layl
============

The time for Salatul Layl begins after midnight until the time for Fajr
(morning) prayers. The best time for it is as close to the Fajr prayer
as possible. When there is not enough time, it is recommended to at
least recite the last three raka’ats, or even just the last rak’ah of
Salatul Witr.

Salatul Layl consists of a total of 11 raka’ats, divided into the
following prayers:  
 1. Nafilah of Layl: 8 raka’ats (4 x 2 raka’ats)  
 2. Salât al-Shaf’a: 2 raka’ats  
 3. Salat al-Witr: 1 raka’at

Method
------

The foundation of the prayer consists of the 11 raka’ats. In addition,
there are a variety of surahs and supplications that have been
recommended for recitation during these raka’ats. What follows is the
description of one of the ways that has been recommended.

Additional supplications are also included. Please also refer to the
section on *Salatul Layl* in *Al-Baqiyat al-Salihat* (commonly found on
the margins of or as an appendix to *Mafatihul Jinan*) for other
variations.

### Nafilah of Layl

The 8 raka’ats of Nafilah are divided into four prayers of two raka’ats
each. With the intention of reciting two raka’ats of Salatul layl,
recite two raka’ats like the Fajr prayer.

After Sura al-Hamd it is recommended to recite al-Ikhlas (\#112) in the
first raka’at and Sura al-Kafirun (\#109) in the second raka’at. Qunut
is recommended in the second raka’at and can simply consist of saying a
salawat only or *subhanallah* three times.

In the other salats of Nafilah of Layl, any small surahs can be recited
after Sura al-Hamd. It is also permissible to omit the second surah
after Suratul Hamd during these raka’ats.

### Sura al-Kafirun (\#109)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا الْكَافِرُونَ لاَ أَعْبُدُ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ أَنتُمْ عَابِدُونَ مَا أَعْبُدُ وَلاَ أَنَا عَابِدٌ مَّا
عَبَدتُّمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ أَنتُمْ عَابِدُونَ مَا أَعْبُدُ لَكُمْ دِينُكُمْ وَلِيَ دِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful  
 Say: O unbelievers  
 I do not serve that which you serve  
 Nor do you serve Him Whom I serve  
 Nor am I going to serve that which you serve  
 Nor are you going to serve Him Whom I serve  
 You shall have your religion and I shall have my religion.

### Salat al-Shaf’a

This is a two rak’aat prayer, and there is no qunoot in it.  
 1st raka’at: Recite Sura an Nas after al-Hamd.  
 2nd raka’at: Recite Sura al-Falaq after al-Hamd.

### Sura al-Falaq (\#113)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ الْفَلَقِ ، مِن شَرِّ مَا خَلَقَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِن شَرِّ غَاسِقٍ إِذَا وَقَبَ ، وَمِن شَرِّ النَّفَّاثَاتِ فِي
الْعُقَدِ ، وَمِن شَرِّ حَاسِدٍ إِذَا حَسَدَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the name of Allâh the Beneficent, the Merciful.  
 Say: I seek refuge with (Allâh) the Lord of the daybreak  
 From the evil of what He has created;  
 And from the evil of the dark night as it comes into darkness  
 And from the evil of those who blow in knots  
 And from the evil of the envier when he envies.

### Sura an-Nas (\#114)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ النَّاسِ ، مَلِكِ النَّاسِ ، إِلَهِ النَّاسِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِن شَرِّ الْوَسْوَاسِ الْخَنَّاسِ ، الَّذِي يُوَسْوِسُ فِي صُدُورِ
النَّاسِ ، مِنَ الْجِنَّةِ وَ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allâh, the Beneficent, the Merciful.  
 Say: I seek refuge with (Allâh) the Lord of mankind  
 The King of mankind  
 The God of mankind  
 From the evil of the whisperer who withdraws  
 Who whispers in the hearts of mankind,  
 From among the jinns and men.

### Salatul Witr

This is a one rak’ah prayer. The following surahs are recited after Sura
al-Hamd.  
 Sura al-Ikhlas (\#112) 3 times  
 Sura al-Falaq (\#113) 1 time  
 Sura an-Nas (\#114) 1 time

### Qunut of Salatul Witr

After completing the Surahs recite Qunut in the following manner. It is
highly emphasized to be humble and tearful in Salatul Witr. Raise the
left hand for asking forgiveness and use the right for holding a tasbih.
Some recommended duas are as follows.

**a)** Recite the following du’a  
 (See also the longer version of this du’a: Du’a Qunut for Salatul Layl)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لآ اِلَهَ اِلاَّ اللّهُ الْحَلِيْمُ الْكَرِيْمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لآ اِلَهَ اِلاَّ اللّهُ الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيْمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ اللّهِ رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ السَّبْعِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ رَبِّ الاَرْضِيْنَ السَّبْعِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا فِيْهِنَّ وَ مَا بَيْنَهُنَّ وَ مَا فَوْقَهُنَّ وَ مَا
تَحْتَهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيْمِ وَ سَلاَمٌ عَلى الْمُرْسَلِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْحَمْدُ لِلّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ صَلَّى اللّهُ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ الطَّاهِرِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent the merciful  
 There is no god except Allah  
 the Forbearing, the Generous  
 There is no god except Allah  
 the High the Almighty

Glory be to Allah  
 Lord of the seven heavens  
 and Lord of the seven earths

and whatever is in them, and between them  
 and above them and below them,  
 Lord of the Mighty Throne.  
 Peace be on the Messengers.  
 All praise is for Allah Lord of the worlds.  
 O Allah bless Muhammad and his pure family.

**b)** Recite 70 times this prayer for forgiveness

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَسْتَغْفِرُ اللّهَ رَبِّي وَ اَتُوْبُ اِلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I seek forgiveness of Allah my Lord and I turn to Him

**c)** Ask for the forgiveness of forty believers, men and women, who
have died or are living, by repeating forty times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O’ Allah, forgive

Fill in the names of believers. Apart from relatives and friends, it is
recommended to remember the Ulama (Scholars) who have served and
propagated Islam. If it is not possible to name forty believers, name as
many as possible and then say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِلْمُؤْمِنِيْنَ وَ الْمُؤْمِنَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah forgive all believers, male and female

Then say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَسْتَغْفِرُ اللّهَ الَّذِي لاَ اِلَهَ اِلاَّ هُوَ الْحَيُّ
الْقَيُّومُ لِجَمِيْعِ ظُلْمِي وَ جُرْمِي وَ اِسْرَافِي عَلى نَفْسِي
وَ اَتُوْبُ اِلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I seek forgiveness of Allah, He who there is no god but He, the Ever
living, the subsisting, from all my oppressions and my sins and my
excesses on my soul, and I turn (repentant) to Him

**d)** Repeat seven times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذَا مَقَامُ الْعَآئِذِ بِكَ مِنَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

This is the position of one who seeks refuge in You from the fire

**e)** Say three hundred times: **اَلْعَفْوَ**  
 (I ask for Your) pardon

Then say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَ ارْحَمْنِي وَ تُبْ عَلَيَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّكَ اَنْتَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيْمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

My Lord, forgive me and have mercy on me, and turn to me Surely You are
the Oft-returning, the Merciful


