28 Killing of Even One Believer
===============================

And whosoever killeth a believer intentionally, his recompense shall be
Hell, he shall abide therein and God's wrath shall be on him and His
curse, and (there) is prepared for him a great torment (4:93)

For this reason did we prescribe unto the children of Israel that he
who slayeth any one (man) without (that being for) murder or for
mischief in the land, (it shall be as though he hath slain mankind as a
whole; and he who saveth it (a human life) shall be as though he hath
saved mankind as a whole; and certainly our Apostles came unto them with
clear evidences, and yet verily many of them even after that certainly
did commit excesses in the land. (5:31) Man must judge in the light of
the above ordinances, the position of those who killed the very beloved
ones of God, the Holy Ahiul- Bait. History testifies that none but the
Fourteenth of the Holy Ones did escape murder at the hands of those who
called themselves Muslims and as rulers of States, called themselves
Caliphs.

**29 The Dead in the Way of the Lord are Alive**

The following declaration of God through His Final Word, the Holy
Qur'an, says that those who lay their lives in God's way are alive, and
must not be counted as dead. Thus the Shias believe that the martyrs are
alive and continue to revere their memory:

And say not of those who are slain in the path of God that they are
dead; Nay (they are) living, but ye perceive it not (2:154)

Reckon not those who are slain in the way of God to be dead; Nay! alive
are they with their Lord being sustained (3:168)

**30 Reverence and Respect for the Signs of God**

Everything in the Universe is a Sign of God, particularly those
associated with godly objects and the men of God:

Verily "Safa" and "Morwa" among the signs of God; whoever therefore
maketh a pilgrimage to the House or performeth "Umra"; therefore it
shall be no blame on him to go round them both; and whoever of his own
accord doeth anything good in deed, verily God is Gracious, All-Knowing.
(2:158) (As for the Camels) We have made them for you of the Signs of
God. (22:36) That shall be so, and whosoever respecteth the Signs of
God, then that verily is the outcome of the piety of heart. (22:32)

It is obvious that if the mounds of Safa and Marwa and animals of
sacrifice are worthy to be Signs of God, the Standard of Islam with
which Husain fought and established the Truth will be the greatest sign
of God, the Sign of the Religion revealed by the Lord, and respect and
reverence for it must be the Sign of the piety of the individual. The
Shias, the followers of the Qur'anic faith, the Islam-Original, are more
careful against Shirk than any other school. They regard the
Alam-e-Husainy neither as God, nor as Husain, but as a token of the
Standard of Islam.

**31 Mourning for the Martyrs**

So wept not on them the heavens and the earth nor were they respited
(44:29)

The Holy Qur'an declares that heaven and earth also mourn When they do
not mourn for the wicked, it means that they mourn for the righteous.

Mourning for the righteous, particularly for those who have laid down
their lives for the Lord, is godly behaviour.

There are authentic traditions of the Holy Prophet shedding tears for
the prophesied martyrdom of Husain even before the event had taken
place.

There is Qur'anic evidence of Jacob's weeping for his son Joseph who
had disappeared, even though, as an Apostle, he knew that his son was
not dead.

Thus mourning for Husain or for any other martyr of the House of the
Holy Prophet is in accordance with the apostolic tradition.

**32 Breast-Beating for the Martyrs**

Breast-beating, which is generally done by the Shias for the martyrs of
the House of the Holy Prophet, the Ahlul-Bait, is not a part of the Shia
faith. It is an active expression of sorrow for the holy ones and
identification with their suffering in serving the Lord. History records
similar conduct by Owais Qarani, who hurt himself, breaking his own
teeth in grief for the suffering of the Holy Prophet in Ohad. This is
known by the Muslim world and was recognised by the Holy Prophet
Himself. Though breast-beating is not a part of the religion, it is
tolerated.

The violent expression of feeling on the part of Shias for the
martyrdom of the Holy Ones of the House of the Holy Prophet represents a
natural attachment to the Holy Ones. People do not Condemn one who weeps
and mourns when a close relative dies, and the Shias actually regard the
Holy Ones as their spiritual parents. The Holy Prophet said, "I and Ali
are the two fathers of this people."

**33 Reverential Prostrations**

Reverential prostration before any sacred object is not prohibited in
Islam. People who misunderstand it may wrongly term it Shirk. But Iblees
or Lucifer was cast out for not prostrating himself before Adam:

And when said We unto the angels, "Prostrate ye before Adam!", they all
prostrated themselves save Iblees, who refrained and was puffed up with
pride and was turned into one of the disbelievers. (2:34)

And indeed We did create you, then We did fashion you, then said We
unto the angels, "Prostrate yourselves unto Adam!" So they all did
prostrate themselves except Iblees; he was not of the prostrating ones.
(7:11)

Jacob, being the Apostle of God, prostrated himself; along with his
sons, before his own son on the throne of authority:

And raised he his parents to the throne, and they fell down unto him,
prostrating themselves, and he said, "O my father! This is the
interpretation of my dream of aforetime! Indeed my Lord hath made it
come true; and indeed He was kind unto me when He took me out of the
prison and hath sown Satanic dissension between me and my brothers.
Verily my Lord is Beneficent unto whomsoever He willeth; verily He is
All-Knowing, All-wise."

**34 Every Muslim is not a Mo'min ie. a Genuine Believer**

The Qur'an clearly gives the actual position of a Muslim and a Mo'min.
The word, Muslim, refers to one who submits himself to the faith of
Islam, whether forced by circumstances or sincerely. The word, Mo'min,
means a believer who has an earnest and genuine conviction about the
Truth: Say the desert Arabs "We believe." Say thou (unto them), "Ye
believed not, but say ye, We submit, for faith hath not yet entered your
hearts; and if ye obey God and His Apostle, He will deny none of your
deeds. Verily God is Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful (49:14)

**35 Respite Given to Disbelievers**

The respite given to disbelievers is not, in fact, good for them. Let
not those who disbelieve think that Our giving them respite is good for
their selves; We only give respite to them that they may increase in
sins, and for them it is a terrible punishment (3:77)

**36 Hoarding of Wealth**

These verses concern those who heard wealth and do not spend it in
God's way:

And as for those who hoard up gold and silver and spend it not in the
way of the Lord announce unto them a painful punishment.

On the day when the fire of hell shall be heated, their foreheads and
their sides and their backs shall be branded with the words: "This is
what ye hoarded up for yourselves, so taste ye what ye hoarded"
(9:34,35)

**37 A Goodly Loan to God has a Multiple Return**

Spending in the way of God is lending to God, which earns not only a
multiple return, but forgiveness of sins: If ye lend God a goodly loan,
He will double it unto you and will forgive you; And God is Most
Gracious and Most Forbearing. (64:17) Let him with abundance spend of
his abundance and he who is straitened let him spend of what God hath
given him; (for) God layeth not on any soul a burden save to the extent
to which He hath given it; God will soon bring ease after difficulty.
(65:7)

**38 Self-Defence Prescribed**

Islam is not an impractical ideal. Man must resist evil as best he can
by all good means. But when the aggressor goes beyond the reasonable
limit and exploits the goodness of the one who is resisting, then he
must defend himself with an equal measure of strength, but he himself
must not go beyond the reasonable limit.

O ye who believe! Retaliation is prescribed for you in the matter of
(unlawful) murder freeman for freeman, bondman for bondman, woman for
woman; but if any remission is made (in any case) by his (aggrieved)
brother, then the recognised course be adopted and payment made to him
in handsome manner. This is a dispensation and a mercy from your Lord,
and whosoever transgresseth the limit after this, then for him shall be
a painful punishment. (2:178)

This is an ordinance of the Holy Qur'an. The Bible teaches that one
should turn the other cheek if one is smitten, and to surrender the coat
if the cloak is taken away. This is not practical, and could never be
practised even by the staunchest Christian. It is clear which ordinance
will help to maintain peace, security, safety and order, and which will
let loose mischievous elements through the practice of self-surrender
preached by the Christian Church, which in fact is not, and cannot be,
practised.

**39 A Believer Described**

Indeed successful are the believers, Those who in their prayers are
humble, And those who, from what is vain keep (themselves) aloof And
those who act for purification, And those who guard their private parts,
Except from their wives or those whom their right hands possess, for
then verily they are not blameable. (23:1-6)

**40 Sex Segregation or Purdah for Women**

Let those who advocate the modern social freedom and individual liberty
which leads to immorality hear what Mrs Annie Besant says about the
state of womanhood:

You can find others stating that the religion (Islam) is evil because
it sanctions a limited polygamy But you do not hear as a rule the
criticism which I spoke about one d~ in a London hall where I knew that
the audience was entirely uninstructed. I pointed out to them that
monogamy with a blended mass of prostitution was an hypocrisy and more
degrading than a limited polygamy Naturally a statement like that gives
offence, but it has to be made because it must be remembered that the
law of Islam in relation to women was until lately,

when parts of it have been imitated in England, the most just law as
far as women are concerned to be found in the world. Dealing with
property, dealing with rights of succession and so on, dealing with
cases of divorce, it was far beyond the law of the West, in the respect
which was paid to the rights of women. Those things are forgotten while
people are hypnotised by the words monogamy and polygamy and do not look
at what lies behind it in the West - the frightful degradation of women
who are thrown into the street when their first protectors, weary of
them, no longer give them any assistance.

I often think that woman is more free in Islam than in Christianity.
Woman is more protected by Islam than by the faith which preaches
monogamy In Al-Qur'an the law about women is more just and liberal. It
is only in the last twenty years that Christian England has recognised
the right of women to property, while Islam has allowed this right from
all times. It is slander to say that Islam preaches that women have no
souls. (Annie Besant, The Life and Teachings of Muhammad, Madras, June
1932, page 3)

Islam aims at keeping men and women separate to keep them safe against
sexual attractions and contact, and to protect them from modern
lifestyles which permit pre-marital and free sex.

**41 The Veil for the Believing Woman**

And say unto the believing women that they cast down their gaze and
guard their private parts and they display not their adornment save what
is apparent of it; and to draw their veils over their bosoms and display
not their adornment save to their husbands or their fathers or the
fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or the sons of their husbands
or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or their sisters' sons, or
their women, or those whom their right hands possess, or the male
servants void of sexual stimulant, or the children who have not yet
attained the carnal knowledge of women's nakedness, and let them not
strike their feet (while walking) that what they hide of their adornment
becomes apparent; and turn ye (repentant) unto God all of you, O ye
believers, that ye may prosper. The believing ladies who faithfully
follow the Holy Lady Fatema Zahra need no directions beyond that godly
model of chaste womanhood.

**43 Marriage: Man told to Marry**

There is no celibacy or monasticism in Islam Man must marry. The Holy
Prophet declared, Marriage is my "Sunnat" (tradition) and he who turns
away from my Sunnat is not of me. Wed and meet and multiply yourselves,
for on the Day of Judgment I shall be proud of the number of my
followers compared to those of other peoples.

The First Holy Imam, Amirul Momineen Ali ibne Abi Taleb says:

A prayer (Namaz) consisting of (the minimum of) only Two Rak'ats
(units) offered by a wedded pair is better than seventy Rak'ats offered
by single ones.

**44 "Muta": Temporary Marriage**

What the Holy Prophet validated shall remain valid and none shall
invalidate it. Muta, or temporary marriage, is valid 160 according to
the Qur'an and was valid during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet and in
the time of the first Caliph, Abu-Bakr. But later Omar chose to
invalidate it. The Shias, who follow the Holy Qur'an, hold Muta as
valid:

And (all) protected (married) ones of the women (are forbidden unto
you) save those whom your right hands possess. (This is) God's written
ordinance unto you; And it is allowed for you (all women) besides these
that ye may seek (them) by means of your wealth taking (them) into
marriage and not committing fornication; and as such of them that "ye
have Muta" with them, give them their dowries as a fixed reward; and it
shall not be a sin on you in whatever you mutually agree (to vary) after
the fixed reward; Verily God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.


**45 Polygamy and Islam**

People, without knowing what Islam says about polygamy, criticise it
Islam did not start Polygamy, but controlled it. No religion has
protected women as much as has Islam. The verse permitting polygamy does
not order a Muslim to be polygamous; in fact, it warns man that if he
has more than one wife he must observe total equality among them. Islam
permits man to marry up to four wives, but warns that if he cannot
maintain justice he should have only one:

Then marry those who seem good to you, two, or three, or four, and if
ye fear that, ye shall not deal justly (with so many) then (marry) only
one. (4:3)

The earlier quotation from Annie Besant commends Islam for its
treatment of women. And James Michener writes: Western writers have
based their charges of voluptuousness mainly on the question of women.
Before Muhammad, however, men were encouraged to take innumerable wives;
he limited them to four only, and the Koran is explicit that husbands
who are unable to maintain strict equality between two or more wives,
must confine themselves to one. (James A. Michener, "Islam: The
Misunderstood Religion" Readers Digest, American Edition, May 1955,
pages 68-70)

Suppose the wife of a man becomes incurably ill, or she is proved
barren, or she becomes incurably insane, without discarding his wife or
himself living a miserable life, Islam allows him to take another
wife.

**46 Birth Control**

Slay not your children for fear of poverty (6:152)

47 Reward for Shunning the Greater Evils Shunning the greater evils
makes up for other sins:

And (as for) those who believe and do good, certainly blot out from
them their evil deeds, and certainly we will reward them the best of
what they are doing. (29:7)


