48 Intoxicants and Gambling
===========================

When man becomes sunk in sinning, he begins to delude himself with
self-deceiving arguments in favour of his conduct, justifying his
actions as being within the law. He argues that liquor and gambling are
not forbidden in the Holy Qiir'an. But the Qur'an speaks vehemently
against these thing~.

They ask thee (O Our Apostle Muhammad) concerning wine and lots (games
of chance); Say, in both these is great sin and also (some) profit for
men; but their sin is greater than their profit. And they will ask thee
(O Our Apostle Muhammad) what they shall spend (in alms);Say,
"whatsoever can be spared"; thus doth God make clear for you the signs
so that ye may ponder. (2:219)

O ye who believe! Intoxicants and games of chance, (dedications of)
stones (ie. idols) and (divination by) arrows, are only an abomination
of Satan's handiwork, so be ye away from it so that ye may be successful
(5:90)

**49 Niggardliness**

A niggardly person regards only himself. Whatever he owns he will leave
in this world and will leave it without spending his wealth in the right
way and thus without earning good in the afterlife.

He who is niggardly is verily niggardly to his own self (47:38)

For God says:

Never shall ye attain to righteousness until ye give away (in the way
of your Lord) of what ye love; and of whatsoever ye give, verily God
knoweth it (3:91)

**50 Behaviour Towards Parents**

And thy Lord hath commanded that thou worship not (anyone) but Him, and
show goodness to parents; if either or both of them reach old age with
thee, utter not unto them (even so much a) "Fie", nor chide them, and
speak unto them a generous word (17:23)

And We did enjoin upon man concerning his parents; his mother beareth
him in weakness upon weakness, and his weaning taketh two years (and)
saying: "Be thou grateful unto Me and unto thy parents." (31:14)

**51 Usury or Charging Interest on any Lending**

Those who swallow interest will not (be able to) stand (in the
Resurrection) except as standeth one whom Satan hath confounded with his
touch; this because they say trade is only like (earning) interest,
whereas God hath decreed trade lawful and hath forbidden interest,
wherefore whosoever (after) the admonition hath come unto him from His
Lord, if he desists, shall have what hath gone before; and his affair
rests with God; and whoever returneth (to in even after the admonition),
they are the inmates of the fire (hell), therein shall they abide.
(2:275)

**52 Life of This World**

Verily the life of this World is only an idle sport and play. (47:36).
See also 6:32, 29:64, 57:20

**53 No One Knows where He will Breathe His Last**

Verily, God is He with Whom is the knowledge of the Hour and He sendeth
down the rain, and knoweth He what is in the womb. And knoweth not any
soul what he shall earn on the morrow; and knoweth not any soul in what
land he will die. Verily God is All-Knowing, All- Aware. (31:34)

**54 Khatan: Circumcision**

Circumcision in Islam is a tradition which is compulsory. Its origin
lies in the time of Abraham, and was the token of Abraham's Everlasting
Covenant with the Lord. It is said that the Holy Prophet and all the
Holy 'mains of his House, the Ahlul- Bait, were circumcised. Older
converts such as the earliest companions of the Holy Prophet were not
circumcised and it was not insisted on for them.

**Abraham:**

This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you and thy seed
after thee: Every man child among you shall be circumcised And ye shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the
covenant between me and you. And he that is eight days old shall be
circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is
born in the house, or bought with money to any stranger, which is not of
thy seed. (Old Testament, Genesis 17:lO-13)

**Isaac:**

And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had
commanded him. (Genesis 21:4)

**Jesus:**

And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the
child, his name was called Jesus, which was so named of the angel before
he was conceived in the womb. (New Testament, Luke 2:21)

**55 Following the crowd blindly**

Man is warned against following the crowd and being influenced by
numbers:

Indeed We have created for hell many of the jinn and the men; They have
hearts (but) they understand not with them; they have eyes (but) they
see not with them; and they have ears (but) they hear not with them;
they are like cattle, nay, more astray; These are they, the heedless
ones. (7:179)

**56 Misappropriating the Property of Orphans**

And give unto orphans their property, and substitute not (your)
worthless things for (their) good ones, and devour not ye their property
along with your own; for verily it is a great crime. (4:2)

Verily, those who eat away the properties of orphans unjustly, they
swallow (only) fire into their bellies and anon shall they enter the
blazing Hell-fire. (4:10)

**57 Repel Evil with What is Best**

Man should as far as possible be good and do good, and if any one does
evil, return evil with that which is best. The best, a very
comprehensive term, meaning as well as the situation demands.

And equals cannot be the good and the evil Repel thou (evil) with what
is the best, when lo ! he between whom with thee there was enmity, shall
be as though he were a warm friend. (41:34)

The best example of some one returning good for evil is seen in
Amirul-Momineen Ali ibne Abi Taleb, who having commanded a drink to be
brought to him immediately after being mortally wounded by Abdur-Rahman
ibne Muljim, served it first to his assassin. Many similar examples
exist in the glorious lives of the Holy 'mains, and even of their
devotees.

**58 Mischief is Graver than Murder**

Mischief is more grievous than murder. (2:217)

**59 Merciful Pardon in response to Sincere**

Repentance Promised

Islam, while warning against the false belief in vicarious atonement,
preaches the hope of a sure and merciful pardon by the All-Merciful Lord
where there is sincere repentance, and so encourages man to forsake his
evil ways and return to righteousness:

Say thou (O Our Apostle Muhammad), "O My servants who have been
extravagant unto their own selves, despair ye not of the mercy of God;
verily God forgiveth sins all together; verily He is the Oft-Forgiving,
the Most Merciful. (39:53)

**60 Every One's Actions are Being Watched**

And say thou (unto them), "Act ye as ye wil4 God beholdeth your deeds,
and His Apostle and the believers and then ye shall be brought back to
the Knower of the hidden and the manifest." (9:105)

The Omnipresence of God is indisputable, and the presence of the Holy
Prophet is definitely declared But who else can be the Believers other
than those who were purified by the Lord Himself ie. the Holy
Ahlul-Bait? (33:33)

The above verse declares that, in every age, there will be a Believer
(a member of the Ahlul-Bait), the Imam of the age. As it has been
declared by the Holy Prophet:

Man Maata walam ya'rif Imama Zamaanihi faqad Maatameetatul jahiliah
("He who dieth without knowing the Imam of his age, hath died the death
of the age of ignorance (as did Abu Jehaland Abu Lahab and the others of
his kind.")


**REVOLUTIONARY CHANGES RESULTING FROM THE Qur'anIC TEACHINGS**

The wonderful transformation that the Holy Prophet Muhammad, the Last
Apostle of God, so successfully effected within the short span of only
twenty-three years of his apostolic mission is, in itself, the mightiest
of the miracles the world had ever witnessed. He successfully attacked
every problem of wild barbarism and chronic paganism which prevailed at
the time of his advent, and established a godly life of superb virtues
through these changes:

1 Humanity was united under One God. 2 A death blow was dealt to the
misconceptions about multiple deities. 3 All apostles of God were
declared to be equally truthful, holy and sinless. Thus the Brotherhood
of Religions was established. 4 Respect for the leaders of the other
faiths was enjoined. 5 The truthfulness of all heavenly scriptures was
declared, and respect and regard for all heavenly scriptures was
ordained. 6 All kinds of worship of creatures other than the Creator was
strictly prohibited. 7 All man-made distinctions of caste, colour and
birth were eliminated. 8 Compulsory and regular congregational prayers
(daily, weekly, and at other fixed times),

with the annual rehearsal of the Human Brotherhood at Haj, were
prescribed and firmly established. 9 Uniform methods of prayer at fixed
times, with the text of the verbal supplication to be recited, were
prescribed to be strictly followed. 10 Idolatry of every kind was
strictly prohibited and banned. 11 The rights of men and women were
prescribed in detail and were effectively enforced. 12 The minimum
amount of regulated charity was made compulsory. 13 Celibacy was
condemned; marriage was encouraged and wedlock honoured. 14 The ways of
a godly life in the world were demonstrated with practical examples to
be followed.

15 Women were honoured; marriage was sanctified; parental rights were
prescribed; widow marriage was legalised and commended. 16 Unlimited
marriages and the institution of concubinage or having an unlimited
number of wives was stopped and controlled. 17 Polygamy as a curative
measure was made strictly conditional subject to a perfect equality
among wives. 18 Women were given equal opportunity for spiritual
elevation along with men. 19 The burial of female babies was stopped.

The value of daughters was made equal to that of sons. 20 Sobriety and
temperance were ordained. The use of all intoxicants was strictly
prohibited. 21 Distribution of property was prescribed in detail and
strictly enforced. 22 Places of worship were declared open to all
worshippers, without any monopoly for any individual or community. 23
Nude dances were stopped. Modest dressing was prescribed. 24 Seeking of
knowledge was made compulsory for both men and women. Scholarship was
encouraged and scholars honoured. 25 Gambling and all games of chance
were declared to be crimes. 26 Adultery was declared to be the most
abhorrent and the most severely punishable crime.

27 Slavery was abolished in the most practical and peaceful way. 28 The
law of 'Maktabah' to help slaves to become liberated was enforced. 29
Usury was strictly prohibited. Lending without interest was highly
commended. 30 A socialistic pattern of society was established through a
commonwealth called 'Bait-ul-mal'. 31 The accumulation of wealth was
controlled through the Laws of Inheritance and by an annual tax at a
prescribed rate. 32 The hoarding of food grains and other foodstuffs was
declared to be a punishable crime. 33 The just and correct use of
weights and measured was ordered. 34 Cleanliness of body, thought,
conduct and character was mandatory.

**35 The varieties of food and drinks, and the limits of eating and
drinking, were controlled.**

**36 Strictly regulated fisting was prescribed and made compulsory.**

**37 The protection and help of travelers was made obligatory and
highly commended.**

**38 Patronage of orphans and the destitute was declared to be one of
the great virtues.**

**39 Forced conversion was prohibited.

40 People were given freedom to choose their own faith.**

These most ancient and basic works on Islam do not reveal any mention
of Tahreef-Makani, or any addition to or subtraction from the present
version of the Holy Qur'an which is in our hands. The only mention found
in these basic authorities concerns Taweel (interpretation). In the
Tenth Volume of the Biharul-Awar of Mullah Baqir Mujlisi, there is a
discussion between Abdullah ibne Abbas and Ma'aviah. Ibne Abbas, in
answering Amir Sham, who had commanded that praising Ali and the
Ahlul-Bait be discontinued, does not speak of any distortion or
misarrangement of the verses of the Holy Qur'an,

or of any addition or subtraction, but he questions Ma'aviah,
challenging him on the interpretation of the verses of the Qur'an which
expressly speak of Ali and the Ahlul-Bait. This is another clear
evidence that the present Qur'an is the same collection as was made in
the lifetime of the Holy Prophet at his command, and was the collection
that was with Ameerul-Mo'mineen Ali ibne Abi Taleb, with the special
explanatory notes from the Holy Prophet and by himself regarding the
external as well as the internal meaning of the Word of God.


**ONE OF THE MYSTERIES**

One of the wonderful mysteries about the personalities of Muhammad, the
A-c of God, his daughter Fatema, the Lady of Light, and the Eleven of
the Twelve chosen successors (imams) from Ali-al-Murtaza to
Hasan-Al-askari, is that all of them were martyred and none of the Holy
Fourteen had had any education; and yet they were the fountainhead of a
wonderful, divinely-inspired knowledge and were unequalled by any other
than those of their own holy group.

Imam Hasan-al-Askari, the 11th Imam, was martyred in 260 A.H. The
Abbasid Caliph Mo'tmad sent his men to kill the 12th Imam who, under
divine inspiration, took shelter in the cave at 'Surra manra' and
disappeared. Many great Sunni Scholars have also accepted this incident,
namely:

1 Mullah Jami in his Shawahidun-Nubwwa

2 Abdul-Wahab Sha'rani in his Lawahaqul-Answar and in his Alyawa
queet-Wal-Jawahir

3 Shaik-e-Akbar, Mohieddin ibne-Arabi, in his Futuhate- Makkiah

4 Khaja Parsa in Faslul-Khitab

5 Abdul Huq Mohaddis Dehlavi in A'immatul-At'har

6 Jamaluddin Mohaddith in his raudzatul-ahbab

7 Abu-Ahdullah Shami, author of Kifayatul-Tibyan-Fi-
Akbare-Sahebuz-Zaman

8 Sibt-ibne-Jawzi in his Tizkirae-Khawasal-Umma

9 lbne-Sabbagh Nuruddin Ali Maleki in his Fusoolul- Muhimma

10 Kamaluddin-bin Talha Shafayi in his Matalebus-Su'ool

11 Shah Valiullah in his Fazlul-Mubeen

12 Shaik Sulaiman Hanafi in his Yanabiul Mo'addah

About the indefinite and extraordinary length of life granted to the
12th Imam, the great scholars have said that, when Muslims believe in
the life of the holy prophets Jesus, Khizr, Idris and even the Dajjal,
why should people wonder about the life of a Divine?

**The Abbasid Caliphs**

Until the Omayyids, there was one Caliph (Ruler) for the whole of the
Muslim Empire, but with the start of the Abbasid Caliphate, the Spanish
territory did not acknowledge the Abbasid rulers. Abdur-Rahman had
established his hold on Spain, competing with the pomp and show of the
Abbasid Court. The African positions were under different rebel heads.
Thus, with the start of the Abbasid rule, there were many separate
rulers in various parts of the Muslim Empire, each claiming to be the
Caliph or the rightful successor of the Apostle of GOCL Thus the word,
"Caliphate" and the title "Caliph" became openly identical with rulers
of the Muslim States, but the people still considered the Caliphs as,
not only their political lords, but as their supreme spiritual leaders.
The Shias, the followers of Ali, though subjected to the most miserable
persecution and painful torture, were always with the Holy Imams who
were the source of spiritual knowledge.

The Abbasids, though related to Ali, as the issue of Abbas, the uncle
of the Holy Prophet, were hostile to the family of Ali and Fatema.

The Abbasids ruled as kings until 656 A.H., when Mo'tasim, son of
Mustansar, was killed by the Mongol King Halako, and thus the Caliphate
at Baghdad came to an end. But one of the sons of Tahirbillah fled to
Egypt and started a dynasty which ruled until 1517 ~D when Sultan Salim
of Turkey conquered Egypt and founded the Ottoman Caliphate in Turkey
which continued until 1922 A.D., when Mustafa Kamal Ataturk abolished it
altogether. From that time there has been no Caliph. Thus the Caliphate
'started by man was abolished by man, while the Imamat, or the divinely
commissioned succession from the Holy Prophet, continued and was
acknowledged by the Muslim world as the Golden Chain of the divinely
commissioned and sinless guides and Imams, guardians of the Holy Qur'an
and its correct interpretation, and perfect models of Islamic
practice.


