Misinterpretation
=================

The question is: from whence comes the venom which is used against
Islam and its Holy Founder? How is it that some non- Muslim scholars
misunderstand Islam, while others understand and appreciate it? This is
the question for which we must find an answer. This misunderstandiug
exists not only in the minds of the anti-Islam element, but also in the
minds of some Muslims whose only available source of knowledge is
literature in the Engstsh language which provides faulty information
about Islam and its Founder. However sincere these Muslims are in
seeliing to know the tr'ith of Islam, the literature available to them
makes them doubt the claims of Islam to be God's revealed religion and
its Holy Founder the Apostle of God.

Consider, for insance, the following:

1 The labricated story of the Holy Prophet being frightened by the
heavenly Messenger, being comforted by Lady Khadija, and being advised
of the apostleship conferred on him by Waraqa bin Nawfil.

2 The fiLise stories of sexual lust indulged in by the Holy Prophet

3 Descriptions of the defensive resistance which Islam was forced to
exercise, such as wielding the sword for territorial ambition.

4 The fabricated story of the Holy Prophet seating one of his wives on
his shoulders to show her the slave dance.

5 The denial of the miracles of the apostles of God and the Holy
Prophet.

6 The false story of the Virgin Mary having contact with Joseph in the
Sanctuary, assigning a huruan father to the Holy Prophet Jesus and thus
denying his miraculous birth.

7 Creating doubts upon the bodily Ascension (Me'raj) of the Holy
Prophet.

8 Aligning the sinful ones with those purified by God Himself.

9 Misinterpreting the Qur'anic laws of heritage relating to the
Apostles of God.

10 Inventing false traditions in the name of the Holy Prophet.

11 Hiding the defects, drawbacks and the natural deficiencies of some
pet heroes, and praising them in spite of their known errors, and
presenting even tyrants as leaders of the faith.

12 Lowering the position of the holy ones in favour of those who can
never be their equal.

13 Misinterpreting verses of the Holy Qur'an to suit a particular
theory.

14 Misinterpreting the significance of the most important historic
event of Ghadeer-e-Khum.

15 Denying that the Holy Prophet appointed his succor, claiming that he
left this world without doing so.

16 Presenting as legal and warranted the acts of some political leaders
after the departure of the Holy Prophet, and presenting them as heroic
deeds for the faith Such falsehoods and misrepresentations appear in the
translations and works of many non-Muslim writers. And those who take
guidance from the Holy Ahlul-Bait have a responsibility to present the
truth to the world and correct the lies against Islam which are
misleading many men and women who are searching for the truth. Besides
the above falsehoods,

there is also mischievous propaganda against the genuineness of the
Holy Qur'an, which throws doubt about the completeness of the Holy Book
and the arrangement of the material in it In reply to this hostile
material which is misleading its readers, the only source of correct
information about the faith and its truths is the verdict of the
Ahlul-Bait, the authorities divinely set up by the Lord through the Holy
Prophet. The pity is that this panacea for all evils has not been made
available by us for the information and guidance of seekers of the truth
and as an answer to the hostile forces.

Therefore, instead of attempting to answer each mischievous publication
and each mischief-maker who may appear on the scene each day in a
different garb, the foremost concern of the advocates of Islam and its
Holy Founder is to put a stop to these poisonous publications and bring
Out an authentic version of the Holy Qur'an in the English language so
that there will be no misunderstandings of the Qur'anic truth either by
uninformed friends or misinformed foes. With such an authentic source,

we can quell all antagonistic movements against the teachings of Islam
and the Holy Prophet by making available to the misguided ones an
authentic source of the faith. Until this is done, errors and
misunderstandings will continue to occur. And to do the task, the
responsibility rests with whose who call themselves the devotees of the
Ahlul-Bait, the Shias.

I considered it my first concern to clarify the actual position of the
Holy Qur'an, which is the greatest and ever-current miracle of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad, the last Apostle of God until the Day of Final
Judgement. Because of the importance of this subject and its direct
concern with the faith, I have taken detailed notes from Hujjatul Islam
Ayatullah A1haj Allama Agha Mirza Mahdi Pooya Yazdi, one of the
well-known authorities on the Holy Qur'an and Islam. These notes were
prepared with special care and effort, using authentic sources, and are
presented with maximum brevity.

There is clear evidence of the following:

1. The Qur'an, as a whole and complete Book, was revealed to the Holy
Prophet on the Night of Qadr (2:185,44:3,97:1). 2. In the course of its
Tanzeel, or gradual revelation, as and when the verses were revealed,
the Holy Prophet put them in their respective places as he was divinely
directed to do. 3. The Holy Qur'an was recorded in writing at least by
the following:

(a) Ameerul Momineen Ali ibne Abi Taleb, whose collection contained not
only the text, but also the notes - both ordinary and special - from the
Holy Prophet. (b) Abdullah ibne Mas'ood (c) Ma'aaz ibne Jabal (d) Obai
ibne Kaab 4. The Holy Prophet, before his departure from the world, made
the well-known historic announcement, universally acknowledged by the
Muslim world, that he was leaving behind for the people (not one
particular person, for the words are clear, Feekom, "among you") the
Saqalain (or Thaqalain),

the two weighty or important things, the Kitaaballah, the Book of God
and the Ahlul-Bait. This shows that by that time the Qur'an had been
collected and formed a complete Book. 5. If the Qur'anic verses had not
been collected into a complete Book, what was the Book to which Omar
referred when he said in reply to the demand of the Holy Prophet for pen
and paper, Hasbona Kitaaballah, "Sufficient for us is the Book of
God."

With all this unchallenged evidence of history, any one who suggests
that the verses of the Qur'an were collected by some one else, or who
suggests its Tahreef is either betraying a determination not to know the
truth, or an inability to understand it Readers may refer to the notes
by Ayatullah Pooya Yazdi on Tahreef where they will find the truth about
the compilation of the Qur'an and the genuineness of the version in our
possession.

In addition to the detailed notes from Ayatullah Pooya Yazdi, I wrote
to the great scholar-divines, the Mujtahids in Iran and Iraq, and have
obtained their respective verdicts on Tahreef in the Qur'an, providing a
decisive verdict for the Shia world. (See the Fatwas).

Thus, any talk denying the genuineness, completeness, originality and
correctness in the arrangement of the material in the Qur'an is
anti-Shia and anti-Islamic.

With regard to the other doctrines of Islam, about which many
slanderous allegations have been made aimed at poisoning the mind of the
general public, I have given short explanatory notes under each topic,
and have quoted one or two of the many verses of the Qur'an on which the
doctrine and its practice are based. This has been offered to the
seekers of the truth, and that the general public may know what is meant
by the original Islam which, in order to distinguish it from other
sects, is termed Shiaism.


**The Originality and Genuineness Of The Holy Qur'an in Its Text and
Its Arrangement**

by Hajjatul-Islam Ayatullah Allama Haji Mirza Mahdi Pooya Yazdi

The great majority of scholars of all schools of thought in Islam agree
that the Holy Qur'an, as it is today in our hands, was put into writing
under the command, and under the personal supervision, of the Holy
Prophet himself, and that there were no additions, omissions or
alterations whatsoever.

There are, however, a few traditionalists of the Sunni as well as the
Shia schools who, influenced by tradition rather than reason and
historical fact, have held the view that some omissions and alterations
occurred before official assent was given to the present version by the
Third Caliph. The advocates of this view have not succeeded in providing
any evidence of this. Their views remain as individual opinion with
support from others. Our intention here is to:

1. Point out the reasons underlying these doubts

2. Weigh up the traditions put forward in support of the doubts

3. Given the internal and external historical evidence for and against
these theories

4. Explain what Muslims are required to believe about the Holy Qur'an
as a part of their belief
Before dealing with these matters, the following points must of
necessity be made.


**The Qur'an: What Does it Mean?**

By the Qur'an we mean the verses, phrases, sentences and chapters
uttered by the Holy Prophet of Islam, not as his own words, but as the
Word and the Book of God revealed to him; this he claimed as his
Everlasting Miracle which bears testimony to his Prophethood; and with
this he challenged not only those who doubted its origin, and not only
humankind alone, but even the Jinns, saying that even if the Jinns and
men joined forces to produce the like of it, they would never be able to
do even a small part of it This challenge was made not to any particular
age, but to all ages.

By this definition we exclude all the utterances of the Holy Prophet
which he did not claim to be the words of God (although the ideas and
subject matter were certainly a revelation from God).

The definition also excludes the words of the Holy Prophet which he
presented to the people as the Word of God, but not as a miracle or a
part of it with which he challenged the world (namely the various
Ahadees-e-Qudsi). These Ahadees-Qudsi are so numerous and abundant that,
collected together, they would be no less than the size of the Holy
Qur'an, if not more, but their value is no greater than the other
genuine traditions of the Holy Prophet This definition must be kept in
mind throughout the discussion of the Holy Qur'an.

1. Of the religious records of historical value, pre- Islamic or
post-Islamic, in our possession, no document can ever compete with the
Holy Qur'an in authenticity. Of the historical records which the Muslims
claim to be most authentic and genuine - of the Sunni school the Sehha-e
Sitta and of the Shia school the KotobeArba'a - none can be said to have
been within the reach of every Muslim from his earliest years until his
death as has the Holy Qur'an. And no tradition is considered so
important that every Muslim child must learn, recite and memorise it
word for word with grammatical accuracy and phonetic perfection as they
must do with the Holy Qur'an.

2. This importance and care which is given to the Qur'an by every
Muslim did not emerge in a later period. The Muslims were attracted to
the Holy Qur'an as the Word of God from the time of its revelation to
the Holy Prophet and its recitation to the people. The Holy Qur'an
itself; from the time of its revelation, encouraged the people in
various ways to learn, read, recite and memorise ft and to ponder over
every word of it and to listen carefully when it was recited. When one
recites it, one must first prepare for it by dissociating oneself from
anything which would cause any diversion of thought or distraction of
attention (16:98-7:204).

3. The Holy Prophet was commanded by God not to be in a hurry in the
recitation, or in the arrangement, of the Holy Qur'an, but to follow the
divine order in both respects. (This indicates that the arrangement is
not to be according to the date of the revelation). In short, the
student of the Holy Qur'an will realise the importance and care attached
to the Qur'an by its Author; and therefore the Muslims who rightly
believe that God is the Author of the Holy Qur'an, show the utmost
devotion to the Holy Book and obey the orders required of them. They
learn it, and make their children learn it and put it into writing.

Thus the Muslims in the lifetime of the Holy Prophet were taught that
to learn the Holy Qur'an is "Ibadat" (Devotion); to recite it is
"Ibadat"; to write it down is "Ibadat"; to teach others and make them
read and learn it by heart and understand it is "Ibadat"; and to use the
verses of the Holy Qur'an in daily life is "Ibadat". History records
people who never used any other verse or phrase or sentence in their
life than the words of the Holy Qur'an The Holy Qur'an declares that the
purpose of the coming of the Holy Prophet was to bring the teachings of
the Book (the Divine Book) and to show the importance of the written
word. if the teacher is absent, the student can read the written word.
The Holy Qur'an commands the people, in their business transactions, to
write down their contracts before witnesses to avoid later doubts and
disputes.

Is it possible that the Author of the Holy Qur'an, who attaches so much
importance to writing down our business affairs, should not care for His
own important work, namely the provision of a Book containing the
fundamental principles of the true, divine, universal and final message,
a message which is not only for one section of humanity, or for a
particular period of time, but for the human race as a whole, for all
times and for all parts of the earth?

The authenticity and genuineness of the version of the Holy Qur'an now
in our possession, and its being the same Qur'an uttered by the Holy
Prophet, is so evident and obvious that no Muslim scholar of any
standing has ever doubted that this same version of the Holy Qur'an -
every letter, word, sentence, verse and chapter - was uttered by the
Holy Prophet In other words, what we have in our possession is the
Qur'an. The dispute is about omissions and alterations in the
arrangement of some letters, and not about additions.

Alterations and alternatives given by some commentators regarding the
writing or pronunciation of some words in the Holy Book do not effect
any substantial change either in the meaning or the significance of
phrases or sentences. This will be dealt with in discussing variations
in the same word, for example "Malika" and "Malika". In short, the
Muslim World throughout the ages has believed unanimously that nothing
has been added to the Holy Qur'an now in our possession. Religious
records other than the Holy Qur'an, Islamic and non-Islamic, are
suspected of containing passages and even chapters which have been added
to the original work.

Having in mind this complete authenticity of the Holy Qur'an in every
part, the Holy Prophet and his companions and scholars in subsequent
generations are unanimous in the belief that the Holy Qur'an is to be
regarded as the standard and the criterion upon which other religious
records, Islamic and non-Islamic, must be judged.

Any utterance or action attributed to the Holy Prophet or the Holy
Imams of his House which may disagree with the Holy Qur'an is to be
considered spurious and must be rejected. This was declared by the Holy
Prophet and by Ali, Hasan and Husain and by the succeeding nine Imams of
the Holy House, which means that the Qur'an existed as the standard and
criterion for the verification of the falsehood and truth of other
statements and narratives available to the public through the ages until
260 A.H.

There is no doubt that the Qur'an in our possession is the same as the
version which received the official assent of the Third Caliph. All that
has been said about the omission or alteration refers to the arrangement
or the wording of verses or chapters in the period between the departure
of the Holy Prophet and the official assent of the Third Caliph to the
present version.

As has already been pointed out, the Holy Qur'an was in use in the
lifetime of the Holy Prophet There was a keen desire on the part of
Muslims, men, women and children, to possess the Book - in writing or,
mostly, by heart. There were also the chosen scholars among the early
Muslims to whom the Holy Prophet had entrusted the duty of recording the
Qur'an as it was revealed and recited by him. The foremost of these was
Ali ibne Abi Taleb, Jafar ibne Abi Taleb;

besides Ali there were Abdullah ibne Mas'ood and Mas'ab ibne Omair
among the earliest Muslims in Mecca, and Obai ibne Kaab among the
earliest adherents in Medina, Ma'az ibne Jabal, Salim Maula Hazaifa and
others. Jafar ibne Abi Taleb was the head of the early Muslims who had
migrated to Abyssinia and he was a master of the Qur'an so far revealed.
Mas'ab ibne Omair was sent to Medina to teach the Qur'an to the people
before the migration of the Holy Prophet to that place.

These people recorded the Qur'an in writing under the direct command
and personal supervision of the Holy Prophet, in his presence, as it was
revealed, placing each part of it in its relevant place as commanded by
the Holy Prophet, and reading their manuscripts to him then and there
for his approval and also repeatedly afterwards. These scribes were
considered to be responsible for teaching the Qur'an to others. They
were regarded as the masters and teachers of the Holy Qur'an during the
lifetime of the Holy Prophet and thereafter.

These people, and thousands of prominent companions (Sahabas) who were
interested in learning the Holy Qur'an and its meaning, and their
disciples such as Abdullah ibne Abbas and others, all lived in the
intermediary period between the departure of the Holy Prophet from this
world and the time that the Third Caliph gave official assent to the
present version. They taught Muslims throughout the length and breadth
of the fast-Expanding Muslim Empire. And the people of various races and
creeds learnt it by heart and wrote it down for their own use. In fact,
it is said that in the one battle of Yamama, which took place about six
months alter the departure of the Holy Prophet, seven hundred Huffaz
(those who know by heart) were killed in a single day's fight.

The Qur'an existed during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet in the form
of an arranged Book as approved by the Holy Prophet himself. As the Holy
Prophet said, "Gabriel would place before me the Qur'an for review once
a year, but this year he did it twice, which indicates that the time of
my departure is close at hand." It is evident that the divine Author and
the Holy Prophet both guarded the Qur'an to the extent that no
adulteration of any kind could be made by any profane hand, and that the
Qur'an received its complete arrangement and order not later than about
three months before the departure of the Holy Prophet. It is to this
revealed Book in its complete form and available to all that the Holy
Prophet referred when he declared to his followers: "I leave amongst you
Two Great Things, the Book of God and my Ahlul-Bait."

And it was with reference to the complete Book of God, which was in the
hands of the Muslims at the time of the departure of the Holy Prophet,
that Omar dared to say reply to the demand of the Holy Prophet for paper
and ink, "Hasbona Kitaballa", that is, "Sufficient for us is the Book of
God" This clearly proves that the Qur'an in its complete and duly
arranged form existed among the people, and was within the reach of the
common man, as were the Ahlul-Bait who were left by the Holy Prophet
together with the Qur'an If this were not so, a reference to the "Book
of God" is meaningless.

The Holy Qur'an claims for itself a pre-Existence with God (in the
Lauhe Mahfooz, the Secured Tablet) and the Kitabe Maknoon, ie. the
Hidden Book (for believers) or at least in the mind of the Holy Prophet
(for unbelievers). The arrangement of the revealed book should be in
accordance with the pre-revealed arrangement, rather than in the order
of the date of its revelation. For instance, a poet or writer may
arrange his lyrics or articles in his mind. Although circumstances may
force him to recite portions from two lyrics of different method on the
same occasion, when he comes to put the work into writing, the lines of
the lyrics will be put in their correct order irrespective of the date
of the recitation.

Although there is no problem, theological, theoretical or practical,
which the Qur'an has not dealt with (and it surpasses all scriptural
records of pre-Islamic or post-Islamic periods in the abundant variety
of its contents), yet its method of approach, presentation and solution
is exclusively unique. It does not deal with a topic in the systematic
way - by ordinary authors of theology or even by any apostolic writer;
on the contrary, it expressly says that it has adopted a special method
of its own, with changing topics, moving from one subject to another, or
reverting to the previous one and deliberately repeating the same
subject in order to reinforce the understanding, learning and memorising
of it:

And certainly We have used various arguments for men in this Qur'an,
every kind of description, but most men consent not to aught but
denying. (17:89)

And certainly We have repeated (the verse) to them that they may be
mindful, but the greater number of men consent not to aught but denying.
(25:50) Say! Have ye considered that if God taketh away your hearing and
your sight and setteth a seal on your heart, who is the god besides God
that can bring it to you? See how We repeat the verses, yet they turn
away. (6:46)

Say! He hath the power that He should send on you chastisement from
above you or from beneath your feet, or that He should throw you into
confusion (making you) of different parties, and make some of you taste
the fighting of others. See how We repeat the verses that they may
understand (6:65) The repetition is to show forth in various ways the
signs (of the Unity of God).

From the following verse of the Holy Qur'an, it is quite 6bvious that
the Holy Qur'an was already aware that there would be those who would
accuse its Author of scattering its subject- matter here and there. For
this reason, the verse (and other verses) explains the special and
unique system of presentation:

And thus do We (variously) repeat the verses and that they may say,
Thou hast learnt (them from others) and that We may make it clear to a
people who know. (6:106)

However, it is a tact that the Holy Qur'an deals in each chapter of a
particular rhythm with various topics in various ways, and this variety
only adds to its unique beauty and matchless eloquence. Any attentive
reciter or intelligent audience of the Holy Qur'an, while -sing through
variations in one rhythm, will enjoy what the Holy Qur'an itself
declares:

God hath the best announcement, a Book comfortable in its various
parts, repeating thereof do make tremble the skins of those who fear the
Lord; then their skins and hearts became pliant to the remembrance of
God; This is God's guidance. He guideth with it whomsoever he willeth;
and (as for) him whom God alloweth to err, there shall be no guide for
him.

Is he then who has to guard himself with his own person against the
evil chastisement on the Resurrection Day? And it will be said to the
unjust: "Taste ye what ye earned."

Those before them rejected (the apostles) therefore there came unto
them the chastisement from whence they perceived not.

So God made them taste the disgrace in this world's life, and certainly
the chastisement of the hereafter is greater; if they only know (it)!

And certainly We have set forth for men in this Qur'an similitudes of
every sort that they may mind.

An Arabic Qur'an without any crookedness that they may (guard) against
evil.

God setteth forth a parable; there is a man in whom are (several)
partners differing from one another, and there is another man (devoted)
wholly to a man. Are they two alike in condition? (All) praise is God's;
nay! most of them know not (39:23-29)

Even those who doubted the genuineness of the arrangement of the
present version did not claim that the whole arrangement of the verses
in all the chapters has been affected. There are chapters which were
undoubtedly revealed in complete form, namely Chapters 54, 56, 56 and
the chapters immediately preceding and succeeding them. One will find
the same variation of subject is manifested in those chapters. This
variety of expression in rhythmical form is found not only in the
chapters, but even in the verses of the Holy Book. These are the facts
an intelligent and a sincere student of the Holy Qur'an will recognise
in studying the Book.


