Traditions On the Collection of the Holy Qur'an
===============================================

We now examine a few references given by the traditionalists which have
somehow found their way into the books of traditions of both the Sunni
and the Shia Schools.

Regarding the first attempt of the ruling party to make a collection of
their own, Bokhari quotes Zaid bin Thabit that, after the battle of
Yamama, the First Caliph sent for Zaid and told him, in the presence of
Omar, that he (Omar) had told him that many reciters of the Qur'an had
been killed in the battle and that he was afraid that others would be
killed and that a great portion of the Qur'an would be lost. Omar had
said, "I believe that you should order the collection of the Qur'an",

and the First Caliph had replied, "How could I do what the Holy Prophet
did not do?", to which Omar had replied, UBY God I swear, it is good
that this be done". Said the Caliph to Zaid' "Omar continued demanding
this of me until God opened my heart to it", claiming a sort of
inspiration. Zaid said that the First Caliph had told him, "You are an
intelligent young man whom we do not suspect, and you used to write the
revelations for the Holy Prophet. You search for the Qur'an and collect
it."

Zaid Says, "I swear on my God, if they had ordered me to carry out the
task of shifting a mountain from its place, I would not have felt it so
heavy a task as the one which they asked me to undertake." To the First
Caliph he said, "How dare you do something which the Holy Prophet did
not do?" and the First Caliph replied,

"By God I swear, it is good that this he done." He says, "Thereafter
the First Caliph continued to ask me to undertake the task until God
opened my heart as he had opened the heart of the First Caliph and of
Omar. Thereafter I carried out a search for the Qur'an, collecting it
from the pieces of wood, bones, and from the memories of the people,
until I found the last verse or the Sura-e-Tauba with Abi
Khozaima-e4nsari and with none other.11 The collection remained with the
First Caliph until his death and then passed to Omar and then to his
daughter Hafsa.

Boldiari tells us that Hozaifatibnil-Yaman, on his return from the
expedition to Armenia and Azarbaijan, expressed his anxiety about the
variation among the members of the expedition in the recitation of the
Qur'an, and asked the Third Caliph to take the necessary steps to unite
the Muslims to avoid controversy over the Book of God such as existed
about the Holy Scriptures of the Jews and the Christians; even today
there are different versions of the Old and New Testaments, some parts
being regarded as apocryphal by some and not by others.

The Third Caliph asked Omar's daughter Hafsa to hand over the
collection left with her so that copies could be made. He ordered Zaid,
Abdullah ibne Zobair, Sayeed ibnul As and Abdur-Rahman ibne Harith ibne
Hisham to make copies of it. The Third Caliph told the three
Khoraishites that wherever they differed from Zaid in the recitation of
the Qur'an and its pronunciation, it should be written in the dialect of
the Qoreish since it was revealed in their dialect.

They did as they were bidden and prepared copies of the collection, and
returned the original to Hafsa and sent the copies to all corners of the
empire. The Third Caliph ordered the Qur'an in all other forms or
collections to be burnt and destroyed.

Bokhari relates that the son of Zaid claimed that he had heard his
father say, "when we were copying the collection, we missed a verse from
Sura-e-Ahzab which I used to hear the Holy Prophet reciting; we searched
for i4 we found it with Khozaimat ibne Thabith Ansari and we put it in
the same Sura in the collection."

These two traditions of Bokhari regarding the collection of the reign
of the First Caliph and the copying of it during the reign of the Third
Caliph contain a slight contradiction regarding the missing verse.

Now, besides these two, there are twenty more traditions regarding the
collection of the Qur'an, each contradicting the other in some way.
Eleven of them are mentioned in the Muntakhab-e-Kanzul Ummal and the
rest have been taken from Itqan of Suyooti and others. The following is
a brief account of these traditions.

In one tradition ibne Abi Shaiba relates that Ali said that Abu Bakr
was the greatest one in the collection of the Qur'an, being the first
person to collect the Qur'an. Another tradition says that Abu Bakr
collected the Qur'an on paper and asked Zaid ibne Thabit to review it;
when Zaid refused, he sought the help of Omar to persuade Zaid, which he
succeeded in doing, and the reviewed copy remained with Abu Bakr, being
passed to Omar and then to Hafsa.

A third tradition from Hisam ibne Orwa claims that after the battle of
Yamama, when some of the companions of the Holy Prophet who had
collected the Qur'an were killed, Abu Bakr ordered Omar and Zaid ibne
Thabit to sit at the gate of the Mosque and collect the Qur'an from the
people.

Another tradition, from Muhammad ibne Seereen, relates that Omar was
killed before the Qur'an was collected.

A fifth tradition says that, when Omar asked for one verse of the Holy
Qur'an, he was told that it was with some one who was killed in the
battle of Yamama. He became very worried and ordered the Qur'an to be
collected, and was the first person to collect it in book form.

A sixth tradition tells us that Omar decided to collect the Qur'an and
ordered that "whosoever has received from the Holy Prophet any portion
of the Holy Qur'an should bring it to US". The people had the Qur'an on
pieces of wood, stones, skin, leaves of trees and bones. Omar would not
accept anything from any one unless it was certified by two witnesses.
But he (Omar) was killed while the collection was still going on. Osman
succeeded him and continued the task, also demanding two witnesses
before he accepted anything.

Then Khozaimatibne Thabit carne with the last two verses of the
Sura-Bar'at, saying, "I have received it from the Holy Prophet and you
have not got it in your Qur'an", to which Osman replied, "Yes, I also
give evidence that these verses are from God, but tell me where we
should place them. Abu Khozaimat said, "Place these two verses at the
end of the last revealed portion of the Qur'an." Accordingly, they were
placed at the end of the Sura-Bar'at.

The seventh tradition asserts that it was Omar who accepted these last
verses of the Sura-Bar'at from a man of the Ansars without any
witnesses, with his own confirmation of it.

The eighth tradition says that, after the battle of Yamama in which
four hundred or seven hundred reciters of the Qur'an were killed, Zaid
ibne Thabit approached Omar and said, 91 The Qur'an is the only unifying
factor of our religion; if it is lost, our religion is also lost. I have
decided to collect it in book form.",

to which Omar replied, "Wait until I ask Abu Bakr". Both went to Abu
Bakr and informed him of their conversation. Abu Bakr replied, "Wait
until I consult the Muslims." He then began to talk to the people, and
all approved of the plan. Then they collected the Qur'an, and Abu Bakr
ordered a crier to announce that whoever had a part of the Qur'an should
bring it A ninth tradition tells that Khozaimatibne Thabit said that he
brought the last verses of the Sura-Tauba to Omar and Zaid ibne Thabit
Then Zaid asked Khozaimat who would give evidence in his support, to
which Khozaimat replied that he did not know any one. Then Omar said
that he was there to witness it.

The tenth tradition says that, when Omar had collected the Qur'an, he
asked, "Who is the best in pronunciation?" The people said, "Syeed ibnul
As", and then Omar asked, "Who is the best calligrapher?" The people
named Zaid ibne Thabit. Then Omar said, "Let Syeed dictate and Zaid
write." They made four copies, of which one was sent to Kufa, one to
Basra, one to Damascus and one to Hidjas.

The eleventh tradition reports that, when Omar wanted to write the
Leading Qur'an, he made a few of his companions undertake the task,
saying, "wherever you differ in the wording, write it down in the
dialect of Mozar, for the Qur'an was revealed to a man of Mozar."

The twelfth tradition gives the report of Abu Qullaba that, during the
reign of Osman, the teachers of the Qur'an started teaching their pupils
different recitations and the students used to meet and differ from each
other. This was brought to the notice of the teachers and each condemned
the other's recitation. News reached Osman, who said, "You people differ
in the recitation and you recite in my presence. what about those who
are far away in distant cities? Their recitation would differ even
more.

Then he spoke to the companions of the Holy Prophet, ordering them to
write a Leading Qur'an for the people. Abu Qullaba says that Malik ibne
Anas claimed that he was among those who used to dictate the Qur'an;
they used to dictate the Qur'an, mentioning the name of the person who
had received that verse from the Holy Prophet. If that person was not
present, they would write down the preceding and succeeding verses,
leaving a space for the verse under consideration until the person
concerned was available. And Osman completed the collection and wrote to
the people in the big cities that he had destroyed what he had and that
they should do the same.

The thirteenth tradition tells that Osman addressed the people in one
of his talks, saying, "Only thirteen years have passed between you and
your Prophet and you doubt the Qur'an, s~ying the recitation of Obai or
of ibne Mas'ood, and one telling the other that his recitation is not
the right one." Then he urged them all by an oath that whoever had a
portion of the Qur'an should bring it. People brought pieces of paper,
bits of wood, skin, etc.,

with the Qur'an on them until a great number were collected. Then Osman
went inside (his house) and called one after another and made each one
swear that he had heard it from the Holy Prophet, and that the Holy
Prophet had dictated it to him. After finishing this, he asked who was
the beet in pronunciation; the people said, "Syeed ibnul As." Then he
ordered Syeed to dictate and Zaid ibne Thabit to write. Several copies
were made and were distributed among the people and the one who tells of
the events (Mas'ab ibne Sa'b) says that he heard some of the companions
of the Holy Prophet approving this act of Osman.

The fourteenth tradition tells us about the persons who were ordered by
Osman to make the collection. The one who dictated was from the tribe of
Hozail and the scribe from the tribe of Thaqeef A fifteenth tradition
relates that, after the collection was completed, it was brought to
Osman who looked at it and said, "You have done well, the best. Yet I
see some mistakes which the Arab would correct by his own tongue."

The sixteenth tradition relates that, when the collection was shown to
Osman and he found some mistakes in it, he sai4, "Had the dictator been
from the Hozails and the scribe from the Thaqeefs, these mistakes would
not have occurred" A seventeenth tradition reports that, when Osman
wanted to make copies of the Qur'an, he sent for Obai ibne Kaab, who
dictated to Zaid ibne Thabit, and Zaid wrote it down and Syeed ibnul As
was there to correct the pronunciation. Thus the Qur'an of Osman was the
recitation of Obai and Zaid.

The eighteenth tradition reports the seventeenth one, bnt adds a person
named Abdur-Rahman ibnul Harith to assist Syeed ibnul As in correcting
the pronunciation.

In the nineteenth tradition, Zaid ibne Thabit says that, while they
were making the copies of the Qur'an, he found the passage 33:23 of
Sura-e-Ahzab was missing and he found it with Khozaimatibne Thabit only,
whose sole evidence was accepted by the Holy Prophet as the evidence of
two.

The twentieth tradition tells us that the first person who collected
the Qur'an was Abu Bakr. Zaid ibne Thabit was the scribe, and people
would come to Zaid with passages and he would not accept any passage
unless it was supported by at least two pious men, except in the case of
the last passage of the Sura- e-Bar'at which was found by Abu
Khozaimatibne Thabit, whose lone evidence was taken as two by the Holy
Prophet; that Omar brought the passage concerning the stoning of
adulterers, but it was not accepted as there was no other witness.

There are the reports of the attempts by the ruling party to make a
collection of the Qur'an during the reigns of the first thee Caliphs.
But none of these has any authenticity and they are subject to criticism
in various ways.

Let us now examine the first two traditions on the authority of
Bokhari:

1Assurriing that the Qur'an was not collected and arranged in book form
during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet, what right would any one have
to do it according to his own preference or fancy? What does Sharhe Sadr
(the opening of the heart) mean? Does it mean the kind of inspiration or
revelation which Christians claim for the authors of the Gospels?

Can it be taken an authorised source like Kitaab and Sunna (the Book
and the Tradition) of Islamic Jurisprudence giving the Halal (the
permitted) and the Haram (prohibited)? Or was it an exclusive privilege
granted to these three only (Abu Bakr, Omar and Zaid ibne Thabit)? And
what about the other companions of the Holy Prophet who had also made
collections as unanimously acknowledged by the Muslim world?

2 Why did then Osman destroy the other collections without the sanction
of the Holy Prophet? Zaid's collection, as well as the collection of
others were,

according to this statement, based on their ijtehad. Then why should
one ijtehad be preferred above another?

3 Why was Zaid's inspired collection not immediately published and
placed within the reach of the people without providing time for other
versions of the Qur'an to gain currency through the Muslim empire for
twenty years before Osman destroyed them?

4 What is the implication of the words of Abu Bakr to Zaid, "You are an
intelligent young man whom we do not suspec4 and you used to write the
revelations for the Holy Prophet."?

What were the qualifications of Zaid which made him preferred above the
other scribes who were writing the revelations when Zaid was still a
child? What was actually needed was ripe age. And what do the words
"whom we do not suspect" mean? Ignore Ali ibne Abi Taleb, who was
declared by the Holy Prophet to be the one who would always be with the
Holy Book and with whom the Holy Book would always be? Ali, about whom
there were numerous declarations from God and the Holy Prophet,

identified with the Holy Prophet in the words, "Aliyyun Minni wa ana
min Ali" (Ali is of me and I am of Ali); who was named as the Nafs, the
soul of the Holy Prophet on the occasion of the historic Mubahila, and
about whom the Holy Prophet declared, "Ana wa Ali min Noorin Wahid"
('and Ali are of one and the same Light); who was next only to the Holy
Prophet as meant by the verse of Tatheer; who was declared by the Holy
Prophet to be always with the truth, and the truth always with him;

who was foremost of the Itrat, ie. the Ahlul-Bait along with the
Kitaaballah, the Book of God, the Holy Qur'an, the two being left among
the Ummat (the Muslims) as the Two Inseparable entities of the highest
value for the guidance of the Ummate Muslima (the Muslim nation as a
whole); who was regarded by the Holy Prophet in the same relationship as
Aaron was to Moses (with the exception of Nubuwaat (Apostleship); who
was declared by the Holy Prophet to be "The Gate of the City of
Knowledge and Wisdom" and "The Best Judge and the Witness of Truth". And
if; as is said by Bokhari and Muslim, through Malik ibne As binul
Hassan, the riling party believed that Ah had no good opinion of them
and was not, at the time,

on good terms with them, what about Abdullah ibne Mas'ood, Obai ibne
Kaab, Ma'aaz ibne Jabal and Saalim Maula Abi Hozaifa, whose authority
according to Bokhari was declared by the Holy Prophet who had ordered
the people to receive the Qur'an from the above four persons. This is
related by Abdullah ibne Omar. of course, Saalim was killed in the
battle of Yamama, but the other three were alive and available at the
time that Osman issued the official version, but no reference was ever
made to any of these persons. Why?

During the reign of Osman, the assistance of certain Omayyid youths
such as Syeed ibnul As and Abdur-Rahinan ibnul Haris ibnul Hisham was
sought while persons such as Abdullah ibne Mas'ood and Obai ibne Kaab
were ignored. Was it because they suspected them, and if so, of what?

Was it:

(a) a lack of knowledge of the Qur'an, (b) a lack of truthfulness and
reliability, or (c) a lack of political loyalty to the ruling party?

Considering the declaration of the Holy Prophet, the first two
possibilities must be discarded. Only the third possibility remains. It
is a historic fact that the above were not loyal to the ruling party.
But Zaid ibne Thabit was loyal to that party and, as Ibne Abdul-Bir (the
author of Istee'aab) tells us, Zaid remained pro-Osman and pro-Omayyid
and never joined hands with the opposition. For this act of loyalty on
his part, he was rewarded with wealth and comfort, while persons like
Abdullah ibne Mas'ood and Obai ibne Kaab suffered disfavour and,
particularly the former, persecution by the ruling party. if these were
the reasons for ignoring these people, the bonafide of the attempt
itself to collect the Qur9an becomes subject to suspicion.

5 These two traditions of Bokhari contain contradictory statements
regarding the missing verse of the Qur'an.

In one tradition, the verse is not found by any one but Abi
Khozaima-Ansari, and in the other tradition it was found by
Khozaimatibne Thabit-Ansari. In the first tradition it is said that the
passage became the last verses of the Sura- Bar'at, and in the second it
is said to be verse 33:23.

of the twenty traditions mentioned above, the first and second tell us
that Abu Bakr was the first person to collect the Qur'an; according to
the second, Zaid ibne Thabit was asked only to review Abu Bakr's
collection, contradicting the previous tradition which says that it was
Zaid who collected ft at the order of Abu Bakr.

The third tradition says that Omar and Zaid were given the joint task
of making the collection, and that some companions of the Holy Prophet
who had already collected the Qur'an were killed in the battle of
Yamama. History is silent about these collections and why they were not
sought by the ruling party which was so seriously interested in the
collection of the Qur'an. And this contradicts the two previous
traditions and the two before them, as it asserts that others had
already collected the Qur'an.

The fourth tradition contradicts all the other traditions that Omar was
killed before the Qur'an was collected. The fifth tradition is entirely
different, stating that Omar was the first to order the Qur'an to be
collected in book form after he had asked about some passage of the
Qur'an and was told that the person who had it had been killed in the
battle of Yamama. This would mean that the collection of the Qur'an took
place during the reign of Omar and after the end of the battle of
Yamama.

The sixth gives an entirely different picture, saying that it was Omar
who decided to collect the Qur'an from bones, leaves, bits of wood,
paper, etc., with witnesses, but that he was killed before the work was
completed, that Osman continued the work and that he, not Omar, was the
one who supported the statement of Khozaimatibne Thabit But the seventh
tradition says that this happened in the reign of Omar and that he
accepted the verses from a person who brought them without asking for
any witnesses.

The eighth tradition gives the credit for the initiative and the
decision to collect the Qur'an to Zaid ibne Thabit during the reign of
Abu Bakr, saying that Abu Bakr would not approve the proposal of Zaid
(which was supported by Omar) until he had consulted a crowd of Muslims
and gained their approval, after which he ordered the collection.

The ninth makes Osman and Zaid ibne Thabit the joint champions of the
collection of the Qur'an, and says that Omar accepted the statement of
Khozaimatibne Thabit without further evidence, offering himself as a
witness to it.

The tenth asserts that Omar was the initiator of the collection,
employing Syeed ibnul As the dictator and Zaid ibne Thabit as the
calligrapher, and produced four copies which were despatched to the big
cities mentioned in the tradition. This contradicts the first two
traditions of Bokhari which date the initiative to make the collection
in the reign of Abu Bakr and the despatch of the prepared copies to the
big cities during the reign of Osman. And it contradicts the traditions
which give credit for the initiative to Omar and the completion to
Osman.

The eleventh tradition wants to confer the honour of the authorship of
the Leading Qur'an on Omar.

The twelfth gives the credit for the initiative in the collection and
completion and preparation of copies to Osman, and introduces Anas ibne
Malik as one of the dictators while it was being copied. It also asserts
that Osman advised the people in the big cities of what he had done with
the Qur'an and ordered them to follow his footsteps, without sending any
copies to them, which clearly indicates that Osman was sure that the
people already had copies of the Qur'an. It shows that, of the various
recitations, the most currently used was that of Abdullah ibne Mas'ood
and Obai ibne Kaab.

The thirteenth tradition asserts that Syeed ibnul As was the dictator
and Zaid ibne Thabit the calligrapher who produced the copies which were
distributed to the people.

The fourteenth tradition claims that the talk of dictation and writing
down the Qur'an was given by Osman to Hozails and Thaqeefs, and not to
Syeed ibnul As and Zaid ibne Thabit, the first of whom was an Omavi and
the second an Ansari, while the sixteenth says that, if the dictator and
calligrapher had been Hozails and Thaqeefs, mistakes found by Osman in
the prepared copies would not have occurred, clearly indicating that
Hozails and Thaqeefs were never employed to copy the Qur'an.

The fifteenth and sixteenth traditions state that the prepared copy was
not free from mistakes, that they were left to the tongue of the Arabs,
and no corrections were made.

In the sixteenth and eighteenth traditions, the name of Obai ibne Kaab
is mentioned as the dictator and Zaid ibne Thabit as the calligrapher,
contradicting the traditions which give Zaid ibne Thabit as the only
responsible person to undertake the work.

The nineteenth and twentieth traditions contradict each other about the
missing passage found by Khozaimatibne Thabit. The first says that it
was verse 33:23 and the other says that it was the last verse of the
Sura-e-Bar'at.

All these contradictory and inconsistent statements, if they are not
the creation of later periods, show that, in order to counter the
special authority given by the Holy Prophet to Ali and the other members
of the Ahlul-Bait, as well as to Abdullah ibne Mas'ood, Obai ibne Kaab,
Ma'aaz ibne Jabal and Saalim as the highest authorities on the Qur'an,
an attempt was made by the ruling party to produce their own collection,
brush aside all these other authorities and gain accreditation for
themselves. But they differed even among themselves as to who should get
the credit. So there were parties within parties, each trying to claim
credit for its own group and its own hero. The only thing that can be
said is that, whoever it was,

he was neither competent nor authorised for the task. And although they
collected scattered fragments from here and there, they dared not
publish it for more than twenty years, during which time the Qur'an in
perfect book form gained tremendous currency throughout the Muslim
empire, and was taught,

learnt, memorised and acted upon in the daily lives of the people, and
justice was meted Out according to it When Osman and the ruling party of
his time recognised the failure of their attempt to gain credit for
their venture, they procured a copy of the current version, gave
official assent to it and called it the official version. The absence of
the so-called collection of Abu Bakr (which was passed to Omar and then
to his daughter, Hafsa), of the so-called collection of Omar and the
so-called collection of Osman, and the absence of any other collection,
together with the absence of any objection to the official version, is
the greatest, irrefutable testimony to the fact that this received
version had continued to be the same since the departure of the Holy
Prophet, about which the Holy Prophet declared, "I leave among you the
Book of God and my Ahlul- Bait."

So, whatever has been said in contradiction of this is mere fabrication
or wishful thinking without validity. It only throws light on the fact
that there were people who attempted to discredit the received version
by spreading rumours and mischievous propaganda. In support of this
fact, we quote some of the statements attributed to some prominent
members of the ruling party about omissions from the present version:

First and foremost, the majority of the Sunni school hold that there
are some passages where the wording is not in the Qur'an, but the
content of the instructions remain valid. An example is the reference to
the stoning of adulterers, the wording for which is provided in three
different forms, as Boldiari and Muslim report on the authority of Ibne
Abbas from Omar.

And Muslim tells us that Ayesha said that there were two revealed
passages dealing with the number of feedings which will prohibit a
foster mother, or quality her, to be considered the mother of the baby.
Ayesha said that, in the first passage the number was ten different
feedings, this being replaced by another passage which reduced the
number to five, and that both passages were read as part of the Qur'an
until the departure of the Holy Prophet. This is given as an example of
the abrogation of passages, the wording and the instruction implied.

However, a careful examination shows that the word "abrogation" was
merely a sugar-coated word to avoid using the word "omission" since only
the Holy Prophet had the right to omit anything from the Qur'an, either
in wording or in meaning. It is obvious that the abrogation was not the
work of the Holy Prophet, as the first statement says that Omar brought
the passage dealing with the stoning of adulterers when they were
collecting the Qur'an, but it was not accepted, not because it was
abrogated,

but because there was no other witness to support Omar's statement. In
the second case, Ayesha expressly states that the passages dealing with
the fostering mother were a part of the Qur'an until the departure of
the Holy Prophet. Therefore, if these statement are true, itmeans only
that there was an intentional omission of certain passages of the Qur'an
by unauthorised people.

Suyuti, in his Itqan in continuation of the narrative of Bokhari and
Muslim regarding this matter, relates from Omar that there is another
passage which is said to be missing from the received version of the
Qur'an. But a proper examination of the said missing passages which Omar
and Ayesha present, companions them with the style of the Qur'an proves
beyond any doubt that they can never have been a part of the Qur'an and
are nothing but personal fancies.

This is nothing new, for the companions of the Prophet used to accuse
each other of such mistakes regarding the mourning for a departed, and
Ayesha accused Omar of misunderstanding the statement of the Holy
Prophet. It is impossible that a part of the Qur'an should be unknown to
all the companions of the Holy Prophet except for Ayesha and Omar, both
of whom were accused of forgetfulness and a lack of knowledge of the
Qur'an.

The Itqan, on the authority of Tibrani, states that Omar said that the
Qur'an contained ten lakhs twenty-seven thousand letters, whereas the
Qur'an available at the time would not reach even one-third of the
quantity, which means that more than two- thirds of the Qur'an has been
omitted A question arises, if, according to Omar and the ruling party,
the Qur'an was still being collected up to the end of his life. how is
it that the letters of the whole book were counted? Especially
considering that he was intimately acquainted with the existing
one-third and a multitude of Muslims had even memorised it.

Moreover, considering that his evidence for just one verse which he so
well remembered was not accepted by his own party, while Khozaima's
statement was accepted without the testimony of others, how can his
solitary statement about the missing two- thirds of the Qur'an be
accepted of which he could not remember one single verse?

The Itqan tells us that Abdullah ibne Omar said that some one may say
that he has received the whole Qur'an, but what does he know about the
whole? One can only say that he received of the Qur'an only that which
has been known in evidence. Again Itqan says that Ayesha claimed that
the Sura-Ahzab at the time of the Holy Prophet contained 200 verses and
that in Osman's collection we find much less. Similarly, the Muntakhabet
Khanzul Ummal quotes Obai ibne kaab as saying that the Sura-e- Ahzab,
which now contains seventy-three verses, was originally equal to, or
even longer than, the Sura-Baqara.

Omar is the one whom Obai ibne kaab discredited in the matter of the
Qur'an as a person who was busy in his transactions in the marketplace
while Obai and 6thers were busy studying the Qur'an under the Holy
Prophet And in another dispute about the status of the Ansar being equal
to the Mohajir or subordinate to them, Omar quoted verse 100 of Chapter
9, omitting the conjunctive letter between Ansar and the relative
pronoun (those who follow them), making the following adjectival clause
qualify the Ansar, which would mean that the Ansars should follow the
Mohajirs.

Obai ibne Kaab refuted Omar's misreading by inserting the conjunctive
letter between the Ansar and the relative pronoun, which makes the
Ansar's status equal to the Mohajirs, the relative pronoun referring to
those who follow the Mohajirs and then the Ansars. This was a matter of
great political importance as it dismisses the claim of the Khoraish to
be superior to the Ansar. Obai's authority was accepted and Omar
withdrew his misquotation.

Ayesha's evidence for the missing 127 verses of the Sura- Ahzab,
without quoting even a single verse of it, should be discredited as she
did not remember even the first words of verse 33 of the same Sura,
which concern herself as well as the other wives of the Holy Prophet.
Also, the statement attributed to Obai ibne Kaab is also to be dismissed
because of the omission of so large a portion of one particular Sura,
without it being remembered by such an acknowledged authority on the
Qur'an - and none other than he remembering such a large amount of
material - is unbelievable; and such a claim could never have come from
some one of the stature of Obai ibne Kaab.

Another tradition of the Itqan asserts that Ayesha had a collection of
her own, quoting her father as saying that in the Sura-e-Ahzab, alter
"Tasleema" in verse 56 of Salawat, there was a conjunctive clause, "wa
alallazina yasiloona sofooful awwal", and that was before Osman made
changes in the collection.

First of all, the internal evidence against this is the style of the
alleged missing clause: it is contrary to the common usage of Muslims,
since Muslims in their Salawat on the Holy Prophet either stop with the
Holy Prophet or add his family, or go further and add the companions in
general, or the wives and issue of the Holy Prophet There is no trace of
evidence in support of this suffix. Further, no one else has ever said
that Ayesha's Mus'haf (her own collection) was destroyed by any one. So
what happened to that collection?

Another tradition of Sahih Muslim says that Abu Musa-e- Ash'ari called
the reciters of the Qur'an in Basra, and people who had studied the
Qur'an came to him:

He addressed them, saying: "You are the chosen ones of the people of
Basra and reciters of the Qur'an. You continue to recite the Qur'an
regularly and do not neglect it for long lest your hearts become
hardened like the hearts of the people of old times." He said, "We used
to read a Sura in the Qur'an which was equal in length and rigidity to
the Sura-e-Bar'at, but I have forgotten it except for one verse.

and there was another Sura which resembled the Musabbihat, but that
also I have forgotten except for one verse of it which runs as
follows...

The style of both the quotations of Abu Musa is quite inferior to that
of the Qur'an and the wording of the first passage itself makes it quite
obvious that it belongs to the category of Ahadees- e-Qudsi, a
definition of which has already been given Regarding the second
quotation, it might be taken as a parenthetical sentence, a commentary
added to verse 61:2 before the third verse (Kabora ma maqtan indallah)
of the same chapter.

Abu Musa, having heard it, might have taken it to be a different Sura
because he is known to have been credulous and weak in memory and
literary taste; and since he himself confesses to have forgotten both
the suras and no one else had any knowledge of it, this statement must
automatically be dismissed. Further, if the statement is true, it may
have been made after the start of the tension between Osman and himself
which led to his removal from the governorship, in which case it would
have been intended to discredit Osman by accusing him of the omission.

Suyuti, in his Itqan, tells us that once Omar told Abdur- Rahman ibne
Auf, "Didn't you find this passage among what was revealed to us?" ("In
jahado kama jahadtum awwala marratin". "Surely we do not find it now!")
To this Abdur-Rahman replied that it was one of the passages of the
Qur'an which was omitted.

First of all, this is a conditional clause, part of the larger one. The
following sentence is not mentioned, and neither Omar nor Abdur-Rahman
ibne Auf mentions of which part of which verse of which Sura it was,
thereby showing the failure of this man. In the second place, who
prevented Omar from re-inserting this and the other omitted passages
into their respective places in the Qur'an, he being a powerful leader
of the ruling party? Or, rather, is it that these and many other
passages fancied by Omar and Abdur-Rahman to be parts of the Qur'an were
rejected by the Muslims through lack of internal and external supporting
evidence?

Similar to this is the statement of Suyuti, claiming that a prominent
companion of the Holy Prophet, Muslimatibne Mukhallad Ansari, once asked
the people (among whom was also Sa'aad ibne Malik Ansari), "Will you
tell me about the two passages of the Qur'an which were not included in
the collection?" But no one replied, except his son (probably Muhammad
ibne Muslima) who recited the passage.

A proper examination of this passage will reveal beyond all doubt that
the reciter had confused passages from different suras, adding his own
fancies, which throws light on the miraculous style of the Qur'an which
exposes any one who tries to imitate it.

Secondly, one can infer that having a knowledge of the Qur'an at that
time brought merit, credit and honour. So that those who lacked it tried
to pose as students of it, but were betrayed, on the one hand by the
miraculous nature of the style of the Qur'an, and on the other hand by
the lack of supporting witnesses, just as we, today, have among us
incompetent and unqualified people who pose as great scholars of science
and politics. To this tradition may be added what is said about the two
suras found in the collection of Ibne Abbas and Obai ibne Kaab,

which reveal a style which is different from that of the Qur'an and
must be classed as supplications (Adyiya, prayers) worded by the Holy
Prophet or some member of his family. In the opinion of some, these two
are inferior in language and style even to the supplications of the
Imams of the Holy House of the Holy Prophet, the authentic collections
of which are in our Possession.

There are some more traditions like the above which are not worth
considering. What is given here is only "Mushti az Kharwar", a handful
from a heap. Sufficient to say that the Qur'an has its own internal
evidence, an inimitable style peculiar to itself, together with
innumerable external witnesses. All the verses and suras, since their
revelation, have been placed within the reach of those who longed to
hear, write, learn, understand, memorise and act accordingly. Not a
single word or sentence can be accepted as part of the Qur'an without
such internal and external evidence.

Therefore, it is easy for a student of the Qur'an to discard such
traditions, irrespective of the qualifications of the companions of the
Holy Prophet to report them and the number of people who subsequently
repeated them. We must assume that those responsible for the traditions
were' either trying to discredit each other, or to discredit the
received version of the Qur'an which stood between themselves and their
political aspirations; some of the members of the ruling party were
inclined to spread such disruptive rumours.

On the other hand, those of the Ahiul- Bait, the people attached to
them and other companions who were not close to the ruling party, during
this period never attacked or criticised the received version or even
raised any voice of dissent against it. On the contrary, they, following
the command of the Holy Prophet, insisted upon the authenticity and
validity of the received version as the standard and criterion
prescribed by the Holy Prophet by which false traditions, both
pre-Qur'anic and post-Qur'anic, were to be judged. The Holy Ahlul-Bait
recorded the saying of the Holy Prophet:

Certainly, the liars around me have increased abundantly. Beware! For
every truth there is a proof and for every Right there is the Light
Thus, to whatsoever agrees with the Book of God hold fast, and
whatsoever is opposed to the Book of God, reject it.

The Holy Ahlul-Bait maintained this; Ali said the same, Hasan said the
same, Husain said the same, and each of the nine succeeding Imams after
Husain followed the same principle, as did their adherents (see Kaafi
and all the subsequent authorities on tradition). No tradition dealing
either with the theory or practice of Islam has been, or ever will be,
acceptable to the Imams of the Holy House of the Holy Prophet or to
members of their school of thought if it does not agree with the Book of
God. As Allama Majlisi has put it:

Of the innumerable miracles of the Holy Prophet, the first and foremost
is the Holy Qur'an, which is the most genuine and authentic one
(narrated and recorded ever since its revelation by innumerable persons
generation after generation down to us) and will last as such till the
day of Resurrection. (Haqul-Yaqeen)

Before concluding this section, it is desirable to refer to some more
traditions of the Sunni school about the nature of Ali's collection of
the Qur'an, the date of the collection, its authenticity and Ali's
knowledge of the inner and outer aspects of the Qur'an in its parts and
its whole.

Suyuti, in his Tarikhul Khulafa, tells us that Ali is one of the godly
scholars, the celebrated Warrior, the famous Ascetic and the well-known
Orator, one of those who collected the Qur'an and presented it to the
Holy Prophet for his review. And in the Itqan, Suyuti, on the authority
of Abu Na'yeem, quotes the statement of Ali himself, "Of every verse of
the Qur'an which was revealed I know about what, and when, it was." And
the same Abu Na'yeem quotes Abdullah ibne Mas'ood as saying that the
Qur'an was revealed on seven sides (Ahrof) or aspects, each of which has
an inner and an outer significance, and that Ali ibne Abi Taleb had with
him all the inner and outer aspects with all the inner and outer aspects
with all the significance of each aspect.

The author of Waseelatun Najaat, Mullah Muhammad Mubeen Luckhnavi, on
the authority of Ibne Seereen, assets that Ali arranged the Qur'an
according to the dates of the revelation.

Again, Suyuti in his Itqan, says that Ali was one of those who arranged
the Qur'an according to the dates of revelation. And Abu Shukoor, the
author of Tamheed, says that the companions of the Holy Prophet were not
unanimous in accepting Ali's collection. The Itqan of Suyuti says that
Ali's collection began with Sura Iqra, and then Almuddasir, then
Muzzammil and then Tabbat, and then Takweer, and so on. Ali the Meccan
suras, then the Madinite suras. And Abdullah ibne Mas'ood's collection
began with Baqara, then Nisa, then Aale Imran, with many differences
therein. And the same was the case with the collection of Obai ibne
Kaab.

These accounts and others of the same kind, if we accept their
authenticity, will only go to confirm that Ali is the foremost one next
only to the Holy Prophet in the thorough knowledge of the inner and the
outer significance of every word, sentence, passage, part or chapter of
the Qur'an in its revealed and pre-revealed form. The Qur'an itself
hears testimony to this if it is properly and impartially read without
prejudice:

verses 56:77-79 as the major premises and verse 33:33 as the minor
premise, and verse 3:60 as the conclusion defining the personnel of the
Ahlul-Bait, added to which is the unanimous verdict of the Muslim world
as to the names of the persons to whom the above verses applied. These
verses, supported by many other verses of the Qur'an, declare that the
descendants of Abraham (Aale Ibrahim), those who were divinely made to
inherit the' Book (Kitaab), Wisdom (Hikmat), the Great Kingdom (Mulke
Azeem) and the Office of Imamat (Ohda-e-Imamat), they are foremost in
total obedience and service of the Absolute, purified from all ungodly
desires.

The foremost of the Ishmaelite branch is the Holy Prophet Himself, and
next to him the members of his holy family (the Ahlul-Bait) headed by
Ali as Imam and succeeded by the eleven holy Imams. The inclusion of the
Holy Lady Fatema in the Ahlul-Bait is not only because of her personal
purity but also by virtue of her three-sided position, being the
daughter of the Holy Prophet, the wife of the first Holy Imam, and the
"mother" of the eleven 'mains, thus establishing her link between
Prophethood (Risalat) and divine guidance (Imamat), a status achieved
not only by being a wife of a prophet, but by having a role in
establishing the divinely chosen line of Abraham's descendants.

This clear evidence of the Qur'an is supported by the authentic
declarations of the Holy Prophet:

Ali is of me and l am of Ali Ali is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an will
be with Ali Ali is with the Right and the Right will be with Ali The
Qur'an and the Ahlul-Bait are the Two Inseparable Entities, each perfect
in itself reflecting the others. (These Inseparable Ones were left among
the people by the Holy Prophet for their guidance and to protect them
from going astray.

Regarding Ali's collection and those of others, it has already been
said that the particular arrangements of others must be for commentary
purposes or for the personal information and guidance of the collectors
themselves, or for other academic purposes. There is abundant evidence
that Ali's collection and those of the other authorised companions of
the Holy Prophet (namely, Abdullah ibne Mas'ood and Obai ibne Kaab),
contained explanatory notes which were meant to be placed alongside the
text,

and that these people never attempted to give any publicity to their
notes against the received version of the Qur'an which is meant for all
men for all times and as an everlasting miracle of the Holy Prophet The
point to be noted here is that the statement of Suyuti to the effect
that Ali collected the Qur'an and presented it to the Holy Prophet for
his review contradicts all the statement which assert that Ali collected
the Qur'an after the departure of the Holy Prophet. Furthermore, we
support the fact that the collection of the Qur'an in the lifetime of
the Holy Prophet was made, not only by Ali, whose authenticity is
unquestioned and by other authorised companions of the Holy Prophet, but
there were many others who collected the Qur'an during the lifetime of
the Holy Prophet, including not only men, but also women.

It is amusing to note that, in some traditions, Zaid ibne Thabit, the
hero of the official venture by the ruling party to collect the Qur'an,
is also included among those who collected the Qur'an during the
lifetime of the Holy Prophet. This discredits all the stories of his
collecting fragments of the Qur'an from pieces of paper, bits of wood,
bones, leaves, skins, etc. by the order of the First, Second and Third
Caliphs, jointly or severally.

Tabarani and Ibne Asakir quote Sho'abi as saying that the Qur'an was
collected during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet by six persons of the
Ansars: Obai ibne Kaab, Zaid ibne Thabit, Abu Darda, Ma'aaz ibne Jabal,
Sa'ad ibne Abaid and Abu Zaid. There was a seventh one, Majama' ibne
Jariah, who also collected the Qur'an, but with the exception of two or
three suras.

Bokhari tells us that Arias ibne Maalik said that four persons, all
from the Ansars, collected the Qur'an during the lifetime of the Holy
Prophet, namely Obai ibne Kaab, Zaid ibne Thabit, Ma'aaz ibne Jabal and
Abu Zaid.

Nasaee asserts that Abdullah ibne Omar said:

I collected the Qur'an and used to complete its recitation (as a whole)
every night, which news reached the Holy Prophet, and he called me and
told me not to hurriedly complete the recitation of the whole Qur'an in
one night (ie. not to recite it mechanically as recitation for
recitation's sake), but to recite it (intelligently), to ponder over its
contents to understand them by completing the recitation in one month.

Ibne Sa'ad asserts in Tabaqat on the authority of Fadhl ibne Dakeen,
from Valeed ibne Abdullah ibne Jameel, who reports from his grandmother
Umme Waraqa, that the Holy Prophet used to visit her and call her
"Shaheedah" (witness) and she was one of those who had collected the
Qur'an.

There is a report from ibne Abbas related by Ahmed ibne Hambal, Ibne
Abi Shaiba, Tirmizi, Nasaee, Ibne Habban, Haakim, Baihaqi arid
Zia-e-Maghdasi, that ibne Abbas once asked Osman why "Bismillah" was not
written at the beginning of the Sura-Bara'at, and why they had joined
this Sura with the other and put the two suras in the seven big suras.
Osman replied as follows: sometimes suras would be revealed to the Holy
Prophet, but not complete, and later some verses of the Sura would be
revealed,

at which time the Holy Prophet would call the scribes arid tell them to
place those verses in certain positions in the suras, arid so the verse
subsequently revealed would be placed in position as directed by the
Holy Prophet. The Sura-Anfaal was revealed in Madina early after the
Hijrat, arid the Sura- Bara'at was the last of the Madinite Suras, but
the contents were very similar arid the Holy Prophet did not say whether
it is a separate Sura or a continuation of the previous Sura. Therefore,
said, Osman, I joined these two together without using "Bismillah" arid
put in the long suras.

This statement of Osman, if true, is an attempt on his part to gain
credit for the arrangement of some of the Qur'an, namely Bara'at and
Anfaal, but it asserts the fact that the Qiir'an used to be written
under the supervision and instruction of the Holy Prophet, and that
arrangement of the verses (Aayats) in the suras, and the arrangement of
the suras one after another, was done according to the instruction of
the Holy Prophet (ie. Anfaal and Bara'at). But there are authentic
traditions by both the schools (the Sunni as well as the Shia) that the
revelation of the Sura~- Bara'at began in the ninth year of the Thjrat
with the twenty verses which Ali was eutnisted to recite at Mecca during
the Haj season, and "Bismillah" was not revealed in the staat of it.

Thus there is no question of Osman joining these two suuas or arranging
them together as one. The Sura~-Bara'at was revealed without
'~Bismillah" and, on account of the similarity of the contents, was put
after Anfaal at the corninand of the Holy Prophet, and not as part of
Anfaal, but as a separate sura. Probably Osman had no knowledge of this,
and he followed what was current among the Muslims. It is not possible
to imagine that, when the Sura~-Bara'at was revealed (its first part
being revealed in the beginning of Zilkaffah of the 9th Hijri),

its actual position among the other suras would not have been made
clear by the Holy Prophet until a year before his deparrure from this
world, when he used to himseff direct the scribes about the arrangement
of the suaas and even the arrangement of the verses in them. In any
case, this statement discredits Osman's claiin that he collected
fragruents of the Qur1an from people and copied them with the support of
witnesses, and supports all the evidence to show that the Qur'an was
collected during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet.

According to the unanimous statement of the AhIul-Bait, Bismillah is a
part of the Quran revealed to the Holy Prophet at the beginning of every
sura except the Sura-e-Bara'at which was revealed without Bismillah. The
last portion of Osman 5 statement cannot be his, and may be a
fabrication of a later period by those schools of thought which do not
consider Bismillah as a part of the Qur'an except for the Bismillah used
in the middle of the Sura-e-Naml.


