The Various Recitations of the Holy Qur'an
==========================================

A few words should he said about the recitations "Qira'aat". It is
generally known that there are seven or ten different recitations of the
Qur'an. By the word "recitation" is meant the various wordings which
convey the same or allied meanings ("Maalik" and "Malik") For example
"Yatta'harna" and "Yat'harna". It is generally believed that the
recitation of the seven or of the ten reciters of the first, second and
third centuries of Islam are valid, and Muslims are allowed to adopt
either of these in reciting the Qur'an.

It is generally believed that the origin of these various recitations
goes back to the time of the Holy Prophet who approved these varieties
but, according to the Shia Ithna-Ashari School, whose views are based on
the teachings of the Holy Imams, the revealed recitation of the Qur'an
can he only one since, as the Imam put it,

"The Qur'an is One, came down as One, the variation in the recitation
comes from the reciters, not from God" It is a misrepresentation of the
fact by the ruling party for propaganda purposes that the Holy Prophet
followed the recitation of Zaid ibne Thabit during the close of his
ministry. But, as stated by Mustafa Sadiqe-Rufaa'yee in his book EjaazuI
Qur'an, the Holy Prophet does not follow anything but the divine
recitation 75:16-19. Zaid ibne Thabit and the ruling party who already
failed to produce a collection of their own had no alternative but to
adopt an approved collection of the Holy Prophet and his recitation;
anything else would have been rejected by the Muslim world. 67

Shia Qurra (Reciters):

1 Hamzatubna Habeeb

2 Aasim 3 Abdullah ibne Aamir Yasabi, who acquired knowledge from
Waasila Adqu' (a companion of the Holy Prophet) d. 116 A.H.

4 Abi ibne Hamza-e-Kas'ayi, who acquired knowledge from Hamza b.
Habeeb, and Ibne Abi laila, who had learnt from Ameerul Momineen Ali
ibne Abi Taleb

5 Khalaf ibne Hashanul Bazzar, a student of Hamzatibna Habeeb

6 Yakoob ibne Is'haaq Qazrami, who learnt from Ameerul Momineen Ali
ibne Abi Taleb

7 Yazeed ibne Qeeqaa' Makhzoomi, from Abdullah ibne Abbas, who learnt
from Ameerul Momineen Ali ibne Abi Taleb.


**WHAT IS ISLAM?**

The Islamic Way of Inviting Mankind to the Truth The following verse of
the Holy Qur'an lays down in clear terms the only method by which
mankind can be invited to the Truth, that is, through Islam.

It is true that Islam was spread with the sword. But which sword? Not
the one the Christian Church used under the Edict of Milan against the
poor and helpless Jews, men, women and innocent children, but with the
sword of ever-triumphant Islamic ethics, through the ideal conduct and
godly character of the Holy Prophet, and through the matchless
sacrifices of the Holy Ahlul- Bait - a lovely heavenly weapon shipper
and surer than the brutal one used to spread the creed started in the
name of Jesus. The following is the Qur'anic injunction on the preaching
of the faith by the Muslims:

And call thou unto the way of thy Lord with wisdom and kindly
exhortation, and dispute with them in the manner which is the best;
Verily thy Lord knoweth better of him who hath gone astray from His
path; and He knoweth best of those guided aright. Truth is that which
even the enemy is helpless to deny. Let the world listen to what the
great Christian scholar declares:

History makes it clear, however, that the legend of fanatical Muslims
sweeping through the world and forcing Islam at the point of the sword
upon the conquered races is one of the most fantastically absurd myths
that historians have ever repeated.

(De Lacy O'Leary in Islam at the Crossroads, London 1923, page 8) There
are many more of such open declarations by impartial scholars of the
non-Muslim world who earnestly seek the truth. To quote all of them
would need a separate volume in itself.


**The Meaning of Deen and Maz'hab**

The Arabic term Deen or Maz'hab stands for the word "Religion" in
English. Religion is Human recognition of superhuman controlling power
and especially of a personal God entitled to obedience, effect of such
recognition on conduct and mental attitude." (OED)

Man by nature is conscious of an Absolute Authority, a Super Power of
the highest order, and the way he thinks and behaves in his desire to
reach or to please that Power, that is religion. Islam, as a religion,
stands for the divinely prescribed code for disciplining the human Ego
or self in its practical life on earth, to enable man to raise himself
from the abyss of material degradation towards the sublime heights of
eternal heavenly bliss. Such bliss is in store for those who
successfully conquer the lust for material possessions and physical
power and restrain carnal desires.

Islam is a divinely formulated and perfectly regulated formula.
Expressed in a few words, it is:

Say thou (Oh, our Apostle Muhammad!), My Prayer, my Sacrifice, my Life
and my Death (are all, only) for God, the Lord of the worlds. (6:163) It
is worth imagining, if man ponders over the complete implications of
this heavenly guidance in its fullness and acts upon it, how glorious
life on earth would Be; there would be no need for man to aspire to
Paradise, For the earth itself would become a replica of Heaven. This is
the spirit and aim of Islam, the Islam-Original called "Shiaism".

**How was the Qur'an, the Final Word of God, Acquired?**

It is a well-known historic fact that every religious Scripture
revealed before the Holy Qur'an suffered alterations, additions and
subtractions; some have even disappeared altogether. Leaving aside the
ancient ones, take for instance the case of Jesus, the most recent of
the Apostles of God before the Holy Prophet Muhammad. What is available
today is a collection of mere stories told by different persons at
different times based upon often contradictory records.

And even this has undergone revision, with various translations of the
text, hailed by some and contested by others; for example the Douai
Bible of the Catholic Church, the King James Version of the Protestant
Churches and the Diaglott of the Watchtower Society, etc. This
destructive activity by man was tolerated by the Almighty Providence
while the Scriptures were being tampered with, awaiting the Final and
All-Comprehensive revelation which was yet to be given to the human
race.

This was revealed to the Holy Prophet Muhammad, the Last of the
Messengers and Warners from God. This Final Word of God, the Qur'an, was
sent down with a challenging Under taking and assurance that none
thereafter shall ever be able to tamper with it, meddle with it, as the
Omnipotent Author of the Word and its Revealer Himself would take care
of its Originality, Arrangement, Completeness and Security:

Verily, We have sent down the Reminder (the Qur'an), and verily We
(Ourself) for it will certainly be the Guardian. (15:9) On Us is its
(Qur'an's) Compilation, its Recitation and its Explanation.

Before leaving this world, the Holy Prophet declared:

I leave among you Two great (very important) things, the Book of God
and my Ahlul-Bait; should ye be attached to these Two, never, never
shall ye go astray, and verily never, never shall these Two be separated
from one another.

This Apostolic announcement clearly states that:

1 The Holy Qur'an was there in the form of a complete Book.

2 It was there in the hands of the people, for the Holy Prophet says,
"I leave among (or in the midst of) you".

3 To avoid going astray, people should hold fast to both, the Qur'an
and the Ahlul-Bait, and not to others.

4 The Ahlul-Bait will always be with the Qur'an, and the Qur'an in its
original form and with its correct meanings will be only with the Holy
Ahlul-Bait. 5 As the Holy Prophet says, these Two will never be
separated from each other. As long as the Qur'an is there in this world,
there will be one of the Ahlul-Bait (the Imam of the age).

The historic recital of the Qur'an by the severed head of Husain, the
King of Martyrs, at Karbala, proved that a member of the Ahlul-Bait,
even when killed, is the custodian of the Qur'an and can deliver it to
the world.

The Word of the Holy Prophet Muhammad was the Revealed Word of God The
Holy Prophet Muhammad spoke nothing but the revelation from the Lord.
This unique character, or exclusive distinction, of the Holy Prophet has
been declared by the Holy Qur'an as well as in the ancient Scriptures:

Nor does he speak of (his own) inclination; It (the wording) is naught
but a revelation revealed (unto him.) The Holy Prophet has been
identified as such even in ancient Scriptures:

For Moses truly said unto the fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise unto you of your brethren like unto me; him shall ye hear in
all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.

And it shall come to pass that every soul which will not hear "that
Prophet" shall be destroyed from among the people. I will raise them up
a Prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and will put my
words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall
command him.

And it shall come to pass that whosoever will not hearken unto my words
which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. (Deuteronomy
18:18, 19)

Howbeit, when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you unto all
truth for he shall not speak of himself but whatsoever he shall hear,
that shall he speak; he will show you things to come. (St John's Gospel,
16:13)


**Islam: What does it Mean, and Who are the Muslims?**

Islam literally means Surrender, Submission, that is, the complete
handing over of one's self to another. Islam also means Peace. Islam as
a religion means an unconditional and complete submission to the
All-Supreme and the Absolute Sovereign authority of the Lord of the
Universe. In other words, the total submission of the individual will to
the Universal will of the Lord. Whoever does this is a Muslim. In fact,
once one does this one's individual will ceases to operate and it
becomes subject to the Universal will of the Lord. In relation to this
state of submission, the Holy Qur'an declares:

Say: Verily my prayer and my sacrifice, my life and my death (are all,
only) for God, the Lord of the worlds. (6:163)

Verily the religion with God is ISLAM (submission to God's will); and
those to whom the Book had been given did not differ, but after the
knowledge (of the Truth) had come unto them... (3:18) Yea! whosoever
submitteth his self (entirely) to God and is a doer of good, for him
there shall be his reward with the Lord, on such shall be no fear, nor
shall they grieve.

(2:112)

And who is better in religion than he who resigneth himself entirely
unto God and is righteous, and followeth the creed of Abraham, the
Upright One, And God took Abraham for a Friend. (4:125)

What is demanded of a human being, or that which is acceptable to God,
is nothing short of Islam: This day have I perfected for you your
religion, and have completed My favour on you, and chosen for you ISLAM
(to be) the Religion. (5:3) The following verse gives the last word on
the choice of a religion for mankind: And whosoever seeketh any religion
other than Islam (total resignation unto God) never shall it be accepted
from him, and in the next world he shall be among the losers. (3:84)

**SHIAISM: THE ORIGINAL ISLAM**

Shiaism: What is it and Why is it So Called?

Shiaism is another name for the original Qur'anic faith. In short, it
is nothing more nor less than the Islam-Original. It is an historic fact
that, no sooner had the Holy Prophet departed from this earth, than the
vested interests of man gained hold on matters secular as well as
spiritual and started making additions, subtractions and alterations to
the original teachings of Islam, misinterpreting the Word of God and
inventing counterfeit traditions in the name of the Holy 'Prophet. The
Holy Prophet, before departing from this world, had openly and
repeatedly made the following guiding announcement for the people to
abide by:

Of whomsoever lam the Lord, this Ali is the Lord And the Holy Prophet,
before his departure, declared:

I leave behind me amidst you Two weighty (very important) things, the
Book of God (the Holy Qur'an) and my Ahlul-Bait. Should ye be attached
to these Two, never, never shall ye go astray, and never shall these Two
be separated from one another until they meet me at the Spring of
"Kauthar" (ie. Paradise). (Tafsir-e-Kabir, Tafsir-e-Durre Manthur and
others)

The Holy Prophet further announced:

The likeness of my Ahlul-Bait is that of the Ark of Noah. whosoever
getting into it is saved and who soever turneth from it is drowned and
lost. (Hadith)

People neglected the Ahlul-Bait and began following their own ways and
created what they called their own Schools of Islam, and, as deviators
from the prescribed course, called themselves Muslims. Then those who
had faithfully followed the original teachings of the Holy Qur'an and
remained faithful to the course prescribed by the Holy Prophet had of
necessity to distinguish themselves from those who had discarded the
divinely established guides, the Ahlul-Bait. So those who followed Ali
alter the Holy Prophet called themselves Shias of Ali and the
Islam-Original became identified as "Shiaism". This was quite in
accordance with the Bait, or allegiance to Ali, required by the Holy
Prophet at Ghadeer-e-Khum. But others disregarded it and paid allegiance
to their own chosen leaders.

Thus Shiaism stands for the Islam-Original and Shias for the true
Muslims faithfully attached to the Holy Prophet and the Holy Ahlul-Bait.
In fact the Shia-Ithna-Ashari School is the Qur'anic Islam of the Holy
Prophet and the rest are the newly-established sects and sub-sects
deviating from the original course.

**The Most Misrepresented and Misunderst9od School, the School of the
Islam-Original**

Islam in general is no doubt misrepresented and misunderstood on
account of the antagonistic propaganda by Christian missionaries.
However, the most misrepresented and misinterpreted of all is Shiaism,
which is the most misunderstood of all the religions of the world. The
reason for this is the absence of literature about it in languages other
than Arabic, Persian and Urdu.

A very brief note on the fundamental doctrines, with a few leading
verses of the Qur'an on which the ideology is based, will help the
reader to see that Shiaism, the Islam-Original, is the superb and
unchallengeable pure Qur'anic Faith presented to mankind by the Holy
Prophet and preserved By the Ahlul-Bait.

The notes are not intended to lengthen the work, but have the sacred
purpose of establishing a better understanding of the Truth and creating
the love and fellowship among the various groups of the human family on
earth.

**The Classification of Religious Knowledge**

The knowledge of the religion of Islam has been classified as
follows:

1 UsooI-e-deen, the fundamental roots and basis of the religion; 2
Fur-e-deen, the articles of the practice of the faith.

In the following pages I will deal only with the first, the Usool-e-
deen, the basis of Islam.


