Some Truths of Islam
====================

**1 The Whole Humanity is One Family**

There could be no means for uniting mankind into one single brotherhood
than by convincing them that all mankind is one family, children of the
same parents.

Mankind was but one people; and God sent apostles as bearers of good
tidings and warners and sent down with them the Book with the Truth that
it might judge between men in that wherein they differed; and none
differed therein; but those very (people) to whom it was given, after
clear signs had come unto them, did revolt among themselves; whereupon
God guided those who believed, by His Will, regarding that which the
people differed about the Truth, and verily God guideth whomsoever He
willeth to the Right Path. (2:213)

Besides this, there are other verses which declare that men and women
were created from one single self It can easily be imagined how far the
belief in the truth about the unity of the human race would go to
sublimate the animal nature in man, to create in him the feliow4eeling
for others of his kind and thereby establish a human brotherhood on
earth. Unfortunately, in the West, the Christian world, there is racism,
and in the East our Hindu brothers observe the caste system. The Holy
Qur'an declares the unity of the human race and Islam lays great stress
upon this truth.

**2 The Mystery of the Individual Differences and the Unity of
Purpose**

Though man has been given physical and mental faculties necessary for
his life and progress, not all men are gifted in equal measure. Some
have certain gifts which others do not have. Some excel in physical
strength while others are gifted with great mental powers. People differ
in the level of intelligence and aptitude. Some are gifted writers, some
are convincing orators, some are wonderful artists and some are
enchanting poets, some are inventive scientists or mathematicians, and
some are powerful administrators.

These are gifts of the Omnipotent Creator, intuitive mysteries with
which the nature of man is endowed. The fact Seems clear that the
members of the human race were destined to be dependent upon each other.
If all had been endowed with exactly the same gifts, people would not
have needed the help of each other and there would have been no social
life upon earth. As man needs his fellow men, he also needs some one
with special gifts to explain the very mystery of his life, the way to
live, and life in the hereafter. Only those informed by the Creator
Himself and chosen for this purpose fulfil this function, and they are
the Apostles of God and the Imams (Guides).

**3 From God alone can come Guidance**

Man could not create himself He was created by a Self-Existing
Sovereign Power, and Omnipotent Independent Authority. He was brought
into an already-Existing world. Left to himself he could never have been
able to guide himself. The ever-Extending universe with its astonishing
energies, functioning in perfect harmony, indicates the causative will
which is Omnipotent and All-Wise and with purpose. The knowledge of the
purpose of creation is essential to man if he is to adjust himself to
the harmony of his environment, talk from it and giving to it in return.
Of the purpose in the creation of the universe, the Holy Qur'an says:

Thou who remember God, standing, sitting and reclining on their sides,
think (seriously) of the creation of heaven and earth; saying, "O Our
Lord! Thou hast not created (all) this in vain! Glory be to Thee! Save
us then from the torment of the fire (Hell)." (3:190)

**4 All Man-made distinctions annihilated**

Islam demands the end of all man-made distinctions in human society.
Such distinctions of caste, colour, community and race were outlawed in
the declaration:

o ye people! Verily We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you in nations and tribes, that ye may recognise each other; Verily
the most honoured of you with God is the one of you who guardeth
(himself) the most (against evil), verily God is the All-Knowing, the
All-Aware. (49:13) The above declaration Clearly states that the
distribution of the human family into tribes and families is only for
identification, and the distinction within the human race shall be based
only on the degree of piety and personal excellence of each individual,
man or woman. 5 The Sources of Knowledge: man specially equipped Man has
been blessed with special powers and faculties which no other creature
on earth owns. But, like other animals, man has eyes, ears, nose, tongue
and skin. Through these doorways man acquires knowledge of the sensual
world.

But man has the gift of special intellect by which he can ponder the
mystery of life, choose his own way of life, and his welfare or
perdition in the life hereafter. if man controls his sensual nature by
the use of the great gift of conscience and reasoning he will succeed;
if he allows his conscience to be ruled by degrading sensual forces, he
will lose the game of life. This is the Test. 6 God is Nearest to
Everything Man is warned that God is nearest to man, nearer thin his own
Life-Vein:

And indeed We created man, and know We whatever thoughts whispereth he
unto himself and We are nearer to him than his very life-vein. (50:16) 7
Man directed to seek the medium to reach the Lord O ye who believe! Fear
ye God! And seek ye the medium of approach until Him. (5:35) 8 No
Compulsion to Faith Since the Truth has been clearly revealed against
falsehood, through the Holy Qur'an, Islam has sounded an open warning
against compulsion to faith: No compulsion be in religion; Indeed truth
has been made manifestly distinct from error; therefore he who
disbelieveth the rebels (false deities) and believeth in God hath indeed
laid hold on the strongest handle which cannot be broken; and verily God
is All-Hearing, All- Knowing. (2:256)

**9 Good and Evil promised to be Individually**

Rewarded and Punished

Islam charges every individual man and woman with personal
responsibility to make his or her own way to heaven or hell by being
good and doing good, or by being evil and doing evil in this life. Life
on earth has been said to be the season for cultivation of the life
hereafter. As one sows here so shall one reap in the hereafter, in the
life after death. As the right way to eternal bliss has been clearly
shown, all have been warned through the following about the Day of Final
Judgment:

On that day shall come out people (from their graves) in groups to be
shown their (own) deeds. (99:6)

Then he who hath done an atom-weight of good shall see It. (99:7)

And he who hath done an atom-weight of evil shall see it. (99:8)

From this comes great encouragement to do good and to shun evil.

**10 No Physical Eye can ever see God**

Vision perceiveth Him not, and He perceiveth (all) vision; He is the
Subtle, the All-Aware. (6:104) Hence, it is impossible to see God in
Person at any time in this life or in the next.

**11 The Word of the Holy Prophet is Final**

And it is not for a believer, man or woman, to have any choice in a
matter when God and His Apostle have decided the matter; and whoever
disobeyeth God and His Apostle, indeed he hath truly gone astray.
(33:36)

**12 Speaking ill of the Holy Prophet**

Those who speak ill of or hurt the Holy Prophet by acting against his
will or command, or by hurting the Holy Ones or killing their issue, the
Ahlul-Bait, the Holy Imams and their devotees shall be punished:

Surely those who hurt God and His apostle, God hath cursed them in this
world and hereafter and he hath prepared for them a terrible
chastisement

**13 The importance of the Choice of a Leader**

On the Day of Judgment every one will be called, along with his Imam,
the leader whom he has followed in his life: Remember the Day (of
Judgment) when We will summon every people with their Imam (leader);
then whosoever is given his book in his right hand, these shall read
books (with pleasure), and they shall not be dealt with in the slightest
unjustly. (17:71)

who will be better than the Holy Ahlul-Bait whom God Himself purified
(33:33)? The Imam is he who embraces all things. The Holy Prophet
declared: "Ana Madeenatul wa Alliyyun Babuha." ("I am the City of
Knowledge and Ali its Gate") Ali is the Gate of the City of Knowledge
and the ever-triumphant Lion of God, a distinction held by Ali and by
none other.

**14 The Identification of a Genuine Heavenly Guide**

If a man sincerely seeks the help of his Creator Lord to find a genuine
heavenly guide, there is the Holy Qur'an, God's final word, to help him.
It is the declared promise of the All-Merciful Lord to show the right
way to those who seek him. The first condition is sincerity in seeking
the divine help:

And those who strive hard for Us, certainly will We guide them in Our
ways; and verily God is (always) with those who do good. (29:69) Say
thou (O Our Apostle Muhammad!), "Of your associates is there any one who
can guide unto truth?" Say thou, 'It is God alone Who guideth unto
truth; Is then He Who guideth unto truth more worthy to be followed or
he who himself goeth not aright unless he be guided? What then hath
befallen you? How (ill) ye judge?" (10:35)

What! Is he who goeth along grovelling on his face better guided, or he
who walketh upright upon the straight path?" (67:22)

Thus a genuine heavenly guide is he who never needs any education or
guidance from any mortal in this world. He is sent into the world
divinely conditioned with guidance as were all the apostles from God,
the Last one of them the Holy Prophet Muhammad and the holy Thirteen of
his godly family, ie. the Twelve Holy Imams and the Holy Lady of Light
Fatema Zahra (the only daughter of the Holy Prophet, who was the wife of
the first Holy Imam Ali ibne Abi Taleb, and the "mother?' of the other
Eleven Holy Ones.)

**15 Blind Following**

Professing a creed, blindly following a crowd, or joining any religious
order for any material benefit is quite different from adopting a faith
with genuine conviction, knowing the truth therein after a thorough
study of its fundamentals and reasoning them out against
counter-arguments. Islam discourages any blind following, and abhors the
exploitation of the ignorance of poor illiterates among the
poverty-stricken masses of the slums, and is vehemently opposed to
attracting any one or bribing any one with promises of material benefits
or social or economic progress in order to swell the ranks of its
adherents.

The only aim of Islam is to educate the members of the human family
with the truth about the Absolute Sovereignty of the Only True God and
the need for every creature to submit voluntarily to the All- Supreme
Authority of the Creator Lord of the universe. Islam invites every
awakened mind of the human world to a serious study of the mystery of
the creation of life, the truth about the Omnipotent Originator, so that
people may raise themselves from the abyss of material degradation and
ascend to the heavenly heights of eternal spiritual bliss. Islam accepts
only the independent judgment of the individual without coercion or
pressure of any kind other than that of his own conscience.

**16 Man charged with Personal Responsibility for being Guided
Aright**

Man had been deluded by the false belief in an unconditional escape
from punishment for his wickedness by supposed atonement through
man-made gods and goddesses. Islam dealt a death blow to such false
imagination which allowed people to act without restraint in confidence
of redemption. Islam charges man with the personal and individual
responsibility for holding the right and correct faith and bearing his
own burdens.

whosoever getteth guided aright, verily he getteth guided aright for
his own self and he who goeth astray, verily he goeth astray against his
own self nor shall the bearer of a burden bear the burden of another;
And we chastise not (any people) until We raise an apostle (among them).
(17:15)

And no bearer shall bear the burden of another; and if the heavy4aden
one should cry for (another bearer to carry) its burden, (even) aught of
it shall not be carried, and even if he be near of kin; Thou canst but
warn those who fear their Lord unseen and keep up regular prayer; And
whosoever purifieth (himself), he only purifieth for his own self And
unto God (alone) is the destination (of all). (35:18)

**17 The Individual Liberty or Freedom of Choice announced**

Having shown the right way against the wrong one, every human soul has
been given the freedom of choosing his own way to the life hereafter:
Verily have We shown him the (Right) way, be he grateful or ungrateful
(76:3)

Let those who blindly criticise Islam and its Holy Founder, attributing
compulsion to the spread of the Qur'anic faith, dispassionately and
impartially judge, in view of the above Qur'anic declaration and also
verse 2:256 whether there be any room for doubt about the mission of the
Holy Teacher.

**18 The Individual and Personal Responsibility of every man and
woman**

Islam charges man with the individual responsibility to take the right
path on earth, declaring that whatever a soul does, be it good or evil,
it is for or against the soul itself:

whosoever getteth guided aright, verily he getteth guided aright for
his own self and he who goeth astray, verily he goeth astray against his
own self nor shall the bearer of a burden bear the burden of another;
And we chastise not (any people) until We raise an apostle (among them).
(17:15)

Whosoever doeth good, it is for his own self and whosoever doeth evil,
it is against it; and thy Lord is not unjust unto the servants.
(41:46)

whoever doeth good, it is for his own self and whoever doeth evil, it
is against his own self then unto your Lord ye shall be returned
(45:15)

**19 The Qur'anic Formula for Following the Right**

In a single sentence, the Holy Qur'an gives man the formula for a sure
way to follow the Right path:

No compulsion be in religion; Indeed truth has been made manifestly
distinct from error; therefore he who disbelieveth the rebels (false
deities) and believeth in God hath indeed laid hold on the strongest
handle which cannot be broken; and verily God is All-Hearing, All-
Knowing. (2:256)

**20 The Decree of the Holy Imam**

The decree of the Masoom (the Sixth Holy 'main) with regard to Ijtehad
is not the only tradition; there are, in fact, many undisputed
traditions from other Imams establishing the institution of Ijtehad,
prescribing the minutest details of its functioning, a brief outline of
which is given below.

The decree of the Holy Imam is as follows:

Ammo Hawadisal Waqi'aat, Far 'jeoo ila ruwate Ahadeesenafa innahom
hujati alaikum Wa ana Hujjatullah ("In all the events of life, refer ye
to those who bear our traditions, they are the authority over you on my
behalf and I am the authority on behalf of God.")

of the many declarations of the other Imams, two are outstanding. One
is from Hazrate Imam Jafar ibne Muhammad As-Sadiq, known as the
Maqool-el-Omar-bin Hanzala (the tradition of Omar ibne Hanzala); the
other is from the Eleventh Holy Imam Husain al-Askari.

**21 Taqleed**

The best protection afforded to Shiaism against raids by Satan and his
disciple missionaries is the ordinance about Taqleed (16:43), or to
abide always by the A'li or the most learned one called the Mujtahid.
This course always guides one to the right practice of the faith and
protects him from committing any excesses and from onslaughts by Satanic
forces.

Taqleed has also been misinterpreted in the innovation of the Mureeds
with blind following of the Pirs. Be it known that being guided by a
Mujtahid in practice of the faith has nothing in common with this blind
following. Taqleed is used only of scholars who have reached the level
of Itjehad (the ability to interpret the Holy Qur'an and the genuine
traditions of the Holy Prophet). In matters of doubt about the practice
of the faith, Furu-e-Deen or articles of faith Usool-e-Deen, following
any one else is Haram (prohibited). For not every one can be expected to
know all the minute details about the practice of the faith or correctly
interpret the Holy Qur'an, the Hadith and the sayings of the Holy
Prophet.

The highest authority in knowledge and piety need only be followed in
the case of Fatwa or concerning the law; for the application of the law,
to follow the Ijtehad is sufficient. Shiaism, the Islam-Original, has
sounded a caution against the ruinous effects of unqualified
administration of justice. The following is the decree of the Sixth Holy
Imam, Jafar ibne Muhammad As-Sadiq, the Regulator of the Shia faith:

Any one who takes this seat, save a Prophet of God, or the Successor to
the prophet, is an evil one.

This declaration warns that any unqualified one (lacking the authority
from the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imam) who assumes the seat of Qaza'at
(Justice) will be none but the evil one. Thus a Qazi (judge) must be a
Mujtahid, qualified under the this declaration. While condemning the
yielding to the rule of Taghoot, ie. authority without divine sanction,
the Sixth Holy Imam said that, instead of submitting to such a tyrant,
the people must seek the greatest scholar, who knows the traditions, the
sanctions, the prohibitions and the rulings and accept him as Judge and
Ruler. If he gives a ruling which is unacceptable, it will be an offence
against God's Sovereignty, which is almost a Shirk (recognition of an
authority other than God's.)

The definition and requirements of Ijtehad and Taqleed given below are
those prescribed by the Masoom (the Twelfth Holy Imam), as ordained by
the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnat which are an intrinsic part of the system
of Divine Sovereignty and Absolute Theocracy within the meaning of the
word "Islam", complete submission to the Absolute Sovereignty of God.

When the period of codification and consolidation of the Kitab and
Sunnat was completed, the age of the Imamat serving that purpose came to
an end. Thus the seclusion of the Twelfth Imam occurred, though his
hidden existence continues as a link between God and His creation. The
Imams declared the institution of Ijtehad as the sole directive
authority on their behalf to lead men on the path of submission to God
in all matters within the Kitab and Sunnat. In other words, Ijtehad and
Taqleed are supplementary to Imamat, which is, in turn, supplementary to
Risalat (Apostleship), which is the' manifestation of the Divine
Sovereignty. There is no room for any individual view or choice, but the
door is left open for any one, irrespective of race or place, to quality
to the level of an Ijtehad.

**22 The Definition of "Ijtehad"**

Ijtehad literally means an effort to interpret and explain the divine
orders, rules and regulations of the Holy Qur'an and the authentic
sayings of the Holy Prophet and the apostolic Imams. It does not mean
using one's discretion in the findings parallel to the Qur'an and the
Sunnat. Any one who has the capacity to understand and interpret the
divine laws, rules and regulations and is of outstanding learning,
knowledge and piety, can be a Mujtahid. Any one who has not reached that
level is a layman and must follow one who has reached that standard.

Where there are several men of equal standard, but who differ in their
decisions, the layman can choose to follow any one of them, and where
these Mujtahids differ in their accomplishments, the best among them
should be followed. if one is better in knowledge and the other better
in piety, the latter is to be followed.

In trying to find the best Mujtahid, the layman should refer to the
evidence of competent and pious scholars of Islamic Theology. By the
collection of these evidences, one can easily decide for himself who is
the best. This is the best method used throughout history of the Niabat
of the Imam after the Ghaibat There is no room for election or counting
votes, nor is there any group to appoint an ecclesiastical head as in
the Papal system of Christianity. Nor is it the Pin and the Mureedi
practised by some sections of the Muslims as a parallel to Imamat The
qualifications for Itjehad are recognised and measurable, unlike the
qualifications for Piri which are neither fixed nor measurable.

It should be noted that the question of following the opinion of the
best in knowledge and piety is confined to such questions in which
Mujtahids differ; the question of which to follow does not arise in
matters unanimously accepted by all Mujtahids.

For the administration of theological centres and other religious
services, any pious Mujtahid is competent for the position, and if any
pious Mujtahid offers to take on the task, another Mujtahid should not
stand in his way, but should help him.

**23 Mere Verbal Profession of the Faith is not Sufficient**

Every one will be tried in his faith to prove to himself that his
profession if bona fide:

what! Do people imagine that they will be let in by saying, "We
Believe!" and they will not be fried? (29:2)

We will surely test you with something of fear and hunger and loss of
wealth and lives and fruits; and give glad tidings to the patient ones.
who, when misfortune befalleth them, say, "Verily we are God" and verily
unto Him shall we return."

Those are they on whom are the blessings from their Lord and (His)
Mercy; and they are the ones that are (rightly) guided (2:155-157)

**24 The Real Islamic Piety Explained**

To all hypocritical show of formal observance of the faith without
sincerity in its practical expression, Islam has dealt a death blow in
the following decree:

It is not righteousness that ye turn your faces towards the East and
the West; righteousness is rather one who believeth in God and the Last
day and the angels, the Book and the Apostles, and giveth his wealth out
of love for Him to the kindred and the orphans and the poor and the
wayfarer and the need' and for those in bondage; and establisheth prayer
and payeth the poor-rate; And those who fulfil their promise when they
make a promise and the patient ones in distress and affliction and in
the time of war; these are they who are the Truthful and these are they
who are the pious. (2:177)

**25 Man Should Always be with the Truthful Ones**

Man was ordained to be always with the Truthful Ones, those who do not
utter a lie. The great lie is Shirk, the belief that there is another
besides God, or worshipping false deities. Who else can be the Truthful
ones other than the Holy Ahlul-Bait who never in their lives bowed down
to any besides God and are the ones whom God says He Himself purified
(33:33).

O ye who believe! Fear ye God and be ye (always) with the Truthful
ones. (9:119)

**26 Taqiah**

Hiding the faith, giving out a mere verbal profession to save one's
life. This is a Qur'anic ordinance.

And said a man who was a Believer, from among the people of Pharaoh,
who used to conceal his faith: "What! Slay ye a man for saying, 'My Lord
is God" and indeed he hath brought unto you clear proofs (of his
mission) from your Lord? while if he be a liar, on him will be his life;
and if he be truthful, then will afflict you some of what he warneth you
(with); Verily, God guideth not him who is extravagant (and a liar)."
(40:28)

And there came a man from the remotest part of the city, running (and)
said, "O Moses! Verily the chiefs are consulting to slay thee. Begone
(from here at once)! Verily, unto thee lam of the sincere advisers."
(28:20)

**27 Intercession Available**

Intercession for redemption against deserved punishment is available,
not from false deities, but from those divinely qualified to do it:

who is he who can intercede unto Him but by His Permission? (2:255)

They shall not own intercession, save he who has made a covenant with
the Beneficent God. (19:87)

On that day shall avail not intercession (of any) save (that of) whom
hath permitted God, and whose word He is pleased with. (20:109)

Knoweth He what is before them and what is behind them, and they can
not intercede but for him whom He approveth, and they, of His fear,
tremble. (21:28)

And will avail not aught any intercession with Him save Of him whom He
hath permitted (34:23)


