Section 7: The Coming of the Day of Judgment
============================================

Surah An-Naml - Verses 83-84
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلّ‌ِ اُمَّةٍ فَوْجاً مّـِمَّن يُكَذّ‌ِبُ
بِاَيَاتِنَا فَهُمْ يوزَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّي إِذَا جَآءُوا قَالَ أَكَذَّبْتُم بِاَيَاتِي وَلَمْ تُحِيطُوا
بِهَا عِلْماً أَمَّاذَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***83. “And on the Day when We shall muster out of every nation a party
from those who belied Our revelations, and they shall be kept in
rank.”***  
***84. “Till when they come (before their Lord), He will say: ‘Did you
reject My revelations while you had no comprehensive knowledge of them?
Or what was it you did?’”***

This verse indicates that Allah shall muster only a part out of every
nation, while in Hereafter all people will be mustered. This makes it
clear that the above verse does not relate to Hereafter but it relates
to ***/raj‘at/ ‘return to life’*** in which a group of men will be
quickened before Resurrection.

So, this verse says:

***“And on the Day when We shall muster out of every nation a party from
those who belied Our revelations, and they shall be kept in rank.”***

The Arabic word /hašr/ means ‘to cause to camp’, and ‘to send out a
group from their place and to move them toward the battle-field, and the
like’.

The Arabic word /fauj/, as Raqib says in Mufradat, means ‘a group who
travel speedily’.

The Qur’anic word ***/yuza‘un/*** means ‘keeping a crowd of people in a
manner that a group of them joins another’ and this meaning is usually
applied upon some tremendous crowds, the like of which was used for the
troops of Solomon in this Surah.

Thus, the verse, on the whole, indicates that there will come a day when
Allah will raise to life a group from any nation and will send them
forth for the retribution of their deeds.

Many of the commentators have considered this holy verse as a reference
for the subject of /raj‘at/ ‘return to life’ and the return of some evil
doers and good doers to this world at the threshold of the Hereafter,
since if it was referring to the Resurrection and Hereafter the
application of the holy phrase ‘out of every nation a party’ would not
be correct, because in Hereafter all people will be mustered, as the
Qur’an in Surah Al-Kahf, No. 18, verse 47 says:

***“…and We muster them nor shall We leave out any one of them.”***

Another reference is that before this verse the words were about the
signs of Resurrection at the end of this world, and the coming verses
also point to the same subject, therefore, it is not probable that the
verses before and after it speak about the events which happen before
Resurrection, but the middle verse speaks of the Resurrection.

The agreement of the verses requires that all of them speak about the
events before the Resurrection.

There are also many narrations in this ground that we will point to them
when commenting the meaning of /raj‘at/ (return to life).

The concept of ‘Raj‘at’ is one of the famous creeds of Shi‘ah, the
commentary of which, in a short sentence, is as follows. After the
advent of Hadrat Mahdi (as) and at the threshold of Resurrection a group
of ‘true sincere believers’ and a group of ‘very vicious disobedient
infidels’ will return to this world.

The former group (true believers) will pass some degrees of development
and the latter group will receive some harsh retributions.

The Late Sayyid Murtada, who is one of the dignitaries of Shi‘ah, says:

*“After the advent of Hadrat Mahdi, Allah, the Exalted, will cause some
of those who have passed away aforetime to return to this world in order
that they take part in the rewards and honours of his victory and
observe his government throughout the world, and He will cause a group
of obstinate enemies to return to this world to punish them.”*

Then, Sayyid Murtada adds:

*“The reasoning of this sect is that no intellectual person can deny the
power of Allah upon this thing, because it is not an impossible matter,
while some of our opponents deny this subject so earnestly that it seems
improbable and they count it impossible.”*

Then he adds:

*“The proof for the legitimacy of this belief is the consensus of
Twelvers, because none of them has ever opposed this belief.”*[^1]

It is understood, of course, from the words of some of the ancient
scholars of Shi’ah, and the Late Tabarsi’s in Majma‘-ul-Bayan that a
very minority of Shi‘ah did not believe in this belief and commented
/raj‘at/ in the sense of the return of the domination and government of
Ahl-ul-Bayt (as), not the return of persons and that the dead be
quickened, but their opposition is in such a way that it does not harm
consensus.

However, there are a lot of statements here that, in order not to go out
of the way of commentary discussion, they are referred to in short as
follows:

1- No doubt, the act of restoring some dead persons to life in this
world is not one of the impossible things, as the restoring all human
being to life in Hereafter is quietly possible.

To surprise for such an affair is like the wonder of a group of pagans
of the Age of Ignorance concerning the subject of Resurrection, and
mocking it is similar to their mockery upon Resurrection, because
intellect does not consider it impossible; and the Power of Allah is so
vast that all these affairs are easy for Him.

2- According to the Holy Qur’an, the occurrence of /raj‘at/ (return to
life) has happened for five instances of the former nations:

A. The first instance is about a prophet who was passing by a township
the walls of which were ruined and the bones of the bodies of its people
were scattered over there. He asked himself how Allah might restore
these dead bodies to life.

Then Allah caused him to die and after one hundred years He restored him
to life and asked him how long he had tarried. The prophet in answer
said he tarried for one day or a part of a day. But Allah said he
tarried for one hundred years.[^2]

Whether this prophet is ‘Uzayr or other prophet it is the same, the
important matter is the life after death in this world.

The Qur’an says:

***“…so Allah made him die a hundred years, then He raised him up…”***

B. The Holy Qur’an in Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 243 also speaks
about another group who, being afraid of death and, with pretext of
plague, restrained from going to the Holy War. They went out of their
houses and Allah issued the command of death for them and then they were
restored to life.

***“…Then Allah said to them; ‘Die’ (and they died); then He restored
them to life…”***

C. Again in Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verses 55 and 56, concerning the
Children of Israel, we recite that a group of them, after asking Moses
for seeing Allah, died because of thunderbolt, and, the Qur’an says:

***“Then We raised you up after your death in order that haply you might
be thankful.”***

D. In Surah Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 110, among miracles of Jesus (as)
we recite:

***“…and you did raise the dead (from their graves), by My leave…”***

This shows that Jesus (as) used to use this miracle of his repeatedly to
raise the dead, and this is counted as a kind of /raj‘at/ for some men.

E. Concerning the dead body and finding his murderer, the Children of
Israel were quarrelling. Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 73 says:

***“So, We said: ‘strike him (the corps) with a part of it (the
sacrificed cow)’. Thus, Allah gives life to the dead and shows you of
His signs, so that you might understand.”***

In addition to these five instances, there are also some other instances
mentioned in the Qur’an, like the story of ‘the Companions of the Cave’
which was something similar to /raj‘at/ (return to life); and the story
of Hadrat Ebrahim and the four birds that, after killing them, returned
to life again in order to illustrate the possibility of Resurrection of
human beings for him.

This is also notable in the subject of /raj‘at/.

However, how is it possible that a person accepts the Qur’an as a
heavenly Book and, with these clear verses, does also reject the
possibility of /raj‘at/ (return to life)?

Basically, is /raj‘at/ something other than returning to life after
death? Is /raj‘at/ not counted as a small example of Resurrection in
this small world? He who accepts Resurrection with its vast scale, how
can he deny the subject of /raj‘at/ (return to life in this world)?

3- Whatever was said, up to here, proved the possibility of the
occurrence of /raj‘at/ (return to life), and there are also many
traditions narrated from Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) which confirm its happening.
Since our discussion has not the capacity of mentioning all of them, it
is enough to refer to the number of them which the Late ‘Allamah Majlesi
has collected and introduced.

He says:

*“How is it possible that a person believes the truthfulness of the
statements of Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) but he does not accept the widely
transmitted traditions of /raj‘at/, the explicit traditions the number
of which reaches about two hundred and that more than forty reliable
persons of the narrators and famous scholars have referred to them in
more than fifty books. If these traditions are not widely transmitted,
what kind of tradition is widely transmitted?”*[^3]

### A Few Traditions as Examples

1- Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“The first one to whom the earth (grave) will be cleft and he will
return to the world is Husayn-ibn-Ali (as).”*

2- Imam Baqir (as) said to ‘Bukayr-ibn-’A‘yan’:

*“Verily the Messenger of Allah (S) and Ali (as) will return to life.”*

3- Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“There will come with Gha’im (as) twenty seven men from behind Kufah;
fifteen persons of them are from the people of Moses (as), those who
used to guide (others) to the Truth and to call (them) to it; and seven
persons of the Companions of Kahf; and Yusha‘-ubnu-Nun, Salman,
’Abu-Dujanat-il-’Ansari, Miqdad, and Malik-i-’Ashtar will be his helpers
and governors.”*[^4]

Imam Sadiq (as) in a tradition says:

*“Verily /raj‘at/ (return to life) is not general but it is informal,
because only a group will return to life that have pure faith or pure
infidelity.”*[^5]

This holy tradition defines the philosophy of /raj‘at/, because a group
of sincere believers who had encountered some barriers on the path of
spiritual perfection in their life and their perfection remained
incomplete, the Divine Wisdom requires that they continue their path of
perfection by returning again to this world, so that they can be
witnesses of the worldly government of Truth and Justice and participate
in building this government, since participation in the formation of
such a government is one of the greatest honours.

On the contrary, some of the hypocrites and obstinate tyrants, besides
their special retribution in Hereafter, must tolerate some punishments
in this world similar to what the people of Pharaoh, ‘Aad, Thamud and
Lot tolerated, and its only way is /raj‘at/ (return to life in this
world).

During the period of /raj‘at/ (return to life in this world), the
disbelievers will be reprimanded for both their beliefs and their
behaviour.

Concerning the time when they are brought for reckoning, the verse says:

***“Till when they come (before their Lord), He will say: ‘Did you
reject My revelations while you had no comprehensive knowledge of them?
Or what was it you did?’”***

The speaker of this statement is Allah and the objective of the Qur’anic
term ***/’ayati/*** is the miracles of Divine prophets, or the
commandments of Allah, or all of them.

And the purpose of the phrase ‘you had no comprehensive knowledge’ is
that without doing any research about it and being unaware of the
reality of a matter, they began to reject it. This is the ultimate
ignorance of a person that with rather no research and having no
knowledge about something tries to deny it.

In fact, they will be asked of two things: one is their rejection while
having not any research, and the other is the deed they used to do.

If the above verse is taken as about Hereafter and Resurrection, its
meaning is clear, but if it refers to /raj‘at/ (return to life in this
world), as the agreement of the verse requires, it points to this fact
that at the time of returning some of the wrong doers to this world, the
one who is vicegerent of Allah and is the ‘master of affairs’ will
investigate them and then he will punish them in this world as much as
they deserve.

This punishment does not hinder their Hereafter punishment. It is like
the state of many of the criminals who tolerate the ‘fixed punishment
for certain crimes’ in this world and, if they do not repent, their
proper chastisement in Hereafter is reserved.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 85
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَقَعَ الْقَوْلُ عَلَيْهِم بِمَا ظَلَمُوا فَهُمْ لاَ يَنطِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***85. “And the word will be fulfilled against them because they were
unjust so they shall not speak.”***

The Divine punishment of the oppressors is decisive and the promise of
the Divine chastisement has been said to them aforetime. Of course
usually the cause and factor of the man’s afflictions is he himself.

However, concerning the punishment, this verse implies that when the
command of Allah will be issued against them, they will not have
anything to say.

It says:

***“And the word will be fulfilled against them because they were unjust
so they shall not speak.”***

This punishment is their chastisement in this world, if the verse is
commented in the sense of /raj‘at/ (return to life in this world); and
it means the chastisement of Hereafter, if the verse is commented in the
sense of Hereafter.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 86
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّا جَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ لِيَسْكُنُوا فِيهِ
وَالنَّهَارَ مُبْصِراً إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***86. “Have they not seen how We have appointed the night that they may
rest therein, and the day to give light? Verily, in this are signs for
the people who believe.”***

The function of the darkness of night in man’s tranquility of nerves,
and the light of the day in man’s activity are the scientific issues
which have been proved today.

Night is one of the bounties and mercy of Allah upon people, and it is
the sign of Divine knowledge and power, thus, ignoring the function of
the night is an example of the ‘ignorant rejection’.

These verses refer to the subjects of origin and end, and the signs of
Power and greatness of Allah (s.w.t.) in the world of existence.

The Qur’an also refers to the events of Resurrection, when it says:

***“Have they not seen how We have appointed the night that they may
rest therein, and the day to give light? Verily, in this are signs for
the people who believe.”***

This is not the first time that the Qur’an speaks about the refreshing
effects of night and day, and the system of light and darkness; and it
is not the last time, either.

This repetition is for the fact that the Qur’an is a Book for education
and training of men, and we know that the principles of education
sometimes require that a subject should be repeated and reminded in
different occurrences, so that that subject might be completely
understood.

The tranquility that can be obtained from night is a certain scientific
fact. The dark curtain of night not only is an compulsory means for the
cessation of activities of the day, but also it has a deep effect on the
nerves of men and other animals and causes them to be in a deep sleep
and rest, or as the Qur’an says, to be in a ‘silence’.

Also, scientifically there is no room for any doubt that the light of
the day has a relation with the struggle movement and activity of man
during the day which is the property of the sunlight. Sunlight not only
brightens the scene of life and makes man’s eyes active, but also it
awakens all the particles of the entity of man and makes them to move.

This verse makes manifest a part of ‘Lordly Unity’, and in view of the
fact that the true object of worship is the Lord and Administrator of
the world of existence, it nullifies the idols and causes the idolaters
to review their creeds.

It is necessary for man to note this point that he must adapt himself
with this system; to rest at night and to have effort and endeavour
during the day, so that he can be safe and active. Spending the night
like some sensual persons, and sleeping in the morning until noon, is
wrong.

It is interesting that the Arabic word /mubsir/, which originally means
‘clear-sighted’, has been used as a modifier for the day while it is a
modifier for human beings in the day. This is a kind of beautiful
emphasis for it.

This difference of meaning which is seen in the statement of the benefit
of the night and the day inside the verse, and once it says /liyaskunu
fih/ and then in another place it says /mubsiran/ may be a hint to this
fact that the main aim of the night is rest and peace, but the aim of
the light of the day is not ‘seeing’ but seeing is a means for reaching
the merits of life and enjoying them. (Be careful)

However, though this noble verse speaks directly about Monotheism and
contrivance of the world of existence, it can contain a tender hint to
the subject of Resurrection, too, because sleep is like death and
wakefulness is like life after death.

At the end, some things that are introduced as the means of peace and
tranquility are stated as follows:

1- Remembrance of Allah:

***“…Behold! By Allah’s remembrance (only) the hearts are set at
rest.”***[^6]

2- Unseen succour:

***“It is He Who sent down tranquility into the hearts of the
Believers…”***[^7]

3- Some sacred effects and objects:

***“…That the Ark of Covenant will come to you, wherein shall be a
tranquility from your Lord…”***[^8]

4- The encouragement of the Divine saints:

***“…Surely your prayers are a comfort for them…”***[^9]

5- Residence and house:

***“And Allah appointed a place of rest for you of your houses…”***[^10]

6- Spouse:

***“…He created for you mates from among yourselves, that you dwell in
tranquility with them…”***[^11]

7- The Night:

***“…We have appointed the night that they may rest therein…”***[^12]

It should be said that the occurrence of the descent of the Qur’an, the
Prophet’s ‘ascension to Heaven’, and the proper time for prayer and
supplication all are at night, though some of the deluded persons misuse
the bounty of the darkness of the night and commit some sins in it. In
the present age, people seek for tranquility somewhere else and,
therefore, they do not obtain it.

Today the world is engaged with technology, weapon, wealth, power, and
political relations and, because of losing spirituality, it cannot find
tranquility. There are also many persons who have been polluted with
narcotic matters, alcoholic liquors, sex, etc. and are completely
sinful. To find the reality in this regard, it is enough to refer to the
investigations of crimes in the world.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 87
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يُنفَخُ فِي الصُّورِ فَفَزِعَ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَن فِي
الاَرْضِ إِلاَّ مَن شآءَ اللَّهُ وَكُلٌّ أَتَوْهُ دَاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***87. “And (remind them of) The Day when the Trumpet will be blown and
those who are in the heavens and those who are in the earth shall be
terrified except him whom Allah will please, and all shall come to Him
in utter humility.”***

The destruction of the system of existence, the death of people, and
beginning of Hereafter will occur with terrible sound of trumpet, (the
Trumpet will be blown).

So, this noble verse, referring to the Resurrection and its preliminary
events, announces:

***“And (remind them of) The Day when the Trumpet will be blown and
those who are in the heavens and those who are in the earth shall be
terrified except him whom Allah will please, and all shall come to Him
in utter humility.”***

It is understood from the whole verses of the Qur’an that the Trumpet
will be blown two or three times. One of them will be at the end of the
world and at the threshold of Resurrection, when horror will encompass
all. The second time is when, by hearing it, everybody will die. (These
two Blasts of Trumpet may be the same).

The third time will be at the time of resurgence and establishment of
Hereafter when by the blown of the Trumpet quickening of the dead will
occur and all the dead return to begin a new life.

Commentators are divided in the belief that the above verse refers to
the first and second Blast or the third Blast. There are some frames of
reference both in this verse and the coming verses which involve both of
them. Some other commentators believe that it points to all of these
Blasts.

But the apparent of the verse shows that it relates to the first Blast
that occurs at the end of the world, because the Qur’anic word
***/faza‘/*** which means a fear and horror that fills the whole heart
of man is counted of the signs of this Blast; and we know that, in the
Blast of Hereafter, fear and horror is because of deeds, reckoning, and
retribution, not because of the effect of the Blast.

In other words, the apparent of the Qur’anic term ***/fa fazi‘a/,***
mentioned in the verse, indicates that this fear and horror is because
of blowing in the Trumpet which belongs to the first Blast, since not
only the last Blast does not create any horror, but also it is the cause
of life and movement, and if there is any fear at that time it is for
the deeds of man himself.

The Arabic word /nafx/ means ‘to blow’, and the word /sur/ means
‘trumpet’. When offering the commentary of Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse
68, we will explain the different ideas of the commentators concerning
its purpose.

The holy phrase ‘except him whom Allah will please’ points to those who
are good and pure, irrespective of the angels and the believers who are
in the heavens and the earth. As the result of their Faith, they will
have a special tranquility, and neither will the first Blast make them
terrified, nor the last one.

And also in the next verses we recite:

***“Whoever brings good, for him shall be better than it, and they shall
be secure from the terror on that Day.”***[^13]

The last sentence of the verse under discussion which says:

***“All shall come to Him in utter humility”***

apparently is general and there is no exception in it, because even the
prophets and saints will be humble before Him.

And Surah As-Saffat, No. 37, verses 127-128 which says:

***“…therefore they shall most surely be brought up,”***

***“Except the chosen servants of Allah, the purified ones.”,***

contain no contradiction with the generality of the verse under
discussion, because the abovementioned verse refers to the principle of
attendance in gathering-place of resurrection before Allah and secondly
refers to the attendance in the scene of reckoning the deeds.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 88
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَي الْجِبَالَ تَحْسَبُهَا جَامِدَةً وَهِيَ تَمُرُّ مَرَّ
السَّحَابِ صُنْعَ اللَّهِ الَّذِي اَتْقَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ إِنَّهُ
خَبِيرٌ بِمَا تَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***88. “And you see the mountains and think them firmly fixed but they
shall pass away as the passing away of the cloud. It is the work of
Allah Who has made everything in perfect order.*** ***Verily He is Aware
of what you do.”***

The Arabic word /sun‘/ is used for a work which is based upon knowledge,
accuracy, and skill.

The universe is moving; even the mountains which seem motionless have
motion and this motion is the sign of the Wise Power of Allah.

This verse points to another sign of the grandeur of Allah in the
expansion of the world of existence.

It says:

***“And you see the mountains and think them firmly fixed but they shall
pass away as the passing away of the cloud. It is the work of Allah Who
has made everything in perfect order…”***

The One, in Whose program of creation all these orders and accuracy are
found, is certainly aware of the deeds we do.

The verse says:

***“…Verily He is Aware of what you do.”***

Many commentators believe that the above mentioned holy verse is a hint
to the events that will happen at the threshold of Resurrection, for we
know that at the end of this mortal world and at the beginning of the
next world there will happen some great earthquakes, explosions, and
transformations wherein mountains will surely burst asunder.

This meaning is explicitly mentioned in many Suras in the end of the
Qur’an.

Of course, this verse being set among the verses of Resurrection is the
reason and evidence of this commentary.

But there are several frames of reference in the verse that verify
another commentary. For example, the abovementioned verse is of the kind
of verses of Unity and the signs of the greatness of Allah in this very
world; and it points to the ‘movement of the earth globe’, the movement
which is not sensible for us.

Thus, some parts of the verses under discussion are about Unity and some
parts are about Resurrection.

The conclusion we can take from this commentary is that these mountains
which we consider motionless are moving fast. Certainly, the movement of
these mountains, without the movement of the lands they are on them, is
meaningless. Thus, the meaning of the verse is that the earth moves fast
like the movement of the pieces of the cloud.

According to the calculations of the modern scientists, the movement of
the earth around itself is about 30 kilometers a minute, and its
rotation around the sun is more than this.

The reason why the Qur’an has put the mountains in the center of
discussion here, maybe for that mountains from the point of heaviness,
weight and firmness are referred to in parables, and for explaining the
Power of Allah, are counted a better example.

When the mountains, with this greatness and heaviness they have, move
(accompanied with the earth) by the command of Allah, His Power over
everything is proved.

However, the abovementioned verse is one of the scientific miracles of
the Qur’an. We know that the first scientists who found out the movement
of the sphere of the Earth were Galileh from Italy, and Kepernic from
Netherlands.

They introduced this idea to the world in the end of sixteenth century
and at the beginning of seventeenth century A.D., although the
authorities of the Church violently condemned them.

But the Qur’an many years before them removed the curtain from over this
fact, and announced the movement of the earth in the above form as a
sign of Unity.

Therefore, informing of the movement of mountains is among the
scientific miracles of the Qur’an, and in recognition of Allah
everything is fix and perfect in its place, as the Qur’an says about
Him:

***“Who has made every thing in perfect order.”***

Surah An-Naml - Verses 89-90
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ جَآءَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ فَلَهُ خَيْرٌ مِنْهَا وَهُم مِن فَزَعٍ
يَوْمَئِذٍ ءَامِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ جَآءَ بِالسَّيّـِئَةِ فَكُبَّتْ وُجُوهُهُمْ فِي النَّارِ هَلْ
تُجْزَوْنَ إِلاَّ مَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***89. “Whoever brings good, for him shall be better than it, and they
shall be secure from terror on that Day.”***  
***90. “And whoever brings evil, those shall be cast down on their
faces, in the (Hell) Fire; ‘Are you rewarded (for) aught except what you
used to do?’”***

One of the bounties of the Qur’an is that it has let the way open to all
people for development and happiness.

The holy verse says:

***“Whoever brings good, for him shall be better than it, and they shall
be secure from terror on that Day.”***

This merit is for all people without considering their age, race, and
sex. The word ‘good’ is used in general meaning /al hsanah/, in order
that it concludes all favours, including: accepting the leadership of
the Truth, the way of the Truth, the word of the Truth, the job of the
Truth, and the choice of the Truth, the examples of some of which have
been referred to in Islamic narrations.

But if the good deed, from whoever it is, is not destroyed because of
hypocrisy, pride, haughtiness, and sin and comes to its destination
safely, will deserve some additional rewards:

***(Whoever brings good…).***

But pleasures, insolence, and contumacies which come into being in the
world as the result of sin, by burning in Hereafter, will be changed
into disgrace and degradation.

The verse says:

***“Whoever brings good, for him shall be better than it, and they shall
be secure from terror on that Day.”***

Upon the objective meaning of the Qur’anic word ***/hasanah/***
commentators have offered different beliefs. Some of them have rendered
it into the term ‘Unity’ and the holy phrase of: ‘There is no god but
Allah’, and also into ‘having faith in Allah’.

Some of them believe that it refers to the mastership of
Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) and immaculate Imams (as). This meaning has
been emphasized in many traditions narrated from Ahl-ul-Bayt (as).

For example: in a tradition Imam Baqir (as) says that one of the
followers of Ali (as) who was called ’Abu-‘Abdullah Jabali came to him
(as) and Imam asked him whether he might inform him of the meaning of
the word of Allah that says:

***“Whoever brings good, for him shall be better than it, and they shall
be secure from terror on that Day.”***

He answered:

*“Yes, may I be your ransom, O’ Amir-ul-Mu’minin!”*

Imam said:

*“Good is cognition of mastership and the love of us, Ahl-ul-Bayt; and
sin is the denial of mastership and enmity against us,
Ahl-ul-Bayt.”*[^14]

Of course, as we have said repeatedly, the scope of the meaning of the
verses is vast and the Arabic words /hasanah/ and /sayyi’ah/ have also
here such a vast concept that envelops all the good deeds, including:
faith in Allah, the Messenger of Islam, and the mastership of the
Immaculate Imams (as), that are at the top of every good deed, and do
not hinder that other righteous deeds be involved in the meaning of the
verse.

And that some persons have become worried because of this generality
concerning the word ‘good’ and said whether there can be found anything
better than the Faith in Allah to be its reward. Its answer is clear
because the pleasure of Allah is also higher than Faith. In other words,
all of these things are the preliminaries for that and the consequence
is prior to the preliminary.

Another question here is that the apparent of some verses (like Surah
Al-Hajj, No. 22, verse 2) shows that the terror of Resurrection will
cover all, then how are the possessors of good as an exception from it?

Surah Al-’Anbiya’, No. 21, verse 103 answers this question, where it
says:

***“The Great Terror (of that Day) shall not grieve them…”***

And we know that the ‘Great terror’ is the terror of the Hereafter Day,
and the Terror of arriving into Hell, not the horror which will appear
at the time of the Blast.

By the way, the Arabic word /kubbat/, mentioned in the verse, means: ‘to
be cast down’.

Then, the next verse refers to those who are situated in a place
opposite to this group.

The verse says:

***“And whoever brings evil, those shall be cast down on their faces, in
the (Hell) Fire…”***

Such people cannot expect anything except this.

The verse continues saying:

***“…‘Are you rewarded (for) aught except what you used to do?’”***

The Arabic term /kubbat/ is derived from /kabb/ which originally means
‘casting something on face down’, and, therefore, mentioning the word
‘faces’ in the above verse is for emphasis.

As the worst kind of punishment is said that this group shall be cast
down on their faces in the (Hell) Fire. In addition, since they used to
turn their faces away when they confronted the Truth, and they used to
go toward sins with the same faces, now they should meet such a
punishment.

The sentence:

***“…‘Are you rewarded (for) aught except what you used to do?’”***

may be the answer to the question that someone may say this punishment
is a grievous punishment. They will be answered that those are the same
deeds of theirs that have seized them and they have not any reward
except their own deeds.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 91
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَآ اُمِرْتُ أَنْ اعْبُدَ رَبَّ هَذِهِ الْبَلْدَةِ الَّذِي
حَرَّمَهَا وَلَهُ كُلُّ شَيْءٍ وَأُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ مِنَ
الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***91. “(O’ Muhammad say:) ‘I am commanded only to serve the Lord of
this city, Who has made it sacred, and His are all things; and I am
commanded that I should be of those who submit’.”***

The holy Prophet (S) is under the command of Allah, the Almighty.

A leader must announce his severity and decisiveness to people and say
to them that whether they believe or not he will continue his way. The
day when Mecca was conquered by Muslims, the Messenger of Allah (S)
arrived in Mecca and broke the idols therein.

Then he stood at the threshold of Ka‘bah and said:

*“Verily Allah has respected Mecca (since the first day until the
Hereafter).”*[^15]

This verse, addressing the Prophet of Islam (S), reiterates some facts.
It implies that he (S) should tell the people that he does his duty
whether the obstinate pagans believe or not.

The verse says:

***“(O’ Muhammad say:) ‘I am commanded only to serve the Lord of this
city…”***

This sacred city (Mecca) is the secure sanctuary of Allah, and is the
noblest point on the earth. It is the oldest temple of Monotheism.

Yes, The Prophet (S) is commanded to worship the Lord Who has made this
city (Mecca) sacred, and He has appointed some specialities for it. He
has assigned some particular respects, ordinances, and prohibitions for
it that other cites in the world do not have them.

But do not consider that only this city belongs to Allah, because
everything in the world of existence belongs to Him.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Who has made it sacred, and His are all things…”***

The second order that he (S) is commanded to fulfil is that he should
absolutely submit the commandment of Allah, not other than it.

The verse says:

***“…and I am commanded that I should be of those who submit’.”***

Thus, the Prophet (S) states his two main missions which are
‘worshipping Allah, the One’, and ‘being absolute obedient to His
commandment’.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 92
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ أَتْلُوَا الْقُرْءَانَ فَمَنِ اهْتَدَي فَإِنَّمَا يَهْتَدِي
لِنَفْسِهِ وَمَن ضَلَّ فَقُلْ إِنَّمَآ أَنَاْ مِنَ الْمُنذِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***92. “And that I should recite the Qur’an (to people), so whoever is
guided aright, he is guided aright to his own gain, and whoever goes
astray, then say: ‘I am only (one) of the warners’.”***

Next to Monotheism, the most important mission of the holy Prophet (S)
was reciting the Divine verses to people. The benefit and harm of belief
and disbelief of people, whether they accept the truth or not, return to
them.

By this verse, the Prophet of Islam (S) announces that he is commanded
to recite the Qur’an to the people of Mecca and to invite them to fulfil
its commandments, to use the Qur’an as a light of guidance, to drink
much from its life-giving source, and to rely on its guidance in all his
programs.

Yes, Qur’an is a means for him in reaching to those two sacred aims and
struggling against any infidelity, deviation, and aberration.

The verse says:

***“And that I should recite the Qur’an (to people)…”***

Then, he (S) adds to the abovementioned statement implying that the
people should not think that their belief is beneficial for him or more
important than that, for Allah, the Great. No, all the benefits of
guidance reach them both in this world and the Next.

The verse continues saying:

***“…so whoever is guided aright, he is guided aright to his own
gain…”***

And whoever goes astray his burden is over his own shoulder, because the
Prophet (S) is only a warner and the evil consequences of their deeds do
not reach him. His duty is to convey the clear revelation, and his duty
is also showing the way and that how it can be paved, but he who is
eager to remain in aberration he has caused only his own misfortune.

It is interesting that concerning guidance it says:

***“whoever is guided aright, he is guided aright to his own gain”,***

but concerning aberration it does not say it is to his own loss; it
says:

***“I am only (one) of the warners”.***

This difference in statement may refer to this fact that the prophet is
never silent in front of those who go astray and he does not leave them
alone to their own state, but he constantly warns them and he does not
become tired of doing it continuously, because he is a warner.

The verse says:

***“…and whoever goes astray, then say: ‘I am only (one) of the
warners’.”***

This point is noteworthy that this Surah has begun with the statement of
the importance of the Qur’an and it ends with the emphasis on recitation
of the Qur’an, so the beginning and the end of the Surah is about the
Qur’an.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 93
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلِ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ سَيُرِيكُمْ ءَايَاتِهِ فَتَعْرِفُونَهَا وَمَا
رَبُّكَ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***93. “And say: ‘Praise be to Allah. Soon He will show you His signs
that you shall recognize them, and your Lord is not heedless of what you
do’.”***

The Qur’anic phrase ***/’al hamdu lillah/ (praise be to Allah)*** is the
best sentence for praising Allah that not only the Prophet (S) has
repeatedly been commissioned to say it, but also everyday all Muslims
have to repeat it through Surah Al-Hamd.

Therefore, in this verse, which is the last verse of Surah An-Naml, the
command is that he should praise Allah for all these great bounties,
specially for the bounty of guidance.

It says:

***“And say: ‘Praise be to Allah…”***

This praise relates to both the bounty of the Qur’an, and the guidance
of Allah, and also can be a preparation for the next sentence when it
says:

***“…Soon He will show you His signs that you shall recognize them…”***

This meaning in this verse indicates that by the passing of time and the
development of science, knowledge, and man’s wisdom, everyday some new
secrets of the revelations in connection with the world of existence
will be unveiled and, a day after another, humankind can be acquainted
more and more with the greatness of the Power of Allah and the depth of
His knowledge, and this property of Divine revelation will never be
ceased and will continue as long as man lives.

Yet, if you go astray and pave the way of deviation, you must know that
your Lord is never heedless of the deeds you do.

The verse says:

***“…and your Lord is not heedless of what you do’.”***

You should not imagine that if Allah postpones your retribution because
of His grace and mercy it is for the reason that He is not aware of your
deeds, or that its reckoning and record are not preserved.

The above ending sentence of the verse, which has exactly been repeated
in nine occurrences of the Qur’an or with a little difference, is a
short sentence and it is an expressive warning upon all human beings.

*O Lord! Show us a part of the signs of Your greatness each day so that
we know You everyday better and more than before, and that we thank You
for these bounties You have bestowed on us!*

*O Lord! A mass of difficulties have surrounded us, and the enemies,
both inside and outside, are trying hard to quench Your Light!*

*O Lord! It is You Who gave Solomon those abilities, and strengthened
Moses to stand against Pharaoh; cause us to be victorious against the
enemies, and destroy those of them who are not eligible to be guided
like the People of ‘Ad, the People of Thamud, and the People of Lot.*

[^1]: Safinat-ul-Bihar, Vol. 1, P. 511

[^2]: Surah Baqarah, No. 2, verse 259

[^3]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 53, P. 122

[^4]: Mizan-ul-Hikmah, Vol. 4, P. 1982; Tafsir-us-Safi, Vol. 4, P. 76;
Bihar, Vol. 53, P. 39

[^5]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 53, P.39

[^6]: Surah Ar-Ra‘d, No. 13, verse 28

[^7]: Surah Al-Fath, No. 48, verse 4

[^8]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 248

[^9]: Surah At-Taubah, No. 9, verse 103

[^10]: Surah An-Nahl, No. 16, verse 80

[^11]: Surah Ar-Room, No. 30, verse 21

[^12]: Surah An-Naml, No. 27, verse 86

[^13]: The current Surah, verse 89

[^14]: The Commentaries of As-Safi, Burhan, Atyab-ul-Bayan,
Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Jawami‘-ul-Jami‘, following the verse.

[^15]: The Commentary of Kanz-ud-Daqa’iq


