Section 5: Moses’ Mission Referred to
=====================================

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 43
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ءَاتَيْنَا مُوسَي الْكِتَابَ مِن بَعْدِ مَآ أَهْلَكْنَا
الْقُرُونَ الأُولَي بَصَآئِرَ لِلنَّاسِ وَهُدًي وَرَحْمَةً لَعَلَّهُمْ
يَتَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***43. “And indeed We gave Moses the Book (Torah) after We had destroyed
the earlier generations (as a means) of insight for mankind and a
guidance and mercy that haply they might receive admonition.”***

The Arabic word /basa’ir/ is the plural form of /basirat/ in the sense
of ‘insight and awareness’, and the word /’absar/ is the plural form of
/basar/ which means ‘eye’.

A man usually will not be guided unless he obtains /basirat/ (insight
and awareness), and he will not be guided unless he receives the favour
and grace of Allah.

Religion is inside the nature of human beings, and the Heavenly Books
uncover the dust from it.

By this verse, which is the last verse of this section of verses, we
reach the tenth scene of the adventurous story of Moses (as). This verse
speaks in relation with the revelation of Divine ordinances and Torah,
i.e. the period when the ‘negation of deity’ has finished and the period
of construction and proof begins.

It says:

***“And indeed We gave Moses the Book (Torah) after We had destroyed the
earlier generations (as a means) of insight for mankind and a guidance
and mercy that haply they might receive admonition.”***

Concerning the objective of the Qur’anic phrase: ***/qurun al ’ula/ (the
earlier generations who were destroyed)*** and that who they are,
commentators are divided.

Some of them have said that it refers to the disbelievers among the
people of Noah, ‘Ad, Thamud, and the like, because, by the past of time,
the effects of the former prophets had disappeared and it was necessary
that a new Heavenly Book be set at mankind’s disposal.

Some other commentators of the Qur’an believe that it refers to the
destruction of the people of Pharaoh who were the remaining of the early
generations, since Allah gave Torah to Moses (as) after their
destruction. But it is no problem that the above-mentioned sentence
refers to all of these generations and peoples.

The Qur’anic term ***/basa’ir/***, which is the plural form of
/basirat/, means insight and awareness and its objective here is the
verses and proofs that caused the hearts of believers to be enlightened,
and guidance and mercy are also the concomitants of this ‘insight’, and
there follows it admonition and vigilance of the receptive hearts.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 44
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كُنتَ بِجَانِبِ الْغَرْبِيّ‌ِ إِذْ قَضَيْنَآ إِلَي مُوسَي
الأَمْرَ وَمَا كُنتَ مِنَ الشَّاهِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***44. “And you were not on the western side of (Mount Tur) when We
passed to Moses the commandment, and you were not one of the
witnesses.”***

Reiterating the story and adventure of Moses’ prophethood with all its
qualities from the tongue of a prophet who did not present at those
times, is a sign of legitimacy and inimitability of the Qur’an.

Some of the stories of the Qur’an are among the heavenly news, not taken
and narrated from eyewitnesses.

Therefore, in this verse the fact is stated, saying that whatever was
said about Moses and Pharaoh, with all its details, is a proof for the
legitimacy of your Qur’an, because you did not attend in these scenes
and did not see these events by your eyes. It was only the Grace of
Allah that He sent down these verses unto you for the guidance of
people.

The verse says:

***“And you were not on the western side of (Mount Tur) when We passed
to Moses the commandment, and you were not one of the witnesses.”***

It is necessary to note this point that on his way from Madyan to Egypt,
which was in the land of Sinai, Moses (as) was going just from East
towards West, and, on the contrary, when the Children of Israel came
from Egypt towards Syria and passed Sinai, they were coming from West to
Egypt. (That is why some of the commentators believe that the sentence:

***“Then they (Pharaoh’s hosts) pursued them at sunrise”,***[^1]

which is about the hosts of Pharaoh in pursuance of the Children of
Israel, points to this meaning.)

Finally the author of Atyab-ul-Bayan in the following of the verse says:

*“Some Islamic narrations indicate that the objective of executorship
has been Yusha‘-ibn-Nun- and that every prophet that was sent his
executor of testament was appointed by Him and the appointment of
executor of testament is in His hand.*

*That is, you, O’ Messenger of Allah, too, should appoint your executor
of testament. Some of these narrations denote that the purpose was
‘going’ toward Pharaoh, but it apparently means if you were there and
saw the affairs of Moses and inform them to the Ummat, this would not be
a miracle for them.*

*They would say that he has seen it and informs of it; but now that you
inform them of these affairs by means of the Qur’an, this is itself a
miracle that without seeing them you inform of Moses’ affairs as well as
other prophets and their nations.*

*The Qur’an also informs of the future events because Allah (s.w.t.) has
the knowledge of everything from beginning to the end of arriving in
Hereafter; and this itself is a great miracle.*[^2]

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 45
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَكِنَّآ أَنشَأْنَا قُرُوناً فَتَطَاوَلَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْعُمُرُ وَمَا
كُنتَ ثَاوِياً فِي أَهْلِ مَدْيَنَ تَتْلُواْ عَلَيْهِمْ ءَايَاتِنَا
وَلَكِنَّا كُنَّا مُرْسِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. “But We raised up generations and a long time passed upon them,
and you were not dwelling among the people of Madyan, reciting unto them
Our signs, but We were sending messengers.”***

The Qur’anic word ***/awiyan/*** is derived from /awi/ which means
‘resident’, and also the term /mawi/ derived from the same root, means
‘abode’.

So, through this holy verse, Allah says:

***“But We raised up generations and a long time passed upon them…”***

A long time passed and the effects of the prophets as well as their
guidance went away from their hearts and thoughts. That was why We
brought both you and your Qur’an forth and stated the story life of the
old generations in it in order to enlighten mankind.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and you were not dwelling among the people of Madyan…”***

O Prophet! You were not among the people of Madyan to be acquainted with
their signs and the news of their lives so that you can reiterate them
for the people of Mecca. But We sent you and gave you these exact news
related to thousands years ago in order that you guide them.

The above holy verse continues saying:

***“…reciting unto them Our signs, but We were sending messengers.”***

Of course, the time between the advent of Moses (as) and the advent of
the Prophet of Islam (S) lasted about two thousand years.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 46
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كُنتَ بِجَانِبِ الطُّورِ إِذْ نَادَيْنَا وَلَكِن رَّحْمَةً مِن
رَّبّـِكَ لِتُنذِرَ قَوْماً مَّآ أَتَاهُم مِن نَّذِيرٍ مِن قَبْلِكَ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. “And you were not on the side of the Mount Tur when We called
(unto Moses), but (this revelation is) a mercy from your Lord that you
warn a people to whom no warner had come before you, in order that they
may receive admonition.”***

Like other people, the Divine prophets do not know the heavenly news
without the contact with the source of Divine revelation.

The Qur’anic news is entirely from the source of Divine revelation.

Again, for emphasis on this very meaning, this holy verse adds:

***“And you were not on the side of the Mount Tur when We called (unto
Moses)…”***

It was that time that Allah (s.w.t.) issued the command of prophethood
for Moses.

The Qur’an continues saying:

***“…but (this revelation is) a mercy from your Lord that you warn a
people to whom no warner had come before you, in order that they may
receive admonition.”***

Shortly speaking, Allah (s.w.t.) reiterated the warnings and awakening
events that had occurred in the old nations’ time when the Prophet of
Islam (S) was not present and did not witness them, so that he would
recite them for this misguided people, probably they cause them to
awaken.

There arises a question here that how does the Qur’an say that no warner
had come for this nation (i.e. the Arabs contemporary with the Prophet
(S)), while we know that there comes no time that the earth is empty of
a godly Hujjat (proof) and the vicegerents of the prophets had always
been present among this nation, too?

In answer, we say that its purpose is to send a prophet who had a
heavenly Book and was a clear warner, because it prolonged for centuries
between the time of Jesus (as) and the advent of the Prophet of Islam
(S) when no arch-prophet came, and this very matter gave a pretext to
the atheists and mischief-makers.

In one of his sermons, Ali (as) says:

*“Verily Allah sent Muhammad (S) when none among the Arabs read a
(heavenly) Book or claimed prophethood. He guided the people till he
took them to their (correct) position and reached them their
salvation.”*[^3]

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 47
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْلآ أَن تُصِيبَهُم مُّصِيبَةٌ بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ
فَيَقُولُوا رَبَّنَا لَوْلآ أَرْسَلْتَ إِلَيْنَا رَسُولاً فَنَتَّبِعَ
ءَايَاتِكَ وَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. “And were it not that there should befall them a calamity for
what their hands have sent before, they would say: ‘Our Lord! Why did
You not send to us a messenger so that we might follow Your signs and so
be of the believers?’”***

The previous verse denoted that the purpose of coming prophets was
warning and admonition. This verse states another aim of the mission of
the Prophet (S) which is to complete the argument and to shut the way of
seeking pretext.

Thus, in the verse under discussion, the Qur’an, pointing to the grace
given unto the Prophet (S), says:

***“And were it not that there should befall them a calamity for what
their hands have sent before, they would say: ‘Our Lord! Why did You not
send to us a messenger so that we might follow Your signs and so be of
the believers?’”***

In fact, the verse refers to this point that: the path of Truth is
clear, and any intellect judges the falseness of paganism and idolatry.
The ugliness of a great deal of their vain deeds, like tyrannies and
cruelties, belongs to the judgment of intellect, and even without
sending prophets in this regard they can be punished.

But, even in this field, upon which the judgment of intellect is clear,
Allah sent prophets with heavenly Books and miracles in order to
complete the argument and negate any kind of pretexts, so that no one
can say their misfortune was because of lacking any leader and if they
had divine leader(s) they would not be misguided.

However, this verse is among the verses that have indication to the
necessity of Grace through sending prophets.

It shows that Allah’s way of treatment is based on this fact that he
should not punish any nation for their sins before sending a prophet for
them; as Surah An-Nisa’, No. 4, verse 165 says:

***“(We sent) messengers as givers of glad tidings and as warners, so
that people might have no argument against Allah after the (invitations
of) the messengers, and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise.”***

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 48
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا جَآءَهُمُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ عِندِنَا قَالُوا لَوْلآ اُوتِيَ
مِثْلَ مَا اُوتِيَ مُوسَي أَوَلَمْ يَكْفُرُوا بِمَآ اُوتِيَ مُوسَي مِن
قَبْلُ قَالُوا سِحْرَانِ تَظَاهَرَا وَقَالُوا إِنَّا بِكُلٍّ
كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. “But when the truth came to them from Us they said: ‘Why has he
not been given the like of what was given Moses?’ (But) did they not
believe also in what Moses was given aforetime? They said: ‘A pair of
sorceries supporting each other’. And they (also) said: ‘Verily we
disbelieve in all’.”***

Magic and sorcery was the most current accusation which prophets were
accused of. The enemies confuse the logic and truth in order that they
pave the way for their own denial. Therefore, in this holy verse the
Qur’an points to their seeking pretexts and implies that, even after
sending messengers for them, they did not abandon pretext seeking and
continued their deviated way.

It says:

***“But when the truth came to them from Us they said: ‘Why has he not
been given the like of what was given Moses?’…”***

They want to say why does not the Messenger of Islam have a staff like
what Moses had? Why did he not have a white Hand? Why does not the sea
cleave for him? Why do the enemies not drown? Why and why…?

The Qur’an answers these pretext seekers when it says:

***“…(But) did they not believe also in what Moses was given
aforetime?…”***

Did they not say that these two, Moses and Aaron, were two sorcerers who
had exchanged hands with each other to misguide them? And, therefore,
they said they disbelieved them. The verse continues stating:

***“…They said: ‘A pair of sorceries supporting each other’. And they
(also) said: ‘Verily we disbelieve in all’.”***

Though customarily there must be said /sahiran/ (sorcerers) in the verse
instead of saying /sihran/, it is for the severity of emphasis, because
when, in Arabic, it is speaking about a person earnestly, that person is
counted as the exact, for example, justice, or injustice, or magic.

It is also probable that the purpose of /sehran/ is the two great
miracles of Moses: Rod and White Hand.

If someone says what is the connection of these denials with the pagans
of Mecca, and it relates to the people of Pharaoh who were infidels? Its
answer is that the purpose of it is that the subject of seeking pretext
is not a new thing. All of them are alike and their statement is very
similar to that of each other. Their line, method, and program are the
same.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 49
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ فَأْتُوا بِكِتَابٍ مِنْ عِندِ اللَّهِ هُوَ أَهْدَي مِنْهُمَآ
أَتَّبِعْهُ إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. “Say (O’ Apostle Muhammad): ‘Bring you then a Book from Allah
that gives better guidance than both of them (i.e., Torah and Qur’an),
(that) I follow it, if you are truthful’.”***

Man is surely incapable to bring a book better than the Qur’an and
original Torah. The religious leaders must deliver the best speech and
the most logical style when confronting the opponents. They must answer
the vain sayings of the rejecters with a suitable reply.

Therefore, this verse, addressing the holy Prophet (S), says:

***“Say (O’ Apostle Muhammad): ‘Bring you then a Book from Allah that
gives better guidance than both of them (i.e., Torah and Qur’an), (that)
I follow it, if you are truthful’.”***

In other words, they are seeking for a Book of guidance and for
miracles. What miracle is greater than the Qur’an and what guiding Book
is better than it? If the Prophet of Islam (S) had not anything other
than this Qur’an, it would be enough for proving the legitimacy of his
invitation. But they do not seek the Truth; they are a group of pretext
seekers.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 50
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإِن لَّمْ يَسْتَجِيبُوا لَكَ فَاعْلَمْ أَنَّمَا يَتَّبِعُونَ
أَهْوَآءَهُمْ وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنِ اتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ بِغَيْرِ هُدًي
مِنَ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لاَ يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. “But if they do not answer you, then know that they only follow
their own low desires, and who is more astray than he who follows his
own low desire without any guidance from Allah? Verily Allah does not
guide the unjust people.”***

Wherever there is not any eligibility of accepting guidance, sensuality
dominates. The rejecters of the Truth and sensualists are the most
misguided people. Thus, the relation between these two is explicitly
stated in this verse, and even the most aberrant people are introduced
as those who have taken their own sensual desire as their leader and
they have never accepted the Divine guidance.

Sensual desire is a thick curtain before the eyes of man’s intellect.

Sensual desire attracts the man’s attention to a subject so much that he
often loses the ability of understanding the facts because the condition
of understanding the fact is an absolute submission for realities,
leaving any prophecy and attachment, and to be unconditionally
submissive unto whatever outwardly exists, whether it is sweet or
bitter; it is alongside our innate wishes or opposite of them; it is on
the way of our personal interests or against them; but sensual desire is
not consistent with these principles.

In this regard, there is a detailed discussion explained when commenting
on Surah Al-Furqan, No. 25, verse 43.

It is interesting that through a lot of Islamic narrations, the
abovementioned verse has been rendered into those who have not accepted
the Divine leaders and have relied only on their own thoughts.[^4]

These narrations which have been narrated from Imam Baqir (as), Imam
Sadiq (as) and some other Imams (leaders) of right guidance (as) are, in
fact, of the kind of clear aspect. In other words, man is in need of
Divine guidance.

This guidance sometimes is found in the heavenly Book, sometimes in the
person of Prophet (S) and his way of treatment, sometime in his
immaculate vicegerents, and sometimes in the logic of intellect and
wisdom. The important thing is that man should be on the line of Divine
guidance, not on the line of his own sensual desire, so that he can
enjoy the rays of this guidance.

[^1]: Surah Ash-Shu‘ara’, No. 26, verse 60

[^2]: Atyab-ul-Bayan, following the verse

[^3]: Nahj-ul-Balaqah, sermon 33

[^4]: ’Usul-i-Kafi, Basa’ir-ud-Darajat, according to Nur-uth-Thaqalayn,
Vol. 4, P. 136


