Section 7: Unity of Allah
=========================

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 61
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَن وَعَدْنَاهُ وَعْداً حَسَناً فَهُوَ لاَقِيهِ كَمَن مَتَّعْنَاهُ
مَتَاعَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ هُوَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ مِنَ
الْمُـحْضَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. “Is he then unto whom We have promised a goodly promise which he
shall meet it, similar to him whom We have provided with the provision
of the life of this world, then on the Day of Hereafter he shall be of
those brought up (for punishment)?”***

The promises of Allah are both decisive and certain; and rewards in
hereafter are both great and good.

In the previous verses, the words were about the persons who, for the
enjoying of the bounties of the world, prefer disbelief to Faith and
infidelity to Monotheism. Now, the verse under discussion defines the
situation of this group in the Hereafter comparing the true believers.

At first, through a question, the Qur’an wants the conscience of all to
judge, when it says:

***“Is he then unto whom We have promised a goodly promise which he
shall meet it, similar to him whom We have provided with the provision
of the life of this world, then on the Day of Hereafter he shall be of
those brought up (for punishment)?”***

No doubt every vigilant conscience prefers the Divine goodly promises
and His great lasting merits to a few days of enjoying of perishing
bounties and fleeting joys which have pain and toil in sequel.

The Qur’anic sentence ***/fahuwa laqiyah/ (which he shall meet it)*** is
an emphasis on the fact that the promise of Allah does not infringe, and
it should be such, because to infringe the promise is either because of
ignorance or powerlessness, none of which is found in Divine Essence.

The Qur’anic sentence:

***“Then on the Day of Hereafter, he shall be of those brought up (for
punishment)”***

refers to the calling before Allah (s.w.t.) for the reckoning of deeds.
Some commentators have rendered it into calling to the Hell Fire, but
the first commentary is more suitable. However, this meaning shows that
these polluted persons are drawn to this scene unwillingly, and it must
be so, because the horror of reckoning and retribution has covered their
whole entity.

The application of the Qur’anic phrase ***/hayat-ud-dunya/ ‘life of this
world’***, which has repeatedly been mentioned in different Suras of the
Qur’an, points the meanness of this mortal life in comparison with the
‘Hereafter life’ which is permanent and perpetual.

The Arabic word /duniya/ is derived from /dunuw/ which originally means:
‘nearness in place, or time, or position’.

Then the terms /duniya/ and /adna/ have sometimes been used for the
small creatures which are available, versus huge creatures, and
sometimes it has been used for some mean things versus good and exalted
things, and sometimes for ‘near’ versus ‘far’.

And, in view of the fact that the life of this world in the face of the
life of the next world is both small and worthless, and near, then the
appellation of /hayat-ud-duniya/ (the life of this world) is perfectly
fitting.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verses 62-64
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يُنَادِيهِمْ فَيَقُولُ أَيْنَ شرَكَآءِيَ الَّذِينَ كُنتُمْ
تَزْعُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الَّذِينَ حَقَّ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقَوْلُ رَبَّنَا هَؤُلآءِ الَّذِينَ
أَغْوَيْنَآ أَغْوَيْنَاهُمْ كَمَا غَوَيْنَا تَبَرَّأْنَآ إِلَيْكَ مَا
كَانُوا إِيَّانَا يَعْبُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِيلَ ادْعُوا شُرَكَآءَكُمْ فَدَعَوْهُمْ فَلَمْ يَسْتَجِيبُوا لَهُمْ
وَرَأَوُا الْعَذَابَ لَوْ أَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا يَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***62. “And on the Day (when) He will call them and say: ‘Where are My
associates whom you were asserting?’”***  
***63. “Those against whom the sentence has been confirmed will say:
‘Our Lord! These are they whom we led astray; we led them astray, as we
were astray ourselves. To You we declare ourselves to be clear (of
them). They were not unto us worshipping’.”***  
***64. “And it will be said (unto them): ‘Call your associate (gods)’.
So they will call upon them, but they will not answer them, and they
will see the punishment and would wish that they had been guided
aright.”***

Whoever calls others towards himself instead of Allah, the punishment of
Allah is certain for him. We must not do something that we remain unable
to answer for that thing on the Day of Hereafter.

Through these verses, the Qur’an illustrates the scenes of Resurrection
for pagans in a way that its consideration brings horror and causes
man’s body to shake.

The verse says:

***“And on the Day (when) He will call them and say: ‘Where are My
associates whom you were asserting?’”***

It is evident that this question is an objurgatory question, for on the
Hereafter Day, when the curtains will be removed and everything is
manifest, neither paganism is meaningful nor pagans have remained on
their belief. So, this question is only a kind of reproach and
punishment, or a kind of reprimand and retribution.

But instead of pagans, that must answer this question themselves, their
objects of worship will start speaking and express their hatred from
them. We know that their objects of worship were sometimes idols made of
stone and wood, and sometimes some sacred beings such as angels and
Jesus Christ, and sometimes Jinns and Satans.

Here, the third group will speak who will be referred to in this verse,
which says:

***“Those against whom the sentence has been confirmed will say: ‘Our
Lord! These are they whom we led astray; we led them astray, as we were
astray ourselves. To You we declare ourselves to be clear (of them).
They were not unto us worshipping’.”***

The abovementioned verse is similar to Surah Yunus, No. 10, verse 28
which says:

***“…and their associates shall say: ‘It was not us (indeed) that you
used to worship’.”***

Thus, the seductive objects of worship, such as: Pharaoh, Namrud, and
Satans and Jinns will proclaim their hatred from such worshippers and
defend themselves. They will also negate even aberration from themselves
and implicitly say that the worshippers followed them with their own
accord.

But it is clear that neither this negation has any effect nor that
hatred and repudiation are useful, and they will surely share the sin of
their worshippers.

It is worthy to note that on that Day every one of these sinful deviated
persons will repudiate the other one and each of them try to put his own
sin on another’s shoulder.

This is just like the thing we see its small example in this world with
our own eyes. A group of persons gather with together to commit a crime.
Then, after being captured, and attending in the court, they hate each
other and try to put the fault on the neck of another one. This is the
fate of the criminals and astray ones in this world and the next.

Also, Surah ’Ibrahim, No. 14, verse 22 indicates that, on the Day of
Hereafter, Satan will say to his followers as follows:

***“…and I did not have any authority over you except that I called you
and you responded me. Therefore, do not blame me, but blame
yourselves…”***

Concerning pagans, in Surah As-Saffat, No. 37, we recite that they will
conflict with each other and every one will count another a guilty one,
but those whose work is temptation will explicitly reply them:

***“Nor had we any authority over you. Nay, it was you who were a people
in obstinate rebellion!”***[^1]

However, after that they will be questioned about their objects of
worship and they will remain impotent to answer.

Their situation is explained as follows:

***“And it will be said (unto them): ‘Call your associate (gods)’…”***

They are told to call their gods to help them but they, who know their
objects of worship cannot do anything there, as a result of the intense
horror and that they find nothing to help them, or because of obeying
the command of Allah, Who wants to disgrace such pagans and their astray
objects of worship before the public, they will go to their gods and ask
them to help them, but it is clear that they will not answer them.

At this time, they will see the chastisement of Allah by their own eyes,
and they gain nothing but failure and disgrace, because the only way of
salvation is Faith and righteous deed which they do not have.

The verse says:

***“…So they will call upon them, but they will not answer them, and
they will see the punishment and would wish that they had been guided
aright.”***

Surah Al-Qasas - Verses 65-67
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يُنَادِيهِمْ فَيَقُولُ مَاذَآ أَجَبْتُمُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعَمِيَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الاَنْبَآءُ يَوْمَئِذٍ فَهُمْ لاَ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَمَّا مَن تَابَ وءَامَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحاً فَعَسَي أَن يَكُونَ مِنَ
الْمُفْلِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. “And on that Day He will call them and say: ‘What was the answer
you gave to the messengers?’”***  
***66. “On that Day (all) tidings will be dimmed for them, nor will they
ask each other.”***  
***67. “But any that (in this life) repents, and believes, and works
righteousness, haply he shall be one of the prosperous ones.”***

Every body is responsible before the call and invitation of the Divine
prophets.

On the Hereafter Day, people cannot prepare any answer for the just
court of Allah (s.w.t.) by means of cooperation, consultation and asking
questions from each other.

Next to the question about their objects of worship, the pagans will be
asked another question about their reaction before the Divine prophets.

The verse says:

***“And on that Day He will call them and say: ‘What was the answer you
gave to the messengers?’”***

It is certain that, like the first question, they will not have any
answer for this question. If they say that they answered their
invitation, it will be a lie, and a lie will have no room there.

If they say that they rejected the prophets, denigrated them, called
them sorcerers and insane ones, and struggled against them with weapons
and killed both them and their followers, their statement will be the
cause of their disgrace and misery.

On the Hereafter Day, when the prophets will be questioned that what
people did in answer to their invitation and they will answer:

***“…‘We have no knowledge, verily You are the All-knowing of the
Unseen’.”,***

what can these blind-hearted pagans say in answer to this question?

Therefore, in the next verse the Qur’an implicitly says that they will
have no answer to deliver, nor can they hear any answer from each other.

The verse says:

***“On that Day (all tidings will be dimmed for them, nor will they ask
each other.”***

It is worthy to note that, in the above verse, blindness and dumbness
are attributed to ‘tidings’ not to them. It does not say that they will
become blind, but it implies that all tidings will be blind to find
them.

The reason is that many times it happens that a person is not aware of
something but it seems that the news turns round by tongues and finally
comes to him, as many social news are scattered through this very way
where neither are persons aware of them, nor are the news worthy of
being scattered.

Thus, all tidings will be covered for them, and they will find no answer
for the question that what they answered to the Divine prophets and,
therefore, there will remain an absolute silence for them as an answer.

And, since the Qur’an always leaves the door open for the sinners and
pagans to return to the truth in what stage of mischief and pollution
they may be, by the next verse it adds:

***“But any that (in this life) repents, and believes, and works
righteousness, haply he shall be one of the prosperous ones.”***

Therefore, the way of felicity is summed up in three phrases: returning
to Allah, Faith and righteous deeds in this world the result of which
will certainly be: deliverance, salvation and prosperity.

Though whoever has true Faith and righteous deed will surely be
prosperous, the usage of the word /‘asa/ (haply) in the verse may be for
the sake that this prosperity is conditioned to the existence and
continuation of this state, and since the existence and continuation of
this state is not certain for all the repentant, the word ‘haply’ has
been used for it.

Some commentators have also said that when this word, haply, is said by
a generous personality, its concept is the certainty of the matter, and
Allah is ‘The Most Generous’.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verses 68-70
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَبُّكَ يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَآءُ وَيَخْتَارُ مَا كَانَ لَهُمُ
الْخِيَرَةُ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ وَتَعَالَي عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَبُّكَ يَعْلَمُ مَا تُكِنُّ صُدُورُهُمْ وَمَا يُعْلِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ اللَّهُ لآ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ لَهُ الْحَمْدُ فِي الأُولَي
وَالاَخِرَةِ وَلَهُ الْحُكْمُ وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***68. “And your Lord creates whatever He pleases, and He chooses: They
have not the choice. Glory be to Allah, and exalted be He above what
they associate (with Him)!”***  
***69. “And your Lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they
manifest.”***  
***70. “And He is Allah, there is no god but He! His is all praise in
this (life) and the Hereafter, and His is the authority, and unto Him
you shall be returned.”***

The Absolute Power is Allah’s, and then the creation of existence and
the law of life (religion) both belong to Him. Therefore, the choice of
heavenly leader is in the hand of Allah, not in the authority of people.

These verses, in fact, are as an evidence for the negation of polytheism
and falseness of the belief of polytheists.

The first verse says:

***“And your Lord creates whatever He pleases…”***

Creation belongs to Him, and administration, authority, and choice are
also under His will and commandment.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and He chooses: They have not the choice…”***

The authority of creation is with Him, the authority of intercession is
in His hand, and the authority of sending prophets is also in His will.
Shortly speaking, the authority of all things depends on the Divine
providence, His Pure Essence. Therefore, neither can idols do anything,
nor even can the angels and prophets, save with His leave.

However, Allah is the possessor of authority both in natural affairs and
religious affairs, both of which originate from the rank of His
creation.

Yet, how do they pave the path of polytheism, and how do they go towards
other than Allah?

Thus, at the end of the verse, the Holy Qur’an says:

***“…Glory be to Allah, and exalted be He above what they associate
(with Him)!”***

In the narrations of Ahl-ul-Bayt (as), the above verse has been rendered
into the authority and choice of Immaculate Imam (as) from the side of
Allah, and the Qur’anic sentence:

***“They have not the choice”***

has also been adapted to this very meaning. This, in fact, is of the
kind of stating the clear example, because protecting divine religion
and choosing the immaculate leader for this aim is impossible but from
the side of Allah.[^2]

The next verse, which is about the vast knowledge of Allah, is, indeed,
an emphasis, or a reason, upon what was stated in the previous verse
concerning the vast authority of Allah.

It says:

***“And your Lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they
manifest.”***

This His sovereignty over everything is a reason for His authority unto
all things, and, in the meantime, it is a threat for the pagans who
should not imagine that Allah is not aware of their intentions and
plots.

The last verse of the abovementioned verses is, in fact, as a conclusion
and explanation for the previous verses in the field of negation of
polytheism. It points to four qualities of the Attributes of Allah, all
of which are derivatives of His creative power and His Will being
independent.

It says:

***“And He is Allah, there is no god but He!…”***

How can an object of worship, except Him, be found while He is the only
creator and all authorities belong to Him? Those who, as a pretext of
intercession and the like of it, go to idols are seriously in error.

Another thing is that all bounties, whether in this world and the next,
are from His side, and this is the requisite of His absolute creative
Power.

Therefore, it says:

***“…His is all praise in this (life) and the Hereafter…”***

The third is that He is the Judge in both worlds. The verse continues
saying:

***“…and His is the authority…”***

The fourth is that the return of all men, for reckoning and receiving
rewards and retribution, will be to Him.

The verse says:

***“…and unto Him you shall be returned.”***

It is He Who has created us, and it is He Who is aware of our deeds, and
it is He Who is the Judge of the Day of retribution; therefore the
reckoning and reward of our deeds are in His hand, too.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 71
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِن جَعَلَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْكُمُ الَّيْلَ سَرْمَداً
إِلَي يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ مَنْ إِلَهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ يَأْتِيكُم
بِضِيَآءٍ أَفَلاَ تَسْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. “Say: ‘Have you thought, if Allah made the night everlasting for
you till the Day of Resurrection, what god other than Allah shall bring
you illumination? Will you not hear?”***

The Arabic word /sarmad/, mentioned in this verse, means permanent and
perpetual.

Among the ways of knowing Allah there is the way of contemplation about
extinction or change of bounties. The change of day and night, of
course, is one of the greatest Divine bounties and signs.

The verse under discussion points to a great part of Divine bounties,
which is both a reason on Monotheism and negation of polytheism.

From this point of view, it completes the previous discussion, and it is
an example of the bounties of Allah for which He is eligible of being
praised and glorified, a praise that was pointed out in the previous
verses. It is also the evidence on His authority in the system of
creation and administration of this world.

At first, it points to the great bounty of the light of the day, which
is the cause of any movement.

It says:

***“Say: ‘Have you thought, if Allah made the night everlasting for you
till the Day of Resurrection, what god other than Allah shall bring you
illumination? Will you not hear?”***

Here, the word /diya’/ (light) has been used, because the main purpose
of ‘day’ is ‘light’, the same light that the life and living of all
living beings depends on it. If there were not the sunlight, neither
would a tree grow, nor could a flower smile, nor might a bird fly, nor
would exist a human being, nor would it rain a drop of rain.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 72
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِن جَعَلَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْكُمُ النَّهَارَ سَرْمَداً
إِلَي يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ مَنْ إِلَهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ يَأْتِيكُم
بِلَيْلٍ تَسْكُنُونَ فِيهِ أَفَلاَ تُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***72. “Say: ‘Have you thought, if Allah made the day everlasting for
you till the Day of Resurrection, what god other than Allah shall bring
you the night in which you rest? Do you not then see?”***

The existing system of the world of existence is arranged from the side
of Allah, and if He wills He can change it to another system, because
the power of Allah is the same unto all beings.

This verse refers to the bounty of darkness. It, addressing the Prophet
(S), commands him to tell the people of Mecca who were busy worshipping
idols:

***“Say: ‘Have you thought, if Allah made the day everlasting for you
till the Day of Resurrection, what god other than Allah shall bring you
the night in which you rest?…”***

It is evident that they are not able to answer this question except that
they say there is not anyone to do it. Consequently, the argument is
completed to them and they must confess that there is not anyone
eligible for being worshipped but Allah, the One.

Therefore, it says:

***“…Do you not then see?”***

That is, do you not obtain knowledge by the way of insight? Do you not
observe the day and the night, and do you not contemplate about them so
that you know that they both are from the side of a Wise Administrator?

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 73
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِن رَحْمَتِهِ جَعَلَ لَكُمُ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ لِتَسْكُنُوا
فِيهِ وَلِتَبْتَغُوا مِن فَضْلِهِ وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***73. “And it is out of His Mercy that He has made for you the night
and the day, that you may rest therein, and that you may seek of His
grace, and that you may give thank.”***

In the verses of the holy Qur’an, the word ‘night’ is always mentioned
before the word ‘day’. It may be for the reason that the darkness of the
night substantially belongs to the earth and it is from the earth
itself, but the light of the day is from the sun which comes to the
earth.

This verse, which is, in fact, the conclusion of the previous two
verses, says:

***“And it is out of His Mercy that He has made for you the night and
the day, that you may rest therein, and that you may seek of His grace,
and that you may give thank.”***

Yes, the vastness of the expanse of Allah’s Mercy requires that He
provides all the means of your life. From one side, we need to work,
struggle, and run, which is not possible without the light of the day;
and from another side, we need to rest and to have tranquility, which
naturally does not complete without the darkness of the night.

Today, it has scientifically been proved that, because of light, all
organs of the body of man become active and alive, such as: circulation
of the blood, respiratory organs, the work of the heart, as well as
other organs.

And if light is too much, the cells will become tired and joy and
cheerfulness gives its place to weariness. On the contrary, at night,
the organs of the body go into a deep tranquility and rest, and get
strength and joy by it.

It is interesting that when in verse 71 it speaks of the lasting night,
at the end of verse it says:

***“…will you not hear”***

while at the end of verse 72 it says:

***“Do you not then see?”***

This variation of meaning may be for the reason that the sense
proportional to night is hearing and the sense proportional to day is
sight. To this extreme the Qur’an uses exactness and precision.

This is also noteworthy that at the end of this verse the subject of
thanksgiving is mentioned; giving thank for the accurate system of light
and darkness, a thanksgiving that causes man to know the Benefactor, and
a thanksgiving which is the motive of Faith in the doctrinal subjects.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 74
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يُنَادِيهِمْ فَيَقُولُ أَيْنَ شُرَكَآءِيَ الَّذِينَ كُنتُمْ
تَزْعُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***74. “And on the day when He shall call them and say: ‘Where are My
partners whom you used to assert?’”***

Allah, the Almighty, has no partner. Whatever is counted as a partner
for Him, is naught but an imagination and unfounded assumption.
Therefore, those who associate anything with Allah (s.w.t.) must prepare
themselves to have an answer on the Day of Hereafter.

The commentary of this verse, of course, was explained formerly and its
repetition is for the sake that in the first time the aim was that they
would confess their aberration, and here the aim is that they might be
made understand that they are unable to bring any reasoning.

Thus, Hereafter is the Day when the futility of the objects of worship
and frustration of polytheists will appear. It is a Day when all objects
of worship in their vanity and all polytheists in their being unable to
give answer are equal.

However, it is cited in the commentary of Jawami‘-ul-Jami’that Allah,
the Glorified, repeats the scorn of pagans for their disbelief in order
to claim that paganism causes the Wrath of Allah more than any other
sin, as Monotheism is the most inclusive thing for gaining the consent
and pleasure of Allah.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 75
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَزَعْنَا مِن كُلّ‌ِ اُمَّةٍ شَهِيداً فَقُلْنَا هَاتُوا
بُرْهَانَكُمْ فَعَلِمُوا أَنَّ الْحَقَّ لِلَّهِ وَضَلَّ عَنْهُم مَّا
كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***75. “And We will draw forth from every nation a witness, and say:
‘Bring you your proof!’ Then shall they know that the Truth is Allah’s,
and that which they used to forge shall depart from them.”***

Pagans have not any logic and demonstrative proof.

On the Day of Hereafter, the witnesses come out from their own nations.
On that Day, the sinful persons will think of denying their crimes, but
the existence of witnesses cause them not to do anything.

So, this verse says:

***“And We will draw forth from every nation a witness, and say: ‘Bring
you your proof!’…”***

It is at this time that everything will be manifested, and as the verse
says:

***“…Then shall they know that the Truth is Allah’s, and that which they
used to forge shall depart from them.”***

According to some other verses of the Holy Qur’an, these witnesses will
be the Divine prophets, and every prophet is the witness of his own
nation, while the Prophet of Islam (S), who is the seal of the prophets,
will be a witness over all prophets and nations, as Surah An-Nisa’, No.
4, verse 41 says:

***“How will it be, then, when We bring from every people a witness and
We bring you a witness over those (witnesses)?”***

Thus, there will be held a meeting at the presence of prophets and
Messengers. In this great meeting, those blind-hearted arrogant pagans
will be put under judgment. It is at that time that they will be
acquainted with the depth of the calamity of paganism and will
understand the rightfulness of the Lord and futility of the idols
clearly.

It is interesting that the Qur’an in the above mentioned verse says:

***“…and that which they used to forge shall depart from them.”***

That is, their baseless imaginations about idols will completely be
dismissed from their minds, because resurrection plain is the place of
Truth and there is no room for falsehood there. In that place, falsehood
will be lost and disappear.

If in this world falsehood hides itself under the curtain of truth and
is busy with deceit for a few days, in Hereafter the curtains of deceit
and trick will disappear and there will remain nothing but the Truth.

Upon the commentary of the Qur’anic sentence:

***“And We will draw forth from every nation a witness…”***

Imam Baqir (as) in a tradition has said:

*“And from this nation there will also be chosen its Imam.”*[^3]

This noble statement refers to this fact that in any age there will be
necessary to exist an immaculate witness, and the abovementioned
tradition is of the kind of statement of the extension of this meaning.

[^1]: Surah As-Safat, No. 37, verse 30

[^2]: According to Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 4, P. 136

[^3]: The Commentary of Al-Mizan, Vol. 16, P. 20


