Section 9: The Apostle (Muhammad)
=================================

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 83
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الدَّارُ الاَخِرَةُ نَجْعَلُهَا لِلَّذِينَ لاَ يُرِيدُونَ
عُلُوّاً فِي الاَرْضِ وَلاَ فَسَاداً وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***83. “That abode of the Hereafter, we assign it for those who do not
intend to exalt themselves in the earth nor (to make) mischief and the
good end is for the pious ones.”***

This verse works the resolution of the story of Korah, indicating that
any amassing wealth and self-superiority is the cause of destruction in
the world and wretchedness in the Hereafter. According to some Islamic
narrations, Hadrat Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) recited this holy verse for the
merchants in the market.[^1]

A tradition indicates that if a person thinks of himself as superior to
another person because of having a better shoelace, he is one of those
who intend to exalt themselves in the earth.[^2]

There are many people who, for providing a residence, vehicle, clothing,
speech, marriage and nominating their child, do something that they may
become recognized in the society and attract people to themselves. Such
people, as the above tradition denotes, intend to exalt themselves in
the earth and will be deprived from Heaven.

After mentioning the agitating story of that rich, proud, and criminal
man, i.e., Korah, there is a statement in this verse which, in fact, is
a general conclusion from this event.

It says:

***“That abode of the Hereafter, we assign it for those who do not
intend to exalt themselves in the earth nor (to make) mischief…”***

Not only they are not self-superior and mischievous, but also they do
not even intend to do it. Their heart is free from these affairs and
their soul is far from these pollutions.

Whatever causes the deprivation of man from the merits of the abode of
Hereafter is found, indeed, in these very two things. All sins are
concentrated in self-superiority and mischief in the earth.

The reason is that whatever Allah has prohibited us from is surely
against the system of the creation of man and the development of his
entity. Therefore performing it disturbs the system of his life and,
thus, it is the source of mischief in the earth.

Even the subject of self-superiority is itself one of the clear expanses
of mischief in the earth, but its extraordinary importance has caused it
to be mentioned particularly.

Islamic narrations have specially emphasized on this subject very much.
A tradition from Imam Amir-ul-Mu’minin Ali (as) denotes that he said:

*“sometimes it happens that someone likes that his shoelace is better
than that of his friend and for this very thing he will be counted in
this verse, (because this mood is a small branch of
self-superiority).”*[^3]

It is interesting that the author of Kashshaf commentary, after
mentioning this tradition says:

*“Some of the covetous ones say that according to the sentence:*

***‘Verily Pharaoh exalted himself in the land (of Egypt)…’***[^4]

*the word ‘**to exalt**’ mentioned in the abovementioned verse refers to
Pharaoh, and according to the sentence:*

***“…and do not seek to make mischief in the land”***[^5]

*‘**mischief**’ refers to Korah, and they say he who is not like Pharaoh
and Korah, Paradise and the eternal abode belong to him, and thus they
send only Pharaoh and Korah and those similar to these two out from
Heaven and consider the rest belonging to them.*

*They have not taken the last sentence of this verse under consideration
which says:*

***“…and the good end is for the pious ones”***

*such that Ali (as) has taken it in mind.’*

The matter that we must add to this statement is that this group of
people have been in err even for knowing Pharaoh and Korah, because
Pharaoh both exalted in the earth and was a mischief-maker, when the
verse says:

***“…Verily he was of the mischief-makers”.***[^6]

And Korah also was both a mischief-maker and exalted according to the
sentence which says:

***“So he went forth unto his people in his adornment…”***[^7]

Another tradition about Imam Ali- (as) indicates that during his
apparently caliphate, Ali (as) used to walk in the market, leading those
who were lost, helping the weak and, when passing by the sellers and
trades men, he recited this verse for them:

***“That abode of the Hereafter, we assign it for those who do not
intend to exalt themselves in the earth nor (to make) mischief and the
good end is for the pious ones.”,***

then he (as) usually said:

*“This verse has revealed about the just and humble rulers and also
other powerful ones among people.”*[^8]

This means that in the same manner that I have not use the government as
a means for my self-superiority, you must not use your financial ability
as means for your domination over others, either, because the good end
belongs to that group who do not want to make mischief and do not seek
self-superiority.

The Qur’an at the end of the verse says:

***“…the good end is for the pious ones.”***

The word ‘end’ in its vast concept is ‘the good end’, victory in this
world, and Heaven and its bounties in the next world. We saw what an
evil fate had the people like Korah and Pharaoh, though their might was
unique. Since they were not pious they afflicted the most painful fate.

We conclude the speech about this verse by a tradition narrated from
Imam Sadiq (as).

It happened that when Imam Sadiq (as) recited this verse he began
weeping and said:

*“By Allah! With this verse, all of the hopes have entirely perished,”*

and it is difficult to gain the good abode of Hereafter.[^9]

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 84
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ جَآءَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ فَلَهُ خَيْرٌ مِنْهَا وَمَن جَآءَ
بِالسَّيّـِئَةِ فَلاَ يُجْزَي الَّذِينَ عَمِلُوا السَّيّـِئاتِ إِلاَّ
مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***84. “Whoever brings good, he shall have (reward) better than it, and
whoever brings evil, then those who commit misdeeds shall not be
requited except for what they used to do.”***

After mentioning this fact that the good abode of Hereafter and its
bounties are specific to the humble, pious truth-seekers, in this verse
the Qur’an refers to stating a general law which is a complex of
‘justice’ and ‘favour’ concerning both reward and retribution.

It says:

***“Whoever brings good, he shall have (reward) better than it…”***

This is the stage of favour or kindness. That is, Allah is not
ill-liberate, as some people are, that they try to pay the wage or
reward of someone so just and exact in order to observe justice.

Sometimes, He gives the reward of a deed tenfold and sometimes one
hundred fold out of His unending grace, and at least He pays ten fold of
it, as Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 160 says:

***“Whoever brings a good (deed), he shall have ten times its like…”***

And only Allah knows its maximum, a part of which concerning the payment
of the alms-tax in the way of Allah is mentioned in Surah Al-Baqarah,
No. 2, verse 61.

Of course, this is not an additional or undue reward. It depends on the
level of purity of the deed, sincerity, good intention and serenity of
the heart, and this is the stage of Divine favour for the righteous.

Then the Qur’an points to the punishment of the wrong doers.

It announces:

***“…and whoever brings evil, then those who commit misdeeds shall not
be requited except for what they used to do.”***

This is the stage of Divine Justice, because, according to the verses of
the Qur’an, they will not be punished more than what they have done,
even as an atom.

It is interesting that it implies that their own deeds are their
retribution. That is, their deed, that according to the law of
permanence of beings in the world of existence, the effect of which
remains in this world, whether inside of the soul or outside of it, and
on the Day of Hereafter, which is the day of manifestation of what is
hidden, will be depicted in an appropriate form and will accompany the
sinners and will torture them.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 85
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْءَانَ لَرَآدُّكَ إِلَي مَعَادٍ
قُل رَبّـِي أَعْلَمُ مَن جَآءَ بِالْهُدَي وَمَنْ هُوَ فِي ضَلاَلٍ
مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***85. “Verily He Who has (revealed and) ordained the Qur’an unto you
will bring you back to the destination. Say: ‘My Lord knows best him who
has brought the guidance and him who is in manifest error.”***

### The Occasion of Revelation

A group of commentators have narrated an occasion of revelation for this
verse from Ibn-Abbas, the content of which is as follows:

When the Prophet (S) was coming as migration from Mecca to Medina, he
reached Juhfah, a land not so distanced from Mecca. He thought of his
home, Mecca, a city which is the secure sanctuary of Allah, and where
Ka‘bah was located, the thing that the heart and soul of the Prophet (S)
had an unbroken link with it.

The signs of this yearning, which had been mixed with an impression and
sadness, were seen in his blessed face. Here Gabriel, the harbinger of
revelation, came down and asked him (S) whether he was fond of his city
and home town. The Prophet answered him positively.

Gabriel said:

***“Allah has sent this message for you: ‘Verily He Who has (revealed
and) ordained the Qur’an unto you will bring you back to the
destination.’…”***

And we know that this great promise was finally fulfilled and the
Prophet of Islam (S), with a mighty army and with abundant glory,
returned to Mecca victoriously, and the secure sanctuary of Allah was
given to him without fighting and blood shedding.

Thus, the abovementioned verse is one of the miraculous predictions of
the Qur’an which stated such a prophecy so decisively and without any
condition and it happened after a short time.

This verse addresses the Prophet of Islam (S) and, following the
statement about some parts of the life story of Moses, the son of ‘Imran
(as), and his struggle against Pharaoh, gives a glad tidings with some
serious instructions to the Prophet of Islam (S).

We said that the first verse out of these verses, as it is circulated,
was revealed in Juhfah when the Prophet (S) was going to Medina. He was
going to go to Yathrib and change its name to Madinat-ur-Rasul in order
to form the main center of the Islamic government there and to cause the
people’s talents to open to blow.

He wanted to make it a platform for availability to the vast Divine
government and his aims. Yet, his love and affection to Mecca vexed him
hard and that periodic from that secure sanctuary of Allah was very
inconvenient for him.

Here, the light of revelation enlightened his pure heart and gave him
the good tidings of returning to his hometown, and announced:

***“Verily He Who has (revealed and) ordained the Qur’an unto you will
bring you back to the destination…”***

Do not grieve! The same Lord Who returned Moses to his mother when he
was a baby; the same Lord Who after ten years of absence returned him
from Egypt to his main home-town in order to lighten the light of
Monotheism and form the government of the oppressed after breaking the
power of Pharaoh and his people, the same Lord will return you to Mecca
with full might and strength and will lighten the light of Monotheism by
your hand in this holy land.

These affairs are easy for the power of the Lord, the same Lord Who sent
down the Qur’an unto your heart and made its conveyance obligatory and
its ordinances incumbent. Yes, He is the Lord of the Qur’an, the Mighty
Lord of the earth and heavens.

Then the Qur’an adds that, against the stubbornness of the obstinate
opponents, the Prophet (S) must treat as follows:

***“…Say: ‘My Lord knows best him who has brought the guidance and him
who is in manifest error.”***

The way of guidance is clear, and their aberration is manifest. They
make themselves tied in vain. Allah is well aware and the truth-seeking
hearts also know this reality.

Of course, the manifest commentary of the verse was the same thing which
was said in the above, but some of the commentators have delivered some
other probable meanings upon the Qur’anic word ***/ma‘ad/*** and said
that the purpose of /ma‘ad/ is ‘returning to life after death’, or ‘the
land’, or ‘the rank of the Great Intercession’, or ‘Paradise’, or
Jerusalem which was the place of ascension of the first prophet, and the
like.

But regarding to the whole content of Surah Qasas and what is said in
the story life of Moses and the Children of Israel, as well as the
occasion of revelation that was cited in the above, all of these
meanings seem improbable except the commentary of /ma‘ad/ i.e., the
place of return, the land of Mecca.

In addition, Resurrection on the Day of Hereafter is not something that
can be specific to the Prophet (S), while the verse speaks only about
the Prophet (S), and this verse, being mentioned after the verse
concerning the reward and retribution in the Hereafter, not only is not
an evidence for this matter but also it may be a reason for its
contrary, because the previous verse talks about the felicity in the
next world and it is appropriate that the verse under discussion talks
about the victory in this world.

By the way, the commentaries of Burhan, Safi, and ‘Atyab-ul-Bayan
narrated from Jabir, from Hadrat Imam Baqir (as) and Imam Sadiq (as)
that the purpose of the Qur’anic phrase: ***/la radduka ’ila ma‘ad/***
is the period of Raj‘at (return to this world after death) when the
Prophet (S), Imam Amir-ul-Mu’minin Ali (as), the Immaculate Imams (as),
those who are absolutely believers, and those who are absolutely
disbelievers will return to this world and the Imams will govern
throughout the world and will take vengeance from the enemies.

The narrations of Raj‘at are widely transmitted and Raj‘at is of the
self-evident knowledge of Shi‘ah sect. There are also some verses in the
Holy Qur’an that adapt to it.

For example:

***“He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of
Truth, that He may prevail it over all religions, though the polytheists
may detest it.”,***[^10]

***“Allah has promised those of you who believe and do righteous deeds,
that He will certainly appoint them successors in the earth as He
appointed successors those before them; and that He will certainly
establish for them their religion which He has chosen for them; and that
certainly He will, after their fear, give them security in exchange.
They will do worship Me (alone) and not*** ***associate aught with Me;
and whoever disbelieves after this, then these are they that are
evil-doers.”***[^11]

and some other verses. Up to now the religion of Islam has not prevailed
over all religions and the promise of Allah has not been done yet, but
it will not fail either, and this belongs only to the period of Raj‘at.

The Late Sayyid Murtada ‘Alam-al-Huda has narrated in his book: ‘Muhkam
Wa Mutashabih’ from Amir-ul-Mu’minin Ali (as) that this verse relates to
Raj‘at in this world.[^12]

At the presence of Imam Baqir (as) Jabir-ibn-‘Abdillah-’Ansari was
spoken about, when Imam Baqir said:

*“May Divine Mercy be upon Jabir. He was one of our jurisprudents.*

*His knowledge had reached to a point that he knew the verse:*

***‘Verily He Who has (revealed and) ordained the Qur’an unto you will
bring you back to the destination…’***

*which relates to Raj‘at.”*[^13]

Once Imam Sadiq (as) was asked about the commentary of this verse. He
said:

*“By Allah, the world will not end until the holy Prophet (S) and
Amir-ul-Mu’minin Ali (as) meet each other in Thuwiyyah. They will build
a mosque there the doors of which will be numerous.”*[^14]

Thuwiyyah is the name of a province in the suburb of Kufah.[^15]

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 86
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كُنْتَ تَرْجُوا أَن يُلْقَي إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابُ إِلاَّ رَحْمَةً
مِن رَبّـِكَ فَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ ظَهِيراً لِلْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***86. “And you did not hope that the Book should be cast unto you,
except it be a mercy from your Lord, therefore be not a supporter of the
disbelievers.”***

The Divine prophets, with that purity of soul and perfection in worship,
did not expect to receive revelation. Revelation and sending Heavenly
Books are among the affairs of sovereignty of Allah.

There are two similarities between Hadrat Musa (as) and Hadrat Muhammad
(S) found in the verses of this holy Surah:

1. Hoping to obtain fire Hadrat Musa went toward it and he reached a
Light. The Prophet of Islam went into Hirra cave intending to worship
and he was acquainted with Heavenly revelation.

This verse points to one of the greatest bounties of Allah bestowed on
the Prophet (S).

It says:

***“And you did not hope that the Book should be cast unto you, except
it be a mercy from your Lord…”***

A great deal of people had heard the glad tidings of the advent of the
new religion and, perhaps, a group of the People of the Book, and other
than them, were waiting that the revelation might be sent down on them
and Allah would give them this responsibility, but the Prophet (S) did
not think of it and Allah knew him the most eligible for it.

Then the verse continues implicitly saying that now for giving thanks
upon this great bounty he should follow this command:

***“…therefore be not a supporter of the disbelievers.”***

Surely the Prophet (S) was never a supporter of the disbelievers, this
commandment was an emphasis concerning him, and it was the statement of
an important duty for others.

This meaning, in fact, agrees with the matter which was mentioned in
former verses about Moses that he (as) said:

***“…‘My Lord! For the bounty you have bestowed on me, never shall I be
a supporter of the guilty’.”***[^16]

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 87
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يَصُدُّنَّكَ عَنْ ءَايَاتِ اللَّهِ بَعْدَ إِذْ اُنزِلَتْ إِلَيْكَ
وَادْعُ إِلَي رَبّـِكَ وَلا تُكُونَنَّ مِنَ المُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***87. “And let them not turn you away from the signs of Allah after
they have been sent down unto you, and invite (mankind) unto your Lord,
and be not of the polytheists.”***

Being attentive to Monotheism and negation of paganism and infidelity,
it is so important that in these verses Allah has warned the Prophet (S)
about them.

Most sentences concerning this matter in these recent verses are
accompanied with the Arabic signs of emphasis, and with the exaggeration
form:

***(be not of …, let them not turn you away …).***

The two ending verses of the Surah are an emphasis on the subject of
Monotheism with some different expressions and reasoning. It is
Monotheism which is the origin of all religious affairs, a Monotheism
that is both source and branch, both whole and part.

In this holy verse there are four instructions given to the Prophet (S)
and Allah is qualified by four attributes which complete the whole
discussions of the verses of this Surah.

At first, it says about the pagans:

***“And let them not turn you away from the signs of Allah after they
have been sent down unto you…”***

Although the prohibition is for pagans, its concept is that the Prophet
(S) should not surrender for their hindrances and plots. It is just like
that we say so and so must not temptate you, i.e., you should not
surrender to his temptations.

Thus, the Prophet (S) is commanded that when the Divine verses are sent
down, he should stand decisively on them without any hesitation and
doubt. He (S) must remove the hindrances that are on his way, and go
forward to the destination with firm steps, because Allah is with him
and supports him.

According to the statement of Ibn-Abbas, the famous commentator, though
the addressee is the Prophet (S), the purpose of the verse is all
mankind.

Following this instruction, which had a negative aspect, this holy verse
issues the second instruction, which has a positive aspect.

It says:

***“…and invite (mankind) unto your Lord…”***

He is the Lord Who is your owner, your trainee, and your fosterer.

After invitation to Allah, the third instruction is negation of any
polytheism and idolatry. It says implicitly that he (S) should never
become of the polytheists, because the way of Monotheism is brightly
clear and those who pave it are on the straight way.

Surah Al-Qasas - Verse 88
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَدْعُ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلهاً ءَاخَرَ لآ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ كُلُّ
شَيْءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلاَّ وَجْهَهُ لَهُ الْحُكْمُ وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***88. “And do not call upon another god with Allah, there is no god but
He. Every thing is perishable but He. He is the Authority and unto Him
shall you be returned.”***

The true monotheist is the one who is free from all objects of worship,
great powers, deviated parties, and tyrants:

***(… do not call upon another god with Allah).***

This holy verse is a second emphasis on the negation of any polytheism,
when it says:

***“And do not call upon another god with Allah…”***

These consecutive instructions, each of which emphasizes on one another,
make clear the importance of the subject of Monotheism in Islamic
programs without which every thing is lost.

Next to these four instructions, the Qur’an qualifies Allah by four
attributes all of which are some repeated emphasis on the subject of
Monotheism.

At first, it says:

***“…there is no god but He…”***

***“…Every thing is perishable but He…”***

The Judgment and Sovereignty in the world of creation and the world of
religion both are specific to His Pure Essence.

The verse says:

***“…He is the Authority…”***

And the return of all of you is toward Him (s.w.t.):

***“…and unto Him shall you be returned.”***

These recent three qualities can be a reasoning upon proving the
Monotheism and abandoning any kind of idolatry which is inside of the
first quality, because:

When we are all perishable and existence is allocated to Him;

When the administration of the system of existence belongs to Him;

And when the return of all of us in the Hereafter is toward Him, what
kind of function can other objects of worship have? And except Him, what
is appropriate to be worshipped?

The great commentators of the Holy Qur’an have delivered different
matters upon the sentence:

***“Everything is perishable but He”***

which turn on the axis of commenting the Qur’anic term: ***/wajh/*** and
the Arabic word /halik/.

Philologically the Arabic word /wajh/ is applied for a part of the body
which is located on the face of man, but when it is used concerning
Allah, it means ‘His Pure Essence.’

The Arabic term /halik/ is derived from /halak/ which means ‘death’ and
‘destruction’. Therefore the abovementioned sentence refers to the
destruction of all beings except His Pure Essence.

They are perishable not only after the end of this world, but also they
are perishable before Him just now, because all beings are dependant on
His Pure Essence and in all moments they take their own possibility of
being from Him and they have nothing from their own essence but that
which is from Allah.

Moreover, all beings of this material world are variable and are in the
expose of variations, even according to the belief of
transubstantiation, the essence is the object of change, and we know
motion and variation means perishing into a new thing permanently.

In any moment the beings of the world of matter die and are quickened.
Therefore, just now they are perishable and destroyed. The only Essence
that does not change, has not destruction, and is absolute independent
is His Holy Essence.

We also know that at the end of this world destruction will have a more
clear manifestation and, as the Qur’an says:

***“Everyone on it must pass away,”***

***“And there will endure for ever the person of your Lord, the Lord of
glory and honour.”***[^17]

Not only the beings on the earth, but also those who are in heavens will
perish.

The Qur’an says:

***“The Trumpet will (just) be sounded, when all that are in the heavens
and on the earth will swoon…”***[^18]

This is a commentary consistent with the apparent of this noble verse
and other verses of the Qur’an. But some other commentators have
delivered some other commentaries on it, too, including as follows:

The objective of the Qur’anic word ***/wajh/*** is ***‘righteous
deed’***, and the concept of the verse is that all deeds will perish
save the deed which has been done for the Pure Essence of Allah.

Some others have said that the objective of the Qur’anic word
***/wajh/*** is that very relation of the things to Allah. Thus, the
concept of the holy verse is that everything is naturally perishable
except for its relation to Allah.

Some commentators have said that the Qur’anic word ***/wajh/*** means
***‘religion’*** and the concept of the verse is that all religions are
perishable and nullified, except the religion of Allah. They have taken
the Qur’anic phrase ***/la hul hukm/*** in the sense of religious
sovereignty and considered it an emphasis upon this commentary.

They have also commented the Qur’anic sentence:

***“Unto Him shall you be returned”***

in the sense of returning to Allah in choosing religion and a second
emphasis on this meaning.

These interpretations, in fact, do not contrast to what was said in the
above, because when we accept that the only thing that will remain in
this world is the Pure Essence of Allah, it will become clear that
whatever is somehow related to His Pure Essence, that thing will also
take the colour of existence and eternity to it.

The religion which is from His side is eternal; the righteous deed that
is done for Him is eternal; and the Divine leaders who relate to Him,
from this point that they are related to Him, are eternal. In short,
everything that is somehow related to the Pure Essence of Allah, from
that point is not perishable and has not destruction.

At the end, some ‘fanatic sects’ of Sunnite people say that whoever
calls upon other than Allah will become a polytheist, since Allah has
said:

***“…do not call upon another god with Allah…”.***

Therefore, those who call the saints of Allah in their supplications are
polytheists.

But this verse explains that polytheist is the one who calls upon other
than Allah as another god:

***“…do not call upon another god with Allah…”.***

And it is evident that the Shi‘ite people do not call any rank as Allah,
but they call the one as a person who has honour with Him, the honour
that has been given him from the side of Allah, such as prophets, the
friends of Allah, not any illusive intercessor and honoured, since the
idol-worshippers in their imagination also consider an honour for their
idol.

In this holy verse, wiping polytheism has been stated with different
phrases:

1- Do not call upon another god with Allah.

2- There is no god but He.

3- Everything is perishable but He.

4- He is the Authority.

5- Unto Him shall you be returned.

Every year, the king of Sa‘udi Arabia invites the scholars of Islamic
sects to entertain them on the Day of festival of sacrifice.

One year ‘Allamah Sayyid Sharaf-ud-Din Jabal-‘Amili (one of the
outstanding scholars of Lebanon) was invited to that festival. As soon
as ‘Allamah entered the meeting, he gave a Qur’an with leather cover as
a gift to the king. The king took it and kissed it.

‘Allamah told him he was a polytheist. The king became inconvenient that
why ‘Allamah accused him like that. ‘Allamah answered him that it was so
because the king kissed a piece of leather which was an animal’s skin
and respecting the skin of an animal is polytheism.

The king said:

*“I do not kiss any skin. My shoe is made of leather and the skin of
animal, but I never kiss it. This piece of leather has been used as the
cover of the Qur’an.”*

‘Allamah said:

*“We do not kiss any piece of iron, either. We kiss the iron which has
been used as the box, or burial chamber, and the door and window of the
grave of the Prophet (S) or that of our Immaculate Imams (as).”*

Yes, polytheism is the case when we take someone or something as god
instead of Allah, and consider an independent might for that. The
Shi‘ite do not consider the might of the friends of Allah as an
independent might, but they consider it a power dependent to the power
of Allah.

Therefore, if the Shi‘ite make a dome, or build a shrine, it is for the
sake that they inform people that there is a monotheist buried here, or
the one who is buried here is a martyr in the way of Allah and has been
devoted for Unity. Thus, a dome and an Islamic shrine usually means a
center under which the call of Unity is heard, not a center opposite to
mosque.

Imam Rida (as) said:

*“The prophet of Allah and His Authorities on the earth are /wajhullah/
by whom Allah, religion, and His cognition are paid attention to.”*[^19]

We recite in Nudbah Supplication about the Expected Imam (May Allah
hasten his glad advent):

*“Where is the Authority of Allah that will come?”*

And also we read in it:

*“Where is the Authority of Allah who pays attention to the saints?”*

*O Lord! Do taste us the sweetness of recitation of the Qur’an,
contemplation in it and being advised by it!*

*O Lord! Enlighten our hearts with the Light of the Qur’an, and set our
entity a light giver!*

*O Lord! Cause our manner and speech to be emerged from Qur’an and from
the manner and life of Prophet Muhammad (S) and his Immaculate progeny
(Ahl-ul-Bayt) (as)*

*Amen, O the Lord of the Worlds!*

[^1]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, following the verse.

[^2]: Jawami‘-ul-Jami‘, the Commentary, following the verse

[^3]: Jawami‘-ul-Jami‘, the Commentary, following the verse

[^4]: The current Surah, verse 4

[^5]: Ibid, verse 77

[^6]: The current Surah, verse 4

[^7]: The current Surah, verse 79

[^8]: Zazan has narrated this tradition from Amir-ul-Mu’minin Ali (as),
taken from Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^9]: The commentary of Ali-ibn-’Ibrahim, following the verse.

[^10]: Surah At-Taubah, No. 9, verse 33

[^11]: Surah An-Nur, No. 24, verse 55

[^12]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 93, P. 87

[^13]: Burhan commentary, Vol. 3, P. 240, and Al-’Iqaz, P. 386

[^14]: Bihar, Vol. 53, P. 113

[^15]: Mustadrak Safinah, Vol. 1, P. 429

[^16]: The current Surah, verse 17

[^17]: Surah Ar-Rahman, No. 55, verse 26 and 27

[^18]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 68

[^19]: Tauhid-i-Saduq, P. 117


