Section 2: Noah and Abraham’s Mission
=====================================

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verses 14-15
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَآ نُوحاً إِلَي قَوْمِهِ فَلَبِثَ فِيهِمْ أَلْفَ
سَنَةٍ إِلاَّ خَمْسِينَ عَاماً فَأَخَذَهُمُ الطُّوفَانُ وَهُمْ
ظَالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَنجَيْنَاهُ وَأَصْحَابَ السَّفِينَةِ وَجَعَلْنَاهَآ ءَايَةً
لّـِلْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***14. “And certainly We sent Noah to his people, so he remained among
them a thousand years save fifty years. And the deluge overtook them
while they were unjust.”***  
***15. “So we delivered him and the Companions of the Ark. And We made
it a sign for all peoples.”***

Propagation and training need patience and resistance. This holy verse
shows the resistance of Noah (as) and obstinacy of people.

However, since the previous verses had some statements about the general
trial of people, from here on the verses contain some discussions about
the hard trials of the former divine prophets and their peoples that how
they were under the pressure and hurt of their enemies, and how they
applied considerable patience that finally they gained victory.

This was both consolation for the companions of the holy Prophet of
Islam (S), who were under the harsh pressure of the powerful enemies of
Islam in Mecca, and a threat for the enemies that they should be careful
of the painful end of their lifetime.

At first, it begins from the first arch-prophet, i.e. Noah (as), and in
some short sentences it explains that part of his life that is more
suitable with the condition of the Muslims of that day.

It says:

***“And certainly We sent Noah to his people, so he remained among them
a thousand years save fifty years…”***

All days and nights Noah was busy teaching and inviting people to
Monotheism. During this long time, that is 950 years, using the
opportunity both in private and among public, Noah called them toward
Allah and he did not become tired from this constant effort, and he did
not let weakness and intermission come to him.

Yet, they did not believe save a small group (about eighty people as
history narrates), that is, every twelve years one person.

Therefore, O Prophet! you should not get tired in the way of invitation
toward the truth and struggle against deviations, because your program
comparing that of Noah is very easy.

Now behold that how the end of this cruel and obstinate group of people
was.

The verse continues saying:

***“…And the deluge overtook them while they were unjust.”***

And thus the length of their disgraceful life ended and their castles,
palaces, and dead bodies were buried under the waves of flood.

The application of ‘a thousand years save fifty years’ in the verse,
while it could say 950 years from the beginning, refers to the greatness
and length of this time, because the figure ‘one thousand’ which is used
in the form of ‘a thousand years’ for ‘the length of the time of
propagation’ is counted a very enormous figure:

The apparent of the above verse shows that this amount was not the whole
lifetime of Noah, though the present Torah has mentioned this figure for
the entire lifetime of Noah[^1], but he lived another length of time
after Flood either, and according to some commentators this time was
three hundred years.

Of course, this long lifetime comparing the usual life times of our age
is very long and it does not seem natural. It is probable that the
length of lifetime in those days was different from that of today.

Some documents indicate that, in principle, the people of Noah had a
long lifetime and, in this course, Noah had also been extraordinary.
However, this shows that the man’s structure lets him have a long
lifetime.

The studies of the scientists show today that man’s lifetime has not a
fix and determined restriction. Some people consider it as limited to
120 years, or less and more than that which is completely baseless, and
with the change of conditions it may vary.

Now, by some experiences, scientists could prolong the lifetime of some
plants, or some other living creatures, to twelve times of their
ordinary lifetime, and in some instances, if you do not wonder, to nine
hundred times. If they succeed they can increase the man’s lifetime with
the same criterion, and man may live thousands of years.[^2]

By the way, it must be noted that the Arabic word /tufan/ originally
means any event that surrounds man. (It derives from Tawaf).

Then it has been used for abundant water, or a strong flood which covers
a vast land and overtakes it, and also it has been used for any thing
that is severe, much, and stretched, irrespective of wind, fire, and
water. Sometimes it has also been used in the sense of severe darkness
of the night.[^3]

It is interesting that the holy verse says: /wa hum zalimun/ (while they
were unjust) which means: at the time of the occurrence of the flood,
they were going on their injustice. This indicates that if they had left
this deed and became regretful with going to Allah, they would not have
been involved in such an evil fate.

Then, in the next verse, it adds:

***“So we delivered him and the Companions of the Ark. And We made it a
sign for all peoples.”***

It was made a sign for all peoples and it means that it is a
gazing-stock for all people until the Hereafter Day, because the event
of the Ark separated the line of the believers from disbelievers and
distinguished the righteous ones from the guilty ones, in order to prove
that Noah was truthful in his statement, and his people were infidels.

By the way, the pronoun in the Arabic phrase: /ja‘alnaha/ refers to the
Arc.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 16
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِبْرَاهِيمَ إِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاتَّقُوهُ
ذَلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. “And (recollect) Abraham when he said unto his people ‘Worship
Allah and be in owe of Him; that will be best for you if you did but
know’.”***

Monotheism and piety are at the top of the programs of Divine prophets,
and, therefore, worship without piety is not so effective.

Next to the concisely explained event of Noah (as) and his people, the
Qur’an refers to the story of Abraham (as), the second great
arch-prophet, and says:

***“And (recollect) Abraham when he said unto his people ‘Worship Allah
and be in owe of Him; that will be best for you if you did but
know’.”***

Here, the noble verse has stated two important creedal and practical
programs of the prophets with together, which is invitation to
‘Monotheism’ and ‘piety’.

At the end of the verse it says if you contemplate correctly, following
Monotheism and piety is the best for you, because they save you in this
world from pollutions of polytheism and sin and affliction, and your
next world will also be with perpetual felicity.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 17
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ أَوْثَاناً وَتَخْلُقُونَ
إِفْكاً إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ لاَ يَمْلِكُونَ
لَكُمْ رِزْقاً فَابْتَغُوا عِندَ اللَّهِ الرّ‌ِزْقَ وَاعْبُدُوهُ
وَاشْكُرُوا لَهُ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. “You worship idols besides Allah and you create a calumny, verily
those whom you worship besides Allah do not own for you any sustenance,
therefore seek the sustenance from Allah and worship (only) Him, and be
grateful to Him, unto Him you shall be returned.”***

Through the previous verse, Hadrat ’Ibrahim invited people to worship
and obedience of Allah, and in this holy verse he (as) negates the
worship of other than Allah and counts it useless while, at the end of
the verse, he emphasizes again on the worship of Allah.

Then, Abraham points to the reasons of the nullification of idolatry and
condemns their belief earnestly with different statements, each of which
contains a separate reason.

At first, he says:

***“You worship idols besides Allah…”***

These idols are some statues with no soul. They have no will, no
intellect, no sense, and no understanding, so that their appearance is a
clear evidence for the falseness of the belief of idolatry.

You must be careful that the Arabic word /auan/ is the plural form of
/waan/ in the sense of some pieces of stone which idolaters curve and
worship.

After this, he goes further and he implicitly says that not only the
circumstances of these idols show that they cannot be worshipped, but
you also know that you yourselves forge some falsehoods and put the name
of the object of worship on them.

The verse continues as follows:

***“…and you create a calumny…”***

What kind of reason do they have for this great lie, except some fancies
and superstitions?

Since the Arabic term /taxluqun/ is derived from /xalaqa/ which
sometimes is used with the meaning of ‘to create and to make’ and
sometimes with the sense of ‘to lie’, some commentators have mentioned
another commentary upon this sentence which is different from what was
said in the above.

They have said that the purpose is that you grate these idols (false
idols) with your own hand and you create them. (Therefore, the word
/’ifk/ means ‘false objects of worship’ and /xalq/ means ‘to grate and
to create some stone and wooden idols’.

Then he refers to the third reason, saying that your worship due to
these idols is either for material interests or your fate in the next
world, and whichever of them it may be it is wrong, because:

***“…verily those whom you worship besides Allah do not own for you any
sustenance…”***

You yourselves accept that idols are not creators, and the Creator is
Allah, therefore the giver of sustenance is also Allah.

The verse says:

***“…therefore seek the sustenance from Allah…”***

And since He is the giver of sustenance, then worship and thank Him,
too.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and worship (only) Him, and be grateful to Him…”***

In other words, one of the incentives of worship is usually thanksgiving
unto the true benefactor. You know that the true Benefactor is Allah,
then thanks and worship is also specific to His Pure Essence.

And if you seek the life of the next world, the return of all of you is
unto Him, not unto idols.

The verse says:

***“…unto Him you shall be returned.”***

Idols are effective neither here nor there. Thus, Abraham (as) condemns
their logic by means of a few short and clear proofs in these verses.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 18
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن تُكَذّ‌ِبُوا فَقَدْ كَذَّبَ اُمَمٌ مّـِن قَبْلِكُمْ وَمَا عَلَي
الرَّسُولِ إِلاَّ الْبَلاَغُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. “And if you reject (the Message), so did generations before you
and nothing is incumbent on the messenger but a plain delivery (of the
message).”***

The rejection of the opponents should not hinder the act of propagation.

In this verse, as a threat and also as heedlessness to them, Abraham
(as) says:

***“And if you reject (the Message), so did generations before you…”***

And, of course, they were punished severely with a painful chastisement.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and nothing is incumbent on the messenger but a plain delivery (of
the message).”***

The objective of “***generations before you***” is the people of Noah
and the nations who came to live after them.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 19
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَ لَمْ يَرَوْا كَيْفَ يُبْدِئُ اللَّهُ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ
إِنَّ ذَلِكَ عَلَي اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. “Have they not seen how Allah originates creation, then brings it
back again? Verily that is easy for Allah.”***

Creation, causing to die, and to raise from the dead are the permanent
work of Allah; and the world of creation is the manifestation of
providence in creating the life and death of phenomenon.

In this point, the Qur’an temporarily leaves out the story of Abraham,
and completes the discussion that Abraham had in the field of Monotheism
and expressing his own prophethood by mentioning reason upon
Resurrection, and concerning the rejecters of Resurrection it says:

***“Have they not seen how Allah originates creation, then brings it
back again?…”***

The purpose of the act of ‘see’ is the observation by heart and having
knowledge about it. It means: do they not know the quality of the
creation of Allah? The same One Who had the power of ‘the first
creation’ is also able to return it, because having power on one thing
is the power on its similar ones, too.

This is also probable that the word ‘see’ here is used in the sense of
observation by the eye, because everybody observes by his eye that dead
lands are quickened, plants grow, babies are born from sperm drop, and
chickens are produced from eggs. The One Who is able to do such things,
is also able to bring the dead to life again.

Then, at the end, as an emphasis, it says:

***“…Verily that is easy for Allah.”***

It is so because comparing the creation on the first day, revival is
counted an easier work.

This meaning, of course, is due to the conception and logic of
individuals, else being easy or difficult has no meaning for the One
Whose Power is unlimited. It is our limit power that creates these
concepts and regarding its application, some things are difficult and
some others are easy.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 20
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ سِيرُوا فِي الأَرْضِ فَانْظُرُوا كَيْفَ بَدَأَ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ
يُنشِئُ النَّشْأَةَ الاَخِرَةَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَي كُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. “Say: ‘Travel in the earth and see how He has originated the
creation, then Allah brings forth the later creation; verily Allah is
powerful over everything’.”***

By exact study in creation, we can remove our doubt and know Allah
better than before.

Peregrination, traveling, studying the nature, and purposeful excursion
is a duty and value.

This holy verse continues the subject of Resurrection. This meaning has
been expressed in the form of parenthetical clauses in the middle of the
story of Abraham (as).

This is not the first time that we encounter such a method of
explanation. This is the style of the Qur’an that when the statement of
a story reaches a sensitive stage, it temporarily leaves the rest of it
and pays to the necessary conclusion emerged from that story.

However, this verse invites people to extroversive traveling upon the
subject of Resurrection, while the previous verse had mostly the side of
introversive traveling. The verse implicitly says that you should travel
on the earth in order to see kinds of living creatures, and different
nations with their specialties and observe how Allah (s.w.t.) has
originated the creation.

The verse announces:

***“Say: ‘Travel in the earth and see how He has originated the
creation…”***

Then, the same Lord, Who has the power to create these plenty creatures
with various colours and different nations, is able to bring forth the
next creation, because by the first creation He has proved His Power to
all and, truly, He is powerful over everything.

The verse says:

***“…then Allah brings forth the later creation; verily Allah is
powerful over everything’.”***

Both this verse and the verse before it prove the possibility of
Resurrection through the way of the vastness of Providence, with this
difference that the first verse talks about the first creation of man
himself and whatever is around him while the second verse commands to
study the different states of other nations and creatures so that they
see the first life in different features and in various conditions, and
be acquainted with the generality of the Power of Allah and understand
His ability to the return of this life.

In fact, in the same way that proving Monotheism is sometimes possible
by observing the ‘introversive signs’ and sometimes by ‘extroversive
signs’, proving resurrection can be done through both of them, too.

Today, this verse can give scientists some deeper and more exact meaning
in this manner that they go and see the effects of the first living
creatures in the depth of the seas, inside mountains, and between the
levels of the earth.

In this way, they can understand a part of the secrets of the beginning
of life in the earth as well as the greatness and power of Allah, and do
know that He is able to bring back the life.

By the way, the Arabic word /naš’at/ originally means ‘to create and
train something’ and sometimes the term: /naš’at-il-’ula/ is used for
‘this world’ and /naš’at al-’axirah/ is used in the sense of ‘the next
world’.

This point is also notable that at the end of the previous verse the
sentence:

***“Verily that is easy for Allah”***

and at the end of this verse the sentence:

***“Verily Allah is powerful over everything”***

are mentioned. This difference may be for the sake that the first verse
states a limit study and the second one indicates to a vast study.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verses 21-22
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُعَذّ‌ِبُ مَن يَشَآءُ وَيَرْحَمُ مَن يَشَآءُ وَإِلَيْهِ تُقْلَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَنتُم بِمُعْجِزِينَ فِي الاَرْضِ وَلاَ فِي السَّمَآءِ وَمَا
لَكُم مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مِن وَلِيٍّ وَلاَ نَصِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “He punishes whom He pleases and has mercy on whom He pleases,
and unto Him you will be turned back.”***  
***22. “You are not able to frustrate Him either in the earth or in
heavens; and you have not, apart from Allah, either protector or
helper.”***

The training style of the Qur’an is in a manner that when it states the
love and wrath of Allah it often begins with love and mercy and then
refers to wrath and chastisement, but since this verse is the
continuation of the rejection of disbelievers it has begun the words
about punishment, and next to it, it has spoken about the Divine mercy.

Then, this holy verse refers to the completion of one of the issues
concerning the Resurrection, i.e. the issue of mercy and punishment.

It says:

***“He punishes whom He pleases and has mercy on whom He pleases, and
unto Him you will be turned back.”***

In other words, though His mercy precedes His punishment, here
punishment has been mentioned before mercy, because the verse intends to
threat and the word suitable for threat is said in this manner.

By the way, this point is also clear that the purpose of the Qur’anic
phrase: ***/man yaša’/ (whom He pleases)*** is the Divine Will
accompanied with wisdom. That is, whom He knows deserving and eligible
for it, because the Divine Will is not undue and it is consistent with
eligibilities and merits.

The Arabic phrase /taqlibun/ is derived from /qalb/ which originally
means: ‘To change a thing from one form into another form’, and since on
the Hereafter Day man changes from soil into a complete living being,
this meaning has been used for his second creation.

This meaning may also refer to this point that in Hereafter man will be
changed in a way that his inward aspect will appear and his interior
secrets will be made manifest and, thus, it reminds the meaning of verse
9 from Surah At-Tariq, No. 86, which says:

***“On the Day when hidden things shall be made manifest.”***

Then, in the next verse, on the completion of this discussion which is
about the punishment and mercy of Allah, and that the return of all is
unto Him, it adds implicitly that if you think that you can exit from
the domain of Allah, the Almighty, and that the grips of punishment may
not seize you, you are in a great err, because:

***“You are not able to frustrate Him either in the earth or in
heavens…”***

And if you think that a guardian or helper will defend you, you are
wrong, too, because:

***“…and you have not, apart from Allah, either protector or helper.”***

In fact, deliverance from the Divine punishment is either in the case
that you go out of the realm of the government of Allah, or that you
remain and, relying on the power of others, defend yourself; while
neither going out of it is possible when everywhere is His realm, and
all the world of existence belongs to Him, nor does anyone exist who can
stand before His Power and defend you.

The Late Tabarsy in Majma‘-ul-Bayan says:

*“A guard in /waliyy/ is he who helps without asking”.*

Regarding those two words, it can be said that /waliyy/ refers to the
guardian who helps without asking him to help, and /nasir/ is the helper
who comes to help after asking him to help.

Thus, the Qur’an shuts all the doors of escaping from the grips of
Divine punishment to the wrong-doers.

[^1]: Torah, Genesis, chapter 9

[^2]: You may refer to the book: “Mahdi ’Inqlabi-yi- Buzurg”

[^3]: Mufradat by Raqib and ‘Amid Dictionary


