Section 2: Solomon Inherits From David
======================================

Surah An-Naml - Verse 15
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ءَاتَيْنَا دَاوُدَ وَسُلَيْمَـانَ عِلْماً وَقَالاَ الْحَمْدُ
لِلَّهِ الَّذِي فَضَّلَنَا عَلَي كَثِيرٍ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. “And certainly We gave David and Solomon knowledge and they both
said: ‘Praise belongs to Allah, Who has favoured us above many of His
believing servants’.”***

The knowledge which has been given to David and Solomon may be the
knowledge of Judgment; its reference is the verse which says:

***“…and We gave him wisdom and a clear judgment”,***[^1]

and also with reference to the verse which says:

***“…and unto each (of them) We gave wisdom and knowledge…”***[^2]

And it may be the knowledge of speaking with the birds, with reference
to the verse which says:

***“…We have been taught the language of the birds…”***[^3]***,***

or it may be the knowledge of making the coat of mail, as the Qur’an
says:

***“…And We taught him the art of making the coat of mail…”***[^4]

But it is better to render the Qur’anic word ***/‘ilm/*** in a general
sense, that is the knowledge of administration of the country.

However, this verse speaks about two other great Divine prophets: David
and Solomon. Of course, there is only a hint to David but Solomon is
explained more.

Mentioning a part of the life story of these two prophets next to the
story of Moses (as) is for the sake that these two prophets were from
among the prophets of the Children of Israel, too.

The difference between their history and the history of other prophets
is that these were more successful to establish a great government
because of mental and social receptivity of the atmosphere of the
Children of Israel, and they could expand the Divine religion by the
help of their governmental power.

Therefore, the style of explanation of the life story of other prophets,
who encountered the severe opposition of their nations and sometimes
they were expelled from their home and city, is not seen here, and the
explanations are totally different. This clearly shows to what extend
the difficulties may be solved and the path can become level if the
Divine callers succeed to form a government.

However, here the words are about knowledge, ability, power, and
dignity. It speaks about the submission of the birds and other creatures
and, finally, about the severe struggle against idolatry through the way
of logical invitation and, then, enjoying the power of government. And
these things are the qualities that separate the life story of these two
prophets from that of other prophets.

It is interesting that the Holy Qur’an here has begun the statement with
the issue of the ‘merit of knowledge’ which is the foundation of a
righteous and powerful government.

It says:

***“And certainly We gave David and Solomon knowledge…”***

A great deal of commentators have tried very much to find out what kind
of knowledge it is that Allah bestowed on David and Solomon, and it is
stated here ambiguously and not definitely, and as it was precisely said
at the beginning of the commentary of the verse, some commentators,
relying on some other verses of the Qur’an, have considered it ‘***the
knowledge of judgment***’:

***“…and We gave him wisdom and clear judgment.”***[^5]

***“…and unto each (of them) We gave wisdom and knowledge…:***[^6]

And some commentators also with frame of reference to the verses under
discussion, which speak of ‘the language of the birds’ have counted this
knowledge as the knowledge of speaking with birds, while some others,
with frame of reference to the verses that talk of the knowledge of
‘making the coat mail’, have specified this knowledge to it.

However, it is clear that ‘***knowledge***’, hare, has a vast meaning
which includes the knowledge of monotheism, religious belief, religious
laws, knowledge of judgment, and all knowledge and information which
have been necessary for the formation of such extensive and powerful
government.

Its reason is that the establishment of a divine government basing on
justice which is an equipped and free government, is not possible
without enjoying a complete knowledge. Thus, the Qur’an specifies the
rank of knowledge in the human society and in establishment of
government as the first stone of the foundation of this building.

And next to this sentence, from the tongue of David and Solomon, it
continues saying:

***“…and they both said: ‘Praise belongs to Allah, Who has favoured us
above many of His believing servants’.”***

It is interesting that immediately after stating the great merit of
‘knowledge’ it speaks of ‘thanksgiving’ in order to make it clear that
there is a thanksgiving for every blessing, and the reality of
thanksgiving is that every blessing should be used in the same way that
it has been created for; and these two great prophets did their best
from their knowledge in formation of a Divine government.

By the way, they introduced the criterion of their own superiority to
others by having ‘knowledge’, not by having power and government, and
they also applied thanksgiving for having knowledge not for other
merits, because all values belong to ‘knowledge’ and all powers
originate from ‘knowledge’.

This point is also noteworthy that they did thank for governing over a
faithful people, since governing over a corrupted group, who are
disbelievers, is not an honour.

There arises a question here that why did they say in their thanksgiving
that ‘He had favoured them above many of His believing servants’ and
they did not say over all believing people, though they were prophets
who were above all the people of their time?

Using this kind of meaning may be for observing the principles of
discipline and humility that one, in any rank, must not think of oneself
above all.

Or it is for the sake that they did not consider only a particular part
of time but they considered the whole times, and we know that there have
been some greater prophets than them during the history of man.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 16
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَرِثَ سُلَيْمَـانُ دَاوُدَ وَقَالَ يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ
عُلّـِمْنَا مَنطِقَ الطَّيْرِ وَاُوتِينَا مِن كُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ إِنَّ
هَذَا لَهُوَ الْفَضْلُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. “And Solomon inherited David and he said: ‘O people! We have been
taught the language of the birds, and we have been granted of
everything; verily this is the manifest favour’.”***

The purpose of the Arabic word ***/waria/*** in this verse is to inherit
both wealth and government, not the knowledge and prophethood, because
prophethood is not something to be inherited, and the knowledge of
prophets is not heritable either since it is not something to be
acquired.

In this verse, at first it points to inheriting Solomon from his father
David.

It says:

***“And Solomon inherited David…”***

Here, commentators have some different ideas as for the meaning of
heritage and that what that is:

Some believe that it is only the heritage of knowledge because,
according to their own thought, prophets do not leave any heritage of
their own properties.

Some others have mentioned inheritance is confined to property and
government, because this word recalls that concept to the mind, before
anything else.

And same commentators have rendered it into the language of speaking
with the birds.

But regarding to the fact that the verse is general and, in the later
Qur’anic sentences the words are also about both knowledge and all other
merits, there is no reason to limit the concept of the verse.

Thus, Solomon had been the heir of all merits of his father.

The traditions narrated from Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) have reasoned to this
verse before those who said that prophets do not leave any heritage and
laid emphasis on the tradition which says:

*“We prophets do not leave any heritage”.*

They have reasoned that since the said tradition contrasts to the Book
of Allah, it is invalid.

We read in a tradition narrated from Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) that when ’Abubakr
decided to take Fadak from Fatimah (as) she (as) heard of that decision
and came to ’Abubakr and said:

*“Is there any thing in the Book of Allah that you inherit from your
father but I do not inherit from my father? This is a wonderful thing!*

*Have you forgotten the Book of Allah and put it behind you when it
says:*

***‘And Solomon inherited David’?”***[^7]***”***

Then the Qur’an in this verse adds:

***“…and he said: ‘O people! We have been taught the language of the
birds, and we have been granted of everything; verily this is the
manifest favour’.”***

Some claim that the application of ‘***language and speaking***’ for
non-human beings is not correct save as metaphor; but if a non-human
being also utters some sounds and words which are meaningful and
indicate some matters, there is no evidence not to call it ‘speaking’,
since ‘speech’ is often any words that communicate a truth and a
concept.

Of course, we do not want to say that those special sounds that
sometimes some animals produce because of anger, wrath, or pleasure and
consent, or as the result of pain, or as a sign of affection unto their
children are called language.

No, these are some sounds that they bring forth out of their mouth at
the time of a special mood. But, as we see in the verses of the Qur’an,
Solomon communicates some matters with hoopoe and he (as) sends a
message by the hoopoe and then he asks its answer from this bird.

This shows that besides the sounds that they produce because of their
moods, animals can speak in some particular conditions by the command of
Allah. Another clear example is the explanation about the speech of the
ant which will be mentioned later concerning the future verses of this
Surah.

Of course, the vast concept of /nutq/ (speech) has been used in the
Qur’an which, indeed, states the spirit and conclusion of it, and it is
‘the statement of what is in mind’, whether it is done by means of words
and speech; or through other means, like the verse which says:

***“This is Our Book that speaks against you with justice…”***[^8]

But we do not need to render the word /nutq/ in connection with the
speech of Solomon and the birds into this sense; because according to
the apparent of the above verses, Solomon was able to understand the
special words that birds used for transferring their matters and he
could speak with them.

Contrast to the limitations that some commentators have cited for the
Qur’anic sentence:

***“…we have been granted of every thing…”,***

it has a vast meaning and it concludes all physical and spiritual means
which were necessary for the formation of that Divine government and,
basically, without it this statement will be imperfect.

By the way, Allah has given some special knowledge to some particular
persons and He has mentioned them in the Qur’an:

1- Adam had the knowledge of all things:

***“And He taught Adam all the names…”***[^9]

2- Khidr knew the inward knowledge and interpretation (so that Moses
could be his student:

***“…‘Shall I follow you that you teach me right conduct…”***[^10]

3- Yusuf was taught the knowledge of interpretation of dreams:

***“…this is of what my Lord has taught me…”***[^11]

4- David was taught by Allah the knowledge of making the coat of mail:

***“And We taught him the art of making the coat of mail…”***[^12]

5- Solomon knew the language of birds:

***“…We have been taught the language of the birds…”***[^13]

6- ’Asif Burkhiya (Solomon’s assistant) had the knowledge by which he
could bring the royal throne (of the Queen of Sheba) from one country to
another country:

***“One with whom was some knowledge (of a part) of the (Divine) Book
said…”***[^14]

7- Talut knew the knowledge of army:

***“…‘Verily Allah has chosen him over you, and He has increased him
abundantly in knowledge and stature…”***[^15]

8- The holy Prophet (S) and other prophets had the knowledge of Unseen:

***“…so He does not reveal His secrets to any,”***

***“Except to whom He chooses as an apostle…”***[^16]

It is for this reason that it has been said that the prophets’ knowledge
is ‘an intuitive knowledge’ and it is bestowed on them through
inspiration by Allah.

### Some Points

#### 1- The Relation Between Religion and Politics

Contrast to what some short sighted persons think, religion is not only
a collection of advice or affairs concerning to the private and personal
life. Religion is a collection of some general and common laws of life
and common programs which conclude the whole life of men and social
issues in particular.

The appointment of prophets to their missions is for the settlement of
justice and equity.[^17]

Religion is for breaking the chains of captivity of men and providing
the freedom of human beings.[^18]

Religion is the cause of securing the oppressed from the grips of
oppressors and tyrants, and putting an end to the course of their
sovereignty.

Finally, religion is a collection of education, and training men along
the path of purification and making them complete.[^19]

It is evident that earning these great aims without having a government
is impossible. Who can establish justice with mere ethical
recommendations so that he stops the domination of the oppressors over
the oppressed?

Who can break and take the chains of captivity from the hands and feet
of those who are afflicted in it without being supported by a power?

In a society where the means of spreading culture and propagation are in
the hands of the vicious and mischief-makers, who can settle the correct
principles of education, and foster the morals in the hearts?

That is why we say that ‘religion’ and ‘politics’ are two inseparable
elements. If religion separates from politics it totally loses its arm
of execution, and if politics separates from religion it will be changed
into a destructive element which moves along the path of its interests.

If the Prophet of Islam (S) succeeded to spread this Divine religion
quickly in the world, it was because, at the first opportunity, he
started to form a government and by means of the Islamic government he
pursued the divine aims.

Some other divine prophets who could do like that and succeeded, were
able to spread the Divine call better, while some others of them who
were in difficulties and the conditions did not let them to form a
government, did not succeed to progress very much.

#### 2- The Divine Government and its Means

It is interesting that in the life story of Solomon and David we clearly
see that they succeeded to quickly root out the effects of polytheism
and idolatry and to establish a government whose main means, according
to the concerning verses, was knowledge and awareness in various fields.

It was a system that Allah’s Name was at the top of its programs. This
system used to apply all the eligible powers and used even the ability
of a bird for reaching its aims.

It was a system that could control all devils and dominated over the
oppressors.

And, finally, it was a system which had both enough military force and
elements of information, and some persons who had sufficient awareness
and skill in different fields, and it had gathered all of these elements
under the camp of belief and Monotheism.

#### 3- The Birds’ Speech

In the above verse and the verses which will come later in the story of
hoopoe and Solomon, the birds’ speech and the kind of their sense and
understanding are referred to explicitly.

No doubt that birds, like other animals, in different circumstances make
some various sounds that, with careful observation, we can recognize
their states and situations by the kind of that sound and say which
sound indicates to their anger, which one to their content, which sound
is the reason of their hunger, and which one shows their whining.

We can understand with which sound the animal calls its children and
with which sound it warns them of coming a horrible event. This part of
the birds’ sound contains no doubt and all of us are, more or less,
acquainted with it.

But the holy verses of this Surah apparently intend to say something
beyond this matter. They talk about a kind of animal speaking in a
secret way which carries some more minute subjects in it. They talk
about understanding and a debate between birds and a human being.

This meaning is surprising for some persons, but regarding to the
various matters that the scientists have written in their books and the
personal observation, and experiences that some other persons had
concerning birds, it is not so surprising.

We know some matters even more surprising than this in relation with the
talent of animals, and birds in particular.

Some of them are so skilful in making houses and nests for them that
they exceed our engineers.

Some of birds possess so much exact information about their future
offspring and their needs and difficulties and they act so minutely
concerning their salvation that is surprising for all of us.

Their foresight about the circumstance of weather, even from some months
before, their awareness of earthquakes before they occur and even before
that our seismographs record the slightest quakes are well known.

The training with which some animals are trained in our time, and the
extraordinary jobs they do and many people have seen them in many
circuses all denote to their wonderful intelligence. The marvelous acts
of ‘ants’ and their wonderful civilization; the marvels of the life of
bees and their amazing finding the traces are famous.

The recognition of the emigrating birds, which sometimes pave the
distance between North Pole and South Pole, and their awareness of the
circumstances of the ways along this extraordinary long traveling are
wonderful.

The amazing information about Salmon-trout, when they emigrate in groups
in deep sees, are generally some subjects that scientifically are
certain and are reasons for the existence of an important stage of
apprehension, or instinct, or whatever we may call, in these animals.

The existence of some extraordinary senses in animals, such as the
system of radar in a bat, very strong sense of smell in some insects,
the extraordinary extensive power of sight in some birds, and so on, are
also some other evidences for the fact that they are not weaker than us
in anything.

Keeping these things in mind, it does not seem wonderful that they have
a special speech, too, and can speak with the person who is aware of the
method of their talking.

In the verses of the Qur’an, there are also some different points which
refer to this meaning.

For example, Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 38 says:

***“And there is no creature (that walks) on the earth nor a bird that
flies with its two wings, but they are communities the like of you…”***

In Islamic narrations there are a lot of traditions which refer to the
animals’ speech and that of the birds, and even for each of them there
have been cited some popular statements whose explanation is very long.

Imam Sadiq (as) in a narration said that Imam Amir-ul-Mu’minin Ali (as)
once told Ibn-‘Abbas:

*“Verily Allah taught us the birds’ speech as He taught Solomon, son of
David, as well as the speech of every living creature in the land and
sea.”*[^20]

#### 4- The Explanation of a Tradition

There has been recorded a tradition in some different books of Sunnites
from the Prophet of Islam (S) which denotes:

*“We prophets do not leave any heritage, and whatever we leave must be
used as alms (in the way of Allah).”*

Sometimes this very tradition has been cited in a form that its first
sentence is omitted, like this:

*“Whatever we leave must be used as alms (in the way of Allah).”*

The document of this tradition in those books is often ended to Abubakr
who took the rein of Muslims’ affairs after the Prophet (S), and when
Hadrat Fatimah (as) or some other wives of the Prophet (S) demanded
Abubakr their inheritance, relying upon this narration, he did not give
them any inheritance.

This tradition is recorded by ‘Muslim’ in his Sahih, Vol. 3, P. 13790,
by Bukhari, in Kitab-ul-Fara’id, chapter 8, P. 185, and some others have
recorded it in their own books.

It is worthy to note that in the latter document, through a tradition
narrated by ‘Ayishah, we read as follows:

*“(After the death of the Prophet (S)), Fatimah and ‘Abbas came to
’Abubakr and demanded their heritage remained from the Prophet (S). At
that time they demanded their land in ‘Fadak’ and their share ‘remained
from Kheybar’.*

*’Abubakr said:*

*‘I heard from the Messenger of Allah who said:*

*‘We do not leave any heritage, and whatever we leave is alms’.’*

*When Fatimah heard this statement she angrily left ’Abubakr and she
never spoke with him, even for one word, until the end of her
life.”*[^21]

This tradition, of course, from different dimensions is objectionable
and can be investigated, but what can be said in short here is as
follows:

1- This tradition is not consistent with the verses of the text of the
Qur’an, and according to the laws and principles we have, every
tradition which does not adapt to ‘the Book of Allah’ is invalid and it
cannot be taken as the tradition originated from the Prophet (S) or
other immaculate ones (as).

In the above-mentioned holy verse, we read that Solomon inheritance
David, and the apparent of the verse is general and it concludes
properties, too.

Concerning Yahya and Zechariah we read in the Qur’an:

***“(One that) shall be my inheritor and the inheritor of the posterity
of Jacob…”***[^22]

Especially in respect to Zechariah, many commentators have emphasized on
financial aspects.

Moreover, the apparent of the verses about inheritance in the Qur’an is
general and envelops all. Maybe, it was for the same reason that
Qurtabi, the famous Sunnite Commentator, had to take the tradition as
the strong verb and the most, not as a general one.

He has said that: this is like the sentence that Arabs say:

*“We community of Arabs are the most hospital ones among people, (while
it is not a general ordinance).”*[^23]

But it is clear that this statement nullifies the value of this
tradition, because if we take this excuse for the case of Solomon and
Yahya, other aspects that are concluded in it are not certain either.

2- The above mentioned tradition is in contrast with other narrations
which show that ’Abubakr decided to return Fadak to Fatimah, but some
others hindered it, as it is cited in Sirah Halabi:

*“Fatimah, the Prophet’s daughter, came to ’Abubakr while he was on the
pulpit.*

*She said:*

*“O ’Abubakr! Is the matter in the Book of Allah that your daughter
inherits from you but I do not inherit from my father?”*

*’Abubakr wept and shed tears. Then he came down of the pulpit, and
wrote a later indicating that Fadak was turned back to Fatimah (as).*

*At this time ‘Umar entered and said:*

*“What is this?”*

*’Abubakr said:*

*“I wrote a letter to return the inheritance of Fatimah from her father
to her.’*

*‘Umar said:*

*“If you do this, where from do you obtain the expenditure of the fight
with the enemies, now that Arabs have stood against you?”*

*Then ‘Umar caught the letter and tore it.”*[^24]

How could there be an explicit prohibition issued by the Prophet (S) and
Abubakr would dare to oppose it? And why did ‘Umar rely upon the needs
of fight and did not rely on Prophet’s tradition?

Careful studying the above-mentioned narration shows that the Prophet’s
prohibition was not in contemplation, the important thing, here, was the
political issues of the time.

These are the things that remind one the statement of Ibn-’Abil-Hadid
Mu‘tazily who said:

*“I asked my teacher, Ali-ibn-Fariqi,*

*‘Was Fatimah (as) right in her claim?’*

*He answered:*

*‘Yes.’*

*I said:*

*‘Why did not ’Abubakr give Fadak to her while he counted her a truthful
one?’*

*My teacher smiled with a very meaningful smile and expressed a
beautiful smooth statement, though he did not customarily joke.*

*He said:*

*“If today he gave Fadak to her, she would come the following day and
claimed the caliphate for her husband, and she would unsettle him of his
position, and he had neither any excuse to say nor any thing to agree
with.”*[^25]

3- A Famous Tradition from the Prophet (S)

In many books of great sects of Islam, there is recorded a famous
tradition which says:

*“The scholars are the heirs of the prophets.”*[^26]

It is also narrated from the Prophet (S) who said:

*“Verily the prophets did not leave any Dinar nor Dirham (drachma) as
heritage.”*[^27]

It seems from these two traditions that the main aim has been to make it
clear that the capital and the honour of the Divine prophets had been
their knowledge.

The most important thing that they left behind was the issue of
guidance, and those who earned some larger share from this knowledge are
the essential heirs of prophets, without that they seek for the
properties remained from the prophets.

Later this tradition has been paraphrased and has been misused by
corruption in transmission, and probably the Arabic phrase /mataraknahu
sadaqatun/ (whatever we leave must be used as alms (in the way of
Allah)), which had been understood from some narrations, has been added
to it.

To shorten our discussion, we conclude this statement with an
explanation from Fakhr-i-Razi, the famous commentator of Sunnites, who
has cited about Surah An-Nisa’, No. 4, verse 11.

He says that one of the allotments that has been set for this verse (the
verse of children’s heritage) is what is the majority of the
jurisprudents of Sunnites believe and it indicates that prophets (as) do
not leave any thing as heritage, while Shi‘ite have (generally) opposed
this matter.

It has been narrated that when Fatimah (as) demanded her heritage, they
deprived her from it attaching to the Prophet’s tradition which says:

*“We prophets do not leave any heritage, and whatever we leave must he
used as alms (in the way of Allah)”*

*At this time Fatimah (as) reasoned to the generality of the above
mentioned verse (the verse of children’s heritage) as if she wanted to
point to this fact that the whole Qur’an cannot be appropriated with a
single narration.”*

Then, Fakhr-i-Razi adds:

*“Shi‘ites say that supposing that allotment of the Qur’an be
permissible with a single narration, it is not permissible here because
of following three reasons:*

*1. This contrasts the explicit text of the Qur’an which says that
Zechariah asked Allah to give him a child who could inherit from him and
the posterity of Jacob. And also the Qur’an says that Solomon inherited
from David.*

*These verses cannot be rendered into the heritage of ‘knowledge’ and
‘religion’, since this is a kind of figurative heredity and these
prophets taught knowledge and religion to their children, not that they
took it from themselves and transferred it to them. The real heritage is
considered only in wealth (that it be taken from one and be given to
another).*

*2. Another matter is that how is it possible that ’Abubakr could be
aware of this subject, which he did not need, but Fatimah (as), Abbas,
and Ali (as), who were of the greatest virtuous and knowledgeable ones
and were dealing with the issue of the Prophet’s heritage, were not
aware of it?*

*How could it be possible that the Prophet (S) taught this tradition to
the one who did not need it and restrained it from the one who needed
it?*

*3. The Arabic phrase /ma taraknahu sadaqah/ (whatever we leave must be
used as alms (in the way of Allah) is next to the Arabic phrase /la
nuwarri/ which means: the properties we have set apart for the purpose
of alms do not come inside the circle of heritage, not other than
that…”*

Then, Fakhr-i-Razi gives a short answer to the above-mentioned known
reasoning and says:

*“After speaking with Abubakr, Fatimah (as) became content with that
speaking. Besides, the consensus has reached to this that the word of
Abubakr is right.”*[^28]

But it is clear that the answer of Fakhr-i-Razi is not sufficient for
the abovementioned reasoning, because, as was narrated from the Sunnite
famous sources, Fatimah (as) not only was not contented but she was so
angry that she did not speak even for a word with Abubakr until the end
of her life.

Moreover, how could there be a consensus upon this subject while Ali,
Fatimah (as) and Abbas, who had been trained in the center of
revelation, had opposed it?

Surah An-Naml - Verse 17
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحُشِرَ لِسُلَيْمَـانَ جُنُودُهُ مِنَ الْجِنّ‌ِ وَالإِنسِ وَالطَّيْرِ
فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. “And gathered together unto Solomon his hosts of jinn and men and
birds and they were kept in order and ranks.”***

In different occasions the Qur’an has talked about jinn and one of the
suras of the Qur’an is also called Jinn.

Now, here, it refers to some of their qualities:

Jinn is a creature which has sensation and has been addressed by Allah,
where the Qur’an says:

***“O’ assembly of the jinn and mankind!…”***[^29]

Some of Jinn are believers while some others of them are disbelievers.
They are male and female and naturally they have venereal desire.

Some of them worked for Solomon as builders and divers, as the Qur’an
says:

***“And the Satans, (including) every builder and diver.”***[^30]

It is understood from the verses of the current Surah and those of Surah
Saba’, No. 34, that the government of Solomon had not an ordinary
circumstance but it was formed by some extraordinary events and various
miracles, some of which are mentioned in this Surah (like Solomon’s
governing over Jinn and birds), recognition of the talk of ants, and
speaking with ‘Hoopoe’, and another part of it has been mentioned in
Surah Saba’, No. 34.

In fact, Allah showed His Might in making appear this great government
and the forces it possessed; and we know that, from the view point of a
monotheist, these affairs are easy, simple and untroubled for Allah, the
Mighty.

By this verse, the Qur’an says:

***“And gathered together unto Solomon his hosts of jinn and men and
birds…”***

The number of his forces was so large that, in order to regulate the
army, it was ordered that the primary rows of forces should stop until
when the last rows could move and reach others.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and they were kept in order and ranks.”***

The Qur’anic word ***/yuza‘un/*** is derived from /waza‘a/ in the sense
of ‘to restrain, to hold back’. When this word is used in respect to
army it means that the first part of the army should be stopped until
the ending part of it joins, and they would not be divided.

The Arabic word /waza‘/ is also applied in the sense of ‘avarice, and
intensive interest’ so that it hinders man from other affairs.

It is understood from this application that the forces of Solomon were
both abundant and they worked under a special order.

The Qur’anic word ***/hušira/*** is derived from /hašr/ which means:
‘bringing out the crowd of army from the resting place’, and causing
them to start toward the battle-field, and the like. It is understood
from both this meaning and the meaning used in the next verse that
Solomon had led an army to a place, but it is not quite clear that which
one it is among Solomon’s military expeditions.

Taking the content of the next verse in mind, which speaks about
reaching Solomon to the land of ants, some say that it had been a region
near Ta’if, while some others have said it had been a land near Syria.

However, since the statement of this matter had not any effect from the
point of ethical and educational aspects, it has not been spoken of.

By the way, some commentators have discussed whether the whole human
beings, jinn, and birds were the army of Solomon, or a part of them
formed his army. This discussion seems rather needless, because
undoubtedly Solomon did not govern the whole earth and the realm of his
government was Syria, Jerusalem, and probably some other lands around
there.

It is also understood from the later verses that Solomon had not any
dominion over Yemen at that time, and he gained his authority over there
after the event of ‘hoopoe’ and the submission of the Queen of Sheba.

The Qur’anic phrase ***/tafaqqad-at-tayr/***, mentioned in the coming
verses, shows that among the birds, which were in the obedience of
Solomon, there was a hoopoe that when Solomon did not see it over there
he asked about it. If all birds were included and there were thousands
of hoopoes among them, this meaning could not be correct. (Be careful)

Surah An-Naml - Verse 18
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّي إِذَآ أَتَوْا عَلَي وَادِ الَّنمْلِ قَالَتْ نَمْلَةٌ يَآ
أَيُّهَا النَّـمْلُ ادْخُلُوا مَسَاكِنَكُمْ لاَ يَحْطِمَنَّكُمْ
سُلَيْمَـانُ وَجُنُودُهُ وَهُمْ لاَيَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. “Until when they came to the Valley of Ants, an ant said: ‘O you
ants! Get into your habitations, so that Solomon and his hosts may not
crush you, being unaware’.”***

The Arabic word /naml/ philologically means ‘creeping with small feet’.
The Qur’anic word ***/namlatun/***, because of its Arabic nunnation, can
be meant ‘a big ant which is a commander’. In this case, there is
commandership and administrationship in the life of ants.

This nunnation can be meant as the sign of uncertainty of the ant. In
this case, the message of the verse is that if an undefined one gives a
sympathetic warning that warning must be attended to.

However, Solomon with this great army started and went until they
reached the valley of ants. Here, an ant, addressing other ants, said
that they should go into their dwellings, so that Solomon and his army
might not crush them while they are unaware.

The verse says:

***“Until when they came to the Valley of Ants, an ant said: ‘O you
ants! Get into your habitations, so that Solomon and his hosts may not
crush you, being unaware’.”***

There are some explanations to say that how this ant became aware of the
presence of Solomon and his hosts in that land, and how it announced
this happening to other ants, which will be referred to later.

By the way, it is understood from this sentence that the justice of
Solomon was made manifest to even the ants because the sentence
implicitly means if the hosts are aware of the existence of the ants
they will not tread that weak animal, then if they tread the ants it is
because they do not know it.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 19
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَبَسَّمَ ضَاحِكاً مِن قَوْلِهَا وَقَالَ رَبّ‌ِ أَوْزِعْنِي أَنْ
أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ وَعَلَي وَالِدَيَّ
وَأَنْ أَعْمَلَ صَالِحاً تَرْضَاهُ وَأَدْخِلْنِي بِرَحْمَتِكَ فِي
عِبَادِكَ الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. “Then he smiled, laughing at its words, and said: ‘My Lord!
Dispose me that I may be thankful for Your bounty, which You have
bestowed on me and my parents, and that I may do righteousness such as
You are pleased with, and admit me, by Your mercy, among Your righteous
servants’.”***

One of the principles and conditions of leadership and administration is
tolerance. Solomon (as) heard that the ant said about him and his troops
that they were unaware, but he (as) did not show it and he only smiled.

Criticism and a right speech must be heard from any one and it must be
received, because accepting criticism is a value. Solomon admired the
word of the ant and smiled. Commentators are divided as for what was the
cause of Solomon’s smile.

It appears that the self of this event was a wonderful matter that an
ant called other ants to beware of the great army of Solomon and that it
attributed that army of being unaware.

This amazing affair caused Solomon’s laugh, as the verse says:

***“Then he smiled, laughing at its words…”***

Some of commentators have said that this smile was a smile of joy,
because Solomon understood that even ants confessed to the justice of
Solomon and his troops and accepted their piety.

Some others have said that his joy was for the reason that Allah had
given him such a power that at the time of the great anxiety and
excitement of the army he was not neglectful of the sound of an ant
either.

However, here Solomon turned to the presence of Allah and asked a few
things as follows:

***“…and said: ‘My Lord! Dispose me that I may be thankful for Your
bounty, which You have bestowed on me and my parents…”***

Solomon asked Allah to teach him how he could thank for the great
bounties that He had granted him and his parents to be able to use them
in the way that He had commanded and was the cause of His pleasure so
that he would not deviate from the right path, since being thankful for
those abundant favours is not possible save with His succour and aid.

The next thing he asked for was as follows:

***“…and that I may do righteousness such as You are pleased with…”***

This statement points to this matter that what was important for Solomon
was not the remaining of that great army and his government with those
vast organizations, it was important for him to do such righteous deeds
that caused His pleasure.

And in view of the fact that the Arabic word /’a‘mala/ is a verb in
present tense, which is used in that language for the continuation of
the action, it is an evidence that he asked Allah for the continuation
of this succour.

Finally, the third thing he asked was that he said:

***“…and admit me, by Your mercy, among Your righteous servants’.”***

Surah An-Naml - Verses 20-22
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَفَقَّدَ الطَّيْرَ فَقَالَ مَالِيَ لآ أَرَي الْهُدْهُدَ أَمْ كَانَ
مِنَ الْغَآئِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاُعَذّ‌ِبَنَّهُ عَذَاباً شَدِيداً أَوْ لاَذبَحَنَّهُ أَوْ
لَيَأْتِيَنّـِي بِسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَكَثَ غَيْرَ بَعِيدٍ فَقَالَ أَحَطتُ بِمَا لَمْ تُحِطْ بِهِ
وَجِئْتُكَ مِن سَبإٍ بِنَبَإٍ يَقِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. “And he reviewed the birds; then he said: ‘How is it with me that
I do not see the hoopoe? Or is it that he is of the absentees?’”***  
***21. “Certainly will I chastise him with a terrible chastisement, or
will I slaughter him, or he brings me a clear reason (for his
absence).”***  
***22. “But the hoopoe tarried not long, then he (came and) said: ‘I
have comprehended that which you have not comprehended, and I have come
to you from Sheba with a sure tiding’.”***

Through this group of verses, the Qur’an has pointed to another height
of the amazing life of Solomon, and reiterates the event of hoopoe, and
the Queen of Sheba. At first it speaks about Solomon (as) and hoopoe,
whom he (as) sought after but he did not see it.

The verse says:

***“And he reviewed the birds…”***

This phrase clearly indicates that Solomon (as) was carefully observing
the circumstances of the country and his government in a manner that
even the absence of a bird was not concealed before his eyes.

No doubt that the purpose of the bird, here, is the hoopoe, since in the
continuation of the statement the Qur’an adds:

***“…then he said: ‘How is it with me that I do not see the hoopoe?…”***

***“…Or is it that he is of the absentees?’”***

Concerning the fact that how Solomon recognized that hoopoe was not
present among the gathering of birds, some commentators have said: that
it was for the sake that, at the time of his traveling, birds did cast a
shadow over his head and, because of the existence of an opening (hole)
in that vast canopy, he found out the absence of the hoopoe.

Some others have considered a mission for the hoopoe in his
organizations and they have said that the hoopoe was commissioned to
find the places where there was water and when the bird had gone to
search for water, he (as) found it absent.

However, this statement that at first he said:

***“…I do not see the hoopoe…”***

and then he added

***“…Or is it that he is of the absentees…”***

may point to this matter that whether the hoopoe is absent without
having a plausible excuse or it has been absent with a plausible excuse.

An way, an organized, ordered, and powerful government has to put all
movements, activities, and actions and reactions that happen in its
country and realm under consideration; and it must not neglect even the
presence and absence of a bird, an ordinary agent, and this is a great
lesson.

Finally, some other commentators have said that the objective of hoopoe,
here, is a particular ‘Hoopoe’. Their reference is the existence of Alif
and Lam at the beginning of the Arabic word, ‘Al-Hudhud’, as well as the
hoopoe’s power of anthropology and its theological ability. The
explanation of this meaning will be offered later.[^31]

Once Abuhanifah asked Imam Sadiq (as):

*“Why did Solomon ask only about hoopoe among all birds?”*

The Imam (as) said:

*“Its reason is for the fact that a hoopoe sees the existence of water
inside the earth, the same as we see oil in a crystal container.”*[^32]

As for the punishment of the hoopoe, some commentators have mentioned a
few examples; including separating it from its fellow, pulling off its
feathers, putting it under sunshine, banishing it from Solomon’s court,
or putting it in the same cage with an enemy.[^33]

One point, however, must be noted that reviewing and being kind to
inferiors, visiting their work, and asking about their affairs are among
the Islamic, ethical, social, educational, and administrative
principles.

Then, in order not to judge in its absence, and in the mean-while the
absence of the hoopoe does not affect other birds, still less the
persons who undertook some sensitive and important jobs, Solomon added:

***“Certainly will I chastise him with a terrible chastisement, or will
I slaughter him, or he brings me a clear reason (for his absence).”***

The purpose of the Arabic word /sultan/, here, is a reason which causes
one’s authority and ability to prove one’s mind, and the Arabic word
/mubin/ is an emphasis on the matter that this faulty one must certainly
bring a clear reason for his own fault.

Solomon (as), in fact, without judging in its absence, threatened the
offender by the necessary chastisement if the fault is proved. He even
considered two stages for his threat in order that it could be
proportional to the kind of the sin: the stage of punishment without
execution, and the stage of execution.

By the way, he showed that he surrendered to proof and logic even in
front of a weak bird and he would never rely on his power and abilities.

***“But the hoopoe tarried not long…”***

The hoopoe returned and, addressing Solomon, said that it had known
something which he (as) did not know and it was an assured news from the
land of Sheba.

The verse says:

***“…then he (came and) said: ‘I have comprehended that which you have
not comprehended, and I have come to you from Sheba with a sure
tiding’.”***

As if the hoopoe has seen the signs of anger in Solomon’s face. Then, in
order to remove his distress, the bird shortly and closely announced of
an important matter that Solomon, even with his whole knowledge, was not
aware of it. Then, when the anger of Solomon was lightened, Hoopoe began
explaining it, which will be described through later verses.

It is worthy nothing that Solomon’s troops, and even the birds that
obeyed him, had felt such a freedom, security, and daring in Solomon’s
justice that, without any fear Hoopoe frankly and explicitly says:

***“…‘I have comprehended that which you have not comprehended…”***

The Hoopoe’s treatment with Solomon was not like the treatment of the
flattering men of courts with the tyrannical kings, who, for
communicating a fact at first flatter and make themselves so low before
them as an insignificant atom.

Then they humbly state their aim inside many sorts of flatteries and
never try to deliver a definite statement; so they always use some
delicate allusions lest the king’s feeling be a little injured.

Yes, the hoopoe clearly said that its absence was not unreasonable and
he had brought Solomon some news that he was not aware of it.

By the way, this meaning is a great lesson for all human beings that
there may be a small creature, like hoopoe, which knows a matter that
the most knowledgeable man of the people of the time is unaware of it;
and no one should be proud of his knowledge even he is Solomon with that
vast knowledge of prophecy.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 23-24
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنّـِي وَجَدتُّ امْرَأَةً تَمْلِكُهُمْ وَأُوتِيَتْ مِن كُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ
وَلَهَا عَرْشٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَدتُّهَا وَقَوْمَهَا يَسْجُدُونَ لِلشَّمْسِ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ
وَزَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ فَصَدَّهُمْ عَنِ
السَّبِيلِ فَهُمْ لاَيَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “Verily I found a woman ruling over them, and she has been given
of everything, and she possesses a magnificent throne.”***  
***24. “I found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of
Allah, and Satan has made their deeds fair-seeming to them and he has
barred them from the (right) way, so they are not guided aright.”***

However, Hoopoe explained the event of going to the land of Sheba and
its Queen under the name of Bilqiys, as follows:

***“Verily I found a woman ruling over them, and she has been given of
everything, and she possesses a magnificent throne.”***

By these three short sentences, the hoopoe told Solomon nearly all
qualifications of the country of Sheba and that how it was governed.
First of all, it said that it was a habitable country with all kinds of
merits and potentialities.

The next matter was that a woman was ruling over there who had a very
glorious court, perhaps even more glorious than the organizations of
Solomon, since though the hoopoe had certainly seen Solomon’s throne it
mentioned that of the Queen as ‘a magnificent throne’.

By this speech, the hoopoe made Solomon understand that he should not
think that the entire world was in the realm of his government and that
the great throne and magnificence was allocated only to him.

By hearing this news, Solomon began contemplating, but the hoopoe did
not give him time and added another amazing matter, when it said:

***“I found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of
Allah…”***

The Hoopoe explains that Satan has dominated over them and has so
ornamented their deeds to them that they boast of worshipping the sun,
and thus Satan has hindered them from the right way and they have so
engaged in idolatry that I do not believe they return easily from that
way.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and Satan has made their deeds fair-seeming to them and he has
barred them from the (right) way, so they are not guided aright.”***

In this way, the hoopoe made clear the spiritual and religious situation
of those people and announced that they had earnestly fallen in
idolatry, and their government encouraged them to adorring the sun, so
people usually follow the religion of their kings.

Their idol temples and their other circumstances show that they insist
on paving this wrong way: they like it and they boast of it. In the
conditions that both the whole people and government are wrongly on one
line, their guidance is very improbable.

That marvellous story indicates that some animals possess a high
understanding, such as hoopoe who understood and realized some concepts,
like: man and woman, crown and throne, government and ownership,
monotheism and idolatry, sun and prostration, Satan and his
ornamentations, right and wrong, guidance and misguidance.

Surah An-Naml - Verses 25-26
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَّ يَسْجُدُوا لِلَّهِ الَّذِي يُخْرِجُ الْخَبْءَ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالاَرْضِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا تُخْفُونَ وَمَا تُعْلِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ لآ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “So that they prostrate not themselves to Allah, Who brings forth
what is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows what you hide and
what you reveal.”***  
***26. “Allah, there is no god but He! Is the Lord of ‘Arsh, the Mighty
(throne of Supreme Authority).”***

The Arabic word /xab’/ means ‘concealed and hidden’.

Ali (as) Says:

*“(The value of) man is hidden under his tongue.”*[^34]

The growth of plants, as well as falling rains, are the clear examples
of bringing forth those which are hidden in the heavens and the earth.

The ears (of corn) are hidden inside a corn and the Might of Allah
brings it forth from inside of it. All the things that alter from
potentiality to actuality are the extensions of this very verse.

However, it says:

***“So that they prostrate not themselves to Allah, Who brings forth
what is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows what you hide and
what you reveal.”***

The Qur’anic word ***/xab’/***, which means anything hidden and
concealed, here points to the omnipotence of Allah’s knowledge due to
the unseen of heavens and earth.

Thus, the verse means why they do not prostrate themselves to the Lord
Who knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth and the secrets hidden
in them.

Some commentators have rendered it to rain (respecting the heavens) and
plants (respecting the earth), this in fact, is from the kind of
statement of a clear extension.

Alike them are those commentators who have commented this phrase upon
‘bringing out the creatures from the unseen of nonexistence into
existence’.

It is interesting that the holy verse firstly speaks of the knowledge of
Allah unto ‘the secrets hidden in the heavens and the earth’, and then
it refers to the secrets concealed in the hearts of people.

Why the hoopoe, among all attributes of Allah (s.w.t.), emphasized on
the issue of His knowledge due to unseen and seen in the macrocosm and
microcosm, it may be in relation to the fact that Solomon, with all his
abilities and knowledge, was not aware of the country of Sheba and its
qualities, and it says that we must seek the grace of the Lord for Whom
nothing is concealed.

Or it is in relation to the known matter which is said that hoopoe has a
special sense by which it can understand the existence of water inside
the land that contains it. Then it speaks of Allah Who is aware of all
the things which are concealed in the world of existence.

At last, the hoopoe concludes his saying with the following statement:

***“Allah, there is no god but He! Is the Lord of ‘Arsh, the Mighty
(throne of Supreme Authority).”***

Thus, the hoopoe emphasized on ‘unity of worship’ and ‘Unity of
Lordship’ of Allah and the negation of any polytheism, and then put an
end to his speech.

By the way, what is cited in this part of the verse contains a lot of
points which can be effective in the life of all human beings and in the
process of all governments.

1- The chief of a government, or an administrator, must be so careful
and aware of the order of his organizations that he recognizes and
realizes even the absence of an ordinary and insignificant member, and
pursues its affairs.

2- He must be careful of the offence of a single member and, in order
not to affect others, he must apply the necessary precautions.

3- No one should be judged in his absence, or to pass a judgment by
default. The one should be allowed to defend himself if possible.

4- The amount of forfeit must proportionate to the crime. So, for every
crime a suitable punishment must be decided, and hierarchy should be
observed, too.

5- Everybody, even the greatest powers of the society, must submit to
reason and logic though the reason is uttered by a very insignificant
person.

6- There must exist so much freedom and explicitness in the atmosphere
of the society that, at the necessary time, even an ordinary person can
tell the chief of the government:

***“I have comprehended that which you have not comprehended.”***[^35]

7- Sometimes some ordinary persons or the smallest ones get information
of something that the greatest scientists and the most powerful ones are
unaware of it, and we must never be proud of our knowledge.

8- In the society of human beings, the reciprocal needs are so much so
that sometimes some great men, such as Solomon, are dependant on a bird.

9- Though there are many eligibilities in women, and even this very
story shows that the Queen of Sheba possessed an extraordinary
understanding and perspicacity, the leadership of a government is not
consistent with the situation of their spirit and body; so the hoopoe
also surprised of it and said:

***“Verily I found a woman ruling over them…”***[^36]

10- People often have the same religion that their rulers have.

Therefore, we read in this story that the hoopoe says:

***“I found her and her people prostrating to the sun…”***

(The words are first about the prostration of the Queen and then that of
the people.)

> ﴿27﴾ قَالَ سَنَنظُرُ أَصَدَقْتَ أَمْ كُنتَ مِنَ الْكَاذِبـِينَ

> ﴿28﴾ اذْهَب بِكِتَابِي هَذَا فَاَلْقِهْ إِلَيْهِمْ ثُمَّ تَوَلَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْهُمْ فَانظُرْ مَاذَا يَرْجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “(Solomon, after hearing hoopoe’s information,) said: ‘Soon we
will see whether you have told the truth or whether you are of the
liars.”***  
***28. “Go you with this letter of mine, and throw it down unto them,
then turn away from them, and (wait to) see what (answer) they
return.”***

The Divine prophets’ communication and writing letters to disbelievers
and polytheists has a long background, and the Prophet of Islam (S) did
it, too. He (S) wrote some letters to the rulers of several countries,
such as Iran and Byzantine.

In order to reach to some leading and cultural aims, sending messages,
advisors, cultural counselors, officers, and taking the lead in these
affairs had been the conduct of the divine prophets.

Of course, when confronting some complicated systems and governments, we
cannot encounter them simply, and, thus, recognizing them secretly and
far from the eyes is the deepest kind of cognitions.

Therefore, Solomon carefully listened to the words of the hoopoe and
began thinking. Solomon might mostly thought that that news was right,
and there was no reason for it to be a lie so great.

But since it was not a simple issue and it related to the fate of a
country and a great nation, he should not suffice only to the statement
of a single informer, and he ought to investigate more about this
sensitive subject.

Thus, the Qur’an announces:

***“(Solomon, after hearing hoopoe’s information,) said: ‘Soon we will
see whether you have told the truth or whether you are of the liars.”***

This statement clearly proves that for important matters, which relate
to the fate of people, one must pay attention to the information
received from a simple member and soon it must be sufficiently
researched about.

Solomon did neither accuse nor condemn hoopoe, nor did he verify its
speech without any proof, but he took it as the cause of a research.

He said:

***“Go you with this letter of mine, and throw it down unto them, then
turn away from them, and (wait to) see what (answer) they return.”***

Surah An-Naml - Verses 29-31
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتْ يَآ أَيُّهَا الْمَلَؤُا إِنّـِي اُلْقِيَ إِلَيَّ كِتَابٌ
كَرِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ مِن سُلَيْمَـانَ وَإِنَّهُ بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ
الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَّ تَعْلُوا عَلَيَّ وَأْتُونِي مُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. “(When the Queen of Sheba received the letter,) she said: ‘O
chiefs! Verily there has been thrown unto me a noble letter.”***  
***30. “Verily, it is from Solomon; and verily it is: ‘In the Name of
Allah. The Beneficent, the Merciful’.”***  
***31. “Exalt not yourselves against me, and come to me in
submission.”***

Guidance and preaching must be delivered kindly and mercifully;
beginning with the holy phrase:

***‘In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful’.***

Solomon (as) wrote a very short and comprehensive letter and, giving it
to the hoopoe, he told the bird to throw it down unto them and then
return and wait in a corner to see what reaction they would have.

It is understood from the Qur’anic phrase “***Throw it down unto
them***” that the hoopoe should throw it down when the Queen of Sheba
was sitting in the gathering among her people so that there would remain
no room for forsaking and denying it.

This also makes it clear that there is no proof for the commentary of
some commentators who have said the hoopoe entered the castle of the
Queen of Sheba and her room and threw the letter on her chest or her
throat, though it is not so inconsistent with the sentence mentioned in
the next verse which says:

***“…Verily there has been thrown unto me a noble letter.”***

The Queen of Sheba opened the letter and was informed of its content.
Since she had formerly heard of the fame of Solomon and the content of
the letter indicated that he had taken a severe decision about the
country of Sheba, she fell into a deep thought; and since she used to
consult with the chiefs of her entourage, she invited them.

As the Qur’an says:

***“(When the Queen of Sheba received the letter,) she said: ‘O chiefs!
Verily there has been thrown unto me a noble letter.”***

Had the Queen of Sheba truly not seen the bringer of the letter? But,
with the content of the letter, she felt the nobility of the letter and
she never thought that it might be a fabricated letter.

Or she saw the letter with her own eyes, and its surprising circumstance
proved that there was a reality over there and it was not an ordinary
thing. Whatever it was, she relied on the letter with certainty.

The matter that the Queen says that the letter is a noble and worthy
one, may be for the magnificent content of it, or for its beginning
which began with the name of Allah, and its ending was correctly signed
and sealed;[^37] or its sender had been a noble person, each of which
has been guessed by the commentators.

Or all of them may be found in this consistent concept, because there is
no contradictory between them.

It is true that they were sun-worshippers, but we know that many of the
idolaters believed in Allah, too, and called Him as the Lord of lords.
They counted His respect and glorification important.

Then, the Queen of Sheba referred to the content of the letter when she
said:

***“Verily, it is from Solomon; and verily it is: ‘In the Name of Allah.
The Beneficent, the Merciful’.”***

***“Exalt not yourselves against me, and come to me in submission.”***

It is not probable that Solomon had written the letter with these very
Arabic phrases; therefore the above-mentioned phrases can be
paraphrased, or they are the summary of Solomon’s letter that the Queen
of Sheba reiterated for her people.

It is interesting that the content of this letter was indeed not more
than three sentences: one sentence was the name of Allah, and the
statement of His attributes of mercifulness and compassionateness.

The second sentence was a recommendation for controlling the low desire
and abundance of self-superiority, which is the origin of many personal
and social corruptions.

And the third one was to submit to the truth. And if we carefully notice
them, there was nothing more which was necessary to be mentioned.

[^1]: Surah Sad, No. 38, verse 20

[^2]: Surah Al-’Anbiya’, No. 21, verse 79

[^3]: The Current Surah, verse 16

[^4]: Surah Al-’Anbiya’, No. 21, verse 80

[^5]: Surah Sad, No. 38, verse 20

[^6]: Surah Al-’Anbiya’, No. 21, verse 79

[^7]: ’Ihtijaj by Tabarsi, Vol. 4, P. 75

[^8]: Surah Al-Jathiyah, No. 45, verse 29

[^9]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 31

[^10]: Surah Al-Kahf, No. 18, verse 66

[^11]: Surah Yusuf, No. 12, verse 37

[^12]: Surah Al-’Anbiya’, No. 21, verse 80

[^13]: Surah An-Naml, No. 27, verse 16

[^14]: Surah An-Naml, No. 27, verse 40

[^15]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 247

[^16]: Surah Al-Jinn, No. 72, verses 26-27

[^17]: Surah Al-Hadid, No. 57, verse 25

[^18]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 157

[^19]: Surah Al-Jumu‘ah, No. 62, verse 2

[^20]: The commentaries of As-Safi, and Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, the
explanation of the verse

[^21]: Sahih Bukhari, Part 8, P. 185

[^22]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 6

[^23]: Tafsir Qurtabi, Vol. 7, P. 4880

[^24]: Sirah Halabi, Vol. 3, P. 301

[^25]: The explanation of Nahj-ul-Balaqah, by ’Ibn-’Abil-Hadid, Vol. 16,
P. 284

[^26]: Sahih Tarmathi, Chapter knowledge, Tradition No. 19; and Sunan
Ibn-i-Majih, the introductory to tradition No. 17

[^27]: ’Usul-i-Kafi, Vol. 1 Chapter: ‘The Attribute of knowledge’,
tradition No. 9

[^28]: The Commentary of Fakhr-i-Razi, Vol. 9, P. 210

[^29]: Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 130, and Surah Ar-Rahman, No. 55,
verse 33

[^30]: Surah Sad, No. 38, verse 37

[^31]: the commentary of Furqan, and Fi-Zilal

[^32]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, the Commentary

[^33]: The commentaries of Ruh-ul-Bayan and Kanz-ud-Daqa’iq

[^34]: Nahj-ul-Baqalah, saying No. 148

[^35]: Current Surah, verse 22

[^36]: Current Surah, verse 23

[^37]: An Islamic tradition denotes that the seal of a letter shows its
nobility. (The Qur’anic commentaries of Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Al-Miza, and
Qurtubi) Another tradition indicates when the Prophet of Islam (S)
decided to write a letter to the king of Iran, he was told that they did
not accept any letter without sealing. Then the holy Prophet (S) ordered
that a ring should be made and on its bezel had to be carved “La ’ilaha
’illallah, Muhammad Rasul-ul-lah”. Then he sealed the letter with it.
(Qurtubi, the explanation of the verse)


