Section 4: Saleh and Lot
========================

Surah An-Naml - Verses 45-46
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَآ إِلَي ثَمُودَ أَخَاهُمْ صَالِحاً أَنِ اعْبُدُوا
اللَّهَ فَإِذَا هُمْ فَرِيقَانِ يَخْتَصِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ لِمَ تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ بِالسَّيّـِئَةِ قَبْلَ
الْحَسَنَةِ لَوْلاَ تَسْتَغْفِرُونَ اللَّهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. “And indeed We sent unto (the tribe of) Thamud their brother
Saleh, saying: ‘Worship you Allah!’ but behold, they became two parties
quarrelling with each other.”***  
***46. “He said: ‘O my people! Why will you hasten on the evil before
the good? Why do you not ask forgiveness of Allah so that you may be
dealt with mercifully?”***

Next to a part of life stories of Moses, David, and Solomon (as)
mentioned in the previous verses, the fourth prophet, a part of whose
life story is referred to in this Surah, is Hadrat Saleh, the prophet of
Thamud people.

At first, it says:

***“And indeed We sent unto (the tribe of) Thamud their brother Saleh,
saying: ‘Worship you Allah!’…”***

As it was also said before, the application of the concept of ‘their
brother’, which has been used in the story life of several prophets, is
a hint to their ultimate love and affection unto their peoples. In
addition to this, in some instances, it points to their relationship
with those people, too.

However, the entire messengership and invitation of this prophet is
summarized in the holy phrase:

***“Worship you Allah!”***

Yes, the servitude of Allah is the essence of all teachings of the
messengers of Allah.

Then, the verse continues saying:

***“…but behold, they became two parties quarrelling with each
other.”***

Those two groups, who quarrelled with each other, were the believers,
from one side, and the obstinate disbelievers, from the other side.

Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“A group attested the invitation of Hadrat Salih but another group
rejected it.”*[^1]

These two groups are referred to in Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 75 as:

***‘The arrogant’***

and

***‘those who were considered weak’.***

It says:

***“The chiefs of the arrogant among his people said to those who were
considered weak – those of them who believed – ‘Do you know that Saleh
is sent by his Lord?’ they said surely we believe in what he has been
sent with’.”***

***“Those who were arrogant said: ‘We, indeed, disbelieve in that which
you believe’.”***[^2]

Of course, this conflict of two groups of believers and disbelievers
existed among the peoples of many prophets, although some of them were
deprived of even these adherents and nearly the totality of their people
were rejecters of the truth.

Finally, in order to awaken them, Hadrat Saleh (as) began warning them,
and made them aware of the painful chastisements of Allah. But not only
they did not take counsel, but also took that very matter as a reason
for their obstinacy, and persistently wanted him that they should be
involved with the Divine punishment if he was truthful.[^3]

But Saleh replied them as follows:

***“He said: ‘O my people! Why will you hasten on the evil before the
good?…”***

Why do you concentrate your thought on meeting the Divine punishment? If
the Divine chastisement meets you, it will put an end to your life and
there will not remain any time for you to believe. Let yourselves try
the legitimacy of my statement by the grace and blessings of Allah which
will embrace you as the result of Faith.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Why do you not ask forgiveness of Allah so that you may be dealt
with mercifully?”***

Why do you seek for evils and the descent of punishment? What is this
obstinacy and arrogance for?

Those who rejected the call of prophets and asked for the promised
punishment were not limited to the people of Saleh, this matter is
repeatedly seen in the Qur’an concerning other peoples, too, including
the people of Nuh.[^4]

In relation to the Prophet of Islam (S) and some fanatic and obstinate
polytheists, the Qur’an says:

***“And (remember) when they said: ‘O Allah! If this (Qur’an) is the
truth from You, then rain down upon us stones from the sky, or bring us
a painful punishment’.”***[^5]

This is, indeed, surprising that some persons want to try the
truthfulness of the call of the prophet by the way of Divine destructive
punishment, not by the way of asking for Divine mercy; while certainly
they do verify the probable legitimacy of those prophets in their
hearts, though they deny it by tongue.

This behaviour is like a person who claims he is a physician and says
this medicine is curative and that one is fatal, and then, in order to
test him, we use the fatal medicine, not the curative one.

This is the ultimate ignorance, folly and fanaticism, while ignorance
has many fruits of this kind.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 47
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا اطَّيَّرْنَا بِكَ وَبِمَن مَّعَكَ قَالَ طَآئِرُكُمْ عِندَ
اللَّهِ بَلْ أَنتُمْ قَوْمٌ تُفْتَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. “They said: ‘Ill omen do we augur from you and those with you’.
He said: ‘Your ill omen is with Allah. Nay! You are a people who are
being tried’.”***

The Arabic word /tatayyur/ is derived from /tayr/ which means ‘a bird’.
Some of Arabs used to leave a bird at the time when they wanted to
travel.

If it went to the right direction they would start their traveling, and
if it flew to the left (they augured ill and) they would suspend their
traveling.[^6] In Islam auguring ill has been considered disbelief. To
augur ill leads to leaving the main reasons and going toward
superstitions.

There are many occurrences in the Qur’an which indicate that the Divine
prophets had been augured ill. The people of Pharaoh thought that their
afflictions had come because of Moses (as).

The Qur’an says:

***“…and if any evil afflicted them, they took it bad omens due to
Moses…”***[^7]

Jesus (as) was told:

***“…For us, we augur an evil omen from you…”***[^8]

In the above mentioned verse, the disbelievers told Saleh:

***“…‘Ill omen do we augur from you and those with you’…”***

However, this arrogant nation, instead of listening to the sympathetic
advice of their great prophet and applying it, they opposed him with
some vain words and baseless conclusions, among them is their following
statement:

***“They said: ‘Ill omen do we augur from you and those with you’…”***

It seems that there was drought, and deficiency of crop and foodstuff
for the people of Moses in that year. They said that all those
afflictions and difficulties were because of unpleasant advent of Moses
and his followers who brought them and their society misery and omen.

By resorting to the weapon of ill omen, which is often the weapon of
arrogant and superstitious persons, they wanted to overcome the strong
logic of Moses (as). But in answer to them, he said that their evil
fortune was with Allah, and it was their own deeds that resulted such
miseries and afflictions, as punishments. In fact, this was a great
Divine trial for them.

The verse continues saying:

***“…He said: ‘Your ill omen is with Allah. Nay! You are a people who
are being tried’.”***

These are some Divine trials. They are some warnings and awakening
subjects for those who have some suitability and competency to awake
from the sleep of negligence and, by going to the path of Allah, improve
themselves.

There are also some people in some societies who do not believe in
Allah, although they have earned some considerable good grades in
knowledge and science but, in the meantime, they have some superstitions
and similar vain beliefs in them and they still have a warm market for
fortune-telling and soothsaying among them, so that the illusive subject
of luck and horoscopy has many customers.

But the Qur’an through a short sentence says:

***“Your ill omen is with Allah.”***

This means your luck, your victory, your defeat, and your success and
failure all are with Allah, Who is Wise, and His favours are divided
among men according to their competencies, those very competencies which
are the reflection of their Faith, action, speech and behaviour.

Thus, the Qur’an drives out the followers of Islam from the valley of
superstition to reality and from devious way toward straight Path.

### Some Traditions Upon Bad Omen

1. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The atonement of ill omen is reliance in Allah.”*[^9]

2. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Ill omen is infidelity and it is not from us, but reliance in Allah
abolishes it.”*[^10]

3. There has been narrated that, in supplication, the Prophet (S) used
to say:

*“O Allah! There is no omen but Your omen, no goodness but Your
goodness, and no god but You (Allah). O Allah! No one gives rewards but
You, and no one wipes the faults but You, and there is no power except
in Allah, the Exalted, the Great.”*[^11]

Surah An-Naml - Verse 48
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَانَ فِي الْمَدِينَةِ تِسْعَةُ رَهْطٍ يُفْسِدُونَ فِي الاَرْضِ
وَلاَ يُصْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. “And there were in the city nine (groups of) persons who made
mischief in the land and would not reform.”***

The Arabic word /raht/ is used for ‘a group of people among whom there
is a warm relation’.

This holy verse refers to another part of the life story of Saleh (as)
which completes the previous part and concludes the story. It concerns
the plot of nine groups of pagans and hypocrites who wanted to kill
Saleh, but their evil plot failed.

The Qur’an says:

***“And there were in the city nine (groups of) persons who made
mischief in the land and would not reform.”***

Regarding to the fact that the Arabic word /raht/ in lexicon means a
group of persons who are less than ten or less than forty members, makes
it clear that these small groups, each of which had a separate line,
were similar to each other in one thing and it was making mischief in
the earth, disturbing the social system and the creedal and ethical
principles.

The Qur’anic phrase ***/layuslihuna/ (would not reform)*** is an
emphasis on this matter, because it sometimes happens that someone makes
a mischief and later he regrets and tries to amend himself, but the real
mischief mongers are not like that. They go on their corruption
constantly and never try to rectify their wrong.

Paying attention to the Arabic conjugation of the verb /yufsidun/ (make
mischief), which is in future and simple present tense form and
indicates to the duration of the action, it shows that this action was
their permanent deed and they used to commit it.

Each of these nine groups had a chief, and probably every one of them
was from a separate tribe.

Surah An-Naml - Verse 49
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا تَقَاسَمُوا بِاللَّهِ لَنُبَيّـِتَنَّهُ وَأَهْلَهُ ثُمَّ
لَنَقُولَنَّ لِوَلِيّـِهِ مَا شَهِدْنَا مَهْلِكَ أَهْلِهِ وَإِنَّا
لَصَادِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. “They said: ‘Swear a mutual oath by Allah that surely we will
make a sudden attack on him and his family by night, then we will tell
his heir, we were not present at the slaughter of his household, and
verily we are truthful’.”***

The content of this holy verse is similar to the state of the pagans of
Mecca who united by an oath and decided to surprise and kill the Prophet
of Islam (S) in his bed while he was asleep, but the holy Prophet (S)
asked Hadrat Ali (as) to sleep in his bed and thus the enemy’s plot was
nullified.

Certainly by the appearance of Saleh and his pure religion in the
society, those groups were driven to extremities, and it was in that
condition that, as the verse says:

***“They said: ‘Swear a mutual oath by Allah that surely we will make a
sudden attack on him and his family by night, then we will tell his
heir, we were not present at the slaughter of his household, and verily
we are truthful’.”***

The Arabic word /taqasamu/ (swear a mutual oath), in an imperative verb
form, means: ‘everybody must participate in making an oath and promise
to achieve this great plot’, a promise in which there is no change or
return.

It is interesting that they made an oath by Allah. It indicates that,
besides worshipping idols, they believed in Allah, the Creator of the
skies and the earth, too. Therefore, they used to make an oath to Him in
relation to important matters.

It also shows that they were so proud that they did this great crime of
theirs by mentioning their names; as if they wanted to worship, or to do
a godly service. This is the custom of haughty misguided disbelievers.

The Qur’anic word ***/lanubayyitannahu/ (surely we will make a sudden
attack on him)*** is derived from /tabyit/ which means ‘to surprise and
to attack suddenly by night’. The application of this meaning here shows
that, in the meanwhile, they were afraid of the adherents of Saleh and
his tribe.

Therefore, in order that they could reach their own goal and, in the
meantime, they might not confront the anger of his followers, they
designed the plot of a sudden attack at night and colluded that if
Saleh’s followers came to them, all of them with together take an oath
that they had no role in that event absolutely, and even they were not
present there nor had they witnessed it.

Surah An-Naml - Verses 50-51
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَكَرُوا مَكْراً وَمَكَرْنَا مَكْراً وَهُمْ لاَ يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ مَكْرِهِمْ أَنَّا دَمَّرْنَاهُمْ
وَقَوْمَهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. “And they devised a device, and We devised a device (too), but
they were not aware;”***  
***51. “And behold, how was the end of their device! For We destroyed
them and their people all together.”***

The means of annihilation of the people of Thamud has been referred to
in several occurrences of the Qur’an with different explanations:

1) By earthquake:

***“…Then the earthquake seized them…”***[^12]

2) By thunderbolt:

***“…So the Thunderbolt seized them…”***[^13]

3) By Mighty Blast:

***“And the (mighty) Blast overtook those who were unjust…”***[^14]

It does not matter, of course, that these three punishments might have
occurred simultaneously.

One of the aspects of the device of Allah is giving respite and bounty
to the sinners, so that they be busy with them, and when their time is
over they are suddenly involved in the chastisement of Allah.

History announces that there was a mountain in a side of the city and it
had a slit where the temple of Saleh was. Sometimes Saleh (as) went
there at night in order to worship and prattle with Allah as two lovers.

They decided to lie in ambush there and when Saleh came over there they
would kill him, and then, after his martyrdom, they would attack his
home by the same night and kill his household, too, and return to their
houses; and when they were questioned about it, they would say they knew
nothing.

But Allah nullified their plots surprisingly and their plans remained
invalid.

When they were lying in ambush in a corner of the mountain, some pieces
of the mountain fall and a huge rock from upward of it came down over
them and destroyed them in a short moment.

The verse says:

***“And they devised a device, and We devised a device (too), but they
were not aware;”***

Then, the next verse implies that not only those people, but also their
adherents were destroyed.

It says:

***“And behold, how was the end of their device! For We destroyed them
and their people all together.”***

As it has been mentioned formerly, the Qur’anic term ***/makr/***, in
the Arabic literature, means any ‘application of a remedy’, and it does
not pertain exclusively to satanic and harmful plans that is used in the
Persian language today. Thus, it is used in both harmful plans and good
devices.

Raqib in Mufradat says:

*“**/makr/ (device)*** *is that which hinders one to reach his goal.”*

Therefore, when this word is used about Allah, it means: ‘nullification
of harmful plots’; and when it is used about mischief mongers, it means:
‘impedimental acts against reproving programs’.

Surah An-Naml - Verses 52-53
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتِلْكَ بُيُوتُهُمْ خَاوِيَةً بِمَا ظَلَمُوا إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً
لِقَوْمٍ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنجَيْنَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَكَانُوا يَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. “So those are their houses in empty ruins for they were unjust.
Verily there is in this a sign for a people who have knowledge.”***  
***53. “And We saved those who believed and used to keep from evil.”***

The Arabic word /xawiyah/ means ‘corruption, annihilation, and
destruction’, and it is also used in the sense of ‘empty of dwellers’.

Chastisement is not limited to that of Hereafter, sometimes oppressors
are punished in this world. This situation is also the same for the
effects of faith and piety which is not particular to the Hereafter. The
pious people observe the result of their deeds in this world, too.

However, regarding to their annihilation and final fate, the holy Qur’an
says:

***“So those are their houses in empty ruins for they were unjust…”***

Their houses are utterly ruin and there is no people to have activities
therein, and there have remained no sign of their glories, bounties and
sinful gatherings.

Yes, the fire of cruelty and injustice caused them and all their
belongings to be burnt and destroyed. This is a clear sign for the end
of the act of those who are unjust.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Verily there is in this a sign for a people who have knowledge.”***

But in this event those who were not guilty were not burnt in the fire
of the guilty ones and were not involved in the evil fate of wrongdoers.

The verse says:

***“And We saved those who believed and used to keep from evil.”***

Surah An-Naml - Verses 54-55
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلُوطاً إِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ أَتَأْتُونَ الْفَاحِشَةَ وَأَنتُمْ
تبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَئِنَّكُمْ لَتَأْتُونَ الرّ‌ِجَالَ شَهْوَةً مِن دُونِ النّـِسَآءِ
بَلْ أَنتُمْ قَوْمٌ تَجْهَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “And (We sent) Lot, when he said to his people: ‘Do you commit
indecency while you see (its iniquity)?’”***  
***55. “What! Do you approach men lustfully instead of women? No, you
are a people that are ignorant.”***

The people of Lot used to commit sodomy in their public meetings and
before the eyes of each other. Surah Al-‘Ankabut, No. 29, verse 29 says:

***“…and you commit dishonour in your assemblies?…”***

In the above verse, the Qur’an also says:

***“…while you see (its iniquity)?”***

which means ‘you commit indecency before the eyes of each other, or you
commit sin consciously and with insight.

Sodomy is one of the great and hideous sins, because the later verses of
the Surah indicate that it consequently brings the chastisement of
Allah.

Some other verses of the Qur’an refer to the fact that wife is necessary
for calmness, educating and raising up generation, and cooperation in
living; but, here, the Qur’an points only to the phenomenon of lust,
because the people of Lot had not any aim of their shameful act but
lust.

Next to mentioning parts of the life stories of Moses, David, Solomon,
and Saleh and their peoples, the fifth prophet whom has been referred to
in this Surah, is Lot, the great prophet of Allah.

This subject has repeatedly been referred to in the former Suras of the
Qur’an, such as Al-Hijr, Hud, Ash-Shu‘ara, and Al-’A‘raf, where some
matters have been mentioned in this ground.

This repetition, and the like of it, is for the fact that the Qur’an is
not a book of history in which an event may be wholly explained for one
time and it usually does not refer to that event again.

But Qur’an is a book of education for training good men, and we know
that in educational themes sometimes the conditions require that an
incident should be repeated again and again, in order that it could be
reminded and be dealt with from different dimensions.

However, the story of the people of Lot, who are known in the world for
their sexual deviation, Sodomy, and for other hideous deeds, as well as
their fate at the end of their life, can be an example for those who are
drowned in the cesspool of lusts; and the spread of this pollution among
societies requires that this instructive event to be mentioned
repeatedly.

Here the Qur’an says:

***“And (We sent) Lot, when he said to his people: ‘Do you commit
indecency while you see (its iniquity)?’”***

The Arabic word /fahišah/, as we have said aforetime, means some deeds
that the indecency and ugliness of which is manifest, but here the
purpose of it is the shameful act of Sodomy.

The Qur’anic phrase ***/’antum tubsirun/ (while you see)*** refers to
this fact that you see the ugliness and the evil results of this hideous
action with your eyes, and you observe that your society has wholly
become polluted, so that even your own children are not secured. Why do
you see, but yet you do not awake?

Then, in the next verse, it says:

***“What! Do you approach men lustfully instead of women?…”***

In fact, at first the Qur’an points to this action as an indecent
action, /fahišah/, then it explains it more clearly so that there
remains no ambiguity for anybody. This is one of the styles of decorum
in order to state an important thing.

Then for making clear that the motive of this action is ignorance, it
says:

***“…No, you are a people that are ignorant.”***

This ignorance is the ignorance to Allah, the ignorance to the purpose
of creation and laws of creation, and the ignorance to the evil effects
of this important sin. If a person, contemplates deeply, he will
understand that how much ignorantly this evil action is.

The reason why this sentence is stated in interrogative form is for the
sake that they hear its answer from the inside of their own conscience
so that it may be more effective.

**The End of Part 19**

Surah An-Naml - Verse 56
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا كَانَ جَوَابَ قَوْمِهِ إِلآَّ أَن قَالُوا أَخْرِجُوا ءَالَ لُوطٍ
مِن قَرْيَتِكُمْ إِنَّهُمْ أُنَاسٌ يَتَطَهَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. “But the answer of his people was naught except that they said:
‘Drive out the people of Lot from your city; verily they are people (who
seek to be) pure.”***

Since the wrong doers have not any acceptable logic before the Divine
prophets, they use force against them.

The former discussions with the strong logic of Lot, the Divine prophet,
in front of those polluted people, explained that how he dissuaded them
from the hideous act of Sodomy by his reasonable and eloquent statement,
and he showed them that this act is the consequence of ignorance and
being unaware of the law of creation and all human values.

Now, we see the answer of this polluted nation to the logical statement
of Lot (as).

The holy Qur’an says:

***“But the answer of his people was naught except that they said:
‘Drive out the people of Lot from your city; verily they are people (who
seek to be) pure.”***

This answer is an implication to the low level of their thought and the
extraordinary fall of their ethical affairs.

Yes, in the environment of the polluted ones, chastity is a crime and a
defect. The chaste and modest ones, like Yusuf, are put in prison, and
the household of the divine prophet, because of their chastity and
avoidance from pollution, are banished, while the persons like Zulaykha,
are free and possess ranks.

Lot’s household must be banished, but the people of Lot can live in
peace in their city freely.

This is the clear example of the word of Qur’an where it says about the
wrong doers that their hearts were sealed because of their deeds and
their eyes were veiled and their ears had heaviness.[^15]

It is also probable that because of their being sunk in corruption and
being accustomed to pollution, concerning Lot’s household, they said in
mockery:

***“…They are people (who seek to be) pure…”.***

These people implied that Lot’s household imagined that their piety was
chastity and the act of the people of Lot was impious. What a wonderful
and ridiculous thing!

And it is not surprising that, as the result of getting accustomed to a
shameful action, the sense of recognition of a person changes. The
famous story of a tanner, who was constantly with the purified skins and
his sense of smell had got accustomed to that bad smell, is well known.

When he was passing the market of perfume-sellers, he became
unconscious, and the concerning doctor ordered that he should be brought
into the market of tanners to ‘recover his sense’. We have heard this
story and it is an interesting sensible example for this logical matter.

Surah An-Naml - Verses 57-58
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأنجَيْنَاهُ وَأَهْلَهُ إِلاَّ امْرَأَتَهُ قَدَّرْنَاهَا مِنَ
الْغَابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِم مَّطَراً فَسَآءَ مَطَرُ الْمُنذَرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***57. “So We saved him and his household, except his wife, We had
decreed her to be of those that tarried.”***  
***58. “And We rained down on them a shower (of brimstone), and evil was
the shower of those who had been warned.***

The Divine leaders are under the protection and support of Allah:

***“So We saved him…”***

The fruit of people’s piety and virtue in this world is their being
saved from the wrath of Allah.

The Arabic word /qabirin/, which means: ‘those that tarried and were
annihilated’, has been used seven times in the Qur’an and all of them
are about Lot’s wife.

It has been cited in narrations that Lot taught those people for about
thirty years but none believed in him except his household, (and among
them even his wife had the creed of pagans).[^16]

It is evident that such a group, who might not be improved, could not
have a room for living in this world and they should be annihilated.

Therefore, this verse says:

***“So We saved him and his household, except his wife, We had decreed
her to be of those that tarried.”***

Then, when Lot and his family came out of the city at the appointed
time, (in midnight of the night when the city was full of corruption and
shame), a terrible earthquake turned their land completely upside down,
and, in the morning, a shower of brimstone came over there.

The verse says:

***“And We rained down on them a shower (of brimstone), and evil was the
shower of those who had been warned.”***

We had a detailed discussion about the people of Lot and their fate, as
well as the evil effects of Sodomy, when explaining holy Surah Hud, No.
11, verse 77-83, which is not necessary to be repeated here again.

There is only one point, of course, that seems necessary to be mentioned
here, as follows:

As a factor for duration of man’s seed and the calmness of his soul, the
law of creation has set the sexual attraction between two opposite
sexes, and its change toward Sodomy disturbs both the spiritual calmness
and the social peace. And since these social laws have a trace in man’s
nature, this change causes a kind of disorder in the system of the
entity of man.

Lot, the great prophet of Allah, attracted the attention of that
deviated nation to this natural trace and said to them:

***“Do you commit indecency while you see (its iniquity)?”***

This ignorance and unawareness of the law of life was in the sense of
foolishness that drugged them towards this devious way.

It is not marvellous that other laws of creation may change due to this
nation, too, and instead of a wholesome rain water, a shower of
brimstone rains down over them, and their peaceful land turns over by an
earthquake, and, consequently, not only they are destroyed but also no
trace remains from them.

[^1]: Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^2]: Al-’A‘raf, verses 75-76

[^3]: This meaning is explicitly expressed in Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7,
verse 77

[^4]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 70

[^5]: Sur Al-’Anfal, No. 8, verse 32

[^6]: Tafsir-ul-Kashshaf

[^7]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 131

[^8]: Surah Yasin, No. 36, verse 18

[^9]: Nahaj by Ibn-Abil-Hadid, Vol. 20, P. 283

[^10]: Sunan-i-Ibn-Majid, Vol. 2, P. 1170; and Sunan-i-’Abi Dawud, Vol.
2, P. 344

[^11]: Safinah, Vol. 2, P. 102

[^12]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 78

[^13]: Surah Ath-Thariyat, No. 51, verse 44

[^14]: Surah Hud, No. 11, verse 67

[^15]: Surah ’Isra’, No. 17, verse 46

[^16]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, the Commentary, Vol. 2, P. 382


