Did the Shi'ite Muslims Borrow Some Jewish Teachings?
=====================================================

The mercenary writers whose goal is to split the Muslims allege that a
Yemenite Jew from Sana', Abdullah Ibn Saba (also called Ibn al-Sawda),
adopted Islam during the reign of the third Caliph 'Uthman. They allege
that Ibn Saba, through some doctrines that he spread among Muslims, was
a big factor in causing the revolt against 'Uthman. The following are
some of the doctrines attributed to Ibn Saba.

**(1).** This alleged Jew invented the idea that the Prophet Muhammad
would return before the Day of Judgement. He based his allegation on the
return of Jesus, saying: "If Jesus is going to come back, Muhammad will
also return because he is more important than Jesus."

He also quoted the following verse from the Qur'an to support his
allegation:

"Certainly the one who revealed the Qur'an to you shall return you."

These writers say that the Shi'ite school borrowed from this imaginary
Jew the idea that the Prophet would return.

**(2)**. Ibn Saba is the one who propagated the idea that Ali Ibn Abi
Talib is the executor and successor of the Messenger of God. He said
that there were a thousand prophets before Muhammad, and that each
prophet had an executor after him, and that Ali is the executor of the
Prophet. Furthermore, Ibn Saba said that the three caliphs who ruled
after the Prophet were usurpers of the Islamic rule.

**(3).** Ibn Saba is the one who instigated the two prominent companions
of the Prophet Muhammad, Abu Dharr and Am-mar Ibn Yasir, against
'Uthman.

The mercenary writers also allege that this imaginary Jew met Abu Dharr
in Damascus, and that he introduced him to the idea of prohibiting
treasuring gold and silver. He also said that the revenue from Zakat and
land tax belongs to the Muslims rather than to God.

**(4).** Ibn Saba persuaded the men who participated in killing 'Uthman
to start the battle of Basra (at night) between Imam Ali's camp and the
camp of the three leaders (A'ishah, Talhah, and Zubayr). He wanted to
make each of the two armies accuse the other of starting the battle.

Let us discuss each of these allegations in order.

The Return Of The Prophet Muhammad
----------------------------------

The attribution to Ibn Saba of the idea that the Prophet would return is
ridiculous. It shows the ignorance of the mercenary writers who write
such allegations. They misunderstand the history of Islam. Had these
mercenaries studied Islamic history carefully, they would have known
that the first one who declared the idea of the return of the Messenger
of God was 'Umar Ibn Al-Khattab.

Muslim historians agree that 'Umar stood at the Mosque of the Prophet
when the Prophet passed away and said:

"There are hypocrite men who allege that the Messenger of God has died.
Certainly the Messenger of God did not die, but he went to his Lord as
Moses, son of 'Imran, went to his Lord (for receiving the Heavenly
commandments). By God, Muhammad will return as Moses returned, and he
shall sever the hands and legs of the men who alleged that the Messenger
of Allah has died." (Ibn Hisham, *Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah,* part 2, page
655)

We cannot say that 'Umar took this idea from Abdullah Ibn Saba or any
other person. Ibn Saba did not even exist at that time, not even in the
imagination of Sayf bin 'Umar al-Tamimi, who invented the entire
allegation.

The Shi'ite school of thought does not consider the Prophet's return a
part of Islamic belief. If any Muslim believes in this, it would only be
logical to say that the source of this doctrine is the second Caliph's
speech on the day the Messenger of God died, rather than Ibn Saba.

The Doctrine Of Ali's Executorship
----------------------------------

The dividers of Muslims alleged that Ibn Saba is the one who invented
the doctrine of Ali's executorship. Yet history testifies that the
Messenger of God himself is the one who declared that Ali would be his
executor.

Imam Ali reported the following:

When the Qur'anic verse: "And warn your closest relatives" was revealed,
the Messenger of God called me and said: "Ali, certainly Allah commanded
me to warn my closest relatives, and I feel the difficulty of this
mission. I know that when I confront them with this warning, I will not
like their response." The Prophet invited the members of his clan to
dine with him on a small amount of food and little milk. There were
forty of them. After they ate, the Prophet spoke to them:

"Children of Abdul Muttalib, by God, I do not know of any young man from
the Arabs who brought to his people better than I brought to you. I have
brought to you the goodness of this world and the Hereafter. The
Almighty commanded me to invite you to it. Who among you will assist me
on this mission and become my brother, executor, and successor?"

No one accepted the invitation, and I said: "Messenger of God, I shall
be your assistant." He held my neck and said to them: "This is my
brother, executor, and successor. Listen to him and obey him." They
laughed, saying to Abu Talib: He (Muhammad) commanded you to listen to
your son and to obey him. *(*al-Tabari*, al-Ta'rikh,* part 2, pages
319-21)

This hadith was reported by Ibn Ishaq, Ibn Abi Hatim, Ibn Mardawayh, and
Al-Bayhaqi in his book *aI-Dala'il.* This was also reported by a number
of historians including Abu al-Fida and Ibn al-Athir. In addition,
Muhammad Hussein Haykal recorded it in his book *Hayat Muhammad* (first
edition).

Here we should ask the following question:

Imam Ali reported that the Messenger of God is the one who granted him
the office of executorship, brotherhood, and successorship. Sayf Ibn
'Umar reported that the idea of the executorship of Ali had come from a
Jew called Abdullah Ibn Saba. We should ask the members of the Takfeer
University (who call everyone who disagrees with them
"Kafir"-unbeliever) the following question: Do you believe Imam Ali's
report or Sayf Ibn 'Umar's? Sayf was accused by prominent Sunnite
scholars of weakness, forgery, and heresy.

Of course, we should not expect any true Muslim to choose the report of
a liar such as Sayf Ibn 'Umar and reject the report of the Imam of the
faithfuls, Ali Ibn Abi Talib, the brother of the Prophet. The Messenger
of God once said to Ali:

"Would you not be pleased to be to me like Aaron was to Moses, but there
shall be no Prophet after me?" (al-Bukhari in his *Sahih* reported this
through his channel to Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas, part 6, page 3). Muslim also
reported this in his *Sahih*, part 15, page 176.

Hadith Al-Ghadir
----------------

Do the mercenary writers who endeavor to spread hostility among Muslims
forget that while returning from his farewell pilgrimage, and in the
presence of over a hundred thousand pilgrims, the Messenger of God
declared:

"Do I not have more right over the believers than they have over
themselves?"

"They answered: 'Yes, Messenger of God.'

"The Prophet held up the hand of Ali and said:

'Whoever I am his Mawla (leader), this Ali is his Mawla. God, love
whoever loves him, and be hostile to whoever is hostile to him.' "

No Muslim would doubt that the Messenger of God is the leader of all
Muslims from all generations. The Prophet in his statement granted Ali
the same position as his when he said that Ali is the leader of everyone
who follows the Prophet.

This declaration which was reported by about a hundred companions does
not just indicate that Ali is the executor of the Prophet, but also
indicates that Ali takes the place of the Messenger in the leadership of
all Muslims. However, these mercenaries still allow themselves to say
that the belief that Ali was the executor of the Messenger had come
through a Jew who declared his Islam during the days of 'Uthman.

The Mercenaries Try To Defame The Two Beloved Companions Of The Prophet, Abu Dharr And Ammar Ibn Yasir
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The mercenary workers did not even hesitate to attack the outstanding
companions, Abu Dharr and Ammar. They said that Abu Dharr and Ammar met
the imaginary Jew Ibn Saba, were affected by his propaganda, and thus
turned against 'Uthman.

They say this while history testifies that Abu Dharr said to 'Uthman in
the presence of Ka'b Al-Ahbar:

"Do not be satisfied that people do no harm to others. They should try
to assist one another. It could be that the person who pays Zakat should
do more. He should assist his neighbors and Muslim brothers and be
generous to his relatives."

Ka'b Al-Ahbar said:

"Whoever performs his duty would be free of any other additional
charitable spending."

Abu Dharr immediately took his cane and hit Ka'b on the neck injuring
him and said: "Son of a Jewish lady, are you trying to teach us our
religion?"

With such a firmness in religion which made Abu Dharr hit and injure
Ka'b (who was highly respected by 'Umar and 'Uthman) because he tried to
give a verdict in the Islamic religion, it is inconceivable that Abu
Dharr would learn from the imaginary Ibn Saba, who never met 'Uthman or
any other caliph before him.

The dividers of Muslims do not hesitate to attack Abu Dharr and Ammar by
saying that they were affected by Ibn Saba. However, we should not
forget that by their attacking two prominent companions, they actually
are attacking the Messenger of God who attested to their purity and
righteousness.

Ibn Majah, in his authentic *Sunan*, reported that the Messenger of God
said:

"Certainly Allah commanded me to love four persons and informed me that
He loves them."

The companions asked the Prophet:

"Messenger of God, who are these four persons?"

The Prophet said:

"Ali is from them (repeating that three times), Abu Dharr, Salman, and
Al-Miqdad." (part 1, page 52, hadith No.149)

Al-Tirmidhi, in his authentic *Sunan*, reported that the Messenger said:

"Every prophet was given by God seven righteous companions. I was given
fourteen righteous companions." He included in them Ammar and Al-Miqdad.
(part 5, page 329, hadith 3877)

Al -Tirmidhi also reported that the Prophet said:

"Heaven has not shaded, nor has the earth carried a truer person than
Abu Dharr. He walks on earth with the immaterialistic attitude of Jesus,
son of Mary." (part 5, page 334, hadith 3889)

Ibn Majah, in his authentic *Sunan*, reported that Imam Ali said: "I was
sitting in the house of the Prophet and Ammar asked to see him. The
Prophet said 'Welcome the good and the purified.'"

Ibn Majah also reported that 'A'ishah reported that the Messenger of God
said "Whenever Ammar is given two alternatives, he always chooses the
most righteous of the two."

Al-Tirmidhi, in his authentic Sunan, reported that the Messenger of God
witnessed Ammar and his two parents tortured in Mecca. The Prophet said
to them:

"Members of Yasir's family, be patient. Your destination is paradise.
(part 5, page 233)

Thus, Ammar and his parents were the first people to be declared by the
Prophet to be dwellers of Paradise.

Here we should say: When a Muslim knows that the Prophet has commended
these two important companions so highly, and if he is a believer in the
truthfulness of Muhammad, he does not allow himself to insult these two
companions. Such an insult discredits the Prophet.

We find that the hostility of Sayf Ibn 'Umar Al-Tamimi, who lived during
the second century after the Prophet, and the hostility of his students
towards the Shi'ites motivated them to spread cheap propaganda. Sayf
knew that attributing the revolt against 'Uthman to the work of Ibn Saba
contradicted known historical facts which show that the two companions,

Abu Dharr and Ammar, were opposed to 'Uthman 's ever coming to power.
Because Sayf knew of their opposition to 'Uthman, he tried to smear
their reputations by adding the names of the two prominent companions to
the list of students of the imaginary Jew.

If Ibn Saba ever existed he, according to the tale of Sayf Ibn 'Umar,
had declared his Islam after 'Uthman came to power. Abu Dharr and Ammar
Ibn Yasir, on the other hand, had been opposed to 'Uthman's caliphate
before he came to power. The two companions were followers of the Imam
Ali. They were firm believers that he was appointed by the Prophet to be
his successor.

Since this was their belief before Ibn Saba's existence, Sayf's story
about their being influenced by Ibn Saba is unfounded and untrue.

Thus, in order to clear the third caliph from all the accusations
pertaining to his ill-management of the Islamic treasury, Sayf accused
the revolters of being students of Ibn Saba. He then completed his story
by adding the two companions to the class of Ibn Saba's students,
intentionally overlooking the fact that the two companions belong to the
first successful class of the school of the Prophet Muhammad. They were
among the important companions who were honored by the Prophet.

In the end, Sayf was led by his untrue story to reject the testimony of
the Prophet. By this, Sayf had disproved his whole tale.

Who is Sayf Ibn 'Umar?
----------------------

The books that deal with the reporters of hadiths inform us that Sayf
was a well-known liar.

Ibn Ma'in (died in 233 AH) said: Sayf is weak.

Abu Hatim (died in 277 AH) said: Sayf's hadith is rejected.

Al-Nisa'i (died in 303 AH) said: Sayf is weak.

Abu Dawud (died in 216 AH) said: Sayf is nothing. Some of his hadiths
were conveyed and the majority of them are denied.

Ibn Hibban said: Sayf attributed fabricated hadiths to good reporters.
He was accused of being a heretic.

Al-Darqutni (died in 385 AH) said: Sayf is weak.

Al-Hakim Al-Nisaburi (died in 405 AH) said: Sayf is accused of being a
heretic.

Ibn Abd Al-Barr (died in 462 AH) said in his writing abut Al-Qa'qa':
Sayf reported that Al-Qa'qa' said: I attended the death of the Prophet
Muhammad.

Ibn Abd Al-Barr also said: Ibn Abi Hatim said: Sayf is weak. Thus, what
was conveyed of the presence of Al-Qa'qa' at the death of the Prophet is
rejected.

Ibn Hajar (died in 850 AH) said: Sayf's hadith is weak.

Al-Suyuti (died in 900 AH) said after conveying a hadith: "Many
reporters of this hadith are weak and the weakest among them is Sayf."

(Sayyid Murtada Al-’Askari, *Abdullah Ibn Saba*, pages 27-28)

I should mention that Al-’Askari had a very distinguished achievement.
He proved beyond any doubt, in his book *Abdullah Ibn Saba,* that Ibn
Saba never existed, and that he was invented by Sayf Ibn 'Umar.


