The Relationship Between Muslims and Jews in the Present Era
============================================================

Finally, we can say that the present very often informs us about the
past and may tell us about the future. Let us look at the world in which
Muslims live during the 20th century, a time distinguished from previous
centuries by its Zionist character.

During this century, the Zionist dream was realized through the creation
of Israel. With this event, the Arab people and governments were put to
the test. Israel was planted in the heart of the Islamic and Arab world.
The East and West gave their support for this location. This unanimous
support was not due to their love of the Jews but rather, it was
motivated by their prejudice against Islam and Muslims. East and West
were determined to destroy the future of Islam.

The Arab Muslim governments stood up, thundering and expressing their
anger. They threatened and declared that their aim was to throw the
Israelites into the sea.

These governments participated totally or partially in three wars
against Israel. In each war, Israel came out bigger in size and stronger
in force. The factors which gave the Israelis these victories are the
following:

1. The superiority of the Israelis over the Arabs in technology and
their sincerity towards the interest of Israel.

2. The military, financial, and political assistance Israel received
from western governments, especially political and financial from Jewish
American Institutes.

3. The lack of seriousness on the part of the Arabs. Arab governments
displayed the opposite of their stated intentions. They came to war
without planning, and their preparedness was not proportionate to the
size of the mission. Arab countries with petroleum gave some financial
assistance to poor Arab governments for the sake of war, but these
countries did not commit any military divisions in battles. Because of
this, the number of Arab lives lost was incomparably larger than the
number of Israeli losses.

Most Arab governments did not take a serious stand in which they would
give dignity to Islam and Muslims. Yet these governments are the ones
that claim to be the protectors of Islam, its sacred places, and its
principles. As a matter of fact, most of these governments conducted
themselves in a way that was constantly degrading to Islam and
increasingly submissive to governments in alliance with Israel.

The majority of the petroleum countries who were repeatedly humiliated
by Israel continued to follow their foolish policy of putting their
money in the countries most supportive of Israel. The press more than
once published startling information. These Arab countries purchase
bonds worth billions of dollars every year from governments allied with
Israel. It was reported by some knowledgeable sources that those bonds
were not supposed to be cashed. This meant that the billions of dollars
which are paid for these bonds are paid toward nothing except to please
the foreign masters whose aim is only to humiliate the Muslims and
support the Zionists.

With all their harmful deeds, those governments which still claim that
they are the protectors of the Sunni Muslims, continue, shamelessly, to
spend the public's money on mercenary writers who sell their honor for
money, spreading lies about the Shi'ite Muslims. They forget that it was
Imam Ali who defeated the Hijazi Jews. They forget that it was Sunni
companions and scholars who were students of the Rabbi Ka'b Al-Ahbar.

The Stand Of The Islamic State In Iran
--------------------------------------

To uncover the liars and hypocrites who claim dedication to Islam, the
Almighty chose to create in Iran (the biggest Shi'ite country) a popular
revolution, replacing the non-Islamic and Zionist agent government of
the Shah by a real Islamic government. This new government has revived
the rule of the Book of God, the Sunnah of the Prophet, and the
instructions of the members of the House of the Prophet.

The first item on the agenda of the new Islamic government was to deport
the Israeli representative from Iran and to give the Israeli Embassy in
Iran to the Palestinians.

After one year of this unique event, the Egyptian government made peace
with Israel and allowed it to establish an Israeli Embassy in Egypt (the
country to which the good Sunni Muslims look up for religious guidance).
Thus, this Embassy was the first Israeli Embassy established in an Arab
country.

Israel was certain that it had no serious enemy in the Middle East
because most of the governments of the Arab countries were hostile to
Israel in words, peaceful in deeds. The Shah (who was imposed on the
Iranian by the imperialistic forces) was a true servant of Israel. When
the Islamic Republic of Iran was established, Israel, for the first
time, felt that it had a real enemy in the Middle East. The Islamic
Republic is based on the principles of justice without compromise. The
establishment of the new Islamic Republic had on Israel the effect of a
destructive earthquake.

It was expected from the Arab governments to welcome the establishment
of the new formidable enemy of Israel. Iran's appearance on the
political and military arena in the Middle East was an unexpected
heavenly gift. It was only logical to expect the Arab governments to
establish an alliance with the Islamic Republic and to take advantage of
the great and unique opportunity to give Israel a devastating defeat.
Unfortunately, most of the Arab governments took an extremely shameful
attitude towards the new Islamic government, one that was not expected
from any country other than Israel. However, in spite of its hostility
toward the Islamic government, Israel did not enter an open war against
Iran.

The reason is obvious.

The Arab governments which claim to be protectors of Islam have
fulfilled the mission which pleases Israel and fulfills its goals. Thus,
Israel did not need to spend any Israeli blood or fund. The Arab
governments spent more than one hundred and fifty billion dollars in
their shameful war against the Islamic Republic, the most hostile enemy
to Israel, proving that they are more friendly to the enemies of Islam
than they are to the true Islamic nation.

The Shi'ite Muslims In South Lebanon
------------------------------------

However, Israel was surprised with a new and unexpected development in
South Lebanon. Israel faced in 1984-85 a new enemy that was small in
number but big in courage, having no arms except faith in God and love
of martyrdom in the way of God.

Isaac Rabin, the Israeli Defense Minister, said that it never came to
his imagination, nor did he find in the records of the Israeli
information that a human being would be transformed into a living bomb
that goes toward its target to explode the target and itself. However,
what did not cross the mind of any Israeli has become a devastating
reality to Israel and astonishing to the whole world.

A few hundred Lebanese Shi'ite Muslim heroes alone were able to fulfill
what Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf States were unable
to fulfill. The few hundred Lebanese heroes defeated Israel, forced its
army to retreat and liberated an important portion of the occupied land
of South Lebanon.

These Shi'ite Lebanese have demonstrated a heroism unparalleled in
history. Unarmed men, women, and children sold their pure souls to their
Lord to please Him and to defend His religion. Their battle produced
priceless results, among them are the following:

1. These heroes achieved the first true victory against Israel. They
forced the Israeli forces to retreat rapidly for the first time.

2. It erased the shame which the Arab nation had in many military
defeats.

3. The battle liberated the Muslims in general and the Arabs in
particular from the complexes of fear and despair which the repeated
defeats had produced and had made the Arab people believe that the
Israelites are invincible.

4. What these heroes achieved was physical evidence proving that it is
possible for any Arab people to defeat the Zionists if they believe in
God and the hereafter and love martyrdom.

5. They have given to all oppressed people of the earth the living
example which proves that it is possible for poor people to challenge
powerful nations if they face death courageously.

Yes, it is permissible to say that what happened and what will happen in
South Lebanon is a start of a world-liberating battle.

What Was The Attitude Of The Arab Governments?
----------------------------------------------

The size of the result of this liberating battle in South Lebanon was
expected to meet a great appreciation by the Arab governments. It was
expected that the Arab oil countries would shower the people of Lebanon
with billions of dollars to compensate them for the sacred battle which
cost the people of South Lebanon their material wealth as well as their
best youth. Tens of thousands of homeless families were left exposed to
the cold of winter and the heat of summer, with no protection.

These governments, which are swimming in a sea of wealth, not only
refused to fulfill the minimum of their humane, Islamic, and national
duties but took a hostile attitude by starting a strong and inhumane
campaign against the Shi'ite heroes of South Lebanon. They conducted an
extremely cruel campaign of deportation against the Lebanese Shi'ites
who had lived under the authority of those governments for years,
perhaps decades. They deported them without giving them even the
opportunity to prepare themselves for that deportation.

This action made the economical crisis of South Lebanon suffocating.
Thus, these governments rewarded the heroes of Islam with what
displeases Allah and His Messenger and pleases only the Israelites and
their allies.

It seems as if these Arab governments have avenged the Israeli defeat by
punishing the ones who defeated Israel.

It should be made absolutely clear that the aim here is not to accuse
our Sunni brothers with what some of them accused us. Certainly, we
respect them and respect their imams. They are too pious to deliberately
take from Ka'b Al-Ahbar or Wahb Ibn Munabbih or others from the Jews who
adopted Islam superficially and hid what was in their hearts.

If some of the caliphs or prominent companions listened to these fake
converts, we believe that the Mujtahid would be excused in his endeavor
to research and find the truth, if he is not negligent in his research.

Those who directed accusations at their Shi'ite brothers should have
studied Islamic history thoughtfully and seriously. Had they done that,
they would have learned that the Shi'ites were the most formidable
opponents of the Zionists and their allies.

It would not be logical for a camp to direct accusations toward another
camp while the accusations are disproved by clear evidence, and while
the accusers have committed worse than the accusations they hurled at
the Shi'ites.

I hope that our honorable Sunni brothers will dispel from their minds
those imaginary accusations which some people spread against their
Shi'ite brothers, for it is clear that the Shi'ites are innocent of all
these false and fabricated accusations.


