Introduction
============

This book, which we have called Shi'ite Islam, seeks to clarify the
true identity of Shi'ism which is one of the two major branches of
Islam - the other being Sunnism. It deals in particular with the way
Shi'ism originated and later developed, with the type of religious
thought present in Shi'ism, and with Islamic sciences and culture as
seen from the Shi'ite point of view.

**The Meaning of Religion (din), Islam, and Shi'ism**

Religion. There is no doubt that each member of the human race is
naturally drawn to his fellow-men and that in his life in society he
acts in ways which are interrelated and interconnected. His eating,
drinking, sleeping, keeping awake, talking, listening, sitting, walking,
his social intercourse and meetings, at the same time that they are
formally and externally distinct, are invariably connected with each
other. One cannot perform just any act in any place or after any other
act. There is an order which must be observed.

There is, therefore, an order which governs the actions man performs in
the journey of this life, an order against which his actions cannot
rebel. In reality, these acts all originate from a distinct source. That
source is man's desire to possess a felicitous life , a life in which he
can react to the greatest extent possible the objects of his desire, and
be gratified. Or, one could say that man wishes to provide in a more
complete way for his needs in order to continue his existence.

This is why man continually conforms his actions to rules and laws
either devised by himself or accepted from others, and why he selects a
particular way of life for himself among all the other existing
possibilities. He works in order to provide for his means of livelihood
and expects his activities to be guided by laws and regulations that
must be followed. In order to satisfy his sense of taste and overcome
hunger and thirst, he eats and drinks, for he considers eating and
drinking necessary for the continuation of his own happy existence. This
rule could be multiplied by many other instances.

The rules and laws that govern human existence depend for their
acceptance on the basic beliefs that man has concerning the nature of
universal existence, of which he himself is a part, and also upon his
judgment and evaluation of that existence. That the principles governing
man's actions depend on his conception of being as a whole becomes clear
if one meditates a moment on the different conceptions that people hold
as to the nature of the world and of man.

Those who consider the Universe to be confined only to this material,
sensible world, and man himself to be completely material and therefore
subject to annihilation when the breath of life leaves him at the moment
of death, follow a way of life designed to provide for their material
desires and transient mundane pleasures. They strive solely on this
path, seeking to bring under their control the natural conditions and
factors of life.

Similarly, there are those who, like the common people among
idol-worshipers, consider the world of nature to be created by a god
above nature who has created the world specially for man and his
goodness. Such men organize their lives so as to attract the pleasure of
the god and not invite his anger. They believe that if they please the
god he will multiply his bounty and make it lasting and if they anger
him he will take his bounty away from them.

On the other hand, such men as Zoroastrians, Jews, Christians, and
Muslims follow the "high path" in this life for they believe in God and
in man's eternal life, and consider man to be responsible for his good
and evil acts. As a result they accept as proven the existence of a day
of judgment (qiyamat) and follow a path that leads to felicity in both
this world and the next.

The totality of these fundamental beliefs concerning the nature of man
and the Universe, and regulations in conformity with them which are
applied to human life, is called religion (din). If there are
divergences in these fundamental beliefs and regulations, they are
called schools such as the Sunni and the Shi'ite schools in Islam and
the Nestorian in Christianity. We can therefore say that man, even if he
does not believe in the Deity, can never be without religion if we
recognize religion as a program for life based on firm belief. Religion
can never be separated from life and is not simply a matter of
ceremonial acts.

The Holy Quran asserts that man has no choice but to follow religion,
which is a path that God has placed before man so that by treading it
man can reach Him. However, those who have accepted that religion of the
truth (Islam) march in all sincerity upon the path of God, while those
who have not accepted the religion of the truth have been diverted from
the divine path and have followed the wrong road.

Islam etymologically means surrender and obedience. The Holy Quran
calls the religion which invites men toward this end "Islam" since its
general purpose is the surrender of man to the laws governing the
Universe and man, with the result that through this surrender he
worships only the One God and obeys only His commands. As the Holy Quran
informs us, the first person who called this religion "Islam" and its
followers "Muslims" was the Prophet Abraham, upon whom be peace.

Shi'ah, which means literally partisan or follower, refers to those who
consider the succession to the Prophet - may God's peace and benediction
be upon him - to be the special right of the family of the Prophet and
who in the field of the Islamic sciences and culture follow the school
of the Household of the Prophet.

