The Fourth Imam
===============

Imam Sajjad (Ali ibn Husayn entitled Zayn al-'abidin and Sajjad) was
the son of the third Imam and his wife, the queen among women, the
daughter of Yazdigird the king of Iran. He was the only son of Imam
Husayn to survive, for his other three brothers Ali Akbar, aged
twenty-five, five year old Ja'far and Ali Asghar (or 'Abdallah) who was
a suckling baby were martyred during the event of Karbala. The Imam had
also accompanied his father on the journey that terminated fatally in
Karbala, but because of severe illness and the inability to carry arms
or participate in fighting he was prevented from taking part in the holy
war and being martyred. So he was sent with the womenfolk to Damascus.
After spending a period in imprisonment he was sent with honor to Medina
because Yazid wanted to conciliate public opinion. But for a second
time, by the order of the Umayyad caliph, 'Abd al-Malik, he was chained
and sent from Medina to Damascus and then again returned to Medina.

The fourth Imam, upon returning to Medina, retired from public life
completely, closed the door of his house to strangers and spent his time
in worship. He was in contact only with the elite among the Shi'ites
such as Abu Hamzah Thumali, Abu Khalid Kabuli and the like. The elite
disseminated among the Shi'ah and the religious sciences they learned
from the Imam. In this way Shi'ism spread considerably and showed its
effects during the imamate of the fifth Imam. Among the works of the
fourth Imam is a book called Sahifah sajjadiyah. It consists of
fifty-seven prayers concerning the most sublime Divine sciences and is
known as "The Psalm of the Household of the Prophet."

The fourth Imam died (according to some Shi'ite traditions poisoned by
Walid ibn 'Abd al-Malik through the instigation of the Umayyad caliph
Hisham) in 95/712 after thirty-five years of imamate.

**The Fifth Imam**

Imam Muhammad ibn Ali Baqir (the word baqir meaning he who cuts and
dissects, a title given to him by the Prophet) was the son of the fourth
Imam and was born in 57/675. He was present at the event of Karbala when
he was four years old. After his father, through Divine Command and the
decree of those who went before him, he became Imam. In the year 114/732
he died, according to some Shi'ite traditions poisoned by Ibrahim ibn
Walid ibn 'Abdallah, the nephew of Hisham, the Umayyad caliph.

During the imamate of the fifth Imam, as a result of the injustice of
the Umayyads, revolts and wars broke out in some corner of the Islamic
world every day. Moreover, there were disputes within the Umayyad family
itself which kept the caliphate busy and to a certain extent left the
members of the Household of the Prophet alone. From the other side, the
tragedy of Karbala and the oppression suffered by the Household of the
Prophet, of which the fourth Imam was the most noteworthy embodiment,
had attracted many Muslims to the Imams. These factors combined to make
it possible for people and especially the Shi'ites to go in great
numbers to Medina and to come into the presence of the fifth Imam.
Possibilities for disseminating truths about Islam and the sciences of
the Household of the Prophet, which had never existed for the Imams
before him, were presented to the fifth Imam. The proof of this fact is
the innumerable traditions recounted from the fifth Imam and the large
number of illustrious men of science and Shi'ite scholars who were
trained by him in different Islamic sciences. These names are listed in
books of biographies of famous men in Islam.

**The Sixth Imam**

Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad, the son of the fifth Imam, was born in
83/702. He died in 148/765 according to Shi'ite tradition, poisoned and
martyred through the intrigue of the Abbasid caliph Mansur. After the
death of his father he became Imam by Divine Command and decree of those
who came before him.

During the imamate of the sixth Imam greater possibilities and a more
favorable climate existed for him to propagate religious teachings. This
came about as a result of revolts in Islamic lands, especially the
uprising of the Muswaddah to overthrow the Umayyad caliphate, and the
bloody wars which finally led to the fall and extinction of the
Umayyads. The greater opportunities for Shi'ite teachings were also a
result of the favorable ground the fifth Imam had prepared during the
twenty years of his imamate through the propagation of the true
teachings of Islam and the sciences of the Household of the Prophet.

The Imam took advantage of the occasion to propagate the religious
sciences until the very end of his imamate, which was contemporary with
the end of the Umayyad and beginning of the Abbasid caliphates. He
instructed many scholars in different fields of the intellectual and
transmitted sciences, such as Zararah, Muhammad ibn Muslim, Mu'min Taq,
Hisham ibn Hakam, Aban ibn Taghlib, Hisham ibn Salim, Hurayz, Hisham
Kalbi Nassabah, and Jabir ibn Hayyan, the alchemist. Even some important
Sunni scholars such as Sufyan Thawri, Abu Hanifah, the founder of the
Hanafi school of law, Qadi Sukuni, Qadi Abu'l-Bakhtari, and others, had
the honor of being his students. It is said that his classes and
sessions of instructions produced four thousand scholars of hadith and
other sciences. The number of traditions preserved from the fifth and
sixth Imams is more than all the hadith that have been recorded from the
Prophet and the other ten Imams combined.

But toward the end of his life the Imam was subjected to severe
restrictions placed upon him by the Abbasid caliph Mansur, who ordered
such torture and merciless killing of many of the descendants of the
Prophets who were Shi'ite that his actions even surpassed the cruelty
and heedlessness of the Umayyads. At his order they were arrested in
groups, some thrown into deep and dark prisons and tortured until they
died, while others were beheaded or buried alive or placed at the base
of or between walls of buildings, and walls were constructed over
them.

Hisham, the Umayyad caliph, had ordered the sixth Imam to be arrested
and brought to Damascus. Later, the Imam was arrested by Saffah, the
Abbasid caliph, and brought to Iraq. Finally, Mansur had him arrested
again and brought to Samarrah where he had the Imam kept under
supervision, was in every way harsh and discourteous to him, and several
times thought of killing him. Eventually the Imam was allowed to return
to Medina where he spent the rest of his life in hiding, until he was
poisoned and martyred through the intrigue of Mansur.

Upon hearing the news of the Imam's martyrdom, Marsur wrote to the
governor of Medina instructing him to go to the house of the Imam on the
pretext of expressing his condolences to the family, to ask for the
Imam's will and testament and read it. Whoever was chosen by the Imam as
his inheritor and successor should be beheaded on the spot. Of course
the aim of Mansur was to put and end to the whole question of imamate
and to Shi'ite aspirations. When the governor of Medina, following
orders, read the last will and testament, he saw that the Imam had
chosen four people rather than one to administer his last will and
testament: the caliph himself, the governor of Medina, 'Abdallah Aftah,
the Imam's older son, and Musa, his younger son. In this way the plot of
Mansur failed.

**The Seventh Imam**

Imam Musa ibn Ja'far Kazim, the son of the sixth Imam, was born in
128/744 and was poisoned and martyred in prison in 183/799. He became
Imam after the death of his father, through Divine Command and the
decree of his forefathers. The seventh Imam was contemporary with the
Abbasid caliphs, Mansur, Hadi, Mahdi and Harun. He lived in very
difficult times, in hiding, until finally Harun went on the hajj and in
Medina had the Imam arrested while praying in the Mosque of the Prophet.
He was chained and imprisoned, then taken from Medina to Basra and from
Basra to Baghdad where for years he was transferred from one prison to
another. Finally he died in Baghdad in the Sindi ibn Shahak prison
through poisoning and was buried in the cemetery of the Quraysh which is
now located in the city of Kazimayn.

**The Eighth Imam**

Imam Rida (Ali ibn Musa) was the son of the son of the seventh Imam and
according to well-known accounts was born in 148/765 and died in
203/817. The eighth Imam had reached the imamate, after the death of his
father, through Divine Command and the decree of his forefathers. The
period of his imamate coincided with the caliphate of Harun and then his
sons Amin and Ma'mun. After the death of his father, Ma'mun fell into
conflict with his brother Amin, which led to bloody wars and finally the
assassination of Amin, after which Ma'mun became caliph. Until that day
the policy of the Abbasid caliphate toward the Shi'ites had been
increasingly harsh and cruel. Every once in a while one of the
supporters of Ali ('alawis) would revolt, causing bloody wars and
rebellions which were of great difficulty and consequence for the
caliphate.

The Shi'ite Imams would not cooperate with those who carried out these
rebellions and would not interfere with their affairs. The Shi'ites of
that day, who comprised a considerable population, continued to consider
the Imams as their religious leaders to whom obedience was obligatory
and believed in them as the real caliphs of the Holy Prophet. They
considered the caliphate to be far from the sacred authority of their
Imams, for the caliphate had come to seem more like the courts of the
Persian kings and Roman emperors and was being run by a group of people
more interested in worldly rule than in the strict application of
religious principles. The continuation of such a situation was dangerous
for the structure of the caliphate and was a serious threat to it.

Ma'mun thought of finding a new solution for these difficulties which
the seventy-year old policy of his Abbasid predecessors had not been
able to solve. To accomplish this end he chose the eighth Imam as his
successor, hoping this way to overcome two difficulties: first of all to
prevent the descendants of the Prophet from rebelling against the
government since they would be involved in the government themselves,
and secondly, to cause the people to lose their spiritual belief and
inner attachment to the Imams. This would be accomplished by having the
Imams become engrossed in worldly matters and the politics of the
caliphate itself, which had always been considered by the Shi'ite to be
evil and impure. In this way their religious organization would crumble
and they would no longer present any dangers to the caliphate.
Obviously, after accomplishing these ends, the removal of the Imam would
present no difficulties to the Abbasids.

In order to have this decision put into effect, Ma'mun asked the Imam
to come to Marw from Medina. Once he had arrived there, Ma'mun offered
him first the caliphate and then the succession to the caliphate. The
Imam made his apologies and turned down the proposal, but he was finally
induced to accept the successorship, with the condition that he would
not interfere in governmental affairs or in the appointment or dismissal
of government agents.

This event occurred in 200/814. But soon Ma'mun realized that he had
committed an error, for there was a rapid spread of Shi'ism, a growth in
the attachment of the populace to the Imam and an astounding reception
given to the Imam by the people and even by the army and government
agents. Ma'mun sought to find a remedy for this difficulty and had the
Imam poisoned and martyred. After his death the Imam was buried in the
city of Tus in Iran, which is now called Mashhad.

Ma'mun displayed great interest in having works on the intellectual
sciences translated into Arabic. He organized gatherings in which
scholars of different religions and sects assembled and carried out
scientific and scholarly debates. The eighth Imam also participated in
these assemblies and joined in the discussions with scholars of other
religions. Many of these debates are recorded in the collections of
Shi'ite hadiths.

**The Ninth Imam**

Imam Muhammad (ibn Ali) Taq (sometimes called Jaway and Ibn al-Rida)
was the son of the eighth Imam. He was born in 195/809 in Medina and
according to Shi'ite traditions was martyred in 220/835, poisoned by his
wife, the daughter of Ma'mun, at the instigation of the Abbasid caliph
Mu'tasim. He was buried next to his grandfather, the seventh Imam, in
Kazimayn. He became Imam after the death of his father through Divine
Command and by the decree of his forefathers. At the time of the death
of his father he was in Medina. Ma'mun called him to Baghdad which was
then the capital of the caliphate and outwardly showed him much
kindness. He even gave the Imam his daughter in marriage and kept him in
Baghdad. In reality he wanted in this way to keep a close watch upon the
Imam from both outside and within his own household. The Imam spent some
time in Baghdad and then with the consent of Ma'mun set out for Medina
where he remained until Ma'mun's death. When Mu'tasim became caliph he
called the Imam back to Baghdad and, as we have seen, through the Imam's
wife had him poisoned and killed.

**The Tenth Imam**

Imam Ali ibn Muhammad Naqi (sometimes referred to by the title of
Hadi), was the son of the ninth Imam. He was born in 212/827 in Medina
and according to Shi'ite accounts was martyred through poisoning by
Mu'tazz the Abbasid caliph, in 254/868.

During his lifetime the tenth Imam was contemporary with seven of the
Abbasid caliphs: Ma'mun, Mu'tasim, Wathiq, Mutawakkil, Muntasir,
Musta'in and Mu'tazz. It was during the rule of Mu'tasim in 220/835 that
his noble father died through poisoning in Baghdad. At that time Ali ibn
Muhammad Naqi was in Medina. There he became the Imam through Divine
Command and the decree of the Imams before him. He stayed in Medina
teaching religious sciences until the time of Mutawakkil. In 243/857, as
a result of certain false charges that were made, Mutawakkil ordered one
of his government officials to invite the Imam form Medina to Samarrah
which was then the capital. He himself wrote the Imam a letter full of
kindness and courtesy asking him to come to the capital where they could
meet. Upon arrival in Samarrah the Imam was also shown certain outward
courtesy and respect. Yet at the same time Mutawakkil tried by all
possible means to trouble and dishonor him. Many times he called the
Imam to his presence with the aim of killing or disgracing him and had
his house searched.

In his enmity toward the Household of the Prophet Mutawakkil had no
equal among the Abbasid caliphs. He was especially opposed to Ali, whom
he cursed openly. He even ordered a clown to ridicule Ali at voluptuous
banquets. In the year 237/850 he ordered the mausoleum of Imam Husayn in
Karbala and many of the houses around it to be torn down to the ground.
The water was turned upon the tomb of the Imam. He ordered the ground of
the tomb to be plowed and cultivated so that any trace of the tomb would
be forgotten. During the life of Mutawakkil the condition of life of the
descendants of Ali in the Hijaz had reached such a pitiful state that
their womenfolk had no veils with which to cover themselves. Many of
them had only one old veil which they wore at the time of the daily
prayers. Pressures of a similar kind were put on the descendants of Ali
who lived in Egypt. The tenth Imam accepted in patience the tortures and
afflictions of the Abbasid caliph Mutawakkil until the caliph died and
was followed by Muntasir, Musta'in and finally Mu'tazz, whose intrigue
led to the Imam's being poisoned and martyred.

**The Eleventh Imam**

Imam Hasan ibn Ali 'Askari, the son of the tenth Imam, was born in
232/845 and according to some Shi'ite sources was poisoned and killed in
260/872 through the instigation of the Abbasid caliph Mu'tamid. The
eleventh Imam gained the imamate, after the death of his noble father,
through Divine Command and through the decree of the previous Imams.
During the seven years of his imamate, due to untold restrictions placed
upon him by the caliphate, he lived in hiding and dissimulation
(taqiyah). He did not have any social contact with even the common
people among the Shi'ite population. Only the elite of the Shi'ah were
able to see him. Even so, he spent most of his time in prison.

There was extreme repression at that time because the Shi'ite
population had reached a considerable level in both numbers and power.
Everyone knew that the Shi'ah believed in the imamate, and the identity
of the Shi'ite Imams was also known. Therefore, the caliphate kept the
Imams under its close supervision more than ever before. It tried
through every possible means and through secret plans to remove and
destroy them. Also, the caliphate had come to know that the elite among
the Shi'ah believed that the eleventh Imam, according to traditions
cited by him as well as his forefathers, would have a son who was the
promised Mahdi. The coming of the Mahdi had been foretold in
authenticated hadiths of the Prophet in both Sunni and Shi'ite sources.
For this reason the eleventh Imam, more than other Imams, was kept under
close watch by the caliphate. The caliph of the time had decided
definitely to put an end to the imamate in Shi'ism through every
possible means and to close the door to the imamate once and for all.

Therefore, as soon as the news of the illness of the eleventh Imam
reached Mu'tamid, he sent a physician and a few of his trusted agents
and judges to the house of the Imam to be with him and observe his
condition and the situation within his house at all times. After the
death of the Imam, they had the house investigated and all his female
slaves examined by the midwife. For two years the secret agents of the
caliph searched for the successor of the Imam until they lost all hope.
The eleventh Imam was buried in his house in Samarrah next to his noble
father.

Here it should be remembered that during their lifetimes the Imams
trained many hundreds of scholars or religion and hadith, and it is
these scholars who have transmitted to us information about the Imams.
In order not to prolong the matter, the list of their names and works
and their biographies have not been included here.

**The Twelfth Imam**

The promised Mahdi, who is usually mentioned by his title of Imam-i
'Asr (the Imam of the "Period") and Sahib al-Zaman (the Lord of the
Age), is the son of the eleventh Imam. His name is the same as that of
the Holy Prophet. He was born in Samarrah in 256/868 and until 260/872
when his father was martyred, lived under his father's care and
tutelage. He was hidden from public view and only a few of the elite
among the Shi'ah were able to meet him.

After the martyrdom of his father he became Imam and by Divine Command
went into occultation (ghaybat). Thereafter he appeared only to his
deputies (na'ib) and even then only in exceptional circumstances.

The Imam chose as a special deputy for a time Uthman ibn Sa'id 'Umari,
one of the companions of his father and grandfather who was his
confidant and trusted friend. Through his deputy the Imam would answer
the demands and questions of the Shi'ah. After Uthman ibn Sa'id, his son
Muhammad ibn Uthman Umari was appointed the deputy of the Imam. After
the death of Muhammad ibn Uthman, Abu'l Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh Nawbakhti
was the special deputy, and after his death Ali ibn Muhammad Simmari was
chosen for this task.

A few days before the death of Ali ibn Muhammad Simmari in 329/939 an
order was issued by the Imam stating that in six days Ali ibn Muhammad
Simmari would die. Henceforth the special deputation of the Imam would
come to an end and the major occultation (ghaybat-i kubra) would begin
and would continue until the day God grants permission to the Imam to
manifest himself.

The occultation of the twelfth Imam is, therefore, divided into two
parts: the first, the minor occultation (ghaybat-i sughra) which began
in 260/872 and ended in 329/939, lasting about seventy years; the
second, the major occultation which commenced in 329/939 and will
continue as long as God wills it. In a hadith upon whose authenticity
everyone agrees, the Holy Prophet has said, "If there were to remain in
the life of the world but one day, God would prolong that day until He
sends in it a man from my community and my household. His name will be
the same as my name. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as
it was filled with oppression and tyranny."

**On the Appearance of the Mahdi**

In the discussion on prophecy and the imamate it was indicated that as
a result of the law of general guidance which governs all of creation,
man is of necessity endowed with the power of receiving revelation
through prophecy, which directs him toward the perfection of the human
norm and the well-being of the human species. Obviously, if this
perfection and happiness were not possible for man, whose life possesses
a social aspect, the very fact that he is endowed with his power would
be meaningless and futile. But there is no futility in creation.

In other words, ever since he has inhabited the earth, man has had the
wish to lead a social life filled with happiness in its true sense and
has striven toward this end. If such a wish were not to have an
objective existence it would never have been imprinted upon man's inner
nature, in the same way that if there were not food there would have
been no hunger. Or if there were to be no water there would be no thirst
and if there were to be no reproduction there would have been no sexual
attraction between the sexes.

Therefore, by reason of inner necessity and determination, the future
will see a day when human society will be replete with justice and when
all will live in peace and tranquillity, when human beings will be fully
possessed of virtue and perfection. The establishment of such a
condition will occur through human hands but with Divine succor. And the
leader of such a society, who will be the savior of man, is called in
the language of the hadith, the Mahdi.

In the different religions that govern the world such as Hinduism,
Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism and Islam there are
references to a person who will come as the savior of mankind. These
religions have usually given happy tidings of his coming, although there
are naturally certain differences in detail that can be discerned when
these teachings are compared carefully. The hadith of the Holy Prophet
upon which all Muslims agree, "The Mahdi is of my progeny," refers to
this same truth.

There are numerous hadiths cited in Sunni and Shi'ite sources from the
Holy Prophet and the Imams concerning the appearance of the Mahdi, such
as that he is of the progeny of the Prophet and that his appearance will
enable human society to reach true perfection and the full realization
of spiritual life. In addition, there are numerous other traditions
concerning the fact that the Mahdi is the son of the eleventh Imam,
Hasan al-'Askari. They agree that after being born and undergoing a long
occultation the Mahdi will appear again, filling with justice the world
that has been corrupted by injustice and iniquity.

As an example, Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (the eighth Imam) has said, in the
course of a hadith, "The Imam after me is my son, Muhammad, and after
him his son Ali, and after Ali his son, Hasan, and after Hasan his son
Hujjat al-Qa'im, who is awaited during his occultation and obeyed during
his manifestation. If there remain from the life of the world but a
single day, Allah will extend that day until he becomes manifest, and
fill the world with justice in the same way that it had been filled with
iniquity. But when? As for news of the 'hour,' verily my father told me,
having heard it from his father who heard it from his father who heard
it from his ancestors who heard it from Ali, that it was asked of the
Holy Prophet, 'Oh Prophet of God, when will the "support" (qa'im) who is
from thy family appear?' He said, 'His case is like that of the Hour (of
the Resurrection). "He alone will manifest it at its proper time. It is
heavy in the heavens and the earth. It cometh not to you save unawares"
(Quran, VII, 187).'"

Saqr ibn Abi Dulaf said, "I heard from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali
al-Rida [the ninth Imam] who said, 'The Imam after me is my son Ali; his
command is my command; his word is my word; to command is the command of
his father ; to obey him is to obey his father.' After these words the
Imam remained silent. I said to him, 'Oh son of the Prophet, who will be
the Imam after Hasan?' The Imam cried hard, then said, 'Verily after
Hasan his son is the awaited Imam who is "al-qa'im bi'l-haqq" (He who is
supported by the Truth).'"

Musa ibn Ja'far Baghdadi said, "I hear from the Imam Abu Muhammad
al-Hasan ibn Ali [the eleventh Imam] who said, 'I see that after me
differences will appear among you concerning the Imam after me. Whoso
accepts the Imams after the Prophet of God but denies my son is like the
person who accepts all the prophets but denies the prophethood of
Muhammad, the Prophet of God, upon whom be peace and blessing. And whoso
denies [Muhammad] the Prophet of God is like one who has denied all the
prophets of God, for to obey the last of us is like obeying the first
and to deny the last of us is like denying the first. But beware! Verily
for my son there is an occultation during which all people will fall
into doubt except those whom Allah protects."
The opponents of Shi'ism protest that according to the beliefs of this
school the Hidden Imam should by now be nearly twelve centuries old,
whereas this is impossible for any human being. In answer it must be
said that the protest is based only on the unlikelihood of such an
occurrence, not its impossibility. Of course such a long lifetime or a
life of a longer period is unlikely. But those who study the hadiths of
the Holy Prophet and the Imams will see that they refer to this life as
one possessing miraculous qualities. Miracles are certainly not
impossible nor can they be negated through scientific arguments. It can
never be proved that the causes and agents that are functioning in the
world are solely those that we see and know and that other causes which
we do not know or whose effects and actions we have not seen nor
understood do not exist. It is in this way possible that in one or
several members of mankind there can be operating certain causes and
agents which bestow upon them a very long life of a thousand or several
thousand years. Medicine has not even lost hope of discovering a way to
achieve very long life spans. In any case such protests from "peoples of
the Book" such as Jews, Christians and Muslims are most strange for they
accept the miracles of the prophets of God according to their own sacred
scriptures.

The opponents of Shi'ism also protest that, although Shi'ism considers
the Imam necessary in order to expound the injunctions and verities of
religion and to guide the people, the occultation of the Imam is the
negation of this very purpose, for an Imam in occultation who cannot be
reached by mankind cannot be in any way beneficial or effective. The
opponents say that if God wills to bring forth an Imam to reform mankind
He is able to create him at the necessary moment and does not need to
create him thousands of years earlier. In answer it must be said that
such people have not really understood the meaning of the Imam, for in
the discussion on the imamate it became clear that the duty of the Imam
is not only the formal explanation of the religious sciences and
exoteric guidance of the people. In the same way that he has the duty of
guiding men outwardly, the Imam also bears the function of walayat and
the esoteric guidance of men. It is he who directs man's spiritual life
and orients the inner aspect of human action toward God. Clearly, his
physical presence or absence has no effect in this matter. The Imam
watches over men inwardly and is in communion with the soul and spirit
of men even if he be hidden from their physical eyes. His existence is
always necessary even if the time has not yet arrived for his outward
appearance and the universal reconstruction that he is to bring about.

**The Spiritual Message of Shi'ism**

The message of Shi'ism to the world can be summarized in one sentence:
"To know God." Or in other words, it is to instruct man to follow the
path of Divine realization and the knowledge of God in order to gain
felicity and salvation. And this message is contained in the very phrase
with which the Holy Prophet commenced his prophetic mission when he
said: "Oh men ! Know God in His Oneness (and acknowledge Him) so that
you will gain salvation."

As a summary explanation of this message we will add that man is
attached by nature to many goals in this worldly life and to material
pleasures. He loves tasty food and drink, fashionable dress, attractive
palaces and surroundings, a beautiful and pleasuring wife, sincere
friends and great wealth. And in another direction he is attracted to
political power, position, reputation, the extension of his rule and
dominion and the destruction of anything that is opposed to his wishes.
But in his inner and primordial, God-given nature man understands that
all these are means created for man, but man is not created for all
these things. These things should be subservient to man and follow him
and not vice versa. To consider the stomach and the region below it as a
final end of life is the logic of cattle and sheep. To tear up, cut and
destroy other is the logic of the tiger, the wolf and the fox. The logic
inherent in human existence is the attainment of wisdom and nothing
else.

This logic based upon wisdom with the power which it possesses to
discern between reality and the unreal, guides us toward the truth and
not toward things our emotions demand or toward passions, selfishness
and egoism. This logic considers man as a part of the totality of
creation without any separate independence or the possibility of a
rebellious self-centeredness. In contrast to the current belief that man
is the master of creation and tames rebellious nature and conquers it to
force it to obey his wishes and desires, we find that in reality man
himself is an instrument in the hand of Universal Nature and is ruled
and commanded by it.

This logic based upon wisdom invites man to concentrate more closely
upon the apprehension he has of the existence of this world until it
becomes clear to him that the world of existence and all that is in it
does not issue from itself but rather from an Infinite Source. He will
then know that all he beauty and ugliness, all these creatures of the
earth and the heavens, which appear outwardly as independent realities,
gain reality only through another Reality and are manifested only in Its
Light, not by themselves and through themselves. In the same way that
the "realities" of today no more than vaguely remembered dreams in
relation to what will appear as "reality" tomorrow. In the last
analysis, everything in itself is no more than a tale and a dream. Only
God is Reality in the absolute sense, the One Who does not perish. Under
the protection of His Being, everything gains existence and becomes
manifested through the Light of His Essence.

If man becomes endowed with such vision and power of apprehension, then
the tent of his separative existence will fall down before his eyes like
a bubble on the surface of water. He will see with his eyes that the
world and all that is in it depend upon an Infinite Being who possesses
life, power, knowledge and every perfection to an infinite degree. Man
and every other being in the world are like so many windows which
display according to their capacity the world of eternity which
transcends them and lies beyond them.

It is at this moment that man takes from himself and all creatures the
quality of independence and primacy and returns these qualities to their
Owner. He detaches himself from all things to attach himself solely to
the One God. Before His Majesty and Grandeur he does nothing but bow in
humility. Only then does he become guided and directed by God so that
whatever he knows he knows in God. Through Divine guidance he becomes
adorned with moral and spiritual virtue and pure actions which are the
same as Islam itself, the submission to God, the religion that is in the
primordial nature of things.

This is the highest degree of human perfection and the station of the
perfect man (the Universal Man; insan-i kamil), namely the Imam who has
reached this rank through Divine grace. Furthermore, those who have
reached this station through the practice of spiritual methods, with the
different ranks and stations that they possess, are the true followers
of the Imam. It becomes thus clear that the knowledge of God and of the
Imam are inseparable in the same way that the knowledge of God is
inextricably connected to the knowledge of oneself. For he who knows his
own symbolic existence has already come to know the true existence which
belongs solely to God who is independent and without need of anything
whatsoever.

