The Benefit Which the Shi'ah Derived From the Caliphate of Ali
==============================================================

During the four years and nine months of his caliphate, Ali was not
able to eliminate the disturbed conditions which were prevailing
throughout the Islamic world, but he was successful in three fundamental
ways:

1. As a result of his just and upright manner of living he revealed
once again the beauty and attractiveness of the way of life of the Holy
Prophet, especially to the younger generation. In contrast to the
imperial grandeur of Mu'awiyah, he lived in simplicity and poverty like
the poorest of people. He never favored his friends or relatives and
family above others, nor did he ever prefer wealth to poverty or brute
force to weakness.

2. Despite the cumbersome and strenuous difficulties which absorbed his
time, he left behind among the Islamic community a valuable treasury of
the truly divine sciences and Islamic intellectual disciplines. Nearly
eleven thousand of his proverbs and short sayings on different
intellectual, religious and social subjects have been recorded. In his
talks and speeches he expounded the most sublime Islamic sciences in a
most elegant and flowing manner. He established Arabic grammar and laid
the basis for Arabic literature.

He was the first in Islam to delve directly into the questions of
metaphysics (falsafah-i ilahi) in a manner combining intellectual rigor
and logical demonstration. He discussed problems which had never
appeared before in the same way among the metaphysicians of the world.
Moreover, he was so devoted to metaphysics and gnosis that even in the
heat of battle he would carry out intellectual discourse and discuss
metaphysical questions.

3. He trained a large number of religious scholars and Islamic savants,
among whom are found a number of ascetics and gnostics who were the
forefathers of the Sufis, such men as Uways al-Qarani, Kumayl
al-Nakha'i, Maytham al-Tammar and Roshaid al-Hajari. These men have been
recognized by the later Sufis as the founders of gnosis in Islam. Others
among his disciples became the first teachers of jurisprudence,
theology, Quranic commentary and recitation.

**The Transfer of the Caliphate to Mu'awiyah and Its Transformation
into a Hereditary Monarchy**

After the death of Ali, his son, Hasan ibn Ali, who is recognized by
the Shi'ah as their second Imam, became caliph. This designation
occurred in accordance with Ali's last will and testament and also by
the allegiance of the community to Hasan. But Mu'awiyah did not remain
quiet before this event. He marched with his army toward Iraq, which was
then the capital of the caliphate , and began to wage war against
Hasan.

Through different intrigues and the payment of great sums of money,
Mu'awiyah was able gradually to corrupt the aides and generals of Hasan.
Finally he was able to force Hasan to hand the caliphate over to him so
as to avoid bloodshed and to make peace. Hasan handed the caliphate to
Mu'awiyah on the condition that the caliphate would be returned to him
after the death of Mu'awiyah and that no harm would come to his
partisans.

In the year 40/661 Mu'awiyah finally gained control of the caliphate.
He then set out immediately for Iraq and in a speech to the people of
that land said: "I did not fight against you for the sake of the prayers
or of fasting. These acts you can perform yourself. What I wanted to
accomplish was to rule over you and this end I have achieved." He also
said, "The agreement I made with Hasan is null and void. It lies
trampled under my feet." With this declaration Mu'awiyah made known to
the people the real character of his government and revealed the nature
of the program he had in mind.

He indicated in his declaration that he would separate religion from
politics and would not give any guarantees concerning religious duties
and regulations. He would spend all his force to preserve and to keep
alive his own power, whatever might be the cost. Obviously a government
of such a nature is more of a sultanate and a monarchy than a caliphate
and vicegerency of the Prophet of God in its traditional Islamic sense.
That is why some who were admitted to his court addressed him as "king."
He himself in some private gatherings interpreted his government as a
monarchy, while in public he always introduced himself as the caliph.

Naturally any monarchy that is based on force carries with it
inherently the principle of inheritance. Mu'awiyah, too, finally
realized this fact, and chose his son, Yazid, who was a heedless young
man without the least religious personality, as the "crown prince" and
his successor. This act was to be the cause of many regrettable events
in the future. Mu'awiyah had previously indicated that he would refuse
to permit Hasan ibn Ali to succeed him as caliph and that he had other
thoughts in mind. Therefore he had caused Hasan to be killed by
poisoning, thus preparing the way for his son, Yazid.

In breaking his agreement with Hasan, Mu'awiyah made it clear that he
would never permit the Shi'ah of the Household of the Prophet to live in
a peaceful and secure environment and continue their activity as before,
and he carried into action this very intention. It has been said that he
went so far as to declare that whoever would transmit a hadith in praise
of the virtues of the Household of the Prophet would have no immunity or
protection concerning his life, merchandise and property. At the same
time he ordered that whoever could recite a hadith in praise of the
other companions or caliphs would be given sufficient reward. As a
result a noticeable number of hadiths were recorded at this time
praising the companions, some of which are of doubtful authenticity. He
ordered pejorative comments to be made about Ali from the pulpits of
mosques throughout the lands of Islam, while he himself sought to revile
Ali. This command continued to be more or less in effect until the
caliphate of Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, when it was discontinued. With the
help of his agents and lieutenants, Mu'awiyah caused elite and the most
outstanding among the partisans of Ali to be put to death and the heads
of some of them to be carried on lances throughout different cities. The
majority of Shi'ites were forced to disown and even curse Ali and to
express their disdain for him. If they refused, they were put to
death.

**The Bleakest Days of Shi'ism**

The most difficult period for Shi'ism was the twenty-year rule of
Mu'awiyah, during which the Shi'ites had no protection and most of them
were considered as marked characters, under suspicion and hunted down by
the state. Two of the leaders of Shi'ism who lived at this time, Imams
Hasan and Husayn, did not possess any means whatsoever to change the
negative and oppressive circumstances in which they lived. Husayn, the
third Imam of Shi'ism, had no possibility of freeing the Shi'ites from
persecution in the ten years he was Imam during Mu'awiyah's caliphate,
and when he rebelled during the caliphate of Yazid he was massacred
along with all his aides and children.

Certain people in the Sunni world explain as pardonable the arbitrary,
unjust and irresponsible actions carried out at this time by Mu'awiyah
and his aides and lieutenants, some of whom were like Mu'awiyah himself,
among the companions. This group reasons that according to certain
hadiths of the Holy Prophet all the companions could practice ijtihad,
that they were excused by God for the sins they committed, and that God
was satisfied with them and forgave them whatever wrong they might have
performed. The Shi'ites, however, do not accept this argument for two
reasons:
1. It is not conceivable that a leader of human society like the
Prophet should rise in order to revivify truth, justice and freedom and
to persuade a group of people to accept his beliefs - a group all of
whose members had sacrificed their very existence in order to accomplish
this sacred end - and then as soon as this end is accomplished give his
aides and companions complete freedom to do with these sacred laws as
they will. It is not possible to believe that the Holy Prophet would
have forgiven the companions for whatever wrong action they might have
performed. Such indifference to the type of action performed by them
would have only destroyed the structure which the Holy Prophet had built
with the same means that he had used to construct it.

2. Those sayings which depict the companions as inviolable and pardoned
in advance for every act they might perform, even one unlawful or
inadmissible, are most likely apocryphal ; the authenticity of many of
them has not been fully established by traditional methods. Moreover, it
is known historically that the companions did not deal with one another
as if they were inviolable and pardoned for all their sins and
wrongdoings. Therefore, even judging by the way the companions acted and
dealt with each other, it can be concluded that such sayings cannot be
literally true in the way some have understood them. If they do contain
an aspect of the truth it is in indicating the legal inviolability of
the companions and the sanctification which they enjoyed generally as a
group because of their proximity to the Holy Prophet. The expression of
God's satisfaction with the companions in the Holy Quran, because of the
services they had rendered in obeying His Command, refers to their past
actions, and to God's satisfaction with them in the past, not to
whatever action each one of them might perform in the future.

**The Establishment of Umayyad Rule**

In the year 60/680 Mu'awiyah died and his son Yazid became caliph, as
the result of the allegiance which his father had obtained for him from
the powerful political and military leaders of the community. From the
testimony of historical documents it can be seen clearly that Yazid had
no religious character at all and that even during the lifetime of his
father he was oblivious to the principles and regulations of Islam. At
that time his only interest was debauchery and frivolity. During his
three years of caliphate he was the cause of calamities that had no
precedent in the history of Islam, despite all the strife that had
occurred before him.

During the first year of Yazid's rule Imam Husayn, the grandson of the
Holy Prophet, was massacred in the most atrocious manner along with his
children, relatives, and friends. Yazid even had some of the women and
children of the Household of the Prophet killed and their heads
displayed in different cities. During the second year of his rule, he
ordered a general massacre of Medina and for three days gave his
soldiers freedom to kill, loot, and take the women of the city. During
the third year he had the sacred Ka'bah destroyed and burned.

Following Yazid, the family of Marwan gained possession of the
caliphate, according to details that are recorded in the history books.
The rule of this eleven-member group, which lasted for nearly seventy
years, was successful politically but from the point of view of purely
religious values it fell short of Islamic ideals and practices. Islamic
society was dominated by the Arab element alone and non-Arabs were
subordinated to the Arabs. In fact a strong Arab empire was created
which gave itself the name of an Islamic caliphate. During this period
some of the caliphs were indifferent to religious sentiments to the
extent that one of them - who was the "vicegerent of the Holy Prophet"
and was regarded as the protector of religion - decided without showing
any respect for Islamic practices and the feelings of Muslims to
construct a room above the Ka'bah so that he could have a place to enjoy
and amuse himself during the annual pilgrimage. It is even recounted of
one of these caliphs that he made the Holy Quran a target for his arrow
and in a poem composed to the Quran said: "On the Day of Judgment when
you appear before God tell Him 'the caliph tore me.'"

Naturally the Shi'ites, whose basic differences with the Sunnis were in
the two questions of the Islamic caliphate and religious authority, were
passing through bitter and difficult days in this dark period. Yet in
spite of the unjust and irresponsible ways of the governments of the
time the asceticism and purity of the leaders of the Household of the
Prophet made the Shi'ites each day ever more determined to hold on to
their beliefs. Of particular importance was the tragic death of Husayn,
the third Imam, which played a major role in the spread of Shi'ism,
especially in regions away from the center of the caliphate, such as
Iraq, the Yemen, and Persia. This can be seen through the fact that
during the period of the fifth Imam, before the end of the first Islamic
century, and less than forty years after the death of Husayn, the
Shi'ites took advantage of the internal differences and weaknesses in
the Umayyad government and began to organize themselves, flocking to the
side of the fifth Imam. People came from all Islamic countries like a
flood to his door to collect hadith and to learn the Islamic sciences.
The first century had not yet ended when a few of the leaders who were
influential in the government established the city of Qum in Persia and
made it a Shi'ite settlement. But even then the Shi'ah continued to live
for the most part in hiding and followed their religious life secretly
without external manifestations.

Several times the descendants of the Prophet (who are called in Persian
sadat-i 'alawi) rebelled against the injustice of the government, but
each time they were defeated and usually lost their lives. The severe
and unscrupulous government of the time did not overlook any means of
crushing them. The body of Zayd, the leader of Zayd Shi'ism, was dug out
of the grave and hanged; then after remaining on the gallows for three
years it was brought down and burned, its ashes being thrown to the
wind. The Shi'ites believe that the fourth and fifth Imams were poisoned
by the Umayyads as the second and third Imams had been killed by them
before.

The calamities brought about by the Umayyads were so open and unveiled
that the majority of the Sunnis, although they believed generally that
it was their duty to obey the caliphs, felt the pangs of their religious
conscience and were forced to divide the caliphs into two groups. They
came to distinguish between the "rightly guided caliphs" (khulafa
rashidun) who are the first four caliphs after the death of the Holy
Prophet (Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Ali), and the others who began with
Mu'awiyah and who did not possess by any means the religious virtues of
the rightly guided caliphs.

The Umayyads caused so much public hatred as a result of their
injustice and heedlessness during their rule that after the definitive
defeat and death of the last Umayyad caliph his two sons and a number of
their family encountered great difficulties in escaping from the
capital. No matter where they turned no one would give them shelter.
Finally after much wandering the deserts of Nubia, Abyssinia, and
Bajawah (between Nubia and Abyssinia) during which many of them died
from hunger and thirst, they came to Bab al-Mandab of the Yemen. There
they acquired travel expenses from the people through begging and set
out for Mecca dressed as porters. In Mecca they finally succeeded in
disappearing among the mass of the people.

**Shi'ism During the 2nd/8th Century**

During the latter part of the first third of the 2nd/8th century,
following a series of revolutions and bloody wars throughout the Islamic
world which were due to the injustice, repressions, and wrongdoings of
the Umayyads, there began an anti-Umayyad movement in the name of the
Household of the Prophet in Khurasan in Persia. The leader of this
movement was the Persian general, Abu Muslim Marwazi, who rebelled
against Umayyad rule and advance his cause step by step until he was
able to overthrow the Umayyad government.

Although this movement originated from a profound Shi'ite background
and came into being more or less with the claim of wanting to avenge the
blood of the Household of the Prophet, and although people were even
asked secretly to give allegiance to a qualified member of the family of
the Prophet, it did not rise directly as a result of the instructions of
the Imams. This is witnessed by the fact that when Abu Muslim offered
the caliphate to the sixth Imam in Medina he rejected it completely
saying "You are not one of my men and the time is not my time."

Finally the Abbasids gained the caliphate in the name of the family of
the Prophet and at the beginning showed some kindness to people in
general and to descendants of the Prophet in particular. In the name of
avenging the martyrdom of the family of the Prophet, they massacred the
Umayyads, going to the extent of opening their graves and burning
whatever they found in them. But soon they began to follow unjust ways
of the Umayyads and did not abstain in any way from injustice and
irresponsible action. Abu Hanifah, the founder of one of the four Sunni
schools of law, was imprisoned by al-Mansur and whipped. The sixth Imam
died from poisoning after much torture and pain. The descendants of the
Holy Prophet were sometimes beheaded in groups, buried alive, or even
placed within walls of government buildings under construction.

Harun al-Rashid, the Abbasid caliph, during whose reign the Islamic
empire reached the apogee of its expansion and power, occasionally would
look at the sun and address it in these words: "Shine wherever thou
wilt, thou shalt never be able to leave my kingdom." On the other hand
his armies were advancing in the East and West, on the other hand a few
steps from the palace of the caliph, and without his knowledge,
officials had decided on their own to collect tolls from people who
wanted to cross the Baghdad bridge. Even one day when the caliph himself
wanted to cross the bridge he was stopped and asked to pay the toll.

A singer, by chanting two lascivious verses, incited the passions of
the Abbasid caliph, Amin, who awarded him three million dirhams. The
chanter in joy threw himself at the feet of the caliph saying, "Oh,
leader of the faithful! You give me all this money?" The caliph
answered, "It does not matter. We receive money from an unknown part of
the country."

The bewildering amount of wealth that was pouring every year from all
corners of the Islamic world into the public treasury in the capital
helped creating luxury and a mundane atmosphere. Much of it in fact was
often spent for the pleasures and iniquities of the caliph of the time.
The number of beautiful slave girls in the court of some of the caliphs
exceeded thousands. By the dissolution of Umayyad rule and the
establishment of the Abbasids, Shi'ism did not benefit in any way. Its
repressive and unjust opponents merely changed their name.

**Shi'ism in the 3rd/9th Century**

At the beginning of the 3rd/9th century Shi'ism was able to breathe
once again. This more favorable condition was first of all due to the
fact that many scientific and philosophical books were translated from
Greek, Syriac, and other languages into Arabic, and people eagerly
studied the intellectual and rational sciences. Moreover, al-Ma'mun, the
Abbasid caliph from 198/813 to 218/833, had Mu'tazilite leanings and
since in his religious views he favored intellectual demonstration, he
was more inclined to give complete freedom to the discussion and
propagation of different religious views. Shi'ite theologians and
scholars took full advantage of this freedom and did their utmost to
further scholarly activities and propagate Shi'ite teachings. Also,
al-Ma'mun, following demands of the political forces at the time, had
made the eight Shi'ite Imam his successor, as is recounted in most
standard histories. As a result, the descendants of the Holy Prophet and
their friends were to a certain extent free from pressures from the
government and enjoyed some degrees of liberty. Yet before long the
cutting edge of the sword once again turned towards the Shi'ites and the
forgotten ways of the past came upon them again. This was particularly
true in the case of al-Mutawakkil (233/847-247/861) who held a special
enmity towards Ali and the Shi'ites. By his order the tomb of the third
Imam in Karbala was completely demolished.

**Shi'ism in the 4th/10th Century**

In the 4th/10th century certain conditions again prevailed which aided
greatly the spread and strengthening of Shi'ism. Among them were the
weaknesses that appeared in the central Abbasid government and
administration and the appearance of the Buyid rulers. The Buyids, who
were Shi'ite had the greatest influence not only in the provinces of
Persia but also in the capital of the caliphate in Baghdad, and even
upon the caliph himself. This new strength of considerable proportions
enabled the Shi'ites to stand up before their opponents who previously
had tried to crush them by relying upon the power of the caliphate. It
also made it possible for the Shi'ites to propagate their religious
views openly.

As recorded by historians, during this century most of the Arabian
peninsula was Shi'ite with the exception of some of the big cities. Even
some of the major cities like Hajar, Uman, and Sa'dah were Shi'ite. In
Basra, which had always been a Sunni city and competed with Kufa which
was considered a Shi'ite center, there appeared a notable group of
Shi'ites. Also in Tripoli, Nablus, Tiberias, Aleppo, Nayshapur, and
Herat there were many Shi'ites, while Ahwaz and the coast of the Persian
Gulf on the Persian side were also Shi'ite.

At the beginning of this century Nasir Utrush, after many years of
propagation of his religious mission in northern Persia, gained power in
Tabaristan and established a kingdom which continued for several
generations after him. Before Utrush, Hasan ibn Zayd al-'Alawi had
reigned from many years in Tabaristan. Also in this period the Fatimids,
who were Isma'ili, conquered Egypt and organized a caliphate which
lasted for over two centuries (296/908-567/1171). Often disputation and
fighting occurred in major cities like Baghdad, Cairo and Nayshapur
between Shi'ites and Sunnis, in some of which the Shi'ites would gain
the upper hand and come out victorious.

**Shi'ism from the 5th/11th to the 9th/15th Centuries**

From the 5th/11th to the 9th/15th centuries Shi'ism continued to expand
as it had done in the 4th/10th century. Many kings and rulers who were
Shi'ite appeared in different parts of the Islamic world and propagated
Shi'ism. Toward the end of the 5th/11th century the missionary activity
of Isma'ilism took root in the fort of Alamut and for nearly a century
and a half the Isma'ilis lived in complete independence in the central
regions of Persia. Also the Sadat-i Mar'ashi, who were descendants of
the Holy Prophet, ruled for many years in Mazandaran (Tabaristan). Shah
Muhammad Khudabandah, one of the well-known Mongol rulers, became
Shi'ite and his descendants ruled for many years in Persia and were
instrumental in spreading Shi'ism. Mention must also be made of the
kings of the Aq Qoyunlu and Qara Qoyunlu dynasties who ruled in Tabriz
and whose domain extended to Fars and Kerman, as well as of the Fatimid
government which was ruling in Egypt.

Of course religious freedom and the possibility of exerting religious
power by the populace differed under different rulers. For example, with
the termination of Fatimid rule and coming to power of the Ayyubids the
scene changed completely and the Shi'ite population of Egypt and Syria
lost its religious independence. Many of the Shi'ites of Syria were
killed during this period merely on the accusation of following Shi'ism.
One of these was Shahid-i awwal (the First Martyr) Muhammad ibn Makki,
one of the great figures in Shi'ite jurisprudence, who was killed in
Damascus in 786/1384. Also Shaykh al-ishraq Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi was
killed in Aleppo on the accusation that he was cultivating Batini
teachings and philosophy. Altogether during this period Shi'ism was
growing from the point of view of numbers, even though its religious
power and freedom depended upon local conditions and the rulers of the
time. During this period, however, Shi'ism never became the official
religion of any Muslim state.

**Shi'ism in the 10th/16th and 11th/17th Centuries**

In the 10th/16th century Isma'il, who was of the household of Shaykh
Safi al-Din Ardibili (d. 735/1334), a Sufi master and also a Shi'ite,
began a revolt in Ardibil, with three hundred Sufis who were disciples
of his forefathers, with the aim of establishing an independent and
powerful Shi'ite country. In this way he began the conquest of Persia
and overcame the local feudal princes. After a series of bloody wars
with local rulers and also the Ottomans who held the title of caliph, he
succeeded in forming Persia piece by piece into a country and in making
Shi'ism the official religion in his kingdom.

After the death of Shah Isma'il other Safavid kings reigned in Persia
until the 12th/18th century and each continued to recognize Shi'ism as
the official religion of the country and further to strengthen its hold
upon this land. At the height of their power, during the reign of Shah
'Abbas, the Safavids were able to increase the territorial expansion and
the population of Persia to twice its present size. As for other Muslim
lands, the Shi'ite population continued the same as before and increased
only through the natural growth of population.

**Shi'ism from the 12th/18th to the 14th/20th Centuries**

During the past three centuries Shi'ism has followed its natural rate
of growth as before. At the present moment, during the latter part of
the 14th/20th century, Shi'ism is recognized as the official religion in
Iran, and in the Yemen and Iraq the majority population is Shi'ite. In
nearly all lands where there are Muslims one can find a certain number
of Shi'ites. It has been said that altogether in the world today there
are about eighty to ninety million Shi'ites.

**CHAPTER II DIVISIONS WITHIN SHI'ISM**

Each religion possesses a certain number of primary principles which
form its essential basis and other principles of secondary importance.
When the followers of a religion differ as to the nature of the primary
principles and their secondary aspects but preserve a common basis, the
result is called division (inshi'ab) within that religion. Such
divisions exist in all traditions and religions, and more particularly
in the four "revealed" religions of Judaism, Christianity,
Zoroastrianism, and Islam.

Shi'ism did not undergo any divisions during the imamate of the first
three Imams: Ali, Hasan, and Husayn. But after the martyrdom of Husayn,
the majority of the Shi'ites accepted the imamate of Ali ibn Husayn
al-Sajjad, while a minority known as the Kisaniyah believed that the
third son of Ali, Muhammad ibn Hanafiyah, was the fourth Imam as well as
the promised Mahdi, and that he had gone into occultation in the Radwa
mountains and one day would reappear. After the death of Imam al-Sajjad
the majority of the Shi'ites accepted as Imam his son, Muhammad
al-Baqir, while a minority followed Zayd al-Shahid, another son of Imam
al-Sajjad, and became known as Zaydis. Following Imam Muhammad al-Baqir,
the Shi'ites accepted his son Ja'far al-Sadiq as Imam and after the
death of Imam Ja'far the majority followed his son Imam Musa al-Kazim as
the seventh Imam. However, one group followed the older son of the sixth
Imam, Isma'il, who had died while his father was still alive, and when
this latter group separated from the majority of Shi'ites it became
known as Isma'ilis. Others accepted as Imam either 'Abdollah al-Aftah or
Muhammad, both sons of the sixth Imam. Finally, another party stopped
with the sixth Imam himself and considered him as the last Imam. In the
same way, after the martyrdom of Imam Musa al-Kazim the majority
followed his son, Ali al-Rida, as the eight Imam. However, some stopped
with the seventh Imam and became known as the Waqifiyah.

From the eighth Imam to the twelfth, whom the majority of the Shi'ites
believe to be the promised Mahdi, no division of any importance took
place within Shi'ism. Even if certain events occurred in the form of
division, they lasted but a few days and dissolved by themselves. For
example, Ja'far, the son of the tenth Imam, claimed to be Imam after the
death of his brother, the eleventh Imam. A group of people followed him
but scattered in a few days and Ja'far himself did not follow his claim
any further. Further more, there are differences between Shi'ites in
theological and juridical matters which must not be considered as
division in religious schools. Also the Babi and Baha'i sects, which
like the Batinis (the Qaramitah) differ in both the principles (usul)
and branches (furu') of Islam from the Muslims, should in any sense be
considered as branches of Shi'ism.

The sects which separated from the majority of Shi'ites all dissolved
within a short period, except two: the Zaydi and the Isma'ili which
continue to exist until now. To this day communities of these branches
are active in various parts of the world such as the Yemen, India, and
Syria. Therefore, we shall limit our discussion to these two branches
along with the majority of Shi'ites who are Twelvers.

**Zaydism and Its Branches**

The Zaydis are the followers of Zayd al-Shahid, the son of Imam
al-Sajjad. Zayd rebelled in 121/737 against the Umayyad caliph Hisham
'Abd al-Malik and a group paid allegiance to him. A battle ensued in
Kufa between Zayd and the army of the caliph in which Zayd was killed.

The followers of Zayd regard him as the fifth Imam of the Household of
the Prophet. After him his son, Yahya ibn Zayd, who rebelled against the
caliph Walid ibn Yazid and was also killed, took his place. After Yahya,
Muhammad ibn 'Abdallah and Ibrahim ibn 'Abdallah, who revolted against
the Abbasid caliph Mansur al-Dawaniqi and were also killed, were chosen
as Imams.

Henceforth for some time there was disorder in Zaydi ranks until Nasir
al-Utrush, a descendant of the brother of Zayd, arose in Khurasan. Being
pursued by the governmental authorities in that region, he fled to
Mazandaran, becoming himself Imam. For some time his descendants
continued to rule as Imams in that area.

According to Zaydi belief any descendant of Fatimah (the daughter of
the Prophet) who begins an uprising in the name of defending the truth
may become Imam if he is learned in the religious sciences, ethically
pure, courageous and generous. Yet for some time after Utrush and his
descendants there was no Imam who could bring about an insurrection with
the sword until recently when, about sixty years ago, Imam Yahya
revolted in the Yemen, which had been part of the Ottoman Empire, made
it independent, and began to rule there as Imam. His descendants
continued to rule in that region as Imams until very recently.

At the beginning the Zaydis, like Zayd himself, considered the first
two caliphs, Abu Bakr and Umar, as their Imams. But after a while some
of them began to delete the name of the first two caliphs from the list
of Imams and placed Ali as the first Imam.

From what is known of Zaydi beliefs it can be said that in the
principles of Islam (usul) they follow a path close to that of the
Mu'tazilites, while in the branches or derivative institutions of the
law (furu') they apply the jurisprudence of Abu Hanifah, the founder of
one of the four Sunni schools of law. They also differ among themselves
concerning certain problems.

**Isma'ilism and Its Branches**

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq had a son named Isma'il who was the oldest of his
children. Isma'il died during the lifetime of his father who summoned
witnesses to his death, including the governor of Medina. Concerning
this question , some believed that Isma'il did not die but went into
occultation, that he would appear again and would be the promised Mahdi.
They further believed that the summoning of witnesses on the part of the
Imam for Isma'il's death was a way of hiding the truth in fear of
al-Mansur, the Abbasid caliph. Another group believed that the true Imam
was Isma'il whose death meant the imamate was transferred to his son
Muhammad. A third group also held that although he died during the
lifetime of his father he was the Imam and that the imamate passed after
him to Muhammad ibn Isma'il and his descendants. The first two groups
soon became extinct, while the third branch continues to exist to this
day and has undergone a certain amount of division.

The Isma'ilis have a philosophy in many ways similar to that of the
Sabaeans (star worshippers) combined with elements of Hindu gnosis. In
the sciences and decrees of Islam they believe that each exterior
reality (zahir) has an inner aspect (batin) and each element of
revelation (tanzil) a hermeneutic and esoteric exegesis (ta'wil).

The Isma'ilis believe that the earth can never exist without Proof
(hujjah) of God. The Proof is two kinds: "speaker" (natiq) and "silent
one" (samit). The speaker is a prophet and the silent one is an Imam or
Guardian (wali) who is the inheritor, or executor of the testament
(wasi) of a prophet. In any case the Proof of God is the perfect
theophany of the Divinity.

The principle of the Proof of God revolves constantly around the number
seven. A prophet (nabi), who is sent by God, has the function of
prophecy (nubuwwat), of bringing a Divine Law or Shari'ah. A prophet,
who is the perfect manifestation of God, has the esoteric power of
initiating men into the divine Mysteries (walayat). After him there are
seven executors of his testament (wasayat) and the power of esoteric
initiation into the Divine Mysteries (walayat). The seventh in the
succession possesses those two powers and also the additional power of
prophecy (nubuwwat). The cycle of seven executors (wasis) is then
repeated with the seventh a prophet.

The Isma'ilis say that Adam was sent as a prophet with the power of
prophecy and of esoteric guidance and he had seven executors of whom the
seventh was Noah, who had the three functions of nubuwwat, wasayat, and
walayat. Abraham was the seventh executor (wasi) of Noah, Moses the
seventh executor of Abraham, Jesus the seventh executor of Moses,
Muhammad the seventh executor of Jesus, and Muhammad ibn Isma'il the
seventh executor of Muhammad.

They consider the wasis of the Prophet to be: Ali, Husayn ibn Ali (they
do not consider Imam Hasan among the Imams), Ali ibn Husayn al-Sajjad,
Muhammad al-Baqir, Ja'far al-Sadiq, Isma'il ibn Ja'far, and Muhammad ibn
Isma'il. After this series there are seven descendants of Muhammad ibn
Isma'il whose names are hidden and secret. After them there are the
first seven rulers of the Fatimid caliphate of Egypt the first of whom,
'Ubaydallah al-Mahdi, was the founder of the Fatimid dynasty. The
Isma'ilis also believe that in addition to the Proof of God there are
always present on earth twelve "chiefs" (naqib) who are the companions
and elite followers of the Proof. Some of the branches of the Batinis,
however, like the Druzes, believe six of the "chiefs" to be from the
Imams and six from others.

**The Batinis**

In the year 278/891, a few years before the appearance of Ubaydallah
al-Mahdi in North Africa, there appeared in Kufa an unknown person from
Khuzistan (in southern Persia) who never revealed his name and identity.
He would fast during the day and worship at night and made a living from
his own labor. In addition he invited people to join the Isma'ili cause
and was able to assemble a large number of people about him. From among
them he chose twelve "chiefs" (naqib) and then he set out for Damascus.
Having left Kufa he was never heard of again.

This unknown man was replaced by Ahmad, known as the Qaramite, who
began to propagate Batini teachings in Iraq. As the historians have
recorded, he instituted two daily prayers in place of the five of Islam,
removed the necessity of ablution after sexual intercourse, and made the
drinking of wine permissible. Contemporary with these events, other
Batini leaders rose to invite people to join their cause and assembled a
group of followers.

The Batinis had no respect for the lives and possessions of those who
were outside their group. For this reason they began uprisings in the
cities of Iraq, Bahrain, the Yemen, and Syria, spilling the blood of
people and looting their wealth. Many times they stopped the caravans of
those who were making the pilgrimage to Mecca, killing tens of thousands
of pilgrims and plundering their provisions and camels.

Abu Tahir al-Qaramati, one of the Qaramite leaders who in 311/923 had
conquered Basra and did not neglect to kill and plunder, set out with a
large number of Batinis for Mecca in 317/929. After overcoming the brief
resistance of government troops he entered the city and massacred the
population as well as the newly arrived pilgrims. Even within the Masjid
al-haram (the mosque containing the Ka'bah) and within the Holy Ka'bah
itself, there flowed streams of blood. He divided the covering of the
Ka'bah between his disciples. He tore away the door of the Ka'bah and
took the black stone from its place back to the Yemen. For twenty-two
years the black stone was in Qaramite hands. As a result of these
actions the majority of Muslims turned completely away from the Batinis
and considered them outside the pale of Islam. Even 'Ubaydallah
al-Mahdi, the Fatimid ruler, who had risen in those days in North Africa
and considered himself the promised Mahdi, abhorred them.

According to the view of historians the distinguishing characteristic
of the Batini school is that it interprets the external aspects of Islam
in an esoteric manner and considers the externals of the Shari'ah to be
only for simple-minded people of little intelligence who are deprived of
spiritual perfection. Yet occasionally the Batini Imams did order
certain regulations and laws to be practiced and followed.

**The Nizaris, Musta'lis, Druzes and Muqanna'ah**

The Nizaris. Ubaydallah al-Mahdi, who rose in North Africa in 292/904
and as an Isma'ili declared his imamate and established Fatimid rule, is
the founder of the dynasty whose descendants made Cairo the center of
their caliphate. For seven generations this sultanate and Isma'ili
imamate continued without any divisions. At the death of the seventh
Imam, al-Mustansir bi'llah Mu'idd ibn Ali, his sons, Nizar and
al-Musta'li, began to dispute over the caliphate and imamate. After long
disputes and bloody battle al-Musta'li was victorious. He captured his
brother Nizar and placed him in prison, where he died.

Following this dispute those who accepted the Fatimids divided into two
groups: the Nizaris and the Musta'lis. The Nizaris are the followers of
Hasan al-Sabbah, who was one of the close associates of al-Mustansir.
After Nizar's death, because of his support of Nizar, Hasan al-Sabbah
was expelled from Egypt by al-Musta'li. He came to Persia and after a
short while appeared in the Fort of Alamut near Qazwin. He conquered
Alamut and several surrounding forts. There he established his rule and
also began to invite people to the Isma'ili cause.

After the death of Hasan in 518/1124 Buzurg Umid Rudbari and after him
his son, Kiya Muhammad, continued to rule following the methods and ways
of Hasan al-Sabbah. After Kiya Muhammad, his son Hasan
'AlaDhikrihi'l-Salam, the fourth ruler of Alamut, changed the ways of
Hasan al-Sabbah, who had been Nizari, and became Batini. Henceforth the
Isma'ili forts continued as Batini. Four other rulers, Muhammad ibn Ala
Dhikruhi'l-Salam, Jala al-Din Hasan, 'Ala' al-Din, and Rukn al-Din
Khurshah, became Sultan and Imam one after another until Hulagu, the
Mongol conqueror, invaded Persia. He captured Isma'ili forts and put all
the Isma'ilis to death, leveling their forts to the ground.

Centuries later, in 1255/1839, the Aqa Khan of Mahalat in Persia, who
belonged to the Nizaris, rebelled against Muhammad Shah Qajar in Kerman,
but he was defeated and fled to Bombay. There he propagated his
Batini-Nizari cause which continues to this day. The Nizaris are today
called the Aqa Khanids.

The Musta'lis. The Musta'lis were the followers of al-Musta'li. Their
imamate continued during Fatimid rule in Egypt until it was brought to
an end in the year 567/1171. Shortly thereafter, the Bohra sect,
following the same school, appeared in India and survives to this day.

The Druzes. The Druzes, who live in the Druze mountains in Syria (and
also in Lebanon), were originally followers of the Fatimid caliphs. But
as a result of the missionary activity of Nashtakin, the Druzes joined
the Batini sect. The Druzes stop with the sixth Fatimid caliph al-Hakim
bi'llah, whom others believe to have been killed, and claim that he is
in occultation. He has ascended to heaven and will appear once again to
the world.

The Muqanna'ah. The Muqanna'ah were at first disciples of 'Ata'
al-Marwi known as Muqanna', who according to historical sources was a
follower of Abu Muslim of Khurasan. After the death of Abu Muslim,
Muqanna' claimed that Abu Muslim's soul had become incarnated in him.
Soon he claimed to be a prophet and later a divinity. Finally, in the
year 162/777 he was surrounded in the fort of Kabash in Transoxiana.
When he became certain that he would be captured and killed, he threw
himself into a fire along with some of his disciples and burned to
death. His followers soon adopted Isma'ilism and the ways of the
Batinis.

**Differences Between Twelve-Imam Shi'ism and Isma'ilism and
Zaydism**

The majority of the Shi'ites, from whom the previously mentioned groups
have branched out, are Twelve-Imam Shi'ites, also called the Imamites.
As has already been mentioned, the Shi'ites came into being because of
criticism and protest concerning two basic problems of Islam, without
having any objections to the religious ways which through the
instructions of the Prophet had become prevalent among their
contemporary Muslims. These two problems concerned Islamic government
and authority in the religious sciences, both of which the Shi'ites
considered to be the particular right of the Household of the Prophet.

The Shi'ites asserted that the Islamic caliphate, of which esoteric
guidance and spiritual leadership are inseparable elements, belongs to
Ali and his descendants. They also believed that according to the
specification of the Prophet the Imams of the Household of the Prophet
are twelve in number. Shi'ism held, moreover, that the external
teachings of the Quran, which are the injunctions and regulations of the
Shari'ah and include the principles of a complete spiritual life, are
valid and applicable for everyone at all times, and are not to be
abrogated until the Day of Judgment. These injunctions and regulations
must be learned through the guidance of the Household of the Prophet.

From a consideration of these points it becomes clear that the
difference between Twelve-Imam Shi'ism and Zaydism is that the Zaydis
usually do not consider the imamate to belong solely to the Household of
the Prophet and do not limit the number of Imams to twelve. Also they do
not follow the jurisprudence of the Household of the Prophet as do the
Twelve-Imam Shi'ites.
The difference between the Twelve-Imam Shi'ism and Isma'ilism lies in
that for the latter the imamate revolves around the number seven and
prophecy does not terminate with the Holy Prophet Muhammad. Also for
them, change and transformation in the injunctions of the Shari'ah are
admissible, as is even rejection of the duty of following Shari'ah,
especially among the Batinis. In contrast, the Twelve-Imam Shi'ites
consider the Prophet to be the "seal of prophecy" and believe him to
have twelve successors and executors of his will. They hold the external
aspect of the Shari'ah to be valid and impossible to abrogate. They
affirm that the Quran has both an exoteric and an esoteric aspect.

**Summary of the History of Twelve-Imam Shi'ism**

As has become clear form the previous pages, the majority of Shi'ites
are Twelvers. They were originally the same group of friends and
supporters of Ali who, after the death of the Prophet, in order to
defend the right of the Household of the Prophet in the question of the
caliphate and religious authority, began to criticize and protest
against prevalent views and separated from the majority of the people.

During the caliphate of the "rightly-guided caliphs" (11/632-35/656)
the Shi'ites were under a certain amount of pressure which became much
greater during the Umayyad Caliphate (40/661-132/750) when they were no
longer protected in any way against destruction of their lives and
property. Yet the greater the pressure placed upon them, the firmer they
became in their belief. They especially benefited from their being
oppressed in spreading their beliefs and teachings.

From the middle of the 2nd/8th century when the Abbasid caliphs
established their dynasty, Shi'ism was able to gain a mew life as a
result of the languid and weak state prevailing at that time. Soon,
however, conditions became difficult once again and until the end of the
3rd/9th century became ever more stringent.

At the beginning of the 4th/10th century, with the rise of the
influential Buyids, who were Shi'ites, Shi'ism gained power and became
more or less free to carry out its activities. It began to carry out
scientific and scholarly debates and continued in this manner until the
end of the 5th/11th century. At the beginning of the 7th/13th century
when the Mongol invasion began, as a result of the general involvement
in war and chaos and the continuation of the Crusades, the different
Islamic governments did not put too great a pressure upon the Shi'ites.
Moreover, the conversion to Shi'ism of some Mongol rulers in Persia and
the rule of the Sadat-i Mar'ashi (who were Shi'ites) in Mazandaran were
instrumental in the spread of the power and territory of Shi'ism. They
made the presence of large concentrations of Shi'ite population in
Persia and other Muslim lands felt more than ever before. This situation
continued through the 9th/15th century.

At the beginning of the 10th/16th century, as a result of the rise of
the Safavids, Shi'ism became the official religion of the vast
territories of Persia and continues in this position to the present day.
In other regions of the world also there are tens of millions of
Shi'ites.

