Part Ii: Shiites Religious Thought
==================================

**CHAPTER III THREE METHODS OF RELIGIOUS THOUGHT**

By "religious thought" we mean that form of thought which is concerned
with any of the problems of a religious nature within a particular
religion, in the same sense that mathematical thought is the form of
thought which deals with mathematical questions and solves mathematical
problems.

Needless to say religious thought, like other forms of thought, must
have reliable sources from which the raw material of its thought
originates and upon which it depends. Similarly, the process of
reasoning necessary for the solution of mathematical problems must have
a series of established mathematical facts and principles.

The single source upon which the divinely revealed religion of Islam
depends and upon which it is based, inasmuch as it is based on a
revelation of celestial origin, is none other than the Holy Quran. It is
the Quran which is the definitive testament of the universal and
ever-living prophethood of the Prophet and it is the content of the
Quran that bears the substance of the Islamic call. Of course the fact
that the Quran is alone the source of Islamic religious thought does not
eliminate other sources and origins of correct thinking, as will be
explained later.

There are three methods of religious thought in Islam. The Holy Quran
in its teachings points to three paths for Muslims to follow in order to
comprehend the purposes of religion and the Islamic sciences: (1) the
path of the external and formal aspect of religion (the Shari'ah); (2)
the path of intellectual understanding; and (3) the path of spiritual
comprehension achieved through sincerity (ikhlas) in obeying God.

It can be seen that the Holy Quran in its formal aspect addresses all
people without providing any demonstration or proof. Rather, depending
on the unique sovereignty of God, it commands people to accept the
principles of faith such as divine unity, prophethood, eschatology; it
gives them practical injunctions such as the daily prayers, fasting,
etc.; and at the same time it prohibits them from committing certain
other actions. Yet if the Quran had not provided authority for these
commands it would never have expected man to accept and obey them. It
must, therefore, be said that such simple utterances of the Quran are a
path toward the understanding of ultimate religious ends and the
comprehension of the Islamic sciences. We call such verbal expressions
as "Believe in God and His Prophet" and "Perform the prayers," the
external or formal aspect of religion.

In addition to guidance in the external aspect of religion, we see that
the Holy Quran in many verses guides man toward intellectual
understanding. It invites man to meditate, contemplate and deliberate
upon the signs of God in the macrocosm and the microcosm. It explains
many verities through unfettered intellectual reasoning. It must be said
in truth that no sacred book praises and recommends science and
intellectual knowledge for man as much as does the Quran. In many of its
words and utterances the Quran attests to the validity of intellectual
proof and rational demonstration, that is, it does not claim that man
should first accept the validity of the Islamic sciences and then
through intellectual proofs justify these sciences. Rather, with
complete confidence in the truth of its own position it proclaims that
man should use his intellect to discover the truth of the Islamic
sciences, and only then accept this truth. He should seek the
affirmation of the words contained in the Islamic message in the world
of creation which is itself a truthful witness. And finally man should
find the affirmation of his faith in the results of rational
demonstration ; he should not have to gain faith first and the, in
obedience to it, seek proofs. Thus philosophical thought is also a way
whose validity and efficacy is confirmed by the Holy Quran.

Also, in addition to guidance in the external and intellectual aspects
of religion, we see that the Holy Quran in subtle terms explains that
all true religious science originates and comes from Divine Unity
(tawhid) and the knowledge of god and His Attributes . The perfection of
the knowledge of God belongs to those whom He has drawn from all places
and elevated solely to Himself. It is these men who have forgotten
themselves and all things and as a result of sincerity in obedience to
God have been able to concentrate all their powers and energies upon the
transcendent world. Their eyes have become illuminated through the
vision of the light of the Pure Creator. With the eye of discernment
they have seen the reality of things in the kingdom of heaven and earth,
for through sincerity of obedience they have reached the station of
certainty (yaqin). As a result of this certainty the kingdoms of heaven
and earth and the immortal life of the eternal world have become
revealed to them.

Deliberation upon the following holy verses illuminates fully this
claim: "And We sent no messenger before thee but We inspired him
(saying): There is no God save Me (Allah), so worship Me" (Quran, XXI,
25); and, "Glorified be Allah from that which they attribute (unto Him),
Save single-minded slaves of Allah" (Quran, XXXVII, 159-160); and, "Say,
I am only a mortal like you. My Lord inspireth in me that your God is
only One God. And whoever hopeth for the meeting with his Lord, let him
do righteous work, and make none sharer of the worship due unto his
Lord" (Quran, XVIII, 111); and, "And serve the Lord till the inevitable
[al-yaqin] cometh unto thee" (Quran, XV, 99); and God says, "Thus did We
show Abraham the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be
of those possessing certainty" (Quran, VI, 76); and "Nay, but the record
of the righteous is in 'Iliyin - Ah! what will convey unto thee what
'Iliyin is! - A written record, attested by those who are brought near
(unto their Lord)" (Quran, LXXXIII, 18-21); and, "Nay, would that ye
knew (now) with a sure knowledge ['ilm al-yaqin]! Ye will behold
hellfire" (Quran, XII, 5-6).

Thus it may be said that one of the paths for the comprehension of
religious verities and sciences is the purification of the carnal soul
and sincerity in obedience to God.

From what has been said it becomes clear that the Holy Quran proposes
three methods for the comprehension of religious truths: the external,
or formal aspects of religion; intellectual reasoning; and sincerity in
obedience leading to the intellectual intuition which results in the
unveiling of the truth and its inward vision. Yet it must be understood
that these three methods differ from each other in several ways. For
instance, since the external forms of religion are verbal expressions in
the simplest language, they are in the hands of all people, and everyone
benefits from them according to his own capacity. On the other hand, the
other two paths, which are appropriate to a particular group (the
elite - khawass), are not common to all. The path of the external forms
of religion leads to the understanding of the principles and the
obligations of Islam and results in knowledge of the substance of the
beliefs and practices of Islam, and of the principles of the Islamic
sciences, ethics, and jurisprudence. This is in contrast to the other
two paths. The intellectual path can discover the problems connected
with faith, ethics, and the general principles governing practical
questions, but the intellectual method cannot discover the specific
religious injunctions given in the Quran and the Sunnah. The path of
purification of the carnal soul, since it leads to the discovery of
God-given spiritual truths, can have no limits nor measure of its
results or of the truths revealed through this divine gift. Men who have
reached this knowledge have cut themselves off from everything and
forgotten everything but God and are under the direct guidance and
dominion of God Himself - May His Name be Glorified. Whatever He wants
and not what they want is revealed to them.

We will now take up in detail the three methods of religious thought in
Islam.

**FIRST METHOD: THE FORMAL ASPECT OF RELIGION**

**The Different Facets of the Formal Aspect of Religion**

It has become clear from what has been said thus far that the Holy
Quran, which is the principal source of religious thought in Islam, has
given full authority to the external meanings of its words for those who
give ear to its message. The same external meaning of the Quranic verses
has made the sayings of the Prophet complementary to the words of the
Quran and has declared them to be authoritative like the Quran. For as
the Quran says: "And We have revealed unto thee the Remembrance that
thou mayst explain to mankind that which hath been revealed for them"
(Quran, XVI, 44). And, "He it is who hath sent among the unlettered ones
a messenger of their own, to recite unto them His revelations and to
make them grow, and to teach them the scripture and Wisdom" (Quran,
LXII, 2). And, "And whatsoever the messenger giveth you, take it. And
whatsoever he forbiddeth, abstain (from it)" (Quran, LIX, 7). And,
"Verily in the messenger of Allah ye have a good example" (Quran,
XXXIII, 21).

It is quite evident that such verses would not have any real meaning if
the words and deeds of the Prophet and even his silence and approval
were not authority for us just as the Quran itself is. Thus the words of
the Prophet are authoritative and must be accepted by those who have
heard them orally or received them through reliable transmission.
Moreover, through such a completely authentic chain of transmission it
is known that the Holy Prophet said, "I leave two things of value amidst
you in trust which if you hold on to you will never go astray: the Quran
and the members of my household. These will never be separated until the
Day of Judgment." According to this and other definitely established
hadiths the words of the Family of the Household of the Prophet form a
corpus that is complementary to the Prophetic religious sciences and are
inerrant in the explanation of the teachings and injunctions of Islam.
Their sayings, received orally or through reliable transmission, are
reliable and authoritative.

Therefore, it is clear that the traditional source from which the
formal and external aspect of religion is derived, which is an
authoritative document and which is also the basic source for the
religious thought of Islam, consists of two parts: The Book (the Quran)
and the Sunnah. By the Book is meant the external aspect of the verses
of the Holy Quran; and by the Sunnah, hadith received from the Prophet
and his revered Household.

**Traditions of the Companions**

In Shi'ism hadiths transmitted through the companions are dealt with
according to this principle: if they deal with the words and actions of
the Prophet and do not contradict the hadiths of the Household of the
Prophet, they are acceptable. If they contain only the views or opinions
of the companions themselves and not those of the Prophet, they are not
authoritative as sources for religious injunctions. In this respect the
ruling of the companions is like the ruling of any other Muslim. In the
same way, the companions themselves dealt with other companions in
questions of Islamic law as they would with any Muslim, not as someone
special.

**The Book and Tradition**

The Book of God, the Holy Quran, is the principal source of every form
of Islamic thought. It is the Quran which gives religious validity and
authority to every other religious source in Islam. Therefore, it must
be comprehensible to all. Moreover, the Quran describes itself as the
light which illuminates all things. Also it challenges men and requests
them to ponder over its verses and observe that there are no disparities
or contradictions in them. It invites them to compose similar work, if
they can, to replace it. It is clear that if the Holy Quran were not
comprehensible to all there would be no place for such assertions.

To say that the Quran is in itself comprehensible to all is not in any
way contradictory to the previous assertion that the Prophet and his
Household are religious authorities in the Islamic sciences, which
sciences in reality are only elaborations of the content of the Quran.
For instance, in the part of the Islamic sciences which comprises the
injunctions and laws of the Shari'ah, the Quran contains only the
general principles. The clarification and elaboration of their details,
such as the manner of accomplishing the daily prayers, fasting,
exchanging merchandise, and in fact all acts of worship ('ibadat) and
transactions (mu'amalat), can be achieved only by referring to the
traditions of the Holy Prophet and his Household.

As for the other part of the Islamic sciences dealing with doctrines
and ethical methods and practices, although their content and details
can be comprehended by all, the understanding of their full meaning
depends on accepting the method of the Household of the Prophet. Also
each verse of the Quran must be explained and interpreted by means of
other Quranic verses, not by views which have become acceptable and
familiar to us only through habit and custom.

Ali has said: "Some parts of the Quran speak with other parts of it
revealing to us their meaning and some parts attest to the meaning of
others." And the Prophet has said, "Parts of the Quran verify other
parts." And also: "Whosoever interprets the Quran according to his own
opinion has made a place for himself in the fire."

As a simple example of the Quran through the Quran may be cited the
story of the torture of the people of Lot about whom in one place God
says, "And we rained on them a rain," and in another place He has
changed this phrase to, "Lo! We sent a storm of stones upon them (all)."
By relating the second verse to the first it becomes clear that by
"rain" is meant "stones" from heaven. Whoever has studied with care the
hadiths of the Household of the Prophet, and the outstanding companions
who were the followers of the Prophet, will have no doubt that the
commentary of the Quran through the Quran is the sole method of Quranic
commentary taught by the Household of the Prophet.

**The Outward and Inward Aspects of the Quran**

It has been explained that the Holy Quran elucidates religious aims
through its own words and gives commands to mankind in matter of
doctrine and action. But the meaning of the Quran is not limited to this
level. Rather, behind these same expressions and within these same
meanings there are deeper and wider levels of meaning which only the
spiritual elite who possess pure hearts can comprehend.

The Prophet, who is the divinely appointed teacher of the Quran, says:
"The Quran has a beautiful exterior and a profound interior." He has
also said, "The Quran has an inner dimension, and that inner dimension
has an inner dimension up to seven numerous references to the inner
aspect of the Quran.

The main support of these assertions is a symbol which God has
mentioned in Chapter XIII, verse 17, of the Quran. In this verse divine
gifts are symbolized by rain that falls from heaven and upon which
depends the life of the earth and its inhabitants. With the coming of
the rain, floods begin to flow and each river bed accepts a certain
amount of the flood, depending on its capacity. As it flows, the flood
is covered with foam, but beneath the foam there is that same water
which is life-giving and beneficial to mankind.

As is indicated by this symbolic story, the capacity for comprehension
of divine sciences, which are the source of man's inner life, differs
among people. There are those for whom there is no reality beyond
physical existence and the material life of this world which lasts but a
few days. Such people are attached to material appetites and physical
desires alone and fear nothing but the loss of material benefits and
sensory enjoyment. Such people, taking into consideration the
differences of degree among them, can at best accept the divine sciences
on the level of believing in a summary fashion in the doctrines and
performing the practical commands of Islam in purely outward manner
without any comprehension. They worship God with the hope of recompense
or fear of punishment in the next world.

There are also those who, because of the purity of their nature, do not
consider their well-being to lie in attachment to the transient
pleasures of the fleeting life of this world. The losses and gains and
bitter and sweet experiences of this world are for them no more than an
attractive illusion. Memory of those who passed before them in the
caravan of existence, who were pleasure-seekers yesterday and no more
than subjects of stories today, is a warning that is continuously
present before their eyes. Such men who possess pure hearts are
naturally attracted to the world of eternity. They view the different
phenomena of this passing world as symbols and portents of the higher
world, not as persisting and independent realities.

It is at this point that through earthly and heavenly signs, signs upon
the horizons and within the souls of men, they "observe" in a spiritual
vision the Infinite Light of the Majesty and Glory of God. Their hearts
become completely enamored with the longing to reach an understanding of
the secret symbols of creation. Instead of being imprisoned in the dark
and narrow well of personal gain and selfishness they begin to fly in
the unlimited space of the world of eternity and advance ever onwards
toward the zenith of the spiritual world.

When they hear that God has forbidden the worship of idols, which
outwardly means bowing down before an idol, they understand this command
to mean that they should not obey other than God, for to obey means to
bow down before someone and to serve him. Beyond that meaning they
understand that they should not have hope of fear of other than God;
beyond that, they should not surrender to the demands of their selfish
appetites; and beyond that, they should not concentrate on anything
except God, May His Name be Glorified.

Likewise when they hear from the Quran that they should pray, the
external meaning of which is to perform the particular rites of prayers,
through its inner meaning they comprehend that they must worship and
obey God with all their hearts and souls. Beyond that they comprehend
that before God they must consider themselves as nothing, must forget
themselves and remember only God.

It can be seen that the inner meaning present in these two examples is
not due to the outward expression of the command and prohibition in
question. Yet the comprehension of this meaning is unavoidable for
anyone who has begun to meditate upon a more universal order and has
preferred to gain a vision of the universe of reality rather than his
own ego, who has preferred objectivity to an egocentric subjectivism.

From this discussion the meaning of the outward and inward aspects of
the Quran has become clear. It has also become evident that the inner
meaning of the Quran does no eradicate or invalidate its outward
meaning. Rather, it is like the soul which gives life to the body.
Islam, which is a universal and eternal religion and places the greatest
emphasis upon the "reformation" of mankind, can never dispense with its
external laws which are for the benefit of society, nor with its simple
doctrines which are the guardians and preservers of these laws.

How can a society, on the pretense that religion is only a matter of
the heart, that man's heart should be pure and that there is no value to
actions, live in disorder and yet attain happiness? How can impure deeds
and words cause the cultivation of a pure heart? Or how can impure words
emanate from a pure heart? God says in His Book, "Vile women are for
vile men, and vile men for vile women. Good women are for good men, and
good men for good women." (Quran, XXIV, 26) He also says, "As for the
good land, its vegetation cometh forth by permission of its Lord; while
as for that which is bad, only evil cometh forth (from it)." (Quran,
VII, 58) Thus it becomes evident that the Holy Quran has an outward and
an inward aspect and the inward aspect itself has different levels of
meaning. The hadith literature, which explains the content of the Quran,
also contains these various aspects.

**The Principles of Interpretation of the Quran**

At the beginning of Islam it was commonly believed by some Sunnis that
if there was sufficient reason one could ignore the outward meaning of
Quranic verses and ascribe to them a contrary meaning. Usually the
meaning which opposed the outward, literal meaning was called ta'wil,
and what is called "ta'wil of the Quran" in Sunni Islam is usually
understood in this sense.

In the religious works of Sunni scholars, as well as in the
controversies that have been recorded as taking place between different
schools, one often observes that if a particular point of doctrine (that
has been established through the consensus of the ulama of a school or
through some other means) is opposed to the outward meaning of a verse
of the Quran, that verse is interpreted by ta'wil to have a meaning
contrary to its apparent meaning. Sometimes two contending sides support
two opposing views and present Quranic verses in proof of their
contentions. Each side interprets the verses presented by the other side
through ta'wil. This method has also penetrated more or less into
Shi'ism and can be seen in some Shi'ite theological works.

Yet, sufficient deliberation upon Quranic verses and the hadith of the
Household of the Prophet demonstrates clearly that the Holy Quran with
its attractive language and eloquent and lucid expression never uses
enigmatic or puzzling methods of exposition and always expounds any
subject in a language suitable for that subject. What has been rightly
called ta'wil, or hermeneutic interpretation, of the Holy Quran is not
concerned simply with the denotation of words. Rather, it is concerned
with certain truths and realities that transcend the comprehension of
the common run of men ; yet it is from these truths and realities that
the principles of doctrine and the practical injunctions of the Quran
issue forth.

The whole of the Quran possesses the sense of ta'wil, of esoteric
meaning, which cannot be comprehended directly through human thought
alone. Only the prophets and the pure among the saints of God who are
free from the dross of human imperfection can contemplate these meanings
while living on the present plane of existence. On the Day of
Resurrection the ta'wil of the Quran will be revealed to everyone.

This assertion can be explained by pointing to the fact that what
forces man to use speech, create words and make use of expressions is
nothing other than his social and material needs. In his social life man
is forced to try to make his fellow-men understand his thoughts and
intentions and the feelings which exist within his soul. To accomplish
this end he makes use of sounds and hearing. Occasionally also he uses
to a degree his eyes and gestures. That is why between the mute and the
blind there can never be any mutual comprehension, for whatever the
blind man says the deaf cannot hear, and whatever the mute makes
understood through gestures the blind man cannot see.

The creation of words and the naming of objects have been accomplished
with a material end in view. Expressions have been created for those
objects, states, and conditions which are material and available to the
senses or near to the sensible world. As can be seen in those cases
where the person addressed lacks one of the physical senses, if we wish
to speak of matters which can be comprehended through the missing sense
we employ a kind of allegory and similitude. For example, if we wish to
describe light or color to one who is born blind, or the pleasures of
sex to a child that has not reached the age of adolescence, we seek to
achieve our purpose through comparison and allegory and through
providing examples.

Therefore, if we accept the hypothesis that in the scale of Universal
Existence there are immense levels of reality which are independent of
the world of matter (and this is in reality the case), and that in each
generation there are among mankind but a handful who have the capability
of comprehending and having a vision of these realities, then questions
pertaining to these higher worlds cannot be understood through common
verbal expressions and modes of thought. They cannot be referred to
except by allusion and through symbolism. Since religious realities are
of this kind, the expression of the Quran in such matters must of
necessity be symbolic.

God says in his book, "Lo! We have appointed it a Lecture in Arabic
that haply ye may understand. And Lo! in the Source of Decrees, which We
possess, it is indeed sublime, decisive." (Common comprehension cannot
understand it or penetrate into it.) (Quran, XLIII, 3-4) He also says,
"That (this) is indeed a noble Quran, In a book kept hidden, Which none
toucheth save the purified" (Quran, LVI, 77-79). Concerning the Prophet
and his Household he says, "Allah's wish is but to remove uncleanness
far from you, O Folk of the Household, and cleanse you with a thorough
cleansing" (Quran, XXXIII, 33).

As proved by these verses, the Holy Quran emanates from sources beyond
the comprehension of common man. No one can have a full comprehension of
the Quran save those servants of God whom He has chosen to purify. And
the Household of the Prophet are among those pure beings.

In another place God says, "Nay, but they denied that (the Quran), the
knowledge whereof they could not compass, and whereof the interpretation
(in events) [ta'wil] hath not yet come into them" (Quran, X, 40)
(meaning the day of Resurrection when the truth of things will become
known). And again he says, "On the day (the Day of Resurrection) when
the fulfillment [ta'wil] thereof (of the whole Quran) cometh, those who
were before forgetful thereof will say: The messengers of our Lord did
bring the Truth!" (Quran, VII, 53)

**Hadith**

The principle that the hadith possesses validity, as attested by the
Quran, is not at all disputed among Shi'ites or in fact among all
Muslims. But because of the failure of some of the early rulers of Islam
in preserving and guarding the hadith, and the excesses of a group among
the companions and followers of the Prophet in propagating hadith
literature, the corpus of hadith came to face a certain number of
difficulties.

On the one hand the caliphs of the time prevented the writing down and
recording of the hadith and ordered any pages containing texts of hadith
to be burned. Sometimes also any increase in activity in the
transmission and study of hadith was forbidden. In this way a certain
number of hadiths were forgotten or lost and a few were even transmitted
with a different or distorted meaning. On the other hand another
tendency also prevailed among another group of the companions of the
Holy Prophet who had had the honor of seeing his presence and actually
hearing his words. This group, which was respected by the caliphs and
the Muslim community, began an intense effort to propagate the hadith.
This was carried to such an extent that sometimes hadith overruled the
Quran and the injunction of a Quranic verse was even considered
abrogated by some people through a hadith. Often the transmitters of
hadith would travel many miles and bear all the difficulties of
traveling in order to hear a single saying.

A group of outsiders who had worn the dress of Islam and also some of
the enemies within ranks of Islam began to change and distort some of
the hadith and thus diminished the reliability and validity of the
hadith that was then heard and known. For this very reason Islamic
scholars began to think of a solution. They created the sciences
concerned with the biography of learned men and chains of transmission
of hadith in order to be able to discriminate between true and false
hadith.

**The Method of Shi'ism in Authenticating the Hadith**

Shi'ism, in addition to seeking to authenticate the chain transmission
of hadith, considers the correlation of the text of the hadith with the
Quran as a necessary condition for its validity. In Shi'ite sources
there are many hadiths of the Prophet and the Imams with authentic
chains of transmission which themselves assert that a hadith contrary to
the Quran has no value. Only that hadith can be considered valid which
is in agreement with the Quran.
Basing itself on these hadiths, Shi'ism does not act upon those hadiths
which are contrary to the text of the Quran. As for the hadiths whose
agreement or disagreement cannot be established, according to
instructions received from Imams they are passed by in silence without
being accepted or rejected. Needless to say there are also within
Shi'ism those who, like a group among the Sunnis, act on any hadith
whatsoever which they happen to find in different traditional sources.

**The Method of Shi'ism in Following the Hadith**

A hadith heard directly from the mouth of the Prophet or one of the
Imams is accepted as is the Quran. As for hadiths received through
intermediaries, the majority of Shi'ites act upon them if their chain of
transmission is established at every step or if there exists definite
proof concerning their truth, and, if they are concerned with principles
of doctrine which require knowledge and certainty, according to the text
of the Quran. Other than these two kinds of hadith, no other hadith has
any validity concerning principles of doctrine, the invalid hadith being
called "tradition with a single transmitter" (khabar wahid). However, in
establishing the injunctions of the Shari'ah, because of reasons that
have been given, Shi'ites act also on a tradition which is generally
accepted as reliable. Therefore it can be said that for Shi'ism a
certain and definitely established hadith is absolutely binding and must
be followed, while a hadith which is not absolutely established but
which is generally considered as reliable is utilized only in the
elaboration of the injunctions of the Shari'ah.

**Learning and Teaching in Islam**

To acquire knowledge is a religious duty in Islam. The Prophet has
said, "To seek knowledge is incumbent upon every Muslim." According to
fully established hadiths which elucidate the meaning of this saying,
knowledge here means the three principles of Islam : unity or tawhid ;
prophecy or nubuwwat; and eschatology or ma'ad. In addition to these
principles, Muslims are expected to acquire knowledge of the subsidiary
branches and the details of the injunctions and laws of Islam according
to their individual circumstances and needs.

It is clear that acquiring knowledge of the principles of religion,
even if it be in summary fashion, is possible to a certain extent for
everyone. But acquiring detailed knowledge of the injunctions and laws
of religion through use of the basic documents of the Book and the
Sunnah and technical reasoning based upon them (or what is called
demonstrative jurisprudence, fiqh-i istidlali ) is not possible for
every Muslim. Only a few persons have the capacity for demonstrative
jurisprudence, nor is such acquiring of detailed knowledge required of
everyone, for there are no injunctions in Islam requiring one to do what
lies beyond his abilities.

Therefore, the study of Islamic injunctions and laws through reasoning
has been limited through the principle of "sufficient necessity"
(wajib-i kifa'i) to those individuals who have the necessary capability
and are worthy of such study. The duty of the rest of the people,
according to the general principle of the necessity for the ignorant to
depend on the one who knows, is to seek guidance from capable and worthy
men of learning, who are called mujtahids and faqihs. This act of
following mujtahids is called imitation or taqlid. Of course this
imitation differs from imitation in the principles of religious
knowledge which is forbidden according to the very text of the Quran,
"(O man), follow not that whereof thou hast no knowledge." (Quran, XVII,
36).

It must be known that Shi'ism does not permit imitation of a dead
mujtahid. That is to say, a person who does not know the answer to a
problem through ijtihad and through religious duty must imitate a living
mujtahid and cannot depend on the view of a mujtahid who is not living,
unless he had received that guidance while the mujtahid was alive. This
practice is one of the factors which have kept Islamic Shi'ite
jurisprudence alive and fresh throughout the ages. There are individuals
who continuously follow the path of independent judgment, ijtihad, and
delve into the problems of jurisprudence from one generation to
another.

In Sunnism, as a result of consensus of opinion (ijma') that occurred
in the 4th/10th century, it was decided that submission to one of the
four schools (of Abu Hanifah, Ibn Malik, al-Shafi'i, and Ahmad ibn
Hanbal) was necessary. Free ijtihad or imitation of a school other than
these four (or one or two smaller schools that died out later) was not
considered permissible. As a result, their jurisprudence has remained in
the same condition as it was about 1100 years ago. In recent times
certain individuals in the Sunni world have turned away from this
consensus and have begun to exercise free ijtihad.

**Shi'ism and the Transmitted Sciences**

The Islamic sciences, which owe their existence to the ulama of Islam
who organized and formulated them, are divided into the two categories
of intellectual ('alqi) and transmitted (naqli). The intellectual
sciences include such sciences as philosophy and mathematics. The
transmitted sciences are those which depend upon transmission from some
source, such as the sciences of language, hadith, or history. Without
doubt the major cause for the appearance of the transmitted sciences in
Islam is the Holy Quran. With the exception of a few disciplines such as
history, genealogy, and prosody, the other transmitted sciences have all
come into being under the influence of the Holy Book. Guided by
religious discussions and research, Muslims began to cultivate these
sciences, of which the most important are Arabic literature (grammar,
rhetoric, and the science of metaphors) and the sciences pertaining to
the external form of religion (recitation of the Quran, Quranic
commentary (tafsir), hadith, biography of learned men, the chain of
transmission of hadith, and the principles of jurisprudence).

Shi'ites played an essential role in the foundation and establishment
of these sciences. In fact, the founders and creators of many of these
sciences were Shi'ites. Arabic grammar was put into a systematic form by
Abu'l-Aswad al-Du'ali, one of the companions of the Holy Prophet, and by
Ali. Ali dictated an outline for the organization of the science of
Arabic grammar. One of the founders of the science of eloquence
(rhetoric and the science of metaphors) was Sahib ibn 'Abbad, a Shi'ite,
who was a vizier of the Buyids. The first Arabic dictionary is the Kitab
al-'ayn composed by the famous scholar, Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Basri, the
Shi'ite who founded the science of prosody. He was also the teacher of
the great master of grammar, Sibuwayh.

The Quranic recitation of 'Asim goes back to Ali through one
intermediary, and 'Abdallah ibn 'Abbas, who in hadith was the foremost
among the companions, was a student of Ali. The contributions of the
Household of the Prophet and their associates in hadith and
jurisprudence are well known. The founders of the four Sunni schools of
law are known to have associated with the fifth and sixth Shi'ite Imams.
In the principles of jurisprudence the remarkable advances accomplished
by the Shi'ite scholar Wahid Binbahani and followed by Shaykh Murtada
Ansari have never been matched in Sunni jurisprudence according to
existing evidence.

