Second Method: the Way of Intelection and Intelectual Reasoning
===============================================================

**Philosophical and Theological Thought in Shi'ism**

It has been mentioned before that Islam has legitimized and approved
rational thought, which it considers a part of religious thought.
Rational thought in its Islamic sense, after confirming the prophecy of
the Prophet, provides intellectual demonstrations of the validity of the
external aspect of the Quran, which is a divine revelation, as well as
of the definitely established sayings of the Prophet and his noble
Household.

Intellectual proofs, which aid man in finding solutions for these
problems through his God-given nature, are of two kinds : demonstration
(burhan) and dialectic (jadal). Demonstration is a proof whose premises
are true (accord with reality) even if they be not observable or
evident. In other words, it is a proposition which man comprehends and
confirms by necessity through his God-given intelligence, as for example
when he knows that "the number three is less than four." This type of
thought is called rational thought; and in case it concerns universal
problems of existence, such as the origin and end of the world and of
man, it becomes known as philosophical thought.

Dialectic is a proof all or some of whose premises are based on
observable and certain data, as for example the case of believers in a
religion for whom the common practice is to prove their religious views
within that religion by appealing to its certain and evident
principles.

The Holy Quran has employed both these methods and there are many
verses in the Holy Book attesting to each type of proof. First of all,
the Quran commands free investigation and meditation upon the universal
principles of the world of existence and the general principles of
cosmic order, as well as upon more particular orders such as that of the
heavens, the stars, day and night, the earth, the plants, animals, men,
etc. It praises in the most eloquent language intellectual investigation
of these matters.

Secondly, the Quran has commanded man to apply dialectical thought,
which is usually called theological (kalami) discussion, provided it is
accomplished in the best manner possible, that is, with the aim of
manifesting the truth without contention and by men who possess the
necessary moral virtues. It is said in the Quran, "Call unto the way of
thy Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and reason ["jadil," from
jadal] with them in the better way" (Quran, XVI, 125).

**Shi'ite Initiative in Islamic Philosophy and Kalam**

As for theology, kalam, it is clear that from the beginning when the
Shi'ites separated from the Sunni majority they began to debate with
their opponents concerning their own particular point of view. It is
true that a debate has two sides and that both the opponents share in
it. However, the Shi'ites were continuously on the offensive, taking the
initiative, while the other side played the defensive role. In the
gradual growth of kalam, which reached its height in 2nd/8th and 3rd/9th
centuries with the spread of the Mu'tazilite school, Shi'ite scholars
and learned men, who were students of the school of the Household of the
Prophet, became among the foremost masters of kalam. Furthermore, the
chain of theologians of the Sunni world, whether it be the Ash'arites,
Mu'tazilites or others, goes back to the first Imam of the Shi'ites,
Ali.

As for philosophy, those who are acquainted with sayings and works of
the companions of the Prophet (of which the names of 12,000 have been
recorded and 120,000 are known to exist) know that there is little in
them containing an appreciable discussion of philosophical questions. It
is only Ali whose compelling metaphysical utterances contain the deepest
philosophical thought.

The companions and the scholars who followed them, and in fact the
Arabs of that day in general, were not acquainted with free intellectual
discussion. There is no example of philosophical thought in the works of
the scholars of the first two centuries. Only the profound sayings of
the Shi'ite Imams, particularly the first and eighth, contain an
inexhaustible treasury of philosophical meditations in their Islamic
context. It is they who acquainted some of their students with this form
of thought.

The Arabs were not familiar with philosophical thought until they saw
examples of it during the 2nd/8th century in the translation of certain
philosophical works into Arabic. Later, during the 3rd/9th century,
numerous philosophical writings were translated into Arabic from Greek,
Syriac, and other languages and through them the method of philosophical
thought became known to the general public. Nevertheless, most jurists
and theologians did not look upon philosophy and other intellectual
sciences, which were newly arrived guests, with favor. At the beginning,
because of the support of the governmental authorities for these
sciences, their opposition did not have much effect. But conditions soon
changed through strict orders many philosophical works were destroyed.
The Epistles of the Brethren of Purity, which is the work of a group of
unknown authors, is a reminder of those days and attests to the
unfavorable conditions of that epoch.

After this period of difficulty, philosophy was revived at the
beginning of the 4th/10th century by the famous philosopher Abu Nasr
al-Farabi. In the 5th/11th century, as a result of the works of the
celebrated philosopher Ibn Sina (Avicenna), Peripatetic philosophy
reached its full development. In the 6th/12th century Shaykh al-Ishraq
Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi systematized the philosophy of illumination
(ishraq) and because of this was executed by the order of Salah al-Din
Ayyubi. Thereafter, philosophy ceased to exist among the Muslim majority
in the Sunni world. There was no further outstanding philosopher in that
part of the Muslim world except in Andalusia at the edge of the Islamic
world where at the end of the 6th/12th century Ibn Rushd (Averroes)
sought to revive the study of philosophy.

**Shi'ite Contributions to Philosophy and the Intellectual Sciences**

In the same way that from the beginning Shi'ism played an effective
role in the formation of Islamic philosophical thought, it was also a
principal factor in the further development and propagation of
philosophy and the Islamic sciences. Although after Ibn Rushd philosophy
disappeared in the Sunni world, it continued to live in Shi'ism. After
Ibn Rushd there appeared such celebrated philosophers as Khwajah Nasir
al-Din Tusi, Mir Damad, and Sadr al-Din Shirazi, who studied, developed
and expounded philosophical thought one after another. In the same
manner, in the other intellectual sciences, there appeared many
outstanding figures such as Nasir al-Din Tusi (who was both philosopher
and mathematician) and Birjandi, who was also an outstanding
mathematician.

All the sciences, particularly metaphysics or theosophy (falsafah-i
ilahi or hikmat-i ilahi), made major advances thanks to the
indefatigable endeavor of Shi'ite scholars. This fact can be seen if one
compares the works of Nasir al-Din Tusi, Shams al-Din Turkah, Mir Damad,
and Sadr al-Din Shirazi with the writings of those who came before
them.

It is known that the element that was instrumental in the appearance of
philosophical and metaphysical thought in Shi'ism and through Shi'ism in
other Islamic circles was the treasury of knowledge left behind by the
Imams. The persistence and continuity of this type of thought in Shi'ism
is due to the existence of this same treasury of knowledge, which
Shi'ism has continued to regard with a sense of reverence and respect.

In order to clarify this situation it is enough to compare the treasury
of knowledge left by the Household of the Prophet with the philosophical
works written over the course of the centuries. In this comparison one
can see clearly how each day Islamic philosophy approached this source
of knowledge ever more closely, until in the 11th/17th century Islamic
philosophy and this inspired treasury of wisdom converged more or less
completely. They were separated only by certain differences of
interpretation of some of the principles of philosophy.

**Outstanding Intellectual Figures of Shi'ism**

Thiqat al-islam Muhammad ibn Ya'qub Kulayni (d. 329/940) is the first
person in Shi'ism to have separated the Shi'ite hadiths from the books
called Principles (usul) and to have arranged and organized them
according the headings of jurisprudence and articles of faith. (Each one
of the Shi'ite scholars of hadith had assembled sayings he had collected
from the Imams in a book called Asl, or Principles.) The book of Kulayni
known as Kafi is divided into three parts: Principles, Branches, and
Miscellaneous Articles, and contains 16,199 hadiths. It is the most
trustworthy and celebrated work of hadith known in the Shi'ite world.

Three other works which complement the Kafi are the book of the jurist
Shaykh-i Saduq Muhammad ibn Babuyah Qumi(d. 381/991), and Kitab
al-tahdhib and Kitab al-istibsar, both by Shaykh Muhammad Tusi (d.
460/1068).

Abu'l-Qasim Ja'far ibn Hasan ibn Yahya Hilli (d. 676/1277), known as
Muhaqqiq, was an outstanding genius in the science of jurisprudence and
is considered to be the foremost Shi'ite jurist. Among his masterpieces
are Kitab-i mukhtasar-i nafi' and Kitab-i sharayi', which have been
passed from hand to hand for seven hundred years among Shi'ite jurists
and have always been regarded with a sense of awe and wonder.
Following Muhaqqiq, we must cite Shahid-i Awwal (the First Martyr)
Shams al-Din Muhammad ibn Makki, who was killed in Damascus in 786/1384
on the accusation of being Shi'ite. Among his juridical masterpieces is
his Lum'ah-i dimashqiyah which he wrote in prison in a period of seven
days. Also we must cite Shaykh Ja'far Kashif al-Ghita' Najafi (d.
1327/1909) among whose outstanding juridical works is Kitab kashf
al-ghita'.

Khwajah Nasir al-Din Tusi (d. 672/1274) is the first to have made kalam
a thorough and complete science. Among his masterpieces in this domain
is his Tajrid al-iteqed which has preserved its authority among masters
of this discipline for more than seven centuries. Numerous commentaries
have been written on it by Shi'ites and Sunnis alike. Over and above his
genius in the science of kalam, he was one of the outstanding figures of
his day in philosophy and mathematics as witnessed by the valuable
contributions he made to the intellectual sciences. Moreover, the
Maraghah observatory owed its existence to him.

Sadr al-Din Shirazi (d. 1050/1640), known as Mulla Sadra and Sadr
al-Muta'allihin, was the philosopher who, after centuries of
philosophical development in Islam, brought complete order and harmony
into the discussion of philosophical problems for the first time. He
organized and systematized them like mathematical problems and at the
same time wed philosophy and gnosis, thereby bringing about several
important developments. He gave to philosophy new ways to discuss and
solve hundreds of problems that could not be solved through Peripatetic
philosophy. He made possible the analysis and solution of a series of
mystical questions which to that day had been considered as belonging to
a domain above that of reason and beyond comprehension through rational
thought. He clarified and elucidated the meaning of many treasuries of
wisdom, contained in the exoteric sources of religion in the profound
metaphysical utterances of the Imams of the Household of the Prophet,
that for centuries had been considered as insoluble riddles and usually
believed to be of an allegorical or even unclear nature. In this way
gnosis, philosophy and the exoteric aspect of religion were completely
harmonized and began to follow a single course.

By following the methods he had developed, Mulla Sadra succeeded in
proving "transubstantial motion" (harakat-i jawhariyah), and in
discovering the intimate relation of time to the three spatial
dimensions in a manner that is similar to the meaning given in modern
physics to the "fourth dimension" and which resembles the general
principles of the theory of relativity (relativity of course in the
corporeal world outside the mind, not in the mind), and many other
noteworthy principles. He wrote nearly fifty books and treatises. Among
his greatest masterpieces is the four-volume Asfar.

It should be noted here that before Mulla Sadra certain sages like
Suhrawardi, the 6th/12th century philosopher and author of Hikmat
al-ishraq, and Shams al-Din Turkah, a philosopher of the 8th/14th
century, had taken steps toward harmonizing gnosis, philosophy and
exoteric religion, but credit for complete success in this undertaking
belongs to Mulla Sadra.

Shaykh Murtada Ansari Shustari (d. 1281/1864) reorganized the science
of the principles of jurisprudence upon a new foundation and formulated
the practical principles of this science. For over a century his school
has been followed diligently by Shi'ite scholars.

**THIRD METHOD: INTELLECTUAL INTUITION OR MYSTICAL UNVEILING**

**Man and Gnostic Comprehension**

Even though most men are occupied with gaining a livelihood and
providing for their daily needs and show no concern for spiritual
matters, there lies within the nature of man an innate urge to seek the
ultimately Real. In certain individuals this force which is dormant and
potential becomes awakened and manifests itself openly, thus leading to
a series of spiritual perceptions.

Every man believes in a permanent Reality despite the claim of sophists
and skeptics, who call every truth and reality illusion and
superstition. Occasionally when man views with a clear mind and a pure
soul the permanent Reality pervading the universe and the created order,
and at the same time sees the impermanence and transient character of
the diverse parts and elements of the world, he is able to contemplate
the world and its phenomena as mirrors which reflect the beauty of a
permanent reality. The joy of comprehending this Reality obliterates
every other joy in the eye of the viewer and makes everything else
appear as insignificant and unimportant.

This vision is that same gnostic "divine attraction" (jadhbah) which
draws the attention of the God-centered man toward the transcendent
world and awakens the love of God in his heart. Through this attraction
he forgets all else. All his manifold desires and wishes are obliterated
from his mind. This attraction guides man to the worship and praise of
the Invisible Deity who is in reality more evident and manifest than all
that is visible and audible. In truth it is this same inner attraction
that has brought into being the different religions within the world,
religions which are based on the worship of God. The gnostic ('arif) is
the one who worships God through knowledge and because of love for Him,
not in hope of reward or fear of punishment.

From this exposition it becomes clear that we must not consider gnosis
as a religion among others, but as the heart of all religions. Gnosis is
one of the paths of worship, a path based on knowledge combined with
love, rather than fear. It is the path for realizing the inner truth of
religion rather than remaining satisfied only with its external form and
rational thought. Every revealed religion and even those that appear in
the form of idol-worship have certain followers who march upon the path
of gnosis. The polytheistic religions and Judaism, Christianity,
Zoroastrianism, and Islam all have believers who are gnostics.

**Appearance of Gnosis (Sufism) in Islam**

Among the companions of the Prophet, Ali is known particularly for his
eloquent exposition of gnostic truths and the stages of the spiritual
life. His words in this domain comprise an inexhaustible treasury of
wisdom. Among the works of the other companions which have survived
there is not a great deal of material that concerns this type of
question. Among the associates of Ali, such as Salman Farsi, Uways
Qarani, Kumayl ibn Ziyad, Roshaid Hajari, Maytham Tammar, Rabi'ibn
Khaytham.

However, there are figures who have been considered by the majority of
the Sufis, Sunni and Shi'ite alike, as the heads of their spiritual
chain (silsilah) after Ali.

After this group there appeared others, such as Tawus Yamani, Shayban
Ra'i, Malik ibn Dinar, Ibrahim Adham, and Shaqiq Balkhi, who were
considered by the people to be saints and men of God. These men, without
publicly talking about gnosis and Sufism, appeared externally as
ascetics and did not hide the fact that they had been initiated by the
earlier group and had undergone spiritual training under them.

After them there appeared at the end of the 2nd/8th century and the
beginning of the 3rd/9th century men such as Bayazid Bastami, Ma'ruf
Karkhi, Junayd Baghdadi and others like them, who followed the Sufi path
and openly declared their connection with Sufism and gnosis. They
divulged certain esoteric sayings based on spiritual vision which,
because of their repellent external form, brought upon them the
condemnation of some of the jurists and theologians. Some of them were
imprisoned, flogged, and even occasionally killed. Even so, this group
persisted and continued its activities despite its opponents. In this
manner gnosis and the "Way" (Tariqah, or Sufism) continued to grow until
in the 7th/13th and 8th/14th centuries it reached the height of its
expansion and power. Since then, sometimes stronger and at other times
less so, it has continued its existence to this very day within the
Islamic world.

Gnosis or Sufism as we observe it today first appeared in the Sunni
world and later among the Shi'ites. The first men who openly declared
themselves to be Sufis and gnostics, and were recognized as spiritual
masters of Sufi orders, apparently followed Sunnism in the branches
(furu') of Islamic law. Many of the masters who followed them and who
expanded the Sufi orders were also Sunnis in their following of the
law.

Even so, these masters traced their spiritual chain, which in the
spiritual life is like the genealogical chain of a person, through their
previous masters to Ali. Also the results of their visions and
intuitions as transmitted to us convey mostly truths concerning divine
unity and the stations of the spiritual life which are found in the
sayings of Ali and other Shi'ite Imams. This can be seen provided we are
not affected by some of the striking and even sometimes shocking
expressions used by these Sufi masters and consider the total content of
their teachings with deliberation and patience. Sanctity resulting from
initiation into the spiritual path, which Sufis consider as the
perfection of man, is a state which according to Shi'ite belief is
possessed in its fullness by the Imam and through the radiance of his
being can be attained by his true followers. And the Spiritual Pole
(qutb), whose existence at all times is considered necessary by all the
Sufis - as well as the attributes associated with him - correlates with
the Shi'ite conception of the Imam. According to the saying of the
Household of the Prophet, the Imam is, to use the Sufi expression,
Universal Man, the manifestation of the Divine Names and the spiritual
guide of the lives and actions of men. Therefore, one could say,
considering the Shi'ite concept of walayat, that Sufi masters are
"Shi'ite" from the point of view of the spiritual life and in connection
with the source of walayat although, from the point of view of the
external form of religion they follow the Sunni schools of law.

It is necessary to mention that even in classical Sunni treatises it
has sometimes been said that the spiritual method of the "Path," or the
"techniques" whereby one comes to know and realize himself, cannot be
explained through the external forms and teachings of the Shari'ah.
Rather these sources claim that individual Muslims themselves have
discovered many of these methods and practices, which then have become
accepted by God, such as is the case with monasticism in Christianity.
Therefore each master has devised certain actions and practices which he
has deemed necessary in the spiritual method, such as the particular
type of ceremony of being accepted by the master the details of the way
in which the invocation is given to the new adept along with a robe, and
the use of music, chanting and other methods of inducing ecstasy during
the invocation of the Divine Name. In some cases the practices of the
Tariqah have outwardly become separated from those of the Shari'ah and
it may seem difficult for an outsider to see the intimate and inward
relation between them. But by taking into consideration the theoretical
principles of Shi'ism and then studying in depth the basic sources of
Islam, namely the Quran and the Sunnah, he will soon realize that it is
impossible to say that this spiritual guidance has not been provided by
Islam itself or that Islam has remained negligent in clarifying the
nature of the spiritual program to be followed.

**Guidance Provided by the Quran and Sunnah for Gnostic Knowledge**

God - exalted be His Name - has commanded man in several places in the
Quran to deliberate upon the Holy Book and be persistent in this effort
and not be satisfied with a merely superficial and elementary
understanding of it. In many verses the world of creation and all that
is in it without exception are called portents (ayat), signs and symbols
of the Divine. A degree of deliberation upon the meaning of portents and
signs and penetration into their real significance will reveal the fact
that things are called by these names because they manifest and make
known not so much themselves but a reality other than themselves. For
example, a red light placed as a sign of danger, once seen, reminds one
completely of the idea of danger so that one no longer pays attention to
the red light itself. If one begins to think about the form or quiddity
of the light or its color, there will be in his mind only the form of
the lamp or its glass or color rather than the conception of danger. In
the same manner, if the world and its phenomena are all and in every
aspect signs and portents of God, the Creator of the Universe, they have
no ontological independence of their own. No matter how we view them
they display nothing but God.

He who through guidance of the Holy Quran is able to view the world and
the people of the world with such an eye will apprehend nothing but God.
Instead of seeing only this borrowed beauty which others see in the
attractive appearance of the world, he will see an Infinite Beauty, a
Beloved who manifests Himself through the narrow confines of this world.
Of course, as in the example of the red light, what is contemplated and
seen in "signs" and "portents" is God the Creator of the world and not
the world itself. The relation of God to the world is from a certain
point of view like (1 + 0) not (1 + 1) nor (1 x 1) (that is, the world
is nothing before God and adds nothing to him). It is at the moment of
realization of this truth that the harvest of man's separative existence
is plundered and in one stroke man entrusts his heart to the hands of
Divine love. This realization obviously does not take place through the
instrument of the eye or the ear or the other outward senses, nor
through the power of imagination or reason, for all these instruments
are themselves signs and portents and of little significance to the
spiritual guidance sought here.

He who has attained the vision of God and who has no intention but to
remember God and forget all else, when he hears that in another place in
the Quran God says, "O ye who believe! Ye have charge of your own souls.
He who erreth cannot injure you if you are rightly guided" (Quran, V,
105), then he understands that the sole royal path which will guide him
fully and completely is the path of "self realization." His true guide
who is God Himself obliges him to know himself, to leave behind all
other ways and to seek the path of self-knowledge, to see God through
the window of his soul, gaining in this way the real object of his
search. That is why the Prophet has said, "He who knows himself verily
knows the Lord." And also he has said, "Those among you know God better
who know themselves better."

As for the method of following the path, there are many verses of the
Quran which command man to remember God, as for example where He says,
"Therefore remember Me, I will remember you" (Quran, II, 152) and
similar sayings. Man is also commanded to perform right actions which
are described fully in the Quran and hadith. At the end of this
discussion of right actions God says, "Verily in the Messenger of Allah
ye have a good example" (Quran, XXXIII, 21).

How can anyone imagine that Islam could discover that a particular path
is the path which leads to God without recommending this path to all the
people? Or how could it make such a path known and yet neglect to
explain the method of following it? For God says in the Quran, "And We
reveal the Scripture unto thee as an exposition of all things" (Quran,
XVI, 89).

