A Brief History of the Lives of the Twelve Imams
================================================

**The First Imam**

Amir al-mu'minin Ali - upon whom be peace - was the son of Abu Talib,
the Shaykh of the Banu Hashim. Abu Talib was the uncle and guardian of
the Holy Prophet and the person who had brought the Prophet to his house
and raised him like his own son. After the Prophet was chosen for his
prophetic mission, Abu Talib continued to support him and repelled from
him the evil that came from the infidels among the Arabs and especially
the Quraysh.

According to well-known traditional accounts Ali was born ten years
before the commencement of the prophetic mission of the Prophet. When
six years old, as a result of famine in and around Mecca, he was
requested by the Prophet to leave his father's house and come to the
house of his cousin, the Prophet. There he was placed directly under the
guardianship and custody of the Holy Prophet.

A few years later, when the Prophet was endowed with the Divine gift of
prophecy and for the first time received the Divine revelation in the
cave of Hira', as he left the cave to return to town and his own house
he met Ali on the way. He told him what had happened and Ali accepted
the new faith. Again in a gathering when the Holy Prophet had brought
his relatives together and invited them to accept his religion, he said
the first person to accept his call would be his vicegerent and
inheritor and deputy. The only person to rise from his place and accept
the faith was Ali and the Prophet accepted his declaration of faith.
Therefore Ali was the first man in Islam to accept the faith and is the
first among the followers of the Prophet to have never worshipped other
than the One God.

Ali was always in the company of the Prophet until the Prophet migrated
from Mecca to Medina. On the night of the migration to Medina (hijrah)
when the infidels had surrounded the house of the Prophet and were
determined to invade the house at the end of the night and cut him to
pieces while he was in bed, Ali slept in place of the Prophet while the
Prophet left the house and set out for Medina. After the departure of
the Prophet, according to his wish Ali gave back to the people the
trusts and charges that they had left with the Prophet. Then he went to
Medina with his mother, the daughter of the Prophet, and two other
women. In Medina also Ali was constantly in the company of the Prophet
in private and in public. The Prophet gave Fatimah, his beloved daughter
from Khadijah, to Ali as his wife and when the Prophet was creating
bonds of brotherhood among his companions he selected Ali as his
brother.

Ali was present in all the wars in which the Prophet participated,
except the battle of Tabuk when he was ordered to stay in Medina in
place of the Prophet. He did not retreat in any battle nor did he turn
his face away from any enemy. He never disobeyed the Prophet, so that
the Prophet said, "Ali is never separated from the Truth nor the Truth
from Ali."

On the day of the death of the Prophet, Ali was thirty-three years old.
Although he was foremost in religious virtues and the most outstanding
among the companions of the Prophet, he was pushed aside from the
caliphate on the claim that he was too young and that he had many
enemies among the people because of the blood of the polytheists he had
spilled in the wars fought alongside the Prophet. Therefore Ali was
almost completely cut off from public affairs. He retreated to his house
where he began to train competent individuals in the Divine sciences and
in this way he passed the twenty-five years of the caliphate of the
first three caliphs who succeeded the Prophet. When the third caliph was
killed, people gave their allegiance to him and he was chosen as
caliph.

During his caliphate of nearly four years and nine months, Ali followed
the way of the Prophet and gave his caliphate the form of a spiritual
movement and renewal and began many different types of reforms.
Naturally, these reforms were against the interests of certain parties
that sought their own benefit. As a result, a group of the companions
(foremost among whom were Talhah and Zubayr, who also gained the support
of A'ishah, and especially Mu'awiayh) made a pretext of the death of the
third caliph to raise their heads in opposition and began to revolt and
rebel against Ali.

In order to quell the civil strife and sedition, Ali fought a war near
Basra, known as the "Battle of the Camel," against Talhah and Zubayr in
which A'ishah, "the Mother of the Faithful," was also involved. He
fought another war against Mu'awiyah on the border of Iraq and Syria
which lasted for a year and a half and is famous as the "Battle of
Siffin." He also fought against the Khawarij at Nahrawan, in a battle
known as the "Battle of Nahrawan." Therefore, most of the days of Ali's
caliphate were spent in overcoming internal opposition. Finally, in the
morning of the 19th of Ramadan in the year 40 A.H., while praying in the
mosque of Kufa, he was wounded by one of the Khawarij and died as a
martyr during the night of the 21st.

According to the testimony of friend and foe alike, Ali had no
shortcomings from the point of view of human perfection. And in the
Islamic virtues he was a perfect example of the upbringing and training
given by the Prophet. The discussions that have taken place concerning
his personality and the books written on this subject by Shi'ites,
Sunnis and members of other religions, as well as the simply curious
outside any distinct religious bodies, are hardly equaled in the case of
any other personality in history. In science and knowledge Ali was the
most learned of the companions of the Prophet, and of Muslims in
general. In his learned discourses he was the first in Islam to open the
door for logical demonstration and proof and to discuss the "divine
sciences" or metaphysics (ma'arif-i ilahiyah). He spoke concerning the
esoteric aspect of the Quran and devised Arabic grammar in order to
preserve the Quran's form of expression. He was the most eloquent Arab
in speech (as has been mentioned in the first part of this book).

The courage of Ali was proverbial. In all the wars in which he
participated during the lifetime of the Prophet, and also afterward, he
never displayed fear or anxiety. Although in many battles such as those
of Uhud, Hunayn, Khaybar and Khandaq the aides to the Prophet and the
Muslim army trembled in fear or dispersed and fled, he never turned his
back to the enemy. Never did a warrior or soldier engage Ali in battle
and come out of it alive. Yet, with full chivalry he would never slay a
weak enemy nor pursue those who fled. He would not engage in surprise
attacks or in turning streams of water upon the enemy. It has been
definitively established historically that in the Battle of Khaybar in
the attack against the fort he reached the ring of the door and with
sudden motion tore off the door and cast it away. Also on the day when
Mecca was conquered the Prophet ordered the idols to be broken. The idol
"Hubal" was the largest idol in Mecca, a giant stone statue placed on
the top of the Ka'bah. Following the command of the Prophet, Ali placed
his feet on the Prophet's shoulders, climbed to the top of the Ka'bah,
pulled "Hubal" from its place and cast it down.

Ali was also without equal in religious asceticism and the worship of
God. In answer to some who had complained of Ali's anger toward them,
the Prophet said, "Do not reproach Ali for he is in a state of Divine
ecstasy and bewilderment." Abu Darda', one of the companions, one day
saw the body of Ali in one of the palm plantations of Medina lying on
the ground as stiff as wood. He went to Ali's house to inform his noble
wife, the daughter of the Prophet, and to express his condolences. The
daughter of the Prophet said, "My cousin (Ali) has not died. Rather, in
fear of God he has fainted. This condition overcomes him often."

There are many stories told of Ali's kindness to the lowly, compassion
for the needy and the poor, and generosity and munificence toward those
in misery and poverty. Ali spent all that he earned to help the poor and
needy, and himself lived in the strictest and simplest manner. Ali loved
agriculture and spent much of his time digging wells, planting trees and
cultivating fields. But all the fields he cultivated or wells that he
built he gave in endowment (waqf) to the poor. His endowments, known as
the "alms of Ali," had the noteworthy income of twenty-four thousand
gold dinars toward the end of his life.

**The Second Imam**

Imam Hasan Mujtaba - upon whom be peace - was the second Imam. He and
his brother Imam Husayn were the two sons of Amir al-mu'minin Ali and
Hadrat Fatimah, the daughter of the Prophet. Many times the Prophet had
said, "Hasan and Husayn are my children." Because of these same words
Ali would say to his other children, "You are my children and Hasan and
Husayn are the children of the Prophet."

Imam Hasan was born in the year 3 A.H. in Medina and shared in the life
of the Prophet for somewhat over seven years, growing up during that
time under his loving care. After the death of the Prophet which was no
more than three, or according to some, six months earlier than the death
of Hadrat Fatimah, Hasan was placed directly under the care of his noble
father. After the death of his father, through Divine Command and
according to the will of his father, Imam Hasan became Imam; he also
occupied the outward function of caliph for about six months, during
which time he administered the affairs of the Muslims. During that time
Mu'awiayh, who was a bitter enemy of Ali and his family and had fought
for years with the ambition of capturing the caliphate, first on the
pretext of avenging the death of the third caliph and finally with an
open claim to the caliphate, marched his army into Iraq, the seat of
Imam Hasan's caliphate. War ensued during which Mu'awiyah gradually
subverted the generals and commanders of Imam Hasan's army with large
sums of money and deceiving promises until the army rebelled against
Imam Hasan. Finally, the Imam was forced to make peace and to yield the
caliphate to Mu'awiyah, provided it would again return to Imam Hasan
after Mu'awiyah's death and the Imam's household and partisans would be
protected in every way.

In this way Mu'awiyah captured the Islamic caliphate and entered Iraq.
In a public speech he officially made null and void all the peace
conditions and in every way possible placed the severest pressure upon
the members of the Household of the Prophet and the Shi'ah. During all
the ten years of his imamate, Imam Hasan lived in conditions of extreme
hardship and under persecution, with no security even in his own house.
In the year 50 A.H. he was poisoned and martyred by one of his own
household who, as has been accounted by historians, had been motivated
by Mu'awiyah.

In human perfection Imam Hasan was reminiscent of his father and a
perfect example of his noble grandfather. In fact, as long as the
Prophet was alive, he and his brother were always in the company of the
Prophet who even sometimes would carry them on his shoulders. Both Sunni
and Shi'ite sources have transmitted this saying of the Holy Prophet
concerning Hasan and Husayn: "These two children of mine are Imams
whether they stand up or sit down" (allusion to whether they occupy the
external function of caliphate or not). Also there are many traditions
of the Holy Prophet and Ali concerning the fact that Imam Hasan would
gain the function of imamate after his noble father.

**The Third Imam**

Imam Husayn (Sayyid al-Shuhada', "the lord among martyrs"), the second
child of Ali and Fatimah, was born in the year 4 A.H. and after the
martyrdom of his brother, Imam Hasan Mujtaba, became Imam through Divine
Command and his brother's will. Imam Husayn was Imam for a period of ten
years, all but the last six months coinciding with the caliphate of
Mu'awiyah. Imam Husayn lived under the most difficult outward conditions
of suppression and persecution. This was due to the fact that, first of
all, religious laws and regulations had lost much of their weight and
credit, and the edicts of the Umayyad government had gained complete
authority and power. Secondly, Mu'awiyah and his aides made use of every
possible means to put aside and move out of the way the Household of the
Prophet and the Shi'ah, and thus obliterate the name of Ali and his
family. And above all, Mu'awiyah wanted to strengthen the basis of the
caliphate of his son, Yazid, who because of his lack of principles and
scruples was opposed by a large group of Muslims. Therefore, in order to
quell all opposition, Mu'awiyah had undertaken newer and more severe
measures. By force and necessity Imam Husayn had to endure these days
and to tolerate every kind of mental and spiritual agony and affliction
from Mu'awiyah and his aides- until in the middle of the year 60 A.H.
Mu'awiyah died and his son Yazid took his place.

Paying allegiance (bay'ah) was an old Arab practice which was carried
out in important matters such as that kingship and governorship. Those
who were ruled, and especially the well-known among them, would give
their hand in allegiance, agreement and obedience to their king or
prince and in this way would show their support for his actions.
Disagreement after allegiance was considered as disgrace and dishonor
for a people and, like breaking an agreement after having signed it
officially, it was considered as a definite crime. Following the example
of the Holy Prophet, people believed that allegiance, when given by free
will and not through force, carried authority and weight.

Mu'awiyah had asked the well-known among the people to give their
allegiance to Yazid, but had not imposed this request upon Imam Husayn.
He had especially told Yazid in his last will that if Husayn refused to
pay allegiance he should pass over it in silence and overlook the
matter, for he had understood correctly the disastrous consequences
which would follow if the issue were to be pressed. But because of his
egoism and recklessness, Yazid neglected his father's advice and
immediately after the death of his father ordered the governor of Medina
either to force a pledge of allegiance from Imam Husayn or send his head
to Damascus.

After the governor of Medina informed Imam Husayn of this demand, the
Imam, in order to think over the question, asked for a delay and
overnight started with his family toward Mecca. He sought refuge in the
sanctuary of God which in Islam is the official place of refuge and
security. This event occurred toward the end of the month of Rajab and
the beginning of Sha'ban of 60 A.H. For nearly four months Imam Husayn
stayed in Mecca in refuge. This news spread throughout the Islamic
world. On the one hand many people who were tired of the iniquities of
Mu'awiyah's rule and were even more dissatisfied when Yazid became
caliph, corresponded with Imam Husayn and expressed their sympathy for
him. On the other hand a flood of letters began to flow, especially from
Iraq and particularly the city of Kufa, inviting the Imam to go to Iraq
and accept the leadership of the populace there with the aim of
beginning an uprising to overcome injustice and iniquity. Naturally such
a situation was dangerous for Yazid.

The stay of Imam Husayn in Mecca continued until the season for
pilgrimage when Muslims from all over the world poured in groups into
Mecca in order to perform the rites of the hajj. The Imam discovered
that some of the followers of Yazid had entered Mecca as pilgrims
(hajjis) with the mission to kill the Imam during the rites of hajj with
the arms they carried under their special pilgrimage dress (ihrami).

The Imam shortened the pilgrimage rites and decided to leave. Amidst
the vast crowd of people he stood up and in a short speech announced
that he was setting out for Iraq. In this short speech he also declared
that he would be martyred and asked Muslims to help him in attaining the
goal he had in view and to offer their lives in the path of God. On the
next day he set out with his family and a group of his companions for
Iraq.

Imam Husayn was determined not to give his allegiance to Yazid and knew
full well that he would be killed. He was aware that his death was
inevitable in the face of the awesome military power of the Umayyads,
supported as it was by corruption in certain sectors, spiritual decline,
and lack of will power among the people, especially in Iraq. Some of the
outstanding people of Mecca stood in the way of Imam Husayn and warned
him of the danger of the move he was making. But he answered that he
refused to pay allegiance and give his approval to a government of
injustice and tyranny. He added that he knew that wherever he turned or
went he would be killed. He would leave Mecca in order to preserve the
respect for the house of God and not allow this respect to be destroyed
by having his blood spilled there.

While on the way to Kufa and still a few days' journey away from the
city, he received news that the agent of Yazid in Kufa had put to death
the representative of the Imam in the city and also one of the Imam's
determined supporters who was a well-known man in Kufa. Their feet had
been tied and they had been dragged through streets. The city and its
surroundings were placed under strict observation and countless soldiers
of the enemy were awaiting him. There was no way open to him but to
march ahead and to face death. It was here that the Imam expressed his
definitive determination to go ahead and be martyred ; and so he
continued on his journey.

Approximately seventy kilometres from Kufa, in a desert named Karbala,
the Imam and his entourage were surrounded by the army of Yazid. For
eight days they stayed in this spot during which the circle narrowed and
the number of the enemy's army increased. Finally the Imam, with his
household and a small number of companions were encircled by an army of
thirty thousand soldiers. During these days the Imam fortified his
position and made a final selection of his companions. At night he
called his companions and during a short speech stated that there was
nothing ahead but death and martyrdom. He added that since the enemy was
concerned only with his person he would free them from all obligations
so that anyone who wished could escape in the darkness of the night and
save his life. Then he ordered the lights to be turned out and most of
his companions, who had joined him for their own advantage, dispersed.
Only a handful of those who loved the truth - about forty of his close
aides - and some of the Banu Hashim remained.

Once again the Imam assembled those who were left and put them to a
test. He addressed his companions and Hasimite relatives. Each could
benefit from the darkness of the night and escape the danger. But this
time the faithful companions of the Imam answered each in his own way
that they would not deviate for a moment from the path of truth of which
the Imam was the leader and would never leave him alone. They said they
would defend his household to the last drop of their blood and as long
as they could carry a sword.

On the night of the month the last challenge to choose between
"allegiance or war" was made by the enemy to the Imam. The Imam asked
for a delay in order to worship overnight and became determined to enter
battle on the next day.
On the tenth day of Muharram of the year 61/680 the Imam lined up
before the enemy with his small band of followers, less than ninety
persons consisting of forty of his companions, thirty some members of
the army of the enemy that joined him during the night and day of war,
and his Hashimite family of children, brothers, nephews, nieces and
cousins. That day they fought from morning until their final breath, and
the Imam, the young Hashimites and the companions were all martyred.
Among those killed were two children of Imam Hasan, who were only
thirteen and eleven years old ; and a five-year-old child and a suckling
baby of Imam Husayn.

The army of the enemy, after ending the war, plundered the haram of the
Imam and burned his tents. They decapitated the bodies of the martyrs,
denuded them and threw them to the ground without burial. Then they
moved the members of the haram, all of whom were helpless women and
girls, along with the heads of the martyrs, to Kufa. Among the prisoners
there were three male members: a twenty-two year old son of Imam Husayn
who was very ill and unable to move, namely Ali ibn Husayn, the fourth
Imam ; his four year old son, Muhammad ibn Ali, who became the fifth
Imam ; and finally Hasan Muthanna, the son of the second Imam who was
also the son-in-law of Imam Husayn and who, having been wounded during
the war, lay among the dead. They found him near death and through the
intercession of one of the generals did not cut of his head. Rather,
they took him with the prisoners to Kufa and from there to Damascus
before Yazid.

The event of Karbala, the capture of the women and children of the
Household of the Prophet, their being taken as prisoners from town to
town and the speeches made by the daughter of Ali, Zaynab, and the
fourth Imam who were among the prisoners, disgraced the Umayyads. Such
abuse of the Household of the Prophet annulled the propaganda which
Mu'awiyah had carried out for years. The matter reached such proportions
that Yazid in public disowned and condemned the actions of his agents.
The event of Karbala was a major factor in the overthrow of Umayyad rule
although its effect was delayed. It also strengthened the roots of
Shi'ism. Among its immediate results were the revolts and rebellions
combined with bloody wars which continued for twelve years. Among those
who were instrumental in the death of the Imam not one was able to
escape revenge and punishment.

Anyone who studies closely the history of the life of Imam Husayn and
Yazid and the conditions that prevailed at that time, and analyzes this
chapter of Islamic history, will have no doubt that in those
circumstances there was no choice before Imam Husayn but to be killed.
Swearing allegiance to Yazid would have meant publicly showing contempt
for Islam, something which was not possible for the Imam, for Yazid not
only showed no respect for Islam and its injunctions but also made a
public demonstration of impudently treading under foot its basis and its
laws. Those before him, even if they opposed religious injunctions,
always did so in the guise of religion, and at least formally respected
religion. They took pride on being companions of the Holy Prophet and
the other religious figures in whom people believed. From this it can be
concluded that the claim of some interpreters of these events is false
when they say that the two brothers, Hasan and Husayn, had two different
tastes and that one chose the way of peace and the other the way of war,
so that one brother made peace with Mu'awiyah although he had an army of
forty thousand while the other went to war against Yazid with an army of
forty. For we see that this same Imam Husayn, who refused to pay
allegiance to Yazid for one day, lived for ten years under the rule of
Mu'awiyah, in the same manner as his brother who also had endured for
ten years under Mu'awiyah, without opposing him.

It must be said in truth that if Imam Hasan or Imam Husayn had fought
Mu'awiyah they would have been killed without there being the least
benefit for Islam. Their deaths would have had not effect before the
righteous-appearing policy of Mu'awiyah, a competent politician who
emphasized his being a companion of the Holy Prophet, the "scribe of the
revelation," and "uncle of the faithful" and who used every stratagem
possible to preserve a religious guise for his rule. Moreover, with his
ability to set the stage to accomplish his desires he could have had
them killed by their own people and then assumed a state of mourning and
sought to revenge their blood, just as he sought to give the impression
that he was avenging the killing of the third caliph.

