13. The interpretation of the reports concerning Al-Qada’ and Al-Qadar
======================================================================

As for the reports which Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy upon him,
relates concerning the prohibition of discussion of qada’ and qadar,
they can bear two meanings: first, that the prohibition is restricted to
those people whose discussions result in corrupt doctrine and divert
them from the faith; for they will not keep their religion intact unless
they refrain from discussion and abstain from indulging in it.

Thus, the prohibition does not necessarily apply to all those who have
reached years of discretion (mukallafin), since what is good for some
might prove to be bad for others[^1] , \*and, on the contrary, what is
evil for some might be good for others[^2] , and this demonstrates why
the Imams, peace be upon them, endeavored to direct their followers in
religion in accordance with what they knew to be in their best interest.

Secondly, discussion \*of qada’ and qadar\*[^3] is probably prohibited,
regarding the reasons and causes of what Allah has created; and what He
commands; and the religious duties He imposes; since the inquiry into,
and asking for the causes and reasons of, creation and religious
obligations are prohibited, because Allah, the Exalted, has veiled these
questions from the great majority of mankind.

Do you not realize that no one is permitted to seek for the cause of the
creation of all that has been created, in detail? And to ask, 'Why has
He created this thing and that? Until he has enumerated all created
things and accounted for them. Nor is anyone permitted to ask, 'Why did
He command this? And impose that? And forbid the other?'

For His imposing this, and commanding that, is because He knows the best
interests of His creation. Allah, the Almighty, has not disclosed to any
of His creatures the particular causes for what He has created or
commanded or imposed, notwithstanding that He has stated a priori that
He did not create His creation lightly (‘abath), but He did – indeed–
create them with a wise purpose (li hikmah).

Yet, both reason and scripture (sam‘) support this. Allah says:  
 ***We created not the heaven and the earth, and whatsoever between them
is, as though (we were) playing [21:16].***

And He says:

***Do you think that We created you only for sport [23:115].***

And He says:

***Surely We have created everything in measure [54:49],***

that is, justly and fittingly. And He says:

***And I have created jinn and men, only that they might serve Me
[51:56].***

And He says, concerning what He enjoins on us:

***The flesh of them shall not reach Allah, neither blood, but piety
shall reach Him from you [22:37].***

Thus, it is likely that Allah, the Almighty, might create one particular
animal to the end that it will cause some unbelievers (to believe); or
it might lead some fornicators to repent; or that it might benefit some
of the faithful; or that some evil-doers might take heed from it; or for
the sheer benefit or the animal itself; or that it might serve as a
warning to someone, whether in the earth or in the heavens, the aspects
of which are all beyond our grasp and far from our comprehension, though
we have to believe a priori that all that Allah has created is for a
wise purpose and not for mere sport.

It is also possible that its purpose is to draw us near to obedience to
Him and to keep us from rebelliousness, and that service through prayer
stands as a Divine favour either to all the worshipers, or to a few.
Since all these hidden aspects of the Divine ordinances have been veiled
from us, and since no authority exists for inquiring into it or asking
for detailed explanation; though it is obligatory to believe that as a
whole they have been created for a Divine purpose, hence it is forbidden
to discuss qada’ and qadar in the context mentioned above.

At any rate, the foregoing argument is necessary only if the reports
related by Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy upon him, are approved
sound; otherwise, if they are untrustworthy, then we are relieved of the
duty of refuting it. As for the tradition which he related on the
authority of Zurarah[^4] , it is the only sound one of them all, and its
meaning is obvious, and it is not difficult for the intelligent to
comprehend.

It confirms the soundness of the doctrine of the People of Justice (ahlu
'l-‘adl), and demonstrates the falsity of the doctrine of the
Predestinarians. Have you not understood and comprehended the tradition
we related from Abu ‘Abdillah, peace be upon him, "When Allah will
collect or (assemble) men (creation) on the Day of Resurrection, He will
ask them concerning what He had enjoined on them and will not question
them concerning what He had des- tined for them?"

Moreover, the Qur’an declares emphatically that men are responsible for
their actions, so if their actions were decreed from Allah, then He
never would ask them about it, which demonstrates that the eternal
decree means the 'creation of their things', and what this entails is
that Allah the Almighty will ask them only concerning what He enjoined
on them in commanding them to do good deeds and to abstain from evil.
Thus, according to this reasoning the tradition mentioned above is an
illustration supporting the foregoing explanation of qada’ and qadar
which is comprehensible.

[^1]: N reads: la yasluhu bihi akharun.

[^2]: \* \* Not found in N.

[^3]: \* \* Not found in N.

[^4]: Zurarah ibn A‘yan ash-Shaybani (d. 150 AH): It is said that his
real name was ‘Abdu Rabbih, whereas Zurarah was his laqab. His kunyah
wasAbu '1-Hasan. He was one of the earliest distinguished Shi‘ah divines
and a remarkable theologian, jurist and traditionist. His father,
Sunsun, is said to have been a Roman slave who was freed for his
knowledge of the Qur’an, and his grandfather is said to have become a
Christian Monk. He was highly honoured by Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq (a.s.),
who said of him: "Had it not been for Zurarah, the traditions of my
father would have been forgotten". The biographers ascribe to him, among
other works, a theologi- cal tract called al Jabr wa 'l-istita‘ah. See
Ibnu 'n-Nadim, al-Fihrist, p.220; at-Tusi, Rijali 'sh-Shi‘ah, p.123;
al-Kishshi, ar-Rijal, p.88; an-Najashi, al- Fihrist, p.125, adh-Dhahabi,
Mizanu 'l-i‘tidal, vol.2, p.69, no.2853; al- Mamaqani, Tanqihu 'l-maqal,
vol.l, p.438, no.4213.


