15. Concerning Human Capacity (Al -Istita‘Ah)
=============================================

Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy upon him, says concern- ing human
capacity, that our belief in this (question) is what Imam Musa ibn
Ja‘far, peace be upon both of them, said that "A human being has
capacity, provided he possesses four characteristics..."

Abu ‘Abdillah adds that what Abu Ja‘far relates from Abu 'l-Hasan Musa,
peace be upon him, on al-istita‘ah, is a shadhdh tradition.
Al-Istita‘ah, that is, capacity for action, in fact, consists of health
and soundness of limb. Thus, every healthy man is a capable agent, and
becomes impotent and deprived of capacity only when he is not in
possession of health. He would be a capable agent even if he were not in
possession of the instrument necessary for the performance of the
action.

Then in that case, he is a capable agent impeded from action, and being
impeded does not nullify the capacity, but merely the action. In this
way a man might be able to marry, though he has not found a woman to
marry. Allah, the Exalted, says:

***And whoever among you cannot afford to marry free believing women . .
. [4:25],***

which states that a man is able to marry though he has not yet married,
and that he is capable of performing the pilgrimage before doing so, and
is capable of going out in the Holy War although he has not done so.

Allah Almighty says:

***And they will swear by Allah, if we had been able, we would have gone
out with you (Muhammad) [9:42],***

which indicates that they were able to go forth, though they refrained
from doing so. And He, the Exalted, says:

***Pilgrimage to the House is a duty which men owe to Allah, every man
who is able to make his way thither [3:97].***

Thus, He prescribed pilgrimage for men, which implies that they
possessed the capacity for it beforehand. Then how could Abu Ja‘far
claim that fornication is dependent on the presence of the woman;
whereas we have demonstrated that a man possesses the capacity although
he lacks her presence. Hence, if the tradition related by Abu Ja‘far is
proved to be sound, then the only meaning of the capacity is to
facilitate the action and pave the way for it.

Yet, as we demonstrated, the absence of the means does not involve
impotency, and capacity exists in spite of the impediment. Since this
subject is a controversial one, and if we deal with it at length it will
be long drawn out indeed, then what we have established about it is
sufficient to the intelligent.


