17. Concerning Religious Disputation (Al-Jidal)
===============================================

Abu Ja‘far says, concerning disputation: "Disputation concerning Allah
is prohibited, because it leads to that which does not befit Him"; then
he quoted as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, as saying: "The speculative
theologians (ahlu 'l-kalam) will perish, and those who accept the faith
without question will be saved".

Abu ‘Abdillah ash-Shaykh al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy upon him,
comments that: Disputation is of two kinds; true (i.e., a sincere quest
after the truth) and false (i.e., discussion without the object of
arriving at the truth or merely to find fault).

The true disputation is recommended and desirable; whereas the false one
is prohibited, and indulgence in it is abhorred. Allah, the Almighty,
admonishing His Messenger, says:

***And argue with them in the best manner [16:125],***

which obviously states the legality of arguing with opponents in order
to convince them, since the disputation of the Prophet was true. Also
Allah, the

Almighty, addressing the whole Muslim community, says:

***And argue not with the People of the Book except by what is best
[29:46].***

Thus, He permitted them to argue with the People of the Book with what
is best, and prohibited indulgence in false and base disputation with
them.

He, the Exalted, reporting the speech of the people of Noah, peace be
upon him, in their disputation says: They said,

***"O Noah! indeed you have disputed with us and prolonged dispute with
us" [11:32].***

Thus, if disputation was altogether vain, then Allah, the Almighty,
would never have commanded His Prophet to adopt it, or the prophets
before him to use it, and would not have allowed the Muslims to employ
it.

As for the false disputation, Allah, the Almighty, the Belessed, has
described it in His saying:

***Have you not seen those who dispute (foolishly) about the signs of
Allah, how they distort them? [40:69].***

Thus, He reproached their false disputation concerning the signs of
Allah, either to reject or to vilify them, or to cast suspicion on them.
He, the Exalted, also reports the controversy of His friend, Ibrahim,
with an unbeliever (concerning the existence of Allah) and says:

***Have not you thought of him who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord
[2:258].***

Also, reporting his refutation of his opponents, He says:

***And that is Our argument, which We gave Ibrahim as against his
people, We raise up in degrees whom We will [6:83].***

Also, commanding His Prophet (Muhammad), peace be upon him and his
progeny, to argue with. his opponents, He says:

***Say: "Have you any knowledge, for you to bring forth for us?"
[6:148].***

And He, Exalted be His Name, says:

***All food was lawful to the Children of Israel [3:93],***

and telling His Prophet, says:

***Whoever then disputes with thee in this matter after the knowledge
that has come to thee [3:61].***

Moreover, the Imams still continued to debate the religion of Allah, and
the learned amongst their followers in every age used to rely on sound
argument and reasoned proofs in their polemics, in order to establish
the truth and refute the false, and the Imams always praised them for
that, and appreciated their efforts highly in this respect.

Chapter: al-Kulayni[^1] , may Allah have mercy upon him, relates in his
book, al-Kafi, which is one of the most admirable books of the Shi‘ah,
the discussion Yunus ibn Ya‘qub[^2] had with Abu ‘Abdillah, peace be
upon him, when the Shami[^3] came to dispute with him.

Abu ‘Abdillah said to him: "O Yunus! I wish that you had mastered
speculative theology (kalam)"; thereupon Yunus replied: "May I be made
your ransom! I have heard that you have forbidden people to dispute and
that you have said; 'Woe unto those who indulge in dialectics, who say
this is a tenable proposition and this is not, this consistent, and this
not, and this is conceivable and this is not.'

"Then Abu ‘Abdillah said: "I called woe upon them if they abandoned my
teaching and clung to what is opposite to it." Then he asked Humran ibn
A‘yan[^4] , Muhammad ibn at- Tayyar[^5] , Hisham ibn Salim[^6] and Qays
al-Masir[^7] to hold a debate before him and afterwards Hisham[^8] (ibn
al-Hakam) came forward with his thesis (lit. apology); then the Imam
praised him and congratulated him, and said:

"It is you who can dispute with the people." Also, (it has been related)
that when he heard of the death of at-Tayyar, he said: "May Allah have
mercy upon him and show him splendor and happiness; indeed, he was
vigorous in his defence of us, the People of the House." Abu 'l-Hasan
Musa ibn Ja‘far, peace be upon him, said to Muhammad ibn Hakim[^9]:

"Dispute with the people and disclose the truth which you are following,
and make clear the error into which they are fallen." Abu ‘Abdillah
(Ja‘far as- Sadiq), peace be upon him, said to some of our companions:
"Debate with the people with my argument, and if they overcome you by
argument, it will be I who am controverter, not you."

Also, he said to Hisham ibn al-Hakam, after he had answered his question
concerning the Names of the Almighty and their etymology: "Have you
comprehended what I have explained to you to such an extent that you
would be able to refute our heretical opponents and make their polemics
of no effect?" "Yes," answered Hisham.

Then the Imam said: "May Allah help you". He also admonished a group of
his followers and said: "Explain to the people the guidance which follow
and show them the evils to which they adhere, and initiate (bahilhum fi
‘Ali) discussion with them concerning ‘Ali." Thus, the report displays
that he (Ja‘far as-Sadiq) encouraged them to dispute with others, and he
admonished them to comprehend the methods of disputation, and
recommended them to exert themselves in learning it.

It has been related also that he (the Imam) once forbade a man to
dispute whereas he commanded another to exert himself in acquiring this
art: there-upon, some of his followers asked him: "May I be made your
ransom! Why have you commanded one of them to master disputation whereas
you forbade it to other?" He answered: "Because the first has a keen
insight into the matter and is more informed about it than the other."

Thus, the argument mentioned above confirms the fact that for the two
sadiqs (i.e., the two veracious imams, Muhammad al-Baqir and his son,
Ja‘far as-Sadiq), prohibition only applies to a particular group of
those who are not well-versed in it, and are uninformed in its methods,
and whom dialectics confuse; and it (i.e., kalam) is commanded for the
other group who have perfected it and mastered its methods.

As for the prohibition of disputation applied to Allah, this is, in
fact, limited to discus- sion regarding the drawing of comparison
between Him and His creation, and also charging Him with injustice. But
as for discussion about Allah's unity and the denial of His resem-
blance to His creation and the affirmation of His transcendence and His
glory, there are many traditions and narrations commanding and
encouraging it.

Some of these evidences I have recorded in my book al-Arkan fi da‘aimi
'd-din, and I also wrote a comprehensive chapter in my book al-Kamil fi
‘ulumi'ddin. Also, on this subject, my book ‘Uqudu'd-din, contains a
section; he who depends on it can dispense with everything else. Then it
is self-evident that whosoever denies insight and reasoning bears
witness to the weakness of his own opinion, and this displays his
deficiencies in seeking knowledge and indicates his fall from the ranks
of people of perception.

Also, we should discriminate between nazar and munazarah, (i.e.,
'insight' and 'disputation'), since it is permissible some- times to
restrain people from doctrinal disputation for the sake of their
self-preservation (at-taqiyyah)[^10] , whereas it is not permissible, in
any circumstances, to forbid them reasoning and insight; because to
restrain them from exercising reason is to pave the way to blind
imitation, which is sharply criticized by the unanimous opinion of the
learned divines, as also by the plain text of the Qur’an and
Tradition.  
 Allah, the Almighty, reporting the speech of the unbelievers, and
reproaching their blind imitation says:

***"Lo! We found our fathers upon a com- munity, and we are following
upon their traces." [43:22],***  
 and also He, the Exalted, says:

***(And the Warner said:) "What! even though I bring you a better
guidance than you found your fathers following" [ibid.: 24].***

al-Imam as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, says: "He who takes his faith from
the mouth of men, men will make him slip (from the truth), but he who
takes his faith from the Book and Tradition will never slip though
mountains may slip (from their positions)."

Also, he says:

***"Beware of blind imitation, because he who follows others blindly in
his religion will be destroyed, since Allah says: They have taken as
lords their Rabbis and their Monks [9:31].***

By Allah they have never prayed for them nor fasted for their sake, but
they declared lawful what was forbidden and considered forbidden for
them what was lawful and they followed them blindly in what they enjoyed
and what they forbade, and therefore, they worshipped them
unconsciously[^11] . And he says: "He who responds to a Warner has
worshipped him, then if he was sent by Allah he has worshipped Allah,
and if he was from Satan, then he has worshipped Satan."

(The logical conclusion of our argument, then is that) if blind
imitation was approved and insight was vain, then to imi- tate one group
is no more praiseworthy than to imitate another, and also, whoever erred
through imitation would have been excused, and whoever follows an
innovator would not have sinned.

But this is an assumption which no one (endowed with reason) would
assert; thus, it is a self-evident fact that reasoned speculation is
right, and sincere disputation is approved, and as for the traditions
which Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy upon him, related their true
interpretation is the one which we have put forward, and the real
meaning is not what he has imagined. And Allah is the truest
supporter.  
 p

[^1]: Muhammad ibn Ya‘qub ibn Ishaq al-Kulayni ar-Razi: He is known as
Abu Ja‘far, the compiler of the great compendium of Shi‘ite traditions,
al- Kafi fi ‘ilmi 'd-din, which occupies in Shi‘ism a position analogous
with that of the Sahih, of al-Bukhari among the Sunnis. It was his
life-work and took twenty years to compile. He is called, in recognition
of his diligence in collecting Shi‘ite traditions, the Trustworthy
authority of Islam "Thiqatu'l-Islam", (In respect to Thiqatu 'l-Islam
al-Kulayni and the book of al- Kafi, see our two introductions to the
English translation of al-Kafi at the beginning of the "The Book of
Reason and Ignorance" [ed.])al-Kulayni was born porbably before 260/847,
and died in Baghdad in Sha‘ban, 329 AH (May, 941 AD). For a critical and
detailed account of his life and work see Ivanow, W., The Alleged
Founder of Isma‘ilism, pp.ll-27. Also, the "Introduction" to the new
edition of al-Kafi by Dr. Husayn‘Ali Mahfuz (Tehran, 1381 AH).
an-Najashi, op. cit. p.266; at-Tusi, op. cit., p.495; al-Mamaqani, op.
cit., vol.3, p.211, no.11540.

[^2]: Yunus ibn Ya‘qub ibn Qays: His kunyah was Abu ‘Ali al-Jallab. He
wascontemporary with both as-Sadiq, the sixth Imam, and his son,
al-Kazim (a.s.). He was highly esteemed by the Shi‘ah for his profound
knowledge of fiqh. The Shi‘ah biographers honour him for being the
author of a book on pilgrimage, which is counted among the Four Hundred
Principle Books. He died during the imamate of the Eighth Imam, ‘Ali ibn
Musa ar-Rida (203/ 818). See an-Najashi, op. cit., p.311; al-Kishshi,
op. cit., p.245; at- Tusi, op. cit., p.335; al-Mamaqani, op. cit.,
vo1.3, p.344, no.13365.

[^3]: 24 For more detail concerning this debate, see al-Kulayni,
al-Kafi, vol.l ,p.171; al-Mamaqani, op. cit., vol.l, p.371.

[^4]: Humran ibn A‘yan ash-Shaybani: His kunyah is variously reported as
Abu '1-Hasan or Abu Hamzah. He was a distinguished traditionist and
jurist. He was contemporary with both Imams, al-Baqir and as-Sadiq
(a.s.),and was highly respected by the latter, of whom it is reported
that he said:"Humran is one of our company both in this world and the
world here- after". He also promised him paradise for his intimacy with
the Family of the Prophet, and his staunch defence of the Shi‘ah tenets.
Opinions differ concerning his trustworthiness, thus, while the Shi‘ah
authorities generally praised him and accepted him as a reliable
transmitter, the orthodox were split; some discarded his reports, others
accepted them as genuine and reliable. See al-Kishshi, op. cit., p.117;
at-Tusi, op. cit., p.117; al-Mamaqani, op. cit., vol.l, pp.370-2,
no.3351; adh-Dhahabi, Mizanu 'l-i'tidal, vol.1, p.604, no.2292; Ibn
Hajar, Tahdhibu 't-tahdhib, vo1.3, p.25, no.32; Ibnu'n-Nadim,
al-Fihrist, p.220.

[^5]: Muhammad ibn ‘Abdillah ibn at-Tayyar: A follower of the Fifth
ImamMuhammad al-Baqir (a.s.). He was known as a dialectic theologian and
a reciter of the Qur’an. See al-Kishshi, op. cit., pp.222-3; at-Tusi,
op. cit., pp.135-292; al-Mamaqani, op. cit., vol.3, p.134, no.10895.

[^6]: See al-Kafi, "Introduction" to "The Book of Divine Unity", (Eng.
transl.),published by WOFIS, Tehran.

[^7]: Qays al-Masir: The famous Shi‘ah theologian and traditionist, who
lived during the first half of the second century of the hijrah. He was
an intimateassociate of the Fourth Imam, ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (d.
92/710-1), from whom, it is said, he acquired skill in disputation. He
relates many tradit- ions on the authority of as-Sadiq (a.s.). See
al-Mamaqani, op. cit., vol.2, p.33, no.9728; al-‘Amili, A‘yanu
'sh-Shi‘ah, vol.l, pt.2, p.77.

[^8]: See al-Kafi, "Introduction" to "The Book of Divne Unity", (Eng.
transl.),published by WOFIS, Tehran.

[^9]: Muhammad ibn Hakim al-Kath‘ami: His kunyah was Abu Ja‘far. He was
associated with both as-Sadiq and his son al-Kazim (a.s.). See
at-Tusi,op. cit., p.316; an-Najashi, op. cit., p.205; al-Mamaqani, op.
cit., vo1.3, p.109, no.10624.

[^10]: See p.92.

[^11]: al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, "Babu 't-Taqlid", vol.l, p.53.


