The Author and His Works
========================

Abu‘Abdillah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn an-Nu‘man al-Harithi al-‘Ukbari
al-Baghdadi[^1]. He was one of the most famous divines of the
Ithna-‘Ashariyyah School of the Shi‘ah and was unanimously regarded as
one of their foremost scholars, while his works were considered to be
among those which established the nascent theology of the Shi‘ah on a
sound and clear cut basis. Abu ‘Abdillah traced his descent back to
Qahtan, so was proud of his purely Arab ancestry.

He is well-known to us under two different laqabs, al-Mufid and Ibnu
'l-Mu‘allim. The former laqab was bestowed on him, according to some
authorities, by his master ‘Ali ibn ‘Isa ar-Rummani[^2] with whom
al-Mufid "discussed the Imamate and displayed a powerful intelligence;
therefore he called him by this laqab"[^3]. Others mentioned the
assertion that the Twelfth Imam (Sahibu 'z- Zaman), 'The Master of the
Time’, “appointed him as his deputy and bestowed upon him this honorific
title[^4]. His second title, Ibnu 'l-Mu‘allim, seems to have been
derived from his "father's occupation as a teacher in the city of
Wasit"[^5].

Al-Mufid was born in a small village in the district of ‘Ukbara, known
as Suwayqat ibn al-Basri, in 11th Dhi 'l-Qi‘dah,336/947 – according to
an-Najashi[^6] and al-Khwansari[^7] or in 388, according to at-Tusi[^8]
and Ibn Shahrashub[^9] , and died on the third (or second) of Ramadan
413 AH/December 1022 AD,at al-Karkh and was buried first in his
house-yard in the suburb of al-Ushnan[^10] . Afterwards his body was
transferred to the cemetery of Quraysh.

Historians described the day of his death as a day of universal
lamentation; "both his friends and enemies were full of mourning"[^11].
He was so highly esteemed that "eighty thousand people are said to have
gathered in the public square in Baghdad at the time of his
funeral"[^12]. Among those who wrote elegies on him was his pupil,
ash-Sharif ar-Radi.

Historians, whether from the Sunnite ranks or from those of the Shi‘ah
are unanimously of the opinion that al-Mufid was one of the most
brilliant scholars of his day and destined to play a constructive and
decisive role in the intellectual and political affairs of the Buwayhid
regime. Both his friends and opponents recognized his outstanding
ability and contribution to knowledge.

Al-Mufid was famous for his learning and integrity, as well as his
powers of memory and reasoning. Ibnu 'n-Nadim says, "in our time Abu
‘Abdillah was the head of the Shi‘ah theologians, outstanding in the art
of dialectics in the school he followed, of a penetrating wit and
retentive memory. I met him and found him excelled"[^13].As-Safadi
characterized him as "the unrivalled master of the.known sciences of
that time"[^14]. Ibn Hajar described him as, "an author of many
outstanding works numbering about two hundred"[^15]. Ibn Kathir
described him as "the head of the Rawafid and the man who wrote many
works which defended and consolidated their doctrines"[^16].

The Shi‘ah biographers also esteemed him highly and recognized the great
influence he had on later theologians and traditionists. al-Khwansari
observed that "he was the most honored teacher and the spiritual head of
all the Shi‘ahs, and he who followed him benefited by his knowledge; his
profound comprehension of jurisprudence, scholastic theology, and the
science of transmission (riwayah) was famed far and wide."[^17]

He is numbered in A‘yanu 'sh-Shi‘ah among "the chief Shi‘ah
theologians", and described as the "foremost faqih and doctor of his
time, whom the Shi‘ahs regarded as the master of theology, principles of
jurisprudence, tradition, biography and exegesis of the Qur’an"[^18].
al-Mufid, in an endeavor to consolidate Shi‘ite thought and give it an
integral shape, compiled two books, the first concerning the principles
of belief, called Awailu 'l-maqalat, and the other concerning the
principles of the practical law, called al-I‘lam. These became a basis
for Shi‘ah learning and their effect was far-reaching.

The high position of al-Mufid can be appreciated by the fact that "the
Buwayhid amir, al-Mu‘tadid, used to visit him at his house and attend
the discussions held at his behest"[^19]. According to the assertion of
many authorities, al-Mufid was in con- tact with the Master of the Time
and he bestowed upon him his favor and addressed him as his deputy. One
of his charges runs like this, "Peace be unto thee, O our sincere
disciple, in whom we have complete trust . . . may God perpetuate His
guidance to you in your championing of the truth and may He reward you
highly for preaching the truth on our behalf"[^20].

Al-Mufid, at an early age, acquired his knowledge from more than sixty
masters – shaykhs; among them was the celebrated divine, Ibn Babawayh
al-Qummi (d. 381 AH) and the illustrious traditionist, Abu 'l-Qasim
Ja‘far ibn Muhammad, Ibn Qulawayh al-Qummi (d. 368 AH)[^21] , and the
famous theologian, Abu ‘Ali Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn al-Junayd al-Iskafi
(d. 381)[^22] . Among the prominent Shi‘ah scholars who received their
education from al-Mufid were ash-Sharif ar-Radi (Abu 'l- Hasan Muhammad
ibn al-Husayn al-Musawi, d. 406)[^23] , ash-.Sharif al-Murtada (‘Alamu
'l-Huda Abu 'l-Qasim ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, d. 436)[^24] and at-Tusi (Abu
Ja‘far Muhammad ibn al- Hasan, d. 458)[^25].

Al-Mufid represents a new, rational trend within Shi‘ah thought, the
result of which was the rejection of literal acceptance of the divine
law and the introduction of rational and allegorical interpretation into
Imamiyyah teaching for the first time, in an attempt to eradicate the
fallacies and absurdities resulting from literal acceptance. This new
method, though it had supporters, was not approved by his successors
without a great deal of reluctance and criticism; some, such as ‘Izzu
'd- Din al-Hasan ibn Sulayman al-Hilli, writing refutation of
the'innovations' he introduced [^26] .

With regard to the works of al-Mufid, our sources ascribe to him two
hundred books. This large number may be due to the fact that some of the
titles mentioned, in a large number of cases, could be chapters,
abstracts, response, or even summaries of a book, rather than complete
works. It is also possible that in some instances the same book may have
been known under two or more different titles.[^27]

A Historical Sketch of his Times
--------------------------------

The period in which al-Mufid lived has a special import- ance not only
from the point of view of Shi‘ite theology, but also in the history of
scholastic theology in general. It was a period of dogmatic
controversies and sectarian disputes, each school trying to reshuffle
and re-examine its teachings. It was a period when the most eminent
theologians of Islam lived and exercised their influence, such as
al-Baqillani (an Ash‘arite), al-Qadi ‘Abdu '1-Jabbar (a Mu‘tazilite) and
al-Mufid, the Shi‘ite. Thus it is necessary to give a brief sketch of
the Buwayhid regime (334-447 AH) in which al-Mufid played a remarkable
role, and which was roughly coterminous with his lifetime.

The Buwayhids entered Baghdad on Jumadu 'l-Awwal, 344/ 17th January,
946, with an army mainly composed of foreign elements under the
leadership of Ahmad ibn Buwayh. The suc- cess of this entry was due
partly to a secret correspondence with the Caliph al-Mustakfi (d.
338/949), "who received the victorious leader and bestowed upon him the
honorific title of Mu‘izzu 'd-Dawlah and installed him as Amiru
'1-Umara’. At the same time, his brothers ‘Ali and al-Hasan received the
titles of ‘Imadu '1-Dawlah and Ruknu 'd-Dawlah, respectively. Moreover,
he ordered their names and titles to be struck on the coinage"[^28].

The advent of the Buwayhids to Baghdad brought about an essential and
profound change in the Caliphate. It is true that the seizure of power
by the Buwayhids did little more than set the seal on the development
which had, in effect, placed the caliphate under the domination of army
chiefs, promoted Amiru '1-Umara’. "But this time there was the added
fact that the Buwayhids were professing Shi‘ahs, so much so that it
might have been asked whether they were not about to sup- press a
caliphate whose legitimacy had no special meaning for them"[^29].

No sooner had they entered Baghdad than they displayed their disrespect
toward the Caliphate, so twelve days after, Mu‘izzu 'd-Dawlah dismissed
the Caliph on "the ground that he was plotting with his officers against
him, and seeking help from the Hamdanids of al-Mawsil; moreover, he was
annoyed by the Caliph who put the head of the Shi‘ah into prison"[^30].
The dismissal of the Caliph "took place in an unceremonious manner"[^31]
.

From the dogmatic point of view, the Buwayhids "were imbued with
Shi‘ism; they preached it energetically; and Shi‘ism was substantially
strengthened by their effort"[^32]. Being the adherents of a political
system based on and derived from a divinely appointed Imamate "they did
not recognize the claim of the Sunni caliph to supreme headship of the
Islamic world"[^33], and consequently they "rejected altogether the
‘Abbasid's right to caliphate, because they were convinced that they had
usurped the office from its true holders, and so the religious impulse
which might have incited them to obey the ‘Abbasid Caliphate was
absent"[^34].

It was essential doctrine which obliged them to accept the divinely
appointed Imam as the only justified temporal and spiritual leader of
Islam. As a matter of fact, they maintained the ‘Abbasid Caliphate for
purely political reasons, since the abolition of it might have resulted
in a colossal revolt against Buwayhid authority, which they were anxious
to avoid[^35].

Yet this doctrinal divergence in the conception of political authority
was responsible for a series of humiliations to the Sunni caliph. Thus
the Buwayhid amirs were "the first princes who insisted on having their
names mentioned in the khutbah along with that of the Caliph"[^36]. This
was followed by a series of further encroachments on the prerogatives of
the Caliph.

They began to impose restrictions on the political power of the caliphs;
the confiscation of their lands and properties, and the dismissal of
whomsoever they desired by cauterizing their eyes with hot iron, and
thereby disqualifying them from ruling. It is curious to mention that on
one occasion "‘Adudu 'd-Dawlah commanded that the Caliph's name should
be abolished from the Friday khutbah so that no prayer was said for the
Caliph for two months, because of a slight dispute which took place
between ‘Adudu 'd-Dawlah and the Caliph"[^37].

It is a historical fact that with the beginning of the Buwayhid regime,
the caliphate as a body-politic began to lose its importance, and the
caliphs gradually, but constantly, lost all their political powers. What
remained to them was, as al-Biruni observed, "Only a religious,
doctrinal authority and not a secular power, exactly like that of the
head of the Jalut (Diaspora) among the Jews, who have only the religious
leadership with- out any temporal powers"[^38] .

Beside what has been mentioned, the most important feature of this
period, which has its relative importance in our present study, was that
it witnessed a severe struggle between the two dominant doctrines, the
Sunnite and the Shi‘ite, each trying to impose its religious sovereignty
all over the Muslim world. The ‘Abbasid Caliph, after being deprived of
all his effective political powers, was anxious to restore his religious
supremacy among the people.

The result of this trend was the emergence of a semi-religious party,
mainly composed of the ‘ulama’, fuqaha’,and the khutaba’. This
semi-religious party proved to be of a special importance to the
ever-weakened caliph. Thus, although the Buwayhid amirs were the real
independent governors of the empire, yet it was very dangerous for them
to display openly their enmity towards the caliphs.

As Prof. Arnold observed, "the inflictions of such humiliation on the
caliph is in striking contrast with the honour and reverence paid to
him, whenever it was politic to bring him forward, as the supreme head
of the faith"[^39] .

This religious party was to play a decisive role especially during the
period of Buwayhid decline and was used as a weapon by which the Caliph
began to impose his will on the Buwayhid amirs. For example, when the
Caliph al-Qaim (422-467/1031-1075) rebuked Jalalu 'd- Dawlah (416-435)
for not punishing his slave for entering an orchard of the Caliph, "he
asked the judges not to deliver judgement, the jurists to refrain from
delivering response and the preachers to refrain from their duties,
which forced the Buwayhid amir to petition the Caliph"[^40] .

Meanwhile, the Caliph laid emphasis on his religious duties, as a means
of fortifying his prerogative against the unscrupulous behavior of the
Buwayhids, which was constantly increasing. We may note in particular,
as an event without previous parallel, that the Caliph, al-Qaim, wrote a
theological work in the orthodox Sunni strain which was read out every
Friday in the circle of the traditionists in the mosque of
al-Mahdi[^41].

As a counter-balance to this Sunni party, the Buwayhids for their part
began to depend largely on the Shi‘ah. It is said that Mu‘izzu'd-Dawlah
intended from the very beginning to abolish the ‘Abbasid Caliphate and
to transfer it to Abu 'l- Hasan Muhammad ibn Yahya az-Zaydi[^42].

He was deterred from carrying out this scheme by his wazir (vizier), who
told him, "today you are faced with a caliph whom you and your followers
believe has no right to the caliphate; thus if you command them they
will kill him and consider themselves innocent of his blood, whereas if
you replace him by an ‘Alid Caliph, whom you and your followers believe
to be the rightful caliph, then if he commands them to kill you, they
will perform his command"[^43] .

From this, it would appear that the Buwayhids maintained the caliphate
"purely for political reasons" because they were aware that "had they
destroyed the caliphate in Baghdad, the institution would have
reappeared elsewhere"[^44]. The caliphate for them, then, was a means to
legalize their authority over the Sunnites in their state, and to
strengthen their diplomatic relations with the world outside by the
weight of the moral authority and respect which the Sunnite caliph still
enjoyed.

Thus it is obvious that the Buwayhid period was the scene of a severe
struggle between two divergent political powers, and echoing this, of
two doctrinal schools within the Muslim community. As for the importance
of this period in the founding and developing of Shi‘ite theology, it
can be demonstrated in two points:

**First**: With the beginning of the Buwayhid regime, a severe dogmatic
struggle arose between the two dominant doctrines, the Shi‘ites and the
Sunnites. "It is certain that the Buwayhids welcomed somewhat
indiscriminately the Shi‘is or Mu‘tazilis of different shades of
opinion, but politically they were Twelvers"[^45].

This sectarian struggle culminated in 351 AH, when Mu‘izzu 'd-Dawlah
caused Shi‘ite curses to be inscribed on the walls of the mosques which
run thus; "May God curse Mu‘awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan, and him who prevented
al-Hasan's body from being buried behind the grave of his grandfather,
and him who exiled Abu Dharr, and him who expelled al-‘Abbas from the
shura (electoral council)"[^46] .

These curses were publicly displayed while the Caliph was unable to
forbid them. This dogmatic rift deepened still further when Mu‘izzu
'd-Dawlah introduced, "influenced perhaps by Daylamite practices"[^47],
the commemorating of the martyrdom of al-Husayn. On the 10th of
Muharram, ‘Ashura day, the chief festival of the Shi‘ah, the bazaars
were closed, the butchers suspended business, the cooks ceased cooking,
the cisterns were emptied of their contents, pitchers were placed with
felt covering the streets, women walked about with fallen tresses,
blackened faces, torn dresses, striking their faces and wailing for
al-Husayn.

In the same year, on the 18th Dhu 'l-Hijjah, the celebration of the day
of the "pond of Khumm", the day on which the Prophet is said to have
nominated ‘Ali as his successor, was officially inaugurated at Baghdad,
fires were lit, drums were beaten, horns blown, and people hastened from
the early morning to the cemetery of Quraysh"[^48] .

These foreign and newly imported practices gave rise to bitter sectarian
hatreds, and were responsible for sporadic civil wars. "In 388, a
destructive conflict broke out between the two sects and consequently
al-Karkh district was plundered[^49].

In 346 AH a similar civil disturbance occurred between "the Shi‘ite
section of al-Karkh and the Sunnites because of as-sabb,[^50] which
resulted in a heavy massacre"[^51]. These civil conflicts took place
continually in the year 348-351,353, 393-398 and 409.

This was the characteristic feature of the period; what, then, was the
attitude of al-Mufid towards current events? al-Mufid as the "head of
the Shi‘ah and the teacher of the Rawafid"[^52] was destined to play an
active role in defending the dogma of the Ithna-‘Ashariyyah school of
the Shi‘ah. Due to "his high ranking position at the courts of the
Buwayhids and the princes of dynasties"[^53], he enjoyed spiritual
supremacy and considerable influence over the affairs of that time.

Thus, it was during the Buwayhid period and because of their energetic
support, says al-Maqrizi, "that the teachings of the Rawafid spread
widely in North Africa, Syria, Diyar Bakr, Kufah, Basrah, Baghdad, all
‘Iraq, Khurasan, Transoxiana, Hijaz, Yaman and Bahrayn"[^54]. As a
result of this tremendous expansion of Shi‘ism, there were ceaseless
disturbances and dissensions between the Shi‘ites and the Sunnites.

In 393 AH, widespread disturbances occurred and the trouble-makers
spread all over the country, a thing which caused Bahau 'd-Dawlah
(989-1012 AD) to send the leader of the army to deal with the situation.
He reached Baghdad, suppressed by force the agitators and prevented both
The Sunnites and the Shi‘ites from demonstrating their doctrines and
expelled Ibnu 'l-Mu‘allim, the Shaykh of the lmamiyyah. Thus the city
regained its tranquillity[^55].

**Second**: The second reason for the importance of the Buway- hids in
the development of Shi‘ah theology, is that they pro- vided a meeting
point where Shi‘ah theology was influenced by the rational methods of
the Mu‘tazilah. This dogmatic and intellectual relationship which, in
the words of Prof.Macdonald, is "the great mystery of Muslim
History"[^56] , has still not received full attention, and can only be
made clear by comparative research based on a profound historical study
of the Buwayhid period from the dogmatic point of view.

At the end of the third century of the Hijrah, Mu‘tazilism was suffering
a severe decline in political influence, which began early with the
accession of al-Mutawakkil to the caliph- ate (232/847). This political
decline was coupled at the beginning of the fourth century with a
decisive triumph of Ash‘ar-ism which "evolved a new orthodox
scholasticism and defeated the Mu‘tazilites on their own ground[^57].

In this perilous situation, the Mu‘tazilah might have been induced by
the instinct of self preservation to conclude a political alliance with
Shi‘ism, then the official and politically influential doctrine of the
state. One of the reasons which facilitated this compromise was that
"the vagueness of Rafidites had been replaced by the much more definite
lmamite form of Shi‘ism[^58].

It is curious that the very Mu‘tazilism of which "the refutation and
rejection of the extremely heterogenous elements of Rafidites was the
centre of its invaluable service to the cause of Islam" [^59] was now
trying to come to some sort of agreement with it. Here we have also to
bear in mind that the "suggestion has been made that Mu‘tazilism was
essentially an attempt to work out a com- promise that would in part
overcome the cleavage between Sunnites and Shi‘ites"[^60] .

At any rate, Shi‘ism and Mu‘tazilism, as adh-Dhahabi says, "established
from about 370 AH a friendly and brotherly rela- tionship with each
other"[^61] .al-Maqdisi was fully aware of this interrelation; he states
that "the majority of the Shi‘ah in Persia were Mu‘tazilite, and that
the Buwayhid, ‘Adudu 'd-Dawlah adopted it"[^62] .

This dogmatic interrelation is affirmed by both Adam Mez and Goldziher,
who say that "theologically the Shi‘ahs are the heirs of the
Mu‘tazilah", and that "in the fourth century there was actually no real
system of Shi‘ite theology; henceforth the Shi‘ite amir, ‘Adudu
'd-Dawlah, merely adapted himself to the view of the Mu‘tazilite"[^63] .

This attachment of Mu‘tazilism to the ruling power was of special
importance, which is confirmed by al-Maqrizi, who says that "Mu‘tazilism
spread considerably under the Buwayhids regime in Iraq, Khurasan and
Transoxiana"[^64].

I am inclined to suggest that the period in which as-Sahib ibn ‘Abbad
(326-385/939-995) governed the empire inde- pendently during the emirate
of Fakhru 'd-Dawlah al-Buwayhi and which lasted eighteen years
(367-385/977-995) is the period within which Shi‘ism adopted the
rational system of Mu‘tazilism.

Abu 'l-Qasim Isma‘il ibn ‘Abbad as-Sahib is known as an "illustrious
Mu‘tazilite who inherited his ideas from his father who wrote a book on
the ordinances of the Qur’an, Ahkamu 'l- Qur’an, in which he supported
Mu‘tazilism"[^65]. In his formative years, as-Sahib was greatly
influenced by and imbued with their dogmas till he came to be known "as
one of their fore- most masters"[^66].

When he was wazir, he used his office as a means to support
whole-heartedly the Mu‘tazilite teachings so "people began to follow the
doctrine he professed, and copy his words, desiring reward from
him"[^67]. as-Sahib has also been mentioned among the Shi‘ah divines and
.was accused of Shi‘ite tendencies. Ibn Hajar says "that he added to the
innovation of the Mu‘tazilah the heterodoxy of the Shi‘ah"[^68].

This intellectual influence of Mu‘tazilism on Shi‘ism which is confirmed
by ash-Shahrastani[^69] , Ibn Taymiyyah[^70] and ad- Dawani[^71] was
emphatically rejected by the Shi‘ah. They were, and still are, anxious
to deny this impact on their dogmas, which are supposed to be the fruits
of the direct teachings of the divinely-inspired Imams. al-Mufid himself
rejected this charge, which seems to be very old, and denied that the
Shi‘ah were influenced by and borrowed from the Mu‘tazilah[^72] .

But a critical and comparative study of his book, Tashih I‘tiqadati 'l-
Imamiyyah with that of his master, Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi, which is the
purpose of this thesis, establishes the fact that the shifting of Shi‘ah
theology from an authoritarian stand, repre- sented by Ibn Babawayh, to
a rational interpretation cultivated first by al-Mufid, was a direct
result of this Mu‘tazilite impact which is specifically denied by him.
It is worth observing that the "Mu‘tazilite influence has maintained its
hold on the Shi‘itic literature up to the present time. It is a serious
error to assert that after the decisive victory of the Ash‘arite
theology, the Mu‘tazilite teachings ceased to play any active part in
religion or literature. The rich dogmatic literature of the Shi‘ah
extending into our own days refutes such an assertion"[^73]

[^1]: Ukbari, ‘Ukbarawi: his nisbah (relationship) is derived from a
small town, ‘Ukbar, near ad-Dujayl, about ten farsakhs distance from
Baghdad. The name seems not to be Arabic. See Yaqut, Mu‘jamu 'l-buldan,
vo1.5, p.203.

[^2]: Abu '1-Hasan, ‘Ali ibn ‘Isa ar-Rummani al-Ikhshidi al-Warraq, one
of the most illustrious doctors of the Mu‘tazilah of the tenth class,
well known as an exegetist, philologist and theologian. He was called
‘Ali al-Jami‘ because of his profound and comprehensive knowledge of
Fiqh, Qur’an, Nahw and Kalam. as-Sahib ibn ‘Abbad, on being questioned
if he, too, had written a commentary on the Qur’an, replied ‘Ali ibn
‘Isa had left nothing for him to do. He has also been accused of Shi‘ite
tendencies. See Ibnu 'l-Murtada,al-Munyah wa 'l-amal, p.65. Yaqut,
Mu‘jamu 'l-udaba’, vo1.14, p.73; as-Suyuti, Tabaqatu 'l-mufassirin,
p.24.

[^3]: al-Majlisi, Biharu 'l-anwar, the introduction to the new edition
by ash-Shirazi, vo1.1 , p.71

[^4]: Ibn Shahrashub, Ma‘alimu 'l-‘ulama’, p.101.

[^5]: al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad, vo1.3, p.231.

[^6]: an-Najashi, ar-Rijal, p.286.

[^7]: al-Khwansari, Rawdatu 'l-jannat, p.563.

[^8]: at-Tusi, Rijalu 'sh-Shi‘ah, p.186.

[^9]: Ibn Shahrashub, op. cit., p.101. Cf., Borckelmann, C., GAL,
Supp.1, p.322. Also, E.I., the article,"al-Mufid", vo1.3, ii, p.625.

[^10]: al-Ushnan, an old suburb of Baghdad, see Mu‘jamu 'l-buldan,
vol.l, p.262.

[^11]: at-Tusi, ar-Rijal, p.187.

[^12]: Donaldson, D.M., The Shi‘ite Religion, p.287.

[^13]: Ibnu 'n-Nadim, al-Fihrist, p.178.

[^14]: as-Safadi, al-Wafi bi 'l-wafayat, vo1.5, p.l 16.

[^15]: Ibn Hajar, Lisanu 'l-mizan, vo1.5, p.368.

[^16]: 16 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah, vo1.12, p.15.

[^17]: al-Khwansari, Rawdatu 'l-jannat, op. cit, p.563.

[^18]: Muhsin al-Amin, al-‘Amili, A‘yanu 'sh-Shi‘ah, vol.l, pt.2, p.106.

[^19]: Ibn Hajar, op. cit., vo1.5, p.368.

[^20]: al-Majlisi, Biharu 'l-anwar, the introduction to the new edition
by ash- Shirazi, vol. 1, p.71.

[^21]: For his life, see: an-Najashi, op. cit., p.89; Ibn Hajar, op.
cit., vo1.2, p.125; Ibn Shahrashub, op. cit., p.26.

[^22]: For his life, see: Ibnu 'n-Nadim, op. cit., p.196.

[^23]: For his life, see: Ibn Khallikan, Wafayatu 'l-a'yan, vol.2, p.2;
an-Najashi, op. cit., p.283; Ibn Hajar, opcit., vo1.5, p.141.

[^24]: For his life, see: Ibnu '1-Murtada, op. cit., p.19; an-Najashi,
op. cit., p.192; Ibn Hajar, op. cit., vo1.4, p.223.

[^25]: For his life, see: Ibn Hajar, op. cit., vo1.5, p.135. Also Ibn
Shahrashub, op. cit., p.102.

[^26]: The refutation is called al-Muhtadir, published in an-Najaf
al-Ashraf(Iraq) in 1370/1951. See: ash-Shaykh ‘Abdullah, Falasifatu
'sh-Shi‘ah, pp.454-66.

[^27]: A full list of his works will be given later.

[^28]: Ibnu 'l-Athir, al-Kamil, vo1.8, p.337, Hasan Ibrahim Hasan,
Tarikhu 'l-Islami 's-siyasi, vo1.3, p.43.

[^29]: E.I., the article, "Buwayhids", by Cl. Cahen, vol.1, ii, p.1350.

[^30]: ad-Duri, ‘Abdu '1-‘Aziz, Dirasat fi 'l-‘usuri 'l-‘Abbasiyyah
al-muta'akhkhirah, p.249.

[^31]: Ibid., p.249. See also: Arnold, T., The Caliphate, p.61;
al-Khudari,Muhadarat fi tarikhi 'l-umami 'l-Islamiyyah, vo1.2, p.380.

[^32]: al-Maqrizi, al-Khitat, vo1.2, p.308.

[^33]: Arnold, T., op. cit., p.61.

[^34]: Ibnu '1-Athir, op. cit., vo1.8, p.339.

[^35]: ad-Duri, op. cit., p.248. See p.l l.

[^36]: Arnold, T., op. cit., p.61.

[^37]: Ibnu '1-Jawzi, al-Muntazim, vo1.7. p.75.

[^38]: Quoted from ad-Duri, op. cit., p.255.

[^39]: Arnold, T., op. cit., p.65.

[^40]: Ibnu '1-Jawzi, op. cit., vol.8, p.82.

[^41]: Ibid., vo1.8, p.109. Also, Mez, Adam, The Renaissance of Islam,
Eng. transl. by Khuda Bukhsh and Margoliouth, p.61.

[^42]: ad-Duri, op. cit., p.248.

[^43]: Ibnu '1-Athir, op. cit., vol.8, p.339; Cf., ad-Duri, op. cit.,
p.248.

[^44]: Ibid.; al-Khudari, op. cit., vol.2., p.378.

[^45]: E.I, the article, "Buwayhids", by Cl. Cahen, vol.l, ii, p.1352.

[^46]: as-Suyuti, Tarikhu 'l-khulafa’, p.266; Ibn Khaldun, at-Tarikh,
vol.4, p.886; Cf., Mez, Adam, op. cit., p.68.

[^47]: E.I, the article, "Buwayhids", vol.l, ii, p.1352.

[^48]: Ibnu '1-Jawzi, op. cit., vol.7, p.10; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah,
vol.11, p.243. Also, Mez, Adam, op. cit., p.69.

[^49]: Ibn Kathir, op. cit., vol.ll, p.221.

[^50]: Denouncing certain companions of the Holy Prophet (of Islam).

[^51]: Ibid., p.232.

[^52]: Ibn Taghri Birdi, an-Nujumu 'z-zahirah, vol.4, p.258; as-Safadi,
op. cit., vol.5, p.116.

[^53]: Ibn Taghri Birdi, op. cit., vol.4, p.258.

[^54]: al-Maqrizi, al-Khitat, vol.2, p.308.

[^55]: Ibnu '1-Athir, op. cit., vol.9, p.126.

[^56]: Quoted from Holister, J.N., The Shi'a of India, p.26.

[^57]: Gibb, H.A.R., Mohammadanism, p.116.

[^58]: Watt, W.M., Islamic Philosophy and Theology, p.83.

[^59]: Nyberg, H.S., his intro. to his ed. of Kitabu 'l-Intisar, p.24.
Zuhdi Hasan Jarullah

[^60]: Watt, W.M., op. cit., p.83.

[^61]: adh-Dhahabi, Mizanu 'l-i‘tidal, vol.2, p.230; (Quoted from,
al-Mu‘tazilah, p.207).

[^62]: al-Maqdisi, Ahsanu 't-taqasim, p.439.

[^63]: Mez, Adam, op. cit., p.62; Cf. Goldziher, L, Vorlesungen über den
Islam, the Arabic translation, p.224.

[^64]: al-Maqrizi, op. cit., vo1.2, p.358.

[^65]: Yaqut, Mu'jamu 'l-udaba’, vol.6, p.127.

[^66]: Ibn Hajar, Lisanu 'l-mizan, vol.1, p.413.

[^67]: Yaqut, op. cit., vol.6, p.225.

[^68]: Ibn Hajar, op. cit., p.413.

[^69]: ash-Shahristani, al-Milal, vol.1, p.209. Also, p.224.

[^70]: Ibn Taymiyyah, ar-Rasail, vol.3, p.115.

[^71]: ad-Dawani, Jalalu 'd-Din, Sharhu 'l-‘aqaidi 'l-‘Adudiyyah,
(quoted from Muhammad ‘Abduh bayna 'l- falasifah wa 'l-mutakallimin,
edited by Sulayman Dunya, p.26).

[^72]: al-Mufid, Ajwibatu 'l-masaili 's-saghaniyyah, MS. No.442,
an-Najaf al- Ashraf, (Iraq), Maktabat Muhsin al-Hakim, fol. 14.

[^73]: Goldziher, I., op. cit., p.222.


