19. The Metaphysical Meaning of the Throne (Al-‘Arsh)
=====================================================

ash-Shaykh Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy upon him, says: "Our belief
concerning the Throne is that it is the support of the whole
creation."[^1]ash-Shaykh al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy upon
him,comments poet says: that 'Throne' linguistically means 'kingdom':
the When the dominion of Banu Marwan shall have departed,and been
effaced as were Iyad and Himyar,which means when the kingdom of Banu
Marwan (the Umay- yids) is destroyed and they are effaced.

Another says: "Do you think that your throne will never vanish or
change?", which means, 'Do you think that your kingdom will never vanish
or change?' Allah, the Almighty, relating the speech of those who
describe the kingdom of the Queen of Sheba says:

***She has been given of everything, and she possesses a mighty throne
[27:23],***

which means that she has got a mighty kingdom.

Then it follows from this that the Throne of Allah, the Almighty, is His
Kingdom, and seating Himself upon the Throne is equiv- alent to
establishing His sovereignty over His Kingdom. The Arabs often
substitute istiwa’, that is, seating oneself upon, for istila’, that is,
to take possession of.

The poet says:

*Bishr has seated himself on Iraq,*  
*without recourse to sword or bloodshed,*

which means that he has dominated Iraq. As for the Throne (‘arsh) which
is carried by angels, it is only a portion of the Kingdom of Allah, and
it is a Throne which Allah created in the seventh heaven which is
carried by angels in adoration and glorification of Allah; as He has
erected a house on the earth (i.e., Ka‘bah) and commanded man to make it
their goal, visit it and perform the pilgrimage to it and glorify it.

It has been handed down in tradition that Allah Almighty has created a
house beneath the Throne and called it al-Baytu 'l-Ma‘mur (i.e., the
ever-prosperous house), to which the angels make their pilgrimage every
year. Also, He established a house in the fourth heaven and named it
ad-Durah, to which the angels, in obeisance to Allah, make their
pilgrimage, venerate it, and accomplish the circumambulation of it; and
He created al- Baytu 'l-Haram on the earth and placed it beneath
ad-Durah.

It has been related that as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, has said: "If a
stone were to be thrown down from the ‘arsh it would fall on the back of
al-Baytu 'l-Ma‘mur, and if it were to be thrown from al-Baytu 'l-Ma‘mur,
it would fall on the back of al-Baytu'l-Haram." (Thus it is
self-evident) that Allah, the Exalted, has not created a Throne for
Himself to settle in (Allah is Exalted far above that!), but He created
the Throne and appropriated it to Himself to increase its greatness and
glory, and required His angels to make obeisance in bearing it.

Also, He established a House on earth which He has not created for
Himself, nor that He should dwell therein; Allah is Exalted far above
that – but He created it for His creation and appropriated it to Himself
that they should honour and venerate it, and He required them to visit
it and make pilgrimage to it as obeisance to Him.

As for the description of ‘ilm (knowledge) as ‘arsh, it is purely
metaphorical. Therefore, it is not justifiable to interpret the meaning
of the speech of Allah, the Almighty:

***The All-com- passionate sat Himself upon the Throne [20:5],***

in the sense that He is the Omniscient. The only rational interpretation
is the one we put forward above.

As for the traditions related about the angels as being bearers of the
Throne, they are all ahad traditions, and based upon the authority of a
single narrator. Hence, the reports can- not be allowed as genuine, nor
can they be used as a basis for practice. Yet it is more reasonable to
hold a non-committal view about them.

Then it is obvious that the only tenable doctrine is that 'Throne' means
kingdom, and that the ‘arsh which is carried by angels is only a portion
of the Kingdom (mulk), by the bearing of which Allah ordered angles to
make obeisance to Him.

[^1]: T, hamalat jami‘i 'l-khalq: N, jumlat jami‘i 'l-khalq. Prof. Fyzee
(A Shi‘ite Creed, Note no.lll) reads jumlat for hamalat. However,
hamalat is more in keeping with the chapter and what is generally held
by the Shi‘ah traditionists, concerning al-‘Arsh. See al-Ash‘ari,
Maqalatu 'l-Islamiyyin, vol.l, p.35.


