20. Concerning Souls and Spirits (Al-Arwah wa 'n-Nufus)
=======================================================

ash-Shaykh Abu Ja‘far says: "Our belief concerning souls is that they
are spirits, and that they were the first of created things; and that
they were created for eternal existence; and that they bodies."are
strangers in the earth and imprisoned in their ash-Shaykh Abu ‘Abdillah
says that Abu Ja‘far's discussion of souls and spirits is based upon
conjecture with no scientific investigation. It would have been wiser
had he contented himself with the mere mention of the reports, without
involving himself in intricacies of inner meaning, since he is not well-
equipped for such a task.

As for 'soul'[^1], it has different meanings:

l. The essence of a thing (dhatu 'sh-shay’);

2. The moving blood (ad-damu 's-sail);

3. The breath which is the wind (an-nafas);

4. Desire and passion (al-hawa).

Now, the proof of the first meaning is the saying: "This is the very
thing itself, that is, its essence and it itself." And the proof of the
second meaning is the saying: "Whatsoever is classified as an animal
with circulating blood is to be judged thus and thus." And the proof of
the third meaning is the saying: "So-and-so has perished, if he ceases
to breathe and no air remains in his body to inflate his lungs."

And the proof of the fourth meaning is the speech of Allah;

***Surely, the soul of man incites to evil [12:53],***

which means passion instigates evil. Soul (nafs) might designate the
meaning of retribution, the proof of which is the saying of Allah, the
Almighty:

***And Allah biddeth you beware of Him (nafsahu) [3:28],***

which means 'of His retribution and punishment.'

Ruh (i.e., Spirit), also has several meaning:

1. Life (hayat);

2. Qur’an;

3. A particular one of the angels of the Almighty Allah (malak);

4. Jibril.

Now, the proof of the first meaning is the saying: "Everything that is
classified as being endued with spirit is to be judged thus and thus,"
by which they mean every being that has life, and their saying in
respect of him who died, "he gave up the Ghost", (lit. the spirit went
out of him), which means his life. And the same is their description of
the embryo, "a form not endued with spirit", which means that it lacks
life.

And the proof of the second meaning is the speech of Allah:

***So We have revealed to thee a spirit of Our command [42:52],***

which means here the Qur’an. And the proof of the third meaning is the
speech of the Almighty:

***Upon the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks
[78:38].***

And the proof of the fourth meaning is the saying of the Almighty: Say,

***"The Holy Spirit has revealed it" [16:102],***

that is, Jibril, peace be upon him.

As for the narrations which Abu Ja‘far reports, that souls were created
two thousand years before the bodies; and that those of them who were
acquainted with each other are intimate, and those who were strangers to
each other are disparate[^2] , it is, in fact, an ahad tradition and a
report unsupported except by one narrator.

Nevertheless, it bears an interpretation which differs from that adopted
by those who are not acquainted with the fact of the matter. Hence, the
sound interpretation is that Allah, the Exalted, created the angels two
thousand years before mankind; then those amongst them who were
acquainted with each other before the creation of men are also intimate
after the creation of men;

whereas those among them who were strangers to each other before, are
also strangers after the creation of men. Then, the reality is far from
what is maintained by the adherents of transmigration.  
 This specious doctrine has crept into the Hashwites in the ranks of the
Shi‘ah; who erroneously alleged that our beings which are subject to the
commands and prohibitions of Allah were created in the world of atoms
(‘alamu 'dh- dhar), and that they were acquainted with each other and
endued with the faculties of discernment, comprehension and speech; then
Allah created bodies for them after that and put them together.

(Do they not realize) that if this were so, then we would know the state
which we occupied before, and that if it were recalled to us, we would
remember it and nothing of it would be hidden from us? Do you not
realize that if someone was brought up in a place and settled there for
a year, and then turned away from it to a second place, he will never
forget what he knows about it; and that if he forgets it through absent-
mindedness, it would be easy for him to remember it if he was reminded
of it?

If this was so, then would it be probable that one of us, who was born
in Baghdad and settled there for twenty years and then immigrated to
another place, would forget all that happened to him at Baghdad even if
he were reminded of it in detail? In fact, this is an assumption which
no one endowed with reason will make.

It would have been wiser for those who are not well-equip- ped for such
a task to deal with the subject without applying any discussion. What
Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy upon him, maintained about spirits and
souls is unwittingly the actual doctrine of transmigration. So, he
committed a fearful crime against himself and others.

As for his opinion regarding the perpetuity of the soul, it is, indeed,
a statement to be castigated, since it contradicts the plain meaning of
the Qur’an. Allah, the Almighty, says:

***All that dwells upon the earth is transient, and none endures for
ever but the Face of thy Lord, Majestic, and Splendid [55:26-27].***

Thus, what he narrated and erroneously assumed is, in fact, the doctrine
of the majority of the heretical philosophers who maintain the eternity
of the soul and its incorruptibility and perpetuity, and advocate the
opinion that the soul abides, and that it is only the body that
undergoes degeneration and corruption.

The same opinion was held by some of the adherents of transmigration,
who claim that souls recur perpetually in different forms and bodies,
and that neither are they contingent nor will they corrupt or be
annihilated. This is one of the most monstrous claims and far removed
from the truth. Comparable to it in wickedness and error is the charge
of the Nasibah[^3] (that)[^4] these are the real doctrines of all the
Shi‘ah; on the strength of which they brand them with heresy.

Thus, if those who gave authority to such traditions had been aware of
the dangers that lay in them, they would never have affirmed them.
However, the indiscriminating of our companions, who are incapable of
accurate judgment and sound comprehension, often accept the traditions
at their face value without checking their authority, and do not
distinguish between the true and the absurd without realizing what
follows from accepting them or comprehending the real meaning of what
they affirm.

What has been affirmed by (genuine) traditions in this respect is that
souls after death are of two kinds: those which proceed to reward or
punishment; and those which are abolished and therefore known neither
reward nor punishment.

A tradition has been related from as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, which
confirms and clarifies this interpretation. He was asked: "What will
happen to the spirit of the dead? and where will it abide?" He replied:
"The dead are of two categories: (a) either purely faithfully, or (b)
purely wicked; then the spirits of each passes from his body (lit.
house-haykal) to its like, and each is rewarded for its acts till the
Day of Resurrection.

On the Day of Ressurrection Allah will restore his body and insert his
spirit into it, and call him to accept the final judgment for his deeds.
The spirit of the faithful will pass from his dead body to a similar
form, and abide in a paradise of Allah, where he will enjoy a perpetual
grace till the Day of Resurrection.

But the unbeliever's spirit will pass to a form similar to itself and
abide in fire and torture till the Day of Resurrection. And that this is
the lot of the believer is proved by the speech of Allah: It was said:
"Enter paradise". He said:

***"Ah! Would my people had knowledge that my Lord has forgiven me . .
." [36:26-27].***

And that the unbeliever's state is as has been mentioned is proved by
the speech of Allah:

***The Fire, to which they shall be exposed morning and evening, and on
the Day when the Hour is come\*: "Admit the people of Pharaoh into the
most terrible chastisement!" [40:46]***[^5]***.***

Thus, He, the Exalted, tells that a believer, after his death as he is
admitted to paradise, says: "Ah! Would that my people had knowledge that
. . ." Also, He relates that an unbeliever is admitted to chastisement
after his death and that he is tortured morning and evening until the
Day of Resurrection he will be made to abide in Hell.

As for him who falls into oblivion (man yulha ‘anhu), his spirit will be
destroyed after the decomposition of his body; thus, he will be aware of
nothing till the Day of Resurrection. This is the state of those who are
neither purely faithful nor purely wicked. Allah Almighty speaks of
their state and says:

***He of them who was fairest in the way will say: "You have tarried
only a day" [20:104].***

Thus, He demonstrates that a certain group of people on the Day of
Resurrection will not remember how long they were in the tombs, so that
some will assume that they were in them ten days, and some will suppose
a day only. This, of course, cannot be the state of those who have been
tortured or blessed until the Day of Resurrection, since he who has
enjoyed perpetual pleasure or punishment will not forget the treatment
he experienced, not will he be uncertain about it in his life after
death.

It was related from Abu‘Abdillah, peace be upon him, that he said: "Only
those who are purely faithful or purely unbelievers will be questioned
in the grave, whereas the others will fall into oblivion." He said con-
cerning the second coming (ar-raj‘ah): "Those who will return at the
coming of the Qaim (the Holder), peace be upon him, will be only those
who are purely faithful or purely unbelievers; as for the others, there
will be no return until the Day of Resurrection."

Also, our companions are of different opinions concerning the question
of what is the subject of bliss or punishment. Some are of the opinion
that the subject of the eternal bliss or punishment is the spirit to
which are addressed the commandments, prohibitions and legal
obligations, and they call it a 'substance' (jawhar), others say that
spirit is the same life which enters a body which is the replica of that
of its lifetime on earth.

Both suggestions are, in fact, conceivable by reason, but the more
likely, to my mind, is the one which defines the spirit as 'the
substance which Allah commands' (al-jawharu 'l-mukhatab), and this is
what the philosophers name 'the simple' (al-basit). It has been related
in the traditions that the prophets, peace be upon them, in particular,
and the Imams, peace be upon them, after them will be translated to the
heavens both body and spirit, where they will enjoy the Divine bliss in
their earthly bodies which they inhabited in the lifetime.

But this is a privilege restricted to the Proofs of Allah (Hujaj Allah)
only. Also, it is related from the Holy Prophet, peace be upon him and
his progeny, that: "He who prays for me by my tomb I will hear him, and
he who prays for me from a remote place, his prayer will reach me." He,
peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "He who prays for me once, I
will pray for him ten times, and he who prays for me ten times I will
pray for him a hundred times, then let your prayers for me be many or
few." Thus he, peace be upon him and his progeny, made it clear that
after he had left the world he would hear the prayer devoted to him, a
fact which implies that he is alive with Allah, the Almighty.

The state of the Imams (lit. the Righteous Guides) is the same as those
who hear the prayers of a Muslim close at hand or receive his prayer if
far away. This is affirmed by sound narrations related on authority.
Allah Almighty says:

***Account not those who were slain in Allah's way as dead, nay they are
alive [3:169].***

It has been related from the Holy Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, that he stood by the pit of Badr and addressed the unbelievers'
corpses, who were slain and thrown into a pit: "You were an evil
kinsfolk to the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his progeny),
you drove him out of his home and chased him away; then you flocked to
fight against him. I have found that what my Lord promised me is true;
have you found that what your lord promised you is true?"[^6]

‘Umar exclaimed, "O Messenger of Allah! What wis- dom is there in
addressing mouldering corpses?" Thereupon he replied: "Hush, O son of
al-Khattab! I swear by Allah that you do not hear me better than they
do, and nothing prevents the angels from clothing them with iron, but my
turning my face from them like this."

It is related from ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, the Commander of the Believers,
peace be upon him, that after the battle of Basrah[^7] terminated, he
began to inspect the ranks till he came across the corpse of Ka‘b ibn
Sur[^8] – \*(he was appointed a judge over Basrah by ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab and continued to hold office throughout the reigns of ‘Umar
and ‘Uthman [ibn ‘Affan]; when the civil war broke out at Basrah, he
hung the Qur’an round his neck and incited all his family to fight the
Commander of the Believers and they were all slain)\* [^9] .

The Commander of the Believers asked that the corpse be raised by the
help of two men. Then he addressed the body and said: "0 Ka‘b ibn Sur! I
have found that what my Lord promised me is true. Did you find that what
your lord promised you was true?" Then he asked that the body be laid
aside and went on a little; then he came across the slain body of Talhah
ibn ‘Ubaydillah, and asked that the body be raised, then addressed it
and said: "OTalhah! I have found that what my Lord promised me is true.
Did you find that what your lord promised you was true?"

Then he ordered the body to be laid aside. A man exclaimed: "O Commander
of the Believers! What was the wisdom of talking to two slain bodies who
were unable to follow you?" Thereupon he said: "By Allah, O men! They
heard me as the people of the pit (qalib) heard the speech of the
Messenger of Allah." Thus, this is one of the narrations which affirm
that some of those who die will have their spirits restored to them to
enjoy bliss or suffer punishment of the grave; yet this is only an
exception and not a general rule which applies to all the dead.

[^1]: N reads, qala ash-Shaykh Abu ‘Abdillah ‘alayhi 'r-rahmah, amma
'n-nafs

[^2]: See al-Bukhari, as-Sahih, "Kitabu 'l-Anbiya’, "Babu 'l-arwah junud
mujan- nadah", no.1; Muslim, as-Sahih, "Kitabu 'l-birr wa 's-silah wa
'l-adab". Tradition no.159.

[^3]: Nawasib: An appelation used by the Shi‘ah to designate those who
refuse any pre-eminence to ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), sometimes applied
to the orthodox indiscriminately. Friedlaender, I., says that
"Originally, Nawasib stood for the exact reverse of Rawafid: the
'enemies' or 'haters' of ‘Ali, and was confined to the extreme
Kharijites. Gradually, its meaning expanded so that it finally embraced
all the Sunnites, however far they were from hating ‘Ali." (The
Heterodoxies of the Shi‘ites in the Presentation of Ibn Hazm, vol.2,
p.156). See also, Ibn Manzur, Lisanu 'l-‘Arab, vol.l, p.762.

[^4]: T, shana‘a bihi 'n Nasibah; N, ma shana‘a . . .

[^5]: \* \* Not found in N.

[^6]: See Ibn Hisham, as-Sirah, Eng. transl. by Guillaume, A., p.306.

[^7]: Harbu 'l-Basrah, also called Harbu 'l-Jamal, because ‘Aishah, the
wife of the Prophet, was mounting a camel, around which the battle was
con- centrated. Harbu 'l-Jamal was the first civil war in Islam which
took place between Amiru '1-Mu’minin, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), and
Talhah ibn‘Ubaydillah, az-Zubayr ibn al-‘Awwam and ‘Aishah. See
at-Tabari, at- Tarikh, vol.1, pt.6, p.3078; Ibnu '1-Athir, al-Kamil,
vol.3, p.165; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah, vol.7, p.229; al-Maqdisi, al-Bad’
wa 't-tarikh, vol.5, p.211.

[^8]: Ka‘b ibn Sur: (It is written 'Surah' which is a mistake.) A
companion,who was sent by ‘Umar as a judge to Basrah. He is known to be
a man of extreme piety who would pray thoughout the night and fast the
whole day; thereupon, his wife complained of him to the Caliph who
ordered him to be moderate in his worship and observe his family
obligations. It is reported that he was one of those who refrained from
fighting in the early stages of the Battle of Camel (i‘tazala 'l fitnah)
and shut himself inside a cottage; later on, under the pressure of
‘Aishah, he came out displaying his Qur’an in an effort to make peace
between the two camps, but was shot down by a stray arrow. See Ibn Sa‘d,
at-Tabaqat, vol.7, p.65.[Ka‘b ibn Sur was not a companion of the Holy
Prophet, and he had not heard anything from the Holy Prophet or met him.
He was only a tabi‘i. See Ibn ‘Abdi '1-Barr, al-Isti‘ab, vol.3,
pp.1318-9; Ibnu 'l-Athir, Usdu 'l- ghabah, vol.4, pp.242-3; Ibn Hajar,
al-Isabah, vol.3, pp.314-5. Ibn Sa‘d mentions him as a tabi‘i from
Basrah who was the companion of ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab (ed.)]

[^9]: \* \* Not found in N.


