22. The Belief concerning the questioning in the Grave
======================================================

\*Abu Ja‘far says: "Our belief concerning the questioning in the grave
is that it is true."\*[^1]Abu ‘Abdillah ash-Shaykh al-Mufid, may Allah
have mercy upon him, adds that what is mentioned by Abu Ja‘far does not
tell all that should be told about the questioning and its purpose; what
should be mentioned in this respect is what I am going to establish by
the will of Allah, the Exalted.

The genuine narrations which have been handed down from the Holy
Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny are to the effect that the
angels will descend to men in the grave and question them regarding
their faith. It is noteworthy that the different reports have a common
tone.

One of these runs thus: After death two angels of Allah, the Sublime,
named Munkar and Nakir, come to the dead man and question him regarding
his Lord, his Prophet his faith and his Imam; if he answers according to
the truth, they deliver him to the angels of bliss, and if he falters,
they deliver him to the angels of punishment.

Yet, some other reports name the two angels – who come to the unbeliever
– Munkar and Nakir, whereas those who come to the believer are called
Mubashshir and Bashir. It has been related that the two angels sent to
the unbeliever are named thus, because he denies the truth, rejects and
scorns what they bring him.

The two angels sent to the believer are named Mubashshir and Bashir
because they bring him glad tidings and eternal reward from the Almighty
Allah. Moreover, these two names are not their personal names, but
designate their acts. These, however, are reports close to each other in
content, and of which the meaning is easily conceivable, yet Allah, the
Exalted, knows best the truth of it.

We have also mentioned above that the only people whom the two angels
will question are those who are purely faithful or completely infidels,
whereas all others will fall into oblivion. This is confirmed by the
traditions handed down on this matter, and this is why we mentioned the
above statement about it.

Chapter: (In point of fact) the two angels will question only him who is
alive and him who can understand the content of the question, and is
capable of conceiving its meaning. This is clear evidence that Allah,
the Almighty, will quicken the dead servant for questioning, and
thereafter his life may be perpetuated for eternal grace, if he deserves
grace, or for ever-lasting punishment, if he deserves this; let us seek
refuge in Allah from His wrath, and let us beg His help to perform what
He pleases.

The purpose for which the two angels descend and question the servant is
that Allah, the Almighty, will entrust the servant, after his death, to
the angels of grace or punishment; they cannot discern what the servant
is except as Allah has instructed them. And of the two angels, who come
to the servant, one is from the angels of grace and the other is from
the angels of punishment.

When they descend to him, they will discern his state by questioning
him. Thus, if his answers are satisfactory and deserving of Divine
Grace, charge of him will devolve upon the angel of grace, whereas the
angel of punishment will abandon him. And if he shows signs of deserving
punishment, then he will be in the care of the angel of torment, whereas
the angel of grace will abandon him.

Also, it has been related that the angels appointed for reward and
punishment are other than those who are appointed for questioning, and
that the two angels of grace and punishment will be informed of what the
servant deserves by the two angels of questioning, who have the task of
questioning the servant and ascertaining what he deserves; they relate
this to the angels of retribution and then they ascend to their post in
heaven. These narrations are all permissible, yet we do not prefer one
to another; since they are of similar import, and since our procedure,
in such cases, is to be cautious and non-committal.

Chapter: The purpose for which Allah, the Sublime, entrusts these tasks
to the angels of questioning and the angels of punishment and grace, is
that they worship Him through this, as is the case with the angels who
show their worship through keeping record of the acts of mankind,
inscribing, abrogating them and lifting the record (to Allah), and as is
the case with those who serve Allah by preserving humanity from harm, or
those who are commissioned to destroy the nations, or those who bear the
Throne, or those who circumambulate the Ever-prosperous House (al-Baytu
'1-Ma‘mur), or those who glorify Him or those who are charged with
asking forgiveness for the faithful, or those who are employed in
showing grace to the people of Paradise, or those who are assigned to
torture the people of Hell.

Thus, all worship Him to gain His grace and they do not serve Him in
vain[^2]; as men and jinn do not serve Him for play. But all worship
Him, looking to His reward, or that He should make Him- self known to
them, or to show their thanks to Him, Who favored them with His favors.
For Allah is able to punish him who deserves it, or to shower His grace
upon him who merits it without mediators, for the reasons given above,
and for the Divine wisdom as has been shown.

The position of the two angels who will come and question the dead after
their departure from this world is a theme attested by textual proof
(as-sam‘), whereas the question of Allah quickening the dead at the time
of questioning is a theme proved by reason, since questioning the dead
or inquiring of an inanimate body is inconceivable, because speech is
only valid with a rational being, capable of understanding speech, and
approving it, and thereby bearing the responsibility for what was within
his power.

Yet it has been related that to everyone subject to questioning, life
will be restored after death,that he may be capable of understanding
what is addressed to him; thus the reports which are related confirm
what has been proved by reason. And even if we lack traditions, then the
proof of reason is, indeed, sufficient in this respect.

[^1]: \* \* Not found in N.

[^2]: T, wa ta‘abbuduhum bidhalika liyuthibahum ‘alayha – N, wa
't-ta‘abbudu bidhalika liyuthibahum ‘ala 'l-a‘mali 'l-lati yuadduna biha
't-taklif kamata‘abbada 'l-bashar wa 'l-jinn bi 'l-a‘mal liyuthibahum
‘alayha . . .


