24. Chapter on Al-A‘raf
=======================

Abu Ja‘far says: "Our belief concerning al-A‘raf is that it is a
dividing wall . . ."ash-Shaykh al-Mufid comments that: "It has been said
that al-A‘raf is a mountain midway between Paradise and the Fire. Also,
that it is a dividing wall between Paradise and Hell. It is generally
considered a (particular) place belonging neither to Paradise nor to
Hell."These interpretations are confirmed by traditions, which
furthermore, state that on the Day of Resurrection there will be found
upon it the Messenger of Allah, the Commander of the Believers and the
Imams from his progeny – may the blessing of Allah be upon him and his
family.

Those are they whom Allah, the Exalted, and means by His saying:

***And on the ramparts do men know each by their mark, who shall call to
the inhabitants of Paradise: "Peace be upon you! They have not entered
it, for all their eagerness" [7:46],***

that is, because Allah, the Almighty, will enable them to discriminate
between the inhabitants of Paradise and those of Hell by signs
resembling marks.

This He illustrates further in His saying:

***"They know each by their mark". And also: The sinners shall be known
by their marks [55:41].***

He the Almighty, also says:

***Surely in that are signs for such as mark; surely they are on a way
still un- effaced [15:75-76].***

Thus, He tells that amongst His creatures there is a group which
scrutinizes men and knows them by the marks they bear. It has been
related from the Commander of the Believers, peace be upon him, that he
has said in some of his narrations, "I am the holder of the baton and
the clear-sighted", which means that he knows the state of him whom he
scrutinizes carefully.

It has been related from Abu Ja‘far Muhammad al- Baqir, peace be upon
him, that he was questioned on the meaning of the speech of Allah:
"Surely in that are signs for such as mark[^1] , he said, "That it
refers to us, the People of the House (i.e., the Imams, peace be upon
them)." It is also mentioned in the traditions that Allah, the Almighty
will place therein, that is, al-A‘raf, a group of men who have failed to
merit Paradise by their good acts and have not deserved punishment, yet
they do not merit an eternal abode in Hell; among these are they who
wait for the decision of Allah and entertain hope of intercession; they
will abide there till they are permitted to enter Paradise through the
intercession of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, and the
Commander of the Believers and the Imams, peace be upon them.

It has been mentioned also that it is an abode of those who were not
subject to any relig- ious obligation in their lifetime, thus they do
not deserve either Paradise or Hell; therefore Allah will place them
therein and recompense them with a certain grace which is far below that
of those who merited it by the virtue of their acts. Hence, all that is
mentioned above (concerning al-A‘raf) is tenable by reason and confirmed
by traditions, and yet Allah best knows the truth. What is generally
accepted regarding al-A‘raf is that it is a place midway between
Paradise and Hell; there will stand those whom we call the Proofs of
Allah to His creatures (Hujaj Allah, that is, the Prophet and the
Imams); there, also, will be those whose final judgment has been
deferred. Beyond this Allah knows best what will be.

[^1]: See al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, vol.l, p.218, Tradition nos.l & 2. Also,
al-Mufid,al-Ikhtisas, p.303.


