30. Concerning the descent of revelation (Nuzulu 'l-Wahy)
=========================================================

Ash-Shaykh Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy upon him, says \*on the
descent of revelation that\*[^1] , "Our belief concerning this is that
there is a Tablet between the two eyes of Israfil . . ." ash-Shaykh
al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy upon him, says that Abu Ja‘far depends in
this matter on a shadhdh tradition which is not generally accepted.
Moreover, he has mentioned previously that the Tablet is an angel of
Allah, the Almighty.

Wahy, originally, means a hushed speech; it might also bear the meaning
of any speech which is intended to be understood by the hearer privately
and by no one else, and directed at him and to no one else. But if it is
applied to Allah, the Sublime, then according to the usage of Islam and
the law of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, it signifies
what has been reserved for the messengers, peace be upon them, alone and
is not given to others.

Allah, the Sublime, says:

***So We revealed to Moses's mother, "Suckle him . . ." [28:7];***

thereupon Muslims unanimously agreed that the revelation in this case
was a vision, or a speech addressed to and heard by Moses's mother
alone, when she was asleep. And Allah, the Sublime, says:

***And thy Lord revealed unto the bees [16:68],***

which means a secret illumination, since it is restricted to the bees,
and the bees are acquainted with it without a speech proclaimed loudly
by the speaker in order to be heard by others. And Allah, the Sublime,
says:

***Surely the devils inspire their friends [6:121],***

which means that they whisper to their friends through what they
introduce into their inmost hearing, by which means they inform
privately without telling it abroad. And He, the Exalted, says:

***He came forth unto his people from the sanctuary and inspired them
[19:11],***

which means that he commanded them without the utterance of words. He
likened this (i.e., his signal to them) to revelation in being hidden
from others and secret from them.

Allah, the Exalted, (might give illumination to many of His creatures in
their dreams, the interpretation of which may be proved sound and their
truth established, yet they cannot be specified as revelation, since the
shari‘ah has been settled once and for all. Also, it is not permissible
to say of those who are inspired with the knowledge of something that
Allah has revealed it to them.

Also (according to our tenets) Allah, the Almighty might inspire the
proofs after His Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, with speech
which descends to them, revealing what will be, but still it cannot be
called revelation for the reasons given above, which confirms that the
general consensus of the learned Muslims is that no revelation can
descend on anyone after our Prophet, may Allah bless him and his progeny
and grant him salvation. Therefore, none of these things which we
mentioned can be called a revelation to anyone, since it is for Allah,
the Exalted, to permit the use of the term at one time and forbid it at
another, sometimes to prohibit it and to allow it to others. As for its
significance, it never departs from its true meaning as given above.

Chapter: As for the revelation from Allah, the Most High, to His
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his progeny, it was conveyed to him,
sometimes without an intermediary, and some- times from the lips of the
angels who transmitted it to him. What Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy
upon him, has mentioned concerning the Tablet and the Pen, and what he
confirmed on this matter, has only one tradition supporting it.

Yet we do not rely on it, nor do we affirm its authenticity, and we
testify only to that which we know, since the tradition is not
mutawatir, nor is it confirmed by the consensus of opinion, nor does the
Qur’an proclaim it, nor is it established by a Proof (an imam) of Allah,
the Almighty, that it would be considered tenable. And the best course
is to reserve judgment on it, and to allow it without affirming it or
declaring it sound definitively, and keep it within the bounds of
possibility. As for the certainty with which Abu Ja‘far affirms it and
his belief in it, this is nothing but blind imitation, and far be it
from us to imitate (anything) blindly.

[^1]: \* \* Not found in N.


