33. Chapter on Excess and Delegation (Al-Ghuluww wa’t-Tafwid)
=============================================================

Abu Ja‘far says: "Chapter concerning the denial of Excess and Delegation
".ash-Shaykh al-Mufid says: 'Excess' (al-ghuluww)[^1], linguistically
means 'exceeding the limit and turning aside from the true goal'. Allah,
the Almighty, says:

***O, People of the Book! Do not exaggerate in your religion, nor utter
aught concerning Allah save the truth [4:171].***

Hence, He forbade exceeding the limits concerning the belief in the
Messiah, and warned against turning aside from the true goal in speech,
and declared the Christians' claims about him excess, since they went
beyond the limit, as we have explained.

The Extremists (al-Ghulat) among those who outwardly profess Islam, are
those who attribute divinity and prophethood to the Commander of the
Believers and Imams of his progeny, peace be upon them, and ascribe to
them privileges concerning their status in this world and the world to
come, by which they go beyond the limit and turn aside from the goal;
hence they are evil-doers and infidels whom the Commander of the
Believers \*has sentenced to death, and the stake;\* [^2] also the
Imams, peace be upon them, have branded them with unbelief and departing
from the pale of Islam.

Chapter: As for what Abu Ja‘far mentions of the death of our Prophet and
the Imams by poison or murder, some of this is confirmed as fact and
some not. What is confirmed is that the Commander of the Believers,
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace be upon them, departed from this world by
murder, none of them died a natural death. Musa ibn Ja‘far, peace be
upon him, was killed by poison.

It is highly probable that ar-Rida (‘Ali ibn Musa) was poisoned, yet
this cannot be confirmed. As for the others, there is no justification
for the claim that they were either poisoned or murdered or killed
through persecution, since the reports concerning this matter are
extremely confused, and there are no means of proving it definitely.

The adherents of the doctrine of delegation (al-Mufawwidah)[^3] are a
group of extremists who are distinguished from the others by their
peculiar claim that though the Imams are created, originated beings, and
not eternal, yet they ascribe to them creation and sustaining. Also,
they maintained that Allah, the Exalted, created them and ceased to
create, delegating to them the creation of the world and what lay
therein.

As for the Hallajiyyah, they are a certain group of Sufis, the adherents
of the doctrine of licentiousness (ibahah) and incarnation
(al-hulul)[^4] . Al-Hallaj[^5] outwardly claimed to be a Shi‘ah, yet he,
in fact, was a Sufi. The Hallajiyyah are, indeed, heretics and zindiqs,
appearing to each sect as if they were of their persuasion, and claiming
impossible powers for al-Hallaj, as the fire-worshippers used to ascribe
miracles to Zoroaster, and the Christians who attribute miracles and
wonders to their monks. Yet, fire-worshippers and Christians are nearer
to fulfilling duties than they are, and, indeed, they are further
removed from the observance and practice of the law than are the
fire-worshippers and the Christians.

Chapter: As for the claim of Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy upon him,
that he who accuses the learned divines of Qum of attributing to the
Imams less than their due, should be stigmatized as an extremist. In
fact, the charging of this group with such attribution is not a sign of
excess, since amongst those who are mentioned as learned divines and
scholars, there are many who accuse the bona fide scholars of
attributing less than their due to the Imams, be they from Qum or from
any other country or any other people.

We have heard a narration, the meaning of which is plain, related to the
authority of Abu Ja‘far Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Walid"[^6], may
Allah have mercy upon him, and the interpretation in favour of taqsir is
inescapable. This is what is related on his authority: "The first degree
of excess is to deny that the Prophet and the Imams were ever fallible
(sahw)", Then if this was indeed related by him, he in fact attributes
less than their due to the Imams, and yet he is one of the divines of
Qum.

Moreover, we found a group of the divines of Qum who openly and firmly
made this attribution in their belief, and they were degrading the Imams
from their proper ranks, and alleging that they were ignorant of many of
the religious ordinances until they received illumination. Also, we saw
that many of them claim that they (the Imams), apply religious law
according to their personal opinion and suppositions, and yet they claim
that they are divines and this indeed, is attributing to the Imams less
than their due.

Indeed, it is a sufficient sign of excess to claim that the Imams are
not created beings, and that they are divine and eternal, since the only
logical conclusion of this assertion is excess; that the Imams are the
creators of bodies, originators of substances, and bring into existence
accidents which are beyond human power. We need no more than this to
judge or to ascertain their position without the signs which Abu Ja‘far,
holds the marks of excess.

[^1]: al-Ghuluww: The technical term for the ultra-Shi‘ah groups.
"Originally, it seems to have had", as Friedlaender observed, "a wider
range and to have been applied to other than Shi‘ite movements", (op.
cit., p.12). ‘Ali burnt\* several of certain groups of them who publicly
proclaimed his divinity. ash-Shahristani says that the innovations of
the extremists can be restricted to four: Anthropomorphism (at-tashbih,
al-bada’, i.e., mutability of Allah's Will), ar-raj‘ah (the return) and
at-tanasukh, transmigration or reincarnation, (al-Milal, vo1.2, p.11).
See also Lisanu 'l-‘Arab, vol.l5, p.132; an-Nawbakhti, Firaqu
'sh-Shi‘ah, p.35; al-Ash‘ari, op. cit., vol.l, p.16; Ibn Hazm, al-Fisal,
vol.4, p.186; Ibnu 'l-Jawzi, Talbis Iblis, p.99; at- Tahanawi, Kashshaf
istilahati 'l-funun, vol.2, p.1099.\*[What has come to us in the Shi‘ite
Traditions Amiru '1-Mu’minin, peace be upon him, has not killed them by
burning but they were suffocated by an overwhelming sour fumes. What has
been narrated by the translator was quoted from the Sunni sources (ed).]

[^2]: 56 T, hakama fihim Amiru 'l Mu’minin bi 'l-qatl wa 't-tahriq bi
'n-nar. . .; N,hakama fihim Amiru 'l-Mu’minin bi 'l-kufr.

[^3]: Al-Mufawwidah: A group which maintains that Allah created
Muhammad, peace be upon him and his progeny, (some add ‘Ali, peace be
upon him),then He committed to him (or to them) the management of the
world and the disposal of its affairs. Then Muhammad, peace be upon him
and his progeny, entrusted the rule of the universe to ‘Ali and the
Imams, peace be upon them, after him. According to Friedlaender, "At the
bottom of this idea lies the Gnostic discrimination between the
'unoriginated, inconceiv- able Father' and the word (Logos) emanating
from him which is Demiurge", op. cit., p.92; see also al-Baghdadi,
al-Firaq, p.237; al-Ash‘ari, op. cit., p.16; Ibnu '1-Jawzi, op. cit.,
p.98; Ibn Hazm, op. cit., vol.4, p.179.

[^4]: al-Hululiyyah: A group who derive their name from the doctrine of
incarnation, hulul, and incorporation, imtizaj. They held that it is
possible and permissible for Allah to become incarnated in man's body.
Most of them have, also, an inclination to a relaxed attitude towards
religious obligations prescribed by the Divine Law. The Hululis are
often mentioned as followers of and related to al-Hallaj; nevertheless,
al-Hujwiri denies this relation and says that, "In the compositions of
al-Hallaj himself there is nothing but profound theosophy" (al-Hujwiri,
Kashfu 'l-mahjub, Eng. transl. by Prof. Nicholson, R.A., p.260). See
al-Baghdadi, op. cit., p.241; al-Ash‘ari, op. cit., pp.13-14; Ibnu
'1-Jawzi, op. cit., p.171 ; Friedlaender, L, op. cit., vol.2, p.12;
at-Tahanawi, op. cit., vol.1, p.352.

[^5]: Abu '1-Mughith al-Husayn ibn Mansur ibn Mahama al-Baydawi:
APersian mystic and theologian. His grandfather is said to have been a
magician. He was born in 244/858 at at-Tur near al-Bayda (Fars). He was
accused of being charlatan by the Mu‘tazilah, ex-communicated by a
tawqi‘ of the Imamiyyah and a fatwa of the Zahiriyyah, and twice
arrested by the ‘Abbasid police (E.I., the article, "al-Hallaj", by
Massignon, L.). "The Sufi shaykhs", says al-Hujwiri, "are at variance
concerning him. Some reject him, while others accept him. Others
suspended their judgment about him" (op. cit., p.150). He was executed
by crucifixion after a trial on Tuesday, 24th Dhi 'l-Qi‘dah, 309 AH
(26th March, 922 AD), during the caliphate of al-Muqtadir, because in
one of his ecstasies he had cried out "I am the Truth". "al-Hallaj",
says al-Hujwiri, "was the author of brilliant compositions and
allegories and polished sayings in theology and jurisprudence" (op.
cit., p.151). See Ibnu 'n-Nadim, al-Fihrist, pp.190-2;Ibn Khallikan, op.
cit., vol.l, p.183; adh-Dhahabi, Mizanu 'l-i‘tidal, vol.l, p.548;
Browne, E.G., A Literary History of Persia, vol.l, p.428; Nicholson,
R.A., A Literary History of the Arabs, p.399.

[^6]: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid: He is known asAbu
Ja‘far al-Qummi (d. 343 AH), was a celebrated traditionist, a jurist of
high reputation and the spritual head of the Qummi divines. He was
accepted by the traditionists as a trustworthy and realiable
transmitter. He was the shaykh of Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi. See an-Najashi,
op. cit., p.271; at-Tusi, op. cit., p.495; al-Mamaqani, op.cit., vol.3,
p.100, no.10534.


