36. Concerning the interpretation of the verse 42:43
====================================================

**Concerning the interpretation of the verse:**

***Say (O Muhammad, Unto Mankind):"I Ask You No Requital Thereof"***

Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy upon him, says that Allah, the Exalted,
has ordained a requital for His Prophet, may the blessing of Allah be
upon him and his progeny, for his apostleship and guidance of mankind's
devotion to his Ahlu 'l-Bayt, peace be upon them. Then, he adduces in
evidence of this the speech of Allah:

***Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): "I ask you no requital for this, save
loving-kindness towards (my) kinsfolk" [42:23].***

ash-Shaykh al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy upon him, comments that it is
not true that Allah, the Exalted, has made the requital of His Prophet
men's devotion to his Ahlu 'l-Bayt, peace be upon them, nor that He made
this a part of his reward. For the reward of the Prophet, may the
blessing of Allah be upon him and his progeny, for his devotion to Him
is perpetual grace. It is this with which Allah, the Exalted, out of His
justice, generosity and bounty, has bound Himself to recompense him. For
the rewarding of a deed is not owed to men as the act should be devoted
sincerely to Allah alone, and that which is Allah's is to be rewarded
from Allah alone, and none save Him. Further, Allah, the Exalted, says:

***"And, O my people! I do not ask of you wealth for this; my wage rests
with Allah alone" [11:29].***

He also says:

***"O my people! I do not ask of you a wage for this; my wage falls only
upon Him Who did originate me" [ibid.:51].***

Then, if the requital was in accordance with what Abu Ja‘far presumed
about the meaning of the verse, then the Qur’an would have contradicted
itself, since the verse would have to be rendered like this – 'I do not
ask you a wage, but I do ask of you a wage'. And also – 'My wage is with
Allah alone, but rather my wage is with Allah as well as with others
than Him'. And this is impossible since the text of the Qur’an cannot
bear this meaning.

If then, it happened that someone said: "Then what is the meaning of 'I
do not ask of you a wage for this, save loving- kindness towards (my)
kinsfolk'? Does it not mean that He asked of them devotion towards his
Prophet's progeny in return for what he has done for them?", then we
would have to say that the facts are now what you have presumed them to
be; since the proof of reason and of the Qur’an refute it, as we
demonstrated above.

The exceptive (istithna’) in this particular place is not part of the
main sentence because it refers to something distinct from the main
clause; 'I do not ask of you a return for this, but I ask and oblige you
to show devotion towards kinsfolk'. Then His speech, "I do not ask of
you a return for this", is an independent sentence complete in itself;
while His speech (only I demand of you) "loving-kindness towards
kinsfolk" forms a new sentence signifying, "but I do ask of you devotion
to (my) kinsfolk". This is similar to His saying:

***Then the angels bowed themselves all together, save Iblis
[15:30-31],***

which means, "whereas Iblis (did not)"; hence it is not an exceptive
clause dependent on the preceding. And His saying:

***They are an enemy to me, except the Lord of all beings [26:77], which
means, 'but the Lord of all beings is not an enemy of mine'.***

The poet says:

A land in which there is no companion, but the gazelles and the piebald
camels.Then the meaning of his verse, 'A land in which there is no
companion', is a self-sufficient sentence, complete in itself, while the
verse, 'but the gazelles . . .' being a new sentence, means 'but there
are gazelles and piebald camels in it'. This is clear and has no
obscurity for anyone with any knowledge of language, and it is too
well-known to linguists to require elucidation.


