39. On the Divergent Traditions (Al -Ahadithu 'l-Mukhtalifah)
=============================================================

Abu Ja‘far says on the divergent traditions .ash-Shaykh al-Mufid, may
Allah have mercy upon him, comments that Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have
mercy upon him, did not explain the method of ascertaining which
tradition is to be followed as binding precedent in jurisprudence, and
which is not. In fact, he gives only a brief account of this,
notwithstanding the need for a detailed examination to discriminate
between what must be followed and what not, and for scrutinizing every-
one of them, to tell the true tradition from the spurious, and what he
has established in his summary is insufficient.

We have discussed the divergence of the traditions and explained the
difference between the sound and the spurious, the true and the false,
and what is binding precedent and what is to be disregarded, and that
which agrees in content, although the wording differs, and that which
stems from prudent fear (at-taqiyyah) and that where the meaning is the
same as that expressed. All this is set out in our books and
compilations in such a way as to dispel any doubt for those who will
consult them, and grace is of Allah, the Almighty. He who wants to
comprehend this subject should consult our book entitled at-Tamhid, and
that entitled Masabihu 'n- nur.

Also, the responses (given) to our followers throughout the world. In
brief, not every tradition ascribed to the truthful Imams does, in fact,
derive from them, since patent absurdities are ascribed to them (with
others). Consequently, he who has not mastered this science cannot
distinguish the true from the false.

Thus, different expressions have been related on their authority, of
which the meanings are identical though they differ in expression. This
difference is due to the fact that they deal with both the specific and
the general (al-khass wa 'l-‘amm), and the supererogatory and the
obligatory; so, also, some deal with particular points on which the
decision cannot be applied to other cases, and still others are worded
metaphorically, out of prudent fear and cautious behavior. Each of these
categories has its own inferences and its own proofs, and grace is of
Allah, the Exalted.

However, these general considerations can be elaborated when we classify
the divergent traditions accurately, as we have discussed above, and
determined the meaning of them in the manner we described. Thus, the
false tradition, however many authorities are given for it, does not
circulate as widely as the genuine which has been related on the
authority of the Imams, peace be upon them.

And what has been related on their authority which is delivered out of
expediency, is not related frequently on their authority like the one
which is acted upon, since one of the two inevitably is given preference
over the other, if the chain of the authority is scrutinized closely.
Moreover, our companions have not agreed unanimously either upon what is
delivered because of expediency or upon what has been adulterated
(tadlis), or forged, or what has been put in their mouth falsely, or
deceitfully ascribed to them.

Then, (as a general rule), when we find that one of the two traditions
has been accepted as genuine and binding precedent, then it is that
which is sound in both its exoteric and esoteric meanings, whereas the
second one is not feasible, either because it has been said from
prudence or it has been adulterated.

And, if we find a tradition related on the authority of ten of the
followers of the Imams, peace be upon them, differs from another in both
expression and meaning, and if it is impossible to reconcile the two, we
should prefer the one related by ten to that related by two or three
authorities; and we should consider that which is sustained only by a
few as being delivered from prudence, or else that its transmitter has
deluded himself.

And, if we find that a particular tradition has been put into practice
repeatedly by chosen companions of the Imams, peace be upon them,
continuously and in the lifetime of one Imam after another, then we
should inevitably prefer it to a tradition which others sustain, and
which differs from it, provided that it has not been strengthened by
other chains or put into practice. And, if we find a tradition related
on the authority of the learned divines of the group (i.e., the Shi‘ah)
and they have not testified to anything which differs from it, we
consider the first to be sound; even if the latter has been related on
others' authority, they are not comparable in number or distinction to
the Imams, as are the first, since this (i.e., closeness to the Imams)
is the sign of veracity and the distinction between true and false.

It is indeed unlikely that the Imams, peace be upon them, should deliver
an opinion (responsum) dictated by prudence (at- taqiyyah) in a certain
case, and that this should be heard by the learned divines among their
companions without their having any knowledge of its true
interpretation, since, even if this escaped one, it would not escape
all, as they were well-versed in deliver- ing response, and the limits
of what is lawful and what is prohibited, what is obligatory and what is
supererogatory, and the general ordinances of religion.

Above all, whenever we find a tradition differing from the text of the
Book (Qur’an) and it cannot be reconciled with it, we discard it as the
Book and the consensus of the Imams' dictate, and so, if we find a
tradition contradicts the rules of reason, we discard it, as reason
declares it corrupt; yet we judge either that it is sound and has been
delivered from prudence or false and has been ascribed to the Imams, so
we content ourselves with mentioning it, and admitting it in the light
of the various kinds of expediency accepted as lawful by the shari‘ah
and that which it proscribes, or those the current usage sanctions or
denies.

This is part of the general rule which has been described in detail, and
which (if applied) will show the truth in divergent traditions; yet the
final judgment cannot be established before specifying the divergent
traditions and applying the rules appropriate in each case, as we have
explained. As for the tradition which Abu Ja‘far, may Allah have mercy
upon him, relies on, and which has been mentioned in the book attributed
to Sulaym[^1] , on the authority of Aban ibn Abi ‘Ayyash, the (general)
meaning of it is sound, yet none the less, the book is unauthoritative
and most of it cannot be accepted as binding precedent, since it has
suffered corruption and adulteration; therefore the scrupulous should
abandon all that it contains, and not rely on the greater part of it, or
imitate its narrator, but enquire of the learned divines, to distinguish
for him the sound from the spurious. And Allah is He Who guides to the
truth.

[^1]: Sulaym ibn Qays al-Hilali al-‘Amiri al-Kufi: His kunyah was
AbuSadiq. He was accused by al-Hajjaj for his Shi‘ite learnings, a
charge which made him go into hiding. He was a companion of ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib and known as a man of piety. It is said that his face was
illuminated by his piety. It is also said that he handed over the
traditions entrusted to him by‘Ali ibn Abi Talib to Aban ibn Abi ‘Ayyash
as a mark of gratitude for granting him a refuge. See at-Tusi, op. cit.,
p.43; al-Kishshi, op. cit., p.68; al-Mamaqani, op. cit., vol.2, p.52,
no.5157; Ibnu 'n-Nadim, op. cit., p.219.


