The Duties of Hajj of Tamattu'
==============================

**1. IHRAAM of the HAJJ of TAMATTU'**

The duties of the HAJJ are thirteen as outlined earlier, and the first
of these duties is the IHRAAM.

After the completion of the UMRAH of TAMATTU', when one intends to
start the HAJJ of TAMATTU', the first thing to do is to declare IHRAAM
for the HAJJ of TAMATTU'.

The IHRAAM is the same as that of the UMRAH of TAMATTU', with the
exception that the IHRAAM for the UMRAH must be declare at one of the
MIQAAT's mentioned above, whereas the IHRAAM for the HAJJ is declared in
Makkah.

It is desirable that the declaration for the IHRAAM of the HAJJ be made
from the MASJID EL-HARAAM or the Holy Mosque of the CA'BAH. The NEYYAH
or intention for the IHRAAM would be:

"I declare the IHRAAM for the HAJJ of TAMATTU' seeking nearness to
Allah Almighty".

The timing of the HAJJ of TAMATTU' is after completing the duties of
UMRAH of TAMATTU' and before time of WUQUF in ARAFAAT.


**2. Wuquf in Arafat**


The second duty of the HAJJ is WUQUF in ARAFAAT, which is to remain in
ARAFAAT on ARAFAH Day (the ninth day of Dhil-Hajjah) from Noon until
Sunset.

The NEYYAH for this WUQUF is:

"AQIFU (I stay) in ARAFAAT for the HAJJ of TAMATTU' seeking nearness to
Allah Almighty." 3. WUQUF in MASH'AR al-HARAAM (al- MUZDALAFAH)

After sunset on the eve of the Eid, one must leave ARAFAAT and head to
the MASH'AR AL-HARAAM, and must stay (WUQUF) in the desert of the
MASH'AR until sunrise - as a precaution - of the Day of Eid, which is
the th10 Day of Dhil-Hajjah.

When the FAJR, or dawn break, of the 10 Day is drawing near one must
declare the intention of WUQUF in the MASH'AR as follows:

th "AQIFU (I stay) in the desert of the MASH'AR AL- HARAAM form the
FAJR to Sunrise, seeking nearness to Allah."

4 - 6. The Duties of MINA - Stoning, Sacrifice, & Shaving

At sunrise on the Day of Eid, one must go to MINA and perform three
duties:

1. RAM'Y - the stoning of JAMARAT-UL- AQABAH (the largest JAMARAH -
obelisk) with seven small stones consecutively. The NEYYAH for the
stoning is as follows: "ARMI (I stone) JAMARAT UL-AQABAH as ordered by
Allah Almighty"

2. DHABH - slaughtering a camel, cow, or sheep. The NEYYAH for this is
as follows: "ADHHI (I sacrifice) as ordered by Allah Almighty."

The sacrifice must be complete and must not have any limbs missing, and
must be healthy, and should be of certain age range as detailed in the
book MANAASIK AL-HAJJ.

As a recommended precaution and it is also desirable that the person
offering the sacrifice uses some of the sacrifice for food, gives a
third of it as a gift, and gives the other third to the poor or the
charity.

3. HALQ - shaving the head, or trimming some hair of the head or the
face, with the intention or NEYYAH as:

"I shave or trim for the HAJJ of TAMATTU' as ordered by Allah
Almighty".

On the occasion of the first HAJJ as a recommended precaution the male
HAAJJ must shave his head.


