7 - 11. the Duties in Makkah
============================

After discharging the duties of MINA, the HAAJJ (pilgrim) goes to
Makkah, on the same Day of Eid, to perform five duties:

**1. TAWAAF AL-ZEYAARAH**

The NEYYAH for this is: "I do TAWAAF AL- ZEYAARAH as ordered by Allah
Almighty" 2. The SALA of TAWAAF AL-ZEYAARAH by, or behind, MAQAAM
IBRAHIM (pbuh).

The NEYYAH for the SALA (prayer), which is of two Rak'ats, is: "USALLI
(I pray) two Rak'ats of SALA of TAWAAF AL-ZEYAARAH, seeking nearness to
Allah Almighty."

3. SA'Y between the SAFA and MARWAH, as mentioned previously. The
NEYYAH is: "AS'EI (I strife) between the SAFA and MARWAH for the HAJJ of
TAMATTU', seeking nearness to Allah Almighty."

4. TAWAAF AL-NISAA' - it is like the TAWAAF AL-ZEYAARAH but with
intention or NEYYAH: "I do TAWAAF AL- NISAA' as ordered by Allah
Almighty"

5. The SALA of TAWAAF AL-NISAA' which is two Rak'ats with the NEYYAH:
"USALLI (I pray) two Rak'ats of SALA of TAWAAF AL-NISAA', seeking
nearness to Allah Almighty."


**Two points**

There is no objection to staying in MINA on the 10th day, the Eid Day,
to do the duties of MINA and to remain there for the rest of the day.
One may then go to Makkah to perform its duties on the 11 or the 12 or
even after finishing all the duties of MINA.

After performing all the duties of Makkah, everything becomes Halal to
the HAAJJ (the pilgrim) such as dwelling with one's spouse, the usage of
scent and perfume, etc. except two things:

1. Hunting,

2. Uprooting the trees and vegetation of the Holy Mosque (this because
of the sanctity of the Mosque rather than the restriction of the
IHRAAM).


**12. MABEET in MINA**

The HAAJJ must remain in MINA on the eve ththof 11 and the 12 , and if
he approached his wife while in the status of IHRAAM or engaged in
hunting, then he must also remain thin MINA on the eve of the 13 . The
NEYYAH for the MABEET is: "ABEETU (I stay) in MINA seeking nearness to
Allah Almighty."

The obligatory duration of MABEET is half of the night, whether the
first half or the second half of the night. One may also spend this time
in Makkah in acts worship instead of the MABEET in MINA.

If the HAAJJ does not approach his wife (for sexual contact), or does
not hunt while in IHRAAM, he may leave MINA on the after thnoon of the
12 , but if he stayed in MINA on ththe 12 until sunset, then he must
continues ththe MABEET in MINA for the eve of the 13 .

If the HAAJJ does not perform MABEET in MINA, (stay in MINA) he must
pay CAFFARAH of one sheep per day, and in that case he would have
committed disobedience if he intentionally did not stay in MINA but his
HAJJ will correct.


