Letters of the Imam of the Time (a.s)
=====================================

Narrators have recorded some of the letters that His Eminence addressed
to Shia personalities. Some of them are replies to legal questions posed
to His Eminence. Here we present some examples of the same:

### 1. Letter of the Imam of the time to Ahmad bin Ishaq

Ahmad bin Ishaq Ashari Qummi was the leader of the group of Qom pilgrims
who went for the Ziyarat of the Purified Imams (a.s). He is one of the
important narrators of traditions. Once a Shia man met him and gave him
a letter of Ja’far, the son of Imam Hadi (a.s). In this letter, Ja’far
had introduced himself and informed that after the passing away of his
brother, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s), he was the leader and chief of the
Islamic world. And Ja’far claimed to possess what the people were in
need of regarding the lawful and the unlawful matters of the Islamic
Law. After he got this letter, Ahmad wrote to His Eminence, the Awaited
Imam, and also enclosed the original letter of Ja’far. His Eminence,
Imam Mahdi (a.s) replied to Ahmad as follows:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

“Your letter has been received, may Allah protect you, and a letter
attached to it, with the things mentioned in your letter. In spite of
the fact that the words and imports of the letter were metamorphosed and
confused and mistakes and errors were numerous, as I have understood; if
you had paid close attention to it you would also have realized it.

Praise is only to the Lord of the worlds, a praise not shared by anyone
else: Praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds and by that favor and
kindness that is on us from Him. Allah Almighty has perfected the truth
and rendered falsehood invalid. And Him that I mention is the witness
and there is no doubt in what I am saying, we shall collate these things
now. And every fact about which questions shall be raised. And the
writer of that letter to you and none from the creatures has the
responsibility of Imamate, obedience and covenant. And soon we shall
explain to you those matters that shall be sufficient to convince you.

O Ahmad! May Allah have mercy on you. The Almighty Allah has not created
people in vain and He has not left them aimless and useless. Rather, by
His power He created them and provided them with hearing, sight, mind
and conscience. Then He sent towards them prophets, who were warners and
givers of glad-tidings. They command the people for obedience of Allah
and restrain them from His disobedience. They introduce the divine
command and religion to them. He sent down the Book on them and sent
angels towards them so that they may be mediums and channels between the
Almighty and the prophets.

Among the prophets there is someone for whom Allah made the fire, cool
and mercy and made him His friend and confidant.

Among them was one such that Allah spoke with him emphatically and
openly made his staff into a python.

Someone from them is such that enlivened the dead and cured the born
blind and the leper.

Someone from them is such that Allah taught him the language of the
birds and he was given everything.

And after that He sent His Eminence, Muhammad (a.s) the mercy for the
worlds. And by him He completed the favor and ended the series of
prophets and sent him for all the people of the world. And (he)
demonstrated and explained his truthfulness, his signs and his
prophethood to the people. At

last, he, who was a praiser of Allah Almighty, fortunate and successful,
he also met his Lord.

On this point, he entrusted the affairs to his brother, cousin, legatee
and inheritor, that is Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s) and after that to his
successors from the sons of His Eminence one after the other. And
revived His religion and perfected His light through them. He accorded
them a clear distinction among their brothers, cousins and other family
members so that they may be recognized as the proof of Allah and leaders
among the common people. In such a way that He made them (Prophet and
his legatees) free of all sins and defects and pure from impurity. And
also, the Almighty Allah made them the custodians of His knowledge and
wisdom and the center of His secrets and confidential matters and
supported them with proofs and arguments. And if He had not done so, all
the people would have been same from all aspects indeed; truth and
falsehood, knowledgeable and ignorant would not have been distinguished.

Therefore, know that this false man has associated falsehood to the
Almighty God. And that what he claims (in this letter) is falsehood and
fabrication, I don’t know on what he relies to prove his claima On his
deep understanding of the religion of Goda By Allah! He is not capable
to discriminate between legal and illegal and incorrect from correct.
And whether it is on his knowledge and know-howa He is not able to
distinguish a fact from a lie and the clear from the ambiguous, and the
extent of ritual prayer and its time. Or is it that he relies on his
piety and abstemiousnessa Allah is a witness that he omitted obligatory
prayer for forty days with the false notion that by omitting prayer he
would be able to acquire the art of deception. And may be this
information has reached you also. The containers of wine are present for
him and signs of his sins and disobedience of Allah Almighty are obvious
for everyone. Does he intend to prove his claim by a sign and miraclea
Then he should put forward his argument and miracle. Does he rely on any
argumenta Then he should mention his argument. The Almighty Allah says:

**“Ha Mim. The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the
Wise. We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between
them two save with truth and (for) an appointed term; and those who
disbelieve turn aside from what they are warned of. Say: Have you
considered what you call upon besides Allaha Show me what they have
created of the earth, or have they a share in the heavensa Bring me a
book before this or traces of knowledge, if you are truthful. And who is
in greater error than he who calls besides Allah upon those that will
not answer him till the day of resurrection and they are heedless of
their calla And when men are gathered together they shall be their
enemies, and shall be deniers of their worshipping
(them).”<sup>[1]</sup>**

O Ahmad! May Allah give you divine opportunity to test and ask this
transgressor about those matters I have explained to you. And ask him
about a verse of Quran so that he may explain its meaning and ask him
about an obligatory prayer to explain its extent and its obligatory
rituals. At that time you would know his condition and limits,
understand his defect and ignorance. May Allah make him accountable.

Although the Almighty Allah has not appointed Imamate on any two
brothers, except Imams Hasan and Husain (a.s). And in the same way has
accorded us permission in some matters. Truth is manifested and
falsehood, destroyed. And I am hopeful of the favors and sufficiency.
Allah is sufficient for us and the best of helpers. And may Allah bless
Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad.”

This letter proves that the personality of Ja’far who claimed Imamate
was questionable and in fact, the Imam considered him to be bereft of
all the qualities necessary for the high position of Imamate. So much so
that he has introduced Ja’far to be absolutely ignorant and foolish. Not
only was he incapable to interpret the law of Shariah and other
religious matters, he could not even discriminate between his right and
left hand. Therefore, how could he claim the lofty status of Wilayata
<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Ahqaf 46:1-6 [2] Guardianship

### 2. Letter of the Imam of the time to Al-Amri and his son

Uthman Ibne Saeed Amri and his son Muhammad wrote a letter to His
Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) stating that Mithami, a Shia, has informed
them that Mukhtar, a deviated person, has called the Shias to the
Imamate of Ja’far. In reply to that letter, His Eminence wrote as
follows:

“May Allah make you successful in His obedience and steadfast in his
religion and may He make you fortunate by His pleasure. I have learnt of
what you have mentioned about Mithami and what he has stated about
Mukhtar. And the one who met Mukhtar and spoke to him and concluded that
the sole successor of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) is only Ja’far, the son of
Imam Hadi (a.s), and that he considered his Imamate to be valid. We have
taken note of the whole matter that you had received from the friends
and companions (Shias). And I seek refuge of Allah from blindness after
light and vision, and from deviation after guidance and from evil deeds
and dangerous mischiefs, while the Almighty Allah says:

**“Do men think that they will be left alone on saying: We believe, and
not be trieda”<sup>[1]</sup>**

And it is indeed surprising! How people fall into mischief and step into
bewilderment and lean towards left and right and separate from their
religion. Are they victims of doubta Are they inimical to trutha Are
they ignorant of the message and import of authentic traditions and
correct reportsa Or is it that they are aware of it but they have made
themselves forget ita

Indeed the earth is never devoid of the proof, whether apparent or
hidden. They have not seen and do not know that the Imams have arrived
one after the other after their Prophet till the position reached Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s) and he sat on the seat of his respected father by the
leave of Allah and guided towards the true path. He was the luminous
star and the brilliant moon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Ankabut 29:2

Then the Almighty Allah summoned him to His presence and took him in His
mercy. He, like his respected forefathers, made a bequest and entrusted
his successorship and the covenant and last Imamate to his successor and
his legatee. The Almighty Allah, by His predetermined will, concealed
his location and His elevated rank is with us, Ahle Bayt and His favor
is for us. If the Almighty Allah permits me to reappear, I would present
truth in the best form and the most illuminated argument and sign, and I
would have made myself apparent and established the proof. But the will
of Allah is more dominant and cannot be subverted and His decision does
not change. And the time decided by Him does not become apparent. On the
basis of this they should keep aloof from their sensual desires and
remain steadfast on the path they were on before this. And they must not
try to search out needlessly that, which Allah has kept concealed as
they would become sinful and they must not try to expose the divine
secret, as they would regret it.

Although they should know that the truth is by us and with us and no one
except us would claim thus, but that he or she would be a liar and
fabricator. None except us can claim thus, except that he or she be
deviated. Therefore, what we have stated here should suffice for them,
rather than seeking further clarifications. Rather than desiring more
explanation and details, they should rest content with this much, if
Allah wills.”<sup>[1]</sup>

Ja’far had spread deviation and misguidance among the Shias and had
become a denier of His Eminence, the Awaited Imam. In this letter, His
Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) has exposed him and due to their deviation
from truth and because of their own misguidance he has denounced his
followers. In the same way he has justified his occultation and lack of
reappearance to divine will and says that His Eminence, had no say in
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kamaluddin 2/190

### 3. Letter of the Imam of the time to some of his Shias

Ibne Abi Ghanam Qazwini along with some Shia people had a difference of
opinion regarding the successorship of His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s). So much so that Qazwini denied the existence of His Eminence, the
Awaited Imam (a.s). However, others stressed that the successor of His
Eminence was present and he is His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s). They
wrote a letter to the Awaited Imam and related their discussion with
Qazwini. His Eminence, wrote in reply as follows:

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

May the Almighty Allah keep you and us safe from the mischiefs and may
He bestow you and us with certainty and may He also protect you and us
from bad consequences. Information regarding the doubt and denial of a
group from you in religion and the matter of guardianship (Wilayat) has
reached us. Our sorrow and anger is for you and not for our ownselves,
as the Almighty Allah is with us, therefore except for Him we are not
needful of anyone else and the truth is with us. Therefore I am not
afraid if someone turns away from us. And we are the first creations of
our Lord and (other) creatures and people were created afterwards. And
you O People! Why have you fallen into doubt and bewildermenta Have you
not heard the statement of Almighty Allah that He said:

**“O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you; then if you quarrel about anything, refer it
to Allah and the Apostle, if you believe in Allah and the last day; this
is better and very good in the end.”<sup>[1]</sup>**

Don’t you know that it has come in traditional reports that unforeseen
events had befallen the past and would befall the remaining Imamsa Have
you not seen how in all the times, the Almighty Allah had made a refuge
for you to seek protection ina He appointed torches of guidance from the
time of Adam (a.s) till the time of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) that you may
obtain

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Nisa 4:59

guidance and direction, in such a way that whenever a guide went away,
another one took up his place and torch.

When the Almighty Allah took away Imam Hasan Askari (a.s), do you think
He has rendered His religion invalid and severed His relation with the
creaturesa Never! Till the Day of Judgment and the time of the exposure
of Allah’s command, which is not in favor of the people, it cannot be
thus.

Indeed, His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) passed away with success
and good fortune like his respected forefathers and in such a condition
that his knowledge and will is present with us. And his successor would
perform his functions. And except for an unjust criminal, no one has a
dispute with us in this matter. And except for a denier disbeliever, no
one claims this our divine position. And if it would not have rendered
the command of Allah to be subverted and His secret had not been
exposed, our right upon you would have become so clear that your
intellects would have become astonished and your doubts and
uncertainties would have disappeared. However, what Allah had willed,
predestined and written would surely happen and nothing except that.
Then fear Allah and submit to our affair, and leave this matter with us.
And do not persist in acquiring that which Allah has concealed and do
not get deviated to the left and right. And make our right and
illuminated path as the aim. Indeed I wish your well-being and Allah is
witness upon you and me. If I had no affection for you and had not
desired mercy and good for you, I would not have said anything to you.

It is by way of trial and divine test for us that a misguided oppressor,
without any right has become a prisoner of his selfish desires and
usurped the right of others. Like the daughter of the Messenger of Allah
it is obligatory I should be patient and in the end the ignorant and
tyrant would see the consequences of his deeds. May Allah Almighty
protect you and us from perditions, calamities and evils. And Allah is
having authority and power on them and blessings and mercy of Allah be
upon all the

successors, saints and believers. And may Allah bless Muhammad, the
Prophet, and his progeny and peace be upon them.<sup>[1]</sup>

### 4. Letter of the Imam of the time to Muhammad Asadi

Muhammad bin Ja’far wrote a letter to His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s)
asking him about some religious problem. His Eminence replied as
follows:

As for a question you asked about the Prayer at the time of sunrise and
sunset its reply is as follows: It is so that they say that the sun
rises and sets between the two horns of Shaitan, then what is better
than prayer that it may rub the nose of Shaitan on the eartha Therefore
recite prayer at this time and rub the nose of Shaitan (humiliate him).

As for a question about that which has become endowed about us and that
which is fixed for us, but inspite of this if its owner becomes needful
of it, its reply is as follows: Till it has not been accepted, a
transaction is allowed to be made invalid and one could spend from it.
If it has been accepted it cannot be made invalid, whether he is needful
of it or not.

3. As for that which you asked: that if someone is having something from
our property and he spends it without our permission as if he is himself
the owner and considers it permissible for himself. The reply to it is
as follows: One who does thus is accursed and on the Day of Judgment we
would be displeased with him. The Holy Prophet (a.s) has certainly said:
“Anyone who considers a prohibited thing of my progeny as permissible is
eligible for my curse and that of all the prophets. One who encroaches
upon our rights is among those who are unjust upon us and the curse of
Allah is upon him. The Almighty Allah says:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar 13/247

**“Know that! The curse of Allah is upon the
oppressors.”<sup>[1]</sup>**

His Eminence, the Awaited Imam has replied to some queries regarding the
Islamic practical law:

1. Prayer at the time of sunrise and sunset is considered lawful. And
one, who says against it, is saying so without any proof. In the same
way the saying that “The sun rises and sets between the two horns of
Shaitan” has been told to be a joke because these things are nothing but
a part of baseless and useless views and statements.

2. Regarding endowments, especially for the Ahle Bayt (a.s), before it
is accepted, the endowment maker is allowed to retract it in the
circumstances that he has not yet entrusted to them, he can spend from
it and take it back. But if the endowment has already been accepted by
them, he is not allowed to annul it and take it back, because he has
made it a necessity and taking back a necessity is not correct and the
Imamate jurisprudents have issued a decree based on this.

3. It is not lawful to spend from the property that belongs exclusively
to the Ahle Bayt (a.s). Then if someone considers it lawful he is an
oppressor and usurper.

### 5. Replies of the Imam of the time to the Questions of Ishaq

Ishaq Ibne Yaqub wrote a letter to His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s)
containing numerous religious questions that were difficult for him. He
sent this letter to His Eminence through Muhammad Ibne Uthman, who was
one of the trustworthy and pure persons. His Eminence wrote the
following replies:

O Ishaq! May Allah guide you, make you steadfast and keep you safe. As
for what you asked me regarding some of your family and cousins and
their denial about me, you should know that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kamaluddin 2/199

there is no proximity and relationship between Allah and anyone, and
anyone who denies me is not from me and his path is like the path of
Prophet Nuh’s son. And as for the path of my Uncle, Ja’far, it is like
the path of Prophet Yusuf’s brothers. As for “Fuqaa” (A drink prepared
from barley extract) it is unlawful to drink it. And as for “Shilmaab”
(A non-intoxicant drink and its use in the present age is common); it is
not doubtful. And as for your property, till you do not purify it, do
not use it. Then anyone who wants to send it to me and anyone who does
not want to be separated from it, then what Allah has bestowed to us is
better than what Allah has given you.

As for the reappearance and advent, it solely depends on the will of
Allah and those who fix a time for it are liars.

As for the saying of those who think that Imam Husain (a.s) has not been
slain is a kind of disbelief, denial, deviation and misguidance.

“But as for the problems which will occur in the future, you should
refer to the narrators of our traditions for their verdicts as they are
my proofs to you, and I am Allah’s proof to them.”

As for Muhammad bin Uthman Amri, may Allah be pleased with him and his
father, he is trustworthy and reliable one of mine and his writing is my
writing.

As for Muhammad bin Ali bin Mahziyar Ahwazi, then very soon, Allah would
reform his heart and remove his doubt.

As for the money that you sent for me is not acceptable to me, except
that money which is pure. And the compensation for a singing girl is
unlawful.

As for Muhammad bin Shazan bin Naeem, he is from the Shias of us, Ahle
Bayt (a.s).

As for Abul Khattab Muhammad bin Ali Zainab Ajdaa, then he and all his
associates are accursed and you do not cultivate the company of those
who harbor their beliefs. And my forefathers and I are aloof from them.

As for those who are in possession of our funds, in a way that they
consider it lawful for themselves and spend it, have in fact devoured
(Hell) Fire.

As for Khums, it is lawful for our Shias till the time of reappearance,
so far as their children are pure and not involved in sinful activities.

As for the funds that are sent to us and after which they fell into
doubts and became regretful of having paid it to us, then anyone who
wants we would return to him and we are not needful of the money of
those who harbor doubt with regard to Allah.

As for the cause of occultation, the Almighty Allah has said:

**“O you who believe! Do not put questions about things which if
declared to you may trouble you…”<sup>[1]</sup>**

Each of my forefathers in his time was compelled by the oath of
allegiance to the tyrant ruler and when I reappear I would not be having
the allegiance of any tyrant on my neck. As for how people would benefit
from me during my occultation, it is like getting benefits from the sun,
which is concealed by the clouds. And I am the security for the people
on the face of the earth just as stars are security for the inhabitants
of the heavens. Therefore do not ask what you are not in need of and do
not put yourself into undue trouble. And pray more for an early
reappearance as in it lies your success. Peace be on you O Ishaq Ibne
Yaqub and peace be on all those who follow the guidance…<sup>[2]</sup>

This letter, in addition to legal problems also contains various other
matters:

**Firstly:** some of the Sadat (Sayyids) among the cousins of Imam Mahdi
(a.s) denied the existence of His Eminence, inspite of so many signs and
proof for it. In this letter, His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) has
introduced them to be deviated and misguided

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Maidah 5:101 [2] Ihtijaj 2/281-284

people and the Almighty Allah would interrogate them regarding their
denial and deviation.

**Secondly:** the reappearance of His Eminence for the establishment of
truth and justice is not at his own discretion, but it is at the
discretion of someone else. Rather it is solely at the discretion of
Allah, the Wise. It is He alone, who would fix the time of the
reappearance of his Wali (Vicegerent).

**Thirdly:** some people started a false propaganda that His Eminence,
the chief of the Martyrs, Imam Husain (a.s) is not martyred and the
killers of His Eminence are wrongly accused. Rather someone resembling
His Eminence, Imam Husain (a.s) had been murdered. His Eminence, the
Master of the Age (a.s) in this letter, has denounced this false
propaganda and labeled it to be a fraud, deviation, falsehood and an
invalid claim.

**Fourthly:** In this letter, His Eminence, has praised and supported
Muhammad bin Uthman Amri so much so, that he has designated his writing
as his own writing. Similarly he has described Muhammad bin Shazan to be
of the Shia personalities and considered him trustworthy in his religion
and piety.

**Fifthly:** In this communication, His Eminence has prohibited his
Shias from cultivating the company of the group of Abu Khattab Ajdaa,
who are misguided and perjurers, because they have gone out of the
religion of Islam and they have made the lawful as unlawful and the
unlawful as lawful. And having any connection with them is misguidance
and ignorance.

**Sixthly:** One who unlawfully usurps the property of Ahle Bayt (a.s)
is denounced herein; because of this usurpation of their property very
soon that property would become a burning fire.

**Seventhly:** His Eminence has prohibited from the pursuit of finding
out the wisdom behind occultation and the lack of reappearance, because
the reappearance of His Eminence is not at his own discretion. It is
solely at the command and will of Allah. And the Almighty Allah is aware
of all the aspects of His creatures.

**Eighthly:** In this letter of his, the Imam (a.s) has introduced
himself to be the source of benefits and favors for the people during
the period of occultation, because the Almighty Allah, by the blessings
of the existence of His Wali and Proof keeps away punishment from the
people and he is the security for the people of the earth like the stars
are security for the inhabitants of the sky.

**Ninthly:** His Eminence has commanded his Shias to pray more for his
reappearance so that he may establish truth and justice on the earth.
These are some of the important things discussed in the letter.

### 6. Letters of the Imams of the time to Shaykh Mufeed

His Eminence, the Promised Imam (a.s) sent some letters to the
Trustworthy one of Islam, the Shaykh al-Mufeed. May Allah purify his
burial place of whom Shaykh Tabarsi has quoted two letters. They are as
follows:

1. This letter is for the worthy brother and righteous friend, Shaykh
Mufeed Abu Abdillah Muhammad Ibne Muhammad Numan, may Allah always
maintain his honor, it is from the position achieved due to the covenant
taken from the people:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

So to say: Peace be on you, O friend who is sincere in the religion of
Allah and is successful in certainty in us. We are thankful for our
existence to Allah, except Whom there is no God. And we ask Allah for
blessings and mercy upon our Prophet Muhammad and the Progeny of
Muhammad. And may He always give you divine opportunity to help the
truth and increase your rewards for speaking up in our favor. We
announce that we have been permitted to honor you with our letter and
entrust you with responsibility of our friends who are present around
you. May Almighty Allah befriend them due to His obedience and may He
suffice them in their important

matters. May the Almighty Allah help you against the pledge-breakers who
have gone out of the religion of God. Then consider what I am explaining
to you and convey it to those whom you rust, if Allah wills.

If we are in such a position that we are away from the habitations of
the oppressors and it is due to hidden wisdom that the Almighty Allah
has considered best for us and the believer followers of us, till the
material wealth is in control of the transgressors. Inspite of all this
we are perfectly cognizant of all your affairs and problems and nothing
regarding you is hidden from us.

We have received information about the disgrace and humility suffered by
you all due to most of you acting in opposition to the ways of your
predecessors, regarding which you may not have received any information.
And that we are concerned about you and we do not forget you and if this
attention and favor had not been there, poverty and tension would have
befallen you and your enemies would have destroyed you. Therefore fear
the Almighty Allah and help us to save you from this mischief. Anyone
whose death is near shall be killed in this mischief and one who has
obtained his desire shall remain safe and this mischief is a sign of
distance and proximity of our commands and prohibitions. Although the
Almighty Allah would perfect His light even if it is detestable to the
disbelievers. Remain attached to dissimulation and keep away from
stoking the fire of ignorance…

At the end he writes: This letter is for you, O sincere brother and
friend. O loyal friend. May Allah protect you. Keep this letter in safe
custody and do not show it to anyone. Though you may convey the points
mentioned therein to those whom you trust. And persuade them to act upon
it, if Allah wills.

And may Allah bless Muhammad and his Purified Progeny.

This blessed letter contains many important matters:

**Firstly:** Shaykh Mufeed is considered great and is praised. He is one
of the pillars of Islam in knowledge, merits, piety and steadfastness in
religion and its propagation. He was one who had been permitted to
remain in contact with the Imam of the Age (a.s) and that in fact, he
should be an emissary of His Eminence among his Shias.

**Secondly:** In this letter, His Eminence has indicated that the place
of his residence is away from the area of the oppressors, and that his
uprising has been concealed from them. And it is only known to the
Almighty and depends on His will, till the time the oppressors rule the
earth, His Eminence would not reappear.

**Thirdly:** From the whole letter it becomes apparent that His Eminence
is aware of all the aspects and conditions of his Shias and no matter is
concealed for him. Then His Eminence is concerned for them and helps
them and by the permission of Allah keeps harm away from them. Such that
if the care of His Eminence had not be there for the Shias they would
have been surrounded by their enemies from all sides.

### Second letter of the Imam of the time for Shaykh Mufeed

The second letter of His Eminence was received by Shaykh Mufeed (r.a.)
on 23 Zilhajj 412 A.H. it is as follows:

In the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful.

Peace and mercy of Allah be upon you, O helper of religion. O one who
invites to Allah with the word of truth. We thank Allah, except Whom
there is no deity, for your existence and invoke His blessings for our
master and chief, Muhammad, the seal of the prophets and his Ahle Bayt.
The letter inter alia says:

O sincere friend and struggler, may Allah help you as He had helped His
chosen servants in the past. I promise that if anyone from your brothers
in faith acquires the fear of Allah and pays that amount which is
obligatory on him to the eligible recipient, would be safe from sorrow
and calamities. But if anyone is

miserly in giving away the wealth that Allah has given him temporarily
he has made a loss for his children and his hereafter.

This letter written on the 1st of Shawwal in 412 A.H. by His Eminence
contains the following in the end:

This is my letter to you; O friend the truth is inspired upon you. Keep
it secret from everyone and only convey the points mentioned in it to
those of our friends whom you trust. If Allah wills, the blessings of
Allah would be in their share. Praise be to Allah and blessings be upon
our chief Muhammad the Prophet and his purified Progeny.<sup>[1]</sup>

This letter contains some remarkable points:

In this letter, His Eminence, the Master of the Age has addressed Shaykh
Mufeed as the helper of truth and the caller to Allah with truth, which
are some of the loftiest qualities of righteous people.

In this letter he has announced that his Shias should recite the
supplication for the safety and release of His Eminence from oppressors
and nothing would come in between the supplication from reaching the
Almighty.

In this letter, His Eminence has commanded his Shias to observe piety
and to keep away from disobedience of Allah. They must pay up their
religious taxes. In the same way they should cultivate fear of Allah and
obey Allah in the true sense. If they do thus no barrier would remain
between them and His Eminence and they shall be endowed with the good
fortune of seeing the Imam. But their sins are barriers between the
Shias and His Eminence and it does not allow them to have the honor of
meeting the Imam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ihtijaj 2/324-325

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](10.htm)[  
 Back](14.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](12.htm)[  
 Next](16.htm)
