Examples of Jurisprudence of the Imam of the Time
=================================================

### 1. Queries of Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Ja’far

Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Ja’far wrote some questions regarding
religious law in a letter to His Eminence, the Awaited Imam. The letter
was as follows:

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent the Merciful.

May Allah always keep you safe, happy and honorable. And may He perfect
the favor of His blessings upon you. May He sacrifice me upon you before
any evil befalls you. People compete with each other for scaling the
heights of status but in my view whomsoever you accept has achieved true
status. And whomsoever you reject is the one who is drowned and fallen.
The deprived is the one who has been spurned away from your court. I
seek the refuge of Allah from such a condition.

There is a group of Shias in our city having the same social status. And
by way of position and grades they are more proximate to each other. A
letter that you wrote to a group of them commanding them to help “Suad”,
but a person named Ali bin Muhammad Husain bin Malik, famous as Malik
Baduke, who is also son-in-law of “Saud”, no letter was taken among
them. Therefore he has become aggrieved and requested me to convey it to
His Eminence. In this way a sin has been committed by him. He should be
prepared to atone for it. If there is some other reason for it, it
should be announced to him so that he is satisfied. If Allah wills.

This letter proves its writer is a person from the believers and one who
was proximate to His Eminence. Therefore he was cognizant of the
position and value of the Imam (a.s). In the end he poses the following
questions:

**Question 1:** Scholars of the progeny of Muhammad have narrated for us
that a question was asked regarding some people who were praying the
congregation prayer behind the leader of congregation when suddenly
something happened to him and he died. Then what should his congregation
members doa He replied that some should go ahead and some move behind
and complete their prayer and those who have touched him should perform
the ritual bath.

**Reply:** One who has moved him aside with his hands has not to do
anything except wash his hands. And if nothing extraordinary happens to
break the Prayer, he should complete the Prayer with them.

The explanation of direction received from the Imam (a.s) is as follows:
If during a congregation prayer something happens to the congregation
leader, like sudden death, the person who moves him aside is only
obliged to wash his hands. This is so because to touch a dead body
before it has cooled does not make one needful of ritual bath. Also,
among the people praying behind the congregation leader who has suddenly
collapsed, one of them should step forward and stand in the place of the
congregation leader and others should continue to pray behind and
complete their prayers. In case, instead of sudden death the
congregation leader collapses or become unconscious etc. and then again
he recovers during the prayer he is obliged to redo the ablution and
lead the congregation again in place of one who was substituting for him
previously.

**Question 2:** It is narrated from the scholar (Imam) that if one
touches a dead body while it is still warm he is only obliged to wash
his hands and if the corpse has cooled down and one touches it after
that, one is obliged to perform the ritual bath of

touching a dead body. The congregation leader who had just died is warm
or may be the person who has moved him aside does not touch the body. He
handles him from over his dress so how the ritual bath would become
obligatory on hima

**Reply:** If he touches him while he is still warm, it is only
necessary to wash his hands.

**Question 3:** In Prayer of Ja’far-e-Tayyar if a person forgets to
recite the Tasbihat-e-Araba in standing, or bowing or prostration and
later when he has gone ahead he remembers it. Does he have to recite the
forgotten Tasbihat-e-Araba now or he should continue his prayera

Before we mention the reply of His Eminence, the Imam (a.s) we shall
describe the Prayer of Ja’far at-Tayyar:

### Prayer of Ja’far at-Tayyar

Prayer of Ja’far at-Tayyar is a very much recommended ritual. It is also
called as the prayer of Tasbih and Prayer of Habwa. Shia and Sunni both
have recorded numerous traditions in recommendation of Prayer of Ja’far
Tayyar. The method of this prayer is as follows:

It is a four unit Prayer, divided into two parts. Pray each part exactly
like the Morning Prayer, with the following adjustments:

(i) First Unit

After recitation of Suratul Faatihah, recite Suratuz Zilzaal

(ii) Second Unit

After recitation of Suratul Faatihah, recite Suratul Aadiyaat

(iii) Third Unit

After recitation of Suratul Faatihah, recite Suratun Nasr

(iv) Fourth Unit

after recitation of Suratul Faatihah, recite Suratul Ikhlaas.

(If you have not learnt by heart the second Surah of each unit, recite
suratul Ikhlaas in all 4 units).

In each unit recite Tasbeehaatul Arbaa

Subhaanallaahi wal hamdu lillaahi wa laa ilaaha illallaahu wallaahu
Akbar.

<sup>[Glory\\ be\\ to\\ Allah,\\ Praise\\ be\\ to\\ Allah,\\ there\\ is\\ no\\ god\\ but\\ Allah,\\ and\\ Allah\\ is\\ Great.]</sup>

(i) After recitation of Surahs… 15 times

(ii) In Rukoo… 10 times

(iii) In Qiyaam after Rukoo… 10 times

(iv) In the First Sajdah… 10 times

(v) While sitting after First Sajdah… 10 times

(vi) In the second Sajdah… 10 times

(vii) While sitting after second Sajdah… 10 times.

There are altogether 300 Tasbeehaat-e-Arba in this prayer.

**Reply:** If he forgets it in one position and remembers it in another
position he should recite it then and if he forgets some of the Tasbih
recitals and is reminded later on, he should recite it then and his
Prayer is correct.

**Question 4:** Is it allowed for a woman whose husband dies to
accompany the funeral processiona

**Reply:** It is allowed for a woman to leave the house to accompany the
funeral procession of her late husband.

**Question 5:** Can the woman visit the grave of her deceased husband
while she is in the Iddaha

**Answer:** She is allowed to visit the grave of her deceased husband.

The Iddah of the woman whose husband has passed away consists of giving
up embellishments she used to have previously. And it does not become a
cause to prevent her from visiting her husband’s grave. Or those things
that are a necessary part of her life and she is in need of them, she
cannot forgo them. And its further explanation has come in the
statements of Imam (a.s).

**Question 6:** Can a woman during Iddah period leave her house for
necessary errandsa

**Reply:** If it is necessary to do that job by going out of the house,
she can do so but she must spend the night in her house.

**Question 7:** It is narrated from scholars regarding the reward of
Quran in its necessary and non-necessary aspects that he said: It is
astonishing that a person who does not recite Surah Qadr in his prayer,
how his Prayer is accepteda

It is narrated that: A prayer in which “Qul huwallaho Ahad” is not
recited does not scale heights of honor.

It is narrated that: One who recites Surah Humazah in his prayers, he
would get the reward equal to the whole world. Then is it allowed for
one to recite Surah Humazah and omit other Surahs that we mentioned,
while it is narrated that Prayer is not accepted without thema And the
purity and loftiness of the Prayer is due to those Surahsa

**Reply:** Imam (a.s) replies to the three questions as follows:

The rewards of the Surahs is on the same basis as narrated. If one
leaves the Surah that is eligible for rewards and instead recites “Surah
Qul huwalho Ahad or Surah Inna Anzalna” for their merits he would get
the rewards of the Surahs he has recited as well as the rewards of the
Surahs he has left. Although it is also allowed to recite a Surah other
than these and his Prayer is correct but that he has omitted a
meritorious deed.

**Question 8:** When is the supplication of the Farewell to month of
Ramadan reciteda Because people have different views regarding it. Some
say that it should be recited on the last night of the month of Ramadan
while others say that it should be recited on the last day of the month
of Ramadan at the time of viewing the new moon of Shawwal.

**Reply:** This ritual is for the last of the nights of the month of
Ramadan and in the last night of the month of Ramadan. Therefore if one
fears that the month will be reduced by a day, he should recite the
supplication on last two nights.

### 2. Others Queries of Muhammad bin Abdullah

Muhammad bin Abdullah Himyari also sent other queries to His Eminence,
the Imam (a.s) and they are as follows:

**Question 1:** When a person is praying and after the first Tashahud
getting up to perform the third prayer, is it obligatory to recite
Takbir (Allaho Akbar) or is it sufficient just to say “Bi hawlillah wa
quwwatihu Aqoomo wa Aqud.” (By the strength and power of Allah I stand
up and I sit)a

**Reply:** There are two traditions regarding this matter. One says that
when one goes from one position to another one must say Takbir. Another
tradition says that: If one raises ones head from the second prostration
and says the Takbir and then sits down and then gets up and after the
Qiyam, sits down again, he does not have to say the Takbir. In the same
way it is in the first Tashahud and in every position whatever you do by
way of acceptance is correct. Takbir during standing up after the first
Tashahud and etc. is not obligatory and the person has the choice to say
it or not.

**Question 2:** A person purchases a sacrificial sheep for one who is
not present and takes it to slaughter it in Mina. But at the time of
slaughter he forgets the name of that person and just slaughters it on
his behalf and later he remembers the name. Would it be considered to be
on behalf of that persona

**Reply:** There is no doubt in it. The sacrifice would be considered on
his behalf.

On the basis of this narration and similar reports from the Purified
Imams (a.s) jurisprudents have issued the verdict that if a person
forgets the name of the person who has paid for a share in the
sacrifice, it is no problem. If the sacrifice is made on his behalf it
is sufficient.

**Question 3:** Among us are those Magian weavers who eat carrion and do
not perform the ritual bath of Janabat. They weave clothes for us. Is it
allowed to pray in these clothes before they are washeda

**Reply:** There is no problem in it. Because there is no certainty that
the Magian has touched the cloth with a wet hand. Even if there is a
doubt in it, it should be considered pure. Therefore there is no problem
in praying in these clothes.

**Question 4:** If a person is praying in a dark and by mistake he puts
his forehead on a cloth or a sack and does not do the Sajdah on a Mohr
(soil) and he gets the Mohr only after he raises his head, would this
prostration be sufficienta

**Reply:** Till the time he sits down completely after the prostration
there is no problem if he picks up that object on which prostration is
correct and performs the prostration again.

**Question 5:** A person who is wearing Ihram removes the covering of
the canopy but leaves the frame. Is it alloweda

**Reply:** There is no problem if he leaves the frame.

One of the things a person in Ihram has to avoid is shade. Thus if he
rides a camel with a canopy or a bus with roof he has to pay the
Kaffarah (Penalty) of sacrificing a sheep. But if the covering of the
canopy or the bus is removed, leaving the frame and walls there is no
problem in it.

**Question 6:** If a person wearing Ihram shades himself with a sack or
with something else to protect himself or his seat from getting soaked
in rain, is it allowed for him to do soa

**Reply:** If he does this on the way with canopy the Kaffarah is
obligatory on him. The penalty of a goat is due to the fact that the
person has shaded himself from rain and to shade oneself is an omission
for a person wearing Ihram.

**Question 7:** Is it necessary for a person doing Hajj as proxy, to
mention the name of the one whose Hajj he is doing at the time of Ihrama
Is it obligatory that he must do separate sacrifice for himself as well
as whose Hajj he is performinga

**Reply:** It is not necessary to recite it in details and one sacrifice
is sufficient on behalf of the one whose Hajj he is performing.

It has come in the reply of Imam (a.s) that taking the name of one whose
proxy he is, is not necessary. Rather he makes an intention in his heart
about the one whose Hajj he is performing and he does not even have to
utter his name. It is sufficient. In the same way one animal on behalf
of the person is sufficient because the person doing the Hajj is not
doing for himself. He is a proxy of someone else. Therefore one
sacrifice is sufficient.

**Question 8:** Is it permitted for man to tie up the Ihram with a sheet
of fura

**Reply:** There is no problem, righteous and decent people have been
Muhrim with it.

Ihram in a sheet of fur has no problem, but Ihram of soft wool of that
animal whose meat is not eaten and it is prohibited to tie Ihram with
its fur is impurity the extent of which is not condoned for a person who
prays the prayer and the stitched cloth, as the jurisprudents have
mentioned, is not allowed.

**Question 9:** A man goes for Hajj with a group of opponents and they
do not tie up the Ihram at Maslakh. Whether for this man who is from the
companions, is it allowed to delay his Ihram till Zaat-e-Arq so that he
becomes Muhrim with them at that placea

**Reply:** It is necessary to become Muhrim from the Miqaat and say the
Talbiyah softly and when he reaches the Miqaat with them he should make
it obvious.

One who intends to perform Hajj or Umrah and is passing by the Miqaat he
must become Muhrim at that Miqaat and he must not pass the Miqaat
without Ihram. However, if tying the Ihram at the Miqaat frightens him
due to the presence of those who do not consider it Miqaat, he must get
into Ihram but keep it concealed.

**Question 10:** How is wearing leather slippers, because people say
that it is Makruh to wear thema

**Reply:** It is permissible and there is no problem.

**Question 11:** A man is a treasurer in endowments, and he is careless.
He considers as permissible for himself the endowments, which are under
his control, and he does not abstain from them. Often when I enter his
office and he is present or I enter his house and he is present he
invites me to eat and if don’t eat at his place he would become inimical
to me and say: such and such has not considered my food lawful that is
why he has not eaten it. Now please tell me if it is allowed for me to
eat with him and then later pay Sadaqah for it. And how much Sadaqah
should I paya Or whether it is allowed for me to accept a gift that he
gives to mea

**Reply:** If this man is having other property in addition to the
endowments he holds and has other occupations also you may eat with him
and accept his gifts. If it is not so, you must neither eat at his place
nor accept any gift from him.

If a person perfectly knows that so and so who is offering him food, it
is from unlawful wealth, he must not partake it. But if he knows that
the man possesses lawful as well as unlawful wealth, and the food or
gift he is offering could be from unlawful or lawful money, then it is
not unlawful for him.

**Question 12:** A man is a Shia and considers Mutah and temporary
marriage permissible and also believes in the Rajat (return) and all his
family members are united. This man has made a vow that he would not
take a second wife according to them and nor would he do Mutah. And he
has spent 19 years with this vow. Now if he breaks his vow, does he
become liable for a penalty or sina

**Reply:** It is Mustahab (recommended) for him to do Mutah at least
once for obedience of Allah so that the sin of the vow is removed from
him.

Vow and oath becomes valid when it is with relation to a preferable
thing and not for something inferior and unlawful. On the basis of this
if the action or leaving the action is inferior, these oath and vow
shall not be valid in it. And Mutah, as it is legal and lawful in the
view of Quran, to leave it through a vow or an oath is not allowed. But
the prohibition of Mutah is an opinion in comparison to textual command
and therefore it is of no value. Although, regarding this, we have a
detailed discussion and its lawfulness and legality has been proved on
the basis of Quran and traditions.

### 3. Other Queries

Muhammad Ibne Abdullah wrote other queries to His Eminence and asked for
replies and they are as follows:

**Question 1:** A person who is praying in the beginning of the prayer
when he recites the verse:

**“Surely I have turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who
originated the heavens and the earth, and I am not of the
polytheists.”<sup>[1]</sup>**

Is it necessary for him to add: Upon the religion of Ibrahim and the
faith of Muhammad. May Allah bless the religion of Muhammad (a.s)a As
some people have said that whoever

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Anam 6:79

recites “Upon the religion of Muhammad” has committed an innovation as
we have not found it the books of prayer. And only the tradition in the
book of Qasim from his grandfather from Hasan Ibne Rashid is there, that
His Eminence, Sadiq (a.s) said to Hasan: How do you recite the Verse of
Tawajjoha<sup>[83]</sup> Hasan replied: I say: Labbaik wa Saadaik. Imam
Sadiq (a.s) said: My question was not that. Rather I asked you how you
recite the verse:

**“Surely I have turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who
originated the heavens and the earth, and I am not of the
polytheists.”<sup>[1]</sup>**

Hasan Said: I recite that only.

His Eminence, Sadiq (a.s) said: “When you say thus, after that you must
add: Upon the religion of Ibrahim and the faith of Muhammad and the way
of Ali bin Abi Talib and following the progeny of Muhammad, the upright,
the submissive and we are not from the polytheists. May Allah bless the
religion of Muhammad (a.s).”

**Reply:** Actually the verse of Tawajjoh and saying: “Surely I have
turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who…” is not obligatory. It
is an emphasized recommended deed like an unanimous view as no one has
opposed it:

“Surely I have turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who
originated the heavens and the earth, upon the religion of Ibrahim and
the faith of Muhammad and the guidance of Amirul Mo-mineen and I am not
of the polytheists. Surely my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my
death are (all) for Allah, the Lord of the worlds. No associate has He;
and this am I commanded, and I am the first of those who submit. O Allah
make me among the Muslims. I seek refuge in Allah the All- hearing the
All-knowing from the accursed Shaitan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Anam 6:79 [2] Surah Anam 6:79

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.”

After that recite the Surah Hamd.

These supplications and recitals are recommended practices and are not
from the obligatory rituals of prayers and the Imam (a.s) has explained
its method.

**Question 2:** After a person completes reciting the Qunut is it
allowed for him to pass his hands over his face and chesta On the basis
of a tradition quoted in this regard, “In fact the Almighty Allah is
much higher than it that He keeps the hands of his servants empty.
Rather He fills them with bounties.” While some of our scholars have
mentioned that it is one of the rituals in prayers.

**Reply:** To pass the hands over the head and face after Qunut is not
permitted in obligatory prayers.

**Question 3:** How about the prostration of thanks after obligatory
prayers because some people say that it is an innovation. If it is
allowed should it be performed after the obligatory Magrib Prayer
(evening prayer) or after the Nafila<sup>[1]</sup> of Maghriba

**Reply:** “The prostration of thanks is among the most necessary and
proven practices and none says that prostration is innovation but that
he intends to create an innovation in the religion of Allah. Because the
prostration of thanks is an emphasized recommended deed. And one who
considers it an innovation has not any cognizance of the religion of
Allah and religious jurisprudence.” After the Imam (a.s) denied its
innovation he further says:

“A tradition that says that it must be performed after Magrib Prayer,
which is of three units, or after four units of Nafila. Because the
merit of supplication and Tasbih<sup>[2]</sup> after obligatory prayer
in relation to supplication after recommended prayer is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Supererogatory [2] Repetitions

just like the superiority of the obligatory prayer over that of the
recommended prayer. And prostration is a supplication and Tasbih, thus
it is preferable that it should be after the obligatory prayer. But even
if it be after the recommended prayer, it is allowed. On the basis of
this, the prostration of thanks is supplication and Tasbih and it is
preferable that it should be performed immediately after the obligatory
prayer. Although it is allowed to be performed after the recommended
prayer also.”

**Question 4:** Some of our brothers have got new farms and besides them
are bad farmlands and non-habitated lands which hold shares of the
ruler. The agents and officials of the rulers continuously trouble our
brothers. In this way the ruler intends to compel them to purchase the
barren lands from him. Though it is said that the share of the king had
been originally an endowment.

Therefore is it allowed to purchase this land from the rulera

Reply: It is not lawful to purchase that land except from its owner or
by the permission and order of the owner. And the land which is adjacent
to their farms about which it is not known whether the ruler is its
owner or not, cannot be purchased till they find out its actual owner
and buys it from them.

Other Queries of Muhammad
=========================

Muhammad Ibne Abdullah Himyari wrote a letter to His Eminence asking the
following questions:

Question 1: A person is riding on a camel and there is so much of snow
that it is as high as a man and he is afraid to come down and pray. Is
it allowed for him to recite the Prayer on the camel ?

Reply: If it is necessary there is no problem in it. The condition for
praying the Prayer on the ground is superseded by the difficulty present
there hence praying on the ground is given exemption in this case.

Question 2: A person joins the congregation prayer when the congregation
leader is in the Ruku (bowing). Would it be counted as one unit for hima
As some of scholars have said that if one has not heard the Takbir of
Ruku of the Imam one must not count it as one unit ?

Reply: If the follower is able to reach even one recitation of the ruku
it would be counted as one unit. If he does not hear the Takbir of ruku
and joins when the Imam is in the ruku before he raises up his head it
would be counted as one unit and he would get the reward of
congregation.

Question 3: Do the people of Paradise have children ?

Reply: Women in Paradise shall not become pregnant and would be free of
dirt and labor and postnatal bleeding. In Paradise all those things are
present that a person desire to have. As the Almighty Allah says. Thus
if a believer desires to have a child the Almighty would create it
without making a woman pregnant just as He had created Adam (a.s).

Question 4: Is it allowed for a man to marry the step daughter of his
wifea

Reply: If she has been bred in his lap it is not allowed for him. But if
she was not brought up with him and her mother is from another family,
it is narrated that it is lawful for him.

"Step daughter is unlawful for the husband of her mother. She is like a
daughter of this man. In case the man has married a woman but did not
have sexual intercourse with her and he divorces her or gives up the
time (in case of Mutual Marriage), her daughter is not unlawful for him.

Question 5: The soil of the grave is kept along with the dead body in
the grave. Is it permitted ?

Reply: It should be kept with the dead body in the grave and it should
be mixed in the Hunut **<sup>[1]</sup>**, if Allah wills.

It is a strong possibility that the soil of the grave is the same soil
of the grave of the chief of the martyrs, the beloved son of the
Messenger of Allah, May Allah bless him and his progeny and peace be
upon them, His Eminence, Imam Husain (a.s).

Question 6: It is narrated for us that His Eminence, Imam Sadiq (a.s)
wrote on the shroud of his son, Ismail: He witnesses that there is no
god except Allah. Is it allowed to write that with the soil of Imam
Husain's grave ?

Reply: It is allowed.

Question 7: Is it allowed to recite the rosary of the soil of the grave
of the chief of the martyrsa Is there is any special merit in it ?

Reply: Make Tasbih of it, because nothing is better than it. And of its
merits is that when you forget to recite the Tasbih and only turn about
the beads the reward of reciting the Tasbih will continue to be written
for you.

Question 8: Is it permitted to perform prostration on a piece of clay of
the grave of Imam Husain (a.s)a Is there any special merit in it ?

Reply: Is it allowed and also has merit.

We are commanded that we prostrate on the earth in obescience to Allah
and the mentioned soil and mud is a part of the earth. And the soil of
the grave of the place of the martyrdom of the chief of the youths of
Paradise and the beloved one of the Messenger of Allah, His Eminence,
the chief of the martyrs (a.s) is the most exalted and meritorious piece
of earth. Therefore prostration on soil taken from Kerbala is the most
superior prostration for the Almighty Allah. A faithless group makes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Camphor rubbed at the seven prostration points of the body of the
dead

unmanly and cowardly attacks on the Shias regarding this and makes false
allegations saying that Shias worship the soil of the grave of Husain
(a.s), although the Shias prostrate to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, on
a piece of the earth which is most superior one and it is not that they
prostrate for the soil itself.

Question 9: Is it allowed for a person who goes for the Ziyarat of the
graves of the Holy Imams to prostrate on the gravesa Is it allowed for
one to recite prayers besides the grave of these noble soulsa Is it
allowed for him to stand behind the grave and face the grave like prayer
direction (Qibla) and stand at the head or the feeta And is it allowed
to stand before the grave and recite the prayer while the grave is
behind him ?

Reply: As for prostrating on a grave - whether in supererogatory or
obligatory prayer is not allowed. What is to be done is that you must
put your right cheek on the grave. As for prayer, it is necessary to
recite it behind the grave and to keep the grave in the front. And it is
not allowed to recite the prayer ahead of the grave and it is also not
allowed to recite prayers besides the head or the feet side. It should
be performed either behind the grave or at the head or the feet side but
a little behind and not exactly parallel to the head or the feet.
However there is no problem in reciting it behind the grave. It is
better to recite it at the head side but one should not be parallel to
the head. (One should be a little behind it).

Question 10: Is it allowed for a man to turn the beads of the rosary
with his left hand and recite the Tasbih ?

Reply: It is allowed. And praise be to Allah the Lord of the Worlds.

Question 11: For a person reciting an obligatory or recommended prayer
is it allowed for him to keep the Tasbih with him for counting ?

Reply: If he fears he may forget the counting of recitation, it is
allowed.

Question 12: A thing, which is from the endowments to particular persons
and if all of them do not agree to sell it. Is it allowed to purchase
from thema Is it allowed to sell endowed properties ?

Reply: If the endowment is for the Imams of Muslims its sale is not
allowed. If it is for a group of Muslims and every group that is capable
to sell it they can sell it whether as a group or their own share in it.

Question 13: Is it allowed for a Muhrim,<sup><sup>[1]</sup></sup> to use
Murtak and Tutiya (fragrant substances) to ward off the smell of his
armpits ?

Reply: It is allowed and Tawfeeq (divine opportunity) is from the
Almighty Allah.

Question 14: A person is an eyewitness to something and later he loses
his eyesighta Is his testimony valid ?

Reply: If he perfectly remembers the place and time of the incident, it
is allowed.

Question 15: A person has endowed a farm or cattle and he witnesses it
in the name of one of the trustee of the endowment. After that this
trustee dies or his place changes and another man becomes a trustee. Is
it allowed for the new trustee (the representative) to give testimony ?

Reply: It is not permitted, because the testimony mentioned is not for
the representative. It is for the original owner and the Almighty Allah
has said:

**"…and give upright testimony…"<sup>[2]</sup>**

Question 16: Regarding the last two units of the four-unit prayer some
narrations say that reciting Surah Hamd is preferable and some say that
Tasbihat-e-Arba is better. Which is the preferable option ?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] A person who is performing pilgrimage [2] Surah Talaq 65:2

Reply: The Surah Hamd in those two units (rakats) is abrogated and the
saying of Masoom (a.s) that: "Every prayer in which it is not recited is
incomplete except for the sick person or for one who is very forgetful
which causes the risk of making the prayer invalid," has abrogated the
reciting of Tasbihat-e-Arba.

Question 17: Among us there is a custom that for pain in throat and
cough we take the paste of walnut. Its detail is as follows: Fresh
walnut before it becomes hard is grinded and then cooked till its volume
is halved and kept aside for 24 hours. After that it is put on fire and
for every six measure, one measure of honey is mixed with it and then
boiled. Then dry ammonia and vitriol is added of one mithqal weight. At
this time one dirham dry saffron is also added to it. Then all of it is
boiled and its froth is removed and it becomes thick like honey. Then it
is brought down from the fire and cooled and then consumed. Is it
allowed to drink it ?

Reply: In case it is intoxicating in large or small quantity it is
unlawful but if it is non-intoxicating, its consumption is allowed.

Question 18: A man is facing a decision to do something or not. He picks
up two rings. On one is inscribed, "Do it" and on the other "Don't do
it". Then he seeks good from God and picks up one of them and acts upon
it. Is this lawful actiona Can it be said that this is also like
Istekhara ?

Reply: What the Scholar (a.s) have ruled to be the Istekhara is by lots
and prayer.

Question 19: What is the best time for reciting the prayer of Ja'far bin
Ali Taliba Does it have a Qunut ?

Reply: The best time to recite this prayer is on Friday at the time when
the sun has risen. Apart from this it is good to recite it any time of
the days of the week. It has two Qunuts. In the second unit it is
recited before the bowing (ruku) and in the fourth unit it is recited
after the bowing (ruku).

Question 20: A man separates a part of his money with the intention of
giving it to a brother in faith. Later he learns that some people of his
family are needful. In such a situation should he pay the money to the
former or the latter ?

Reply: Whoever is more religious should be given preference. As the
Scholar (a.s) has said: The Almighty Allah does not accept Sadaqah
(giving of alms) till there remains some needy person in the family. Pay
attention, and distribute it among them so that you obtain the merits of
both.

Question 21: It is narrated from Imam Askari (a.s) that he was asked
regarding the wearing of rabbit skin in prayers. He permitted it. But in
another narration he is reported to have prohibited it. Thus on which
report should we rely ?

Reply: If the garment is made of only the fur of the rabbit it is
allowed. But if it is made of rabbit skin (leather) it is not allowed.

One of the conditions for the dress of a person who prays is that his
garments must not be made from any part of the body of an animal whose
meat is unlawful. That is why the skin (leather), or its hair or fur and
every part of body of every animal is unlawful to be worn in Prayers.
However the religious jurisprudents have exempted pure silk, which is
not mixed with rabbit, or fox fur is exempted.

Question 22: Some scholars have reported that Imam Sadiq (a.s) was asked
about this and he replied: Do not pray in the fox or rabbit fur and
neither in cloth like the same.

Reply: His Eminence replied: Here it denotes the skin of these animals
and not something else.

Question 23: There is a garment in Isfahan, which is decorated with
silk. Is prayer valid in it ?

Reply: Prayer is not valid except of garments whose yarn is of cotton or
linen.

Question 24: Should the wiping of feet be done one after the other or it
can be done for both the feet together ?

Reply: Both can be done together. But if it is done one after the other
the right feet should be wiped before the left. The wiping of the feet
should be done from the tips of the toes till the ankles. It is a part
of ablution and their wiping together is allowed. But if done for one
foot at a time, he should wipe the right feet first.

Question 25: Is it allowed for a person to recite prayer of Ja'far
at-Tayyar during a journey ?

Reply: Yes.

Question 26: A person reciting the Tasbih of Her Eminence, Zahra (s.a)
recites the Takbir (Allaho Akbar) more than 34 times. Should he continue
with the Tasbih or restarta If he has uttered it for 67 times what
should he doa Should he start all over againa Please explain what is
obligatory in this case ?

Reply: If he makes a mistake in repeating the Takbir and exceeds 34
times he should suffice with it. But if he recites 67 times he should be
content with it. But if "Alhamdo lillah" is recited more than the
stipulated times there is nothing upon him.<sup>[1]</sup>

This was a part of that which has reached us from the Master of the Age
and it was the most beautiful and lasting reminder of the purified Imam
(a.s).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ihtijaj 2/309

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](11.htm)[  
 Back](15.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](13.htm)[  
 Next](17.htm)
