The Minor and the Major Occultation
===================================

I am certain that the readers would be eager to gain information on the
minor and major occultation of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s), as this
belief is not fully supported by all the sects of Muslims. Therefore, we
present the following discussion for the benefit of our respected
readers.

### The Imam of the time under the shade of his respected father

As His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) is that divine reformer whom the
Almighty Allah has kept especially for the reformation of the world and
the establishment of religious rule on the Earth therefore, His
Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) also accorded the best of respects and
honors to his son who would be the “Remnant of Allah on His Earth”
(Baqiatullah Fil Arzih). He kept his affair concealed very meticulously
from the oppressive Abbasids who were in severe pursuit of him. In spite
of this Imam Askari (a.s) informed many great trusted personalities of
the Shias regarding this matter and introduced His Eminence, Imam Mahdi
(a.s) to them in special audiences. These people saw His Eminence, Imam
Mahdi (a.s) in some gatherings of Imam Askari (a.s). These gentlemen in
turn conveyed this information to the other Shias who were considered
trustworthy and sincere with regard to the Wilayat (love and
guardianship) of Ahle Bayt (a.s) till the existence of His Eminence,
Imam Mahdi (a.s) became a certain fact to all of them and no doubts
remained in this regard.

The subject of the Awaited Imam is the foremost of the accepted and
clear beliefs of the Shias. He is the last of the successors of the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) who were certified by him as the leaders of his
community. Therefore, it was but natural for the Shias to pose many
detailed questions about him to the Prophet and other Imams in order to
recognize him perfectly and to gain as much information in this subject
as possible. We have hinted about this in the previous discussions.

### Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) goes towards the Eternal Abode

The Abbasid tyrants used to wreak the worst kind of tortures and
pressures on His Eminence, Imam Askari (a.s). They transferred him from
one prison to another so that a major part of his limited and brief life
passed away in dark and horrible prisons. Similarly they did not permit
that Shias should meet His Eminence and that the scholars and narrators
of tradition should benefit from the company of the Imam. Also, with
absolute strictness and mercilessness they imposed economic embargo on
His Eminence and all this was as a result of malice and jealousy that
these evil people had harbored against the Holy Imam for the following
reasons:

Firstly: His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) was the most eminent
personality of his times, as a big portion of the Muslim community
regarded him as their Imam and leader. And it did not support the
tyrannical rule of the Abbasides and were not in favor of it. Rather
they were in the forefront of opposition to the oppressive Abbaside
regime and their view was exactly opposed to the Abbasides to the extent
of even criticizing and denouncing them. Therefore, the Abbasides
behaved with utmost severity and force with His Eminence.

Secondly: The Abbaside rulers were absolutely terrified of the son of
His Eminence and the Awaited Imam whom the Messenger of Allah (a.s) had
prophesied that he would be his last vicegerent and the unique reformist
who would establish the

system of absolute justice and equity and wipe off all oppressions and
injustice, because they were certain that their oppressive rule would be
destroyed at his hands. That's why they tried to murder Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s) time and again so that his progeny is cut off just as some
letters of His Eminence state. In letters that he wrote to some of his
Shia followers it is mentioned:

“They thought that they could plan to murder so that my progeny may be
cut off. And the Almighty Allah rendered their word and their plots
ineffective and thanks and gratitude is to the Allah, the High.”

The above letter was written after the birth of His Eminence, the
Awaited Imam (a.s).

Thirdly: The Alawite Sadats raised standards of revolts in various areas
against the tyrannical and despotic rule of the Abbasides in order to
establish justice and restore the rights of humanity that had been
trampled by the Abbasides. These uprisings were supported in sections of
the society and Muslim community. Naturally this was a matter of great
consternation for the Abbasides who became deadly foes of anyone who was
even suspected to be an Alawite and they wreaked upon them the worst of
the tortures and atrocities. At that time Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) was a
pivot and a great personality and obeyed by everyone. Therefore he was
the target of the wrath and enmity of the Abbaside tyrants. Thus they
subjected him to the worst of the tortures, atrocities and pressures.
All these are examples of the causes for the enmity and malice of the
Abbasides against the Holy Imam (a.s).

### Clarification of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) on the Imamate of the Awaited Imam (a.s)

When Imam Hasan Askari became cognizant that his death and martyrdom was
near he clearly announced the Imamate of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s)
and he introduced him to his close confidants and reliable followers.
Ahmad bin Ishaq Ashari, a trustworthy, pious and god-fearing man was one
of these persons. It has come in narrations that he said: I went to Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s) and wanted to inquire about his successor. His
Eminence, preceded me in the matter and said as follows:

“O Ahmad bin Ishaq! The Almighty Allah has not left the earth without a
Divine Proof since the creation of Adam (a.s) and would not leave it
without a Divine Proof till the hour shall be established (Day of
Judgment). Through the Divine Proof calamities are repelled from the
inhabitants of the Earth, rain falls and the bounties of the earth come
out.”

After hearing these words Ahmad asked His Eminence: “Who is the Imam and
Caliph after youa” Imam Hasan Askari arose from his seat and hurried
inside his house and returned after a short while in such a way that
upon his neck on his shoulders sat a boy, whose face seemed to be like
the full moon and it seemed that he was three years old. After that, His
Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) said:

“O Ahmad! If you were not having a special and exalted position before
Allah and the Proof of Allah, I would not have shown this son of mine to
you. His name and patronymic is the same as that of the Messenger of
Allah (a.s). He would fill the earth with justice and equity, as it
would be fraught with injustice and oppressions. O Ahmad! In this
community his example is like that of Khizr and Dhulqarnain. By Allah!
He will have an occultation and none shall be safe from destruction but
one whom Allah has kept steadfast in the belief of his Imam and given
the divine opportunity (Tawfeeq) to pray for his reappearance.”

Ahmad immediately asked, “Is there any sign or symbol so that it may
satisfy my heart ?”

Just then the boy, who looked like a full moon, began to speak and he
said:

“I am the remnant of Allah on His earth and the revenge- taker from His
enemies and do not demand proof after what is before you…”

After hearing these words of the Proof of Allah, Ahmad went out of the
house of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) in such a condition that his complete
being was surrounded by joy. When again he came to Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s) after that he said: “O son of Allah's Messenger! I was very much
pleased with the favor you bestowed me that day. Thus what is the
continuing practice of Khizr and Dhulqarnain ?”

His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) said in reply, “Prolonged
occultation.”

Ahmad at once said, “O son of Allah's Messenger, would the occultation
of the Promised Imam (a.s) be also prolonged ?”

His Eminence, Imam (a.s) replied, “By my Lord! Yes, so much so, that
even those who had accepted him, would turn away from their belief and
none shall remain except one from whom Allah has taken the covenant of
our guardianship and in whose hearts is rooted our love and those who
support it with their hearts.

O Ahmad! This is the command of Allah and one of the divine secrets and
one of the Unseen matters of Allah. So remember what I am telling you
and keep it confidential and be of the thankful ones so that you may
reside in the position of Illyeen<sup>[1]</sup> with us.”<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] The highest place in Hereafter [2] Kamaluddin, Saduq, Pg 216

This tradition contains some very important points as follows:

Firstly: Since the Almighty Allah created man on the earth, He
considered it necessary for their needs to establish His proof on them.
So He sent prophets and successors towards them that they may convey the
message of their Lord and complete the proof upon them. And this is due
to the kindness of the Lord. And divine grace is having a logical base
which the scholars and experts of scholastic theology in their
discussions present their arguments through it. And they say that it is
incumbent on Allah according to rational arguments to establish and
complete His argument on the people so that one who intends to awaken
himself, his awakening should be on the basis of proof and logical
arguments. And one who desires to destroy himself, it should also be on
the basis of proof and argument. And apart from this, the existence of
the Proof of Allah is itself a cause of His innumerable fruits and
blessings. Some of them are repelling of calamities from the creatures
of the earth and the coming down of rain etc.

Secondly: When the Almighty Allah favors His creatures with the
reappearance and advent of His great reformer, His Eminence, the Awaited
Imam (a.s), they would establish the loftiest values, chief of whom is
the establishment of political and social justice in the world and
destroy the various forms of oppressions that shall be present there.

Thirdly: The Almighty Allah shall prolong the age of the Awaited Imam
(a.s) like the age of Khizr (a.s) and Dhulqarnain. And this is not
difficult for the All-powerful and All-wise Lord. It is the same way as
the Almighty has made the stars and the planets fixed in their orbits
and which continue to exist on the face of the earth. Thus for such a
wise Lord it is not difficult to prolong the age of His reformer saint
in view of those hidden wisdoms that only He is aware of.

Fourthly: The Almighty Allah tests His servants through the prolonged
occultation of His Saint and helper, the Awaited Imam (a.s). And only
those shall remain steadfast on his Imamate who are firm in their belief
about him. These were some important points mentioned in the blessed
tradition.

One of the traditions that Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) has stated to explain
the Imamate of his great son, His Eminence, the awaited Imam (a.s) is
the one quoted by the eminent and trustworthy personality, Muhammad Ibne
Uthman Amri from his father. He said: I was present in the service of
Abu Muhammad Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) when His Eminence was asked about
the traditions, ‘Indeed the earth shall never be devoid of the Proof of
Allah upon His creatures till the Day of Qiyamat and if he dies without
recognizing the Imam of his time he dies the death of ignorance...’ that
had been narrated by the forefathers of His Eminence. His Eminence in
reply to the question emphasized on the authenticity of this tradition
and said: “This tradition is true and correct, just as the day and the
sun is true and correct...”

At that time a person in the gathering stood up and asked: “O son of
Allah's Messenger! Who is the Divine Proof and Imam after youa”

His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) guided him to the Imam after him
and said, “My son, Muhammad, is the Imam and the Proof of Allah after
me. Whosoever dies without recognizing him shall die the death of
ignorance. He has an occultation when the foolish and misguided people
would be perplexed and destroyed. And those who fix the time of his
reappearance are liars. Then he shall reappear.”

This tradition also contains the same points as the previous one we had
discussed before.

### Assassination of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)

Since His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) was famous among all and
worthy of respect and honor of the Muslims and all the Alawites, it was
hard upon the tyrant Abbaside, Mutamid. And they were not able to bear
this honor and respect of Imam (a.s), therefore they decided to poison
the Imam (a.s).<sup>[1]</sup> And they proceeded with the plan. And when
His Eminence was poisoned, he fell down on the earth due to the severe
effect of pain and discomfort of the poison. In spite of this the Imam
bore the pain and discomfort patiently.

### Vigilance of the Abbaside rule

The Abbaside rule became severely vigilant and they were horrified.
Therefore Mutamid Abbaside ordered five of his confidants and one of his
servants instructed Nahrir not to leave the house of His Eminence and
observe all the information connected with the Imam (a.s) closely and to
pass on the information to him. On the other hand he formed a medical
committee and ordered them to visit His Eminence every morning and late
afternoon. Two days after the poison was administered to His Eminence
his condition worsened and he became weak. Mutamid commanded the
physicians they must not leave the side of Imam (a.s) and not leave him
alone.<sup>[2]</sup> In the same way he instructed the chief Qazi who
was that day appointed as a minister. He in turn provided ten people to
further subject the Imam to surveillance with clear orders not to be
away from the side of Imam (a.s).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Life of al-Imam Al-Hasan al-Askari [2] Al-Irshad, Pg. 283

### Towards Paradise

Due to the effect of the terrible poison, the condition of His Eminence
became more and more serious and the physicians became hopeless to save
him. Therefore, the Imam turned to Qibla and immersed himself in the
remembrance of Allah and recitation of the Holy Quran. And with complete
entreaty and weeping sought the proximity of Allah and supplicated and
pleaded till his purified soul flew away towards the high heavens and
towards the Lord and was welcomed by the angels and the pure souls of
the Prophets and saints.

The death and martyrdom of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) at that time was
great loss and a severe calamity for the whole world of Islam while the
Muslim community had been deprived of the great religious guide and
protector of human rights. Therefore plaintive cries and mournful chorus
arose from the house of Imam (a.s).

### The Last rites of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)

At last the purified body of Imam (a.s) was given the funeral bath,
anointed, shrouded and readied for the funeral prayers. Abu Isa Ibne
Mutawakkil was appointed by Mutamid, the Abbaside to recite the funeral
prayer. (It has come in narrations that Ja'far, the uncle of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.s) stepped forward to recite the prayer but Imam-e-Zaman
(a.s) pulled him back and said, “I am more deserving to pray over my
father than you.” After that he recited the prayer over the holy corpse
of his father. At that time Ja'far's face became red in shame. Those who
were present there asked him regarding the Awaited Imam, who had prayed
on his father. He said he did not know him. After the funeral prayers
were over the regime ordered to keep the face of the Imam open so that
Bani Hashim, Abbasides and defense officials, civil servants, chiefs of
organizations and government magistrates may see His Eminence for the
last time. At that moment he said in this way: This is Hasan Ibne Ali
Ibne

Muhammad Ibne Reza, who has died a natural death, while such and such
employees of the caliph and so and so officials of the chief Judge were
at his bedside.<sup>[1]</sup> After that he covered the face of the Holy
Imam (a.s). They did thus so that the Abbaside regime may not be held
responsible for having poisoned the Imam like they had poisoned his
grandfather, Imam Musa Ibne Ja'far.

### Elaborate arrangements of the Funeral Procession of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)

People from all walks of life of Samarrah converged on the residence of
the Imam (a.s) in aggrieved condition to participate in the funeral. All
the official organizations, courts and markets closed down and Samarrah
resembled a scene of apocalypse.<sup>[2]</sup>

Till that day Samarrah had not seen such a huge gathering in a funeral.
People came in groups and in crowds and participated in the funeral of
the Holy Imam. They paid condolence to each other and comforted each
other for the gigantic loss suffered by the community. They reminded
each other of the virtues and merits of the Holy Imam (a.s).

### Burial Place of Imam Hasan Askari

The holy body of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) was buried in his own house
besides the grave of his respected father, Imam Ali al-Hadi (a.s). Yes!
The beloved of the Holy Prophet of Allah and the illuminated leaf and a
luminary of the Holy Progeny was at last buried.<sup>[3]</sup> The
Alawite Sadat and Abbasides stood besides the grave. People came in
groups and paid condolence to them and the funeral program came to an
end. People departed for their homes in aggrieved condition with heavy
hearts.<sup>[4]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Irshad, Pg 383 [2] Al Irshad, Pg. 383, Dairatul Ma'rif, Bustani
7/45 [3] Life of al-Imam al-Hasan al-Askari [4] Ibid

### Raid on the house of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)

The Abbaside regime was so much terrified and concerned regarding the
Awaited Imam that they immediately surrounded the house of Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s) and the neighboring houses also in case a lady of the Imam
(a.s) may be hiding there. The house of Imam (a.s) was thoroughly
searched and then sealed and locked and it was instructed to some woman
to keep strict vigilance on the ladies of the Imam's household. And if
anyone of them were to be pregnant she was to be arrested. Till the time
they were informed that a lady was pregnant. She was immediately taken
into custody and put under the charge of Nahrir and some lady officers.
The oppressive Abbaside rulers took such severe measures so that the
Awaited Imam may not come and destroy their rule. However, divine will
is not that it could be prevented by such raids and searches etc.

### Delegation from Qom

A group of Iranians from Qom departed for Samarrah carrying some monies
as trusts and religious payments of the Shias of Qom to visit His
Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari and to deliver him the monies. But when they
reached Samarrah they learnt that Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) had passed
away. Some servants of Ja’far told them that after him the Imam was
Ja’far. At that same time Ja’far has gone out with his singers and
musicians to entertain himself on the banks of Tigris River. That is why
the delegation of Qom did not believe that Ja’far could be the Imam
because they knew that an Imam and a Divine Proof is aloof from sinful
acts and disobedience. Thus they decided to see him and learn the truth
about him. So they arrived when Ja’far returned home and met him saying:
We are a group of Shias from Qom and we bring some monies for our
master, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s). Ja’far did not let them complete the
sentence and asked in haste: Where are the moniesa “With us”, they
replied but they requested Ja’far to tell them about the amount of money
they had brought and who had given it to them. Because previously
whenever they came to Imam Hasan Askari

(a.s) he used to inform them all these things. Ja’far was dumbfounded
and did not know what to do. Ja’far protested that they were lying and
the knowledge of the unseen was only for Allah and his brother was not
having such knowledge. The delegation of Qom was further perplexed and
they looked at each other. But Ja’far told them in an angry and harsh
tone to hand him the money. The group said that they were
representatives of the people of Qom and that they would hand him the
monies only if he could furnish some signs like Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)
used to do. Therefore if he were their Imam he should prove that he is
the Imam otherwise they would return the monies to their respective
owners. On hearing this reply Ja’far hurried to the Abbaside Caliph and
informed him about the matter concerning the group from Qom. Ja’far
sought his help in taking hold of the monies from the Qummi group. The
Caliph also pressured the Qummis and said to them, “Give this money to
Ja’far.” The Qom delegation said that they were representatives and
agents of people of Qom. “They have requested us not to give these
monies to anyone without getting a proof of Imamate. And this same
procedure was prevalent during the time of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s).”

“What was that sign that Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) presented ?”

The group said, “Without us saying anything, His Eminence used to inform
us the details of whatever we had brought. And when we used to be
reassured that the Imam is perfectly knowing those things we used to
hand them over to him. Now if this man is the owner of Guardianship
(Wilayat) like his brother he should inform us about these things and
explain their quantity and condition so that we can hand it over to him.
Otherwise we would convey it back to the owners.”

Ja’far was infuriated and he turned to the Caliph and said, “O Master of
believers! These people attribute falsehood to my brother because this
is knowledge of the unseen and my brother had no such knowledge.”

The Caliph paid no attention to the statement of Ja’far but said, “They
are agents and they are not the owners so they could not be held
responsible for their decision.”

The delegation implored the Caliph to help them leave the city in safety
and security. The Caliph ordered they be taken out of the city under
police protection and none should obstruct their passage.

The Qom delegation left the boundaries of the city and all of a sudden
they decried a handsome young man who mentioned each of their names and
said, “Accept your Master!” The group said, “Are you the master of
Guardianshipa” The youth replied, “Refuge of Allah (No)! Rather I am the
slave and the obedient one of your Master, so come with me to be in the
presence of our Master.”

The Qom group happily followed the young man. When they reached the
house of Imam (a.s) they saw that the Imam was sitting on a platform
wearing a green dress. His face shone like a full moon. They saluted the
Holy Imam (a.s) and after they had made themselves comfortable the Imam
informed them about the amount of monies with them and the details of
other items as well.

The Qom group fell into prostration of thanks for Almighty Allah for
having given them the recognition of their Imam and the Divine Proof.
After that they posed some religious queries to His Eminence and His
Eminence provided the replies. Then they handed over the monies and
goods to the Imam. His Eminence instructed them that in future they must
not bring anything to Samarrah but that it should be handed over to the
Imam's representative in Baghdad. The Imam's written communications must
also be taken from this representative. In that same gathering Imam
(a.s) gave a shroud and camphor to Abu Abbas Muhammad Ibne Ja’far Qummi
Himyari and said, “May Allah magnify your rewards...”

After having received these favors the group bid farewell to His
Eminence and departed for Iran and Qom and during the journey when they
reached between Uqbah and the area of Hamadan, the above-mentioned
gentleman, Abu Abbas died.<sup>[1]</sup>

### Ja’far and the Abbaside Caliph

After the passing away of the Imam Hasan Askari (a.s), Ja’far sent 20000
Dinars to the Abbaside Caliph and requested him to bestow Ja’far the
status and position the eleventh Imam was having. The Abbasides replied
to him that the position and elevated status of the previous Imam was
not bestowed by them but it was from the Almighty Allah. He further
confessed that they had applied all their resources to destroy all that
but the Almighty Allah continued to elevate the position of the Holy
Imam. That's why His Eminence was having perfections of knowledge, merit
and virtues. So if Ja’far was having the same elevated status in the
view of the Shias and followers of the Holy Imam he did not need
anything else. But if the Shias of Imam Askari (a.s) do not recognize
the merits it is evident that he did not possess what his late brother
was having. In such circumstances any assistance from the Abbasides
would be useless for Ja’far.<sup>[2]</sup>

In fact the statement of the Abbaside Caliph was true, that the position
and status of Iman (a.s) was not in the control of the Abbasides, that
they may bestow it to anyone they pleased. Rather the personality of the
Imam and his honorable post was from the Almighty Allah. And it is He
alone who selects the best of His servants for Imamate and guardianship
(Wilayat). The Abbaside regime had concentrated all their efforts to
bring down the elevated position and status that was possessed by Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s) and the other Imams. And they considered

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kamaluddin [2] Muntakhabul Athar, Pg. 370

every type of atrocity and tyranny permissible on the Ahle Bayt and
their followers. In spite of this their position and success increased
day by day. And trust and satisfaction of the people with regard to His
Eminence continued to increase. However, Ja'far with his false claim of
Imamate and Wilayat continued to suffer loss and his request to the
Abbaside Caliph was of no avail and he did not succeed in achieving this
position and honor.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](12.htm)[  
 Back](17.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](14.htm)[  
 Next](19.htm)
