The Minor Occultation
=====================

The oppressive Abbasid caliphs tried very much to arrest His Eminence,
Imam Mahdi (a.s) and put him to death. Therefore the Almighty Allah
bestowed a great favor and mercy on His Eminence, the Awaited Imam and
kept him away from the eyes of the Abbasids, just like He had concealed
the great-grandfather, the Prophet of Islam (a.s) from the view of the
Quraish who had gathered to assassinate him and the Holy Prophet (a.s)
came out from among them and they did not see him. In the same way His
Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) was among Abbasides but they were not able to
see him. In the forthcoming discussion we would present some details
about the period of the Minor Occultation.

### Period of Minor Occultation

The period of minor occultation commenced from the time of the martyrdom
of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) in 260 A.H.<sup>[1]</sup> After the passing
away of his respected father, His Eminence disappeared from the view of
people and only some believers, righteous persons and trustworthy
gentlemen met His Eminence as we shall discuss in the forthcoming pages.

### Place and situation of Minor Occultation

His Eminence disappeared in his house in Samarrah where the holy graves
of holy grandfather, His Eminence, Imam Ali al-Hadi (a.s) and his
father, His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) are situated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Miraatul Jinaan, 2/462; Tarikh Khamis, 2/ 347; Tarikh Ibne Wardi,
1/319

### Lies And Allegations

Shias and followers of the school of Ahle Bayt (a.s) are made targets of
unjust calumnies and allegations. And many false things are heaped upon
those who have always served the religion of Islam and helped in its
spread. One of these concocted and shameful allegations is regarding the
Awaited Imam. According to them Shias claim that His Eminence, had
disappeared into the cellar and in this also there are two statements,
one of them mentions a cellar in Babel and another in Samarrah.

1. Cellar in Babel<sup>[1]</sup>
--------------------------------

Ibne Khaldun has mentioned the location of the cellar to be in Babel. He
says: The Shias think that their twelfth Imam is Muhammad Ibne Hasan
al-Askari (a.s) and that his title is Mahdi. He entered the cellar of
his house in Hilla with his mother and disappeared from there. And he
will reappear in the last period of time and fill the earth with equity
and justice. The Shias quote the tradition that Tirmidhi has recorded in
his book regarding Mahdi. And they (the Shias) still await for him and
that's why they refer to him as “the Awaited Imam” and every evening
after the sunset prayers they wait outside the entrance of this cellar
with a steed calling him by his name and urging him to reappear. They
continue till the stars fade from the sky and then disperse to return
again the next day.

This statement of Ibne Khaldun is a lie and calumny and full of malice
and hatred towards the Holy Ahle Bayt (a.s) and their followers. We
shall point out some of the factual errors of Ibne Khaldun as below:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Muqaddimah, Pg. 359

Firstly: On the basis of his statement quoted above, Ibne Khaldun has
rejected the existence of His Eminence, the Awaited Imam (a.s) whereas
there are numerous traditions and narrations of the Holy Prophet of
Islam (a.s) regarding His Eminence and his reappearance. Such that they
reach to the level of Tawatur (widely narrated) and certainty. The
well-known scholar and teacher-researcher, Agha Ahmad Muhammad Shakir
has explained the weakness of the statements of Ibne Khaldun and he
says:

“Ibne Khaldun has followed a thing about which he has no knowledge and
has put himself in a way that is full of difficulties and it is not a
way traversed by knowledge of narrators. His involvement in political
affairs of the rulers and governments has hindered him. That is why he
has conjectured that the belief of Mahdi is a Shiite belief. And in his
book, Muqaddimah, he has written a detailed chapter: Section regarding
the Fatimi when people go to him by his command.”<sup>[1]</sup>

The belief of Shias and all the Muslims regarding His Eminence, Imam
Mahdi (a.s) is a part of the Islamic Messengership. Whoever denies it,
has in fact denied Islam as some scholars of Ahle Sunnat have explained
it. We shall discuss this also in the coming pages.

Secondly: In this statement the errors and factual mistakes of Ibne
Khaldun is that he says: The Awaited Imam entered the cellar with his
mother and disappeared from there. This allegation is one that exposes
his weakness, because:

A. The mother of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) had died two years prior
to the martyrdom of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s), as we have already
mentioned in the beginning chapters of this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sharh Musnad Imam Ahmad, 5/197

B. No Shia or non-Shia historian has ever written that His Eminence was
arrested or that the Abbaside ruler had got power over them. Neither at
Hilla nor anywhere else: What Ibne Khaldun has quoted regarding the
Shias is pure calumny and an allegation, and it inverts the beliefs of
the Shias.

Thirdly: Among the allegations of Ibne Khaldun against the Shias is that
Shias gather before the entrance of the cellar in Hilla and present a
mount for him and pray for his advent and reappearance.

Shias are present in all parts of the world and such a thing has never
been heard or seen. And they are aloof from all kinds of such lies. Yes,
such types of calumnies and allegations have been concocted by Ibne
Khaldun, who himself possessed not a single merit or virtue.

2. Existence of cellar in Samarrah
----------------------------------

Some Ahle Sunnat historians have written that Shias say the Awaited Imam
(a.s) disappeared into the cellar in his house in Samarrah.

Historians like:

### (A) Suwaidi

He says: “The Shias believe that the Awaited Imam (a.s) disappeared in
the cellar of his house in Samarrah in 260 A.H. and the protectors
protect him.”<sup>[1]</sup>

### (B) Ibne Taiymiyah

He thinks that Shias believe that the Awaited Imam (a.s) is alive in a
cellar in Samarrah and that they are awaiting his reappearance from that
same cellar.<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sabaikuz Zahab, Pg. 78 [2] Minhajus Sunnah

### (C) Ibne Hajar

He has also mentioned the same thing and on the basis of the view of
Ibne Khallikan he has associated it to Shias and quoted from Ibne
Khallikan that: “The Shias believe that Imam Mahdi (The Awaited Imam) is
the inmate of the cellar and in the last age he would reappear from that
same cellar in Samarrah.” He says: “The Awaited Imam entered the cellar
in 265 AH while his mother saw him do it.” Then he has quoted two
couplets in his praise as follows:

*Is it not time for the cellar that it should show up the one whom you
have made a human on the basis of your ignorance ?*

Then may locks be on your senses because you have concocted a third,
after the griffon (legendary bird) and ghoul (legendary desert
demon).<sup>[1]</sup>

May a handful of mud be upon the faces of these poets who have
criticized that in which the Shias have no belief. This poet and others
like him have heaped calumnies against Shias. And all this is due to the
hatred and malice they harbor against the Shias. And this is not only
against the Shias, it is also against the Imams of guidance, those from
whom Allah has removed all impurities.

### (D) Qaseemi

Abdullah Qaseemi has also alleged falsehood against the Shias regarding
the Awaited Imam as follows that the readers may also note. It is
nothing but a false word and lie of Qaseemi: “In fact the greatest
stupid and dogmatic are those who have made their Imam in the cellar and
kept the Quran and their scrolls concealed with him. And it is the same
people, who every night, take their horses and asses in front of the
cellar and await for the Hidden Imam and they call him to reappear. They
follow the same ritual since the last thousand years.”<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] As-Sawaiqul Mohreqa, Pg 100 [2] Al-Sirah bainal Islam Wal Wathinina,
1/ 374

Allamah Muhaqqiq Amini has written a gloss on these black words of
Qaseemi as follows: “The calumny of the cellar is the worst of
allegations, though before this some writers of Ahle Sunnat have
mentioned the same allegation in their books, but Qaseemi has added to
it. It is that he has added horses and asses to it. And also claimed
that the Shias have a custom of standing before the cellar with their
horses and asses since a thousand years. While the Shias do not believe
that the occultation of the Imam (a.s) was in the cellar and neither was
it that the Shias have made him disappear in the cellar. They also do
not believe that he would reappear from the cellar. Rather the belief of
the Shias that is supported by traditions of Ahle Bayt (a.s) is that His
Eminence would reappear in Mecca next to the Holy Ka'ba. None have said
that he is in the cellar.”<sup>[1]</sup>

### Investigation in this matter

Here it is necessary that we have a brief discussion on this topic.
Because a cellar which is besides the graves of Imam al-Hadi and Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s) is revered by all the Shias. Just as the Abbaside
caliph, Nasiruddinollah also considered it holy because it was the place
of prayers of three Imams: His Eminence, Hadi, His Eminence, Askari and
His Eminence, the Proof (Hujjat (a.s), and thus he put a grill on it.
And none of the Shia scholars and historians have said that His
Eminence, the Awaited Imam (a.s) has disappeared into the cellar,
whether it be a cellar in Samarrah or Hilla or Baghdad. Let us see the
view of some Shia scholars:

(A) Muhaddith Noori
-------------------

Muhaddith Noori the complier of Mustadrak says: “Though we have scanned
history we do not find what they say. Actually there is no mention of
the cellar in the traditions.”<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Ghadeer, 3/308 [2] Kashful Astar

(B) Allamah Sadruddin
---------------------

Allamah Sadruddin says: “Most Sunni scholars say that Shias believe that
the Imam of the time disappeared in the cellar. But this claim of Sunnis
has no firm basis and we find no such thing in existence among the
Shias.”<sup>[1]</sup>

(C) Muhaqqiq Arbili
-------------------

Muhaqqiq Arbili says: “Those who say that His Eminence exists do not say
that he is in the cellar. Rather they say that like others he walks and
lives on the earth.”<sup>[2]</sup>

(D) Muhaqqiq Amini
------------------

A while before we had mentioned some statements of Allamah Amini that he
had boldly issued against those allegations. The following is the final
portion of his discourse in this regard:

“Alas! These allegation-makers on the topic of cellar:

if only they had sufficed on one allegation it would not have exposed
their fallacies further. Ibne Batuta would not have said that this
cellar is in Hilla and Qirmani would not have claimed that it is in
Baghdad and others would not have remarked that it is in Samarrah. And
then after this Qaseemi would not have remained perplexed and astonished
and he would have simply mentioned the word of “Cellar” without stating
anything about its location and town, so that his defect would have
remained concealed.”<sup>[3]</sup>

Therefore the disappearance of His Eminence, the Awaited Imam (a.s) in
the cellar is a piece of fiction that none has mentioned it in the whole
history of Shias. Rather the haters and enemies of the Shias have
concocted it and attributed it to the Shias.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Mahdi, Pg 155 <sup>[2]</sup> Kashful Ghummah, 3/283
<sup>[3]</sup> Al-Ghadeer, 3/309

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](13.htm)[  
 Back](18.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](15.htm)[  
 Next](20.htm)
