The Great Emissaries of the Imam of the Time (a.s)
==================================================

His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) appointed some prominent scholars and
worthy people as his emissaries so that they may act as medium between
the Imam and the Shias. Their function was to convey the problems and
queries of the Shias to His Eminence and seek their solution from His
Eminence. We have already mentioned some of these queries in the past
pages. In the following pages we shall provide some details about the
special representatives of the Holy Imam (a.s).

### 1. Uthman bin Saeed Amri

He was the first representative and ambassador of His Eminence. He had
the honor of being the Imam's representative for a long time. He was a
very worthy personality and most trustworthy and reliable gentleman. Let
us briefly discuss the life and times of Uthman bin Saeed.

Uthman bin Saeed's services to the Imam (a.s)
---------------------------------------------

Uthman bin Saeed remained in the service of the Holy Imam (a.s) for many
years. He joined the services of the Infallible Imams (a.s) when he was
just a lad of eleven.

At that time, the situation was very tense and especially during the
rule of the Bani Abbas and Mutawakkil, the tyrant Abbaside who was
absolutely cruel and atrocious on the Holy Imam, and he subjected them
to constant surveillance and surrounded them with police and kept them
under house arrest. Uthman bin Saeed for the sake of their holy mission
of Imamate and Wilayat (Guardianship) posed as an oil-vendor till he got
the appellation

of “Samman”. And in this disguise he became a link between the Shias and
their Imam. The Shias sent to him their religious payments and he also
put these monies in the oil containers and delivered them to His
Eminence, Imam Hadi (a.s) and after that to Imam Askari (a.s) and thus
by this he used to solve the financial problems of the Holy Imams. And
after those two Imams, he also received the honor of representing His
Eminence, the Awaited Imam (a.s).

Trustworthiness and reliability of Uthman bin Saeed
---------------------------------------------------

According to historical sources and biographical sciences, Uthman bin
Saeed was among the trustworthy, pious and just people. So much so, that
His Eminence, Imam Hadi (a.s) has certified his reliability and
introduced him to be a trustworthy person:

A. Ahmad bin Ishaq has narrated that he asked Abul Hasan, Imam Hadi
(a.s) from whom should he take the material of Imam (a.s) and whose
statement should be accepta

His Eminence, Imam Hadi (a.s) guided him to the course of truth and
reality and said: “Amri (Uthman bin Saeed) is my trustworthy associate,
so whatever he conveys to you on my behalf it is in fact from myself,
and whatever he has said on my behalf, it is in fact what I have said.
Thus listen and obey him because he is trustworthy and
reliable...”<sup>[1]</sup>

These certifications of the master of Wilayat (Guardianship) and
infallibility, His Eminence, Imam Hadi (a.s) regarding Uthman bin Saeed
Amri prove that Uthman bin Saeed held an esteemed position and
trustworthy status with the Imam (a.s).

B. A person inquired from His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)
regarding Amri.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tanqihul Maqal, 2/245, Usool al-Kafi

His Eminence replied: “Al-Amri and his son, both of them are trustworthy
and reliable. Whatever they convey to you from me is in fact from me,
and whatever they say on my behalf is actually what I have said. Thus
listen to them and obey them because they are worthy of trust and are
reliable.”<sup>[1]</sup>

C. A matter that proves the position and elevated status of Uthman bin
Saeed and confirms his trustworthiness and reliability is that letter of
His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) that he sent to Ibrahim bin Abde
Nishapuri, commanding him to obey and follow Uthman bin Saeed: “Do not
leave the town till you meet Amri and be in his charge and obedience.
Recognize him and let him also recognize you. Because he is a pure,
chaste and trustworthy man in our view...”

These statements and other certifications, all inform us of the piety
and elevated status of Uthman bin Saeed.

Deputyship of Uthman bin Saeed from His Eminence, the Awaited Imam (a.s)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Uthman bin Saeed was having the absolute deputyship and general
representation of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s). He was a link between
His Eminence and his Shias. He used to convey their letters, rights and
religious payments to His Eminence. And no one else had received such
trust and deputyship among the Shias from His Eminence.

Death of Uthman bin Saeed
-------------------------

The blessed grave of Uthman bin Saeed is in Baghdad besides Rasafa where
the believers and religious people visit it.

Shaykh Tusi says: “We used to visit the grave of Uthman bin Saeed and
the Ziyarat was performed openly. This practice continued from the time
I arrived in Baghdad in 408 A.H. till the year 430.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mawaqidul Maarif, 2/63

Shaykh Tusi further says, “The Governor, Muhammad bin Faraj had a metal
enclosure constructed over the grave of Uthman bin Saeed and the
neighbors and people visit the grave and obtain blessings
therefrom.”<sup>[1]</sup>

Condolence of the Awaited Imam (a.s)
------------------------------------

After the death of Uthman bin Saeed, His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) sent
condolence letter to his knowledgeable son, Muhammad bin Uthman as
follows:

“Indeed we are from Allah and to Him we shall return...We submit to His
command and are satisfied with His decree. Your father has lived in good
fortune and has passed away with dignity. May Allah's mercy be upon him,
he has joined his friends and masters. Your father was always in the
affair of the Imams (a.s) and whatever would bring him near to Allah.
May Allah brighten his countenance!

May Allah give you more reward...and from the success of that departed
one it is sufficient that he had a son like you, who would succeed him
in his place and invoke mercy for him. And I also say that thanks be to
my Lord because the hearts of the Shias are happy because of what Allah
had made in you. May Allah help you and make you succeed. May He be your
guardian and protector.”

Just as the sorrowful statements of His Eminence, the Master of the Age
prove the trustworthiness and elevated status of Uthman bin Saeed, in
the same way they confirm the reliability and trustworthiness of his
son, Muhammad bin Uthman, who also possessed great merits and good
manners...

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Moraqidul Maarif, 2/63

### 2. Muhammad bin Uthman

After the death of his father, Muhammad bin Uthman succeeded to the post
of the special deputyship of the Awaited Imam (a.s). Muhammad was among
the trustworthy and reliable persons and was a dignified personality of
the Shias in his knowledge as well as his actions. Since everyone also
trusted him like his father, the Shia people now forwarded their queries
and religious payments through him to the Holy Imam. Muhammad bin Uthman
then conveyed the replies of the Imam to his Shias.

### Justice and Trustworthiness of Muhammad bin Uthman

All biographers of Muhammad Ibne Uthman are unanimous about his work,
position and elevated status among the Shias. And this distinction is
sufficient for him that he was a special deputy of the Proof of Allah,
and the Awaited Imam (a.s). A position held by his father during his
lifetime, which after his passing away was transferred to Muhammad Ibne
Uthman.<sup>[1]</sup> The written communication of His Eminence, the
Master of the Age, proves his position and elevated status and the
letter is as follows:

“And as for Muhammad bin Uthman Amri, may Allah be pleased with him and
his father before him, is my trustworthy and reliable associate and his
writing is my writing.”<sup>[2]</sup>

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) was asked regarding Uthman Amri. He replied:
“Amri and his son, both are trustworthy and reliable. Whatever they do
on my behalf is in fact from me. And whatever they say on my behalf is
in fact my saying. Then listen to and obey them because they are
trustworthy and reliable.”<sup>[3]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tanqihul Maqal, 3/149 [2] Tanqihul Maqal, 3/149 [3] Bihar, 13/97

Regarding him, His Eminence, the Master of the Age (a.s) writes in a
letter to Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Mahziyar Ahwazi: “Muhammad was always
in the time of his father, may Allah be pleased with him, worthy of our
trust. He is like his father in our view and he is appointed to his post
and he acts according to our commands. May Allah protect him. So act
upon what he says.”<sup>[1]</sup>

And Muhammad bin Uthman has narrated that His Eminence, the Master of
the Age (a.s) performed the Hajj Pilgrimage every year. He says, “By
Allah! His Eminence, the Master of the Affair (a.s) is present every
year in the Hajj season and he sees the people and recognizes them, but
the people do not recognize him.”<sup>[2]</sup>

Writings of Muhammad bin Uthman
-------------------------------

Muhammad bin Uthman has compiled a book on Islamic Jurisprudence and
traditions that he heard from Imam Hasan Askari (a.s), Imam Mahdi (a.s)
and his father, Uthman bin Saeed who had also heard them from the Holy
Imams (a.s). Umme Kulthum daughter of Abu Ja'far has mentioned that her
father's books reached Husain Ibne Ruh.<sup>[3]</sup>

Deputyship of Muhammad bin Uthman from Imam Mahdi
-------------------------------------------------

Muhammad bin Uthman had the absolute deputyship and general
representation from His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) for fifty years. The
Shias came to him from all corners and sent to him their religious
payments so that he may convey them to the Imam of the time (a.s). They
also received replies to their numerous juristic inquiries through him
from the Imam (a.s).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar, 13/97 [2] Bihar, 13/97 [3] Bihar, 13/97

Death of Muhammad bin Uthman
----------------------------

Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Uthman had gained much from faith and piety,
therefore when he perceived that his death was near and that he must
move towards meeting with Allah, he dug a grave for himself and once in
a while descended into it for reciting Quran therein. So much so, that
he had inscribed some verses of Quran and names of the Holy Imam on a
tablet and had made a bequest that it be buried with him. After a few
days his illness worsened and his soul flew away to the ethereal world
and he submitted his life to his creator. This occurred in the end of
the month of Jamadi I in the year 305 A.H.<sup>[1]</sup>

### 3. Husain bin Ruh

Husain bin Ruh was the third special deputy of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi
(a.s) during the period of minor occultation. He was a worthy
personality, a pious, intelligent and a knowledgeable man. In this way
he was greatly respected among all Muslims, whether Sunnis or Shias.
When Muhammad bin Uthman was on his deathbed he was surrounded by the
Shias of his time. They asked him: Who is the deputy of His Eminence,
Imam Mahdi (a.s) after you ?

He replied: This Abul Qasim shall take my place and he would be the link
between you and the Master of the Age (a.s). He is the deputy and
representative of His Eminence. He is a trustworthy and a reliable
person. Therefore, refer to him in your affairs and seek his counsel in
your problems. I have been ordered to convey this message to you and I
have done so.

Debate of Husain bin Ruh with the opponents
-------------------------------------------

A person from among the opponents had a debate with Husain bin Ruh
Nawbakhti that shows the intellectual level and powerful knowledge of
the latter. The opponent said to Husain bin Ruh, “I wish to pose some
questions to you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar

He replied, “You may ask.”

He asked, “Please tell me if Husain (a.s) is the Wali (saint) of Allaha”

He replied at once, “Yes.”

He asked, “Is it possible for Allah to give power to His enemy over this
frienda”

Husain bin Ruh said, “Pay attention to what I am saying and remember it.
You should know that the Almighty Allah does not speak to the people
directly. But He sends some prophets of His to them. If He had sent
non-humans as prophets they would not have gathered near him, they would
have shunned him. That's why the prophets were from the people (human).
They used to eat like humans and walked in the streets and bazaars.
People used to say to him: You are like us and we are like you. We do
not accept that you are a prophet but that you present some miracle. If
you show a miracle we would know that you have a special distinction
from Allah, which we do not have. Thus the miracles of the prophets are
the greatest proof of the veracity of their claims. Therefore some of
them after warnings and completion of proof presented the miracle of the
flood and storm and the arrogants were drowned. Some were such that when
thrown into the fire, it became cool and comfort for them. For some of
them the sea split and the enemies drowned in it. The Almighty Allah
turned the dry staff into a python. Of them were such through whose
hands the Almighty enlivened the dead and for some split the moon and in
the same way gave speech to animals like camel and wolf, etc.

In other words the divine prophets presented such miracles that people
were not capable of performing them. The wisdom of the Almighty was such
that the prophets, though they possessed the miracles sometimes they
achieved victories and sometimes they suffered defeat. If they had
always been victorious and had never suffered defeat and calamities the
people would have mistaken them for being god and considered them
all-powerful. Thus the

prophets, despite their miracles were sometimes victorious and
successful and sometimes vanquished, Therefore the people did not
perceive them to be omnipotent and realized that there was a power above
the prophets Who is the creator and Nourisher of the Universea They were
compelled to confess to Him and obey His prophets, who are the proofs of
Allah over the people. Anyone who saw their propagation, warnings and
signs decided and confessed that it was truth and worth obedience. In
this way they secured their salvation and those who deviated from this
and became inimical to the divine messengers fell into everlasting
chastisement.”

This reply and debate shows the powerful rational capability and
knowledge of Husain bin Ruh. The opponent was so much affected by the
discourse that he fell into bewilderment. Therefore, Muhammad bin
Ibrahim bin Ishaq who was present in the gathering says that the reply
of Husain bin Ruh was so astonishing that the next day I went to him to
ask him whether it was his own reply or he had learnt it from the
Infallible Imam (a.s). Husain bin Ruh told him: “O Muhammad bin Ibrahim!
I never say anything on my own even in the most difficult circumstances.
Rather the source of all the things is from the favors I have received
from the Proof of Allah and heard from him...”<sup>[1]</sup>

Steadfastness of Husain bin Ruh
-------------------------------

Husain bin Ruh had a powerful determination on the path of truth and
possessed great steadfastness and bravery. Abu Sahl Nawbakhti says: “If
Abul Qasim had the Imam underneath his garment, and even if his flesh
was being cut into pieces to make him reveal his whereabouts, he would
not yield or reveal his presence to his foes.”<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Muntakhabul Athar, Pg. 397-399 [1] Bihar, Maraqidul Ma'arif, 1/25

Dissimulation of Husain bin Ruh
-------------------------------

Husain bin Ruh was living in a time when the society was full of hatred
and malice towards the family of the Messenger of Allah (a.s). Therefore
he was compelled to secure his life. So that he may continue to fulfill
the great duty and heavy responsibility of the deputyship of the Imam of
the time. Thus he used to act in dissimulation. Historians state that
one day a sentry of his cursed Muawiyah, therefore Husain bin Ruh
terminated his services and though many people interceded that he be
reinstalled he was not taken back by Husain bin Ruh ever.<sup>[1]</sup>

Husain bin Ruh with Ali Qummi
-----------------------------

The great Allamah, Ali bin Husain Qummi wrote a letter to Husain bin Ruh
that he request His Eminence, to pray that the Almighty Allah may give
him a child who may become a scholar of religion from his present wife,
who was the daughter of his uncle. Husain bin Ruh also conveyed his
request to His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s). The reply came that he would
not have any children from this wife. But soon he would become a master
of a bondmaid through whom would be born two sons, deeply knowledgeable
about religion and religious law. Not much time passed but that he
became a master of a Dailamite lady. The Almighty Allah gave him three
sons from this lady, Muhammad, Husain and Hasan. But Muhammad and Husain
became prominent scholars of Shia Islam having few equals. They were
experts of religion and memorizers of the verses of Allah Almighty and
their powerful memory astonished the people and people say that this
distinction was due to the blessings of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s).
However Hasan was an ordinary man and was always engrossed in prayers,
away from the company of people.<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar [2] Ghaybah, Shaykh Tusi, Pg 188

Death of Husain bin Ruh
-----------------------

Husain bin Ruh was the sole deputy and emissary of His Eminence, Imam
Mahdi (a.s) for 21 or 22 years. He was the sole link and medium between
Shias and His Eminence (a.s). He used to convey the queries and
religious payments to His Eminence and obtain their replies from him.
After this period he fell ill and in the year 326 he passed away from
this world and was buried in Baghdad with elaborate funeral arrangements
at Bazar Shorja, which is an important business center and court of law.
People go for Ziyarat to his grave and obtain blessings therefrom.

### 4. Ali bin Muhammad Samari

Ali bin Muhammad Samari was a man of faith and piety and had a very
special and elevated position of spirituality among the people. It is
sufficient for his distinction that he had the honor of being the
special deputy of His Eminence, the Master of the Age (a.s). In spite of
the fact that in his time there existed many worthy and capable people
among the Shias, he became the last special deputy of His Eminence. And
with his passing away commenced the Major Occultation of the Twelfth
Imam. Now the general deputyship of His Eminence became the share of the
great scholars of Shia religion.

Narrators have reported that His Eminence wrote an Epistle to Ali bin
Muhammad Samari before his death as follows:

“O Ali bin Muhammad Samari, may Allah reward you. You are going to die
in six days. Tie up your affairs and do not appoint any successor to
carry out your duties after your final transfer. The full occultation
has begun and there shall be no appearance but after Divine permission,
high His name is, and that shall be after lengthy times, and the
hardening of the hearts and the earth being replete with inequity.
Individuals who claim to have seen me will come to my Shia. Behold,
whoever claims seeing me before the

rise of Sufyani and the Call, is a liar and a slanderer. And there is no
power except through Allah, the Lofty, the Great.”<sup>[1]</sup>

We learn from this epistle that if anyone after the major occultation
claims to meet His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) he would be a blatant
liar. On the other hand we have historical records of many people and
many great scholars meeting the Imam (a.s). Now how can we reconcile the
two things. The explanation is that one who claims to meet the Imam at
will and also says that he is an agent of the Imam like some people did
during the minor occultation is a liar. However, if one reports without
such a claim there is no harm in it. This according to me is the
apparent explanation of this puzzle.

Death of Ali bin Muhammad Samari
--------------------------------

Ali bin Muhammad Samari became indisposed and the Shia people visited
him and inquired, “Who is your successor after youa”

He replied, “The affair rests in the hands of Allah (I do not have a
successor).” Samari entered into the mercy of the Lord on 15th of Shaban
328 A.H.<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mojam Rijalul Hadith, 13/186 [2] Ghaybah, Shaykh Tusi

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](14.htm)[  
 Back](19.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](16.htm)[  
 Next](21.htm)
