Guardianship of the Scholar
===========================

### (Wilayat-e-Faqih)

The Awaited Imam (a.s) has appointed the great Shia jurists as his Wali
and deputies just as the Purified Imams (a.s) had appointed them from
their side and commanded their Shias that during the time of the
Abbasides when it is not possible to contact the Imams, they must refer
to the religious jurists and seek their opinion in legal matters. In a
well-known tradition from Umar Ibne Hanzala it is mentioned that two
Shia persons had a dispute and were going to present their case to the
government magistrate. When Imam Sadiq (a.s) was asked if such a step
was permitted, he replied,

“One who presents his case to a tyrant and he gives a verdict it is
invalid, even though it may be his lawful right. Because he has got it
through the verdict of a tyrant while the Almighty Allah has commanded
shunning the tyrants.”

I asked, “Then what should these people doa” He replied, “See who
relates our traditions and narrations to you and who considers our
permitted and prohibited and who possesses knowledge and information
about our commands. Be prepared to follow him. I have appointed him as
authority on you. And when he commands our commands and prohibits our
prohibitions and he is not obeyed, it is as if the commands of Allah
were considered unimportant. And we have been denied. And one who denies
us has denied Allah. Such that he shall be in the limits of having
associated with Allah.”<sup>[1]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Wasaelush Shia, Kitabul Qaza

In this discourse, the Holy Imam (a.s) has given a general Wilayat to
the jurists and made him the authority as the ruler and point of
reference for all Muslims in their social aspects. Like this tradition
there is another famous narration of Ibne Khadijah that the Imam (a.s)
told him:

“Beware! Do not take your mutual disputes to the tyrant rulers. Rather
search among yourselves and see if you can find one who is knowledgeable
about our judgments and solutions to religious problems. Make him a
judge among yourselves. Because I have appointed him as a judge. So take
your cases to him.”<sup>[1]</sup>

On the basis of this we can say that Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s) has
appointed the just jurisprudent as the general authority and the point
of reference for the Muslims. Similar to these two traditions is an
epistle of His Eminence, the Master of the Age (a.s) addressed to Shaykh
al-Mufid (r.a.). It is as follows:

“As for the events, which will occur, turn to the narrators of our
traditions, because they (the narrators) are my proof to you, while I am
the proof of Allah to them...”

In this tradition and others like it, His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) has
appointed the jurists as his deputies and commanded the Shias to refer
to them and follow their verdicts in all religious aspects of their
life.

However, one who is responsible for the religious leadership of Muslims
during the occultation of His Eminence must possess the following
qualities:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Wasaelush Shia, Kitabul Qaza

1. Adulthood 2. Sanity 3. Justice 4. Man 5. Knowledge of Jurisprudence
6. Independence (according to some narrations.<sup>[1]</sup>

### Responsibilities of the Religious Jurisprudent

The following are the responsibilities of the religious jurisprudent
appointed as the general deputy of His Eminence:

A. The Islamic world and all the sects have considered (accepted) that
he is one who takes care and is concerned for everything regarding the
world of Islam and if there is an attack from the enemy or an infidel
invades Muslim lands it is necessary that he should rise to defend them
and the Shia point of reference is in Najaf Ashraf. Thus when Libya was
attacked by the Italians and Muslims of Palestine were under the yoke of
the Zionists (Jews) the scholars of Najaf Ashraf always supported the
people of Libya and rose up to defend the Muslims.

B. He must possess expertise on all the faculties of the colleges of
religious sciences and he must be responsible for their expense and the
budgets.

C. He must convey funds to the poor and deprived people of community and
fulfill their needs. These were some of the responsibilities of the
religious jurisprudents appointed as point of reference by the Holy Imam
(a.s) for the Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Urwathul Wuthqa, Vol. 1. Pg. 4

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](15.htm)[  
 Back](20.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](17.htm)[  
 Next](22.htm)
