A Study of the Occultation of Imam Mahdi
========================================

The most important discussion in this book, in my view, is that the
readers of this book learn something about the causes of the occultation
of Imam (a.s) and also that the information about the natural causes of
the longevity of His Eminence may be conveyed.

### Causes of the occultation of Imam Mahdi (a.s)

The occultation of His Eminence, the Master of the age (a.s) is a
necessary thing and His Eminence is not needless of it. We shall discuss
those factors that rendered it an absolute necessity.

1. Fear of tyrannical Abbaside regime
-------------------------------------

When Abbaside rulers gained power they initiated the worst of atrocities
and tortures on the Holy Imams (a.s). Basically they considered the
school of Ahle Bayt (a.s) and anyone who was their adherents to be
eligible for extreme pressure and restrictions. They were thrown into
horrible prisons and then put to death. Poets and historians have drawn
a pathetic picture of the perilous circumstances suffered by the Alawite
Sayyids.

Abu Ataa says:

**Alas! If only the oppression of the Merwanids (Bani Umayyah) had
returned and the justice of Abbasides were destroyed and thrown into the
fire.**

Dibil Khuzai says:

**The oppression of Bani Abbas has covered everything and no one was
secure from its oppression. If we regard the oppression of Bani Umayyah
an expected fact, as they were enemies of Bani Hashim, how can we
justify the oppression of Bani Abbas who were themselves from Bani
Hashima**

Yaqub bin Sikkit, an intellectual and a scholar of language says
regarding Mutawakkil, the Abbaside, when he razed the tomb of the
beloved one of the Holy Prophet (a.s) and harassed and tortured the
visitors to his grave:

“It is true that Bani Umayyah unjustly killed the son of the daughter of
the Prophet of Islam (a.s). But the Bani Abbas regretted not being
present among them when they committed this crime. So their malice was
expressed in mutilating the grave of the His Eminence...”

Abu Faras Hamadani has described the various kinds of tortures and
atrocities wrought by the Abbasides with regard to Ahle Bayt (a.s) in
the following words:

“The Abbasides have metamorphosed the religion of Allah and usurped the
rights and subjected the progeny of Ali to humiliation and imprisoned
and tortured them. Though the Bani Abbas can never reach the elevated
position of the progeny of Ali (a.s). They cannot aspire for the exalted
status of Bani Hashim. Their ancestor, indeed was not having even
one-tenth of the position of the Progeny of the Prophet. Basically there
is no similarity between the two clans. On the basis of this, the
Progeny of Ali is great and honorable. Even though Abbasides are rulers,
but in fact they shall remain servants of the Progeny of Ali (a.s).”

Abu Faras further satires the Abbasides thus:

“Why are these blatant behaviors and unsuitable things kept away from
the Progeny of the Messengera Really, how deep you have gone into deceit
in religion. How much blood of the Progeny of Messenger has been spilled
at your hands! No matter how hard you try, you are going into further
deviation. You can never gain the status of the Progeny of Ali. This is
your Haroon who could not be compared with Musa bin Ja’far (a.s). And
this is your Mamun, who like his father, was sunk in evil deeds and so
he could not be compared to Ali bin Muse ar-Reza (a.s). The

fact is that you exceed the Umayyads in your atrocities towards the
progeny of the Prophet.”

Ibne Rumi has penned the following:

“You have two options before you. One is the straight path of truth and
the other is a deviated road. Man is given the option to take one of the
two. The path of enmity to the progeny of the Prophet, which is the path
of deviation or the path of truth.”

Then he says:

“How prolonged is the path of usurping the rights of the Progeny of Ali
(a.s) and their tortures and killings. How long would the progeny of the
prophet be continued to be killed, and for how long would their blood
continue to be spilleda How long would you continue to sell your
religion to these rulers to whom you have paid allegiancea Is there none
among you who could respect the rights of the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
and have fear of the Lord of retributiona So that you may help them in
such times of terrible calamities and oppressionsa”

He further says:

“Beware of the Bani Abbas and keep away from them. You should know that
they are drowned in the sea of oppression and injustice. And their
kingdom and regime is not permanent and it should not be a cause of your
pride and deceit. Very soon an avenger shall arise and seek revenge of
the blood of the progeny of the Messenger, which was spilled unjustly;
because after every dark night there is a bright day.

Apparently, Ibne Rumi has alluded to the reappearance and advent of His
Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) who would rise up to establish his right.

The above were some examples of the atrocities the Abbasides had
committed on the descendants of Imam Ali (a.s) that were versified by
these poets.

Letter of Khwarizmi to the people of Nishapur
---------------------------------------------

Abu Bakr Khwarizmi wrote the following letter to the people of Nishapur.
It is an example of records containing the oppressions done on the Ahle
Bayt (a.s) after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that
were committed by Umayyads, Abbasides and others. Here we shall quote
this letter verbatim, because it contains in details some of the
tortures suffered by the Alawites. It is as follows:

“Know that! May Almighty Allah guide your efforts and may He gather your
activities on piety and fear of God. There is a matter on which no
powerful person has spoken about. That he could not bear any kind of
difficulty except that he should have kept it in his own place and would
not confess to its greatness but that he be inclined to it and no one
shall care, that he should destroy his religion. If his world becomes
bad and if he saw his happiness in it he does not care about the
pleasure of Allah.

You all and me - may Allah reform you and us. We are that group that
Allah has not made us for this world. Rather he was kept us for the
Hereafter. He has kept us away from instant happiness and prepared the
rewards of the Hereafter for us. We are divided into two groups: A group
that accepted sacrifice and another group that is a life of
homelessness. The living people doubt regarding those who have died and
had reached an elevated status and are not pleased with the life given
to them. <sup>[That\\ is\\ the\\ life\\ of\\ homelessness]</sup>.

Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s), the chief of religion said: “Calamities reach
our Shias more swiftly than water reaches a low-lying land.” The
conclusion of this discourse is that these things are obtained by
patience; and he found the people of his house to be always in
difficulties and calamities. Their life was always in difficulties and
their hearts were always filled with sadness and grief and the world had
becomes aloof from them. If we wish to be the Shias of Ahle Bayt (a.s)
in the obligatory and recommended deeds and wish to act on all their
commands, we must also be prepared to bear the worst kinds of
difficulties.

In the end of his discourse he has mentioned the different types of
atrocities wrought upon the Shia by the tyrant rulers and the calamities
that befell them shall be recompensed in form of great reward of
Paradise by the Almighty Allah, which is for His favorite ones. The
Almighty would reward them more in recompense of the atrocities borne by
them, due to their having affection for Ahle Bayt (a.s)...”

Among the points derived from his statements is that the people of
Nishapur were subjected to great oppression and calamities due to their
love for Ahle Bayt (a.s) therefore, Abu Bakr has written this letter
comforting them in their troubles. Further on the letter-writer says:

“The right of Fatima Zahra (s.a.) regarding her inheritance from her
father was usurped on the day of Saqifah and Amirul Momineen (a.s) was
deprived of caliphate. Imam Hasan (a.s) was secretly administered poison
and his brother was slain openly. Zaid Ibne Ali was crucified on a tree
in Kanasa and he was beheaded in the battle
<sup>[though\\ it\\ is\\ said\\ that\\ he\\ was\\ beheaded\\ after\\ the\\ battle]</sup>.
His sons, Muhammad and Ibrahim were murdered by Isa bin Musa, the
Abbaside. Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s) passed away
<sup>[was\\ martyred]</sup> in the prison of Haroon. Imam Reza (a.s) was
poisoned at the behest of Mamun. Idris fled from the battles of Fakh and
led a solitary life in Andulasia. Isa bin Zaid died while he had been
expelled and had fled. Yahya bin Abdullah was killed inspite of having
been guaranteed safety.”

In this part of the letter Khwarizmi has detailed the atrocities borne
by the Ahle Bayt (a.s). The most serious of these crimes against them
was against the chief of the ladies of the world and the beloved of the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) and a part of his body, Her Eminence, Fatima
Zahra (s.a.). That she was deprived of her inheritance on the day of
Saqifah. On the day whose calamity shall remain forever in the history
of the world. And all those atrocities and oppression that have reached
the Ahle Bayt

(a.s) all of them are the consequences of that unfortunate day; when
they kept away the Master, Amirul Momineen (a.s), from the center of
caliphate even though the Prophet of Allah (a.s) had appointed him to
Imamate on the day of Ghadeer. From that day onwards, such atrocities
continued on the Ahle Bayt of the Messenger (a.s). Muawiyah, the son of
Hind, had Imam Hasan (a.s), the great leader of the youths of Paradise,
poisoned. Yazid, the son of Muawiyah, massacred the beloved grandson of
the Messenger of Allah (a.s) and his family members and friends at
Kerbala. It was such a terrible carnage that its equal is not present
anywhere in the history of mankind.

Among the calamities that befell Ahle Bayt (a.s) was the martyrdom of
Zaid, the son of Imam Sajjad (a.s) who was killed by the Umayyads and
after that he was impaled on a date tree. He continued to remain there
for some years. He showed the Muslims the path of freedom and dignified
humanity. He persuaded them to fight for freedom rather than lead a life
of degradation.

In the same way the greater personality from Ahle Bayt of his time, His
Eminence, Musa bin Ja'far (a.s), who was also the leader and guide of
the people had to bear the wrath of Haroon, who suppressed social
justice and cast the Holy Imam (a.s) in the dark dungeons of the prison
and finally had him martyred by poison.

After that his son, Imam Reza (a.s) became engrossed in the atrocities
of Mamun, the Abbaside, when he was compelled to accept the
heir-apparency of Mamun. Later on, the same Mamun had him martyred
through poison.

Such atrocities were heaped upon the purified Sadat while they all were
those who invited the people to justice and freedom in the world of
Islam.

Khwarizmi further details the problems suffered by the Alawites and
says:

“Apart from this Yaqub bin Laith oppressed the Alawites in Tabristan.
Muhammad bin Zaid and Hasan bin Qasim Dai were arrested and imprisoned
by the Sassanids. Additionally we have the troubles that Abu Saj imposed
on the Alawites of Medina when he forcibly brought them to Samarrah in
such a way that no shade was provided over their heads and only barren
earth was there to walk and sit. This occurred after the killing of
Qutaybah bin Muslim along with his family and children who had been
arrested by Umar bin Ali who was overpowered by Babawahy. Later on he
concealed himself and changed his name in order to escape death.

In addition to what Husain bin Ismail Musabi did with Yahya bin Umar
Zaidi. It was what Muzahim bin Khaqan did with the Alawites of Kufa and
it is sufficient for you. There is no town in the Islamic lands but that
at least one martyr from the Alawites is buried therein and none but the
Umayyads or the Abbasides had a hand in their killings and the Arabs of
Adnan and Qahtani descent are unanimous on this.

There is none of the living ones whom we could recognize from Yemen,
Bakr and Mudir but that they were partners in the bloodshed of Ahle Bayt
(a.s). They are partners in it just as the butcher divides the meat of
the slaughtered animal.”

In these statements, he has mentioned the atrocities of Bani Abbas with
regard to the great personalities of the Alawites and Shias, who were
subjected to killings and destruction. The Abbaside ruler had commanded
his security organization to find the Alawites wherever they might be
and subject them to the worst tortures. Khwarizmi has given a brief
account of all the leading Alawite personalities who were martyred at
the hands of Abbasides.

Khwarizmi then moves ahead and further details perilous circumstances of
the Alawites and says:

“Their personality and abstemiousness guided them to death. A life of
degradation was not a good future for them. Thus they

welcomed a death of dignity. They reposed their faith on that which was
stored for them in the Hereafter. They kept their temporal selfish
desires at a distance. Thus none but their Shias and fans had to drink
the cup of death. Their helpers and followers bore each and every kind
of torture with patience and forbearance.”

In this section, Khwarizmi has described the honor and dignity of the
Alawites and says that the Alawites possessed such self-respect that
they could not bear a life of degradation under the shameless
indignities from the Abbasides. Therefore they raised the flags of
opposition and revolution so that they may gain and retain freedom and
they bore unlimited atrocities in this process. The worst tortures
descended upon the Shias who took up resistance against the tyrannical
Abbasides and Umayyads.

Thereafter, Khwarizmi has mentioned the tortures borne by the Alawites
and their Shias:

“In the illuminated Medina, Uthman bin Affan kicked Ammar bin Yasir
severely in the stomach. He also arrested and confined Abu Zar Ghiffari,
and harassed Ammar bin Abdul Qais Tamimi. Ashtar Nakhai and Abi bin
Hatim at-Tai were beaten up by him. Ubayy Ibne Kaab was tortured and
Muhammad bin Hanafiyyah was oppressed and kept away. He did what he
intended with the blood of Ibne Salim. He did not fell short in doing
what he intended with Ka'ab Zihatba.”

In these statements Khwarizmi has described the behavior of Uthman bin
Affan, the senior member of the Umayyad clan towards the senior
companions of the Prophet and the punishments and mental tortures meted
out to them. For example, the great companion, Ammar Yasir and the
respected companion, Abu Zar Ghiffari and others like them also opposed
the politics of wealth hoarding and the precedence given to Bani Umayyah
and Progeny of Abu Muit. Uthman had gifted to them vast wealth and
imposed their power on the lives of Muslims. This alone became the cause
of the Muslims coming together upon the killing of Uthman.

Khwarizmi has mentioned all the problems and oppression borne by the
Ahle Bayt and the Shias and he says:

“And Bani Umayyah followed the footsteps of Uthman. Thus whoever
confronted them in war was killed and whoever submitted to them was
abused. They did not provide any social security for the Emigrants
(Muhajarin) and made them dispersed. Nor did they accord any place of
safety for the helpers (Ansar). They had no fear of God and they had no
respect for anyone. They considered the people as their slaves and
considered the property of God as their own. They made the Ka'ba
deserted and invited their companions to worship them. They omitted the
ritual prayers. They destroyed the freedom of people. Their behavior in
the holy places and cities of Muslims was like that of the infidels in
their own holy places and cities. And if a person from the Umayyads
committed a sin, it was not even criticized, as if he had committed
nothing wrong.”

In this section, he has penned the crimes and misappropriations of Bani
Umayyah. They were not having any kind of regard for the people upon
whom they ruled with an iron hand. They considered lowly all those who
wanted to advise them to good and they forced all that the people did
not like. Similarly he mentions other calamities imposed by the
Umayyads.

After that Khwarizmi details the continuous oppressions and atrocities
of Bani Umayyah upon the Alawites:

“Muawiyah killed Hujr bin Adi; he also arrested and killed Amr bin Hamaq
Khuzai in spite of having given him guarantee of safety and a promise of
according him security. Ziyad bin Sumaiyah massacred thousands of Shias
of Kufa and tortured and killed the Shias of Basra. He was the one whose
prison was the largest and who had the largest number of captives under
him. Finally the Almighty Allah gave the worst form of death to Muawiyah
and life ended in the worst manner. After that he prepared his son to
finish off the remaining righteous people and slaughter the children of
the martyrs. Thus first he put to

death Hani bin Urwah Muradi and Muslim bin Aqeel Hashmi. After that
Harith bin Ziyad Riyahi then Abi Musa Amr bin Qarda Ansari, then Habib
bin Mazhar Asadi, Saeed bin Abdullah Hanafi, Nafe bin Hilal Jamali,
Hanzala bin Asad Shami and Abis bin Abi Shabeeb Shakiri. The number
reached to more than seventy Shias who were killed by him.

And after that he ordered for the killing of Imam Husain (a.s) in
Kerbala so that the second part of the strategy was started. Then the
son of the bastard, Ubaidullah Ibne Ziyad, was imposed on the people, so
that he impales his opponents on date palms, and people were killed in
different ways till the time he was killed. But the great burden of
bloodshed of the sacred blood and the gigantic sin remained on his neck,
till a group which Allah had intended, rose up to finish off those who
had committed the heinous crime. They were supporters of Ahle Bayt (a.s)
and they came together to oppose this group and sought revenge for the
martyrs. Although the son of the Bastard was not totally helpless and
continuous assistance reached him. The prominent personalities of Kufa
rose up against him to oppose him and be killed and there was no other
way for them. They sacrificed their lives and property on this path. So
much so, that Sulaiman bin Surd Khuzai, Musayyab bin Najih Farazi and
Ubaidullah bin Waal Tamimi and some of the prominent people and the best
believers and the chiefs of the followers of companions, who were the
leading lights and the brave stalwarts of Islam, were martyred.”

In these statements, Khwarizmi has delineated the tortures and
oppressions borne by the Shias during the caliphate of Muawiyah bin Abi
Sufyan. It was that he appointed Ziyad bin Abih and initiated the
massacre and pursuit of the Shias. When the tenure of Muawiyah ended,
his son, Yazid assumed power and committed such oppressions as have no
equal in the history of the world. He martyred the progeny of the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) in such a terrible manner with such
mercilessness that its

equal is not found anywhere else in history, because here the sanctity
of the Holy Prophet and his descendants was trespassed, and whatever
Ibne Ziyad did with the chief of the youths of Paradise did not suffice
for him. He also stretched his hands towards the great Shia leaders. For
example, he had Mitham bin Tammar crucified on a date tree. After that a
religious group of supporters of the Shias revolted and demanded revenge
for the blood of Imam Husain (a.s), who were called Tawabeen (the
repenters). Their leaders were martyred, like Sulaiman bin Surd Khuzai,
Musayyab bin Najih Farazi and Abdullah bin Waal Tamimi, and also others
who were the leading lights of Shia Islam.

Khwarizmi goes further regarding the calamities of the Shias and says:

“After that Ibne Zubair gained power in Hijaz and Iraq and killed
Mukhtar. It was Mukhtar who had raised the banner of revolt and revenged
the blood of the martyrs of Kerbala and put to death all those who were
involved in the martyrdom of the chief of the martyrs (a.s) and arrested
those who had dishonored him.

After Mukhtar, Ibne Zubair killed Abi Umar Ibne Kaisan, Ahmar Ibne
Shameet, Rufa bin Yazid, Saib bin Malik and Abdullah bin Malik and those
who were of the Shias. He had them arrested and cut up into pieces and
had them killed in the most terrible manner. Till the time the Almighty
Allah had the cities rid of Abdullah bin Zubair and got the people peace
from his brother Musab Ibab. Both of them were killed by Abdul Malik bin
Marwan.

**“In this way we shall put some of the oppressors with other oppressed
as a consequence of the deeds they had committed.”**

And when Muhammad Ibne Hanafiyyah was in the prison of Ibne Zubair and
wanted to burn him to death he also arrested Abdullah Ibne Abbas and
caused a lot of bloodshed.

The above words are about a great commander and a powerful ruler like
Mukhtar bin Yusuf Thaqafi, who had purified the earth of the impurity of
the misappropriators and criminals who were the killers of the Chief of
the Youth of Paradise, Imam Husain (a.s). He pursued all of them and
caught them from wherever they were hiding and executed them.

After that people aligned with Abdullah bin Zubair and his brother Musab
and gained power in Hijaz and Iraq and started the killing of the Shias
of Ahle Bayt (a.s) and at the end of that killed the ruler of Iraq,
Mukhtar and his group who were the signs of the believers and righteous
people. But not much time had passed when Abdul Malik bin Marwan killed
both of them and the Almighty Allah saved the people from their
tyranny.”

Here Khwarizmi has related some of the atrocities of Abdul Malik Marwan
and other Umayyads against the Shias:

“When the kingdom of Progeny of Marwan became consolidated they
appointed Hajjaj on the governorship of Mecca and Medina and later as
the governor of Kufa and Basra and he did whatever oppressions on the
Bani Hashim he was capable of. And he terrorized the Fatimids and
massacred the Shias of Imam Ali (a.s) and the heritages of the house of
the Prophet were destroyed. He did what he did with Kumail Ibne Ziyad
Nakhai. In this way the oppressions continued during the period of the
caliphate of the Merwanids till the time of the Abbasides. The Almighty
Allah decided to put an end to the caliphate of Merwanid with the most
terrible crime. The greatest crime they committed against the rightful
group at the end of their rule was that the hypocrites deserted Zaid bin
Ali and he was martyred at the hands of the Syrians. And his Shias like
Nasr bin Khuzaimah Asadi, Muawiyah bin Ishaq Ansari and a group who had
supported and followed him were also executed. Rather whoever was found
to have any relationship with him was murdered.”

He has described the evil handiworks of the Merwanid rule; how they
occupied the seat of Muslim rule, how they hoisted themselves to
misappropriate the wealth of Muslim and how

they wrought havoc on the populace. The chief of them being the
appointment of Hajjaj bin Yusuf Thaqafi on the necks of Muslims. He
initiated elaborate measures to tyrannize the believers and righteous
people by employing spies and mercenaries. The atrocities reached such a
stage that Zaid bin Ali decided to rise up in revolt against all these
tyrannies and gathered a group around himself. However, the hypocritical
people soon deserted Zaid and he was also executed on Hajjaj's orders.
Hajjaj also destroyed all the signs of the House of the Prophet and was
so atrocious that anyone suspected of being a Shia was immediately
arrested and executed and anyone even supportive of the Shias was not
spared.

After that, Khwarizmi has indicated how the Kingdom of the Umayyad
declined and how the Abbasides achieved power and how the Shias were
again between atrocities and calamities:

“When they destroyed the sanctity of Ahle Bayt and martyred Zaid bin
Ali, the Almighty Allah became infuriated with them and He tore away
power from Abu Mujrim, no Abu Muslim Khorasani, gained the power. When
he saw the atrocities upon the Alawites being wrought by the Umayyads he
took it as a pretext to raise the standard of revolt against them and in
the process obtained for the Abbasides the Kingdom and rule of Islamic
lands. But soon they also began to continue the misdeeds of their
predecessors. They began with the killing of Abdullah bin Muawiyah bin
Abdullah bin Ja’far bin Abi Talib. They imposed the rebels of Khorasan
and the Khawarij of Seestan and the kings of Isfahan upon the necks of
Progeny of Ali Talib. These people were hotly pursued and sought out
from wherever they had taken refuge. Ultimately they abandoned the towns
and villages and retired into wilderness or mountains to save their
lives. Till the time, the Almighty Allah imposed His best friend upon
them and the foe was killed. Everyone who followed Abu Muslim was
killed. He then invited the people to pay allegiance to him. Till the
time the Almighty Allah became

infuriated with him and he committed the most heinous crime upon
whomsoever he could reach. Then came Dawaniqi, who made himself cheap
like the rate of jewels falls but he did not select the straight path.
He ruled with a heavy hand till he finally died while his prison was
filled with the Ahle Bayt and the repositories of Prophethood.

He pursued those who had concealed themselves and put them to death.
Till the time he had Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Abdullah Hasani killed in
Sindh at the hands of Umar bin Hisham Taghlibi. Then at the time he was
killed in Sindh, know that also, whoever he could reach what was it that
he did not do with them. Was it anything less than what Haroon Rashid
and Abu Musa had done previouslya And you will know what Musa did with
Husain bin Ali at the Fakh and similarly what Haroon did with Ali bin
Aftas Husaini and that was what had been done with Ahmad bin Ali Zaidi,
Qasim bin Ali Husaini and Ali bin Ahsan Hazir Khuzai.

At last Haroon died and by the time of his death, he had destroyed the
tree of Prophethood and uprooted the foundation of Imamate. And you (O
people of Nishapur) may Allah reform you. You had a great part of faith.
They abused Amash, dethroned Shareek, terrorized Hisham bin Hakam and
made allegations against Ali bin Yaqtin.”

In the above statements, Khwarizmi has drawn a picture of the handiworks
of the Abbaside tyrants against the holy Ahle Bayt (a.s) and their
sincere followers. We can say that what the Umayyads could not do was
accomplished by the Abbasides who claimed affinity to the Prophet.
Khwarizmi has drawn up a list of the Alawi Sadat who were put to death
at the hands of Abu Musa Khorasani. The same Abu Musa from whom Allah
took revenge. Mansur made him taste what he had done with hundreds and
thousands of Muslims. But the greatest atrocities were committed on the
Alawi Sadat during the caliphate of Mansur Dawaniqi. He exceeded all
limits in their killing and he gave up

all the pretences of self-respect and merits. He pursued all of them in
such a severe manner, that even if one concealed oneself behind the
rocks or below the earth, he used to search him out and had him killed
or had him imprisoned in his dark dungeons where one could not
distinguish between day and night.

At the time he died, his prisons were crowded with Sadat and sincere
Shias and the same atrocities continued under the sons of Mansur. The
worst times came during the caliphate of Haroon Rashid that he wreaked
terrible oppressions on the Alawites and destroyed the descendants of
the Messenger of Allah (a.s). He massacred and trampled upon them with
utmost ferocity. He oppressed the leader of the family of the Prophet,
Imam Musa Ibne Ja'far (a.s), had him imprisoned for years and then
finally had him poisoned.

After this, Khwarizmi further details the troubles faced by the Alawites
and Shias as follows:

“In the beginning important personalities like Zaid bin Sauhan Abadi,
Uthman bin Hunaif Ansari were convicted. Then Harith bin Qudama Sa'adi
went into hiding and Jundab, Shareeh, Malik, Motal, Harith and Abu
Tufayl etc. were killed or humiliated in their own houses. They heard
their friends being abused and insulted and they could not say anything
against it. They saw their followers being killed before their own eyes
but had to maintain silence. It did not remain hidden that they did not
create any obstacle and most of them were kept bewildered. For example,
people like Jabir, Rashid, Zurarah and others like them, who had
devotion towards the holy saints and had kept aloof from their enemies.
And when they were put into perplexity the most terrible crime of theirs
was that they did not recognize their own Imam.”

In these lines, Khwarizmi has described the perilous circumstances of
the great Shia personalities and their followers during the regime of
Bani Umayyah and all these atrocities were not except due to their
devotion towards Ahle Bayt (a.s), whose love the Almighty Allah had made
obligatory on all the Muslims.

After that Khwarizmi describes the bitter conditions of the Shias during
the tyrannical rule of the Abbasides and says:

“In Bani Abbas there are a lot of things that you will see and ponder
upon as much as you can and you will find many strange things in them.

And at the time when money was brought for them it was distributed among
the Dailamites and Turks and they used to spend it on the Maghribis and
Farghabis. When an Imam of the Imams of guidance and a chief from the
Sadat of Bani Mustafa passed away no one used to participate in his
funeral and his grave was not cemented. And for one who passes
flatulence loudly regularly or a sportsman or gymnast or jester or one
who dies by the whips of women, the magistrates and judges used to
attend his funeral and arrange mourning assembles for him under the
command of the regime. Those who are atheists or sophists are not
objected to anything and no action is taken against them. They are in
peace and security. If anyone reads the books of philosophy and
mysticism he is not restrained or objected to. However, if anyone is
recognized as a partisan of Shia religion, he is killed. Anyone who
named a child of his as Ali was executed. If anyone was even suspected
to be a Shia, except of the partisans of Mualla bin Khumais, who was
killed at the hands of Dawood bin Ali, he was put to death. If they had
not imprisoned all the Shias except those of Abi Turab Maruzi it would
have been such a wound that never heals and such a fire that never
cools, a headache that never goes away, a crack that is never filled. It
is sufficient what the poets of Quraish say: In the period of ignorance
there were some poems through whom they attacked Amirul Momineen (a.s)
and confronted the Muslims

through the couplets. When their poems were collected and their
narrations were classified. So much so that writers have recorded their
histories in their books like Waqidi, Wahab bin Mamba Tamimi, Kalbi
Sharqi bin Qatami, Haitham and Daab bin Canaani etc.

However, whenever a Shia poet composes poems in the honor of the virtues
of the Master and mentions the miracles of the Prophet, his tongue is
pulled out and his collection is torn up. Just as in the case of
Abdullah bin Ammar, Kumail bin Zaid Asadi. The grave of Mansur bin
Zabarqa was ransacked. The house of Dibil bin Ali Khuzai was destroyed.
While they supported and helped Marwan and Ali bin Jahm. Though it was
not but due to their extreme enmity to Ahle Bayt (a.s). They had indeed
earned the worst anger of the Almighty. The circumstances reached such a
stage that Haroon bin Khaizan and Ja'far who was the agent of Satan, and
not that of the Beneficent, he did not spend but to help the abusing and
denouncement of the Master and help the enemies of Ahle Bayt (a.s). For
example Abdullah bin Musab, Wahab bin Wahab Bakhtari and the poets like
Maswan, and the litterateurs like Abdul Malik and in the caliphate of
Ja'far people like Bakar, Abi Samt and Ibn Abi Shaurab etc.”

In these words, Khwarizmi has described the calamities faced by the
Shias of Ahle Bayt (a.s) during the regime of the Abbaside ruler who had
the audacity to shed their blood and pressurized them. The great Shia
luminaries who were executed or put into prison had no crime upon their
necks except their devotion to Ahle Bayt (a.s), and Khwarizmi has
mentioned their names. Another activity of the Abbasid was to suppress
the remembrance of Ahle Bayt among the people. They did it firstly by
censuring and torturing anyone who composed an elegy or praised their
virtues; he was either executed or put into prison. Also, whoever abused
and denounced them was accorded great honors by the regime and rewarded
greatly.

And those things that further illuminate their dealings with the Shias
are as follows:

“May the Almighty Allah guide. Indeed we have held the strong rope of
Allah (Ahle Bayt) and followed the religion and preferred them to
material wealth. None saw us but that there was an increase in his
insight. And one who has more defects than us cannot point out our
shortcomings. Since the beginning, Islam was only poor and in this way
it would be again turned poor. It is the statement of Almighty Allah and
bequest of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that He would give power and
rulership to whomsoever He likes and the final end is for those who fear
Allah. And know that after everyday there is a tomorrow and after every
Saturday there is a Sunday. That is, the world is not the same always.

In the battle of Siffin, Ammar Yasir said: If the enemy kills and when
we lose all hopes of survival we still know that we are on the right and
the enemy is wrong. Indeed the Messenger of Allah (a.s) was weak in the
beginning but later he became strong. In the same way Islam was
initially backward but afterwards it achieved honor and precedence:

**“Do men think that they will be left alone on saying, we believe, and
not be tried ?”<sup>[1]</sup>**

And if the severity upon the believers and their paucity had not been
there and if the power of the disbelievers and their great numbers had
not been there, indeed, the Hell would not be filled up. And that it
says: Give me more! And the Almighty Allah would not have said: But most
of them do not know! And it is not known that the one who pleads and
begs is of the patient and forbearing one. And the thanks-giver would
not have been distinguished from the denier. The obedient one, eligible
for reward and the sinner who is liable for chastisement would not have
been distinguished. Thus whenever a calamity befalls us,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Ankabut 29:2

we indeed consider it our habit. If power and kingdom comes into our
hand while we are expecting, thanks be to the Almighty. We are seeking
salvation in all circumstances and always we hope for the best but
maintain patience in even the worst circumstances. Indeed, the Master
(Ali) was abused for a thousand months but we never doubted his
teachings. And the Holy Prophet (a.s) was falsified for 10 years but we
laid no blame on his prophethood and the Iblis lived for years more than
the number of grains of sand and we do not refrain from cursing him. We
had been tested with wealth for a long time also and indeed we had faith
in the Kingdom of Allah. And Imams after an Imam and the pleasure of
Allah with His Will. They were all martyred but we did not doubt their
Imamate. Indeed the promise of Allah would be fulfilled and the command
of Allah changes never. You will never come to know it, never; very
soon, the oppressors shall know what their end shall be. Indeed, you
shall know their fate after sometime, in Qiyamat.”

These words describe the patience and forbearance of the Shias, and
their lack of undue concern towards the problems that befall them which
are caused by the misappropriators and enemies of Ahle Bayt. They never
compelled them to abandon their love and devotion of Amirul Momineen
(a.s) and his descendants.

They were the callers to the social activities in Islam. And the Shias
proved in two periods, in the rule of the Umayyads and Abbasids that
they were the strongest defendants of Islam and open opposition of the
people against oppression and rebellion and as a result the standard of
Islam was raised high and fluttered. And they never submitted defeat to
the Umayyads and Abbasids and confronted them with all resources they
had.

And Khwarizmi further says:

“Know that! May Allah have mercy on you! Bani Umayyads, all of them are
the accursed tree and it has come about them: They are the followers of
the sinners and rebels and the cahoots of falsehood who had the audacity
to conceal the virtues and merits

of the Master and they gathered some people around them to forge
traditions of the Messenger of Allah (a.s). They changed their residence
from Medina to the neighborhood of Baitul Maqdas and transferred the
seat of Caliphate from Kufa to Damascus. In this field they spent a lot
of wealth for causing destruction. They appointed an official agent in
every place and appointed those who were like ruffians. But they could
not destroy any tradition of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) neither could
they interpolate any verse of the Book of Allah. They could not even
place one of the enemies of Allah at the position of His friends. Indeed
the merits of the Progeny of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) and their fame
spread to all corners and their proof and argument was presented to
others. Actually the awe of the King and the Sultan had no effect on
their hearts that they be afraid of him or be affected by him. And truth
had always been dominant and lofty even if the people of truth were
downtrodden and there were very few like it and they are lowly and
humiliated. On the other hand falsehood is honorless and insulted even
though they may try to bestow great honor upon it. It is bad even if it
is presented in a beautiful manner.

Abdur Rahman the leading light of Bani Umayyads says:

*Sumaiyah increased her progeny so much that it became equal to the
grains of sands in the deserts, while the daughter of the Prophet had no
descendants.*

Another poet rebuts this saying:

*May Allah curse all those who abuse Ali (a.s) and Husain (a.s) who is
the Imam and leader of all.*

Abu Dahbal says regarding the power of the Kingdom of Bani Umayyah and
devotion of Progeny of Abu Sufyan:

*The Bani Umayyads intoxicated with comfort turn the night into a day
while in Taff and Kerbala the martyrs of Ahle Bayt (a.s) did not get to
sleep.*

Sulaiman says:

*And the one killed at Taff from the progeny of Hashim, how he has
degraded the reputation of Muslims. What a great disrespect!*

But Kumayt has replied by saying:

*Ask the Bani Umayyads what religion they have chosen for themselves
that you threaten the people of cutting off their limbs.*

May Allah starve those whom you have fed and may He satiate those whom
you have starved.”

In the above discussion, Khwarizmi speaks about the steps Bani Umayyads
took in order to suppress and destroy the excellent merits and virtues
of Amirul Momineen (a.s). They employed their wealth, power and all
means to efface the signs of Ahle Bayt so that their virtues may remain
hidden but they did not succeed and their merits and good qualities
become apparent just as humanity becomes apparent from a human being. In
all the stages of history it was picturized just as it was for everyone
and it became apparent that they were the defrauders who cheated the
Muslims of what was rightfully theirs. They spent all the wealth in the
fulfillment of their selfish desires and vices and the Muslims were
forced upon what they were helpless in. Khwarizmi says:

“And what is being said is not surprising. What the poets of Bani Abbas
have narrated to the Caliphs, even though they did not like to hear it.
That is they spoke in praise of Ahle Bayt (a.s) though the Abbasids did
not like to hear all that.

Mansur bin Zabarqan said in the presence of Haroon:

The progeny of the Prophet and their supporters conceal themselves due
to the fear of being killed while the Jews and Christians are in peace
and security. Even though they are the people of Monotheism they lead a
life of fear and insecurity.

Dibil says:

Don't you see that I am nearly eighty years of age and day and night I
am in sorrow and anger to see the property of Ahle Bayt (a.s) being
usurped by others and spent upon themselves while the followers of Ahle
Bayt do not get anything!

Ali bin Abbas Rumi says:

Every period of time is a killing one for the Holy Prophet (a.s) and it
is smeared in its own blood.

Ibrahim, a scribe and a close confidant of Mamun says:

The Bani Abbas give the wealth of Ahle Bayt to their followers with
great obligation while they would not give anyone more than a hundred.”

The above statements describe that the compositions of the poets that
announce the virtues and merits of Ali (a.s) and his descendants were
more than those of the Abbasides and they announced for them the most
severe times and the most bitter of them. When anyone remembered the
Purified Imams in a good way, he got nothing except sword or spear. That
is they were put to death. But these people were lion-hearted and brave.
They had no fear to speak the truth.

Khwarizmi moves forward saying:

“And how could these poets not denounce the people while they had
starved their cousins and filled up the cities of Dailam and Turks with
gold and silver. And they supported the Maghribi and Farghana people
while they oppressed the Emigrants and Helpers. They accorded
ministerial posts to non-Arabs. They gave military commands to Tamatam
and Persians while they denied the descendants of Abu Talib from the
inheritance of their mother. And even though it all belongs to their
ancestor if the Alawites wanted to spend a penny from it, he was
deprived of it. They were kept hungry during the day and not given any
food and while all the Islamic wealth and income from various provinces
was bestowed to Ibne Abi Maryam Madyani, Ibrahim, Ibne Jame, Zulzal and
Soma. And the Bakhtish Christians are given the food equal to that of a
town. The Jari and Afshin are given food equal to a community.
Mutawakkil keeps 12000 slave girls in his harem to have sexual
enjoyments while a chief of the Sadat has to content himself and protect
his chastity with a

single slave girl. A lot of wealth is reserved for the vain pastimes,
unlawful foods, feeding the dogs, training the monkeys and paying for
female singers and falcons. The Court jester, Umar is given a lot of
wealth while they are miserly to the Fatimids even to the extent of
giving them a morsel of food and a draught of water. They deny them 1/6
of a Dirham and a grain and give them the leftovers which they purchase
before it becomes stale while the Almighty Allah has made Khums their
obligatory share and made Sadaqah prohibited for them. And love and
devotion towards them is incumbent while they spend their lives in
hardships and pass away in poverty. In order to satiate their hunger
some of them pawn their sword and some sell off their clothes while they
behold the wealth of God with sorrow. They experience such a difficult
life as there is nothing equal to it while their only sin is that their
ancestor is the Messenger of Allah, their Father is Master (Ali), their
mother is Fatima and their grandmother is Khadijah and their faith and
their guide is Quran.”

In this portion, Khwarizmi speaks about some difficulties that made the
Alids sorrowful that were caused due to the economical hurdles posed by
the Abbasides. They denied even the minimum human rights to them. They
imposed upon them the worst of the hardships, so much so that the
Alawites did not own a piece of cloth to cover their nakedness and food
to satiate their hunger. While all the wealth was diverted to the
singers, the players and those who flatter. Khwarizmi has listed the
names of those who were bestowed great favors and millions of good
things by the Abbasides. While on the other hand they put the Muslim
Community in poverty and deprivation.

The letter continues:

“Indeed, the shameful deeds of the Umayyads were mentioned from people
to people and their evil doings were transferred from generation to
generation. Muawiyah was such a person who killed the companions of the
Prophet and the companions

of the companions. His mother was the one who had chewed the liver of
the purified martyrs. His son, Yazid was addicted to playing with
monkeys and wild dogs. He was the demolisher of the Ka’ba, the plunderer
of Medina and the killer of Ahle Bayt; and Marwan the son of the Lizard
because he listened to the talks of the Prophet’s house from behind the
wall and he is the one whose father was cursed by the Prophet, while
Marwan was in the loins of his father. Thus the divine curse fell upon
him also. And Abdul Malik was one who had committed a great sin, who
made the earth narrow and spread his power in all directions. He was the
one who appointed Hajjaj Ibne Yusuf Thaqafi, who in the due course
killed the people and trampled the principles of Islam and uprooted the
branches of faith and made the cities into deserted ruins. He was the
most unchaste of the people whoever ruled over the Islamic lands and
many of his misdeeds are recorded in books of history and biography.

Walid was another Umayyad transgressor. He appointed Hajjaj on the
Eastern lands and give the western dominions to Qurrah bin Shareek.
Sulaiman was one with a huge appetite and this eventually became a cause
of his death, while he had filled his belly with food and seeds.

Yazid was having a sting of a serpent and his belly was like a great
utensil; he abrogated Jihad by wine and spent the period of his
Caliphate on the lute and Zumar (a wind instrument). He was the first to
increase the payments of singing girls and committed every lewd action
openly. And what can be said that on one side is Marwan and on the
other, Yazid bin Muawiyah and they inherited their genes from both of
these accursed ones. Thus he was the offspring of two accursed ones and
the partner of two disbelievers.

Hisham was the killer of Zaid bin Ali and the patron of Yusuf bin Umar
Thaqafi.

Walid Ibne Yazid was the last of the Umayyad Caliphs. He was a denier of
God (atheist) and he used a copy of the Holy Quran for

target practice. He was the to compose poetry in denial of faith and
openly committed lewd and unchaste deeds.”

In this section, Khwarizmi has described the conditions of the Umayyad
rulers and their remaining activities that opened up shameless deeds and
blackened the pages of history. And the community also bore their worst
tortures and most heinous crimes under their shade. They destroyed
public property and snatched away from people their freedom. Hajjaj bin
Yusuf Thaqafi and stonehearted and tyrannical people like him behaved
with them like wolves and wild criminal. They transformed this life into
hell and made oppression and corruption common among the people.

Now pay attention to the part of this letter, which says:

“In spite of the greatness of the crimes of Umayyads and their magnitude
and severity, in comparison to that of Bani Abbas they were like
dispensations of justice and their rule was marked with a distinct
support for justice and equity. Their Friday prayer leaders also used to
mention these qualities and congregation prayers were established by
them. On the other hand the Abbasides had established a city of
injustice and oppression and spent the wealth of Muslims in sinful
activities and gatherings of vain pastimes and vices while they
themselves were supposed to be the leaders of guidance and the Friday
leader used to describe them thus in their sermons.”

In these statements, Khwarizmi has described the sinful activities of
Bani Abbas and says that the crimes of the Abbasids were much more in
magnitude and severity than those of the Umayyads. The Abbasides spent
public funds on the fulfillment of their sensual desires and their
intrigues and bloody associates, while the majority of the people spent
a life of poverty and sorrow. The most astonishing thing is that the
best titles are attributed to these rulers and it is said that they were
the leaders of guidance, that they ruled with justice and actions and
equality is associated with them.

Here our discussion about the letter is coming to an end. The letter,
which is the most important political document and has great
authenticity and is most appropriate with the topic of our discussion.
It is that the Sadat and Shias had borne with great difficulty the
tortures and calamities caused to them by the Umayyad and Abbaside
rulers. And the letter itself shows what could be the reason for
occultation of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s), and why he is concealed
from the view of the people. That which is thought to be the basic
reason is the force applied upon the two Imams, Imam Hadi and Imam
Askari (a.s) who were made to reside at Samarrah under house arrest. And
moreover they were surrounded by a large army of male and female spies
so that they may come to know when Imam Mahdi (a.s) is born so that he
is immediately taken into custody and put to death. Since their heart
was throbbing with anxiety and fear due to the numerous reports of the
Prophet of Islam (a.s) and also those of the successors among the
purified Imams (a.s), that the Awaited Imam is the last caliph of the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) and that he is the one who would establish
justice and spread the truth. He would create peace, security and
comfort between the people and it is he only who would destroy all types
of oppressions and defeat the oppressors. Therefore they considered it
necessary upon themselves to employ strict surveillance on his
grandfather and father and after the passing away of Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s) <sup>[(Actually\\ it\\ was\\ after\\ Imam\\ Hadi\\ (a.s)]</sup>
they laid siege to his house and arrested some ladies from the Imam's
household suspected of being pregnant and kept them in custody as we
have already described in detail in the foregone pages. This is one of
the most important causes of the disappearance of Imam (a.s) and his not
being identified by the people. In the tradition of Zurarah this same
cause is mentioned by the Imam that:

“For the Qaim (a.t.f.s), there is an occultation before his
reappearance.”

Zurarah immediately asked, “What fora” Imam replied, “For fear of being
murdered.”<sup>[1]</sup>

Shaykh Tusi says: The cause of the obstacle in the reappearance of Imam
Mahdi (a.s) is nothing but the fear of being killed. Because if there
had been any other reason, his remaining in occultation would not have
been justified.<sup>[2]</sup>

Doubt of Khanizi
----------------

Abul Hasan Khanizi has objected to the belief that the non-reappearance
of Imam Mahdi (a.s) is due to the fear to his life. He says that such a
surmise is baseless and wrong and that it is a sort of allegation to say
that Imam Mahdi (a.s) is not reappearing due to the fear of
enemies.<sup>[3]</sup>

The objection of Khanizi is incorrect, because if the Abbaside rulers
had managed to get hold of His Eminence, they would definitely have put
him to death, in the same way as they had martyred his respected father
and grandfather. They kept his father, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) under
strict surveillance and after the martyrdom of His Eminence, they
surrounded and raided his house and tried their utmost to find the
whereabouts of the Awaited Imam. The Almighty Allah kept him concealed
from the Abbasid tyrants so that he remains safe in order to allow him
to spread truth and justice and establish peace and security on the
earth. The time for that occasion is known only to Allah. None else has
any idea about it nor anyone is having control over it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ghaybah, Shaykh Tusi and Al-Kafi [2] Ghaybah, Shaykh Tusi, Pg. 199
[3] Ad-Dawaatul Islamia, Pg. 199

2. Test and Trial
-----------------

One of the causes of the occultation of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s)
is said to be the test of people. It is narrated from His Eminence, the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he said:

"By Allah! He would go into occultation and none shall get salvation
except those who have faith in the heart and whom Allah
helps."<sup>[1]</sup>

Although the divine practice is appointed that people should be
subjected to tests and trials so that those who perform better deeds may
be rewarded suitably. The Almighty Allah says:

The one who created death and life so that "He may test you, which of
you has the best deeds."

He also says:

"Do men think that they will be left alone on saying, we believe, and
not be trieda"

The occultation of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) is a very important
component of Divine test. None has faith in it except those who have
perfect belief and testify to what the Messenger of Allah (a.s) and the
Purified Imams (a.s) have said regarding the occultation of His Eminence
and that he does not fix the period of his occultation. Rather he should
agree that the reappearance of His Eminence is upto the wise decision of
the Almighty Allah. No one has any choice in it. The example of His
Eminence is like that of the Hour (Qiyamat) that there is no doubt in
its coming.

3. Secrets of the Occultation of the Imam of the Time
-----------------------------------------------------

The occultation of the Awaited Imam (a.s) is explained to be one of the
divine secrets and no one else has any knowledge of it. It is this same
point stated by the Messenger of Allah (a.s) when he said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar 53, Pg 7 and 281

"The example of the occultation of the Qaim is like that of the Hour
(Qiyamat), that only the Almighty Allah is cognizant of it and that it
will not come towards you but all of a sudden."<sup>[1]</sup>

It is narrated from His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) that he said:

"Do not put yourself into difficulty and do not ask about matters that
have no material or spiritual benefit. And do not ask but pray more for
the reappearance as in it lies your success; and peace be to those who
follow the guidance."<sup>[2]</sup>

Shaykh Miqdad Siyuri says:

"The wisdom of the occultation of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) is
restricted only to Allah and its knowledge is only with Almighty
Allah."<sup>[3]</sup>

4. Not paying allegiance to the oppressors by the Imam of the time (a.s)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

As a justification of the occultation of His Eminence, the Master of the
Age (a.s), it is mentioned that the Imam (a.s) is in occultation so that
he does not have to pay allegiance to any oppressive ruler. Hasan bin
Ali bin Fazal has narrated from his father from Imam Reza (a.s) that he
said:

"The Shias, during the absence of the son of the third of us would be
like sheep that run towards the pasture but they would not find the
pasture."

Then he was asked, "O son of Allah's Messenger! Why is it soa"

He replied, "Because their Imam shall be in occultation."

He asked, "Why ?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Burhan fi Alaamaat-i-Aakhiruz Zaman, 1/255 [2] Bihar, 52/92 [3]
Mukhtasar al-Tohfatul Ithna Ashariya, Pg. 199

He replied, "Because if he rises up with a sword he would be compelled
to have the allegiance of others upon his neck."

His Eminence, the Master of the Age (a.s) has announced that each of his
predecessors had the allegiance of the tyrants on his neck but when he
reappears he shall not have the allegiance of any tyrant on his
neck.<sup>[1]</sup>

The above were some of the important causes of the occultation of His
Eminence, which we have explained. And the fact is that the Almighty
Allah has kept His Wali and the great reformer in occultation due to the
reasons best known to Him alone, which we are not aware of.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Muntakhabul Athar, Pg, 267

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](17.htm)[  
 Back](22.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](19.htm)[  
 Next](24.htm)
