Those Who Prophesied the Reappearance of the Imam of the Time (a.s)
===================================================================

Numerous traditions of the Prophet of Islam and the Infallible Imams
(a.s) have predicted the reappearance of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s).
And that His Eminence will reappear and straighten the deviations and
release humanity from the mischief of oppressors and he would establish
peace and security on the earth and spread love and equity among the
people and remove fear and anxiety from them. Those who have mentioned
such prophecies are as follows:

### 1. The Holy Prophet (a.s)

Numerous traditions are quoted from the Prophet of Islam that prophesize
the advent of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s):

a. Huzaifah has narrated from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he said,
“If only a single day remains from the tenure of this world, the
Almighty Allah in that same day, will raise a person from my descendants
whose name and manners shall be like mine and his patronymic shall be
Abdullah, and people would pay allegiance to him between Rukn and Maqam
and the Almighty Allah will revive the religion through him and give him
victories and all the people on the earth shall be the reciters of the
formula ‘La ilaaha Illallaah’ (There is no God except Allah).”

Salman asked: O Allah's Messenger, which of your sons ?

The Holy Prophet (a.s) said, “This son of mine. So saying, he placed his
hand on Husain (a.s).”<sup>[1]</sup>

This tradition means that the reappearance and advent of His Eminence,
Imam Mahdi (a.s) is from the confirmed and certain

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar, Chapter 2, Tradition 41

matters that it will indeed come to pass even if a single day remains
for the world to end.

b. Abdullah bin Umar has narrated from the Holy Prophet (a.s) that he
said, “In the last age a man from my descendants, whose name is same is
mine, shall arise and fill the earth with justice and equity just as it
would be fraught with injustice and oppression.”<sup>[1]</sup>

According to this tradition, the Master of the Age (a.s) shall spread
truth and justice among the people and destroy oppression and injustice
from the world.

c. Amirul Momineen (a.s) has quoted the Prophet of Islam that he said,
“Mahdi is from my progeny and he has an occultation that many from the
communities shall be misguided and deviated and in the end the treasures
of the prophets shall become apparent through His Eminence, the remnant
of Allah (Baqiatullah). He would establish justice and equity just as it
would be fraught with injustice and oppression.”<sup>[2]</sup>

This tradition proves that His Eminence, the Master of the Age shall
have an occultation and that a group of people would deny him and
another group shall have faith in him. When he reappears he would be
having with him the relics of the prophets and their successors and he
would establish justice and truth.

d. Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari has related from the Prophet of Islam (a.s)
that he said, “Mahdi is from my progeny and his name and patronymic is
same as mine. He shall have an occultation; during which the communities
would be lost and deviated. At last, like a brilliant moon he would
shine and fill the earth with justice and equality just as it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression.”<sup>[3]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar, chapter 2 [2] Faraidus Simtain, End of Part II,
Yanabiul Mawaddah, Pg. 448 [3] Yanabiul Mawaddah, Pg. 448

e. Saeed bin Jubair has narrated from Ibne Abbas who quotes the Holy
Prophet (a.s) to have said, “Indeed, Ali is my successor and His
Eminence, the Awaited Qaim, Mahdi (a.s) is from his descendents. And he
would fill the earth with justice and equality just as it would be full
of injustice and oppression. By the One Who has sent me as a Prophet and
warner, those who are steadfast on his Imamate during his occultation
shall be more precious than red sulphur.” Jabir asked His Eminence, “O
Allah's Messenger! Is there occultation for the Qaim of your progeny ?”

The Holy Prophet (a.s) replied, “Yes, by Allah! So much so, that he
would purify the believers and destroy the infidels.”

Then he said, “O Jabir! This is one of the divine affairs and one of the
secrets of Allah, so do not ever doubt it because doubt in a divine
affair is disbelief.”<sup>[1]</sup>

This tradition also explains that those who shall believe in His
Eminence, the Master of the Age during his occultation shall be very
less and they shall be like red sulphur and their existence is very
pure. And the occultation of His Eminence is by way of the test of the
people. It is a matter not known to the people and it is in the hands of
Allah. It is one of the divine secrets and if one has any doubt about
it, one leaves the pale of Islam.

f. The Prophet of Islam (a.s) said, “The world shall not end but that a
man from my Ahle Bayt, whose name shall be same as mine, would have
power and authority over all.”<sup>[2]</sup>

The Qaim of the Progeny of Muhammad shall establish justice on the earth
and fulfill the aims of the prophets and messengers. He shall hoist the
flag of monotheism and he would destroy polytheism and apostasy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Yanabiul Mawaddah [2] Sahih Tirmidhi 2/46; Musnad Ahmad Hanbal,
1/376

g. Huzaifah bin Yaman has narrated from the Prophet of Islam (a.s) that
he said, “O Huzaifah! Even if a day remains from this world, the
Almighty Allah would prolong that day till a man from my Ahle Bayt takes
over the reigns of power and establishes Islam. And the Almighty Allah
never breaks His promise and He is having power over it.”

h. Abi Saeed Khudri has narrated from the Prophet of Islam (a.s) that he
said, “In the last age, there would be terrible oppressions for my
community from the rulers of that time the like of which have never
occurred; so much so, that the world would become narrow for them and
the earth shall be replete with injustice and oppression and the
religiously inclined people shall not have any refuge. It is the time
when the Almighty Allah would raise a man from my progeny and he would
fill the earth with justice and equity just as it would be fraught with
injustice and oppression. The earth shall become populated and divine
blessings shall descend and the people who shall live for a few years
would say, ‘If only those who had died were alive to witness this
scene.’”<sup>[1]</sup>

i. Ali Hilali has narrated from his father that he came to the Prophet
of Islam (a.s) to find Fatima (a.s) sitting near his head while he was
on his deathbed and she was wailing aloud. The Messenger of Allah (a.s)
turned to Fatima and asked, “My dearest Fatima! Why do you weep ?”

She replied, “Due to the afflictions after you.” He said, “My dear! The
Almighty Allah sent your father for the people of the earth, then He
selected your husband and revealed to me to marry you to him. And the
Almighty Allah has bestows us, Ahle Bayt (a.s) with seven special
characteristics, such that none before or after us shall have them. I am
the seal of the Prophets and the greatest of them and the most beloved
creature of Allah among them. And I am your father. And my successor is
the best

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Yanabiul Mawaddah, Pg. 448; Al-Burhan fi Alamat-e-Aadkhiruz Zaman,
Chapter 2; Muntakhabul Athar Pg. 149; Kashful Ghummah

successor and the most beloved of them and he is your husband. Among us
is the one with two green wings who glides in Paradise with the angels.
He is the son of your father's uncle and the brother of your husband.
And the two grandsons of this community are from us. And they are your
sons, Hasan and Husain and they are the chiefs of the youths of Paradise
and their father, by the One who sent me with truth, is the best; and he
is from us.”

“O Fatima! By the One Who sent me with truth, the Mahdi of this
community is from us. When mischief, corruption and troubles shall
surround the world and the paths become unsafe and the elders are not
kind on the youngsters and the youngsters do not respect the elders, at
that time the Almighty Allah will send the one who shall conquer the
fortifications of deviation and ignorance and establish the religion
just as I had done so in the beginning and he shall fill the earth with
justice and truth just as it would be fraught with injustice and
oppression.”<sup>[1]</sup>

j. His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (a.s) has said, “I asked the Messenger
of Allah (a.s), ‘O Allah's Messenger! Is the Progeny of Muhammad from us
or from someone other than usa’ He replied, ‘Indeed it is from us. The
religion shall be completed on us just as it began with us. People shall
be relieved of mischiefs through us, just as they have got relief from
polytheism through us. And through us they cultivate love and amity
among themselves and their brotherhood is strengthened.’”<sup>[2]</sup>

It is understood from this tradition that just as the Holy Prophet (a.s)
saved mankind from deviation and polytheism and guided it to the
straight path in the same way his last successor, His Eminence, the
Remnant of Allah, the great (Baqiatullah Azam) would remove the problems
of humanity and establish justice and truth upon them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Bayan fi Akhbar-e-Sahibuz Zaman [2] Al Bayan Fi Akhbar-e-Sahibuz
Zaman

k. Jabr bin Nauf says that he told Abu Saeed Khudri, “By Allah! Our each
year is worse than the previous one and every ruler and leader who comes
is worse than his predecessor.” Abu Saeed said, “I have also heard from
the Prophet of Islam (a.s) that he said:

Continuous mischief and calamities shall come on you. So much so that
none shall dare to say: ‘God.’ After that the Almighty Allah shall raise
a man from my progeny and he would fill the earth with justice and
equity just as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression. And
the earth shall expose its treasures for him. The economic affair and
prosperity of the people shall be at its zenith and Islam shall become
stable.”

l. Abu Saeed Khudri has narrated from the Holy Prophet (a.s) that he
said from the pulpit, “Indeed the Mahdi is from my Progeny and from my
Ahle Bayt. He shall reappear in the last age. The sky shall send its
rain for him and the earth shall expose its contents for him. Then he
would fill the earth with justice as the oppressors had filled it with
injustice and oppression.”<sup>[1]</sup>

These were some examples of the traditions of the Holy Prophet (a.s)
that are narrated and recorded in the books of all sects of Muslims.
These traditions prove that the reappearance of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi
(a.s) is a certainty. They give glad tidings to the Islamic world that
His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) will definitely come and he would
establish truth, justice and peace; such that no one would have ever
witnessed such a period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ghaybah, Shaykh Tusi

### 2. His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (a.s)

Numerous traditions have been recorded from the chief of the Progeny of
the Messenger of Allah, His Eminence, Ali (a.s) regarding the
reappearance of His Eminence, the Awaited Imam Mahdi (a.s). Some of them
are presented in the following pages:

a. Abu Wail, His Eminence, Ali (a.s) glanced at Husain (a.s) and said,
“This son of mine is the chief, just as the Messenger of Allah (a.s) has
named him the chief and master. And in the future a man from his progeny
having the same name as that of your Prophet's shall appear in the
period of heedlessness of the people and non-existence of truth and the
appearance of oppression; and the heavenly folks shall be elated by his
advent and he is a man with a bright forehead and a high
nose.”<sup>[1]</sup>

The above tradition proves the following points:

1. His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) is from the progeny of Aba Abdillah,
the chief of the Martyrs, Imam Husain bin Ali (a.s).

2. The reappearance of His Eminence shall be sudden and people would be
least expecting it.

3. Suppression of truth and elevation of oppression are the signs of the
reappearance of His Eminence.

4. The tradition has described the excellent physical appearance of the
Holy Imam.

5. When he reappears, he would spread truth and justice in the true
sense of the word.

b. His Eminence, Ali (a.s) has said in some of his sermons, “A man from
my Ahle Bayt shall be my caliph who would command by the order of Allah
and strengthen the commands of Allah at a time when mischiefs and
calamities would have surrounded human societies and hopes would be cut
off and bribing would be commonplace.”<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar, Chapter 3[2] Muntakhab Kanzul Ummal, 6/34

c. Asbagh bin Nubata has narrated from His Eminence, Ali (a.s) that he
said, “In the last age, the Mahdi is from us. There is none in the
community who does not wait for his reappearance.”<sup>[1]</sup>

d. Imam Husain (a.s) has quoted his father, His Eminence, Ali (a.s) that
he told him, “O Husain, your ninth descendent is the Qaim by truth and
one who would spread religion and establish justice everywhere.” After
that Imam Husain (a.s) asked for more details. In reply, His Eminence
said, “Yes! By Allah! Who sent His Eminence, Muhammad and chose him
above all, it is so, but he shall have an occultation which shall be
confusing and perplexing but only those who are sincere and those who
have certainty and from whom the Almighty Allah has taken the covenant
of our guardianship (Wilayat) and in whose hearts He has made belief
firm, and supported them and blessed them, they shall be steadfast on
that Qaim and continue to have faith in him.”<sup>[2]</sup>

e. His Eminence, Imam Ali (a.s) said, “Very soon the Almighty Allah
shall bring a community that He shall love and they shall also love
Allah and anyone who is poor among them shall become powerful. He is
that same Mahdi whose appearance…”

These were some examples of the traditions of Ali (a.s) that convey glad
tidings of the reappearance of the universal reformer, His Eminence, the
Remnant of Allah, the Greatest (Baqiatullahil Aazam). And it is that he
shall revive Islam and prove the signs of Allah among the people.

### 3. His Eminence, Imam Hasan Mujtaba (a.s)

Numerous traditions are recorded from His Eminence, Imam Hasan (a.s)
regarding the subject of His Eminence, the Master of the Age. Some of
these traditions were of the time of the forced treaty with Muawiyah.
Some partisans of His Eminence

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[1]</sup> Dalailul Imamah <sup>[2]</sup> Kamaluddin

criticized him for signing the treaty and he told them, “Woe be unto
you! Don't you know that I am your Imam and my obedience is obligatory
upon youa And on the basis of the clear statement of the Prophet I am
one of the two chiefs of the youths of Paradise ?”

The replied, “Yes! It is so.”

He asked, “Don't you know that when His Eminence, Prophet Khizr made a
hole in the boat, repaired the wall and killed that boy, Prophet Musa
bin Imran, because he did not know the wisdom of those actions, became
upset while all these actions were right and based on wisdom in the view
of Allah. Don't you know that all of us are having the allegiance of
tyrant of the time on our necks except His Eminence, Qaim (a.s), behind
whom the spirit of Allah (Ruhullah) would recite the prayera The
Almighty Allah has concealed his birth and kept him in occultation
otherwise he too would have been forced to have the allegiance of a
tyrant on his neck. That Qaim is the ninth descendant of my brother,
Husain, the son of the chief of the ladies of the worlds. Almighty Allah
will prolong his age and occultation. After that, by His power, He would
make him reappear in the form of a young man aged less than forty years.
And He is powerful over everything.”<sup>[1]</sup>

The above tradition contains some very important points. Some of them
are as follows:

a. The treaty of Imam Hasan (a.s) with Muawiyah was a necessary step as
there was no other solution, because if armed confrontation had started,
the victory would have been Muawiyah's. While on the other hand the
military prowess of the Imam had been greatly marred due to the previous
battles and due to the emergence of the Khawarij beliefs in the people
their sloth and inclination towards a life of comfort and luxury had

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[1]</sup> Kamaluddin, Kifayatul Athar

increased. In addition to this, his army was also infiltrated by some
hypocritical elements and Muawiyah’s agents. Therefore it was not
possible to have a serious military confrontation with Muawiyah and
defeat him. So much so, that they were also prepared to abduct the Imam
and hand him over to Muawiyah in exchange of monetary favors. Thus there
was no other option except to sign a treaty and Imam Hasan (a.s)
selected this same option. If he had not done so, Muawiyah would have
defeated him and openly announced disbelief and irrelegiousity; like his
son, Yazid had done.

b. His Eminence, the Master of the Age, will not have the allegiance of
any oppressor on his neck. Rather the Almighty Allah has kept him safe
and secure away from the tyrant rulers.

c. When His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) reappears, His Eminence, Isa
Masih (Jesus Christ) will arrive and recite congregation prayer behind
him.

d. The Almighty Allah has concealed the birth of His Eminence, Imam
Mahdi (a.s) from the tyrant Abbaside rulers so that they may not get
hold of him, as we have already discussed in detail before.

e. The Almighty Allah shall give to His Wali, a long life and make him
reappear as a young man, so that he may establish justice and truth on
the earth.

### 4. His Eminence, Imam Husain (a.s)

Many traditions have been quoted from His Eminence, the chief of the
martyrs (a.s) regarding the reappearance of the Awaited Imam (a.s). Some
of them are presented below:

a. Imam Husain (a.s) said, “The ninth of my descendants has a similarity
with Prophet Yusuf and a similarity with Prophet Musa (a.s). And he is
Qaim of us, Ahle Bayt of the Prophet. The Almighty Allah will improve
his affairs in a single night.”<sup>[1]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[1]</sup> Kamaluddin, Al-Ihtijaj

The similarity to Prophet Musa (a.s) is that like him, Imam Mahdi (a.s)
also was born unknown to the tyrannical ruler of that time due to his
fear. And in the matter of his being concealed from the view of the
people, His Eminence was like Prophet Yusuf (a.s), who remained in
prison for a long time.

b. His Eminence, Imam Husain (a.s) said, “The Qaim of the Ummah
(community) is my ninth descendant and he is having an occultation.”

c. His Eminence, Imam Husain (a.s) said, “The twelve leaders are from
us. The first of them is His Eminence, Amirul Momineen Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s) and the last of them is my ninth descendant who will arise with
truth and rid the earth of barrenness and give life to it and make the
true religion dominant even if the polytheists dislike it. Although he
has an occultation during which a group will have doubts in him, another
group will remain steadfast on it. He shall be in a painful condition
(uncomfortable). He would be asked, ‘When would your promise be
fulfilled if you speak trutha’ Though the patient ones and his
supporters would have forbearance on this denial and falsification. And
their reward and recompense is like that of the holy fighters who have
fought with the sword, side by side the Messenger of Allah
(a.s).”<sup>[1]</sup>

We come to know from this tradition that people shall be tested and
examined through the occultation of His Eminence, the Awaited Imam
(a.s). Only one whom the Almighty Allah has blessed and whose heart is
made firm with faith would remain steadfast on the Imamate of His
Eminence. These people shall be like the holy fighters of early Islam
who fought alongside the Holy Prophet (a.s).

d. Imam Husain (a.s) said, “The master of this affair, that is the
Mahdi, has two occultations, one of which shall be longer than the other
till some people say that His Eminence has expired.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kifayatul Athar

And some of them shall go out to search for him but they would not be
able to trace him. And only the Wise Lord is his guardian and only He is
aware of his whereabouts.”<sup>[1]</sup>

### 5. His Eminence, Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s)

Numerous narrations are recorded from the Imam of the Pious, His
Eminence, Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s) regarding the glad tiding of the
reappearance of His Eminence, the Master of the Age. Some of them are
presented below:

a. His Eminence, Ali bin Husain, Imam Sajjad (a.s) recited the verse of,
**“that He will most certainly make them inherit the
Earth…”<sup>[2]</sup>** and then said, “They are the supporters of us,
Ahle Bayt and this “inheritance” shall be through a man from us, and he
is the Mahdi of this community. The Holy Prophet (a.s) has said, ‘Even
when the entire duration of the world's existence is exhausted, and one
solitary day is left to embrace the eve of Doomsday, Allah will prolong
that day and make it swell to such a length of time as to accommodate
the ultimate reign of a person out of my holy Progeny who will be called
by my name and my agnomen (Abul Qasim). He will then make the earth
abound with peace and justice as it will have been fraught with
injustice and tyranny before him.’”<sup>[3]</sup>

b. His Eminence, Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s) said, “The verse of: **Allah
has promised...**(24:55), is revealed about the Imam Qaim, His Eminence,
Mahdi (a.s).”<sup>[4]</sup>

c. When His Eminence, Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s) was apparently taken as
a prisoner he said inter alia in his sermon, “From us was the Messenger
of Allah and his successor, the chief of the Martyrs, Ja'far at-Tayyar
in Paradise, the two grandsons

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Burhan Fi Alamat-e-Sahibuz Zaman <sup>[2]</sup> Surah Nur 24:55
[3] Yanabiul Mawaddah Pg. 426; Majmaul Bayan; Tafsir Ayyashi [4]
Yanabiul Mawaddah, Pg. 425

of this community and the Mahdi who would slay the
Dajjal.”<sup>[1]</sup>

d. His Eminence, Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s) said, “Our Qaim has the
characteristics of seven prophets: From our forefather Adam (a.s), from
Nuh (a.s), from Ibrahim, from Musa (a.s) from Isa (a.s), from Ayyub
(a.s) and His Eminence, Muhammad Mustafa (a.s).

As for the similarity with Adam and Nuh (a.s) it is a long life. From
Ibrahim is the concealed birth and going away from among the people.
From Musa (a.s) it is fear and occultation. From Isa (a.s) it is the
controversies that people created about him. From Ayyub (a.s) it is
release and success after trials and tribulations. From the Holy Prophet
(a.s) is the armed uprising.”<sup>[2]</sup>

### 6. His Eminence, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s)

Traditions regarding His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) and the certainty of
his reappearance are also recorded from Imam Baqir (a.s). Some of them
are as follows: Abu Basir has narrated that His Eminence said, “In the
Master of this affair are similarities with Prophet Musa, Prophet Isa,
Prophet Yusuf and Prophet Muhammad (a.s). As for the similarity with
Prophet Musa (a.s) it is fear; from Yusuf (a.s) it is his imprisonment
and occultation; from Prophet Muhammad (a.s) it is the taking up of
arms. He shall continue to exterminate the enemies of God so that Divine
Pleasure is achieved.”

Abu Basir asked, “How would it be known that the Almighty Allah is
pleaseda”

He replied, “He (God) will put mercy and kindness in his
heart.”<sup>[3]</sup>

His Eminence, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) mentioned the names of the
twelve Imams and successors of the Holy Prophet

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Muntakhabul Athar, Pg. 172 [2] Kamaluddin, Pg. 318 [3] Kamaluddin,
Pg. 319

(a.s) that he had introduced and appointed and said, “The last and the
twelfth of them is the one under whose leadership Isa bin Maryam will
perform the prayer.”<sup>[1]</sup>

### 7. His Eminence, Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s)

Numerous traditions are quoted from Imam Sadiq (a.s) regarding the
subject of the Awaited Imam (a.s) and the fact that his reappearance is
certain, some of which are quoted by us as follows:

a. The great Sayyid Ismail bin Muhammad Himyari, a prominent poet among
the partisans of Ahle Bayt (a.s) says, “I was an extremist (ghulat) for
a long time and believed in the occultation of Muhammad bin Hanafiyyah
till the time Allah favored me and saved me from hell fire through Imam
Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) and guided me to the true path. When it was
finally proved to me with arguments and proofs that His Eminence, Imam
Sadiq (a.s) is the proof of Allah on me and all the people and the one
whose obedience is obligatory and incumbent. At that time I asked His
Eminence, “Traditions are quoted from your respected forefathers
regarding occultation and its authenticity; on whom would this
occultation take placea”

The Imam replied, “This occultation will occur for my sixth descendant
who is the twelfth Imam from the Imams of guidance after the Prophet of
Islam (a.s). These Imams, the first of whom is Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s)
and the last is Mahdi, who will rise with truth. He is the remnant of
Allah (Baqiatullah) and the Master of the Age. By Allah! Even if his
occultation may be prolonged, he will in the end definitely reappear and
fill the earth with justice and equity, as it would be fraught with
injustice and oppression.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kamaluddin

Sayyid Himyari says, “When I heard this matter from my master, His
Eminence, Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s), I repented to Allah and became
regretful of my past. Then I composed a panegyric, which begins as
follows:

*When I saw that people have become deviated in religion*

I said ‘Bismillah’ and became a Ja’fari with the
Ja’faris.”<sup>[1]</sup>

b. His Eminence, Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s) said, “Our Master, that is Imam
Mahdi (a.s) shall reappear and he is from the progeny of this person.”
And so saying he pointed towards Musa Ibne Ja'far. “And he shall fill
the earth with justice just as it would be full of injustice and
oppression and the world shall be reformed through him.”<sup>[2]</sup>

c. His Eminence, Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s) said, “The Khalaf-e-Salih (The
righteous successor) is from my descendants and he is the Mahdi, whose
name is Muhammad and patronymic Abul Qasim. He shall reappear in the
last period of time. His mother shall be Narjis. There would be a cloud
over the head of His Eminence and it would never leave him so that the
heat of the sun may not affect His Eminence. The cloud remains with His
Eminence and cries out loudly: ‘This is Mahdi, follow him.’”

Narrators have quoted many traditions like this from Imam Ja'far Sadiq
(a.s) and all announce the certainty of the reappearance of the Awaited
Imam who would establish truth and destroy falsehood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kamaluddin [2] Ghaybah, Shaykh Tusi

### 8 - His Eminence, Imam Musa Kazim (a.s)

Like the other Imams, His Eminence, Musa bin Ja’far has also explained
the Imamate of His Eminence, the Master of the Age. Yunus bin Abdur
Rahman says that he went to His Eminence, Musa bin Ja’far (a.s) and
asked him if he were the Qaim.

The Imam replied, “I am indeed the Qaim but the Qaim who would purify
the earth from Allah’s enemies and fill it with justices and equity like
it would be filled with injustice and oppression is my fifth descendant.
He shall have a prolonged occultation such that many people shall deny
him and others would have firm faith in him. Congratulations to our
Shias who shall remain attached to our guardianship (Wilayat) during the
occultation of our Qaim. They shall be steadfast on our guardianship and
keep aloof from our enemies. They are from us and we are from them. They
are pleased with our Imamate and we are satisfied with their adherence.
Therefore, blessed are they. I swear to Allah, that they shall be with
us in our rank in Paradise.”<sup>[1]</sup>

This tradition shows that His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) shall purify
the earth of Allah’s enemies and destroy the oppressors.

### 9. His Eminence, Ali bin Musa (a.s)

His Eminence, Imam Reza (a.s) has also given glad tidings to the Muslims
that His Eminence, the Remnant of Allah (Baqiatullah) in the earths
shall reappear. For example:

a. The poet among the partisans of Ahle Bayt, Dibil Khuzai came to Imam
Reza (a.s) and recited a panegyric he had composed regarding the
afflictions of Ahle Bayt from Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas. The opening
lines were as follows:

*Schools divine verses are bereft of recitation place.*

Places of divine revelation are empty and the area has become deserted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kifayatul Athar

When he reached the lines:

*Then if it had not been what I desire for today or tomorrow any heart
would have broken in the grief of your signs.*

His Eminence raised up his head to listen to what Khuzai hoped. That
hope, which if it had not been there, his longings would have killed
him. Dibil continued to recite and when he recited:

*Advent of an Imam; it would definitely happen.*

He will rise in the name of God and come with the bounties. He will
differentiate between who is right and who is wrong.

And give recompense for good and bad.

His Eminence, Imam Reza (a.s) began to weep incessantly and turned to
Dibil, the poet of the oppressed ones, saying, “O Khuzai! Ruhul Qudus
(the angel) has made you recite these two couplets. Do you know who that
Imam isa And when he would arise ?”

Dibil replied, “No my master. I have only heard that an Imam from among
you shall arise and purify the earth of corruption and fill it with
justice.” His Eminence, Imam Reza (a.s) began to introduce the great
reformer, His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) and said:

“O Dibil after me, my son Muhammad shall be the Imam and after him, his
son Ali, and after him, his son Hasan al-Askari, and after him, his son,
Al-Qaim who shall be the awaited one during the period of his
occultation. When he shall reappear, the believers would follow him.
Even if a single day remains for this world, Allah, the Sublime and the
Mighty, shall prolong that day till he reappears and fills the earth
with justice as it has been filled with tyranny. And as for the time of
his reappearance, or to forecast about it, indeed, my father has heard
from my grandfather and he from his forefathers from Ali (a.s) who says
that the Messenger of Allah (a.s) was asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah, when
will the Qaim of your progeny arise ?’

He replied, ‘His likeness is to the Hour (Qiyamat), that only the
Almighty Allah knows about it and it will arrive all of a
sudden.’”<sup>[1]</sup>

b. Hasan bin Khalid has narrated from Imam Ali bin Musa ar-Reza (a.s)
that he said, “One who has no abstemiousness, has no faith and one who
has no dissimulation cannot be a believer. And the most honorable of you
near Allah, is the most pious; that is one who is most particular about
dissimulation.”<sup>[2]</sup> His Eminence was asked, “O son of Allah’s
Messenger, till what time ?”

He replied, “Till the appointed day, and that is the day of the
reappearance of our Qaim. Therefore, whoever gives up Taqayyah before
the reappearance of our Qaim is not from us.”

His Eminence was asked, “O Son of Allah’s Messenger. Who is your Qaim ?”

He replied, “My fourth descendant. He is the son of the Chief of the
slave maids. He shall purify the earth of injustice and oppression. He
is such that his birth will be a matter of doubt for most of the people
and he shall have an occultation. And when he reappears he would spread
light and he would establish the scales of justice among the people and
none shall be oppressed. And he is such that he shall encompass the
world and a caller shall proclaim from the sky and call the people
towards him and all the people of the earth shall hear that call. The
call would be as follows:

“Know that! The proof of Allah has reappeared from the side of the House
of Allah! Thus follow him. Because the truth is in him and with him. And
it is the statement that He says:

*If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven so
that their necks should stoop to it.”<sup>[3]</sup>*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ghayatul Maram, Pg. 696 [2] Taqayyah [3] Surah Shoara 26:4

And the Almighty Allah has said:

**“And listen on the day when the crier shall cry from a near place. The
day when they shall hear the cry in truth; that is the day of coming
forth.”<sup>[1]</sup>**

“That is the advent of my son, Mahdi Qaim (a.s).”<sup>[2]</sup>

These were some traditions narrated from Imam Reza (a.s) regarding Imam
Mahdi (a.s). The most important point derived from all these traditions
is that the Imam of the time shall soon be the source of light of the
whole earth.

### 10. His Eminence, Imam Muhammad Jawwad

His Eminence has also given glad-tidings regarding the perfect reformer,
the Master of the Age (a.s) and considered his reappearance a certainty
in the following traditions quoted from him:

a. The great trustworthy personality, His Eminence, Abdul Azim Hasani
says: I came to my master, Muhammad bin Ali (a.s) and wanted to ask His
Eminence regarding the word ‘Qaim’, that whether it is for the Mahdi or
someone else. I saw that His Eminence began to speak and told me, “O
Abul Qasim, indeed the Qaim is from among us, he is that same Mahdi, who
should be awaited during his occultation. And when he reappears he
should be followed. He is my third descendant. By the God Who sent
Muhammad (a.s) and restricted the Imamate to us, if only a day remains
from the world, the Almighty Allah shall prolong that same day till His
Eminence reappears and fills the earth with justice and equity just as
it would be fraught with injustice and oppression. And the Almighty
Allah would reform his affairs in a single night just as He reformed the
affair of His Kaleem (who conversed with Allah), Musa (a.s) when he went
to get fire, but he returned in such a way that he had become a prophet
and messenger of Allah.” Then he said: “The best deed of my Shias is to
wait for the reappearance.”<sup>[3]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Qaf 50:41-42 [2] Faraidus Simtain, Kifayatul Athar [3]
Kifayatul Athar, Kamaluddin wa Itmamin Ni'mah

In the above tradition, Imam Jawwad (a.s) has proved to the Shias and
the narrators of his traditions regarding the Awaited Imam that the
reappearance of His Eminence is definite and this will indeed come to
pass.

b. Saqar bin Abu Dalf says: I heard from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far
Muhammad bin Ali (a.s) that he said, “The Imam after me is my son, Ali.
His command is my command, his saying is my saying. His obedience is my
obedience.” Then he fell silent. I asked him, “O Son of Allah’s
Messenger! Who is the Imam after Ali ?”

He replied, “His son, Hasan.”

I asked, “Who is the Imam, after Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) ?”

His Eminence, Jawwad (a.s) wept severely and then said, “The son of Imam
Hasan will the Qaim with truth and the Awaited one.”

I asked His Eminence, “Why is he given the title of ‘Qaim’ ?”

He replied, “Because his advent (Qiyam) shall be after he is forgotten
and after the apostasy of those who had initially believed in his
Imamate.”

I asked His Eminence, “Why is he given the title of the Awaited one
(Muntazar) ?”

He replied, “He shall have an occultation, which shall be greatly
prolonged, and his sincere followers will wait for him and those who
doubt shall reject him. And his deniers will ridicule about him and
those who fix the time of his reappearance shall be proved liars. The
people of falsehood shall be destroyed and the Muslims and the people of
submission shall get salvation.”<sup>[1]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kifayatul Athar, Kamaluddin, Alaamul Wara

### 11. His Eminence, Ali al-Hadi (a.s)

His Eminence, Imam Hadi (a.s) has also given glad tidings regarding the
Holy existence of His Eminence, the Wali of Almighty God in the
following traditions narrated from him:

a. Saqar bin Abu Dalf says: I heard Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali ar-Reza
(a.s) say, "The Imam after me is my son Hasan and after him, his son
Qaim who would fill the earth with justice and equity after it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression."<sup>[1]</sup>

b. The great religious jurisprudent, Sayyid Abdul Azim Hasani says: I
came to my master Ali bin Muhammad (a.s). When His Eminence turned his
attention to me he said, "Welcome to Abul Qasim who is our real
supporter."

I told him that I wanted to present my religion to him and if he had no
objection to it I would remain on it till I meet my Lord. His Eminence
said, "You may begin reciting it."

I said: There is nothing like Allah and the Almighty Allah is beyond the
two invalid extremes and comparison. He has no shape, form or substance.
Rather He is the Creator of all bodies, the maker of faces, the
originator of forms and substances. He is the master and Lord, the one
who appoints for everything. And His Eminence, Muhammad (s.a.) is the
slave and Messenger of Allah and seal of the prophets and no other
prophet will come after him. And his Shariah (religious law) is the last
Shariah. Till the Qiyamat, no other Shariah will arrive. After the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), the Imam, the Caliph and the guardian (Wali)
of the affair is His Eminence, Amirul Momineen Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s)
after that. Imam Hasan, Imam Husain, Ali bin al-Husain, Muhammad bin
Ali, Ja'far bin Muhammad, Musa bin Ja'far, Ali bin Musa, Muhammad bin
Ali and after that you are my master!

After this statement, His Eminence, Abdul Azim fell silent. At

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Alaamul Wara, Kifayatul Athar

that time the Holy Imam told him about the Imam after him and said, "The
Imam after me is my son, Hasan. Then after him how would the people be
with the successor of His Eminencea"

Abdul Azim eagerly asked about the successor of His Eminence, Hasan
Askari (a.s). Imam Hadi (a.s) said, "He is the Awaited Imam, who is
concealed from the eyes till he reappears and fills the earth with
justice and equity as it would be fraught with injustice and
oppression."

Abdul Azim confessed to what Imam Hadi (a.s) commanded him and brought
faith on the occultation of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s). After that
His Eminence, Hadi (a.s) turned to him and said, "O Abal Qasim! This is
the religion Allah likes for His slaves."<sup>[1]</sup>

### 12. His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)

His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) has also explained about his son,
the Qaim, the awaited Mahdi (a.s). We have mentioned some of his
traditions in the foregone pages. One of them was as follows:

The reliable personality, Ahmad bin Ishaq bin Sa'ad Ashari says: I went
to Imam Hasan Askari, Abu Muhammad (a.s) and wanted to ask him about his
successor. His Eminence, Askari (a.s) began speaking and said,

"O Ahmad bin Ishaq! The Almighty Allah has not left the earth without a
Divine Proof since the creation of Adam (a.s) and would not leave it
without a Divine Proof till the hour shall be established (Day of
Judgment). Through the Divine Proof calamities are repelled from the
inhabitants of the Earth, rain falls and the bounties of the earth come
out."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kamaluddin, Pg. 325

After hearing these words Ahmad asked His Eminence, "Who is the Imam and
Caliph after you ?" Imam Hasan Askari arose from his seat and hurried
inside his house and returned after a short while carrying on his
shoulders a young boy, whose face seemed to be like the full moon and it
seemed that he was three years old. After that, His Eminence, Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s) said,

"O Ahmad! If you were not having a special and exalted position before
Allah and the Proof of Allah, I would not have shown this son of mine to
you. His name and patronymic is the same as that of the Messenger of
Allah (a.s). He would fill the earth with justice and equity, as it
would be fraught with injustice and oppression. O Ahmad! In this
community his example is like that of Khizr and Dhulqarnain. By Allah!
He will have an occultation and none shall be safe from destruction but
one whom Allah has kept steadfast in the belief of his Imam and given
the divine opportunity (Tawfeeq) to pray for his reappearance."

Ahmad immediately asked, "Is there any sign or symbol so that it may
satisfy my heart ?"

Just then the boy, who looked like a full moon, began to speak,

"I am the remnant of Allah on His earth and the revenge-taker from His
enemies; do not demand proof after what is before you…"

After hearing these words of the Proof of Allah, Ahmad went out of the
house of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) in such a condition that his complete
being was surrounded by joy. When again he came to Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s) after that day he said, "O son of Allah's Messenger! I was very
much pleased with the favor you bestowed me that day. Thus what is the
continuing practice of Khizr and Dhulqarnaina"

His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) said, "Prolonged occultation."

Ahmad at once said, "O son of Allah's Messenger, would the occultation
of the Promised Imam (a.s) be also prolonged ?"

His Eminence, Imam (a.s) replied, "By my Lord! Yes, so much so, that
even those who had accepted him, would turn away from their belief and
none shall remain except one from whom Allah has taken the covenant of
our guardianship and in whose hearts is rooted our love and those who
support it with their hearts.

O Ahmad! This is the command of Allah and one of the divine secrets and
one of the Unseen matters of Allah. So remember what I am telling you
and keep it confidential and be of the thankful ones so that you may
reside in the position of Illyeen<sup>[1]</sup> with us."<sup>[2]</sup>

Here we conclude the prophecies of the Messenger of Islam (a.s) and the
Infallible Imams (a.s) regarding Imam Mahdi (a.s). The conclusion
derived from all these traditional reports is that the Awaited Imam
shall reappear and make the earth replete with justice and equity and he
would eradicate all injustice and oppressions. Also that he is the son
of Imam Hasan Askari and Her Eminence, Narjis (s.a.). He is the ninth
descendant of Abu Abdillah Al-Husain (a.s). His name and patronymic is
same as that of the Holy Prophet (a.s).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] The highest place in Hereafter [2] Kamaluddin, Shaykh Saduq, Pg 325

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](19.htm)[  
 Back](25.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](21.htm)[  
 Next](27.htm)
