The Reappearance of the Great Reformer of the World – a Fundamental Religious Belief
====================================================================================

The belief that at the end of the time a universal reformer will arise
and provide success to mankind and save people from their afflictions
and calamities, is one of the most ancient and fundamental beliefs, that
all the heavenly religious have given glad tidings of this and all the
history of mankind has recorded it as a sanctified and respectful
belief.

The man who has witnessed the worst of the disasters, battles and
turmoil caused by the inhuman people and surrounded the whole mankind.
The man who is trampled upon by tyrants and deprived by greedy and
selfish elements from the blessings that should have been available to
all in the world. Such a man is in anticipation of a reformer who would
transform the flow of history and establish the Kingdom of truth. There
is no doubt that he shall be that same Mahdi of the Progeny of Muhammad.
The world shall be graced by his knowledge, justice, good diplomacy and
planning. The Prophet of Islam (a.s), who never spoke without
revelation, and his Infallible Successors who had always been associated
with piety and godfearingness have explained about that great reformer,
that is the Qaim of the Progeny of Muhammad (a.s). Here it would be
appropriate that we mention some examples of the advent of the universal
reformer and his justice and truth.

### The Universal reformer in the view of the Christians

A great number of religious and faithful people from the Christians were
subjected to tortures and calamities during the time of His Eminence,
Prophet Isa (a.s) and also after His Eminence at the hands of the
oppressors and tyrants, especially during the reign of Nirun in the year
64 A.D. and during the reigns of Tarajan in 106 A.D. and Desius in
249-251 A.D. They witnessed such atrocities as defy description. They
were very severe on the people during the reign of Nero and blamed for
burning Rome, therefore terrible calamities descended upon them and they
were stuffed in the skins of animals and thrown to dogs and torn to
pieces. In the same way some were clothed into tar clothes and put to
fire and Nero himself ignited these tar torches and they continued to
burn till they were reduced to ashes.

During the reign of Tarajan also, different types of tortures and
punishments befell them. If anyone was found to be a believer in Prophet
Isa (a.s), he or she was immediately put on the stake. However, if
anyone worshipped idols, drank wine and spoke ill of Prophet Isa (a.s)
he was saved from the stake. These tortures and severities continued on
Christians till the death of Tarajan. When Desius ascended the throne he
imposed such tortures on the people that they shake the foundations of
humanity.

### Return of the Christ for reformation of the People

Christians believe that His Eminence, Prophet Isa (a.s) is the awaited
reformer and one who would rise with truth. He would definitely return
to the earth to establish the kingdom of knowledge and learning and that
he may spread peace and security and general prosperity. These are some
of the statements of the New Testament:

1. Gospel of John
-----------------

It is mentioned in the Gospel of St. John:

“Truly, truly, I say to you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will
live. For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son
also to have life in himself, and has given him authority to execute
judgment, because he is the Son of man. Do not marvel at this; for the
hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his
voice.”<sup>[1]</sup>

2. Gospel of St. Luke
---------------------

The Gospel of St. Luke says:

“And there will be signs in sun and moon and stars, and upon the earth
distress of nations in perplexity at the roaring of the sea and the
waves, men fainting with fear and with foreboding powers of what is
coming on the world; for the powers of the heavens will be shaken. And
then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great
glory.”<sup>[2]</sup>

3. Gospel of St. Matthew
------------------------

This Gospel contains prophecies regarding the reappearance of Prophet
Isa (a.s). Some of them are as follows:

(a) “Immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun will be
darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall
from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken; then will
appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven…”<sup>[3]</sup>

(b) “But at midnight there was a cry, ‘Behold, the bridegroom! Come out
to meet him.’”<sup>[4]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] John 5:25-28 <sup>[2]</sup> Luke 21:25-28 <sup>[3]</sup> Matthew
24:29-30 <sup>[4]</sup> Matthew 25:6

(c) “Therefore you also must be ready; for the Son of man is coming at
an hour you do not expect.”<sup>[1]</sup>

These prophecies about unfavorable circumstances show that the return of
Jesus Christ shall be to remove all pains and difficulties of the
people. This is the belief of all the Christians of the world.

And Will Durant says: “Christians of the world scattered on the earth
believe in the return of Christ and that he would return to the earth
and establish his rule and one who brings faith in him shall be bestowed
with bounties of the Hereafter. And that Jesus is the son of God, is a
general belief among the Christians.”<sup>[2]</sup>

### Signs of reappearance of Christ (a.s)

Some of the signs of the reappearance of Jesus Christ are mentioned in
the New Testament. It is mentioned in the Gospel of Mark:

And as he came out of the temple, one of his disciples said to him,
“Look, Teacher, what wonderful stones and what wonderful buildings!” And
Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great buildingsa There will not be
left here one stone upon another, that will not be thrown down.”

And as he sat on the Mount of the Olives opposite the temple, Peter and
James and John and Andrew asked him privately, “Tell us, when will this
be, and what will be the sign when these things are all to be
accomplisheda” And Jesus began to say to them, “Take heed that no one
leads you astray. Many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he!’ and they
will lead many astray. And when you hear of wars and rumors of war, do
not be alarmed; this must take place, but the end is not yet. For nation
will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Matthew 24:44 [2] Al Masih fil Quran wa Taurat wa Injeel, Pg. 533

will be earthquakes in various places, there will be famines; this is
but the beginning of the birth pangs.

“But take heed to yourselves; for they will deliver you up to councils;
and you will be beaten in synagogues; and you will stand before
governors and kings for my sake, to bear testimony before them. And the
gospel must first be preached to all nations. And when they bring you to
trial and deliver you up, do not be anxious beforehand what you are to
say; but say whatever is given you in that hour, for it is not you who
speak, but the Holy Spirit. And brother will deliver up brother to
death, and the father his child, and children will rise against parents
and have them put to death; and you will be hated by all for my name’s
sake. But he who endures to the end will be saved.

“But when you see the desolating sacrilege set up where it ought not to
be (let the reader understand), then let those who are in Judea flee to
the mountains; let him who is on the housetop not go down, nor enter his
house, to take anything away; and let him who is in the field not turn
back to take his mantle. And alas for those who are with child and for
those who give suck in those days! Pray that it may not happen in
winter. For in those days there will be such tribulation as has not been
from the beginning of the creation which God created until now, and
never will be. And if the Lord had not shortened the days, no human
being would be saved; but for the sake of the elect, whom he chose, he
shortened the days. And then if any one says to you, ‘Look, there he
is!’ do not believe it. False Christs and false prophets will arise and
show signs and wonders, to lead astray, if possible, the elect. But take
heed; I have told you all things beforehand.

“But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun will be darkened,
and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will be falling from
heaven, and the powers in the heavens will be shaken. And then they will
see the Son of man coming in clouds with great power and glory. And then
he will send out the angels and gather his elect from the four winds,
from the ends of the earth to the ends of the heaven.

“From the fig tree learn its lesson; as soon as its branch becomes
tender and puts forth its leaves, you know that summer is near. So also,
when you see these things taking place, you know that he is near, at the
very gates. Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass away
before all these things take place. Heaven and earth will pass away, but
my words will not pass away.

“But of that day or that hour no one knows, not even the angels in
heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.”<sup>[1]</sup>

In all periods of time the Christians have been waiting for the advent
of the Jesus Christ. Amir Shabib Ansatan says: Huart, the French
historian and the author of the History of Arabs says: The Britishers
come to the Baitul Maqdas in the valleys where it is said that very soon
judgment will be established. There, every morning they beat the drums
and await his reappearance. And I have heard that the English woman – I
think – came to Quds and for the sake of Jesus Christ prepared tea.

And La Martine the French Poet in his travelogue says regarding the
Mountain of Lebanon that in the village named Jaun, he met Madame Istir
Satanub, the well known minister of British Isles and saw that a female
attendant was ready with a saddled horse so that if Jesus Christ returns
she must be ready for it.<sup>[2]</sup>

These were some of the examples that the Christian thinkers and scholars
have mentioned regarding the return of Jesus Christ. As for the Muslims,
they on the basis of widely related reports, have the belief that Jesus
Christ shall come to the earth and that he would not be directly doing
the reformation but he will be assisting Imam Mahdi (a.s) and his
followers in the establishment of peace and kingdom of truth and
whatever shall be best for humanity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Marks 13:1-32 [2] Hajir ul Aalamul Islami, Vol. 2, Pg. 195

### The Great Reformer in the view of Jews

One of the beliefs of the Jews is the advent of a Universal reformer in
the Last Age. He is the one who would purify the evil manners of the
people. As Ibne Qayyim says: Indeed the Jews are anticipating a
revolution from the Progeny of Prophet Dawood (a.s) in such a way that
even if his lips move in prayers, all the communities shall be
destroyed. This Promised one in the view of the Jews is the savior who
was promised to the Jews.<sup>[1]</sup>

### Description of the Advent of the Reformer of Jews

As for the description of the advent of the reformer of the Jews, a
prophet named Ashiya has said as follows: Very soon, one who is from the
Progeny of Prophet Dawood shall arise and the Holy Spirit would enter
into him and the Spirit of Wisdom, understanding, power, recognition of
the fear of God would become dominant on him. He shall rule with justice
for the good of the oppressed people and procure justice for them and
destroy the hypocrites. He would establish peace and security in such a
way that all the people would live a life of peace and
prosperity.<sup>[2]</sup>

Although it is an established fact that such a golden era has never
occurred in the history of the world so far, that justice is established
in every corner of the earth. It shall only be achieved at the hands of
only and only the Universal Reformer, the Mahdi from the Progeny of
Muhammad (a.s). He is the one who would fill the earth with justice and
equity and lead the people with heavenly guidance such that there shall
be no deceit and fraud in his Kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Hidayatul Hayari Fee Ajwabal Yahood wan Nasari, Pg. 133 [2] Al
Burhan fi Alamate Akheruz Zaman 1/122

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](20.htm)[  
 Back](26.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](22.htm)[  
 Next](28.htm)
