Signs of Reappearance of the Imam of the Time
=============================================

The Jews have recorded in their books the signs of the reappearance of
the universal reformer whom they are expecting:

a) All the ten sons of Prophets Dawood (a.s) shall come together and
arise from the House of Dawood.

b) Gog and Magog shall be killed

c) The Mount of Olive shall burst asunder

d) The valley of Egypt shall become dry

e) Sweet water springs will burst forth from Jerusalem and from Baitul
Maqdas.

f) Ten leaders of different religions of the world shall be dressed up
in Jewish dress and they shall request to be taken into their fold as
they have heard that God is with the Jews.

g) All the people (communities) shall migrate to Jerusalem to
participate in the worship of Almighty.

h) The mischief and corruption of the earth shall be destroyed. Their
view is that Prophet Isa (a.s) will not come before one who had arisen
on the religion of Bani Israel is destroyed. Therefore it is incumbent
on every Jew that all the sects do not unite. So that power remains in
the hands of the Jews. Before Jews are able to gain complete domination
of the world, it is certain that there would be wars as a consequence of
which one-third of the world population will perish. The Jews shall rule
the world for seven years at a stretch and burn up the weapons they have

obtained after gaining victory. It is the same day when the Jews shall
reach an elevated position and be absolute masters of the wealth of the
world. Very soon the treasures of the earth would fill up their lavish
homes. Such that 300 asses would be required to carry their keys. It
would be the time when people shall enter the fold of Jews in groups and
all would welcome them except the Christians who are destroyed, as they
are from the progeny of Satan.<sup>[1]</sup>

This part shows that the Jews have animosity towards all faiths,
especially Christianity. They desire to be the most dominant people on
the earth and that the rest of the world should come under their
domination and power.

i) Peter has mentioned one of the signs of reappearance as follows:

Since all these things (religions) are thus to be dissolved, what sort
of persons ought you be in lives of holiness and godliness, waiting for
and hastening the coming of the day of God, because of which the heaven
will be kindled and dissolved, and the elements will melt with fire. But
according to his promise we wait for new heavens and a new earth in
which righteousness dwells.<sup>[2]</sup>

j) In the teachings (Talmud), regarding the signs of the advent of the
Jewish savior it is mentioned: It is incumbent upon every Jew that he or
she strives to obtain the power in the world and subject others to the
worst form of humility. And before the last victory there shall be war
and two third of the world would be destroyed. And the Jews shall remain
dominant for seven years and burn up the weapon they lay their hands on.
And it would be the time when the enemies of the Jews shall have their
teeth 22 yards long and they shall be protruding out from their
mouths!!!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Burhan, Pg. 8, Quoted from Qisse Diyanat, Pg. 376 [2] Peter II
(3:11-13)

The Jews during this time shall be at war against all the communities
and the last real savior will come and he shall be the one who is
anticipated. They shall be successful and the Jew community shall be at
the Zenith in matter of wealth and prosperity as they shall be the
masters of all worldly wealth. So much so, that at least 300 asses will
be required to carry the keys of their treasures.<sup>[1]</sup>

These statements show that the Jews harbor enmity and animosity to all
the other religious communities of the world and their aim is to grab
all the wealth and power of the world and that they be dominant over the
world.

### The Vast Spread of Bounties after the Advent of the Savior of the Jews

Jews believe that after the advent of the savior, the widespread
bounties shall reach to every nook and corner of the world. Such that
people shall continue to live for centuries and their stature would be
200 yards in height.<sup>[2]</sup>

It is said: Very soon the lands of Israel will fructify with bread and
fabrics and the stalks of wheat will grow high in Lebanon like the date
palms and they would sway in the wind so fast that they grind the grains
in them.<sup>[3]</sup>

Also, the lands of Israel will give out unleavened bread and each grain
will produce a thousand grains. Wine shall be available in abundance and
the cultivation of grapes will increase. Buildings of Jerusalem shall
rise high upto three miles. Their gates shall be made of pearls and
genuine gemstones such that each part shall be 30 yards
long.<sup>[4]</sup> Poverty will be eradicated and people shall be
healthy and acquire more good qualities. Justice, truth

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Israel and Talmud, Pg. 60 [2] Al-Burhan, 1/129 [3] At-Talmud
Tarrkhiya wa Tahmiya, Pg. 60 [4] Qisatud Diyanat, Pg. 376

and peace shall be dominant.<sup>[1]</sup> And this is the time when
Jews shall dominate the world and all communities will submit to that
savior. Each Jew shall have 2800 servants to attend him.<sup>[2]</sup>

Yes! The Jews have such beliefs and it is the part of their fundamental
principles of faith. On the basis of this they aim to subjugate the
world and acquire all the wealth of the world.

Thus we conclude our discussion regarding the signs of the advent of the
last savior of mankind that are present in the teachings of the greatest
world religious. And it is noteworthy that according to the beliefs of
all people, the advent of this savior is definite and certain.

We have also established that this last savior is none but Imam Mahdi
(a.s), the Awaited Imam. He is the one at whose hands Christians and
Jesus would submit immediately and Almighty Allah would support and help
him like He supported His chosen representatives. He shall also be the
recipient of Unseen help till the time he establishes truth, justice,
peace and equity among the people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] At Talmud, Tarikh and Talim, Pg. 61 [2] Al Burhan, 1/3, quoted from
Al-Masih fil Quran, wal Taurat wal Injeel, Pg. 526

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](21.htm)[  
 Back](27.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](23.htm)[  
 Next](29.htm)
