Believers and Deniers of the Imam of the Time (a.s)
===================================================

All Islamic scholars are unanimous regarding the belief that Imam Mahdi
(a.s) shall indeed reappear and reform the world and destroy all
oppression. The government of His Eminence shall be such a great success
and achievement, as the mankind has never seen in the history so far.
The scholars of Islam have faith in it and consider it to be an
inseparable part of religious belief. It is due to the widely related
and authentic traditions narrated from the Holy Prophet (a.s) and the
Imams of guidance (a.s) sources of which we have already quoted in the
foregone pages. Therefore there is no difference of opinion in the
above-mentioned matter. Rather the difference is regarding some other
matters, for example in the birth and existence of His Eminence. All
Shias, without any exception and a large number of Ahle Sunnat scholars
and historians believe that His Eminence is already born and exists in
the present time. However some of them say that he shall be born in the
future. We shall investigate this opinion of theirs.

### Those who believe the Imam is born and exists

Shia Imamites are unanimous that the Awaited Holy Imam (a.s) exists and
that he has already taken birth and at present he is the Proof of Allah
on the Earth. The Almighty Allah has kept him alive by providing all the
necessities for survival and he is away from all weakness, old age and
death, and nothing is difficult for the Almighty God.

The One Who has kept the stars and the planets rotating in their orbits
in space and One Who has life and death under His control and has power
over everything. He is the One Who had made the people of the cave
asleep for 309 years and then revived them and kept them alive. He is
the One Who kept Prophet Yunus alive in the whale’s belly. When he
sought forgiveness he was brought out. If he had not sought forgiveness
he would have remained alive inside the whale till Qiyamat. Such types
of examples are numerous in the Holy Quran. Now we shall mention some
statements of Ahle Sunnat scholars that are in consonance with the
beliefs of the Shia Imamiyah.

1. Muhammad bin Talha Shafei
----------------------------

Muhammad bin Talha bin Muhammad Qarashi Nasibi says:

“Muhammad bin Hasan Khalis, son of Ali Mutawakkil, son of Muhammad
Qane’, son of Ali ar-Reza, son of Musa Kazim, son of Ja’far Sadiq, son
of Muhammad Baqir, son of Ali Zainul Abideen, son of Husain Zaki, son of
Ali Murtada, son of Abu Talib is the Mahdi, the Hujjat (Proof), the
Khalaf Salih (the righteous successor) and the awaited one, peace be
upon him.”

*This is the righteous proof (Khalaf Salih)*

Allah indeed has helped him…

He also said: “As for the place of his birth, it is Sar-man-rai (and he
was born) on the 23rd of Shaban 258 A.H.”

These sentences prove the belief of Muhammad bin Talha in the existence
of His Eminence, Mahdi (a.s) on the basis of traditions and sayings of
the Holy Prophet (a.s) regarding Imam Mahdi (a.s).

2. Ibne Arabi
-------------

Muhyuddin Muhammad bin Ali known as Ibne Arabi Andulusi has explained
the Imamate of His Eminence, Mahdi (a.s) and his birth. He says, “Mahdi
will reappear in the last age and the Messenger of Allah (a.s) has
prophesied about him, and he is from the purified Ahle Bayt (a.s) and
from the lineage of Muhammad.

**Indeed the Imam is needful of a vizier.**

And upon the two of them the whole universe rotates.

You should know that the Almighty Allah has a Caliph who would reappear
and fill the earth with justice and equity after it would have been
filled with injustice and inequity. Even if a single day remains for the
earth, the Almighty Allah will prolong this very day till this Caliph,
who is from the Progeny of the Messenger of Allah and from the
descendants of Fatima, reappears. The grandfather of this Caliph is
Husain bin Ali bin Abi Talib and his respected father is Hasan Askari
(a.s). He shall have the same name as that of the Holy Prophet (a.s) and
people would pay allegiance to him between Rukn and Maqam. In appearance
he shall be like Allah’s Messenger and in manners slightly less than the
Prophet, because no one could be equal to the Prophet. The Almighty
Allah has said: ‘Indeed you are having lofty manners.’

He is having an illuminated forehead and a raised nose. People would
become fortunate through him and he would distribute wealth evenly among
the people and establish justice. There would be such prosperity during
his time that when a man comes and asks him for monetary help he would
be given as much as he could lift. In his tenure bad manners and evil
traits shall be transformed into amicable mannerisms.

It would be seen that a person who was ignorant and cowardly at night
would become knowledgeable, kind and brave in the morning and success,
help and assistance would be surrounding him.

He shall be the helper and supporter of the weak and helpless people and
dominating and strict for the oppressors.

He shall practically act upon what he preaches and teach the people what
he acts upon. Through him, Islam would get respectability and revival.
People who are cognizant of the Almighty and truth shall be surrounding
him and they would help and assist His Eminence. His Eminence, Ali (a.s)
shall descend from the heavens in such a manner that an angel would be
at his right and another at his left; he would assist Imam Mahdi (a.s)
and he would break the cross and kill the pig.”<sup>[1]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Futuhat-e-Makkiyah, 3/429-430

3. Ibne Sabbagh Maliki
----------------------

Shaykh Nuruddin Ali bin Muhammad, popularly known as Ibne Sabbagh Maliki
says, “The twelfth Imam is Muhammad bin Hasan.” Then he mentions the
date of his birth and the proof of his Imamate and also some traditions
regarding His Eminence, his occultation and the duration of his
government etc.<sup>[1]</sup>

4. Ibne Athir
-------------

Ali bin Karam Muhammad bin Muhammad Shaibani, alias Ibne Athir Jazari
says, “In that year, that is in 260 A.H., His Eminence, Abu Muhammad
Hasan Askari Alawi passed away and he was the eleventh of the twelve
Imams of the Imamiyah (Shias). He was the father of Imam Mahdi
(Muhammad) who was born in the year 232 A.H.”<sup>[2]</sup>

5. Shamsuddin
-------------

Shamsuddin Abu Muzaffar Yusuf bin Faza Ali, known as Sibte Ibne Jawzi
has said, “Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Musa
ar-Reza bin Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain bin Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s), whose patronymic is Abu Abdullah and Abul Qasim, is the Caliph,
the Proof, the Master of the time, the Qaim, the Awaited one and the
last of the twelve Imams.”<sup>[3]</sup>

6. Abul Fida
------------

Ismail Abu Fida writes, “Imam Hasan Askari is one of the twelve Shiite
Imams. He is the father of Muhammad, the Awaited one who was born in the
year 235 A.H.”<sup>[4]</sup>

Shias do not believe that the Imam (a.s) has disappeared into the
basement, and in the same way they do not await his return at the
basement, rather the Shias say that Imam (a.s) is hidden

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Fusulul Muhimma [2] Tarikh Ibne Athir, 5/373 [3] Tadkiratul
Khawas al-Aimma [4] Tarikh Abul Fida, 2/152

from the eyes of people and he is in occultation. Shias await for the
reappearance of the Imam at the House of Allah (Ka’ba) as we have
already explained in the foregone pages.

7. Qirmani
----------

Qirmani has written, “Imam Abul Qasim Muhammad bin Hasan Askari who was
five years old when his father passed away was bestowed wisdom by the
Almighty Allah, just as He had blessed Yahya (a.s) with it. He is of
medium height, elegant stature, beautiful hair, raised nose and
illuminated forehead.”<sup>[1]</sup>

8. Ibne Khallikan
-----------------

Ibne Khallikan has written in his biography of the Awaited Imam (a.s) as
follows, “Abul Qasim Muhammad bin Hasan bin Muhammad Jawwad, is the
twelfth of the twelve Imams and he was born on Friday, the 15th of
Ramadan (15th Shaban) in the year 255 A.H.”<sup>[2]</sup>

9. Dhahabi
----------

Dhahabi has mentioned regarding the birth of His Eminence, the Awaited
Imam as follows, “An important event of the year 261 A.H. was the
passing away of Hasan bin Ali bin Jawwad bin Reza (a.s) who was one of
the twelve Imams and the father of the Awaited Imam (a.s), Muhammad bin
Hasan.”<sup>[3]</sup>

10. Sirajuddin Rufayi
---------------------

Shaykhul Islam, Abul Maali Sirajuddin Muhammad Rufayi has written, “His
title was Naqi (Pure), Aalim, (Scholar), Faqih (Jurisprudent), Amir
(Chief), Daleel (Proof) and Askari (one from the army cantonment)…He had
five issues, Imam Hasan Askari, Husain, Muhammad, Ja’far and Aishah. But
the Awaited

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Akhbaarud Dawl, Pg. 117 [2] Wafayatul Ayan, 2/457 [3] Tarikh Dawl
al-Islami, 5/115

Proof, the Wali of Allah, Imam Mahdi was (born) from Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s).”<sup>[1]</sup>

11. Shaykh Shablanji
--------------------

The accomplished scholar, Shaykh Shablanji has mentioned, “This section
is about the merits of Muhammad bin al-Hasan al-Khalis bin Ali al-Hadi
bin Muhammad al-Jawwad bin Ali ar-Reza bin Musa al-Kazim bin Ja’far
as-Sadiq bin Muhammad al-Baqir bin Ali bin al-Husain bin Ali bin Abi
Talib. His mother is Ummul Walad, Narjis, Saiqal and also known as Susan
and his patronymic is Abul Qasim and the Imamite Shias have given him
the following titles: Hujjat<sup>[2]</sup>, Mahdi<sup>[3]</sup>, Khalaf
Salih<sup>[4]</sup>, Qaim<sup>[5]</sup>, Montazar<sup>[6]</sup> and
Sahib-uz-Zaman.<sup>[7]</sup> The most well known of these titles is
Mahdi. His Eminence is a tall young man with a beautiful face and hair
that reaches to his shoulders. He has big eyes and a brilliant
countenance.”<sup>[8]</sup>

12. Sulaiman Ibne Khwaja
------------------------

The great scholar, Shaykh Sulaiman bin Khwaja has given a lengthy
explanation in which he has proved that the Promised Mahdi about whom
the Messenger of Allah (a.s) has prophesied is the same Proof of God,
Muhammad bin Hasan Askari and he has mentioned proofs and testimonies to
support his belief. And it is interesting to note that this Shaykh was
from the Hanafi school and he followed the Sufi religion.<sup>[9]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sihahul Akhbar[2] Proof[3] Guided one[4] Righteous Successor [5] One
who rises[6] Awaited one[7] Master of the Age[8] Nurul Absar, Pg. 152[9]
Yanabiul Mawaddah

13. Abdul Wahhab Sherani
------------------------

The mystic Shaykh, Abdul Wahhab Ahmad bin Ali Sherani says, “The birth
of the Awaited Imam took place on the 15th of Shaban in the year 255 AH
and he is alive and present, till the time he would reappear and Isa bin
Maryam would also be with him. He is from the progeny of Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s).”<sup>[1]</sup>

14. Khairuddin Zarkali
----------------------

Khairuddin Zarkali has said, “Muhammad bin Hasan Askari Khalis bin Ali
al-Hadi, Abul Qasim is the last leader of the twelve Shia Imams. Among
the Imamites, he is known as the Mahdi, the Master of the Age, the
Awaited one, the Proof and the owner of the cellar. He was born in
Samarrah and when he was five years old, his father passed away. When he
was nine, ten or nineteen years old he entered the cellar in the house
of his father and he never emerged from it.”

Ibne Khallikan says, “In the last age the Shias expect him to reappear
from any of the cellars of Samarrah.”<sup>[2]</sup>

However, as we have repeatedly mentioned, Shias never expect the Imam to
reappear from a cellar of Samarrah; they believe that the advent of the
Holy Imam shall be from the Holy Ka’ba.

15. Baihaqi
-----------

Baihaqi Shafei says, “People have differed regarding Mahdi. A group has
stopped and entrusted his knowledge to its scholar and have the belief
that he is from the progeny of Fatima, the daughter of the Messenger of
Allah (a.s).” He further says, “His long age is not impossible like that
of His Eminence, Isa bin Maryam and His Eminence, Prophet Khizr
(a.s).”<sup>[3]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Yuwaqeet [2] Al Alaam, 6/309-310 [3] Sha'b al-Eimaan

16. Husain Kashifi
------------------

Husain, the compiler of Quranic exegesis says, “Muhammad bin Hasan is
the twelfth Imam and his patronymic is Abul Qasim and he was born in
Samarrah.”<sup>[1]</sup>

17. Shuqrani
------------

Shuqrani says, “The sixty-sixth discussion is about the conditions of
the coming of the Final Hour as the Holy Prophet (a.s) has informed. All
of them are true and all of them shall indeed occur before the Day of
Judgment, like the advent of the Mahdi (a.s), then the Dajjal and the
descent of Isa (a.s), the advent of the creature (Daabba), the rising of
the sun from the west and the breaking of the barrier of Gog and Magog.
So much so, that even if a solitary day remains for the end of the
world, all of them shall come to pass.”<sup>[2]</sup>

18. Salahuddin Safadi
---------------------

Shaykh Salahuddin Safadi writes, “The Promised Mahdi is the same twelfth
of the Twelve Imams, the first of whom is the Chief of the Pious, Ali
(a.s) and the last is Mahdi.”<sup>[3]</sup>

19. Muhammad Najjari
--------------------

Hafiz Muhammad bin Muhammad Najjari, a prominent Hanafi scholar says,
“Abu Muhammad is the father of Imam Mahdi. His son is Muhammad known to
the closest members of his family and his trusted relatives. Then he
goes on to describe the circumstances surrounding his holy
birth.”<sup>[4]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Rauzatush Shohada, Pg. 326 [2] Al-Yuwaqeet wal Jawahir [3] Yanabiul
Mawaddah, Pg. 471 quoted in Sharh Dairah [4] Faslul Khitab

20. Sayyid Ahmad Zaini Dahlan
-----------------------------

Sayyid Ahmad Zaini Dahlan in refutation of the belief of those who say
the Abbaside Mahdi was the Awaited Imam, says, “As the traditions and
narrative reports prove and as the scholars have explained, the Awaited
Mahdi has not reappeared till date and some of the signs of his
reappearance have already occurred and some of them have yet to occur.
And the clearest sign of him is that the Almighty Allah will improve his
affair on a Saturday and he would be from the Progeny of Fatima…but it
is certain that he would definitely reappear.”

These were some examples of the statements of Ahle Sunnat wal Jamat
scholars that have been recorded and all of them clearly explain that
His Eminence does exist and his reappearance is imminent. The great
traditionists, Shaykh Noori in his book, Kashful Astar, has mentioned
forty Ahle Sunnat intellectuals and scholars who have expressed faith in
His Eminence, and considered his reappearance imminent. And the
accomplished teacher, Haaj Ali Muhammad Ali Dokhiayyal has mentioned 144
books dealing mainly about the topic of Imam Mahdi (a.s) and the
interesting thing is that a majority of these books are written by Ahle
Sunnat scholars.<sup>[1]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Futuhat al-Islamiyyah, 2/322

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](22.htm)[  
 Back](28.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](24.htm)[  
 Next](30.htm)
