Books Written About His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s)
==================================================

Scholars and intellectuals of the Islamic world have written numerous
books about Imam Mahdi (a.s) and it is worth pointing out that a
majority of them are from Ahle Sunnat community. Moreover, the Shia
scholars have also written many books about Imam Mahdi
(a.s).<sup>[1]</sup> Below we mention some of these books:

1. Al-Bayan Fi Akhbar Sahib az-Zaman, written by Abu Abdillah Muhammad
bin Yusuf Ganji Shafei. Recently, the great researcher Sayyid Mahdi
Khorasani has written a very nice foreword to this book.

2. Iqdud Durar Fi Akhbar-e-Montazar wa Huwal Mahdi (a.s), written by
Allamah Yusuf bin Yahya bin Ali bin Abdul Aziz Muqaddasi Shafei Salmi
and Shaykh Muheeb bin Salih Burini has researched it fully. It is
published by Maktab al-Manar, Jordan.

3. Al-Burhan Fi Alamaat Mahdi Aakhir az-Zamaan, written by Shaykh Ali
bin Husam, popularly known as Muttaqi Hindi. It is a two-volume book.
Jasim bin Muhammad Ilyasin has researched it and it is printed by Zatul
Salasil Co., Jordan. It is one of our sources for this book.

4. Al-Mahdi al-Maood al-Montazar Inda Ahlas Sunnah wal Imamiyah, written
by the great scholar, Shaykh Najmuddin Ja’far bin Muhammad Askari in two
volumes. It is published from Dar az-Zahra, Lebanon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Imam al-Mahdi, Pg. 310-318

5. Ash-Shia war Raja’, written by the scholar and researcher, Shaykh
Muhammad Reza Tabasi Najafi which has recently been published mentioning
the original sources.

6. Al-Fitan, written by Naeem bin Hammad Maroozi (died 228 A.H.). Copies
of this manuscript are available in Riyadh, Medina, Mecca from Turkey,
London, India and Iraq.<sup>[1]</sup>

7. Al-Malahim, written by Abul Hasan bin Manadi Ahmad bin Ja’far (died
336 A.H.).<sup>[2]</sup>

8. Al-Mahdi or Akhbar al-Mahdi, written by Abu Naeem Isfahani (died 430
A.H.) is present in manuscript form.

9. Al-Sunan Warida Fil Fitan, written by Abu Amr Uthman bin Saeed Dani
Maqri, (died 444 A.H.) is present in manuscript form.

10. Al-Ba’ath wan Nushoor, written by Baihaqi (died 458 A.H.) is
available in manuscript form.

11. Irtiqa al-Farq, written by Sakhawi, (died 903 A.H.). It is mentioned
in his book, Maqasid.

12. Al-Arful Wardi fi Akhbar al-Mahdi, written by Suyuti (died 911
A.H.). It is published alongside his another book, Al-Hawi fil Fatawi.

13. Al-Qaul al-Mukhtasar Fi Alamat al-Mahdi al-Montazar, written by Ibne
Hajar Haithami Shafei, (died 974 A.H.) is also available in manuscript
form.

14. Al-Mashrab al-Wardi fi Mazhab al-Mahdi, written by Mulla Ali Qari,
(died 1033 A.H.) and Baranji has mentioned about it in his book, Ashraat
as-Saa-a.

15. Fawaid Fawaid al-Fikr fil Mahdi al-Montazar, written by Mari’ bin
Yusuf Karami Hanbali, (died 1033 A.H.) is available in manuscript form.
A copy of the same is available in Paris, France.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar Fi Akhbar al-Montazar, Pg. 32 [2] Iqdud Durar Fi Akhbar
al-Montazar, Pg. 32

16. Al-Ishaa-a li Ashrat as-Saa-a, written by Baranji (died 1103 A.H.)
is available in printed form.

17. Al-Ahadith al-Qaziya Bi Khurooj al-Mahdi, written by Muhammad bin
Ismail Sanai and it is mentioned in the book, Al-Izaa-a.

18. Al-Bahoor as-Zakhira fi Uloom al-Aakhira, written by Muhammad bin
Haaj Ahmad Safarini Hanbali, (died 1088 A.H.).

19. At-Tauzeeh Feema Tawatur fil Muntazar wal Dajjal wal Masih, written
by Shaukani (died 1250 A.H.). And Shaukani has mentioned it in his
Tafsir Fathul Qadeer (Vol. I).

20. Talkhis al-Bayan fi Alamaat Mahdi Aakhir az-Zaman, written by Shaykh
Akhsarai is available in manuscript form. It is present in the Arif
al-Hikmah Library of Medina under the listing no. 26/240/7/Q.

21. At-Tasrih Bima Tawatur fi Nuzool al-Masih, written by Kashmiri (died
1352 A.H.) is available in printed form.

22. Al-Jawab Muqna al-Muharrar Fir Radde A’laa Man Tagha wa Tajabbar bi
Dawa An Isa Huwal Mahdi al-Montazar, written by Muhammad Habibullah
Shanqeeti and it is available in printed form.

23. Al-Khitab al-Malih fi Tahqiq al-Mahdi wal Masih, written by Shaykh
Ashraf Ali Thanavi. This book is available in Urdu language.

24. Tahdeeq an-Nazar bi Akhbar al-Montazar, written by Shaykh Muhammad
bin Abdul Aziz Mane’, is available in manuscript form and one copy is
available in Dar al-Kutub al-Misriyya.

25. Mukhtasar al-Akhbar al-Masha-a fil Fitan wa Ashraat as-Saa-a wa
Akhbaar al-Mahdi, written by Abdullah bin Shaykh and it is published
from Riyadh.

26. Al-Bayanaat anil Mahdi, written by Mauridi.

27. Al-Ahadith Waarida fil Mahdi fi Meezan al-Jarah Ta’deel, written by
Abdul Aleem bin Abdul Azeem and it was published in the Makkah Mukarrama
University.<sup>[1]</sup>

28. Al-Muntazar A’laa Zawa al-Haqaiq, written by Muhammad Husain Adeeb,
published from the Haidariyya Press, Najaf al-Ashraf.

29. Al-Imam al-Mahdi, written by the accomplished Haaj Ali Muhammad Ali
Dokhaiyyal, published from Aadaab Printing Press, Najaf al-Ashraf.

30. Muntakhab al-Athar fil Imam at-Thani Ashar, written by the great
scholar, Shaykh Lutfullah Safi Gulpaygani and this is one of the best
books on the subject of the Awaited Imam.

31. Ibraz al-Waham al-Maknoon min Kalaam Ibne Khaldun, written by Ahmad
bin Siddiq Bukhari published from the Taraqqi Printing Press, Damascus.

32. Arbaeen Hadithan Fil Mahdi, written by Abul Alaa Hamadani.

33. Arbaeen Hadithan Fil Mahdi, written by Hafiz Abu Naeem Ahmad bin
Abdullah Isfahani.

34. Talkhis al-Bayan Fi Alamaat Mahdi Aakhir az-Zamaan, written by Ibne
Kamal Basha Hanafi, (died 940 A.H.).

35. Al-Qatar ash-Shahdi Fi Awsaaf al-Mahdi, edited by Shahabuddin Ahmad
bin Ahmad Ismail Halwani Shafei (died 1308 A.H.).

36. Al-Mahdi, written by Abu Dawood Sulaiman bin Ashath Sajistani. He is
the compiler of one of the six Sunni authentic books (Sihah Sittah).

37. Al-Mahdi Ilaa Maward Fil Mahdi, written by Shamsuddin Muhammad bin
Tulun.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar Fi Akhbar al-Muntazar, Pg. 33-35

38. An-Najm al-Thaqib Fi Bayan Aal al-Mahdi min Aulad Ali bin Abi Talib.

39. Al-Hadiyatul Mahdaviyyah, written by Abul Rajaa Muhammad Hindi.

40. Al-Awasim Anil Fitan al-Qawasim, written by Ali bin Burhanuddin
Halabi Shafei.<sup>[1]</sup>

41. Al-Ghaybah, written by Shaykh Tusi

42. Kamaluddin, written by Shaykh Saduq

43. Al-Ghaybah, written by Muhammad bin Ibrahim Nomani

44. Al-Malahim wal Fitan, written by Raziuddin Ali bin Tawoos

45. Baheth Hawl al-Mahdi, written by Shahid Sadr

46. Basharatul Imam Fi Zahoor al-Mahdi, written by Mustafa Aale Sayyid
Haider Kazmi

47. Al-Ghaybah, written by Shaykh Muhammad Hirzuddin, with research of
Shaykh Muhammad Husain Hirzuddin is available in manuscript form.

48. Al-Ghaybah, written by Shaykh Mufeed

49. Mahdi Maood, translated by Ali Dawani

50. Al-Mahdi al-Maood, written by Sayyid Muhammad Sadr

These were some of the books that are written about His Eminence, Imam
Mahdi (a.s) and most of them are compiled by Ahle Sunnat scholars and I
don’t think as many books are written regarding any other Imam by Ahle
Sunnat scholars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[1]</sup> Razail Shaykh Mufid

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](23.htm)[  
 Back](29.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](25.htm)[  
 Next](31.htm)
