Deniers of Imam Mahdi (a.s)
===========================

A group has denied the Holy Existence of Imam Mahdi (a.s) while some of
the Shias and believers have actually met the Holy Imam (a.s) in person.
Here we shall mention about some deniers of Imam Mahdi (a.s):

1. Ibne Khaldun
---------------

In a chapter of his Muqaddimah, Ibne Khaldun has brought the traditions
of the Holy Prophet (a.s) narrated by the narrators and he has
endeavored to prove that all these traditions are baseless. The great
scholar and teacher, Ahmad Shakir has written a refutation of Ibne
Khaldun and said:

“However Ibne Khaldun has taken up a subject about which be has no
knowledge and spoke of a matter regarding which he had no proficiency.
Ibne Khaldun was involved in political affairs and was busy in the
service of the rulers. Therefore he conjectured that the subject of His
Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) was a Shiite belief or he has put himself in
doubt regarding this matter. On the basis of this, be has written a long
chapter in his well-known Proglamena. (Chapter on Fatimids or that which
the people did unto them).”<sup>[1]</sup>

The teacher, Ahmad Shakir, in refutation of Ibne Khaldun’s skepticism
writes that his denial with regard to the Awaited Imam (a.s) is denial
of a necessary principle of religion, because the traditions of the Holy
Prophet (a.s) about His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) reach to the level of
widely-related (Tawatur) and there is no scope of doubt in them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sharh Musnad Al-Imam Ahmad, 5/197

2. Muhammad Amin Baghdadi
-------------------------

Muhammad Amin Baghdadi, famous as Suwaidi, has denied the existence of
His Eminence, the Awaited Imam (a.s) but said that he shall be born in
the future. He also says, “The Shias think that he disappeared into a
basement of Samarrah in 262 A.H. and he is the sword-bearer and one who
would arise prior to Qiyamat. Also that before his reappearance he shall
have two occultations, one of them being longer than the other.”

I say that there are many facts that invalidate the statement of
Muhammad Amin when he says that Imam Mahdi (a.s) will be born in the
future before Qiyamat; thus implying that he does not presently exist.
This is against the principles of Shia faith available in their books of
religion. The important points can be summarized as follows:

1- Appointment of Imam is incumbent on God.

2- It is not permissible for God to keep any period of time devoid of an
Imam.

3- Imamate is restricted to twelve personalities.

4- Shias believe that all of the above must be infallible.

On the basis of what this writer says, “Allah did not bring about what
was incumbent on Him. That is, after the passing away of Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s) He did not appoint Imam Mahdi (a.s) immediately. Rather He
has postponed the Imamate of Mahdi (a.s) for the Last Age!!”

If Shias say that this same Mahdi is now the Imam we shall ask what is
the use of an Imam in occultationa Since he is incapable of removing
oppression. In spite of the fact that the Imams prior to him, even
though their tenure was close to the period of the Prophet, they were
present in public view. Whereas this period, which is furthermost from
the period of the Prophet and oppressions have increased, there is
greater need of an Imam.

And that upon which the scholars are unanimous is that Mahdi is the Qaim
of the Last Age and he would fill the earth with justice.<sup>[1]</sup>

The denial of Suwaidi has no basis and the belief of the Shias regarding
the Imam of the time has no contradiction with the other principles of
faith as Suwaidi has conjectured. Because the appointment of the Imam is
logically incumbent on Allah, in view of His Grace, and Shias are firmly
convinced about this. Imam Mahdi (a.s) is one of the twelve Imams who
are successors of the Prophet of Islam. He has gone into occultation
away from the view of people due to hidden wisdom as we have already
explained in the forgone pages. He would indeed reappear and establish
truth, justice, prosperity and peace among the people.

3. Ahmad Kasravi
----------------

Ahmad Kasravi had been unjust upon the Shia people and attributed
falsehood and made allegations about them regarding the Imam of the time
(a.s) saying:

“When Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) passed away in 260 A.H., a great problem
arose because he did not leave behind any issue. The Rafidis (Shias)
fell into great confusion and many divisions appeared among them. A
group claimed that the purpose of Imamate was over hence it had come to
an end. A group began to follow Ja’far, the brother of Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s). While Uthman bin Saeed a trusted aide of Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)
made a very surprising claim that Imam Hasan Askari indeed had a five
year old son who disappeared into the basement and he shall not appear
for anyone and that he is the Imam after his father.”<sup>[2]</sup>

Partialities and loyalties of this writer towards the imperialist powers
are known to all. He says: “The claim of Uthman bin Saeed a deputy of
Imam Hasan (a.s), that His Eminence had a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sabaikuz Zahab, Pg. 78 [2] At Tashiyyo wash-Shia, Pg. 31

son who will not appear to anyone and he is the Awaited Imam and the
Mahdaviyat is firm with him, and from all aspects all his claims and
statements are baseless.” However, his statement is absolutely invalid
because we have already quoted in the forgone discussions, in a clear
manner, traditions and reports from the Holy Prophet (a.s) and Purified
Imams (a.s) and all those narrations and reports have given glad tidings
to the world of Islam about the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s) and
that His Eminence will revive the religion and make it strong.

4. Ahmad Amin
-------------

Ahmad Amin, like the Magian Kasravi is also having malice and jealously
against Imams of guidance, whom the Almighty Allah has purified from all
filth and impurities. He also issued statements on the basis of his
bigotry, instead of referring to authentic Shia sources. He made
baseless claims and false allegations regarding them and he has himself
accepted this. Due to his animosity towards the Shias he has heaped
every type of falsehood on them. Those Shias who shape a great part of
the Islamic community and desire truth and justice and despise dispute,
rebellion and oppression are well known.

Dr. Abdur Rahman Badawi says, “Shias posses greater virtue and are
pre-eminent among all because they have preserved Islam with its
originality and perfection and bestowed the restless and confused
consciences with spirituality, steadfastness and aplomb; otherwise
petrifaction and a dry and motionless structure would become dominant.”

In any case, Ahmad Amin has written a treatise in which he has denied
Imam Mahdi (a.s) and considered the Shia belief regarding His Eminence a
defect. He has not given any importance to the traditions of the six
canonical books of Ahle Sunnat on the subject. The compilers of books of
Prophetic narrations, the widely related reports and widespread sayings
of the Prophet of Islam (a.s) regarding Imam Mahdi (a.s) are known to
all. The great scholar, Hujjatul Islam wal Muslimeen

Ustad Shaykh Muhammad Ali Zahiri have refuted Ahmad Amin with logical
arguments and textual proofs. He has replied to the baseless statements
of Ahmad Amin. The honorable personality, Imam Shaykh Muhammad Husain
Kashiful Ghita in his foreword to the book of Zahiri says:

“The matter of His Eminence, the Awaited Imam in occultation – may our
souls be sacrificed on him – is a belief rooted in truth and a social
principle and it is based on a firm foundation and it is not possible to
deny it. It is included among the significant and most important
principles.”<sup>[1]</sup>

5. Shukri Afandi
----------------

Shukri Afandi Baghdadi has composed a panegyric in which he has
expressed doubts about Imam Mahdi (a.s) and has denied him! He says:

*“O the scholars of the time! O those who know everything (deeply). The
thought about him is perplexing.”*

Scholars and learned men of Najaf Ashraf have taken steps to refute him.
Muhaddith Noori – may Allah the Almighty be pleased with him – has
compiled a book, Kashful Astar Anil Hujjatul Ghalib Anil Absar to refute
him. In this book he has collected statements of forty great Ahle Sunnat
scholars – regarding the birth and existence of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi
(a.s). In the same way, Imam Kashiful Ghita has in response to Afandi
composed a beautiful panegyric, which runs as follows:

*“My life be sacrificed for one who is far away from home, but whom
remembrance brought close.*

And the fascination and remembrance of his followers have kept him
near.”

This complete panegyric is quoted in the book, Ilzamun Nasib.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Mahdi wa Ahmad Amin, Pg. 7

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](25.htm)[  
 Back](31.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](27.htm)[  
 Next](33.htm)
