Signs of the Reappearance of the Imam of the Time (a.s)
=======================================================

Traditional reports of the Prophet of Islam and Purified Imams (a.s) on
the subject of the reappearance of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s),
mention about signs and portents of his advent. They mention about the
time and place where he would reappear. However, the signs of
reappearance can be categorized into the certain and probable signs of
reappearance.

### Certain Signs

Narrations and traditions are unanimous in this respect and some of the
signs preceding the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s) are certain and
inevitable. Among them are the following:

Widespread Injustice and Oppression
-----------------------------------

Among the prominent signs of reappearance of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi
(a.s) is widespread injustice and oppression and total absence of peace
and security in such a way that fear, terror, calamities, problems,
corruption, mischief and ignorance will dominate human society. The
people shall do anything for the sake of the world and they shall
compete with each other on the way of sin and evil and in their view sin
would be considered good and on one hand the Islamic Law, like in the
beginning, would be unknown to the people. Kingdoms of the great
oppressors of the world would subjugate Muslims and their reputation and
economic sources shall be destroyed. Following are some traditions in
this regard:

1. Abu Saeed Khudri has narrated that the Holy Prophet (a.s) said,
“After me mischiefs will arise and Ihlas (Addiction) is one of them. And
in it is war and flight and after that also mischiefs will arrive in
such a way that for every age it would be said that another mischief has
ended in the same way it will move forward and these mischiefs will
enter each and every center of the family of all Arabs and Muslims till
a man from my progeny will appear.”<sup>[1]</sup>

This tradition proves that tribulations, bloodshed, calamities and
horrible events would surround the Islamic and non-Islamic countries and
the life of all Arabs and Muslims.

2. Abu Saeed Khudri has narrated that the Holy Prophet (a.s) said, “This
severity and suffocation would continue on you in such a way that the
earth shall be replete with injustice and oppression and no one would
dare to say, “God”. After that the Almighty Allah would send a man from
my progeny who would fill the earth with justice and equity just as it
would have been fraught with injustice. And the earth will discharge its
bounties and blessings and the life of Muslims would become prosperous
and comfortable.”<sup>[2]</sup>

3. Abu Saeed Khudri narrated that the Holy Prophet (a.s) said, “In the
Last Age, severe tribulations would afflict my community from their
rulers and kings such that they have not heard of more severe atrocities
and the earth shall become constricted for them and become filled with
injustice and oppression and the faithful believer would have no place
of refuge from those oppressions. At that time, Almighty Allah would
send a man from my progeny who would fill the earth with justice and
equity and all inhabitants of the earth and heavens would be satisfied
and happy and the earth would spew out its treasures and the sky would
shower its blessings...”<sup>[3]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar, Pg. 119; Al-Masabih [2] Amali, Shaykh Tusi [3] Iqdud
Durar, Pg. 113

4. The Holy Prophet (a.s) said, “After me are Caliphs and after Caliphs,
rulers and after rulers, kings and after kings, emperors and tyrannical
and rebellious dictators. After that a man from my Ahle Bayt will
reappear and fill the earth with justice and equity just as it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression.”<sup>[1]</sup>

This tradition shows that the administrators of the Muslims shall be of
various kinds: Some caliphs, some kings and some tyrants. They would
fill up the earth and cities with injustice. After that Almighty God
would send the great savior, Mahdi of the Progeny of Muhammad and he
would destroy the tyrants and establish Divine Law on the earth.

5. Auf bin Malik has narrated from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he
said, “How shall you be, O Aufa When the community would be divided into
73 sects, one of whom would go to Paradise and the rest to Hell ?”

Auf immediately asked, “How ?”

The Prophet of Islam (a.s) said, “...A time when fools would occupy the
pulpits and Zakat would be considered a loss and trusts shall be
considered as war booty. Contemplation in religion of Allah shall be for
other than Allah. Men shall obey their wives and be disowned by their
mothers. They shall become aloof from their father. The last of this
Ummah will curse the first and the transgressing tribes shall be leading
them and the leaders of the people will be the worst people among them.
People would respect them for being safe from their mischief. At that
time people will take refuge in Damascus which is the best city of Sham
(Syria) and they shall remain safe from the enemies.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kanzul Ummal, Pg. 7/186

It was asked, “O Allah’s Messenger! Would Sham be conquereda”

He replied, “Very soon (it would be conquered), after that mischief will
arise. Then the mischief of the worst kind would appear. In short, there
would be mischief after mischief till finally a man from my Ahle Bayt
would appear, whose name is Mahdi (a.s).”<sup>[1]</sup>

6. The Prophet of Islam (a.s) said, “The Mahdi of this community is from
us (our family). When confusion, turmoil and mischief would surround the
world and the paths shall be cut off and people will destroy each other
and the elders shall not be merciful on the young and the young shall
not respect the elders. In that period, the Almighty Allah would send
our Mahdi, who is the ninth descendant of Imam Husain (a.s) and he would
conquer the centers of deviation and the oblivious hearts and establish
religion just as it were founded and he shall fill the earth with
justice and equity just as it would be full of injustice and
oppression.”<sup>[2]</sup>

7. It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) that he said, “Mahdi
(a.s) will reappear at the time when fear, mischiefs, calamities,
epidemics, violence, divisions in religion and transformation of the
peoples’ condition shall be dominant on the world and society. Day and
night people would yearn for death and shall be at each other’s throat.
In other words despair and hopelessness would have conquered them. At
that time His Eminence would reappear; and congratulations to the one
reaches Imam Mahdi (a.s) and becomes his supporter and woe to the one
who opposes him.”<sup>[3]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kanzul Ummal, 6/44 [2] Biharul Anwar, 13/174 [3] Qalaidud Durar, Pg.
133

8. His Eminence, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) said to a group of his Shias
regarding His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s), “Our Qaim would receive help
in instilling fear and awe in the hearts of the enemies, and the earth
will come into his control and its treasures would be uncovered for him.
His rulership will extend to the east and the west. The Almighty Allah
would make His religion dominant even if polytheists detest it. He would
revive the barren lands and the earth would sprout out its vegetation
and during his time, people would be immersed in blessings such that its
parallel has never been seen.”

A man in the gathering asked, “When would your Qaim reappear ?”

The Holy Imam (a.s) in reply to this question related the signs of
reappearance saying, “A time when men shall resemble women. When women
shall be in saddles and men shall omit prayers and follow the base
desires and take usury and consider spilling of human blood easy and
deal with usury and openly commit fornication and construct high-rises
and consider lying permissible and accept bribery and follow sensual
desires and sell religion in exchange of material benefits and
dissociate from relatives and consider forbearance as weakness and
oppression as pride. The rulers shall be sinners, the administrators,
liars, the trustees, misappropriators and friends and helpers shall be
oppressors. Reciters of Quran shall be sinners. Oppression would be open
and divorces common and sins would be committed openly and false
testimonies would be accepted, wine would be imbibed and man shall mount
upon man and women shall be needless of men and public funds would be
considered spoils of war, alms would be considered a monetary loss. They
would be afraid of the tongue of the evil people. A time when Sufyani
would arise from Sham and Yamani would appear from Yemen and a
descendant of the Progeny of Muhammad would be slain between Rukn and
Maqam. A caller will call out from the sky: The truth is with him and
his followers. This is the time of

the reappearance of our Qaim. When he reappears he would lean on the
Ka’ba and 313 of his followers will gather around him. The first words
he utters would be: The remnant of Allah is best for you, if you only
knew it. Then he would say: I am the remnant of Allah and the Caliph of
Allah and His proof upon you. At this his point every Muslim would
salute him in the following manner: Peace be upon you, O remnant of
Allah on His earth. And when ten thousand men gather before him neither
would Jews survive nor Christians or those who worship other than Allah.
Rather all would bring faith on him and testify about him and a single
community, that is the Islamic community shall come into being. Indeed a
fire would descend from the sky and burn up all the deities other than
Allah that are deified in every nook and corner of the
world.”<sup>[1]</sup>

### The Signs of the Hour (Qiyamat)

Some traditions mention the events of the Final Age, like the mischiefs,
calamities and tribulations and it is assumed that these are also signs
of the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s) and we shall mention two
traditions of this type:

First Tradition
---------------

Ata, son of Abu Riyah narrated from the Rabbi of the Ummah, Abdullah bin
Abbas that he said: I performed the Farewell Hajj with the Holy Prophet
(a.s). His Eminence held the door of the Ka’ba and glanced to the people
and said, “Do you want me to inform you about the signs of the Hour and
Qiyamata”

Salman Farsi who was the most proximate to the Prophet replied, “Yes, O
Allah’s Messenger!”

His Eminence began to reply and said, “One of the signs of Qiyamat is
that the Prayer would be wasted – that is the Prayer of the Muslims will
lapse. And sensual desires shall be followed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al Fusulul Muhimma Ibne Sabbagh Maliki, Pg. 248

And people would be inclined to their carnal desires. Religion would be
lost for material gains. It is the time when hearts of the faithful
shall be terrified of widespread evils that they would witness but would
be unable to change. It would be like salt dissolves in water.

Salman inquired in surprise, “O Allah’s Messenger! Indeed, would such a
time really come to passa” He replied, “Yes! By the God in Whose control
is my life! O Salman! At that time leadership and guardianship of
Muslims shall be in the hands of tyrannical rulers. Rulers, whose
ministers shall be transgressors and the nobles, unjust and the
trustees, misappropriators.”

Salman (r.a.) asked, “Would such conditions really occur, O Allah’s
Messenger!” He replied, “Yes! By the God in Whose hands is my life! At
that time evil shall be considered good and good, evil. The
misappropriator would be a trustee on paper only and the trustee would
misappropriate. The liar shall be testified for and the truthful deemed
a liar.”

Salman asked in astonishment, “O Allah’s Messenger! Would it indeed be
in this waya”

He said, “Yes! By the God in Whose Control is my life! O Salman! In that
age, women shall be rulers and maidservants would become consultants and
children would mount pulpits. Lying would be a way of life, Zakat would
be considered a monetary loss, and misappropriation of public funds
would be considered a type of profit. Men shall oppress their parents
and be kind to their friends and a comet shall appear.”

Salman again asked, “O Allah’s Messenger would it indeed be in this
waya” He replied, “Yes! By the God in Whose control is my life! O
Salman! At that time, the wife would be a partner in the trade of her
husband and rain would not fall in its season. But it would fall in
summer. The kind people would be very hot- tempered. The poor man shall
be humiliated. At that time markets shall become proximate to each
other. A time when one would say: I have not sold anything and another
would say: I have made

no profit. In such a way that everyone who hears this would understand
that he is thankless to God.”

Salman asked, “O Allah’s Messenger! Would this indeed come to pass ?”

He replied, “Yes! By the God in Whose control is my life! O Salman! At
this time some groups would be dominating them. Such that even if they
move their lips they shall be killed and if they don’t say anything
their enemies would consider their property permissible for themselves.
Till they would fill their pockets with public funds and misbehave with
their ladies, spill their blood and their fill their hearts with fear,
terror and awe. In those days you will not see the believers except in a
condition of fear, terror and awe.”

Salman beseeched, “O Allah’s Messenger! Would such a time come for the
believers ?”

He replied, “Yes! By the God in Whose hands is my life! O Salman! At
this time, they would get some things from the east and some from west
so that they may lead the Muslim community. In that period woe be to the
helpless condition of my community by the mischiefs of the east and
west. And woe be on the condition of the easterners and westerners from
divine chastisement. Yes, neither would they be merciful on the young
nor have any respect for elders and nor would they condone anyone who
commits a mistake. Their news are all indecencies and improper. Their
bodies are humans but their hearts like satans.”

Salman implored, “O Allah’s Messenger! Would such a day really come to
pass ?”

The Messenger of Allah (a.s) replied, “Yes! By the God in Whose hands is
my life! O Salman! At that time males shall satisfy their lusts with
males and females with females. And in the same way the father and
people of family will be possessive of their own daughters and sons
(that is they would want them for

themselves). Men shall resemble women and women shall resemble men and
women shall ride mounts. May curse of Allah be on them.”

Salman asked in surprise, “O Allah’s Messenger! Would this indeed
happena”

The Messenger of Allah (a.s) replied, “Yes! By the God in Whose hands is
my life! O Salman! At that time mosques would be decorated with gold
like churches and synagogues. Qurans would be taken as ornament and
decoration and shops would be elevated and rows, elongated but they
would be inimical to each other and everyone shall have their own
justifications.”

Salman asked, “O Allah’s Messenger! Would this really happen ?”

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s) said, “Yes! By the God, in Whose hands
is my life! At that time men and boys of the community would wear gold
and silk and deal in leopard skins.”

Salman asked, “O Allah’s Messenger! Would this also happen ?”

The Prophet replied, “Yes! By the One in Whose hands is my life! O
Salman! At that time usury would be widespread and a common activity and
business transactions would comprise of backbiting and bribery. Religion
shall be humiliated and the world shall be honored.”

Salman asked, “O Allah’s Messenger! Would this also come to pass ?”

He replied, “Yes! By the One in Whose hands is my life! O Salman! At
that time divorces would increase and no penalty would be carried out
although Almighty Allah would not be harmed by all this in any way.”

Salman asked, “Would this also happen ?”

He replied, “Yes! By the God in Whose Hands is my life! O Salman! In
that age singing girls would appear and the mischiefs of my community
shall dominate.”

Salman asked, “O Allah’s Messenger! Would such circumstances really
appear ?”

The Prophet replied, “Yes! By the One in Whose hand is my life! O
Salman! The affluent people of my community would go for Hajj for the
sole purpose of recreation and the middle class would go for business
and the poor for show off. In that time the community would learn Quran
for (a purpose) other than Allah and recite it with musical instruments.
A group of people will obtain knowledge of religious jurisprudence for
other than Allah. In that time illegitimate children will increase,
Quran will be recited in tune for entertainment.”

Salman requested, “O Messenger of Allah! Would such a day come to pass
?”

He replied, “Yes! By the God in Whose hands is my life! O Salman! It is
the time when no type of sanctity and limits shall be observed and
people would knowingly and willingly commit sins and evil people will
dominate righteous souls. Lying would become open and flattery will
become general, the poor shall openly display their poverty, some would
pride upon others with regard to their clothes. Rain shall be
unseasonal. People would consider chess, backgammon and music as
favorite activities and in comparison to it they would consider Amr bil
Maroof (Advising good) and Nahy Anil Munkar (Restraining from evil) as
bad. So much so, that a faithful person shall be the most degraded and
despised person of the community. The reciters (of Quran) will denounce
the worshippers and the worshippers shall denounce the reciters. These
are the people who are considered as filth in the kingdom of the
heavens.”

Salman asked in astonishment, “O Messenger of Allah! Would such a day
really come ?”

He replied, “Yes! By the God in Whose hands is my life! O Salman! In
that time the ‘Ruwabyiza’ will speak.”

Salman asked, “O Messenger of Allah! My parents be sacrificed on you!
What is ‘Ruwabyiza’ ?”

He replied, “A thing or a person’s speaking about the general matters
that has never been spoken about. In that time people will not have a
long life, suddenly the earth will call out and every person will think
it is for him or her. After that the world would remain in that
condition till Allah likes and after that it would be destroyed. The
earth would spew out whatever it contains. The Prophet himself said:
That is Gold and Silver. At that moment he pointed out to the pillars
and said: Like this, but on that day neither gold nor silver be of any
use. This is the meaning of the verse: Now indeed the tokens of it have
come…”<sup>[1]</sup>

Second Tradition
----------------

Humran has related that Imam Sadiq (a.s) was speaking about the pomp and
splendor of the tyrant rulers and the poverty and bad conditions of the
Shias. He says, “I was in the presence of Abu Ja’far Mansur Dawaniqi
while he was the ruler and he was riding his mount accompanied by
numerous attendants. Some others were riding astride him. He asked me,
‘O Aba Abdillah! Indeed it is a fact that the Almighty Allah has given
us kingdom and security and an honor, which He made easy for us. Be
happy with it and do not say to the people you and your Ahle Bayt are
more eligible than us for this rulership because if you utter such a
thing it would be as if you have instigated yourself and the people
against me.’”

He says, “I said, ‘Who has told you such a thing. Whoever has said it
has lied.’” Mansur asked, “Can you swear that you have not said anything
like it ?”

He says, “I replied, ‘People are magicians. They like to instigate you
against me. It is upto you to keep your ears protected and do not accept
all they say because our caution regarding you is more than your caution
about us.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Muhammad 47:18, Tafsir Qummi

At that time he said to me, ‘Do you remember that day when I asked you
whether I would reach your thronea You said: Yes! A rule of long
duration widespread and secure, which will not decline in your kingdom
you will be given respite and comfort. And in your world would be
increase and excess till the time that in the Holy month and the Holy
city their hands shall be smeared in our blood.’”

The Imam says, “I understood that I remembered that incident. I said,
‘Yes! I hope Allah, the Mighty and the Sublime would keep you safe and I
also on that day by those words did not mean you by that person. Rather
it was a tradition I had quoted for you. Although it is possible that
person who would smear his hands with our blood may be a person from
your family.’

When I told him this he fell silent and did not say anything else. After
we reached our destination one of our supporters came to me with some
people and said to me, ‘May I be sacrificed on you! I saw you in the
caravan of Abu Ja’far (Mansur). You were on an ass while he rode a
horse. His head was bowed towards you and he was speaking to you. As if
he wanted to control you. I said to myself: O flatterer! This is the
proof of God on the creatures and is the real owner of this kingdom and
grandeur. And he is the one whom all the rulers of the world should
follow. And this other person is an oppressor, a tyrant and the slayer
of the children of the prophets and a blood-shedder who spills innocent
blood and whom Allah does not like. At that time he was riding a horse
while you rode an ass. That thought worried me so much and I got such a
doubt that I began to doubt about my life and my religion.’

Imam (a.s) said, “I told you that if you had seen the honor and the
service of the angels who were moving ahead of me and behind me,
Mansur’s kingdom would have become worthless in your view.”

When my follower heard this he said, “Now my heart is satiated.”

And then he asked, “For how long would these people remain in powera And
in which time would Islam become safe from their mischief ?”

I replied to him, “But you don’t know that there is a limit to
everything.”

He said, “Why not! (I know it)”

I said, “If you know when this would occur, before the blink of the eye.
At that time your knowledge would be beneficial to you. Yes! You knew
the position these people have near Allah at that time your hatred to
them will increase. If you and all the people of the earth endeavor to
make more severe the condition in which they are, you are not at all
capable of it. Then Shaitan would not touch you that honor is for Allah,
the Messenger and the believers but the hypocrites do not know.”

Do you not know that one who is in anticipation of our affair and are
patient on difficulties they face, tomorrow he shall be in our army.
Thus whenever you see that truth is extinct and inhabitants of the earth
are destroyed and injustice and oppression have surrounded from all
sides and Quran has become old-fashioned and those things become
apparent in it that are not in it and you see Quran interpreted by
selfish motives and see that religion is inverted like a bowl. (Another
version says: Like water is inverted). And you see people of falsehood
dominating over people of truth and see mischief becoming common but no
one restraining it. Rather the mischief-makers shall be defended and you
will see that transgression is openly committed. Men shall satisfy their
lust with men and women shall satisfy theirs with women. You will see
that the believer assumes silence as his advice will not be accepted.
You will see the transgressor lying and also see that his lies are being
accepted and no one is refuting and falsifying his words. You will see
the young insulting the elders. You will see that dissociating with
relatives has become common. You will see that when a person praises sin
he would do it laughingly

and one who says it will not be refuted. You will see boys will be given
to those whom they give women. You will see women marrying women. You
will see that praise and extolling would increase. You will see that
people spending their wealth on the way of other that God and there
would be none to restrain them and hold back their hands. You will see
that when people see a believer making effort and searching, they would
seek the refuge of Allah that they may not become like him. You will see
a neighbor harassing other neighbor and no one would stop him. You will
see that when a disbeliever sees the poor condition of the believer he
would be elated by his own condition and when he sees corruption
widespread on the earth he would be happy. And you will see that wine is
openly imbibed and people who are gathered around tables do not care
about Allah, the Mighty and the Sublime. You will see that enjoining
good has become extinct. You will see that the transgressor is powerful
and is being defended and praised in deeds disliked by Allah. You will
see that those having the signs (Another version: Those having the
relics) would also face humiliation. You will see that the path of good
is closed and the path of mischief is open and full of people who walk
upon it. You will see that the Holy Ka’ba is rendered empty and people
shall be prevented from its visitation and encouraged to leave it. You
will see each one advising others what he himself hasn’t done. You will
see men dressing up for men and women shall dress up for women (and show
off themselves as they are not). You will see men earning their living
through service and women through their private parts.

You will see women arranging for themselves assemblies like men do. You
will see descendants of Bani Abbas openly committing sodomy and women
becoming men. That is why they dye and comb their hair like ladies make
up their hair for their husbands. Men would spend their wealth for their
private parts. Many people would fight for one man and each of them
would try to put to shame the other.

You will see that one possessing wealth is more respected than a
believer. Usury would be openly practiced and none shall be chastised
about it. You will see a woman praised for her adulterous exploits. The
wife would help and support her husband in committing sodomy with
another man. You will see people helping their ladies in sensual deeds
and they shall be considered the best family men.

You will see the believer always in sorrow, degradation and humiliation.
You will see innovations and adultery common. You will see people
competing with each other in testifying falsely. You will see that the
prohibited has become permissible, the permissible has become
prohibited. You will see people justifying their religion on the basis
of their personal views and opinions and the Book of God and its
commands are rendered useless.

You will see that no one is committing sins in the darkness of the
night. Rather you will see them committing sins in broad daylight. You
will see the believer, except by his heart, cannot refute the evils. You
will see unprecedented wealth being squandered on activities hated by
God. You will see wealthier people more deserving of leadership of the
people. You will see relatives of prohibited degree satisfying each
other and marrying each other. You will see people killed merely on
allegations and doubts. You will see men dropping their shame in
competing for the love of a boy. So much so, that they would sacrifice
their life and wealth on this love.

You will see people denouncing men who go to women for satisfying their
lusts. You will see people living off the adulterous earnings of their
wives knowingly. You will see wives dominating and suppressing their
husbands. They act contrary to their desires and spend money on it. You
will see people hiring out their wife, daughter, and maid for sex and be
satisfied to eat and drink things purchased by such money. And you will
see that false oath is common, chess is played openly and wine is sold
openly and no one is prohibiting it. And you will see Muslim women
giving their kinswomen to disbelievers.

And you will see music and singing very open and common. Muslims would
go beyond that and none shall refrain the other and none shall dare to
prevent him. You will see respectable people humiliated by those whose
power they dread. You will see that the closest people to their leaders
shall be those who speak ill of us, Ahle Bayt and praise those leaders.
You will see that people would find it very difficult to listen to
Quranic recitation while on the other hand, it would be easy and
acceptable for them to listen to impermissible sounds.

You will see people respecting a neighbor for fear of his sharp tongue.
You will see the most truthful people lying. You will see that mischief
is open and tale telling is common. You will see that rebellion and
injustice has come out in open. You will see backbiting has become a
sort of good and jovial manner and people would give glad-tidings to
each other through it. You will see that the aspect of other than Allah
would be found in Hajj and Jihad. You will see the ruler humiliating a
believer because of a disbeliever. You will see destructions dominating
their lives. You will see that human life would become a saleable
commodity. You will see that bloodshed would become an easy and very
common matter.

You will see that someone is standing up for leadership while his sole
aim will be the world and he would introduce himself to be a
harsh-tongued person so that none may dare to oppose him and through it
he may have his purpose solved. You will see that carelessness is
exercised with the Prayer. You will see that the rich has much wealth
collected with him and since he has started hoarding it he has not paid
Zakat on it. You will see that they would take out the corpse out of the
grave, hurt it and sell off its shroud. You will see that there is too
much of topsy-turvy. You will see that people are intoxicated in the
morning and late afternoon without any care for anyone or anything. You
will see them having sexual intercourse with animals. You will see
animals fighting and killing each other.

You will see people going to places of worship and coming back in
condition of having their garments looted. You will see that the hearts
of the people have become hard and their eyes have no shame and the
remembrance of Allah is hard on them and consumption of prohibited would
become open and they would compete with each other in this. You will see
that if a worshipper goes to the worship house he does so with the
intention of showing off, that people may see him. If you see a
jurisprudent is contemplating something other than religious aim it is
that he intends to obtain material gains and worldly power. You will see
that people are supporting only those who are powerful and those who are
victorious without any thought of whether he had been on the right or
wrong.

You will see that those who try to earn through lawful means are
denounced and criticized and those who seek through unlawful means are
respected and praised. You will see such activities in the two holy
sanctuaries of Ka’ba and Medina, that the Almighty Allah does not like
and none would be there to stop it. Rather there would be no obstacle
between them and their ignorance. You will see that music is played
openly in the two sanctuaries. You will see a person issuing good
exhortation but someone would stand up and say that Allah does not want
him to say these things; while he would be considered a well-wisher of
this man. You will see people united in following the people of
mischief. You will see that paths of good are deserted and no one walks
upon them.

You will see that they shake up the dead body and no one would be
disturbed by it. You will see that every year there is increase in
innovations and mischief would increase. You will see that people and
groups do not follow anyone except the rich. You will see that the needs
of the needy are fulfilled laughingly and mockingly and their kindness
shall be for ulterior motives. You will see that the heavenly signs
shall become apparent but none would be afraid of them. You will see
people clinging to each

other like animals and none would consider it bad. Even if they consider
it bad, they would not say anything against it due to the fear of the
people. You will see people spending most of their wealth in ways other
than Allah’s and they would be unwilling to spend even a little on the
way of Allah. And you will see that hurting parents, being disowned by
them or insulting the parents would be common. Parents would be
considered the worst of the people in view of their children. So much
so, children will be pleased when allegations are made against their
parents. You will see women dominating rulership and they would be
having power on everything that fulfills their sensual desires.

You will see children making allegations against their parents and
criticizing them. They would be elated on hearing the news of their
demise. You will see that the conditions reach to such a stage that if a
day passes for a man without having committed any sin, short-selling,
misappropriation, usurpation and wine-drinking he would think that a day
of his life is wasted. You will see the ruler hoarding essential
commodities and the property of the near kindered of the Prophet (a.s)
being distributed unjustly. And he will spend it in gambling and
drinking.

You will see him seeking cure through wine, and he would praise and
recommend it for those who are sick. He would say: Such and such wine is
beneficial for you. He would seek cure from alcohol. You will see people
united in leaving off the enjoining of good and restraining from evil.
You will see that the flag of hypocrites is flying high and the flag of
people of truth missing. You will see callers to Prayer and worshippers
calling Azan and performing prayers for money.

You will see the mosques full of people who do not fear God. They have
gathered to backbite and consume the flesh of the people of truth. They
shall discuss about wine-drinkers. You will see the prayer leader
leading prayer in a state of intoxication. Such that he would not
understand what he is reciting and none

would denounce him. Rather if he is intoxicated, people would respect
him due to fear and leave him alone. They would not pursue him; rather
they would consider him worthy of being excused. You will see people who
usurp the property of orphans praised. You will see judges issuing
judgments against divine commands. You will see rulers, because of
greed, seeking refuge of those who misappropriate.

You will see the guardians giving off the wealth to transgressors and
sinners against Allah rather than pay the inheritance according to
religious law. They would accept their bribes as fees. And they shall
leave him free so that inheritors may do whatever they like. You will
see people advising good from the pulpit but themselves not acting upon
it. You will see that Prayer is not recited on time and preference will
not be accorded for praying at the earliest hour. You will see charity
(Sadaqah) and alms are being paid on the basis of recommendation. And in
it there would be no intention of seeing Allah’s pleasure but it would
be only because people are petitioning. You will see that people are
free in satisfying carnal desires and they do not care what they eat and
where they fulfill their lust. You will see that the world is moving
towards the people.

You will see that the signs of religion have become outdated, antiquated
and old. Then beware of such a day for the sake of Allah and beseech the
Almighty for salvation. Know that in such days people shall be deep in
divine chastisement. And if the Almighty Allah has given them respite it
is because you must wait for the time Allah has appointed for a matter.
You must try to be such that you are opposed to these types of people so
that if chastisement descends upon them, you may soon reach the mercy of
Allah. If their chastisement is delayed and they fall into it, you may
be out of their midst; you must not be the one who has dared to disobey
Allah. You should know that the Almighty Allah does not waste the
rewards of the good doers. And the mercy of Allah is near to the
righteous ones.”<sup>[1]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Rauzatul Kafi, Vol. 8, Pg. 36-42

Here we conclude our discussion about traditions that speak about the
signs of the Day of Judgment. These traditions clearly show that the
moral and ethical level of the people shall be at the lowest and they
shall be mired in the filths of ignorance. It is very likely that these
would also be the signs of the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s).

### Advent of Dajjal (Anti-Christ)

One of the sure signs of reappearance of His Eminence, the Awaited Imam,
is the advent of Dajjal. He would misguide the thinking of the people
and Jews would accept him and become attached to him and be fond of him.
Dajjal would deceive the gullible people with wealth and money. He would
become so powerful that he would control some parts of the Islamic
world. Here we shall explain some things related to him.

Emphasis of traditions for the advent of Dajjal
-----------------------------------------------

Traditions are emphatic that Dajjal would appear before the advent of
His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s). Here are some of these traditions:

1. Hisham bin Aamir has narrated from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that
he said, “There is nothing greater than Dajjal between the Creation of
Adam and the Day of Judgment.”<sup>[1]</sup>

2. Anas bin Malik has related from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he
said, “All prophets have warned about the liar Dajjal. But on Dajjal’s
forehead is the inscription that he is a disbeliever.”<sup>[2]</sup>

3. Asma binte Yazid has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (a.s) was
in her house when there was a discussion about Dajjal and he (a.s) said,
“His tenure shall be for three years. In one year, it would rain for a
third of the year and for the rest two-thirds of the year there would be
drought. In the second year the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar, Pg. 324 [2] Iqdud Durar, Pg. 323

earth and sky would have no rain and cultivation, thus all cattle and
quadrupeds would perish. The most terrible mischief of the Dajjal is
that he would come to a Bedouin and say, ‘If I bring your dead camel
back to life would you not accept me as your Lorda’ The Bedouin would
reply, ‘Yes!’ Thus Satans will appear in the form of a fitful camel with
huge udders and long teeth and go to the man whose brother and father
have died and say to him, ‘If we bring your brother and father back to
life would you not create a belief in our divinity ?’ He would reply,
‘Yes!’ At that time the satans will appear in the form of his brother
and father.”

Asma says: His Eminence left the house for some work and then returned.
The people in his house were still shocked and sorrowful due to what
they had heard from the Prophet about Dajjal. Then, His Eminence took me
near the door and asked, “Are you perplexed and worried ?”

Asma replied, “O Allah’s Messenger! The discussion about Dajjal has made
me distraught.”

The Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “If Dajjal appears and I am alive I
would stand up to confront him and I would prevent his deceits.
Otherwise my Lord would be the protector and defender of every
believer.”<sup>[1]</sup>

4. Abu Amama Bahili has quoted the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he
said, “From the time the Almighty Allah created Adam, there had been no
mischief greater than that of Dajjal. All prophets have issued warnings
against the mischief of Dajjal. I am the last of them (prophets) and you
are the last community. On the basis of this, Dajjal is sure to appear
in this community…He would be between Syria and Iraq and wherever he
goes he would create chaos and confusion. I am explaining in a way no
prophet has explained. Then he (Dajjal) would say, ‘I

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar, Pg. 329

am a Prophet and after me there is no prophet.’ Then he would say, ‘I am
your Lord.’ From his mischiefs is the claim that Hell and heaven are
with him (in his control). Then his hell is heaven and his heaven, hell.
And whoever falls into his Hell should seek refuge of Allah and recite
Surah Kahf so that it becomes cool and safety for him. Just as the fire
became such for Ibrahim. And from his mischief is that he shall say to a
Bedouin, ‘If I bring your parents back to life would you testify that I
am your lorda’ He would reply, ‘Yes!’ At that time two Satans shall come
in the form of his parents and tell him. ‘O Son, obey him, because he is
your Lord.’”<sup>[1]</sup>

Titles of Dajjal
----------------

His name is not clear but he would be famous by the titles of ‘Aawar’
(one-eyed) and Dajjal. Another title of his is ‘Christ’. It is due to
the following reasons:

(a) His eye has been rubbed out.

(b) He would conquer the earth from Mecca, Medina to Baitul
Maqdas.<sup>[2]</sup>

Patronymics of Dajjal
---------------------

1- Abu Yusuf

2- ‘Amirus Salem’ or ‘Ilahkar’; these titles are given by
Jews.<sup>[3]</sup>

3- ‘Raees’ – the Christians has given him this title.<sup>[4]</sup>

4- Dictator<sup>[5]</sup>

5- The Great Ruler<sup>[6]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[1]</sup> Iqdud Durar, Pg. 332-334 <sup>[2]</sup> Al-Fitan, Ibne
Kathir, Pg. 172 <sup>[3]</sup> Al-Masih ad-Dajjal, Pg. 237
<sup>[4]</sup> Al-Masih ad-Dajjal, Pg. 238 <sup>[5]</sup> Al-Masih
ad-Dajjal, Pg. 238 <sup>[6]</sup> Al-Masih ad-Dajjal, Pg. 238

Characteristics of Dajjal
-------------------------

The qualities of Dajjal are abhorring and despicable and show his evil
and filthy character. In some traditions of the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
it is mentioned:

1- His left eye is blind.<sup>[1]</sup>

2- His right eye is blind.<sup>[2]</sup>

3- He is blind and the pupils of his eyes are protruding
out.<sup>[3]</sup>

In other words he is one-eyed or he is blind in the right or the left
eye.

4- He is fair complexioned.<sup>[4]</sup> There is redness in his face.

5- He has broad forehead and long neck.<sup>[5]</sup>

6- He has long and curly hair.<sup>[6]</sup>

Fabricated Traditions
---------------------

Zahak has narrated that Dajjal has no beard and has a long mustache and
his face is two yards long and his stature is eighty yards to the sky.
His dress, shoes, saddle and bridle are of gold and precious stones and
there is a crown on his head, set with precious stones…<sup>[7]</sup>

It is not possible for a human being to posses these characteristics and
no other tradition has supported the above report. Therefore it shows
that it is a fabricated tradition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sahih Muslim, Tibrani [2] Bukhari, 4/537 [3] Mustadrak al-Hakim,
4/537 [4] Musnad Ahmad, Tibrani, Az-Zawaid 7/337 [5] Mustadrak al-Hakim,
4/535 [6] Sahih Muslim, 18/62 [7] Al-Unsul Jaleel Bi Tarikhul Quds wal
Khaleel, 1/233

Plight of the Believers under Dajjal
------------------------------------

The people of belief shall be troubled and oppressed under the tyranny
of Dajjal and some say that nothing is more terrible than the scourge of
Dajjal.<sup>[1]</sup>

Nawawi says, “Dajjal is a person to whose scourge the Almighty Allah
would subject the people and install him upon some of the destined
affairs.<sup>[2]</sup> Through him some of the signs and miracles, like
the rain etc. shall be brought out. And this would cause many people to
be deceived by him. But the Almighty Allah would make his tactics known
to the people of faith. However the gullible and simple-minded people
shall be fooled by him.”<sup>[3]</sup>

It is narrated from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he said, “How
shall you be when a man shall be controlling the streams and fruits of
the earth and you are involved with hima While he would provide food to
whosoever follows him and he would turn him into a
disbeliever.”<sup>[4]</sup>

The aim of Dajjal is mischief, calamities and tests of the people. One
who brings faith in him has exited from Islam. One who denies him shall
be a believer, whose heart the Almighty Allah has prepared for faith.
Faith has become deep-rooted in him. However, Dajjal shall wreak the
worst of the tortures on the believers.

Followers of Dajjal
-------------------

As for the followers and supporters of Dajjal—most of them shall be
Jews—are the actual source of mischief in the world. It is narrated from
the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he said, “The first supporters of
Dajjal would be seventy thousand Jews

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kitabus Sunnah Ibne Hasim, 1/173 [2] Sahih Muslim, 18/58 [3]
Al-Fatawi al-Kubra, Ibne Taiymiyah 20/456, At-Tawatur, Pg. 368 [4]
Az-Zawaid, Tibrani 7/346

wearing silk garments and the Jew magicians and sooth-sayers that
deceive the people – shall be with him.”<sup>[1]</sup>

In another tradition it has come that, “Seventy thousand Jews of Isfahan
shall become followers of Dajjal; they shall be wearing
skins.”<sup>[2]</sup>

Also 13000 women would follow him. The Messenger of Allah (a.s) says, “A
group of people would go out to him and shall be deceived by his
propaganda and the greedy people shall become his supporters.”

It is quoted in prophetic traditions that, “Some communities would
gather around Dajjal and say, ‘We are with him so that we may get food
from him and we know that he is an infidel.’ Thus when the divine
chastisement descends, it would fall on all of them.”<sup>[3]</sup>

Faith of Jews on Dajjal
-----------------------

The Jews would bring faith on Dajjal and consider him their greatest
leader and guide. They would think that he is the promised savior of
their scriptures. They shall say, “He is that same savior, in whose
anticipations we had been for a long time. He is the same person
described in our Holy Book.”

The actual cause of the Jews having faith in Dajjal is their animosity
towards Islam and very soon Dajjal would battle against Muslims; which
in fact is the ultimate aim of Jews and Zionists.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Masih ad-Dajjal, Pg. 248 [2] Al-Masih ad-Dajjal, Pg. 249 [3]
Al-Masih ad-Dajjal, Pg. 549

### Signs of the advent of Dajjal

Among the portents of advent of Dajjal are: Widespread oppression,
injustice and usurpation of rights, corruption, discords, ill manners,
deviations and other social evils. It is mentioned in a tradition of the
Holy Prophet (a.s) that he said, “Five years prior to the advent of
Dajjal there shall be drought and nothing shall be cultivated. Such that
all the hoofed animals shall perish.”

Dajjal would bring food for them so that he may deceive them and prevent
them from the path of God. It is that time when hunger would melt their
bodies and in a condition that technology shall fail to provide food to
the people.

A tradition says, “We know what Dajjal has; there are two streams with
him; one of them is of white water and other of blazing flames of
fire.”<sup>[1]</sup>

Treasures under Dajjal’s control
--------------------------------

One of the tortures of Dajjal is that the treasures of the earth would
come under his control. It has come in traditions that: Dajjal would
pass by a ruin and say to it: Throw out your treasure. The ruin would
also bring out its treasure.<sup>[2]</sup>

In another tradition it is mentioned that Dajjal would say to the earth:
Sprout forth. And the earth would also sprout forth
vegetation.<sup>[3]</sup> The meaning of these acts is that in order to
achieve his aim and to deviate the people, Dajjal would resort to magic
and sorcery. Thus magic is that sole weapon and medium that would
dominate over people who are gullible and the general public, which does
not have knowledge and piety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Muslim, 18/61 [2] Al-Masih ad-Dajjal [3] Al-Masih ad-Dajjal

The End of Dajjal
-----------------

The end of this dangerous criminal and sinner shall be at the hands of
the Awaited Imam (a.s), the Great reformer of humanity. His Eminence,
Imam Sadiq (a.s) narrates from his father and he from his great
grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he mentioned about the
advent of Dajjal, the place of his appearance and some of his
characteristics and said that the Dajjal would claim divinity and on the
first day of his appearance, seventy thousand Jews of illegitimate
birth, habitual drinkers, singers, musician, bedouins and women shall
follow him.

He said, “Then Dajjal would make fornication, sodomy and all sinful
activities lawful. So that people may have illicit relationships with
women and children openly on the roads. His followers shall be prolific
in consuming pork, wine and all types of sinful acts. They would obtain
control over various areas of the earth except Mecca, Medina and shrines
of the Holy Imams (a.s). At the time when his transgression would exceed
all limits and the earth full of his oppression and his followers, one
behind whom Isa bin Maryam (a.s) shall pray would slay him. And that
person is Imam Mahdi (a.s).”<sup>[1]</sup>

For the sake of Zionism, Dajjal would continue to increase terrorist
attacks and keep on increasing corruption and destruction. He would rise
up to fight against God. His end shall be at the hands of the greatest
reformer of society, His Eminence, the Remnant of Allah, the Great
(Baqiyatullah-il-Aazam).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Muntakhabul Athar, Pg. 480

### Advent of Sufyani

One of the sure signs of the reappearance of the Awaited Imam (a.s) is
the advent of Sufyani who is one of the pillars of mischief and
corruption on the earth. We shall discuss in brief about him also.

Sufyani’s Lineage
-----------------

Some sources explain that Sufyani is from the lineage of Khalid bin
Yazid the great grandson of Abu Sufyan, the oldest enemy of the Holy
Prophet (a.s) and Islam. Actually this clan was nurtured for the sole
purpose of animosity towards Islam, Quran and wickedness.

Physical features of Sufyani
----------------------------

He shall be having a fat body and a swollen face and there is a white
spot on his eye.<sup>[1]</sup>

Sufyani’s Character
-------------------

Sufyani shall be having a mischievous temperament and oppressive nature
towards people. Actually, he shall be a person who has transmogrified
and the filthiest of them. When appears, he would have children killed
and bellies of women slit.<sup>[289]</sup> He would put righteous people
to death and commit the worst of deeds and destructions.

### Tradition of His Eminence, Ali (a.s) regarding Sufyani

His Eminence, Ali (a.s) issued an important and detailed narration
regarding the crimes, oppressions and tyrannies of Sufyani. After His
Eminence mentioned the name of Sufyani he said, “He is the accursed one
in the heavens and the earth and the most oppressive of the creatures of
Allah…Thus he would

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar [2] Iqdud Durar

appear suddenly, and greedy and hateful people would gather around him
and their figure shall reach 50000. Then he would send them to the Kalb
tribe. They would come towards him like floodwaters. At that time
Berbers shall fight with Abbaside rulers and they are from Dailamites,
Turks and non-Arabs. They shall have black flags and Berbers shall have
yellow flags while the flag of Sufyani shall be red. They shall have a
severe battle in the center of the Jordan valley and 60000 men shall be
killed and as a result of this Sufyani would be victorious and he shall
adjudicate regarding them so that the sayer says, ‘Nothing but lies have
been told about him.’ By Allah, they themselves are liars. If they
realize what benefits the community of Muhammad has obtained from them,
they would never speak about them in this manner. He would dispense
justice in this way and move forwards and pass by the Euphrates River
and then return to Damascus. He would prepare two armies and send one of
them to Medina and another to the East. However, the army that he
dispatches to the East would kill 70000 people in Zura (Baghdad) and
slit the bellies of 300 women; and from Baghdad it would move to Kufa
and slay some people there also.

The army sent towards Medina would accomplish what it had intended, then
move towards Mecca. When they shall be in the middle of the desert, a
caller would call to them. And he is Jibraeel. Then none would remain
among them except that Allah shall cause them to sink into the earth.
There would be only two survivors. One shall be the giver of
glad-tidings and the other a warner. So the two of them would return to
Sufyani and inform him about the fate of his army. These two persons
shall be from Juhaina.

After that a group from the descendants of the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
shall flee towards Rome. Sufyani would ask the ruler of Rome to send
them back and the Roman king would deport them. Then Sufyani would slay
them in the eastern side of the Damascus Mosque and none would say
anything against it. Then

70000 persons would move to Kufa and Basra. They would surround the
cities, kill the enemies, burn the Quran, demolish mosques, make
unlawful as lawful, make sinful acts lawful and make everything that
Allah had made obligatory on them as unlawful. They will not refrain
from any transgression and sinful act. On the basis of their animosity
towards the Progeny of the Messenger, they would put to death anyone
having the name of Ahmad, Muhammad, Ali, Ja’far, Hamzah, Hasan, Husain,
Fatima, Zainab, Ruqaiyyah, Umme Kulthum, Khadijah or Aatika.

After that they would collect children, boil olive oil for them, and
kill them. Children would plead that even if their parents had opposed
them, they have caused them no harm. He would take out two children from
them named Hasan and Husain and crucify them.

Then they would rush to Kufa and do the same thing with children there.
Here also two children, named Hasan and Husain would be crucified at the
Mosque gate. Their blood would boil like the blood of Yahya bin Zakaria.
So when he sees them he would become certain that calamity and death is
inevitable. After that he would go Syria and not bear to see anyone
opposing him. When he enters Syria he would make wine and sinful
activities lawful for himself and his followers and command them for
these acts. Sufyani will come out openly armed and catch a woman and
throw her towards his companions and tell them to rape her. They would
rape her in the middle of the road and then slit her belly and take out
the fetus from her and none would raise any voice against it. Then
angels of God would become restless in the heavens. At that time the
Almighty Allah would command Jibraeel to scream over the festivities of
Damascus, ‘O community of Muhammad! The refuge and shelter has arrived.
Your release has come. This is Mahdi, who has arisen from Mecca. So
harken to him.’”

Then His Eminence, Ali (a.s) explained the characteristics of Imam Mahdi
(a.s), characteristics and number of his followers, the Hasanid Sayyid
who would pledge allegiance to him etc.

“And clamor would arise in Syria that the Bedouins of Hijaz are moving
towards them. Then Sufyani shall ask his companions, ‘What do you think
about this communitya’ They would reply, ‘They are archers and camel
riders while we are strong and armed with weapons. Take us out so that
we may confront them.’ They think that Sufyanis are fearful and he knows
what is expected of him. After that 260 persons shall come out and reach
Hira (Tiberia) and Mahdi shall also move forward and on his way no town
or city comes but that it gives the message of peace, security and glad
tidings. Jibraeel shall be to his right and Mikaeel to his left and
people would join him from all sides. In these circumstances there is
confrontation with Sufyani at Tiberia. The Almighty Allah sends His
wrath on Sufyani and his followers and all the creatures, including the
bird are wrathful on Sufyani and his followers hitting him with their
wings and feathers. The mountains hit the Sufyani army with stones and
the Almighty Allah destroys the army of Sufyani. Due to the defeat they
flee the battlefield and a man named Sabah, a follower of Imam, arrests
Sufyani and brings him to Imam Mahdi (a.s) while he was concluding his
night Prayer (Isha). The Imam concludes his Prayer and comes out to see
that a turban is put around the neck of Sufyani and is being pulled.
After that Sufyani is left with the Imam and he addresses the Imam, ‘O
cousin! Have pity on me so that I may survive. I give you my word that I
would be your sword and fight your enemies.’ While he (the Imam) is
among his companions he says, ‘Catch hold of him.’

The companions would ask, ‘O son of the daughter of the Messenger of
Allah! Would you let him live while he has killed the descendants of the
Messenger of Allah ?’

His Eminence shall say, ‘The decision is upon you.’

Sabah along with a group of people would take Sufyani near Sidra, behead
him and bring his severed head to His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s). Then
Shias of Mahdi shall glance at the

severed head and raise slogans of ‘Allah is the Greatest. There is no
God except Allah and Praise be to Allah.’ Then His Eminence would
command them to bury it.’”<sup>[1]</sup>

Since the chain of narrators of this tradition is authentic it provides
a detailed account the circumstances of Sufyani, that he shall be a
sinful and tyrannical fellow who would render the prohibited of God as
lawful. And that his end shall be at the powerful hands of His Eminence,
the Wali of Allah, the Greatest.

### Duration of Sufyani’s Rule

The period of Sufyani’s rule and his oppression shall last for eight
months. In this brief time span he would exceed all limits in wreaking
havoc and terror. He shall slay the righteous and during his tenure the
hope of the weak, the deprived and the oppressed, His Eminence, Imam
Mahdi (a.s) shall reappear.

Black Flags
-----------

Another sure sign of the reappearance is the formation of Islamic army,
which would raise up black standards and it is strongly conjectured that
the black flags shall be for the sake of the mourning for the chief of
the martyrs and the beloved grandson of the Messenger of Allah (a.s),
Imam Husain (a.s). Here we narrate some traditions on this subject:

1. Thauban narrates from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he said,
“When you see black flags approaching from Khorasan, join them, because
the Caliph of God, His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) is among
them.”<sup>[2]</sup>

2. Hasan narrates from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that His Eminence
mentioned the calamities that would befall his Ahle Bayt (a.s) and then
said, “Till the time the Almighty Allah brings out the black flags from
east; and He shall help all those who

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Mahdi Maood Al-Muntazar, 2/97-100 quoted from Iqdud Durar [2]
Kanzul Ummal, 7/182

help it. And whosoever causes disrespect to him shall be degraded by
Allah. Till the time they shall gather near a person having my name and
entrust their affairs to his guardianship (Wilayat). Then the Almighty
Allah would support and help him.”<sup>[1]</sup>

3. Jabir has quoted from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) that he said, “The
flags that arrive from Khorasan shall reach Kufa. And when His Eminence,
Imam Mahdi (a.s) reappears from Mecca, these flags shall go towards him
and pledge allegiance to him.”

4. Abdullah bin Masud says, “We were with the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
and suddenly we saw that some Hashemite youths approached and upon
seeing them, His Eminence became worried and his eyes opened wide and
his complexion changed. I asked, ‘O Allah’s Messenger! What’s wrong with
youa Why your mood has changed suddenlya’ He replied, ‘We and my Ahle
Bayt, the Almighty Allah has selected for us the Hereafter over the
world. Very soon my Ahle Bayt shall fall into calamities, arrests and
flights. Till the time groups will come from east, holding black flags.
Then they would not get anything but good. They would fight a battle and
they shall be victorious and whatever they desire shall be given to them
but they shall not accept it. A person from my Ahle Bayt would be given
the power to fill the earth with justice and equity, as it would be full
of injustice and oppression. Whomsoever of you reaches them should join
that group.’”

5. Jalaluddin Suyuti quoted the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he said,
“Black flags shall come out of Khorasan and nothing could halt their
movement till they reach Eliya.”

Ibne Kathir says, “These are not flags of Abu Muslim Khorasani that the
Umayyads may destroy. Rather they are some other flags that shall be
with His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s).”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Malahim wal Fitan, Ibne Tawus 1/100

6. Abu Tufail Aamir narrated from His Eminence, Ali (a.s) that he said,
“O Aamir! Whenever you hear that flags are moving from Khorasan, and you
are in a casket and it is locked, you must break the lock so that you
may lay your life below those flags. If you are not able to break it,
you must overturn it so that you may reach under the flags.”

Others traditions that prove that black flags would appear from the east
or from Khorasan, imply that it is the preface to the reappearance of
His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s).

### Voice from the Sky

One of the sure signs of the reappearance of the Awaited Imam is the
voice of the angel of sky giving glad-tidings of the reappearance of His
Eminence and it would invite people towards the Imam. There are there
kinds of traditions in this regard:

First Group of Traditions
-------------------------

This group clearly says that when the Awaited Imam (a.s) reappears there
would be an angel above his blessed head proclaiming: This is the same
Mahdi, so follow him.

(a) Abdullah bin Umar narrated from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he
said, “The Mahdi shall reappear and there would be a cloud above him and
in it shall be angel proclaiming: This is the Caliph of Allah and the
same Mahdi, so obey him.”<sup>[1]</sup>

(b) Abu Naeem quoted from Ibne Umar that the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
said, “The Mahdi shall reappear in such a way that an angel shall
proclaim above his head: This is the same Mahdi, who is the Caliph of
Allah. So follow him. And people would bring faith on him and his love
shall enter the hearts of the people. He is one who shall rule over the
east and the west and those who pledge allegiance to him first shall be
same as the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Arful Wurdi, 2/61

number of Badr fighters. They shall give allegiance to him between Rukn
and Maqam.”<sup>[1]</sup>

(c) Abu Naeem quotes from Ibne Umar that the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
said, “The Mahdi shall reappear in such a way that an angel shall
proclaim from above his head: This Mahdi is the Caliph of Allah. So obey
and follow him.”<sup>[2]</sup>

Second Group of Traditions
--------------------------

An angel shall proclaim from the sky that the Awaited Imam (a.s) has
reappeared, so you all follow him:

(a) His Eminence, Imam Reza (a.s) said, “When His Eminence, Imam Mahdi
(a.s) reappears, the earth shall be illuminated by his effulgence and
scales of justice shall be established among people. Then none shall
oppress the others and the earth shall be at his disposal. A caller
shall proclaim from the sky and all the inhabitants of earth shall hear
it: Know that, the Proof of God has reappeared near the House of God.
The truth is in him and with him. So you all follow him. And that is the
saying of Allah when He says:

**If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven so
that their necks should stoop to it.”<sup>[3]</sup>**

(b) Rabi bin Kharrash narrates from Huzaifah regarding the tradition
about Sufyani that he said, “When the slaves who have fled from Rome
reach the gates of Damascus a caller shall proclaim from the sky: O
People! The time of the oppressors, hypocrites and their followers is
over and the best of the Progeny of Muhammad (a.s) that is the same
Mahdi, the master of guardianship over you has arrived. Then go and join
him at Mecca.”<sup>[4]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Isafur Raghibeen, printed on the margins of Nurul Absar, Pg. 127-130
[2] Faraidus Simtain [3] Surah Shoara 26:4 [4] Al-Malahim wal Fitan,
3/104

(c) Huzaifah Yamani narrated from the Prophet of Islam (a.s) that he
said, “At that time – that is during the tyranny of Sufyani – a voice
shall proclaim from the sky: O people! Almighty Allah has ended the
reign of the tyrants and oppressors and the best member of the community
of Muhammad, that is His Eminence, Mahdi is appointed as your guardian.
So join him at Mecca.”<sup>[1]</sup>

(d) His Eminence, Ali (a.s) said, “Await for the reappearance of the
Awaited One on three occasions.” He was asked what those three occasions
area He replied, “When the Syrians fight among themselves, when black
flags arrive from Khorasan and when there is terror and fear in the
month of Ramadan.” His Eminence was asked as to what is the terror and
fear of the month of Ramadana He replied, “A caller will proclaim from
the sky in such a way that all those who are asleep shall wake up and
all those awake shall be shook up. A young maiden shall come out from
behind the veil and all shall hear the heavenly call. And whoever comes
from whichever side would say: I have also heard the voice.”

(e) His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (a.s) said, “When the caller proclaims
from the sky: The Truth is indeed with the Progeny of Muhammad – That is
the same time when His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) shall reappear and
people shall become prosperous and the matter of the reappearance of His
Eminence, will become known to all.”<sup>[2]</sup>

Third Group of Traditions
-------------------------

This group states that the angel who proclaims from the sky giving glad
tidings of the reappearance of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s), is
Jibraeel:

His Eminence, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) says, “That call shall be raised
in the month of Ramadan on Friday Eve. So pay

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar, Chap. 3, Tradition 49 [2] Al-Malahim wal Fitan, Pg. 36

heed to it and obey it. And at the end of the day the accursed Shaitan
would raise a call that such and such – probably Sufyani – has been
killed unjustly. He would make the people fall into doubt and on that
day many people shall be perplexed.” His Eminence said, “If you hear the
call in the beginning of the month of Ramadan do not doubt it as that
call is from Jibraeel and its sign is that he would call by the name of
Mahdi and his father.”<sup>[1]</sup>

### Jesus shall pray behind Imam Mahdi (a.s)

Among the sure signs of the reappearance of His Eminence, the Master of
the Age (a.s) is the coming down on earth of His Eminence, Jesus Christ
and his paying allegiance to and praying behind in congregation Prayers
led by His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s). When Christians see him, they
shall bring faith on Islam and embrace it and abandon Christianity.

1. The Prophet of Islam (a.s) said, “Isa bin Maryam shall descend to the
earth at dawn, decked in Mahar and Deen. And Mahar and Deen are two
pieces of saffron garments. He shall be fair complexioned and his hair
would be red, shinning and thin. It would be as if oil is dripping from
his hair. In his hand he shall hold a weapon with which he shall break
the cross, kill the pig and destroy Dajjal and recover the Imam’s
property and the People of the Cave shall walk behind him. And he shall
be the vizier, the right hand, the guard and protector of the Qaim of
the Progeny of Muhammad. He shall spread peace in the East and the
West.”<sup>[2]</sup>

2. After the description of the scourge of Dajjal, His Eminence, Ali
(a.s) says, “When it would be Friday and the people would be ready for
Prayers, Isa bin Maryam shall descend to the earth wearing two pieces of
bright garments. As if oil is dripping from

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar, Chap. 4, Tradition 148 [2] Ghayatul Maraam, Pg. 697
quoted from Tafsir of Thalabi

his hair, he shall have an elegant face and he shall resemble Prophet
Ibrahim (a.s) greatly. Then His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) would glance
at him and say, ‘O Son of the Chaste lady (Maryam)! You lead the
Prayer.’ Jesus Christ would reply, ‘Leading the Prayers is your
prerogative.’ Then Imam Mahdi (a.s) would step forward and lead the
congregation Prayer and Christ would pray behind him. Then he would pay
allegiance to him. When His Eminence, Isa (a.s) comes out he would see
Dajjal taunting; he (Dajjal) would melt like lead.”<sup>[1]</sup>

3. Saeed bin Jubair has narrated from Ibne Abbas that the Messenger of
Allah (a.s) said, “My Caliphs and successors are twelve persons, first
of whom is my brother and the last my great grandson.” He was asked, “O
Allah’s Messenger! Who is your brothera” He replied, “Ali bin Abi
Talib.” He was asked, “Who is your great grandsona” He replied, “Mahdi,
who shall fill the earth with justice and equity like it would be
fraught with injustice and oppression. By the One in Whose hands is my
life! Even if a day remains for the earth, the Almighty Allah will
prolong this day till my son, Mahdi reappears and Isa bin Maryam
descends to the earth and recites prayer behind His Eminence. The earth
shall be illuminated from the east to the west.”<sup>[2]</sup>

4. Abu Amama Bahili has related that the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
recited a sermon for us and spoke about the Dajjal and his mischief.
Then he said, “And the Imam of the people is a righteous and worthy
person, who would be His Eminence, the Mahdi. It would be told to His
Eminence to lead the Morning Prayer and when he recites the Takbir
(Allaaho Akbar) and begins the prayer, Isa Ibne Maryam shall descend and
when Imam Mahdi (a.s) sees him, he shall recognize him. He would slowly
move behind till Isa bin Maryam becomes ahead of him. However Isa (a.s)
would put his hand on his shoulder and say,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Iqdud Durar, Tradition 352 [2] Faraidus Simtain, Ghayatul Maraam,
Pg. 43

“You lead the prayer, as the establishment of prayer is for you.” Then
Isa (a.s) shall recite his prayers behind His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s)
and then say, “Open the gates,” and gates shall be opened and there
shall appear Dajjal with 70000 armed Jews. When Dajjal sees Prophet Isa
(a.s) he shall melt like lead melts in fire or like the ice melts in
water and is dissolved in it…”<sup>[1]</sup>

5. Muhiyyuddin Arabi says, “Know that His Eminence, Mahdi – May Allah,
the High, hasten his reappearance – when he reappears, all Muslims shall
be in a prosperous condition and people of God shall accept his
invitation. They shall help him and be his deputies as they would be
responsible for important functions of his government. Isa bin Maryam
shall descend to the white minaret on the east of Damascus while an
angel shall be on his right and another on his left and he shall meet
His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s).”<sup>[2]</sup>

Although numerous narrations prove the descent of His Eminence, Jesus
Christ from the sky and also mention that Isa (a.s) shall pay the oath
of fealty at the hands of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) and assist him
in truth and justice.

Although other signs and portents like the advent of Yamani, killing of
the Pure Soul (Nafs-e-Zakiyyah), rising of the sun from the west etc.
have been recorded in traditional sources we have refrained from quoting
them here. Those who desire may refer to the concerned books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Mahdi al-Maood, 2/236, quoted from Al-Malahim wal Fitan 2/110 [2]
Al-Futuhat-e-Makkiyyah

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](26.htm)[  
 Back](32.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](28.htm)[  
 Next](34.htm)
