Time and Venue of the Reappearance of His Eminence, the Master of the Age (a.s)
===============================================================================

Here we shall discuss in brief traditions of the Messenger of Allah
(a.s) regarding the time and place of reappearance of His Eminence,
system of his government and the special characteristics of the
companions of His Eminence.

Time of Reappearance
--------------------

As for the time of the reappearance of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s),
it would be a Saturday of the month of Mohurrum. It shall be the day
when the chief of the martyrs, Imam Husain (a.s) was martyred (10th
Mohurrum).

1. Abu Basir narrated from Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s) that he said, “Our
Qaim shall reappear on Saturday, the day of Ashura – the day when Imam
Husain (a.s) was martyred.”<sup>[1]</sup>

2. Ali Ibne Mahziyar narrated from His Eminence, Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s) that he said, “As if I am seeing the Qaim on a Saturday, the day
of Ashura, standing between Rukn and Maqam and Jibraeel is in the front
calling that oath of fealty be given to him for the sake of God. Then he
shall fill the earth with justice and equity like it would have been
full of injustice and oppression.”<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kamaluddin [2] Ghaybah, Shaykh Tusi

3. Abu Basir narrated from Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s) that he said, “Our
Qaim shall not reappear but in an odd numbered year, like one, three,
five, seven or nine, on the day of Ashura and (it would be) a Saturday.
He shall stand between Rukn and Maqam and someone standing before him
would be calling: ‘Allegiance, allegiance!’ Thus the helpers of His
Eminence shall rush towards him from all around the world and give
allegiance to him. Then through him the Almighty Allah would fill the
earth with justice and equity, just as it would have been filled with
injustice and oppression. Then he would move from Mecca to Kufa and camp
at Najaf. From there he would dispatch his armies to various
cities.”<sup>[1]</sup>

Time of the call of the Angel
-----------------------------

As for the time of the call of the angel or Jibraeel and his
glad-tidings about the reappearance of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) it
is the eve of 23rd of the month of Ramadan. Some of the traditions about
this are as follows:

Muhammad bin Muslim says: A person asked His Eminence, Imam Ja'far Sadiq
(a.s), “When would your Qaim reappeara” He replied, “When misguidance
shall be more and guidance less… at such time, with the blessed name of
Qaim on the eve of the 23rd of the month of Ramadan a call shall be
issued and he would arise on the day of Ashura.”<sup>[2]</sup>

And it is said that the call of the angel is in the month of Ramadan and
the reappearance of His Eminence is in the month of Shawwal of an odd
numbered year.<sup>[3]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Muntakhab al-Athar, Pg. 465, quoted from Kashful Astar, Pg. 181 [2]
Kashful Astar, Pg. 181 [3] Yanabiul Mawaddah, Pg. 194

Widespread Power of the Imam of the Time (a.s)
----------------------------------------------

His Eminence, the Awaited Imam (a.s) is the first ruler of Islam whose
dominion shall stretch from the east to the west and in the world there
would be no command without his command.

1. Ibne Abbas has narrated from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he
said, “Caliphs, successors and proofs of God on the creatures, after me
are twelve persons. The first of them is my brother and the last of them
is my (great grand) son.” It was asked, “O Messenger of Allah (a.s)! Who
is your brothera” He replied, “Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s).” He was asked,
“Who is your sona” He replied, “Mahdi, who would fill the earth with
justice and equity just as it would have been fraught with injustice and
oppression. By the One Who has sent me as a giver of glad tidings, even
if a solitary day remains for the tenure of the world, the Almighty
Allah shall prolong this day till my son, Mahdi reappears in it, then
His Eminence, the Spirit of Allah, Jesus son of Maryam shall descend
(from the heavens) and stand to pray behind the Imam and the earth shall
be washed in divine light and his rule shall surround the east and the
west.”<sup>[1]</sup>

2. Abu Saeed Khudri narrated from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that he
said, “The world shall not end till a man from my Ahle Bayt (a.s) is at
the helm of affairs and fills the earth with justice and equity just as
it would have been fraught with injustice and oppression…”<sup>[2]</sup>

3. Abdullah Ibne Abbas narrated from the Messenger of Allah (a.s) that
he said, “Four persons had been absolute rulers on the earth, two were
believers and two infidels. Thus the two believing ones were Dhulqarnain
and Sulaiman Hashmatullah and the two infidels were Bakht-e-Nasr and
Nimrod and soon the fifth one, a person from my Ahle Bayt (a.s) shall be
its undisputed ruler.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Faraidus Simtain, Yanabiul Mawaddah, Pg. 447 [2] Al-Arful Wardi, Pg.
2/63

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](27.htm)[  
 Back](33.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](29.htm)[  
 Next](35.htm)
