Dedication
==========

To the designer of the human civilization that is established on the
Unity of Almighty Allah… To the redeemer of human volition and thought…
To the Seal of the Prophets and the Master of all beings; the Holy
Prophet Muhammad—peace be upon him and his Household… I dedicate this
survey on the Seal of his Successors, the Reviver of his Faith, and the
resuscitator of his Mission: Imam al-Mahdi, peace be upon him who shall
fill the earth with justice and righteousness after it will be filled
with injustice and prejudice. I thus hope for acceptance so that I will
keep it as reservoir for the day on which I shall meet Almighty Allah.

O my Master! The whole world is looking forward to receiving your
delightful advent so that you shall raise the standard of justice, very
high and fluttering; and you shall spread security and luxury over the
peoples of the world and the inhabitants of this globe; and you shall
save human beings from the dooms of the oppressors and the persecutions
of the terrorists; and you shall fold the frivolous political regimes
that have violated all the sanctities of Almighty Allah, abused all
human rights, transmuted the earth into hell, and exhausted the fortunes
of the peoples on making destructive weapons that are destroying “the
crops and the cattle” while millions of people are starving!

O My Master! O the hope of the weak and the tortured on this earth! To
you are the eyes of these people turning and for you are they desiring
so that you shall save them from their bitter actualities, establish
social justice in their lands, and distribute the riches of Almighty
Allah among them fairly in order that

hunger and deprivation will no longer snap at the body of anyone under
your authority; rather everybody will live as exactly as Almighty Allah
wants for them to live with comfort and opulence; neither attacked by
humility nor fearing any meekness, nor anticipating any partiality.

O My Master! Ethics have collapsed, virtues have been eliminated, human
race have fallen down to a baseless, lowly level as honesty has
disappeared, fabrication has prevailed, hypocrisy has become common,
social relations have vanished, and man has no longer played his role
that Almighty Allah wanted for him—to act as His representative on this
earth by following the right and seeking the justice.

Consequently, humanity is aspiring after your arrival and hoping for
your government so as to save them from this horrible collapse that is
preparing for the revival of the jungle law.

O My Master! The laws of Islam have been frozen, its commandments have
been impeded, and nothing of it has remained except the name. Here it is
crying for your aid so that you may reinforce its marks and bring back
its signs so that the world will flourish with the justice of Islam, the
fearful will be secured, and the enfeebled will be delighted by its
laws.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](00.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
 Next](02.htm)
