System of the Imam’s Government
===============================

The program of the government and his policies shall be mainly concerned
with spreading of truth and justice and making peace and security
general for all the people. His policies shall be based on commands of
the Book of Allah, practice of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) and manners
of his honorable grandfather, Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s). His Eminence shall
be the standard bearer of social justice and one to establish justice
and truth. Here we quote some traditions on this subject:

1. Jabir narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) that he said, “Mahdi
shall reappear in Mecca at the time of Isha (Night Prayer) and the flag,
the dress and the sword of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) shall be with
him and he shall be having the signs of effulgence and mode of speech.
Thus after he completes the Isha Prayer, he shall raise his voice and
say, ‘I would make you remember Almighty Allah while you are in fact in
the service of your Lord. And the proof is complete upon you and the
messengers have been sent and the books have been revealed and they
command you not to associate anything with God and obey Allah and His
Prophet. Whatever the Quran has kept alive you also keep alive and
whatever the Quran destroys you also destroy it. Be supporters of
guidance and remain with piety because the world is soon to end and to
announce its farewell. And I invite you to Allah and the Messenger of
Allah (a.s) and to act on the Book of Allah and to destroy falsehood and
to revive the practice of the Prophet…’”

2. His Eminence, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) said, “When our Qaim
reappears he shall distribute equally and judge between good and bad for
the creatures of Allah.”<sup>[1]</sup>

3. His Eminence, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) said, “When our Qaim
reappears, he shall rule with justice, and injustice and oppression
shall be destroyed and roads shall become safe and the earth shall spill
out its treasures and every right shall be restored to its rightful
owner.”<sup>[2]</sup>

4. His Eminence, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) said, “His Eminence, Mahdi
(a.s) shall ward off oppressions of the people. So much so, that even if
it is held between the teeth, he would restore it to its
owner.”<sup>[3]</sup>

In fact, the method and diplomacy of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) is
only the continuation of the practice of his grandfather, the Messenger
of Allah (a.s) and the legatee and the Gate of the City of the knowledge
of the Holy Prophet (a.s). He would rise up just as they had risen. Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s) was asked about the system of the government of His
Eminence, the Remnant of Allah and the Imam replied, “He would cancel
the past just as the Messenger of Allah (a.s) had done and establish
Islam anew.”<sup>[4]</sup>

### The Imam’s Companions

Companions and helpers of His Eminence shall be persons of piety,
caution, merits and purity. They shall be the best kind of people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Biharul Anwar [2] Al-Irshad [3] Al-Malahim wal Fitan <sup>[4]</sup>
Ghaybat Nomani, Pg. 123

Characteristics of the Companions of Imam Mahdi
-----------------------------------------------

1. Muhammad bin Hanafiyyah has narrated that a person inquired from Imam
Ali (a.s) about Imam Mahdi (a.s) and Ali (a.s) replied, “He shall
reappear in the Last Age.” Then he mentioned the characteristics of his
companions and said, “Then the Almighty Allah shall collect a group of
people near him like pieces of scattered clouds and he shall create love
among themselves and none of them shall be fearful…”<sup>[1]</sup>

This tradition means that companions of His Eminence shall be having
religious insight and the proofs of Allah are complete on them. They
shall not be pleased or sad to see anyone joining or leaving them. Their
hearts are filled with the blessings of Allah and with faith, and they
are appointed for the service of Islam, its significance and the aims of
His Eminence.

2. His Eminence Ali (a.s) has said about their characteristics, “They
shall be a group that does not oblige Allah by its patience. And they do
not consider themselves great while sacrificing their lives on the path
of truth…”<sup>[2]</sup>

3. His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (a.s) has said regarding their
characteristics, “They are warriors on the path of God and the arrogant
and transgressors consider them lowly. Their worth is not known on the
earth but they are well known in the heavens.”<sup>[3]</sup>

4. Muhiyuddin Arabi said, “The people having divine recognition shall
pay the oath of allegiance to His Eminence and they are the servants of
God who shall harken to the call of His Eminence and become his
supporters. They are those deputies of his who shall take up the
responsibility of the important functions of his government…the Almighty
Allah would select those persons as his deputies whom He has made
cognizant of divine realities.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[1]</sup> Mustadrak Hakim, 4/554 [2] Yanabiul Mawaddah, Pg. 437 [3]
Yanabiul Mawaddah, Pg. 437

Number of the companions of Imam Mahdi (a.s)
--------------------------------------------

As for the number of the companions of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s)
who shall pay allegiance to him are same as the number of the warriors
of Badr, that is 313. Sulaiman bin Haroon Ajali narrated that he heard
His Eminence, Imam Sadiq (a.s) saying, “Indeed the master of this
affair, that is the Qaim of the Progeny of Muhammad is safe, such that
if all the people go away, the Almighty Allah shall bring his companions
and they are the same that are implied in the words of Allah:

*O you who believe! Whoever from among you turns back from his religion,
then Allah will bring a people, He shall love them and they shall love
Him, lowly before the believers, mighty against the
unbelievers…”<sup>[1]</sup>*

And also:

**“…wherever you are, Allah will bring you all
together…”<sup>[2]</sup>**

They shall be the companions of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s). His
Eminence, Imam Ali (a.s) said, “By Allah! I am aware of the companions
of Imam Mahdi (a.s); I know their names, tribes and the names of their
chiefs. These are the people whom Almighty Allah shall gather in ones
and twos from different tribes and communities till they are nine. Then
their number shall reach the warriors of Badr, that is 313 persons. And
that is the saying of Almighty Allah:

*“…wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together; surely Allah has
power over all things.”<sup>[3]</sup>*

So much so, that people would not have time to change and Allah would
make them reach the Imam.<sup>[4]</sup>

Abu Khalid Kabuli narrated from His Eminence, Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s)
that he said, “They are such that they sleep on their beds (It means
that they were asleep and Allah took them

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[1]</sup> Surah Maidah 5:54 [2] Surah Baqarah 2:148 [3] Surah
Baqarah 2:148 [4] Ghaybah, Shaykh Tusi

out and gathered them in Mecca). They are 313 persons, same as the
number of Badr warriors and they shall be in Mecca overnight and that is
the saying of Allah:

*‘…wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together…’<sup>[1]</sup>*

And these are the companions of the Qaim of the Progeny of
Muhammad.”<sup>[2]</sup>

Venue of Allegiance
-------------------

The venue where companions of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) pay the
oath of fealty at his hands is between the Rukn and Maqam, which is the
most sanctified and exalted spots. And a many traditions have been
recorded on this subject.<sup>[3]</sup>

Conditions imposed by the Imam of the time (a.s) for giving allegiance
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Narrators of traditions and historians have mentioned that His Eminence,
the Master of the Age (a.s) would put some conditions for accepting
allegiance. They are as follows:

His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (a.s) after describing the characteristics
of the companions of Imam Mahdi (a.s) mentions the conditions that Imam
Mahdi (a.s) shall impose for those who wish to pay allegiance to him:
They should promise that they shall not steal and commit fornication.
Should not commit murder or defile honor. They must not speak ill to the
Muslims. They must not attack any house and must not kill anyone except
for justification.

(He would mean to say:) You shall not tie bands of gold or wear silk.
You shall not desecrate the mosque and you shall not block the paths.
You shall not oppress the orphans and make the paths insecure. You shall
not resort to intrigue and deceit. You shall

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Baqarah 2:148 [2] Kamaluddin [3] Iqdud Durar, Musnad Ahmad

not usurp the property of the orphans. You shall not commit sodomy,
drink wine and do misappropriation with Imamate and guidance. You shall
not break oaths and promises. You shall not hoard wheat and barely. You
shall not kill the one who has taken asylum with you. Do not pursue
those who flee. Do not shed blood and do not attack an injured person.
Wear coarse garments and prostrate on the bare earth. Eat barely bread
and fight on the way of Allah. Wear perfumes and despise the impure
things.

Meanwhile, His Eminence will impose upon himself the condition that
there shall be no obstacle between him and his followers. All his
activities shall be before them. He shall be satisfied with less and by
the help of Allah he shall fill the earth with justice just as it would
be fraught with oppression. And he shall serve Allah as He ought to be
served…<sup>[1]</sup>

These conditions and characteristics show that the aim of His Eminence
is spreading justice and equality and the establishment of the rule of
Allah on the earth in such a way that no power and value remains for the
tyrants. Also it shows that the ruler and the subjects are eligible for
equity and there shall be no kind of discrimination between different
classes of people except that it be having a firm base. His humility and
his being with the common people shall be among the characteristics of
His Eminence, the Master of the Age, the Remnant of Allah the Great
(a.s).

The Standard-Bearer of Imam Mahdi (a.s)
---------------------------------------

According to traditions, the standard bearer of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi
(a.s) shall be Shuaib, the son of Salih, who shall be the commander of a
huge army. He shall arrive from Khorasan to help and pay oath of
allegiance to Imam Mahdi (a.s).<sup>[2]</sup> And it

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Mahdi Maood 3/11, quoted from Al-Malahim wal Fitan, Ibne Tawus
2/104 [2] Kanzul Ummal, 7/260

is said that he is from the Tamim and he is the one who shall defeat the
Sufyani so that they come to Baitul Maqdas and prepare the ground for
the government of His Eminence, the remnant of Allah. And from the time
of the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s) till the time his command gains
absolute authority, there is a period of 72 months.<sup>[1]</sup>

It is narrated that on the flag of Imam Mahdi (a.s) shall be written:
The allegiance is only for Allah.<sup>[2]</sup> The philosophy behind it
is that the allegiance to His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) is allegiance
to Allah, and his command is the Command of Allah.

### Period of Imam Mahdi’s Government

There is difference of opinion among narrators of traditions as regards
the period of the Imam’s government since there are various narrations
on this subject.

1. The period of his government shall be 40 years and this is narrated
from Imam Ali (a.s).<sup>[3]</sup>

2. It is 30 years<sup>[4]</sup>

3. It is 21 years<sup>[5]</sup>

Abundance of riches and blessings during the reign of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Numerous traditions are recorded that convey that during the period of
the Imam’s government there shall be widespread blessings:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Malahim wal-Fitan, 1/3 [2] Al-Mahdi Maood [3] Al-Bayan
Fi-Akhbaar-e-Sahebuzzman, Minanur Rahman 2/42 [4] Muntakhab Kanzul
Ummal, 6/34 [5] Isafur Raghibeen, Pg. 140

1. Abu Saeed Khudri narrated from the Prophet of Islam (a.s) that he
said, “Mahdi will be from my progeny. In his regime, my nation shall be
bestowed with bounties, without parallel in the history of mankind.
Everything will be available and distributed freely. Wealth and riches
will be in excess. A person shall implore, ‘O Mahdi, give me,’ Imam
(a.s) will reply, ‘Take whatever you please.’”<sup>[1]</sup>

2. Abu Saeed Khudri narrated from the Prophet of Islam (a.s) that he
said, “In the last age of my nation, the Mahdi shall reappear. And the
Almighty Allah would shower His blessings upon him and the earth shall
put forth its wealth. And the earth shall produce more and perfect
economic possibilities. (Good Vegetation).”<sup>[2]</sup>

3. His Eminence, Imam Ali (a.s) says regarding His Eminence, Imam Mahdi
(a.s) that, “Imam Mahdi (a.s) shall instruct his representatives in all
cities that they should deal justly with people in such a way that the
jackal and the ewe may graze at the same place. And evil may disappear
and only goodness remains. Those who sow one mudd (unit) shall reap
seven mudds as the Almighty Allah has said. Fornication, wine drinking
and usury shall be finished and people shall be inclined towards
worship, Islamic Law, charitable deeds, Prayers and religious programs.
And the trusts shall be restored to their owners; there shall be
increase in vegetation and blessings shall increase. Evils shall be
destroyed and goodness shall remain and none who harbors animosity
towards Ahle Bayt (a.s) shall survive.”<sup>[3]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mustadrak Hakim, 4/558 [2] Mustadrak Hakim, 4/558 [3] Muntakhabul
Athar, Pg. 474 quoted from Kashful Astar

[![ Back](images/back.gif)](28.htm)[  
 Back](34.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)](30.htm)[  
 Next](36.htm)
