Foreword
========

In The Name Of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful
==================================================

We Shias are caught in the clutches of the hopes of humanity and we are
being grinded between the oppressors. Therefore our sights are fully
trained on the advent of a great savior so that he comes to establish
the divine rule, as no one is needless of it and there is no injustice
in it.

We are convinced of the age of justice in which injustice, oppression
and slavery would be eradicated and he would spread love, lofty morals,
equality and sacrifice among the people, and in the shade of such a
government those powers would be destroyed and suppressed who play with
human life or those who spread destruction on the earth.

We are present in the age of that divine just one and the Awaited one,
who is the Haibatullah (awe of Allah), a gift and a great bounty of
Allah for the humanity. That awaited leader, who is the hope for the
deprived ones and the helpless and who would bestow them mercy and
distribute goodness and divine bounties among them.

We live during the age of the twelfth Imam from the Imams of Ahle Bayt
who is also known as the Qaim-e-Aale Muhammad, whom the Almighty Allah
has prepared for the reformation of the world and changing of the system
of the corrupted rulers of the world who have pushed the people into the
worst circumstances.

The Almighty Allah has created the holy personality of Imam Mahdi (a.s)
for the loftiest aims and the greatest reformation of human society.
Thus it is him who would fill the earth with justice and equity after it
would have been filled with injustice and oppression.

The Kind Lord has selected him from among the saints for such a lofty
purpose, because the heart and the original essence (teenat) of the His
Eminence is purer and cleaner than all the people and from the aspect of
insight and intelligence is the most dominant one because he is from a
family, which the Almighty Allah has honored and kept away from all
sorts of uncleanness and bestowed it with purity and chastity.

He, the Promised Mahdi, is the most important religious fact and the
clearest of the Islamic beliefs. Indeed the Holy Prophet of Islam (a.s)
did not say anything of his own and in the same way are the Imams of
Muslims and leaders of Muslim Ummah who are the treasures of Prophetic
sciences and exponents of Prophetic wisdom. They have all conveyed the
good news of the existence and advent of the Mahdi. Reports and
traditions of these great personalities in the terminology of the
science of narrators (Ilme Rijal) are not ‘solitary narrations’ that
could be doubted or refuted and finally discredited. Rather, these
reports, in the terminology of the science of narrators are known as
‘Mutawatir’ (widely narrated) and reach to the level of certainty, and
scholars and experts of traditions have certified them and guaranteed
their veracity. All of them have included these traditions in their
collections, writings and histories. ‘Tawatur’ (widely narrated) and
certainty in these reports has reached to the limit that doubt and
misgiving about them is like doubting a necessary principle of faith,
because it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (a.s) that he said: “One
who disbelieved in the advent of Mahdi is a disbeliever.”

The perfect intellect, absolutely believes in the existence of the
Promised Mahdi and the Awaited Imam and that he would surely reappear.
Because reason dictates that it has to be thus and it is a confirmed
matter and no kind of intellectual proof goes against it, because these
traditions are mentioned under such discussions in the history of the
Holy Prophet (a.s), his practice and also that of his honorable
successors that they have removed every kind of doubt and uncertainty
and very clearly throughout his life he issued sayings regarding the
confirmed reappearance for the eradication of injustice and oppression
and for infusing fresh life into the religion of Islam and its complete
reformation and well-being.

In addition to these reports and narrations, all divine religions and
sects are unanimous that a reformer would surely arrive to establish
truth and a just rule, and who would destroy all corruptions and evils.

Also the rule and system of this holy personality would be such that
nothing as great and as perfect had ever been present on the face of the
earth throughout history in the destiny of the humanity. It would be
much higher and exalted. In addition to this his rule and rulership will
have such progress as human civilization has never seen anywhere
previously.

If we desire to study the life history of Imam Mahdi (a.s) with all its
characteristics and different aspects on the basis of philosophical
arguments, it would necessitate that we associate with it and bring
faith upon it. Because the Almighty Allah has always continued His Grace
upon His creatures and this shall never be stopped by Him. He has
bestowed bounty upon His servants that shall never be stopped from them.
He brought them from non-existence into existence and created them in
the best of the forms and made him superior to most of the creatures and
commanded the angels to prostrate before their father, Adam, and gave
the Sun and the Moon in their control and provided them with everything
they are in need of.

The greatest grace and bestowal of Allah upon His servants is that He
has kept them away from deviation and misguidance. For their guidance He
sent great prophets like Ibrahim, Musa, Isa and Muhammad (a.s) at the
time when humanity was sunk in ignorance, crimes and evils. The Almighty
Allah says:

*“And you were on the brink of a pit of fire, then He saved you from
it.”<sup>[1]</sup>*

His Eminence, Amirul Mo-mineen (a.s) has described the society, which
was filled with all evil when the Holy Prophet (a.s) announced his
prophethood in the following words:

“Allah sent the Prophet when the mission of other prophets had stopped
and the people were in slumber for a long time. Evils were raising
heads; all matters were under disruption and in flames of wars, while
the world was devoid of brightness, and full of open deceitfulness. Its
leaves had turned yellow and there was absence of hope about its
fruits.”<sup>[2]</sup>

In the same way the reappearance of the Qaim of Aale Muhammad would
occur at a time when humanity and human beings would be under the yoke
of injustice and oppression, undergoing pains and calamities and tasting
the bitterness of oppression and falsehood. That is the time when the
most kind Lord would save humanity through the great reformer, His
Eminence, the Mahdi. He would establish peace and justice and provide
all kinds of comforts and good things to the humanity, which is eagerly
waiting for his advent and he would spread all these good things among
them.

The birth, occultation and reappearance of His Eminence, Mahdi (a.s)
resembles the various aspects of the great divine Messengers and social
reformers of the earth. The concealed birth of Imam Mahdi (a.s) closely
resembles the birth of Prophet Musa (a.s) because in the case of Musa
(a.s) the Pharaoh had

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Aale Imran 3:103 [2] Nahjul Balagha

appointed female spies to inform him about the birth of male children to
every woman so that they could be murdered. If the newborn were female
it was of no concern. This was so because astrologers had predicted to
Pharaoh that his power and kingdom would be brought to end through a
young man who would be born in that same period.

In the same way was the incidence of the conception and birth of His
Eminence, Mahdi, the awaited one, that the most Wise Lord kept him
concealed because the Abbaside tyrants were in search of him so that as
soon as he is born he should be murdered. So much so that the house of
Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) was surrounded by the security forces and filled
with male and female informers so that they may identify the newborn
child of Imam Hasan Askari, who according to the sayings of the Holy
Prophet (a.s) would be the last Caliph. Thus the Abbasides may put an
end to his life immediately. The Abbaside rulers had become certain that
their power and kingdom would be destroyed through such a personality.
Thus through any means he should be captured and killed like his
forefathers.

In the same way, Imam Mahdi (a.s) resembles the great Prophet Isa, the
son of Maryam (a.s) in the matter that he spoke as soon as he was born.
When he was born from the womb of his mother, Maryam, a group of people
gathered near her and accused her of unchastity. Maryam pointed towards
her newborn child. The Almighty Allah made the newborn Isa to speak in
the cradle and he said:

*“Surely I am a servant of Allah; He has given me the Book and made me a
prophet; and He has made me blessed wherever I may be, and He has
enjoined on me prayer and poor-rate so long as I live…”<sup>[1]</sup>*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Maryam 19:30-31

When the Master of the Age, Imam Mahdi (a.s) was born, he recited the
following verse of Quran:

*“And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and to make them the Imams and to make them the
heirs.”<sup>[1]</sup>*

His Eminence, the Awaited Imam, was not similar to the prophets in only
these aspects. He was having similarity in more important aspects like
changing the society and taking the ethics of the society to a great
height and also to destroy evil; reformation of the society, and
crystallization in proper way of the thoughts and views of the people
and to suppress and destroy injustice and oppression.

His Eminence, Mahdi, the Awaited one fulfills the same function that the
great Messengers of the Lord had performed. On the basis of this, he
would eradicate inequity and oppression and establish justice, truth and
brotherhood among the people.

In my view, no other topic of discussion, except the subject of the
Promised Imam is accorded more importance and significance in the
writings of scholars and researchers. Scholars, biographers and
researchers have discussed all the aspects of the Imam on the basis of
Quran and traditions. They have studied and written upon all the aspects
connected with the signs and prophecies connected with the reappearance
of the Awaited Imam. It is necessary to mention that books of Ahle
Sunnat scholars written on Imam Mahdi (a.s) exceed those written by Shia
scholars. We would mention a list of 50 such books in the forthcoming
pages. The subject of Imam Mahdi (a.s) reaches to such a limit of
certainty among Muslims that to harbor any doubt about it is like
doubting in the established principles of faith. Such that reason and
common sense do not support it and logic does not accept it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Qasas 28:5

In any case, to say anything in denial of the holy existence of His
Eminence, Mahdi (a.s) is a sign of deficient intelligence and
superficial thinking. However, the cause and the philosophy of denial of
those like Ibne Khaldun, Kasrawi Majoosi and Ahmad Amin Misri is due to
the enmity and deep hatred of these people with the Imams of Ahle Bayt
(a.s). All these writers have been disrespectful to these honorable
personalities and guides of humanity. However, the readers of books
written by these writers do not consider them to be serious and reliable
and that whatever they have written about the reformers of the community
and Imams of Muslims, has no scholarly value and authenticity because
they write thus only due to their malice and bigotry.

Shias and followers of Ahle Bayt (a.s) have been unjustly made the butts
of criticism and allegations throughout the ages due to their belief in
the Awaited Imam, may the souls of the worlds be sacrificed on him.
Allegations of falsehood and lies have been associated with them. For
example, they say: The Shias believe in an Imam who disappeared from the
cellar of his house in Samarrah and they await for him to emerge from
that same cellar.

And they say: The Shias gather in a particular cellar in Babylon and
await the reappearance of that Imam from that same cellar.

These kinds of foolish allegations are made against the Shias.

It is definite that the belief of the Shias and followers of the school
of Ahle Bayt (a.s) in the matter of the Awaited Imam and the universal
reformer is like all their principles of belief, clean and pure and as
clear and illuminated as the shining sun. It is based on the respected
Islamic texts and teachings of the Imams of guidance of Ahle Bayt of the
Messenger (a.s). The Almighty Allah has kept them away from every
impurity and dirt and bestowed on them purity and sanctity. Thanks be to
Allah, our belief is not taken from the liars, forgers and deviated
persons.

There is no kind of deficiency, deviation, falsehood or misguidance in
the beliefs of the Shias and it is in no way against the rules of nature
and natural aspects. Rather the followers of Ahle Bayt (a.s), all of
them together believe in all that is accepted by logic, argumentative
proof, nature and realization and all the human society in all the ages
are unanimous upon it.

Shias believe that when the Abbasid tyrants surrounded the Imam and
wanted to put an end to his life, he disappeared just like his
grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (a.s) when he was surrounded by the
Quraish in his house. He appointed his successor and the gate of the
city of his knowledge, His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (a.s) in his place
and escaped to Yathrib (Medina) from between them. Ali (a.s) slept on
the bed of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) and the Quraish were not able to
perceive it.

Shias have clearly announced their belief and they continue to do so,
that the reappearance of the Master of the Age will not be from the
cellar of Samarrah. Rather the place of reappearance of His Eminence is
the Holy Mecca and the Honorable Ka’ba and it shall be on a clear day
just as his respected grandfather had risen up from this holy land. We
shall discuss this aspect in the coming pages.

People ask regarding the wisdom and philosophy of occultation of the
Awaited Imam that why does the Imam not meet the Shias and other people
during the period of occultation. Why he does not participate in the
affairs of the worlda In my view, the Almighty Allah on the basis of
hidden wisdom has kept concealed the true wisdom and secret of
occultation from the people like He has reserved the secret of the Night
of Power, the Day of Judgment and the time of Friday when prayers are
accepted and the form and appearance of the spirit and place of the
birth of the Prophet of Allah, Musa Ibne Imran was kept secret. The
occultation and reappearance of His Eminence, Imam Mahdi (a.s) is also
in the same way. It is an accepted fact

that limited human understanding is not capable to fully realize the
affairs of the great creator of the universe and existence. The
Omnipotent Lord has made apparent the existence and the universe and
designed a system for controlling and running them. We humans do not
have any knowledge about these systems and rules. However, the Wise Lord
possesses perfect knowledge about His creation and has true wisdom about
everything while man sometimes understands His wisdom and philosophy but
most of the time he is helpless to perceive them.

Search for recognition and knowing the signs of the reappearance has
been given utmost importance and arrangements made for the same. In my
view, such elaborate arrangement shows that people are fed up with the
systems created by human beings. Their cries and protests have risen up
greatly, while these systems and kingdoms have considered it permissible
to torment and oppress the people. They have put the people and the
world in mischief and destruction. It is here that people of the world
are desirous of the command of Allah and a divine government so that
political and social justice may be accorded to them and that they may
be saved from the attack of those who do as they like. Numerous reports
and narrations recorded in books of history and traditions from the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) and Imams of guidance mention and explain the
signs of reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s).

In this book, we shall study in brief the special characteristics of
Imam Mahdi (a.s) especially those lofty qualities that are spiritual and
moral. Doubtlessly these qualities are permanent and everlasting and
were present in his forefathers and ancestors, all of whom were sources
of good and beneficial to people of all communities and societies.

The most apparent and obvious quality of the Imams of the Muslims was
that they were the destroyers and crushers of oppressions and false
deities.

His Eminence, Amirul Momineen (a.s), the chief and the senior member of
the purified progeny of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) has said: “The
strong one in my view is weak till I take from him the right and the
weak one is strong in my view till I obtain his right for him.”

The same blessed quality and personal characteristic in its best form is
present in his (grand) son, the Awaited Imam. In the light of the widely
related reports, when Imam Mahdi (a.s) would reappear he would spread
justice and destroy injustice and oppression. He would lay the
foundation of the centers of justice and equality and shake up the
throne of rebellion and oppression.

In this book, a section is devoted to the tortures and pressures
witnessed by the Sayyid elders and their followers at the hands of the
tyrannical rulers and oppressors of their time. These rulers dealt very
harshly with these noble souls and even used to bury them alive and
raise walls over them. They used to drown their young children by
throwing them into the river.

So much so, ministers on special occasions and for flattery and gaining
proximity with the caliphs, used to present the heads of the Sayyids and
Shias to the oppressive rulers. In other words the tortures of the
oppressors on the Imams of guidance and their Shias were of the worst
kind.

The time and place of the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s) is discussed
in this book in the light of traditional reports. The place of
reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s) is the Holy Mecca, the Masjidul Haram
and at the sanctified Ka’ba. It is that same House of Allah, Hajj
towards which Allah made obligatory on the people. It is that holy place
from where would be raised the call of justice and truth by the divine
promised one and reach the ears of the people of the world. In the same
way, this book has explained the method and policies of the Imam (a.s)
and activities of the Master of the Age. We shall also explain the
system of his government to some extent.

When that divine personality reappears, he would establish peace,
comfort and prosperity for the people and establish justice among them.
Such a kind of justice as had never been witnessed in the rules
(kingdoms) throughout history.

In this book we shall also discuss about the helpers and supporters of
Imam Mahdi (a.s) and their lofty qualities and merits as befits the
fighters in the way of Allah. Those great people whose help the Imam
takes to spread divine principles and human virtues and to make apparent
virtues of humanity and after the proof of humanity is taken from them
they would be appointed for this task. These were some topics that are
going to be discussed in this book.

It is appropriate that before I conclude this discourse, I should
clearly announce that this book is a life sketch of the Imam of the Age
whom the Almighty Allah has prepared and treasured to reform the world
and to keep the religion established and to further spread the religion
of Islam. This is neither an underestimation nor extremism. Rather, it
is fact that his holy existence is shading all the people and has them
in his control and submission.

As the practice and method of this dear Imam and his respected
forefathers and the life of these great people in all aspects, resembles
their grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (a.s) it has continued in the
Imam of the present Age, such that he shall fill the earth with his
virtues and sciences. No book can be comprehensive enough to cover all
the facts and realities of this matter and it is not possible to expose
all the secrets and realities of his existence. Thus are the respected
successors and protectors of the knowledge and wisdom of the prophets…

**Baqir Sharif Qarashi  
 Najaf Ashraf**

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](02.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
 Next](04.htm)
