Manifestation of the Light of the Imam of the Time (a.s)
========================================================

### Manifestation of the Light

Before we mention about the blessed birth of the great universal
reformer and the hope of humanity, the great leader of the people, the
Awaited Imam (a.s), it would be most fitting to mention in brief about
the exalted family and genealogy of the holy Imam (a.s), and the true
loftiness and exaltedness that is present in this pure family tree and
is the source of heavenly light. He it is who would illuminate the
horizon of the world and eradicate oppression and darkness of ignorance
and stupidity and destroy the mischief-makers and their centers of
destruction and oppression.

### Honorable father of Imam Mahdi (a.s)

The eleventh of the Imams of guidance is Imam Hasan Askari (a.s). Like
all the Imams, he was the source of contemplation and awakening of the
Islamic world and one who made the people proximate to God, one who
entreats and pleads in the court of the Lord of the world.

According to unanimity of historians and biographers, Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s) was the greatest personality of Islam of his time and the leader
of opposition of the usurper and oppressor Abbaside ruler, whose rule
was based on injustice and the rights of the people were being trampled
upon.

The Abbaside rule kept on increasing pressure and force on the Imam
(a.s) till they finally imprisoned the Holy Imam. And he was forcibly
taken to Samarrah and put under surveillance and house arrest. Every
type of communication between the Imam and his Shias was stopped. The
complete life history of this holy

Imam has been discussed by us in the book, Life of Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s). In the forthcoming discussion we would again touch upon some
aspects of his blessed life.

### Respected mother of Imam Mahdi (a.s)

The genealogy of the respected mother of the Awaited Imam can be traced
to the great Roman personalities on the basis of traditional reports and
clear statements of the historians. She was the daughter of Yusha whose
genealogy goes back to Caesar of Rome. In the same way her mother's
lineage could be traced to Simon, the successor and one of the
companions of Prophet Isa (a.s).<sup>[1]</sup>

This chaste lady is one of the greatest lady of the Muslims by way of
purity, faith and chastity, and she is the mother of the greatest
reformer of human society after his honorable forefathers, throughout
history. This alone is sufficient for her from the viewpoint of dignity
and honor.

In spite of the fact that Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) himself possessed
absolute perfections and virtues, he used to accord utmost respect to
this esteemed lady, just as the respected aunt of His Eminence, Askari
(a.s) paid due honor to her since her nephew informed her that the
Awaited Imam would be born through her.<sup>[2]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar, 13/5 [2] Bihar, 13/5

### The name of Imam Mahdi's Mother

Historians have mentioned the following good names of this honorable
lady: Susan<sup>[1]</sup>, Raihana<sup>[2]</sup>, Narjis<sup>[3]</sup>,
Saqeel<sup>[4]</sup>, Khamt.<sup>[5]</sup> From the aspect of her being
pregnant with the holy effulgence of the Promised Mahdi and that she was
the mother of that respectable personality she was surrounded by
effulgence and light, therefore she was addressed by these blessed
names.

### In Praise of Imam Mahdi's Mother

In history a part of traditional reports and narrations of the Imam of
guidance is recorded in praise of this honored lady. We mention below a
few of them.

1. In the final stages of the Battle of Naharwan the matter of the
advent and reappearance was presented before His Eminence, Amirul
Momineen (a.s). Ali (a.s) praised and glorified the mother of Imam Mahdi
(a.s) and said thus:

"O Son of the best of the maidservants! How long would you waita I give
good news of a near victory from the Merciful Lord."<sup>[6]</sup>

2. Abu Basir, a student of the school of Ahle Bayt says, "I asked Imam
Sadiq (a.s), 'O Son of the Messenger of Allah (a.s)! Who is the Qaim
among you Ahle Bayta' He replied: 'O Abu Basir! He is my fifth
descendant from my son, Musa (a.s). He would be the son of the chief of
the maidservants and the greatest of ladies. He would go into an
occultation and the followers of falsehood would doubt in him. After
that, the Almighty Allah would make him reappear, and conquer the east
and west of the earth through his powerful hands.'"<sup>[7]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Matalib as Soo-ol fi Manaqib Aale Rasool, Bihar, 13/7 [2] Bihar,
13/6 [3] Wafayatul Ayaan, Al Irshad [4] Miraatuz Zamaan [5] Bihar [6]
Yanabiul Mawaddah [7] Kamaluddin

3. Muhammad, the son of Asaam, through his own chain of narrators
narrates from Abu Basir (a.s) that he quotes Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s)
or Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) that he said, "There are two signs in His
Eminence, Qaim (a.s), a black spot on the head and a black spot between
the shoulders, just as the leaf of the sweet basil. He is the son of the
female prisoner and the best of maidservants."<sup>[1]</sup>

History mentions numerous narrative reports of such kinds from the Imams
of Ahle Bayt (a.s) describing the lofty station of this exalted lady and
her greatness and majesty. Inspite of the fact that she was a slave maid
there is no negative effect in her status because the great religion of
Islam has destroyed and eradicated all types of criteria, standards and
baseless veils and made piety and obedience of the Lord of the world to
be a distinction and merit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ghaibat Nomani

The sky and the atmosphere of the world became illuminated by the birth
of the great reformer who would once again create the grandeur and
bounty of Islam for the people and save them from the darknesses of
oppression and transgression.

Among the greatest of bounties of Almighty Allah upon His Eminence,
Mahdi (a.s) was that his presence in the womb of his mother and his
birth was kept concealed like that of Prophet Musa Ibne Imran (a.s).
Historians state that Imam Hasan Askari invited his aunt, Hakima the
daughter of Imam Jawwad (a.s) to his house, who was an Alawite lady of a
very pious character. Her chastity and purity closely resembled that of
her honorable grandmother, Fatima Zahra (s.a.). When she arrived at the
residence of her nephew, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s), he welcomed her with
utmost respect and said,

“Auntie, be with us today for breaking the fast. Very soon the Almighty
Allah would gladden you as a result of His Wali and Proof (Hujjat) on
the people and my caliph after me.”

The whole being of the exalted lady became surrounded with elation and
joy just by hearing these words of the Imam and she said, “O my master
and chief! May I be sacrificed on you, from whom would the caliph be
borna”

Imam (a.s) replied, “From Susan (or Narjis).”<sup>[1]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar 13/5

Her Eminence, Hakima cast a glance at Susan but did not see any sign of
pregnancy in her. She turned to Imam (a.s) and said, “She is not
pregnant.” The Imam (a.s) smiled and said, “The pregnancy would be
manifested for you at dawn. Because her pregnancy has not become
apparent like that of the mother of Musa (a.s) and no one could learn
about it till the time of delivery. This was so because, the Pharaoh
used to have the bellies of expecting ladies cut open so that he could
get hold of Musa (a.s); and this newborn child is also like His
Eminence, Musa (a.s).”

When the time of evening prayer (Maghrib) arrived, Lady Hakima recited
the evening and night prayers. After that she sat down with Lady Susan
for breaking the fast. Later she went to sleep. She awoke during the
night and glanced at Susan but again saw no sign of pregnancy and
childbirth in her. When the last hours of the night approached she arose
and began to perform the Midnight (Shab) Prayer. When she reached the
one-unit ‘watr’ prayer, Susan, the chaste lady, woke up from her sleep
and also recited the Midnight Prayer. After the prayers she began to
feel labor pains. Lady Hakima approached the honorable maid and asked,
“Do you feel somethinga” She replied, “I am feeling a severe thing.”

Lady Hakima addressed her with utmost kindness and respect, “If Allah
wills, there is no fear for you.” Not much time passed when a beautiful
male child was born from the womb of his mother, Susan. The child who
would purify the earth from transgressors and oppressors and establish
the rule of God over it.

His Eminence, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) was extremely overjoyed at the
birth of this blessed and fortunate child and he began to speak up in
refutation of the Abbaside rulers that they used to think that they
would be able to soon kill him and deprive the Imam from continuing his
progeny. He said in this way, “These cruel people thought that they
would kill me so that this progeny could be cut off. What an estimation
of God’s power they hada”<sup>[1]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar 13/10

Performance of rituals connected with the new birth
===================================================

Lady Hakima took the newborn child of exalted rank to its honorable
father, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) who welcomed him with great pleasure and
joy and initiated the Islamic rituals connected with the occasion. In
the right ear of the newborn child, the Imam recited the
'Azan'<sup>[1]</sup> and in his left recited the 'Iqamat'.<sup>[2]</sup>
Thus the first words to reach his ears were, 'God is the
Greatest'<sup>[3]</sup> and, 'There is no god, except
Allah'<sup>[4]</sup>.

In fact, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s), by these words fed the child with the
secret of existence and the aim of the prophets and it resulted in
completely surrounding the heart with kindness, feelings and
understanding and at this moment the nascent divine child spoke up, like
among the past prophets Isa (a.s) had done, reciting the following verse
from the Holy Quran:

*"And we desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and make them the Imams, and to make them the
heirs…"<sup>[5]</sup>*

In this way, the Proof of Allah on people and His Guardian (Wali) was
born in such a concealed way due to the fear of the oppressive rulers
who were in severe pursuit to find and kill him. Lady Hakima took him in
her arms, kissed him and said, "I smelt such a sweet fragrance from him
as I had never before experienced."

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) again took the child from Lady Hakima and said,
"I am entrusting you to the one whom Musa's mother had entrusted, Remain
in the care and protection of Allah."

Then he said to Lady Hakima, "Auntie take him back to his mother, and
keep the report of the birth of this newborn child a secret and do not
convey it to anyone till the time is ripe for it…"<sup>[6]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Call for Prayer [2] Shorter call for prayer [3] Allaho Akbar [4] Laa
ilaaha illallaah [5] Surah Qasas 28:5 [6] Bihar, 13/7

### Public Feast

After the birth of his blessed child, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) ordered
that a large quantity of meat and bread be purchased and distributed
among the needy people of Samarrah. In this way seventy sheep were
slaughtered for his Aqiqa Ceremony from which four were dispatched to
his friend, Ibrahim along with the following letter: "In the name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. These sheep are due to (the birth
of) my son, Muhammad Mahdi. Partake it yourself and whomsoever of our
Shias you see, make them partake it too."<sup>[1]</sup>

### Shias informed of the birth of the Imam of the time

The Shias learnt of the birth of the Imam, Proof of Allah upon the
people, the awaited Imam, and they were overjoyed upon this news with
their whole beings. Among those who received the good tidings was
Hamzah, son of Abul Fath. He was told, "Good news! Yesterday, the
Almighty Allah bestowed, Abu Muhammad, Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) with a
child, though the holy Imam has ordered that this information be kept
confidential."

Hamzah asked, "What is the name of the childa" He was told, "His name is
Muhammad and agnomen, Abu Ja'far."<sup>[2]</sup>

### Felicitations for the birth of the Imam of the time

As a result of the birth of Imam Mahdi (a.s) all the centers and
gatherings of Shias were in joy and exultation. Prominent personalities
and elders came to Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) in groups and congratulated
him for the birth of Imam Mahdi (a.s). One of them, Hasan, the son of
Husain Alawi says, "I came to Imam Hasan Askari (a.s) in Samarrah and
complimented him about the birth of his son, Qaim (one who
rises)."<sup>[3]</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar, 13/10 [2] Bihar, 13/4 [3] Bihar, 13/6, Ghaybah, Shaykh Tusi

Not much time elapsed after the birth of the Holy Imam that Shias
continued to compliment and congratulate each other for the good news,
and poets composed couplets and poems on the festive occasion expressing
their joy. Shaykh Muhammad Samawi says,

*"O the night that passed in the birth of that child.*

By whom the atmosphere was mesmerized and his fragrance spread all
around…"<sup>[1]</sup>

Among those who composed eulogical poems on this occasion was Shaykh
Kazim Aale Nuh, the acknowledged and successful literary personality. He
writes in a panegyric thus,

*"Good news arrived on this great night.*

Of the one who is as great as this night."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Minanur Rahman, 2/233

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](03.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
 Next](05.htm)
