12) Fatimah (sa): the centre of love for the Holy Prophet (saw) on earth
========================================================================

> 30. عن جُمَيع بن عُمير التيمي، قال: دخلت مع عمتي على عائشة، فسئلت أي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الناس كان أحب إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم؟ قالت: فاطمة، فقيل: من
الرجال؟ قالت: زوجها، إن كان ما علمت صواما قواما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jumai bin Umair Taymi (ra) narrates that he visited Ayeshah (ra) in the
company of his paternal aunt and asked her, “Who was the most beloved to
the Holy Prophet (saw)?” The Mother of the Believers (ra) replied,
“Fatimah.” “And who from among the men?” she was asked again. She
replied, “Her husband. As far as I know he fasts a great deal and he
often stays awake at length during nights in order to worship Allah
(SWT).”

> 31. عن ابن بريدة، عن أبيه، قال: كان أحب النساء إلى رسول الله صلى الله
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عليه وسلم فاطمة و من الرجال علي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Buraidah (ra) narrates that from women Fatimah was the most beloved to
the Holy Prophet (saw) and from the men Ali (as) was most dear to him
(saw).

> 32. عن أبي سلمة بن عبد الرحمن، قال أخبرني أسامة بن زيد، قال: كنت جالسا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذ جاء علي و العباس رضي الله عنهما يستأذنان، فقالا: يا أسامةَ! استأذن
لنا على رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم، فقلت: يا رسول الله! علي و العباس
يستأذنان، فقال: أتدري، ما جاء بهما؟ قلت: لا، فقال النبي صلى الله عليه
وسلم لكني أدري، فأذن لهما، فدخلا، فقالا: يا رسول الله! جئناك نسألك أي
أهلك أحب إليك؟ قال: فاطمة بنت محمد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Salamah bin Abd-ur-Rahman (ra) narrates that Usamah bin Zaid (ra)
told him, “I was sitting when Ali (as) and Abbas (ra) came to seek
permission and said, ‘Usama, request permission from the Holy Prophet
(saw) for us to enter.’ I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Ali and Abbas
request permission to enter.’ The Holy Prophet (saw) said, ‘Do you know
why they have come?’ ‘No,’ I replied. He (saw) said, ‘But I know. Let
them in.’ both gentlemen entered and they said, ‘Oh Messenger of Allah!
We have come to you to ask you that who from ‘the people of your house’
is most beloved to you.’ The Holy Prophet (saw) replied, ‘Fatimah
daughter of Muhammad.’”

> 33. عن أبي هريرة رضي الله عنه، قال: قال علي بن أبي طالب رضي الله عنه:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا رسول الله! أيما أحب إليك: أنا أم فاطمة؟ قال: فاطمة أحب إلي منك،
وأنت أعز علي منها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Hurairah (ra) narrates Ali (as) asked the Holy Prophet (saw), “Oh
Messenger of Allah (saw), who is more beloved to you from Fatimah and
me?” The Holy Prophet (saw) replied, “Fatimah is more beloved to me than
you are and you are dearer to me than she is.”

> 34. عن بن أبي نجيح عن أبيه، قال: أخبرني من سمع عليا رضي الله عنه على
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
منبر الكوفة يقول: دخل علينا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم فجلس عند
رؤوسنا فدعا بإناء فيه ماء فأتي به فدعا فيه بالبركة ثم رشه علينا، فقلت:
يا رسول الله! أنا أحب إليك أم هي؟ قال: هي أحب الي منك و أنت أعز علي
منها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Abu Najeeh narrated from his father that the person who told him had
heard Ali (as) say on the pulpit in Kufah, “The Holy Prophet (saw) came
to our house and sat with us beside the cushions and asked for water in
a container. It was brought to him and he (saw) performed a prayer on it
for blessings and sprinkled this water upon us. I asked, ‘O Messenger of
Allah (saw), do you have more love for me or for Fatimah?’ The Prophet A
replied, ‘She is more beloved to me than you and you are more honourable
to me than she is.’”


