13) Nobody’s habits resembled more to the Holy Prophet (saw)
============================================================

> 35. عن عائشة أم المؤمنين رضي الله عنها، قالت: ما رأيت أحدا أشبه سمتا و
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دلا و هديا برسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم في قيامها و قعودها من فاطمة
بنت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Mother of the Believers Ayeshah (ra) narrates, “I have not seen
anyone who resembled the Holy Prophet (saw) more in manners, habits,
character and in the method of sitting and standing than Fatimah the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah.”

> 36. عن عائشة أم المؤمنين رضي الله عنها، قالت: ما رأيت أحدا من الناس
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان أشبه بالنبي صلى الله عليه وسلم كلاما ولا حديثا ولا جلسة من فاطمة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Mother of the Believers Ayeshah (ra) narrates, “I have not seen
anyone from the people who bears closer resemblance to the Prophet (saw)
in talking and sitting than Fatimah (sa).”

> 37. عن أنس بن مالك رضي الله عنه، قال: لم يكن أحد أشبه برسول الله صلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله عليه وسلم من الحسن بن علي، و فاطمة صلوات الله عليهم أجمعين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ans bin Malik narrates that nobody showed more resemblance to the Holy
Prophet (saw) than Hasan bin Ali (ra) and Fatimah (sa).

> 38. عن عائشة رضي الله عنها قالت: اجتمع نساء النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلم يغادر منهن امرأة، فجاءت فاطمة تمشي كان مشيتها مشية رسول الله صلى
الله عليه وسلم، فقال: مرحبا بابنتي: فأجلسها عن يمينه أو عن شماله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ayeshah (ra) narrates, “All of the wives of Holy Prophet (saw) were
present and no one from among them was absent when Fatimah (sa), whose
style of walking was exactly like the walking of the Holy Prophet (saw),
came. The Prophet (saw) said, ‘Welcome my daughter,’ and then seated her
on his right side or on his left side.”

> 39. عن مسروق: حدثتني عائشة أم المؤمنين رضي الله عنها، قالت: إنا كنا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أزواج النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم عنده جميعا، لم تغادر منا واحدة، فأقبلت
فاطمة عليها السلام تمشي، ولا والله ما تخفى مشيتها من مشية رسول الله
صلى الله عليه وسلم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Masruq (ra) narrates that the Mother of the Believers, Ayeshah (ra)
narrated to him, “We, the wives of the Holy Prophet (saw), were all with
him (saw) and none of us were absent when Fatimah came. I swear by Allah
that her style of walking was in no way different to that of the Holy
Prophet (saw).”


