14) The pleasure of Fatimah (sa) is the pleasure of the Holy Prophet (saw)
==========================================================================

> 40. عن المسور بن مخرمة رضي الله عنه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وسلم: إنما فاطمة شجنة مني يبسطني ما يبسطها و يقبضني ما يقبضها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Miswar bin Makhramah (ra) narrates that the Holy Prophet (saw) said,
“Indeed, Fatimah is my fruitful branch; whatever makes her happy also
makes me happy. Whatever hurts her hurts me.”  
**  
**

41. عن سعيد بن أبان القرشي، قال: دخل عبد الله بن حسن بن حسن بن علي بن
أبي طالب على عمر بن عبد العزيز، وهوحدث السن وله وفرة، فرفع عمر مجلسه و
أقبل عليه، وقضى حوائجه، ثم أخذ عكنة من عُكنِه‘ فغمزها حتى أوجعه، وقال:
اذكرها عندك للشفاعة. فلما خرج لامه قومه و قالوا: فعلت هذا بغلام حدث!
فقال: إن الثقة حدثني حتى كأني أسمعه من فيّ رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم:
إنما فاطمة بضعة مني، يسرني ما يسرها. وأنا أعلم أن فاطمة رضي الله عنها لو
كانت حية، لسرها ما فعلت بإبنها. قالوا: فما معنى غمزك بطنه، و قولك ما
قلت؟ قال: إنه ليس أحد من بني هاشم إلا وله شفاعة، فرجوت أن أكون في شفاعة
هذا.

Saeed bin Aban Qarshi narrates that Abdullah bin Hasan bin Hasan bin Ali
bin Abi Talib (ra), who was still a young boy with his hair reaching his
ears, went to Umar bin Abd-ul-Aziz (ra). (On his arrival) Umar bin
Abd-ul-Aziz (ra) concluded his meeting and welcomed his guest and
fulfilled his needs. He then pressed the stomach of the boy to the
extent that the boy felt some pain. Umar bin Abd-ul-Aziz said, “(On the
Day of Judgement) at the time of intercession remember this.” On the
departure of the boy, the people taunted Umar bin Abd-ul-Aziz and said,
“You showed so much respect to a young boy?” On this Umar bin
Abd-ul-Aziz said, “I have heard a saying of the Holy Prophet (saw) from
an authentic narrator; it is as though I have heard it directly from the
Messenger of Allah (saw) (saying), ‘Indeed, Fatimah is a part of me and
whatever pleases her pleases me.’” (Umar bin Umar bin Abd-ul-Aziz then
added), “I am sure that if Fatimah (sa) was alive today, she would be
happy at the way I treated her son.” Then the people asked, “What is the
meaning of your squeezing the boy’s stomach and what did you mean by the
word that you said?” To this Umar bin Abd-ul-Aziz replied, “There is not
a single person from the clan of Bani Hashim who has not been given the
power to intercede. I just wanted to earn the right to the boy’s
intercession.”


