Introduction
============

In this day and age Muslims are fully inundated upon the biographies of
celebrities, sports stars and actors yet do they have the same amount of
information about the members of the Prophetâ€™s family, companions and
other important Islamic personalities?

The sad fact is that Muslims, particularly in the West, are unfamiliar
with even the names of such great people let alone have a detailed
account of their lives which they can use as guides on how to perfect
their own life styles.

To put an end to this alienation of important personalities of Islam,
Shaykh-ul-Islam Dr. Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri has compiled a series of
hadith books on them. This book is one of those collections of
traditions.

The status of Sayyedah Fatimah (sa), the blessed daughter of the Prophet
Muhammad (saw), is so great that those who are oblivious to it are not
only doing injustice to themselves by depriving themselves from her
teachings but are also unknowingly showing disregard to the Prophet
(saw).

At a time when Muslim women are flooded with so-called female role
models, who rather than encouraging a modest and pure lifestyle,
practice and preach the contrary, it is indeed time for Muslim women to
adopt the life style of Sayyedah Fatimah (sa) who received divine praise
for her morality.

People will be shocked to learn of the high esteem which she was held by
the Prophet (saw) and how divine commandments were revealed to the
Prophet (saw) which were specifically regarding Sayyedah Fatimah (sa).

One of the main reasons for the downfall of the Muslims over the past
centuries is that they have forgotten their true models and ideals
instead adopting bogus and imperfect ones. Shaykh-ul-Islam Dr.
Tahir-ul-Qadri, in this book and many others in the series, has
presented a cure for this cancer. The choice is now ours whether we want
the true cure or opt for artificial ones.


