19) The enemy of the family of Fatimah (sa) is a hypocrite, cursed and bound for Hell
=====================================================================================

> 50. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه, قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وسلم: من أبغضنا أهل البيت فهو منافق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Saeed Khudri (ra) narrates that the Holy Prophet (saw) said,
“Whoever holds hatred against us the ‘people of the house’ is a
hypocrite.”

> 51. عن زر قال: قال علي رضي الله عنه: لا يحبنا منافق و لا يبغضنا مؤمن.

Zirr narrates that Ali (as) said, “A hypocrite does not love us and a
believer does not hate us.”

> 52. عن جابر بن عبد الله الانصاري رضي الله عنهما قال: خطبنا رسول الله
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صلى الله عليه وسلم وهو يقول: أيها الناس! من أبغضنا أهل البيت حشره الله
يوم القيامة يهوديا. فقلت: يا رسول الله صلى الله عليك وسلم! و إن صام
وصلى؟ قال: وإن صام و صلى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir bin Abdullah narrates that the Holy Prophet (saw) delivered a
sermon to us during which he (saw) was saying, “Whoever holds enmity
against us the ‘people of the house’, on the Day of Judgement his fate
will be that of the Jews.” I asked, “O Messenger of Allah (saw), even if
he fasts and performs prayer?” The Holy Prophet (saw) replied, “Yes!
Even if he fasts and performs prayer (because he is the enemy of the
‘people of the house’, Allah (SWT) will reject his worship and raise him
on the Day of Judgement with the Jews).”

> 53. عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الله عنه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وسلم: والذي نفسي بيده! لا يبغضنا أهل البيت أحد إلا أدخله الله النار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Saeed Khudri (ra) narrates that the Holy Prophet (saw) said, “I
swear by the Lord in whose hands my life is in! Whoever has hatred for
us the ‘people of the house’, Allah (SWT) will send him to Hell.”

> 54. عن ابن عباس رضي الله عنه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: لو
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أن رجلا صف بين الركن و المقام، فصلى و صام، ثم لقى الله وهو مبغض لأهل
بيت محمد دخل النار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abdullah bin Abbas (ra) narrates that the Messenger of Allah (SWT) said,
“Even if anybody performs prayer between Rukn Yamani and Maqam Ibrahim
and he (also) fasts, he then dies, having hatred for the ahl-ul-bait
(the people of the house) of Muhammad, he will go to the Fire.”

> 55. عن معاوية بن حديج، عن الحسن بن علي رضي الله عنهما، أنه قال له: يا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
معاوية بن حديج! إياك و بغضنا، فإن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال: لا
يبغضنا و لا يحسدنا أحد إلا ذيد عن الحوض يوم القيامة بسياط من نار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muawiyah bin Hudeej narrates that Hasan bin Ali (ra) said, “Oh Muawiyah
bin Hudeej! Refrain from having hatred against us because the Messenger
of Allah (saw) said, ‘There is not a single person who has hatred and
jealousy for us, who will not be whipped away by fire at the Kauther
(Pond) on the Day of Judgement.’”


