24) Fatimah’s (sa) marriage ceremony at the Upper Heavens with the participation of forty thousand angels
=========================================================================================================

> 65. عن أنس رضي الله عنه، قال: بينما رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المسجد، إذ قال لعلي: هذا جبريل يخبرني أن الله عزوجل زوجك فاطمة، و أشهد
على تزويجك أربعين ألف ملك، و أوحى إلى شجرة طوبى أن أنثرى عليهم الدر و
الياقوت، فنثرت عليهم الدر و الياقوت، فابتدرت إليه الحور العين يلتقطن
في أطباق الدر و الياقوت، فهم يتهادونه بينهم إلى يوم القيامة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ans bin Malik (ra) narrates that when the Messenger of Allah (saw) was
in the mosque, he said to Ali (as), “This is Jibraeel who is telling me
that Allah (SWT) has performed your marriage ceremony to Fatimah (sa) in
the presence of forty thousand angels as witnesses to the marriage
ceremony. He (SWT) said to the tree of tuba (blessing) to rain pearls
and rubies on them. The tree showered them with pearls and rubies. Then
women with beautiful eyes gathered the pearls and rubies in trays which
the angels (present in the ceremony) will present to each other as gifts
until the Day of Judgement.”

> 66. عن علي رضي الله عنه قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: أتاني
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ملك، فقال: يا محمد! إن الله تعالى يقرأ عليك السلام، و يقول لك: إني قد
زوجت فاطمة ابنتك من علي بن أبي طالب في الملأ الأعلى، فزوجها منه في
الأرض.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali (as) narrates that the Messenger of Allah (saw) said, “An angel came
to me and said: Oh Muhammad, Allah (SWT) sends peace upon you and says,
‘I have had your daughter married to Ali bin Abu Talib in the Upper
Heavens and now you also arrange the marriage ceremony of Fatimah with
Ali on earth.’”


