30) Fatimah (sa) will be the first to meet the Holy Prophet (saw) after his passing away
========================================================================================

**  
**

**  
**
78. عن عائشة رضي الله عنها، قالت: دعا النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم فاطمة
ابنته في شكواه التي قبض فيها،

**  
**

**  
**
فسارها بشيء فبكت، ثم دعاها فسارها فضحكت، قالت: فسألتها عن ذلك، فقالت:
سارني النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم فأخبرنى أنه يقبض في وجعه الذي توفي فيه،
فبكيت، ثم سارنى فأخبرنى أنى أول أهل بيته أتبعه، فضحكت.

The Mother of the Believers Ayeshah (ra) narrates, “During the illness
in which the Holy Prophet (saw) passed away, he (saw) called for
Fatimah, his daughter, and whispered to her and she began to cry. Then
he (saw) called her nearer and whispered something to her and she
laughed.” Ayeshah (ra) says, “I asked Fatimah regarding this incident
and she said, ‘The Holy Prophet (saw) whispered to me that that he (saw)
would pass away during this illness so I began to cry. Then he (saw)
whispered to me and told me that from the ‘people of the house’ I will
be the first to come after him and meet him. To this I laughed.’”

> 79. عن عائشة رضي الله عنها، عن فاطمة رضي الله عنها: أن النبي صلى الله
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عليه وسلم قال لها: أنت أول أهلى لحوقا بى، فضحكت لذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ayeshah (ra) narrates from Fatimah (sa), “The Holy Prophet (saw) said to
her, ‘From ¢the people of my house¢ you will be the first to meet me
(after I have passed away).’ To this good news I laughed.”

> 80. عن بن عباس رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لفاطمة رضي الله عنها: أنت أول أهلي لحوقا بى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abdullah Ibn Abbas (ra) narrates that Holy Prophet (saw) said to Fatimah
(sa), “From my household you will be the first to join me.”

> 81. عن بن عباس رضي الله عنه، قال: لما نزلت (إذَا جَاءَ نَصْرُ اللهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْفَتْحُ) دعا رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم فاطمة، فقال: قد نعيت إلى
نفسى، فبكت، فقال: لا تبكى، فإنك أول أهلي لحاقا بى فضحكت فرآها بعض
أزواج النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم، فقلن: يا فاطمةَ! رأيناك بكيت، ثم ضحكت،
قالت: إنه أخبرنى أنه قد نعيت إليه نفسه فبكيت، فقال لى: لا تبكى، فإنك
أول أهلى لاحق بى فضحكت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Abbas narrates that when the Quranic verse, “When the help of Allah
and victory comes…”, was revealed, the Messenger of Allah (saw) called
Fatimah (sa) and said, “The news of my passing away has come.” She
started to cry. The Holy Prophet (saw) said, “Don’t cry. Indeed from my
household you will be the first to join me.” She started to laugh. This
incident was witnessed by some of the wives and they asked, “Fatimah! We
saw you cry and then you smiled.” Fatimah replied, “The Messenger of
Allah (saw) told me that the time of his passing away has arrived. To
this I cried. Then he (saw) said, ‘Do not cry. You will be the first to
meet me from my household.’ To this I laughed.”


