33) Fatimah will cross the Bridge accompanied with seventy thousand Hurs
========================================================================

> 87. عن أبي أيوب الأنصاري رضي الله عنه: إذا كان يوم القيامة نادى مناد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من بطنان العرش: يا أهل الجمع! نكسوا رؤسكم و غضوا أبصاركم حتى تمر فاطمة
بنت محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم على الصراط، فتمر و معها سبعون ألف جارية من
الحور العين كالبرق اللامع.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Ayyub Ansari narrates the Holy Prophet (saw) said, “On the Day of
Judgement an announcer from the depths of the Throne will announce, ‘Oh
people! Bow your heads and lower your gazes so that Fatimah daughter of
Muhammad (saw) can cross the Bridge (sirat).’ She will pass in the
company of seventy thousand servants from the hur-ul-in (superior female
servants in Paradise) who will be like flashes of lightning.”

> 88. عن علي رضي الله عنه، قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: تحشر
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إبنتى فاطمة يوم القيامة وعليها حلة الكرامة قد عجنت بماء الحيوان، فتنظر
إليها الخلائق، فيتعجبون منها، ثم تكسى حلة من حلل الجنة [تشتمل] على ألف
حلة مكتوب [عليها] بخط أخضر: أدخلوا بنت محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم الجنة
على أحسن صورة و أكمل هيبة و أتم كرامة و أوفر حظ. فتزف إلى الجنة
كالعروس حولها سبعون ألف جارية.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali (as) narrates that the Holy Prophet (saw) said, “On the Day of
Resurrection my daughter will be raised wearing the dress of honour
washed in the ‘Water of Life’. The whole creation will be amazed on
seeing her. Then she will be given the dress of Paradise, each layer
comprising of a thousand layers. Each layer will read in green, ‘Take
the daughter of Muhammad to Paradise in the best form, great dignity,
high esteem and deep respect.’ She will be beautified like a bride and
will be taken to Paradise surrounded by seventy thousand hurs (beautiful
women of Paradise).”


