2) The Family of Fatimah (sa) are ‘the People of Kisaa’
=======================================================

> 3. عن صفية بنت شيبة، قالت: قالت عائشة رضي الله عنها: خرج النبي صلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله عليه وسلم غداة وعليه مرط مرحل من شعر أسود. فجاء الحسن بن علي
فأدخله، ثم جاء الحسين  فدخل معه ثم جاءت فاطمة رضي الله عنها فأدخلها،
ثم جاء علي فأدخله، ثم قال: (إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ
عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا).
  </p>
</blockquote>

Safiyyah the daughter of Shaybah narrates that Ayeshah (ra) said, “The
Holy Prophet (saw) came out one morning wearing a cloak which had camel
saddles woven on to it with black wool. Then Hasan bin Ali (ra) came and
the Holy Prophet (saw) took him under the cloak, then Husain (ra) came
and entered beneath it with the Holy Prophet (saw). Then Fatimah (sa)
came and the Holy Prophet (saw) took her under the cloak.

Next Ali (as) came and the Holy Prophet (saw) also included him beneath
it. Then the Holy Prophet Muhammad (saw) recited the verse:

***“Allah only desires to keep away (all kinds of) impurity from you, O
‘people of the house!’ (the Prophet’s family) and to totally purify
you,’ (al-Ahzab 33:33).”***

Umar bin Abi Salamah (ra) who was brought up by the Prophet (saw)
narrates that when the verse,

***“Allah only desires to keep away (all kinds of) impurity from you, O
‘people of the house!’ (the Prophet’s family) and to totally purify
you,” (al-Ahzab 33:33),***

Was revealed to the Holy Prophet (saw) at the home of Umm Salamah (ra),
he (saw) called Fatimah (sa), Hasan (ra) and Husain (ra) and covered
them with a cloak. Ali (as) was behind him (saw), the Holy Prophet (saw)
also covered him under the same cloak and then said, “Oh Allah! These
are my ahl-ul-bait (‘people of the house’) so keep impurity away from
them and totally purify them.”


