3) Fatimah (sa) is the leader of all women
==========================================

> 5. عن عائشة رضي الله عنها أن النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم قال وهو في مرضه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذي توفي فيه: يا فاطمة! ألا ترضين أن تكوني سيدة نساء العالمين وسيدة
نساء هذه الأمة و سيدة نساء المؤمنين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ayeshah (ra) narrates that the Holy Prophet (saw) said during the
illness in which he passed away, “Oh Fatimah (sa)! Are you not pleased
with the fact that you are the leader of the women of all the worlds,
the leader of the women of this ummah (nation) and the leader of the
women of all the believers.”

> 6. عن عائشة رضي الله عنها قالت: أقبلت فاطمة تمشي كأن مشيتها مشي النبي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صلى الله عليه وسلم فقال النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم: مرحبا بابنتي. ثم
أجلسها عن يمينه أو عن شماله، ثم أسر إليها حديثا فبكت فقلت لها: لم
تبكين؟ ثم أسر إليها حديثا فضحكت، فقلت: ما رأيت كاليوم فرحا أقرب من
حزن، فسألتها عما قال، فقالت: ما كنت لأفشي سر رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم حتى قبض النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم فسألتها، فقالت: أسر إلي: إن
جبريل كان يعارضني القرآن كل سنة مرة، وإنه عارضني العام مرتين، ولا أراه
إلا حضر أجلي، وإنك أول أهل بيتي لحاقا بي. فبكيت، فقال: أما ترضين، أن
تكوني سيدة نساء أهل الجنة، أو نساء المؤمنين! فضحكت لذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ayeshah (ra) narrates, “Fatimah (sa) came and her way of walking was
just like that of the Holy Prophet (saw). The Holy Prophet (saw)
welcomed his beloved daughter and seated her on his right hand side or
on the left hand side\*. Then he whispered something to her which made
her cry. So I asked her why she was crying. Then the Holy Prophet (saw)
whispered something to her and she laughed. So I said, ‘I have never
seen happiness so close to sadness as I have seen today.’ I asked
(Fatimah (sa)), ‘What did the Holy Prophet (saw) say?’ She replied, ‘I
cannot disclose the secret of the Messenger of Allah (saw).’ When the
Holy Prophet (saw) passed away I asked her again (about this incident)
and she replied, ‘The Holy Prophet (saw) whispered to me, ‘Every year
Jibraeel recites the whole of the Quran with me once but this year he
has recited it twice. I am sure that the end of my time in this world
has come and indeed you are the first from my family who will come to
me.’ This made me cry. Then the Holy Prophet (saw) whispered, ‘Are you
not happy with the fact that you are the leader of the women of Paradise
or the leader of all Muslim women\*.’ To this I laughed.’”

> 7. عن مسروق: حدثتني عائشة أم المؤمنين رضي الله عنها، قالت: قال رسول
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله صلى الله عليه وسلم: يا فاطمة! ألا ترضين أن تكوني سيدة نساء
المؤمنين، أو سيدة نساء هذه الأمة!
  </p>
</blockquote>

Masruq narrates from the Mother of the Believers Ayeshah (ra) that the
Holy Prophet (saw) said, “Fatimah, are you not happy that you are the
leader of the women of all the believers or the leader of the women of
this ummah.\*”

> 8. عن أبي هريرة رضي الله عنه أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم قال: إن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ملكا من السماء لم يكن زارني، فاستأذن الله في زيارتي، فبشرني أو أخبرني:
أن فاطمة سيدة نساء أمتي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Hurairah (ra) narrates that the Holy Prophet (saw) said, “An angel
in the skies who had not seen me requested permission from Allah (SWT)
to see me (which he was granted); he told me the good news or brought me
the news\* that Fatimah (sa) is the leader of all women in my nation.”


