His School and Knowledge
========================

A. His Position as a Scholar:

"...Not only was he the most devout in his worship among the people,
but he was also the most well-versed man in Islamic sciences and
jurisprudence."[^29]

Imam Musa bin Jafar (a.s.) is the grandson of the Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.), and the inheritor of the knowledge of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.). He
was the disciple of his father, Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.), the great
spiritual leader, and the top scholar of his time, about whom Malik bin
Anas, the leader of the Malikiyyah school of thought, said:

"Never has an eye seen, nor has an ear heard, nor has a mind of a man
ever thought of a man better than Ja'far al-Sadiq in his outstanding
merits, knowledge, worship and piety."[^30]

The well-known historian al-Ya'qoobi wrote, describing him, "He was the
best among people and the most well-versed in the faith. The scholars
who reported from him, would open their narratives, if they conveyed
them from him, with these words, 'The great alim told us that..."[^31]

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.) appointed his son Musa al-Kadhim as his
successor to the office of Imamate. Ali bin Ja'far, the brother of Imam
Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.), a dependable, trustworthy narrator, is reported
to have said, "I heard Abu-Ja'far bin Muhammad (a.s.) saying to some
people from his entourage and close friends, 'Take good care of this son
of mine, Musa. He is the best of my sons, and the best among whom I
leave after me. He shall be my successor and the proof of Allah, the
Exalted, over all his servants after me."[^32]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) himself once said to a companion of his, "Should
you ask this son of mine, whom you know, about what is between the two
covers of the Qur'an, he will certainly answer you knowledgeably."[^33]

And so Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) received the heavy trust of guiding the
ummah from his father. The Imam (a.s.) raised a generation of 'ulama',
preachers and narrators of Prophetic traditions. His mission lasted 35
years.

His era was abundant with ideological and philosophical currents.
Divergent views on fiqh, Qur'anic exegesis and science of traditions
emerged.

That era was the most critical in the life of Muslims. Atheism,
polytheism, and hyperbole penetrated the Muslim society, and new
ideological trends, with conflicting beliefs and doctrines surfaced.
Schools of fiqh diversified and new sciences, including logic,
philosophy, linguistics, in addition to comparison, appreciation and
personal tastes, were adopted as bass for deducing fiqh decrees. Some
judges and fuqaha' distorted their judgements and decrees so as to suit
the rulers. Distorted and fabricated traditions were spread.

Though extremely restricted and beleaguered, Imam Musa bin Ja'far
(a.s.) didn't give up his mission. It was his top priority to correct
the Islamic march by showing to the ummah what was original and what was
non-Islamic. Aided by his disciples, he faced the new ideological
trends, exactly as his.

father, al-Sadiq (a.s.), and his grandfather, al-Baqir (a.s.), had done
before, and displayed their flaws, and demonstrated that they were only
distorted views of the original Islam. As for fiqh, he enriched it with
his explanations, statements and deductions. By so doing, the Imam
(a.s.) solidified the pillars of Islam, purified methodologies of fiqh
and Islamic laws. He kept the school of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) original, and
enriched it.

Biographical books and those related to traditions maintain that upward
to 300 men had reported from Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.). Proudly
history cites a list of Imam's students who were distinguished as great
scholars, and prominent ulama'. Most of them authored and compiled rich,
and great books on the different sciences of Islam.

Sheikh al-Toosi writes, "The followers of our school of thought have
agreed on the probity and trustworthiness of six fuqaha', who were
taught and educated by al- Kadhim and al-Ridha (a.s.). They were: Yunus
bin Abdul-Rahman, Safwan bin Yahya, Bayya' al-Sabiri, Muhammad bin
Abi-Umayr, Abdullah bin al-Mughirah, al-Hassan bin Mahboob al-Rad and
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Abi-Nasr."[^34]

Distinguished among his students were also Hisham bin al-Hakam, the
great alim in the science of monotheism and Islamic beliefs, Ali bin
Suworyd, Muhammad bin Sinan...etc.

Following are very brief biographies of four of Imam's students and
followers. These might give us an idea of how great was the impact of
the school of Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) on the ummah.

Ali bin Suwayd al-Soo'i:

He transmitted traditions from Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) and Imam al-Ridha
(a.s.). He corresponded with Abul-Hassan I, namely Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.)
when the latter was in prison. Judging from the letters the Imam (a.s.)
sent him, he was a man of great social position, and was a well-known
scholar. He authored a book mentioned by Ahmad bin Zayd
al-Khuza'i.[^35]

Muhammad bin Sinan:

Muhammad bin al-Hassan bin Sinan was known by the name of his
grandfather because his father died while he was still a child. His
grandfather took custody of him. He was nicknamed Abu-Ja'far and
al-Zahiri, after the name of Zahir, the servant of Umar bin al-Humq
al-Khuza'i, a well-known companion of both Imam Abul-Hassan al-Kadhim
(a.s.) and Imam Abul-Hassan al-Ridha (a.s.). He authored books mentioned
by, among others, al-Hassan bin Sham'oon, Muhammad bin al-Hussein, Ahmad
bin Muhammad, and Muhammad bin Ali al- Sayrafi. A number of reputed
people like Safwan and al-Abbas bin Ma'roof, and Abdul-Rahman bin
al-Hajjaj[^36], quoted him.

Muhammad bin Abi-Umayr al-Azdi:

His father is Ziyad bin Isa. He was Baghdadi by birth and lived in
Baghdad. In the sight of all people, the common and those close to the
Imams, he was one of the most trustworthy, pious and devout among
people. "He was unique, among all people, in all his qualities," wrote
al-Jahidh. "He was a leading Shi'ite," adds al- Jahidh. "Under
al-Rasheed he was thrown in prison, so as to force him to name the
Shi'ites, and especially the followers of Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.). He was
so severely beaten that he was about to confess, when he heard Muhammad
bin Yunus bin Abdul-Rahman saying to him, 'Fear Allah, Muhammad bin
Umay.' He bravely endured torture until Allah granted him freedom."

Al-Kishshi reports that, in the days of Haroon, Muhammad was beaten 120
times with a thick piece of wood. Al-Sindi bin Shahik beat him because
of being a Shi'ite. He was imprisoned and kept there until he paid a
total of 21,000 Dirhams from his own money.

It was also said that al-Ma'moon, the Abbasside caliph, kept him in
prison until he accepted the post of judge in a Muslim town. According
to Sheikh al-Mufid, in his book al-Ikhtisas (a book of traditions) he
was imprisoned 17 years. His sister buried his books for four years,
during which period the books decayed. It was also said that he had kept
them in a room where the rain destroyed them. So he depended on his
memory, or on the traditions and narratives he had conveyed earlier to
people, when he started once again orally narrating the traditions or
writing them down. He lived during the Imamate of al-Kadhim (a.s.)[^37]
but did not quote him, but quoted both al-Ridha and al-Jawad (a.s.). He
died in 217 A.H. [^38] Historians say that he wrote 94 books on different
Islamic sciences and arts.[^39]

Hisham bin al-Hakam:

Abul-Hakam Hisham bin al-Hakam al-Baghdadi al-Kindi was the servant of
the family of Shayban. Shi'ite agree on his probity and great position
in the eyes of the Imams (a.s.). He had long discussions with those who
differed with him on many aspects of the faith. He associated with
Abu-Abdullah Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.), then with his son al-Kadhim (a.s.),
then with al-Ridha (a.s.), until his death in 179 A.H. in the city of
Kufa.[^40]

Historians maintain that he was a man of profound knowledge,
particularly in the areas of philosophy of monotheism, Imamate and
Islamic beliefs. He wrote 30 books.[^41]

These are only four leading scholars we picked them from a list of
students of Imam al-Kadhim's school. Sayyid Ibin Tawoos says, "The
companions and close friends of the Imam used to attend his assembly,
carrying ebony boards and sticks in their sleeves. They would write down
anything he said, or any judgement he gave on any affair".[^42]

B. Some of Imam's Statements on Monotheism:

Without any philosophization or complication, Muslims took plainly and
simply monotheism from the preacher of monotheism, Muhammad (s.a.w.).
They grasped it from the Book of Allah and believed in it. They fully
understood this doctrine and believed in prophethood, revelation, the
Hereafter, Paradise, Hell, attributes of Allah, the Glorified, and His
relation with the deeds of His servants, the universe, sustenance of His
servants, things closely related to monotheism. But through the passage
of time, philosophy, logic, and dialectics infiltrated Islamic beliefs,
and people began to differ on such things as the divine attributes, the
deeds of people, the Hereafter and other things linked to core Islamic
beliefs. Some people said that Allah, like any of his creatures, had a
body. Others said Allah descended to our sky on a white donkey. Some
Muslims believed in fatalism and free choice. A group of people denied
the torture of the grave, while another group denied that people would
be resurrected bodily on the Judgement Day. Some people called for
asceticism and the cutting of one's ties with this life, Imams of
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), especially al-Baqir, al-Sadiq, al-Kadhim and al-Ridha
(a.s.), with their students stood against all kinds of ideological
deviations, and refuted them with proofs, logic, and reasoned answers.

When some people claimed that Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, descended
to the sky, he said, "Allah never descends. He need not descend He is
the same, whether close or remote. No remote thing is far from Him, nor
a close thing is near Him. He needs nobody and nothing, but everybody
and everything are in need of Him. He is the Generous and Powerful There
is no god but He, the Mighty and Wise.

As for those describers who say that He descends, the Blessed and
Exalted Allah is far above this description. Those who say so believe
that Allah is vulnerable to decrease or increase. Any movable thing
needs some outside force that moves is or serves as a medium for its
movement. Doomed is he whose faith in Allah is shaken. Beware to
attribute to Allah qualities that depict Him as decreasing or
increasing, moving or being moved, changing or descending, standing or
sitting. Allah, the Almighty and Powerful, is certainly beyond the words
of the describers, the depiction of depicters, and the fancy of the
fanciful"[^43]

Some people explained the verse "The Beneficent is established on the
Throne of Power. "by saying that Allah sits on a throne like a chair. He
corrected their idea when he said, "The meaning of this "The Beneficent
is established on the Throne of Power" is that Allah has power over all
things, tiny or huge.[^44] That means He has true power over the whole
universe. 'Sitting' here is equal, in its meaning, to the description of
Allah, the Exalted, as being Powerful and enjoying mastery over all
things. Though near and present everywhere, He does not go far away, nor
diminish."

One of his contemporaries argued with him about the exegesis of this
verse. The man said, 'I see here a coming out of the unseen, and a
descension to the earth. I think Muhammad (s.a.w.) saw his Lord with his
heart but it was attributed to his eyesight. How can this be
explained?'

'He drew near and came down,' replied the Imam (a.s.), 'But He did not
leave a place, nor did He come down in a body.'

'I describe Him by His own description,' said the man. 'He did not come
down from His place without leaving it. If the matter was not so, He
would not describe Himself in this way.'

'This is an expression used by the tribe of Quraish,' said the Imam
(a.s.). 'When a man from them wants to say 'qad sam'it 'I have heard -,
he says 'qad tadallayt' - I have come down. 'Coming down' means
understanding in the Quraishi dialect."[^45]

In another statement Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) explains the relation
between Allah's will and man's. He shows how man's behaviour has
developed, whether it is good or bad. He emphasizes the fact that man is
free, and he enjoys the full freedom of choice. He can do something and
can refrain from doing it. Allah never abolishes man's will. But this
freedom to act on the part of man doesn't mean that Allah is unable to
prevent His servants from doing evil, o r that He can't force them to do
good. Allah simply wants to test man in this life, Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.)
says:

"When Allah created His creatures, He knew what their fates would be.
He ordered them to do certain things and forbade them to do other
things. If He ordered them to do certain things, He left them free to do
them or not. They cannot do something or abstain from doing it without
His will. Never did Allah force any of His servants to disobey Him. 'He
simply tests His servants with tribulations'."[^46]

C. Imam States Key Sources of Islamic Thought and Legislation:

Here we have a brief look at certain ideas, concept and basic standards
laid down by the Imam to control the foundations of fiqh, deduction of
Islamic laws from Islamic text, and thought. They were stated and
explained in a letter he wrote at the behest of the Abbassid caliph,
Haroon al-Rasheed. "I ask you, by the names of your fathers, to
summarize the discussion we have just had in numbered, comprehensive
words," asked Haroon al-Rashid. "Yes," agreed the Imam (a.s.). An inkpot
and paper were brought to him. He wrote the following:

"In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful. All that
concern religions can be summed up in four categories, concerning which
there is no dissent: There are matters so clear that people unanimously
agree on their authenticity, among which are the religious texts and
traditions, the authentic, agreed-upon ones, in the light of which
doubted matters are examined, and new judgements are inferred. There are
matters that appear doubtful They are settled by asking the
knowledgeable, who seek a proof, from the Book of Allah, on which all
Muslims as authentic, or syllogism reasons acknowledge its fairness, and
neither scholars nor the common people doubt it. These two categories
cover all matters, including monotheism and what is less grave, and the
compensation one should make for a slight injury one causes to others,
and what is graver. So these are basic standards according to which
religious matters are scrutinized. What is proved to be correct you
should accept, and what remains vague and doubtful you should put aside.
Any one of these three is the conclusive proof which Allah emphasizes is
His address to His Messenger. Such conclusive proof is understood by the
ignorant, in spite of their ignorance, and also by the knowledgeable, by
virtue of their knowledge. That is because Allah is Just, and never
treats His servants unjustly. He argues with His servants with what they
know. He calls to what they blow, not to what they do not blow or
deny."[^47]

The Imam (a.s.), by these words, states the sources of the faith and
Islamic laws, so as to keep reason, thinking, and conduct from slipping
into deviation. He names specifically the Noble Qur'an, the authentic
Sunnah, and syllogism based on the Book and Sunnah. Imam al-Kadhim
(a.s.) defines syllogism as a way to keep thinking, and religious
inferences away from methodological mistakes. That is why he calls to
unify our thinking, understanding, studying and judgement inference, in
order to preserve the originality of the faith on one hand, and to
enrich Islamic thought and legislation, on the other hand. He decides
that we should make the Qur'anic concepts, accepted by Muslims with one
interpretation, and the religiously authentic Sunnah, a basis for
deducing ideas, concepts and judgements. He also makes syllogism, which
is viewed as fair by mature intellects, a method by which opinions,
concepts and judgements are deduced from these two sources. Thus,
neither various interpretations of Qur'anic concepts, nor every
tradition and statement handed down from each narrator, nor the
fairlooking syllogism, that appears to the researcher good, can be
justifiably made a basis for the comprehension of the faith, or
deduction of the laws and judgements.

And, as we have said before, the Imam (a.s.) raised a generation of
fuqaha' , ulama', and tradition transmitters he bestowed on his
companions, students and fellow ulama', religious decrees, judgements,
lessons, arguments...etc.

History conveyed to us sessions in which the Imam had argued with the
accomplished thinkers and fuqaha' of his time, among whom Abu-Hanifah,
and Abu-Yusuf, the supreme judge, under Haroon al-Rasheed and others.
They all acknowledged the correctness of Imam's judgements and
decrees.

The chief faqih of Hanbalis, Ahmad bin Hanbal, confidently and
respectfully conveyed certain thoughts and concepts from him. This fact
is attested to by a group of narrators, authors and men concerned with
the traditions. Ahmad bin Hanbal is quoted as saying, "Musa bin Ja'far
said to me, on the authority of Abu- Ja'far bin Muhammad...on the
authority of the Prophet." Ahmad then added: "This chain of transmitters
is so indisputably authentic that if it is read to a fool, he would
certainly restore his reason."[^48]

D. Reason, its Scientific and Behavioural

Value in the Sight of ,he Imam:

Reason enjoys great value and importance in Islam. By it Allah, the
Exalted and High, is known and His greatness is grasped. By it knowledge
and sciences are acquired, and so life progresses. By it man takes the
path leading to good, and differentiates between good and evil. And
finally by virtue of reason man's humanity and value find their sense.
That is why Islam regards reason as something unequally precious. It
respects reason and the men of sound judgements, and attaches much
importance to knowledge and the knowledgeable. It makes thinking
obligatory, and urges the good use of reason and the conquest of new
horizons of research and thinking.

When Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) describes reason, and explains its
value and importance, he in fact conveys the view of the Qur'an and
states the standpoint of Islam. The following advice given by the Imam
to Hisham bin al-Hakam, one of his disciples, is considered as one of
the most valuable statements ever said about reason, its preciousness
and responsibility. Here we quote parts of the statement of the Imam
(a.s.):

The Imam (a.s.) said, "Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, certainly gave
the good news to the possessors of good reason and understanding, in His
Book, by these words,"...so give good news to My servants, who listen to
the Word, then follow the best of it. Such are they whom Allah has
guided, and such are the men of understanding."

"O Hisham! Allah, the Almighty and High, completed His proofs to people
with reason, communicated to them His message with plain eloquence, and
acquainted them with His Lordship by means of His guides.

"O Hisham! Then he explained that reason goes with science by saying,
"And these parables, We sent them forth for people, and none understand
them but the learned."

"O Hisham! Allah says, "And certainly We gave Luqman wisdom, ..." which
means understanding and reason. "O Hisham! Luqman said to his son, 'Be
humble toward right and you shall be the sagest among people. The
sagacious are modest toward right. My little son! Life is a deep sea, in
which a great number of people drowned So make fear of Allah your ship
on it. And make faith its contents, trust in Allah its sails, reason its
captain, knowledge its guide, and patience its rudder.

"O Hisham! Everything has a guide, and the guide of the sagacious is
contemplation. And the guide of contemplation is silence. Everything has
a mount, and the mount of the sagacious is modesty. It is certainly the
pinnacle of ignorance to do what you are forbidden to do.

"O Hisham! Allah has certainly two proofs before people: A revealed
proof, and a hidden one. As for the revealed, it is the Messengers,
Prophets and Imams, and the hidden is reason.

"O Hisham! Who destroys his reason, he undoubtedly spoils both his
faith and life.

"O Hisham! People were created to serve Allah. There is no salvation
without obedience. Obedience is the fruit of knowledge. Knowledge is
acquired by learning, and learning is spurred by the desire to know.
There is no knowledge equal to that acquired from a spiritual scholar.
The learned gain knowledge by virtue of their reason.

"O Hisham! A sagacious man agrees to be gifted with wisdom though his
share of life's spoils is little. But he cannot be satisfied with a
little share of wisdom, even if provided with luxury in this life.

"O Hisham! The Commander of the Faithful, Ali bin Abi-Talib (a.s.)
said, 'There is nothing better than reason with which Allah is served'

"O Hisham! The Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) said, 'No one should
lead a number of people without enjoying three qualities: He should be
able to provide answers for every question posed to him. He should be
able to speak plainly when other people fail to do so. And he should be
able to offer the counsel which benefits people. He is certainly a fool
who lacks these three qualities but seeks the leadership.'

"Hassan bin Ali (a.s.) said, 'When you are in need of something, ask it
from those able to grant it.' 'O son of the Messenger of Allah, , he was
asked, 'and who are these?' 'They are those whose mention was made by
Allah in His Book, when He says,"...only men of understanding mind'
which means those endowed with good reason.'

"Ali bin Hussein (as.) said, 'Sitting with the righteous people leads
one to uprightness. Politeness of scholars is a compliment added to
their sound understanding. Obedience of the legitimate rulers of justice
is the peak of power. Investment of one's money is the epitome of
unselfishness. Enlightening advice seekers is an act of gratitude in
return for Allah's favours. Abstention from harming others is a sign of
sagacity. It is the source of the body's rest, in this life, and the
next one.'

"O Hisham! A sagacious man does not tell something to someone whom he
fears to give the lie to him on account of it.

He will not ask the favour of whom he fears to refuse, nor does he
promise what he is not able to deliver, nor does he hope to get what he
would be scolded on account of nor does he advance voluntarily to do
what he is unable to. The Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) is reported
to have given his companions this piece of advice, 'I advise you to fear
Allah in privacy and in public, stick to justice in time of satisfaction
and anger, work is poverty and richness, keep your relations with
whoever ends his relations with you, forgive whoever wrongs you, and to
be kind to whoever deprives you. Let your contemplation be for the sake
of drawing useful lessons, your silence be thinking, your words be
remembrance of Allah, and your nature generosity, for no miser is
entitled to enter Paradise, and no philanthropist is going to enter
Hell'

"O Hisham! The best ways to gain closeness to Allah, after knowing Him,
are prayer, kindness of one's parents, and giving up envy, vanity and
pride.

"O Hisham! Isa (a.s.) said to his disciples. 'People, with regard to
wisdom, fall into two categories; those who master it in words and suit
their actions to their words. And those who master it in words but miss
it with their misdeeds. mat a great difference is there between them!
Blessed be the learned with their good deeds, and woe to the
knowledgeable who only talk'

"Make your hearts abodes of piety, but never make your hearts the
dwelling of pleasures. Those who extremely grieve in time of adversity
are those who excessively love this life. Those who patiently bear
tribulations are certainly those who are less attached to this life. It
is no use to purify your skins as long as your hearts are impure.

"Do not be like a sieve that passes the fine flour and retains the
bran. Here you are bringing out wisdom from your mouths, while your
chests remain full with rancour. O slaves of this world!

You are like a candle which gives light to people, but bums itself] O
Israelites! Pay special attention to attend learned men's assemblies,
even if you have no other choice but to crawl on your hands and knees,
for Allah certainly revives the dead hearts in exactly the same way He
revives the dead earth with a downpour.'

"O Hisham! mat a bad servant of Allah is the one who is double-faced,
who praises his brother when he sees him, and backbites him during his
absence, the one who envies his brother when he acquires some wealth,
and fails him when he is afflicted with an adversity... The reward of
good deeds is certainly at hand, and the retribution for an injustice is
surely at hand. The most evil servants of Allah are certainly those whom
you detest to talk to on account of their obscenity. What causes people
to enter hell face down other than the product of their tongues? A sign
of one's good faith is one's leaving anything that does not concern
one.

"O Hisham! Beware of pride, for no one who nurtures an iota of pride in
his heart is entitled to enter Paradise. Pride is Allah 's mantle, and
whoever tries to share it with Him, He throws him into hell face down..
but who submits to Allah, Allah certainly raises him up.

"O Hisham! He who does not make a reckoning with himself at the end of
every day, with the intention of doing more good works, if he has got
many good deeds on that day, and not asking Allah's forgiveness and
turning to Him in repentance if he has done evil things on that day, is
certainly out of our fold (Ahlul-Bait).

"Mind to take refuge in Allah, put your trust in Him, and fight your
self to prevent it from following its own low desires..."[^49]

This is a bunch of roses picked from Imam's gardens of knowledge. It
gives the aroma of faithfulness, and blooms with the beauty of worship
and spirituality. These are the gardens of prophethood, the fragrance of
the Qur'an, and Islam's beautiful roses, grown in Imam's serene soul.

How important is for us to learn from the Imam (a.s.), and walk in the
light of his guidance, so as not to stray in the wrong direction or have
a blurred vision. What the Imams left for us is in fact a highly valued
intellectual legacy, which contributes to the making of man, and correct
his march. It is a fortune that can't be found anywhere. We should make
good use of these rich, educational, and intellectual treasures, by
employing them in improving our social life, building our Islamic
culture and raising committed, faithful men. No other people, in the
world of Islam, have the privilege of "designing" the character of man
and life, and planning its outlines and frame, beside the guiding Imams
from the house of the Prophet (s.a.w.), who were unique in their
characters. They had pure conscience, upright conduct, sound reason,
ripe awareness of life, deep spiritual sense, and the gift of taking the
whole shari'ah, from their grandfather, the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.),
who, in turn, had gotten it through Jabra'il (a.s.), from Allah.

These are the people whom the faithful should follow, in the light of
their guidance the reformers and righteous men should walk, and to their
principles the religious good men, who seek the shortest ways to Allah's
pleasure, should cling.

E. Guidelines on Education:

Following are educational guidelines and general teachings on social
behaviour, ethics, worship, and mediation, quoted from the Imam of
Muslims, the guide of people, martyr Musa bin Ja'far al-Kadhim (a.s.).

He is reported to have said, "That who knows Allah well, should never
mistrust Allah with regard to His sustenance, nor should he think ill of
the way He manages His servants' lives."

Asked about certitude, he said, "It is putting one's trust in Allah,
submitting to Allah, being satisfied with Allah's ordinance, and
commending oneself to Allah."

He also said, "He who discusses the nature of Allah is doomed. He who
seeks leadership is doomed. He who thinks very highly of himself is
doomed"

"Good neighborliness is not refraining from mischief. It is patience
and tolerance towards mischief."

Once he said to one of his sons, "My little son, take care not to let
Allah see you committing a sin He forbids you to do. Take care not to
let Allah miss you doing a ritual of devotion He orders you to do. Never
think that you are not remiss in worship and obedience to Allah, for
Allah is never served as He should be served. Beware of joking, for it
removes the light of your faith, and deprives you of solemnity. Beware
of disinterest and laziness, as they block your success in this life and
the hereafter."

He said to Ziyad bin Abi-Salamah, pointing out the attitude one should
take towards the oppressors, emphasizing the necessity to boycott
them,

"O Ziyad, being thrown down from a high place, and cut into pieces, is
more pleasing to me than working on their behalf, or setting foot on a
mat of one of them."[^50]

"If oppression was prevailing, and right was shrinking, one had not to
think well of anyone else until he had known one to be righteous." "Work
hard to divide your day into four times: One for praying to Allah. One
for breadwinning. One for sitting with the brothers and trustworthy who
know your faults and are faithful to you from the depths of their
hearts. And one for your pleasures, without doing the forbidden. It is
this time that helps you to manage the other three times properly."

Do not think of poverty or long life, for whoever thinks of poverty
turns to misery, and whoever thinks of living long covets worldly
spoils. Let yourselves enjoy life by moderately getting what halal you
desire, which does not harm your solemnity. Fortify yourselves with
this, so that you can perform your religious duties. It is reported that
he who has given up his worldly life for the sake of his faith, or his
faith for the sake of his worldly life, is certainly not counted as one
of our followers."

"He who is punished unjustly knows full well what injustice means."

"A calamity is one trial for the patient. But it is doubled for the
impatient."

"Convey what is good. Say what is good. Do not be a naive imitator."
'What is meant by naive imitator?' asked I. "Do not say," replied the
Imam (a.s.) "I am with people. And I am one of them."[^51] The Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.) is reported to have said, "O people! There are only
two paths ahead of you', the path of goodness, and the path of evil, do
not let the path of evil be more desirable to you than that of
goodness."[^52]

We have quoted these statements and advice from the Imam (a.s.) without
commenting on them. They are self expressive and clear. How great is our
need today to study the lives of the Ahlul-Bait Imams (a.s.), and
examine, unbiasedly, their legacy. We need to make them our
exemplaries.

"These are they whom Allah guided, so follow their guidance..."

Holy Qur'an (6:91)


