Political and Social Conditions During Imam's Time
==================================================

Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) was born in the closing years of the
Umayyad rule. Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) wasn't five years old when the
Umayyads were overthrown. People were hoping that political and social
conditions would get better. Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) and the offspring of
Abu-Talib, in general, bore the bulk of the Umayyads terror and
oppression. The Umayyads shed the blood of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) and the
leading men from the descendants of Ali bin Abi-Talib and Fatimah
al-Zahra' (a.s.) and dealt with them in the most brutal and savage ways.
The most bitter and painful tragedy for Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) was the
massacre of Karbala' which was perpetrated by the Umayyad dictator Yazid
bin Mu'awiyah, on the tenth of Muharram, 61 A.H, in which Imam Hussein
bin Ali bin Abi-Talib (a.s.), the grandson of the Prophet (s.a.w.),
along with a number of the members of his family and followers were
martyred.

The second heart-rending tragedy took place in 121 A.H, in the month of
Safar. Zayd bin Ali bin Hussein bin Ali bin Abi-Talib was martyred on
the orders of the Umayyad ruler, Hisham bin Abd ul-Malik.

Abul-Faraj al-Asfahani, the famous historian, mentioned 33 martyrs from
the descendants of Abu-Talib, who were slaughtered at the hands of the
Umayyad rulers. The list begins with Imams Hassan and Hussein (a.s.),
the two master youths of Paradise, and the sons of Imam Ali (a.s.) and
Fatimah Mu'awiyah bin Abi-Sufyan, the first Umayyad ruler, was the first
murderer of the sons of Abu- Talib. The victims were all descendants of
Imam Ali (a.s.), Ja'far and Aqeel bin Abi-Talib, Imams Hassan and
Hussein (a.s.) the two sons of Imam Ali (a.s.) and Fatimah al-Zahra'
(a.s.), the Mistress of the Women of the World. They were all looked at
by the people as men of outstanding merits and piety. The Umayyads
couldn't tolerate them and unjustly and brutally slaughtered them. They
liquidated them because they wouldn't yield to oppression and hated to
be humiliated, and for such considerations they declared war on the
rulers, in defence of Islam, hoping to implement its teachings. In his
book Maqatil al-Talib (Murders of the Descendants of Abu-Talib),
Abul-Faraj al-Asfahani says that 33 members of the family of Abu- Talib
were killed as from the day Abul-Abbas al-Saffah seized power until the
death of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.). The three most well-known martyrs
among them were: Muhammad bin Abdullah bin al-Hassan (al-Nafs
al-Zakyyah), who was killed in 145 A.H., Hussein bin Ali bin al-Hassan
(Martyr of Fakh), who was killed on the 8th of Dul-Hijjah, 169 A.H. at
the hands of the Abbassid ruler, Musa al-Hadi bin Abi-Ja'far al-Mansoor,
near the well of Fakh in the vicinity of the holy city of Makkah, and
Imam Musa bin Ja'far al-Khadhim (a.s.), the chief and Imam of Ahlul-Bait
on the 25th of Rajab, 183 A.H, who was killed on the orders of the
Abbassid ruler Haroon al-Rasheed. But these 33 victimized Shi'ites were
only the leading men, famous and distinguished among the descendants of
Abu-Talib. As for the actual number of the victims, it is believed,
based on historical accounts, that the number is at least many times
larger.

Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) lived in the most critical and crucial time in
the life of Ahlul- Bait (a.s.).

The Abbassids hunted down the descendants of Imam Ali bin Abi-Talib
(a.s.) and their followers, prosecuting them in every part of the
Islamic state. Men recruited for this purpose were treated lavishly.
Their job was uprooting the Alawites, getting rid of their leaders
because of their fear of the hostile activities of the Alawites and the
love the common people held for them.

In this eventful period of time revolutions erupted, followed by
arrests and single or mass murders of the descendants of Imam Ali bin
Abi-Talib (a.s.) and their followers. It was a dark age, men were caught
and sentenced to death on the slightest suspicion. The Abbassids
monopolized power and thought little of peoples' dignity. Eventually,
imprisonment, beating and killing became common practices. The Islamic
state was turned into an empire governed by a hereditary dictatorship in
which the Islamic state was divided into fieldoms. Governors ruled,
abusing power, and acting according to their own wishes as long as they
remained loyal to the central government and the Abbassid caliph.

The rulers sought men of this caliber who would remain faithful to
them. The Abbassids were not concerned with establishing justice,
implementing Islamic laws and introducing reforms. They only thought of
their thrones and lusts. They busied themselves laying plans to
eliminate their Entertainment, singing and base arts permeated the
Muslim Society. The palaces of caliphs, princes, governors, ministers
and their entourage were filled with maidens and musical instruments and
dancers, and poets whose main were collecting money.

The rulers began eagerly to buy maidens,[^53] jewels, perfumes, clothes,
tools of entertainment, pleasure and luxury.

They pilfered millions and squandered the wealth of the ummah which
they milked from the veins of the oppressed, the hunted, the prisoners
or those sentenced to death In spite of this oppression, science,
literature and culture bloomed. Knowledge in general, literary works,
arts and discoveries prospered and new schools in philosophy and fiqh
surfaced. Such trends had both positive and negative effects on the life
of Muslims. They deepened division and dissension among Muslims. They
split into numerous ideological schools that led to the growing of
distrust, disbelief, and distortions in the beliefs of Muslims.
Positively, such new trends contributed to the development of Islamic
way of thinking, enrichment of the Islamic mentality and pushing it
toward new horizons of innovation and advancement. Islamic studies
expanded to new areas and realms.

Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) followed in the footsteps of his father,
al-Sadiq (a.s.). He played a key role in standing against decadence in
politics, morals and the Islamic way of life, brought about or helped by
the Abbassid rule. Even in prison, Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) didn't give up
his responsibility towards the faith and the faithful. Some scholars,
and many of his followers and students, kept contact with him secretly,
asking him about any aspect of Islamic thought and beliefs. He had his
means of writing back to them answering to their questions.

Due to the harsh conditions Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) went through, during
his Imamate, researchers find that the percentage of traditions and
statements on the various branches of knowledge handed down from him is
less compared to those of Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.), and Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir (a.s.), his grandfather.

If his father and grandfather were mostly busy explaining the knowledge
of Ahlul- Bait (a.s.) and outlining their school of thought and its
methodology concerning fiqh, Islamic beliefs, Qur'anic exegesis,
politics, morals, etc., which they took from their forefather Imam
al-Sajjad (a.s.), who took it from his father Imam al-Hussein (a.s.),
who took it from his father Imam Ali bin Abi-Talib (a.s.), who took it
from the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.); Imam al-Kadhim's (a.s.) role was
manifest in his political militancy. He peacefully challenged the
rulers, and, as a result, was thrown into prison. He acted wisely
according to the conditions of his time.

It is only natural that the "official" historians, who adhered to the
rulers out of fear of their power, would endear themselves to them,
falsifying the truth, lavishing the qualities of greatness, sacredness
and idealism on these tyrants. They tried hard to drown the voice of
right and avoid the mention of rejection and opposition to the
oppressors. They would depict the political opponents in their writings,
as subversives, mutinees and outlaws. Much have we read about the
Abbassid era being described as "the golden age". It is correct that
sciences and knowledge, in general, advanced clearly, thanks to the hard
work of the scholars, men of letters, intellectuals, fuqaha',
philosophers, and researchers, but the dynasty of the Abbassids only
spread terror and savageness.

Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), and the reformers, fuqaha' and scholars were the
victims, while the maidens, singers, entertainers, opportunists, royal
poets, judges, governors, the well-off and their likes, basked in the
wealth of the ummah.

The true value of the civilization can only be judged through its human
side, its efforts to establish justice, and the course it tread, not
through the material side which only represents the tool of the rulers
to plunder and expand their power.

During that terrible era (148-183 A.H.) Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) took on
the responsibility of Imamate.

Following is a brief look at the development of events which were to
the disadvantage of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), during that critical era.

A. The Imam (a.s.) and Abu-Jafar al-Mansoor:

Under the rule of Abu-Ja'far al-Mansoor, Alawites suffered beyond
description. They were terrorized in the most heartbreaking way. As the
picture was crystal clear for Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.), he knew in advance
that armed struggle would yield nothing, he avoided making his real
attitude public, preferring to keep his opposition to Abu-Ja'far
al-Mansoor secret. The years of al-Mansoor dragged on, heavy and bitter,
for Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.), and the sons of Abu-Talib in particular, and
the opposition of the broad sections of the ummah in general. Abu-
Ja'far al-Mansoor confiscated the property of the Alawites, threw them
behind bars, and hunted them down. He subjected them to unspeakable
torture, innovated new ways of killing them, and shed their blood
ruthlessly. He put them in half-built pillars and completed the building
leaving them there to die. He also withheld food and water from the
prisoners to let them die from starvation in the depths of his dark
horrible cells. He also used to weigh them down with shackles and chains
of which they slowly died. The term of Imam al-Kadhim's (a.s.) Imamate,
under al- Mansoor's rule, lasted ten years. Historians agree that
al-Mansoor didn't imprison Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.), but they said that he
was under surveillance assigning a few men to spy on him.

When al-Mansoor died on the third of Thil-Hijjah 158 A.H., his son,
Muhammad al-Mahdi, took over.

B. The Imam (a.s.) and Muhammad al-Mahdi:

The years of Abu-Ja'far al-Mansoor, the miser and murderer, who
plundered people's wealth, shed blood, stifled freedom and throttled
people, finally came to a close. People received the news of his death
with relief and delight, for they felt the chains broken which bound
them. However, the fear, gloom and general mistrust in the Abbassid
policy remained. In accordance with hereditary rule adopted by the
Abbassids, Muhammad al-Mahdi succeeded his father and ascended to the
caliphate. Al-Mahdi sensed the brutality of the policy his father had
taken and tried to soothe people's pains at the beginning of his
caliphate. He released prisoners and gave back confiscated property.
This decision applied also to the descendants of Abu-Talib.[^54] The
property of Imam Ja'far bin Muhammad al-Sadiq (a.s.), taken by the
Abbassid authorities, was turned back to his son, Imam Musa bin Ja'far
(a.s.).

That period, extending from 3 Thul-Hijjah 158 A.H. to 22 Muharram
169[^55] was a breathing space for the Imam and the descendants of
Abu-Talib. But fear of the strong personality of Imam Musa bin Ja'far
(a.s.) was eating away at al-Mahdi's heart. He saw how the masses
rallied around the descendants of Abu-Talib, and he was worried that
there would be an uprising against his rule. His enmity for Ahlul-Bait
(a.s.) increased. As a result, he ordered his governor in Madinah to ask
Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) to travel to Baghdad to stand trial and maybe face
a prison sentence. The governor instantly did al-Mahdi's bidding. Imam
al-Kadhim (a.s.) didn't resist. He set out on a long journey, across
extended deserts, to Baghdad. As he started his trip, the hearts of the
Shi'ites and his followers hovered over his caravan, frightened and
troubled. But Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) was sure that al-Mahdi wouldn't
do him any harm. He assured his close associates and companions of
this.

As soon as Imam Kadhim (a.s.) arrived in Baghdad, al-Mahdi ordered his
guard to arrest him and throw him in prison. But Allah wouldn't forget
his devoted servant. He guarded his servant against any evil.

A strange thing happened afterwards. Al-Mahdi, in a dream, saw the
Commander of the Faithful (a.s.), threatening him and saying "O
Muhammad, 'But if you turn away, you are sure to make mischief in the
land and cut off the ties of kinship." Al-Mahdi awoke, seized with great
panic. He sent for al-Rabi', his vizier, and ordered him to set Imam
Kadhim (a.s.) free.

Imam Kadhim (a.s.), released from prison, returned to the city of his
grandfather, the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.), and resumed his religious,
educational and cultural mission.

C. The Imam (a.s.) and Musa al-Hadi:

Al-Hadi's rule was one of the most difficult periods for the
descendants of Abu- Talib. He adopted the policy of hatred toward the
Alawites, the descendants of Ali bin Abi-Talib, and the sons of
Abu-Talib in general. He persecuted and harassed them. The Alawites, who
could endure such savageness no more, revolted against him under the
leadership of al-Hussein bin Ali near a place called Fakh in 169 A.H.
That was during the Imamate of Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.).

That revolt reflected the spirit of the struggle between Ahlul-Bait
(a.s.) and their followers, and the corrupt Abbassid rulers. Because the
revolt took place in the time of Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.), and because of
its historical importance, and its significance as a beacon for the
militants, we provide, in the following pages, a nearly detailed account
of it

1. "Fakh": Star in the Sky of History:

In the Sky of Islamic history, places, events and personalities shone.
From the heart of the ummah and its arteries too much pure blood flowed
and irrigated the sapling of faith. With glittering titles and shining
letters, this blood wrote the epics of glory and jihad. The land of Fakh
is one of those never-forgotten places. So is the leader of the
uprising, al-Hussein bin Ali bin al-Hassan bin al-Hassan bin Ali bin
Abi-Talib, and his devoted followers. Fakh was perpetuated the same way
Badr, Karbala' and their likes were immortalized.

The great tragedy of Fakh is actually a repetition of Karbala', and an
echo of the great martyr Imam Hussein (a.s.).

If you read the prosecution of Zainab to the people of Kufa, and listen
to her complaint and lamentation, you will have no doubts that Karbala'
was repeated at Fakh. The disaster that had befallen Ahlul-Bait (a.s.)
at Karbala' was recounted on the pure dust of Fakh. Zainab, the daughter
of Imam Ali bin Abi-Talib (a.s.), and her holiness Fatimah (a.s.), had
only just addressed the people of Kufah--after she had witnessed the
tragedy and surveyed the battlefield examining the bodies of her
slaughtered family--with these words,

"Woe to you! Do you know how you tore the liver of the Apostle of
Allah? Whom of his women folk you exposed? What blood of his you shed?
What honour of his you defamed?"

History repeated itself. Years after the tragedy of Karbala', Zainab,
the daughter of Abdullah bin al-Hassan bin al-Hassan bin Ali bin
Abi-Talib, the mother of al- Hussein bin Ali, the leader of the uprising
of Fakh, lived the same tragedy, and suffered the same anguish. This
woman mourned her father, brother, husband, her cousins and their sons
who were put to the sword by Abu-Ja'far al-Mansoor, and wore only
callous hairy garments, as a sign of her deep grief over their death.
This devout woman used to lament them, crying until she fainted. She
wouldn't revile Abu-Ja'far al-Mansoor, lest she should find consolation
in something displeasing. She would say, "O You who created the skies
and the earth, O You Who knows the unseen and the visible, Who judges
between His servants, judge between us and our people fairly, and You
are the best among those who judge."[^56]

"Zainab used to prance about with al-Hussein, who was still a little
boy, and al-Hassan, his brother, chanting:

"You know, O the son of Zainab and Hind, how many men you have in the
desert ready for battle. How many truthful, honourable maternal uncles
you have, how many great grandfathers you have."[^57]

Time had come for her son, al-Hussein, the revolutionary Alawite to
follow in the footsteps of Imam Hussein (a.s.), hoist the banner of
jihad and martyrdom, shed his pure blood, and leave the Apostle of Allah
(s.a.w.) to grieve over him, as he had done over the martyrs of
Karbala'. Both tragedies, Fakh and Karbala', moved the Apostle of Allah
(s.a.w.) and the members of his family to tears. He talked about them in
advance and cried bitterly for the tribulations his family would face.

Shaikh Abul-Hassan Ali bin Muhammad al-Mawardi al-Shafi'i, in his book,
A'lam al-Nubuwwah (Signs of Prophethood), p. 83, the edition published
in Egypt, says:

"Of his forewarnings is that which was reported by Urwah, on the
authority of A'ishah (a wife of the Prophet). Urwah said, 'Hussein bin
Ali (a.s.) went to see the Messenger of Allah of the time when he was
receiving revelations from his Lord. Hussein mounted the back of the
Prophet (s.a.w.) who was prostrate. Hussein played there. 'O Muhammad,'
called Gabrial, 'your ummah would certainly suffer from dissension after
your death. This son of yours would certainly be killed after you.'
Gabrial stretched out his hand and brought a handful of white dust, and
said, 'On this land your son will be slaughtered. It is called al-
Taff'" After Gabrial had gone, the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.) came out to
meet his followers, including Abu-Bakr, Umar, Ali, Hudaifah, Ammar and
Abu-Thar. The Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.) was crying. 'What makes you cry,
O Messenger of Allah?' asked his followers, to which question he
replied, 'Gabrial has just told me that my son, Hussein, will be killed
after my death in the land of al- Taff He has brought to me this dust
and said that it was taken from the spot where he would be murdered
"[^58]

In addition to the tragedy of Karbala', the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
had told his companions about the battle of Fakh. Abu-Ja'far Muhammad
al-Baqir bin Ali (a.s.) is reported to have said through a chain of
transmitters, that, "the Prophet (s.a.w.) once passed by Fakh. He
dismounted and offered two ruk'ah prayer. In the second ruk'ah his eyes
welled with tears. When people saw the Prophet (s.a.w.) crying they
cried When they left that place he asked them, mat made you cry.?' 'When
we sawyou crying, we also cried, O Apostle of Allah, , said the people.
'At the end of the first ruk'ah, Gabrial descended,' replied the Prophet
(s.a.w.), 'and said: 'O Muhammad, a man from your descendents will be
murdered in this place. The divine reward for every one who would be
martyred with him shall be twofold."[^59]

Imam Ja'far bin Muhammad al-Sadiq (a.s.) stopped, on one of his
journeys from Madinah to Makkah, at Fakh. There he offered a prayer.
"May I be your ransom," asked al-Nadhr bin Arwash, the owner of the
camels rented for the journey, "I have seen you do something. Is it one
of the rites of hajj?"

"No," said the Imam (a.s.), "but a man from my household will be killed
right here, fighting along side a bunch of men whose souls will fly
ahead of their bodies towards Paradise."[^60]

Zayd bin Ali bin al-Hussein is reported to have said that the Apostle
of Allah (s.a.w.) had performed prayer at Fakh and said, "Right here, a
man from my own family will be killed along with a group of devout men.
Their shrouds and perfume (which is ritually applied to the dead) shall
be brought to them from Paradise. Their souls will outrun their bodies
to Paradise."[^61]

If the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.) and Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), who didn't
witness the massacre, were greatly shocked at the horrendous news, Imam
Musa bin Ja'far al- Kadhim (a.s.), the Imam of Muslims and the chief of
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) of the time, must have been moved beyond description
by the tragedy as it unfolded in front of him. That tragedy had a heavy
impact on his life and mission. That is because the day of Fakh was a
terribly saddening memory in the history of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.). Imam
Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s.), the grandson of Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.), was
quoted as saying, "After al-Taff we witnessed no massacre more horrible
than that of Fakh. "[^62]

Musa al-Hadi, the Abbassid caliph, on whose order the massacre was
perpetrated, blamed the uprising on Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) and the
survivors from the house of Abu-Talib. Imam Kadhim (a.s.) endured all
the atrocities against him and his followers with his great heart,
endless patience and iron will.

That is the great leader. Muslim leaders have to be greater than
tribulations, firmer than the hardships placed in their path, and braver
than their adversaries, so that they can go on with their tasks. The
Imams of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) were all possessed of such qualities. How
truthful are the words of the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.), "We are members
of a household to whom no one could ever be compared"

2. Blood and Martyrdom in the Uprising of Fakh:

Musa al-Hadi was in constant fear of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), who enjoyed the
support of the masses. He particularly feared Imam Musa (a.s.) and his
leadership. His fear intensified when the Alawite revolutionary Abu-
Abdullah al-Hussein bin Ali bin al- Hassan bin al-Hassan bin al-Hassan
bin al-Hassan bin Ali bin Abi-Talib (a.s.) rose up in arms, in the
historical battle of Fakh. By then he had no doubts that it was the
leader of Ahlul-Bait, Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.), who was the
motivator, director, planner, and backer of the revolt.

Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) were always there in the arena. Hardly freshly shed
blood of theirs dried without other blood of theirs shed.

No sooner did a star of theirs fade in the sky of jihad than a new star
rose. They were the blood of Islam, its heart, and its guiding brain.
They were the driving force, and the hand that pushed forward the jihad,
opposition, reform and change. They were the articulate tongue of right,
in the name of the downtrodden and victims, and the drawn sword over the
necks of the tyrants and oppressors.

Al-Hussein bin Ali bin al-Hassan bin al-Hassan bin al-Hassan bin Ali
bin Abi-Talib declared war against the Abbassid ruler in Dul-Qi'dah, 169
A.H., from the holy city of Madinah near the tomb of the Apostle of
Allah (s.a.w.). His revolt failed, and he was killed at Fakh in the
vicinity of Makkah.

Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) were shocked at the result of the uprising, and they
were subjected to persecution, oppression and torture. Based on the
traditions and statements handed down from his forefathers, Imam Musa
al-Kadhim (a.s.) was fully sure, in advance, that the movement would be
foiled. But al-Hussein insisted on his plan. He saw no other alternative
beyond the uprising. He couldn't vision the consequences as clear as
Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.). Furthermore, he could no longer endure the
brutalities done to Ahlul-Bait (a.s.). When Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.)
saw that al-Hussein bin Ali wouldn't yield, and that his decision to
revolt was final, he expressed his grief over al-Hussein's inevitable
fate, and took farewell of him, saying these words which signal his
conviction that he would see al-Hussein no more:

"You will surely be killed So strike hard in the battle, for those
people are irreligious. They pretend to be faithful, but they hide their
hypocrisy and disbelief We are from Allah and to Him we shall return. I
seek Allah's reward by your loss, O good people."[^63]

Historians wrote about this heroic uprising, analyzing its terrible and
tragic outcome. Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani says:

"The reason why al-Hussein bin Ali bin al-Hassan bin al-Hassan bin
al-Hassan bin Ali bin Abi-Talib revolted was that Musa al-Hadi appointed
Ishaq bin Isa bin Ali as the governor of Madinah. Ishaq put a man called
Abul-Aziz bin Abdullah al- Umari[^64] in his place. Al-Umari hated the
house of Abu-Talib. He offended them and went to excessive lengths in
maltreating them. He ordered them to report to him every day at the
reception hall of his palace. Each one of them stood surety for his
companion or relative. Al-Hasan bin Muhammad bin Abdullah bin al-Hassan
was guaranteed by both al-Hussein bin Ali and Yahya bin Abdullah bin
al-Hassan.

Al-Hussein bin Muhammad arrived in the first days of hajj. About
seventy men from the Shi'ites also came with him. They all stayed at the
house of Ibn Aflah at al-Baqi'. There, they met al-Hussein, among many
others. Al-Umari heard of that and he flew into a fury. Before that,
al-Umari had arrested al-Hassan bin Muhammad bin Abdullah, Ibn Jundub
al-Huthali, the poet, and a slave of Umar bin al-Khattab[^65] while they
were present at a meeting. He claimed publically that they were caught
drinking wine. He ordered al-Hassan to be given 80 lashes, Ibn Jundub
15, and the slave of Umar bin al-Khattab seven. Then he ordered them to
be displayed throughout the city, with bare backs, so that they would be
disgraced..."[^66]

Finally, he backed off although he once again began to persecute the
descendants of Abu-Talib. Abu-Bakr bin Isa al-Ha'ik, whom he appointed
in charge of their affairs, maltreated them. One Friday he locked them
in the mosque till the time of the Friday prayer entered. He then
allowed them only to do their ablution (wudoo'). Having finished the
prayer, he threw them in the reception hall. In the afternoon he checked
them, looking for al-Hassan bin Muhammad who had not presented himself
for three successive days to Abu-Bakr bin Isa. Not finding him among the
detained group he threatened both Yahya and al-Hussein, who stood surety
for him, with imprisonment if they failed to bring al-Hassan to him.
Yahya spoke roughly with him, reviling him. Ibn al-Ha'ik reported that
to al-Umari who sent for Yahya and al-Hussein and scolded them severely.
Al-Hussein managed to pretend to be friendly with al-Umari and discussed
the matter calmly. "I will bring al-Hassan bin Muhammad to you," said
Yahya to al-Umari. "I will bring him if I find him or I will knock on
your door so that you will know that I have called on you." Later
al-Hussein asked with great surprise, "How will you bring al-Hassan to
him?" Yahya answered, "I did not mean that I would hand over al-Hassan
to him. I only meant that I would knock on his door carrying my sword
with me. If it was possible I would kill him." Al-Hussein narrated the
whole story to al-Hassan bin Muhammad, and said in conclusion, "You have
heard what took place between this depraved man and us. So you may go to
wherever you wish." Al-Hassan refused and said, "Rather I will go right
now and put my hand in his. Al-Hussein rejected this proposal and said
to al-Hassan, "I myself will go with you so that Allah may spare me the
fire."

Al-Hussein then called the Hashimites, his followers and servants.
twenty-six men from the family of Abu-Talib, ten from the pilgrims and a
band of servants answered his call.

When the dawn prayer was due, they went into the mosque. Abdullah bin
al- Hassan al-Aftas asked the caller of the adan (prayer call) to
include "hayyi ala khayril-amal" (hurry to the best deed) into his adan
as it was recited in the time of the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.).
Frightened, the man recited the phrase at which point al-Umari knew that
an Alawite revolution was announced. Confused and scared, al-Umari lost
control of himself and began crying ravingly inside his palace, "Close
the mule...the door," and, "Feed me two grains of water." These two
sentences were soon spread among the people indicating his fear. They
nicknamed his son, "Son of Two Grains of Water". The Alawites were true
to their word. They stormed al-Umari's house but the man escaped death
at the hands of the people by prayer and delivered a sermon at the end
of the prayer. He then seized control of the city. That was in the month
of Dil-Qi'dah, 169 A.H. For the sake of hajj, and winning people to his
side, al-Hussein headed for Makkah.

Accompanied by about 200 people from his own family and followers, he
set out on the journey hoping to meet as many pilgrims as he could. When
they drew near Makkah and arrived at Fakh[^67] and the Valley of Baldah,
the Abbassid army attacked them, and a ferocious battle ensued between
the two parties on the morning of the day of Tarwiyah (the ninth of
Dil-Hijjah). Due to their small number, the followers of al-Hassan were
crushed. Al-Hussein, who was wounded, was offered amnesty if he
surrendered. He said to his enemies, "By Allah, one cannot trust you,
but, nevertheless, I accept your promise of amnesty." His sword broken,
he gave himself up. Breaking their word, they put him to the sword after
brutally torturing him.

This heroic uprising ended in a horrible tragedy and great sacrifice.
More than one hundred men were martyred from these bold revolutionaries.
Historians stated that the Abbassids cut off the heads of the martyrs.
The rest of the small army was taken captive.

3. Abbassid Authorities Blame the Imam (a.s.) for Battle of Fakh:

The heads were brought to Musa and al-Abbas. Present were men from the
families of al-Hassan and al-Hussein. Also present was Imam Musa bin
Ja'far (a.s.) who was asked by al-Abbas about the heads. "Is this the
head of Hussein?"

"Yes," replied Imam Kadhim (a.s.), "We belong to Allah and to Him we
shall return. He died, by Allah, a righteous Muslim, who kept fasting,
enjoining good and forbidding evil. In his family he had no match."

The captives were carried to al-Hadi who ordered them to be
executed.[^68] Not only did the murderers shed the blood unjustly,
mutilate the bodies of the martyrs and kill the prisoners, but they,
namely al-Umari, razed the victims' houses to the ground, confiscated
their property, and set their orchards on fire.

Historians say then, "when al-Umari, who was in the city of Madinah at
the time, got word of the outcome of the battle, he burnt down the house
of al-Hussein and the houses of his family, confiscated their wealth and
date-palm orchards considering them as part of the spoils of war
traditionally set aside for the ruler."[^69]

Another version says, "He hastened to the house of al-Hussein, and the
houses of members of his family, and others who took part in the
uprising of al-Hussein and tore them down. He set the date-palms ablaze,
and took over those which he did not destroy considering it as part of
the spoils of war traditionally set aside for the ruler."[^70]

Such is the practice of tyrants, anytime and anywhere, against the
symbols of uprightness and vanguards of mujahideen. It is motivated by
the black desire to kill and plunder, confiscate property and find
comfort at the pain of others.

The heads of the martyrs were placed before the Abbassid caliph, Musa
al-Hadi. At that point, he was boiling with spite and the spirit of
revenge. He wanted to repress the family of Abu-Talib and its chief, the
Muslims' Imam, Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.). He resorted to threats, and swore
that he would get rid of Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.). He couldn't make a
distinction between the supervision of Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) of
the uprising and the actual leadership of this great Alawite Islamic
revolt which was achieved by al-Hussein. Al-Hussein had stressed that he
only wanted to restore the right of governance to Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) and
to rule in accordance with the Qur'anic teachings and the sunnah of the
Prophet (s.a.w.). He said:

"I give you my pledge to abide by the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of
the Apostle of Allah, that Allah should be obeyed and not disobeyed I
call you to please the household of Muhammad I promise you to rule
according to the Book of Allah and the sunnah of His prophet, blessings
of Allah be on him and his family, establish equality among people, and
distribute money equally among Muslims. I demand that you stay with us
to the end, fighting our enemy. If we were true to our word, stick to
your pledge of support, but if we were not, consider your pledge of
allegiance to us null and void."[^71]

A good look at these historical documents explains to us the nature of
the political and social conditions Muslims in general, and the
Alawites, their leaders and Imams in particular, went through and
acquaints us with the grave dilemma of the ummah and the root cause of
the revolts, uprisings and continuous opposition to the different
despotic regimes by the Imams of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.). Thanks to their
unselfishness, bravery, frankness and leadership qualifications, they
were acknowledged as the sole competent leaders of the ummah. Truthful
are the words of the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.) concerning Ahlul-Bait,
"We are members of a household to whom no one could ever be compared"

The Abbassid ruler, Musa al-Hadi, couldn't overlook this fact. He knew
full well the real forces which dominated the social and political
arena, which acted to bring about a social and political change and
introduce reforms to the Islamic society. He attributed the uprising to
Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) in the same way al-Mansoor before him blamed
the uprising of Muhammad (al-Nafs al-Zakiyyah) on Imam al- Sadiq (a.s.),
the father of Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.), and exactly as Hisham, the
Umayyad ruler, had blamed the uprising of Zayd to Imam Muhammad al-Baqir
(a.s.), the grandfather of Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.), despite the fact
that all the three Imams had advised Zayd, Muhammad Thul-Nafs
al-Zakiyyah and al-Hussein bin Ali, the leader of the uprising of Fakh,
against resorting to armed struggle, because they knew beforehand that
course of action would bring nothing. They spoke frankly to the three
leaders before the uprisings. But these facts wouldn't convince the
rulers who feared even the mention of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) who commanded
people's respect and obedience. Historians say that Abu-Hanifah, the
leader of an Islamic school of thought, supported Zayd and passed a
religious decree (fatwah) allowing Muslims to give the Islamic tax of
Zakat in favour of Zayd's movement. Abu-Yousif, the well-known judge,
the companion of Abu- Hanifah, and one of the most famous official
fuqaha' of his time, defended Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) before Musa
al-Hadi when the latter made up his mind to kill the Imam, despite his
religious differences with Ahlul- Bait (a.s.), and the fact that he led
a different school of thought.

Let's have a look at the following historic document:

"When the head of Abu-Abdullah al-Hussein bin Ali, the leader of the
well known uprising of Fakh, was brought to Musa al-Hadi and placed
before him, he recited these lines of verse:

"O our cousins! Recite verse no longer after you have laid verse rhyme
to rest "We are by no means like those people whom you can appease, and
easily convince with mere words, or the arbitration of a judge.

"Nay, the edge of the sword is hanging above you. We shall be satisfied
as soon as the sword is satisfied.

"Should you say that we have done injustice, it is not so, but we have
gone to the wrong arbitrator.

"I am boundlessly upset by what the war has brought between us, O our
cousins, if only that was an easy task!."

He then reviled the family of Abu-Talib until he mentioned Imam Musa
bin Ja'far (a.s.) whom he swore by Allah to kill. Abu Yousif, the judge
present, spoke well of him until al-Hadi calmed down."[^72]

Musa al-Hadi, Allamah al-Majlisi reports, sent for one of the captives.
He scolded him severely then killed him. Another group of the sons of
the Commander of the Faithful Ali bin Abi-Talib, blessings of Allah be
upon him, faced the same fate shortly after. Then al-Hadi began to curse
the family of Abu-Talib. He did not spare Imam Musa bin Ja'far, the
blessings of Allah be upon him, whom he reviled. "By Allah, Hussein did
not rebel until after being ordered by him.

Hussein has only done what he deemed on behalf of him (Imam Musa Kadhim
(a.s.)), because he is the appointed trustee of this household. May
Allah destroy me if I spare him." Abu-Yousif, Ya'qoob bin Ibrahim, the
judge, who would not hesitate to speak his mind with al-Hadi said, "O
Commander of the Faithful! Shall I talk or keep silent?! May Allah kill
me if I for give Musa bin Ja'far. If I had not heard about what al-Mahdi
had said to al-Mansoor about the outstanding merits of Ja'far, his
faith, knowledge, and righteousness, and if I had not been informed of
al- Saffah's praise of Ja'far, I would have dug up his grave and set it
on fire."

Abu-Yousif, talked importunately, asking him to calm down until he did
so.[^73] But Musa al-Hadi wouldn't feel comfortable or contented with his
kingdom while Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) was free, playing his cultural
role, and enjoying a leading social position. For these reasons, he
decided to detain the Imam whom he continued to threaten with harsh
measures.

Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) got word of al-Hadi's real intention. That didn't
scare him. He gave no thought to it. He was sure that ruler would face
his grave fate and his rule would soon come to an end.

Ali bin Yaqtin, one of Imam's closest companions, relates this story:

"Abul-Hassan Musa bin Ja'far was sitting with men from his own family
when he was informed of Musa bin al-Mahdi's decision concerning him.
'What do you think I should do?', the Imam asked them. 'We think that
you should keep apart from him and avoid meeting him, for he is an evil
man.'"

Abul-Hassan Musa bin Ja'far smiled and said: 'Sukkaynah claimed that
she would defeat her Lord But the One Who always defeats the heroes
shall certainly prevail.' Then he raised his hands in prayer, 'O Lord,
how many a foe has sharpened the blade of his knife, honed the edge of
his sword, prepared for me the fatalist of his poisons, whose eye never
slept, always watching me. Seeing me unable to endure disasters and ward
off the disastrous calamities, You turned all that away from me with
Your power and might. You threw him in the hole he had dug for me,
disappointed at not achieving what he had hoped for in this world, being
distanced from what he wished for in the next world. For that, I praise
You as much as You deserve.

"'My Lord, O Allah! Punish him with Your might, weaken his strength
with Your power, keep him busy finding no way to achieve his ends, and
unable to do what he intends to. O my Lord! Grant me a quick victory
over him that would heal me of my anger, and restore my right. O Lord!
Accept my prayer, and bring about the change I desire as a result of my
complaint. Show him soon what You promised the unjust, and show me what
You promised as an answer to the prayer of the needy. Certainly You are
the One whose grace is infinite and favours are abundant'

"Ibn Yaqtin then said, 'Thereafter, the people Scattered. They gathered
after that only to read the letter sent to Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.)
informing him of the death of Musa bin al-Mahdi."[^74]

Thus the struggle between this Abbassid ruler and Imam Musa bin Ja'far
(a.s.) came to an end, but it restarted with the new ruler, Haroon
al-Rasheed.


