The Imam (a.s.) and Haroon Al-rasheed
=====================================

A. Concise Account of Al-Rasheed's Policy:

Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.), like the other members of Ahlul-Bait
(a.s.), their followers and the common people, lived in an atmosphere of
oppression, terror, and intimidation. At any moment they could be thrown
in jails or made homeless.

During that period of time, the Abbassids got rid of many of their own
supporters and followers. The Barmecides, who were staunchly loyal to
them, who shed blood, and brutally dealt with people to consolidate the
Abbassid rule, weren't spared. Like many others, they were put to the
sword.

A glance at what was said by the closest allies of the Abbassids and
the events of that era, would reveal to us the scope of fear and terror
implanted by the new rulers in the hearts of people, and the importance
of Imam's firm attitude of standing up against injustice and terror, and
tearing down the wall of fear among the ummah.

Al-Fadhl bin Yahya bin Khalid al-Barmaki, a close assistant of
al-Rasheed, was stripped naked, beaten, insulted and cursed publically
on the orders of al-Rasheed, because he provided some comfort to Imam
al-Kadhim (a.s.) while he was in prison.

Al-Fadhl bin al-Rabi', one of the closest Abbassid officials to
al-Rasheed, and a pillar of the Abbassid rule, recounts a bitter
experience, which portrays the depth of fear and panic which he felt,
due to the suffocating political climate created by the Abbassids.

"One night," al-Fadhl says, "I was lying in bed with one of my
bonds-maids. At about midnight, I heard the door of the main room
rattling. I was panic stricken. 'Maybe it is the wind,' said the maid.
But it was not long before the door of the bedroom opened and Masroor,
The Big, stepped in. 'The prince wants you.' He said that without
greeting me and so I felt an overwhelming despair. 'This is Masroor,'
said I to myself. 'He entered my house without my permission. He has not
greeted me. Nothing then awaits me but death.' I was unclean but I could
not ask Masroor for a delay to go to the bathroom. Realizing how
bewildered and awkward I was, the maid urged me, ,Put your trust in
Allah, the Mighty and High, and rise up.' I rose up and put on my
clothes. I went with Masroor to the caliph's palace. He was lying in his
bed. I greeted him, and he returned my greeting. At that point I
collapsed. 'Are you scared?', asked he. 'Yes, Commander of the
Faithful,' I replied. He left me alone for nearly an hour until I felt
calm again."[^75]

The reader of this historical document realizes how the Abbassids
abused people's liberties. The closest official to the ruler, and the
key pillar of al-Rasheed's rule, was obsessed with fear. What about the
opponents, and those who had nothing to do with the ruler, especially
the common people?

The policy of terror practised by the Abbassids isn't in fact,
different from the methods adopted by the spying agencies, intelligence
apparatus, and police units employed by the terrorist regimes, imposed
on the people. We have seen how al- Rasheed's messenger stormed into
al-Fadhl's house, while the latter was sleeping in his bed, with no
prior permission. We have read how he was driven by despair to the point
of fainting, and how he could not talk with al-Rasheed until one hour
had passed and after he came around.

This is what fear does to men's will. It deprives them of their dignity
and humanity.

Here is another document handed down to us by the historians. This time
the mass scare from the Abbassid authorities is fully described. It is
said that when Yahya bin Kahlid al-Barmaki arrived at Baghdad to lay the
plans for the assassination of Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.), the people
were shocked by his mission. Fear took hold of them. Rumours spread, and
stories of an impending evil were heard everywhere. The historical text
reads, "Then Yahya bin Khalid, himself, arrived at Baghdad using the
services of the post. People were greatly troubled, and they plunged
into unbridled rumours."[^76]

These words, "People were greatly troubled, and they plunged into
unbridled rumours" reflect expressly the nature of the relationship
between the ummah and the rulers. They depict a clear picture of how the
state affairs were conducted, how the Abbassids and their followers
consolidated their grip over the ummah, and how the attitude of the Imam
was, in fact, a result of his feeling of the heavy burden of salvaging
the ummah and tearing down the wall of terror built around them.

That is the constant policy of Ahlul-Bait Imams (a.s.) toward the
successive tyrants. Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) stayed in prison and
refused to go out. He wanted to make it clear to the ummah that the
struggle between them and the unjust rulers would go on for years, as
long as the legitimate leadership was opposing oppression, while being
restricted. On this path treaded the reformers who preferred the
darkness of jails to the luxury of palaces. With their swords and the
words of right, they faced the tyrants.

Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), their followers, and the descendants of Ali bin
Abi-Talib (a.s.), offered, throughout the reigns of Abul-Abbas
al-Saffah, al-Mansoor, al-Hadi, al- Mahdi, al-Rasheed, and the rest of
the Abbassid dynasty, their blood for the sake of the faith. They filled
up the cells and dungeons. On their bodies palaces were built, and in
their pillars they were thrown alive. Their heads were carried from one
city to another.

A tragic, heartrending story about the savagery and brutality of the
Abbassids was recounted by Hamid bin Quhtubah, a senior assistant of
al-Rasheed, to one of his closest friends.[^77]

The story says that when al-Rasheed was in Toos (Khurasan-Iran), he
sent for Hamid bin Qurtubah. Al-Rasheed asked him about his loyalty to
him, to which question Hamid answered that he was quite ready to carry
out whatever task he might assign him. When al-Rasheed felt Hamid was
staunchly loyal to him and that he was capable of doing what he wanted
him to do, he ordered his servant to give him a sword and take him to a
closed house in whose center there was a well. There were three big
rooms in the house. When Hamid opened the door of the first room, he saw
twenty men; young, middle-aged and old, from the descendants of Ali bin
Abi-Talib and Fatimah (a.s.). They were all in shackles and chains. The
servant ordered him to kill them and throw their bodies into the well,
which he did.

In the second room there were also twenty men. Hamid killed them all
with his sword. And he did the same thing to the fettered men in the
third room who were also twenty in number.

This story was kept a guarded secret for a long time, in the cells of
the terrorist rulers and murderers. He had murdered for no convincing
reasons at all, obsessed by the feeling that he had lost his humanity
and was metamorphosed into a blood-thirsty animal, and being desperate
from Allah's forgiveness, Hamid bin Quhtubah divulged that horrible
secret.

In the holy month of Ramadham, Ubaidullah al-Bazzaz al-Nishapoori, an
intimate friend of Hamid called on him. Ubaidullah had just arrived from
a long journey. Hamid bin Quhtubah was preparing his lunch. Hamid asked
his friend to eat, hut Ubaidullah excused himself by saying that he was
fasting. "Maybe the prince has an excuse and a religiously acceptable
reason for not fasting. But for me, I am fasting." 'I am not sick,'
replied Hamid, 'and I have no excuse at all.' Then tears rolled down his
cheeks and he cried. He narrated the dreadful story. 'What kind of
forgiveness can I hope to win?', he said hopelessly, 'and what benefit
would my fasting be after I have committed this crime and slain sixty
innocent men from the descendants of Ali and Fatimah? How could I meet
Allah and his Messenger tomorrow?"[^78]

Historians recounted numerous tragic stories about the persecution of
the Alawites and their followers, especially the companions, students
and disciples of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.).

Muhammad bin Abi-Umayr al-Azadi, historians say, was one of the most
trustworthy men in the eyes of both Sunnis and Shi'ites. He was known
for his asceticism, devoutness and worship. Al-Jahidh, the reputed
writer, is reported to have said, "He was unique, among all people, in
everything." And added, "He was a leading rejectionist (of the Abbassid
rule). In the days of al-Rasheed he was thrown in jail in order to force
him to accept the post of the senior judge, or, as some people said, to
disclose the names of the Shi'ites and the companions of Imam Musa bin
Ja'far (a.s.). For that, he was severely beaten. He was about to confess
due to the pain which was beyond his endurance, when he heard Muhammad
bin Yonis bin Abdul-Rahman saying to him, 'Fear Allah, Muhammad bin
Abi-Umayr.' He held up and Allah relieved him when he was released."

Al-Kashshi said that he was flogged 120 times with a piece of wood, in
the days of al-Rasheed. Al-Sindi bin Shahik flogged him. The charge was
being a Shi'ite. He was also thrown in jail and not set free until he
had paid, from his own wealth, 21,000 Dirhams. It was reported that
al-Ma'moon, the Abbassid caliph, had imprisoned him until he accepted
the post of the senior judge in one of the provinces. In al-Ikhtisas,
Sheikh al-Mufid says that he was locked up for 17 years, during which
his sister buried his books. But after four years the books were found
to have decayed.[^79]

The annals of history recorded many heroic epics of the disciples of
Imam al- Kadhim (a.s.). Sheikh al-Mufid mentions in his book,
al-Ikhtisas that "Ali bin Hashim bin al-Barid, Abdullah bin Alqamah, and
Mukhawwal bin Ibrahim al-Sahdi were close companions of Imam al-Kadhim
(a.s.). All of them were thrown in al- Matbiq.[^80] There, they remained
12 years."[^81]

B. The Imam (a.s.) is Al-Rasheed's Prison:

In such a climate of terror and oppression, it was only natural that
Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) would fall victim to the rash policies of
al-Rasheed, and to the lies of his enemies who were continuously giving
false information about him.

Al-Rasheed, obsessed by the idea of keeping his power, believed them.
Historians say that "the reason why Musa bin Ja'far came to Baghdad was
that Haroon al- Rasheed wanted to appoint his son Muhammad bin Zubaida
(al-Amin) as the crown prince. He had 14 sons, from among whom he picked
three to succeed him: Muhammad bin Zubaidah whom he made the crown
prince, Abdullah al- Ma'moon, whom he appointed as the successor to
al-Amin, and al-Qasim al- Mu'taman, who would take over after
al-Ma'moon.

Al-Rasheed wanted to settle the matter and make it public so that all
people would be aware of it. He went to perform hajj in the year 179
A.H. From Makkah he wrote to all fuqaha', scholars, preachers and
governors to attend the season of hajj in Makkah. He, himself, took the
route that would lead him to Madinah.

Ali bin Muhammad al-Nawfali said, "My father said that the reason why
Yahya bin Khalid spoke evil of Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) before
al-Rasheed was that al- Rasheed had put his son, Muhammad bin Zubaidah,
in the care of Ja'far bin Muhammad bin al-Ash'ath, as his tutor, Yahya
was extremely infuriated. 'If al- Rasheed dies and Ja'far bin Muhammad
al-Asha'th and his sons seize control of the state affairs,' said Yahya
to himself, 'that only means that my power and that of my sons will
certainly come to an end, while Ja'far bin Muhammad bin al-Asha'th and
his sons will enjoy power.' Yahya knew that Ja'far was Shi'ite, so he
pretended to be Shi'ite before Ja'far who was greatly delighted by that.
As a result, he confided in Yahya, telling him all about his personal
affairs and had no doubt that he was loyal to Imam Musa bin Ja'far
(a.s.).

When he got quite sure that Ja'far was a follower of Imam Musa bin
Ja'far (a.s.), Yahya began to vilify him before al-Rasheed who was kind
to him due to the great efforts he and his father had made in supporting
the Abbassids in their fight to seize power. Al-Rasheed thus was not
ready to take a decisive decision concerning him. Meanwhile, Yahya did
not stop accusing Ja'far of fatal charges.

One day Ja'far called on al-Rasheed, who received him warmly. They
talked bitterly about Ja'far's loyalty to the Abbassids. Ja'far
beseeched al-Rasheed not to look at him with suspicion, reminding him of
the sacrifices of he and his father. Al- Rasheed gave him a reward of
20,000 Dinars. Yahya, who was present, said nothing until nightfall. At
that time he said to al-Rasheed, 'Commander of the Faithful, I have been
talking to you about Ja'far and his religious beliefs, but you will not
believe me. Here is something that will settle the matter.' 'And what is
that?', enquired al-Rasheed. 'As soon as he receives money from anyone,'
explained Yahya, 'he will send one-fifth of it to Musa bin Ja'far. I
have no doubt that he has done so with the 20,000 Dinars you have
ordered to be given to him.' That will settle the matter,' agreed
Haroon.

Al-Rasheed sent for Ja'far at night. Ja'far was well aware that Yahya
had been informing al-Rasheed on him. Both of them showed animosity to
each other. So when al-Rasheed's envoy knocked on his door at night he
feared that al-Rasheed might have listened to Yahya, and that he would
be called to face death. He took a bath, perfumed himself with musk and
camphor, put a cloak over his clothes and went to see al-Rasheed. When
the latter looked at him, smelled the odour of camphor and saw the
cloak, he inquired, "Ja'far what is that?" "O Commander of the
Faithful," replied Ja'far, "I have known that he had tipped you off
about me. When your messenger arrived at this hour, I felt insecure for
you might have been influenced by what had been said about me and as a
result you have sent to get rid of me." "No," said al-Rasheed, "but I
was told that you send a fifth of whatever money you receive to Musa bin
Ja'far. And that you have done the same thing with the 20,000 Dinars. I
only wanted to know about this." "Allahu-Akbar, O Commander of the
Faithful," said Ja'far in protest, "send one of your servants, and he
will bring the money to you in their bags with the seals still
intact."

Al-Rasheed then, said to a servant of his, "Take the seal of Ja'far,
and hurry up until you bring me that money." Ja'far gave him the name of
the maid in whose possession the money was. She handed the bags of
money, which were still sealed, over to the servant. He brought them to
al-Rasheed. "This is the first by which you uncover the lies of those
who wanted to pit you against me," said Ja'far. "You are right, Ja'far,"
conceded al-Rasheed. "Go away secure. I will never approve of anything
said by anyone against you."

"But Yahya," went on al-Nawfali, "did not give up his schemes to trap
Ja'far."

"Ali bin al-Hassan bin Ali bin Umar bin Ali," added al-Nawfali, "said
to me, quoting one of his teachers, during al-Rasheed's hajj, which
preceded this last one; Ali bin Isma'il bin Ja'far bin Muhammad[^82] saw
me and asked, 'Why are you so lazy and crazy? Why do not you deal with
the vizier? He has sent after me. I joined him in his camel litter, and
asked his help in meeting my needs."

The reason behind that was that Yahya bin Khalid had once said to Yahya
bin Abi-Maryam, "Will you guide me to a man from the family ofAbu-Talib
who likes mundane luxury so I could satisfy his needs?" "Yes, I will
lead you to a man with this quality. He is Ali bin Isma'il bin Ja'far
bin Muhammad." Thereupon Yahya sent after the man and demanded, "Tell me
about your uncle and his followers and the money which is sent to him."
"I know about all this," Ali agreed. He divulged the secrets of his
uncle (Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.)) to Yahya. He said, "He has so much
money that he bought a farm, named al-Bashariyyah for 30,000 Dinars.
When he brought the money the seller said, 'I do not want this money. I
want the such and such money.' He gave orders that the money be put back
in the money chest. Then he brought out 30,000 Dinars from the quality
the farm owner insisted to get, weighed it, and handed it to the seller
as a price for the farm.

Al-Nawfali added, quoting his father, "Musa bin Ja'far, peace be upon
him, provided Ali bin Isma'il with money. He trusted him to the point
that sometimes he would send letters to his followers in Ali's
handwriting. But then he started feeling uneasy about him. Then when
al-Rasheed made known his intention of travelling to Iraq, Imam Musa bin
Ja'far (a.s.) was informed that Ali, his nephew, wanted to join the
ruler on his journey. He sent after him and asked, 'Why do you want to
go with the ruler?' 'Because I am in debt,' replied Ali. 'I will pay all
your debts,' Imam Musa (a.s.) assured him. 'And what about my family?',
asked Ali. 'I will support them,' said Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.). But
Ali insisted on going on with his plan. Imam Musa (a.s.) sent his
brother, Muhammad bin Ja'far, to him with 300 Dinars and 4,000 Dirhams.
,Put this with your belongings, and do not leave my sons bereaved of
their father,' Muhammad advised him."[^83]

There are other versions handed down by historians.

"Muhammad bin Isma'il bin al-Sadiq, a nephew of Imam Musa al-Kadhim
(a.s.), was the writer of Imam Musa's letters to his followers in
different parts of the region, but upon the arrival of al-Rasheed in
al-Hijaz, he tipped his uncle off. 'Do not you know that there are two
caliphs on earth to whom taxes are given?,' started Muhammad. 'Woe on
you! I and who?', the enraged al-Rasheed cried. 'Musa bin Ja'far,' said
Muhammad. He told him whatever he knew about him. Al- Rasheed ordered
the arrest of Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.), and Muhammad won the favour
of al-Rasheed. Imam Musa bin Ja'far al-Kadhim (a.s.) prayed to Allah to
punish Muhammad. The prayer was answered, and both Muhammad and his
children greatly suffered as a result of it."[^84]

Ali bin Ja'far, a brother of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.), is reported to
have said, "Muhammad bin Isma'il bin Ja'far bin Muhammad called on me
and informed me that Muhammad bin Ja'far, a brother of Imam Musa
al-Kadhim (a.s.), when admitted to see Haroon al-Rasheed, greeted him as
the caliph of Muslims, and said, 'I would have never thought that there
were two caliphs until I have seen my brother, Musa bin Ja'far, greeted
as the caliph.'"

Ya'qoob bin Dawood, who embraced the Zaydi beliefs, was one of those
who spoke spitefully about Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) before
al-Rasheed."[^85]

Ibrahim bin Abil-Bilad is reported to have said, "I visited Ya'qoob bin
Dawood at his home in Madinah the night before Musa bin Ja'far was
arrested. 'I have already come from the house of the vizier (i.e. Yahya
bin Khalid),' Ya'qoob said, 'and he has told me that he had heard
al-Rasheed saying near the holy tomb of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
the following, as if addressing him, 'May my father and mother be your
ransom, O Messenger of Allah. I am apologizing to you for something I
have made up my mind to do. I want to detain Musa bin Ja'far and throw
him in prison for I fear otherwise that he might set off a war among
your ummah in which their blood will be shed.' I think that he will
arrest him tomorrow.' The following day al-Rasheed sent al-Fadhl bin
al-Rabi' to Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.), who was standing in prayer on
the same spot the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w.) used to offer his prayers.
Al-Fadhl ordered him to be arrested and thrown in prison."[^86]

This is a brief historical view depicting the bitter political struggle
that was raging between the leaders of guidance and faith, namely the
household of the Prophet (s.a.w.), and the Abbassid rulers, their
henchmen, stooges, opportunists, power mongers, wealth seekers and fake
reputation gainers. Limited as it is, in terms of time and place, it
presents that period with all its psychological, political, and
ideological dimensions.

The reader can see how Imam's character was great and impressive, and
how boundless was the anxiety and concern of the rulers, along with
their followers, about this great man. Despite their power, strength,
state and financial resources, the Abbassids found no other way to deal
with Ahlul-Bait (a.s.), than prison, terrorism and repression to keep
their state and protect their thrones. History presents a good picture
of Imam Kadhim's imprisonment, suffering, patience and the brutality of
his enemies.

It is reported that, "al-Rasheed went, in that year, to perform hajj,
and started with the Prophet's tomb. 'O Apostle of Allah. I am
apologizing to you on account of something I want to do. I want to put
Musa bin Ja'far in prison. He seeks to drag your ummah into dispersion
and let their blood be shed.'

"Then he ordered Musa to be let in. He ordered him to be shackled. From
his house two mules with dome-shaped litters were brought out, inside
one of them he had put Musa. Both of the mules were escorted by
horsemen. The mules were sent in two different directions; one to Basrah
and the other to Kufah, so as to mislead the people. Imam Musa (a.s.)
was with the caravan that was sent to Basrah. Al- Rasheed had ordered
his envoy to hand Imam Musa (a.s.) over to Isa bin Ja'far bin al-Mansoor
who was the governor of Basrah. He kept him in jail for one year, then
wrote to al-Rasheed asking him to receive Musa and put him in the care
of anyone he liked, otherwise, Isa said, he would set him free. He
admitted that however hard he tried to find a way to incriminate him, he
found none. In his letter, Isa said that he even listened secretly to
Musa, that he might hear him invoke evil upon him or al-Rasheed in his
prayers, but he only heard him asking the mercy and forgiveness of
Allah.

"Al-Rasheed sent a messenger who received Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.).
In Baghdad, he ordered al-Fadhl bin al-Rabi' to put him in jail. There,
Imam Musa (a.s.) was left for a long time. Al-Rasheed tried to force
al-Fadhl bin al-Rabi' to do Imam Musa (a.s.) harm but he did not yield.
Al-Rasheed wrote to al-Fadhl bin Yahya to take care of Imam Musa (a.s.).
He asked him also to persecute him, but al-Fadhl rejected that,
informing him that Imam Musa (a.s.) was provided with comfort and
treated kindly in al-Riqah, where the prison was. Al-Rasheed quickly
dispatched Masroor to Baghdad taking the route of the state post. He
ordered him to see Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.), as soon as he arrived,
and see if al-Fadhl had said the truth. If the case was so, Masroor
should deliver a letter from al-Rasheed to al-Abbas bin Muhammad
ordering him to carry out his instructions, and should hand a similar
letter to al-Sindi bin Shahik ordering him to obey al-Abbas bin
Muhammad. Upon his arrival, Masroor went to the house of al-Fadhl bin
Yahya. Of his real intentions no one was aware.

Then he went into the place where Imam Musa (a.s.) was detained, and
saw that it was as al-Fadhl had informed al-Rasheed. Instantly, he
rushed to al-Abbas bin Muhammad and al-Sindi bin Shahik and handed them
the letters from al-Rasheed. It was not long before people saw the
messenger running to the house of al-Fadhl bin Yahya. Then al-Fadhl was
seen shocked and stunned riding with the messenger to the house of
al-Abbas bin Muhammad. The latter ordered whips and two eagles be
brought and sent to al-Sindi who ordered al-Fadhl be stripped of his
clothes and given 100 lashes. Al-Fadhl came-out-ashen faced. He was
haggard and fatigued. Puzzled, he greeted the people on his right and
left.

"Masroor wrote to al-Rasheed about all that. In response al-Rasheed
ordered Imam Musa (a.s.) be handed over to al-Sindi bin Shahik."

C. The Imam (a.s.) is Prison:

The earth, as a whole, was created, in the eyes of the Imam to be a
worshipping place, a concept first presented by the Apostle of Allah
(s.a.w.). This life was created so that people could serve and glorify
Allah, the Most High. It is merely a trip towards Allah, and an attempt
to know Him better. The Imam wouldn't feel a change in time or place.
All the times and places for him were the same. On the contrary, the
more he was persecuted, the closer he got to Allah by means of patience
and prayer. He made his prison a mosque, and his loneliness and the
dreariness of the jail a pleasant place filled with the remembrance of
Allah, the Most High. He fasted during the day, and prayed and recited
supplications in the night, staying up until daybreak.

One of those charged with keeping a watchful eye on the Imam in the
prison of Isa bin Ja'far related that he had heard the Imam praying, "O
Allah, You know that I had been asking You to free me from any
obligation except worshipping You. Now You have done that. So, praise be
to You."[^87]

On account of that, Isa bin Ja'far wrote to al-Rasheed, after he had
kept the Imam in his jail, saying, "Take him, and put him in the care of
anyone you like. Otherwise I will set him free. I tried hard to find a
way to incriminate him, but found none. I went to the point of
eaves-dropping, that he might invoke evil upon me or you, but I heard
him only asking Allah's mercy and forgiveness for himself."[^88]

Ahmad bin Abdullah is reported to have said, quoting his father, "I
called on al-Fadhl bin al-Rabi. He was sitting on the roof of his house.
'Look at this house,' said he, 'What do you see?' 'A discarded garment,'
replied I. 'Look well,' he urged. I examined the thing narrowly and
said, 'A prostrate man.' 'Do you know him?' he asked. 'He is Musa bin
Ja'far. I keep close watch on him, during the day and in the night.
Never did I see him anytime in another position. He says his dawn prayer
and recites the post-prayer supplications, until sunrise. Then he kneels
down in prostration, and remains so until midday. He asked someone to
tell him prayer times. When the man tells him about the time of a
certain prayer, he jumps performing the prayer without renewing his
ablution. That is his habit, saying his sunset prayer, he breaks his
fasting. He keeps performing prayer in the dead night until day
breaks."[^89]

In another version it was added that, "this has been his habit for
about one year."[^90]

In "Bihar al-Anwar" one reads that "al-Rasheed ordered Imam Musa (a.s.)
be given over to al-Fadhl bin Yahya, who received him, locked him in one
of his houses and posted guards around the house. Imam Musa (a.s.) got
busy in worship. He stayed up all night performing prayer and reciting
the Qur'an. During the day he was often fasting. He never averted his
face from his worshipping site. Noticing that, al-Fadhl bin Yahya eased
his restrictions and treated him kindly."[^91]

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) influenced his jailers. He passed his time
in prison reciting supplications, asking Allah's forgiveness. He devoted
his time to worship, regarding the trial of imprisonment as a favour and
mercy conferred on him by Allah.

What kind of man is this? What force could overcome him? The light of
his heart swept away the darkness of the prison. The firmness of his
patience shattered the shackles of the jailer and the will of the
tyrant. The pleasantness of his prayers filled up the gloomy prison with
happiness and brightness. What could the jailer ever do? What could the
tyrant do? Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) was winning over those who were
around him with his good manners, deep spirituality and unique wisdom.

Al-Amiri, in his book "Al-Anwar", reports that "Haroon al-Rasheed sent
a maid to Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) to serve him in prison. She was
beautiful, with a bright face and black eyes. Imam Musa bin Ja'far
(a.s.) commented on this saying, "Nay, you are exultant because of your
gift". 'I have no need of this or to the likes of her.' Hearing that,
Haroon got furious. 'Go back to him,' he ordered his servant, 'and tell
him that it was not with your consent that we have jailed you. Nor was
it with your consent that we have captured you. Leave the maid there and
come back'

The servant did what he had been ordered to do. Haroon then left the
room where he used to receive guests and visitors and sent the servant
back to see the maid and what had become of her. He saw her prostrate
saying, 'O Holy One. Glory to You. Glory to You.' 'By Allah, , Haroon
commented, 'Musa bin Ja'far has bewitched her with
witchcraft..."[92,93]

Maybe Haroon desired to lure Imam Musa Kadhim (a.s.) away from his
sacred objectives with the beauty of women, and the pleasures of life,
acting out of his own flawed convictions. He didn't know that Imam
al-Kadhim (a.s.) was totally absorbed in the beauty of right, and
dissolved in the love of Allah. He had turned his face away from life
and its cheap ornaments. Neither maids could occupy his attention, nor
life's pleasures would fascinate him. He was a man with a mission, who
dedicated his whole life to his principles, and submitted his whole soul
to Allah, the Glorified. As a result, he became a man guiding with his
words and actions, and a preacher who showed the right path with both
his silence and speech. His action spoke instead of his tongue, and his
words declared the path of right. That is why his overcame the maiden's
mind and soul. She cried, "O Holy One. O Glorified One," enraptured in
her prostration. After basking in the pleasures of entertainment,
drinking from the cups of love, passing her time playing musical
instruments, singing love poems, and enjoying wearing fine clothes and
necklaces, she turned to worship. She went on with her prayers and
praises of Allah until she passed away. It is said that her death
occurred a few days before the martyrdom of Imam Musa bin Ja'far
(a.s.).

Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) braved all difficulties and hardships on the
thorny path of faith. He taught the men who came after him, who treaded
the same path, how to be firm in their attitudes, and steadfast inside
prisons, not frightened by their jailers, or the oppression they
practised against them so as to silence them. Imam al- Kadhim (a.s.), on
the orders of al-Rasheed, was transferred from one prison to another. He
was first sent to Isa bin Ja'far, then to al-Fadhl bin al-Rabi, then to
al- Fadhl bin Yahya, and finally to al-Sindi bin Shahik.

Al-Rasheed meant to hide Imam Musa (a.s.), drive him out from the
attention of the ummah and kill its spirit of resistance. The result was
quite the opposite. The ummah was eager to follow the latest news about
Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.), especially when he was moved from one prison
to another, with the authorities unable to take a decisive action
against him. Being in prison was of great value for Imam Musa al-Kadhim
(a.s.). He nurtured the revolution, rejection and resistance, conferring
legitimacy on them. That is why he turned down all offers to intervene
on his behalf with the rulers. He frankly told those who asked him to
allow them to send a delegation of prominent people to al-Rasheed to
persuade him to set him free, "My father told me on the authority of his
father and grandfathers that Allah, the Mighty and Glorified, gave
Dawood (David) this piece of advice: 'Dawood, whoever from My servants
clings to one of My creatures, turning his face from Me, insisting on
that, shall certainly by deprived from heaven's support by Me. I shall
make the earth sink under his feet."[^94]

When al-Rasheed felt that the silent resistance of Imam Musa (a.s.) in
prison began to sneak into people's souls, and that his uncompromising
attitude moved the ummah's awareness and feelings, fear took hold of
him, for that awareness might grow into a violent revolution. He
consulted his vizier, Yahya bin Khalid, who advised him to release Imam
Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.).

Allamah al-Majlisi, in his book "Bihar al-Anwar", says that, "When
al-Rasheed threw Abu-Ibrahim Musa in prison, and saw some miracles made
by him, he was greatly perplexed. He sent for Yahya bin Khalid
al-Barmaki. 'Abu-Ali,' he said, 'Do you not see what wonders we are
witnessing? Can you manage this man and spare us his troubles?' 'What I
see as the best solution, Commander of the Faithful,' said Yahya bin
Khalid, 'is that you do him a favour, by being kind to him as he is your
relative. He has, by Allah, spoiled the hearts of our followers.' Yahya
was a follower of Imam Musa (a.s.) without the knowledge of Haroon.[^95]
'Go instantly to him,' ordered Haroon, 'relieve him of his shackles,
remember me to him, and say to him, 'Your cousin says to you that Yahya
has interceded with me on your behalf, and that I will not release you
until you have admitted your wrongdoings and asked my forgiveness for
what you have done against me. No shame will be attached to your
admittance; nor will it be a flaw on your part to ask my
pardon..."[^96]

When Yahya conveyed the message of al-Rasheed to Imam Musa bin Ja'far
(a.s.), he rejected the offer which would have put him in a humiliating
position, as if he were a wrongdoer. He said to Yahya, "Tomorrow, when
we have knelt down before Allah, Who would judge between us, you would
know who was the oppressor who had wronged the other. Wassalam."[^97]

In this way, Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) defeated all means of injustice
and terror, like prison, pressure, chains, distortion of the truth, and
deceiving public opinion. Al-Rasheed was left with only one choice, to
assassinate Imam Musa al- Kadhim (a.s.), and put an end to his blessed
life.

He thought he could, by committing such a horrible crime, bring down
the curtain on one of the greatest scenes of jihad and resistance
against tyranny, extinguish the light of Imamate of Ahlul-Bait (a.s.),
and get rid of the greatest intellectual and religious figure of his
time.

For such considerations, he made up his mind to assassinate him.

D. The Martyred Imam:

By all means, al-Rasheed tried to get rid of Imam Musa bin Ja'far
(a.s.). The Imam, being a man of great social, religious and
intellectual position, was a nightmare for al-Rasheed. Hearts of people
hovered over Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.). They loved Ahlul-Bait (a.s.). No
Muslim could ever say that he knew nothing about them. People respected
them. Nobody dared ignore their glorious position and their status in
the eyes of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), except those who greedily
sought spoils of this life and trampled all ideals and values under
their feet. Even these worthless people could not make public their
enmity toward Ahlul-Bait (a.s.); nor could they fight them without
twisting the facts to suit their purposes. That is why Isa bin Ja'far,
the governor of Basrah, refused to kill him, asking al- Rasheed to
relieve him of this task and transfer Imam Musa (a.s.) to another
prison. Being in the prison of al-Fadhl bin al-Rabi, Imam Musa (a.s.)
impressed him. Al-Fadhl bin al-Rabi, like Isa, refused to commit the
crime. Imam Musa al- Kadhim (a.s.) was then taken to the prison of
al-Fadhl bin Yahya who treated him kindly and made his prison a bit
comfortable. When al-Rasheed asked him to slay Imam Musa (a.s.) he
declined. When word came that al-Fadhl bin Yahya treated his prisoner
well, al-Rasheed was enraged. He ordered him to be punished. Al- Fadhl
was stripped naked and given 100 lashes in the assembly hall of al-Abbas
bin Muhammad.

Casting around him, al-Rasheed found no one better than the chief of
his police in Baghdad, al-Sindi bin Shahik, a man known to be rough,
stone-hearted and merciless, like other criminals, to murder the Imam.

As we have seen, al-Sindi bin Shahik received Imam Musa (a.s.) from
al-Fadhl bin Yahya, and put him in his prison. He burdened him with
heavy chains and fetters, treating him most brutally and inhumanly.
Yahya bin Khalid, on the other hand, was agonized by the punishment his
son, al-Fadhl, had received from al-Rasheed. He decided to propitiate
al-Rasheed and restore his family's position before the Abbassid ruler.
The price would be the blood of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) even if that
would torture the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

Base people do such things. Controlled by meanness, opportunism and
sycophancy, they seek the closeness of the rulers and blood-thirsty
tyrants by shedding blood and persecuting innocent people who preached
righteousness. They are dazzled by the fake social reputation and
passing pleasures. They act out of the inferiority complex which
overpowers them and prods them to win other's favour.

Yahya bin Khalid talked the matter over with al-Rasheed. He assured him
that al- Fadhl was an inexperienced young man. He offered to go to
Baghdad.[^98] Al- Rasheed was most delighted at having an offer from an
obedient, faithful man. He gave him the green light to perpetrate the
crime. Arriving in Baghdad, Yahya instantly held a meeting with al-Sindi
bin Shahik, during which he explained to him the plan he had set to get
rid of the Imam. The latter accepted it gratefully. According to the
plan, poison was given to Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) in a plate of
dates, or in some other food, according to another version. Imam Musa
(a.s.) partook from that food and felt the poison sneaking through his
pure body. For three days, he struggled with death, before breathing his
last. On the third day, he died at the prison of al-Sindi bin Shahik, or
at the mosque of Haroon, which was called Al-Musayyab Mosque. He won
martyrdom on the 25th of Rajab in the year 183 A.H.[^99]

Imam Musa al-Kadhim's (a.s.) star set, and his light faded away from
the sky of a bereaved Baghdad. Dark descended on the city, whose sky was
cloudy with sorrow and anguish. Her blank eyes were swelled with the
tears of separation and bereavement. She flung aside the false flag of
peace her founder had conferred on her, and put on the clothes of
mourning and protest. She cried out, "I am no longer the city of peace,
nor a resting place for the free, righteous men." The hangman sat
perplexed. Before him the crime was flashing. The horror of such a
heinous act filled him with remorse. This terrorist, al-Sindi bin
Shahik, felt the graveness of the tragedy. He saw Baghdad seething with
anger and tumult. All the criminals who were involved in the conspiracy
saw it. The voice of right was loud on every tongue filling all parts of
Baghdad, "The Imam died without doing any wrong. He was martyred in the
tyrant's prison."

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) left his prison in glory. Al-Rasheed and
al-Sindi were both stained with the disgrace of the crime. "Avenge the
martyr. The day when the wronged revenges himself on the oppressor will
certainly come." Al-Sindi scented the danger and the conspirators saw
the noose tightening around their necks. Bewildered and cornered, they
tried to find an excuse to hide behind. They searched for Yousif's
shirt, for the wild, ravenous wolf to present as a scapegoat. And so
they said, "He died a natural death. He was treated with kindness and
dignity in prison. He simply died.

We have nothing to do with his death." They rushed seeking the help of
the fuqaha', the leading men from the family of Abu-Talib, and the
prominent figures of Baghdad. They uncovered the face of Imam Musa
(a.s.) so as to allow these men to examine it. The men wrote down their
testimonies and statements which declared that he had died a natural
death, and that no one had killed him.

In spite of all that, the criminals' souls were not purified of their
evil and malice. The body of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) was left three
days in the prison. Then it was taken and laid on the bridge of Karkh in
Baghdad with the herald calling out for people, "This is Musa bin
Ja'far. He is dead. Come on and look at him."[^100]

The body of Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) remained on the bridge, while
members of the police, headed by al-Sindi bin Shahik, were standing
around accusing the dead Imam of false charges. People were noisily
coming to the bridge and leaving. Sulayman bin Abi-Ja'far al-Mansoor,
uncle of al-Rasheed, heard the uproar from his house on the other part
of the city across the river Tigris. He asked his servants about it. "It
is the body of Musa bin Ja'far, and the police of al-Sindi bin Shahik
are announcing to the people that Musa bin Ja'far is dead." That annoyed
him because he, along with all the Abbassids, were now in a defenceless
position. He gave his orders to his men to go and wait on the eastern
bank of the Tigris. They had to pounce on the police of al-Sindi bin
Shahik and wrench the coffin from them, once they crossed the bridge.
The men did so. They attacked the police, saved the pure body of the
Imam and brought it to Sulayman bin Abi-Ja'far al-Mansoor. The body was
ritually washed, sprinkled with camphor and wrapped up in a shroud. Then
it was taken to the mosque. There people performed "the prayer for the
dead" over him, and from there it was taken to be buried.

People of Baghdad, headed by the city's chiefs and leading men,
Sulayman bin Abi-Ja'far al-Mansoor included, took to the streets, behind
the coffin, in a most sad, dignified and great procession. Baghdad had
never witnessed a day like that one, nor had it suffered a tragedy like
that. The procession made its way to the cemetery of Quraish where the
body of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) was laid to rest Peace be upon the
Imam on the day he was born, on the day he was martyred amid the
darkness of the prison, and on the day he shall be resurrected as a
witness.


