Imam Calipha Ali Bin Musa Al-ridha (a.s.)
=========================================

Every Imam from Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) appointed his successor who would
inherit his position. This tradition was necessary so that the ummah
would know its leader and religious authority.

Imam Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.) was no exception. He named the next Imam,
who was Imam al-Ridha, his son. He emphasized his will to his followers
and companions.

Dawood al-Raqqi, is reported to have said, through a chain of
transmitters, "I said to Abu-Ibrahim Musa bin Ja'far (a.s.), May I be
your ransom, I am getting too old, tell me who is the Imam who will
succeed you.' He pointed to Abul-Hassan al- Ridha (a.s.) and said, 'This
is your man who will succeed me.'"[^101]

Through a chain of transmitters, Abdullah bin Marhoom is quoted as
saying, "I left Basrah heading for Madinah. I came across Abu-Ibrahim
(a.s.), who was being taken to Basrah, at a stage of the road. He sent
for me and I obeyed. He handed to me some letters and ordered me to take
them to Madinah. 'May I be your ransom, to whom shall I give these
letters?' 'To my son, Ali,' he told me, 'for he is my trustee, the man
who will take charge of my affairs, and the best of my sons.'"[^102]

Through another chain of transmitters, al-Hussein bin al-Mukhtar is
reported to have said, "We received some parchments sent by Abu-Ibrahim
Musa (a.s.) who was in prison. On them these words were written, 'I
appoint my elder son my successor.'"[^103] This referred to Ali al-Ridha
(a.s.).

We cite here only a few statements that were given by Imam al-Kadhim
(a.s.) stating the Imamate of his son, Ali al-Ridha (a.s.).

The chain of Imamate was not broken. Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) carried on
after the martyrdom of his father.

"They were the offspring of one another."

Holy Qur'an (3:33)


