Necessity of Religion
=====================

Religion is a very sensitive issue. We have to be very careful when we
are discussing religion. Even though religion is based upon intellect,
in its practice people do not use their intellect, but instead they put
forth their own desires over what the religion truly says. To make one’s
desires become obedient to one’s intellect is an extremely difficult
task. You will see examples of this while reading my book. You will see
how many difficulties I have had to face, but I want the people to
understand it is necessary to not only search for the truth but to also
accept it. Kufr (Disbelief) is not such a thing which can be seen with
one’s eyes. If you consider a person a kafir (disbeliever), then he also
considers you a kafir (disbeliever). Real kufr (disbelief) is ignorance
and rejecting of truth when it is presented to you. This is such a state
in which the human thinks that only whatever knowledge he possesses is
true haqq (truth). There is nothing beyond his knowledge. Whatever is
beyond his knowledge, he considers as outside of his religion. The other
state in which a human gets trapped in is where he gives his intellect
to others. He simply follows the scholars blindly without using

any thought of his own. Whatever they say is a part of religion, he
simply accepts without any research or thought into the truth of what
they are saying.

This is ignorance and absolute kufr (disbelief). This is the root from
which the tree of kufr (disbelief) grows. When this tree grows, it can
reach to such a level that a person is prepared to become an enemy of
Moula (as). According to a German researcher, 99% of people adopt
religion because of social pressure. They spend their whole lives
defending their new religion without any thought as to whether it is
true or not. The percentage given in the research is the researcher’s
own findings, but according to me, if you find one person in a million
who is researching in his religion, then it is equivalent if not greater
than those who are doing absolutely nothing. Apart from the percentages
given, the researcher is absolutely correct. If you see in Pakistan,
every year hundreds of Muslims become Christian. Is it because they know
the religion of Nabi Isa (as) very well and are impressed with the
teachings of Nabi Isa (as)? No, it is not because of this reason. In
reality, they change their religion because of social pressure. After
they change their religion, their financial situation and other aspects
of their lives become greatly improved. They spend their whole life
defending this religion without truly knowing its real meanings or
history. I have discussed religious matters with so many different
peoples. When they became unable to reply to my questions, then they
will admit that my religion (Shia Islam) is the true religion. When I
ask them, why then do you not become Shia? They always reply if we do so
our whole family will turn against us. They will throw us out into the
streets and boycott us.

This is what is considered as social pressure. In reality, every human
being is suffering from a state of confusion. It does not matter what
religion they belong to. They always change their religion because of
social pressure. If the person is always in this state of confusion, why
should he then follow a religion? Why should he put restriction upon
himself? Do this,

do not do this, eat this, and don’t eat this. Why? Why should I not live
a free life? What does religion give to the people? We do not know if
there is truly a judgment day or if it is only an illusion. Why should I
make my life a hell because of some imaginary fear? Why should I not
follow the saying of Emperor Babar “Why should Babar not enjoy his life?
Who knows if we will get this life again or not? Who knows if you will
come again in this world or not?” This is why you must understand the
psychological state of a person before you try to teach religion to him.
If he is not satisfied with the answers to his basic questions, then he
will never accept religion from his heart. Before answering these basic
questions, we must understand the difference between the life of a human
and an animal. Life and the necessities of life are common in both
animals and humans.

Animals and humans both have five senses. Both go in search of rizq
(sustenance). Both animals and human reproduce by having children. Both
do whatever is necessary for survival. When so many things are similar,
then what is the difference between the two of them? The difference is
animals live their lives by instinct. The animal has no idea about how
to reason. If a scorpion is sitting on a rock, he will instinctively
sting the rock. Even though his poison will have no effect on the rock,
he will still do this because of his instinctive nature. A human’s life
is not ruled by instinct. It is ruled by intellect and reason. Before
performing any action, every human will search for the reason or purpose
of the act. Then they will use their intellect to decide whether or not
to perform the action. Even the people who commit the most horrible
crimes, they also have a reason for doing these things. Just think about
this for a moment and decide for yourself if life is this way or not? If
you agree with my ideology, now we will look at the social aspect of
human life. Aristotle says humans are social animals. Even if Aristotle
did not say this, it would not have affected the social aspect of human
life. This is a truth whether or not anyone states it.

Humans want to live amongst others because this is his nature. In order
to live in such a social climate, every society must have limits and
laws in order to maintain and protect itself. As I said before, humans
search for a reason before they do any thing, and the implementation of
this reasoning is a law. It is very necessary for every society to have
laws. Otherwise the whole society will collapse into disarray and
disorder. The law demands that whosoever goes against it must be
punished. Now I will explain the religion using this ideology as an
example to make it easier to understand. “When a person follows the laws
and rules of religion, he will be rewarded. When a person disobeys the
laws and does not follow them, then he will be punished. It is the same
in religion as in society.” Now that it has been proved that every
society has a punishment for the breaking of its laws, so no nation or
any human can deny religion doing the same. This is the reason why a
human must follow some religion. Humans have certain needs instilled in
their nature. One of those needs is rules and laws. Without them he
cannot function properly. When it has been proved no human society can
survive without law, and then comes the question as to who will make
those laws? From this question, two ideologies have been established.
One group decided they will make the laws themselves. While the other
group decided,

a human who is created cannot make the laws. The laws are only in the
hands of the Creator.

The people who decided they will make the laws themselves, they based
their laws upon their own ideologies instead of upon a religious or a
higher being’s laws. The people who believed only the Creator can make
the laws; they adopted the word deen (religion). This is the way the
word “deen (religion)” became associated with the Creator’s laws.

Beginning of Religion
---------------------

Just as a human is one day born and then one day will die. The ideology
of religion is similar. It begins with the Creator and ends with the
Creator. The human must know he has a Creator. He must believe there is
an afterlife. Whatever he has done during his life, he must answer for
it to his Creator. When a human forgets his death, this is when he
rebels against the laws of the Creator. Now I will give an example for
death which no one can deny. Maybe you will even be amazed, but this is
an ultimate truth. In this world, no one believes he will die one day.
People are afraid of death, but they do not truly believe in death. If
they did believe they would die one day, then its effect could be seen
on their faces and in their actions. You must remember a few years ago
the metrology department announced a hurricane was advancing towards
Karachi very rapidly. They told it would destroy the whole city of
Karachi.

When the people heard this, the whole city was stunned. Fear spread
throughout the city, and every person was extremely worried. This was
only news which could have been true or not. This is what happened to
the people, but the storm did not come. The death is not news. It is a
test for the humans. We see thousands of people dying. We bury hundreds
of people ourselves. Have you ever seen one person whose face and
actions could tell that he really believes in death? Ameerul Momineen
(as) described this reality in these words*“The people think the death
is not for them. They think that it is only for others. The people who
we see dying are travelers who soon will come back to us. The moment we
bury them we start eating whatever he left behind as if we will always
live in this world* . (*Najul Balagha saying 133* )”  In*Usool* *e Kafi
book Iman o Kufr page no. 158 hadith no. 9* Imam Riza (as) said,*“I am
amazed at the person who knows of death and is still happy.”*

Who will make the laws?
-----------------------

As I have said before and will say again, no human or human society on
this earth, even the most uncivilized of nations, can deny that there is
always a punishment for crime.

So we have got to know that this principle is in human nature. Now we
have to ponder upon how many criminals cannot be caught. So if the
criminals cannot be caught, then does this suspend the principle of the
need for laws in a human society? Is the punishment only for those who
get caught? This is against the human nature as well as human intellect.
Every person will agree that neither the nature of a human nor that of
nature can be suspended. Every criminal has to be punished. When this
has been decided, then we have to admit that if someone does not get
punishment in this

world, he will get punished in the next world. So now we come to the
point as to who has the right to make the laws? Does the Creator have
this right or does the human himself have this right? If we give this
right to the humans, then so many problems will arise. The purpose of
making laws will die itself. Whatever law the human will make, it will
be weak in nature. Firstly humans do not have full knowledge of the true
necessities of humans.

If he does not have knowledge, then he cannot make the laws. This is why
in today’s societies throughout the whole world we see that one day a
law will be bringing peace to the people of that nation then the next it
will bring about its destruction. Only the one who knows every big and
small thing of this world and has full knowledge of the nature of every
thing in it has the right to make the laws.

Who created humans? Every creator knows what his creation needs and what
is best for them. Secondly, when the whole of humanity is participating
in the very acts which bring about the necessity of laws, then how is it
possible to give the right to make the laws to humans when he himself is
filled with greed, lustful desires etc and would then need to be
punished by the very laws he has created? It is the same as allowing a
scavenger to be the caretaker of meat.

Two Religions
-------------

Wherever you find the ideology of religion present, you will always find
two different types of religion. One is religion of fear. The second is
free religion. The third one which people do not pay attention to is the
religion of love. It is necessary to look into the religion of fear.
This is the religion in which humans are always afraid. If he does this,
this punishment will happen. If he does that, then he will be doomed for
eternity to a horrible punishment. So he lives his life in constant
fear. From this religion of fear, two horrible results have come about.

The first result is that some people thought that if they missed one
prayer time or if they missed one day of fasting that they will go to
jahannum (hell). Due to this fear, they do many different things which
have nothing to do with the real religion. One act they do out of fear
is they wear their pants high above their ankles. They also increase the
size of their beards. They forget everything except the prayers in which
people will see them doing. Out of this religion of fear grew up a
violent and extremist type mentality in regards to how to perform
religious acts of worship.

They forget everything including Allah, RasoolAllah (saw), and Ahlul
Bayt (as). Even they have forgotten the greatest of ibadats (act of
worship), the azadari (remembrance) of Imam Hussain (as). They believe
the greatest act of worship is the killing and harming of those who
criticize their religious leaders. You can see with your own eyes the
violence which this type of religious extremism has brought to our
society. The second group was then established. The second group, in
order to rid themselves of this religion of fear, stopped following any
type of religion entirely. Moula Ali (as) in only five words handed down
a decision in regards to these two groups which is*“Love is greater than
fear* .”*(Najul Israr page 60)*

Usool e Deen (Principles of Religion)
=====================================

Allama Hilli in his book*Ahsanul Aqaid* *page 115* explained the
principles of religion in these words:

“The basis of any religion is its principles. Its principles are what it
is established upon. If you deny even one of those principles, then the
whole religion will collapse. If the recommended acts are denied or
given up, then the religion will not collapse.” In the same book on page
14, Allama Hilli says “Usool e Deen (principles of religion) is
absolutely wajib (compulsory).”

Recognition of the Principles of Religion
-----------------------------------------

In the same book on page 15, Allama Hilli says “recognition of the
principles of religion is compulsory through proofs not through taqleed
(blind following of a scholar).” If you use your intellect in order to
recognize the principles of religion, then you will find your intellect
insists that you have proof that the religion you are following is
greater than all other religions. If we do not recognize the religion
through our intellect, then we cannot prove our religion Islam is
greater than all other religions. Now we will prove this through the
hadiths of Masoomeen (as).

*Imam Musa al Kazim (as) said, “Momins will be asked in their graves,
“Who is your Rabb (Lord)?” They will reply, “Allah”. Then they will be
asked, “What is your religion?” They will reply, “Islam”. Then they will
be asked, “Who is your prophet?” They will reply,” Muhammad”.*

*Then they will be asked,” Who is your Imam?” They will reply and call
the name of the Imam of their times. Then they will be asked,” How did
you recognize your Imam?” They will reply,”*This was amr (absolute
wajib) which Allah guided me and kept me on this”.* (This is the peak of
intellect)*Then the angels will say, “Keep sleeping such a sleep which
is free of worries, and the angels will open a door of paradise in front
of him.” They will ask the same questions to others. When they ask
others the question how did you recognize you’re Imam, they will reply,”
They heard about who He was from other people. Because others said such
and such was the Imam, I followed what they said* *blindly”. At that
moment, the angels hit him with whip in such a way that whole of
creation altogether cannot bear its pain* .*(Haqul Yaqeen Urdu Second
Edition Page 73)**

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“Allah says ignorance does not blind the
eyes. Instead it blinds the hearts which are inside one’s chest. How
will he be guided, if he does not understand? How will he understand if
he does not ponder upon things* ?” (*Usool e Kafi Kitab e Hujjat chapter
7 hadith no. 7* )

In reality if the basis of your religion is only from hearing what
others have said, this is not a real religion. This is why when the
people claim to follow a certain religion, but upon hearing its real
truth they reject it.

Allama Hilli writes in his book*Ahsanul Aqaid page no. 25* , “If someone
remains ignorant of the principles of religion, then he will be excluded
from those who are considered as momins. He will stay in hell forever.”
Moula Ali (as) says,*“The people are the enemy of the things which they
do not understand.”* (*Najul Balagha saying no. 173* ). It has been told
from the sayings of Moula Ali (as) that one who is not aware of the
principles of religion is an enemy of the religion despite of believing
in those very principles.

So we have given you the initial information about religion. Now say
bismillah (in the name of Allah) and with the help of Imam Zamana (ajf)
step into the valley of marifat (recognition). They will take you to
your destination.

Ghulu (Exaggeration)
--------------------

When Iblees (shaitan la) refused to recognize Nabi Adam (as) by His Noor
instead recognizing Him (Nabi Adam as) by his physical appearance, this
was the first instance in which doubts were created in the way of
recognizing Masoomeen (as). The majority of people today are still
following his (iblees la) way of recognizing Masoomeen (as) by Their
physical appearances instead of by Their Noor. Then the offspring of
Iblees created a second hurdle for humans in order to cast doubt upon
the attributes of Masoomeen (as) which were so clear and apparent that
no one was able to reject them. They created the ideology of ghulu
(exaggeration), and in this way clouded the extremely apparent
attributes of Masoomeen (as) with doubts. In reality, today’s Shia has
fallen into this trap of declaring everything which is in praise of
Masoomeen (as) as ghulu (exaggeration). Whenever any attribute of a
masoom is reported, immediately it is declared as an exaggeration by the
majority of today’s shias. Unfortunately, this has become a common
belief.

With this one doubt, they (offspring of Iblees la) were able to cast
doubts upon not only the attributes of Masoomeen (as), but also upon
everything else in the religion including oneness of Allah, justice,
prophet hood, imamate, and judgment day. They filled the people’s minds
with such doubts that they were able to change the whole truth of what
the real religion is. These doubts have become so strong the people
hesitate to accept any truth about the religion if it differs from their
own so called truths. They (offspring of Iblees la) used all their
energies to degrade the status of Ahlul Bayt (as) as others (wahabis
etc) have used all their energies to degrade the status of RasoolAllah
(saw) in order to lower Them (RasoolAllah saw and Ahlul Bayt as) to
their level. In this way the wahabis can feel superior as if they

know more about the religion than the ones who originally brought it.
Slowly with the passage of time these doubts have been able to cause the
people to be unable to understand what the true meaning of marifat
(recognition) is. Iman (faith) by one’s tongue only instead of in one’s
heart and the showing off of one’s ibadat (acts of worship) has become
the “real” religion of the people of today. We have reached the point
today where the sacrifices made by previous shias who gave up their
lives trying to defend the truth about the attributes of Ahlul Bayt (as)
has been rendered futile. Now so called shias of today openly insult
Ahlul Bayt (as) whether it be intentionally and unintentionally. Not
only do they do this by their tongues but also in their writings. But
yet no one has enough belief in their heart to stand up and say to these
so called shias “Stop”. They allow them to go on insulting Ahlul Bayt
(as) and then accept those insults as truths. They drink these words of
kufr (disbelief) in the same way a baby drinks the milk of its mother.
Still somehow they call themselves “shia”.  The root of all of this evil
is the ideology of ghulu (exaggeration). These so called scholars have
scared the shias of today so much by using the word “ghulu” that the
shias are afraid to accept the truth of the attributes of Ahlul Bayt
(as). Not only do they not accept these truths, but they will not even
listen to anyone who tries to speak them out of a so called imaginary
fear. They are so afraid of

becoming a “ghali” (exaggerator) because in narrations a ghali has been
proved to be a kafir (disbeliever). The people have only heard of this
word ghulu, but no one truly knows what its real meaning is. If you give
Masoomeen (as) a status which is above that of a great scholar, devotee,
or a man of great strength, then it is considered ghulu (exaggeration).
This is not ghulu. This misconception about ghulu has forced me to give
it such great importance in this book. I feel compelled to clear the
doubts of the Shia nation so that they may know not only the truth of
Masoomeen (as) but also what is untrue. In this way I hope to remove the
fear which is hidden in their hearts.

After reading this chapter, it will become so easy for you to understand
the beliefs of Shia. The verdicts which have been given by scholars of
Kufr (disbelief) and shirk (polytheism) will become meaningless in your
eyes. Both of us should pray that we can solve this problem and find its
true solution. In this way the problem will be corrected, and we will
know the truth of our beliefs, be able to recognize the true status of
Aal e Muhammad (as), and get rid of the fear of religious looters (so
called ayatollahs). Then we will truly be able to call ourselves Shia,
and only then will we be deserving of the attributes which were revealed
for true shias.

Are all Muslims nusairis (one who believes Moula Ali (as) is Allah)?

Since the time of Ameerul Momineen (as), there has always been a group
of people who considered Moula Ali (as) as Allah. This is not a
permanent religion. Neither does it have compulsory principles nor
recommended acts of worship. In our society, they are famously known as
“nusairis”. Even though, in different times, they were known by
different names. For example, “sajeela”, “sabia”, “gharabia”,
“nusairis”, etc. I am very sorry to say when I studied about the
different sects of Islam except for a few people, all the Muslims were
either nusairis or very near to these beliefs. I will try to make you
understand this in six sentences.

Claims of Nusairis

*creation and death is only in the hand of Allah*

*these two acts were revealed by Moula Ali (as)*

*so it has been proved that Moula Ali (as) is Allah*

*Claims of Muslims*

*creation and death is in only in the hand of Allah*

*it has been proved Moula Ali (as) is not Allah*

*all those narrations revealed by Moula Ali (as)  regarding creation and
death are false*

Even though you will see these two groups have very different claims,
they have in common the belief of tawheed (Oneness). If the narrations
which have been denied one day are proven true, then there will be no
difference between nusairis and Muslims. The two groups mentioned above
were established because no one could accept the truth of the attributes
of Ahlul Bayt (as).

Everyone who likes justice has to admit that whatever understanding of
tawheed (Oneness) a person has, due to their own intellect and
knowledge, is not the true attributes of Allah. It is simply the level
of understanding that

person has reached. It does not mean that Allah is limited to the level
of knowledge and understanding which a person has. As one person’s level
of intellect determines his understanding of Oneness in the same way a
momin’s ideology determines his understanding of wilayat. The stages of
faith are different for each person. Those narrations, which reveal the
truth of the attributes of Masoomeen (as), you, cannot deny them simply
because you cannot accept them as truth. If you deny them simply on this
reason alone, this is a proof of mental illness. In order to examine the
hadiths, the first thing you have to do is to correct your belief. When
belief has been corrected, then any hadith which agrees with your belief
you must accept. It does not matter if the hadith is mutwater
(consistent), sahih (authentic), hasan (reliable), motaber (authentic),
or zaeef (weak). When your strongest belief is, after Allah, Aal e
Muhammad (as) are the greatest from everything, Their attributes are
uncountable, but yet after all of these absolute proofs from Quran, when
you see a hadith which is not authentic or weak regarding the attributes
of Aal e Muhammad (as) and you reject that hadith simply because it is
weak, this is an undeniable proof that your belief is weak and not real.
No saint, peer, mujtihid, scholar, so called ayatollahs, absolutely no
one has reached the status in which Hazrat Salman al Farsi (as) has
reached. He ( Hz Salman al Farsi as) himself says,*“ If I reveal the
very few attributes of Ahlul Bayt (as) which have been revealed to me,
the people will call me insane and pray for the forgiveness of the one
who will murder me.”*

What is Ghulu (exaggeration)?
-----------------------------

Ghulu is when you exaggerate the truth of what something is by giving it
attributes that it does not possess or by raising its status to a level
which is higher than what it truly is. This is what ghulu is commonly
known as. I have not seen in any dictionary where this word has been
used for one specific purpose or group of people. Anyone who gives a
higher attribute to a person who does not possess those qualities is
considered a ghali. If someone considers others as “Qibla tul Islam”
(honor of Islam) or “Marja anam” (great scholar), he will be considered
as a ghali. Also one who gives himself these titles will be considered
as a ghali. These are the true meanings and explanations of this word
“ghulu”, but unfortunately in Shia Islam, this word is specifically used
for Ahlul Bayt (as). For Shia, ghulu means when you exaggerate the
attributes of Ahlul Bayt (as). Until now the shias take this as the true
meaning of the word “ghulu”. This is such a great tragedy that no matter
how much grief one suffers from knowing this it will never be enough.
Even though it has been proved that when you have marifat (recognition)
of two beings, and you knowingly give the  attributes of the one who
possesses a high status to the one who possesses the lower status, then
this is ghulu. It means that you know the status of Ahlul Bayt (as) and
know their limitations and boundaries maa’z aallah. In this case one who
uses the word ghulu for Ahlul Bayt (as); he is himself a mushrik
(polytheist).

He becomes a mushrik (polytheist) because he claims he knows the
boundaries or limits of Allah’s attributes (astarfghullah). The only way
we can exaggerate the status of Ahlul Bayt (as) is by claiming They are
Allah.

In this book we will prove this statement is absolute truth. In reality
it is impossible to exaggerate the status of Ahlul Bayt (as). Even if
you consider what someone is doing to be an exaggeration of Their
status, in reality he is not doing exaggeration, he is doing taqseer
(lowering Their status). This is because no one can know the true limit
or boundaries of Ahlul Bayt (as). So when you do not know the limit of
something, then it is impossible to exaggerate its status.

“O’ Ali (as), people accuse me that I use “ghulu” when I

describe Your attributes. While in reality, I am unable to

describe Your Attributes. I can never be able to describe

Your attributes (even if I was given thousands of years of

life and I described Your attributes day and night, even then

it would be like a raindrop falling into the ocean).”

The people who consider the sayings of Masoomeen (as) as “ghulu” amaze
me, and then they insult Masoomeen (as) openly, while at the same time
following so called ayatollahs blindly and giving them (ayatollahs) the
respect that should only be given to Masoomeen (as).

Exaggeration in the Favor of Ahlul Bayt
---------------------------------------

There is no doubt about it that in all narrations both ghali and ghulu
have both been condemned by Masoomeen (as). Before becoming so afraid of
these words, we have to find out what the true meanings of these words
are according to Masoomeen (as) and not according to other people.

Masoomeen (as) explained*Ayah 171 of Sura al Nisa* in this way:

Moula Ali (as) said,*“Do not disassociate Us from the status of abduiyat
(servants of Allah). Other than this, whatever you say in regards to Our
attributes, you will never be able to describe Our true attributes.
Listen! Be aware of “ghulu” (exaggeration)! Be aware of what the
Christians did to Isa ibn Mariam (as)! They made Him as their god. I
have no relation to those who will do this to Us.”*

Moula Ali (as) said,*“ I am far away from “ghalis” (exaggerators) the
same way Isa ibn Mariam (as) disassociated Himself from Christians.”*

Imam Zainul Abideen (as) said,*“Jewish love Hazrat Uzair (as). They made
Him as their god. So neither they are from Uzair (as) nor is Uzair (as)
from them. Christians love Isa ibn Mariam (as). They also made Him as
their god. So neither they are from Isa (as) nor is Isa (as) from them.
I am the same way. If a group of our Shia loves us and says the same for
Us as the Jews said for Uzair (as) and the Christians said for Isa (as),
then I am not from them nor are they from Me.”*

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said*, “Our Rabb (Lord) is Allah. We always look
towards Him for assistance. Other than this you can describe Our
attributes in any way you wish.”*

Moula Ali (as) said,*“Be aware of “ghulu”. We are Allah’s servants and
His Worshippers. Allah is Our Rabb (Lord). Apart from this, describe
those attributes given to Us by Allah as you wish.”* **(Haqaiqul Wasiyat
First Edition page 96-100)**

In these five hadiths of Masoomeen (as), it has been clearly proven that
“ghulu” is only when you consider Masoomeen (as) as your Rabb (Lord) in
such a way that you have no other Rabb (Lord) other than Them. Apart
from

this, whatever belief we have about Ahlul Bayt (as), it can never be
considered as “ghulu”. Masoomeen (as) Themselves said it does not matter
how much we describe Their attributes, but we will never find the limit
of Their attributes or Their boundaries. When we are not aware of the
limit and

boundaries of Ahlul Bayt (as), then how is it possible to increase and
go beyond that limit?

Kinds of Ghulu (Exaggeration)
-----------------------------

Allama Majilisi in*Bihar ul Anwar Seventh Edition page 365* has
explained the different kinds of ghulu. We are mentioning these
from*Haqaiqul Wasiyat First Edition page 101* . Even though we do not
agree with what was said, because it is an extract, we will write it as
it was written in the book. Allama Majalisi says, “We must be aware of
the different kinds of ghulu for the Prophet (saw) and the Aimmah (as).”

Consider Them as your Creator.

to believe They have the same attributes as Allah, They are distributors
of rizq, and the creators of everything

They have the ability of resurrection

There is no difference between Allah and Them, They are as One

They have full knowledge of unseen without it being revealed to Them
either from Allah or His Angels

Their souls can be transferred (like the “Arya” believed that a soul can
be transferred from one body to another either as a punishment or as a
reward)

To consider the Imams (as) as prophets

Whenever a person gains Their marifat (recognition), that person then
believes there is no need for prayer, fasting, or any other wajibats
(obligatory acts of worship), and there is no such act they will do
which will be considered as a sin against themselves in which they will
be punished for on judgment day nor will they have to repent for it to
gain the forgiveness of Allah.

Alhamdulilah no true momin believes in these kinds of ghulu
(exaggeration). After writing the different kinds of exaggeration,
Allama Majalisi says, “Some scholars used exaggeration themselves in
order to explain the meanings of ghulu. They did this because they
(scholars) do not have true marifat (recognition) of the Imams (as) and
do not know the truth of Their wonderful attributes. Therefore it caused
them (scholars) to deny those authentic narrations in which the true
attributes of Masoomeen (as) were written.

These so called scholars also wrote that believing the Imams (as) are
without mistake, have knowledge of past and future events, and other
such attributes are an exaggeration. Even though in various hadiths
Masoomeen (as) Themselves have said,*“Do not consider Us as Allah. No
matter how much you describe Our attributes you will never reach Their
limit.”* Masoomeen (as) also said,*“To describe Our true attributes is
very difficult, but to understand those attributes is even more
difficult. Only those angels, prophets, and true momins whose faith has
been tested by Allah are able to understand the truth of Our
attributes.”* There is also another hadith which states that if Hz Abu
Dhar (ra) knew the truth of Hz Salman al Farsi (as)’s iman (faith)
regarding Ahlul Bayt (as), then Hz Abu Dhar (ra) would kill

him. There are so many hadiths; some we have already written and others
we will write later in this book. So it is completely wajib (compulsory)
on true momins to not deny the true attributes and miracles of Ahlul
Bayt (as) in a hurry simply because those attributes are beyond their
knowledge or understanding. Unless it has been proved from:

**the sayings of Masoomeen (as)**

**the verses of Quran**

**is outside of the religion itself**

**is inconsistent or only mentioned in one instance**

If any scholar does not prove a hadith is false by using one of the
above mentioned ways, then you cannot deny that hadith. Every true momin
believes Ahlul Bayt (as) are creators, give rizq (sustenance),  bring
the dead back to life and give death to the life, are present everywhere
at all times, and have full knowledge of unseen with the understanding
that Allah has blessed Ahlul Bayt (as) with these attributes. Allah is
Only One. Ahlul Bayt (as) were created from the attributes of Allah.

Ghulu (Exaggeration) and Taqseer (Lowering the status of Ahlul Bayt as)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Apparently there are two opposite ideologies regarding Masoomeen (as).
One ideology is that They have full command over everything.

The other is that They are unable to do anything. This is the reason the
ideologies of ghulu (exaggeration) and taqseer (lowering the status of
Ahlul Bayt as) were established. Those who have the ideology that They
have full command over everything became ghalis (exaggerators). Those
who have the ideology They are unable to do anything became muqassir
(defamators). These foolish people could not understand that the reason
Masoomeen (as) remained silent and took no action against Their
oppressors and lived Their worldly lives in a state of such poverty was
to show Their followers that They (Masoomeen as) were servants of Allah.

If I say, in front of my teacher, I am an ignorant person, and it causes
my children to believe I am ignorant; it is nothing other than
foolishness. If a person has a limited ability to understand, and he
himself is unable to understand the teachings of any learned person,
then when he relates any information, even if it be the truth, he will
relate it in such a way that no one will be able to understand it in its
true sense. For example, “Ghalib” (a very famous Urdu poet), he has been
considered as a poet whose writings are not understandable by the vast
majority of people. When people understood the true meanings of his
poetry, they then came to know he was a great poet. He was such a great
poet that his poetry is still being read and loved by the people of
today. When the sayings of a human are so difficult that every person is
unable to understand them, then how will we be able to understand the
sayings of Allah and Masoomeen (as)? If you relate all of those
narrations which give Masoomeen (as) a high status to the ghalis, then
it is nothing but pure ignorance. This is why Imam Riza (as) said,
“*When the “ghalis” saw such servants of Allah (Ahlul Bayt as) who were
blessed with such supernatural abilities and used those abilities in
such a way as to show the people how to worship Allah, the ghalis took
this in the wrong way and believed Us to be Allah himself. When in
reality, We are merely servants of Allah. Even though Allah has blessed
Us with full command over everything, still We were showing people with
Our ibadats (acts of worship) the greatness of Allah.”* *(Haqaiqul
Wasiyat First Edition page 104 ref. Ahtejaj Tibarsi)*

On the other hand, there are such people who upon seeing the
condemnation of ghalis (exaggerators) in narrations became so afraid of
becoming a ghali themselves that they denied all those narrations which
tell of the high status of Masoomeen (as). They allowed their fear to
become greater than their iman (faith), and due to such weakening of
iman, they became unable to accept that such greatness could exist in
the form of Masoomeen (as).

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said:

*“A group of Our shia did taqseer (lowering one’s status) in recognition
of Us.” The Imam (as) further said,” If Our shia ponders upon Quran,
then certainly they (shia) will never have any doubts in regards to Our
attributes.”* *(Haqaiqul Yaqeen Second Edition page 40* ). As in regards
to such people (muqassireen), we will mention a few hadiths so that you
will come to know what a great sin taqseer (lowering one’s status) is.

In*Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First Edition page no. 447* , the author
says: We saw Jabir ibn AbdullAllah Ansari (ra) holding his walking stick
wondering the streets of Medina saying,

“O’ Ansarians (helpers)! Put the love of Ali(as) ibn Abi Talib (as) in
your offspring. One who will deny the attributes of Moula Ali (as) must
look at his mother (meaning he is an illegitimate offspring).”

(We must note that here the hadith is not referring to denying Moula Ali
(as) Himself. It is simply referring to the denial of His true
attributes.)

In*Yanabiul Muwaddat page 202* , RasoolAllah (saw) said about Aimmah
(as),*“Those people in my nation who will deny the attributes of My
Ahlul Bayt (as) and do not have any care as to Their relation to Me,
there is only destruction for those people. My intercession will never
reach to such people.”*

In**Najul Israr First Edition page 78** , Ameerul Momineen (as)
said,*“One who denies Our wilayat is a kafir (disbeliever). One who
denies Our attributes is also a kafir.”*

In**Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob Second Edition page no 119** , Moula Ali
(as) said,*“I swear by my Lord, anyone who will decrease Our attributes,
Allah will decrease his reward both in this world and in the
hereafter.”*

Masoomeen (as) never took notice of such so-called shias who were of a
jealous and envious nature or of those who were Shia by name only. These
so called shias are the same as the nasibis (enemies of Ahlul Bayt as).
The friend is one who even upon hearing a false admiration of his
friend, he becomes happy. I cannot understand what type of shia they are
that they cannot bear to accept the true attributes of Ahlul Bayt (as)
which were given to Masoomeen (as) by Allah.

In*Bihar ul Anwar Twelfth Edition page no. 614* , Moula Ali (as)
said;*“Only those true shias whose hearts are filled with Our love and
whose intellect can bear Our attributes can guard Our hadiths.”* It is
really

amazing that Masoomeen (as) always hide Their true attributes. Despite
of this, whatever attributes reach to us, we still cannot accept them.
Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said, “*We are afraid the people will go astray
because of Us and will consider Us as Allah.”  * Yet we do not accept
even those true attributes which are proven by narrations and sayings of
Masoomeen (as) Themselves.

The Worst Thing is Lowering the status of another not Exaggeration
------------------------------------------------------------------

Not a single person can deny that the beginning of sins and deviation
began the moment when shaitan refused to do sajdah (prostration) to Nabi
Adam (as). Now decide for yourself.

Did shaitan do ghulu (exaggeration) or taqseer (lowering one’s status)?
Did he exaggerate the attributes of Nabi Adam (as) or did he decrease
them? He ignored the true recognition of Nabi Adam (as), and only looked
at His (Nabi Adam as) physical appearance. On the basis of his own qiyas
(conjecture),

shaitan thought he was greater than Nabi Adam (as). He (shaitan) became
the true reason of deviation in religion. So the story of Nabi Adam (as)
is enough for our proof. The beginning of deviation came from taqseer
(lowering one’s status). The first muqassir (defamator) was Iblees, and
after him, his whole offspring. (this includes so called shias,
ayatollahs, usoolis and all enemies of Ahlul Bayt as)

Muqassireen (One Who Lowers the Status of Ahlul Bayt as)
--------------------------------------------------------

Muqassireen (defamators) have a strange weapon in their hands. Whenever
they read or hear such hadiths in which Ahlul Bayt (as) introduce Their
true attributes, they (muqassireen) issue a fatwa (verdict) that the
narrators of these hadiths were “ghalis” (exaggerators). They use this
excuse of “ghali” so that they will not have to provide any proof to
their followers, and their followers will simply accept without using
any of their own intellect and without insisting the scholars provide
proof of their claims. These people relate all the sayings of Masoomeen
(as) to “ghalis”. They insult Masoomeen (as) behind the cover of ghalis.
It is amazing that such people who in the enimity of Ahlul Bayt (as)
have forgotten their own ilm e rajjal ( knowledge of “men” ie ruwat,
narrators).

Neither do they tell the names of these so called ghalis nor do they
tell their nation, their tribe, their time, or why such narrations were
even narrated to begin with. They do not give any sources to prove their
claims. They only know of one word which is ghulu (exaggeration). They
tried to hide their defamation behind the veil of exaggeration.

Even though there is not one word in those hadiths which is against the
Oneness of Allah.

These people do not ponder upon a very important point. If all these
narrations and sermons which tell the true attributes of Masoomeen (as)
are unauthentic and written by ghalis, then I make this challenge to all
the so called ayatollahs to bring even one sentence which is similar to
those wonderful sayings which is written in the sermons of Ahlul Bayt
(as) where They Themselves are telling of Their true attributes. I have
no doubt that not

one so called scholar will be able to do such a thing. So it brings us
to this point. If no one today is able to reproduce such eloquent
writings, then who actually wrote those so called unauthentic sermons?
It can only be the words of Masoomeen (as) because if it were the words
of any human, then it could easily be reproduced. A great scholar Syed
AbdullAllah Shah Abd writes in his wonderful book*“Al Ali Sultan un
Naseera” on page 117* , Ameerul Momineen (as) said,*“Two kinds of people
will go into hell in regards to Me. The first kind is a ghali, one who
loves Me in the wrong way. The second kind is a muqassir, one who does
not know Me and lowers My status.”* This saying proves that both ghalis
and muqassir are regarded by Masoomeen (as) in the same way. So we have
to create criteria for both ghulu and taqseer. Then we have to separate
them from the narrations.  After understanding what is ghulu and taqseer
and removing those two things from the narrations, then from the
remaining narrations, we will be able to find the true attributes of
Masoomeen (as). If people do not do this, then they cannot prove what
they are saying to be true because it will become possible to a label a
true momin as a ghali and a muqassir as a true momin. As well we also
have to correct the Quran. There are so many verses which were revealed
in regards to Ahlul Bayt (as), but the scholars have changed the tafseer
of these verses so that the truth of Ahlul Bayt (as) has become hidden
from the people.

So it has been proved that anyone who will deny those narrations will
become a wahabi. The reason is that the wahabis also have these same
invented beliefs about Masoomeen (as) such as They are normal human
beings who cannot do anything. If one has such beliefs, then you
automatically will not be shia anymore. (the Imams (as) have said one
with these beliefs is amongst Our enemies). After this Shah Saheb said,
“Masoomeen (as) never called Themselves “Allah”. They always said, “We
are servants of Allah.” First They prayed to Allah and then described
Their attributes. When the hearts of the muqassireen do not believe
these attributes, they immediately without proof say these narrations
are from ghalis. Due to this so called reason, these narrations become
unacceptable. Those narrators and scholars who brought these attributes
of Masoomeen (as) to us are the same scholars and narrators of hadiths
regarding the other aspects of Islam such as Islam, iman, usool e deen,
and furoo e deen. Muqassireen do not object to these narrations. They
follow them whole heartedly. If they truly consider those narrators to
be ghalis and kafirs, then why do they accept their narrations regarding
other aspects of Islam? This is a very strange thing that when these
narrators describe the other aspects of religion they are authentic,
reliable and true, but when they describe the attributes of Masoomeen
(as), they become ghalis, kafirs, unauthentic, unreliable, and untrue.
So it has been proven that these narrators are not the issue. In
reality, these muqassir intentionally do not want to accept the true
attributes of Masoomeen (as) and use the excuse of “ghalis”. The
rejection of these narrations without proof is enough to prove one is a
muqassir.

Our fifth Imam (as) (Imam Muhammad Baqir as) said*, “I am amazed on
those who claim to be our friends, lovers, and followers, and consider
Us as their Imam, and obey Us the same way they obey Allah, but due to
the weakness of their intellect, they break their promise, oath, and
allegiance to Us and become their own enemy. They lower Our status. They
accuse Us in front of those people whom Allah has blessed with Our full
recognition and who are in full obedience to Us.”* *(Bihar ul Anwar
First Edition page 114)*

Who is worse, an exaggerator or one who lowers the status of Ahlul Bayt (as)?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

We will not decide which is worse ourselves. We will prove this from the
sayings of Masoomeen (as) so that no one can have any objections to our
decision. In religious groups, it is a very common thinking that a
muqassir can be forgiven but a ghali cannot be.  Where this type of
thinking originated from, we have absolutely no idea. But here are some
hadiths of Masoomeen (as) which will reveal the whole truth.

****Quaid ul Sharia fi Aqaid Shia page no. 22 ref. Ahtejaj Tabrisi First
Edition page no. 77, in the Sermon of Ghadeer*** RasoolAllah (saw) said,
“O’ People! I contain the Noor of Allah and after Me it will continue in
Ali and His offspring until Imam Mahdi (ajf) who will take the rights of
Us and Allah.*

*Because Allah has declared it as a  hujjah (proof) on all muqassireen
(those who lower the status of Ahlul Bayt as), rebels, opponents,
untrustworthy peoples, sinful peoples, and the oppressors throughout the
whole world.”*

If you had read this hadith carefully, you will know in this hadith
RasoolAllah (saw) mentioned “muqassireen” as first among His enemies.
This was the last sermon given by RasoolAllah (saw) and in it you will
find absolutely no mention of ghalis.

**Quaid ul Sharia page no. 24 ref. Bihar ul Anwar Seventh Edition page
no. 275,** Moula Ali (as) said,*“Anyone who believes in My attributes is
a true momin. Anyone who doubts, hesitates in believing, or is
surprised; he is a muqassir and a nasibi (enemy of Ahlul Bayt as).”*

You will notice that Moula Ali (as) declared both the muqassir and
nasibis as one.

**Quaid ul Sharia page no. 25 ref. Bihar ul Anwar Seventh Edition** ,
Imam Zainul Abideen (as) said,*“These people are muqassireen. They are
not your friends. Jabir asked, “O’ Son of RasoolAllah, who are the
muqassireen?” Imam (as) replied, “The people who are negligent in the
recognition of Aimmah (as) and those who are negligent in the matters of
commandments by Aimmah (as), then those people are the muqassireen.”*

**In the same book page no. 26 ref. Amarat ul Anwar page no. 81** , Imam
Zainul Abideen (as) said,*“One who neglects in the recognition of Aimmah
(as) is a muqassir. Even though he may believe in Our Imamate.”*

**Quaid ul Sharia ref. tafseer Noor ul Saqlain First Edition page no.
135** , Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said*, “Ghalis will come back to Us. A
muqassir can only be related to Us through truth. Otherwise he will
never be.”*

**Quaid ul Sharia ref. Sahih Fatul Abrar Second Edition page no. 365,**
Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“Muqassireen are those who Allah blessed
with Our knowledge and guided them towards Us, but they doubted. One
who*

*will become ghali in Our Love, we will return him back to Us. He will
become steadfast and accept Our obedience. When we will call the
muqassir to relate with Us and invite them to accept Our attributes, he
will never be steadfast and accept Our obedience nor will He relate to
Us.* Nasibis are your (shias) enemies. Muqassireen are Our enemies.”

In the context of these hadiths, we want you to pay attention to one
very important point. The main principle of friendship is that a friend
of a friend is your friend.

The enemy of a friend is also your enemy. So it can be said without any
doubt, Masoomeen (as) consider Their shias as Their friends. Masoomeen
(as) fulfill Their friendship in such a way that They issued very strict
orders against the enemies of Their friends. We have been ordered, after
shaking hands with a kafir (disbeliever), to go and rub our hands on the
wall. Because nasibis are the enemies of shias, we have been ordered,
after shaking the hand of a nasibis, to go and wash our hands with
water. Furthermore, if two people are dying of hunger, one of them is a
kafir (disbeliever ie Hindu, Buddhist, etc) and the other is a nasibi,
you are to feed the kafir first. Do not feed the nasibi. It clearly
means Masoomeen (as) were not as strict against Their own enemies as
They were with Their friends’ enemies. I ask you a question. In this
situation, is it not wajib on us that we also fulfill our friendship
towards Masoomeen (as) by condemning Their enemies (Muqassireen) in the
same way that Masoomeen (as) condemn our enemies?

I have invited you towards the truth. My invitation is for every person
who claims to be a friend of Masoomeen (as). I have told you the hadiths
of Masoomeen (as) regarding taqseer (lowering the status of another).
Now the decision is in your own hands. Now it is your duty to look
around yourself and see who is trying to divert you from the recognition
of Masoomeen (as).

Do not be deceived by their prayers which are done only for showing off
to others and not for the love of Allah. According to Moula Ali (as),
this world is full of shaitan’s spider web. This is why a true momin has
to be very careful. Otherwise he can fall into shaitan’s trap. Who is a
ghali and who is a muqassir? Insha Allah we will discuss this using
strong proofs in our next chapter.

Ideologies of Ghulu (exaggeration) in the time of Sheik Sudooq
--------------------------------------------------------------

If once someone suffers from the disease of taqseer (lowering of one’s
status), then how does he go astray and what types of actions make him
become astray? You will see the answers to these questions in this
chapter.

*Shahadatul Salisa page no. 50 ref. Bihar ul Anwar Seventh Edition page
no. 263,* the teacher of Sheik Sudooq, Sheik Abu Jafar Muhammad bin
Hasan bin Walid Qumi says, “The first stage of ghulu (exaggeration) is
when you refuse to believe that a prophet or imam cannot make a
mistake.” (This same ideology can be found in the book “*Tareek e
Quran”.)* It clearly means anyone who believes that a prophet or imams
can never make any mistake is considered a ghali. On the base of this
ideology, muqassireen accused the narrators of ghulu.

They made doubtful the hadiths regarding the attributes of Masoomeen
(as) and opened the door of deviation forever. Apart from Sheik Sudooq,
no one has said these narrations are exaggerations.

*Shahadatul Salisa page no. 51 ref. Marat ul Anwar page no. 42* , Allama
Mirza Abul Hasan al Shareef also mentioned the muqassir beliefs of the
scholars of Qum. He wrote, “Among the scholars of Qum, the majority of
scholars deny all those hadiths which tell the true attributes of Ahlul
Bayt (as). They accused these narrators simply because they mentioned
the true attributes of Ahlul Bayt (as). For example, Muhammad bin Sanan,
Mufasal bin Umar, Unis bin AbdurRahman, etc. If you look deeply into
this, most of the narrators which were accused of being ghalis were the
ones who narrated those hadiths which clearly show the very high status
of Ahlul Bayt (as). Our great scholars wrote these narrations in their
books. This means they fully believed in these hadiths. Otherwise, they
would not have included them or would have mentioned they did not
believe in them. If you ponder upon this with a true heart, you will
never be able to find any type of exaggeration in any of these hadiths.
Allama Majalisi realized this injustice which was being done by these so
called scholars. He wrote,

“The people reject all of these hadiths based upon their own opinion
even though the narrators of these hadiths are very trustworthy and
pious people. These muqassireen intentionally lower the status of Ahlul
Bayt (as) and accuse all the narrators of such hadiths which tell us the
high status of Ahlul Bayt (as) of doing ghulu.”

Is this ghulu (exaggeration)?
-----------------------------

*After the demise of RasoolAllah (saw), when Salman al Farsi (as) was
proving Moula Ali (as) as the most deserving person for the caliphate,
he said, “If you had accepted Ali (as) as your leader and absolute wali,
then you would have been blessed greatly. After accepting if you had
ordered the birds which were flying, they would have obeyed your words.
If you had called the fish to come out of the rivers, they would have
come to you as well.” Upon hearing these words, Umar said, “O’ Salman!
It does not matter what you say now. It has happened now.*

*(Abu Bakr has been chosen as caliph). Allah has taken the right of
caliphate from Ahlul Bayt (as) who you (Salman al Farsi as) have
considered as your Rabb (Lord).”*

(Now we have known the inventor of the ideology that when you are
describing the attributes of Moula Ali (as) it means you automatically
must consider Him (Moula Ali as) as your Allah.)

**Haqaiqul Wasiyat Second Edition page no. 65 ref. Ahtejaj Tabrisi** ,
RasoolAllah (saw) said in the Sermon of Ghadeer*, “O’People! Allah has
blessed Ali (as) with uncountable attributes. You can never know all of
the attributes of Ali (as). Whenever someone describes the attributes of
Ali (as), agree with him because whatever he is saying, Ali (as)’s
status is much higher than that, and your knowledge is limited.”*

**Bihar ul Anwar Fourth Edition page no. 54** , Malik Jehni said,*“I
asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (as), “Allah has blessed You with such
greatness and declared You as His Hujjah (Proof upon the Creation) After
hearing*

*these words, and Imam said, “O’Malik! We are much greater than what you
just said.”*

**Speech of Masoom Bihar ul Anwar Fourth Edition page no. 117** , Poet
Kumaat said a few lines of poetry in front of Imam Muhammad Baqir (as)
in praise of the Imam (as). The explanation of his words was “if I am
describing the attributes of Ahlul Bayt (as) and even if I am
exaggerating. I still would not in reality be exaggerating because
whatever I say it will be truth”. Upon hearing these words, the Imam
(as) kept silent.

**Bihar ul Anwar First Edition page no. 23** , Imam Hussain (as) said*,
“We are the offspring of Allah and the inheritors of the Prophet of
Allah.”*

**Bihar ul Anwar Ninth Edition page no. 25** , Imam Muhammad Taqi (as)
said,*“I swear by Allah if there was not such a danger that the
followers of falsehood and the offspring of kufr and polytheists would
attack Us, I would have revealed such truths of Masoomeen (as) upon
hearing the whole of creation would be so surprised. After this Imam
(as) put His hand on His mouth and said, “O’Muhammad! Keep silent the
way your forefathers remained silent.”*

**Haqaiqul Wasiyat Second Edition page no. 48** , Imam Zainul Abideen
(as) said,*“I have such great knowledge, if I reveal it, the people will
say I am an idol worshipper. The Muslims will issue a fatwa that I
deserve to be killed.”*

**Bihar ul Anwar Third Edition Caliphatul Elahiya** ,*“We have such
relations with Allah that sometimes We become Him and sometimes He
becomes Us. Despite of this, He remains He and We remain We.”*

Absolute Wilayat
----------------

Wilayat is the center of belief. This whole universe, its whole
realities and secrets, revolves around wilayat because belief is based
upon the recognition of religion and the promise of allegiance. This is
why before discussing belief it is necessary to understand the true
meanings of religion. In this way you will know why we begin with
wilayat. For explanation of religion, we will consult Quran and tafseer
of Masoomeen (as).

We will reach our decision based upon Their sayings and not upon our own
opinion.

**30 ar-Room (The Romans):** **O’Prophet of Allah (Muhammad)! Keep on
the deen from a pure heart. This is the nature which Allah has made, and
from this nature He created humans. No change can be possible in the
creation of Allah. This is the true deen (religion), but the vast
majority does not know this.**

In order to explain the tafseer of this ayah, we will use the words of
Imam Muhammad Baqir (as).**(Usool e Kafi Tafseer Qumi and Tafseer
Safi)** Imam (as) said*, “According to this ayah, the religion is the
wilayat of Ameer ul Momineen (as). This is the nature, and this is the
right religion.”*

**42 ash-Shura (Consultation) 13: He (Allah) declared sharia (laws) from
the deen (religion) for you whom We have given to Nuh and we revealed
this upon you. Which We also have given to Ibrahim, Musa, and Isa. So
stay on this deen (religion) and do not divert from it.**

In**Tafseer Safi and Qumi** Masoomeen (as) have said,*“Religion is the
wilayat of Moula Ali (as).”*

9 at-Tawba (Repentance) 33: Allah is the One who sent His Rasool with
guidance and true religion. So that He could rectify all other religions
even though the mushrik (polytheists) dislike it.

In**Usool e Kafi Kitab e Hujjat chapter 107 hadith no 91** , Imam Jafar
Sadiq (as) said,*“True deen is wilayat of Moula Ali (as).”*

4. 61 as-Saff (The Ranks) 9: (The meaning of this ayah is the same as
the one above)

In the tafseer of this ayah, Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said,*“Allah gave
an order to His Prophet, Muhammad (saw), to inform the people the true
religion is wilayat of Moula Ali (as).”*

**5 107 al-Ma’oon (Almsgiving) 1: “O’Prophet of Allah (Muhammad)! Have
you seen such a person who denies deen (religion)?”**

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) and Imam Riza (as) wrote in the tafseer of this
ayah*, “Deen is wilayat of Moula Ali (as).”* **(Akmal ul Deen Bay
Wilayat Ameerul Momineen (as) page no. 355)**

We have only mentioned five ayahs from Quran. You can understand easily
for yourself that the meaning of religion according to Allah is the
wilayat of Moula Ali (as). We have been ordered to gain its marifat
(recognition). This is the key to gaining the marifat of Usool e Deen
(principles of religion). If you do not have the marifat of wilayat,
then you will never be able to gain the marifat of principles of
religion. This is why according to those great scholars the religion is
wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as). As Allama Dast Ghayab wrote in his
book*“Wilayat”,* “the true religion is wilayat of Ameerul Momineen
(as).” Allama Bahraini in his book*“Al Hujjah”* narrates the sayings of
Masoomeen (as),*“The true religion is wilayat of Ameerul Momineen
(as)”.* First of all, we have to understand that wilayat is not like
prophet hood and imamate. In fact, wilayat is a commandment upon
everything. So basically, wilayat is the physical presence of Allah’s
attributes upon the earth.

Allah has said about Himself, “I was a hidden treasure.” No one can know
the limits of the Oneness of Allah because Allah Himself has said that
it is hidden. When this hidden treasure revealed itself, it revealed
itself in the form of wilayat. When it is revealed in human form, it
comes in the form of Moula Ali (as). This is why in book*“Saleem bin
Qais page no. 271”,* RasoolAllah (saw) said,*“O’ Ali! The one who denies
Your wilayat has also denied the Oneness of Allah.”* All the attributes
of Allah can be found under wilayat. Not one single attribute can be
recognized without wilayat. Moula Ali (as) is the caliph of Allah. Every
single creation in the whole universe is under His rule except Allah.
This order of Allah is absolute wilayat. All the prophets and messengers
are also under this absolute wilayat. No one can write anything on this
topic because we are so ignorant to the truth of wilayat. Even if Moula
Ali (as) blesses someone with the ability to explain, and they try to
write about wilayat, then the people would simply deny what was written
and reject it as if it was an untruth. No one can understand all the
secrets of wilayat nor is anyone permitted to reveal those secrets even
if they are able to understand.

“How can we praise You. Our tongues can’t say

Anything because Your attributes are so

Pure and our tongues are so impure.”

Abu Dhar (ra) was a great saint (arif). He had knowledge of the secrets
of wilayat. He was also the religious brother of Hz Salman al Farsi
(as). Despite of this, Hz Salman (as) had such a status that even Abu
Dharr (ra)’s iman could not bear knowing his (Hz Salman as) iman
regarding Ahlul Bayt (as). Anyone who cannot bear the attributes of
Ahlul Bayt (as) should do the same as Gibrael (as) did and admit their
ignorance. You cannot deny the attributes of Masoomeen (as) simply
because of your ignorance. This denial does not make you become a
scholar. Moula Ali (as) came into this world in human form after passing
through 70,000 veils. Even then He is still considered as Allah by some.
Human intellect became stunned. Their tongues became speechless. No one
could understand even one attribute of Moula Ali (as). At this point,
humans became totally flabbergasted. This is why Ibn Abi Al Hudeed (very
famous Sunni scholar) said, “There is no doubt Ali (as) is human,

but what type of human is He that the attributes of Allah have been
revealed through Him? He is the essence of creation, but His attributes
have the essence of Allah. Even the intellect of the wisest of peoples
is surprised by Him. What type of surprise is this, which no one can
understand.” Imam Shafi (one of the four Sunni “imams”) said, “The
greatness of Moula Ali (as) is such that the people consider Him to be
Allah. And I (Shafi) could not understand even on my deathbed who was my
Rabb (Lord), Ali (as) or Allah?” Imam Shafi also said, “Someone once
asked me to praise Ali (as) because the remembrance of Ali (as)’s
extinguishes the fire. I said, “How can I praise such a person for whom
even the intellect goes astray and starts to pray to Him?”

It seems that Allah revealed Moula Ali (as) for the purpose of testing
His creation. One who could understand the difference between Oneness
and wilayat will be rewarded with the highest levels of paradise. Moula
Ali (as) ‘s attributes are so strange that our intellect and
understanding can never truly grasp the truth of all His attributes.
Allah revealed Moula Ali (as) in His own House. No one even today can
understand this secret.

*Mullah Jami says, “Sheik (a scholar) went towards Kaaba, and I towards
Najaf. I swear by the Lord of the Kaaba, in this matter, Haqq (truth)
was with me. The difference between me and Sheik is* I went towards the
pearl and he went towards the oyster.”

It is an absolute proven truth that Sura Ikhlas is purely tawheed
(Oneness). In this sura, Allah used the word “ahad” (One) for Himself.

Now let’s look at the charismatic personality of Allah’s absolute wali,
Moula Ali (as). There are seven days in a week. Every day is associated
with some Masoom (as). For example, Friday is associated with Imam
Zamana (ajf). Monday is associated with RasoolAllah (saw). The day which
is associated with Moula Ali (as) is Sunday. Sunday in Arabic is called
“ahad” (One).*Kokab Durri page 339* , Moula Ali (as) said,*” People of
the heavens write my name as “Ahad”. On the fifth heaven, my name is
Ali. Allah has given Me a very high status and named me Ameerul
Momineen.”* In the*same book on page 156 ref. Arbaeen and Firdusul
Akhbar* ,

Rasool Allah (saw) said*, “Ali is to the people the way “Qul hu Allahu
Ahad” is to Quran.”*

Even with only mentioning one attribute of Moula Ali (as) it becomes
clear what a great charismatic personality He is. It does not matter
which attribute you look at, you will reach this same conclusion, and if
you ponder deeply upon the true meaning of Moula Ali (as)’s name, then
it will become so difficult to differentiate Moula Ali (as) from Allah
that for some people it will cause them to go astray.  Belief in the
wilayat of Moula Ali (as) is the “pul e sirat” (bridge between Hell and
Paradise) which everyone will have to cross. It is their belief and
recognition of the wilayat of Moula Ali (as) which they will be measured
on. This belief will determine how easily or how difficult it is to
cross this bridge.

When the Oneness of Allah appears in other than Allah or When others appear to be the Oneness of Allah
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Wilayat is a collection of three things, knowledge, commandment, and
order (rule).**

All of these things must be fully authentic and complete. The knowledge
is such a knowledge that it contains absolutely no ignorance because
ignorance is the opposite of knowledge. It is such a knowledge which not
only has full command over what has already been created, but it has
full command over those things which have not been created yet. So if
you doubt in the knowledge of the absolute wali, it means you doubt
Allah Himself. The command is such that there is no doubt in His ability
to be able to fulfill His commandment. Having such doubts in the
commandment of the absolute wali of Allah  or just thinking He has the
ability to do one thing but not another is equal to doubting Allah’s
commandment. It is such an order/rule in which this whole universe is
obedient to His order/rule. Allah’s absolute wali (Moula Ali as) is the
absolute ruler of the whole of creation; those things which are already
in existence and those things which have not yet come into existence.
His rule is Allah’s rule. If you try to create a limit from your own
opinion for Him, then you are challenging Allah’s commandment and rule.
When these three things, knowledge, commandment, and rule, are at their
peak, it is called absolute wilayat. The one who possesses these three
things at their peak will be the absolute wali. In Quran in various
verses, whenever Allah has mentioned wilayat, He also mentioned ilm
(knowledge), qudrat (commandment), and hukm (order/rule). We will
present here a few Quranic verses and hadiths so that this will become
even clearer.

6 al-An’aam (The Cattle) 127-128: “And whatever they have been doing,
they have a wali, and one day He will gather them. Certainly Allah is
most wise and all knowing.”

In these verses, Allah has mentioned wilayat with knowledge. This is
why Allah’s absolute wali, Moula Ali (as) said, “*I have knowledge of
everything* .” He also said,*“I am the caretaker of the knowledge of
Allah.* ” Not only does He have full command on this knowledge, but He
blesses others with knowledge. No one can even touch the knowledge
unless he gives himself in complete obedience to the One whose knowledge
is the

same as Allah’s knowledge, Moula Ali (as). As Moula Ali (as) Himself
said,*“I know those secrets of Allah which no one except Allah Himself
knows.* ”*(Khutba Tuntunjia).*

42 ash-Shura (Consultation) 9:**“Have they created their own wali other
than Allah? Allah is the only wali and He is the one who gives life to
the dead. He has  absolute command over all  of  creation”**

46 al-Ahqaf (The Dunes) 32-33: “Those who do not obey the Ones who call
you towards Allah, they will never be able to do any harm against Allah
on this earth. There is no wali except Allah. Do they not ponder upon
that Allah who created the heavens and the whole universe without any
need of rest, He is the One who gives life to the dead, and certainly
He  has  absolute command over the whole universe”

In these verses, Allah has mentioned commandment with wilayat. We will
explain it in more detail by using the sayings of Masoomeen (as).

Allah has full confidence in His commandment.*Usool e Kafi Kitab Tawheed
chapter 6 hadith 2*

He created things with His commandment and wisdom.**Usool e Kafi Kitab
Tawheed chapter 11 hadith 3**

The wonders of His commandment has no end because everyday He creates
something new.**Usool e Kafi Kitab Tawheed chapter 22 hadith 7**

When this commandment of Allah appears in the form of Moula Ali (as), He
Himself then says,*“Allah has given Me command regarding His knowledge*
.”**(Usool e Kafi Kitab e Hujjat chapter 14 hadith 1)** . So who is
there who can even imagine what is the commandment of Moula Ali (as)?
That Ali (as) which, according to Quran, is at the status of Allah’s
nafs (self). In regards to this nafs of Allah, (Moula Ali as), Masoomeen
(as) have said, “*Allah listens and sees from His nafs* .”**(Usool e
Kafi Kitab Tawheed chapter 13 hadith 2)**

3 aal-Imran (The Family of Imran) 20: “Allah has warned you about His
Nafs (self).”

Aqaee Khoemeni writes about this point in his book*“Misbah ul Hadaya Ala
Calipha wa Wilaya page no. 53”* , “Moula Ali (as) has all the same
attributes as the Oneness of Allah, and He has full command over all of
those attributes. He also has full command over the whole of creation of
Allah, but He never revealed these attributes in their full detail to
the people because these attributes in their full sense can only be
known and seen by Allah.” Since Khomeini has mentioned taqseer and
tawheed, we have included it in our book, but we will explain its
meaning in a simpler way. When you draw a circle around another circle,
then you draw another circle around that one. Then you keep doing this
continuously. It does not matter how many circles you draw, but the
center and original circle will remain unchanged. This is the
explanation of when Allah appears in the form of others and others
appear in the form of the Oneness of Allah. It does not harm or change
the Oneness of Allah. This also is not shirk (polytheism) nor is it
ghulu (exaggeration). It is an established fact.

2 Al Baqara (The Cow) 17. “Don’t you know the rule of the heavens,
earth, and whole universe is only for Allah and there is no wali or
helper other than Allah.”

at-Tawba (The Repentance) 115-116: “Certainly the rule of the heavens
and the earth is only   for Allah. He is the one who gives life and He
is the one who gives death. There is no wali or helper other than
Allah.”

In these verses, Allah has mentioned wilayat with order/rule. An
absolute wali who has such a rule over all of the universe that it
cannot be limited simply to prove He is the leader of any specific area
such as Mecca, Medina, etc. When you limit His rule in this way, you are
insulting Allah directly. He (Moula Ali as) is “Maalik ul Mulk” (owner
of the whole universe).The whole universe is in His obedience, those
things already created and those which will be created. Hazrat Miqdad
(ra) asked Moula Ali (as),*“Are the matters which are in the heavens
also under Your commandment?” Moula Ali (as) replied, “O’Son of Aswad, I
am the Hujjat (proof) on every creation of Allah which is in the heavens
and upon the earth, and upon the angels which are in the heavens. The
angels of the heavens cannot even move without My permission.”* *(Najul
Israr Second Edition page no* .*222)*   In*Khutbat Al Bayan* Moula Ali
(as) said,*“I am the owner of all affairs from the beginning til the
end.”*

After Moula Ali (as) ordered the sun to return to an earlier position,
the people thought this to be a great miracle. This was nothing more
than an ordinary reflection of His unlimited rule. It is a common belief
that Moula Ali (as) did this on two different occasions. This is the
reason people consider it as a miracle. According to certain researchers
Moula Ali (as) ordered the sun to change its position on at least 15
different occasions.*(Manqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First Edition page no.
387)* By doing this on so many different occasions, it is a proof this
is not a miracle of Moula Ali (as). It was a normal thing which was so
easy for Him to do, but ignorant people like us consider such as this to
be a miracle.

Absolute Master
---------------

Because Allah Himself does not come onto the earth to rule, then He must
have some entity upon the earth in which He can reveal His rule through.
In Quran it is written Allah does this through the personality of Moula
Ali (as). Therefore Moula Ali (as) is the absolute master over the whole
universe, those things created and those things which have not yet been
created.

In order to understand the true meaning of our topic, it is necessary to
ponder upon the word “olil amar” (absolute master). In this way you will
be able to understand the true rule and commandment of Allah. In order
to understand the meaning of absolute master, it is necessary to first
understand the word “amr” (absolute commandment). In this book we cannot
explain “amr” (absolute commandment) in its full details. However, we
will discuss “amr” (absolute commandment) in a few sentences. In Quran
this word was used upon different occasions and with different words. To
understand absolute commandment, we will use three Quranic verses as
references. These three verses will explain the true meaning of absolute
commandment comprehensibly.

36 Yaseen 81-83:**“The One who created the heavens and the earth, does
He not have the commandment (ability) to create that which is likened to
them? Yes! He is the One who can create anything, and He**

**has full knowledge of everything. No one else except Him can say “Kun”
(BE) and then it will be. Allah is the most pure. He has full
commandment over the whole universe in His Hands. Every creation will
return back to Him.”**

The first thing notable in these three ayahs is that Allah mentions all
three aspects of wilayat (knowledge, commandment, and order/rule). He
describes absolute commandment by using the reference of “olil amr”
(absolute master). This is an ultimate proof that whoever will be the
absolute master will also have the knowledge, commandment, and rule in
the same way as Allah. In other words, absolute master can only be the
one who is the absolute wali of Allah. If you use this for any other
person, it will be a shirk (act of polytheism). It has been revealed in
these verses that what has been created and what will be created is all
under the command of the one who is the absolute master. Allah has
limited the meanings of “amr” (absolute commandment) after saying
“innama” (one and only). By limiting the meaning of the word “amr”,
Allah Himself has ordered that the word “amr” (absolute commandment) can
only be used in relation to the one who is the absolute master, Moula
Ali (as). So we can say that the only thing which is not under absolute
commandment is Allah. Every single creation, whether it has already been
created or will be created, is under the rule of the absolute wali. The
absolute wali has full commandment over every single thing and the
arrangement of every thing in the whole universe is in His hands. In
Sura Qadr we find phrase “Qul e Amr”. The explanation of the meaning of
absolute commandment in this ayah tells us that the absolute commandment
can only be for the absolute master who was also the absolute master in
the time of RasoolAllah (saw).

4.an-Nisa (The Women) 83: “And when they heard any news of peace or
fear, they spread this in all directions. If they had passed this onto
RasoolAllah (saw) and the Absolute Master, then They would have told
them the whole truth……”

In order to confirm our statement, we will present two hadiths which are
related to the Sura Qadr. In which Allah has mentioned the absolute
commandment which is revealed through the absolute master.

**1. RasoolAllah (saw) said,*“Believe in the night of revelation of the
Quran! Shab e Qadr (night of Power) is associated with Ali (as) ibn Abi
Talib (as) and the eleven Imams (as) which will be from His offspring*
.”(Usool e Kafi Kitab e Hujjat chapter 124 hadith 12)**

**2.**97 al-Qadr (The Power, Fate): “And the angels and the spirit came
down and brought “Qul e Amr” from Their Lord.”****

In the tafseer of this ayah, Ibn Abbas narrates, “In those months during
Laylatul Qadr (night of revelation of Quran) Gibreal (as) use to come to
Moula Ali (as) and say salam from Allah.”**(Manqib ibn Shahr Ashoob
First Edition page no.352)**

We have briefly discussed the topic of knowledge, commandment, and
order/rule. We discussed only what was necessary so that you may
understand our meaning in relation to our topic. However, if you wish to
go into full detail regarding these three things, then you can write
countless books on each topic. This is the reason we have only discussed
those

matters which are directly related to our book and left those things
which were not necessary to make our point clear. It has been proven
these three things are compulsory for wilayat. Whatever level of
knowledge one has in regards to these three things, his level of wilayat
will also be at that same level. The level of wilayat which is with
Moula Ali (as) and His Offspring (as) will be explained later in our
book. At this point we will explain the ideology of ordinary wilayat. In
this way it will become clear to everyone.

A Common Example of Commandment
-------------------------------

Someone is thirsty. He cannot remove his thirst unless he has command
over the waters. First of all, he has to have the knowledge of the
location of the water. Suppose he knows where the water is located, but
he does not have the necessary means to reach the water. In this case,
he cannot remove his thirst. Now suppose he finds a way to reach the
water, but he does not have the commandment to get the water because the
person who owns the water does not give him permission to drink from the
water. Despite of having knowledge and power, he will stay thirsty
unless he can somehow gain the permission of the owner of the water.

When he gets all of these things, then he has full commandment over the
water and can remove his thirst. This is the first stage of wilayat. Now
he can drink the water, but he only has command over the removal of his
own thirst. He cannot remove the thirst of any other person. Whoever
will get this commandment where he can remove the thirst of others;

his wilayat will be greater than the one who can remove his own thirst
but not that of others. Now he has the commandment to remove the thirst
of others, but he does not have the commandment to make juice from the
water. The one who has this commandment to make juice from the water,
his wilayat is greater than the one who can remove the thirst of others
but cannot make juice from the water. If we go further, instead of
finding the water, we ponder upon how the water was created. We will see
that almost every person knows the scientific formula for water. Almost
every person knows when you combine two atoms of hydrogen and one atom
of oxygen, you will make water.

Even if someone has this knowledge, he still cannot create water from
these two things. Only when someone has the knowledge of applied
science, and these things are provided to him, then he can create water.
This is the lowest stage of wilayat. If this person has been given a
commandment to create hydrogen and oxygen, then he will be on a higher
level of wilayat than the person who simply knows of these things but
cannot create them himself. If he has been a commandment to obtain these
things from their source of origin instead of from another person or
place, then he will be on an even higher level of wilayat.

If he has been given the commandment to create these things himself
without the help or need of any other person or thing, then this wilayat
will be greater than all previous mentioned wilayats. Now keep
increasing the stages of wilayat. When you see such personalities whose
knowledge is the knowledge of Allah, whose commandment is the
commandment of Allah, and whose order is the order of Allah, then
imagine what is the level of His wilayat? This is the point where you
cannot be anything except astonished.

You have to admit your ignorance, and you have to submit yourself to
this authority. Only shaitan and his offspring will doubt, deny, or
speak any word against this authority.

Creation and Establishment is related to Wilayat
------------------------------------------------

When the will of Allah desired to be made known, the process of creation
and establishment was started. This will of Allah appeared from the
knowledge of Allah. It is called wilayat. Wilayat is the purpose of the
creation of the whole universe. From this

Wilayat, the process of creation, establishment, and invention came
about. The attributes of Allah must be revealed through the one who is
the absolute wali (Moula Ali as). He is not Allah, but He is the creator
of the whole of universe. He is not Allah, but His wilayat is the
wilayat of Allah. He is the one who created the process of creation.
Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“Before anything there was the will of Allah
and from the will of Allah came all of creation.”* *(Usool e Kafi Kitab
Tawheed chapter 14 hadith 4)*

In Quran Allah mentioned creation in relation to wilayat. We will point
out some Quranic verses which will help to explain this.

6 Al-An’aam (The Cattle) 14: “O’ Rasool! Say to these people, “How can I
believe in any other wali except Allah who is the creator of the heavens
and the earth?”

13 ar-Ra’ad (The Thunder) 16: “O’Rasool! Say, “Who is the creator of the
heavens and the earth? Say, “That is only Allah.” Say, “Have you again
believed in a wali other than Allah? Those which cannot give any benefit
even to themselves.” Say, “How can one who is blind and one who can see
be equal to each other? How can darkness and noor (light) be equal? Have
they as proof of their wilayat created any such creations the way Allah
has? Say, “Allah is the only creator.”

3. 18 al-Kahf (The Cave) 50-51: “Do you believe in Him (shaitan) and his
offspring as your wali instead of Me (Allah)? They are your
enemies.**Calamitous is the exchange for evil-doers.** I**made them not
to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor their own
creation; nor choose I misleaders for (My) helpers.**

4. 29 al-Ankaboot (The Spider) 19-22: “Have they not seen how Allah
produced the creation and how he will reproduce it? Certainly, it is
very easy for Him.

O’Rasool! Say, “Travel throughout the land and see how He originated
creation, Allah is able to do all things. He punishes those whom He
wills and shows mercy to those whom He wills, and turns unto Him. You
cannot escape from Him on the earth or in the sky, and other than Allah
there is no wali or helper.”

32 as-Sajda (The Prostration) 4: “Allah is the one who created the
heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days. Then He
sat upon the Throne. Other than Him, you have no wali or helper.”

12 Yusuf (Joseph) 101: “O’Creator of the heavens and the earth! You are
my only wali in this world and in the hereafter.”

It has been proved from these ayahs that wilayat is the reason of
creation and establishment. Absolute wali is the creator of the whole
universe, that which has already been created and that which will be
created. As in

*Khutbat ul Bayan* , Moula Ali (as) said, “*I am the creator of all
creation* .” In order to maintain the belief regarding tawheed, Imam
Muhammad Baqir (as) said,

*“Talk about the Creator. Do not talk about Allah.”* *(Usool e Kafi
Kitab Tawheed chapter 8 hadith 1)* We do not need to go into details of
this saying. These are the true beliefs of Shia. We will present only
two hadith, one from Moula Ali (as) and the other from Imam Zamana
(ajf).

Moula Ali (as) said to Ammar Yasir (ra),*“O’Ammar! My “ism” (name)
established the whole universe and its inhabitants. I am the One who
created the seven heavens* .”*(Najul Israr First Edition page 447 Bahar
ul Moarif)* In this hadith it is very important to notice that Moula Ali
(as)’s “ism” is the creator of all things, but Moula Ali (as) is the
creator of His “ism” Himself.

Imam Zamana (ajf) said,*“Allah is Our Creator. We are the Creators of
all other things* .*” (Tareek ul Irfan ala Sahib ul Zaman Second Edition
ref Ahtejaj Tabrisi and Bihar ul Anwar)*

I do not care about non shias, but it always astonishes me the people
who call themselves Shia can still have doubts regarding these
attributes of Moula Ali (as). Even though creation is not a very great
attribute of Moula Ali (as) that it should astonish you so much yet this
one attribute seems to amaze the majority of people and they look no
further into the truth of Moula Ali (as) because they are blinded by
this one attribute which is so easy for Moula (as) to do. For Him it is
absolutely nothing. Aqaee Khoemeni is one very popular religious
personality of present times.

In Pakistan a vast majority of people follow and respect him greatly. If
the people have no interest in the sayings of Masoomeen (as), then at
least they should see what their scholars have written. The people
follow their scholars blindly in all other matters. They should also
follow blindly those things which their scholars have said regarding
Ahlul Bayt (as). We are mentioning an extract from*“Akmal ul Deen bay
Wilayat Ameerul Momineen (as) page no. 54”* in which Khoemeni has
written in his book*“Misbal ul Hadaya ala Calipha wal Wilayat”* ;
“RasoolAllah (saw) has mentioned a certain group of momins who were
given such a high status even before their creation. So when they enter
jannah, due to their high status Allah will speak to them and say,
“Allah who is “hayyo ul quyyum” (one who will never die) and these
momins will also never die. When I say “Kun” (Be), it immediately is. I
have also given this to you. When you say “Kun” (Be), things will be
created.”  So those momins have reached such a high status that whenever
they say “Kun”, then that thing will be created.

People must ponder upon this. When those who are the lowest slaves of
Moula Ali (as) have the ability to create, then imagine what is the
status and ability of Moula Ali (as) Himself who has the same command as
Allah. If even these momins can be given the ability to create, then you
should understand why this attribute should not amaze you and why the
ability to create is no great difficulty to Moula Ali (as). The only
reason one would doubt in Moula Ali (as)’s ability to create is that
their hearts have turned towards shaitan and they have lost their iman.
Not only does Moula Ali (as) have full commandment and rule over the
whole of the universe, but He also

has this commandment that He can give this attribute to anyone. We have
written that wilayat is directly revealed from the knowledge of Allah.
In order to explain again we will repeat the sayings of Moula Ali (as).
“Allah gave Me commandment in His knowledge.” It clearly means that even
before the appearance of Moula Ali (as), He had absolute commandment
over the whole universe.

Nearness of Allah
-----------------

This whole universe was created because of certain reasons. Every reason
has a reason itself. This is why there is a huge distance between the
true Creator and His creation.  This distance can never be removed.
There is no possibility its removal will ever happen. The One whom Allah
revealed first, He revealed Him from Himself (Allah). The One whom Allah
revealed first (Moula Ali as) is the one who created the whole universe.

Allah is for Him, and He is for Allah. We start every ibadat (act of
worship) with this as our niyyat (intention) “Qurbat til illah” (to gain
the Nearness of Allah). The purpose of every ibadat (act of worship) is
to gain the nearness of Allah. However, no one can reach Allah directly.
It does not matter whether you try physically, spiritually, through
prayers, fasting, etc. The true purpose of these acts of worship is not
to reach Allah Himself directly but to reach His Mazher (Moula Ali as).
This is the only way you can reach to Allah. Any way other than this is
impossible. How near this Mazher (manifestation of Allah) is to Allah
you will see from these hadiths.

“Touched” in Allah
------------------

RasoolAllah (saw) said,*“Do not ever say anything against Ali (as)
because He is “touched” in Allah.”* *(Kokab Durri page 161 ref Halyatul
Auliya)* This is a very famous hadith. We have to explain what does it
means. Mumsoos means “touched” by Allah. RasoolAllah (saw) did not say
that Moula Ali (as) is touched “from” Allah. RasoolAllah (saw) said Ali
(as) is touched*“in”* Allah. You know very well the difference between
from and in. Now you can understand how near Moula Ali (as) is to Allah.

At this point I think I should keep quiet because I do not want to
become a target of accusation for the enemies of Moula Ali (as), but it
is necessary to mention the way these so called narrators, scholars, and
translators have explained this hadith. In Arabic “mumsoos” is also used
for a person who is possessed (“touched” in his mind) by a spirit or
jinn and becomes insane. So many of the modern day so called narrators
and scholars in their explanations of this hadith (maaz’ Allah) have
said that RasoolAllah (saw) is saying Moula Ali (as) has become “insane”
in the love of Allah so do not say anything against Him. These callous
people who so easily will sell their iman consider Moula Ali (as)
(naudbillah) to be insane simply because their filthy hearts do not want
to accept the truth about Moula Ali (as).

After explaining what it means to be near to Allah in regards to Moula
Ali (as), now we will prove it from*Sura Kahf ayah 50-51:* “Do you
believe in Him (shaitan) and his offspring as your wali instead of Me
(Allah)? They are your enemies.*Calamitous is the exchange for
evil-doers.* I*made them not to witness the creation of the heavens and
the earth, nor their own creation; nor do choose I misleaders for (My)
helpers.”*

In these verses Allah has declared, in the same way as it is declared
there is no Allah other than Allah, there is no wali other than the
absolute wali, Moula Ali (as). From this ayah we can understand that the
absolute wali of Allah is a witness not only to the creation of other
things, but is also a witness to the creation of His own self.

Being a witness on His own self is a proof of His nearness to Allah. It
clearly means there was no witness at the time when Allah revealed Moula
Ali (as) from His nafs (self). Whatever was created after Him, He is a
witness of that creation. From the beginning of time until present day,
it is a common belief among the people that the universe was created
simply by the word “Kun” (Be). All of the intellectuals and scholars
agree upon this principle that in one single moment one essence appeared
from one other essence. So we have to believe the essence which was
revealed from the nearness of Allah was only one in the same way that
Allah is only One. Now we have to recognize Him. We will not be able to
recognize Him from the opinions of so called philosophers, scholars, or
self made ayatollahs. We will recognize Him from the “tongue of Allah”,
Moula Ali (as).

**Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First Edition page no 455** ,*“All the
prophets are a witness upon their own nations. Our Prophet (saw) is a
witness upon all other prophets. Moula Ali (as) is witness on
RasoolAllah (saw) and His Own Self.”* This is an ultimate proof there
was no witness at the time of the appearance of Moula Ali (as).

*Kokab Durri page no. 200* , Moula Ali (as) said,*“I am the first person
whom Allah created as His Hujjat (Proof of Allah upon all creation).”*

In*Khutbat ul Bayan* , Moula Ali (as) said,*“I am the one that looked
everywhere and did not see anything except myself. I am standing in the*
*skies where only* *souls are able to travel and I am the only ‘one’ who
is* *able to breath there.”* *(Najul Israr First Edition).*

In order to reveal the nearness of Moula Ali (as), Allah Himself did
such an arrangement of the universe which will remain until the end of
time. The first house made by Allah on this earth was the house of Ali
(as). In Quran Allah says, “The first house in which people were ordered
to do tawaf (circulate) of was in Mecca and is

so holy it guides the whole universe.” We will not try to prove the
Kaaba is the house of Moula Ali (as) instead of being the house of
Allah. It is true that Allah associated this House towards Himself, but
the word “bait” (house) itself is a proof that only the person who at
least spent one night in the house can be the owner. That person cannot
be other than Moula Ali (as) and His Holy Mother both of whom spent
three nights there. We will present a very authentic extract which we
took from*Nafsul Rasool Second Edition* whose author is Allama Ali
Haider. This is an extract from Aini Nazami’s essay.

In this book while discussing about “nuqta baye bismillah” (the dot on
the “bay” of bismillah) he has provided very convincing proofs. These
proofs I will write for you word for word. Now it is up to you how much
you ponder upon his words and what you take away from his sayings.
Anyone who has “noor e wilayat” (light of wilayat) in his heart will
find no

difficulty in obtaining the truth from this extract.  I am not speaking
to those who do not wish to understand. Aini Nazami says:

“If we look into beliefs, we will find that there are only two things
which are necessities of deen (religion). It is compulsory to believe in
both of those things. Those two things are tawheed (Oneness) and “Maad”
(Judgment Day). There are also two acts which are compulsory to perform.
They are to enjoin the good and forbid the evil. These same four things
are also in Sura Al Fatiha and in bismillah. Now we will come to the

letter “bay” which is a relationship between “abd o Rabb” (Mabood;
creation and Creator). Upon the emergence of this relationship, the
human automatically becomes the slave of Allah. “Bay” cannot exist
without the dot. The whole reality of “bay” is based upon this dot. This
dot is Moula Ali (as). In the dictionary of saints the first appearance
of love is “bay”. The dot was the first creation from the existence of
“bay”. If this dot is not there, neither will “bay” exist nor will it
ever be seen. Without this dot, no creation can be created. If this dot
did not exist, then no human would have existed as well. If the human
does not exist, then how would the hidden treasure of Allah become
known?

This is why Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“If We had not appeared in this
world, then no one would have known or prayed to Allah.”* This dot is
what connects “abd o Rabb” (creation and Creator).  For saints this dot
(Moula Ali as) is the source of wahadat (Oneness of Allah). In sharia
the source of wahadat (Oneness of Allah) is the Imam (Moula Ali as). It
means that for us ignorant people who can never truly understand this
attribute of Moula Ali (as) and can never reach that height of
understanding, we must directly look at Moula Ali (as) in order to
understand and gain nearness to Allah. “

Even though this extract is very brief, but from its depths, you can
gain so much knowledge about the truth of the status of Moula Ali (as).
The complete explanation of the topic of our book can be found in this
extract if you take the time to ponder upon the depths of its meaning.
In Aini Nazami’s discussion, he has taken our topic even one step
further. He gives more detail and insight into the relationship between
Moula Ali (as) and Allah than we have done in our book. We were
discussing Moula Ali (as)’s appearance before all other creations, but
Aini Nazami is not discussing who appeared first or who appeared last.
He is saying the only true existance is Moula Ali (as), and all other
creations are only in existance because of Moula Ali (as). If there had
not been Moula Ali (as), then there would have been no other creation.
