Wasila (Intercessor)
====================

When it has been proven the true existance is Moula Ali (as), then it
automatically proves there is no distance or third party between Moula
Ali (as) and Allah. If we believe that Moula Ali (as) needs a third
party or that there is a third party between Moula Ali (as) and Allah,
then we would have to accept that third party as the first existance.
The blessings from the “zat e aqdas e illahi” (Allah) are continuously
flowing upon the creation. If this stops even for the blink of an eye,
then the process of creation will be destroyed and disappear.

There are two kinds of blessings. The first type of blessing is for both
this world and for the Day of Judgment. The other type of blessing is
for the essence of the survival of creation. Creation itself does not
have the power or capability to take this blessing directly from Allah
because Allah did not put this power or ability in His creation. This is
why creation cannot take this blessing directly from Allah and must have
some third party (Moula Ali as) between creation and Allah in order for
the creation to receive this blessing. It does not matter how much one
struggles to reach this level. You will never be able to reach Allah
directly because it goes against the nature of creation. If it were
possible, there would have been no need for Allah to send prophets and
messengers to the creation. The creation would have been able to reach
Allah by themselves and receive His message directly. The prophets and
messengers acted as a source (Wasila) for the creation so that they
could receive the message of Allah and come to know what Allah is. In
order to receive the orders of Allah; we have to have a Wasila
(intercessor). In the same way we need a wasila (intercessor) to receive
the message of Allah; we also need a Wasila for life, death, rizq
(sustenance), health, etc. When there is a huge distance between Creator
and creation, then certainly there is a need for a “bridge” in between
the two so that the creation can easily reach their Creator. That bridge
must be from Allah directly, but at the same time be in a human form so
that the creation will be able to receive the message and all the needs
of creation easily. If he is not both from Allah and in human form, this
distance cannot be removed.

The Wasila must have the ability to take all the blessings from Allah
directly and have the power to give it to the creation. This is the true
meaning of Wasila (intercessor). For example, there is a universal rule
that fire and water cannot be mixed. So we have to put a pot between
them. From one side this pot takes the heat from the fire and at the
same time the pot must be able to give this heat to the water. This is
an undeniable truth. This pot cannot be made from fire nor can it be
made of water. It must be made from a different substance.

Is Wasila (Intercessor) a Creation?
-----------------------------------

When it has been proven that a Wasila (intercessor) between two things
must be made from a different substance, it becomes so easy for us to
clarify this matter. Now we can say with absolute certainty that the
Wasila (intercessor) which is between “wajib” (Allah) and “mumkin”
(creation) cannot be like either of those two things, He must be
different.But whatever He is; only Allah knows. The creation will never
know nor is it meant for

the creation to fully know. It is only meant for them to accept this
Wasila (Moula Ali as). Moula Ali (as) Himself said,*“My Batin (true
self) is hidden. No one can know Me.”*

A saint described Wasila in these words:

“It is impossible to describe the attributes of Moula Ali (as) because a
whole ocean can never be put inside a cup. When did I have the belief
that Moula Ali (as) is Allah? All I know is this: there is nothing which
is like Moula Ali (as) except Allah.”

Allama Iqbal described this reality in these words: “O’Ali (as)! You are
the secret of the Wasila which is between Allah and His creation.”

Before we go any further on this topic, we want you to be sure you
understand the most important conclusion to be made from the
above-mentioned lines. In this way it will remove the confusion which
has been in the minds of shias for the last many centuries. Then we can
reach a decision which will be final until the day of qiyamat (judgment
day).

Ghulu (Exaggertion) and Taqseer (Lowering the status of Ahlul Bayt as)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

In previous chapters we have discussed these topics in detail, but the
final decision was postponed until we had reached this point so that you
would be able to make a decision after knowing all of the facts. Now we
will remove ourselves from the debate of which attributes of Moula Ali
(as) are ghulu (exaggeration) and which are taqseer (lowering His
status). We also do not need to separate the attributes of Moula Ali
(as) into separate chapters based upon whether they are from ghalis or
muqassirs. This issue has been solved forever. The explanation of Wasila
has closed the door on this debate forever.

**Ghali** is one who believed that Moula Ali (as) is**“zat e wajib”
(Allah).**

**Muqassir** is one who believes that Moula Ali (as) is**“mumkin” (a
creation).**

*Momin* is one who believes that Moula Ali (as) is*the secret of Allah*
, and must admit that only Allah knows the true reality of Moula Ali
(as) because Moula Ali (as) has said this Himself. We can never know the
status of Moula Ali (as). When we do not have any knowledge regarding
the status of Moula Ali (as), then how is it possible to exaggerate His
status?

Two other words which are also used for Wasila are “hijab” (veil) and
“barzakh” (place where souls will stay after death until the Day of
Judgment). As we have previously mentioned, there are uncountable
reasons which are keeping this whole universe together and keeping it
from self destructing. In the same way there are uncountable Wasila
(intercessors) and hijabat (veils) between Allah and His creation.
In*Usool e Kafi Kitab e Tawheed chapter 22 first hadith* , Imam Jafar
Sadiq (as) narrates from a sermon of Moula Ali (as),*“There are so many
veils between the hidden secrets of Allah”.*

Every veil is dependent upon the next veil, but the one who is the last
veil is not dependent on any veil or Wasila. All the veils are dependent
on the first Wasila. Whoever gains anything in this world, he gains it
through this last veil which stands between Allah and all other veils.
We have to find

out who this last hijabat (veil) is.  Allah has ordered us in Quran
“wabtagho elahal Wasila”. In order to recognize this last veil, we will
present some proofs which no one will be able to doubt, but one must
have such a heart that can accept this truth without simply rejecting it
because you do not have knowledge of such things.

RasoolAllah (saw) said, “*There is no hijab (veil) between Ali (as) and
Allah. Ali (as) is a veil between Allah and His creation* . (There is no
need for any explanation. RasoolAllah (saw) has clearly stated the
reality of the Creator, creation, and the Wasila (Moula Ali as). This
hadith clearly proves Moula Ali (as) is the last hijab (veil). There is
no hijab (veil) or Wasila between Moula Ali (as) and Allah. Moula Ali
(as) gains everything directly from Allah. Moula Ali (as) is the
distributor of all things to the creation.)*(Kitab Saleem bin Qais page
no. 275)*

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“There is no hijab (veil) between Us and
Allah. We are “Arkan e Tawheed” (principle of Oneness of Allah).”*
*(Usool e Kafi)*

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said,*“Allah made Ali (as) as a sign between
Him (Allah) and His creation. So one who recognizes Moula Ali (as) as
this sign, then he is a momin. One who denies Moula Ali (as) as this
sign is a kafir (disbeliever). One who remains ignorant to the status of
Moula Ali (as) has gone astray. One who believes there is a veil between
Moula Ali (as) and Allah is a mushrik (polytheist).”* *(Usool e Kafi
Kitab Iman o Kufr chapter 293 hadith 2)*

A very famous saying of Moula Ali (as) is*“If all the veils have been
removed, My belief will not increase even a little.”* Moula Ali (as)’s
saying is a clear absolute proof that there is no veil between Himself
and Allah which has any effect upon His beliefs.

In reality the purpose of Moula Ali (as)’s appearance is for the
creation to be able to recognize Allah. Moula Ali (as)’s true purpose
was revealed upon the completion of the recognition of Allah.

Because Allah is recognized through Moula Ali (as), this is why there
must be no hurdle, obstacle, or veil between Moula Ali (as) and Allah.
Mr. Khoemeni wrote in his book “*Misbah Hidaya Illa Caliphatul Waliya”:*

“Allah revealed Himself through Moula Ali (as). Moula Ali (as) has all
of the same attributes as Allah and the same names as Allah, but even
though there are many similarities, Moula Ali (as) is not Allah.*“(Akmal
ul Deen bay Wilayat Ameerul Momineen page 110)*

*All of the scholars from every sect of Islam have agreed that on the
occasion of Miraj (when RasoolAllah ascended to the heavens) there was a
hijab (veil) between Allah and RasoolAllah (saw). Some foolish people
thought it was an actual curtain that Allah put between Himself and
RasoolAllah (saw). As we have previously mentioned, the meaning of hijab
is Wasila (intercessor). Without this Wasila, RasoolAllah (saw) cannot
speak to Allah. Regarding Miraj Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) narrates, “There
was a hijab between the two of Them (RasoolAllah (saw) and Allah) which
was very bright and flowing. RasoolAllah (saw) examined the Noor of
Allah through a very tiny hole which was like the eye of a
needle.”***(Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat page 110 hadith 13).*** Ponder
upon how is it that when*

*RasoolAllah (saw) examined the Noor of Allah through a hole the size of
the eye of a needle then it becomes a great attribute of RasoolAllah
(saw) and was declared as a Miraj by Allah. Now imagine the status of
the One who is considered to be the “Veil of Allah” and “touched” in
Allah who is not in need of any Wasila between Him and Allah. It is
impossible for us to ever fully understand and realize the status of
such a personality (Moula Ali as).*

Wilayat in Quran
----------------

Quran was revealed through and for wilayat. Every book is based upon a
topic. The topic of the book of Allah is tawheed (Oneness). Tawheed
cannot be proved without wilayat. This is the reason Quran appears as
the “bouquet” of wilayat. Masoomeen (as) have said, “*The whole Quran
was revealed due to Our attributes* .” As we previously mentioned, deen
(religion) is wilayat. The source of deen (religion) is Quran. So there
should be absolutely no doubt or surprise that Quran is an instruction
book for wilayat. In Quran wilayat was mentioned on several different
occasions and in different ways under various names. We cannot discuss
in detail about every occasion.

Our book is brief and this topic is very great in length. We will
mention a few occasions and explain it through the hadiths of Masoomeen
(as).

Promise of Allegiance
---------------------

In Quran Allah has mentioned wilayat as a promise of allegiance on
several different occasions.

**2 Baqara (The Cow) 40: O Children of Israel! Remember my favor
whenever I have favoured you, and fulfil your promise, I shall fulfill
My promise, and fear Me.**

In Tafseer Safi and Ayyashi, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*Allah says if
you accept the wilayat of Ali (as) which is from Me (Allah), I will
grant you jannah (paradise).”*

**5 al-Maaida (The Table) 7: “Remember Allah’s grace upon you and His
promise by which He bound you when you said: We hear and we obey; And
keep your promise to Allah. He knows what is in the chests of men.”**

**In Tafseer Safi page no. 131 ref Tafseer Qumi, when RasoolAllah (saw)
took the promise of allegiance of the wilayat of Moula Ali (as) from the
people, they said, “We hear and we obey. Whatever you have said for us
to do, we will do”. Later they broke this promise of allegiance. So this
verse was revealed for those people who broke the promise of
allegiance.**

**13 ar-Ra’ad (The Thunder) 20: “Such as keep the pact of Allah, and
break not the promise.”**

**In Tafseer Safi ref Tafseer Qumi, Imam Musa al Kazim (as) said, “*This
ayah was revealed for Aal e Muhammad (as) in regards to the promise of
allegiance to Ameerul* *Momineen (as) and other Masoomeen (as) which
Allah took in “Alam Zarr” ( the place where all souls were gathered
before the creation of humans).”***

**Dehar 7: “They fulfilled their promises and fear the day which will be
very difficult”**

Imam Riza (as) said, “Allah*took the promise of allegiance from these
people.”* **(Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 107 hadith 5)**

Now we will present a very important ayah. Not only is all of humanity
mentioned but also all of the prophets. Not only all of the prophets are
mentioned but also RasoolAllah (saw) Himself is mentioned.

**33 al-Ahzaab (The Clans) 7-8: “O RasoolAllah! Remember that time when
we took a promise from all of the prophets, and from thee (RasoolAllah
saw) and from Nuh and Ibrahim and Musa and Isa son of Mariam. We took
from them a solemn promise: That He may ask those who were loyal of
their loyalty. And He has prepared a painful doom for the unfaithful.”**

This is the most important ayah regarding the promise of allegiance.

Allah took a promise of allegiance from all prophets. No one was exempt
from this promise.

Allah also took the promise of allegiance from all of the “olil azam”
(great prophets who came with a sharia and kalima).

Particularly we should notice Allah also took the promise of allegiance
from RasoolAllah (saw) Himself.

It was such a great promise that all the prophets would be answerable to
Allah if they had broken this promise.

Even though these were the great prophets of Allah, if they had broken
this promise of allegiance, even they would have become kafir
(disbelievers).

This question will appear in everyone’s mind. What is so important that
no matter what one’s status was, from the highest of creation to the
lowest, the same punishment would have been given by Allah to anyone who
broke this promise of allegiance and Allah would have handed out this
punishment without any regard to the status of the person whether he be
a high prophet or a low servant, he would be dealt with in the same
manner? Let us consult the fifth inheritor of Quran, Imam Muhammad Baqir
(as). Imam (as) said,*“Allah took the promise of allegiance of wilayat
of Moula Ali (as) from all prophets* .*” (Shahadatay Wilayatay Ali (as)
page 96)*

Amanat (entrustment; Wilayat of Moula Ali as)
---------------------------------------------

The word “amanat” (entrustment) was used several different times in
Quran. This “amanat” was so great.  The angel (Gibrael as) who brought
it was given the title of “Ruh ul Ameen” (most trusted) by Allah. All
the other angels are masoom (without sin). They can never be dishonest.
Yet Allah has not called any other angel “Ameen” (trustworthy). Allah
said this only for Gibrael (as). Even though Gibrael (as) was not the
only angel who use to bring “wahi” (revelations of Allah). There were
many angels who were given this duty.

Yet none of them were regarded as “Ameen”. This sacred angel was called
“Ameen” (trustworthy) because He was given the task of bringing a
special “amanat” from Allah.

The one Gibrael (as) brought this “amanat” to (RasoolAllah saw) was
called “Sadiq ul Ameen” (most truthful and trusted). Because this
“amanat”

was so beloved by Allah, Allah would swear by the place where He
(RasoolAllah saw) use to live. Now we have to see what was this “amanat”
(entrustment) which was the purpose of the prophet hood of RasoolAllah
(saw).

**33 al-Ahzaab 72: “We offered the special amanat to the heavens and the
earth and the hills, but they shrank from bearing it and were afraid of
it.”**

In the tafseer of this ayah, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“Amanat is the
wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as).”* **(Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter
107 hadith 2)** In**Tafseer Safi,** Ayyon Akbar al Riza and Mafi ul
Akbar write the same tafseer of this ayah from Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) and
Imam Riza (as). Now we will ask the Quran itself if Gibrael (as) brought
all of the wahi (revelations of Allah) or only that wahi in regards to
the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as).

**26 ash-Shu’araa (The Poets) 193-194: “Ruh ul Ameen (Gibrael as)
brought this in a clear Arabic language upon thy heart so you may be one
of the warners.”**

In**Usool e Kafi and Al Basair** , Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said,
“*Whatever Gibrael (as) use to bring was in regards to the wilayat of
Ameerul Momineen (as* ).” Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*Gibrael (as)
brought the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen whose position was revealed on
the Day of Ghadeer.”* Shah Shams Tabrez explained the “mehfoom”
(meanings) in these words,

**“Whenever Gibrael (as) would come from His Creator,**

**He would go to**

**RasoolAllah (saw). But His purpose and His reason of going**

**To RasoolAllah (saw) was Moula Ali (as).”**

Haqq (Truth)
------------

In Quran another name for wilayat is Haqq (truth). We will explain this
using the following ayahs.

**34 Saba (Sheba) 6: “Those who have been given the knowledge see that
what is revealed unto you from thy Lord is Haqq (truth).”**

**In Tafseer Safi page 412 ref Tafseer Qumi, Haqq is Moula Ali (as).**

**47 Muhammad 2-3: “And those who believe and do good works and believe
in that which is revealed unto Muhammad and it is Haqq (truth) from
their Lord- He rids them of their ill deeds and improves their state.
This is because**

**those who disbelieve follow falsehood and because those who believe
follow Haqq (truth) from their Lord.”**

In**Tafseer Safi page 464-465 ref Tafseer Qumi** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said,*“In Sura Muhammad one ayah was revealed for Us and one for Our
enemies. In the ayah We are Haqq (truth) and Our enemies are batil
(falsehood).”*

**10 Yunus (Jonas) 53: “And they ask you to inform them “Is it Haqq
(truth)”? Say “Yes, by my Lord verily it is Haqq (truth), and ye cannot
escape.”**

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*O’RasoolAllah (saw) and when they ask you
to inform them “Is it Haqq (truth)?”. Say, “Yes, by my Lord verily it is
the*

*wilayat of Ameerul Momineen Ali ibn Abi Talib (as), and ye cannot
escape from it.”* **(Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 107 hadith 87)**

Naimat (Blessing)
-----------------

Whatever we have received from Allah is a blessing, but there is only
one true  blessing  which Allah not only repeatedly reminds His creation
of but also reminds them that this is the first thing they will be asked
about on the day of judgement. (You will read more about this point in
the chapter Qiyamat (Judgement Day).

This can only be the blessing of the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as).
The whole Quran itself is a witness of this.*Sura Rahman* is an
outspoken proof of this. I cannot go into details, but I will mention a
few ayahs in order to explain this.

**16 an-Nahl (The Bee) 83: “They know the naimat (blessing) of Allah and
then deny it. Most of them are kafir (disbelievers).”**

In**Tafseer Safi page 279-280 ref Tafseer Qumi** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said, “*I swear by Allah, in this ayah, We are the naimat (blessing) of
Allah which Allah blessed His creation with.”* In**Usool e Kafi** Imam
Jafar Sadiq (as) narrates from His forefathers,

*“When this ayah “***innama waliyo kumullah”*** was revealed, some
people gathered in the mosque of Medina. They asked each other,” What do
you think concerning this ayah?” One of them said, “If we deny this
ayah, we will become kafir (disbeliever). If we accept it, then the son
of Abu Talib (as) will over come us.” The other people said, “We know
that Muhammad (saw) is absolutely true in His speech, but we will never
become a friend of His nor will we be obedient to Ali (as). It does not
matter what orders He gives to us.*

*We will never follow Him.” Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said this ayah was
revealed in regards to this incident.*

**102 at-Takaathur (Competition) 8: “Then, on that day, you will be
asked concerning the niamat (blessing).”**

In**Yanabil Muwaddah** , Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said,*“In the deen
(religion) the niamat (blessing) is Our Wilayat.* ” The same narration
is also in**Tafseer Safi and Tafseer** **Ayyashi** from Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as).

Rehmat (Mercy)
--------------

The whole of the universe is under the rehmat (mercy) of Allah. We have
proven the whole universe was created through wilayat. Wilayat is the
rehmat (mercy) of Allah. We will present only one ayah in this regards.

**42 ash-Shura (Consultation) 8: “Had Allah willed, He could have made
them as one community, but Allah brings whom He wills into His rehmat
(mercy). And the wrong-doers have no wali or helper.”**

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*Rehmat (mercy) is the wilayat of Moula Ali
(as). Allah brings whomever He wills into the wilayat* .”**(Akmal ul
Deen bay Wilayat Ameerul Momineen (as) page 337 ref Taveel ul Aayat)**

Sirat ul Mustaqeem (The Straight Path)
--------------------------------------

We have been ordered to read “namaz” (pray). Namaz is a Persian word. In
Quran it is written as “salat”.

There are two meanings of salat in Arabic, durood and dua. We read
durood in the tashahud. We make dua at the point where we say “Ahadena
Siratul Mustaqeem”. If salat means durood, then namaz is nothing except
the tashahud. If your tashahud is not correct, then your namaz will
become the same as the namaz of those who have been cursed by Allah. It
has been stated in*Sura Ma’oon* , “Fawaylunn lil musalleen”. There is a
wayal (curse), lanat (curse), destruction, and jahannum (hellfire) for
the namazis (one who reads prayers). You must remember Allah uses the
word “wayal” (curse) specifically for kafirs (disbelievers) and those
who will go to the hell. How unfortunate is that person who prays all
the time and still will go to the hell. Because this topic is not the
purpose of this book, for now we will leave this point as we do not have
the time to explain both our topic and this one as well. But I will
advise you to read these two books so

that you will be able to fully understand the true meaning of tashahud.
The two books are*Shahadatay Wilayatay Ali (as) by Moulana Nazar Hussain
Qamar and Akmal ul Deen bay Wilayat Ameerul Momineen (as) by Moulana
Nisar Abbas Naqvi.* These two books are compulsory for those who believe
namaz is a wajibat (compulsory act of worship).

If the meaning of namaz (prayer) is dua, then namaz is nothing except
“Ahadena Siratul Mustaqeem”. If you do not know the true meaning of
“Siratul Mustaqeem” (Straight Path), then all of your prayers (namaz) is
of absolutely no value and will give you no benefit in the hereafter.
The main purpose of explaining this term “Siratul Mustaqeem” is so that
we can correct not only our beliefs but our acts as well. We will to
look to Quran for the explanation of “Siratul Mustaqeem”.

**23 al-Mu’minoon (The Believers) 73: “Certainly thou summons them unto
the straight path”**

**Tafseer Safi page 344 ref Tafseer Qumi, Masoomeen (as) have said,
“*Siratul Mustaqeem is the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen.”***

**43 az-Zukhruf (Ornaments of gold) 43: “So hold thou fast to that which
is revealed in thee. Certainly you are on the right path”**

In its tafseer Masoomeen (as) have said, “*Moula Ali (as) is Siratul
Mustaqeem* .”**(Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 107 hadith 24)**

**Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said regarding Sura Hajjar ayah 41, in Quran
itself this is what is written,*“Haza Siratul Mustaqeem”(this is the
straight path), but the actual words of the ayah are “Haza Siratul Ali
Mustaqeem” (The path of Ali (as) is the straight path)”* (Usool e Kafi
Kitab Hujjat chapter 107 hadith 63)**

**6 al-An’aam (The Cattle) 153: “And He commanded you saying: This is My
straight path, so follow it. Follow not other ways, lest you be parted
from His way. This hath He ordained for you, that you may ward off
evil.”**

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) says,*“Wilayat of Ali (as) and His Offspring is
the Siratul Mustaqeem (straight path) of Allah.”*

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*Moula Ali (as) is Siratul Mustaqeem”*
*(Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 107 hadith 91)*

RasoolAllah (saw) said,*“Siratul Mustaqeem is the wilayat of Ali (as)
and Aimmah (as).”* **(Yanabil Muwaddah page 184)**

Like Siratul Mustaqeem, “Sabeel Allah” (way of Allah) is also the
wilayat of Moula Ali (as). In*Tafseer Ayyashi* Jabar bin Abdullah Al
Ansari narrates in the tafseer of this ayah of*Sura Aal Imran* (If you
die or get killed in the way of Allah), Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,

“*Sabeel is Ali (as) and His Offspring (as). One who gets killed in the
way of Their wilayat, it is the same as if he had got killed in the way
of Allah. One who died in the way of Their wilayat, it is also the same
as if he died in the way of Allah.”*

Hidayat (Guidance)
------------------

On several occasions in Quran Allah has declared wilayat and hidayat
(guidance) as compulsory upon the creation.

We will mention two ayahs here:

**17 Bani Israel 97: “ And he whom Allah has guided, he is led aright;
while, as for whom He sends astray, for them they will find no wali
beside Him”**

**18 al-Kahf (The Cave) 17: “He whom Allah guideth, he is indeed led
aright, and he whom He sendeth astray, for him thou will not find any
other wali”**

Now we will search for who is the “wali” who guides the creation aright.

**20 Taa-haa 82: “Verily I am forgiving towards him who repents and
believes and does good and afterwards walks aright.”**

It has been proven from this ayah that without getting guidance tawba
(repentance), faith or acts of good deeds is not enough for you to be
forgiven. In**Tafseer Qumi** , Masoomeen (as) explained this ayah in
these words, “*Hidayat (guidance) is Our wilayat and Our recognition.”*
A very important point in this saying is that one must recognize that
belief and marifat (recognition) are two different things. What the Imam
(as) is saying is that one must gain marifat (recognition) because
having belief alone is not enough.

**42 ash-Shura (Consultation) 52: “And thus have We revealed in thee
(Muhammad) a Spirit of Our Command. Thou knew not what the Scripture
was, nor what was the Faith. But We have made it a light whereby We
guide whom We will of Our bondsmen. And thou verily dost guide unto a
right path”**

**In Tafseer Noor ul Saqlain, in regards to this ayah Imam Muhammad
Baqir (as) said,*“Noor (light) is Moula Ali (as). Whomsoever Allah
guides, He guides through Moula Ali (as).”***

**In Kitab Saleem bin Qais page no. 275** , RasoolAllah (saw) said,
“*Allah has sent Moula Ali (as) to every nation as a proof of His
guidance. The prophets and messengers are also included amongst the
people. They were a witness of this proof. To Allah the one who gains
the marifat (recognition) of Moula Ali (as) is at the highest level.”*

Islam
-----

**1 al-Anfaal (The Spoils of War) 61: “And if they incline towards
peace, then thou incline towards it also”**

**Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“Islam (peace) is when you obey the
commands of Masoomeen (as).”* (Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 107
hadith 16)**

**2 al-Baqara (The Cow) 208: “O believers! Come all of you and enter
into Islam”**

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said about “innalazeena endallah alislam” means
the belief in the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as**). (Manaqib ibn Shahr
Ashoob First Edition page 459)**

Iman (Faith)
------------

Every shia child is aware of the hadith in which RasoolAllah (saw) said
regarding Moula Ali (as) during the Battle of Khunduq. “*Kull e iman
(Moula Ali as) is going to fight kull e kufr (Amar bin Abdowad)”.* Iman
(faith) is Ameerul Momineen (as) and His wilayat. This hadith has proven
this point beyond any doubt. Whenever in Quran Allah uses the word
“iman” (faith),  Masoomeen (as) have told us that this word  is in
reference to Moula Ali (as) and His wilayat.

**5 al-Maaida (The Table) 5: “Whosoever denies the iman (faith), his
work is vain and he will be among the losers in the Hereafter.”**

In the tafseer of this ayah, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) has said, “*Whoever
denies the wilayat of Moula Ali (as) has lost his whole iman (faith).
Ali (as) is the whole of iman (faith* ).

**Momin 10: “Certainly the people who did kufr (enmity towards Masoomeen
as) will be told Allah’s anger is great. When you were invited towards
iman (faith), you did kufr (enmity towards Masoomeen as).”**

Masoomeen (as) said,*“Iman (faith) is wilayat of Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib
(as).”* **(Tafseer Safi and Tafseer Qumi)**

**Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said,*“ Our love is iman (faith) and Our
bughz (enemity) is kufr”* (Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 8 hadith
12)**

**Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First Edition page no. 459, Imam Muhammad
Baqir (as) said*, “Iman (faith) is Moula Ali (as). There are many
hadiths in this regard.”***

Noor (light)
------------

There are so many different ideologies and extreme misunderstandings
regarding the explanation of “noor” (light) amongst the Muslims of
today. A vast majority of shia and sunni scholars think noor is light
which is an absolutely wrong belief. In Arabic language the word which
is used for light is “zia”. Even in Quran the word “zia” is used for
light.

When no one knows what is the meaning of noor, then how is it possible
to understand any truths regarding it? Until today those verses of Quran
which contain the word “noor” remain a secret. If you want to create a
dispute between two groups of Muslims, then you only have to start a
debate regarding whether or not RasoolAllah (saw) is noor.

Because this topic is not a part of our book, we will not discuss it in
its full detail. However, we will briefly explain the true meaning of
noor and will prove that noor is the wilayat of Moula Ali (as). The
first thing we will do is to explain the true meaning of noor. The
literal explanation of noor is

“noor is such a thing that has full command over its own self (nafs ul
amr) and can create from its own self”. Because Masoomeen (as) appeared
from Allah, this is why Allah is “noor” to Them. The rest of creation
was created by Them (Masoomeen as). This is why They are “noor of
alameen” (light of the whole universe). The other explanation of noor is
“noor is such a thing which creates the five senses within humans.”
Light can also be considered a noor because both light and noor are
sources of illumination. If there is darkness, we will be unable to
differentiate between any two objects. As soon as the light comes, we
can recognize every individual object. Our five senses are also noor in
this sense as they allow us to differentiate between two different
objects like colors, voices, tastes, smells, hardness, softness, etc. In
this sense, aql (intellect) is also a noor. Aql (intellect) helps us to
differentiate between Haqq (truth) and batil (falsehood).

One who guides (hadi) is also a noor. It tells us the difference between
the straight path and the path which takes you astray. In this regard,
we will present three ayahs so that you can understand what we are
saying completely.

First ayah is*Sura Baqarah ayah 257* ; Allah says in this ayah,*“Allah
is the wali of those who believe. He brings them out of the darkness
into “noor”* . In this ayah, Allah is referring to those people who are
believers, and Allah is declaring Himself as their wali. Despite of the
fact that they are believers, they are still in the darkness, and Allah
is bringing them towards the “noor”. The next two ayahs are in reference
to those people who are not only believers but also momins. Yet they are
still in darkness, and RasoolAllah (saw) is the one who will bring them
towards the “noor”. These verses are in*Sura Talaq 10-11* *“A messenger
reciting unto you the revelations of Allah made plain, that He may bring
forth those who believe and do good works from darkness into “noor* ”. “

We can understand from these three ayahs that even a momin who is doing
good works can still be in darkness. Allah and RasoolAllah (saw) take
those momins from the darkness to “noor”. So from the last two ayahs we
can conclude these points:

1. RasoolAllah (saw) recites these ayahs in order to take momineen out
of the darkness.

2.  In order to remove this darkness Allah revealed specific ayahs in
Quran.

3. The ayahs which mention iman (faith) and good works are different
than those which mention “noor”.

4. Only these specific ayahs can remove the momins from darkness.

5.  These ayahs were revealed in the recognition of noor and the
condemnation of darkness

6. To Allah the true spirit of ibadat (act of worship) is not only iman
(faith) and good deeds. One cannot enter the jannah (paradise) unless
they recognize “noor”.

7. When one gets the marifat (recognition) of noor and also
possesses iman (faith)                and good deeds, only then will he
be able to enter jannah (paradise).

It has been proven from these three ayahs that unless you get the
marifat (recognition) of noor then you will never be able to enter
jannah (paradise).

It is compulsory for one to search for this noor in order for one to
enter jannah (paradise). Who is this noor? The Noor will tell this to us
Himself. In the tafseer of this ayah (Allah and His Rasool bring momin
towards noor out of darkness) Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) and Imam Jafar
Sadiq (as) have said,*“Noor is the wilayat of Moula Ali (as).”*
*(Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First Edition page no. 453)*

Now we will explain the true meanings of noor using the following ayahs:

**66 at-Tahrim (The Prohibition) 8: “On the day when Allah will not
abase the Prophet and those who believe with him. Their noor will run
before them and on their right hands; they will say: “Our Lord! Perfect
our noor for us and forgive us”**

**In Tafseer Safi page no. 505 ref Majma ul Bayan , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said*, “On the day of Judgement, Aimmah (as) will be walking ahead
of momineen and on their right hands until They(Aimmah as) take them
(momineen) to their houses in the jannah.* ” The same narration is also
in**Tafseer Qumi** and Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said,*“One who will get
noor on that day will be in the jannah. On that day there will be no
such momin who will not get the noor”***

**2. 64 at-Taghaabun (Mutual Disillusion) 8: “So believe in Allah and
His messenger and the noor which We have revealed.**

In**Tafseer Qumi** it has been stated that “noor” is Ameerul Momineen
(as). In**Usool e Kafi** Imam Musa al Kazim (as) said,*“Noor is Imam
(Moula Ali as* ).” Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said,*“I swear by Allah,
noor is all of Aimmah (as).”*

**3** .**7 al-A’araaf (The Heights) 157: “Then those who believe in him
(RasoolAllah saw), and honor him, and help him, and follow the noor
which is sent down with him: they are successful”**

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) in**Tafseer Ayyashi and in
Usool e Kafi** from Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)*that “noor is Ameerul Momineen
(as) as well as the other 11 Imams (as).”*

**4** .**42 ash\_Shura (Consultation) 52:** We have previously mentioned
this ayah and in its tafseer we mentioned the sayings of Imam Muhammad
Baqir (as) where He said,*“Noor is Ameerul Momineen (as). Whosoever
Allah guides, He guides through Moula Ali (as).”*

Zikr-Tazkira (Remembrance)
--------------------------

In Quran these two names are also used for Wilayat. We will mention a
few ayahs in this regard.

**20 Taa-haa 124: “But he who turns away from zikr (remembrance) of Me,
his will be a narrow life, and I shall bring him blind to the assembly
on the Day of Resurrection.”**

**In Tafseer Safi page no. 324, Masoomeen (as) have said*, “Zikr
(remembrance) is the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib
(as). Blind is one who on the day of judgement will be unable to see
from the eyes, but one who is blind in this world is one who does not
recognize the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as) and becomes blind in his
heart.”***

**36 Yaseen 11: “Thou warns only him who follows the zikr (remembrance)
and fears the Beneficent in secret. To him bear tidings of forgiveness
and a rich reward. “**

In**Tafseer Safi page no. 421** , Masoomeen (as) have said,*“Zikr is
Ameerul Momineen (as).”*

**29 al-Ankaboot (The Spider) 45: “Worship preserves one from lewdness
and iniquity, but verily the zikr (remembrance) of Allah is more
important.”**

**Masoomeen (as) say in the tafseer of this*ayah “We are the zikr
(remembrance) of Allah. We are the Akbar (greatest).”* (Shahadatay
Wilayatay Ali (as) page no. 180 ref Maratul Anwar Tafseer Burhan Kafayat
ul Mohadeen)**

**62 al-Jumu’a (Friday) 9: “O ye who believe! When the call is heard for
the prayer on the day of congregation, hasten unto the zikr
(remembrance) of Allah.”**

**Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) says in the tafseer of this ayah*, “Zikr
(remembrance) of Allah is Ameerul Momineen (as).”* (Shahadatay Wilayatay
Ali (as) page no. 180 ref Ikhtasas).**

**74 al-Muddassir (The Cloaked One) 49: “Why now turn they away from the
zikr (remembrance)”**

In**Usool e Kafi** Masoomeen (as) say,*“Zikr is Wilayat of Ameerul
Momineen (as).”*

**72 al-Jinn 17: “Whoso turns away from the zikr (remembrance) of his
Lord: He will throw him into ever-growing torment.”**

Ibn Abbas narrates*“Remembrance (zikr) of Allah is wilayat of Ameerul
Momineen Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib (as).”* **(Akmal ul Deen bay Wilayat
Ameerul Momineen (as) page no. 342)**

Hidden Name of Allah
--------------------

The recognition of every creation is by its name. We cannot recognize
Allah completely until we recognize what is His name.

One way of recognition is through the attributes of an object or person.
This is why Allah has told us to recognize His name by His

attributes because we are unable to recognize Allah directly. We must
recognize Him through His attributes. In this same way we are unable to
recognize Allah directly, we are also unable to recognize the Mahzer of
Allah (manifestation of Allah) directly. We must recognize Him through
His attributes as well. We must recognize Allah through the attributes
of the Mahzer of Allah (Moula Ali as). This is a secret of the Oneness
of Allah. Allah says in*Sura A’raaf ayah 180,* *“Allah has the most
beautiful of names. So call Him by those names.”*

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) says in the tafseer of this ayah, “*We are the
names of Allah. Without gaining Our marifat (recognition) Allah will
never accept their amals (fasting, prayers, etc).”* *(Tafseer Ayyashi)*
In*Usool e Kafi Kitab Tawheed chapter no. 17 hadith 1* , Masoomeen (as)
say,*“Allah revealed His nafs (self) through His names. When He created
the creation He called them and asked them to pray to Him. He put them
in a test so that they would call Him through His names.”*   Unless
there is a zahoor (revelation) of all the names of Allah, then They will
never come into being. His name “Allah”

contains all of His attributes. This name “Allah” requires a Mahzer
(manifestation). The one who is the Mahzer of Allah will have the same
attributes as Allah and will have the same commandment over those
attributes as Allah does. The Mahzer of Allah will tell the creation
about Allah.

This Mahzer(manifestation) is the ruler over all of the creation. His
only ruler or the only “being” which is above this Mahzer of Allah is
Allah Himself. This Mahzer has the same powers of Allah. This Mahzer is
“zat” (self) of Allah. This Mahzer is “saffat” (attributes) of Allah.
This Mahzer is “afaal” (powers) of Allah. He is the owner of the whole
universe. He has full commandment over all of the processes of the
universe, such as life, death, creation, rizq (sustenance), etc. This is
absolute wilayat. When this Mahzer of Allah reveals His power to
ignorant people like us, we call it “mojza” (miracle). He is the secret
which was revealed unto the prophets and messengers. Allah took the
promise of allegiance regarding Him from all of the creation. All of the
creation were told about His

wilayat. Whoever accepted it became successful. Whoever rejected it
became from those who lost their iman. This is the secret which was
revealed in*Hadith e Qudsi* : Allah said,*“O’My Prophet! I shall reveal
Ali (as) to all the prophets secretly and with You I shall reveal* *Him
openly* .” Now we must accept the process of prophet hood was
established by this “olil amr” (absolute master). All of the prophets
received their prophet hood and knowledge through this “olil amr”, Moula
Ali (as). Moula Ali (as) Himself said, “I am the one who gave the
prophets their prophet hood.” This absolute Mahzer of Allah is the first
and the last. He is seen and unseen. Now we need to search among the
names of Allah to know which is the “ism e azam” (hidden name of Allah).

We cannot use our limited intellect to find this hidden name of Allah.
Masoomeen (as) Themselves will tell us what is the “ism e azam” (hidden
name of Allah). We will present two hadiths here.

In*Usool e Kafi Kitab Tawheed chapter 15 hadith 2* , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said, “*Allah is not dependent upon any name, but He selected some
names for Himself in order to make it easy upon the creation to
recognize Allah. The whole of creation calls Him through these names. If
He did not have these names, the creation would not have been able to
recognize Him. The first name He gave to Himself is “Ali ul Azeem”. It
means He is greater than everything. Ali ul Azeem is Allah.”* Ali ul
Azeem is His first name. He (Allah) is above all of creation.

You can search throughout this whole universe, but you will find no one
whom Allah gave His name to. It does not matter if they were a prophet,
a messenger, or Aimmah (as). This honor is only for Moula Ali (as) ibn
Abi Talib (as) whom Allah gave His name to. It is such a name in which
its meanings are greater than the whole of the universe.

This is the reason in*Khutbat Bayan* Moula Ali (as) Himself said,*“I am
the name of Allah which is greater than the whole universe.”*

The hidden name of Allah, Moula Ali (as), has such a high status that
there are no words to describe accurately the truth of this status. This
is such a name of Allah which cannot be compared to any other thing in
the whole

of the universe. Moula Ali (as) said,*“I am the meanings of those things
which cannot be described.”* The mehfoom (explanation) of this saying is
that Moula Ali (as) is the true meaning of the name of Allah. He is the
one who Allah becomes known through. Without Him Allah would not be
known, but Moula Ali (as) Himself has no Mahzer. There is no other
creation which can be likened to Moula Ali (as). This is why it is so
difficult at times to truly be able to understand what is Moula Ali
(as). Because with Allah we can look towards Moula Ali (as) to be able
to gain the recognition of Allah. But there is nothing we can look to in
order to gain the recognition of Moula Ali (as) except Allah or Moula
Ali (as) Himself.

In*Najul Israr First Edition, page no. 97* there is a dialogue between
Moula Ali (as) and Hz Salman al Farsi (as). Hz Salman al Farsi (as)
asked Moula Ali (as),*“O’My Master! What is Your Name?” Moula Ali (as)
replied, “I am the one who has* *no name or no attributes. My zahir
(seen) self is as Imam. My batin (hidden) self is only known by Allah.
It cannot be recognized by any of the creation.”*

Bismillah is the name of Ameerul Momineen (as)
----------------------------------------------

Quran begins with Bismillah. Usually people translate this in three
different ways. Some people translate it as “with the name of Allah”.
Some people translate it as “I start with the name of Allah”. Some
people translate it as “I seek help from the name of Allah”. In all
three translations, the word “name” is used. This is a proof that people
turn “bismillah” into bism-illah. While in reality there is no “ism”
(name) in bismillah.

It is possible that “ism” is present but the alif of “ism” is silent. So
therefore you do not read it. For example, “iqra bismay rabbakalzi
khalq” in this ayah, alif is present, but we do not read it. In
bismillah, there is no alif, but we just act as if the alif is present
and read it as “bismillah”. This makes no sense. This is a proof that
the Shia religion of today is greatly influenced by the non Shia
religion. If Masoomeen (as) had not told us about this, then we would
have to take its meanings from the Arabic experts of grammar. It seems
the Shia of today are so afraid of non shias that the shias do not want
to accept the words of Masoomeen (as). Having the knowledge of Arabic is
very useful. We will be able to understand Quran and hadith much better
if we have some knowledge of Arabic. However this does not mean we
should read Quran in the same way we would read any other Arabic book.
Quran was revealed first, and then the Arabic alphabet was established
after the revelation of Quran.

First of all we will prove that “bismillah” is a complete word. “Bay”,
“ism”, and “Allah” are not separate words. The word “bismillah” is one
whole word not a combination of three separate words.

We are proving this from dua of Imam Zainul Abideen (as) in*Sahifa
Kamila page no 449.* Mufti Jafar Hussain has translated it, and in
several places he has made so many mistakes. He is the one responsible
for the misconceptions the people have due to his mistakes. The Arabic
text of the dua is right in front of you. This is such easy words that
even a child can understand its meanings. Masoom (as) says in His dua:

![](books/0793-kashaful_aqaid/images/image002.jpg)

*“For the sake of bismillah, which is the best name of all. (He)
Bismillah who is the Rabb (Lord) of the heavens and the earth. I desire
the destruction of all evil creations.”*

Here we find out that “bismillah” is a personality who is the Rabb
(Lord) of the heavens and the earth. It has also been proven here that
“bismillah” is not Allah. He is one who is from Allah because in this
dua Imam (as) is speaking to Allah asking “for the sake of” bismillah.

Now we have to find out who is the personality that the Imam (as) is
speaking of.*Kitab Tawheed chapter 15 First hadith,* Masoom (as)
says,*“bismillah is Moula Ali (as).”*

Allegiance of Wilayat was taken on Every Occasion
-------------------------------------------------

The purpose of the creation is allegiance of wilayat. Allah will never
accept any excuse regarding the rejection of the wilayat of Moula Ali
(as). The first occasion in which the promise of allegiance was taken
from all of creation was on the day of creation itself when everything
was first created. Masoom (as) says,*“On* *Roz e Alst” (the day when
everything was created) the most important thing was the promise of
allegiance of wilayat.”* *(Usool e Kafi Kitab Tawheed chapter 20 hadith
7)*

The second occasion was when Moula Ali (as) came into this world in
human form.  Every person in this world calls himself “son of the
earth”. The one who came on this earth in human form was the father of
earth, Abu Turab (as). Now we are going to present an extract
from*Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First Edition page no. 321,*

“That day when Fatima binte Asad (as) conceived Moula Ali (as) the whole
earth shook and a severe earthquake happened. When the people saw these
happenings, they took their idols and put them on

the mountain of Abu Qais. These idols started hitting themselves upon
the rocks. These false gods of Quraish fell down on the earth and
shattered into many pieces. Hz. Abi Talib (as) climbed to the top of the
mountain and spoke to the people in a loud voice. He said*, “O’People!
Neither Allah brought any wrath on this night nor any new creation been
conceived. If you did not obey Him and do not accept the allegiance of
His wilayat or if you do not witness to His imamate, then you will not
ever be removed from the trouble you find yourself in now. Bring full
belief on Him (Moula Ali as).”*

The third occasion was when deen (religion) was going to be completed.
The deen became complete because of this allegiance of wilayat. Before
this, RasoolAllah (saw) never questioned the people whether or not He
had brought to them the order of Allah. Neither did He ask the people on
any other occasion to reply and say, “We have heard and we obey”.
RasoolAllah (saw) never took any promise of allegiance from the people
on any other occasion before this. This was the first time RasoolAllah
(saw) did these things. In*Sura Maida ayah 7* , we find the full
explanation for all of these events;*“Remember Allah’s grace upon you
and His promise by which He*

*bound you when you said “We hear and we obey”; And keep your promise to
Allah. He knows what is in the hearts of men.” * In*Tafseer Safi ref
Tafseer Qumi* , it has been written when RasoolAllah (saw) took the
promise of allegiance of wilayat, the people said, “We hear and we
obey”. Later they broke this promise. This ayah was revealed for those
who broke this promise.

The fourth occasion when the promise of allegiance of wilayat will be
taken is at the time of one’s death. The fifth occasion is in the grave.
The sixth occasion is on the day of judgement when everything will be
decided based upon whether or not one kept or broke their promise of
allegiance of wilayat. As it is written in this Quranic ayah, “wafoqo
aham anhum musuloon”, all of the Shia and Sunni mufassireen (one who
explains the meanings of Quran) are in agreement regarding the
explanation of this ayah. In*Yanabil Muwaddah page no. 182* ; there are
three hadiths of RasoolAllah (saw). RasoolAllah (saw) said, “*This
question will be about the wilayat of Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib (as)”.*

Is there anything which is free from the promise of allegiance of
wilayat?

Absolute wilayat is related to Moula Ali (as) and His offspring (as)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

There are different levels of wilayat. For every level of wilayat there
is one that is above it. Every prophet had a limited wilayat. Every one
of creation also has a limited wilayat. Even if their wilayat circled
around this whole universe, it would still be limited. The one and only
true absolute wilayat is the wilayat of Allah. There is no wilayat above
this one. If you even imagine that it has a limit, then you have
committed shirk (act of polytheism). Here our purpose is to describe and
prove that absolute wilayat is associated with Moula Ali (as) and His
Offspring.

There is absolutely no difference between the wilayat of Moula Ali (as)
and Allah. As in*Kitab e Wilayat* , Allama Daste Ghayeb says, “Allah and
Ali (as)’s wilayat is the same. “

This saying of Allama Daste Ghayeb is a translation of the saying of
Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) which is written in*Usool e Kafi* . Imam (as)
said,*“Our wilayat is Allah’s wilayat* .” In*Sura Kahf ayah 44* , (there
will only be the wilayat of Allah) in the tafseer of this ayah, Imam
Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*Allah’s wilayat is the wilayat of Ameerul
Momineen (as).”*

Now we will present some proofs in order to prove our claims. From not
only Quran and Masoomeen (as) but also from the scholars of Ahul Sunnah
who have written in many of their books in which they highlight the
importance of the fact that the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as) is the
same as the wilayat of Allah.

Allama Majilisi narrates a hadith from RasoolAllah (saw) in*Haqq ul
Yakeem Second Edition page no. 75* ,*“People asked RasoolAllah (saw),
“O’Prophet of Allah! Who is the wali?” RasoolAllah (saw) replied, “Ali
(as) is your wali and after Him, His eleven successors (11 Imams as).”*

In the same book on page 218, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,**“** Allah has
made Moula Ali (as) a sign between Himself and His creation. There is no
other sign except Moula Ali (as).”

In**Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First Edition hadith 433** , RasoolAllah
(saw) said,*“Allah blessed Me with “nabuyiat” (prophet hood) and blessed
My Ahlul Bayt (as) with wilayat.”*

**4** .**Najul Israr First Edition page no. 128** , Moula Ali (as) says
in**Khutbat al Bayan** ,*“I am the one who gives the prophets their
prophet hood. I am the one who took the promise of allegiance from the
souls on the day of creation. I by the order of Allah called “Alast
bayrabikum” (Am I not your Lord?).*

*5* . In*Kokab Durri page no. 225* this incident is written. Zahid Yemen
Mushram ibn Dhaeem al Shayam was 190 years old when he met Hz Abu Talib
(as). He said, “Abdul Muttalib will have two sons. One would be the
master of the prophets. The other will be the master of all walis. When
your son will be born, give my salaams (greetings) to Him. Tell Him “You
are the successor of Muhammad (saw). The prophecy will be finished with
RasoolAllah (saw). The wilayat will start from You. RasoolAllah (saw)
will be “khatim un nabuyiat” (seal of all prophets) and You will be the
glory of wilayat.” It has been proven from this extract that the wilayat
of Moula Ali (as) had been written about in previous books. Mushram did
not receive any revelation from Allah. Whatever he said, he said based
upon his own knowledge.

He had knowledge from the previous books which were revealed upon other
prophets.

*6* . Al Hajj Hakeem Sayed Ameer Hasan Saha Muhadis Dehlvi Baharul Aloom
writes in his book “*Alder alfareed fi aqeeda tul wahi* ” that Hz. Alam
Rabani Ashiq Yazdani Majadid Mansoor alif Sani wrote in his books:

“All the wilayats ,regardless if  they were the wilayat of auliya
(walis), wilayat of prophets, or the wilayat of angels, came from the
wilayat of Moula Ali (as) who is the king of wilayat. Wilayat e Kubra
(greatest wilayat) is the right of only Bani Fatima (sayeds). No non
sayed regardless of his piety can ever reach to that level. Only if
Moula Ali (as) Himself blesses him then he can obtain this level of
wilayat.”

Introduction of wilayat through the King of Wilayat (as)
--------------------------------------------------------

We have told you the basic principles regarding wilayat. Now the time
has come when we must pay full attention. Now the king of wilayat, Moula
Ali (as), will explain to you the truth regarding His wilayat. I am sure
at this point after reading the hadiths of Moula Ali (as) you will not
be surprised. Neither will you have any doubt nor will the words “why or
how” appear in your mind.

In our book, we have previously mentioned most of the points concerning
the wilayat of Moula Ali (as). In reality whatever was written above it
was written based upon the sermons of Moula Ali (as). We will briefly
explain some points which we have not previously mentioned. Before we go
to the sermons of Moula Ali (as), first we will remove this
misunderstanding.

A misconception regarding the Sermons of Moula Ali (as)
-------------------------------------------------------

There is an unfortunate misconception which has developed amongst the
Shia nation of today. Most of the Shia of today’s, not only the
illiterate common people but even the educated people, only knowledge of
the sermons of Moula Ali (as) is limited to Najul Balagha. When they
hear some saying of Moula Ali (as), they immediately will say “It is not
in Najul Balagha therefore it must be unauthentic.” Before we move
further, we thought we must make you aware of this situation. In this
way no one can deny the sayings of Masoomeen (as). This tendency to
doubt the authenticity of the sayings of Moula Ali (as) must be removed
because this is the worst fitna (division within Islam) which if not
stopped will totally destroy the Shia beliefs.

It is compulsory for all Shia to have knowledge regarding the different
sources which contain the sayings and sermons of Masoomeen (as).
Otherwise there is nothing that will be able to keep their beliefs from
being destroyed. Its practical examples can be

seen in your daily life. You must be aware of this reality that Najul
Balagha is no more than a drop in the ocean of the sayings of Moula Ali
(as).

Sayed Razi (compiler of Najul Balagha) has himself admitted that during
the time he compiled Najul Balagha it was an extremely difficult for
shias. This is why he only selected those sermons and sayings of Moula
Ali (as) which were considered uncontroversial during that time. The
history is witness to the fact that the compilation of the writings and
sayings of Moula Ali (as) originally began during Moula Ali (as)’s time.
The compilers of that time were Zaid ibn Wahab Jehni (died 90 Hijra,
Saleem bin Qais Hilali (died 90 Hijra), Harris Aur (died 65 Hijra), and
Abu Rafay Aibaidullah (died 111 Hijra). Other than these compilers,
there is a vast amount of companions of Moula Ali (as) who narrate His
sermons and sayings chain by chain. Due to this, the whole of Moula Ali
(as)’s sayings and sermons until the second century have been compiled
in their entirety. Asbagh bin Nabata says in*Yanabil Muwaddah page no.
339* , “I memorized a treasure from the sermons of Moula Ali (as). You
will not find an example of compilation of sermons and sayings for any
other sahabi (companion of RasoolAllah saw) in the way you will find the
compilation of sayings and sermons of Moula Ali (as).” It has been
written in*Najul Israr ref Mizan ul Aitdal* , whenever Moula Ali (as)
would deliver a sermon, writers, scholars, poets, lecturers, and
hundreds of people would write as He spoke preserving His words for all
of those who would come after them. Historian Masoodi writes in*Marroj
al Mazhab Second Part* ,

“Those sermons of Moula Ali (as), which were delivered spontaneously
whenever Moula Ali (as) went somewhere and the people would ask
something of Him, are more than 480.” It has been written in*Najul
Israr* when Imam Hasan (as) asked Harris who was a great compiler of the
sayings and sermons of Moula Ali (as) to send his compilations to the
Imam (as), the books were so great in number they had to be delivered
upon the back of a camel. In*Najul Israr* there is a list of sixty
different people who compiled the different sayings and sermons of Moula
Ali (as). This is why

limiting the sayings and sermons of Moula Ali (as) to Najul Balagha
alone is a proof of one’s ignorance. There are uncountable sermons which
are not present in Najul Balagha which you can find in the books of
other great scholars. For example, Khutba Al Istasqa , Khutba al Kaleem,
Khutba al Baligha, Khutba Tuttunjia, Khutba al Zahra, Khutba al
Talootia, Khutba al Wasila, Khutba al Mahzoon, Khutba al Munreed, Khutba
al Bayan, and Khutba Iftikaria, etc.

In order to remove this misconception (this is not in Najul Balagha so
it must be false) we have described these proofs in their full details.
As we promised, we will present some extracts from the sermons of Moula
Ali (as). Because these sermons are very long, we are only mentioning
certain parts of the sermons.

1. Khutbat ul Bayan
-------------------

**Najul Israr page no. 126 ref Baharul Moarrif and Mushariq ul Anwar**

“I am the ‘one’ who has the keys of the ‘unknown’ and no one else has
access

to these treasures except and foremost Muhammad (saw) and then Myself.

I possess knowledge about everything; I am the ‘one’ about who
RasoolAllah (saw) has said, ‘I am the city of knowledge and Ali (as) is
its gateway’. I am ‘Zulkarnain’ whose virtues are revealed in the Divine
Books, I am that ‘Hajar Mukarram’ from where springs will emerge, I am
the holder of ‘Sulayman’s Ring’, I am the ‘one’ who appraises the deeds
of masses, I am ‘Lohay-Mahfooz’(The Protected Tablet), I am ‘Junb-Allah’
(side of Allah), and ‘Qalab-Allah’(heart of Allah). I am the ‘one’ who
has control over people’s views and beliefs and they will all return to
Us and We are entrusted with the authority to evaluate their deeds, I am
the ‘one’ about who RasoolAllah (saw) has said, ‘O! Ali your conduct is
the ‘Sirat-e-Mustaqeem’ (true path) and your judgement is, in fact, the
verdict of thy Lord. I have the Divine Knowledge about the past and the
future. I am the (companion of) ‘First Adam’ and I am the (helper of)
‘first Nuh’.I am the reliever of ‘Ibrahim Khaleel (as) when he was
thrown into the pool of fire,

I am the proof of Divine mysteries, I am the rescuer and redeemer of a
‘momin’, I create the means (of sustenance), I form clouds (in the
skies), grow leaves on the trees and bless them with the fruits and make
springs to gush out of the earth’s crust. I laid down the

earth and raised up the skies, I separate truth from falsehood, I will
send people towards heaven and hellfire, I deliver the meanings of
Heavenly scripts, I was created ‘Masoom’ by Allah, I am the treasurer of
Divine knowledge, I am Allah’s ‘Hujjat’(proof) on His

creatures, both in the skies and on the earth, I represent His integrity
and justice, I am the ‘Dabatul Arz’, I will blow the first ‘Surr’’ on
the Final Day of Judgement, I am ‘Rarifa’, I am Allah’s that ‘Symbol’
which will be shown on the day of Resurrection, I am the ‘one’, from
whom nothing is concealed that may be on the face of the earth or
residing in the gardens of heaven, I am that ‘moment in time’ of Allah
(which will appear on the Day of Judgement) whose denier will deserve
the punishment of hellfire, I am

that ‘Divine Book’ of Allah which has no ambiguity, I am those names of
Allah, which should be recited during all prayers. I am the Divine Light
from which Moses benefited

and succeeded, I am the ‘one’ who would bring down high risers with
tremor (on the day of judgement) and I will comfort ‘Momineen’ as they
emerge out of their graves. I am the ‘one’ who has one thousand books of
Divine Prophets, I speak all languages of the world; I am the companion
and deliverer of Nuh (as).

I consoled Ayub (as) when he was suffering and I cured his illness, I
comforted Younis (as) and showed him the way out (of the fish’s jaws), I
am the holder of that ‘Whistle’ which will destroy everything (on the
final day of judgement) and I will, subsequently,

bring back to life all people, and I will look after the affairs of the
‘Final day’. I have raised the ‘seven skies’ with the powers and
commandments, entrusted to me

by my Lord. I am very kind and extend pardon (upon repentance) but my
wrath is certainly the wrath of Allah’s. I am the ‘one’ who was praised
by ‘Ibrahim Khaleel (as) after being saved (from the burning fire), I am
the ‘wonder’ of Moses (as) which will punish all sinners (by grabbing
them from their necks), I am the ‘one’, who when looked at the skies,
did not find anyone who could challenge me. I am the ‘one’ who counts
His creatures, even though they are numerous, and makes sure they return
back to their Lord. I am the trustee who protects Divine commands. I do
not treat anyone with unkindness, as I am the Divine sustainer ‘Wali
Allah’. His commands have been entrusted

upon me and I have been made ruler over masses by my Lord. I am the
‘one’ who called the Moon and the Sun and they moved forward in My
obedience. I am the ‘one’ who called upon ‘seven skies’ and they bow
down on My instructions and stabilized in perfect posture. I am the
‘one’ who nominated all Prophets. created all worlds and laid

down the earth. I am aware of all those affairs which have been made
‘compulsory (by My Lord). I am the ‘Amr’ of Allah and the ‘Spirit’ of
Allah, as Allah says (in Quran),

‘they ask You (O! Prophet) about the ‘Spirit’, You tell them that
‘Spirit’ is from Allah’s ‘Amr’. I am the ‘one’ about whom Allah has said
to His Prophet (saw), ‘Two of you will

send each and every malicious non-believer to the hellfire’. I am the
‘one’ who brought into existence everything, with the blessings of My
Lord, after they were composed. I am the ‘one’ who anchored the
mountains and spread the layers of earth, I am the ‘one’ who makes
spring water flow, bring crops to yield grains, enable trees to grow and

bless them with fruits. I am the ‘one’ who predicts the sustenance
required by the ‘living species’ and bring down the rain, make clouds to
produce thunder and flash lightening. I am the ‘one’ who gave golden
rays to the Sun and enabled it to rise in the morning and created stars
in the sky. I stabilize the boats in the deep oceans, I will bring the
final

day of judgement. I am the ‘one’ who has no sign of decay and cannot be
eradicated. I am fully aware of the instant and place of creation of
each and

everything, the fears which, pass through the minds, the affairs of
intermittent eyes and all that which are hidden in the hearts. I am the
‘Salat’, ‘Zakat’, ‘Hajj’ and ‘Jihad’ of a true believer. I am the

‘one’ who has been nominated by Allah to blow the final ‘whistle’, I am
the manager and owner of all affairs from the beginning to the end, I
was the ‘first’, being created from the Divine ‘Noor’; I am the ‘one’
who creates bright stars and takes away accumulated wealth. I have
control over earthquakes and colossal tremors; I am the bearer of

galaxies and destroy matter (which you see as burning stars). I
understand the reasons of ‘manaya and Balaya’ and distinguish between
the ‘just and unjust’. I am the holder of eloquent columns of heavens,
which could never be replicated by the cities (you build), and I will be
distributing its bounties (to the deserving ones). I annihilate the

arrogant and malicious with ‘Zulfiqar’. I am the ‘one’ who boarded Nuh
(as) on to the rescue boat and saved and consoled Ibrahim (as). From the
ravaging flames, ignited by Namrud (la) I was the savior of Yousif (as)
in the time of his impoverished grief and pulled him out of the deep
well. I am the master and mentor of Moses (as) and Khizar (as) I am the
treasurer of the heavens and the worlds underneath the skies. I create

the features of babies in the wombs of their mothers, I give eyesight to
those who are born blind and heal the incurable. I am aware of all that
is kept in the minds and hearts and all that which is consumed and
stored in the houses. I am that ‘Ba-auza’ which Allah has referred to in
the Quran. I am the ‘one’ who was nominated by Allah at the time when
all creatures were surrounded by the darkness and invited them to find
salvation, under My guidance, but they disregarded their Lord’s
commands, after coming into existence (gaining endurance). Allah has
described this, ‘when he was sent to them they did not recognize him and
became non-believers’. I am the ‘one’, who puts,

with Divine blessings, the layers of flesh on the bones and I will, with
My pious off-springs (Masoomeen as.), carry Divine domain and
‘Liway-al-Hamd’ (Banner offering refuge on day of judgement).”

This magnificent sermon of Moula Ali (as) has always been “noor (light)
of the eyes of the momin” and the pleasure of their hearts. This is such
an ocean of secrets of wilayat from which every momin can derive
countless blessings. Limited only by his own knowledge and
understanding. While on the other hand, this great sermon has always
been disliked and refuted by munafiqeen (hypocrites) and muttaqabareen
(arrogant).

RasoolAllah (saw) has stated until the day of judgement*“O’Ali (as)! No
one will love you except the momin (true believer) and no one will be*

*your enemy except a munafiq (hypocrite).”*   If when you read this
sermon and the ones after this carefully several times over and ponder
deeply upon what is written, you will realize Moula Ali (as) has
described the true meaning of tawheed (Oneness). You will also find
similar examples of Moula Ali (as)’s sermons describing the true meaning
of tawheed (Oneness) in**Bab e Tawheed and Bab e Shirk** . It was very
necessary to mention these sermons for the authenticity of this book.
Now I seem to have gotten myself in a dilemma. If I go further in the
explanation of Moula Ali (as)’s sayings

and sermons, then this book will become very long. Because I am afraid
of creating a huge controversy, there are certain points which I will
deliberately avoid. So I have to be careful, but I will briefly comment
on a few sayings of Moula Ali (as). The rest, however, I will leave to
your intellect.

#### I am that book which contains no doubts

####

In this brief sentence Moula Ali (as) has removed a severe misconception
among Muslims.

In the beginning of*Sura Baqarah* it has been stated “*zalikul kitaba la
raiba fi* ” (that is such a book which contains no doubt). Many Shia and
Sunni muffassireen (one who

explains the meanings of Quran) have taken the word “book” to mean
“Quran”. The mehfoom (explanation) of this ayah is clearly telling us
that the word “book” is not Quran. Because in the Arabic language
“zalik” means “that, and the word “haza” is used for “this”. If in this
verse Allah was mentioning the Quran, Allah would have used “haza”
(this) instead of “zalik” (that). Secondly the next words of Quran are
“guides the muttaqeen (pious people)”. This ayah is telling there is
such a “book” which can realize the difference between a “muttaqi”
(pious person) and “ghair muttaqqi” (non pious person). The Quran does
not have this ability to recognize whether a person is pious or not. In
order to understand Quran it is very necessary to know who “that book”
is.*Ayah 37 of Sura Yunus* explains this. It will clearly prove that the
word ‘book” does not refer to the Quran itself. Instead it is referring
to something other than Quran. Allah says,

**“And this Quran is not such as could ever be invented in despite of
Allah; but it is a confirmation of that which was before it and an
exposition of that which is decreed for mankind- therein is no doubt in
this book- from the Lord of the Worlds.”**

Now it has been proven from this ayah “*Kitab la raiba fi* ” is not
Quran. It is other than the written Quran. It is one who is the real
Quran. Allah also told the name of “Kitab la raiba fi” in*Sura Zukhraf
ayah 3-4* , Allah says,*“We have appointed it a complete book so that
you may understand. And certainly He is the best of all books* .”
In*Safi Mani ul Akbar* and*Tafseer Qumi* Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said,*“The book is Moula Ali (as).”*

Moula Ali (as) Himself describes this in these words, “*I am that book
who has no doubts.”*

#### I am the one who is the representative of the revelation of Allah

####

We find out about this sentence from the words of Moula Ali (as). Not is
wilayat only a source of creation and establishment, but also all the
revelations given to the prophets were done so through the wilayat of
Moula Ali (as).

#### I am Allah’s Power and its Soul

####

We can write countless books from these words of Moula Ali (as), but due
to the brevity of our book, I will only give you a hint and you can go
further into the depths of its meaning on your own.**Sura ash-Shura
ayah**

**52** , “**We sent the Spirit of Our Command towards You (Muhammad
saw). You did not know what was the book nor what was the iman, but We
declared Him a noor from which Our guidance comes. Verily! You are on
the “Siratul Mustaqeem”.**

This secret is hidden in the saying of Moula Ali (as). This spirit which
was sent to RasoolAllah (saw) was Moula Ali (as). The commandment of
Allah was also Moula Ali (as). As Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said in the
tafseer of this ayah,*“Whoever Allah guides, He guides them through
Moula Ali (as).”* Apart from all of this, there is a very important
point in this ayah that one must take notice of. There are six names of
Moula Ali (as) in this ayah. Ruh (spirit), amr (command), kitab (book),
iman (faith), noor (light), and Siratul Mustaqeem (straight path).

#### I am the one who will never die

####

Death is a creation. Allah has stated in Quran, “Khalaq ul mowt wul
hayat” (We created life and death). It has been proven that the process
of creation was established from the hand of Moula Ali (as). So the
death is a creation of Moula Ali (as), and creation can never be above
its creator. All of creation has an end. So when the end comes for death
itself, Allah will do this through His commandment. The commandment of
Allah comes from the Absolute Master.

#### I am the one who has full command of the religion

####

Moula Ali (as) is not dependent upon the religion. In reality the whole
religion is dependent upon Moula Ali (as).

Whatever Moula Ali (as) says, that is the true religion. Because
religion is truth and for haqq (truth) RasoolAllah (saw) has already
said, “*Whatever way Ali (as) turns, the haqq (truth) will also turn.* ”
It means “Ali (as) is also the imam of haqq (truth)”.

#### I am the Trustee of Allah

####

Here we have to understand the meaning of the word “ameen” (trustee). we
will use this word and its plural “amna” on different occasions
throughout our book so we must know what its true meaning is. It is
absolutely necessary for one to ponder upon these two points; the way
Allah uses the word “ameen” (trustee) in regards to Moula Ali (as) and
what amanat (entrustment) did Allah give to

Moula Ali (as). If we are able to clarify these points, then the thought
of “shirk” (polytheism) will never enter your mind. Moula Ali (as) is
ameen (trustee) of attributes and acts of Allah. Every attribute of
Allah is revealed through Moula Ali (as).  Moula Ali (as) physically
performs every act of Allah.

#### I am the one who has nothing like Him

####

“Misal” and “masal” are two different words. When an object is seen
before you, it is misal. When an object is seen through its attributes,
that is masal. As Allah mentioned about masal, “lilla ul masal al illah”
(There is one who has the same attributes as Allah)

For misal Allah has said, “Laisa kamasalehi shayn”. (Nothing is like
Him) These are the same words which Moula Ali (as) has used for Himself.
“Innalazi laisa kamasali shayn” (Nothing is like Me.) This sentence is
like a dagger to the heart for the people who find “shirk” (polytheism)
in everything. I am sure though you will not be surprised by this
because under the subject of wasila we have already explained that
wasila itself is a different thing which rests between two other things.
Moula Ali (as) is wasila between Allah and His creation. So neither the
wajib (Allah) can be like Moula Ali (as) nor can the creation be like
Him. It is Moula Ali’s (as) right to say*“Nothing is like Me.”*

#### I am the one who was before everything

####

Time is a creation which was created through Moula Ali (as). Moula Ali
(as) was known even before the creation of time. Who were those who knew
Moula Ali (as) and what was the purpose for knowing? What Allah has
named this knowing of Moula Ali, (as) I will keep to myself.

2. Khutbat Iftikhar (Sermon of Glorification)
---------------------------------------------

**Najul Israr Chapter 1 page no. 137 ref Mushariqul Anwar**

“I am the one who pledged an everlasting covenant with your spirits on
the dawn of creation and Who on that day asked “Alast bay rabikum” (Am I
not your Lord?) through the will of Allah.

I am the word of Allah (Kalimat’u’llah) which has been uttered upon the
world of creation. But should I tell you all that I am, you would
disbelieve Me. I speak through divine inspiration and know of the stars
and constellations. I am the meaning of Ramadan

and the night of Qadr. I am His worshipper and one created by Him. I am
both the witness and the one witnessed to. He whose name is mentioned in
the heavens and the earth. Who is the traveling companion of the
Messenger of God throughout the heavens, for with Me is the Book, and
the sacred arc.“

#### I speak with divine inspiration

####

Wahi (divine inspiration) is a wasila (intercessor). With this wasila
Allah sends messages to His messengers and prophets. It has been
explained in detail that Moula Ali (as) is “hijab e Akhir” (last veil).
There is no wasila between Allah and Moula Ali (as). Moula Ali (as) did
not mean that He is dependent upon wahi (divine inspiration). Otherwise,
various Quranic ayahs and hadiths of  Masoomeen (as) will have to be
refuted. Moula Ali (as) said, “Whatever I say is wahi (divine
inspiration).” The place where wahi comes from is “Sidra tul Muntaha”.
The wahi comes from “Barzakh e Kubra” to “Sidra tul Muntaha” which is
“hijab e Akbar” (greatest veil) between Creator and creation. It has
been proven that “Barzakh e Kubra” and “hijab e Akbar” is no one except
Moula Ali (as).

#### I am the worshipped and the worshipper

####

Every attribute of Allah needs a Mahzer (manifestation, display).
Otherwise no attribute of Allah can be recognized. “Mabudiyat”
(Lordship)

is also an attribute of Allah. There must be a Mahzer (manifestation,
display) for this attribute.

This Mahzer will not be Allah, but He will seem like Allah. He will be a
slave of Allah, but He will look as if He is Allah. Moula Ali (as)
described this truth in these words,

“*I am Mahzer of Allah, but I am not Allah. I pray to Allah. I am at the
level of abdiyat (slave of Allah) where no one can make any difference
between Me and Allah* ”.

#### I am the book and the sacred arc

####

This is a hint towards Miraj e Rasool (saw) (when RasoolAllah saw
ascended to the heavens). Allah says in**Sura Najm, “We take Our Prophet
(saw) in order to show Him the greatest ayah.** ” In the light of the
sayings of Ameerul Momineen (as), it has been clarified as to who was
that ayah.

3. Sermon of the Gulf
---------------------

**Najul Israr First Edition page no. 144 ref Biharul Moarif and Mushariq
ul Anwar**

“I know of the wonders of work of Allah. That which no one knows except
Allah. I know what has been and what will be and what has been in the
First Sprinkling with those who preceded the First Adam (as). All was
disclosed for Me and I knew and all was taught to Me and I have learnt.
So hearken and do not raise a clamor. Were it not for My fear that you
might say "'Ali has become possessed or apostatized from His Faith" I
shall disclose unto you what and whereat they are and what you shall
encounter on the day of Resurrection. All that knowledge was entrusted
unto Me and thus I knew and the knowledge of all this was hidden from
all the Prophets except the Lord of this Dispensation (*Sharia* ) of
yours (Peace be upon Him and His Family). He taught Me His knowledge and
I taught Him My knowledge.*V* erily We are the Warners from immemorial
times and We shall be unto everlasting Warners from Allah.*T* hrough Us
will perish He that is going to perish and by Us have obtained salvation
all that have obtained salvation and you shall not encompass that
ability that is Ours. By the righteousness of Him Whose power causeth
the seed to germinate and Who breatheth the spirit of life into all
things, by Him Who alone hath power and grandeur! Those with weak iman
will say, “Look what Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib (as) claims for Himself. Be
aware and be happy that tomorrow on the day of judgement all of creation
will be presented before Me by the order of Allah. Whatever I said do
not think it is of great value. It is nothing for Me. I am the creator
of the whole universe.

I am the Kalimatullah (word of Allah) "O alas for the nations! Soon
shall some hypocrites say that 'Ali claimed Lordship (rububiyyat) for
Himself but you should bear witness thus: "'Ali truly is a created
Being, a Servant, nourished of divine sustenance and he that denies this
let him be accursed of Allah.”

Sermon of Recognition
---------------------

This is one of Moula Ali (as)’s most famous sermons. It can be found in
most authentic Shia books. We are narrating this from “Al Ali Sultan un
Naseera page no. 118”. They narrated it from “Al Burhan 14th Edition
Marifat tul Aimmah (as) bil Noorania” by Mulvi Nabi Bux Mashahdi. We
have previously briefly mentioned three sermons of Moula Ali (as), but
because this sermon is very important in the sense that Moula Ali (as)
told the Momineen how to gain Marifat tul Noorania (recognition of
Noor). So we will write the whole sermon. In this way all momin can
benefit from it. The translation of the Arabic text by Mulvi Nabi Bux
Mashahdi is below. Allama Muhammad Baqir Majilisi writes in his book
“Bihar ul Anwar Seventh Edition”, “Muhammad bin Sadqa narrates

Hz Abu Dharr (ra) asked Hz Salman (as), “O’Abu Abdullah! What is the
recognition of the noor of Ameerul Momineen (as)?” Hz Salman (as)
replied, “O’Jondab! Let’s go to Ameerul Momineen (as) and ask Him how to
recognize His Noor.” So they went to Moula Ali (as), but they did not
find Him there. They sat down to wait for Moula Ali (as) to return.
Moula Ali (as) returned back and said upon seeing them waiting, “What
has brought you to Me on this occasion?” They said, “O’Ameerul Momineen
(as)! We came to ask you how we gain the recognition of your Noor
(marifat tul noorania).” Upon hearing their reply, Moula Ali (as) said,
“You are religious friends and always struggle in order to gain more
knowledge. You are not from the Muqassireen at all. I swear by My Life,
Our marifat tul noorania (recognition of Noor) is wajib (compulsory) on
every momin and momina.

Then'Imam Alí (a.s )narrated:

He who accepts my Wilayat superficially (without having deep knowledge
and firm belief), has little reward for his deeds, (as their scale will
be light, their souls will be in perdition).

O Salmán! The faith (iman) of a believer will not attain the level of
perfection unless and until he would recognize me as a Noor-the Light.
When someone knows me as Noor, only then he would truly attained faith;
he is the one whose heart has been tested with the true faith, whose
chest (self) is dilated in true Islam and whose faith is based on
discernment. Thus, he becomes an

‘Arif’-staunch believer and embraces faith with peace of mind. But that
he who fell short of this cognition - he will be a doubter, immersed in
disbelief.

O Salmán!  O Jondáb!  In true essence, recognition of me as a Noor is
the acceptance of Allah and recognition and knowledge of Allah is indeed
my appreciation; this is the meanings of sincere devotion.  Mankind was
ordered by Allah to seek nothing but to admit His Tawheed (Oneness).
And all were commanded to worship none but One Allah.  And they have
been

commanded no more than this: "To worship Allah, offering Him sincere
devotion, being true (in faith), to establish regular prayer; and to
practice regular charity; and that is the religion, right and straight
path." "Worshipping Allah" is believing in ‘Tawheed’. "Sincere devotion"
and "being true in faith” are the confessions to the prophet hood of the
Prophet (saw)of Allah "Establishing Prayer" is my ‘guardianship and
devotion’.

He who pledges devotion and submission unto me has truly established the
obligatory prayers (salat).

Yet, this matter is hard, exceedingly hard! "Regular charity" in the
above verse is confession to the Imamate. All this is the true religion.
The Holy Quran has testified that true Faith is the recognition of
‘Touheed’ and confession to both the Prophet and the Imamate. Thus he
who acts on these beliefs, achieves ‘Deen’.

O Salmán! O Jondáb! A ‘Momin’ who has been tested by Allah is that who
instantly accepts our ‘Amr’ (attributes) and he does not reject any
matter pertaining to ourselves, Allah helps him through opening his’
Chest’. He will not exhibit an element

of doubt or suspension. However, he who quibbles with ‘why and how’
becomes a disbeliever. Thus be submissive to ‘Amr-e-Allah’ we are,
verily, the ‘Amr Allah’ (Cause of Allah)!

O Salmán! O Jondáb!  Verily, Allah has made Me His Trustee over His
creation and His Vicegerent on His earth, in His territories, and over
His servants. Allah has given Me what no artist can depict and no man of
understanding can truly comprehend. One, who knows Me in this manner,
becomes a momin.

O Salmán! Allah, said: "do not seek Allah‘s help but through patient and
prayer: it is indeed hard except for those who possess a humble spirit."
"Patient" is Muhammad (saw) and "Prayer" is my Wilayat.  Thus, that is
why Allah has declared that it is indeed hard to comprehend these
attributes. In truth, my ‘guardianship’ is perplexing/mystifying for all
but for those who have a humble spirit.Thus Allah made my Wilayat easier
only for those who have ‘humble spirits’.

These humble spirits are My Shia. All other sects believe in the
prophet hood of RasoolAllah (saw). They have very good relations with
each other. But they are all enemies of My wilayat. When they get to now
that a person has even the least amount of love for Me, they will
immediately become his enemy. It makes no difference to them that he
believes in the prophet hood of Muhammad (saw) because they are the
enemies of My wilayat. They are friends of Jews, Christians, mushriks
(polytheists), and idol worshippers, but they are the worst enemies of
My wilayat. There are very few people who believe in My wilayat. Allah
has praised such people in His book. Wilayat is a very difficult to
follow but not for those who have humble spirits. Allah called them
humble spirits in Quran. This is the reward of Allah for those momins.
On a different occasion Allah says regarding the prophet hood of
Muhammad (saw) and My wilayat.

Even those who do not accept My wilayat has belief in the prophet hood
of Muhammad (saw), but their belief will be of no benefit to them.
O’Slaves of Allah! Be aware of this truth that the prophet hood of
RasoolAllah (saw) and the belief in My wilayat are from one source.
RasoolAllah (saw) is the seal of all prophets and the Imam of all
creation. After Him, I am His successor and Imam of all creation.
RasoolAllah (saw) said,

“O’Ali (as), You are to Me as Haroon (as) was to Musa (as) except there
is no prophet after Me.” Among us, our first is Muhammad, our median is
Muhammad, in fact, and we are all Muhammad! He who recognized My

wilayat in this manner, surely, attains Faith. And very soon I will
describe this to you by the will of Allah.

O Salmán and O Jondáb! Muhammad (saw) and I were the ‘one-Noor’ that was
voicing forth the ‘divine eulogy’ (tasbee) before any other reality
started to praise Him. We were the cause of illumination unto all
creation. This ‘one-Noor’ was then divided by Allah into two portions,

the Chosen "Mustafa" (saw), and his Vicegerent, "Murtaza".        It is
thus that the Prophet (saw) had said, "I am from 'Alí (as) and 'Alí (as)
is from Me. During his (Muhammad saw) time, Muhammad (saw), would utter
the Divine message, while I would remain silent. Inevitably, during all
times, there is the only ‘One’ who would convey (Allah’s message) while
the ‘other’ keeps silent although both have complete authority over all
(living beings). Allah says, “innama unta munzar walla qullay qoumin
haad”. Muhammad (saw) is the ‘Warner’ and I am the "guide." Then Salman
(as) said Moula Ali (as) hit His one hand onto the other, and said,
“Muhammad (saw) is the Lord of Paradise and I am the Lord of the
Jahannum.” On the day of judgement I will stand near to Jahannum and I
will order it “Take this person because he was My enemy and leave that
person because he was My devotee. “Muhammad (saw) is the Lord of
Earthquakes and I am the Lord of Trembling. I am the ‘Protected Tablet’
(Lowhay Mahfooz) and all the knowledge it has originates from Me.
Muhammad (saw) is the one mentioned in the verse as "most kind and
merciful” and I am the one alluded to as "Most High, Most Great."
Muhammad (saw) is the Lord of signs and I am Master of the miracles.
Muhammad (saw) is the Lord of Revelation and I am the Lord of
Inspiration” I am the ‘Straight Path’.

People are against My wilayat. No other aspect of religion is opposed in
the way My wilayat is. Muhammad (saw) is the Master who raised the Call
and I am the one entrusted with both Sword and Sovereignty. He causes
the Spirit to descend upon His Servant He nominates. “This Spirit then
descends unto the one entrusted with the Command and the Decree. I (Ali
as) give life to the dead. I know what is in the heavens and what is on
the earth. I am, in truth, the Perspicuous Book.  I give life unto the
dead and I have all the knowledge that is in the heavens and on the
earth. I am the Perspicuous Book.

O Salmán! Muhammad (saw) is the Elevator of the Proof, and I am the
Proof of ‘One True Allah’ unto His creatures. It is this Testimony that
empowered the Spirit of Allah to ascend unto heaven. I am the one who
enabled Noah (as) to sail his Ark. I was present with Jonah (Younis) in
the belly of the Whale.  I parted the sea for Moses to create a ‘save
pass’ through it.

I am the one who destroyed Qaruun Ula (Allah‘s enemies). I was bestowed
with the knowledge of the Prophets and Saints and their Decisive
Utterance unto living beings. I make rivers and oceans to flow and
create fountains to burst from the crest of the earth. When I call
together all of man and jinn, they will hear My call as if I was by
their side.

I know what is in the hearts of momins and munafiqs. I am that Khidír
who taught Moses.  I taught David and Solomon.  I am Dhu'l Qarnayn. I am

the one who suppressed the great ‘troughs and peaks’ through the command
of Allah. I am also the one who raised and firm the peaks and flattened
the Earth. I am the Master of all momins and mominat those who have
already left this world and those still remaining in it and those who
have yet to come into it. You can praise us with whatever titles and
attributes (one can imagine) but do not ascribe ‘Rabuviat’ to us
(believe we have a creator). People find salvation through us and reach
destruction due to us (for bearing animosity to us). We are the signs of
Allah (Aitul’-Allah), the significances and the Countenance of Allah.

We are the proof of Allah. His trustee. We are the face of Allah. We are
the eyes of Allah. We are the tongue of Allah. Allah punishes the
creation because of Us. He gives reward because of Us. We are the purest
of all creation. He has given Us full commandment. However, he who
quibbles with ‘why and how’ becomes a disbeliever. No creation has the
right to question Allah as to why He has given all of this to Us. The
people will be questioned as to why they were not obedient to Us.

O Salmán! he who firmly believes in all what I presented and explained,
is that ‘Momin’ whose ‘Qalab’ (heart) has been tested by Allah with
‘Iman’. And he is pleased with Our attributes. But whoever doubts and
hesitate, he is a Muqassir e nasibi (one who lowers the status of Ahlul
Bayt as and an enemy of Ahlul Bayt as), although he may pronounce that
he believes in my Wilayat.

I am the one who gives death and brings the dead back to life by the
will of My Lord. I am the one who provides rizq (sustenance) which is
consumed and stored in your houses. I know what is in the chests of men
as does My Aimmah (as) who are from My offspring. They will have command
over knowledge and will perform all the acts of Allah. Our will is the
will of Allah. Our dislikes are the dislikes of Allah. The deniers of
Our attributes will find nothing except the eternal wrath of Allah and
jahannum (hellfire). Even the denial of only one of Our attributes is
the same as denying the whole of Our attributes and will of Allah.
Remember Allah has given Us more than you will ever know. “.

Abu Dharr (ra) and Salman (as) asked, “What are those things O’Ameerul
Momineen (as)?” Moula Ali (as) replied, “Verily it is the blessing of
Our Lord that He has taught to Us the true meaning of “ism e azam”
(hidden name of Allah).

With the power of this ism e azam if We so wished We could rip apart the
heavens and the earth, and all that is between them. There is no place
that is beyond Our reach. We can reside upon the earth, the heavens, the
East or the West. There is no veil between Us and Allah. The whole
creation of Allah is under Our obedience. The heavens and the earth, the
sun and moon, stars, mountains, trees, animals, rivers, oceans, jannah
and jahannum (paradise and hell). Allah has blessed Us with all of this
through ism e azam. We are the only ones whom Allah has blessed with
this knowledge. Even though We eat,

drink, and walk like humans, We have command over the whole creation of
Allah. We do this by the order of Our Lord. We never call Ourselves

“Allah.” We are only servants of Allah. Verily Allah’s wrath is upon
those kafireen (disbelievers) who deny Our attributes.

O’Salman! O’Jondab! This is Our marifat ul noorania (recognition of Our
noor). So attach yourself to it and you will be guided. Verily not one
from Our Shia will gain iman (faith) without the recognizing Our Noor.
When they gain Marifat ul Noorania, they will obtain such a high level
of iman they will be considered amongst the momins.

He who reaches this very high level of iman (faith) becomes aware of the
secrets of Allah. (O’Allah! For the sake of Muhammad (saw) and Aal e
Muhammad (as) bless us with such an iman as Moula Ali (as) has described
in this sermon)

Truth of Wilayat –Tawheed (Oneness)
-----------------------------------

The beginning of the religion, as Syedul Mohideen Ameerul Momineen Ali
(as) ibn Abi Talib (as) has said, is recognition of Allah. So it is
compulsory that before one can believe in tawheed (Oneness of Allah) he
must gain the knowledge of the marifat (recognition) of tawheed. Before
gaining marifat tul tawheed (recognition of Oneness), it is also
compulsory to have the knowledge of the true meaning of the word
“marifat”

(recognition). Literally marifat means to know those attributes which
makes one superior to others. Until we know which attribute He has which
no one else has which makes Him superior to others, then we cannot say
we have gained marifat. From this we can surmise two points. First
before believing in tawheed we must be aware of the attributes of Allah.
Secondly His attributes must be totally different than the attributes of
His creation. If there is any similarity and you believe in that
similarity, then you cannot gain marifat. Now here comes a question. How
can we know those attributes which are only for Him? Allah says for
Himself, “I was a hidden treasure. I decided to

be recognized. So I created One from which My creation would be able to
gain My recognition. He is a secret known only by Allah.” Allah called
Himself “hidden”. No one can even imagine what the status of Allah is.
If someone even tries to do so, he will gain nothing except the
entrapment of shirk (polytheism). So understanding the “hidden”
attributes of Allah is not the true meaning of marifat because no one
can ever understand the reality of that which is Allah.

The level of marifat begins from the point where Allah has said, “I
decided to be known (recognized) and I revealed One from which My
creation would be able to gain My recognition”.

We must realize there are two aspects in this saying that we must
understand. The first is that the attributes of Allah are “hidden”. Then
there came a point in which Allah decided for those attributes to be
known, but since the creation can never reach Allah directly, Allah made
a way for the creation to recognize Him. It is impossible to gain
marifat (recognition) of that which is hidden. We have discussed this in
full details in the chapter of Wilayat. The absolute wilayat of Moula
Ali (as) is what Allah revealed from His hidden treasure in order for
His creation to be able to gain His (Allah) marifat (recognition). It
clearly means the true meaning of tawheed is not to gain the marifat of
Allah but to gain the marifat of His absolute Wali e

Mutaliq Moula Ali (as). In this way the creation will be able to
recognize the attributes of Allah through this Wali e Muttaliq. Now we
have established the true meaning of marifat. We will explain in detail
how one gains this marifat. It is an undeniable truth that incomplete
beliefs and incomplete denial are both false. If a person does not have
full knowledge regarding a topic, it will not matter if he accepts it
and believes in it or if he rejects it and denies it. Both are the same.
It is absolutely necessary for a person to have full knowledge
regardless of whether they believe in something or are denying it.

The source of a human’s knowledge is his five senses. Some psychiatrists
also believe there are some “hidden” senses apart from these five senses
in humans. For example, having a psychic ability to know past or future
events without any help from any other source other than one’s own mind.

So far, no one has explained these kinds of senses. Secondly these kinds
of senses are also dependent upon what kinds of experiences the
individual has had during their lifetime. A human cannot imagine such a
thing he has not seen, heard, smelled, tasted, or touched. The basic
senses are these five. All the knowledge of humans is based upon these
five senses. A human cannot go beyond these limits set for him by Allah.
The process by which one gains knowledge through these senses is called
examination (Mushahida). Anything which a human examines is called
“mashahood”. There are three basic principles of examination
(mushahida). TIME-SPACE-ENERGY.

It is necessary for a human regardless of his beliefs to possess these
three things in order to go through the process of examination. Human
power alone cannot go beyond this limit. Now we come back to our
original topic. Before believing in tawheed, we must have knowledge of
“maloom o mashahood” (sources and examination). Otherwise this belief
would be worthless and filled with ignorance. So it is our duty to
understand that we should only believe in that tawheed which we have
examined ourselves. The people, who say simply believing in tawheed
without any knowledge of what tawheed is, have made a very irresponsible
claim. It is an invitation of blind following for all of humanity. We
have previously mentioned the saying of Allama Hilli, “the most wajib
principle of Usool e deen (principles of religion) is marifat.”

Allah will never accept those beliefs which simply rest upon one’s
tongue. One must gain marifat (recognition) before his belief will be
accepted by Allah. The ayah, which is written on the cover of this book,
is in reference to this same point. If believing in tawheed is wajib,
then it becomes absolutely compulsory to believe in the marifat
(recognition) of tawheed because one cannot have full belief in tawheed
without first gaining its marifat. It makes no sense that the meaning of
tawheed is to believe in the attributes of Allah. Allah cannot be
examined by the limited abilities of human power. How can Allah be
recognized by your five senses? If one believes Allah would ask His
creation to do such a thing which is beyond their ability to do is the
same as accusing Allah of being unjust and unwise. Such thoughts and
belief are the equivalent of Kufr (disbelief).

**“those who believe You will be like this or that have Limited You**

** and those who worship without Your marifat**

**They consider You as an Idol.”**

So we have to accept the tawheed in which Allah has asked us to believe
in is not hidden. The tawheed in which Allah has asked us to believe in
He Himself has revealed  for us. We will be able to examine that tawheed
with our five senses.

That Mahzer (manifestation) which Allah has revealed for us is our last
limit of marifat. This is the only way to believe in tawheed. Otherwise
there will be no difference between tawheed and shirk (polytheism).

An incident happened in Bangkok which I shall tell you about. In this
way you will be able to understand this concept more easily. Believing
Allah as*as-Sami* (All Hearing),*al-Basir* (All Seeing),*al-Latif*
(Subtle One), and*al-Khabir* (The Aware) are a part of the necessities
of religion. The purpose of believing in this will be revealed in the
following incident. Some Islamic missionaries went to Bangkok. There was
a well dressed educated person there. He was rushing towards the temple
for worship. The Islamic missionaries thought it was their best chance
to guide this man. So they surrounded the man and said, “Brother, you
seem like an extremely educated and intelligent person. Why do you
worship such idols who cannot hear you, see you, or understand you?” The
man replied, “I know my god cannot hear, see, or understand. But Mulvi
Saheb, how can you prove your god listens, sees, and knows what is in
your hearts? At least my god is visible, but your god is invisible. So
you are a greater idol worshipper than I am. You worship such a thing
which you have created in your own mind.” Mulvi became totally
speechless and could not convince the man in anyway. This is a very
important point to consider at great lengths. Unless there is a means of
examination, then you cannot prove tawheed. In order to prove Allah as
creator, you have to search for Hz Isa (as) who use to make birds from
the dust and when He blew upon them, they came to life and flew away. In
order to prove Allah as*as-Sami* (All hearing), you need Hz Solomon (as)
who could even hear the voices of the ants. In order to prove Allah
is*al-Khabir* (The Aware), we must find a personality who use to reveal
the unseen. Allah’s commandment, knowledge, and order can be proved only
if there is someone who practically has full command over all of the
attributes of Allah.

When this personality who has full command over all of the attributes of
Allah performs Sajda, then you can understand there is an Allah, and it
is the same Allah who has blessed Him with command of these attributes.

Stages of Tawheed (Oneness)
---------------------------

Millions of books have been written on the topic of tawheed (oneness).
Thousands of debates have been performed. Until today these Muslims are
trying so hard to prove tawheed (Oneness). Every person who has some
knowledge is well aware of this reality. No one has been able to
completely prove tawheed (oneness).

The mistake they have made is they have tried to prove Allah through
imaginary proofs which were beyond the human capacity of understanding.
No one could understand the truth of tawheed (oneness). No one tried to
prove it through its true and real essence. When something is beyond
human

comprehension, then how is one suppose to prove its existance? Even
though you can understand so easily, tawheed cannot be proven until we
gain marifat (recognition) of

the Mahzer of tawheed (manifestation of Oneness). Allah never said I
created this whole universe for My own marifat (recognition). Allah put
this responsibility on that manifestation which came into being from
Allah Himself. It is Their responsibility to show us how to recognize
Allah. It is not our responsibility to show ourselves. Allah has ordered
us to recognize Him through those who are a veil between Allah and His
creation. This is why Moula Ali (as) said to Hz Salman (as) and Hz Abu
Dharr (ra), “*We are the explanation of tawheed among you. We are His
appearance among you.* ” Now it becomes quite clear that every attribute
needs a Mahzer (manifestation).

Tawheed is also an attribute. For creation which is bound by the
limitation of its examination, the true marifat is marifat of Mahzer e
Tawheed (manifestation of Oneness). Our purpose of discussion is to show
that one cannot gain marifat of tawheed without having marifat of
wilayat. Allah sent His Wali e Muttaliq (as) in human form so that we
could gain the marifat of Allah according to our own intellect and
limitations. In order to introduce wilayat, Allah established the
process of prophet hood. It is absolutely false to believe every
person’s understanding regarding tawheed will be the same. Every
person’s understanding of tawheed will be according to his level of
intellect.  This is why Mahzer Nama Tawheed, Aimmah (as), explained
tawheed in such a way that regardless of a person’s level of intellect
they would be able to gain marifat of tawheed. Along with this They also
explained what is the mehfoom (meaning) of marifat e tawheed
(recognition of oneness). We have to look at all of the sayings of
Masoomeen (as) in their complete context. We cannot take one saying and
ignore the rest, and be like wahabis.

In this chapter of tawheed, all debates will be within this context.
Every proof which shows the tawheed of Allah comes through the Wali e
Muttaliq (as) of Allah. All the attributes of tawheed are revealed from
this Wali e Muttaliq (as). The proof of tawheed is the servitude of this
Wali e Muttaliq (as) and His Sajda which He performs for His creator
with us as a witness to His Sajda.

This is a very sensitive point. If we ignore it, there will be two
horrible outcomes. Either the human will disbelieve the true tawheed and
establish his own concept of tawheed and worship an imaginary creator
all of his life or he will believe this Mahzer e Tawheed is Allah.

If we had no basis to our claims, then these two ideologies would never
have come into existance.  The existance of these two ideologies tells
us two things. First they do not have true belief regarding marifat e
tawheed (recognition of Oneness) nor do they have true belief regarding
marifat of the Mahzer e Tawheed (as).

Proof of Tawheed (Oneness)
--------------------------

We have presented the basic ideology of tawheed. One who has understood
these basic principles, followed them, and gained this knowledge about
the truth of tawheed, inshaAllah, will never have any

doubts and will remove himself from the nonstop debates in regards to
tawheed.

Now we come to the proofs of tawheed. It is not our purpose to rewrite
the proofs which have been written and accepted for centuries. The base
of our proofs is those truths which can be found in real life because
there is no solid proof other than examination (mushahida). So the first
point we shall discuss is fitrat (nature).

First Proof –Nature
-------------------

It is human nature to believe in the presence of a Creator. As it has
been stated in Quran, when Allah created man, He instilled inside of him
a certain way of being, we call this his “nature”. When Hisham bin Salim
asked Imam Jafar Sadiq (as),

”*What is that nature which Allah instilled inside of the human?” Imam
(as) replied, “Fitrat (nature) is tawheed.”* *(Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat
chapter 84 hadith 6).*

In order to explain my purpose I will mention only two parts of human
nature. I do not want this explanation to become lengthy, but these two
parts will explain it completely.

### First Part

###

Through archeological evidence, it can clearly be proven that from the
beginning of the creation of man until today, it has been the human’s
nature to believe in a “higher being” or Creator. The desire of
worshipping this “higher being” is a part of the human’s nature. Look
deeply into history of man you will not find one age where man did not

worship some form of “higher being”. If he could not find his true
Creator, he would begin worshipping some false entity as his true
creator. The reason for him doing this is simply because his desire or
nature to do so is so strong that man would prefer to worship a false
creator as opposed to not worshipping any creator at all. Whenever he
was unable to find his true Creator, then he would simply start
worshipping any thing which had the appearance of being superior to man
such as moon, stars, sun, trees, fire, water, etc. There was not one
thing which man did not worship at some point in history. This natural
desire is proof there is a being which is superior to all, and therefore
all of mankind has this desire to worship Him. No one can deny this is a
part of human nature. It is a proof of tawheed. Now I wish to discuss
two very sensitive aspects of nature. The first is dua (supplication).
Dua is when you ask another to fulfill your need. It cannot be denied
that one who asks is needy, and the one who gives is affluent. It is not
necessary that dua (supplication) be repeated out loud to the one you
wish to grant your need.

All a human has to do is simply think in their mind or feel in their
heart whatever their need is. This is also a form of dua. It is
illogical to think that a person will make a wish, but yet that person
does not have the belief that there is someone who has the ability to
fulfill their wish or desire. If a person is making a wish for the
fulfillment of their needs, then obviously they believe there is one who
can grant their wish or desire.

Show me one person who does not have any desires or has never said in
his heart “I wish this happens”.  Regardless of whether man accepts or
rejects the concept of a superior being, his rejection or acceptance is
undeniable proof of his belief that there does exist some form of
superior being, which has the ability to fulfill his needs. I don’t want
to go into the details of this point otherwise I would explain
completely how every part of the human body is busy in dua all the time.
When his body is short of water, he prays for water through his thirst.
If he is short of food, he prays for food through his hunger. It is not
only for humans. If you just ponder upon this, you will notice every
single particle of the universe is busy in dua all the time. This need
is itself telling that the nature of man has the belief that there is
someone who can fulfill his needs. No one can deny this fact. Need is a
part of the nature of humans. We are dependent on shopkeepers for our
food. Shopkeeper is dependent on the wholesale dealer. Wholesale dealer
is dependant on farmer. Farmer is dependant on seed and water. This need
is never ending. This process of need is called “tasalsul” (consistency)
in “ilm e Kalam” (knowledge of man) which is a false concept.  We have
to accept that nature dictates there is someone, which the whole of
creation is dependant upon, but He Himself is not dependant upon any of
creation or any other being.

After dua the second aspect which is a part of man’s nature is “umeed”
(hope). Regardless of the severity of trouble a person is in, he always
has this hope that one day someone will help him out of this trouble.
Doctors are disappointed. Their patient is about to die. Despite of
this, the family of the patient has hope he will survive. Surely, you
will agree with me that hope can never be one-sided. There has to be
someone who you believe will answer your need..

But what about a person who is totally alone and there is no one in
sight, does hope not come into his heart that someone will come and
remove him from his difficulty? The boat is sinking. It is surrounded
entirely by the ocean. There is no one near who can help. Does hope
still not come in their hearts that there will be a way of survival?

If you are not realizing this, then ask someone who is a captain of the
boat. They often find themselves in this situation. They will tell you
if there is a hope in this situation or not. Hope itself is a proof that
the nature of man believes in a higher being that it cannot see will
come and fulfill all of its needs. This hope is called “*as-Samad* ”
(The Eternal). Now it does not matter if you deny this fact or not but
the nature not only knows his creator but also believes in that creator.

I selected these two aspects, dua and umeed, in order to explain briefly
otherwise there is no aspect of human nature which does not prove
tawheed.

### Second Part

###

Man has always been in search of “wahadat” (Oneness) which is
self-sufficient and unable to divided into parts or substances..
Apparently everything in this world is one. If there are a thousand
people standing together, each person among them will be only one. If
there are millions of rocks piled together, each rock will be only one.
Even though every creation in this world is only one, it is dividable.
It is a mixture of different elements.

Because it is a mixture of different elements, it is not one in its true
essence. Every human, regardless if he is knowledgeable or ignorant, is
aware of this fact.

This is why the nature of man forces him to search for such a “wahadat”
(Oneness) which is not made from different elements. Finally after
centuries of research and experiments, man thought he had found this
“wahadat” which he had long desired. For a long time, the smallest
particle known to man was called the atom, and this ideology was
considered to be authentic and has been written in the books of man for
centuries. Very soon man realized atom is also dividable. There are
electrons and protons inside it which move in a circular orbit. After
more research, scientists discovered every element of universe has the
same process of divisibility as the atom. This process is limitless.
Finally man admitted his ignorance regarding this matter. The nature of
man’s search for an absolute oneness is proof of the existance of this
absolute Oneness. Simply because man does not have the ability to
recognize this absolute Oneness does not mean this absolute Oneness does
not exist.

Last Stage of Human Intellect
-----------------------------

Soon man became disappointed at his inability to describe this absolute
Oneness, so he adopted a different approach. Now the experts of science
took this responsibility upon themselves. They created the ideology that
a body has three dimensions. -Length, width, and depth. Anything which
has one of these three dimensions will be made from a mixture of
different elements. After a long search they discovered a creation which
had not any of these three previously known dimensions. That thing is
“nuqta” (dot). The literal explanation of “nuqta” is “such a thing which
has neither length, width, nor depth.”

This “nuqta” (dot) is the limit of human intellect. If there is no
dimension in “nuqta”, then how does it become a letter? A letter is a
combination of dots. Not only is the letter a combination of dots, but
the whole universe is based upon dots. Every child knows the picture we
see on the television screen is a combination of millions of dots. Every
creation is nothing more than a combination of dots. Allah has explained
this in Quran,*“Wherever you will go, you will find the*

**Face of Allah** .” Allah called this dot “His Face”. Is there anyone
who can claim to be able to examine this dot? This is the hidden element
of tawheed. Is there anyone who can deny the existance of this “nuqta”
(dot)? This is the revelation element of tawheed. There is a dot but no
one can see it. It can be felt but no one can touch it. The intellect of
man stops at this point. Beyond this there is an ocean of wonderment.
This same dot is a proof of absolute tawheed (Oneness). This is the dot
that we were ordered to gain marifat (recognition) of. The reality of
this dot is hidden. When it comes in the form of a letter, then it
becomes known. When this dot comes in the form of a letter, this is the
point at which Allah has revealed Himself. So this is His (Moula Ali as)
right to say, “*I am the one who is revealed, I am the one who is
hidden* .” Whenever a letter is drawn, it will begin with a dot and it
will end with a dot. So this is His right to say, “*I am the first and
the last* .” Upon realizing the attributes of the dot, a poet wrote
these beautiful words:

**“You are everywhere, but no one can see You. Even though**

**You blessed us with eyes, but this whole world is blind. “**

So the limit of our understanding ends with this dot. I have said
wrongly. The limit of our understanding is not this dot. In reality the
limit of our understanding is the knowledge of the existance of this
dot. We all are very well aware of the reality that since the beginning
of time and until the day of judgement no one has claimed to be this dot
except my Moula Ali (as).

So the limit of our marifat (recognition) is to have knowledge regarding
the existance of Moula Ali (as). We will never be able to know what His
batin (hidden self) is. Allah called this dot His nafs (self). This is
the mehfoom (explanation) which was narrated by both RasoolAllah (saw)
and Moula Ali (as).*“One who gains the marifat (recognition) of the nafs
of his Rabb (Lord) has gained the marifat of his Rabb* .” Some ignorant
people explained this hadith in these words, “one who gains the marifat
of his own nafs (self) has gained the marifat of his Rabb.” I would like
to tell these ignorant people to put aside the marifat (recognition) of
nafs (self). No one until today has explained what the word “nafs”
itself means. No one knows what nafs is; if it is a spirit or some other
thing. If it is a spirit, it is “Ruh e Qaseef” (a specific soul not in
this world) or “Ruh e Lateef” (the soul which is inside of man). When
there is no explanation of the word “nafs”, then how can you gain its
marifat? Secondly nafs is a hidden thing. Until today man has been
unable to gain the marifat of his body. Medical science has advanced
greatly. The only thing which medical science has been unable to do is
to bring one who has died back to life. Otherwise they have accomplished
everything. Even medical science has not gained the marifat
(recognition) of the human body. Every day it discovers new aspects of
the human body previously unknown. Scientists present an ideology. Then
after extensive research and experiment, he himself will refute it. When
your physical body cannot be recognized, then how can you recognize your
hidden self? Thirdly we are incomplete in our creation. Therefore our
nafs is also incomplete. The marifat you will gain from this nafs will
always be incomplete. How can the creator of wonder, Allah, declare the
source of His marifat to be something which is incomplete in and of
itself?

The purpose of sending Moula Ali (as) in the form of a human was so that
man could easily recognize Moula Ali (as) from His physical appearance.
That is true marifat (recognition). It has been proven by Quran that
Moula Ali (as) is the nafs of Allah. So the marifat of Moula Ali (as) is
the marifat of Allah.

One who will deny this (Muqassireen) will fall into jahannum (hell). One
who will go beyond this limit (ghalis) will also fall into the hell.

We tried our best to explain the true tawheed. Now we will stop at this
point. Neither should we go nor should we even try to go further. We
must remember this is the limit and power of our intellect. Not the
limit and power of the Mahzer e Wahadat (as) (manifestation of Oneness).
Every attribute of Allah was revealed at its greatest level. If there is
an incomplete attribute in the Mahzer (manifestation), then this would
also mean there is

an incompletion in the “zahir” (Allah). At the level where the attribute
of wahadat is revealed, it is such a level where there is no difference
between “zahir” and Mahzer except this; He (Allah) is the one who
reveals and He (Moula Ali as) is the one who was revealed. After reading
this hadith of Masoomeen (as), you will come to understand this
reality*.* *Usool e Kafi Kitab Tawheed chapter 15 hadith 1* , Imam Jafar
Sadiq (as) said,*“Allah created an “ism” with letters. These letters had
no sound. This letter was silent. This “ism” had no physical body. It
had no limit. It was hidden from all the senses. Allah declared it His
Kalima (sign).”* It has been clarified from the saying of Masoom (as)
that the Kalima was at the level of revelation of wahadat. It contained
all the attributes of tawheed. Neither was it in any specified place nor
was it for a specific time. It had no limit. It has no body. It has no
dimension. None of its attributes were revealed. No one knew to pray to
Him. Except for wahadat, there was no other aspect. Because there was
nothing created which had any effect on it. There was no sense which
could recognize it. We know only five senses. Through these senses we
recognize the whole universe. The Creator of these senses knows how many
He actually created.

Masoom (as) said, “*Among all the senses which Allah has created, there
is not one among those which can recognize the Kalima of Allah (signs of
Allah). Through this Kalima (sign) the people were to understand what
tawheed is. This is that level where you cannot find any difference
between Creator and creation, Worshipper and Worshipped, Rabb and Slave,
Needy and the Fulfiller, except this He is One in and of Himself. The
other is from Him.”*  Here we will again mention the writing of Mr.
Khoemeni*(Misbah ul Hadiya alil Calipha wal Wilaya* ) which we have
previously mentioned earlier in our book.

“Moula Ali (as) has all the same attributes as the Oneness of Allah, and
He has full command over all of those attributes. He also has full
command over the whole of creation of Allah, but He never revealed these
attributes in their full detail to the people because these attributes
in their full sense can only be known and seen by Allah.”

Who is the Kalima Nama? You have already read the Khutbat Tuttunjiya
where Moula Ali (as) said,*“I am the Kalimatul Allah who created the
whole universe and established its timings.”*

Second Proof- Organization
--------------------------

The time of ignorant debates regarding whether or not this universe
created itself has passed. The time has also passed when it was believed
that a particle is the creator of the universe. So much has been said
and written on these absurd topics but we will not write anything like
this in our book because man does not need these shaitanic ideologies.
So we will just avoid this. We will only discuss things using our
intellect and by bringing proofs. Our second proof is “tarteeb”
(organization) which can be found in the Creator.

The eyes see and the intellect ponders upon the organization of this
whole universe. There is such discipline and organization that every one
creation is linked to another. This organization is proof of the one who
organized this.

If someone leaves his room in such a state where his bed is unmade, his
pillow is thrown upon one side, his blanket the other, his books are
scattered all over the floor, his papers and pens are here and there,
but upon re-entering his room, everything has been organized and
returned to its place. Can even the most ignorant of ignorant think that
this room organized itself? When you cannot imagine this for a small
room, then what type of person will imagine this whole universe was
organized by itself. Man denies these realities due to his ignorance. He
has presented his ignorance as proof of these realities, but ignorance
can never be brought forward as a proof. You will understand fully after
reading this example. If a blind person enters an extremely organized
room, then he bumps into an object in the room which is in its proper
place. He will immediately become angry and start cursing the one who
made this object and the one who put it there. It was only an example.
Now I will tell you another incident which I was an eye witness to. Once
I was attending a funeral at a cemetery. One person whose eyesight was
very weak was also there. Whenever there is a lot of rain, many graves
become damaged.

One grave had become extremely damaged. This man’s foot hit the grave
and he fell into the grave. He became buried alive. After much struggle,
the people were able to free him from the grave. When he came out, he
was so angry, and said, “These ignorant people put graves in people’s
way. They do not care about those who are walking here.” He was swearing
at the grave and at the one who made it. He did not look at his own
eyesight. It was neither the fault of the grave nor of the one who made
it. It was the fault of his own eyesight. When people do not understand
the purpose of creation of the universe deny, it is simply due to their
ignorance. These are the same people who deny the Creator of the whole
universe.

Third Proof- istarar e kainat (arrangement of universe)
-------------------------------------------------------

We see in this world every being is forced to perform its purpose of
creation. Whatever place has been designated for it, he cannot move from
that spot. Sun, moon, stars, trees, mountains, rivers, oceans, every
particle of this universe is forced to remain in its place. All the
parts of the human body are forced to perform their designated duties.
It does not matter how much someone tries to see through his nose or
smell through his ear. He will never be able to do this. Humans are
independent only concerning his niyyat (intention). He is also free in
his actions, but in some ways even his actions are also dependent upon
the will of Allah. This is istarar. One thing which is in the state of
istarar is called mustir.  The istarar is a proof that there is someone
who makes it mustir. If you see a rock flying through the air, you will
never think it is flying of its own accord. You will immediately
understand it was thrown by a person.

Even though you did not see the person who threw the rock, you believe
the person exists. I only saw the rock flying in the air, but my
intellect knew it was thrown by someone. This is the same intellect
which knows there is a nafs and ruh (soul) inside of me even though it
did not see this nafs or ruh. The same intellect also thinks about the
creator of this ruh and nafs, but its limitation is the knowledge of a
Creator. It cannot go beyond this. In the

same way he is aware of the presence of nafs and ruh but does not
understand its reality.

It is an authentic principle of science. Nothing can move until a third
party has an effect on it. We see every particle of the universe is
moving. This movement is a proof there is a force that is making it to
move. Quran revealed this reality in these words,*“I swear by the earth
and the one who moves it”.* We mention these proofs in order to satisfy
our readers who are not use to hearing these kinds of proofs. In
reality, there is only one proof of tawheed and that is wilayat. Wali e
Muttaliq (as) is the only source from which we can gain marifat tul
tawheed (recognition of Oneness). He introduced tawheed through His
knowledge, commandment, power, and His servitude. When man sees all of
His wonders, and then examines His Sajda (prostrations), then man will
understand He also has a Rabb (Lord). Then man thinks when this is the
Wali of Allah who has knowledge of the whole universe, who has command
over the whole universe, who is the creator of the whole universe, who
gives rizq (sustenance) to the whole universe, what will be the
greatness of His Rabb for whom He is performing this sajda
(prostration)? Who is this Rabb for whom He sheds tears while performing
prayers? Who is this Rabb for whom He asks for His own sustenance from?
At this point, man finds nothing except astonishment.

This astonishment is the marifat (recognition) of Allah.

Opposite of Wilayat-Shirk
-------------------------

We have proven this in our book “**Kashaful Haqaiq** ” through the
sayings of Masoom (as). There are three kinds of sins. One kind, which
can be forgiven, is “Haqooq Allah” (prayers, fasting, hajj, zakat, etc).
Second kind is “Haqooqul Ebaad” (rights of people). You will be
questioned regarding this on the day of judgement. The third kind, which
can never be forgiven, is shirk. To prove our point we will present
these Quranic ayahs.

**4. Sura an-Nisa (The Women) 48: “Verily Allah does not forgive the
shirk apart from that whomever Allah wishes, He forgives.”**

**5. Sura al-Maida(The Table) 72: “Verily whoever will do shirk against
Allah. He has declared jannah (paradise) as haram (unlawful) for him. We
have chosen the fire of hell for him.”**

**6. Sura An’aam (The Cattle)  82: “Those who believe and did not
oppress their iman for them is peace. They are the rightly guided.”**

In*Tafseer Safi* *page no. 158-159 ref Tafseer Majma ul Bayan* , Ibn
Masood narrates, when this ayah was revealed, the people did not like
this. They said “O’RasoolAllah (saw)! Which one amongst us has not
oppressed his nafs?” RasoolAllah (saw) replied, “*This is not as you
think. The true meaning of this is shirk.”* It has been narrated
in*Tafseer Ayyashi* , when someone read this ayah and asked, “ Is zina
(adultery) included in this oppression?” RasoolAllah (saw) replied,

“*I seek the shelter of Allah from zina, but in this verse zina is not
included amongst the meanings of oppression. However, this zina
(adultery) is a major sin. If someone with a sincere heart asks for
forgiveness, Allah may accept his repentance.”*

Now there is no doubt regarding this. The first two sins are not related
with the day of judgement or with the eternal wrath of Allah. On the day
of

judgement only the sin of shirk is related with the hell and the eternal
wrath of Allah. The first priority for every person is to avoid shirk.
You cannot avoid something until you gain its marifat (recognition). It
is compulsory on every person to fully know and understand what is shirk
and then he must avoid it.

### Explanation of Shirk

###

Shirk is commonly believed to be when a person believes in more than one
god or believing in someone other than Allah as if they are Allah. We
will ponder upon the true meaning of shirk. In**Bab e Tawheed,** it has
been explained that the marifat (recognition) of the Mahzer e Tawheed is
the true tawheed. All these attributes and actions, which are associated
with Allah, are revealed through this Mahzer (manifestation) These
Mahzers, as well as Their attributes and Their actions, are also
“mushood” (witness) upon us. We have to gain Their marifat
(recognition). This is the true explanation of tawheed. Shirk is the
opposite of tawheed. Whatever is opposite of tawheed will be shirk. It
means if you deny the attributes and actions of these Mahzer e Tawheed
even if you are following that god which you have created in your own
mind, this is the most comprehensive explanation of shirk and we will
prove this in our next pages.

Kinds of Shirk
--------------

Scholars have mentioned two basic kinds of shirk. Shirk e Jalli (open
shirk) and Shirk e Khafi (hidden shirk). There are two kinds of Shirk e
Jalli (open shirk). Shirk fi Zaat (shirk in the beliefs of the Oneness
of Allah) and Shirk fil Ibadat (shirk in acts of worship).

### Shirk fi Zaat

###

The explanation of shirk fi zaat which we find is to associate someone
with Allah. For example, the religion of Sanoya believes in two gods.
One god is the god of good deeds. The other is the god of bad deeds. The
ideology of Taslis in which god is separated into three beings such as
believing Hz Isa (as), Bibi Mariam (as), and Allah became one. I must
say this explanation makes no sense. Just think for a moment and you
will immediately realize to associate someone with Allah is impossible
because the distance between Allah and His creation is so great. We are
unable to recognize even the smallest part of creation. Then how is it
possible to recognize Allah directly? Whatever knowledge we gain it
comes from the attributes. We will never be able to understand the
reality of creation. In present time, the most powerful authority is
science. Its job is to find out the realities and origins of creation.
The people who study science are very well aware of the fact that
science has only made initial discoveries regarding creation. For a
moment, we shall leave us, the incomplete creation, on one side and look
only at Masoomeen (as). Even the Prophet of Allah (saw) prayed to His
Lord,*“O’ My Lord! Bless Me with the knowledge of the realities of Your
creation.”* When we are not fully aware of the creation, then how can we
know about our Creator? When we have no knowledge about our Creator,
then how can we commit shirk? If we want to put water in the milk, it is
necessary we have knowledge regarding milk as well as water. These two
things must also be present. Only in that instance can

combine these two things. Who has this courage even to think about shirk
regarding Allah? We will not waste our energy, or yours, on this topic.
The only people who waste their time upon such false ideologies are
those who consider the religion as a game of chess for fun.

### Shirk fil ibadat

###

The other kind of shirk e jalli (open shirk)  is shirk fil ibadat. As it
is stated in**Sura al-Kahf (The Cave) ayah 110, “So the one who hopes
for a meeting with his Lord, let him do righteous deeds and do not
associate anyone in the ibadat of his Lord.”** I have read so many
explanations of ibadat. I have thought very deeply upon each and every
explanation given for ibadat.  After much thought, the explanation,
which I have accepted, I am now presenting to you. However, I do not
force you to accept my explanation. If ibadat is considered sajda and
rukoo, then it will be wrong. In**Sura Yaseen ayah 60-61, Allah says,
“O’Children of Adam! Did I not take the promise of allegiance that you
will not worship  shaitan?”** This ayah is telling us the majority of
people are worshipping shaitan. If the meanings of ibadat are namaz
(prayer), roza (fasting), etc, then you will not find any person who is
praying to shaitan. Who is there which reads namaz for shaitan? Who is
there which fasts and does hajj for shaitan? Ibadat is not related to
these things. In reality, ibadat is absolute obedience. The obedience of
shaitan is considered as ibadat to shaitan. We see Allah has declared
the obedience of Muhammad (saw) and Aal e Muhammad (as) as wajib
(compulsory) upon us. We all know none of us pray to these sacred
personalities. Then what is the obedience that will declare the ibadat
of Allah? After thinking a lot on these points, the explanation I have
come to is this:

“the obedience of the one who is not in the obedience of anyone is
called ibadat”.  It then becomes quite clear the only one who is not in
the obedience of anyone but everyone is under His obedience is Allah.
When He ordered us to obey someone and we deny this and obey others,
this is shirk fil ibadat. The practical examples of this you can find in
your daily life. I will mention only one hadith at this time.

*Usool e Kafi Kitab e Aql chapter 19 first hadith* , this is not the
literal translation of this hadith. It is its true meaning.

Narrator says, he read*ayah 31 of Sura Tawba* in front of Imam Jafar
Sadiq (as) and asked its meaning. “*and they left Allah and made as
their Rabb their scholars and priests.* ” Imam (as) replied, “*The
scholars and priests did not invite Christians to worship their nafs. If
they had invited them, the people would never have accepted. What their
scholars and priests did was to  make the halal (lawful) become haram
(unlawful) and the haram become halal. Instead of Allah’s order, they
established their own orders. So the Christians obeyed their scholars
blindly and prayed to them unintentionally.”*

This was shirk e jalli (open shirk). It cannot only be seen but it can
be easily recognized by anyone. It  also can be avoided. However the
most dangerous is shirk e khafi, which cannot be seen. In fact most of
the time ,due to lack of knowledge, man becomes stuck in the web of
shirk e khafi. He does not even realize he has become stuck in this
shirk.

If he does not use his intellect and remains in this shirk for some
time, then it will become impossible for him to come out of this web. He
thinks he has belief in tawheed, but in reality he is committing shirk.
There are three kinds of shirk e khafi.

**Shirk fi safaat** (shirk in attributes)

**Shirk fil fail** (shirk in acts)

**Shirk fil amr** (shirk in commandment)

### Shirk fil safaat (shirk in attributes)

###

All that has been written regarding tawheed circulates around the first
sentence of the first sermon of Moula Ali (as) in Najul Balagha. I
dedicate this sentence to you, the readers. Moula Ali (as) said, “The
beginning of the religion is recognition of Allah. The perfection of
recognizing Him is to testify Him. The perfection of testifying Him is
to believe in His Oneness. The perfection of believing in His Oneness is
to regard Him Pure, and the perfection of His purity is to deny Him

attributes, because every attribute is different from that to which it
is attributed and everything to which something is attributed is
different from the attribute.”

Moula Ali (as) said the first thing is marifat of Allah. It is quite
clear that marifat (recognition) can begin from attributes. Therefore,
the meaning of the marifat of Allah is to gain the marifat (recognition)
of His attributes. It has also been proven from this saying that the
attributes of Allah are not Allah. Moula Ali (as) has clearly said
attributes and Allah are two different things. Shia scholars have been
writing the attributes of Allah are Allah, but no one until today could
explain its mehfoom (meaning). Despite of this claim, they associate His
attributes with Him. Practically they follow others’ beliefs. If they
deny this, then we have a right to ask them to explain Allah is Alam.
Allah is  All knowing. Allah is Qadir. Allah has full commandment. Allah
is Khaliq o Raziq. Allah is creator and sustainer. What is the meaning
of these sentences? How can you declare Allah and His attributes to be
the same when it is an impossibility? The sayings of Masoomeen (as) are
a proof of this impossibility.  If you have no knowledge regarding the
attributes of Allah, then you cannot claim this to be absolute tawheed.
The end result will be the creation of doubts and this is shirk. As long
as this word attribute is associated with Allah you cannot deny the
dimensions of this attribute. For example :

Attribute is a limitation. For example, Alam is one whose
knowledge is limited. Raheem is one whose mercy is limited. Whoever has
the attribute of raheem (mercy) cannot have the attribute of qahhar
(subduer). These two attributes cannot be in one being at the same time.
The same way qahhar (subduer) is limited with qahar. If you believe His
attributes as His Oneness, then you are limiting Allah. Allah cannot one
moment be al-Raheem (Most Merciful), then the next become al-Qahhar
(Subduer). This constitutes a change in being. Allah does not change
from one attribute to another.

Attributes must be explained. Explanations are dependent upon words.
Words are a creation. If you include His attributes as part of the true
meaning of tawheed, then you must also believe Allah is dependent upon
His creation. Imam Zainul Abdieen (as) said in “*Al-Tawheed* ”, “*Allah*

*cannot be praised by using limits. Our Lord is the greatest. Our Lord
is greater than attributes. Then how can He be praised with limited
words while Allah has no limits?”* Every person possesses each attribute
at a different level. Therefore this is a proof tributes can be divided.
Attributes are a mixture of words and are limited in their explanations
and meanings.

Attributes can be examined. An attribute cannot be explained until you
have examined it. As the body can be seen due its physical appearance,
the same way attributes can be accepted and examined by its appearance.
If it is beyond examination and intellect, then it cannot be an
attribute nor can it be explained. Attributes are related to tongue,
pen, or feelings

You have seen if you use the word attributes for Allah, then it will
create so many doubts that you will not be able to believe in tawheed.
There is no other way except believing Allah is only one. His attributes
can only be used in the sense that He is the creator of attributes. This
is they only way we can keep from losing our iman.

This is the belief we were taught by Masoomeen (as). In reality, His
attributes are revealed from Himself. Like when we see some signs of
knowledge in a person, we assume him to be a great scholar. When we see
the universe, we assume it to have a Creator. When we see signs of
intellect or wisdom, we know this is a very pious person. When we see
the signs of creation or rizq (sustenance), then we know there is a
Creator and Sustainer. This is the reason whenever anyone asked Masoom
(as) "What is the meaning of the saying “Allah is knowledgeable”? Masoom
(as) replied, “*It means He has created someone who has knowledge
regarding the whole universe. He created someone who has full command
over the whole universe.”*

We cannot understand any of Allah’s attributes in their true sense.
Whatever we imagine, in our own minds, an attribute of Allah to be, we
always imagine it to be at its highest level because we believe Allah to
be above His creation and without any fault. As Imam Muhammad Baqir (as)
said,*“Whatever you imagine tawheed to be in your mind, it is limited by
your intellect, but Allah has no limit* .” Because an ant has a stinger,
it also believes Allah has a stinger. It believes Allah has every
attribute and it does not believe in any incompletion. The people try to
prove Allah is pure and free from every incompletion through His
attributes. Scholars have only explained the meanings of “Sifaat e
Sabootia” (attributes which prove the existance of Allah) and “Sifaat e
Salibia” (attributes which prove Allah is self-subsisting). In reality,
it is impossible to understand the attributes for His “zaat” (self).
Scholars have declared those attributes which are “Sifaat e Sabootia” to
be “Sifaat e Salibia”. It means if Allah is All Knowing then He cannot
be ignorant. If He is al-Qadir (The Able), then He is not dependent upon
anything. According to the scholars, if an attribute of Allah is away
from any sort of fault or incompletion, then it is the true attribute of
Allah. If you are not aware of the reality of something, then you cannot
attribute any description to it. Whatever attributes we suggest for Him,
it is a creation from our own minds.

This is the real shirk. As Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) has said, “*A
person, who will place limits upon Allah either by his intellect,
illusions, or*

*thoughts, then he will create an imaginary god for himself. Allah is
far above the imaginings of man.”*

There is only one absolute way to avoid shirk. That way is to believe in
Allah as being One Essence. This belief was introduced by His Wali e
Mutalliq (as) who is the trustee of all the attributes of Allah. His
attributes are the attributes of Allah. When you attribute these
attributes to Allah, this is the real shirk.

Allama Bu Ali Shah Zaidi writes in his book “*Shia Mazhab kay Usool e
Deen First Edition page no. 95”* , “The foundation of iman (faith) is
the words, attributes, names, and actions which Allah associated with
Himself. We must accept them and consider them as a source of marifat.
We must use them for prayers and His remembrance.

In this way we can avoid kufr (disbelief). Then we must believe these
attributes, actions, and names are in reality for the one whom Allah
revealed from Himself. Whoever recognizes this foundation of iman will
be successful. If one could not recognize this foundation of iman, then
he will fall in the valley of shirk. He will burn in the hell forever.
The meanings of shirk fi safaat is to associate any attributes with
Allah and deny these attributes for Moula Ali (as).”

### Shirk fil fail (shirk in actions)

###

Shirk fil fail is to have the belief the actions Allah has associated
with Himself are actually done by Allah Himself.

*For example creation, taking of life, giving of rizq (sustenance), etc.
The reason for this is the act is “hadis” (hadis is a thing, which is
not present but becomes present only after its completion and it can be
changed). While Allah has not such a thing. If we believe this, then we
will believe Allah can be changed which is impossible. Allah is only one
“zaat” (self). Nothing can enter Him and nothing can come out of Him.
Allah says regarding Hz Adam (as), “When I created the physical*

*form of Adam, then I will blow a “spirit” inside of Him.”*

So now will you think (maaz’Allah) that Allah is like a potter who makes
the physical forms of human creation from the clay and then blows
“spirit of life” into them? In reality Allah has appointed some of His
Trustees to do these acts on His behalf. The acts we associate with Him
are a source for us to worship Him. In reality these actions are done by
His Trustees but Allah calls these actions as His own. His every act
means His order. He is a creator in the sense that He orders to create.
He is mohi. He gives life in the sense He orders life to be. He is
mommeet. He gives death in the sense He decrees a time of death for His
creation. What was the purpose of creating His calipha if Allah was
suppose to do all of these acts Himself? Calipha is one who does all of
these acts on behalf of His Creator. This is that secret which the
people have denied to Masoomeen (as) out of their own ignorance. When
Moula Ali (as) says, “*I am the one who created this universe. I am the
one laid this earth. I am the one who established the mountains. I am
the one who made the rivers to flow. I am the one who gives death, and I
am the one who gives life.* ” When people heard this, their ignorance
made them become so frustrated. Immediately they issued fatwas

of shirk. They are unaware of this truth. If you will even think against
the sayings of Moula Ali (as), then you are the one committing shirk.

We have already explained the marifat of the Mahzer e Tawheed is the
real tawheed. Because shirk is the opposite of tawheed, if you ascribe
the attributes of the Mahzer e Tawheed to any other being even if that
being is simply a creation of your own mind or if you deny the
attributes of the Mahzer e Tawheed are the same as Allah, then you have
committed shirk. This is the most comprehensible explanation of shirk.
Because Their attributes and acts are those same attributes and acts
which Allah has associated with Himself. We will consult the Quran
regarding the true meanings of shirk fil fail and acts of Allah in order
to prove our claims.

**18. Sura al-Kahf (The Cave) 51: “Will you choose him (shaitan) and his
seed for your protecting wali instead of Me, when they are an enemy for
you? Calamitous is the exchange for evildoers. I made them not to
witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor their own
creation; nor choose I misleaders for My helpers.”**

In this ayah, Allah has mentioned a few attributes of Wali e Haqq.*Wali
is a witness on the whole of creation. If we ponder a little upon this
ayah, then a couple questions will come in our minds.* What was the need
for a witness? Neither has anyone asked for the witness nor does this
witness provide any benefit to creation. Which attribute of wali is
revealed from this witness? Simply being witness to something does not
prove any greatness. Even we ourselves are witness to thousands of
incidents. Even though we are an eye witness to these incidents, it has
no effect on our status. Nor are we responsible for the incident
occurring.

This witness was silent from the tongue or from the action. Was there
such a situation that Allah was creating and then they became silent
spectators? Or they were giving witness by their tongues saying, “yes
you have finished creating this. Then you will create that.”  Or they
were creating things themselves and they were a witness to Allah’s act
of creation?

Now if you ponder upon these three questions, then you will not find
any other way except this witness was by action. Its purpose was the
acceptance of tawheed. It was a means to tell that Allah is the creator
in the sense that His Mahzer keeps creating and keeps giving witness of
His power of creation. This Mahzer creates and the association goes to
Allah. The purpose is to express His attribute of creation. This Mahzer
does the physical act of creation and is also witness to Allah giving
the order of creation. This attribute, which can never be understood by
the limited intellect of humans, must be proven through His Mahzer. All
the creation believes this Mahzer is creator by the orders of Allah.

Wali e Muttaliq is the power of Allah
-------------------------------------

At this point, you have to believe all the attributes and acts of Allah
are revealed through the Wali e Muttaliq. In Quran Allah has mentioned
all the parts of Wali e Muttaliq that He uses to perform these acts.

Then He associates these parts to Himself. Ayanullah (Eyes of Allah),
Yadullah (Hand of Allah), Uzanallah (Ear of Allah), Lissanullah (Tongue
of Allah). Not only this but Allah has also declared His Wali e Muttaliq
as His

Nafs (Self) who performs acts with these parts. If you will include some
other, even it be a creation from your own mind, in His Wilayat or His
acts, then you are committing shirk.

Now it has been proven the Trustee of the acts of Allah is the Wali e
Muttaliq. So now with the help of Quran, we will briefly look at those
acts that Allah has associated with Himself. If you include any one else
in these acts, then that is shirk.

**30 Sura ar-Room (The Romans) 40: “Allah is He who created you and then
sustained you, then causes you to die, then gives life to you again. Is
there any of your (so-called) partners (of Allah) that does such as
this? Praised and Exalted be He above what they associate (with Him)!”**

There are four acts of shirk in this ayah which people commit.

**creates**

**gives sustenance**

**gives death**

**brings back to life**

Allah is making a challenge regarding these four acts. He is stating
that no one except Him can do these things. If someone associates these
acts to any one other than Allah, He is a mushrik. We have proven our
claim through this point. It has been decided that the Wali e Muttaliq
of Allah is the trustee of all the acts of Allah. This world has seen
the Wali e Muttaliq do these acts again and again. This is an undeniable
proof that if you deny or associate these four acts to any one else,
even if it is that god which you created in your own mind, this is the
true shirk.

**Sura Yunus 34-35: “Say: is there any of your partners which you
ascribe unto Allah that produce creation and then reproduce it? Say:
Allah produces creation, and then reproduces it. How then are you
misled? Is there any of your partners which you ascribe unto Allah that
leads to the truth? Say: Allah leads to the Truth. Is He who leads to
the Truth more deserving to be followed or he who finds not the way
unless he is guided. What ails you? How judge you?**

There are three acts of shirk mentioned in this ayah:

**first creation**

**second creation**

**guidance**

**This is the meaning of the saying of Moula Ali (as), “*I am the one
who creates, I am the one who gives death, I am the one who brings the
dead back to life, I am the one who will resurrect the dead from their
graves. The creation will return back to Me* .” This is the meaning of
the saying of Imam Muhammad Baqir (as), “*One who Allah guides, He
guides them through Moula Ali (as)* .” If someone denies these acts of
wali or associates them with any other person even if it is a god they
have created in their own minds, it will be an act of true shirk. Sura
Momin ayah 42: “You ask me to commit shirk and kufr against Allah of
which I have no knowledge.” This is the same shirk which Allah warned
all prophets about even RasoolAllah (saw). Allah says in Sura Zumr ayah
65: “And verily it has been revealed unto you as unto those**

**before you saying: If you ascribe a partner to Allah your work will
fail and you will indeed be amongst the losers.”**

**Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First Edition page no. 434, in the tafseer of
this ayah Shah Abdul Azeem narrates from Imam Jafar Sadiq (as), “*A man
from the tribe Bani Adi said, “The Quraish gathered in my house.” Then
we went to RasoolAllah (saw) and said, “O’RasoolAllah (saw)! We quit
worshipping idols and we follow You. (we quit apparent shirk). Now
include us in the wilayat of Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib (as) so that we will
become a part of that wilayat.” At that time Gibrael (as) came to
RasoolAllah (saw) and said, “O’Muhammad (saw)! If You included them in
the wilayat of Moula Ali (as), You will be amongst the losers.”***

In brief having the belief that every attribute and act which Allah has
associated with Himself is done by the Wali e Muttaliq is the real
tawheed. If you deny these acts from the Wali e Muttaliq and associate
them with any other even if it is a god created from your own mind, is
the real shirk. The belief you consider as the real tawheed is in
reality the real shirk. And the belief you consider as shirk is in
reality the real tawheed.

### Shirk fil Amr

###

In order to understand shirk fil amr, we will consult Sura*al-Qasas (The
Stories) ayah 68: “Thy Lord brings to pass what He wills and chooses.
They have never any choice. Glorified be Allah and Exalted above all
that they associate with Him.”* It proves from this ayah that only Allah
can appoint someone to act on His behalf. This is the point where we can
understand shirk fil amr.

So believing in one other than that which Allah has appointed or denying
the one, which Allah has appointed to act on His behalf, is shirk fil
amr. When you deny Amr e Khuda is the one, which was appointed by Allah,
it is considered as, shirk. If you deny the orders of Sahib e Amr
Himself who was appointed Allah, it is also a shirk. One who Allah has
declared as His Wali e Amr and you leave Him and follow another of your
own making, this is also shirk fil amr. Here are the sayings of
Masoomeen (as):

**Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 84 hadith 1** , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said,*“When you associate another with the Imam who was appointed
by Allah, it is the same as if you have associated a partner with Allah
Himself.”*

**Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 14 hadith 1** ,Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said, “*If you disobey Moula Ali (as) regardless if the matter is small
or big, you have done shirk against Allah.”*

**Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 108 hadith 7,** Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said, “*One who has associated a partner with Moula Ali (as) is a
mushrik.”*

**Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First Edition page no. 461** , in the tafseer
of this ayah (**and we will punish for shirk** ) shirk is the
association of any one with Moula Ali (as).


