Introduction of Wilayat- Adl wa Nabuwat (Justice and Prophet hood)
==================================================================

It was the will of Allah to introduce Himself, and He introduced Himself
through wilayat. He made it compulsory upon Himself to introduce wilayat
to all of His creation. There are two forms of introduction. One

is through “asar” (influence, guide). The other is “khabar” (message,
news). Asar eWilayat is called “adl”. Khabar e Wilayat is called
“nabuwat”. Because my purpose is to give you those beliefs of Shia,
which Aimmah (as) have taught to us, I am avoiding certain issues that,
are not relevant to my purpose.

Adl
---

By this point of our book, you should have become aware from the
previously mentioned aspects of wilayat that all the aspects of wilayat
depend upon adl It has been proven from knowledge, commandment, and
order/rule that whatever aspect comes out of wilayat is based upon adl
We will discuss it in details, but before doing this we will explain
what the term “adl” itself means.

### Explanation of Adl

###

There are various definitions of adl that have originated from the
various experts of knowledge. The mehfoom (meaning) of their
explanations is all the same. Creation and the survival of creation are
impossible without adl. The experts of language have explained adl in
these words: “to put something in its true place”. If you reflect upon
this explanation, you will immediately realize

if anything from within the universe is removed from its original place,
then it will cause the destruction of the whole universe. Sun, moon,
stars, oceans, etc. survive because they have remained in their places
of origin. If one of them is removed from its place even for only a
second, then one cannot even imagine what catastrophic effects it would
have upon the rest of creation.  Forget about other things. Look at your
own body. Think about the systems of the human body. Every system in the
human body even the smallest of veins are a witness of adl. In present
times medical science has reached its culmination. If you ask the most
talented surgeon in the world to put your liver in the place of your
heart, he will automatically say it is impossible. No human power can
change the system of adl. What has been mentioned, even those with no
intellect, cannot deny. Now every mind will be forced to think and
should reach this conclusion. It is compulsory on the one who created
all of creation that:

He possesses the knowledge of all things, their apparent realities,
their hidden realities, their shapes, their effects on itself as well as
others, and has knowledge of the actions and reactions of those things,
which will act against it.

Along with this knowledge, He must have the ability/power to create and
organize these things. If he simply possesses knowledge, then it is of
no benefit.

Along with knowledge and ability, He must have order/rule over that
which He is to create in order to implement His knowledge and
commandment over His creation.

The combination of these three things is called wilayat. One who has
knowledge regarding a certain creation also must know their origins,
their movements, and must have full commandment over all of creation in
order to put them in their correct places of origin. He must also have
order/rule over these creations. Every particle of the universe is
introducing Wilayat e Muttaliq (absolute wilayat).

The great scholars explained adl as “the center of the circle”. It means
“nuqta” (dot). This dot is called Imam. If the center of the circle
leaves its spot even for the blink of an eye, the circle loses its
existance. It is also not possible that the center of the circle can be
moved from its spot of origin. It cannot be far to the right in one
instance then far to the left in another. The center must have equal
distance in relation to all points of the circle in order for the circle
to exist. You will find such hadith in the chapter of Imamate in which
Masoomeen (as) have said again and again that “*Imam is the cause of the
survival of the universe.* ” If an Imam is not present, then the heavens
and earth will be destroyed. Also reflect upon this very important point
that the center is not dependent on the circle. Wherever the center will
be, a circle can be created around it, but the circle is dependent upon
the center for the survival of its existance. This whole universe is a
circle which is dependent upon its center for its survival. Moula Ali
(as) said in*Najul Balagha saying no 108* , “*We, Ahlul Bayt (as), hold
such central and balancing position in religion (dot) that those who are
deficient in understanding and acting upon its principles, will have to
come to us for reformation, and those who are overdoing it have got to
learn moderation from us* .” The scholars of “ilm e kalam” (theology)
have explained adl in a different way. “The adl of Allah is to believe
Allah cannot do any injustice or wrong towards anyone.”*(Ahsan ul Aqaid
page no. 111)*   The scholars have used the terms of ilm e kalam
(theology) in this explanation. I will explain its meaning briefly so
you can understand its mehfoom (meaning).

There are two words “husn” and “qabeeh”. Husn is when a thing is
comprehensibly complete. Qabeeh is when a thing is incomplete. Allah is
comprehensibly complete. In other words He is the creator of
completeness. It cannot even be imagined there is anything regarding Him
which is incomplete. Automatically whatever is complete is associated
with Him and every incompletion cannot be associated with Him. Allah has
blessed man with a way of examining the husn and qabeeh. If man uses
this blessing, he can easily determine whether anything is good or bad.
That blessing is ‘qalb’ (intellect).

If intellect considers something to be good, then it is good. If
intellect considers something to be bad, then it is bad. This is the
basic principle. Ask anyone in this world which is good, truth or lie.
Every person will answer without hesitation that truth is a good thing
and a lie is a bad thing. If you ask which is good, knowledge or
ignorance, they will reply knowledge is good and ignorance is bad. If
you ask someone which is good, adl or zulm (cruelty), every one will
reply adl is good and zulm is bad. Now I will

explain by using the words of Allama Hilli. “Because adl is a ‘husn’
(comprehensively complete), it is wajib (compulsory) upon Allah, and it
cannot be separated from Allah. Because zulm (cruelty) is ‘qabeeh’
(incomplete), no such act of cruelty can be associated with Allah. Adl
is wajib for Allah and cruelty is impossible.”The scholars have
explained the adl through this principle which we mentioned in the
chapter of shirk in detail. It means creation naturally cannot accept
any incompletion from its Creator. For this reason, when the creation
considered anything to be comprehensively complete in themselves, then
they expect to see it present in their Creator. Creation’s understanding
of whether or not something is complete is limited due to their
intellect.. It does not mean their Creator is also limited to their
understanding. We can only say regarding the comprehensively
completeness of our Creator that He is free from every incompletion.

Because cruelty is an incompletion, it cannot be associated with the
Creator. When it has been disassociated with the Creator, then justice
will be proven automatically.

It has been proven completely that Allah’s attributes and His actions
are revealed through His Mahzer and Trustee which is His Wali e Muttaliq
(Moula Ali as). This is why every particle of creation and its
organization within the universe is a proof that His Wali e Muttaliq is
free from all kinds of incompletion. This is adl.

### Proof Adl is from Usool e Deen (principles of religion)

###

It is an established fact that adl is compulsory on Allah and zulm
(cruelty) is impossible. People ask us; what is the reason you put adl
in Usool e deen? Usool e deen (principles of religion) is one that if
you stop performing it even for a moment then you become kafir
(disbeliever). There are so many answers to this question. First of all
I would like to remove a misconception that Shia are the ones who
included adl in Usool e deen. In reality adl was included in the
principles of religion before the creation of religion. We will prove
this later in our book.

It has been proven that if you leave those things, which are in furoo e
deen, you will not receive an eternal punishment. Then why was Iblees
punished for not doing sajda to Nabi Adam (as)? He has been accursed for
eternity. Iblees did not deny tawheed, nabuwat, or the day of judgement,
which are all in Usool e deen. If simply not performing sajda was the
reason for his eternal punishment, then if a Muslim does not pray zuhr
(noon prayer), he misses performing eight sajdas. So then how much
punishment will he receive? Eight times more than Iblees. We see when
Allah asked him “What stopped you from performing this sajda?”  He then
replied, “I am greater than Adam (as). You created me from fire and Adam
from clay. “

Because it is against the adl of Allah to ask one which is in reality
greater to do sajda to one which is in reality lower to it, his refusal
to perform sajda is not the reason Iblees was punished for eternity. He
was punished because his words were a direct attack against the adl of
Allah (meaning he accused Allah of doing an unjust act). This is proof
that adl is included in Usool e deen.In*Bab e Tawheed* regarding the
proofs of tawheed we also declared organization as a proof of tawheed.
We proved this organization is adl. Adl

itself is a proof of tawheed. Tawheed cannot be proven without the
presence of adl.Allah could have punished and rewarded upon the basis of
His knowledge. Instead He made His caliphs which is proof of adl. If
Allah had not sent His Hujjat (proof) and did not give man the chance to
prove his right for jannah (paradise) or jahannum (hellfire), then it
would have a zulm (act of cruelty). If you do not believe adl is
included in usool e deen, then religion will lose its credibility. Then
every act of cruelty will become associated with Allah. Maybe He will
send a false prophet and reveal miracles through him; in this case we
will be unable to recognize which is a true prophet and which is false.
Then all the orders of Allah become doubtful. Religion will become a
game of chance.

### Allah can never be an oppressor

###

Oppression is the opposite of adl. Allah is denying Himself as being an
oppressor.*Sura Aal e Imran ayah 108 “Allah wills no oppression upon His
creation* .”  In reality there is always a reason behind every act.

Obviously there is even a reason behind acts of cruelty and oppression.
Here are the reasons:

**Jahil (ignorance)**

**Need**

**Worldly desires**

**Tyrant (one who pressurizes and forces others to do acts of
oppression)**

Since our writings are based upon wilayat, we will look at these reasons
to see if any of them are viable towards Allah being an oppressor.

When knowledge is at its highest, then ignorance becomes null and void
itself.

When commandment is at its highest, then need becomes null and void.

In the presence of these two things, worldly desires become null and
void.

When power and order are at their highest level, then tyranny becomes
null and void.

When all these four reasons have become null and void in the presence of
Allah, then there is no reason these acts of oppression will come from
Allah. There is no other way except to disassociate oppression from the
attributes of Allah. Then when oppression has been disassociated from
Allah, then adl is automatically proven as present. After our brief
discussion on adl, now we come to nabuwat.

Explanation of Nabuwat (Prophet hood)
-------------------------------------

The word “nabi” comes from the word “naba”. It means one who brings a
message. The literal meaning of nabi is one who delivers or receives a
message. In Quranic terms nabi is one who delivers the message from
Allah or whom Allah gives His messages to.

### What is a message?

###

*Usool e Kafi Kitab Tawheed chapter 22 hadith 7* , Muhammad (saw) is His
slave and His messenger. Allah sent Him with haqq (truth). One who is
from haqq (truth) and guides towards haqq. So follow this haqq and
accept Him with a sincere heart. Accept this advice “help each other,
and help your nafs (self), and keep on the Siratul Mustaqeem (true
path), and recognize the attributes of those who were given these
attributes by Allah.”

It has been proven from this hadith that haqq, advice, and Siratul
Mustaqeem are all the same thing. All prophets brought the message of
those who were given these attributes by Allah.

### The Greatest Message

###

**Sura an-Naba (The Announcement) 1-3: “Where of do they question one
another? It is of the naba ul azeem (great message). Concerning which
they are in disagreement.”**

We will refer to the tafseer of Masoomeen (as) so that you will know
what is the greatest message which all the prophets were ordered by
Allah to deliver to the creation.

****Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 107 hadith 34*** , Imam Jafar
Sadiq (as) said in the tafseer of this ayah, “This great message was
wilayat of Moula Ali (as).” Narrator asked Imam (as), “Is it not the
wilayat of Allah?”*

*      Imam (as) replied, “Wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as). “*

In**Usool e Kafi** , when Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) was asked regarding
the tafseer of this ayah, Imam (as) said, “*This is for Ameerul Momineen
(as). He use to say “There is no ayah of Allah that is greater than Me.
There is no message of Allah which is greater than Me.* ” In**Tafseer
Qumi** , this same saying is narrated by Imam Riza (as).

### The purpose of sending prophets

###

Because we are discussing nabuwat (prophet hood), it is necessary to
know what is the purpose of a prophet. In this way we will be able to
understand the message of nabuwat (prophet hood). We declared wilayat to
be the main topic of this book. We want to clarify that the real
religion is wilayat. Wilayat is the center of all other aspects of
religion. Our purpose is to prove this claim. Now we will see through
the sayings of Masoomeen (as) what is the purpose of prophet hood.

**Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 108 hadith 4** , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said, “*All the prophets teach their ummah (nation) regarding Our
marifat (recognition)    and told of Our attributes.”*

**Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 108 hadith 5** , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said,*“Our wilayat is the wilayat of Allah. Allah did not send any
prophet without Our wilayat.”*

Moula Ali (as) says**in Khutbat Bayan** ,*“I am the one who to whom
Allah has ordered every ummah (nation) in My obedience.”*

Imam Musa Kazim (as) said,*“Allah has written wilayat of Ameerul
Momineen (as) in the books of every prophet.”* **(Shahadatay Wilayatay
Ali (as) page no. 85 ref Ikhtisas and Bisar ul Darajat)**

### Tabligh (Preaching)

###

We will look at this from another angle in the context of the purpose of
a prophet. After reading Quran extensively, I realized every prophet was
appointed only for tabligh (preaching). We must know it is not an
ordinary word. In reality this was the purpose of prophet hood.

**In Sura, al-A’araaf ayah 62 is in regards to the tabligh of Hz Nuh
(as).**

**In Sura al-A’araaf ayah 68-69 is in regards to the tabligh of Hz Hud
(as).**

**In Sura al-A’araaf ayah 79 is in regards to the tabligh of Hz Salih
(as).**

**In Sura al-A’araaf ayah 193 is in regards to the tabligh of Hz Shoaib
(as).**

*In Sura an-Nahl ayah 62, Sura Noor ayah 53, Sura Ankaboot ayah 18, Sura
ash-Shura ayah 48, Sura Taghaabun ayah 12 are all in regards to the
tabligh of our prophet Hz Muhammad (saw).*

In these ayahs Allah has clearly said the responsibility of the prophets
is only tabligh. This tabligh is the real spirit and purpose of prophet
hood. Without it the purpose of prophet hood becomes worthless. Here
comes a question. What is that tabligh? What does Allah mean by tabligh?
We will present three hadiths and everything will become clear.

While delivering a sermon, RasoolAllah (saw) said, “*O’People! I tell
you that Imamate is associated with My Ahlul Bayt (as) until the day of
judgement* .

*The order of Allah, regarding tabligh which I have conveyed to you, is
a hujjah (proof) for those present as well as those not present here.
The people who are present at this time it becomes their duty to convey
the message of Imamate to others. To those who have already been born
and those not yet born, it is the duty of the father to convey this
message to his sons. This conveyance should never stop* .”**(Haqaiqul
Wasayat First Edition page no. 373 ref Ahtejaj Tabrisi page no. 33)**

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“We have secrets and knowledge of Allah.
Allah ordered its tabligh. Those things in which Allah ordered Us to do
tabligh in, We have fulfilled the order of tabligh.”* **(Usool e Kafi
Kitab Hujjat chapter 101 hadith 5)**

Moula Ali (as) said in a gathering of companions, “*Allah made Muhammad
(saw) prophet and after Him (Muhammad saw), He (Allah) appointed Us as
caliphs. Then He ordered RasoolAllah (saw) to do the tabligh regarding
this matter. So RasoolAllah (saw) fulfilled the order of Allah by doing
tabligh on this. Allah has ordered all the Muslims upon seeing other
Muslims to do this tabligh that Aal e Muhammad (as) are the Imams. Their
obedience is wajib (compulsory). Apart from this, Allah did not order
the tabligh of any other matter.”* **(Haqaiqul Wasayat First Edition
page no. 375 ref Ahtejaj Tabrisi page no. 74-75)**

In Quran the testimony of these hadiths has been written in several
places. We will mention only one ayah and there will be no doubt after
this.**Sura al-Maida (The Table) ayah 67: “O Messenger! Deliver what has
been revealed to You from Your Lord; and if You do it not, then You have
no delivered His message, and Allah will protect You from the people;
surely Allah will not guide the unbelieving people.”**

This ayah is the strongest proof that the only purpose of prophet hood
was to convey the message of wilayat. If RasoolAllah (saw) had not
conveyed this message, He would have lost His prophet hood.

If there had been any other purpose, then Allah would have made it
known. The same warning would have also been given for that purpose as
well. This ayah alone has proven us to be absolutely correct.

### Prophet from birth

###

According to Shia beliefs, nabuwat (prophet hood) is not such a thing
which can be gained through hard work. Allah did not do any experiment
and then made a person become a prophet or imam. Allah was fully aware
of the purpose of every creation before it came into being as a
creation. Therefore one who is a prophet is a prophet by his creation.
However the time when a prophet announces his prophet hood to his ummah
(nation) is according to the orders of Allah. Caliph and guide are born
with knowledge, noor, and as a masoom (infallible)

while humans are born with ignorance and impurities. No animal will
become human even if it learns many human abilities. Due to the
weaknesses in creation, there is not one of creation which can change
itself into another kind of creation (i.e. animal into human or human
into animal). In this same way a human can never become a guide,
successor, caliph, imam, prophet, olil amr (absolute master), or wali
simply by gaining a bit of knowledge. He cannot remove his inabilities
of his humanity. It does not matter if he is a sahabi (companion) or
scholar or Allama or mujtihid. Imam Musa Kazim (as) explained this in
these words, “*Allah created prophets* *based upon nabuwat (prophet
hood). Therefore they became a “nabi” (prophet* ).*(Usool e Kafi Kitab
Iman o Kufr chapter 310 hadith 4)*

### Removal of a doubt

###

Jewish created a belief that there was no prophet from the offspring of
Hz Ismael (as). Muslims have adopted this same belief. Without thinking
even some Shia also believe this to be true. This is due to the
unawareness of the people regarding the status of prophet hood. There
are two kinds of prophets. One who becomes prophet on a nation, and then
He conveys Allah’s message to them.

These prophets are called “nabi al ghairhi”. The other kind of prophet
is one who does not become a prophet on a nation. He is a prophet for
only himself. Allah’s message comes to him and he conveys this message
through his actions and character to the people. His obedience is not
wajib on people. People are guided through his charismatic personality
and his noble actions. These prophets are called “nabi al nafsihi”. It
means the prophet who is a prophet only on his own nafs (self). In the
offspring of Hz Ishaq (as) most of the prophets were nabi al ghairhi. In
the offspring of Hz

Ismael (as) before RasoolAllah (saw) all the prophets were nabi al
nafsihi. This is quite clear that only a prophet can bear the noor of
RasoolAllah (saw). Only a noor can bear a noor.

### Ideology of Ismat (Infallibility)

###

The infallibility of the prophets and aimmah is a very important issue.
This is the distinguishing feature  of Shia religion. Ismat
(infallibility) means you never refrain from any good deed and never
commit any wrong deed. This only becomes possible at such time when you
have knowledge of all the good deeds and all the evil deeds. Otherwise
it

will happen a person will do something thinking he is doing good but in
reality it is evil or he refrains from something thinking it’s an evil
deed but in reality it is a good deed. Due to their own unawareness of
the explanation of ismat, people think Masoomeen (as) naturally cannot
commit sin. If They did not commit sins because of Their nature or
because They were unable to do so, then it would affect the level of
greatness which is ascribed to Them. This idea is absolutely
wrong.Masoomeen (as) are not forced in any way to refrain from
committing sins. One who is forced cannot be praised nor can he be
condemned. Yet the whole Quran is filled with Their praise and
admiration. This is a proof Masoomeen (as) are not forced. They have
full authority. If They refrain from evil, then They do this through
Their own will. If They do good, it is done by Their own will.

Due to Their knowledge, They do only those acts which are good and
refrain from those which are bad. We will present an example. You
acquire a teacher for your child. The teacher is not forced to accept
the position. He has free will. If he chooses, he could teach wrong
information to the child, but his knowledge will never allow him to do
so. If a person goes to a doctor, the doctor also is not forced. He has
free will. He could give the wrong medicines to his patient, but he will
not do this because his knowledge will not allow it. In the same way,
prophets and aimmah perform good deeds from their free will and refrain
from evil deeds because of their knowledge. This is the reason for their
greatness. This greatness is called “ismat” (infallibility). This is why
the only people who will deny “ismat” are those who associate ignorance
with their Prophet (saw). They have the belief (maaz’Allah) their
Prophet (saw) was illiterate. He could not read or write. For forty
years He had absolutely no idea what was iman (faith).

I take full responsibility in saying that not only non Shia have this
belief, but also some so called Shia scholars have this belief. These so
called Shia scholars spread their evil ideologies through their
writings. If you want to know what they have written in their books,
then you must read “*Kashaful Israr* ” by Allama Muhammad Sibtain
Sirsavi. In the chapter of Ghulu, you have read there are some very
famous Shia scholars who have the  belief that Prophet (saw) or Aimmah
(as) can make mistakes. It is very important you are aware of the true
Shia beliefs. According to true Shia beliefs, nabuwat and imamate are
worthless without knowledge. Nabi and Imam are born as alim
(knowledgeable). So according to Shia belief, you cannot imagine nabuwat
or imamate without their having “ismat” (infallibility). If there is
even the minutest doubt of Them having made a mistake, then at that
moment the whole religion will become false.

The religion will lose all of its credibility. In this case no one will
ever know if the Prophet (saw) is speaking a truth or lie. No one will
ever know if He is speaking from Allah or from Himself. Even when He
says it is from Allah, it would still be impossible to trust His words
because it could be possible He is mistaken or lying. So the intellect
demands a nabi must be masoom. Without ismat, nabuwat becomes worthless.

### The reality of Tarke Awla (abandoning that which is better)

###

The ideology of the prophets having ismat (infallibility) is stuck in
the throats of Muslims in such a way that neither can they swallow it
nor can they spit it out. If they deny it, they lose the credibility of
religion. If they believe in it, then they have to face criticism from
other religions. It becomes impossible for them to defend their religion
because it has been completely proven from Quran and hadith that
different prophets did tarke awla and they were punished for this. This
is an absolute truth which no one can deny.

Non Shia developed a way of explaining this by dividing the life of the
prophets into two parts. One is when they received their prophet hood.
The second is they consider them as human. We have already explained
this ideology. These non Shia hide their heads in the sand and by doing
so they think they have fully proven their belief and denied the
objections of others. However for shias, these “mistakes” prove to be a
source of extreme difficulty. In the Shia religion “ismat”
(infallibility) is one of the most important pillars of the religion.
Shia believe in complete prophet hood. They can never deny this belief.
When they find themselves speaking with one who has strong beliefs in
the Tarke Awla, they then become unable to defend or explain their own
beliefs.

When these  so called Shia found themselves in these debates, they
started using their own opinions and unintelligible proofs and
ideologies in order to explain the meanings of the so called “mistakes”
which are written in Quran regarding the prophets. They changed the
meaning of the word “masiat” (literally means “when a  child does a
mistake or wrong, it is done out of innocence not out of evil intention)
and created a new word which is Tarke Awla (abandoning that which is
better). They started telling people they had found the answer to this
issue. In reality, by creating this word, they have opened a door of
insult towards the prophets. They explained Tarke Awla in this way;
“doing such an act which is not according to that person’s level”. They
give an example which is; “if a great scholar is standing in the street
and eating aloo cholay (potatoes and chickpeas), even though this act is
not haram, it is not according to his level. If you condemn him for
doing this act, it is not because he has committed a sin, but because he
held no regard towards his status. They have applied this same false
theory to the prophets that (maaz’Allah) they were unaware of their
status. This ideology brings about horrible conclusions. It proves
prophets (maaz’Allah) were less than a common human. Look at the whole
world. You will not find any religion, nation, religious scholars,
political leaders, or respected elders doing such acts of
irresponsibility that will harm their credibility. I am shocked by their
thinking the prophets were unaware of things that even the most common
of people are aware of. If a person is

either unaware of his status or has no knowledge regarding his status,
then how can we give him the right to guide people and teach them about
morality? This is a direct attack against the adl of Allah.

The foundation of this misconception is that people consider the
prophets as normal humans. They give the prophets the same respect as
they give to themselves. They do not realize that a prophet cannot have
any sort of ignorance regarding any matter. Allah has blessed the
prophets with knowledge. This knowledge is what keeps away the sins and
every act which goes against their status. When they cannot associate
this type of ignorance to the people of their own status, then how can
one associate this type of ignorance to the prophets who are born as
prophets with the blessing of full knowledge regarding all matters?

There is no doubt that the prophets did commit these “masiat” acts. It
has been proven by Quran and hadith. We must understand the true meaning
of the word “masiat”. We can never decide its true meaning on our own.
It is our duty not to use our own intellect and opinion concerning this
sensitive issue. We must consult Masoomeen (as) and see what They have
to say about “masiat”.  Only a masoom can know and understand the
reality of another masoom.

Whatever Masoomeen (as) have told to us is a proof the “masiat” of
prophets is not related to sins or acts of immorality. The prophets are
free from such things. Even if you imagine these things for the
prophets, it is a proof of your own mental illness. It should  be very
clear now that whatever “masiat” came from the prophets it was because
of their carelessness in the marifat (recognition) of Ahlul Bayt (as).
They were punished for this carelessness. All of the warnings given to
the prophets by Allah was due to their carelessness in the marifat
(recognition) of Ahlul Bayt (as). Now we will prove this statement for
you.

*Sura al-Ahzaab (The Clans) 7-8: “And when We exacted a promise of
allegiance from the prophets, and You (Muhammad saw), and with Nuh and
Ibrahim and Musa and Isa, son of Mariam, and  We made with them a solemn
promise. That He may question the truthful of their truth, and He Has
prepared for the unbelievers a painful punishment.”*

From this ayah we can conclude the following points:

Allah took the promise of allegiance from all prophets, messengers,
prophets who were given a sharia, and from RasoolAllah (saw) Himself.

Every prophet will be questioned regarding this promise of allegiance.

Allah issued the verdict of kufr (disbelief) for anyone who will break
this promise.

This is proof that the scale which Allah will judge prophets upon does
not contain issues regarding sharia, but is in regards to their promise
of allegiance. We only need to know what the promise of allegiance was.

*Anwar e Najaf Eleventh Edition page no. 161-162, Tafseer Qumi Second
Edition, Tafseer Safi, Tafseer Burhan, and in all tafseers* in regards
to this ayah, Masoom (as) said, “*This promise of allegiance which
includes RasoolAllah (saw) is a promise of allegiance to the wilayat of
Moula Ali (as) and all other Imams (as).”* *(Akmal ul Deen bay Wilayatay
Ameerul Momineen (as) page no. 381* ). In*Shahadatay Wilayatay Ali (as)
page no.*

*96* , there is a hadith from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) which
says,*“Allah took the promise of allegiance of the wilayat of Ali (as)
from all prophets.”*

This narration is in**Usool e Kafi** .*“A man asked Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as), “Which was that tree who Allah asked Adam not to eat from?” Imam
(as) replied, “That was the tree of envy.” Narrator asked, “Who was Adam
envious of?” Imam (as) replied, “Adam was envious of Moula Ali (as).
This thought came in his heart “I wish I had been among the Aleen
(greatest)” or “I wish the Aleen had done sajda to me”.”*

This narration is a proof that even just thinking they are equal in
status to Moula Ali (as) that it becomes a “masiat” for the prophets.

### Undeniable Proof

###

*Now we will present such a proof which will end the need for all other
proofs. After this, it will become absolutely clear.***Manaqib ibn Shahr
Ashoob Second Edition page no. 301,*** Abu Hamza Thumali narrates
Abdullah ibn Umar came to Imam Zainul Abideen (as) and said, “O’Son of
Hussain (as)! You are the one who says the Prophet Yunus (as) found
himself in trouble because when the wilayat of Your Grandfather was
presented to him, he delayed in his acceptance.” Imam (as)*

*replied, “Yes, this is true.” The man said, “If you are true in your
claims, then show us a miracle.” Then Imam (as) ordered Abdullah ibn
Umar and myself (Abu Hamza Thumali) to be blindfolded. After one hour
Imam (as) ordered the blindfolds to be removed. We saw we were at the
bank of a river whose waves were crashing onto the shore. Ibn Umar said,
“O’My Master! My life is in Your custody. For the sake of Allah, please
save my life.” Imam (as) called, “O’Fish!”  A fish raised its head from
the river. Its head was the size of a mountain. The fish said, “O’Wali
of Allah! I am before You.” Imam (as) asked it, “Who are you?” The fish
replied, “O’My Master, I am the fish of Yunus (as).” Imam (as) said,
“Tell Me your story.” The fish said, “O’My Master, Adam to Your
Grandfather, Muhammad (saw), all the prophets were presented the wilayat
of You (Ahlul Bayt as). They accepted and were forgiven. Allah sent wahi
(revelation) to Yunus (as) to love Ali (as) and the Imams (as) who will
be from His offspring*

*Yunus (as) said, “How can I love someone whom I have not seen?” Then
Allah sent wahi (revelation) to me that I should swallow Yunus (as). So
I swallowed him. When Yunus (as) accepted Your Ahlul Bayt (as), then
Allah ordered me to spit him out on the bank of the river.” Upon hearing
this, Imam (as) ordered the fish to return to its place, and the water
became calm.”*

I do not think there can be a stronger proof than this. It has been
clearly stated that all the prophets were presented with the wilayat of
Moula Ali (as) and the Imams (as). The prophet hood of every prophet and
their forgiveness was dependent upon its acceptance. If they delayed
slightly, they were warned and on some occasions punished. So delaying
in the acceptance of the wilayat of Moula Ali (as) and Aimmah (as) is
the “masiat” of the prophets.

### Removal of another doubt

###

It is a common belief the prophets’ only purpose was simply to guide the
people. If we accept this ideology, then we have to believe the people
were the purpose of the creation of prophets. We also have to believe
the people are greater than prophets are. The reason of creation is
always greater than the reasoning. The existance of prophets would
become as a common creation. As Allah has stated in Quran, “*Everything
in this universe is created for you.* ” In reality the purpose of the
creation of prophets is not people. It is their own

self. Allah created them for Himself. As Allah says for Adam (as),
“*O’Adam (as), I created you so that you would believe in My Oneness,
pray to Me, recite My praise, believe in Me, do not associate kufr
(disbelief) with Me, do not associate any others with Me.”*

In*Sura Taha ayah 41* , Allah says to Hz Musa (as),*“O’Musa (as)! I
(Allah) selected you for My nafs (self)* .” It is stated in*Hadith e
Qudsi, “O’My Slave! O’My Beloved! You are the wish and the one is who
wishes. You are My great creation. I swear by My glory, if it had not
been for You, I would not have created the heavens* .” So now we should
understand Allah did not created prophets for the people. He created
them for Himself.  If the people gain blessings from them, it is only
due to the mercy of Allah. A person who lights a lamp does so for his
own benefit. However, others will also take benefit from this light.

### Levels of Prophet hood

###

In**Sura al-Baqarah (The Cow) ayah 253** , Allah says,**“Of those
messengers, some of whom We have caused to excel others, and of whom
there are some unto whom Allah spoke, while some of them He exalted
above others in degree.** ” This ayah clearly tells each prophet has a
different status. Allah Himself is the creator of these different levels
of status. We cannot say Adl e Muttaliq (Allah) created these
differences without some way of measuring their greatness. Allah
announced these various statuses through Hz Isa (as) from the cradle.
This is**ayah 30 of Sura Mariam** , Hz Isa (as) said three sentences.

**I am slave of Allah.**

**He gave to Me a book.**

*He made Me a prophet* .

Hz Isa (as) announced His servitude and His book before He announced His
prophet hood.

The foundation of the status of a prophet is servitude. How submissive a
prophet is to Allah will determine what type of book is revealed through
Him. The level of His prophet hood is based upon what type of book is
revealed unto Him. It is quite clear here the word “book” is not one of
the Four Scriptures (Tawrat, Zabur, Injeel, and Quran) which came from
the heavens. First when Hz Isa (as) claimed He had a book, the Injeel
(Bible) had not yet been revealed. It was not revealed until much later.
Even if there was a book in the cradle, that would still not be what He
was referring to because the real book is Hz Isa (as) Himself. In*Sura
al-Hadid (The Iron) ayah 25* , Allah says, “*Certainly We sent Our
messengers with clear arguments, and sent down with them the Book ad the
balance that men may conduct themselves with equity”* . Even though it
has been proven and every

person knows all the prophets were not given books or scriptures. Only
certain prophets were blessed with this. So it has to be accepted the
book which Allah has mentioned in Quran cannot be a written book. It is
a “wajoodi” book.  It means that knowledge which Allah gives with their
existance. The status of every prophet’s knowledge and nabuwat will be
according to his servitude. This is the reason at the time of leaving
Shaitan claimed he will cause everyone to go astray. Allah did not say
you will not be able to cause any of My prophets, messengers, or imams
to go astray. Allah said “*Certainly those who are My “abd” (servants)
will not be made to go astray* .” (*Bani Isreal ayah 65)* .  “Ismat”
(infallibility) proves the servitude of the prophets to Allah. If there
is no ismat, then you cannot prove prophet hood. If there is no
knowledge, then you cannot prove ismat. If there is no abdiat, then you
cannot prove knowledge. This is the reason throughout the entire Quran
Allah has called Our Prophet (saw) “Nabi or Rasool”, but when Allah
mentioned the Miraj e Khatim e Nabuwat (ascension of the seal of
prophets); He did not use the word nabi or Rasool. Allah said, “*Glory
be to Him who made His servant to go on a night from the Sacred Mosque
to the remote mosque of which We have blessed the precincts.”*

RasoolAllah (saw) obtained this status due to His great level of
servitude. The result of which is He became blessed with a great book.
Allah mentions this in*Sura an-Nisa (The Women) ayah 113, “He has taught
You what You did not know”* . It means there was not a single particle
of the universe which was beyond the knowledge of RasoolAllah (saw).
After this, He was given the status of the “Seal of All Prophets”. This
is why Allah said for Imam Hussain (as),*“O’My Hussain! Come be included
amongst My Slaves.”* Imam Hussain (as) was at such a level where no
other word except “abd” (servant) can be used.

Now you can understand one who is at such a level of abdiat (servitude)
how can His servitude be described in words. His level of servitude and
His level of worship are beyond our comprehension. Neither can it be
understood nor can it be explained. Through servitude the nearness of
Allah can be gained. From this level we understand the meaning of
“qurba” (Near Ones). This is that point where no one can make any
difference between abd o Mabood (servant and master). He is His noor,
His amr, His will, His kalima, His calipha, His face, His eyes, His
hand, His tongue, and the wasila (intercessor) between Creator and
creation. He Himself is the will of Allah. This is the level which
caused Allama Iqbal to say, “Even if You (Allah) give me the glory of
Your Divinity, I still would not give You my servitude.”

Imamate is a necessity of Prophet hood
--------------------------------------

Even if this is surprising for you, it is still very important that you
know and understand it is necessary for every prophet to be an imam. We

will present some proofs in this regard. It is an absolute truth that
all the attributes of commandment of the prophets are only due to their
being an imam. If it were not like this, then non Shia would have proven
their claim that (maaz’Allah) prophets were only like post men.

Their job was only to deliver messages. They delivered their message and
left. The disassociation of imamate with prophet hood is the cause of
the existance of the sect, Ahlul Quran. They completely deny hadiths
because prophet and prophet hood have no value in their eyes.
Commandment belongs to wilayat. Mahzer e Wilayat is Imam.

### First Proof

###

Our first proof is based upon two ayahs of Quran. What we will conclude
from these two ayahs, we will present that to you as our proof.

**Sura Qaaf ayah 21: “And every soul shall come, with it a driver
(saiq-hanknay wala) and a witness.”**

According to the tafseer of Masoomeen (as), “saiq” (driver) is prophet
of every nation. It also has been proven from this ayah that on the day
of judgement every nation will appear with their own prophet.

**Bani Israel ayah 71: “On the day when We shall summon all men with
their Imam”**

It has been proven from this ayah that all the people will be called
with their Imam. We have completed our two points.

First every nation will appear on the day of judgement with their own
prophet. Second all the people will appear with their own imams. Now
either you must believe there is a contradiction in Quran or it is
compulsory on every prophet to be an imam.

### Second Proof

###

This is an absolutely uncontroversial hadith. “One, who dies without the
marifat (recognition) of the Imam of his time, dies the death of an
ignorant.” In this hadith, RasoolAllah (saw) did not mention a specific
time. The period of this hadith is from Adam (as) until judgement day.

During this time, anyone who dies without gaining the marifat
(recognition) of the Imam of his time will die the death of a kafir
(disbeliever) and munafiq (hypocrite). If we did not believe every
prophet is also an imam, then all the nations who were before Hz Ibrahim
(as) would be considered as kafir and munafiq. Secondly on judgement day
these nations will have an excuse and say to Allah, “O’Our Lord! There
was no imam in our time. So whose marifat were we suppose to gain?” We
have to accept it is wajib (compulsory) that every prophet is also an
imam. Allama AbdulAli Hervi says in his book “*Moizaul Hussna page no.
98* ”; “The meaning of the word imam is “min yaqda behi”. It means the
personality which people follow and consult regarding religious matters
and gain knowledge from. That personality must be the greatest among the
people. He is one who receives messages from Allah and is called
prophet. As a prophet he delivers the orders of Allah to his nation. As
an imam he is a leader of his nation.” Allama Hashmat Ali KhairAllah
Puri writes in his book*“Ghayat ul Miram fi Zarooratul Imam”:*

“By his creation, an imam is a hujjah (proof) upon the creation from
Allah. When Allah appoints this imam to deliver His messages, then it is
called “nabuwat” (prophet hood). Nabuwat begins from the beginning of
the conveyance of the message and ends when the message has been
conveyed. However, the necessity of an imam is from the beginning of the
act until the

end of the act. What is meant by ‘act’ is the first action of the first
creation until the last action of the last creation. I have presented my
proofs and two undeniable witnesses. Now we will discuss the kinds of
imamate in the chapter of Imamate.

### Revelation of Wilayat-Imamate

###

Now we come to the issue which is the distinguishing feature of the Shia
religion. Imamate is such a position of authority that from the
beginning of creation until the day of judgement there will be no
authority which is greater than it. This world is a place for us to gain
its marifat (recognition) and obedience. On the day of judgement every
soul will appear with it. Nabuwat (prophet hood) and risalat
(messengers) are two branches of imamate which are given only when there
is a specific need during a specific time. Once the need has been
fulfilled, then nabuwat or risalat will end. Imamate however will

continue until the day of judgement.  In the way the wilayat is the
revelation of wahadat (Oneness of Allah); imamate is the revelation of
wilayat. Imamate is the only status of Allah which can be compared with
wilayat. Imamate is the only power which is directly associated with
Allah. When it appears from the Veil of Wahadat (as), it is wilayat.
When it comes to the creation, it is called imamate. Imamate is the
cause of the survival of the whole universe. All the blessings of Allah
which reach to the creation do so through imamate. Every one’s religion
and acts are dependent upon the marifat (recognition) of imamate. On the
day of judgement every one will appear with their Imam. Who has the
courage to even imagine what imamate is or even write concerning
imamate? Whatever we say or write regarding imamate, it is only an
expression of our love for Our Imams (as). Imamate is such a high status
that no one can even imagine to reach it. Tongues become silent when
speaking of imamate. We must accept our lowness. This acceptance of
lowness is called marifat (recognition) of imam.

### Kinds of Imamate

###

Allah described two kinds of imamate in Quran. One is the imamate which
is exalted. The other is the imamate which has been accursed.

**Sura al-Anbiyaa (The Prophets) 73: “And We made them Imams who guided
the people by Our command,”**

This is the imamate which is exalted by Allah. If one who claims to be
an imam  is not in reality associated with this imamate, then he is of
those who are accursed. There is no third kind of imamate.

**Sura al-Qasas (The Stories) 41: “And We declared them as Imams who
call to the fire,”**

This is the imamate which was accursed by Allah. We, or any other momin,
have absolutely nothing to do with this type of imamate. Now we will
start upon our topic which is the imamate which is exalted by Allah.

### Levels of Imamate

###

I realize we should have explained the meanings of the word “imamate”,
but depending on which level of imamate we are discussing will determine
which explanation we give for the word. So until we determine which
level is our topic there is no point in defining the word “imamate’ as
the meaning

can change. First we will decide which imamate is the purpose of our
discussion. Because our beliefs are based upon intellect, it is
absolutely necessary to ponder deeply upon these beliefs. We cannot only
be dependent on books because we are the followers of the true religion
not a false religion. When we read Quran we find three different levels
of imamate. It has been proven that it is necessary for every prophet to
be an imam. These are the three levels of imamate.

**Imamate Sughra** (small imamate): This imamate started with Hz Adam
(as) and continued until Hz Tarikh (as).

*Imamate Khubra* (greater imamate): This is that imamate which was
blessed to Hz Ibrahim (as) which was completely

different and very vast in its authority. It encompasses the whole of
humanity. This imamate was given to Hz Ibrahim (as) and He asked for the
same imamate to be given to His offspring. Allah blessed this imamate
from Hz Ibrahim (as) to RasoolAllah (saw).

*Imamate Mutalliqa* (absolute imamate): After RasoolAllah (saw), the
prophet hood ends. The purpose of prophet hood was to introduce Imamate
Mutalliqa (absolute imamate). When prophet hood fulfilled its purpose,
the chapter of prophet hood was closed. Now Imamate Mutalliqa has been
revealed. Allah has calls it in Quran as “Imam e Mobeen” (manifesting
imam). This imamate is specific to only twelve persons. They cannot be
eleven or thirteen.

Some people will become upset when they read my argument. There is
nothing I can do about that. I must say the truth. When Allah has
protected these figures, in such a way, that no one can enter them nor
can anyone come out of them, then how is it possible to exaggerate the
status of these figures in order to make myself or any other happy?

### Importance of Twelve

###

**Sura Tawba (The Repentance ) 36: “Surely the number of months with
Allah is twelve month in Allah’s ordinance since the day when He created
the heavens and the earth, of these, four being sacred; that is the true
religion”**

In this ayah, Allah is telling us the figure “twelve” is the true
religion. Not only today but also from the beginning of the process of
creation, these twelve were the name of the true religion.

Now tell me; is there any nation, territory, or country from the
beginning of this universe until today that has more than twelve months
in their calendar? If these twelve months are considered the true
religion, then it has been proven a true religion for every nation,
religion, and tribe. The figure of months in every calendar is twelve.
We have to accept these twelve months which are the true religion are
not the actual months of the calendar. They must be twelve of something
else. We have only one way to find out the reality of these twelve. That
way is Masoomeen (as).

*Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First Edition page no. 239* , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said,*“ Four sacred months are Moula Ali (as), Imam Hasan (as),
Imam Hussain (as) , and Imam Mahdi (ajf).Allah has mentioned “deen e
qeem” (true religion) in this ayah. ‘Whose believing is wajib
(compulsory) and disbelieving is kufr’. There is no doubt that only two
months among the*

*other months and years are wajib (compulsory) to recognize. One is the
month of Ramadan. The other is Zil-Hajj. If someone died while not
having marifat (recognition) of the months or years, he will not be
accursed. If he died without gaining the marifat (recognition) of Aimmah
(as), then he dies the death of an ignorant* .” Allah has mentioned this
true religion in*Sura ar-Room (The Romans) ayah 30* in such a way that
He ordered RasoolAllah (saw) to hold onto this true religion:

**“Then set thy purpose (O Muhammad saw) for religion in the right
state- the nature made by Allah in which He has made men; there is no
altering of Allah’s creation; that is the true religion but most men do
not know.**

I do not want my readers to be included amongst “most men who do not
know”.

I present to you the tafseer of this ayah from Masoom (as) .*Tafseer
Safi page 390 ref Tafseer Qumi,* Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said, “*That
true religion which was mentioned in this ayah is wilayat of Ameerul
Momineen (as) and Masoomeen (as* ).”  It has also been proven from this
ayah that the true religion is these twelve, Imams (as).

**2** .**Sura al-Baqarah (The Cow) 124: “And when his Lord tried Ibrahim
with His commands, he fulfilled them. He (Allah) said: Surely I will
make you an Imam of men.”**

This ayah tells us that Hz Ibrahim (as) was tested with a few words, and
when he fulfilled the orders of Allah, then Allah blessed him with
Imamate Khubra (greater imamate). We must ponder upon the word
“fatmahin” (tested). This same question Muffassal asked to Imam Jafar
Sadiq (as),*“What was that test?” Imam replied, “Ibrahim (as) said all
twelve names of the Imams (as).* ”*(Manaqib ibn Shahr Ashoob First
Edition page no. 235).* Hz Ibrahim (as) was blessed with an imamate
simply for recounting the names of these twelve, how can I even compare
that imamate to the imamate of Masoomeen (as)?

3. How can I change this figure that Allah has included as a part of
His Kalima “La illha illala” in twelve letters?

<p dir="rtl">
لااله الا الله
</p>

How can I increase or decrease when Allah has included twelve letters in
the kalima of His prophet RasoolAllah (saw) “Muhammad Rasool Allah”?

<p dir="rtl">
محمد رسول الله
</p>

5. Whoever is a momin, he has an ‘ameer’ (master) who is called “Ameerul
Momineen (as)”. This word also has twelve letters.

<p dir="rtl">
امیر المؤمنین (ع)
</p>

6. The same Ameerul Momineen (as) whose name is Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib
(as). His name also has twelve letters.

<p dir="rtl">
علی ابن ابی طالب (ع)
</p>

7. “Kitab la raiba fi” (the book in which there is no doubt) also
contains twelve letters.

<p dir="rtl">
کتاب لا ریب فیه
</p>

8. There are twelve hours in the day and twelve hours in the night. The
Ashari system has been established through out the world, but by the
will of Allah, it has become suspended in regards to time. All the
watches of the world announce these twelve continuously.

9. Hz Musa (as)’s nation had twelve tribes.

10. Hz Yaqoub (as) had twelve sons.

11. In “laitul uqba” RasoolAllah (saw) appointed twelve tribes amongst
the Ansars (helpers).

12. In*Najul Israr First Edition page no. 27* , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
narrates,*“Moula Ali (as) said “Allah put the noor of RasoolAllah (saw)
into twelve veils”.*

By now, it should have become quite clear the topic of our discussion is
Imamate Mutalliqa (absolute imamate) which is associated with the twelve
Imams (as). There is no thirteenth whatsoever. At this point it is
compulsory on us to explain the true meaning of imamate. The next
debates will be based upon this explanation.

Explanation of Imamate
----------------------

The way we are able to recognize something in this world is through its
explanation. According to this principle, if we examine those words,
which are usually used in the explanation of imamate, then we would
never know what kind of imamate it is we believe in. This is very funny
because even though this is the only issue which is disputed between
Shia and Sunni, it may be very surprising to know both use the same
explanation of imamate.

The only difference in their explanations is personalities. We can never
say Sunni scholars were such simpletons and ignorant that they explained
imamate in such a way, which testifies to the Shia explanation of
imamate. If you look at the history of beliefs you will see, Sunni have
never derived their beliefs from Shia books, but Shia however have the
great honor of deriving their beliefs from Sunni books and references.
Both Shia and Sunni explain imamate in this way; “Imamate is the
leadership of government. Imam is a “nayabat” successor of prophet in
both religious and worldly matters.”

First point is this word nayabat. We have no idea who invented this
word. Neither is it mentioned in Quran nor is it in the hadiths of
Masoomeen (as). It makes imamate sound like it is a branch of nabuwat
(prophet hood), and its only purpose is to fulfill the place of nabuwat.
Otherwise it has no authority itself. We have completely proven this
explanation of imamate to be false. We have also proven imamate has been
in place from the beginning of creation and will remain so until the day
of judgement. Nabuwat is a branch of imamate which temporarily is given
to an imam. When it fulfills its purpose, then nabuwat finishes, but
imamate continues. Nayabat e Nabi

has no relation with imamate because Hz Adam (as) was not successor nor
nayab of any prophet nor was Hz Ibrahim (as). Tell us from which hadiths
and which Quranic ayahs did these people get their explanation of
imamate. When we do not have a true explanation of imamate, then
whatever belief you have regarding imamate will be incomplete. This is
the reason today the majority of Shia are very unaware of the reality
and marifat (recognition) of imam.

When you base your beliefs upon the sayings and beliefs of others, then
how can you gain the marifat (recognition) of imam? Especially if those
you use as a base for your beliefs do not even believe imamate is from
Allah. They believe in “ajma” (majority rule). This is why imamate is
not a part of their Usool e deen. Due to this when anyone says a little
thing about imamate, they become surprised and say, “What is this new
thing?” If you write a book against Masoomeen (as), no one will take
notice. If you describe even the minutest of attributes of Masoomeen
(as), then you will hear the chants of “ghali ghali” surrounding you. It
is compulsory to know what the true explanation of imamate is. On this
basis, you will have the beliefs of true Shia. Otherwise there is no
difference between you and others.

### Republic

###

There is no doubt that imamate is related to republic. Every thing in
the republic is under Their authority. Considering a republic as a form
of worldly government is an invention of those people who think their
imam can be ignorant. A wise person will take its meaning in its true
sense. Every particle of this whole universe in fact every thing which
is a thing is in obedience of imam. He is not a follower of the laws of
creation. The laws of creation are a follower of him.

### Nearness of Allah

###

That essence which gives the blessings of Allah to creation must have
been the first existance. You have read in detail in our chapter Wilayat
e Mutalliqa (absolute wilayat).

### Knowledge

###

When He has a republic, which extends from the heavens to the earth and
beyond, where nothing is out of his rule, then it becomes necessary that
he not only has knowledge of all creation but is also aware of their
necessities. When one of his creations asks him a question, it is not
possible for him to say he does not know. In such a situation he cannot
be an imam because ignorance is against imamate. He also cannot gain his
knowledge from books. That knowledge must be directly from Allah. In
other words his nature must have this knowledge. Because he is the
knowledge of the Mahzer of Allah, so

there will be no fault or incompletion in his knowledge. If there were
an incompletion in his knowledge, it would also mean there is an
incompletion in the knowledge of Allah. “*Mafer tana fil Kitab min
shaye.” “Wa qulle shayn ahsaina fi imam mobeen.”* These two ayahs are
pointing towards the highest level of knowledge. So it is compulsory for
an imam to have the knowledge of the whole universe.

### Commandment

###

If he has nearness of Allah as well as knowledge but does not have
commandment, then the first two become worthless. It is necessary for an
imam to have full command.

### Hukm (government, power, and full authority)

###

If he has knowledge and commandment but does not have power and full
authority, then the first two become worthless. We have previously
proven these issues from Quran and hadiths of Masoomeen (as). They are
necessities of imamate and without them imamate cannot be proven.

Now we will explain the absolute true and authentic explanation of
imamate. We took this explanation from Allama Syed Zakir Hussain’s book
“*Hamari Murtaza ki Shaan page no. 111”.*

“Imamate is leader of the republic and the imam has full knowledge,
commandment, rule, and absolute authority over the whole universe.” We
can write the explanation in these words according to our topic,
“Imamate is the starting point of zahooray wilayat. (revelation of
wilayat).” Now it should be clear on which imamate we will discuss.”

### Marifat (recognition) of imam

###

Although we have previously mentioned the explanation of marifat, we
shall repeat it again for you. The meaning of marifat is recognizing
those attributes and abilities in one which are superior and cannot be
found in others. In the light of this explanation the meaning of marifat
e imam is to recognize the imam with those attributes and abilities
which can be seen only in him and cannot be found in others. In this way
he becomes superior to others. Just knowing who the true imam is or
having a little knowledge regarding him, this is not marifat of

imam. We will start our discussion with the importance of marifat.
Because it is a very important issue. We will tell you every saying of
the Masoomeen (as). Until you become fully aware of the importance of
marifat, then any discussion on marifat will become worthless and you
will not gain the full benefits from it.

### Importance of Marifat

###

According to Quran, obedience to Aimmah (as) is wajib (compulsory) on
us. It is quite clear man cannot be obedient to one he does not
recognize. In the same way according to Quran loving Aimmah (as) is also
wajib on us. It also becomes quite clear no one can love another until
he gains the recognition of his love. This is why the true religion was
declared Marifat e Imam (recognition of Imam). Allah has put great
emphasis on this. No other orders of Allah have had such emphasis placed
upon them the way marifat e Imam has had on it. You should never forget
this most important point. You will need Imam more on the day of
judgement than in this world. On the day of judgement man will be fully
dependent upon his Imam. If the Imam is true, then your end will also be
comfortable. If your Imam is false, then your destruction is certain.
This is why RasoolAllah (saw) said,

“*Your Imams will take you to Allah. Think where you are going.* ”
(*Yanabiul Muwaddah page no. 439* ). Now we will mention the importance
of marifat e Imam in the eyes of Masoomeen (as). We will start with a
very

famous hadith. It is not only in Shia books but also in the books of
every Sunni sect. Allama Hilli wrote this hadith in his book “*Ahsan ul
Aqaid page no. 118* ”; “*One who dies without gaining the recognition of
the Imam of his time dies the death of a jahilyat (ignorant), kafir
(disbeliever), and nafaq (hypocrite).* ” This hadith is so vast in
meaning it reveals many important points.

Imamate is from Usool e Deen

There must be an Imam for every time.

We have been ordered to gain the marifat of Imam not to create an Imam.

Therefore, if someone creates an Imam or accepts a false Imam, then he
should be ready to appear on the day of judgement with his so-called
Imam. Now we will present a few hadiths from*Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat*
. We have mentioned chapter number and hadith as reference with the
hadiths.

2. Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*No excuse will be accepted regarding
Our marifat. One who recognizes Us is a momin. One who denies is a
kafir* .” (*chapter 8 hadith 11* )

In this hadith, “recognize” means to accept Their marifat. One who does
not recognize is a kafir (disbeliever).

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said,*“No one can become momin until he
recognizes Allah, His Rasool (saw), and all Imams (as) which includes
the Imam of his time. Consult Them regarding all your matters. Let Them
decide for you.* ”(*chapter 6 hadith 7* )

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“Recognize those who are the pillars of
guidance. Gain the marifat (recognition) of Imams so that your iman
(faith) will become true. Then you will become a momin* .”*(chapter 7
hadith 6)*

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*We are those whom Allah will present on
the day of judgement on ‘pul e sirat’ (bridge between heaven and hell).
No one will be able to enter jannah until They recognize Us and they are
one whom We recognize.”* (*chapter 7 hadith 9* )

Moula Ali (as) said, “*Upon you lies the obedience of the one about whom
you cannot plead the excuse of His ignorance* .”*(Najul Balagha saying
155* )

Therefore, you must be fully aware that marifat of Imam is not a small
thing. This is the foundation and purpose of humanity. It cannot be
gained simply by praying or by saying “Ali (as) Ali (as)”. You have to
attach yourself with it. You have to think deeply upon its meaning.
Moula Ali (as) says, “*One who ponders deeply upon any matter gains its
marifat.* ” (*Najul Israr First Edition page 172* )

Marifat is such a thing that is not limited to one’s own self. It makes
you socialize. In*Najul Israr Second Edition, page no. 56* , Moula Ali
(as) said,*“Keep visiting those who have marifat. Leave those who deny
it.* ” Here the word deny is referring to those who deny the marifat of
Imam. It is not referring to those who deny imamate itself. Moula Ali
(as) is speaking about the acceptance of marifat in this hadith not the
acceptance of imamate. If you did not gain the marifat, then you will go
so far from the truth, and no one wants that for themself. RasoolAllah
(saw) has said, “*One who does not recognize Ali (as) will have one of
these three characteristics- he is a munafiq, illegitimate, or was born
while his mother was in the state of menses.”*

When we have understood the importance of marifat of Imam, now we will
turn our attention towards the attributes of imamate and find those
attributes of the Imams (as) which makes Them superior to others. By
doing this, we take the first step in gaining the marifat (recognition)
of our Imam (ajf). However, before doing this, it is necessary we
mention these three points.

### There has always been a hujjat (proof ) of Allah upon the earth

###

This is one of the basic beliefs of Shia. Aimmah (as) have mentioned two
of its benefits. For the explanation of this, we are writing two hadiths
from**Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 5.**

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*There is always a hujjat (proof) of Allah
upon the earth. There is always an Imam. If people try to add to the
religion, He rejects it. If the people deny something of the true
religion, He corrects it.* ”**(hadith 2)**

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“This earth cannot survive without a Hujjat
(proof) of Allah upon it.”* (*hadith 4* )

From these hadiths, two benefits can be gained regarding the essence of
Imam. One is to guide the creation. The other is the survival of the
earth. It means that an Imam regardless if he is present or in ghaybat
(occultation) will do both of these.

### Imam is the one who will give reward and punishment

###

As we previously mentioned, man is dependent on Imam more on the day of
judgement than he is in this world. So forget about the amals of man.
The first question asked will be “Who was your Imam?” If your Imam is
true, then you will have no fear on the day of judgement. If your Imam
is false, then you will be thrown into jahannum for eternity. If you do
not realize the importance of imamate, then you are playing with your
afterlife. We will present only two hadiths in the favor of our claim.

**Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 90 hadith 6,** Imam Muhammad Baqir
(as) said, “*Allah says ‘I will punish those people who are by
appearance only included as Muslims. They worship such an Imam who was
an oppressor of the people (ghair masoom). He was not from Allah. Even
though they appear by their actions to be very pious. I will forgive
that Muslim who will pray under a Masoom Imam who is from Allah. Even if
that Muslim did not perform his amals (prayer, fasting, etc) properly.”*

**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no .225** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said,*“Verily Allah does not hesitate to punish that group who believes
in an imam who is not from Allah even if by their actions, they are very
pious. Verily Allah hesitates to punish that group who believes in an
Imam which is from Allah even though their amals are not done
properly.”*

### Those who claim to be Imam falsely

###

Before we describe the attributes of imamate, we think it is necessary
to introduce those who falsely claim imamate for themselves and those
who follow these false imams through the sayings of Masoomeen (as). Then
it shall become clear, and we can gain the marifat (recognition) of imam
easily. In total, there are five hadiths. Four of them are regarding
those who

falsely claim the imamate for themselves. The last hadith is in regards
to those who follow them.

**Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 84 hadith 2,** Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said,*“One who falsely claims imamate is a kafir.”*

**Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 84 hadith 12** , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said,*“On the day of judgement Allah will not look at three kinds
of people. Neither will their sins be forgiven. There is a horrible
wrath awaiting them. One who falsely* *claimed the imamate and said he
was from Allah. One who denied the Imam (as) which was from Allah. Third
who claimed the ‘Masoom (as) and ghair masoom’ (true imam and false
imam) both are a part of the Islamic belief.”*

*Haqaiqul Wasiyat First Edition page no. 157 ref Ahtejaj Tabrisi* , a
sentence from Imam Zamana (ajf);

“*A person which is cruel, deviant, and rebellious who is arrogant in
his defiance and fights against his Lord and claims such a status which
does not belong to him and denies the One whose obedience Allah has
declared as wajib. This type person is an oppressor. I am patient the
way the Daughter (as) of RasoolAllah (saw) showed Her patience. Very
soon this ignorant will stand before Allah and be punished for that
knowledge which he wrongly followed.* ” It should be clear that the
character of a person is praised not the people. Whatever Masoom (as)
have said, it applies to every person who has such a character.

**Yanabiul Muwaddah page no. 750** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*On
the day of judgement there will be many imams who will be cursing their
companions and their companions will be cursing on them.”*

These are those hadiths regarding those who claim the imamate falsely.
Now read that hadith regarding those people who accept and believe their
false claims and then follow them. Although I am sure, very few people
will accept this hadith.

**Bihar ul Anwar Ninth Edition page no. 309** , Imam Hasan Askari (as)
said, “*Do not have relations with them. Do not go to visit their sick.
Do not read the funeral prayers over them. If one from them dies, do not
attend his funeral. Those who deny the Imam whose imamate is from Allah
or create an imam that is not from Allah but they include him with those
true Imams (as). This is the same as denying Allah or believing that
Allah is one of three equal parts. Remember who denied the Imamate of
Our Qaim (ajf) has denied the first imamate. One who creates another
imam and associated him with Us is like that person who denies Our
Imamate.”*

After mentioning these important points, we will now present the
attributes of imamate.

Attributes of Imamate
---------------------

The foundation of marifat is not giving your own opinion regarding the
Imam (as). Do not consider Him a human like us. Do not consider the way
we see, hear, smell, eat and drink to be the same as the Imam (as).Do
not consider our physical form to be the same as the Imam (as). Do not
consider our body to be the same as Imam (as). How can our body be like
Imam (as) when flies sit on our body while they do not sit on the body
of Imam (as)? Our body has a shadow, but the body of the Imam (as) does
not have a

shadow. If I write each of the senses one by one of humans, it will take
a very long time. However, I will mention some individually in my next
topic. In order to explain its importance Moula Ali (as) says, “*There
is not one among the people who can use ‘qiyas’ (conjecture) in regards
to Us.”* How can we use ‘qiyas’ (conjecture)? If a person does this,
then there will be no difference between imam and normal humans. When
there is no difference, then how do we gain marifat?

Now we will mention a few attributes of the Imams as told to us by the
Imams (as) Themselves. Now it will depend on your own struggle and
desire as to which level of marifat (recognition) you wish to gain. Imam
Riza (as) explains a few of the attributes of imamate.

*“Imamate does not allow a false imam to enter it* .” It means no
thirteenth can become a part of imamate regardless of who that person
is.

*“Namaz (prayer), zakat (poor tax), fasting, hajj, and jihad (struggle
in the cause of Allah) are all related with the Imam (as)”.* It means
Imam (as) is the true essence of these acts of worships. These acts of
worship are worthless if there is no recognition of Imam (as) while
performing these acts. Without the recognition of Imam (as) these acts
are only for boasting to others and shaitani activities. For example if
you buy an apple and you have no idea about its zahir (apparent self) or
batin (hidden self). It means you have no idea regarding its taste or
the benefits it will give to you. This act is that of a crazy person.

*“An Imam (as) is associated with Allah and His attributes. Allah
blesses Them with His attributes”.* It means His attributes are a
creation unlike normal creation. They do not ask Allah to bless Them
with these attributes. Allah Himself blessed Them with these attributes.
This is adl. Secondly, Imam (as) is greater in every attribute than any
other. These attributes are only associated with Imam (as). They can
never be present in any other.

*“Poets became weakened, writers became bewildered, and speakers became
silent, and still no one was able to describe even one attribute of Imam
(as).”* When they could not praise even one attribute of Imam (as), they
admitted their defeat. When no one can describe even one attribute of
Imam (as), then who has this courage to describe all the attributes of
Imam (as)? No one will ever be able to understand the secrets of
imamate. There is no other creation like imamate. Read this sentence
repeatedly. Then accept your inability and admit there are no words
already in existance or that will come into existance that can describe
the attributes of Imam (as). Whatever words of praise we recite for Imam
(as), it is not the limit of the attributes of the Imam (as). It is
simply the limit of our ability to praise.

That praise can never be ghulu (exaggeration). Anyone who considers the
words of praise which have been written for Imam (as) as ghulu
(exaggeration), then he is from the most ignorant and lowest level of
mankind. The sayings of Imam (as) regarding there is nothing like
imamate reveals there is nothing greater in status than imamate.

*“Imam (as) is the most knowledgeable and there is nothing in the whole
universe which is beyond His knowledge”* . It means Imam (as) has full
knowledge regarding the matters of the whole universe that which has
been created and has yet to be created. This is such a level where
ignorance

ceases to exist. It is a necessity of iman (faith) to disassociate any
kind of ignorance with Imam (as).

*“His obedience is wajib upon the creation.”* In this saying, there is
no specific time nor any conditions mentioned regarding the presence or
occultation of the Imam (as). This obedience is wajib (compulsory) in
all times, during every age, and in every moment. The rules and laws
They have given to us must be followed and obeyed until the day of
judgement. If you include someone other than the true Imam (as) in this
obedience, then this is shirk fil ibadat.

*“An Imam (as) is from Allah and has the wisdom of Allah.”* It means the
conditions that are compulsory for an Imam (as) are from Allah not from
any worldly institute. Secondly, He has the wisdom of Allah not the
so-called wisdom of the followers of the politics of so-called
ayatollahs.

*“There is no question to which He does not know the answer.* ” Anyone
could ask any question at any time. It could be about a past event or a
future one because there is nothing beyond the knowledge of the Imam
(as).**(Usool e Kafi Kitab Hujjat chapter 15 hadith 1)**

Sheik Sadooq in “*Min hazarah ul faqeeh* ” narrates from Imam Riza (as)
and mentions these attributes of imamate:

1. Knowledge

2. Patience

3. Bravery

4. Purity

5. Purifies

6. Owner of the whole universe and time itself

Owner is one who has full authority over his creation. It is in His
power that whenever He wants He can increase or decrease the time. He
can make the past become future or turn the future into past. Being the
owner of the universe means that whenever He wishes He could change any
thing within the universe. Whenever He wants, He could destroy the whole
universe.

7. He has no shadow

8. His eyes sleep but not His heart.

The sayings of Imam Riza (as) are written in these books;*Siratul Savi
Ahwal al Mahdi (ajf) page no. 193 ref Akmal ul Deen* ,*Ayon al Riza
(as), Amli Mafi ul Akbar* ,*and Usool e Kafi* . “*Verily the greatness
of imamate and its attributes and its depth and its secrets are much
more in greatness and above the intellect of people.”*

This is why I am introducing imamate through the sayings of Masoomeen
(as) because our intellects are unable to explain or recognize the
status of the Imams (as). This belief is enough for our iman that the
Imams (as) have such greatness that our intellects are unable to
comprehend its truth. We have no right to attempt to explain the truth
of imamate by our own opinions. Moula Ali (as) Himself says, “*We are
the secret of Allah. We were put in physical form. We do not die. None
of Our ‘ghayab’ (occultation) remains hidden. Lower Us from the status
of tawheed. Remove all the aspects of humanity from Us. We are free from
those attributes that are exclusive to man. After this however you may
describe Our attributes according to the limit of your intellect. You
cannot empty the ocean with*

*only your hands. No one can know the secret of Allah. There are no
words that can praise the “Kalimatullah” (sign of Allah).* **(Haqaiqul
Wasiyat Second Edition page no. 124 ref Tawal ul Anwar).**

We only know that all the attributes of Allah were revealed through
these sacred Imams (as).  There is no blessing of Allah that can reach
to humankind without Their wasila (intercession). There is no such
attribute of Allah, which has not been revealed from Them.  This is the
status of ‘Caliphatul Ilahiya’ (absolute caliphate of Allah). This is
the meaning of the successorship of Allah. Without this, caliphate
becomes worthless. It is such a caliphate that He has full command over
His people. It is compulsory on Him to be aware of His people
completely. This caliph of Allah takes care of His people’s needs in
such a way that He even takes care of those ignorant followers who deny
His caliphate. The attributes of Allah are revealed from Him. He is the
Lord of the whole universe. Without Him the whole system of the universe
would be destroyed as well as its existance. Such an authority is called
Wilayat e Mutalliqa (absolute wilayat) which is revealed through the
Imam (as). The wilayat of Allah can never be discontinued. The Mahzer of
His name ‘al wali’ which is Imam (as) has been in existance before the
very first creation and has always been present. There is not a single
attribute which Imam (as) does not possess. In reality an attribute can
never be proven until it is proven from the essence of Imam (as). This
is the level of Mazheriat where the boundaries of imamate and wilayat
combine. He is the first and the last. He is present and hidden. He
possesses both abdiat (slaveness) and rubuviat (lordship). Abdiat is for
Him because He is dependent upon Allah. He bears hardships and
sufferings, but He is the Lord of the whole universe. He is the creator
of the whole universe. There is not one thing that is outside His
obedience. The whole of creation receives the blessings of Allah through
Him. He is the Lord of the whole of creation.

### Sabr (Patience)

###

Patience is an attribute of Imam (as). As Allah says in*Sura Sajda ayah
24, “And when they became steadfast and believed firmly in Our
revelations, We appointed from among them Imams who guided by Our
command.”* This ayah mentions two attributes of

Imam (as). The first is patience and the other is ‘yaqeen’ (unchangeable
faith). We will briefly discuss yaqeen, but first we will discuss the
patience of Imam (as). It has been proven from Quran that the foundation
of patience is knowledge. In*Sura Kahf* it is written once Hz Musa (as)
went to a slave of Allah for gaining knowledge. In the same ayah, the
slave of Allah replies to Hz Musa (as). He says, “*Certainly you will
not be patient with me. How will you be patient with such a thing which
you have no knowledge?* ” Therefore, we know the level of one’s
knowledge determines their level of patience. If you want to know about
the knowledge of someone then you must look at his patience. Here I
shall remain silent and leave the decision for your own intellect. Now
search for yourself on which occasion patience was at its highest level.
I will not say anything further for I am not responsible for the result
that will come about.

### Yaqeen (Unchangeable Faith)

###

As you know there are three kinds of yaqeen; Ilm ul yaqeen, ain ul
yaqeen and haqqul yaqeen. The greatest level is haqqul yaqeen. One who
has this yaqeen has lost His own identity in such a way that no one can
tell the difference between the two of Them. This is why one

who has haqqul yaqeen on Allah is also considered to be Allah. What
level of yaqeen Imam (as) has you will fully understand after reading
this saying of Moula Ali (as).

*“If all the veils are removed, then My yaqeen would not increase or
decrease even the slightest* .” Who can imagine the yaqeen of the one
“touched” in Allah? There is an even greater status than yaqeen. It is
called ‘itminan’ (satisfaction). Hz Ibrahim (as) asked for this
‘itminan’ from Allah, but that was the itminan of the heart
(satisfaction of heart). It was not ‘itminan’ of nafs (self). The status
of absolute imamate is such that He has ‘itminan’ of nafs (self). As
Allah is calling Imam (as) by this name in**Sura Fajr ayah 27-30,
“O’Nafs e motmannia! Return to Your Lord content in His pleasure. So
enter among My servants and enter into My garden** .” This is the level
where intellect becomes suspended. Even if a human wants to say
something, he is unable to find the words. If he finds something to say,
he becomes too afraid to say it because ignorance and hypocrisy will
attack him. Therefore, silence becomes an act of worship at this point.

### Fortune and Will

###

In hadith of Muffassil, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) says, “*If We were
allowed, We would have told you such things regarding status and
greatness which Allah has blessed Us with. However, people could not
bear it. Muffasil asked, “Are you talking about knowledge?” Imam
replied, “No, Muffasil, knowledge is a very easy thing. Verily the will
of Allah is in the hand of Imam (as). The will of Imam (as) is the same
as the will of Allah.* ” In reality Imam (as) is the will of Allah,
fortune of Allah, and amr of Allah.

### Wahi (revelation) is from Imamate

###

**Sura Anbiyaa ayah 73: “And We made them Imams who guided people by Our
command, and We revealed to them the doing of good** (that act which is
the most important; preaching wilayat of Moula Ali as)**and the right
establishment of worship** (i.e. Wilayat of Moula Ali (as))**and the
giving of the alms** (being steadfast in the wilayat of Moula Ali
(as)),**and Us alone did They serve”**

According to this ayah, wahi (revelation) is from imamate. Every saying
and act of Imam (as) is a representation of ‘wahi illahi’ (revelation of
Allah). – (I want to make it perfectly clear that the wahi (revelation)
of the Absolute Wilayat is different from the wahi (revelation) which
the prophets use to receive. The prophets received wahi indirectly while
Imam (as) has a direct relationship with Allah. He receives directly
from Allah. This is the meaning of ‘wahi’ for imamate. Imam Mobeen (as)
is one who is the representative of Wahi Khuda (revelation of Allah). We
will prove this through the hadith of Masoomeen (as)).

It is possible that some people will try to create doubts. They say this
ayah is related to the prophets of Bani Israel not with our Imams (as).
You should know this is not a new objection. In all times shaitan and
his followers have been creating doubts. Yet every time shaitan and his
followers are refuted. After some time they bring the same objections
back again. Falsehood has no dignity. This is why they feel no shame.
Therefore, we do not have to waste our time on these people. Quran has
both a zahir (apparent) and batin (hidden). This ayah can be applicable
on the prophets of Bani Israel, but its batin (hidden) is only for
Imamate e Mutalliqa (Absolute Imamate). Masoomeen (as) have mentioned
this ayah in the favor of Their imamate on various occasions.

We are presenting hadiths from*Bihar ul Anwar Seventh Edition page no.
12* , which will prove our claims. Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*When an
Imam (as) is born, a proclaimer from Allah comes between the earth and
heavens, and calls the name of the Imam (as) and His father (as) and
then says, “I have suggested three things for Your greatness. One is I
have chosen You out of My whole creation. You are the treasure of the
secrets of My knowledge. You are the trustee of My wahi. You are My
caliph on this earth.* ” (Everyone can understand the meanings of
trustee of wahi. We all believe the trustee of wahi can be only one who
sends wahi. He is not one who receives wahi from angels. Every one
believes that wahi comes from Sidrat ul Mintaha. This wahi reaches to
Sidrat ul Mintaha from Barzakh e Khubra. This point is a veil between
Allah and His creation. This veil is wilayat which is Imam Mobeen as).

### True (sidq)

###

**Sura Tawba (The Repentance) 119: “O you who believe! Be careful of
your duty to Allah and be with the true ones.”**

**Tafseer Safi page no. 219, Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said, “*We are
those true ones.”* Imam Riza (as) said, “*Aimmah (as) are the true ones*
.” Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) says in**Tafseer Majma ul Bayan** , “*The
true ones are those of Aal e Muhammad (as) which the momineen
follow.”***

It proves from this ayah that the true ones are in reference to some
special personalities whom Allah ordered Momineen to follow. If there is
a period when these true ones are not present, then it means there is a
contradiction in Quran. Therefore, They must be present during every
age. The company of Masoomeen (as) is not a temporary existance. It is
everlasting. To be in the company of these true ones is the greatest
blessing and honor one can receive.

The truth of these true ones is not like us. They are such “Sadiq”
(truthful) that whatever They say becomes the truth. There are many
examples of this throughout history

### Arrangement of the Universe

###

When it has been proven, there is no direct relation between Allah and
His creation, then it becomes impossible to limit the Imams (as) simply
to matters of sharia (laws). We cannot receive the orders of Allah
without a wasila (intercessor). In the same way we cannot gain His
blessings without a

wasila. That ‘amr’ which is between us and matters of sharia is also
between us and the blessings of Allah. Allah associates guidance to the
Imams (as) in the same way as He associates guidance to Himself. Imams
(as) are not only a source of conveying the sharia (laws), but They are
also are the source for the matters regarding the universe. Their
sayings and actions are the will of Allah. The way They are ‘amr’ of
Allah in matters of sharia, They also are the ‘amr’ of Allah in the
process of creation. We call Masoomeen (as) as ‘hadi’ (guide). Yet Allah
has associated this title of ‘hadi’ (guide) with Himself. If both Allah
and Masoomeen (as) are guides and both are associated with the title of
hadi, then why can we not also say Masoomeen (as) are the Creators
because They create by the will of Allah?*Sura Inna Anzalanna (Qadr* )
is a witness in Shab e Qadr (Night of Power) angels and spirits bring
all the matters to Imam (as) (or come to receive orders from Imam (as)
regarding all matters.)

Imam (as) issues orders concerning all the matters of the universe.

When the meaning of ‘amr’ was asked to Moula Ali (as), He replied, “*It
means creation, rizq (sustenance), death, age, life and death, knowledge
of the unseen, earth and heavens, and those miracles which are
associated only with Allah and Aimmah (as).”* (*Haqaiqul Wasiyat First
Edition page no. 236 ref Usool e Kafi* ). Therefore, we must accept the
one who will be ‘Sahib ul Amr’ will have full command over the whole
universe, and will be the creator of the universe. Moula Ali (as)’s
title ‘LisanAllah’ (Tongue of Allah) is an ultimate proof that Moula Ali
(as) said “Kun” (Be), and Moula Ali (as)’s title ‘Yadhullah’ (Hand of
Allah) is another ultimate proof that Moula Ali (as) is creator and
raziq. We will prove this through the sayings of Masoomeen (as).

Moula Ali (as) said, “*He created trustees for His ‘amr’. When Allah
created Them, He gave Them power from His own self. They are above the
whole universe, and certainly the act of Allah is Their act.” (Haqaiqul
Wasiyat First Edition page no. 115 ref Ahtejaj Tabrisi)*

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*Do you not know this whole universe and
day of judgement are for Imam (as)? It is the will of Imam (as) what He
does with it, and whomever He wills, He blesses. Allah blessed Them with
this attribute.”* (*Haqaiqul Wasiyat First Edition page no. 236 ref
Usool e Kafi)*

In*Ghara ul Hukam and Darar ul Kalam* , there is a saying of Moula Ali
(as), “*We are His heart, His hand, His tongue, His amr, His order, His
knowledge, His rights (those things which you consider to be “haqooq e
Allah” are also “haqooq” of Imam (as)). Our will is the will of Allah.
Our decision is the decision of Allah. So We are that will of Allah
which when it walks on the earth among you rules according to Our will.
The one who gains Our marifat has gained iman (faith). The one who does
not gain Our marifat remains as a kafir. If it was Our will, We could
rend asunder the earth and return to the heavens. Verily this whole
creation will return to Us. We are those the creation will have to face
on the day of judgement.”*

### Imam is present at all times in every place and has full knowledge of unseen

###

I have realized some people become hesitant regarding these issues. The
reason is the meanings that have been imposed on them regarding presence
and knowledge of unseen are absolutely wrong. A common belief about
omnipresent is that Imam (as) is standing and watching over. That one
can have such a belief and be amazed by it is amazing in itself. Because
this is not the way to describe the attributes of Imam (as), in reality
you are insulting Imam (as). An ordinary worker or mechanic could do
this so easily. Simply standing in his daily duties and watching to
ensure the work is done in a proper fashion. Imam (as) is far above such
thoughts. The truth is when knowledge comes from examination; it is
called knowledge of hazoori. This is the state when every thing is
present at all times in front of his master. The meaning of Imam (as)
being present in all places at all times is that everything is in front
of Imam (as)  and within His reach. He has full command over everything
that is in His presence. An ordinary servant of the Imams (as) is Malik
ul Mowt (angel of death). Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) says regarding Him
in*Kokab Durri page no. 33* ,

“*When RasoolAllah (saw) ascended to the heavens during Miraj, He asked
Malik u Mowt (as), do you take the soul from the body?” He replied,
“Yes, O’RasoolAllah (saw).” Then RasoolAllah (saw) asked, “Are you
present at that* *time?” He replied, “Yes, this world is like a coin
which sits in the palm of your hand. This whole world is always in front
of me.”*

This is the true meaning of present at all places in all times. See
what Imam (as) says regarding this.**Haqaiqul Wasiyat  First Edition
page no. 181 ref Bihar ul Anwar Seventh Edition,** Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
says, “*To Imam (as), this whole universe, heavens, and earth is like
(then Imam (as) pointed towards His palm and said ) this (palm). He has
full knowledge of the universe and heavens. Those things that can be
seen and those that are hidden. Those which enter into it (born) and
those which leave it (die).”*   These are the true attributes of Imam
(as). For Malik ul Mowt (as) this world is like a coin in his hand, he
has to “play” with that coin in order to achieve any results, but for
Imam (as) this world is like the palm that has to do nothing in order to
create or accomplish any result. Imam (as) simply has to will for it to
be and it will be. It is very strange people believe in Quran but also
disbelieve in it at the very same time. They believe shaitan can lead
you astray while remaining in the “ghayab” (hidden), but they refuse to
believe Imam (as) can guide this world while being in the “ghayab”
(occultation). Another very interesting point is that people so easily
believe shaitan is present in every place at all times because they have
read that in**Sura al-A’araaf (The Heights) ayah 27: “O children of
Adam! Let not the shaitan cause you to fall into affliction as he
expelled your parents from the garden, tearing off from them their robe
(of innocence) that he might show them their evil inclinations, he
surely sees you, he surely sees you, as well as his tribe, yet you see
him not. We have made the Shaitans to be the wali of those who do not
believe.”**

In this ayah, Allah is addressing the whole of humanity. He is saying
every person regardless of their location, even if he is hidden in the
deepest darkest part of the earth, but he is not hidden from the eyes of
shaitan and

his tribe. I have never heard or read that anyone has an objection to
shaitan and his tribe being present everywhere at all times.

As soon as we read this ayah ‘Wal qulle shayn ahsana fil Imam Mobeen’,
they immediately say “How is this possible?” In reality, people whose
wali is shaitan can never accept the attributes of the Wali of Allah.
They must think when did Allah say Masoomeen (as) have these attributes
Themselves. Allah said I have given Imam Mobeen (as) every power and
full command. We also say Allah gave Them knowledge and authority over
the whole universe. You can reject our claim only when you can prove
Allah did not give this knowledge to Them. This is why if you do not
believe Imam (as) is present in every place in all times and has full
knowledge of the unseen, then not only are you denying imamate but you
are denying Quran. When it has been proven They are the “Eyes of Allah”,
and you believe there is something that is not within Their sight, then
you are attributing this inability to Allah Himself.

*Sura an-Naml (The Ant) 75: “And there is nothing concealed in the
heaven and the earth but it is in ‘kitab mobeen”*

**Sura Yunus ayah 61: “and there does not lie concealed from your Lord
the weight of an atom in the earth or in the heaven, nor anything which
is greater than or less than that, but it is in kitab mobeen.”**

In both ayahs it has been proven that from the smallest to the largest
even every single particle of the universe regardless if it is seen or
hidden, every single thing is in kitab mobeen. The one who has full
knowledge of this book is in reality this book Himself. If anyone denies
He is present in all places, at all times ,and has full knowledge of
unseen, it is the same as if you insulted Quran and Allah.

### By the permission of Allah (bay Izn Allah)

###

People also believe Masoomeen  (as) can do everything by the permission
of Allah, but without permission They cannot do anythin

Because we are discussing attributes of imamate, it would be better to
remove this doubt. I will explain the meaning of “izn” in a few brief
words. Can this be used for Imam Mobeen (as)? I am taking this
from*Usool e Kafi* where the process of creation was discussed. The
first thing that Allah revealed was His Mashiat (will). We have
previously proven that the Wali e Muttaliq of Allah is His Mashiat
(will). The process of creation was established from Mashiat (will). The
Mashiat created the ‘iradah’ (fortune) and then

‘amr’. This amr is ‘Izn’ (permission). Now the Olil Amr (absolute
master) who established the ‘amr’ will become the will and fortune of
Allah. Therefore, the Olil Amr (absolute master) is one who will give
permission. He is not dependent upon permission. Permission is dependent
upon Him. Hz Isa (as) use to perform miracles by “izn” (permission), but
Imam Mobeen (as) performs miracles by Mashiat (will) and as the ‘nafs
(self) of Mashiat. He does not do this by “izn” (permission).

Occultation of Imam
-------------------

When something reaches the highest level of nearness, then it becomes
beyond the reach of all the senses of man. This is what we call “ghayab”
(hidden). Imamate is the greatest of all greatness. The ghayabat
(occultation) is compulsory for imamate. There are two kinds of
ghayabat.

Ghayabat e Zahiri (apparent occultation)

Ghayabat e Batini (hidden occultation)

Even though every Imam (as) was apparent (seen) by the eyes of people,
but They were hidden from the intellects of people. As Imam Riza (as)
said, “*Not a single attribute of Imam (as) can be described nor can
anyone know its truth.”* This is Ghayabat e Batini (hidden occultation).
We associate ghayabat with our Imam e Zamana (ajf). The reason is there
are two ghayabats (occultation) for Imam (as), zahiri (seen) as well as
batini (hidden). This is a brief introduction of ghayabat. We will not
go into its details. Our purpose is explaining those questions that
disturb people, particularly the young generation.

For example, what was the purpose of ghayabat (occultation)? Was Imam
(ajf) afraid? Did Imam (ajf) not have the power to overcome His enemies?
Why does Imam (ajf) not have contact with the Shia of today who have
become so worried and are unable to find their way? For the satisfaction
of those who have these questions, we will discuss the reasons of
ghayabat e Imam (ajf).

### Reasons for Ghayabat (occultation)

###

If Allah had wanted, He could have overcome the enemies of Imam (ajf)
and killed all the oppressors. If Allah had done this, then He would
have usurped the rights of others. Allah gave humans free will. If Allah
had usurped the rights of humans, then they could not be punished for
their acts.  The first reason was to give a chance to the oppressors.

Punishment cannot be given without a reason. For the same reasons,
reward also cannot be given without any reason. The time of the ghaybat
(occultation) of Imam (ajf) is a time of difficulties, troubles, and it
is also a test to see who will guard the sayings of Masoomeen (as) and
will show his steadfastness and stay on the straight path. The second
reason for ghayabat (occultation) of Imam (ajf) is a test to see who
will ignore the sayings of Masoomeen (as) and instead follow others.

Allah did not send His wrath upon the nation of Nuh (as) until there
were no longer any momins in the generations of upcoming offspring
amongst the kafirs (disbelievers). It is the same as when Moula Ali (as)
killed anyone during a battle, He would look to see if there was any
momins in the offspring of his enemy. If there were even one, He would
not kill that person. This is the third reason of ghayabat. Until all
the momin have been born from the offspring of kafirs, only then will
Imam (ajf) reappear.

The fourth and final reason is Mashiat (will) of Allah.

### A new book and new sharia will be revealed through Imam Zamana (ajf)

###

**We will present five hadith in total, which we took from different
editions of Bihar ul Anwar.**

**Twelfth Edition page no. 259, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“I can see
Him (Imam Zamana ajf) is standing between the people at Rukn o Makam and
taking their bayat (allegiance) upon His book.”***

**Twelfth Edition page no. 153,** Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,*“I can see
the people of heavens are giving their bayat (allegiance) on a new amr,
book, and king* .”

**Twelfth Edition page no. 347** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said,
“*Knowledge is based upon twenty-seven words. All the prophets and
messengers brought only two words. All the people have knowledge of only
these two words. When Imam Zamana (ajf) will reappear, He will reveal
the other twenty-five words, and they will be included with the previous
two words. He will spread the knowledge of all twenty-seven words.”*

****Twelfth Edition page no. 353*** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “When
Imam Zamana (ajf) will reappear, He will establish a new order as
RasoolAllah (saw) did in the beginning of Islam.”*

**Seventh Edition page no. 117** , A Christian asked Imam Musa Kazim
(as) several different questions. When he received the answers, he
became Muslim. One of his questions was , “*Tell me about those eight
words; four of which were revealed in the earth and four of which were
kept hidden in the heavens. Those four which were kept hidden in the
heavens, who were they revealed for and who will interpret these four
words?” Imam (as) replied, “He will be Qaim e Aal e Muhammad (as) from
whom these four words will be revealed. He will interpret their
meanings. There will be such a revelation revealed through Him the likes
of which has never been revealed through any prophet, true one (Sadiq),
or any guide of the religion.”*

### Hadith Tareeq

###

All of this hard work was done so we could present to you this writing
regarding imamate. I wanted to be able to mention an extract from this
great sermon of Moula Ali (as) which is the foundation of marifat
(recognition) of Imam (as).  This is famously known as*Hadith e Tariq or
Khutbat e Tariq* . I have given a separate number to every sentence so
that you can understand easily and gain the marifat (recognition) from
this great sermon according to your intellect.

This khutba is in*Najul Israr First Edition page* *no. 115 ref Mushariq
ul Anwar and Bihar ul Moarrif.* Moula Ali (as) said to Tariq bin Shahab:

“O’Tariq! Imam is Kalimatullah (word of Allah), Hujjatullah (proof of
Allah), Wajjahullah (direction of Allah), Hijabullah (veil of Allah),
and Ayatollah (signs of Allah).

He is chosen by Allah who bestows onto Him whatever (attributes) He
(Allah) chooses, and makes it compulsory on all His creatures to obey
Him (Imam as).

Imam (as) is the wali of Allah on the heavens and earth.

Allah took the promise of allegiance from His slaves. So the one who
will break his promise has done kufr (disbeliever; denied) against
Allah.

An Imam (as) can act as He finds it appropriate, however His actions
only correspond to the will of Allah.

Imam (as) is truth (Sadiq) and adl (justice).

He knows what is in the hearts and has knowledge of the unseen.

Imam (as) has been entrusted with full absolute commandment.

He beholds all that rests between the dominions of the East and the
West.  (He is present at all times in every place.)

Nor is anything from the realms of ‘Mulk and Malakoot’ hidden from Him.
(He has the full knowledge of unseen.)

Imam (as) is the one whom Allah has chosen for His wahi (revelation) and
has approved for Him knowledge of His (Allah) Amr e Ghayab (knowledge of
the unseen).

Allah declared the heart of an Imam (as) as His Mashiat (will). (This is
the difference between Imam’s (as) and our hearts. Our heart is a place
of intellect while Imam’s (as) is the place of the will of Allah)

They are the rulers over the whole creation of Allah. Allah made Them as
“olil amr” (absolute master) and has ordered all of creation to obey
Them.

Imam (as) is an honor for momineen, intercession for the sinful,
forgiveness for friends, and the greatest hope for the repentant,
because Imam (as) is the head of Islam. He is  the greatness of the
faith and marifat (recognition).

Imam (as) is one who is free from all sins and has knowledge of the
unseen.

He is the center of the sphere of iman (faith). He is the height of
generosity and all blessings come from Him.

He is the way of Allah.

He is such an ocean that will never become dry, and has such dignity
that cannot be admired.

His Zahir (apparent self) is such amr that cannot be recognized. (It
means we can never gain the full marifat (recognition) of apparent
imamate)

Who has the ability and perception to recognize even one Divine
attribute of Imam (as)? The Imam (as) who is the “nuqta” (dot; focal
point) of the universe, the pivot of all that revolves, secret of all
that is possible to exist, the majesty of Divine Creator, and the honor
of the heavens and earth.

The level of Aal e Muhammad (as) is exalted above the descriptions of
the describers and the qualifications depicted by the highly qualified
They are beyond the imaginings of man.

He is the first noor, the word of Allah, the names of Allah, and His
oneness.

One who denies Them has indeed denied the oneness of Allah for They are
the greatest veil of Allah.

Those who think imamate can be found in other than Aal e Muhammad (as)
are liars who have gone astray from the righteous path. They have chosen
to worship idols as their Lord and have joined in the ranks of shaitan.
This is all due to their animosity of “Bait ul Safaw” (House of Divine
Qualities) and infallibility of Masoomeen (as). They are jealous of
blessings of greatness bestowed upon the family of the Prophet (saw).
Shaitan has made them believe their devious actions are honorable. (It
means they have abandoned their wajibats (prayers, fasts etc) and are
proud of their wrong doings.)

Imam (as) is the scale, Sirat ul Mustaqeen (true path) ,remembrance of
Allah, and the path that leads to Allah.

These Imams (as) are great, honorable, caliphs of RasoolAllah (saw).
They are the sons of RasoolAllah (saw), and trustees of Allah who is the
greatest of the greats.

Allah created Them from His noor and made Them  Wali over His kingdom
and all the matters within.

Imams (as) are the hidden secrets of Allah. They are the closest ones to
Allah. Allah’s command is  between the letter kaaf and the letter noon.
In fact, They are kaaf and noon.

The knowledge of all the prophets, the divine mysteries of the
messengers, power and glory of saints,  in comparison with Them, is like
a drop in the ocean and grain of sand in the dessert.

Indeed, the heavens and the earth to the Imam (as) are like the hand and
its palm. He knows their apparent (visible) as well as their hidden. He
knows the pious amongst the sinners. He has knowledge of the whole
universe. One who denies this is a cruel and cursed wretch, and as such
is cursed by Allah as well as by all those who also send curse in the
obedience of Allah.

Verily a single word uttered (in Quran) in the praise of Aal e Muhammad
(as), exceeds seventy dimensions (of knowledge). How often in the verses
of the Noble reminder, the blessed book, the eternal words are mentioned
in Our praise,al-Ayn (eye), al-Wajh (face), al-Yadh (hand), and al-Janb
(side).They are these wali because They are Face of Allah, Eyes of
Allah, Truth of Allah, Knowledge of Allah, and Hands of Allah.

Their apparent is batin (hidden) of the attributes of Allah. (Imam (as)
is the truth of all of those attributes of Allah which are apparent)
Their batin (hidden) is apparent of hidden attributes of Allah. (Hidden
of Imam (as) has the attributes of wahadat (oneness)). They are zahir of
batin and batin of zahir.

Imams (as) are the noor of Allah. His power and His will.

They are the seal of the book and protector of His wahi (revelation).
(They established wahi as Allah says in*Sura Ash-Shura ayah 51: “And it
is not for any mortal that Allah should speak to him except by
revelation or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger and
revealing by His permission what He pleases; surely He is ‘Ali (Highest)
and Hakeem (wise)* .) Imams (as) are the trustees and narrators of His
remembrance. Every revelation comes by Their wasila (intercession).

They are the secrets of Allah appearing in the form of human.

Their names are etched on stones, on the leaf of the trees, on the wings
of every bird, on the gates of jannah (paradise) and jahannum (hell),
heavens, on the wings of angels, and on the veils of majesty and on the
canopies of glory and beauty. With Their name, the birds glorify Allah
and the fish in the depths of the ocean ask for the forgiveness of Their
Shia.

Allah did not create any creation until after the promise of allegiance
was taken in regards to His Oneness, wilayat of Masoomeen (as), and
disassociation from Their enemies. The Throne of Allah did not attain

stability until it was inscribed with Divine Noor (light); “La illaha
illallah Muhammad RasoolAllah Ali un Wali Allah”
