Glory of Wilayat-Day of Judgement
=================================

Once Moula Ali (as) said to Hz Salman (as),*“O’Salman (as)! You will
only know My reality on the day of judgement.* ” The day of judgement is
that day when all the veils will be removed. Every person will know for
whom the promise of allegiance was taken on the day of creation, who was
sent to introduce tawheed (oneness), and whose marifat (recognition) it
is wajib (compulsory) upon creation to gain, whom Allah made as a
witness to the creation of  every particle of the universe, who was the
one for whom Allah sent 124,000  prophets to introduce Him, to whom on
the first day of creation Allah ordered the whole of creation to do
sajda (prostrate) to Him, and on the last day of creation sajda to Him
will be ordered by Allah, in front of such a glory

the heart will also bow down as one’s head bows down. Then this secret
will be revealed. The crown of wilayat will be shining on the head of
the one whom in this world people considered as Allah. The day of
judgement will be shining from His Noor. You have to believe Moula Ali
(as) is Mahzer e Wahadat (manifestation of Oneness). Moula Ali (as) is
creator of the whole universe and its purpose. Moula Ali (as) is Malik
ul Mulk (owner of the whole universe) whose kingdom has been in
existance from before the beginning of creation and will continue in its
existance until after the end of creation. Moula Ali (as) is the ruler
of the world as well as the emperor of the day of judgement. He is the
one who will divide jannah (paradise) and jahannum (hell). From today,
attach yourself with the greatness of the attributes of Moula Ali (as)
as well as with Moula Ali (as) Himself. If you do this, then the day of
judgement will be a day of celebration for you. Lanat on that person who
spent his whole life in imaginary worships and who has been negligent of
true and real worship.

For the Momineen, what we have written about the day of judgement must
be very pleasing. It is very sad that people think of judgement day only
as a day of great punishment and calamities. This type of thinking is
what makes all of the people become afraid. The people start speaking
about judgement day without realizing the day of judgement will be
different for every single person.

For those who do not gain the marifat (recognition) of Moula Ali (as),
then certainly the day of judgement will be one of great suffering and
horror. For the true momin, this day will be one of great comfort and
ease. We should remember the day of judgement for some will be a day of
great comfort and ease for some, for some it will be a day of worries,
for some it will be a day of punishment, for some it will be a day of
great fear and sufferings, and for some it will be their day of
destruction. In reality, you cannot understand the day of judgement
until you understand the questioning of judgement day. Just like the day
of judgement will be different for every person also the questioning of
judgement day will be different. Now we will discuss the questioning of
judgement day so that you can gain a better understanding of our topic.

First Questioning
-----------------

The first questioning of day of judgement will be about one’s worldly
life. Judgement day is not a creation of Allah that has already been
made. The human creates his own day of judgement. Every human

knows what all of his actions were and what his niyyat (intention) was.
Therefore, he knows where he will stand on the day of judgement. Human
life demands there must be one day where all are held accountable for
their actions. The first law of Newton is;

***‘For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction’.***

Not one single person can deny this law. Then how is it possible people
can imagine they will have no accountability for the acts they do in
this world? How many crimes are committed, but the criminals are not
caught or given a punishment that does not equal the crime he committed?
If a person murders ten people and is hanged for those crimes, his
punishment of hanging is not equal to the lives of those he murdered.

Second Questioning
------------------

The second occasion of  questioning is at the time of one’s  death.
There are  many thoughts for one to reflect upon. For example, what is
death? What is the benefit of death and loss? What door does death
close, and what door remains open? What are the conditions of death for
every person?

What is death?
--------------

Man is a combination of three things, body, soul (ruh), and nafs (self).
The body has functions it must perform. The soul gives the body power to
perform these functions. The nafs uses these functions. We explain it
with a very simple example.

A car is sitting in front of you. All of its parts are in good
condition. It is a complete machine without any faults. Just imagine
this car is a body. Even though it is complete, it cannot perform until
petrol is put inside of it. As soon as you put petrol, its mechanisms
will be able to  perform. Just imagine the petrol is its ruh (soul).

Now the car is complete. It has petrol in it, but it still cannot be
started until there is a driver to turn its ignition.

Just imagine the driver is its nafs. The same way the body cannot
perform its necessary functions until the soul is inside of it. However,
both are worthless unless there is something that can use them. The

nafs is the one who rules over the body. You see when you violate the
traffic laws; they do not question the car or the petrol. They punish
the driver. Therefore, the same way the nafs is responsible and will be
questioned for its actions because he is the one that used the body
through his will and command.

*There are two ways in which to create a separation between nafs and
body. One is sleep. The other is death. In Sura Zumar ayah 42 Allah
says, “Allah takes the souls at the time of their death, and those that
die not during their sleep; then He withholds those on whom He has
passed the decree of death and sends the others back til an appointed
term;”*

*Now that we have proven Allah takes the nafs out of the body in both
sleep and death, it becomes necessary for us to know what is the
difference between sleep and death. You have noticed when man is
sleeping then his*

*body parts become motionless. The reason is the one that uses the parts
is not present at that time. Despite of this, another noticeable thing
is whenever a mosquito or fly sits on the body, then those powers
suddenly return to the body. This is a proof in sleep the soul remains
present. However the nafs is taken out temporarily. The relationship
between the nafs and body remains. Even in sleep, nafs is still the
ruler of the body. In the condition of death, nafs and soul both are
taken out. When the soul leaves the body, it is no longer able to
function. The nafs cannot use these parts anymore.*

The nafs walks around the dead body. It becomes astonished at why its
body is not obeying it any longer. He does this until he reaches the
grave with the body. There he will face the questioning of the grave.
Therefore, the best explanation of death is that time when the nafs
loses its command and rule over the body.

Which door does death close?
----------------------------

You must know that death does not close the door related to actions.
Good deeds are a way to increase your reward and bad deeds are a way to
increase your punishment. If a wajib (compulsory) act is incomplete,
your next of kin can complete this for you (i.e. making up missed
prayers or fasts etc). The door which death closes forever is belief.
Whatever was one’s belief is at the time of his death, it can never be
changed. This is the point where a human must start to think.

Why man fears death?
--------------------

Every person is afraid of death. The reason is he is completely unaware
of the realities of death. It is natural to be afraid of and hate those
things for which we have no knowledge. No one is free from this fear.
In**Furoo e Kafi Kitab Janaiz chapter 11 hadith 11** , a man asked Imam
Jafar Sadiq (as) ,*“Moula (as), Is Allah eager to see those which are
eager to see Him? Does Allah also not wish to see those who do not wish
to see Him?” Imam (as) replied, “Yes.” Then the man said, “We think
badly about death.” Imam (as) replied, “Whatever you think about death,
it is not like that.* (Whatever one thinks whether good or bad death
will not be as they think)*This will be proven at the time of one’s
death. If he really loves Allah, then he will find his time of death to
be easy. In this case, Allah is eager to see him and he is eager to see
Allah.”*

A Misconception and Its Removal
-------------------------------

It is a common belief amongst people that if a person has an easy death,
then he must be a momin, and if a person has a difficult death, then he
must be a sinner. You can find many people saying, “We use to consider
this person not a momin, but death was very easy on him. Certainly he
must be a very pious person. We were so wrong about him.” Sometimes they
say, “We always considered him a momin, but death was very difficult for
him. Certainly he must not have been a momin, and we were so wrong about
him.”

Such beliefs are created from ignorance. Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) says,
“*Allah orders Malik ul Mowt (as) (angel of death) to  take the soul of*

*momins in such a way that it removes their sins and gives them peace.
People say that the time of death on this momin was very hard. This is
an insult to Allah. One who Allah is angry at and is an enemy of Allah,
then Allah will order Malik ul Mowt (as) to take his soul out the way a
blacksmith will remove hot irons from his fire. Then the people will say
death is very easy on him. People do not know what the person is feeling
at the time of death.* ” (*Furoo e Kafi Kitab Janaiz chapter 12 hadith
1* )

In*Najul Israr Second Edition page no. 376,* Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
says, “*Death is like a fragrant aroma to momin. When the momin smells
it, he goes to sleep. He sleeps in such a way that all his tiredness and
pain leaves him. The death for a kafir (disbeliever) is like the biting
of snakes and scorpions. It is even worse than this. The death of a
kafir seems as if it is easy because Allah gives him the reward of his
good deeds in this world.*

*The death of a momin seems hard because Allah gives the punishment of
his sins in this world.”* We have clarified the condition of death is
different for a momin and a kafir. Momin are never afraid of death. He
always welcomes death.

Condition of a momin at the time of his death
---------------------------------------------

****Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 61*** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said, “When the time of a momin’s death approaches, Allah sends two
helpers. One is “Manssia”. Second is “Masskhia”. Manssia removes the
momin’s wealth and family from his sight. Masskhia prepares him to face
his death with bravery. When Malik ul Mowt (as) comes to take his soul,
He will say, “O’Friend*

*of Allah! Do not worry. I swear by My Lord who sent Muhammad (saw) with
Haqq, I am more kind and merciful to you than your father.”*

**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 63** , “*At the time of death
for a momin, Malik ul Mowt(as) comes near to him and asks, “O’Servant of
Allah! Did you gain that in your life, which will free you from the
wrath of Allah and save yourself from the fires of hell and associate
you with “Ismat e Khubra”? Momin will reply, “Yes.” Then Malik ul Mowt
(as) asks, “What is that?” Momin will reply, “That is wilayat of Ali
(as) ibn Abi Talib (as).”*

For this “Ismat e Khubra” there is another hadith, which we took
from**Furoo e Kafi Kitab Janaiz chapter 11 hadith 4.**

“*At the time of a momin’s death, Malik ul Mowt (as) will come to him
and say,*

*“O’Slave of Allah! I made you free. You will not have to face the
difficulties of death. This is a reward for your association with “Ismat
e Khubra”.” Then the momin will say, “What is that?” The angel will
reply, “That is wilayat of Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib (as).”*

**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 65** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said,*“When the time of a momin’s death comes, RasoolAllah (saw), Moula
Ali (as), Syeda (sa), Imam Hasan (as), Imam Hussain (as), and the angels
come to see him. At that time the tongue of the momin testifies to the
Oneness of Allah, the prophet hood of RasoolAllah (saw), and the wilayat
of Ahlul Bayt (as). If he does not testify to this with his tongue, due
to the knowledge of Allah regarding his beliefs, Allah will appoint a
messenger who will testify for him.*

*Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 67* , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said,*“One from amongst you who dies on the belief of Our wilayat is a
shaheed. Even if he dies in his bed.”*   Insha’Allah we will explain
this hadith in our Fifth Questioning.

From these hadiths we can gather some very precious beliefs.

Angels of mercy come to take the soul of a momin. Angels of wrath come
to take the soul of a kafir.

The first question on the journey towards akhira (afterlife) is asked at
the time of death. That question is about the wilayat of Moula Ali (as).

Momin have to give three shahada (testimonies) in front of Panjatan Pak
(as) at the time of his death.

These testimonies are related to the belief in one’s heart not the
belief on one’s tongue.

Third Questioning
-----------------

The third occasion of questioning is in the grave. Before discussing
this, I feel a need to say, “If you like what I have written then accept
it and believe in it. If you do not, then just leave it.” There is
something before the questioning of the grave. That is “talqeen”
(reminder). In talqeen we remind the dead ones about tawheed, risalat,
the imamate and wilayat of the twelve Imams (as). It clearly means the
one who is reading the talqeen believes you have to give testimony
regarding these three shahadas (testimonies) My opinion regarding
talqeen is it is not a way to pass one’s exam by means of cheating. At
the time of death and in his grave, a person will give the same shahada
that he gave in his life. The lies and cheating will not be accepted in
the grave. Then is it not a  contradiction that when you put him in the
grave you remind him he has to give three shahadas? However, when he was
alive, he was taught there are only two shahadas. Third shahada
(maaz’Allah) is a worthless thing. If you read it, it is good. If you do
not, it is good too. If you say this is wajib (compulsory), then your
namaz, azan, and kalima all become batil (false). Now reflect deeply
upon the meaning of what I just said. Look within yourself. Are you
associated with “Ismat e Khubra”? Regarding the grave, we will look at
two points. One is ‘fishar’ (punishment). Second is ‘sawal’ (question).
There will be no ‘hisab’ (accountability) in the grave. There is only
questioning.

Fishar (Punishment)
-------------------

As I previously mentioned at the beginning of this topic, my purpose is
to refute those false ideologies regarding the day of judgement and the
questioning of the day of judgement which have become common

beliefs amongst the Shia of today. It is also my purpose to prove the
conditions on the day of judgement and in the grave will be different
for every person. The people believe there is ‘fishar’ (punishment) in
the grave for everyone. In order to remove this misconception it is
necessary to look at the teachings of Masoomeen (as) to find out who
will be punished in the grave and who will not.

**Furoo e Kafi Kitab Janaiz chapter 11 hadith 2** , Narrator asked Imam
Jafar Sadiq (as), “*What is “fishar e qabr” (punishment of the grave)?”
Imam (as) replied, “Momineen have nothing to do with it. The soil of
the*

*graves of momin will say proudly to the other soil, “This momin walked
on my back not yours.” Then it will say to the momin, “By Allah I use to
love you when you would walk on me. Now I have command over you, and you
will see what I shall do for you.” Then the grave will become so wide.”*

**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 85 ref Kafi** , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said to Abu Basir (ra),*“When a momin reaches his grave and his
soul comes back in his body, he is then questioned about his beliefs.
When he answers all the questions, then a door of jannah is opened
towards his grave.” Abu Basir (ra) asked, “May I be sacrificed for You!
Where does ‘fishar e qabr’ happen?” Imam (as) replied, “There is no such
thing as ‘fishar’ (punishment) for momins.”*

Question (Sawal)
----------------

We have to see three points regarding the questioning. First, will every
person be questioned in the grave? Second, what will be the questions?
Third, who will ask these questions?

### Who will be questioned?

###

**Najul Israr Second Edition page no. 380** , Imam Muhammad Baqir (as)
said, “*Only a pure momin (true believer) and pure kafir (disbeliever)
will be questioned in the grave.” Narrator asked, “What about others?”
Imam (as) replied, “They will be left alone in the grave.”*

You must remember there is a group between momin and kafir. The day of
judgement is related to this group.

### What will be the questions?

###

**Furoo e Kafi Kitab Janaiz chapter 86 hadith 9,** Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said,*“In the grave every person will be questioned regarding his
beliefs. If he proves his belief true, then his grave gets wider and a
door of jannah is opened for him. He will be told to sleep as a new
bride sleeps.”*

In the same chapter of this book**hadith 8** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said,*“In the grave they will only be questioned regarding iman (faith)
and kufr (disbelief). They will not be asked concerning any other
matter. Specifically they will be asked about Imam Zamana (ajf).”*

**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 75** , Imam Riza (as) said,*“On
the day of judgement and in the grave, people will be asked regarding
their iman (faith).Specifically they will be asked regarding the imamate
of Aimmah (as).”* It has been proven from countless hadiths that the
questions asked in the grave are concerning the wilayat of Moula Ali
(as).

### Who will ask the questions?

###

If you ask this to any Shia child, he will immediately reply “Munkir and
Nunkir”. He will have long hair. Their eyes will be red like fire. They
will be holding a rod of fire. Their voices will be like the sound of
lightning. Upon hearing them, the dead one will forget everything that
he was told in the ‘talqeen’ (reminder). This is a result of the false
theory that the condition of the grave is the same for every person. It
is very necessary for every person to know that Munkir and Nunkir come
only to the graves of kafirs not to momins. Two angels come to question
the Momineen. Their names are “Mubashir and Bashir”. **(Haqqul Yaqeen
Second Edition page no. 69)**

Fourth Questioning
------------------

The fourth occasion of questioning regarding the day of judgement is in
“Barzakh”. Barzakh is the period from the time of one’s death until day
of judgement. Amal (prayers, fasts, etc) are related to Barzakh. We will
prove the day of judgement is not related to these apparent acts of
worship. If you want your amal to be correct, then you must remember
Barzakh. If you do not bring good deeds with you, then you have to face
great difficulties and immense suffering in Barzakh. The time spent in
Barzakh will not be brief. It will be of extreme length. Every person
should take this with extreme seriousness.  One will find comfort ease
in Barzakh from whatever good deeds they have done and whatever evil
deeds they have refrained from doing. The responsibility of Aimmah (as)
is regarding the day of judgement not Barzakh. We will have to face
Barzakh alone. We have not been able to find the details of Barzakh nor
have they come to us. Therefore, we will not explain its details here.
However, we know the souls of momins will remain in their bodies the way
they did in this world. The momins will be able to see each other.

Allama Majilisi writes in “*Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 65* ”,
“It has been narrated in various hadiths that after leaving the body ,
the soul gets a new body which is similar to the bodies of the angels
and jinns. The soul gains the purity of the angels, and his body will be
able to move and fly.”

We must have a clear understanding that Barzakh is in this world. It is
not out of this world and has no relation with the day of judgement.

Fifth Questioning
-----------------

You will feel the importance of this matter after reading this. The
fifth occasion of questioning is “rajat” (when we return to this world).
The matter of ‘rajat’ is one of the basic beliefs of the Shia religion.
It is also included in the necessities of deen (religion). Every Shia
must know whoever does not believe in ‘rajat’ cannot be called a Shia.
As Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said in “**La Ya Zarah al Faqi** ”,*“That
person has no relation with Us who does not believe in Our rajat* .”
In**Najul Israr First Edition page no. 136 Khutbat Iftikhari** ” Moula
Ali (as) said,*“One who denies I will come on this earth again after
rajat has denied Us. One who denies Us has denied Allah.”*

### What is rajat (return)?

###

The meaning of rajat is after the appearance of Imam Zamana (ajf) all
other Imams (as) will return back on this earth. They will rule the
whole world. Every Imam (as) will live His life and have Their natural
period of imamate.

Imam Zamana (ajf) will reappear first. That will be the time of His
imamate. After the rajat (return) of His Forefathers (as), He will
return again.

In reality, discussing rajat (return) is like walking on nails. The
human has to be very careful when discussing this issue. In Quran and
hadith, whenever the day of judgement is mentioned it is referring to
the rajat (return). We should never use our own opinion concerning rajat
(return). If we do this, we will open the doors of deviance.

We should only use the words of Masoomeen (as) to describe rajat
(return). This is why Moula Ali (as) said concerning rajat,*“This is a
specific knowledge, and people cannot comprehend its reality* .” I will
only narrate one hadith as an example. After reading it, you will know

how hard it is to bear the reality of rajat (return).

Regarding the Pond of Kauthar, every person thinks it is related to the
day of judgement. When someone asked Moula Ali (as), “*Tell me about the
Pond of Kauthar. Is it in this world or for the day of judgement?” Moula
Ali (as) replied, “The Pond of Kauthar is in this world.”* *(Kitab Salim
bin Qais page no. 26)*

Rajat (return) can be found in all authentic Shia books. in Bihar ul
Anwar alone, Allama Majilisi narrated more than 200 hadiths from more
than 40 Shia scholars. These hadiths are mentioned in more than 50
authentic books.

### Proof of rajat (return) in Quran

###

**Sura an-Naml (The Ant) 83-84: “And remind them of the Day when We
shall gather out of every nation a party from among those who rejected
Our revelations, then they shall be formed into group”**

**Till, when they come (before their Lord), He will say: Did you deny My
revelations while you had no comprehensive knowledge of them? Or what
was it that you did?”**

A majority of people believe this ayah is in regards to the day of
judgement. This is absolutely false because Allah will gather all of the
people on the day of judgement. Yet in this ayah, Allah is speaking only
about a certain group of people. Allama Majilisi says in “**Haqqul
Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 6** ”, “It has been narrated from Imam
Jafar Sadiq (as) in various hadiths that this ayah is for “rajat”.
“*When Allah will bring to life a group from every nation. The ayah
regarding the day of judgement is* Sura al-Kahf (The Cave) ayah 48: “And
they shall be brought before your Lord, standing in ranks:”*Then Imam
(as) said, “These ayat-Allah is Ameerul Momineen (as).*

**Sura Aal e Imran (Family of Imran) ayah 158: “And if indeed you die or
you are slain, certainly to Allah shall you be gathered together.”**

** In**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 7,** it has been narrated
this ayah is in regards to rajat. SabeelAllah is the way of Moula Ali
(as) and His Offspring. One who believes in this ayah if he is slain in
Their way, he will return to this world when the Imams (as) will return
in this world. If he dies his natural death, then he will return when
the Imams (as) return in this world so that he can be slain in Their
way.**

**Sura Aal e Imran (The Family of Imran) ayah 81: “And when Allah took
the promise of allegiance through the prophets: Certainly what I have
given you of Book and wisdom—then a messenger comes to you verifying
that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must aid him.
He said: Do you agree and accept My compact in this (matter)? They said:
We do agree. He said: Then bear witness, and I am of the bearers of
witness with you.”**

In**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 7** , Saad bin Abdullah
narrates from Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) in his book “**Basair ul Darajat**
”:

*“All prophets will aid Moula Ali (as) when He returns back to this
world* .” In the same book on page 8, it is narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (as) that Moula Ali (as) said, “*When Allah created the souls of
the prophets, He took from them the promise of allegiance regarding
their belief in Us and their help to Us.” Then Moula Ali (as) recited
this ayah and said, “Believe in Muhammad (saw) and help His successor.
Verily Allah took allegiance from Me and Muhammad (saw) that We would
help each other. Verily I helped Muhammad (saw) and fought for Him in
every battle. I fulfilled this promise of allegiance for the pleasure of
Allah and in order to help RasoolAllah (saw). However, among all the
prophets and messengers there has not been one who has helped Me. They
will help Me when I return (rajat). At that time I will be the ruler
over the whole of the dominion all that which is between the East and
West* .*Certainly Allah will send all the prophets from Adam (as) to
RasoolAllah (saw). During that time, all of creation, every prophet,
every human, and every jinn will stand before Me. They will cut the
throats of those who have come back to life at that time.” Then Moula
Ali (as) said, “In the rajat and after I will return back.”*

**Sura Momin ayah 11: “And they said “O’our Lord! You gave us death
twice. And twice you brought us back to life.”**

In**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page 10,** it has been narrated from
various hadiths that the first time Allah will bring those back to life
is in the rajat (return) and the second time is the day of judgement.
One time Allah will give death is in this world and the second is during
rajat (return).

**5. Bihar ul Anwar Twelfth Edition page no. 542** , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said regarding the ayah of**Sura Anbiyaa “And the town We
demolished, they will not be able to return back”; all those towns which
Allah demolished, Allah will not bring them back to life during the time
of rajat (return).”**

This ayah is the greatest proof of rajat. No Muslim can deny all the
people will return on the day of judgement. In this ayah “La yerjaaoon”
means the time of rajat. On the day of judgement every person will
become alive so that Allah can throw them into hell.

**Sura Sajda (The Prostration) ayah 27: “And most certainly We will make
them taste the lower punishment before the greater that haply they may
turn.”**

**In Tafseer Ali bin Ibrahim, Masoom (as) says, “*Azab ul Adna” is the
punishment by sword in the time of rajat* .” (Bihar ul Anwar Twelfth
Edition page no. 553)**

**Sura Momin ayah 84-85: “When they saw Our punishment, they cried out,
"We now believe in Allah, the One, and we reject all those gods whom we
used to associated with Him.” But after having seen Our punishment,
their belief could be of no avail to them,”**

It has been narrated in**Tafseer Ali bin Ibrahim** , “*When Ameerul
Momineen (as) and other Imams (as) will return back, even if people
believe Them during that time, it will not give them any benefits.*
”**(Bihar ul Anwar Twelfth Edition page no. 553)**

We only presented seven ayahs as examples. In this way you can feel the
difference between rajat and the day of judgement. There are various
ayahs

that have been revealed regarding rajat. My purpose is to make you aware
that we should not use our own opinions regarding the tafseer of those
ayahs and hadiths that appear to be concerning the day of judgement but
in reality are for rajat. Denying rajat can exclude you from the Shia
religion. Apart from those ayahs and hadiths that we mentioned above,
you can find rajat mentioned in Ziarat e Jamia, Ziarat e Widah, Ziarat e
Arbaeen, and other ziarats

### Examples of rajat in previous nations

###

To be amazed at the happening of rajat and the dead being brought back
to life is like denying the day of judgement and insulting the Quran.
There are so many examples in previous nations when rajat happened. We
will present three examples from Quran.

**Sura al-Baqarah (The Cow) 55-56: “; and even while you gazed the
lightning seized you. Then we raised you up after your death, that you
may give thanks.”**

**Sura al-Baqarah (The Cow) 243: “Have you not considered those who went
forth from their homes, for fear of death, and they were thousands, then
Allah said to them, Die; again He gave them life;”**

**Sura al-Baqarah (The Cow) 259: “Or the like of him**

**(Uzair) who passed by a town, and it had fallen down upon its roof; he
said: When will Allah give it life after its death? So Allah caused him
to die for a hundred years, and then raised him to life.”**

This is the incident of Hz Uzair (as). The same incident happened to Hz
Armia (as). RasoolAllah (saw) has said the same will happen to My nation
as what had happened to previous nations. The rajat will also happen for
this nation.

Do not be deceived by the word “Shia”
-------------------------------------

You cannot truly be “Shia” simply because you give yourself the label of
Shia. Those who are true Shia must be very careful and alert or else
they will end up following those who are simply Shia by name only, and
the true Shia can lose his whole iman (faith). Masoomeen (as) have
warned us about these so-called shias. In**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition
page no. 21,**

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*When Our Qaim (ajf) will reappear, then
Allah will give life to some of Our Shia. They will be carrying their
swords over their shoulder, prepared for war, and ready to help Imam
Zamana (ajf). When this news will reach to a group of Shia that will
still be alive, they will say, “O’group of Shia! Why are you lying? This
is the time of your kingdom. Your rule. We swear by Allah, they were not
brought back to life from the dead. Nor will they be alive until the day
of judgement.”*

Difference between natural death and one who is slain
-----------------------------------------------------

Death and being slain seem similar, but they are very different. The
first difference is the difference of association. Death is associated
towards Allah. Being slain is associated with the murderer. The second
difference is after a natural death the nafs goes towards Barzakh. While
one who has been slain, his nafs remains in the world of humans. It goes
to Barzakh after it reaches his natural age.

### It is compulsory for a momin to be slain

###

**Sura Tawba (The Repentance) 111: “Surely Allah has bought from the
believers their lives and their wealth because the Garden will be
theirs: they shall fight in the way of Allah and shall slay and be
slain. It is a promise, which is binding on Him in the Torah, the
Injeel, and the Quran. Who fulfilleth His promise better than Allah?
Rejoice then in the pledge you have made, for that is the supreme
triumph.”**

Fourth Questioning
------------------

The fourth occasion of questioning regarding the day of judgement is in
“Barzakh”. Barzakh is the period from the time of one’s death until day
of judgement. Amal (prayers, fasts, etc) are related to Barzakh. We will
prove the day of judgement is not related to these apparent acts of
worship. If you want your amal to be correct, then you must remember
Barzakh. If you do not bring good deeds with you, then you have to face
great difficulties and immense suffering in Barzakh. The time spent in
Barzakh will not be brief. It will be of extreme length. Every person
should take this with extreme seriousness.  One will find comfort ease
in Barzakh from whatever good deeds they have done and whatever evil
deeds they have refrained from doing. The responsibility of Aimmah (as)
is regarding the day of judgement not Barzakh. We will have to face
Barzakh alone. We have not been able to find the details of Barzakh nor
have they come to us. Therefore, we will not explain its details here.
However, we know the souls of momins will remain in their bodies the way
they did in this world. The momins will be able to see each other.

Allama Majilisi writes in “*Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 65* ”,
“It has been narrated in various hadiths that after leaving the body ,
the soul gets a new body which is similar to the bodies of the angels
and jinns. The soul gains the purity of the angels, and his body will be
able to move and fly.”

We must have a clear understanding that Barzakh is in this world. It is
not out of this world and has no relation with the day of judgement.

### Fifth Questioning

###

You will feel the importance of this matter after reading this. The
fifth occasion of questioning is “rajat” (when we return to this world).
The matter of ‘rajat’ is one of the basic beliefs of the Shia religion.
It is also included in the necessities of deen (religion). Every Shia
must know whoever does not believe in ‘rajat’ cannot be called a Shia.
As Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said in “**La Ya Zarah al Faqi** ”,*“That
person has no relation with Us who does not believe in Our rajat*
.”In**Najul Israr First Edition page no. 136 Khutbat Iftikhari** ” Moula
Ali (as) said,*“One who denies I will come on this earth again after
rajat has denied Us. One who denies Us has denied Allah.”*

### What is rajat (return)?

###

The meaning of rajat is after the appearance of Imam Zamana (ajf) all
other Imams (as) will return back on this earth. They will rule the
whole world. Every Imam (as) will live His life and have Their natural
period of imamate.

Imam Zamana (ajf) will reappear first. That will be the time of His
imamate. After the rajat (return) of His Forefathers (as), He will
return again.

In reality, discussing rajat (return) is like walking on nails. The
human has to be very careful when discussing this issue. In Quran and
hadith, whenever the day of judgement is mentioned it is referring to
the rajat (return). We should never use our own opinion concerning rajat
(return). If we do this, we will open the doors of deviance.

We should only use the words of Masoomeen (as) to describe rajat
(return). This is why Moula Ali (as) said concerning rajat,*“This is a
specific knowledge, and people cannot comprehend its reality* .” I will
only narrate one hadith as an example. After reading it, you will know
how hard it is to bear the reality of rajat (return).

Regarding the Pond of Kauthar, every person thinks it is related to the
day of judgement. When someone asked Moula Ali (as), “*Tell me about the
Pond of Kauthar. Is it in this world or for the day of judgement?” Moula
Ali (as) replied, “The Pond of Kauthar is in this world.”* *(Kitab Salim
bin Qais page no. 26)*

Rajat (return) can be found in all authentic Shia books. in Bihar ul
Anwar alone, Allama Majilisi narrated more than 200 hadiths from more
than 40 Shia scholars. These hadiths are mentioned in more than 50
authentic books.

### Proof of rajat (return) in Quran

###

**1.Sura an-Naml (The Ant) 83-84: “And remind them of the Day when We
shall gather out of every nation a party from among those who rejected
Our revelations, then they shall be formed into groups.**

**Till, when they come (before their Lord), He will say: Did you deny My
revelations while you had no comprehensive knowledge of them? Or what
was it that you did?”**

A majority of people believe this ayah is in regards to the day of
judgement. This is absolutely false because Allah will gather all of the
people on the day of judgement. Yet in this ayah, Allah is speaking only
about a certain group of people. Allama Majilisi says in “**Haqqul
Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 6** ”, “It has been narrated from Imam
Jafar Sadiq (as) in various hadiths that this ayah is for “rajat”.
“*When Allah will bring to life a group from every nation. The ayah
regarding the day of judgement is* Sura al-Kahf (The Cave) ayah 48: “And
they shall be brought before your Lord, standing in ranks:”*Then Imam
(as) said, “These ayat-Allah is Ameerul Momineen (as).*

**2.Sura Aal e Imran (Family of Imran) ayah 158: “And if indeed you die
or you are slain, certainly to Allah shall you be gathered together.”**

** In**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 7,** it has been narrated
this ayah is in regards to rajat. SabeelAllah is the way of Moula Ali
(as) and His Offspring. One who believes in this ayah if he is slain in
Their way, he will return to this world when the Imams (as) will return
in this world. If he dies his natural death, then he will return when
the Imams (as) return in this world so that he can be slain in Their
way.**

**3.Sura Aal e Imran (The Family of Imran) ayah 81: “And when Allah took
the promise of allegiance through the prophets: Certainly**

**what I have given you of Book and wisdom—then a messenger comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
aid him. He said: Do you agree and accept My compact in this (matter)?
They said: We do agree. He said: Then bear witness, and I am of the
bearers of witness with you.”**

In**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 7** , Saad bin Abdullah
narrates from Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) in his book “**Basair ul Darajat**
”:

*“All prophets will aid Moula Ali (as) when He returns back to this
world* .” In the same book on page 8, it is narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (as) that Moula Ali (as) said, “*When Allah created the souls of
the prophets, He took from them the promise of allegiance regarding
their belief in Us and their help to Us.” Then Moula Ali (as) recited
this ayah and said, “Believe in Muhammad (saw) and help His successor.
Verily Allah took allegiance from Me and Muhammad (saw) that We would
help each other. Verily I helped Muhammad (saw) and fought for Him in
every battle. I fulfilled this promise of allegiance for the pleasure of
Allah and in order to help RasoolAllah (saw). However, among all the
prophets and messengers there has not been one who has helped Me. They
will help Me when I return (rajat). At that time I will be the ruler
over the whole of the dominion all that which is between the East and
West* .*Certainly Allah will send all the prophets from Adam (as) to
RasoolAllah (saw). During that time, all of creation, every prophet,
every human, and every jinn will stand before Me. They will cut the
throats of those who have come back to life at that time.” Then Moula
Ali (as) said, “In the rajat and after I will return back.”*

**Sura Momin ayah 11: “And they said “O’our Lord! You gave us death
twice. And twice you brought us back to life.”**

In**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page 10,** it has been narrated from
various hadiths that the first time Allah will bring those back to life
is in the rajat (return) and the second time is the day of judgement.
One time Allah will give death is in this world and the second is during
rajat (return).

**5. Bihar ul Anwar Twelfth Edition page no. 542** , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said regarding the ayah of**Sura Anbiyaa “And the town We
demolished, they will not be able to return back”; all those towns which
Allah demolished, Allah will not bring them back to life during the time
of rajat (return).”**

This ayah is the greatest proof of rajat. No Muslim can deny all the
people will return on the day of judgement. In this ayah “La yerjaaoon”
means the time of rajat. On the day of judgement, people will become
alive so that Allah can throw them into hell.

**6. Sura Sajda (The Prostration) ayah 27: “And most certainly We will
make them taste the lower punishment before the greater that haply they
may turn.”**

**In Tafseer Ali bin Ibrahim, Masoom (as) says, “*Azab ul Adna” is the
punishment by sword in the time of rajat* .” (Bihar ul Anwar Twelfth
Edition page no. 553)**

**7. Sura Momin ayah 84-85: “When they saw Our punishment, they cried
out, "We now believe in Allah, the One, and we reject all those**

**gods whom we used to associated with Him.” But after having seen Our
punishment, their belief could be of no avail to them,”**

It has been narrated in**Tafseer Ali bin Ibrahim** , “*When Ameerul
Momineen (as) and other Imams (as) will return back, even if people
believe Them during that time, it will not give them any benefits.*
”**(Bihar ul Anwar Twelfth Edition page no. 553)**

We only presented seven ayahs as examples. In this way you can feel the
difference between rajat and the day of judgement. There are various
ayahs that have been revealed regarding rajat. My purpose is to make you
aware that we should not use our own opinions regarding the tafseer of
those ayahs and hadiths that appear to be concerning the day of
judgement but in reality are for rajat. Denying rajat can exclude you
from the Shia religion. Apart from those ayahs and hadiths that we
mentioned above, you can find rajat mentioned in Ziarat e Jamia, Ziarat
e Widah, Ziarat e Arbaeen, and other ziarats.

### Examples of rajat in previous nations

###

To be amazed at the happening of rajat and the dead being brought back
to life is like denying the day of judgement and insulting the Quran.
There are so many examples in previous nations when rajat happened. We
will present three examples from Quran.

**Sura al-Baqarah (The Cow) 55-56: “; and even while you gazed the
lightning seized you. Then we raised you up after your death, that you
may give thanks.”**

**Sura al-Baqarah (The Cow) 243: “Have you not considered those who went
forth from their homes, for fear of death, and they were thousands, then
Allah said to them, Die; again He gave them life;”**

**Sura al-Baqarah (The Cow) 259: “Or the like of him (Uzair) who passed
by a town, and it had fallen down upon its roof; he said: When will
Allah give it life after its death? So Allah caused him to die for a
hundred years, and then raised him to life.”**

This is the incident of Hz Uzair (as). The same incident happened to Hz
Armia (as). RasoolAllah (saw) has said the same will happen to My nation
as what had happened to previous nations. The rajat will also happen for
this nation.

### Do not be deceived by the word “Shia”

###

You cannot truly be “Shia” simply because you give yourself the label of
Shia. Those who are true Shia must be very careful and alert or else
they will end up following those who are simply Shia by name only, and
the true Shia can lose his whole iman (faith). Masoomeen (as) have
warned us about these so-called shias. In**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition
page no. 21,**

*Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “When Our Qaim (ajf) will reappear, then
Allah will give life to some of Our Shia. They will be carrying their
swords over their shoulder, prepared for war, and ready to help Imam
Zamana (ajf). When this news will reach to a group of Shia that will
still be alive, they will say, “O’group of Shia! Why are*

*you lying? This is the time of your kingdom. Your rule. We swear by
Allah, they were not brought back to life from the dead. Nor will they
be alive until the day of judgement.”*

### Difference between natural death and one who is slain

###

Death and being slain seem similar, but they are very different. The
first difference is the difference of association. Death is associated
towards Allah. Being slain is associated with the murderer. The second
difference is after a natural death the nafs goes towards Barzakh. While
one who has been slain, his nafs remains in the world of humans. It goes
to Barzakh after it reaches his natural age.

### It is compulsory for a momin to be slain

###

**Sura Tawba (The Repentance) 111: “Surely Allah has bought from the
believers their lives and their wealth because the Garden will be
theirs: they shall fight in the way of Allah and shall slay and be
slain. It is a promise, which is binding on Him in the Torah, the
Injeel, and the Quran. Who fulfilleth His promise better than Allah?
Rejoice then in the pledge you have made, for that is the supreme
triumph.”**

Now we come to another important issue.

Period for Accountability
-------------------------

We are mentioning all of those issues, which have not been properly
explained to the people. There are many misconceptions regarding the
period of accountability. The reason for this is the difference between
Qiyamat e Sughra and Qiyamat e Khubra have not been explained

properly. A common belief about the day of judgement is that all the
people will be standing in lines waiting for their turn. It will take
50,000 years. During all of this time, poor Momineen will be waiting for
their turn. They will not face questioning or accountability. They will
simply be waiting for the others to finish so they can reach their
destination. Now we will see the truth regarding the time of
accountability.

**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 114** , Allah will take the
accountability of all of the creation in the blink of an eye. Moula Ali
(as) says,*“It does not take any time for Allah to take accountability
from one of his creation to the next. The way He gives rizq (sustenance)
to one of His creation to the next.”* Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said*,
“Allah will take the accountability of all of creation in one word.
Every person will hear the accountability of his acts. He will not hear
the accountability of others’ acts. Allah will complete this process in
one second.”*

**Bihar ul Anwar Twelfth Edition** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*Even
before the day of judgement Imam Hussain (as) will take the
accountability of all the people. On the day of judgement there will be
only one matter left, who will go to jannah and who will go to
jahannum.”*

### Mizan (Scale)

###

There are so many beliefs regarding mizan (scale). The people have
created many types of scales. They believe their actions will be in some
type of physical form, and the weight of those actions will be measured
on a scale. All of these imaginary beliefs were taken from other
religions. Our religion does not have such beliefs. Every one knows
every thing that can be measured has a different scale for it to be
measured with. There is one scale for iron. One for gold. One for wood.
One for air pressure.  When we say that person has a weighty argument,
it does not mean we have gone and measured it on some scale. In reality,
it means his argument is sound. In the same way, the scale, which will
measure our beliefs and acts, is very different than a physical scale.
Masoomeen (as) have already explained what this scale is in detail.
However if the people do not wish to pay attention to the sayings of
Masoomeen (as), it is not my concern. We will present only

two hadiths regarding this issue.

*Manaqib Shahr ibn Ashoob First Edition page no. 310* , Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) said regarding this ayah*(whose amal will have more weight* ),
“*This ayah means Ameerul Momineen (as).” * It means all of the beliefs
and actions are measured against the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as).

Moula Ali (as) referred to Himself as ‘mizan’ (scale) on a number of
different occasions.

*Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 112* , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said, “*Mizan (scale) is adl (justice).”*

We have previously mentioned adl is Imam (as). There are so many hadiths
proving this.

### Sirat (Bridge)

###

I am sure you have heard all the stories regarding sirat (bridge). It
seems as if only circus performers will be able to cross this bridge.
People will not be able to take even one-step on it. The sirat (bridge)
is narrower than a hair and sharper than the sharpest sword.  To see
such a narrow thing will be very difficult. We will have to be very
careful in every step of the crossing. First, we will explain what sirat
(bridge) is. We will present a hadith in its explanation. Then we will
give our comments on “narrower than a hair and sharper than the sharpest
sword”.

Sirat means every person will be taken near jahannum (hell). One who
will deserve it will be thrown into the hell. Others will be removed
from there. We find so many hadiths regarding everyone being taken near
jahannum. These matters are beyond human intellect so we will remain
silent regarding this topic. Nor do we have the courage to deny these
hadiths. Therefore, we return these hadiths back to Masoomeen (as). They
know what the truth is. However, we know from Quran that not every
person will be taken near jahannum. Only mushrikeen, kafirs, munafiqs,
and people who are the likes of them will be taken near hell. While
Momineen, will not be taken near jahannum.

**Sura an-Anbiyaa (The Prophets) 98: “Surely you and what you worship
besides Allah are the firewood of hell; to it you shall come.”**

This ayah clearly tells all of the mushrikeen will be taken to jahannum.
Allah did not mention the momineen here. In ayah 101 of the same sura,
Allah says, “**Surely those for whom the good has already gone forth
from Us, they shall be kept far off from it;”** This ayah tells us
Momineen will be kept far from jahannum. (The meaning of good deeds is a
separate topic, which we shall discuss in another book but for the
tafseer of this ayah, in**Tafseer Safi** , RasoolAllah (saw) said,*“This
ayah was revealed for those who believe in the wilayat of Moula Ali
(as).* ”  It means for Their Shia).

Now we shall present those hadiths that explain the sirat
(bridge).*Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 150* ,*“It has been
narrated in various hadiths that the Sirat of the day of judgement will
be like Siratul Mustaqeem in this world which is the true religion and
way of wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as) and the Imams (as) from His
Offspring.* ” The Siratul Mustaqeem, which was in this world, will be
the same on the day of judgement. It is on the basis of this wilayat the
decision of who goes to jannah and who goes to jahannum will be made.

Explaining the meaning of “Narrower than the hair and sharper than the
sharpest sword” is a very sensitive issue, but we will give you a sample
of its meaning. Then everyone will know if he will be able to cross this
bridge or not. Our hint is taken from the saying of Moula Ali (as). “*Be
a friend to those who are My friends, even if he is the murderer of your
father.* (with the condition that the father is not a momin. Otherwise,
one who kills a momin becomes a kafir.)*Be an enemy to those who are My
enemies even if he is your father.* ” Now look at yourself and ask, “Can
you follow the sayings of Moula Ali (as)?”

One who has the ability to follow the sayings of Moula Ali (as) will be
able to cross the ‘pul e sirat’ (bridge between heaven and hell).

### Imam of the day of judgement

###

This world would cease to exist without the presence of an Imam (as). In
the same manner, the day of judgement would also cease to exist if there
were an Imam (as) present who has full command over the day of judgement
and over all of those present at that time. This world cannot exist
without Imam (as) nor can the day of judgement. The beginning is with
Imam (as) and the end is also with Imam (as). InshaAllah we will mention
this imamate in our next topic. For now, let us see who is the Imam (as)
of the day of judgement.

**1. Kokab Durri page no. 133 ref Manaqib ibn Merdivia,** Jabir bin
Abdullah Ansari narrates Allah has two flags. One is made of noor. The
other is made of rubies. It is written on both of them, “There is no
other worthy of worship except Allah. Muhammad (saw) is the prophet of
Allah, and the Offspring (as) of Muhammad (saw) is the best from amongst
all of the creation. The owner of these flags is the Imam (as) of the
day of judgement, Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib (as).”

**2. Kokab Durri page no. 186** , RasoolAllah (saw) said regarding Moula
Ali (as),*“On the day of judgement, Ali (as) will be hujjat (proof) of
Allah upon My ummah (nation).”*

**3. Kokab Durri page no. 197,** RasoolAllah (saw) said to Moula Ali
(as), “*The matters of the day of judgement are Your matters. They are
associated with You.”*

**4. Kokab Durri** , RasoolAllah (saw) said, “*Ali (as) is the most
trustworthy. Give the one who loves Ali (as) the good news that
RasoolAllah (saw) has said you are free from the terror of the day of
judgement.”*

Shifaat (Intercession)
----------------------

Shifaat (intercession) is a basic principle in the Shia religion. Allama
Majilisi writes in “**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 143** ”,
“There is no difference regarding shifaat (intercession) amongst the
Shia scholars. Shifaat will remove the punishment from sinful shias
regardless of the greatness of their sins.” The circle of shifaat
(intercession) is extremely wide. Even a common momin has a right to
intercession. Even Allah will accept Their intercession for those who
are in jahannum. There is a hadith from RasoolAllah (saw) in**“Haqqul
Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 144** ”,*“Amongst the momineen they will
be able to do shifaat (intercession) for forty of their brothers who
deserve to be punished.* ” On page no. 150 there is a hadith by Imam
Muhammad Baqir (as) which says, “*Momin will be able to do shifaat
(intercession) even for that neighbor who has no good deeds.”* On page
no. 222, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, “*Some people who will be in
jahannum will remind those in jannah for whom they had done worldly
favors. For instance, we fed you when you were hungry, we clothed you
when you were naked, we gave you shelter when you were afraid, we kept
your secrets hidden. Then the momin will intercede on behalf of these
people. Then they will enter the jannah.* ” This was the introduction of
shifaat (intercession), but we wish to look at a different angle of
shifaat

(intercession). We find three types of ayahs regarding intercession in
Quran. Some that tell Allah will intercede Himself. Some that tell some
special personalities will intercede by the permission of Allah. Some
which tell about those people who will be the owners of intercession on
the day of judgement.

### First Kind

###

**Sura al-An’aam (The Cattle) 51: “And warn with it those who fear that
they shall be gathered to their Lord—there is no guardian for them, nor
any intercessor besides Him-“**

**Sura al-An’aam (The Cattle) 70: “For you there is no guardian or
intercessor besides Allah,”**

**Sura Sajda (The Prostration) 4: “you have not besides Him any guardian
or any intercessor,”**

**Sura az-Zumar (The Groups) 43-44: “Or have they taken intercessors
besides Allah? Say: what! Even though they did not have control over
anything, nor do they understand. Say: Unto Allah belongs all of
creation,”**

### Second Kind

###

**Sura al-Baqarah (The Cow) 255: “who is he that can intercede with Him
except by His permission?”**

**Sura Yunus (Jonas) 3: “there is no intercessor except after His
permission;”**

Now there are two who have the ability to intercede. One is Allah
Himself and the other is those whom Allah has bestowed His permission
on. Now a question comes to one’s mind. Who will the one to whom They
ask if They can intercede upon the behalf of someone? If someone says
the answer is Allah, then Allah is Himself the one who is doing the
interceding. If someone says They will ask RasoolAllah (saw), it is also
wrong because RasoolAllah (saw) Himself will also be doing intercession.
One of the titles of RasoolAllah (saw) is “Shafi Roz e Jaza”
(intercessor on the day of judgement). It has also been proven the
intercession of RasoolAllah (saw) is an ordinary intercession because He
will intercede by the permission of Allah.

**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 145** , Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said, “*On the day of judgement RasoolAllah (saw) will put His head in
sajda (prostrate). He will not lift His head until a voice will come
from Allah “Lift Your head and do shifaat (intercession) so that I may
accept. Ask whatever You want and I will bless You with it.”* This is
the meaning of where Allah says,**“soon We will take you on ‘Muqam e
Mahmood’ (praised stage of RasoolAllah saw).”**

### Third Kind

###

**Sura Mariam 87: “They will have no power of intercession, save him who
has made a promise with his Lord.”**

We have presented the ayahs regarding the three different kinds of
shifaat (intercession) to you. Now it depends on your own intellect to
ponder upon them and decide for yourself. It is your job to find out to
whom Allah has made a promise to. We will just remind you about the
scene of

“Asr e Ashura” when Imam Hussain (as) was in the sajda and Shimr (may
Allah never remove His wrath from him) was holding a spade in his hand.
The cursed Shimr narrates, “When I tried to slaughter Imam Hussain (as),
I saw the lips of Hussain (as) were

moving. When I brought my ears near to the lips of Hussain (as), I heard
Him saying, “*O’My Lord! I have fulfilled My promise. Now You fulfill
Your promise.”*

To whom will the people do sajda (prostrate) on the day of judgement?
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Now we have reached the point that we mentioned in the beginning. The
day of judgement is a day when all veils will be removed. The secret of
wilayat will be revealed. The revelation of wilayat is the true jannah
for momin and true jahannum for those who denied it. That truth which
Allah ordered the whole of creation to do sajda (prostrate) to in the
veil of Hz Adam (as). The stars from the heavens would do sajda upon His
doorstep. The whole universe has been in sajda in front of Him. The
hearts of momineen bowed at the steps of His physical form. Praising His
name was declared as the worship of angels. Today that reality is in
front of our eyes. How long humanity had to wait in order to see Him.
Only those who went through the pain of waiting will be able to realize
its severity. One who did not wait will never believe us. He who does
not believe will create ‘scales and bridges’ for the day of judgement.
Such people have the desire of jannah and fear of jahannum. While momin
by his every breath, his only desire is when could he see His Moula (as)
in front of his own eyes. He always waits for his death so he can see
his Moula (as). When people perform the funeral for a momin, he asks
them to take him to his grave as soon as possible so he can see his
Moula (as). This is the day of judgement. We will present an extract
from the book of Allama Bu Ali Shah Zaidi “*Shia Mazhab kay Usool e Deen
First Edition page no. 17* ”. This will bring great comfort to
momineen.*Sura al-Qalam (The Pen) 42: “On the day when there shall be a
severe affliction, and they shall be ordered to prostrate themselves but
are not able,”* The meaning of “saaq” is pillar. The whole religion
depends on it. Because the marifat (recognition) of Allah is gained
through Muhammad (saw) wa Aal e Muhammad (as), therefore, They are “Saaq
e Illahi” (Pillars of Allah).

Allah sent Them to guide the creation in the veil of human form. On the
day of judgement, Allah will remove the veil of human form and present
Them in Their form of noor. Allah will order the whole creation to do
sajda (prostrate) to Them as He did for Adam (as). In*Tafseer al Ayyun*
, Imam Riza (as) said,*“It means the Veil of Noor will open and momin
(whose hearts bowed at the greatness of Muhammad (saw) wa Aal e*
*Muhammad (as) in this world) will fall down in sajda and the backbone
of munafiqeen (whose hearts never accepted the greatness of Muhammad
(saw) wa Aal e Muhammad (as) in this world) will become as hard as an
iron rod and they will be unable to perform sajda.”* In the beginning of
guidance Allah ordered sajda to be done to Adam (as) who was the first
hujjat (proof) of Allah. This is the foundation and proof that in the
end Allah will order the

sajda to be done to Muhammad (saw) wa Aal e Muhammad (as) which is the
greatest hujjat (proof) of Allah. It will be as if every one is doing
sajda to Allah. The whole creation was ordered to do sajda to Masoomeen
(as) behind the veil of Adam (as). On the day of judgement, they will be
ordered to do sajda to Their Noorani form. The people who are followers
of superficial aspects of guidance and deny its true essence do sajda
towards Kaaba, but deny the greatness and owner of Kaaba, Moula Ali
(as).

You should remember the above-mentioned ayah tells us about sujood which
means there is more than one sajda. On the day of judgement Allah will
order the whole creation to do sajda to all 14 Masoomeen (as) One by
One.

Summary of the Day of Judgement
-------------------------------

**Sura al-A’araaf (The Heights) 44: “Then a crier will cry out among
them that the curse of Allah is on the oppressors.”** Moula Ali (as)
said, “*I am that crier. Oppressors are those people who denied My
wilayat and usurped My rights.”*

Conclusion
----------

Here briefly is the outcome of our discussions regarding the day of
judgement:

Questioning at the time of death, in the grave, and on the  day of
judgement will be regarding the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as).

One who will be asked questions in the grave will not be questioned on
the day of judgement nor will he face accountability. These people are
pure momins and pure kafirs.

One who will not be questioned in the grave will be questioned on the
day of judgement and have to face accountability. These people are
between momin and mushrik. It will depend upon Allah whether He sends
them to jannah because of His Mercy or throws them into hell because of
His Adl (justice). There will be some people who will not go to jannah
or jahannum. They will stay in ‘A’raaf’. This is a place similar to our
world. They will be comfortable and also face sufferings.

No one will go into hell except three kinds of people. Syeda (sa) will
take all of the people into jannah except these:

**one who doubts**

**kafir**

**munafiq**

After reaching this point, we are now able to present that proof which
we have previously mentioned. The day of judgement and the questioning
on the day of judgement will be different for everyone. These sayings of
RasoolAllah (saw) prove our claim to be true:

**Kokab Durri page no. 193** , RasoolAllah (saw) said, “*O’Ali (as)! It
is enough for You that there will be no regrets for Your friends at the
time of death. He will have no fear or worries while in his grave. He
will have no confusion or concern on the day of judgement.”*

Wonders of Paradise
-------------------

**Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page no. 165,** *“The chain at the door
of paradise is made of red rubies. It is fixed on a belfry that is made
of gold. When this chain hits the belfry, it makes the sound of “Ya Ali
(as)”.*

Someone asked me “It has been mentioned in various narrations that three
animals will go to jannah. Dog of Sahab e Kahf, Donkey of Balaimbaaur,
and Wolf of Hz Yusuf (as).  The question is what will be the status of
Zuljenah in the paradise?” I replied, “My brother, Quran and hadith only
explain Usool. If they had told everything in its details, then you
would have a whole library of books. You will notice the rule of
punishment and reward does not apply to animals. Yet these three animals
will be rewarded. There can only be two reasons. They helped and were
loyal to a Masoom. Now whenever you see this attribute, you can know
yourself what the result will be.” In*Haqqul Yaqeen Second Edition page
no. 105,* there is a hadith that states, “The mujahhid will have the
same horses in jannah as

they had in this world.”  May our parents be sacrificed on that sacred
horse that was not only a horse of a mujahhid, but was a mujahhid
himself.

Therefore, our discussion regarding beliefs has reached its end. We have
tried our best to explain briefly, but we also tried not to leave out
any important points. Even if I missed something, I hope my readers will
forgive me.

It is necessary for every momin to stay firmly on three beliefs.

InshaAllah after this you will get spiritual and ever lasting comfort.

To become associated with the Ismat e Khubra of Allah and get use to the
Shahadatay Wilayatay Ameerul Momineen (as) regardless if you are at the
time of your death, in your grave, or the day of judgement, whenever
someone asks you, you will immediately reply “Aliun wali Allah”. Then
firmly believe that any act regardless of its size, nothing will be
accepted without this shahadat.

Disassociate yourself from three groups of people, one who doubts,
kafirs, and munafiqs. Then give yourself to your Masters.

Be the dust of the steps of two great personalities. One is Syeda (sa)
because jannah is Her Mahr. The woman is the owner of her mahr. Second
is Imam e Mazloom Hussain (as) because He has taken a promise from
Allah. After this, you will spend your life with such satisfaction and
faith. No doubt or fear will even touch you. The thought of death will
become jannah for you.

If this book gives such an impression that this is a guarantee for a
momin that he will go to jannah, even though I agree, but I also warn
you that only a TRUE momin who dies  on iman (faith) is guaranteed
jannah. Every momin should be afraid all of the time. He must try to
never do anything that takes his whole iman. At all times he should keep
repeating this dua:

O’My Lord! Forgive my sins and bless me with true iman. When I die, make
me die with iman.

This book “Kashaful Aqaid” by the blessings of Allah and with the help
of Imam Zamana (ajf) was completed today 22 of June, 2001(29 Rabiul Awal
1422 Hijra on Friday 12:00 am)
