With What Does Theoretical Gnosis Deal?
=======================================

Before turning to the significance of theoretical gnosis and doctrinal
Sufism, it is necessary to mention a few words about what subjects this
Supreme Science treats. And before delineating the subjects made known
through theoretical gnosis, one needs to know how one can gain such a
knowledge. The knowledge of the Supreme Reality or the Supreme Substance
is itself the highest knowledge and constitutes the very substance of
principial knowledge. As Frithjof Schuon, one of the foremost
contemporary expositors of gnosis and metaphysics has said, “The
substance of knowledge is Knowledge of the Substance.”59 This knowledge
is contained deep within the heart/intellect and gaining it is more of a
recovery than a discovery. It is ultimately remembrance, the Platonic
anamnesis. The faculty associated with this knowledge is the intellect
(al-‘aql), the nous, not to be confused with reason. The correct
functioning of the intellect within man is in most cases in need of that
objective manifestation of the intellect that is revelation.60 In any
case its attainment always requires intellectual intuition, which is
ultimately a Divine gift, and the ability to “taste” the truth. In the
Islamic tradition this supreme knowledge or gnosis is associated with
such qualities as dhawq (taste), hads (intuition), ishrāq (illumination)
and hudūr (presence).

Those who are able to understand gnosis must possess certain
intellective gifts not to be confused with powers of mere ratiocination.
Also in Islam gnosis has always been related to the inner meaning of the
revelation and its attainment of the initiatic and esoteric power of
walāyah/wilāyah which issues from the fountain of prophecy and about
which so many Muslim gnostics from Ibn ‘Arabī to Sayyid Haydar Āmulī and
from Āqā Muhammad Ridā Qumsha’ī to Muhammad ‘Alī Shāhābādī to Ayatollah
Khomeini have written with differing interpretations.

Turning now to the subjects with which theoretical gnosis and doctrinal
Sufism deal, we must mention that it is not our intention here to
expound its teachings, but only the subjects which are of concern to
this School.61 The supreme subject of gnosis may be said to be the
Supreme Principle or Reality which is absolute and infinite and not even
bound by the condition of being absolute and infinite.

The gnostics often write that it is Absolute Being without even the
“limitation” of absoluteness. It is therefore the Reality which is both
Beyond-Being and Absolute Being. Later gnostics called this supreme
subject wujūd-i lā bi-shart-i maqsamī, the totally unconditioned Being
which is the ground for all divisions and distinctions. Gnosis,
therefore, deals not only with ontology but with a metaphysics that is
grounded beyond Being in the Supreme Reality of which Being usually
understood is the first determination. It begins with the Divine Ipseity
or Dhāt that is above all limits and determinations and that is
sometimes referred to as al-Haqq (the Truth). It also deals with
multiplicity within the Divine Order, that is, the Divine Names and
Qualities which are so many Self-Determinations and Self-Disclosures of
the Supreme Essence.

This Supreme Science (al-‘ilm al-a‘lā) that is gnosis also deals with
manifestations of the Principle, with all the levels of universal
existence

from the archangelic to the material but views all that exists in the
cosmic order in light of the Principle. It descends from the Principle
to manifestation and deals with cosmology as a science of the cosmos in
relation to the Principle, as a form of knowledge that provides maps to
guide and orient human beings who are situated in the confines of cosmic
existence to the Metacosmic Reality. This Supreme Science also deals of
necessity with the human state in all its width, breadth, depth and
height. It contains a most profound “science of man”, which one could
call an anthropology if this term were to be understood in its
traditional and not modern sense, as well as a “science of spirit”
within man or pneumatology which is absent from the worldview of the
modern world. Finally, gnosis deals with the Principle and all the
levels of manifestation from the point of view of the unity which
dominates over all that exists and which is especially central to the
Islamic perspective. One might say that Islamic metaphysics or gnosis is
dominated by the two basic doctrines of the “transcendent oneness of
Being” (wahdat alwujūd) and the universal man (al-insān al-kāmil) which
includes not only a gnostic anthropology but also a symbolic cosmology
on the basis of the correspondence between the microcosm and macrocosm.

Theoretical gnosis is also concerned in the deepest sense with the
reality of revelation and religion. The question of the relation between
gnosis and esoterism on the one hand and the formal and exoteric aspect
of religion on the other is a complicated one into which we cannot enter
here. What is clear is that in every traditional society gnosis and
esoterism have been inextricably tied to the religious climate in which
they have existed. This is as true of Luria and Jewish esoterism as it
is of Śankara and Hindu gnosis as well as everything in between. In any
case in this essay, which deals with gnosis in the Islamic tradition, we
need to mention the profoundest concern of the gnostics with the
realities of religion and explanation of its teachings on the most
profound level as we observe in many Sufi treatises on the inner meaning
of the Islamic rites.62

Theoretical gnosis is concerned not only with the practical aspects of
religion, but also with basic Islamic doctrines such as creation,
prophecy, eschatology, etc. Islamic masters of gnosis speak of both the
why and the how of creation. They speak of “creation in God” as well as
creation by God.63 They expound the doctrine of the immutable archetypes
(al-a‘yān al-thābitah) and the breathing of existence upon them
associated with the Divine Mercy which brings about the created order.
They see creation itself as the Self-Disclosure of God.64 They also
discuss the renewal of creation (tajdīd al-khalq) at every moment.65
Furthermore, theoretical gnosis speaks extensively about the end as well
as the beginning of things. The deepest explanation of Islamic
eschatology based on the Quran and Hadīth is found in such writings as
the Futūhāt al-makkiyyah of Ibn ‘Arabī.

In all traditional religions and cultural climes gnosis also provides
the basis for the science of forms including artistic forms and makes
comprehensible the language of symbolism. Although dealing at the
highest level with the Formless, it is gnosis and metaphysics that
provide the basis for the science of symbols especially in a world where
the “symbolist spirit”

has been lost.66 In Islam treatises on theoretical gnosis do not usually
deal explicitly in a separate section with forms and symbols but expound
the principles of this science which are then applied when necessary.
The writings of Ibn ‘Arabī and Rūmī are replete with such examples. Such
masters provide the science of spiritual hermenetics (ta’wīl) as well as
apply it to diverse religious and artistic forms, symbols and myths
including of course those found in the Quran itself.

Gnosis is illuminative and unitive knowledge and therefore it is natural
that theoretical gnosis be concerned with knowledge as such, primarily
sacred knowledge and knowledge of the sacred but also with the grades
and the hierarchy of knowledge.67 It is true that most traditional
philosophies, including the Islamic, also deal with this issue, but it
is only in works on theoretical gnosis that one finds the most universal
treatment of this subject including of course supreme knowledge that is
gnosis itself. Theoretical gnosis or scientia sacra is also the
metaphysics that lies at the heart of perennial philosophy understood
traditionally. It has been sometimes called theosophy, as this term was
understood before its modern distortion, and is also related to what is
called mystical theology and mystical philosophy in Western languages.
In the Islamic tradition it has provided the ultimate criteria for the
judgment of what constitutes philosophia vera. It has been foundational
in the development of both traditional philosophy and the traditional
sciences and is key to the deepest understanding of all traditional
cosmological sciences including the “hidden sciences” (al-‘ulūm
al-khafiyyah or gharībah).

The later traditional schools of philosophy that have persisted in the
Islamic world to this day, chief among the School of Illumination
founded by Suhrawardī (d. 587/1191) and the Transcendent
Theosophy/Philosophy established by Mullā Sadrā, are closely associated
with ‘irfān. One might in fact say that while after the Middle Ages and
the Renaissance in the West philosophy became more and more wedded and
also subservient to modern science, as we see so clearly in Kant, in the
Islamic world philosophy became ever more closely associated with ‘irfān
from which it drew its sustenance and whose vision of reality served as
basis for its philosophizing. One needs only read the works of Mullā
Sadrā such as his al-Shawāhid alrubūbiyyah or the treatises of Āqā ‘Alī
Mudarris such as his Badāyi‘al-hikam to ascertain the truth of this
assertion. Many of the works of the later Islamic philosophers are at
the borderline between hikmat and ‘irfān although the two disciplines
remain quite distinct from one another.


