The Present Day Significance of Theoretical Gnosis
==================================================

Today the Islamic world suffers greatly from the neglect of its own
intellectual tradition and yet there are some contemporary modernized
Muslim philosophers, especially in the Arab world and to some extent
Turkey, who dismiss later Islamic philosophy precisely because of its
association with ‘irfān which they criticize pejoratively as mere
mysticism. At the other end of the spectrum there are those so-called
fundamentalists who are opposed to both reason and gnosis and turn their
backs on and moreover criticize the Islamic intellectual tradition, at
whose heart stands gnosis, on the pretext of wanting to save Islam. They
are blind to the fact that it is precisely this intellectual tradition
of which Islam is in the direst need today, faced as it is with the
challenges of the modern world that are primarily intellectual.

Some of the greatest problems facing Islam on an intellectual level
today are the invasion of a secularist worldview and secular
philosophies; the spread of a science and technology based on a secular
view of nature and of knowledge of nature; the environmental crisis
which is closely related to the spread of modern technology; religious
pluralism and the need to comprehend in depth other religions; the need
to defend religion itself against all the secularist or exclusivist
Christian attacks against it emanating primarily from the West; the need
to understand the principles of Islamic art and architecture and to
apply these principles to creating authentic Islamic art and
architecture today; to provide an authentic Islamic answer to the
relation between religion and science; to formulate an Islamic science
of the soul or psychology; and to establish a firm foundation for the
harmony between faith and reason. The role of ‘irfān is central to the
solution of all of these problems. It is only in gnosis that the
unifying principle of faith and reason can be found. If one were only to
understand ‘irfān, one would realize its supreme significance for
Muslims today. Furthermore, ‘irfān is not enmeshed in the syllogistic
form of reasoning to be found in Islamic philosophy, a form of reasoning
that is alien to many people today. Paradoxically, therefore, it is in a
sense more accessible to those possessing intellectual intuition than
traditional schools of Islamic philosophy which can also play and in
fact must play an important role in the contemporary intellectual life
of the Islamic world.

As already mentioned, in the traditional Islamic world theoretical
gnosis was not only opposed by certain, but certainly not all, jurists,
theologians and philosophers; it was also opposed by certain Sufis who
claimed that gnosis is the result of what is attained through spiritual
states and not through reading books on gnosis.

Titus Burckhardt once told us that when he first went to Fez as a young
man, one day he took the Fusūs with him to a great teacher to study this
basic text of ma‘rifah or ‘irfān with him. The teacher asked him what
book he was carrying under his arm. He said it was the Fusūs. The
teacher smiled and said, “Those who are intelligent enough to understand
the Fusūs do not need to study it, and those who are not intelligent
enough are not competent to study it anyway.”

The master nevertheless went on to teach the young S. Ibrāhīm (Titus
Burckhardt) the Fusūs but he was alluding to the significance of
realized gnosis and not only its theoretical understanding, a knowledge
that once realized delivers man from the bondage of ignorance, being by
definition salvific knowledge. Burckhardt went on to translate a summary
of the Fusūs into French, a translation which played a seminal role in
the introduction of the School of theoretical gnosis and Ibn ‘Arabī to
the West. In fact, although the magisterial exposition of gnosis and
metaphysics by traditional masters such as René Guénon, Frithjof Schuon,
Burckhardt himself and others were directly related to inner inspiration
and intellection as well as teachings of non-Islamic origin, they were
also inextricably linked with the tradition of ‘irfān discussed in this
essay.

Of course, one does not become a saint simply by reading texts of ‘irfān
or even understanding them mentally. One has to realize their truths and
“be” what one knows. Nevertheless, the body of knowledge contained in
works of theoretical gnosis and doctrinal Sufism are a most precious
science which Muslims must cherish as a gift from Heaven. This vast body
of writings from Ibn ‘Arabī and Qūnawī to Āqā Muhammad Ridā Qumsha’ī and
Amīr ‘Abd al-Qādir and in the contemporary period from Mawlānā Thanwī,
Muhammad ‘Alī Shāhābādī and Ayatollah Khomeini to Sayyid Jalāl al-Dīn
Āshtiyānī and Hasan-zādah Āmulī contain a body of knowledge of vast
richness, a knowledge which alone can provide the deepest answers to the
most acute contemporary intellectual, spiritual and even practical
questions. But above all this tradition alone can provide for those
Muslims capable of understanding it the Supreme Science of the Real, the
science whose realization is the highest goal of human existence.68

Endnotes
--------

1 We use this Latin term to distinguish it from “sacred science” which
possesses a more general meaning and includes also traditional
cosmological sciences.

2 As far as opposition to Ibn ‘Arabī’s doctrines are concerned, see for
example, Alexander Knysh, Ibn ‘Arabī in the Later Islamic Tradition—The
Making of a Polemical Image in Medieval Islam (Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1999).

3 On the traditional understanding of the perennial philosophy see Nasr,
Knowledge and the Sacred (Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1989), pp. 68ff. See also Frithjof Schuon, “Tracing the Notion of
Philosophy,” in his Sufism—Veil and Quintessence, trans. William
Stoddart (Bloomington (IN): World Wisdom Books, 1981), Chap. 5, pp.
115-[^128]:

4 The relation between Shi‘ite gnosis and Sufism is a fascinating and at
the same time crucially important subject with which we cannot deal
here. A number of Western scholars, chief among them Henry Corbin, have
treated this issue metaphysically and historically. See for example his
En Islam iranien, Vol. III, Les Fidèles d’amour—Shi‘ism et soufisme
(Paris: Gallimard, 1972), especially pp. 149ff. See also Mohammad Ali
Amir Mo‘ezzi and David Streight, The Divine Guide in Early Shi‘ism: The
Sources of Esotericism in Islam (Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press, 1994); and S. H. Nasr, Sufi Essays (Chicago: ABC
International Group, 1999), pp. 104-[^120]:

5 Unfortunately there is no complete or even nearly complete history of
either Sufism itself nor doctrinal Sufism. Even the details of the
School of Ibn ‘Arabī are far from being known. At the present stage of
scholarship we know but a few major peaks of this majestic range and
much remains to be discussed and brought to light in the arena of
international scholarship.

6 As an example of the relation between Ibn ‘Arabī and earlier gnostics
one can compare his treatment of walāyah/wilāyah discussed by many
scholars such as Michel Chodkiewicz and William Chittick (see for
example works cited below) and the writings of Hakīm Tirmidhī. For the
views of the latter see Tirmidhī, Kitāb khatm al-awliyā’, ed. Osman
Yahya (Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique, 1965); also Bernd Radtke, Drei
Schriften des Theosophen Tirmid (Beirut: In Kommissein bei Franz Steiner
Verlag Stuttgart, 1992).

There is now a substantial body of works in European languages on Ibn
‘Arabī as well as translations of many of his writings especially in
French. On Ibn ‘Arabī’s life and works see Claude Addas, Quest for the
Red Sulphur: The Life of Ibn ‘Arabī, trans. Peter Kingsley (Cambridge
(UK): Islamic Texts Society, 1993); and Stephen Hirtenstein, The
Unlimited Mercifier: The Spiritual Life and Thought of Ibn ‘Arabī
(Ashland, OR: White Cloud Press, 1999). For an introduction to his
teachings see William Chittick, Ibn ‘Arabī: Heir to the Prophets
(Oxford: Oneworld, 2005). For his works see Osman Yahya, Histoire et
classification de l’oeuvre d’Ibn ‘Arabī (Damascus: Institut Français de
Damas, 1964). For Ibn ‘Arabī’s gnostic teachings see W. Chittick, The
Sufi Path of Knowledge (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
1989); his The Self-Disclosure of God (Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press, 1998; Michel Chodkiewicz, An Ocean without Shore: Ibn
‘Arabī, the Book and the Law, trans. David Streight, (Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1993); idem. Seal of the
Saints—Prophethood and Sainthood in the Doctrine of Ibn ‘Arabī, trans.
Liadain Sherrard (Cambridge, UK: The Islamic Texts Society, 1993); Henry
Corbin, Alone with the Alone: Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn
‘Arabī (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997); and Toshihiko
Izutsu, Sufism and Taoism: A Comparative Study of Key Philosophical
Concepts (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1984), Part I,
pp. 7-[^283]:

7 See The Wisdom of the Prophets of Ibn ‘Arabī, trans. from the Arabic
to French with notes by Titus Burchkhardt, trans. from French to English
by Angela Culme-Seymour (Aldsworth (UK): Beshara Publications, 1975).
This work has penetrating comments on the metaphysics of Ibn ‘Arabī by
Burckhardt. The latest and the most successful translation of the Fusūs
in English is by Caner Dagli, The Ringstones of Wisdom (Fusūs al-hikam)
(Chicago: Kazi Publications, Great Books of the Islamic World, 2004).
See also Charles-André Gilis, Le Livre des chatons des sagesse (Beirut:
Al-Bouraq Éditions, 1997).

8 See Ibn ‘Arabī, Les Illuminations de la Mecque—The Meccan
Illuminations, trans. under the direction of Michel Chodkiewicz (Paris:
Sindbad, 1988).

9 On the history of the School of Ibn ‘Arabī and theoretical gnosis see
W. Chittick, “The School of Ibn ‘Arabī,” in Seyyed Hossein Nasr and
Oliver Leaman (eds.), History of Islamic Philosophy (London: Routledge,
2001), pp. 510-523; S. H. Nasr, “Seventh Century Sufism and the School
of Ibn ‘Arabī,” in his Sufi Essays (Chicago: ABC International Group,
1999), pp. 97-103; and Annemarie Schimmel, “Theosophical Sufism” in her
Mystical Dimensions of Islam (Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North
Carolina Press, 1978), pp. 259-[^286]: There are also important
references to this School in several introductions of Sayyid Jalāl
al-Dīn Āshtiyānī to various philosophical and Sufi works edited by
himself such as his edition of Sharh fusūs al-hikam of Qaysarī (Tehran:
Shirkat-i Intishārāt-i ‘Ilmī wa Farhangī, 1375 [A.H. solar]). See also
A. Knysh, op. cit.

10 See W. Chittick, Faith and Practice of Islam (Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1992); Chittick, “The Five Divine
Presences: From al-Qūnawī to al- Qaysarī,” Muslim World, vol. 72, 1982,
pp. 107-128; and Chittick, “The Last Will and Testament of Ibn ‘Arabī’s
Foremost Disciple and Some Notes on its Author,” Sophia perennis, vol.
4, no. 1, 1978, pp. 43-[^58]: See also Muhammad Khwājawī, Daw Sadr
al-Dīn (Tehran, Intishārāt-i Mawlā, 1378 [A.H. solar]), pp. 17-114,
containing one of the best summaries of the life, works and thought of
Qūnawī.

11 See Kitāb al-fukūk, ed. by M. Khwājawī (Tehran: Intishārāt-i Mawlā,
1371 [A.H.solar]).

12 See the edition of M. Khwājawī (Tehran: Intishārāt-i Mawlā, 1374
[A.H. solar]). This large volume includes, besides the texts of Qūnawī
and Fanārī, glosses by later members of the School of theoretical gnosis
in Persia from Āqā Muhammad Ridā Qumsha’ī, Mīrzā Hāshim Ashkiwarī, and
Sayyid Muhammad Qummī to Ayatollah Rūh Allāh Khumaynī (Khomeini) and
Hasanzādah Āmulī. There are also numerous commentaries on this text by
Turkish authors.

13 This work was studied and translated by Arthur J. Arberry along with
other poems of Ibn al-Fārid in The Mystical Poems of Ibn al- Fārid
(London: E. Walker, 1952 and Dublin: E. Walker, 1956). See also Emil
Homerin, The Wine of Love and Life (Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press, 2005).

14 See S. J. Āshtiyānī’s edition with commentary and introduction upon
Mashāriq al-darārī (Mashhad: Chāpkhāna-yi Dānishgāh-i Firdawsī, 1398
[A.H. solar]).

15 See his Sharh fusūs al-hikam (Qom: Būstān-i kitāb, 2002).

16 See Kashānī, Sharh fus ūs al-hikam, (Cairo: Mustafā al-Bābī
al-Halabī, 1966); also his Majmū‘at al-rasā’il wa’l-musannafāt, ed.
Majīd Hādī-zādah (Tehran: Mīrāth-i maktūb, 2000); and his Traité sur la
prédestination et le libre arbitre, trans. Omar Guyard (Beirut:
Al-Bouraq, 2005).

17 On Maghribī Sufism see Vincent Cornell, The Realm of the Saint—Power
and Authority in Moroccan Sufism (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press,
1998).

18 When Titus Burckhardt was in Morocco in the 1930’s, he experienced
directly the presence of these teachings. We shall turn to this matter
later in this essay.

19 See Michel Chodkiewicz, Spiritual Writings of Amir ‘Abd al-Kader,
trans. by team under James Chrestensen and Tom Manning (Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press, 1995); and Le Livre des haltes,
edited and trans. by Michel Lagande (Leiden: Brill, 2000).

20 See Michael Winter, Society and Religion in Early Ottoman Egypt:
Studies in the Writings of ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-Sha‘rānī (New Brunswick,
NJ: Transaction Books, 1982).

21 See A. Knysh, op.cit., pp. 225ff.

22 See al-Jīlī, Universal Man, extracts translated with commentary by
Titus Burckhardt, English. English translation from the French by Angela
Culme-Seymour (Sherborne, Glos.: Beshara Press, 1983); and Reynold A.
Nicholson, Studies in Islamic Mysticism (Cambridge (UK): Cambridge
University Press, 1978), Chapter II, pp. 77ff. 23 See Nābulusī, Sharh
dīwān ibn al-Fārid (Beirut: Dār al-Turāth, 196?); and Elizabeth
Sirriyeh, Sufi Visionary of Ottoman Damascus: ‘Abd al-Ghanī al-Nābulusī,
1641-1731 (London: Routledge Curzon, 2005).

24 See Leslie Cadavid (ed. and trans.), Two Who Attained (Louisville,
KY: Fons Vitae, in press).

25 In light of our discussion of the significance of theoretical gnosis
it is important to note that this master of ‘irfān was the first rector
of a university, to use a contemporary

term, in the Ottoman Empire. On Qaysarī see the introduction of S. J.
Āshtiyānī to Rasā’il-i Qaysarī (Tehran: Imperial Iranian Academy of
Philosophy, 1357 [A.H. solar]); Mehmet Bayraktar (ed.), Dāwūd
Qaysarī—Rasā’il (Kayseri: Metroplitan Municipality, 1997); and also Emil
Homerin, op. cit.

Many glosses have been written to this day on Qaysarī’s commentary
including that of Ayatollah Khomeini. See Āyat Allāh al-‘uzmā al-Imām
al-Khumaynī, Ta‘līqāt ‘alā sharh fusūs al-hikam wa misbāh al-uns (Qom:
Daftar-i tablīghāt-i islāmī. 1410 [A.H. lunar]). There were also
numerous Ottoman glosses and commentaries on Qaysarī.

26 See his Commentary upon the Introduction of Qaysarī to the Fusūs
al-Hikam of Ibn Arabī, with introductions in French and English by Henry
Corbin and Seyyed Hossein Nasr (Mashhad: Meshed University Press, 1966).

27 See ft. nt. [^12]:

28 See Ibrahim Kalin’s entries to these figures in Oliver Leaman (ed.),
Dictionary of Islamic Philosophy (forthcoming).

29 See W. Chittick, “The School of Ibn ‘Arabī,” in S. H. Nasr and Oliver
Leaman (eds.), History of Islamic Philosophy, p. [^520]:

On the history of this School in India in general see W. Chittick,
“Notes on Ibn ‘Arabī’s Influence in the Subcontinent,” in The Muslim
World, vol. LXXXII, no. 3-4, July-October, 1992, pp. 218-241; and Sayyid
‘Alī ‘Abbās Rizvi, A History of Sufism in India (2 vols.) (New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal, 1978), in passim.

30 Chittick discusses many of these figures in his “Notes on Ibn
‘Arabī’s Influence…”

31 See Chittick, “Notes on Ibn ‘Arabī’s Influence …,” pp. 233ff.

32 See for example, Shah Waliullah of Delhi, Sufism and the Islamic
Tradition, trans. G. N. Jalbani, ed. D. B. Fry (London: Octagon Press,
1980). This work contains the translation of both the Lamahāt, one of
Shāh Walī Allāh’s main philosophical texts, and the Sata‘āt. Both texts,
and especially the first, reveal the influence of theoretical gnosis on
this major intellectual figure.

On Thanvi see Fuad Nadeem, “A Traditional Islamic Response to the Rise
of Modernism,” in Joseph Lumbard (ed.), Islam Fundamentalism, and the
Betrayal of Tradition (Bloomington, IN: World Wisdom Books, 2004), pp.
79-[^116]:

33 See Syed Muhaammad Naquib al-Attas, The Mysticism of Hamzah Fansūrī
(Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya Press, 1970).

34 See Zailan Moris, “South-east Asia,” in Nasr and Leaman (eds.),
History of Islamic Philosophy, pp. 1134ff.

35 Sachiko Murata, Chinese Gleams of Sufi Light: Wang Tai-Yü’s Great
Learning of the Pure and Real and Liu Chih’s Displaying the Concealment
of the Real Realm (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
2000), pp. 32ff. See also Zvi Ben-Dor Benite, The Dao of Muhammad: A
Cultural History of Muslims in Late Imperial China (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2005).

36 See Balyānī, Épître sur l’Unicité absolue, trans. Michel Chodkiewicz
(Paris: Les Deux Océans, 1982).

37 See Henry Corbin and Osman Yahya, La Philosophie shi‘ite
(Paris-Tehran: Andrien-Maisonneuve and Departement d’Iranologie, 1969);
and (same authors) Le Texte des textes (Paris-Tehran:
Andrien-Maisonneuve and Departement d’Iranologie, 1975). This work
contains Āmulī’s commentary on the Fusūs. See also Henry Corbin, En
Islam iranien, Vol. III, pp. 149ff.

38 Edited by Rajab ‘Alī Mazlūmī (Tehran: McGill University and Tehran
University Press, 1980).

39 This long work has been studied and edited by Māyil Hirawī as Sharh
fusūs alhikam (Tehran: Intishārāt-i Mawlā, 1368 [A.H. solar]).

40 Edited by Muhsin Bīdādfar (Qom: Intishārāt-i Bīdār, 1378 [A. H.
solar]).

41 Edited with introduction and commentary by S. J. Āshtiyānī (Tehran:
Imperial Iranian Academy of Philosophy, 1976). On Ibn Turkah see H.
Corbin, En Islam iranien, vol. III, pp. 233ff.; and S. H. Nasr, Islamic
Philosophy—From Its Origin to Today—Philosophy in the Land of Prophecy
(Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, forthcoming), Chapter
[^10]:

42 See Āmulī, Tahrīr tamhīd al-qawā‘id (Tehran: Intishārāt-i al-Zahrā’,
1372 [A.H.solar]). This voluminous text is one of the major works on
theoretical gnosis to appear in recent times.

43 Edited by W. Chittick (Tehran: The Imperial Academy of Philosophy,
1977). This edition contains a major introduction by Āshtiyānī dealing
with some of the most delicate issues of ‘irfān.

44 We were privileged to study the Ashi‘‘at al-lama‘āt over a several
year period with Sayyid Muhammad Kāzim Assār who expounded the major
themes of gnosis through this beautifully written text.

45 On Shi‘ism in Safavid Persia see, S. H. Nasr, Traditional Islam in
the Modern World (London: KPI, 1987), Chapter 4, pp. 59-[^72]:

46 See S. H. Nasr, Sadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī and his Transcendent Theosophy
(Tehran: Institute for Humanities and Cultural Studies, 1997), Chapter
4, pp. 69-[^82]:

47 See Yahya Christian Bonaud, L’Imam Khomeyni, un gnostique méconnu du
XXe siècle (Beirut: Les Éditions Al-Bouraq, 1997), pp. 80-[^81]: Bonaud
mentions in this connection a number of names such as Mullā Hasan
Lunbānī (d. 1094/1683) and Muhammad ‘Alī Muzaffar (d. 1198/1783-84) as
does S. J. Āshtiyānī, but the history of ‘irfān-i nazarī from the
Safavid period to Sayyid Radī is far from clear. As far as ‘irfān is
concerned, Sayyid Radī possibly studied with Mullā Muhammad Ja‘far
Ābāda’ī.

48 On him see Manūchihr Sadūq Suhā, Tārīkh-i hukamā’ wa ‘urafā-yi
muta’akhkhir (Tehran: Intishārāt-i hikmat, 1381 [A.H. solar]), pp.
261-[^262]:

49 On Āqā Muhammad Ridā see Sadūqī Suhā, op.cit., p. 259ff. On him and
other major figures of the School of Tehran see also Nasr, Islamic
Philosophy from its Origin to Today, Chapter [^13]: See also the
introductions of S. J. Āshtiyānī to Sharh al-mashā‘ir of Lāhījī
(Mashhad: Mashhad University Press, 1964); and to Mullā Sadrā’s
al-Shawāhid al-rubūbiyyah (Mashhad: Mashhad University Press, 1967),
concerning Āqā Muhammad Ridā and the whole history of ‘irfān in Persia
from the end of the Safavid period onward.

50 See Sadūqī Suhā, op.cit., p. [^267]:

51 These figures are discussed by Suhā. See also our Islamic Philosophy
… For Shahābādī see Bonaud, op.cit., pp. 82-[^87]:

52 Bonaud, op.cit., p. [^87]:

53 The major study of Bonaud, cited above, is an exception. Nothing
comparable exists in English.

54 One day in the 1960’s when we were discussing the philosophical ideas
of Ayatollah Khomeini with our eminent teacher, ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī, who
was his friend, we asked the ‘Allāmah what philosophical schools most
attracted Ayatollah Khomeini. He answered that Ayatollah Khomeini had
little patience (hawsilah) for the logical arguments of Peripatetic
philosophy but was more interested in Mullā Sadrā and Ibn ‘Arabī. The
same view is confirmed by Mīrzā Mahdī Hā’irī who studied with Ayatollah
Khomeini and who says, He [Imam Khomeini] did not have much interest in
Peripatetic philosophy and logic. His teaching of the Asfār had more of
a gnostic attraction. He had studied ‘irfān well with Āqā-yi Shāhābādī
and was busy all the time reading the books of Ibn ‘Arabī. Therefore, he
also looked at the Asfār from the point of view of Ibn ‘Arabī and not
from the perspective of Ibn Sīnā and Fārābī. When he came to the words
of Ibn Sīnā and Fārābī, he would become completely uncomfortable and
would escape from philosophical constraints through the rich power of
‘irfān. Khirad-nāma-yi hamshahrī, June 1, 2005, p. 17

55 On the different gnostic currents in Shi‘ism see our foreword to
Husaynī Tihrānī, Kernel of the Kernel (Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press, 2003), xiii-xix.

56 On the gnostic works of Ayatollah Khomeini see Bonaud, op.cit.,
Chapter 2, 103ff. The institution called Mu’assisa-yi tanzīm wa nashr-i
āthār-i al-Imām al-Khumaynī in Tehran has published all of his works
including those concerned with gnosis as well as the dīwān of his
poetry.

57 This is not only true of Persia but also of Shi‘ite circles in Iraq
such as the one in Najaf, at least until a few years ago. During the
Qajar and early Pahlavi periods, Tehran was better known for ‘irfān-i
nazarī and Najaf for operative ‘irfān, although texts such as the Fusūs
were also taught in Najaf by remarkable masters with whom such
luminaries as ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī studied this seminal text.

58 Tehran, Sāzimān-i chāp wa intishārāt-i Wizārāt-i Farhang wa Irshād-i
islāmī, 1378 [A.H. solar].

59 To quote the original French, “La substance de la connaissance est la
Connaissance de la Substance.” F. Schuon, Formes et substance dans les
religions (Paris: Dervy-Livres, 1975, p. 35).

60 We have dealt with this issue extensively in our Knowledge and the
Sacred; see also F. Schuon, Stations of Wisdom (Bloomington, IN: World
Wisdom Books, 1995), pp. 1-[^42]:

61 We have dealt with the teachings of this Supreme Science in our
Knowledge and the Sacred, Chapter 4, pp. 130ff. This Supreme Science is
of course also metaphysics as traditionally understood. See René Guénon,
“Oriental Metaphysics,” in Jacob Needleman (ed.), The Sword of Gnosis
(Boston: Arkana, 1986), pp. 40-[^56]: Schuon has also written many
illuminating pages on this subject including his book Survey of
Metaphysics and Esoterism, trans. Gustavo Polit (Bloomington, IN: World
Wisdom Books, 1986). See also S. H. Nasr (ed.), The Essential Frithjof
Schuon (Bloomington, IN: World Wisdom Books, 2005), especially pp.
309ff.

62 See for example, Martin Lings, A Sufi Saint of the Twentieth Century
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1973), Chapter X, pp.
176ff; and Henry Corbin, Temple and Contemplation, trans. Philip and
Liadain Sherrard (London: KPI, 1986), pp. 183ff.

63 Metaphysically speaking, creation must take place in God before the
external act of creation takes place. On this important doctrine across
many religious boundaries see Leo Schaya, La Création en Dieu (Paris,
Dervy-Livres, 1983).

64 See W. Chittick, The Self-Disclosure of God: Principles of Ibn
al-‘Arabī’s Cosmology (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
1998).

65 See Toshihiko Tzutsu, Creation and the Timeless Order of Things
(Ashland, OR: White Cloud Press, 1984).

66 For outstanding examples of this function of metaphysics and gnosis
see René Guénon, Fundamental Symbols: The Universal Language of Sacred
Science, trans. Alvin Moore, ed. Martin Lings (Cambridge, UK: Quinta
Essentia, 1995); and Martin Lings, Symbol and Archetype: A Study of the
Meaning of Existence (Cambridge (UK): Quinta Essentia, 1991).

67 We have dealt with this issue extensively in our Knowledge and the
Sacred.

68 See our In the Garden of Truth (San Francisco, CA: Harper,
forthcoming).
