Introduction
============

There is a body of knowledge in the Islamic tradition which, while
highly intellectual in the original sense of this term, is neither
theology (kalām) nor philosophy (falsafah) while dealing with many
subjects of their concern although from another perspective. This body
of knowledge is called doctrinal Sufism, al-tasawwuf al-‘ilmī in Arabic,
to be contrasted to practical Sufism, al-tasawwuf al-‘amalī, or
theoretical (and sometimes speculative) gnosis (this term being
understood in its original and not sectarian sense), especially in the
Persian-speaking world, where it is referred to as ‘irfān-i nazarī. The
seekers and masters of this body of knowledge have always considered it
to be the Supreme Science, al-‘ilm al-a‘lā, and it corresponds in the
Islamic context to what we have called elsewhere scientia sacra.1 This
corpus of knowledge is implicit in the Quran, Hadīth, and the writings
of early Sufis. It becomes somewhat more explicit from the 4th/10th
century onward in works of such masters as Hakīm Tirmidhī, Abū Hāmid
Muhammad and Ahmad Ghazzālī, and ‘Ayn al-Qudāt Hamadānī and receives its
full elaboration in the 7th/13th century in the hands of Ibn ‘Arabī, not
all of whose writings are, however, concerned with this Supreme Science.
This corpus is distinct from other genres of Sufi writing such as
manuals for the practice of Sufism, works on spiritual virtues, Sufi
hagiographies, Sufi poetry, etc. but during the past seven centuries
this body of knowledge has exercised great influence on most other
aspects of Sufism and also on later Islamic philosophy and even kalām.

Despite its immense influence in many parts of the Islamic world during
the last centuries, doctrinal Sufism or theoretical gnosis has also had
its opponents over the centuries, including certain scholars of the
Quran and Hadīth, some of the more exoterist jurists, many of the
theologians (mutakallimūn), some of the more rationalistic philosophers
and even some Sufis associated with Sufi centers (khānqāh or zāwiyah)
and established orders. The latter have opposed the theoretical
exposition of truths which they believe should be kept hidden and which
they consider to be associated closely with spiritual practice and
inward unveiling (kashf).2 Still, this body of knowledge has been
preserved and has continued to flourish over all these centuries,
exercising immense influence in many domains of Islamic thought while
remaining for many the crown of all knowledge.


