A Brief History of the Tradition of Theoretical Gnosis
======================================================

Before turning to theoretical gnosis itself and its significance today,
it is necessary to provide a brief history over the ages in the Islamic
tradition of the expressions of this Supreme Science which itself stands
beyond history and temporal development, being at the heart of the
philosohia perennis as understood by traditional authorities,3 and not
being bound in its essence by the local coloring of various epochs and
places. Of course, the wisdom with which this Supreme Science deals has
always been and will always be, but it has received distinct
formulations in the framework of various traditions at whose heart is to
be found this wisdom concerning the nature of reality. In the Islamic
tradition this knowledge was handed down in a principial manner by the
Prophet to a number of his companions, chief among them ‘Alī, and in
later generations to the Sufi masters and of course the Shi‘ite Imams,
many of whom were in fact also poles of Sufism of their day.4 Besides
being transmitted orally, this knowledge was often expressed in the form
of allusions, elliptical expressions, symbolic poems and the like.

Gradually from the 4th/10th century onward some Sufis such as Hakīm Abū
‘Abd Allāh Tirmidhī (d. circa 320/938) began to write more
systematically on certain aspects of Sufi doctrine. For example,
Tirmidhī wrote on the central Sufi doctrine of walāyah/wilāyah, that is,
initiatic and spiritual power as well as sanctity. During the century
after him, Abū Hāmid Muhammad Ghazzālī (d. 505/1111) wrote on divine
knowledge itself in both the Ihyā’ and such shorter treatises as
al-Risālat al-laduniyyah (only attributed to him according to some
scholars) as well as writing an esoteric commentary on the Light Verse
of the Quran in his Mishkāt al-anwār. His brother Ahmad (d. 520/1126)
expounded gnosis and metaphysics in the language of love in his Sawānih.
Shortly afterwards, ‘Ayn al-Qudāt Hamadānī (d. 525/1131) dealt with the
subject of divine knowledge and a philosophical exposition of certain
Sufi teachings in his Maktūbāt and Tamhīdāt while in his Zubdah he
criticized the existing rationalistic currents in the thought of some
philosophers and pointed to another way of knowing which is none other
than gnosis. These figures in turn prepared the ground for Ibn ‘Arabī,
although he is a colossal and providential figure whose writings cannot
be reduced to simply historical influences of his predecessors.5

Many have quite rightly considered Ibn ‘Arabī as the father of
theoretical gnosis or doctrinal Sufism.6 His writings as already
mentioned are not, however, concerned only with pure metaphysics and
gnosis. They also deal extensively with Quranic and Hadīth commentary,
the meaning of religious rites, various traditional sciences including
the science of the symbolic significance of letters of the Arabic
alphabet, ethics, law and many other matters, including poetry, all of
which also are of an esoteric and gnostic nature. As far as the subject
of this essay is concerned, it will be confined to works devoted
completely to theoretical gnosis and metaphysics, works which deal
directly with the Supreme Science of the Real. Otherwise, every work of
Ibn ‘Arabī and his School is related in one way or another to gnosis

or ma‘rifah as are writings of many other Sufis. The seminal work of Ibn
‘Arabī on the subject of gnosis and one which is foundational to the
whole tradition of theoretical gnosis in Islam is the Fusūs al-hikam
(“Bezels of Wisdom”)7 along with certain sections of his magnum opus
al-Futūhāt al-makkiyyah, (“The Meccan Illuminations),8 and a few of his
shorter treatises including Naqsh alfusūs which is Ibn ‘Arabī’s own
commentary upon the Fusūs.

In any case the Fusūs was taken by later commentators as the central
text of the tradition of theoretical gnosis or doctrinal Sufism. Many of
the major later works of this tradition are in fact commentaries upon
this inspired text. The history of these commentaries, many of which are
“original” works themselves, stretching from the 7th/13th century to
this day, is itself of great import for the understanding of this
tradition and also reveals the widespread nature of the influence of
this tradition from Morocco to the Malay world and China. Unfortunately,
despite so much scholarship carried out in this field during the past
few decades, there is still no thorough history of commentaries upon the
Fusūs any more than there is a detailed history of the tradition of
theoretical gnosis and/or Sufi metaphysics itself.

Ibn ‘Arabī died in Damascus in 638/1240 and it was from there that his
teachings were disseminated. Some of his immediate students, who were
particularly drawn to pure metaphysics and gnosis, with a number also
having had training in Islamic philosophy, began to interpret the
master’s teachings and especially his Fusūs in a more systematic and
philosophical fashion thereby laying the ground for the systematic
formulation of that Supreme Science of the Real with which the tradition
of theoretical gnosis is concerned. The first commentator upon the Fusūs
was Ibn ‘Arabī’s immediate student and Qūnawī’s close companion, ‘Afīf
al-Dīn al-Tilimsānī (690/1291) who commented upon the whole text but in
summary fashion.9 But the most influential propagator of the master’s
teachings in the domain of gnosis and metaphysics and the person who
gave the systematic exposition that characterizes later expressions of
theoretical gnosis is Sadr al-Dīn Qūnawī (d. 673/1274).10 This most
important student of Ibn ‘Arabī did not write a commentary on the text
of the Fusūs, but he did write a work entitled al-Fukūk which explains
the titles of the chapters of the Fusūs and was considered by many a
later Sufi and gnostic as a key for the understanding of the mysteries
of Ibn ‘Arabī’s text.11 Qūnawī is also the author of a number of other
works of a gnostic (‘irfānī) nature, chief among them the Miftāh
al-ghayb, a monumental work of theoretical gnosis which, along with its
commentary by Shams al-Dīn Fanārī known as Misbāh al-uns, became one of
the premier texts for the teaching of theoretical gnosis especially in
Turkey and Persia.12

Qūnawī trained a number of students who themselves became major figures
in the tradition of theoretical gnosis. But before turning to them it is
necessary to mention a poet who was a contemporary of Ibn ‘Arabī and who
was to play an exceptional role in the later history of this tradition.
This poet is ‘Umar ibn al-Fārid (d. 632/1235), perhaps the greatest Sufi
poet of the Arabic language, whose al-

Tā’iyyah is considered as a complete exposition of the doctrines of
‘irfān expressed in sublime poetry, and the subject of several
commentaries which are themselves seminal texts of ‘irfān.13 There were
also many important Persian poets such as Fakhr al-Dīn ‘Irāqī (d.
688/1289), Awhad al-Dīn Kirmānī (d. 635/1238), Shams al-Dīn Maghribī (d.
809/1406-07), Mahmūd Shabistarī (d. circa 718/1318), and ‘Abd al-Rahmān
Jāmī (d. 898/1492), not to speak of Turkish poets and those of the
Subcontinent who expressed Ibn ‘Arabian teachings in the medium of
poetry but their poems do not belong strictly to doctrinal texts of the
tradition of theoretical gnosis with which we are concerned here
although some of the commentaries on their poetry do, such as Sharh-i
gulshan-i rāz of Shams al-Dīn Lāhījī (d. before 900/1494) as do some
poetic texts such as Ashi‘‘at allama‘āt and Lawā’ih of Jāmī.

Returning to Qūnawī’s students, as far as the subject of this essay is
concerned the most notable and influential for the later tradition was
first of all Sa‘īd al-Dīn Farghānī (d. 695/1296) who collected the
commentaries of his master in Persian on the Tā’iyyah and on their basis
composed a major work in both Persian and Arabic (which contains certain
additions) with the title Mashāriq al-darārī and Muntaha’l-madārik,
respectively.14 Secondly, one must mention Mu’ayyid al-Dīn Jandī (d.
700/1300), the author of the first extensive commentary upon the Fusūs15
which also influenced the very popular commentary of his student ‘Abd
al-Razzāq Kāshānī (d. 730/1330).16

Both of these men also wrote other notable works on theoretical gnosis
such as the Persian treatise Nafhat al-rūh wa tuhfat al-futūh of Jandī
and the Arabic Ta’wīl al-qur’ān of Kāshānī which has been also
mistakenly attributed to Ibn ‘Arabī. This work is illustrative of a
whole genre of writings which explain the principles of gnosis and
metaphysics on the basis of commentary upon the inner levels of meaning
of the Quran. During this early period, when the School of theoretical
gnosis was taking shape, there were other figures of importance
associated with the circle of Ibn ‘Arabī and Qūnawī although not the
students of the latter such as Sa‘d al-Dīn Hamūyah (d. 649/1252) and his
student ‘Azīz al-Dīn Nasafī (d. before 700/1300) who wrote several
popular works in Persian based on the doctrine of wahdat al-wujūd and
al-insān al-kāmil. It is not possible, however, in this short historical
review to deal with all such figures.


