The Arab World
==============

From this early foundation located in Syria and Anatolia the teachings
of the School of Ibn ‘Arabī and theoretical gnosis spread to different
regions of the Islamic world. In summary fashion we shall try to deal
with some of the most important figures in each region. Let us commence
with the Arab world. In the Maghrib a very strong Sufi tradition has
been preserved over the centuries but Maghribī Sufism, although devoted
to gnosis in its purest form as we see in such figures as Abū Madyan,
Ibn Mashīsh and Abu’l-Hasan al-Shādhilī, was not given to long
theoretical expositions of gnosis as we see in the East.17

Most works from this region were concerned with the practice of the Sufi
path and explanation of practical Sufi teachings. One had to wait for
the 12th/18th century to find in the works of Ahmad ibn ‘Ajībah (d.
1224/1809-10) treatises which belong to the genre of theoretical gnosis.
But the oral tradition based on Ibn ‘Arabian teachings was kept alive as
we see in the personal instructions and also written works of such
celebrated 14th/20th century Sufi masters of the Maghrib as Shaykh
al-‘Alawī (d. 1353/1934) and Shaykh Muhammad al-Tādilī (d. 1371/1952).18
Maghribī works on gnosis tended, however, to be usually less systematic
and philosophical in their exposition of gnosis than those of the East.

A supreme example of Ibn ‘Arabian teachings emanating from the Maghrib
is to be found in the writings of the celebrated Algerian amīr and Sufi
master ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jazā’irī (d. 1300/1883), who taught the works of
Ibn ‘Arabī when in exile in Damascus. Amīr ‘Abd al-Qādir also composed a
number of independent works on gnosis such as the Kitāb al-mawāqif.19 To
this day the text of the Fusūs and the Futūhāt are taught in certain
Sufi enters of the Maghrib especially those associated with the
Shādhiliyyah Order which has continued to produce over the centuries its
own distinct genre of Sufi literature going back to the prayers of
Abu’l-Hasan al-Shādhilī (d. 656/1258) and especially the treatises of
the third pole of the Order, Ibn ‘Atā’ Allāh al-Iskandarī (d.709/1309).
In later centuries these two currents, the first issuing from early
Shādhilism and the second from Ibn ‘Arabian gnosis were to meet in many
notable figures of Sufism from that as well as other regions.

There was greater interest in theoretical gnosis in the eastern part of
the Arab world as far as the production of written texts is concerned.
Strangely enough, however, Egypt, which has always been a major center
of Sufism, is an exception. In that ancient land there has always been
more interest in practical Sufism and Sufi ethics than in speculative
thought and doctrinal Sufism although Akbarian teachings had spread to
Mamluk Egypt in the 7th/13th century. There were also some popularizers
of Ibn ‘Arabī’s teachings in Egypt, perhaps chief among them ‘Abd
al-Wahhāb al-Sha‘rānī (d. 973/1565), whose well known works present a
more popular version of the Futūhāt and Fusūs.20 He tried also to link
Shādhilī teachings with those of Ibn ‘Arabī. There are, however, few
notable commentaries on classical texts of gnosis in Egypt in comparison
with those one finds in many other lands. Theoretical gnosis was,
nevertheless, taught and studied by many Egyptian figures. In this
context it is interesting to note that even the

modernist reformer Muhammad ‘Abduh turned to the study of Ibn ‘Arabī
later in life.

Opposition to these writings has remained, however, strong to this day
in many circles in that land as one sees in the demonstrations in front
of the Egyptian Parliament some years ago on the occasion of the
publication of the Futūhāt by Osman Yahya who had edited the text
critically.

In the Yemen there was great interest in Ibn ‘Arabian gnosis in the
School of Zabīd especially under the Rasūlids up to the 9th/15th
century. Ismā‘ī al-Jabartī (d. 806/1403), Ahmad ibn al-Raddād (d.
821/1417-18) and ‘Abd al-Karīm al-Jīlī (d. 832/1428) were particularly
significant figures of this School in the Yemen.21 Al-Jīlī, Theoretical
Gnosis and Doctrinal Sufism and Their Significance Today 9

who was originally Persian but resided in the Yemen, is particularly
important because of his magnum opus, al-Insān al-kāmil, a primary work
of gnosis that is used as a text for the instruction of theoretical
gnosis from Morocco to India to this day. It is a more systematic
exposition of the teaching of Ibn ‘Arabī.22

In the eastern Arab world it was especially in greater Palestine and
Syria that one sees continuous interest in theoretical gnosis and the
writing of important commentaries on Ibn ‘Arabī such as that of ‘Abd
al-Ghanyī al-Nābulusī (d. 1143/1731) on the Fusūs.23

Also, the defense by Ibrāhīm ibn Hasan al-Kurānī (d. 1101/1690), a
Kurdish scholar who resided in Mecca, of the gnosis of Ibn ‘Arabī had
much influence in Syria and adjoining areas. Although, as in Egypt and
elsewhere, many jurists and theologians in Syria going back to Ibn
Taymiyyah and students of Sa‘d al-Dīn al-Taftāzanī, opposed the
doctrines of Ibn ‘Arabian gnosis, this School remained very much alive
and continues to survive to this day in that region.

One of the most remarkable contemporary Sufis who died in Beirut just a
few years ago, the woman saint, Sayyidah Fātimah al-

Yashrutiyyah, gave the title al-Rihlah ila’l-Haqq to her major work on
Sufism on the basis of a dream of Ibn ‘Arabī.24


