Muslim India
============

We have been moving eastward in this brief historical survey and
logically we should now turn to Persia and adjacent areas including
Shi‘ite Iraq, which has been closely associated with Persia
intellectually since the Safavid period and Afghanistan which also
belongs to the same intellectual world as Persia. Because, however, of
the central role played in Persia in the cultivation of ‘irfān-i nazarī
during the past few centuries, we shall turn to it at the end of this
survey and first direct our attention farther east to India, Southeast
Asia and China.

Although a thorough study has never been made of all the important
figures associated with the School of Ibn ‘Arabī and theoretical gnosis
in the Indian Subcontinent, the research that has been carried out so
far reveals a very widespread influence of this School in that area.
Already in the 8th/14th century Sayyid ‘Alī Hamadānī, the Persian Sufi
who migrated to Kashmir (d. 786/1385), helped to spread Ibn ‘Arabī’s
ideas in India. He not only wrote a Persian commentary on the Fusūs, but
also composed a number of independent treatises on ‘irfān.29 A century
later ‘Alā’ al-Dīn ‘Alī ibn Ahmad Mahā’imī (d. 835/1432) not only
commented upon the Fusūs and Qūnāwī’s Nusūs, but also wrote several
independent expositions of gnosis of a more philosophical nature in
Arabic. These works are related in many ways in approach to later works
on gnosis written in Persia. He also wrote an Arabic commentary upon
Shams al-Dīn Maghribī’s Jām-i jahānnamāy which some believe received
much of its inspiration from the Mashāriq al-darārī of Farghānī. It is
interesting to note that Maghribī’s poetry, which like that of many
other poets such as Kirmānī, ‘Irāqī, Shabistarī, Shāh Ni‘mat Allāh Walī
(d. 834/1431) and Jāmī were based on basic gnostic theses such as wahdat
al-wujūd, was especially appreciated by those followers of the School of
Ibn ‘Arabī who were acquainted with the Persian language as was the
poetry of Ibn al-Fārid among Arab, Persian, Turkish and Indian followers
of that School.

Notable exponents of theoretical gnosis in India are numerous and even
the better known ones cannot be mentioned here.30 But it is necessary to
mention one figure who is probably the most profound master of this
School in the Subcontinent. He is Muhibb Allāh Ilāhābādī (also known as
Allāhābādī) (d. 1058/1648).31 Author of an Arabic and even longer
Persian commentary on the Fusūs and also an authoritative commentary on
the Futūhāt, Ilāhābādī also wrote independent treatises on ‘irfān. His
writings emphasize intellection and sapience rather than just spiritual
states which many Sufis in India as elsewhere claimed as the sole source
of divine knowledge.

The significance of the works of Muhibb Allāh Ilāhābādī in the tradition
of theoretical gnosis under consideration in this essay and his later
influence in India are immense. He marks one of the major peaks of the
School not only in India, but in the whole of the Islamic world.

The central thesis of Ibn ‘Arabian gnosis, that is, wahdat alwujūd had a
life of its own in India. While certain Sufis, such as Shaykh Ahmad
Sirhindī, opposed its usual interpretation, it was embraced by many
Sufis including such great saints as Gīsū Dirāz and Nizām al-Dīn Awliyā’
and

many of their disciples. One can hardly imagine the history of Sufism in
the Subcontinent without the central role played by ‘irfān-i nazarī.
Even notable Indian philosophers and theologians such as Shāh Walī Allāh
(d. 1176/1762) of Delhi wrote works highly inspired by this School whose
influence continued into the 14th/20th century as we see in some of the
works of Mawlānā Ashraf ‘Alī Thanwī (d. 1362/1943).32 Moreover, once the
philosophical School of Illumination (ishrāq) and the Transcendent
Theosophy or Philosophy (al-hikmat al-muta‘āliyah) reached India, there
were many interactions between these Schools and the School of ‘irfān as
we also see in Persia itself.


