China
=====

A word must also be said about China. Until the 11th/17th century
Chinese Muslims who dealt with intellectual matters did so on the basis
of Arabic and Persian texts. It was only in the 11th/17th century that
they began to use classical Chinese and to seek to express Islamic
metaphysics and philosophy in the language of Neo-Confucianism.
Henceforth, there developed a significant body of Islamic thought in
Chinese that is being systematically studied only now. It is interesting
to note that two of the classical Islamic works to be rendered the
earliest into Chinese are firstly the Lawā’ih of Jāmī, which is a
masterly summary of ‘irfān in Persian, translated by Liu Chih (d. circa
1670) as Chen-chao-wei (“Displaying the Concealment of the Real Realm”);
and secondly the Ashi‘‘at al-lama‘āt also by Jāmī and again, as already
mentioned, dealing with ‘irfān, translated by P’o Na-chih (d. after
1697) as Chao-yüan pi-chüeh (“The Mysterious Secret of the Original
Display”).35 Also the first Chinese Muslim thinker to expound Islamic
teachings in Chinese, that is, Wang Tai-yü (d. 1657 or 1658), who wrote
his Real Commentary on the True Teaching in 1642 to be followed by
several other works, was steeped in the same ‘irfānī tradition. The
School of theoretical gnosis was therefore destined to play a major role
in the encounter on the highest level between the Chinese and the
Islamic intellectual traditions during the past few centuries.


