Persia
======

Persia was destined to become one of the main centers, if not the
central arena, for the later development of theoretical gnosis. The
circle of Qūnawī was already closely connected to the Persian cultural
world and many of its members, including Qūnawī himself, wrote in
Persian. Qūnawī’s student, Fakhr al-Dīn ‘Irāqī is considered one of the
greatest poets of the Persian language. Among other early members of the
School one can mention Sa‘d al-Dīn Hamūyah, his disciple ‘Azīz al-Dīn
Nasafī, who wrote on gnosis in readily accessible Persian, Awhad al-Dīn
Balyānī (d. 686/1288) from Shiraz, whose famous Risālat al-ahadiyyah was
for a long time attributed to Ibn ‘Arabī,36 and ‘Abd al-Razzāq Kāshānī
who, as already mentioned, is a major figure of the School of
theoretical gnosis and a prominent commentator upon the Fusūs. From the
8th/14th century onward in Persia we see on the one hand the
continuation of the School of theoretical gnosis through the appearance
of prose works in both Arabic and Persian either in the form of
commentary upon the Fusūs and other seminal texts of this School or as
independent treatises. On the other hand we observe the deep influence
of this School in Sufi literature, especially poetry. A supreme example
is the Gulshan-i rāz of Mahmūd Shabistarī, one of the greatest
masterpieces of Persian Sufi poetry which summarizes the principles of
Ibn ‘Arabian gnosis in verses of celestial beauty. That is why its
commentary by Muhammad Lāhījī in the 9th/15th century is such a major
text of theoretical gnosis. Here, however, we are only concerned with
the prose and systematic works of theoretical gnosis and not the
poetical tradition but the nexus between the two should not be forgotten
as we see in the works of ‘Irāqī, Shāh Ni‘mat Allāh Walī, Jāmī and many
others.

Another important event that took place in the 8th/14th century and left
its deep influence upon the history of the School during the Safavid,
Qajar and Pahlavi periods was the integration of Ibn ‘Arabian gnosis
into Shi‘ism which possesses its own gnostic teachings to which scholars
refer as ‘irfān-i shī‘ī. These two outwardly distinct schools are
inwardly connected and go back to the original esoteric and gnostic
dimension of the Islamic revelation. It was most of all Sayyid Haydar
Āmulī (d. 787/1385) who brought about a synthesis of these two branches
of the tree of gnosis, although he also did make certain criticisms of
Ibn ‘Arabī, especially concerning the question of walāyah/wilāyah. Many
others walked later in his footsteps. Āmulī was at once a major
Twelve-Imam Shi‘ite theologian and a Sufi devoted to the School of Ibn
‘Arabī. His Jāmi‘ al-asrār is a pivotal text for the gnosis of Ibn
‘Arabī in a Shi‘ite context.37 He was also the author of a major
commentary upon the Fusūs as well as independent metaphysical treatises.
The later development of theoretical gnosis in Persia, as well as the
School of Transcendent Theosophy of Mullā Sadrā cannot be fully
understood without consideration of Āmulī’s works.

The 8th/14th to the 10th/15th century marks a period of intense activity
in the field of theoretical gnosis and the School of Ibn ‘Arabī in
Persia. Commentaries upon the Fusūs continued to appear. The first in
Persian was most likely that of Rukn al-Dīn Mas‘ūd Shīrāzī, known as
Bāhā Ruknā (d. 769/1367).38 But there were many others by such figures
as Tāj al-Dīn

Khwārazmī (d. circa 838/1435),39 Shāh Ni‘mat Allāh Walī, Ibn Turkah (d.
830/1437) and Jāmī, who in a sense brings this period to an end. This
extensive activity in the domain of gnosis associated specifically with
the School of Ibn ‘Arabī was in addition to the flowering of the Sufism
of the School of Khurasan and Central Asia and profound gnostic
teachings, mostly in poetic form, of figures such as ‘Attār and Rūmī on
the one hand and the Kubrawiyyah School founded by Najm al-Dīn Kubrā on
the other.

We can hardly overemphasize the importance of the Khurasānī and Central
Asian Schools and their profound metaphysical teachings, but in this
essay we shall not deal with them, being only concerned with ‘irfān-i
nazarī in its association with the School of Ibn ‘Arabī.

Among the gnostic figures of this period, Sā’in al-Dīn ibn Turkah
Isfahānī stands out as far as his later influence is concerned.

The author of many independent treatises on metaphysics and the
traditional sciences, he also wrote a commentary upon the Fusūs

which became popular.40 But the work that made him one of the pillars of
the School of theoretical gnosis in Persia during later centuries is his
Tamhīd al-qawā‘id.41 This masterly treatment of the cycle of gnosis
became a popular textbook for the teaching of the subject in Persia
especially during the Qajar period and has remained so to this day as
one sees in the extensive recension of it by the contemporary Persian
philosopher and gnostic, ‘Abd Allāh Jawādī Āmulī.42

The figure, who was given the title of the “Seal of Persian Poets”, that
is, ‘Abd al-Rahmān Jāmī from Herat, was also in a sense the seal of this
period in the history of theoretical gnosis in Persia.

One of the greatest poets of the Persian language, he was also a master
of Ibn ‘Arabian gnosis and in a sense synthesized within his works the
two distinct currents of Islamic spirituality that flowed from Ibn
‘Arabī and Rūmī. Jāmī is the author of a number of commentaries upon the
works of Ibn ‘Arabī such as the famous Naqd al-nusūs fī sharh naqsh
al-fusūs.43 He also authored summaries of the teachings of this School
in works already mentioned such as the Lawā’ih and Ashi‘‘at al-lama‘āt,
both literary masterpieces which are used as texts for the teaching of
‘irfān to this day.44

The spread of Twelve-Imam Shi‘ism in Persia during the Safavid period
transformed the scene as far as the study and teaching of ‘irfān was
concerned. During the earlier part of Safavid rule, many Sufi orders
flourished in Persia whereas from the 11th/17th century onward
opposition grew against Sufism especially among the class of Shi‘ite
scholars who henceforth chose to speak of ‘irfān rather than tasawwuf.45
Although other types of Sufi and gnostic writings appeared during this
period by members of various Sufi orders such as the Dhahabīs and
‘irfān-i shī‘ī also flourished in certain circles, few new works on the
subject of theoretical gnosis appeared during this period in comparison
to the previous era. The main influence of the School of Ibn ‘Arabī came
to be felt through the writings of Mullā Sadrā (d. 1050/1640/41), who
was deeply influenced by Shaykh al-Akbar and quoted from him extensively
in his Asfār and elsewhere.46

But technically speaking the School of Mullā Sadrā is associated with
hikmat and not ‘irfān, although Mullā Sadrā was also a gnostic and
deeply

versed in Ibn ‘Arabian teachings. But he integrated elements of this
teaching into his al-hikmat al-muta‘āliyah (Transcendent Theosophy or
Philosophy) and did not write separate treatises on pure gnosis in the
manner of an Ibn ‘Arabī or Qūnawī. It is highly significant that Mullā
Sadrā did not leave behind a commentary on the Fusūs like that of
Kāshānī or Qaysarī nor write a treatise like Tamhīd al-qawā‘id although
he was well acquainted with Ibn Turkah.

Nor do we find major works devoted purely to theoretical gnosis or
‘irfān-i nazarī by his students such as Fayd Kāshānī, who was also a
gnostic, or Lāhījī. The School of ‘irfān-i nazarī certainly continued
during the Safavid era but the major intellectual thrust of the period
was in the creation of the School of Transcendent Theosophy, which had
incorporated major theses of ‘irfān such as wahdat al-wujūd into its
philosophical system, but which was distinct in the structure of its
doctrines, manner of presentation and method of demonstration from
‘irfān. Furthermore, the subject of hikmat is “being conditioned by
negation” (wujūd bi-shart-i lā) while the subject of ‘irfān is totally
non-conditioned being (wujūd lā bi-shart).

In any case as far as Persia is concerned, one had to wait for the Qajar
period to see a major revival of the teaching of ‘irfān-i nazarī and the
appearance of important commentaries on classical texts of this
tradition. This revival occurred along with the revivification of the
teachings of the School of Mullā Sadrā and many masters of this period
were both hakīm and ‘ārif, while ‘irfān continued to influence
philosophy deeply. The first major figure to mention in the context of
the School of ‘irfān during the Qajar period is Sayyid Radī Lārījānī (d.
1270/1853) who was a student of Mullā ‘Alī Nūrī in hikmat but we know
less of his lineage in ‘irfān.47 He is said to have possessed exalted
spiritual states and was given the title of “Possessor of the States of
the Inner (bātin) World” by his contemporaries.48 We know that he taught
the Fusūs and Tamhīd alqawā‘id in Isfahan and was considered as a saint
as well as master of ‘irfān-i nazarī.

Sayyid Radī’s most important student was Āqā Muhammad Ridā Qumsha’ī (d.
1306/1888-9), whom many Persian experts on ‘irfān consider as a second
Ibn ‘Arabī and the most prominent commentator upon gnostic texts such as
the Fusūs since the time of Qūnawī. Āqā Muhammad Ridā studied in Isfahan
but later migrated to Tehran which became henceforth perhaps the most
important for the teaching of ‘irfān-i nazarī for many decades.49 There,
he taught and trained numerous important students in both ‘irfān and
hikmat.

He also wrote a number of important glosses and commentaries on such
works as the Tamhīd al-qawā‘id and Qaysarī’s commentary on the Fusūs as
well as some of the works of Mullā Sadrā, in addition to independent
treatises. Like so many masters of ‘irfān-i nazarī, Āqā Muhammad Ridā
was also a fine poet and composed poetry under the pen-name Sahbā.
Unfortunately much of his poetry is lost. It is also of great
significance to note that Āqā Muhammad Ridā emphasized the importance of
spiritual practice and the need for a spiritual master.50

One of Āqā Muhammad Ridā’s important students was Mīrzā Hāshim Ashkiwarī
Rashtī (d. 1332/1914), commentator upon Misbāhal-uns, who

took over the circle of instruction of ‘irfān in Tehran after Āqā
Muhammad Ridā. He was in turn teacher of such famous hakīms and ‘ārifs
of the past century as Mīrzā Mahdī Āshtiyānī d. 1362/1953), Mīrzā Ahmad
Āshtiyānī (d. 1359/1940), Sayyid Muhammad Kāzim ‘Assār (d. 1396/1975)
and Muhammad ‘Alī Shāhābādī (d. 1369/1951).51 The latter is particularly
important not only for his own writings on gnosis including his Rashahāt
al-bihār, but for being the master of Ayatollah Khomeini in ‘irfān-i
nazarī, the person with whom the latter studied the Fusūs without the
presence of any other student.52 Many of the ideas of Ayatollah Khomeini
in his Ta‘līqāt, Sharh du‘ā-i sahar and Misbāh al-hidāyah ila’l-khilāfah
wa’l-walāyah/wilāyah reflect the interpretations of Shāhābādī whom he
revered highly.

The extensive political fame and influence of Ayatollah Rūh Allāh
Khumaynī (Khomeini) (d. 1409/1989) has prevented many people in the West
and even within the Islamic world to pay serious attention to his
gnostic works,53 and his place in the long history of theoretical gnosis
outlined in a summary fashion above. There is no doubt that he was
attracted to the study of ‘irfān from an early age and in later years,
while he also studied hikmat, not to speak of the transmitted sciences,
his great love remained ‘irfān, although he was also a recognized master
of the School of Mullā Sadrā.54 In his writings he combined the
tradition of ‘irfān-i shī‘ī55 and that of Ibn ‘Arabī. For example his
Sharh du‘ā-i sahar belongs to the world of Shi‘ite gnosis; the Ta‘līqāt
‘alā sharh fusūs il-hikam wa misbāh il-uns belong to the tradition of
Ibn ‘Arabian gnosis as interpreted over the centuries by Shi‘ite
gnostics and with many new insights into the understanding of these
classical texts; and Misbāh al-hidāyah ila’lkhilāfah
wa’l-walāyah/wilāyah represent a synthesis of the two schools of gnosis.
Other mystical works of Ayatollah Khomeini such as Chihil hadīth, Sirr
al-salāh, Ādāb al-salāh and Sharh-i hadīth-i junūd-i ‘aql wa jahl are
also works of a gnostic and esoteric quality reminiscent of a Fayd
Kāshānī or Qādī Sa‘īd Qummī and going back even earlier, classical Sufi
works on such subjects, but they do not fall fully under the category of
‘irfān-i nazarī as we have defined it in this essay.56 Ayatollah
Khomeini also composed poems of a mystical and gnostic nature.

For many it is interesting to note and might even appear as perplexing
that although later in life he entered fully into the arena of politics,
earlier in his life Ayatollah Khomeini was very much interested not only
in theoretical gnosis but also in operative Sufism with its ascetic
dimension and emphasis on detachment from the world. The key to this
riddle should perhaps be sought first of all in the stages of man’s
journeys (asfār) to God mentioned by Mullā Sadrā at the beginning of the
Asfār, stages which include both the journey from creation (al-khalq) to
God (al-Haqq) and return to creation with God and secondly in Ayatollah
Khomeini’s understanding of the stages of this journey as they applied
to him and to what he considered to be his mission in life. In any case
although the later part of his life differed greatly outwardly from that
of Āqā Muhammad Ridā, his early life was much like that of the figure
whom he called “the master of our masters”. Also like Āqā

Muhammad Ridā, Ayatollah Khomeini was poetically gifted and deeply
immersed in the tradition of Persian Sufi poetry.

There is need in the future to study more closely the relation between
the contemplative and active dimensions of life in the case of Ayatollah
Khomeini in relation to the teachings of ‘irfān, and more generally in
the lives of several other major Muslim political figures of the
14th/20th century such as Hasan al-Bannā’, the founder of the Ikhwān
al-muslimīn, and Mawlānā Mawdūdī, the founder of Jamā‘ati islāmī of
Pakistan, both of whom were deeply immersed in politics while being
earlier in life devoted in one way or another to Sufism. In the case of
none of the major Muslim political figures of the 14th/20th century,
however, is there such a close relationship with Sufism and ‘irfān as
one finds in the case of Ayatollah Khomeini. Such matters raise issues
of central concern for the understanding of the relation between Sufism
and ‘irfān on the one hand and external political action on the other.
These issues are not, however, our concern here.

What is important to note is that irrespective of his political views
and actions, and his particular interpretation of walāyah/wilāyah,
Ayatollah Khomeini remains an important figure in the long history of
theoretical gnosis in the Islamic world.

The tradition of ‘irfān-i nazarī continues to this day in Persia.57
After the generation of such figures as Ayatollah Khomeini, ‘Allāmah
Tabātabā’ī (d. 1404/1983), who was a major gnostic without writing any
commentaries on Ibn ‘Arabī, and also one of the important masters of
‘irfān, Sayyid Muhammad Kāzim ‘Assār, notable figures have appeared upon
the scene such as Sayyid Jalāl al-Dīn Āshtiyanī, Hasan-zādah Āmulī, and
Jawād Āmulī, of whom the latter two still teach at Qom. Āshtiyanī’s
commentary upon the introduction of Qaysarī to the Fusūs mentioned
above, as well as a number of his other commentaries such as those on
Tamhīd alqawā‘id and Naqd al-nusūs, are major contemporary texts of
theoretical gnosis, while the recent commentary by Hasan-zādah Āmulī on
the Fusūs entitled Mumidd al-himam dar sharh-i fusūs alhikam58 reveals
the living nature of this School in Persia as does Jawād Āmulī’s
recension of Tamhīd al-qawā‘id.


