Prelude
=======

There are many reasons the security system of the virtuous community was
paid special importance by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) in their program of
building a virtuous community. Some of these reasons are examined in the
following discussion:

Political Foundations and Conditions
------------------------------------

**The first reason** was related to the political and social conditions
faced by the individuals of the virtuous community. To explain, the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers had to encounter harsh political and
social conditions under which they were exposed to death penalties,
banishment, pursuit, persecution, interrogation about their doctrines to
ascertain their political tendencies, and false accusations of atheism,
apostasy, skepticism, heresy, and fragmentation of Islamic unity.

The reasons for such harsh conditions can be summarized in the following
points:

**A.** Most political regimes in the Muslim world have practiced
political terrorism and persecution to defend their authority because of
discrepancy in doctrines, political views and sectarian rituals. In most
cases, the political states that have ruled Muslims have not allowed
doctrinal, intellectual, sectarian or political pluralism except during
the periods of the Holy Prophet and Imam ‘Ali—peace be upon them.[^1]

**B.** The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers faced difficult and
painful political situations due to the fact that they, i.e. the
virtuous community, took upon themselves the general responsibility of
defending Islam and its true doctrine and resisting any attempt at
misrepresentation and consequent deviation of the Muslim nation. In
addition, they exclusively undertook the responsibility of resisting the
injustice, persecution and tyranny of the ruling authorities towards
Muslim communities as well as external dangers that threatened the
nation.

This political stand of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers was
doubtless the main reason for their persecution. However, the matter did
not stop at this, and persecution extended to include even opposition to
specific doctrines and rituals. The conflict therefore took a religious
and sectarian form because the rulers saw these doctrines and rituals as
positive evidence that verified political identity and affiliation to
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

Therefore, the actual stimulus of the persecution was political identity
and loyalty to the religious personality representing the original
truth. Sectarian discrepancies would naturally point to political
identity; therefore, this identity became the impetus of accusations,
persecution and pursuit because the political loyalty of the public was
intermixed with their daily religious affairs. Moreover, religious
issues and trends were actually political issues because society, in its
entire detail, was based on religion and loyalty to one sect or another.

Consequently, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers suffered harsh
ordeals regarding the practice of their rituals and acts of worship and
their ways of expressing their beliefs, not because they disagreed with
the ruling authorities and other Muslims in their beliefs, but because
these rituals indicated their political identity—an identity that was
rejected by the rulers who wanted to justify their actions before the
public. Of course, the rulers knew that their justifications would not
be acceptable to the public unless they were concealed under the garb of
religion and sacredness.

Nevertheless, in most cases opposition to the ruling authorities,
rejection of injustice and oppression and love and loyally towards the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) were not acceptable justifications, because such
matters were familiar and generally accepted by Muslims. A problem that
existed though was that most Muslims did not have sufficient courage and
ethical commitment to oppose and reject the practices of the ruling
authorities and declare loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).

In any case, an important point is that the justifications upon which
the ruling authorities depended were false accusations against the true
religious creed of Islam.[^2]

**C.** All through the history of Islam, Muslim society witnessed
political and religious uprisings and anarchy, with side effects
injuring the virtuous community and followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).
Although they were not associated with these opposing groups, the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers, who rejected anarchy in the community,
tasted the blazing fire and suffered the consequences and negative
effects of these uprisings because of malicious information, devious
personal goals, or confusion in analysis due to the fact that most of
these revolutions and uprisings raised mottos similar to those of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers, attracted large numbers of
followers and moved in the milieus of those who were politically
classified as acting loyally towards or belonging to the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a).

These harsh conditions forced the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) to
follow a policy and plan a system that would assure the security of the
virtuous community and to opt for the most appropriate, yet perhaps
undesireable[^3], measures to protect the community from persecution,
exile and even annihilation.

Requirements of Religious Law
-----------------------------

**The second reason** special importance was paid to the security system
of the virtuous community was related to the inevitable outcome of
conformity to true religious laws by the virtuous community which
necessitated existence as a financially independent entity in order to
achieve its perfection through familiarity with the accurate religious
laws and in order that authorities could perform their duties, including
arbitration between disputing parties of the community and execution of
authority of administration over private or communal properties that did
not have a particular custodian. This developed from the doctrinal,
political, and practical multidimensional acquaintance of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) with the deviation and tyranny of the ruling authorities of
the Islamic state, their inescapability from fulfilling their
undertakings and their pledge to defend the general political entity of
Islam and maintain the unity of the Muslim nation.

Naturally, such a political and social situation necessitated exactitude
to contend with its intricacy and a special security system that would
lead to perfection of the virtuous community, assist its activities and
grant it flexibility in motion and adaptation with the surrounding
circumstances.

Suppression of Destructive Efforts
----------------------------------

**The third reason** special importance was paid to the security system
of the virtuous community was to protect the virtuous community from
individuals surreptitiously entering the community to damage, defame, or
achieve futile personal benefits at the expense of common interests of
the community, such as by use of siege and house arrest—under which the
Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) lived in the later ages—virtually
imprisoning leaders and religious scholars of the virtuous community in
their homes during various periods of tyrannical rule.

If we take a look at the goals of the security system of the virtuous
community carefully, we discover that this system is not restricted to
protecting the community against external persecution or achieving
flexibility in activities; rather, it includes opposing the movements of
the *ghulat* (extremists) and the opportunists who falsely claimed
Shi’ism in order to attain personal interests. In the coming chapter, we
will discuss these facts in more detail.

[^1]: - I have discussed this topic in my book entitled ‘al-wihdah
al-islamiyyah min manzur al-thaqalayn (Islamic Unity from the
Perspective of the Two Weighty Things—i.e. the Holy Qur'an and the Ahl
al-Bayt)’, pp. 162-186 and in an independent lecture, to which I have
referred in Book III, Chapter: Political Trends.

[^2]: - An analytical view of this socio-political phenomenon clearly
demonstrates the difference between the cruelty that the followers of
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) suffered because of some beliefs that were in
disagreement with other sects and the harm suffered by the followers of
some sects at the hands of other sects—despite the fact that the
disagreements of the these sects with one another were not fewer, and
were perhaps more, than the doctrinal or jurisprudential disagreements
between these sects and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) school and its followers.
Nevertheless, harsh persecution between the other sects and the ruling
authorities did not exist in the same way nor continue for such a long
period; however, persecution against the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their
followers never stopped at all. Undoubtedly, the actual reason for such
persecution was the political identity of the Ahl al-Bayt’s followers
and their protest against injustice and tyranny. Such being the case,
doctrinal practices identified the individuals who supported this
political protest. As a result, doctrinal commitments and denominational
practice of rituals received the same harsh treatment even among other
Muslim sects when they signified affiliation to a political trend
opposing the ruling authorities, such as the conflict that took place
between the Mu’tazilah and the Ash’ariyyah, or the conflicts between
certain Muslim (Sunni) sects in some ages, or the present-day opposition
to the Islamic veil (hijab) and other Islamic commitments that indicate
the political identity of those loyal to them. The sectarian political
condition could be deeply implanted and firmly established in the
milieus of the Muslim nation and enjoy a firm social albeit
non-political identity in spite of being the target of the ruling
authorities’ persecution. This is accelerated because of malice,
unfounded fanaticism as well as intellectual and social retardation of
the nation, as seen between other Muslim sects in some periods of the
history of Islam, however, among the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their
followers this was seen throughout history because they (i.e. the Ahl
al-Bayt and their followers) were distinctively characterized by a
firmly-rooted identity, faith and steadfastness in political situations.

[^3]: - Such as the measures adopted by Imam Hasan (‘a) when he
concluded a truce with Mu’awiyah in order to maintain the existence and
survival of the virtuous community.


