Chapter One: General Measures Of The Security System
====================================================

The general measures of the security system of the virtuous community
can be summed up in the following four points:

**1. Taqiyyah**

**2. Concealment of Secrets**

**3. Presence in the Ruling System**

**4. Immigration**

Taqiyyah
--------

### Fields of Discussions of Taqiyyah

*Taqiyyah*[^1] was of special importance to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).
Numerous *hadiths* and narrations, many of which have been
uninterruptedly and authentically reported, have cited *taqiyyah* as
their subject matter, discussed it from various angles, and dealt with
all its diverse aspects. As a matter of fact, *taqiyyah* is the most
important measure of the security system and covers all other measures.
The following are important aspects of *taqiyyah*:

• Its place in Islamic doctrine and evidence quoted from the Holy Qur'an
and Sunnah to prove its validity.

• The significance of *taqiyyah* in religion including commitments and
covenants to Almighty Allah. In this respect, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّقِيَّةُ دِينِي وَدِينُ آبَائِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Taqiyyah is my religion and the religion of my fathers.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لاَ تَقِيَّةَ لَهُ لاَ دِينَ لَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Faithless is he who does not practice taqiyyah.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عُبِدَ اللهُ بِشَيْءٍ أَفْضَلَ مِنَ التَّقِيَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah has never been worshipped through a matter more
appreciated by Him* *than (taqiyyah).*

• The religious laws and duties appertaining to *taqiyyah* and cases
where it is obligatory (*wajib*), recommended (*mustahabb*), or
prohibited (*haram*); the limits of *taqiyyah*; and its religious
consequences. This aspect is also related to the jurisprudential area of
*taqiyyah*.

• The aspects of *taqiyyah* related to political and social security
which will be our main concern in this discussion.[^2]

Taqiyyah has wide-ranging significance if understood on the strength of
traditions. In addition to abidance by the jurisprudential issues of
one’s own sect while going through the motions of another, taqiyyah
includes concealment of secrets in political, social, and cultural
activities. It also implies showing courtesy and civility in association
with others.[^3] However, in this discussion, I will concentrate on the
first meaning; namely, concealment of beliefs and some jurisprudential
duties while pretending belief in an opposing doctrine to evade
persecution, harm, and loss.

When the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers faced persecution by the
ruling authorities because of their doctrinal and sectarian commitments,
the practice of *taqiyyah* was established by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) based
on the principle of permission to avoid harassment. This permission has
been originally granted by Almighty Allah in the Holy Qur'an which
reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّا يَتَّخِذِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِن دُونِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۖ وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللَّهِ فِي
شَيْءٍ إِلَّا أَن تَتَّقُوا مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً ۗ وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللَّهُ
نَفْسَهُ ۗ وَإِلَى اللَّهِ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Let not the believers take for friends or helpers unbelievers rather
than believers—if any do that, in nothing will there be help from
Allah—except by way of precaution that ye may guard yourselves from
them; however, Allah cautions you to remember Him, for the final goal is
to Allah. (3:28)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كَفَرَ بِاللَّهِ مِن بَعْدِ إِيمَانِهِ إِلَّا مَنْ أُكْرِهَ
وَقَلْبُهُ مُطْمَئِنٌّ بِالْإِيمَانِ وَلَٰكِن مَّن شَرَحَ بِالْكُفْرِ
صَدْرًا فَعَلَيْهِمْ غَضَبٌ مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Any one who, after accepting faith in Allah, utters unbelief—except
under compulsion, his heart remaining firm in faith; but whoso opens
their breast to unbelief, on them is wrath from Allah, and theirs will
be a dreadful penalty. (16:106)***

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) directed their followers to practice *taqiyyah*, as
one of the important religious duties connected with faith, religion,
and seeking nearness to Almighty Allah. They also emphasized this
because they wanted to guarantee protection of the virtuous community,
maintenance of its security, concord and capability of carrying out its
functions as explained in the following narration of ‘Abdullah ibn
Abi-Ya’fur who reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إتَّقُوا عَلَى دِينِكُمْ، وَأَحْيُوهُ بِالتَّقِيَّةِ. فَإِنَّهُ لاَ
إِيمَانَ لِمَنْ لاَ تَقِيَّةَ لَهُ. إِنَّمَا أَنْتُمْ فِي النَّاسِ
كَالنَّحْلِ فِي الطَّيْرِ، وَلَوْ أَنَّ الطَّيْرَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي
أَجْوَافِ النَّحْلِ مَا بَقِيَ مِنْهَا شَيْءٌ إِلاَّ أَكَلَتْهُ.
وَلَوْ أَنَّ النَّاسَ عَلِمُوا مَا فِي أَجْوَافِكُمْ أَنَّكُمْ
تُحِبُّونَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ لأَكَلُوكُمْ بِأَلْسِنَتِهِمْ،
وَلَنَحَلُوكُمْ بِالسَّرِّ وَالْعَلاَنِيَةِ. رَحِمَ اللهُ عَبْداً
مِنْكُمْ كَانَ عَلَى وِلاَيَتِنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Fear for your religion! Keep it alive by means of pious dissimulation.
Verily, faithless is he who does not practice taqiyyah. Among people,
you (i.e. the Shi’ah) are just like bees among birds. Had birds known
what there is in the abdomens of bees, they would have eaten them
completely. Likewise, had people known what you carry in your hearts
concerning your love for us—the Ahl al-Bayt—they would have eaten you
with their tongues and disgraced you overtly and covertly. May Allah
have mercy upon a servant from you who abides by (the terms of) loyalty
to us.*[^4]

### Why Taqiyyah?

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) adopted *taqiyyah* from among a number of major
choices in the struggle against persecution, terrorism and even
annihilation that was practiced on certain occasions against them and
their partisans. These options were:

#### 1. Seclusion from society

One option that the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) had was to order
their followers to isolate themselves from Muslim society, retire or
flee with their family members to remote regions where the ruling
authorities could not reach them, such as mountains, caves, and jungles.
If they did so, they would be able to practice their rituals as
completely as required and openly voice their beliefs that opposed the
beliefs of others in both details and particularities.[^5]

Naturally, if they lived in seclusion away from the sight of people and
the domination of the ruling authorities, they would be able to achieve
this—a matter that was originated and carried out by Christian
monasticism.

Regarding the following verse of the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ قَفَّيْنَا عَلَىٰ آثَارِهِم بِرُسُلِنَا وَقَفَّيْنَا بِعِيسَى
ابْنِ مَرْيَمَ وَآتَيْنَاهُ الْإِنجِيلَ وَجَعَلْنَا فِي قُلُوبِ
الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ رَأْفَةً وَرَحْمَةً وَرَهْبَانِيَّةً
ابْتَدَعُوهَا مَا كَتَبْنَاهَا عَلَيْهِمْ إِلَّا ابْتِغَاءَ رِضْوَانِ
اللَّهِ فَمَا رَعَوْهَا حَقَّ رِعَايَتِهَا ۖ فَآتَيْنَا الَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا مِنْهُمْ أَجْرَهُمْ ۖ وَكَثِيرٌ مِّنْهُمْ فَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then We followed them up with (others of) Our messengers: We sent
following in their footsteps Jesus, the son of Mary, and bestowed on him
the Gospel; and We ordained in the hearts of those who followed him
compassion and mercy. But the Monasticism which they invented for
themselves We did not prescribe for them: (We commanded) only the
seeking for the Good Pleasure of Allah; but they did not foster it as
they should have done. Yet We bestowed, on those among them who believed
their (due) reward, but many of them are rebellious transgressors.
(57:27)***

Some exegetes of the Holy Qur'an have recorded that ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud
reported the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنْتُ رَدِيفَ رَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، عَلَى
حِمَارٍ، فَقَالَ: يَا بْنَ أُمِّ عَبْدٍ، هَلْ تَدْرِي مِنْ أَيْنَ
أَحْدَثَتْ بَنُو إِسْرَائِيلَ الرَّهْبَانِيَّةَ؟ فَقُلْتُ: اللهُ
وَرَسُولُهُ أَعْلَمُ. فَقَالَ: ظَهَرَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الْجَبَابِرَةُ
بَعْدَ عِيسَى، يَعْمَلُونَ بِمَعَاصِي اللهِ، فَغَضِبَ أَهْلُ
الإِيمَانِ فَقَاتَلُوهُمْ، فَهُزِمَ أَهْلُ الإِيمَانِ ثَلاَثَ
مَرَّاتٍ، فَلَمْ يَبْقَ مِنْهُمْ إِلاَّ الْقَلِيلُ، فَقَالُوا: إِنْ
ظَهَرْنَا لِهَؤُلاَءِ أَفْنَوْنَا وَلَمْ يَبْقَ لِلدِّينِ أَحَدٌ
يَدْعُو إلَيْهِ، فَتَعَالَوْا نَتَفَرَّقْ فِي الأَرْضِ إَلَى أَنْ
يَبْعَثَ اللهُ النَّبِيَّ الَّذِي وَعَدَنَا بِهِ عِيسَى (يَعْنُونَ
مُحَمَّداً صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ). فَتَفَرَّقُوا فِي غِيرَانِ
الْجِبَالِ وَأَحْدَثُوا رَهْبَانِيَّةً، فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ تَمَسَّكَ
بِدِينِهِ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ كَفَرَ. ثُمَّ تَلاَ هَذِهِ الآيَةَ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَهْبَانِيَّةً ابْتَدَعُوهَا مَا كَتَبْنَاهَا عَلَيْهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I rode behind Allah’s Messenger (S) on a donkey and he said to me, “Son
of Ummu-’Abd, do you know the source of monasticism that the children of
Israel originated?” “Allah and His Messenger (S) know best,” I answered.
The Holy Prophet (S) then said, “Overpowered by the tyrannical people
who committed acts of disobedience to Almighty Allah after Jesus (‘a),
the faithful believers among the children of Israel were angered by such
acts and fought against these tyrants. However, the faithful believers
were defeated three times and none of them survived except for a few of
them.*

*So, they thought that if they were to stand against these tyrants once
more, the tyrants would exterminate them and none would survive to
propagate the religion, so they suggested that they should spread out in
the lands until Almighty Allah would send the Prophet that Jesus had
promised (i.e. Muhammad—peace be upon him and his Household). They fled
to the caves of mountains and invented monasticism. However, some of
these adhered to the original religion while others apostatized.” The
Holy Prophet (S) then recited this holy verse:* ***“But the monasticism
which they invented for themselves, We did not prescribe for
them…**”*[^6]

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) did not accept this option for their Shi’ah and
followers for many reasons, some of which are as follows:

• This option is not feasible under all circumstances; in fact, it is
out of the question in many cases as the followers would face a dead end
and be annihilated in any case.

• This option could expose the virtuous community to deviation and
straying from the right path when the period of isolation is extended,
because long periods of isolation and remoteness from the sources of
true guidance and knowledge open wide the door for personal inferences,
inclination to individual views and resorting to heresies as in
Christianity.[^7]

• In the field of social relations, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) had already
established the policy of mutual association, coexistence, and accord
with other Muslims in general, and those not known for fanaticism and
animosity against the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), in particular. This is because
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) knew that their followers would be in need of other
people—as has been previously discussed—and, therefore, to abide by the
option of seclusion would be contradictory to this policy and squander
its objective, because such isolation would inevitably leave the
virtuous community besieged, suppressed, and deprived of all collective
religious, social and cultural services available in society.

• The virtuous community is required to ensure the safety of the Islamic
entity and the Muslim nation. They would not be able to fulfill these
responsibilities except by coexisting with other Muslims and being
present in their gatherings. They would only be able to play this
important leading role and make an impact on the common conditions of
Muslims by presenting themselves as good examples for emulation,
enlightening others and demonstrating responsible and difficult
positions of steadfastness.

For these reasons and many others, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) rejected the
option of isolation.

#### 2. Conflict and Clash

The second option was that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) order their followers to
proclaim their beliefs, perform their devotional rituals openly among
communities of other Muslims and engage in direct conflict with other
Muslims regarding secondary issues of Islamic life and primary issues
like Imamate and Islamic rituals.

If the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers proclaimed their beliefs and
performed their rituals openly, there would inescapably be social
conflict because political and spiritual conditions would bring about
intellectual discrepancies on interpretations of doctrines and transform
jurisprudential issues into circles of conflict and clash. Hence,
excessive fanaticism on an opinion could reach a dangerous extent and
might justify the practice of persecution and become a common feature of
the ruling class towards any sectarian affiliation that differed from
them.[^8]

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) obviously rejected this option and discommended
practice of this method (of stimulating clashes and provoking conflicts)
by their followers because it was inconsistent with the policy of
coexistence with other Muslims and maintenance of Islamic unity against
the enemies of Islam. More importantly, this option could potentially do
more harm than good to the Shi’ah and followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
in particular and the Muslim community and nation in general.

As for the dangers faced by the virtuous community, the option of direct
clash could bring about its extermination and eradicate the components
of its social existence. As a result, the role of this community in
Islamic life would be nullified. A greater injury that could inflict the
virtuous community might be that the surviving individuals of this
community might be exposed to deviations in doctrine and behavior and
turn into either esotericists or extremists or abandon practicing their
religious duties and rituals and adopt their personal inclinations and
spiritual practices.

Unfortunately, this fate was encountered by some deviating sects of
Shi’ism because they forsook the policy of coexistence with other
Muslims and took up isolation or embraced open conflict which led them
to deviation.

Another danger might also be expected from adopting open conflict: the
possibility of renunciation of religious faith and abandonment of the
sect because of weakness, lack of steadfastness and devotion, or being
caught between persecution, pursuit, and terrorism on the one hand and
worldly seduction by the ruling authorities on the other.

As is generally understood from their traditions,[^9] the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a), having analyzed the political and social conditions, believed that
open conflict would cause the aforesaid injuries to the virtuous
community. As a result, they rejected this option.

The dangers of these two options have been also mentioned in traditions
concerning the history of Christianity and the invention of
monasticism.[^10]

As for harm done to Muslims in general, the option of open conflict
gives rise to disorder, destabilization of Muslim society, and disunity.
This weakens the general entity of Islam, especially when the virtuous
community can withstand and continue in a state of equality in power.
Such being the case, the external enemies of Islam and the internal
opportunists and interest-seekers will unquestionably make use of this
conflict at the expense of Islam.

This result can be noticed in the conditions that Muslims experienced in
various ages of their history.([^11]) Because of this and due to their
anticipation of these injuries, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) adopted positions
of responsibility towards maintaining the unity of Islam and protecting
the Muslim nation.

#### 3. Taqiyyah and Forbearance

The third option is to adopt *taqiyyah* (pious dissimulation) and to
conceal the secondary issues of one’s faith when such issues reveal ones
political identity or arouse harsh reactions under the circumstances of
fanaticism and persecution and also by performing the sectarian rituals
in such a suitable form that upholds the genuineness of these rituals
and, at the same time, corresponds with the general outlook of the
Muslim nation so as to avoid persecution, terrorism or irritation due to
an unjust or wrong interpretation of rituals and behavior.

This was the option that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) preferred when facing the
difficult circumstances that they and their followers had to encounter.

Evidently, the adoption of *taqiyyah* was *not* on account of a
psychological response to pressures such as fear and cowardice or
feelings of political and spiritual defeat. This fact has been declared
by Imam ‘Ali al-Hadi (‘a) in the famous *ziyarah* of al-Ghadir when he
explains the situation of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a)
when he kept silent on the usurpation of his right of leadership. As a
matter of fact, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their Shi’ah are the true
people of self-sacrifice, struggle, steadfastness and persistence, and
they educated their followers on these lines and foretold the coming
tribulations and ordeals.[^12]

In fact, they adopted this option on the strength of a clear objective
attitude towards both political life and social struggle and the
consequences of the various options. They adopted this option on the
basis of their accurate evaluation of the common advantages and
disadvantages, the priorities of Islam that controlled social progress
and the principle of placing the most important before the less
important of these priorities. Thus, the option of *taqiyyah* has come
to express the intellectual and political line of action that the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) practiced to protect the virtuous community and achieve the
major goals of Islam.

The following points are indications of this understanding of *taqiyyah*
and adoption of this option:

• The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) presented the principle of *taqiyyah* as the
religion itself (“*taqiyyah* is my religion and that of my fathers”), as
the true faith (“faithless is he who does not practice *taqiyyah”*), and
as light on the Day of Resurrection.

• Preventive measures and precautions against anticipated harm and
danger are naturally generated by human beings. The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
warned their followers against treating situations of precaution
casually and encouraged them to adopt and practice *taqiyyah*,
threatening those who abandoned it with punishment in this world and in
the Hereafter, as well as many other instructions that are markedly
cited in the traditions on *taqiyyah*.[^13]

The one and only acceptable interpretation of such warnings and
encouragements is the following:

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) educated their followers to reject injustice and
persecution, be persistent, steadfast and sacrificing for the sake of
the truth, endure all kinds of torture, ordeals, and pain for the sake
of the principles of faith, and fulfill their covenants and pledges. By
doing this they faced serious difficulties in controlling the actual
implementation of these requirements, building the virtuous community
and undertaking the major responsibilities towards Islam as a political
entity and nation. As a result, they had to establish instruction on
adherence to one’s faith, principles, and spirituality that needed to
run parallel to training in high moral and spiritual standards of
self-sacrifice, limitless giving, and readiness for martyrdom.

In the light of the above, *taqiyyah* is a security measure that
guarantees protection of the virtuous community against persecution. In
addition, *taqiyyah* has another educational, social and political
significance that assures spiritual and psychological equilibrium for
the virtuous community in their treatment of various events and
circumstances and creates an opportunity for the community to contribute
to the process of self-construction and social change.

Confirming this fact, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) did not restrict *taqiyyah*
to only situations of danger and anticipated harm; in fact, it was far
more comprehensive.[^14]

### Limits of Taqiyyah

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) did not leave the authorization for *taqiyyah*
without limits; rather, they restricted it and set limits for it. The
restrictions are that *taqiyyah* must not be practiced when it injures
other believers, causes bloodshed or exposes others to dangers. In this
respect, Imam al-Baqir (‘a) says, according to a valid (*mu’tabar*)
tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّمَا جُعِلَ التَّقِيَّةُ لِيُحْقَنَ بِهَا الدَّمُ. فَإِذَا بَلَغَ
الدَّمَ فَلَيْسَ تَقِيَّةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Taqiyyah has been determined in order to save blood from being shed.
Hence, when the matter reaches bloodshed, taqiyyah becomes null.*[^15]

Likewise, *taqiyyah* is not acceptable in situations when its practice
leads to being lax in supporting Islam and Muslims and when it violates
the regulations and laws of striving for Almighty Allah’s sake (*jihad
fi sabilillah*). On such occasions, *taqiyyah* becomes unlawful and
unjustifiable.

According to a validly reported tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ تَبْقَ الأَرْضُ إِلاَّ وَفِيهَا مِنَّا عَالِمٌ، فَإِذَا بَلَغَتِ
التَّقِيَّةُ الدَّمَ فَلاَ تَقِيَّةَ. وَأَيْمُ اللهِ، لَوْ دُعِيتُمْ
لِتَنْصُرُونَا قُلْتُمْ: لاَ نَفْعَلُ، إِنَّمَا نَتَّقِي! وَلَكَانَتِ
التَّقِيَّةُ أَحَبَّ إِلَيْكُمْ مِنْ آبَائِكُمْ وَأُمَّهَاتِكُمْ،
وَلَوْ قَدْ قَامَ الْقَائِمُ مَا إحْتَاجَ إِلَى مُسَاءَلَتِكُمْ عَنْ
ذَلِكَ، وَلأَقَامَ فِي كَثِيرٍ مِنْكُمْ مِنْ أَهْلِ النِّفَاقِ حَدَّ
اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The earth will not exist unless there is a knowledgeable one from us
(i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)) living on it. When taqiyyah reaches
bloodshed, then it becomes null. By Allah I take an oath that when you
are called to support us, you will not respond, claiming that you are
practicing taqiyyah! And taqiyyah will then be dearer to you than your
fathers and mothers. When the Qā’im (Imam Mahdi) comes (to undertake the
mission)—and he shall unquestionably come—he will not need to ask you
about this. He shall execute divine punishment on many hypocrites among
you.*[^16]

According to another tradition, the Imam of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
presents a general rule about the meaning of *taqiyyah* which is to save
oneself from harm provided that such act will not bring about corruption
in the religion or faith. He thus says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلتَّقِيَّةِ مَوَاضِعُ مَنْ أَزَالَهَا عَنْ مَوَاضِعِهَا لَمْ
تَسْتَقِمْ لَهُ، وَتَفْسِيرُ مَا يُتَّقَى مِثْلُ أَنْ يَكُونَ قَوْمُ
سُوءٍ ظَاهِراً حُكْمُهُمْ وَفِعْلُهُمْ عَلَى غَيْرِ حُكْمِ الْحَقِّ
وَفِعْلِهِ. فَكُلُّ شَيْءٍ يَعْمَلُ الْمُؤْمِنُ بَيْنَهُمْ لِمَكَانِ
التَّقِيَّةِ مِمَّا لاَ يُؤَدِّي إِلَى الْفَسَادِ فِي الدِّينِ
فَإِنَّهُ جَائِزٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Taqiyyah is permitted under certain situations. Whoever uses it in
other than these situations, taqiyyah will not be accepted from him. An
example of an acceptable situation under which taqiyyah may be adopted
is that a believer may have to deal with people whose rules and deeds
are evidently opposite to the true laws and deeds; hence, anything that
is practiced by that believer in the presence of these people on the
basis of taqiyyah is allowable provided that his acts do not cause
corruption of his religion.*[^17]

As has been previously cited, the Holy Imams (‘a) instructed their
followers to patiently bear all suffering and sacrifice their souls and
properties for the sake of their religion, or faith.[^18]

All such traditions confirm that *taqiyyah* is a practical means of
security within the limits of the supreme interests of Islam and
survival of the virtuous community. It is not blanket permission to flee
reality or escape one’s enemy.

Concealment of Secrets
----------------------

In addition to *taqiyyah*, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) founded another
principle to ensure the security of the virtuous community. This
principle includes “concealment of secrets”, “preservation of secrets”,
“avoidance of divulging secrets”, and “evasion of revealing secrets to
enemies”, whether the enemies were anti-Shi’ah tyrants and spiteful
opponents, waylaying hypocrites and opportunists, or fickle acquiescent
individuals among the public who incline with every wind.

This principle has been confused with *taqiyyah* to a great extent. Some
narrations give the name of *taqiyyah* to both precaution and
dissimulation on the one hand and concealment of secrets on the other
and regard divulgence of secrets violation of *taqiyyah*. In view of
this probable confusion, we must define the subject matter of
‘concealment of secrets’ as a security measure of the virtuous community
which is adopted by all human societies that intend to protect their
individuals from enemies and maintain their solidarity and capability to
perform. Divulgence of secrets is usually considered the gravest danger
that may be encountered by any community that is exposed to persecution
and extermination.

Books of ethics have dealt with slips of the tongue and the momentous
perils that such blunders cause in the social life of man and in man’s
relationship with Almighty Allah, as well as the many sins, flaws,
misfortunes, and injuries that arise from such slips.

As for this security measure, it deals with slips of the tongue from
another angle—the divulgence and disclosure of secrets that expose the
virtuous community to dangers and reveal its activities, inclinations,
size, and the identies of individuals, endangering their lives.

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), their Shi’ah, and their followers stood for a
“community” of Muslims that had its own particularities with doctrinal,
intellectual, and cultural components in addition to confidential
political inclinations. This community spread over various regions of
the Muslim world and lived within other Muslim communities under their
ruling regimes.

The tyrannical ruling authorities used to consider the Shi’ite community
to be the opposition. As a result, they feared and harassed its people
because they realized its influence, vitality and adherence to the
leadership of the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)—those most rightful
of leadership of the Muslim society and the most accepted and approved
group by all Muslims.

### Incitement of People against the Shi’ah

The community of the Shi’ah were exposed to not only harassment and
persecution but also denouncement and defamation of its doctrines,
activities and purposes in Islamic life with the aim of isolating and
circumscribing it inside the Muslim nation and then putting it under
pressure by inciting others against it.

The political aspect most perturbed the enemies of the Shi’ah—i.e., the
tyrannical rulers, spiteful opponents, and anti-Shi’ah factions—and was
the real reason for alliance against the Shi’ah. The sectarian
affiliation of the individuals of the virtuous community was also
important to the enemies of the Shi’ah, and its importance increased
greatly when this affiliation revealed the political inclinations of
individuals of the community.

The matter was somewhat different in the mind of the common milieus of
the Muslims. They were provoked by the doctrinal aspect of the virtuous
community (owing to their naive understanding of Islam and having been
indoctrinated by the ruling authorities and deviant scholars with
fanaticism and ill will) and were not concerned about political
affiliation as much as the secondary and trivial details of doctrines.
They insensitively rejected every trivial item that violated peripheral
issues of doctrinal views and requisites prescribed by the ruling
authorities.

Using their cadre, the ruling authorities exerted all possible efforts
to keep the nation from realizing the truth appertaining to not only the
corrupt deeds and manners of the tyrannical rulers but also the accurate
political affiliations of other political trends. Moreover, they tried
to incite and provoke the public against these trends, using all
possible methods and means.

Instead of educating the Muslim nation in investigation, seeking
knowledge, establishing freedom in scientific discourse and practical
experimentation within the necessary postulates of its faith, the ruling
authorities fed the public with fanaticism in personal views,
encouraging accusation with “atheism,” “infidelity,” “apostasy from
Islam,” and “fragmenting the congregation of Muslims” towards anybody
who disagreed with them on even a secondary or trivial issue, demanded
his rights, or stood against the tyrannical and oppressive rulers,
rejecting their injustice and monopoly.

Describing this method of indoctrination used on Muslims by tyrants,
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ بَنِي أُمَيَّةَ أَطْلَقُوا لِلنَّاسِ أَنْ يَتَعَلَّمُوا
الإِيمَانَ، وَلَمْ يُطْلِقُوا لَهُمْ أَنْ يَتَعَلَّمُوا الشِّرْكَ،
حَتَّى إذَا حَمَلُوهُمْ عَلَيْهِ لَمْ يَعْرِفُوا ذَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The children of Umayyah*[^19] *gave people freedom to learn faith, but
they did not permit them to learn about polytheism such that if they
were to lead them to polytheism, the people would not realize it.*[^20]

For this reason, the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) determined that
*taqiyyah* alone did not suffice; rather, they asked their followers not
to reveal their beliefs and agitate others by practicing their rituals
openly. They knew that such acts might lead to their isolation from
Muslim society and political, social and economic siege. Of course, it
was possible that the open practice of their rituals might lessen the
extent of pressure from others; nevertheless, the Holy Imams’ (‘a)
instruction was to avoid such acts.

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) paid addiitonal attention to an
even more important issue: they ordered their followers to desist in
arguing about political and religious issues, divulging private
information, and showing feelings and sentiments[^21] that revealed
their political and sectarian affiliation. The followers were also
ordered not to reveal any information about the extent of influence and
impact of the virtuous community and the nature of their political
attitudes to the ruling regime or other oppositionist political
movements that the community adopted because divulgence of such
information could endanger the existence of the virtuous community and
be used by enemies to pursue or annihilate its members.

The concealment of secrets and suppression of information about the
reality of the virtuous community was, at some stage its most important
security issue. It required a high degree of self-restraint and control
over the tongue. The tyrannical rulers were extremely sensitive about
their interests and felt threatened by the genuineness, truth and
faithfulness of the individuals of the virtuous community as well as
their willingness to sacrifice their lives; the plain, true concepts
that they used to proffer to the Muslim nation; and the sound logic they
used to elucidate these concepts.

### Formulas of Warning

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) used many formulas and modes of
warning, enlightenment, and education to express the crucial importance
of this measure in ensuring the security of the virtuous community.

According to a validly reported tradition, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Abi-Nasr has reported that he, once asked Imam al-Ridha (‘a) about a
definite issue, but the Imam (‘a) insistently refused to answer. He then
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ أَعْطَيْنَاكُمْ كُلَّ مَا تُرِيدُونَ كَانَ شَرّاً لَكُمْ،
وَأُخِذَ بِرَقَبَةِ صَاحِبِ هَذَا الأَمْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If we give you everything you want, this will definitely be bad for
you; and this will* *cause problems for the person involved.*

*Abu-Ja’far (‘a) used to say:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وِلاَيَةُ اللهِ أَسَرَّهَا إِلَى جَبْرَئِيلَ، وَأَسَرَّهَا جَبْرَئِيلُ
إِلَى مُحَمَّدٍ، وَأَسَرَّهَا مُحَمَّدٌ إِلَى عَلِيٍّ، وَأَسَرَّهَا
عَلِيٌّ إِلَى مَنْ شَاءَ اللهُ. ثُمَّ أَنْتُمْ تُذِيعُونَ ذَلِكَ! مَنِ
الَّذِي أَمْسَكَ حَرْفاً سَمِعَهُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The secrets of Allah were confidentially passed on to Archangel Gabriel
who confidentially passed them on to (Prophet) Muhammad (S) who
confidentially passed them on to ‘Ali (‘a) who confidentially passed
them on to whom Almighty Allah willed to know. Now, you are divulging
it! Which one of you can withhold a single letter of what he has heard?*

*Abu-Ja’far (‘a) said:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي حِكْمَةِ آلِ دَاوُودَ: يَنْبَغِي لِلْمُسْلِمِ أَنْ يَكُونَ
مَالِكاً لِنَفْسِهِ، مُقْبِلاً عَلَى شَأْنِهِ، عَارِفاً بِأَهْلِ
زَمَانِهِ. فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَلاَ تُذِيعُوا حَدِيثَنَا. فَلَوْلاَ
أَنَّ اللهَ يُدَافِعُ عَنْ أَوْلِيَائِهِ وَيَنْتَقِمُ لأَِوْلِيَائِهِ
مِنْ أَعْدَائِهِ، أَمَا رَأَيْتَ مَا صَنَعَ اللهُ بِآلِ بَرْمَكَ وَمَا
إنْتَقَمَ اللهُ لأَِبِي الْحَسَنِ؟ وَقَدْ كَانَ بَنُو الأَشْعَثِ عَلَى
خَطَرٍ عَظِيمٍ، فَدَفَعَ اللهُ عَنْهُمْ بِوِلاَيَتِهِمْ لأَِبِي
الْحَسَنِ. وَأَنْتُمْ بِالْعِرَاقِ تَرَوْنَ أَعْمَالَ هَؤُلاَءِ
الْفَرَاعِنَةِ وَمَا أَمْهَلَ اللهُ لَهُمْ، فَعَلَيْكُمْ بِتَقْوَى
اللهِ، وَلاَ تُغَرَّنَّكُمُ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا، وَلاَ تَغْتَرُّوا
بِمَنْ قَدْ أُمْهِلَ قَبْلَكُمْ، فَكَأَنَّ الأَمْرَ قَدْ وَصَلَ
إِلَيْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The following is written in the wise book of (Prophet) David’s
household: A true Muslim (i.e. one submissive to the religion) is
required to be self-possessed, engaged with his own affairs, and aware
of the people of his time. So, fear Almighty Allah and never announce
our discourses. (What has saved you from the result of such divulgence
is that) Almighty Allah defends His saints and takes revenge from His
enemies for His saints.*

*Have you not seen what Almighty Allah did to the Barmak and how he
retaliated for Abu’l-Hasan? The family of al-Ash’ath were about to
encounter a great catastrophe, but Almighty Allah saved them from it
because of their allegiance to Abu’l-Hasan. In Iraq, you are witnessing
the evil deeds of these tyrants and the respite that Almighty Allah is
granting them. So, fear Almighty Allah, do not be seduced by this
worldly life, and do not be deceived by the bygone ones whom Almighty
Allah had granted respite. I foresee this matter shall soon be in your
hands.*[^22]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), according to another authentic report, demonstrated
the worldly damage of divulgence of secrets, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنِ إسْتَفْتَحَ نَهَارَهُ بِإِذَاعَةِ سِرِّنَا سَلَّطَ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
حَرَّ الْحَدِيدِ وَضِيقَ الْمَجَالِسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever begins his day with divulgence of our secrets, Almighty Allah
will expose him to the heat of iron and narrow sitting-places.*[^23]

Sometimes, warnings against divulgence of secrets reached such a great
extent of obligation that Imam Abu’l-Hasan (‘a), as reported by ‘Uthman
ibn ‘Isa, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ كَانَ فِي يَدِكَ هَذِهِ شَيْءٌ، فَإِنِ إسْتَطَعْتَ أَنْ لاَ
تَعْلَمَ هَذِهِ (الأُخْرَى) فَافْعَلْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If there is something is your hand, make sure that as far as is
possible the other hand* *does not know about it.*

In his presence, some people talked about divulgence of secrets, so the
Imam (‘a) instructed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إحْفَظْ لِسَانَكَ تَعِزَّ، وَلاَ تُمَكِّنِ النَّاسَ مِنْ قِيَادِ
رَقَبَتِكَ فَتُذَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Withhold your tongue so as to attain dignity, and do not give people a
chance to have a hold over your neck, lest you become humiliated.*[^24]

According to another validly reported tradition, the peril of divulging
a secret is as fateful as killing the prophets. Abu-Basir has reported
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقْتُلُونَ الْأَنبِيَاءَ بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا وَاللهِ مَا قَتَلُوهُمْ بِأَسْيَافِهِمْ، وَلَكِنْ أَذَاعُوا
عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَفْشَوْا سِرَّهُمْ فَقُتِلُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah says (in the Holy Qur'an),* ***“And they slay the
prophets unjustly. (3:112)”*** *By Allah I swear, they did not slay the
prophets with swords; rather, they divulged their secrets and announced
their activities and, as a result, prophets were slain.*[^25]

Through an authentic chain of authority, Sulayman ibn Khalid has
reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا سُلَيْمَانُ، إِنَّكُمْ عَلَى دِينٍ مَنْ كَتَمَهُ أَعَزَّهُ اللهُ،
وَمَنْ أَذَاعَهُ أَذَلَّهُ اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Sulayman, you (i.e. the Shi’ah) are following a faith that whoever
conceals it will be honored by Almighty Allah, but whoever exposes it
will be humiliated by Him.*[^26]

When one of the Holy Imams (‘a) observed an occurrence of rushing into
the adoption of certain political attitudes or impulsive rashness to
move and draw the attention of the public to the love for the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a), the Imam would say the following, as reported from Imam
‘Ali Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدِدْتُ، وَاللهِ، لَوِ إفْتَدَيْتُ خِصْلَتَيْنِ فِي الشِّيعَةِ لَنَا
بِبَعْضِ لَحْمِ سَاعِدِي: النَّزَقَ وَقِلَّةَ الْكِتْمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By Allah, I wish I could give as ransom some of my arm’s flesh for two
traits that our Shi’ah must get rid of: recklessness and lack of
concealment (of our secrets).*[^27]

According to another tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) assigns the
concealment of secrets such an important role that it is related to
faith, belief, loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and the undertaking of
the mission of propagation.

‘Abd al-A’la has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (S) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّهُ لَيْسَ إحْتِمَالَ أَمْرِنَا التَّصْدِيقُ لَهُ وَالْقَبُولُ
فَقَطْ، مِنِ إحْتِمَالِ أَمْرِنَا سَتْرُهُ وَصِيَانَتُهُ عَنْ غَيْرِ
أَهْلِهِ. فَاقْرَأْهُمُ السَّلاَمَ وَقُلْ لَهُمْ: رَحِمَ اللهُ عَبْداً
إجْتَرَّ مَوَدَّةَ النَّاسِ إلَيْنَا. حَدِّثُوهُمْ بِمَا يَعْرِفُونَ،
وَاسْتُرُوا عَنْهُمْ مَا يُنْكِرُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*To abide by our Issue is not merely to believe and accept it. Within
the matters of abiding by our Issue is to hide it and to protect it from
everybody except its people. So,* *convey my greeting to them (i.e. the
Shi’ah) and say to them: May Allah have mercy upon (His) servant who
attracts people’s love toward us. Say to those who understand and
conceal from those who reject.*[^28]

According to another tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) sternly renounces
those who divulge secrets and violate instructions, exposing their Imam
and their companions to peril and perdition. The Imam (‘a) expressed his
rage and denounced them.

Al-Qasim, the partner of al-Fadhl, who was a very honest man, has
reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلْقٌ فِي الْمَسْجِدِ يَشْهَرُونَنَا وَيَشْهَرُونَ أَنْفُسَهُمْ.
أُولَئِكَ لَيْسُوا مِنَّا وَلاَ نَحْنُ مِنْهُمْ. أَنْطِقُ فَأُدَارِي
وَأَسْتُرُ فَيَهْتِكُونَ سِتْرِي! هَتَكَ اللهُ سُتُورَهُمْ.
يَقُولُونَ: إِمَامٌ. وَاللهِ مَا أَنَا بِإِمَامِ إِلاَّ مَنْ
أَطَاعَنِي. فَأَمَّا مَنْ عَصَانِي فَلَسْتُ لَهُمْ بِإِمَامٍ. لِمَ
يُقَلْقِلُونَ بِإسْمِي؟ أَلاَ يَكُفُّونَ إسْمِي عَنْ أَفْوَاهِهِمْ.
فَوَاللهِ لاَ يَجْمَعُنِيَ اللهُ وَإِيَّاهُمْ فِي دَارٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Some individuals are exposing themselves and us in the mosque. They are
not part of us nor are we part of them. When I speak, I try to hide my
beliefs intentionally and when I keep matters covered, such people
unmask me! May Allah lay them bare! They claim that I am their Imam. By
Allah I swear, I am exclusively the Imam of him who obeys me. As for him
who disobeys me, I am not his Imam. Why are they chattering using my
name? Can’t they take my name out of their mouths? By Allah, He shall
never join them to me in the abode.*[^29]

Presence in The Ruling System
-----------------------------

The third measure that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) took in the security system
of the virtuous community was having a relative and limited presence in
the unjust ruling regimes in order to apprise the virtuous community of
the situations, plans, policies and suppressive or corruptive procedures
of these ruling authorities, so that the virtuous community might take
heed, avoid and observe their movements on the one hand and frustrate
and fend off the harms that might afflict them and the Muslims on the
other.

As previously cited, the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) firmly
prohibited their followers from any kind of cooperation with the unjust
authorities—whether in offering general services that might contribute
to strengthening their authority, result in any form of approval of
their rule, or help them in wrongdoing and oppressive acts—and from
accepting offices related to authority and government.

Abu-Basir has reported that he asked Imam al-Baqir (‘a) about the
legality of occupying offices in the ruling regimes of unjust rulers.
The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا مُحَمَّدٍ، لاَ وَلاَ مُدَّةُ قَلَمٍ. إِنَّ أَحَدَهُمْ لاَ
يُصِيبُ مِنْ دُنْيَاهُمْ شَيْئاً إِلاَّ أَصَابُوا مِنْ دِينِهِ
مِثْلَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Abu-Muhammad, never help them in any matter even if it be as trivial
as handing them a pen. No one can obtain any worldly interests from them
without loss of as large a part of his faith as the amount of that
interest.*[^30]

Writing the life account of Safwan al-Jammal, al-Kashshi (in his book of
biography) records the following narration:

*Safwan said: One day, while I was paying a visit to Imam al-Kazim (‘a),
he said to me, “Safwan, all your manners are acceptable and all right
except one thing.”*

*“May Allah accept me as ransom for you! What is that?” I wondered.*

*The Imam (‘a) answered, “It is that you hire camels for this man. (i.e.
the ruler Harun)”*

*Explaining my situation, I said, “I swear by Allah that I have never
hired him a camel for luxurious, reckless, immoral or hunting purposes.
Rather, I have hired out camels for him so that he can use them as
riding animals on his way to Makkah. Moreover, I do not take charge of
the camels myself, but employ some of my servants to do so.”*

*The Imam (‘a) asked, “Do they (i.e. the ruling authorities) pay you for
this hiring?”*

*“Yes, they do,” I answered.*

*The Imam (‘a) asked further, “Do you wish that they would survive to
pay you?”*

*“Yes, I do,” I answered.*

*The Imam (‘a) stated:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحَبَّ بَقَاءَهُمْ فَهُوَ مِنْهُمْ، وَمَنْ كَانَ مِنْهُمْ كَانَ
وَرَدَ النَّارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Then, he who wishes survival for them is definitely one of them, and
he who belongs to them will definitely be in Hellfire.”*

*Immediately after that, I sold all my camels.*

*When Harun was informed about this, he summoned me and said, “Safwan, I
have been informed that you sold your camels.”*

*“Yes, I did,” I answered.*

*“Why?” he asked.*

*“I have become too aged to work, and my servant cannot perform the
necessary jobs,” I answered.*

*Harun insisted, “No! I know him who advised you to do so. This is the
advice of Musa ibn Ja’far.”*

*“What connects this to Musa ibn Ja’far?” I denied.*

*Harun said, “Leave this claim! By Allah I swear, I would kill you had
it not been for your good conduct with us!”*[^31]

In spite of this stern prohibition, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) excluded
certain situations for which they allowed working with the unjust ruling
authorities and accepting offices and jobs in their governments. The
most important of these were offices that served two essential services
to the virtuous community: (1) warding off harm and injury to the
community, and (2) provision of services and facilities, including
defence of the rights of the virtuous community and paying them their
entitlements.

In this respect, ‘Ali ibn Yaqtin is reported to have said that Imam Musa
ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (‘a) said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ للهِ، تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى، مَعَ السُّلْطَانِ أَوْلِيَاءَ
يَدْفَعُ بِهِمْ عَنْ أَوْلِيَائِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, among the company of the oppressors, Almighty Allah has some
intimate servants by whom He repels (harm) from other cherished
servants.*[^32]

Ziyad ibn Abu-Sulma is reported to have related the following:

*One day, I visited Abu’l-Hasan (Imam) Musa al-Kazim (‘a) who asked me,
“Ziyad, do you work with the ruling authority?”*

*“Yes, I do,” I answered.*

*The Imam (‘a) asked, “Why is that?”*

*I answered, “I have a sense of honor, dependants to provide, and no
other resource.”*

*The Imam (‘a) commented, “Ziyad, if I were to fall from a high place
and break to pieces, it would be more preferable to me than holding an
office for any of these (unjust authorities) or even more preferable
than being treading on like their rugs—except for one circumstance. Do
you know what it is?”*

*I answered, “No, I do not. May Allah accept me as your ransom!”*

*The Imam (‘a) explained:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ لِتَفْرِيجِ كُرْبَةٍ عَنْ مُؤْمِنٍ، أَوْ فَكِّ أَسْرِهِ، أَوْ
قَضَاءِ دَيْنِهِ. يَا زِيَادُ، إِنَّ أَهْوَنَ مَا يَصْنَعُ اللهُ جَلَّ
وَعَزَّ بِمَنْ تَوَلَّى لَهُمْ عَمَلاً أَنْ يَضْرِبَ عَلَيْهِ
سُرَادِقَ مِنْ نَارٍ إِلَى أَنْ يَفْرُغَ اللهُ مِنْ حِسَابِ
الْخَلاَئِقِ. يَا زِيَادُ، فَإِنْ وُلِّيتَ شَيْئاً مِنْ أَعْمَالِهِمْ
فَأَحْسِنْ إِلَى إِخْوَانِكَ، فَوَاحِدَةٌ بِوَاحِدَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Except in situations of relieving the anguish of a believer by
releasing him from captivity or helping him settle his debts. O Ziyad,
the lightest penalty that Almighty Allah places upon one that holds an
office with unjust authorities is that He covers him with a canopy of
fire until He finishes settling accounts with all other creatures. O
Ziyad, if you have held any of their offices, then you must behave
kindly with your brethren-in-faith as compensation for holding that
office—an act for an act.”*[^33]

As is understood from some traditions, holding an office in governments
of unjust authorities requires restricted permission given by the Holy
Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) or by the religious legal authority who
runs the affairs of the virtuous community in order that permission
might be disallowed in cases of personal gain or taking on prohibited
jobs that would expose individuals of the virtuous community to
deviation.

According to a valid chain of authority, al-Hasan ibn al-Husayn
al-Anbari[^34] has reported the following:

For fourteen years, I wrote letters to Imam Abu’l-Hasan al-Ridha (‘a)
seeking his permission to hold a governmental office in the regime of
the unjust rulers. In the last letter, I mentioned that I feared my neck
would be cut off as the ruling authority threatened me, saying, “You are
Rafidhi and you are refusing this office only for this reason!”

The answer of Imam al-Ridha (‘a) was the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهِمْتُ كِتَابَكَ وَمَا ذَكَرْتَ مِنَ الْخَوْفِ عَلَى نَفْسِكَ،
فَإِنْ كُنْتَ تَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ إَذَا وَلِيتَ عَمَلَكَ بِمَا أَمَرَ
بِهِ رَسُولُ اللهِ، صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، ثُمَّ تُصَيِّرُ
أَعْوَانَكَ وَكُتَّابَكَ أَهْلَ مِلَّتِكَ، وَإِذَا صَارَ إِلَيْكَ
شَيْءٌ وَاسَيْتَ بِهِ فُقَرَاءَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ حَتَّى تَكُونَ وَاحِداً
مِنْهُمْ، كَانَ ذَا بِذَا، وَإِلاَّ فَلاَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I understand your letter and I am conscious of your fear for your life.
If you know that in holding this office you will do what you have been
ordered by the Messenger of Allah (S), and will chose your
brethren-in-faith to be your agents and clerks, and you share whatever
you gain with the poor faithfuls as if you are one of them, then you may
hold it under these conditions; otherwise, I do not permit it.*[^35]

Sometimes, the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) would direct these
persons in their jobs and confirmed the importance of keeping their
doctrinal identities undisclosed.

Ibn Sinan has reported that Harun al-Rashid, the ‘Abbasid ruler, gifted
‘Ali ibn Yaqtin some garments as an expression of respect. Among these,
there was a black silk garment embedded with much gold. ‘Ali ibn Yaqtin,
in turn, sent most of these, including this silk garment, to Imam
Abu’l-Hasan Musa ibn Ja’far (‘a) adding to them money for *khumus*
taxes. When the gift reached the hands of the Imam (‘a), he accepted the
money and the garments but rejected the silk garment and gave it back to
‘Ali ibn Yaqtin with the same messenger who had brought them. The Imam
(‘a) also wrote a letter to ‘Ali ibn Yaqtin with the following content:
“Keep this garment and don’t let it out of your hand. Soon you will
encounter a matter and you will need this garment.”

Not too long after that, ‘Ali ibn Yaqtin became angry with one of his
close servants and dismissed him. This servant, who had recognized ‘Ali
ibn Yaqtin’s inclination to Imam al-Kazim (‘a) and knew every item that
his master had sent to the Imam, informed al-Rashid of these matters
against his master and added, “‘Ali believes in the Imamate of Musa ibn
Ja’far and hands over to him funds of the *khumus* taxes every year. He,
moreover, gave him the black silk garment that you gifted him as an
expression of respect.”

Upon hearing this, al-Rashid became furious and decided to expose the
matter, “If it is true, I will certainly take the life of ‘Ali ibn
Yaqtin!” Immediately, he ordered his constabulary to bring ‘Ali ibn
Yaqtin to him. When ‘Ali was brought before him, al-Rashid asked, “What
have you done with the garment that I gave you?” He answered, “O
commander of the believers, it is in my possession in a sealed chest. I
have stored it there. I rarely miss a morning when I open it to take a
look at the garment, seeking blessings and kissing it, and then I put it
back there.”

Al-Rashid ordered him to present it at that very moment, so ‘Ali ibn
Yaqtin summoned one of his servants and told him where to find the
garment exactly as he had told al-Rashid beforehand. Before long, the
servant fetched the chest and put it before al-Rashid who ordered the
seal to be broken. As he looked at the garment, al-Rashid found it
exactly as he had been told by ‘Ali ibn Yaqtin. He calmed down and
ordered ‘Ali to put it back in its place. He then said to him, “You may
leave with respect, for I will never believe any information that is
given to me against you.” Moreover, he ordered that an abundant gift be
given to ‘Ali ibn Yaqtin. As for the talebearing slave, al-Rashid
ordered him to be given one thousand lashes. After five hundred, the
slave died.[^36]

### Historical Background of this Policy

It is not inaccurate to say that this policy of security is the most
crucial that the Holy Imams (‘a) planned for the virtuous community.
There are some indications of this in the Holy Qur'an. Narrating the
story of Prophet Moses (‘a), the Holy Qur'an mentions that “the
believing man of Pharaoh’s family” protected Prophet Moses (‘a) from
dangers that were conspired against him, before and after his mission,
as he gave the Prophet information about conspiracies by Pharaoh and his
people to kill him.

‘Ali ibn Yaqtin, the aforementioned, who was the commander-in-chief of
the constabulary of Harun al-Rashid, and ‘Ali ibn Yaqtin’s father were
famous models who adopted this policy in the history of the Holy Imams
(‘a). Even though we have not received details of the lives of other
such personalities, there were surely others who played this role
throughout the history of the Holy Imams (‘a) because we believe that
this strategy of security must have existed in all the stages of the
Holy Imams (‘a) lives.

In a written account of the life of ‘Abdullah ibn Sinan, al-Najjashi
introduces him as follows:

‘Abdullah ibn (i.e. the son of) Turayf was a manumitted slave of the
Hashemites. Others claim that he had been manumitted by the offspring of
Abu-Talib and others claim the same for the offspring of al-’Abbas. He
worked as a secretary for al-Mansur, al-Mahdi, al-Hadi, and al-Rashid,
the ‘Abbasid ruler. A trustworthy person and one of our companions, he
lived in Kufah. He was so lofty that none could criticize him. He
reported sayings from Imam al-Sadiq (‘a). Shaykh al-Tusi in his book,
*al-Fihrist*, also counted him among the trustworthy reporters.[^37]

The same thing has been said about Muhammad ibn ‘Umayr, who was
introduced by both Shi’ites and Sunnis as one of the greatest master
jurisprudents.[^38]

Muhammad ibn Isma’il ibn Buzaygh was also one of the servants of
al-Mansur, the ‘Abbasid ruler, and one of his assistants. He and his
cousin, Ahmad ibn Hamzah, were among the most trustworthy Shi’ite
reporters. One of the most righteous persons, he was of superior
knowledge. Imam Abu’l-Hasan al-Ridha (‘a) once said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ للهِ تَعَالَى بِأَبْوَابِ الظَّالِمِينَ مَنْ نَوَّرَ اللهُ لَهُ
البُرْهَانَ وَمَكَّنَ لَهُ فِي الْبِلاَدِ، لِيَدْفَعَ بِهِمْ عَنْ
أَوْلِيَائِهِ وَيُصْلِحَ اللهُ بِهِمْ أُمُورَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ.
إِلَيْهِمْ مَلْجَأُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنَ الضُّرِّ، وَإِلَيْهِمْ
يَفْزَعُ ذُو الْحَاجَةِ مِنْ شِيعَتِنَا، وَبِهِمْ يُؤْمِنُ اللهُ
رَوْعَةَ الْمُؤْمِنِ فِي دَارِ الظَّلَمَةِ. أُولَئِكَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
حَقّاً. أُولَئِكَ أُمَنَاءُ اللهِ فِي أَرْضِهِ. أُولَئِكَ نُورُ اللهِ
فِي رَعِيَّتِهِمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ، وَيَزْهَرُ نُورُهُمْ لأَِهْلِ
السَّمَاوَاتِ كَمَا يَزْهَرُ الْكَوَاكِبُ الدُّرِّيَّةُ لأَِهْلِ
الأَرْضِ. أُولَئِكَ مَنْ نُورُهُمْ نُورُ الْقِيَامَةِ، تُضِيءُ
مِنْهُمُ الْقِيَامَةُ. خُلِقُوا وَاللهِ لِلْجَنَّةِ وَخُلِقَتِ
الْجَنَّةُ لَهُمْ. فَهَنِيئاً لَهُمْ. مَا عَلَى أَحَدِكُمْ أَنْ لَوْ
شَاءَ لَنَالَ هَذَا كُلَّهُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Among the officials of the unjust rulers, there are those through whom
Almighty Allah has made bright his path and given power in the countries
so as to protect His intimate servants* *through them and set right the
affairs of Muslims. To them do the faithful believers resort when harm
is done to them and to them do the needy among our Shi’ah turn. Through
them does Almighty Allah dispel the fear of the believers in lands
controlled by tyrants. These are the true believers. These are Almighty
Allah’s trustees in His lands. These shall be the source of Almighty
Allah’s light among His subjects on the Day of Resurrection. Their light
is visible to the inhabitants of the heavens just as the shining stars
are visible to the inhabitants of the earth. Their light shall light up
the Resurrection. By Allah I swear, they were created for Paradise and
Paradise was created for them. Congratulations to them. What prevents
you, if you wish, from gaining all that?*

The reporter asked, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you! How can we
gain all this?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَكُونُ مَعَهُمْ فَيُسِرُّنَا بِإِدْخَالِ السُّرُورِ عَلَى
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ شِيعَتِنَا، فَكُنْ مِنْهُمْ يَا مُحَمَّدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*One of you may join them (i.e. the unjust rulers) and, at the same
time, please us by giving pleasure to the believers among our Shi’ah.
So, Muhammad, try to be one of these.*[^39]

If a survey of the companions of Holy Imams’ (‘a) is made, one can find
many such individuals.

This policy indicates a remarkably outstanding and errorless plan by the
Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) that left a strong impact on the
protection, perfection, and development of the virtuous community which
extended to the entire Muslim nation.

Refuge and Migration
--------------------

The fourth measure of security that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) took for the
virtuous community was to choose and migrate to safe shelters in regions
far from the sway of unjust ruling authorities, including rural areas
where Arab tribes that were loyal to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) lived,
mountainous regions, or other regions known for their insubordination to
the ruling regime. The individuals of the virtuous community were able
to resort to this policy only in exceptional cases of emergency, to seek
security and elude danger to their lives on the one hand while
propagating the Islamic mission, spreading true guidance and
righteousness and teaching morals and divine laws on the other.

The Holy Qur'an has presented some examples and events of such
migrations, such as in the story of Prophet Abraham (‘a). After he had
encountered the aftermath of being thrown in the fire, he migrated with
Prophet Lot (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَآمَنَ لَهُ لُوطٌ ۘ وَقَالَ إِنِّي مُهَاجِرٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّي ۖ إِنَّهُ
هُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He (i.e. Abraham) said: I am fleeing to my Lord. Surely, He is the
Mighty, the Wise. (29:26)***

Likewise, Prophet Moses (‘a) migrated to Madyan:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَخَرَجَ مِنْهَا خَائِفًا يَتَرَقَّبُ ۖ قَالَ رَبِّ نَجِّنِي مِنَ
الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا تَوَجَّهَ تِلْقَاءَ مَدْيَنَ قَالَ عَسَىٰ رَبِّي أَن
يَهْدِيَنِي سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So he (i.e. Moses) went forth therefrom, fearing, awaiting, (and) he
said: My Lord! Deliver me from the unjust people. And when he turned his
face towards Madyan, he said: Maybe my Lord will guide me along the
right path. (28:21-22)***

Another example is the exodus of Moses and the Israelites from Egypt to
the Holy Land.

This policy of emigration in the security system of the virtuous
community also has a historical root in the deeds of the Holy Prophet
(S) who, in order to protect newly converted Muslims, ordered them to
emigrate to Abyssinia and seek refuge therein, even though Abyssinia was
not ruled by Islam.

These Muslims had been exposed to severe persecution and they lacked any
suitable means of protection. Once more, Muslims were ordered to
emigrate to Yathrib (later called al-Madinah al-Munawwarah—the luminous
city) where Islam could find itself a center. The polytheists of this
city had not yet taken an extremely hostile position against the Holy
Prophet (S) before his migration.

This procedure of emigration and asylum-seeking is also adopted by
political movements today when some of their members, being harshly
chased by the ruling regimes, seek refuge in other countries that allow
them asylum.

There is a set of indications proving that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) adopted
this policy of security so as to guarantee the protection of their
followers. Some of these indications are as follows:

### Historical Examples of Emigration

Some historical examples of emigration include:

• The descendants and offspring of the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a), as well as righteous scholars of the Shi’ah, spread widely in
various regions of the world, including remote and mountainous regions
such as Mazandaran and Gilan in present day Iran (in earlier times, the
lands of the Turks and Daylam), some regions of Africa, the Indian
subcontinent, the Caucasus, and the Malawi Islands. It is well worth
mentioning that these Sayyids[^40] and righteous scholars propagated
Islam and spread the Islamic culture in these regions, converting their
inhabitants to Islam.

• The Shi’ah of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) spread out in the various countries
of the Muslim world without exception, especially in the ages of the
Holy Imams (‘a). This state existed in other time periods also, despite
the fact that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers lived under
political and social siege and were subjected to execution, pursuit and
constant threat that did not grant them opportunities to engage in
extensive communication. This proves that the Shi’ah abided by the
policy of migration and seeking refuge as planned by the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a). This is also confirmed in a number of traditions.

Describing the manners of the true Shi’ah, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا شِيعَتُنَا مَنْ لاَ يَهِرُّ هَرِيرَ الْكَلْبِ، وَلاَ يَطْمَعُ
طَمَعَ الْغُرَابِ، وَلاَ يَسْأَلُ النَّاسَ بِكَفِّهِ وَإِنْ مَاتَ
جُوعاً... أُطْلُبْهُمْ فِي أَطْرَافِ الأَرْضِ. أُولَئِكَ الْخَشِنُ
عَيْشُهُمُ، الْمُنْتَقِلَةُ دَارُهُمُ، الَّذِينَ إِنْ شَهِدُوا لَمْ
يُعْرَفُوا، وَإِنْ غَابُوا لَمْ يُفْتَقَدُوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Our true Shi’ah are those who do not growl like a dog, do not covet
like a crow, and do not beg from people even if they die of hunger….You
can find them in the four corners of the world. They are those whose
lives are simple, whose abodes move from one place to another, who, if
seen, will not be known, and if absent, will not be missed… etc.*[^41]

• The reason for the emergence of some major events in the history of
Islam was the adoption of this policy of emigration. For instance, the
existence of Shi’ah emigrants in various countries gave rise to some
great states, such as the Fatimid dynasty[^42] and the Hasanid dynasty
in Tabristan, as well as some ‘Alawid political movements, especially
those which rose during the ‘Abbasid dynasty. In conclusion, these
Shi’ah emigrants gradually developed into great powers that threatened
and disturbed the existence of despotic ruling regimes.

• Some traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) give a green light for
resettlement in non-Muslim countries on the condition that there is an
opportunity to announce and propagate one’s faith. However, such
migration is regarded as a form of becoming a wanderer after migration
to civility (*al-ta’arrub ba’da al-hijrah*),[^43] which is forbidden by
the religious law of Islam. Moreover, a set of traditions reported from
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) decisively confirm that vagrancy after migration to
civility is prohibited.

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (‘a) has reported his fathers as quoting the
following from the Holy Prophet to Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَعَرُّبَ بَعْدَ الْهِجْرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do not return to nomadism after migration to civility.*[^44]

Muhammad ibn Sinan has reported that among answers to religious
questions, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) wrote:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَرَّمَ اللهُ التَّعَرُّبَ بَعْدَ الْهِجْرَةِ لِلرُّجُوعِ عَنِ
الدِّينِ وَتَرْكِ الْمُؤَازَرَةِ لِلأَنْبِيَاءِ وَالْحُجَجِ،
عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ، وَمَا فِي ذَلِكَ مِنَ الْفَسَادِ وَإِبْطَالِ
حَقِّ كُلِّ ذِي حَقٍّ لِعِلَّةِ سُكْنَى الْبَدْوِ، وَلِذَلِكَ لَوْ
عَرِفَ الرَّجُلُ الدِّينَ كَامِلاً لَمْ يَجُزْ لَهُ مُسَاكَنَةُ أَهْلِ
الْجَهْلِ وَالْخَوْفِ عَلَيْهِ، لأَِنَّهُ لاَ يُؤْمَنُ أَنْ يَقَعَ
مِنْهُ تَرْكُ الْعِلْمِ وَالدُّخُولُ مَعَ أَهْلِ پالْجَهْلِ
وَالتَّمَادِي فِي ذَلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Almighty Allah has forbidden vigrancy after migration to civility,
because such an act may result in renunciation of one’s faith,
abandonment of support of prophets and representatives (of Almighty
Allah, i.e. Holy Imams), corruption, and denying the rights of others
due to dwelling with Bedouins. Hence, a man who has fully recognized the
religion is not permitted to live with the unschooled and put his faith
under threat because it is not improbable that such a man will lose his
familiarity with religion, decline into unenlightenment of religiously
ignorant people, and go far into apostacy and ignorance.*[^45]

At the same time, other traditions refer to an exception of one case
only from this religious law; that is, the case of the availability of
an opportunity to propagate one’s faith and true beliefs when such
opportunity is impracticable in Muslim countries.

Hammad al-Samandi has reported that he said to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “I
often travel to the cities of the polytheists, but some of our
companions claim that if I die in these territories, I will be added to
the group of their dwellers.”

The Imam (‘a) asked:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا حَمَّادُ، إذَا كُنْتَ ثَمَّ تَذْكُرُ أَمْرَنَا وَتَدْعُو إِلَيْهِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Hammad, do you proclaim our faith and invite people to it when you
are there?*

Hammad answered affirmatively, so the Imam asked again:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإذَا كُنْتَ فِي هَذِهِ الْمُدُنِ، مُدُنِ الإِسْلاَمِ، تَذْكُرُ
أَمْرَنَا وَتَدْعُو إِلَيْهِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When you live in the territories of Muslims, can you make known our
faith and invite people to it?*

Hammad answered negatively. The Imam then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكَ إِذَا مِتَّ ثَمَّ تُحْشَرُ أُمَّةً وَحْدَكَ وَيَسْعَى نُورُكَ
بَيْنَ يَدَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Therefore, if you die there, you will be resurrected alone in an
independent group and your light will be running before you.*[^46]

[^1]: - Taqiyyah (self-protection) is the practice of concealing one’s
belief and foregoing ordinary religious duties when under the threat of
death or injury to oneself or ones brethren-in-faith.

[^2]: - The first and second points will be discussed in detail in one
of the future volumes of this series. The third point is a
jurisprudential thesis that has been discussed elsewhere by
jurisprudents.

[^3]: - These meanings have been discussed in my book entitled,
‘al-wihdah al-islamiyyah min manzur al-thaqalayn (Islamic Unity from the
Perspective of the Two Weighty Things—i.e. the Holy Qur'an and the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a)).’

[^4]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:461, S. 24 (wujub
al-taqiyyah), H. 7 as quoted from Shaykh al-Kulayni’s al-Kafi. All
Muslims and all rational people conform to this social and political
behavior, yet generally, but some Muslim sects try to provide reasoning
for this behavior even to the extent of forging and attributing
falsities to the Holy Prophet (S) for making peace, acquiescing, and
complying with unjust rulers, thus changing this policy into a fixed
mode instead of an exception to be used in emergency. Nevertheless, this
strategy was affixed to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) because in their times they
were continually exposed to persecution. They proclaimed that this
approach of keeping silent should be used only when necessary, not as a
daily activity, and that taqiyyah is a strategy with restricted
features. Further, yet general, details will be cited in future
discussions.

[^5]: - In fact, there is no discrepancy between the Ahl al-Bayt’s
followers and other Muslims in the basic doctrinal issues; rather,
differences may be found in some secondary issues. However, the major
difference is in the issue of the leadership of the Muslim society and
the succession to the Holy Prophet (S). The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their
followers believe that this position of leadership must be held by those
who have been designated for it through sacred texts of Almighty Allah
and His Prophet (S). In this respect, the Holy Prophet (S) designated
Imam ‘Ali and the eleven Imams (‘a) from his offspring as the divinely
commissioned leaders of Muslims. Others believe that the Holy Prophet
(S) left the issue of subsequent leadership unsolved and relegated it to
the Muslims so that they could put whomever they liked in this position
and choose whomever they wished without reference to the religious code
of law, or that the code of law has defined consultation to be the judge
in this question. However, even if the latter were true in this case,
true consultation was in fact not used by the Muslims to determine
leadership. One method of consultation was used to determine the
caliphate (i.e. leadership) of Abu-Bakr, another method for the
caliphate of ‘Uthman, and a third in choosing Imam ‘Ali (‘a).

[^6]: - Shaykh al-Tabrisi, Majma’ al-Bayan 9:243. Al-Suyuti, in al-Durr
al-Manthur 6:177, has reported the same, yet with more details and
partial difference in the purport. He then mentions other narrations
confirming the same meaning.

[^7]: - Ibn ‘Abbas is reported to have said the following: After Prophet
Jesus (‘a), kings distorted the Torah and the Gospel, but a few faithful
believers remained among the public reciting the Torah and the Gospel
exactly as they were revealed, so some talebearers said to the king,
“The most difficult thing that we can ever bear is the insults that we
receive from these people (i.e. the faithful believers). They recite the
following before us: ‘If any fail to judge by the light of what God has
revealed, they are no better than unbelievers.’ They recite such verses
and refer to us as those intended by them. Therefore, summon them and
ask them to recite these verses the same way we do and believe the same
way we do.” The king summoned these faithful believers, gathered them in
one place, and ordered them to choose one of two options: either to be
killed or to stop reciting the original Torah and Gospel but rather the
sections that had been distorted. Some of the faithful believers,
however, asked the other party to leave them alone and made some
suggestions. Some of them suggested, “You may build up a tower, put us
there, and give us nothing more than food and drink. We will then stop
arguing with you.” Others suggested, “Let us wander in the lands and
live just like beasts, and if you find us on your lands, then you may
kill us.” Others suggested, “Set up houses for us in the deserts and we
will dig wells, plow lands, and plant herbs, and we will neither argue
with you nor pass by you.” Each of those who made suggestions had a
close friend with him. About this situation, Almighty Allah has revealed
the following: “But the Monasticism which they invented for themselves,
We did not prescribe for them: (We commanded) only the seeking for the
Good Pleasure of Allah, but that they did not foster as they should have
done.” When Almighty Allah sent Prophet Muhammad (S), only a few of such
people still survived. One came out of his hermitage, another returned
from wandering, a third left his home, and they all believed in and gave
credence to the Holy Prophet (S). Referring to this, the Holy Qur'an
says, “O you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah and believe
in His Messenger: He will give you two portions of His mercy, and make
for you a light with which you will walk, and forgive you, and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.” (57:28) These two portions of His mercy are given
to them because they believed in Jesus (‘a), gave credence to the Torah
and the Gospel, and then believed and gave credence to the Holy Prophet
(S). The light with which they walk is the Holy Qur'an and their
adherence to the Holy Prophet (S). Then, the Holy Qur'an says, “So that
the followers of the Book may know that they do not control aught of the
grace of Allah, and that grace is in Allah's hand, He gives it to whom
He pleases; and Allah is the Lord of mighty grace. ” (57:29) (See Tafsir
al-Tabari 27:138, Ed. Beirut)

[^8]: - This was one phenomenon of the politically retarded communities.
Europeans passed through such retardation during the Medieval Ages
because of clashes between the Catholics and the Protestants. At some
stages in history, the East also passed through this phenomenon.
However, Europeans are still practicing this persecution today, in
another form, such as ban of hijab (Islamic veil), banishing refugees
who practice their religious rituals, marking them with a political
dye—a matter unbearable for Europeans. Likewise, some governments in the
Muslim world are persecuting groups of people because they practice
their religious rituals, both the general ones and those that indicate
their political trend, even where these rituals are not themselves
political.

[^9]: - Among these traditions is the previously mentioned one, which is
reported by ‘Abdullah ibn Ya’fur from Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), as well as
other traditions that have described taqiyyah as “the protection of the
faithful believer” and “the armor of the faithful believer.” For
instance, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (‘a) is reported to have said: وَأَيُّ
شَيْءٍ أَقَرُّ لِعَيْنِي مِنَ التَّقِيَّةِ؟ إِنَّ التَّقِيَّةَ جُنَّةُ
الْمُؤْمِنِ.Is there anything more delightful to me than taqiyyah?
Verily, taqiyyah is the protection of the faithful believer. (See
Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:460, H. 4.) It has been
authentically narrated that Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (‘a) has said:
التَّقِيَّةُ تِرْسُ الْمُؤْمِنِ.Taqiyyah is the armor of the faithful
believer. التَّقِيَّةُ حِرْزُ الْمُؤْمِنِ.Taqiyyah is the shelter of the
faithful believer.لاَ إِيمَانَ لِمَنْ لاَ تَقِيَّةَ لَهُ.Faithless is he
who does not practice taqiyyah.إِنَّ الْعَبْدَ لَيَقَعُ إِلَيْهِ
الْحَدِيثُ مِنْ حَدِيثِنَا فَيَدِينُ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِهِ فِيمَا
بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَهُ، فَيَكُونُ لَهُ عِزّاً فِي الدُّنْيَا وَنُوراً فِي
الآخِرَةِ. وَإِنَّ الْعَبْدَ لَيَقَعُ إِلَيْهِ الْحَدِيثُ مِنْ
حَدِيثِنَا فَيُذِيعُهُ، فَيَكُونُ لَهُ ذُلاًّ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَيَنْزِعُ
اللهُ ذَلِكَ النُّورَ مِنْهُ.One of our discourses may fall in the hands
of a servant (of Almighty Allah) who consequently adopts it as a
devotional act by which he worships Almighty Allah confidentially such
that it grants him dignity in this worldly life and light in the
Hereafter. Another servant may receive one of our discourses, and he
exposes it such that it causes him humility in this worldly life and
Almighty Allah divests him of the light.(See Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il
al-Shi’ah 11:460, H. 6 as quoted from Shaykh al-Kulayni’s Usul al-Kafi.)

[^10]: - ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud has reported the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying, “Those who were before us separated into seventy one sects; only
three of them were redeemed while all the others were exposed to
perdition. One of these three sects faced the kings and fought against
them, following the true religion of Almighty Allah and the faith of
Jesus, son of Mary—peace be upon him. As a result, they were killed by
the kings. The other sect were too powerless to fight the kings, so they
lived among their peoples inviting them to the religion of Almighty
Allah and the faith of Jesus, son of Mary—peace be upon him.
Consequently, the kings slew them and cut them up with saws. The third
sect were also too weak to face the kings or to live among their peoples
and invite them to the religion of Almighty Allah and the faith of
Jesus, son of Mary—peace be upon him. Therefore, they fled to the
wilderness and mountains and practiced monasticism therein. This is the
interpretation of Almighty Allah’s saying: “But the Monasticism which
they invented for themselves, We did not prescribe for them” means that
they did not do it except to seek Almighty Allah’s pleasure. “But that
they did not foster it as they should have done” means that the next
generations of those monks did not continue the practice as it should
have been performed. “So, We gave to those of them who believed their
reward.” These are those who believed in and gave credence to me. “And
most of them are transgressors.” The transgressors among them are those
who denied me.” (See Tafsir al-Tabari 27:138-139, Ed. Beirut)

[^11]: - Clashes between Muslim sects took place in many periods
throughout history, such as the clashes between the Hamdanites and the
Ayyubids in Syria, the Fatimids and the Ayyubids in Egypt, the Umayyads
and the ‘Alawids in the west of the Arab lands, and some Isma’ilis and
‘Abbasids in Iran.

[^12]: - Imam ‘Ali Amir al-Mu'minin (‘a) is reported to have said: مَنْ
أَحَبَّنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ فَلْيَسْتَعِدَّ لِلْفَقْرِ
جِلْبَاباً.Whoever loves us must readily dress himself with
poverty.(Nahj al-Balaghah, Aphorism No. 112) لَوْ أَحَبَّنِي جَبَلٌ
لَتَهَافَتَ.Even if a mountain loves me, it will definitely
collapse.(Ibid, No. 112) Confirming this fact, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are
reported to have stated that ordeals and tribulations increase man’s
nearness to Almighty Allah.

[^13]: - For instance, Abu-Basir is reported to have heard Imam al-Baqir
(‘a) saying: لاَ خَيْرَ فِي مَنْ لاَ تَقِيَّةَ لَهُ. وَلَقَدْ قَالَ
يُوسُفُ: {ﭜ ﭝ ﭞ ﭟ} وَمَا سَرَقُوا.Worthless is he who does not hold
taqiyyah. (Prophet) Joseph (‘a) said (to his brothers), “O caravan! You
are most surely thieves. (12:70)” In fact, they had not stolen anything
(on that occasion).Dawud has reported Imam ‘Ali al-Hadi (‘a) as saying
to him: لَوْ قُلْتُ إِنَّ تَارِكَ التَّقِيَّةِ كَتَارِكِ الصَّلاَةِ
لَكُنْتُ صَادِقاً.Even if I say that the deserter of taqiyyah is the
same as the deserter of (obligatory) prayer, I am surely honest.Al-Hurr
al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:466, H. 26.

[^14]: - In another section, we will talk about the principle of
taqiyyah along with its various aspects to make this idea more clear.

[^15]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:483, H. 1.

[^16]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:483, H. 2.

[^17]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:469, H. 6.

[^18]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:451, H. 2 & 139, H. 2.

[^19]: - Rulers of the Umayyad dynasty.

[^20]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:415, H. 1.

[^21]: - The Shi’ite community passed by such extremely critical times
at which to merely mention Imam ‘Ali and Lady Fatimah—peace be upon
them—admirably had political significance. A tradition reads that Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) said: إِيَّاكُمْ وَذِكْرَ عَلِيٍّ وَفَاطِمَةَ، عَلَيْهِمَا
السَّلاَمُ، فَإِنَّ النَّاسَ لَيْسَ شَيْءٌ أَبْغَضَ إِلَيْهِمْ مِنْ
ذِكْرِ عَلِيٍّ وَفَاطِمَةَ، عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلاَمُ.Beware of mentioning
‘Ali and Fatimah! The most spiteful thing to people has become reference
to ‘Ali and Fatimah—Peace be upon them.(Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il
al-Shi’ah 11:486, H. 2.) It goes without saying that those people who
cannot bear the mention of ‘Ali and Fatimah (‘a) are quite different
from those who proudly own their love for ‘Ali and Fatimah—peace be upon
them. Ibn Hajar, mentioning the biography of ‘Ali ibn Rabah, has
recorded that the Umayyad ruling authorities used to kill any newborn
who had been given the name of ‘Ali. Therefore, Rabah (the father of the
biographee) had to change his son’s name into ‘Ulay instead of ‘Ali.
‘Ali ibn Rabah would be angry if anyone called him ‘Ali. He once said,
“I do not release from religious responsibility any one who calls me
‘Ali, because my name is ‘Ulay. (See Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib
7:280-281, Ed. Dar al-Fikr) Al-Shafi’i referred to this same trend in
his poetic verses.

[^22]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:224-225, H. 10.

[^23]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:493, H. 2.

[^24]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:493, S. 34 (Prohibition
of divulgence of the right when danger is anticipated), H. 5.

[^25]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:494, S. 34, H. 7.

[^26]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:484, S. 32 (Obligation
of concealing the religion of Allah from other than its people along
with taqiyyah), H. 1.

[^27]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:484, S. 32, H. 2.

[^28]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:484, S. 32, H. 5.

[^29]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:484, S. 33 (Prohibition
of saying the names of al-Mahdi and the other Imams), H. 1.

[^30]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:129, H. 5; Shaykh
al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, 5:107, H. 5.

[^31]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, Man La Yahdhuruhu’l-Faqih 4:436; al-Kashshi,
Ikhtiyar Ma’rifat al-Rijal 2:740; al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah1
7:182, H.22305.

[^32]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:139, H. 1.

[^33]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:140, H. 9; Shaykh
al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 5:110, H. 1.

[^34]: - Al-Ardabili has asserted that this person is al-Hasan ibn
al-Husayn al-Kindi.

[^35]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 12:145, H. 1.

[^36]: - Shaykh al-Mufid, Kitab al-Irshad 2:225-227; al-Tabrisi, I’lam
al-Wara bi-A’lam al-Huda 2:19-20; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 48:137-138,
H. 12.

[^37]: - Al-Ardabili, Jami’ al-Ruwat 1:487.

[^38]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Fihrist, pp. 142; al-Ardabili, Jami’
al-Ruwat 2:50-51.

[^39]: - Al-Ardabili, Jami’ al-Ruwat as quoted from al-Najjashi’s book
of biography (rijal) 2:69. This excellent description of the rank of
these individuals has come from the significance of the nature of this
job as well as its risk, difficulty and need for accuracy of
implementation. In addition, such an office entails much suffering that
a righteous individual encounters due to associating with and being in
close proximity with tyrants, while secretly at odds with them.

[^40]: - Sayyid is a title of respect given to the descendants of the
Holy Prophet (S) through Imam ‘Ali and Lady Fatimah al-Zahra (‘a).

[^41]: - Abu-Zaynab al-Nu’mani, Kitab al-Ghaybah, 203-204; al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar 68:165, H. 16.

[^42]: - The Fatimid Dynasty ruled in part of North Africa, Egypt, and
Syria from AD 909 to 1171.

[^43]: - Al-ta’arrub ba’da al-hijrah indicates moving from a country
where Islam is powerful, such as al-Madinah, to another country where
Islam may be weak and inactive because of the social conditions of that
country, such as western countries in the present day and nomadic
regions in the past.

[^44]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:75, H. 1.

[^45]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:75-76, H. 2.

[^46]: - Al-Hurr al-’Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi’ah 11:76, H. 6.


