Other Islamic Issues
====================

Leadership of the Muslims after the Prophet Muhammad
----------------------------------------------------

In every aspect of life, a form of leadership exists, whether it is in
the workforce, education, government, family or religious institutes.
The Quran emphasizes the role and significance of leadership in Islam.
God states,

**“And remember the day on which we will call together all human beings
with their leaders [imams]“** (17:71).

Throughout his prophethood, Muhammad had on several occasions named a
successor after himself; more importantly, the commandment to name his
successor came from God. God commanded the Prophet,

**“O Prophet! Proclaim what has been revealed to you from your Lord [the
succession of Imam Ali], for if you do not, you will not have conveyed
His message, and Allah will protect you from the people”** (5:67).

This historical revelation came upon the Prophet at a major crossroad
between Makkah and Madina, called Ghadeer Khum. The Prophet had just
concluded making his first (and only) *Hajj* and was returning home,
along with 110,000 pilgrims, when he received the command by God to
appoint Imam Ali as his successor after his death. After the Prophet had
revealed the command before the people, the Quran then concluded with
its last and final verse,

**“This day, I have perfected your religion for you, completed my favor
on you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion”** (5:3).

The companions of the Prophet paid personal allegiance to Imam Ali and
accepted him as the caliph after the Prophet.

However, seventy days after the monumental incident, Prophet Muhammad
left this life. Disarray overtook some Muslims regarding who should
succeed the Prophet as leader of the Muslim community. There were two
main groups; one that consisted of the family of the Prophet (Bani
Hashim) and prominent companions, and the other being the prominent
companions of the Prophet.

The first group believed that the Muslim leadership had already been
established by divine ordinance[^1] and iterated by the Prophet.[^2]
This group later became known as the ”*Shia*[^3]*of Ali*.” The second
group believed that the Prophet left the issue of succession open to the
Muslim community to decide the leadership based on the concept of
consultation (*shura*). Members of the second group had suggested that
Imam Ali would be too young (age 33) to assume leadership. In their
opinion, prophethood and succession (caliphate) should not be vested in
one family.

In a hasty meeting at Saqifah Bani Saida in Madina, Abu Bakr ibn Abi
Quhafah assumed leadership (632-634). After Abu Bakr's death, Umar ibn
al-Khattab (634-644) assumed leadership; followed by, Uthman ibn Affan
(644-656), and then finally Ali ibn Abi Talib (656-661). After the
*khalifa* of Ali, two dynasties followed—the Umayyad and the Abbasid.

Social Life in Islam
--------------------

Islam places tremendous emphasis on the social aspects of life. Islamic
practices are not only confined to the spiritual dimensions, but also to
the social environment. For example, Islam encourages people to perform
their daily prayers in congregation. Praying in congregation strengthens
the ties between people by giving them the opportunity to interact with
each other and discuss their issues in a religious compound. Once a
blind man came to the Prophet and said that no one was able to take him
to the mosque to attend the congregational prayer. Prophet Muhammad told
him to stretch a thread from his home to the mosque to assist him in
going to the mosque to attend the congregational prayer.

Similarly, fasting has many social aspects; it causes Muslims to feel
the pains of starvation, the agony of the poor and the deprived in
society, and encourages the fortunate ones to extend their hands in help
toward the indigent.

The *Hajj* undoubtedly is the largest religious and social convention
that congregates millions of people from around the globe into one arena
to strengthen their ties, develop their skills, and exchange ideas and
opinions as to how to improve their situations.

*Khums* and *Zakat* *(charity)* also plays an important social role in
Islam. The giving of *Khums* and *Zakat* holds Muslims responsible in
bridging the gap between the rich and the poor, as well as, sharing in
the wealth that God has provided them with for the needy and
disadvantaged of society.

Enjoining the good and forbidding the evil is a social duty that falls
on the shoulders of each and every individual in an Islamic society—to
promote goodness, kindness, peace and justice, and to fight oppression,
corruption, and evil. Therefore, Islam, in practice, is truly a social
religion.

Marriage and Family Life
------------------------

Another aspect of Islamic social life is marriage and the establishment
of a family. Islam encourages its followers to get married and avoid
celibacy. Prophet Muhammad said, *“The person who marries gains half of
his faith; then he must fear God for the other remaining half.”*[^4] In
another tradition, the Prophet said, *“He who wishes to be clean and
purified when he meets God should marry and have a spouse.”*[^5]

The Quran describes the union between man and woman.

**And among His signs is that He created for you spouses from among
yourselves that you may dwell in tranquility with them, and He has put
love and mercy between your hearts. Verily, in that are signs for those
who reflect.** **(30:21)**

The verse establishes three pillars of a successful marriage. First,
marriage provides an emotional and social shelter whereby the husband
and the wife find stability and security—financial, spiritual,
emotional, and socially. The second pillar of a successful marriage is
the love between the spouses. Marriage that is not based on love is apt
to fail in the future. The third pillar is the mercy between the spouses
in which leads to mutual understanding, appreciation, respect,
forgiveness, and the caring for one another.

Although heavily discouraged, divorce is permissible in Islam. Divorce
in Islam is only used in dire cases in which the marriage had no
possibility of progress or development. God does not want a couple to
remain in misery and sustain emotional, physical, and financial damage.
Thus, God explains the laws and rules of divorce in the Quran chapter
called “Divorce.”[^6]

Islam encourages reconciliation between the spouses. Their families and
friends have the responsibility to counsel the couple as much as
possible, but if the attempt to save the marriage ultimately fails, then
the last resort is divorce. After divorce, there is a waiting period
called *iddah*.

Iddah represents a time of reflection or emotional recuperation for the
couple; it provides them an opportunity to heavily reconsider their
divorce decision. The three-month a waiting period also provides ample
time to confirm the possibility of pregnancy. Most couples return during
the iddah period; however, if the period elapses and the couple shows no
interest in returning to each other then the divorce will be finalized.

Part of the Islamic social life is to have high regards for kinship.
Kindness and respect for one's parents is considered one of the most
notable qualities in Islam.

**The Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him, and that you be
kind to your parents, whether one or both of them attains old age in
your life. Say not to them a word of contempt nor repel them, but
address them in terms of honor, and out of kindness lower to them the
wing of humility and say, 'My Lord, bestow on them Thy mercy, even as
they cherished me in childhood'.** **(23:24)**

Respect and kindness toward parents is as important as worship itself.
Imam as-Sadiq said, *“He* *who glares at his parents with wrathful eyes,
although they have been unjust to him, God will not* *accept his prayers
unless he repents.”*[^7] Respecting one's mother is particularly
important. The Prophet said, *“Treat kindly your mother. Treat kindly
your mother. Treat kindly your mother, and be kind to your father.”*[^8]

Imam as-Sadiq has narrated,  
*He who wishes God, Almighty and Glorious, to lighten the agonies of
death should have regard for his kinship and treat his parents with
goodness. Then God* *will make the agonies of death easy for him, and he
will not be stricken by poverty in his life at all.*[^9]

In general, humankind should all serve one another whether they are
related or not. Prophet Muhammad said, *“He who decreases a grief out of
the agonies for his Muslim brother, God will decrease for him a grief
out of the agonies of the hereafter.”*[^10] He also said, *“People are
the dependants of God for sustenance. So the most beloved person with
God is the one who is helpful to the dependents of God and makes the
family members of a house happy.”*[^11]

As a social responsibility, Islam also encourages its followers to help
the needy. Imam as-Sadiq said:  
*Whoever satiates a hungry believer so that the one is satisfied fully,
neither a human being among people nor a near-stationed angel nor a
divine messenger knows how great his reward is in the Hereafter except
Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.*  
*Feeding a hungry Muslim is among the means of forgiveness.*[^12]

Even people who are not indigent should still be assisted in any
possible way. *“He who is referred to by his Muslim brother [to borrow]
but does not give him a loan, God will forbid him from entering Paradise
on the day when the righteous will be recompensed.”*[^13]

Women in Islam
--------------

It is often stated that Islam considers women to be in a relative
position of a lesser human being, and that the Prophet Muhammad has been
reputed as being “anti-women.” However, upon an in-depth examination of
the Quran and the sayings and practices of the Prophet, one finds this
to be a disingenuous accusation. The Prophet was greatly aware of the
rights of women. In fact, he fought actively to respond to them through
legislation and private and public practice.

An entire chapter of the Quran entitled **“Women”** discusses a woman's
spirituality, in addition to her domestic and social rights. The chapter
begins with—**“O mankind! Be dutiful to your Lord Who created you from a
single soul, and He created its mate out of it, and from them both He
created many men and women” (4:1).**

Oftentimes, Islam has commonly been depicted and judged by the
misconduct of some Muslims, rather than by the content and philosophy of
its teachings. Islam equalizes men and women in their creation,
religious obligations, honor and dignity. Islam has recognized women as
an integral part in life. However, there are natural differences in the
peculiarities of each gender; hence they require varying guidelines. The
female, as a mother, differs in her personality than that of the man, as
a father. For each gender there is a specified message of life.

Islam innovated social and individual rights for women, and,
respectively, has accredited women as full partners in life. She is
entitled to pursue an education. No field career is closed to women,
unless it interferes with their dignity, respect, and chastity in
society. Islam enables a woman to own and dispose of her property
without the consent of her father or husband. She is able to contract
and manage her own business affairs, as well as to earn and manage her
own money. Islam entitles her to an inheritance as a mother, daughter,
sister, and wife. She has the right to deny or accept marriage
proposals.

Muslim women have the full right to choose their own husbands without
pressure or intimidation. An arranged marriage, without the consent or
acknowledgment of a woman is unlawful in Islam. Her marriage mahr (gift)
is solely for her. She is entitled to vote (which is considered to be a
religious duty), and to give her opinion or opposition to issues.

**“O Prophet! When believing women come to you to give you political and
religious allegiance… then accept their allegiance…** (60:12).

Her penalty in a civil offense is the same as a man's. If she is harmed,
she is entitled to just compensation.  
 The following are verses from the Quran that illustrate women's rights
in society.

**There is a share for men and a share for women from what is left by
parents and those nearest related, whether the property be small or
large, a legal share.** (4:7)

**O You who believe, you are forbidden to inherit women against their
will, and you should not treat them with harshness, and live with them
honorably. If you dislike them, it may be that you dislike a thing and
that Allah brings through it a great deal of good.** **(4:19)**

**For men there is reward for what they have earned, and for women there
is reward for what they have earned.** **(4:32)**

**Whoever works righteousness, whether male or female, while he or she
is a true believer, verily to him We will give a good life in this
world, with respect,** **contentment, and lawful provision, and We shall
certainly pay them a reward in proportion to the best of what they used
to do.** **(16:97)**

Islam requires men and women to be conservative in their attire and
behavior. However, the attire for men and women vary. Islam does not
permit women to display their physical appearance in society. Muslim
women when they are among the public are required to cover modestly. The
term used for moderate covering is known as *hejab*, it includes the
covering of hair as well as the contour of the body, except the hands
and face.[^14]

Covering is a form of protection, maintenance of chastity, and to avoid
negative temptations in society for women and men alike. When women
cover, they provide dimensions of moral character and dignity, not only
for themselves, but also for society.

Most importantly, however, it is to protect women from being victimized.
It is well noted that throughout history women have been victims of
physical, mental, and emotional abuse within societies. Many societies
exploited and dishonored women; therefore, Islam wanted (and wants) to
shield her honor and dignity by protecting her physical nature.

Besides protecting the honor of women, Islam wants to inculcate upon men
the importance of women in the sphere of life. Men are to regard women
in a dignified manner and value them as human beings. The acknowledgment
of a woman should not be based on her physical appearance or structure;
respect and acknowledgment must be focused on her character, her
intelligence, and her moral qualities.Besides protecting the honor of
women, Islam wants to inculcate upon men the importance of women in the
sphere of life. Men are to regard women in a dignified manner and value
them as human beings. The acknowledgment of a woman should not be based
on her physical appearance or structure; respect and acknowledgment must
be focused on her character, her intelligence, and her moral qualities.

Human Rights in Islam
---------------------

Islam has laid the fundamental and universal rights for humanity.
Essential human rights have been guaranteed and conferred by God. Such
rights are an important ingredient of the human creation and honor. God
says,

**“And indeed we have honored the children of Adam”** (17:70).

The rights guaranteed by Islam include the right to life, justice,
equality, safety, well-being, and freedom; additionally, respect for
women's' honor and dignity is important. Islam stresses that humankind
originated from one person; therefore, race, color, and ethnicity are
not factors for social privileges or extended rights.

Every person is entitled to respect and equal opportunity. An integral
part of the Islamic faith is to recognize, accept, and practice the
rights of humankind. To do otherwise would be considered an injustice.
The verdict in the Quran is unequivocal for those who fail to do so. The
Quran states,

**“Those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down are the
disbelievers”** (5:44).

Human life is sacred and cannot be taken away without justification.
Once the sanctity of the human soul is violated by a killing, then in
the words of God, *the sanctity of all humankind would have been
violated.* God states,

**“Whoso slay a soul not to retaliate for soul slain, nor for corruption
done in the land, should be as if he had slain mankind altogether”**
(5:32).

Islam, in all cases, protects and defends the life of infants, children,
and elderly people.

Islam considers feeding the hungry, clothing the needy, sheltering the
homeless, adopting orphans, and treating the sick and wounded,
regardless of race or color, are the essential qualities of the Islamic
faith. God says,

**“Do you see the one who denies the reckoning such as one who shuns the
orphan and does not encourage the feeding of the poor. So grief to the
worshippers who do not pray with their hearts, but only wished to be
seen. Those who turn away from neighborly needs”** (107: 1-7).

Examples of human rights:

### The sanctity of people's lives and property.

The Prophet said, *“Your lives and properties are forbidden [from
violation] to one another till you meet your Lord on the Day of
Resurrection.”*

### Freedom of expression.

Every individual is privileged with the right to freedom of thought and
expression. However, freedom should not be exploited in disseminating
mischief or agony within society. Therefore, freedom of expression is
not extended to those who use abusive and offensive language. Islam puts
great emphasis on protecting the dignity and reputation of the people.
The Quran states,

**“And indeed We have honored the children of Adam” (17:17).**

### Personal freedom.

An individual is considered innocent until a legitimate court proves one
to be guilty. An individual is assumed truthful in speech and deeds
until proven otherwise. No individual or group should be punished for
the crime committed by another individual. The Quran states,

**“Nor can one who bears burdens bear the burden of another”** (35:18).

### Political activism.

The Quran instructs believers not to sit idle in face of injustice,
corruption, evildoers, and oppressors. God says, **“And incline not
toward those who do wrong, lest the fire should touch you”** (11:113).
The Prophet states, *“Whoever offers help to an oppressor in his
oppression would come on the Day of Reckoning written on his forehead,
despaired from God's mercy.*”[^15] Islam encourages people to defy
tyranny. The Quran states,

**“Allah does not love evil talk in public, unless it is by someone who
has been injured thereby”** (4:148).

### Religious freedom.

Religion, ideology, and philosophy should not be imposed on an
individual against their will. **“Let there be no coercion in faith,
truly the right way has been clearly distinct from error”** (2:256).
Followers of all religions and sects have the right to worship and
conduct their religious rites in an uninhibited atmosphere. The Prophet
said this about the non-Muslim citizens in a Muslim state, *“One who
kills a man under covenant will never smell the fragrance of Paradise.”*

### Right to a standard means of living.

All humankind has an equal right for aid and assistance for the basic
necessities in life, such as food, drink, shelter, clothing, and
medication. This is a promise God made to the first man,

**“Verily you have between [a promise from Us] that you will never be
hungry therein, nor naked, and you will suffer not from thirst therein,
nor from the suns heat”** (20:118-119).

The poor have an inalienable right of living upon the rich. The Quran
states,

**“And in their wealth there is acknowledged right for the needy and
destitute.”** (51:19).

### Equality before law.

All citizens, regardless of social class, are equal within the law.
There are no dignitaries who can go unpunished for their crimes in
Islam; no one is exempted from the law.

Islamic Law and Punishment
--------------------------

Before speaking of the law and punishment in Islam, many premises must
be introduced regarding Islamic jurisprudence. Islamic ideology
stipulates that God is the main source of Islamic law. These laws were
revealed to all of the divine messengers in different eras and
geographical places, according to the intellectual progress of the
various societies.

Thus, upon the coming of the Quran, God's laws were culminated as the
universal legislation to guide humankind. Therefore, Islamic law is not
only bound by time or place, the laws are designed to cater to the
different needs of the human race for eternity.

The Islamic law of punishment is based on prevention, not retribution.
Islam cares to prevent criminal acts before they happen in order to
maintain the peace of society. These laws are dynamic in that they are
everlasting, not bound by individualistic interests. Islamic laws take
into consideration the general interest of society. God speaks about the
punishment of criminals by saying,

**“O you who believe, the law of equality in punishment is prescribed
for you in case of murder, but if the killer is forgiven by the
relatives of the killed against blood money, then adhering to it with
fairness and payment of the blood money to the heir should be made in
fairness. This is alleviation and a mercy from your Lord”** (2:178).

Islam tries to combat crime and terror actively; however, it leaves room
for mercy and forgiveness, emphasizing the human nature of people to
commit unlawful acts. Islam teaches its followers to learn mercy and
forgiveness from their Lord.

Islamic law is subject to the inherited rights of life. In order for the
Islamic law to be judged and administered properly, all aspects (rights)
of life have to be available for people as a whole in order for the
judicial system to be incorporated. Islam commands societies and
individuals alike to promote social justice, equality, and to maintain
distribution of wealth.

Islamic rule can only be applied when a society has adequate food,
shelter, clothing, and employment. Furthermore, Islamic rule is only
possible if an equal opportunity for education is possible. It is also
important for matrimony to be possible. Islamic rule endeavors to bridge
the gap between the haves and have-nots. Once these orders are in place
then Islam could stand firmly against any person who attempts to
terrorize or jeopardize the safety and security of society.

Mosque (Masjid)
---------------

Mosques are places of worship used by Muslims. Islam encourages people
to perform their prayers in mosques. It also encourages people to
participate in building mosques. Prophet Muhammad said, *“Whoever builds
a mosque, Allah will build for him a house in Paradise.”*

 Mosques play a vital role in Muslim life; in addition to the five daily
congregational prayers and the recommended prayers, the mosque also
accommodates Muslims during the Friday noon prayers and on the *eid*
holidays. Mosques are considered sacred places; men and women who are
ritually impure may not enter them until they have ritually cleansed
themselves. In addition, mosques should not be sold or defiled. The
Quran states:

**The mosques of Allah shall be maintained only by those who believe in
Allah and the last day, perform prayers, and give** ***Zakat*** **and
fear none but Allah. It is they who surely are on true guidance.**
(9:18)

The first mosque built by Prophet Muhammad was called “Qubah,” and it
was located on the outskirts of Madina. However, the holiest of all
mosques and the first house of worship that was built on earth was
*al-Masjid al-Haram*, the sacred mosque in Makkah. The second holiest
mosque is the Prophet's Mosque (in Madina) which was built after the
Prophet's migration from Makkah to Madina.

Mosques have many distinctive features. There is the *musallah* (prayer
hall), the *minbar* (pulpit where the preacher (or imam) stands to
deliver his sermon), and the *mihrab* (the niche that faces the
direction of the Kabah in Makkah, *al-qiblah*). Even though the presence
of God is everywhere, the Quran states,

**“To Allah belong the East and the West, so wherever you turn your face
there is the face of Allah”** (2:115).

Nevertheless, as a sign of unity, Muslims are instructed to face the
*qiblah* (the direction of the Kabah in Makkah) during prayer. Mosques
also have minarets and domes from which the call to prayer is announced.

Before a person enters a mosque, his or her shoes must be removed, and
women should be dressed conservatively (*hejab*). Neither men nor women
should carry on loud conversations inside. Mosques belong to God, not to
specific individuals, families, communities, or tribes. The Quran
states,

**“And the mosques are for Allah alone, so invoke not anyone along with
Allah”** (72:18).

Hence, barring people from conducting their worship in a mosque is
considered a grave sin in Islam. The Quran states,

**“And who is more unjust than those who forbid that Allah's name be
glorified and mentioned much in Allah's mosques and strive for their
ruin?“** (2:114).

[^1]: Quran 5:67, 26:214, 5:55, 4:59.

[^2]: Sahih Bukhari, Book on Outstanding Traits, hadith \#3430; Battles
hadith \#4064; Sahih Muslim, Book of the Merits of the Companions,
hadith \#4418; Al-Tirmidhi, Book on Outstanding Traits, \#3664; Ibn
Majah, Book on the Introduction, 112 and 118; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal
1:173, 175, 177, 179, 182, 184, and 185.

[^3]: The literal meaning of Shia means followers.

[^4]: Al-Kafi, v.5 p.328.

[^5]: Man’la Yahduruhu al-Faqih, v.3 p.385.

[^6]: At-Talaq, chapter 65.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, 2:349.

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi, 2:162.

[^9]: Safinat al-Bihar, v.2 p.553.

[^10]: Shahab al-Akbar, p.194.

[^11]: Usul al-Kafi, v.2 p.164.

[^12]: Usul al-Kafi, v.2 p.201.

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, v.76 p.369.

[^14]: Quran 33:59, 33:53, and 24:31.

[^15]: Kanz al-Ummal \#14950.


