Author’s Note
=============

When the first edition of this book was published in August of 1999, I
received many words of encouragement and inspiration from kind friends
within the community. In recent years, the need for approachable Islamic
publications has been recognized in order to clarify the misconceptions
surrounding Islam.

Remarkably, within two years, three thousand copies of the first edition
of this book have been distributed. Thus, the thought of reissuing the
book surfaced. Yet, as a man begins to age, his approach to ideas and
conceptions evolve. I felt the book warranted a review and revision.
With God's grace, this text reflects that intention.

The writing and publishing of this book would not have been achieved
without God, the Almighty and with the assistance of many dedicated
people within our community. Special thanks go to Sister Fatma Saleh for
her tremendous work in assisting with the second edition. A deep
appreciation and prayer goes to the Sajjad Foundation and its Trustees
for making this book available to readers. May God bless the
aforementioned names and all of the faithful people who spread the light
of Islam.  
 Sayed Moustafa Al-Qazwini  
 Orange County, California  
 July 13, 2001

\*\*\*

It is customary in Islam that when the name of Allah, the Prophet
Muhammad, prophets, or imams (descendants and successors of the Prophet
Muhammad) is enunciated, the following phrases are mentioned:

Allah—*“Glorified and Exalted”(Sabhanna wa-tallah).* Written
abbreviation—*SWT*.

Prophet Muhammad—*“Peace be upon him and his family.”* Written
abbreviation— *pbuh&hf*.

After the names of prophets, imams from the family of Prophet Muhammad
and his daughter:  
*“Peace be upon him/her.”* Written abbreviation—*pbuh*.

With great respect, admiration, recognition, and praise, I have omitted
the mentioned phrases for the sake of continuity.


