Introduction
============

What is Islam?
--------------

*Islam*[^1] means “submitting or surrendering one's will to the will of
Allah.”[^2] Humankinds' innate disposition naturally submits to the
reverence of God; this natural feeling was born with him or her on the
day of creation. In reality, the entire universe, through its ordered
workings, all submit to the will of God. Modern science calls these
phenomena “the laws of nature,” but these laws of nature, from an
Islamic perspective, are not just any laws of nature but the laws of God
for nature. Human beings depend on, and are in need of God's sustenance
and guidance throughout their entire lives; thus, man must yield his
self-will and desires to the will of the Creator.

Submission to God does not entail self-humiliation or a denial of human
intellect; rather, it means trusting the knowledge, wisdom, and fairness
of the Creator. In some form of an act or instance, people involuntary
trust and depend on the safety of their lives to others. Hence, the
decision to trust a person with more knowledge is logical; therefore,
trusting the wisdom of God would not constitute abandoning one's
intellect, but rather, it would constitute following one's natural
inclination.

Islam has other meanings; one of which is “to have peace.” God says in
the Quran,[^3] **“He is Allah, there is no Allah but Him—the King, the
Holy One, and the Peace”** (59:23). Moreover**,** the Quran states
**“And Allah invites to the abode of peace”** (10:25).

By its connotations of peace and safety, Islam indicates that the
religion is free from any deficiencies or defects. As a religion, Islam
is considered *perfect* because it was ordained by God and not invented
or marked by humankind. **“This day have I perfected your religion for
you, completed My favour upon you, and have chosen for you Islam as your
religion”** (5:3).

Commanded by God, Prophet Abraham was the first person to use the words
*Islam* and *Muslim*.[^4] **“It [Islamic monotheism] is the religion of
your father Abraham. He [God] has named you Muslims both before and in
this [Quran]“** (22:78). **“Abraham was neither a Jew, nor a**
**Christian, but he was a true Muslim [submissive to God] and was not
one of the polytheists”** (3:67). Not only did Prophet Abraham call his
religion Islam, but the prophets after Abraham also called their
religion Islam. Prophet Joseph, in the chapter entitled **“Joseph”** of
the Quran states:

**My Lord! You have given me authority and taught me the interpretation
of things. O Creator of the heavens and earth! You are my guardian in
this world and in the Hereafter. Cause me to die as a Muslim, submitting
to Your will, and join me with the righteous** (12:101).  
 Thus, God declares in the Quran, **“Truly the religion before Allah is
Islam”** (3:19).

Who are the Muslims?
--------------------

Muslims are the followers of the religion of Islam (those people who
submit to the will of God as explained in the Quran and the
traditions[^5] of Prophet Muhammad, the Messenger of Islam). Today, the
Muslim population is about 1.2 billion, and it is spread over a vast
range of races, nationalities, and cultures.

Approximately 18% of the Muslims live in the Arab world, but the
majority live in Asia and Africa. The largest Muslim population is in
Indonesia, and a significant number of Muslim minorities exist in
Russia, China, and Europe, North America and South America. The Muslim
population in the United States is estimated to be around six million.

How does one Become a Muslim?
-----------------------------

The basic requirement to become a Muslim is to declare, ”*Ashhadu an laa
ilaaha illa Allah, wa ashhadu anna Muhammadan rasul Allah*.” In English
this means “I testify that there is no God, but Allah, and that Muhammad
is the Messenger of God.” Anyone who proclaims this phrase joins the
ranks of the Muslim nation (*ummah*).

The statement marks the beginning of one's physical and spiritual
journey in practicing the aspects of Islam. A Muslim strives to become
one who the Quran terms as the *faithful* (*mumin*). Although this
journey in becoming faithful may be long, its rewards are numerous for
those who embark on it with sincere will and intention.

Practicing Islam requires learning Islamic ideas, teachings, and
practices, then adhering to them. Moreover, Islamic practice requires
some sacrifice. However, the necessity of sacrifice should not be a
deterrent. Prophet Muhammad states, *“Whenever someone gives up
something for the sake of God, God will replace it with something
better.”*

Sincerity of belief also develops over time. When Prophet Muhammad began
spreading the message of Islam, some people came to him and informed him
that they were believers in Islam. In reply, God revealed the following
verse, **“Say [Muhammad]: 'You believe not,' but say, 'We have submitted
to Islam,' for faith has not yet entered your hearts”** (49:14).

The successor to the Prophet Muhammad, Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib[^6], has
described the dynamic process of following Islam:

*I am defining Islam as no one has defined it before me: Islam is
submission, submission is conviction, conviction is affirmation,
affirmation is acknowledgement, acknowledgement is performance of
obligations, and the performance*  
*of obligations is good deeds.*[^7]7

[^1]: From the Arabic verb aslama, meaning surrender.

[^2]: The Arabic word for God.

[^3]: Quran: Islam’s divine book.

[^4]: Muslim refers to a follower of the religion of Islam.

[^5]: Hadiths, Sunnah, or traditions are actions, words, and consents of
the Prophet Muhammad in matters pertaining to the meaning and practices
of Islam which have been transmitted through a line of narrators.

[^6]: Imam Ali was Prophet Muhammad’s cousin and son-in-law. Since the
age of six, Imam Ali was raised and educated by the Prophet.

[^7]: Nahj al-Balagha (The Peak of Eloquence), sermon \#125.


