Pillars of Islam: Islamic Beliefs
=================================

Monotheism of Allah (Tawhid)
----------------------------

Monotheism is the essence of Islam. It is the affirmation of believing
that there is no other divinity other than Allah. For the most part, the
spirit of the Quran revolves around the theme of pure monotheism. Thus,
God is the center of a Muslim's belief. Whereas certain religions focus
on individuals, for example, Christianity's focus on Jesus Christ, Islam
focuses solely on God. Islam is based on the Absolute (God), not His
manifestations. The Quran itself speaks of the oneness of God:

**Allah has borne witness that there is no Allah but Him, and the
angels, and those with knowledge also witness this. He is always
standing firm on justice. There is no Allah but Him, the Mighty, the
Wise** (3:18).

The oneness of God is not only a philosophical argument, but also an
affirmation in which all human beings once declared the oneness of God
before their souls entered the body:

**[Remember] when your Lord brought forth the children of Adam from
their loins and made them testify over themselves, saying, “Am I not
your Lord?” They said, “Yes! We testify,” lest you should say on the Day
of Resurrection, “Verily, we were unaware of this”** (7:172).

At that time, every person to be created proclaimed God's majesty,
sovereignty, power, transcendence, and absolute oneness. Such was the
covenant God made with all people at the time of their creation, whether
people presently claim to believe in God or not. Similarly, all people
today, regardless of origin, are naturally inclined toward the idea that
God is one and without a partner. The Quran informs the Prophet Muhammad
of the following:

**Set your face to the true religion [Islamic monotheism], the natural
inclination [fitra] with which Allah has created mankind. [Let there be]
no change in what Allah has made; that is the straight religion, but
most people do not understand** (30:30).

Describing God
--------------

One of the shortest chapters in the Quran, **“The Oneness of
Allah***,***“**[^1] summarizes the nature of God in five verses:

**In the name of Allah, the Infinitely Compassionate, the Most Merciful:
Say, 'He is Allah, the One Allah, the Eternal Originator, He does not
bear children, nor was He born and He is beyond compare.'**

The most fundamental Islamic teachings about God are contained in the
previous verses; there is only one God, He is eternal, unique, and has
no kinship, creator, or resemblance to any human being. Prophets have
stated some of the divine attributes of God.

Prophet Abraham said, **“My Lord is He who gives life and causes
death”** (2:258). When confronting Pharaoh, Moses said, **“Our Lord is
He Who gave each thing its form and nature then guided it aright”**
(20:50). The two verses describe God in His relation to human beings;
however, God's being extends far beyond His relation to humankind. Imam
Ali described God in the following manner:

*He who assigns to Him different conditions does not believe in His
oneness, nor does he who likens Him grasp His reality. He who
illustrates Him does not signify Him; he who points at Him and imagines
Him does not mean Him. Everything that is known through itself has been
created, and everything that exists by virtue of other things is the
effect of a cause. He works but, not with the help of instruments; He
fixes measures, but not with the activities of thinking; He is rich, but
not by acquisition. Time does not keep company with Him, and implements
do not help Him.*

*His being precedes time, His existence precedes non-existence, and His
eternity precedes beginning. By His creating the senses, it is known
that He has no senses. By the contraries in various matters, it is known
that He has no contrary, and by the similarity between things it is
known that there is nothing similar to Him. He has made light the
contrary of darkness, brightness that of gloom, dryness that of
moisture, and heat that of cold.*

*He produces affection among inimical things…He is not confined by
limits nor counted by numbers. Material parts can surround things of
their own kind, and organs can point out things similar to
themselves…Through them, the Creator manifests Himself to the
intelligence, and through them He is guarded from the sight of the
eyes…He has not begotten anyone lest He be regarded as having been born.
He has not been begotten; otherwise, He would be contained within
limits. He is too high to have sons…Understanding cannot think of Him so
as to give Him shape…*[^2]

God expresses His own eternity and perpetuity in the Quran when He
states that, **“Every thing on earth shall perish, but the face of Allah
will remain, full of majesty and honor”** (55:26-27).

The 99 Names of Allah
---------------------

**And to Allah belong the most beautiful names, so call on Him by them**
(7:180). Islamic tradition states that God has many different names
representing different aspects of His being; ninety-nine are known
commonly among Muslims.

The Beneficent

*Ar-Rahman*

The Merciful

*Ar-Rahim*

The Sovereign

*Al-Malik*

The Holy

*Al-Quddus*

The Peace

*As-Salaam*

The Protector

*Al-Muhaymin*

The Mighty

*Al-'Aziz*

The Compeller

*Al-Jabbar*

The Majestic

*Al-Mutakabbir*

The Creator

*Al-Khaliq*

The Evolver

*Al-Baari'*

The Fashioner

*Al-Musawwir*

The Forgiver

*Al-Ghaffar*

The Subduer

*Al-Qahhar*

The Bestower

*Al-Wahhab*

The Provider

*Ar-Razzaq*

The Opener

*Al-Fattah*

The Knowing

*Al-Alim*

The Constrictor

*Al-Qaabid*

The Expander

*Al-Baasit*

The Abaser

*Al-Khaafid*

The Wise

*Al-Hakim*

The Glorious

*Al-Majid*

The Exalter

*Ar-Raafi'*

The Honorer

*Al-Mu'izz*

The Dishonorer

*Al-Mudhill*

The Hearing

*As-Sami*

The Seeing

*Al-Basir*

The Judge

*Al-Hakam*

The Able

*Al-Qadir*

The Great

*Al-'Azim*

The All-Forgiving

*Al-Ghafur*

The Appreciative

*Ash-Shakur*

The High

*Al-Aliy*

The Immense

*Al-Kabir*

The Preserver

*Al-Hafiz*

The Maintainer

*Al-Muqit*

The Reckoner

*Al-Hasib*

The Majestic

*Al-Jalil*

The Generous

*Al-Karim*

The Watchful

*Ar-Raqib*

The Responsive

*Al-Mujib*

The Loving

*Al-Wadud*

The Strong

*Aqawi*

The Firm

*Al-Matin*

The Truth

*Al-Haqq*

The Trustee

*Al-Wakil*

The Guardian

*Al-Wali*

The Praiseworthy

*Al-Hamid*

The Enumerator

*Al-Muhsi*

The Originator

*Al-Mubdi*

The Restorer

*Al-Mu'id*

The Giver of Life

*Al-Muhyi*

The Living

*Al-Hayy*

The Finder

*Al-Waajid*

The Noble

*Al-Maajid*

The Unique

*Al-Waahid*

The One

*Al-Ahad*

The Eternal

*As-Samad*

The Guide

*Al-Haadi*

The Powerful

*Al-Muqtadir*

The Expediter

*Al-Muqaddim*

The Delayer

*Al-Mu'akhkhir*

The Manifest

*Az-Zaahir*

The Equitable

*Al-Muqsit*

The Exalted

*Al-Muta'Ali*

The Avenger

*Al-Muntaqim*

The Pardoner

*Al-'Afuw*

The Compassionate

*Ar-Ra'uf*

The Patient

*As-Sabur*

The Gatherer

*Al-Jaami'*

The Self-Sufficient

*Al-Ghani*

The Enricher

*Al-Mughni*

The Preventer

*Al-Mani'*

The Distresser

*Ad-Darr*

The Incomparable

*Al-Badi'*

The Everlasting

*Al-Baaqi*

The Inheritor

*Al-Waarith*

The First

*Al-Awwal*

The Last

*Al-Aakhir*

The Hidden

*Al-Baatin*

The Governor

*Al-Waali*

The Resurrector

*Al-Baa'ith*

The Witness

*Ash-Shahid*

The Aware

*Al-Khabir*

The Kind

*Al-Halim*

The Benefitor

*An-Naafi'*

The Light

*An-Nur*

The Just

*Al-'Adl*

The Subtle

*Al-Latif*

The Lord of Majesty and Bounty

*Dhul Jalaali wal-Ikraam*

The Acceptor of Repentance

*At-Tawwab*

The Guide to the Right Path

*Ar-Rashid*

The Owner of Sovereignty

*Maalik al-Mulk*

The Source of Goodness

*Al-Barr*

The Creator of Death

*Al-Mumit*

The All-Surrounding

*Al-Waasi*

Viewpoints of Islam and Christianity regarding God
--------------------------------------------------

The emergence of Islam returned Abrahamic monotheism to its original
purity. Islam perceives the doctrine of trinity and incarnation as a
veil cast upon the complete reality of divine unity. Nothing should
compromise divine unity. God is the absolute, the one without condition,
and above all relations. The distinguishable feature of Islamic faith
from other monotheistic religions is its insistence on absolute
monotheism. Islam entirely opposes any association concerning God. This
includes the exclusion of the idea that Jesus, the Messenger of God, was
God himself. God states in the Quran:

It is not for a man, that Allah should give him [Jesus] the Book
[Gospel], and Judgment, and apostleship, and yet he [Jesus] should say
to people, “Be ye worshippers of me, besides Allah's,” but rather [he
would say] “Be ye Allah what ye teach the Book and what ye read
[yourselves]” (3:79).[^3]  
 Muslims believe that Jesus was a human prophet and divinely inspired by
God. However, Jesus is considered to be a servant and conveyer of God's
message. Neither the Old Testament nor the New Testament mentions that
Jesus was the son of God. Barbara Brown, a contemporary American
scholar, supports this idea with the following statement:

The doctrine of divinity states that Jesus is the Son of God, the Word
of God made flesh. Even though Jesus himself never claimed to be divine,
Paul gave him this attribute for one reason —to gain converts among the
Gentiles. The Gentiles were pagans who were used to worshipping gods
that had wonderful legends and myths behind them. Several of the pagan
deities of the time such as Mithras, Adonis, Attis, and Osiris were all
the offspring of a supreme ruling idol, and each had died a violent
death at a young age, coming back to life a short time later in order to
save their people. Paul took this into account, giving the pagans
something similar in Christianity. He attributed divinity to Jesus,
saying he was the Son of God, the Supreme, and that he too had died for
their sins. In doing so, Paul compromised the teaching of Jesus with
pagan beliefs in order to make Christianity more acceptable to the
Gentiles.

The term “son of God” was not something new. However, it had been used
in the Old Testament to refer to David (Saul 2:7) and his son Solomon (I
Chronicles 22:100) and to refer to Adam (Luke 3:38) in the New
Testament. In his famous Sermon on the Mount, detailed in Matthew 5,
Jesus tells his listeners, “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall
be called sons of God.” In all cases, the term “son of God” was not
meant to be applied literally but to signify love and affection from God
to the righteous. “Son of God” means a special closeness to God, not to
be of God. After all, people are sons [spiritual dependants] of God, and
God is the creator of all life.[^4]

Christians who lived during the time of Jesus believed that Jesus was
divinely inspired by God, not God himself. However, after the ascension
of Jesus to heaven, Saint Paul, who was deeply influenced by Roman
paganism, wanted his preaching of Christianity to be more appealing to
the Gentiles; thus, he compromised the teachings of Jesus by adopting
certain pagan ideas and interpolating them into Christianity. Even
though it was not part of the original teachings of Jesus, the idea of
the trinity spread.

[^1]: Al-Tawhid, c.112.

[^2]: Nahj al-Balagha (The Peak of Eloquence), sermon \#186. One of the
greatest written compositions in Islam, complied by Al-Sharif Al-Radi
(420H [Al-Hijra] 972CE).

[^3]: Also see Quran 5:72-75.

[^4]: Barbara Brown, A Closer Look at Christianity.


