Divine Justice (‘Adil)
======================

Anyone who believes in Islamic monotheism must also believe in God's
justice. God is just, and He never wrongs. Moreover, He does not have a
cause for injustice toward His creatures, for an injustice is an immoral
action; and God is incapable of evil. God is omniscient and never
neglects any matter. God is self-sufficient, and He is not in need of
the help of people. God is the possessor of everything, and His wisdom
transcends the universe. For example, the Quran states:

**“He is always standing firm on justice. There is no Allah but Him, the
Mighty, the Wise”** (3:18).

**“And your Lord does not deal unjustly with anyone”** (18:49).

**“We**[^1] **did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves”**
(16:118).

Just as God encourages human beings to emulate some of His attributes,
such as being *patient* and *forgiving*, God also requires humankind to
follow the ways of justice. For example, the Quran states: **“Say: 'My
Lord has enjoined upon me justice'“** (7:29). Although people may falter
in the way of justice, none of God's prophets or their successors have
ever committed acts of injustice.

God's justice embraces the entire universe. Whoever ponders the
existence of the universe and the order therein will not only observe
the expansion of God's justice over His entire creation, but also each
of the creations become apparent in all aspects of nature, from the
physical world to the biological world, and from the microcosms to the
macrocosms. The justice of God is particularly visible in the destiny
and free-will of human beings.

Although God's justice encompasses everything people should invoke upon
God to treat them not with His justice, but rather with His mercy. If
God had punished people immediately for all their sins, then humanity
would have perished long ago.

Compulsion (Jabir) or Free Will (Tafwid)
----------------------------------------

The question of man's predestination or freedom of choice has
preoccupied humankind throughout the ages, and it continues to be
discussed by Islamic philosophers and scholars. Ultimately, two schools
of thought regarding this question have emerged. One, called the
Compulsionist, holds that human beings do not have the freedom of
choice. Every decision, utterance, and action people make has already
been predestined since the time of creation. Compulsionists believe that
the faithful have no choice in their faith. Likewise, the unfaithful
also have no choice but to not believe in God. They maintain that
everything is unalterable and predetermined.

The second school of thought, the Free Will, declares that human beings
are masters of their own acts. This notion is in concordance with the
Quran which states, **“None will be wronged in anything, nor will you be
requited anything except that which you used to do”** (36:54). In
addition to another verse from the Quran that states, **“The truth is
from your Lord. So whomever wills, let him believe, and whoever wills,
let him disbelieve”** (18:29).

From these two verses, it can be concluded that human beings have the
freedom to act, but they must bear the moral responsibility and
consequence of their actions. Furthermore, the acknowledgement of divine
will itself makes people accept that their very actions are not
predestined.

The beginning of spiritual guidance is always from God, but the
beginning of man's destruction is one's erroneous choice. The Quran
states, **“Whatever good reaches you is from Allah, but whatever evil
befalls you is from yourself”** (4:79).

[^1]: “We” refers to God. Sometimes “We” is used instead of “I” or
“Allah” in the Quran to refer to God.


