Prophethood (Nubuwwa)
=====================

Prophets were people who received divine revelation and guidance towards
righteousness and God. Since the inception of history, God sent numerous
prophets and messengers to humankind. The messages of the prophets were
of two types: regional or universal. While the local prophets were sent
with specific messages to specific groups of people, the universal
prophets were sent with messages and books for humankind. There were
only five universal prophets: Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad.

A unique characteristic of all the prophets and messengers is that they
were infallible. They committed no sins. To demonstrate the validity of
this concept is to consider that humanity needed prophets and messengers
to set an exemplary structured lifestyle to emulate and follow. If they
had committed errors, then people might be obliged to exemplify and
excuse their errors, thus making the prophets and messengers
untrustworthy.

Infallibility means protection from error in teaching doctrine of faith
and morals. Infallibility is defined as the spiritual grace of God that
enables a person to abstain from sins by his own free will. This power
of infallibility and sinlessness does not make a person incapable of
committing mistakes; rather, he or she refrains from transgression by
his or her own power and will.

Infallibility is essential since the mission of the prophets and
messengers was not only to convey divine scriptures from God, but also
lead and guide humanity toward the right path [God]. Therefore, prophets
and messengers had to be role models and perfect examples for humanity.
The mention of infallibility is stated thirteen times in the Quran. In
the Quran, God said to Satan, **“Certainly you shall have no authority
over My servants except those who follow you and go astray”** (15:42).
Satan then said to God, **“By Your might, then I will surely mislead
them all, except Your chosen servants among them [the messengers and
imams]“** (38:82).

Prophet Muhammad never committed any sin and was never harsh to any
person or animal. God said, **“And by the mercy of Allah you dealt with
them [people] gently, and had you been severe and harsh-hearted, they
would have broken away from you”** (3:158).

In most societies, people with questionable records of conduct would be
ineligible from becoming presidential or gubernatorial candidates since
they would be expected to lead society and set examples of righteousness
and honesty. Unfortunately, many distorted stories and images about
God's prophets exist. For example, stories in the present-day version of
the Old Testament accuse Prophet David of adultery with Baath-Sheba,
Prophet Noah of being drunk, Prophet Lot of having committed incest, and
Prophet Moses of committing adultery. Islam adamantly opposes the
unethical and immoral writings that have been attributed to the prophets
of God.

However, the Quran does mention the errors of some prophets, such as the
divine commandment that forbade Adam from eating of the tree.[^1]
Nonetheless, the verses should not be literally understood as Prophet
Adam having committed a sin. Allegorical and metaphorical verses are
common in the Quran.[^2] Prophet Adam did not disobey the obligatory
commands of God. The command that Prophet Adam did not honor was a
recommended command; therefore, in Islamic teachings Prophet Adam cannot
be considered as having committed a sin.

God preordained all the prophets; nonetheless, the prophets had to
strive for prophethood. The foremost example of the vocational test that
prophets had to endure is told in the life of Prophet Abraham, the
father of all prophets. Prophet Abraham was born into an idolatrous
society, but the purity of his nature recognized that the worship of
idols was wrong, and he recognized that the idols were incapable of
doing any harm or good. One day, when no one was present, Prophet
Abraham smashed all of the idols, except for the largest statue. People
began to question Prophet Abraham about the destruction of their gods.

Prophet Abraham's reply was for the people to question the remaining
statue for the answer since they believed that their stone idols had
power. Although the people were aware that their idols were indeed
powerless, they did not know how to respond to the situation. Thus, out
of embarrassment and anger, they cast Prophet Abraham into a colossal
fire. However, God protected Prophet Abraham from the fire and
confounded the plots of the polytheists.[^3]

After being tortured for and then saved by his faith in God; Prophet
Abraham still had to undergo the hardest test of obedience. A direct
order to sacrifice his son Ishmael came from God.[^4] The order came to
Prophet Abraham in a dream. Although sadness overwhelmed him, Prophet
Abraham was a strong believer in God, so he did not question the divine
order. Ishmael, too, unquestionably accepted the command of God by
allowing his father to lead him to a mountaintop to be sacrificed.

Ishmael's only request was that his father place him face down in order
that his father would not see his facial expression during the
sacrifice. Prophet Abraham raised his blade, still ready to comply with
the command of God, when a revelation intercepted and caused the
cessation of the sacrifice of his son. Prophet Abraham had proven his
loyalty to God. The incident was a trial to measure Prophet Abraham's
faith.

Prophet Abraham was then given a sheep to sacrifice instead. The great
trial of Prophet Abraham is commemorated every year as the *Feast of
Sacrifice* (*Eid al-Adha*). This is a holy holiday for Muslims in which
the meat of animals is distributed to the poor. After passing these
tests, Prophet Abraham became the leader of humankind, as well as the
father of the prophets of the three main monotheistic religions:
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.

Why did God Send Different Prophets and Different Religions?
------------------------------------------------------------

Although God sent prophets to nearly all civilizations, the Quran only
mentions twenty-five names. The first of them was Prophet Adam, the
father of humanity, and the last prophet was Prophet Muhammad, the seal
of the prophets.

Throughout history, different messengers with slightly different
messages were sent to diverse societies. The reason was that the
religious needs of humanity were growing and developing just as the
human race was growing and developing. Also, diverse civilizations
needed to be approached differently in relation to guidance.
Nevertheless, the source and basic message behind the calling was the
same—that there was only one God.

God sent Prophet Moses with the Torah as light and guidance for the
Children of Israel, along with many other prophets, such as Prophet
David and Prophet Solomon. Fifteen-hundred years after Prophet Moses,
God sent Prophet Jesus, the son of Mary, confirming the Torah and
bringing the Gospel, which is also a book of guidance and light.
Finally, six-hundred years after Prophet Jesus, God sent Prophet
Muhammad with the Quran to confirm all the messages sent before him and
to complete the revelation of a universal religion to humanity.

Since all the Judeo-Christian-Islamic prophets were sequentially sent,
the question arises as to why Judaism, Christianity, and Islam now exist
as separate religions. The answer is that the followers of these
religions, particularly Judaism and Christianity, interpreted the
teachings of their prophets differently. The Quran says:

**Verily, the religion with Allah is Islam [total submission to Allah's
will]; and those whom the Book had been given did not differ but after
the knowledge [the truth] had come unto them, out of envy among
themselves** (3:19).[^5]

Nevertheless, many scholars consider the different religions as a divine
test. The Quran says:

**For each of you, We have made a Law and a clear way. If Allah had
willed, He would have made you one nation but that He may test you in
what He has given you. So strive as a race in good deeds. Your return is
to Allah; then He will inform you about that which you used to differ**
(5:48).

The Life of Prophet Muhammad
----------------------------

In 6th century C.E. Arabia, the majority of people were pagans. They
lived in tribes, each with its own leader. Some were agriculture and
cattle farmers, others were merchants and traders, while others raided
tribes for booty as a means of survival. It was into this society, in
570CE, that the Prophet Muhammad was born within the tribe of
Quraysh,[^6] in the city of Makkah.

When his parents[^7] died, his grandfather[^8] looked after him. When
his grandfather died, his paternal uncle, Abu Talib,[^9] cared for him.
While growing up, Prophet Muhammad became known as “Muhammad the
Truthful, the Trustworthy” (*Assadiq, al-Amin*). Early into his
adulthood, Prophet Muhammad worked for a successful widow,
Khadijah,[^10] who was so impressed with his honesty that she asked him
to marry her. The Prophet was twenty-five, and they remained in a
monogamous marriage until Khadijah's death twenty-five years later.

Often, Prophet Muhammad would take a respite from the bustle of Makkah
by traveling to a cave for periods of reflection. During one such time,
when Muhammad was forty years old, he heard the voice of an angel named
Jibrail[^11] giving him a command.

**Recite in the Name of your Lord who creates, creates man from a clot.
Recite! Your Lord is the Most Bountiful, who taught the use of the pen,
taught humankind that which they knew not** (96: 1-5).

Prophet Muhammad repeated the words until he had memorized them. The
Prophet then rushed home and told his experience to his wife, Khadijah
who comforted and reassured him. Khadijah and the Prophet's young
cousin, Ali were the first people to understand and accept that God had
chosen “the Truthful, the Trustworthy” to deliver God's final guidance.
Prophet Muhammad continued to receive revelations for over twenty
years.[^12]

As time passed, it became clear to the ever-increasing number of people
that Prophet Muhammad was indeed the Messenger of God. The least
receptive people were the powerful Makkans who trafficked in idols and
slaves. They benefited mostly from idol worshiping and pilgrim trade.
The Makkans treated Prophet Muhammad with derision. Despite this,
Prophet Muhammad continued to deliver the revelations of God's mercy and
justice, which were welcomed by the poor and oppressed.

The Makkans were becoming more and more intolerant of Prophet Muhammad
and felt threatened by the messages he was advocating, such as the
oneness of God. With the increasing number of converts to Islam within
the region, Prophet Muhammad was becoming a serious threat. In an
attempt to dissuade the expansion of Islam, Quraysh exiled the Prophet,
his family, and followers from Makkah. Quraysh then sanctioned an
economic blockade on trade and association with the Muslims.[^13] For
three years, the Muslims were sheltered in the valley of Abu Talib, near
Makkah. In conditions of hardship and hunger, the Muslims often faced
the ration of one date a day; and at times, two people shared the date.
Yet, because of the Muslims tenacious faith, the siege ended
unsuccessfully.

Shortly after the siege ended, the Prophet was once again faced with
tribulation. The two most influential and dearest people to the Prophet
died; his uncle, Abu Talib and his beloved wife, Khadijah. Overwhelmed
by grief, the Prophet declared that year as “a year of sadness.” No
longer being protected and supported by his uncle, the Prophet became
more vulnerable to the escalating pressure by Quraysh.

Leaders from the distant town of Yathrib[^14] secretly invited the
Prophet and his followers to settle in their hometown and to preach the
word of Islam. Before migrating to Madina in 622 CE, the Prophet
narrowly escaped an assassination attempt in Makkah.[^15] The migration
from Makkah to Madina became known as the *Hijrah*, which is also the
starting point of the Muslim calendar.[^16]

Prophet Muhammad was received with excitement and jubilation[^17] in
Madina, where he became head of what was to become the first Islamic
state. Throughout the first ten years in Madina, Muslims witnessed
several occasions that were to become milestones in the history of
Islam.

The primary task was building a mosque in Madina. The Prophet himself
participated in building the mosque of which also housed the Prophet's
home. Companions of the Prophet built their homes in close proximity to
the mosque to be near the Prophet. It was necessary for the Prophet to
create a center where its members could assemble. The mosque was not
only a place of worship, but also a center of social, political, and
educational services.

The unity of brotherhood was introduced. There were two major tribes in
Madina: Muhajreen (immigrants) and Ansar (indigenous).[^18] The Ansar
were divided into two groups: Aws and Khazraj;[^19] they fought for 120
years. Under a common purpose [Islam], the Prophet appeased the
animosity that existed among the two tribes by forming them as brethrens
of one another. *“Now you should become brothers in faith, by pairs,”*
the Prophet said to his followers.[^20] By this method, the Prophet
insured the political and spiritual nature of his nation. Today, the
unity of brotherhood continues to remain a tremendous act of equality
among Muslims. Islam is the foundation on which all races,
nationalities, cultures, socioeconomic levels, and genders can be united
by religious kinship.

The Prophet made the institution of matrimony easier. The gift in
marriage (*mahr*) was made moderate, and inter-marriages with other
tribes became more accessible. Socio-economic or ancestral descent was
no longer a major factor in marriage. The establishment of marriage
became a form of uniting, securing, and promoting Islam within various
tribes and nations. Marriage not only symbolized the religious union of
a man and a woman, but also, indirectly influenced and affected social
and political ties. The Prophet said, *“He who wishes to appear before
God with a pure soul, should marry.”* [^21]

The Prophet set the example of marriage with his own daughter, Lady
Fatima. Although many companions had proposed marriage to Fatima, they
were aware that the marriage of Fatima was not going to be based on
affluence, rank, or descent. The men knew that the person that resembled
the Prophet in matters of truthfulness, spiritual merit, and moral
excellence would be none other than Ali. The Prophet (by God's
direction) told the suitors that the marriage of Fatima would only occur
by divine order. When Ali approached the Prophet to seek his blessings
to marry his daughter, he was overcome with shyness.

The Prophet encouraged him to speak. Ali then proposed, but the Prophet
did not answer him immediately. The Prophet then consulted Fatima, and
she accepted. The marriage of Ali and Fatima was then solemnized with a
symbolic marriage mahr.

After the migration to Madina, the Prophet faced continual threats from
Quraysh and the polytheists of Makkah, and the non-Muslims in Madina.
Peace and security were paramount, yet attempts to keep peace within the
region by the Prophet were futile. The opposition in Makkah mobilized
its troops to demolish the newly established Islamic state in Madina.
Standing firm in the face of military aggression, the Prophet was
compelled to defend Islam in what became known as the “Battle of Badr.”

The battle erupted only two years into the hijrah (migration), and
although the Prophet's army was far outnumbered, they triumphed. A story
about the battle in the Quran reveals that God had sent an army of
angels to assist the Muslims against the Makkans.[^22] The Muslim
success in the battle gave immense prestige to the infant Islamic
community in Madina and dealt a major blow to the pride of the Makkans.

The following year, the Makkans wanted to avenge their defeat. On a hill
called Uhud, west of Madina, the second major battle was fought in what
has become known as the “Battle of Uhud.” In the beginning of the
battle, the Muslims showed signs of victory; however, the
insubordination[^23] of some Muslim men caused the final setback in the
battle in which many Muslims were injured and lost their lives. The
Prophet himself was injured and he lost his uncle, Hamza ibn Abd
al-Muttalib, who was his greatest supporter. Although the Battle of Uhud
was a set back for the Muslim community, they were able to remain in
Madina. Afterwards, many other victorious battles of defense
consolidated the Muslims;[^24] hence, Islam became an ever-increasing
spiritual and political force in Arabia, which eventually paved the way
to the conquest of Makkah.

In the ninth year of the hijrah (630CE), the Prophet Muhammad and his
followers entered Makkah after a peaceful surrender by the Makkans. The
Prophet went directly to the *Kabah*[^25] to perform the
circumambulation (*tawaf*) around the Kabah. As he entered the station
of the Kabah there sat the three main idols that the pagans had
worshipped above the Kabah's door entrance. With his spear, Prophet
Muhammad destroyed them while reciting, **“And say, truth has arrived
and falsehood has perished, for falsehood is bound to perish.”**[^26]

Subsequentially, hundreds of idols were destroyed inside and around the
Kabah. The destruction of the idols symbolized the arrival and the
proclamation of truth and the end to falsehood. Islam was now home. The
Prophet then granted general amnesty to all the Makkans who had fought
against him for twenty-two years. Afterwards the Prophet addressed them
with these words:

*You have been unreasonable countrymen. You refuted my prophethood and
turned me out of my home, and when I took refuge in a far-off place, you
rose to fight against me. You killed my uncle and my best companions.
However, in spite of all these crimes of yours, I forgive all of you and
make you free, and declare that you may go after the pursuits of your
life.*[^27]

During the tenth year of the hijrah*,* the Prophet performed the
“Farewell *Hajj*,”[^28] his only and final *Hajj* pilgrimage. On the day
of Arafat, over 100,000 pilgrims were present when the Prophet commenced
his sermon by saying:

*O People! Hear my words, for it possible that I may not meet you at
this place in the future. O People! Your blood and property (honor and
reputation) are forbidden toward one another till the day you meet
Allah. O People! Your women have rights upon you and you also have
rights upon* *them. You should treat them with kindness and love, and
you should provide them with a comfortable means in life…*[^29]

Less than three months after the farewell pilgrimage, and days before
the Prophet's death, the final verse of the Quran was revealed. **“Today
I [Allah] have perfected for you your religion, completed my favor upon
you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion”** (5:3). On the
28th of Safar, 11H, at the age of sixty-three, the Holy Prophet died. At
the time of his death, the majority of the people in Arabia had accepted
Islam as their religion and way of life.

[^1]: See Quran 20:115-123.

[^2]: See Quran 3:7.

[^3]: This story is mentioned in the Quran 21:51-68.

[^4]: A similar story is mentioned in the Old Testament; however, the
difference in the Old Testament from Islam’s account is that Isaac was
the son that was to be sacrificed, not Ishmael.

[^5]: Also see Quran 10:93.

[^6]: Quraysh, a major tribe in Makkah, of which the clan of Hashim was
a part and to which Prophet Muhammad belonged.

[^7]: Father, Abdullah Ibn Abd al-Muttalib. Mother, Amina, daughter of
Wahab.

[^8]: Paternal grandfather, Abd al-Muttalib Ibn Hashim.

[^9]: Paternal uncle, father of Imam Ali, one of the chiefs of Makkah
and nobleman of Quraysh. He was famous for his generosity, bravery, and
dedication in protecting his nephew, Prophet Muhammad. He had accepted
Islam and supported the Prophet until the end of his life.

[^10]: Lady Khadijah, the first and most revered wife of the Prophet.
She was the first female to embrace Islam. Khadijah bore the Prophet six
children; two sons, Qasim and Abdullah; four daughters: Ruqawyah,
Zaineb, Um-Kalthum, and Fatima. The male children died before the
ordination of his prophethood. The daughters survived beyond the advent
of their father’s prophethood. Khadijah was known for her noble traits
and sincere dedication to the Prophet. Prophet Muhammad once described
Khadijah in the following statement: “I have not acquired a better wife
after her, she believed in my prophethood at a time when people rejected
it. She placed her wealth at my disposal when people deprived me of
attaining it, and Allah gave me, only through her, children, and not
from any other woman.” Jaffar Subhany, The Message, p.190.

[^11]: Angel Jibrail is one of the four Archangels and is considered one
of the greatest of all angels since he was the channel through which the
divine books and the scriptures were revealed from God to the prophets.
The other three angels: Izrail, the angel of death; Israfil, the angel
assigned to sound the trumpet on the Day of Resurrection; Mikail, who
watches over places of worship.

[^12]: See Seerat Ibn Hisham, v.1, p.236.

[^13]: Seerat Ibn Hisham, v.1, p.350. An economic treaty was initiated
by the grand counsel of Quraysh which entailed an endorsement and a
pledge, until their deaths, by the community not to end the economic ban
on the Muslims with the following criteria: 1.Every type of trade or
business with the supporters of Muhammad shall be banned. 2.Association
with Muhammad and his followers is strictly prohibited. 3.Not one person
is entitled to establish matrimonial ties with Muslims. 4.Opponents of
Muhammad should be supported in all circumstances.

[^14]: Yathrib was a town approximately 350 miles north of Makkah.
Yathrib was later renamed Madina, meaning the city of the Prophet.

[^15]: See Quran 8:30.

[^16]: The Islamic calendar began at the migration of the Prophet from
Makkah to Madina, and it is based on the lunar cycles. Two important
incidents occurred before the migration to Madina: the birth of the
Prophet, during the Year of the Elephant 570CE, which symbolizes the
year that King Abraha came to destroy the Kabah with a herd of elephants
(See Quran c.105) and the ordination of Muhammad to prophethood. Islam,
in its first thirteen years in Makkah, was constantly suppressed and its
followers were tormented. The migration (hijrah) marked the turning
point in liberating Islam and its followers. In addition, Madina
provided a safe haven and an opportunity to establish the birth of the
Islamic state. Quranic verses regarding rules of social, economic,
political, and formal rituals were mostly introduced in Madina. Muslims
consider the migration to Madina as an Islamic victory for freedom of
religion.

[^17]: The Prophet proceeded to Madina. When his camel descended at
Thaniyatul Al-Wida and set its foot on the land of Yathrib, the people
warmly welcomed and greeted the Prophet with jubilation. The mood
surrounding this event is marked by a well-known lyric: The moon rose
from “Thaniyatul Al-Wida.” It is our duty to be thankful for this
blessing, till the day when even one person on the face of the earth
prays to Allah and worships Him.

[^18]: Muhajreen (Muslim immigrants from Makkah) and Ansar (the Helpers
who received the Prophet in Madina) were the two major groups of Muslims
in Madina.

[^19]: Aws and Khazraj were major tribes within Ansar that lived and
supported the Prophet in Madina.

[^20]: Seerat Ibn Hisham, v.1 p.123.

[^21]: Jaffar Subhani, The Message, p.358.

[^22]: See Quran 3:124-126.

[^23]: See Quran 3:152. Seerat Ibn Hisham, v.2 p.400.

[^24]: Battles such as: Ahzab, 5H, Khaybar, 7H, Mutah, 8H, and
Thatusalasil, 8H.

[^25]: Kabah is a cube made of stone. It was first built by Prophet
Adam. Later, Prophet Abraham and his son Ishmael rebuilt the Kabah’s
foundation. The Kabah is the center and direction of Muslim prayers.

[^26]: Quran 17:31.

[^27]: Seerat ibn Hisham, v.4 p.55.

[^28]: See Quran chapter Hajj.

[^29]: Seerat Ibn Hisham v.2 p.605.


