FOREWORD
========

<p dir="rtl">
بسم الله الرحمن الرحیم
</p>

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MOST GRACIOUS, THE MOST MERCIFUL

The Shi'i communities in the Western world face numerous challenges,
often times strikingly inconsistent with those faced by Shi'i Muslim
communities of the East. Aggression against religious philosophies,
ideologies, traditions and rituals is carried out in order to belittle
them, but are more often than not, presented under the guise of
intellectual discourse. These attacks are generally geared to create
questions and doubts, and to leave one with a strong desire for answers.
Given that the masses of all religious communities are imitators - more
or less - in religion, they are therefore highly dependent on the
opinions of their religious authorities. Thus, the masses look towards
them as a source of guidance and turn to them for answers to their
doubts and queries. However, some of these individuals may not always be
able to get satisfactory answers to their questions. This may be due to
an inability to research the question properly, or at times it is
because the expertise of a scholar may be in an area other than that of
the question.

Subsequently, in recent years particularly, this quest for seeking
answers and explanations has created a popular trend amongst the Shi'i
Muslim communities of the West, where individuals who are not scholars
in the truest sense of the word, take it upon themselves to address
these issues and answer such questions from an authoritative position.
Although this trend may be seen as positive by some, many indicators
signify that it is truly dangerous and the communities need to be
cautious of it.

We have seen in the last decade or two, the growing rise of
non-scholarly speakers comfortably sitting on pulpits in order to
deliver sermons, presentations and address question and answer sessions
for live audiences. These - typically young - speakers generally
commence on a very limited scale, perhaps at their local mosque or
religious schools. Nonetheless, as they begin to gain popularity, it is
not uncommon to begin seeing them recite complete sets of lecture series
in the months of Muḥarram, Ramadhān or other seasons. They begin
receiving invitations to different religious institutions, different
cities and even different countries. What is seen on the opposite end
are masses of young men and women, youth in particular, mesmerized by
these speakers and we often witness alongside it a complete devaluation
of knowledge. More often than not, what becomes associated with these
speakers is a celebrity-like status, and many times a cult develops
around them. Symptoms of narcissism begin to show themselves on social
media and mistakes or incorrect conclusions made by these speakers get
over shadowed by the justification done for them by the hordes of their
fans.

The issue is definitely a tough one to tackle, not only because there is
the issue of these speakers per say, but also because many times the
initial gap between the community and true-scholars indeed does exist.
Furthermore, one would be hard pressed to obtain a religious legal
justification to prevent a person from merely speaking or delivering a
lecture in and of itself. Arguments can be made supporting this
permissibility by the communities themselves, based on different
variables, such as lack of scholars in a given area, the crowd-pulling
factor that a certain speaker brings, which speaker is admired and liked
by the audience, and so on. Thus, this issue needs to be seen more in
light of ethical jurisprudence and in terms of what knowledge truly is
meant to be and who it should be attained from.

The response that is generally provided is a simple and straightforward
one. A religious speaker, or a speaker who wishes to deliver religious
knowledge, should generally be someone who has studied in an Islamic
seminary, be it in Qom, Najaf or elsewhere. They should be someone who
would generally have a thorough understanding of religious matters - at
least in one or two subjects within it, while understanding the depths
that exists in other streams. Like with every field, there are
institutions where individuals go and study and subsequently become
experts in a specific subject. These institutions are where an
individual spends a decent number of years studying the intricate
details pertaining to that subject and then after meeting certain
criteria is considered reliable enough to be able to comment as an
authority.

Which circle of academia would take an individual, who has barely
studied a little science or engineering, albeit it be through some of
the very same books that the experts have used to study from, to come
and lecture on that subject at an academic conference without having any
verifiable and credible credentials? Which conscious audience would
generally pay any heed to the opinions of such a person? The practice is
extremely rare and reserved for perhaps a few gems that can be found in
any given industry and many times they are linked to a higher authority
from whom they get this sense of acceptance amongst an audience. Perhaps
an argument can be made that this individual may simply be providing a
summary of their readings of different views on a given matter and is
thus not stating their own views, rather quoting experts. The slight
difference there would be that a person is in reality not presenting his
or her own opinions on a subject matter nor behaving as an authority.
Regardless, the common practice is that one would need to have some
verifiable credibility to convince an audience that they are reliable
enough in their research and analysis to be able to give a presentation.

In a narration pertaining to a verse of the Holy Qur'ān, Zayd al-Shaḥḥām
asks Imam Bāqir (as) about the words "his food" in the Qur'ānic verse:
Then let mankind look at his food (80:24). The Imam (as) responds to him
saying: It is his knowledge which he takes, and he should look into who
he is taking it from.1

If one travels on a lengthy road trip and is informed that all the
restaurants that come on the way have a real risk of giving the person a
disease, would this person rather hold his hunger for a few hours or
risk attaining that disease? It seems obvious that a sane person would
not risk it when it is possible to control their hunger, though they may
have to struggle and wait an extra few hours to fulfill their desire for
food.

If the same parable can be made with certain speakers, who are not
qualified or trained in the proper institutions, neither are they
connected to a higher authority, and it is realized that there is a
valid and serious risk in them causing harm or damage to the souls of
the audience members, why then would the audience not avoid them or at
the very least be cautious of what they have to say? Why then do our
communities so easily permit individuals who have close to no scholarly
credibility, occupy the pulpits and allow their tongues mesmerize the
often young and naive audience when it comes to religious knowledge?
This is not to say that all scholars who have studied formally are
infallible in their speech, or are even capable of delivering a decent
lecture at all - however that is a topic on its own and it is something
that needs to be re-evaluated; i.e. how important is lecturing and
propagating (tablīgh) as it is commonly practiced today, opposed to
building communities based on formal teaching and learning practices
(tadrīs), and what role does mere lecturing itself play in the
development and progress of a community. What is important here is a
connection - whether physical or spiritual - that a scholar has or
should have with a higher body of knowledge. This itself requires
spiritual cleansing and elimination of self-conceit and worship of one's
ego.

A second issue is that while a speaker or even a scholar may be very
well versed in Islamic subjects, their persona does not represent that
of a man of piety, or of those who are generally considered to be
Islamic scholars. When one wants their words to hold any weight, one of
the conditions for it to be effective is summarized by the notion of:
practice what you preach. This notion has been referred to in the
narrations as well, and it will be referred to in the translation of the
book that follows.

When a speaker develops into a celebrity, and their conduct does not
align with what the religious teachings consider to be acts of piety,
humbleness, modesty etc., then there is severe danger to the audience.
They, and society at large can - or rather will - suffer from negative
effects that can last for an eternity. The masses unfortunately, more
often than not will be aloof to this even while partaking in the
celebrity-cult, and only an outsider would generally be able to witness
it.

One purpose of Islamic lecturing and lecturers, especially those who
stay within their communities, is to not only be a mere orator, but a
spiritual guide. They should be someone who the rest can look up to and
learn the value of religion through seeing them practice it to the best
of their abilities. This cannot be done unless the person is sincere in
its most complete sense. Going out of their way to promote themselves,
turning religious lecturing into pure business deals, not practicing
what they preach, etc., are examples of scenarios that do not represent
sincerity in anyway whatsoever.

Sincerity is one of the most primary conditions of a religious speaker
and the instantiations of sincerity are determined, and often clearly
defined, by the Qur'ān, and the traditions of the Holy Prophet (pbuh)
and his progeny (as). Furthermore, an educated and well versed community
understands that certain actions and certain types of behaviour or a
persona undermines the intention and sincerity of an individual and
brings it under doubt.

The discussion on this subject can definitely be further opened up and
various aspects and scenarios can be evaluated independently. However,
the general overall trend is nevertheless something that should not be
encouraged or promoted. With these recent conditions of our societies, I
wished to partially translate this gem of a book titled, Lu'lu wa Marjān
by Muḥaddith Mirza Ḥusayn Nūri (d. 1902), for both those who speak
(scholars and non-scholars) and for those who attend the gatherings
where scholars or non-scholars are lecturing.

**Syed Ali Imran Qum, Iran**

**April 9th, 2015 / 19th Jamādi al-Thāni, 1436**


