ABOUT THE TRANSLATION
=====================

The present book is a partial translation of the book Lu'lu wa Marjān
(lit. Pearls and Corals) written by Muḥaddith Mirza Ḥusayn Nūri (d.
1902), covering the introduction and the first chapter that deals with
sincerity. The original Farsi book used in this translation was
published by Bani Zahra Publications. The published book itself was a
rephrased version, slightly revised and modified from the original by
Jabir Riḍwāni due to the original book making use of vocabulary that
even native Iranians were struggling to understand.

The book not only explicitly deals with the phenomenon of non-scholars
reciting, preaching and orating from two distinct perspectives, but
scholars who do not abide by the moral conduct required of them are also
clearly implied. The first section of the original book deals with
sincerity, and the second section deals with truthfulness.

Martyr Murtaḍa Muṭahhari praises the book and says this specifically
about the second section that deals with honesty and truthfulness:

The second requirement is honesty and truthfulness. Here, he (Muḥaddith
Nūri) elaborates on the topic of false and true narration, discussing
various forms of lying in such a thorough-going manner that I do not
think there is any other book which deals with lying and its various
form in the way that it does, and perhaps there is no such other book in
the whole world. In it he exhibits a marvelous learning and
scholarship.2

I chose to only translate the introduction and the first section on
sincerity as that is what I felt was directly relevant to the phenomenon
the Western Muslim communities are facing today - particularly where
English is used as a medium of preaching.

This is not to say that honesty is not as important, however the author
of the book was concerned primarily with falsehood being spread on the
pulpits that relate to the tragedy of Karbala. Within the communities
where English is the medium of lecturing, I have not yet found this to
be a serious issue, as it may be in communities where more traditional
languages such as Urdu, Arabic or Farsi are employed to relay the
tragedy of Karbala.

Furthermore, I believe the book 'Ashūrā - Misrepresentations and
Distortions, which is based on the lectures of Martyr Muṭahhari suffices
in terms of presenting a brief summary of what Muḥaddith Nūri discusses
in the second part of his book. Anyone interested in getting an overall
understanding of what Muḥaddith Nūri covers and brings to attention in
the second part of his book, can refer to the book of Martyr Muṭahhari.

This is reiterated by the Martyr himself:

In this book, that great man mentions several examples of falsehoods
that have become prevalent in narratives of the historic event of
Karbala. Those which I will mention are all or mostly the same things
that the Marḥūm Hāji Nūri has lamented about.3

The book of Muḥaddith Nūri was one of the last books he wrote - perhaps
during the late 19th/early 20th century - and therefore the reader
should be vary of this while reading the translation. Few of the stories
that the author quotes may sound odd, or the vocabulary that has been
used - such as the usage of dirhams and dinars - are not commonly used
in Western societies. However it is important to understand the time,
environment, geography and culture that these events took place and when
the book was written. Ultimately, what is important is the message and
principles being presented to the reader by the author which hold true
for all times and places.

As far as the translation itself is concerned, I have not limited myself
to translating every sentence as literally as possible, rather I have
paid more attention with regards to remaining true to the meaning of the
text itself.


