SINCERITY
=========

The original goal and the overall purpose of the Messengers and the Holy
Scriptures was to pull mankind towards Allah (swt). It was to show them
clear signs and firm miracles in order to inform them that He (swt) is
One, Wise, Able and Besought, the Creator, Sustainer, Protector, the One
who takes and gives life to all, and that He (swt) has no partner in
these affairs.

The Messengers and their vicegerents (as) through their clear words and
sufficient proofs, clarified these Attributes of Allah (swt) for us. In
order to bring mankind to a platform of belief, acknowledgment, and
submission, and for mankind to act upon what they had been commanded to
do, the Prophets themselves went through tribulations. They were
verbally abused, experienced hardships, and sacrificed their lives and
wealth for this noble cause. This was with the hope that people will
recognize their Lord. Furthermore, it was with the hope that mankind
would recognize themselves as being needy, incapable, and submissive
servants and would not see or recognize anyone except Him (swt) as their
Creator and Sustainer. It was with the hope that mankind would ask for
their needs from Him (swt), fear calamities, and ask Him (swt) to remove
them. If they disobeyed Him (swt), they would seek forgiveness from Him
(swt) and renounce their disobedience.

For those who believed and showed conformity to the message of the
Prophets, they were prescribed with rules on how to live and taught
about ethics. Some of the actions that were prescribed, pertained to the
heart and others to the limbs. Through these acts, people could express
their servitude and admit their inabilities, constraints and neediness.
They could ask Allah (swt) for their needs and give Him (swt) the right
of His (swt) Divinity. In Islamic lexicon, these prescribed actions are
referred to as worship ( عبادة ), which means to honour religious rites
and display servitude. This worship will not reach the precipice of
perfection and will not be considered correct unless and until the
worshipper recognizes himself to be a servant and under the thraldom of
Allah (swt).

Many times, people worship and are content with that which Allah (swt)
has allotted for them, but they have not understood the true meaning of
servitude and do not consider themselves to be true servants. Due to
this, they disobey their Lord and do not abstain from committing sins.
At times, it is the opposite. They recognize themselves to be servants,
but are negligent in their worship. The details

of this subject have been covered in books that describe the differences
between the terms worshipper (عابد ), slave (عبد ), worship (عبادة ) and
servitude (عبودية ).

In both cases (of worship and servitude), worshippers must not attribute
partners to Allah (swt). This means that they should not worship
anything besides Allah (swt). They should not consider themselves as a
servant of anyone else, nor take anyone else as their Lord, nor
recognize anyone else as their master. Furthermore, in both stages they
must be attentive and focused, like they should be during the recitation
of the holy verse, You alone we worship.18 The implications of the verse
must be steady and firm in their hearts, and their actions should be in
accordance with what is in their hearts, otherwise they will be guilty
of uttering a lie. Thus, if anyone idolizes a creation to a degree that
this creation becomes the cause and motivation of their worship, and the
creation receives a place in the heart of the worshipper, or the
worshipper receives wealth from this idolized creation for their act of
worship, this worshipper has indeed taken a partner for Allah (swt) and
therefore has entered into one of the categories of the polytheists.

This subject has been clearly articulated in our books and traditions,
and a sane and clean intellect also testifies to its validity. In fact,
after contemplation, it becomes apparent that the permissibility of
carrying out such an act and considering it lawful is irrational,
because it is incompatible with the original purpose of the Messengers,
Prophets and Books that were sent down. Such acts are not carried out by
a wise individual. For the sake of argument, even if we consider it to
be permissible, it is not rational to say that such an act warrants any
reward or that the doer is somehow deserving of any reward.

RECITING IS A FORM OF WORSHIP
-----------------------------

After our introduction, we affirm that making the Shi'a and the
believers mourn upon the tribulations of the Family of the Prophet (as)
is a worship just like crying itself. This fact is not hidden from the
sight of any intellectual. It is a worship that has been emphasized and
is so desirable that we have been commanded and encouraged to perform
it, and rewards have been set aside for it. Thus, all those who have
reached the age of responsibility, are to take part in this worship to
the best of their abilities and talents. After performing this act of
worship, they are deserving of the rewards allocated for it. The worship
of recitation is just like mourning upon the calamities that befell the
Family of the Prophet (as), which is in itself one of the greatest acts
of worship and something that essentially all are responsible for.

Both these acts (crying and making others cry) are from the same
category of worship and originate from the same root. The difference is
only such that crying is possible for everyone, but being able to make
others cry is not practical for everyone and requires effort and hard
work. Therefore, this group of individuals who are recognized as the
reciters - who put in effort and endure hardships - raise the flag of
this noble tradition high and spend their lives performing this great
act of worship.

Of course, however, they must know and should understand that this
worship is exactly like other worships. This act will only be considered
worship if it is carried out solely for the sake of Allah (swt) and out
of love for the Prophet (pbuh) and the Imams (as). One should not have
any other purpose or goal while carrying out this worship. If one were
to have any other purpose, it should only be to attain the reward that
has been promised for this worship, and to remain protected from sins.
This still requires one to be sincere and in principle, still requires
one to carry out the act for the sake of Allah (swt). It is only through
this intention that the rewards ordained for the worship will reach the
reciters and only then will they remain safeguarded from sins.

This is like the first step of the pulpit. Meaning, when one places
their first step on the pulpit, they must forget everyone except Allah
(swt) and His rightful vicegerents (as). He must not look towards
winning the heart of anyone, or seek to earn wealth when he climbs the
pulpit to recite the tragic narratives and to make the audience cry.

If - God forbid - Satan is able to make the feet of the reciter tremble
on the first step of the pulpit and his desires pull him towards this
polluted world, and he climbs the pulpit, speaks and recites for the
purpose of earning wealth, or to ensure that people around different
cities are aware of his talent and excellence so that he becomes the
subject of discussions, he has in fact thrown himself in a huge pit of
doom, out of which there is no hope of salvation. Some of these issues
will now be addressed.

OSTENTATION IN RECITATION
-------------------------

Firstly: Due to this corrupt reason, one prevents themselves from
receiving any grace or reward which has been promised for this group of
individuals. For the sake of attaining a little bit from this rotten
corpse of a world, one resorts to showing-off and ostentation and
subsequently deprives themselves of the flawless and eternal blessings
of the Hereafter. This is because one of the clearest messages of the
religion is that a reward is given for a worship which is done out of
servitude. Worship without sincerity is not even considered worship,
rather it is considered a concealed form of polytheism.

Sheikh Kulayni has recorded a tradition from Imam al-Ṣadiq (as) as
follow:

*"He who acquires knowledge of the traditions to earn worldly gains will
have no share of rewards in the Hereafter, and he who acquires this
knowledge for the betterment of his Hereafter will be sanctioned by
Allah the good of this life and the Hereafter."* 19

The jurist Muḥammad ibn Idrīs al-Ḥillī in his book Sarā'ir, has recorded
from the book of Abu al-Qāsim Ja'far ibn Quluwayh that Abu Dharr (ra)
stated:

"Whoever acquires knowledge from the knowledge of the Hereafter while
wanting to achieve a worldly purpose, will not be able to smell the
scent of paradise."20

In the book 'Awāli al-La'āli, it has been recorded that Imam 'Ali (as)
heard from the Prophet (pbuh) the following:

*"Whoever attains knowledge from those who possess it and acts upon it,
will find salvation, and whoever desires the world from it, will receive
what he had intended."* 21

Sulaym bin Qays al-Ḥilāli, a companion of Imam 'Ali (as) has recorded
many narrations from the Imam (as) on this subject in his book, such as:

*"And whoever desires the world from it, will perish and receive what he
had intended."* 22

Apart from not attaining anything in the Hereafter, this narration
suggests that such a person will also perish, because he spread
knowledge while intending to attain the world. The explanation of this
point will come later and there are plenty of other narrations on this
subject.

Secondly: The person will enter the rank of those who take the progeny
of the Prophet as a financial source for their income and use them (as)
to gain wealth and take care of their livelihood.

Sheikh Kulayni has recorded a tradition in al-Kāfi from Imam al-Bāqir
(as) who writes in one of his wills to Abu Nu'mān:

*"And do not earn a living from people through us, for it will increase
you in poverty."* 23

The poverty meant in this narration is attributed to both this world and
the Hereafter, as it will become clear in a narration of Mufaḍḍal later
on.

Sheikh Mufīd brings this narration in his al-Amāli as follows:

*"O Abu Nu'mān, do not devour people's wealth by using our name, for
that will increasing nothing but poverty."* 24

Sheikh Kashi in his Rijal work narrates a tradition on the authority of
Qasim ibn 'Awf who says that Imam Zayn al-'Ābidīn (as) said25 : و إياك
أن تستأكل بنا فيزيدك الله فقرا

**And its content is similar to the aforementioned narration.**

Sheikh Ḥasan bin 'Ali bin Shu'ba in his book Tuḥaf al-'Uqūl records a
tradition where Mufaḍḍal bin 'Umar advises his own companions and says:

*"Do not take the family of Mohammed (as) as means by which you collect
earnings. I heard Abu 'Abdillah (as) saying: 'People have taken three
different courses in following us. Some people have followed us and
expected our relief for the purpose that they may obtain worldly
pleasures. They have declared their adherence to us and repeated our
words, but they have omitted abiding by our deeds. God will take them to
Hell in hoards. Some people declared their adherence to us, listened to
our words, and showed no negligence in carrying out our orders, all for
the purpose of gaining the (worldly) donations of people. God will fill
their bellies with fire and will impose upon them starvation and thirst.
Some* *people have declared their adherence to us, retained our wording,
carried out our instructions, and have not dissented from our deeds.
Those are from us and we are from them.'"* 26

The deceased Akhund Mullah Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ Mazandarāni and others have
explained the narrations that Sheikh Kulayni has brought forth in the
chapter of Those Who Use Their Knowledge for Personal Fulfillment. They
have said that these narrations are referring to someone who uses
knowledge as a tool to eat the wealth of people and makes it a source
for his livelihood.

The flames of this second category of individuals have indeed engulfed
many knowledgeable people. The most clear example of this is that group
of speakers and reciters whose real purpose of learning this skill and
that which relates to it, such as learning the meritorious or sorrowful
narrations, learning how to lecture and give sermons, and in fact even
learning religious terms for matters where their usage is necessary, is
solely for the sake of business and attaining wealth. This is done
without any hesitation, dissimulation or concealment. Instead, they do
transactions just like businessmen. They discuss the prices being too
high or too low, and in order to get permission to recite at a
gathering, they write letters citing their availability and send a
middle-man who can find them a place to recite at. If they receive an
amount which is less than what they had expected after reciting at the
gathering - with or without permission - they get angry and speak badly
about the organizer of the gathering. They shame the organizer and treat
him ignominiously. In fact some ill-natured reciters start questioning
them from the top of the pulpits, looking for a sponsor and make deals
over what they have recited.

One of the absurd and laughable things is that despite these
business-like transactions, and exchanging of the Hereafter for this
world, this person sits on top of the pulpits in the gatherings, feels
proud, and considers himself a special servant of Imam Ḥusayn (as). He
considers himself deserving greater rights than others and considers
himself more worthy of deserving respect, generosity and glorification.
This is why at times, you will see them saying statements like: "My
master Imam Ḥusayn (as) did this, said this and did this for you."

This poor and self-blinded person is heedless of the fact that there is
no relationship between him and Imam Ḥusayn (as). The distance between
him and Imam Ḥusayn (as) is greater than the distance between the earth
and the sky. His status is even lower than the lowest rank of workers in
society, such as the porter or a vegetable seller. His name is
registered in the books of businessmen and just like them, this reciter
must also look at his income at the end of the year and pay Khums on the
relevant amount as religious law dictates. Despite paying the Khums to
those who are entitled to it, his status will remain worse than the rest
of the businessmen. This is because permissible income by itself is not
from the category of worship and thus its correctness is not conditional
upon sincerity and intention of seeking proximity to Allah (swt).
Therefore, if the income happens to be attained while devoid of any
prohibited act and the work itself also has no prohibition on it in the
religious law, one has merely done a neutral act and they would have no
sin upon them. If a person works with the intention of making money so
that he is able to visit the graves of the Imams (as), or to help the
cause of the Progeny of the Prophet (pbuh), scholars and the poor, or to
make the living conditions of his family better, or other similar acts
which have been recommended in Islam, he will then be deserving of a
reward.

However, reciting is like the work of students pursuing religious
studies, which is considered a worship and is to be done with an
intention of seeking proximity to Allah (swt). This task wavers between
two things; if it is done with sincerity and the correct intention it
will be greatly beneficial, but if it is done solely with the intention
of attaining wealth and this world, it will result in a great loss. This
is because this valuable act has been ordained for us to attain the
Hereafter, to attain the Satisfaction of Allah (swt) and to attain the
blessings of paradise. The purpose of this worship is not to attain the
sporadic pleasures of this lowly world and the little perishable wealth.

After mentioning these points, it is clear that merely reciting the
merits, virtues, stories and hardships of Imam Ḥusayn (as) does not make
anyone his servant. Otherwise anyone who prints and publishes a book
containing his merits and the story of his martyrdom with the intention
of making money, and in fact even those who carry the book from one city
to another for the purpose of earning money and anyone who delivers the
book to someone's house for the sake of a few dirhams, will all be
considered servants of Imam Ḥusayn (as).

Rather, a reciter will be considered in the ranks of the servants of
Imam Ḥusayn (as) when that which he utters is only for the sake of Allah
(swt) and for fulfilling the rights of His (swt) legates (as). Otherwise
he will be like any other businessman, who considers the merits and
calamities as an investment and busies himself in business with them. He
would not have a right over anyone and would not have done anyone a
favour, and neither will his actions be in accordance with the
instructions of the Ahl al-Bayt (as). So how can such an individual
consider himself a servant of theirs? How can such an individual
consider himself worthy of such an honour?

Therefore, a pious and honest reciter should determine the validity of
such a transaction and of that which he receives in exchange for what he
recites. Instead of blindly following himself or looking for
justifications from other reciters and lecturers like him, he should ask
the jurists, so that he has a valid justification for his actions.

WAYS TO ATTAIN WAGES THROUGH RECITING
-------------------------------------

Is a transaction in this regard like the wage one gets for performing an
act on behalf of someone else when they are hired to do so? When one
performs a religious visitation (to the shrines) or Ḥajj on behalf of
someone else, the wage that one receives is not for the sake of the
pilgrimage or the visitation itself, rather it is for the act of
representing a person. Therefore, in those cases a person must make the
intention before performing an act, that they are receiving a certain
amount of money for representing someone in a religious visitation to a
shrine, pilgrimage or even while reciting at a gathering. So in reality
what they are getting in return of reciting at a gathering is comparable
to what they would get if they represented someone during pilgrimage.
That is to say, that the individual who is being represented is the one
who essentially performed the visitation or the pilgrimage or did the
recitation.

In this situation, the intention of the person would be that they are
performing a religious visitation, pilgrimage or making others mourn -
which is the intended result of reciting at a gathering of mourning - as
a representative for one who requests it. Through this, the person will
not only be performing an act of worship, but will also be deserving of
a wage. If he carries out this act without the intention of performing
an act of worship and without the intention of performing the act as a
representative of someone, he will not be deserving of any such wage. Or
else, the wage he receives will be tantamount to receiving a payment for
the noble act of making others mourn itself, rather than for
representing someone.

Sometimes there may be a situation where one receives a payment for an
act that is outside the folds of the above scenarios. For example when a
person does not recite with the intention of it being a worship or with
the intent to make others mourn. Rather, he will perhaps recite just a
few specific lines of poetry and the payment he receives for that will
be for the recitation of those few lines themselves. This is while,
whether his act causes others to cry or not, and without he himself
paying attention to whether this act of his was an act of worship or
not.

In short, for all these cases there exists many lengthy discourses,
which are better left for the knowledgeable jurists to deal with.
Therefore, in regards to this topic, we will briefly look at the issue
of receiving a wage for reciting the adhān (call to prayer), which is by
itself a recommended act, just like reciting at a religious gathering.
Although, some jurists have allowed a person to receive a payment for
reciting the adhān in certain situations, the famous ruling amongst the
great jurists is that receiving a payment for reciting the adhān is
prohibited. Furthermore, various traditions have also been recorded in
regards to this.

Sheikh Kulayni in his al-Kāfi, and Sheikh Tūsi in his al-Tahdhīb, have
recorded a narration from Imam Muḥammad al-Bāqir (as), with a very
reliable chain, as follows:

*"There is no performing of prayers behind the one who seeks a wage for
the adhān and the ṣalah, and his testimony is not accepted."* 27

Sheikh Ṣadūq records this same tradition with an authentic chain, in his
book al-Faqīh, but over there it has been mentioned that "praying
behind" refers to praying behind them in congregational prayers. Sheikh
Ṣadūq also records a tradition from Amīr al-Mu'minīn (a) in his
al-Faqīh:

A man came near Amīr al-Mu'minīn (as) and said:*"O Amīr al-Mu'minīn, by
Allah (swt) I love you." He (as) replied to him: "But, I detest you." He
said: "Why?" He (as) replied: "Because you seek to make profit through
the adhān."* 28

Sheikh Tūsi records this same tradition in his book al-Tahdhīb, with an
addition:

*"...and you take a wage for teaching the Qur'ān, and I heard from the
Prophet (pbuh) of Allah (swt) who said: "Whoever takes a wage for
teaching the Qur'ān, his fortune will be similar to what he took, on the
Day of Judgement."* 29

In the same book, he records the following tradition from Imam 'Ali
(as):

*"The last thing upon which I separated away from the love of my heart,
was that he (pbuh) said: 'O 'Ali! Whenever you pray, pray the ṣalah in
the same manner that the frailest person behind you is praying (in
congregation), and do not take a mua'addhin (the person who says the
adhān) who takes a wage for reciting the adhān.'"* 30

In the book al-Ja'fariyāt, the author31 also records a narration from
Imam 'Ali (as), where he says that the wage of a mua'addhin is from
illegal earnings, just like the earnings made from carrying out the
obligatory acts pertaining to the dead.32 Other than these, we have
various other traditions that have been recorded in their relevant
places.

The similarity between a reciter and a mua'addhin is very clear. A
mua'addhin informs the believers of that time when they are to present
themselves in the presence of their Lord (swt). He invites them towards
the best of deeds, the prayers, which is the cause of redemption and
salvation from the fire that we have fueled with our sins. Besides this,
there are many merits and effects of prayers, both in this world and in
the Hereafter. To the extent that it is even said that prayer is the
ascension of the believer. Likewise, a reciter also informs the
believers of the merits, virtues, and the hardships that the progeny of
the Prophet (as) had to go through. He informs them of the arrival of
the season of mourning, which becomes the cause of reaching proximity to
Allah (swt) and the cause of happiness for the Prophet (pbuh) and the
Imams (as). Mourning over the progeny of Muḥammad (as) becomes the cause
of salvation in this world and the Hereafter, and the extinguisher of
the firebeds of hell.

Calling the adhān is recommended for everyone, but for most people it is
burdensome. Therefore the Prophet (pbuh) has said:

*"Indeed it (the adhān) has not gone beyond the weak ones amongst you."*
33

Thus, a group of believers come together and perform this recommended
act while removing the burden off of others. Making others mourn is also
exactly like this, and we have discussed this nature of it previously.

In any case, it is the responsibility of a pious reciter who wishes to
earn money, that he refer to a jurist whom he imitates (تقليد ) and
question him regarding the permissibility of earning money through this
worship. If there is a type of transaction that is permissible in this
case, then one should clarify it with the jurist, and act solely upon it
so that he remains protected from performing a prohibited act and
earning unlawful money. If he had been earning unlawful money, he has
already deprived himself of the Divine Graces of the Hereafter, and
should not further throw himself in the captivity and punishment of the
Hereafter.

Thirdly: The person will enter the ranks of those who have sold their
Hereafter for this world. Sheikh Ja'far bin Aḥmad al-Qummi34 records a
narration from the Prophet (pbuh) in his book al-Ghayāt as follow:

*"The most evil of men is he who sells his Hereafter for his world, and
the most evil from that is he who sells his Hereafter for the world of
another."* 35

Narrations on this subject are plenty. A tradition that is similar to
the aforementioned one in terms of its content has been recorded by
Sheikh Ṣadūq in his book Iqāb al-'Amāl. It says that the Prophet (pbuh)
stated the following in his last sermon:

*"...and for whoever the world is presented and he selects the world and
abandons the Hereafter, he will meet Allah (swt) in such a state that he
will have no good deeds through which he can protect himself from the
fire."* 36

Furthermore, in Nahj al-Balāgha, and in Sheikh Mufīd's al-Irshād and
al-Amāli, and in other books, a tradition has been recorded where Imam
'Ali (as) informs Kumayl (ra) of the categories of students of knowledge
and says:

*"...yes, I did find (such a one); but he was untrustworthy. He would
use the religion to seek the world."* 37

The meanings and implications of all these narrations are the same.

Thus, this fact is now clear that if a person sells his Hereafter for
worldly pleasures - whether it be through seeking wealth or higher
positions - essentially gives up his faith and religion. Just like the
weak who abandon the teachings of their religion and join the religion
of falsehood for the sake of attaining proximity to individuals of high
status or for the sake of earning wealth from them. For example, Ibn
'Aās, who forsook the leadership and companionship of Imam 'Ali (as) for
the sake of becoming a governor of Egypt. The Imam (as) repeatedly
reprehended and blamed him for his trading of the religion for the
world, and this incident is readily available in his biography. During
that time of history, we can find numerous examples like that of Ibn
'Aās, who would sell their religion for the wealth that the son of Abu
Sufyān (Mu'āwiyah) would offer them.

Sheikh Abū l-Futūḥ al-Rāzī writes in his exegesis, after a discussion on
some aspects of Imam Ali's (as) asceticism:

*That such was his (as) character, is it really something to be amazed
by? He had a client from amongst his clients, who is famously known as
Abu al-Aswad Al-Du'ali. After the Imam (as) had left the world and was
in the proximity of His Divine Lord, Mu'āwiyah wished to bribe Abu
al-Aswad with material wealth, given that he would devalue his
friendship with the Imam (as). Mu'āwiyah would send gifts for him and
would behave in a graceful manner with him. One day he had sent Abu
al-Aswad a gift which consisted of different types of sweets, mixed with
saffron and honey. Abu al-Aswad had a young five-year old daughter who
ran and took a little of the sweet and put it in her mouth. Her father
said to her: O daughter, spit it out, for it is poison. She said: Why?
He said: Do you do not know that the son of Hind has sent it for us so
that we abandon the friendship of the Ahl al-Bayt (as)? O daughter,
whatever is in your mouth, throw it out.* 38 Then he said:

*"Are you trying to separate us from the purified Leader by honey mixed
with saffron?"* 39

<p dir="rtl">
أ بِالشهْدِ الْمُزَعْفَرِ يَا ابْنَ هِنْد \* نَبِيعُ إِلَيْكَ إِسْلَما
وَدِينا
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فَلَ وَ اللهِ لَيْسَ يَكُونُ هَذَا \* وَ مَوْلَانَا أَمِيرُ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَا
</p>

*With your honey mixed with saffron, O son of Hind Do you think we will
sell our Islam and religion to you Refuge of Allah (God Forbid), how can
this be When our master is, Amīr al-Mu'minīn (as)*

However, in the case of 'Amr Ibn 'Aās and others like him, negligence
has occurred in explaining their actions. This is because while he sold
his religion and was able to gain the world, he did not essentially sell
his religion to anyone. Mu'āwiyah did not receive any value from Ibn
'Aās abandoning his religion, even though Mu'āwiyah paid a lot for it.
As a matter of fact, what Mu'āwiyah received in return was even more
irreligiosity and therefore no real transaction or exchange of goods
took place.

At other times, a man sells his religion for the sake of the world, by
letting go of something from his Hereafter. A man can sell his means and
hope of achieving salvation and blessings of the Hereafter, by trading
them for wealth that he can earn in this world. This is while he can use
these same means to achieve good in the Hereafter, but he does not.
Instead he earns the world instead. For example, teaching the Qur'ān or
religious laws are forms of worships that are extremely beloved and a
person can achieve many great rewards through them. However, at times a
person teaches them and furthers himself from the good of the Hereafter
and in return for teaching, he accepts material wealth. In this
scenario, we can say that a transaction and exchange of goods took
place, and the person clearly becomes amongst those who have been
described in some of the aforementioned narrations. In Tafsīr
al-'Askari, there is a narration which mentions that the Prophet (pbuh)
has mentioned a great reward for the Qur'ān reciter who recites one
verse and for the one who closely pays attention to the recitation, and
says:

*"Do you know when the reciter and the attentive listener of the Qur'ān
will get this great reward? This will be when he does not exaggerate in
the Qur'ān, for this is a Glorious Word, nor does he hold back anything
from it, nor does he eat (earn wages) from it, nor show off through
it."* 40

Any knowledgeable and unprejudiced person will agree that this concept
is not just limited to the Qur'ān. Rather any means and tools provided
by the religion to attain the good of the Hereafter will be subject to
this principal and one must therefore stay away from such an act. The
Imams (as) would try their utmost best to not become a party to such
transactions, to such an extent that they would avoid dealing with
someone who recognized their status, out of fear that the merchant might
lower the price for them. This is because the price that people pay to
purchase an item is one of those means to attain good in the Hereafter.
The Imams (as) were purified and far away from even intending to
purchase something lower than its real value. This notion can be seen
again and again in the biography of Imam Ali (as).

Ibn Shahr Āshūb and others narrate from Imam Muḥammad al-Bāqir (as) who
says:

*"One day Amīr al-Mu'minīn went to a store in the marketplace and asked
a seller: 'Sell me two shirts.' The man replied saying: 'O Amīr
al-Mu'minīn, I have that which you need.' Since* *that seller recognized
the Imam, the Imam left his store and went to a store of a young man and
brought one piece of shirt for three dirhams and one for two dirhams."*
41 In another narration, it says that he went to two different stores
and both sellers recognized the Imam (as). Then he went to a third store
where a slave referred to the Imam as Sheikh. So the Imam brought the
clothes from him and left. When the father or the owner of the slave
came to the store and realized it was Imam Ali (as) who was the
customer, and that the slave had taken a greater sum, the man brought
the excess amount back to the Imam and asked for forgiveness. The Imam
(as) did not take the amount back and instead said: It was a transaction
where both parties were satisfied.

Sheikh Shahīd Thāni, in his Exegesis of Lum'ah - after mentioning the
undesirability of differentiating between customers - says:

*"Yes, is there really is a difference in them (the customers) due to
their merits and religiosity, then there is no issue (in discounting
from the price). However it is still detested that the customer accepts
such a difference. The predecessors (the scholars and pious ones), were
such that they appointed others as their representatives - who would not
be recognized by the sellers - to purchase on behalf of them (in order
to avoid the previously mentioned scenario; i.e. for the sake of their
status and religiosity, the seller does not reduce the price of the
item)."* 42

From these statements, it is clear that other variations of this act
which have become a norm, should also be included in this detested act.
Such as if a Sayyid, a student, a pilgrim or a visitor of the shrines
brings up their status, knowledge, or the fact that they have performed
the Ḥajj, during the purchase of an item and bargain over its price by
saying statements like, "after all I am a Sayyid", or "I'm a student",
or "I have the intention of going to visit the House of Allah (swt) and
the shrine of the Holy Prophet (pbuh) and visit the Imams (as), so
reduce the price". More often than not, for the sake of such statements,
the seller reduces the price and attains a lofty status. However, that
purchaser who is ignorant of religious etiquettes, for the sake of
saving a trivial amount, enters into the ranks of those who have sold
the religion for the world. He turns the religion into a tool to attain
the world and through this transaction ends up in a total loss.

It is not unknown that knowledge which has become a tool to reduce the
price by an ounce, or even less than that, is from the knowledge that
has been referred to in various supplications and we seek refuge in
Allah (swt) from its harm, such as:

<p dir="rtl">
اللهُم إِنِّي أَعُوذ بِكَ مِنْ عِلْم لَا ينَفَع
</p>

*"O Allah! I seek refuge in you, from knowledge that has no benefit."*
43

Therefore, from all that we have said so far, it is very clear that the
group of reciters is like the group of students who have been referred
to in previous narrations. This is because a reciter narrates events
pertinent to merits and hardships, which are a tool of the religion and
a great means to earn a dwelling in the Hereafter. It is very possible
that just like the mua'addhin, or a teacher of the Qur'ān and religious
sciences, he can earn continuous blessings and endless rewards through
his acts. Or, due to the lowliness of his nature, lack of strength, the
scorching existence of greed and desire for money, and fear of poverty,
he exchanges the results of this noble and priceless act for a few
dirhams.

What is astonishing is that when these individuals see this
loss-inducing market at its peak with a lot of buyers, busy with
customers who are in need of their services, their ecstasy, joy, and
cheerfulness increases due to the greater possibility of attaining
wealth and honour. On the contrary, when they see the dullness of their
market of goods, and the lack of customers and those in need of their
service, they become extremely sorrowful, sad and even complain. Then,
when desperate to attract customers, they trap themselves on the path of
sedition and competition - each of them being a separate cause of
destruction of his religion and his life. For example, they will resort
to suffering humiliation and abjectness by using flattery to ask the
customer, the customer's friends or even the customer's servants, about
using their services. They will try to seek information about the
contracts of their own colleagues and then announce their personal
hidden defects and faults. They will even search to find faults in them.
Furthermore, if any of the other reciters succeed them, they will
develop enmity and jealousy towards them in their hearts. If they defeat
others, they feel proud and take glory in their actions, and if they
cause others to leave the ground all-together, they feel as if they have
just received a medal of victory. If the deal between them and the
organizer of the gathering did not explicitly mention the price, and the
amount the organizer gives to them happens to be less than what they had
intended, they annoy the organizer of the gathering.

There is a story that one of the scholars has narrated to this lowly
person (author of the book), that before the month of Ramaḍān, a famous
preacher entered into a city and one of the noble men of the city
invited him to his mosque or to one of the famous mosques of that place.
The narrator of the story had mentioned the names of all three (the two
men and the name of the city), but I do not find it to be appropriate to
mention them here. The man fixed a certain amount with the preacher and
said that he will be paid in the middle of the month. The preacher
accepted and during the days of the holy month, began preaching and
reciting in that mosque till the date of his payment arrived. The man
gave the preacher the money, however the amount was a bit less than what
was initially fixed.

The preacher did not say anything, until the 21st of Ramaḍān - which is
generally considered the most packed night at the mosque. From atop of
the pulpit he began reciting eulogies till people began slapping their
cheeks, opening up their shirt-collars and removing their head
coverings. The preacher at that point, took off his turban, came down
the pulpit and went to the miḥrāb44 and took the turban off of the head
of the man and said to him: You are the organizer of this mourning
ceremony! Everyone in the mosque began to wail louder, hitting their
cheeks, crying and hitting their heads and chests. While everyone was
busy mourning in different ways, this preacher found this moment to be
precious, and thought of a way to make the man pay the rest of the
amount. The preacher began smashing the head of the man, while slowly
whispering to him: Will you pay the rest of the amount or should I
continue what I am doing?

The poor man realized that his head is about to be damaged severely and
no one is noticing it. He helplessly accepted and ensured the preacher
that he will receive his payment. That is when the preacher removed his
hands from the man's head and with a joyful heart, went towards the
pulpit in order to recite the closing supplications.

Honestly speaking, while possessing such a disturbed heart and
committing such a horrible act, was he really worthy of preaching to the
people and does he really have the right to feel proud of being a
devotee of Imam Ḥusayn (as)?

Fourthly: Many of these individuals will enter into a category of people
who have been condemned severely in various verses and narrations. This
is the category of those who seem to present and deliver the truth for
others, such as teaching others about good and bad morals, good and bad
actions, and about the rewards and punishments of each of those actions.
This is particularly true for those actions that are related to Abu
Abdillah (as). However the issue is that they themselves do not act upon
it, and thus they will regret it for an eternity, just as Allah (swt)
has said in the Qur'ān:

<p dir="rtl">
أَتَأْمُرُونَ الناسَ بِالْبِرِّ وَتَنْسَوْنَ أَنْفُسَكُمْ
</p>

***Do you enjoin right conduct on the people, and forget to practise it
yourselves?*** 45

In the exegesis of Shaykh Abū l-Futūḥ al-Rāzī, it has been recorded from
the Prophet (pbuh) who said: "I was taken to the skies on the night of
Mi'rāj and I saw a group of people whose lips were being cut off. After
cutting them off, the lips would grow again. I said: 'O Jibraīl, who are
these people?' He said:

*'These are the speakers (lit. those who deliver sermons) of your
nation, who would say things that they would not act upon, and they
would enjoin right conduct on the people, but would forget to practice
themselves.'"46*

In another narration, the Prophet (pbuh) said:*"The harshest punishment
on the Day of Judgement is for the scholar who did not benefit from his
own knowledge."* 47

In another narration from the Prophet (pbuh), he has been reported to
have said: "*He is like a person who delivers good news to the people,
but does not benefit from the news himself. He is like a lamp that gives
light to others, but burns itself off."* 48

Yet in another narration from him (pbuh) he says:*"The Day of Judgement
will not let a single person take a step forward, until he is answerable
about four matters: 1) What he spent his young age doing, 2) What he
spent his life doing, 3) Where he earned his money from and where he
spend it, and 4) Whether he acted upon his knowledge."* 49

In al-Amāli of Sheikh Ṣadūq and al-Maḥāsin of Barqi, it has been
reported that Mufaḍḍal said to Imam al-Ṣadiq (as):

*"How can one recognize a person who has found salvation?" The Imam (as)
said: "A person whose action is in agreement with his speech is a person
who has found salvation. Every person whose action is not in agreement
with his speech, then his faith is merely like a deposit (i.e. it is not
firm in his heart, and he will give it away when facing a small test)."*
50

*"* *Ayyāshi records in his exegesis from Yāqūb bin Shu'ayb who says: I
asked Abu 'Abdillah (as) regarding the verse "Do you enjoin right
conduct on the people...". He (as) placed his hands on his throat and
said: "He is like a slaughterer slaughtering himself."* 51

Meaning, those who enjoin others to do good, but do not act upon it
themselves are killing and destroying themselves.

In many other narrations the interpretation of the following verse has
been recorded:

<p dir="rtl">
فَكُبْكِبُوا فِيهَا هُمْ وَالْغَاوُونَ
</p>

***So they shall be thrown down into it, they and the erring ones.*** 52

What is implied by the erring ones are those individuals who describe
and preach the truth, such as justice, wisdom, obedience to Allah (swt),
good morals and correct theological beliefs, but they themselves act
contrary to what they mention, and have contrary beliefs. In various
narrations, this point has been mentioned in the following manner: "On
the Day of Judgement, the people facing the most severest of regrets and
remorse are those who would describe justice for others, but would act
contrary to it themselves."

With regards to the interpretation of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَنْ تَقُولَ نَفْس يَا حَسْرَتَا عَلَى مَا فَرطْتُ فِي جَنْبِ الله
</p>

***Lest a soul should say: O woe to me! For what I fell short of my duty
to Allah.*** 53

It has been said that these are the souls that feel regret and they will
utter this statement. There are too many narrations that pertain to this
subject, and a numerous amount of them have appeared in the chapters of
narrations related to those who act or do not act upon what they know.

It is therefore clear now, that there is a specific group of reciters
who - in this trade of speaking - preach, and sometimes present eloquent
sermons, anecdotes, and describe the behaviour of Amīr al-Mu'minīn (as).
They intimidate the people away from the love of the world, its
calamities, destruction and motivate them to distance themselves away
from the world so they move towards asceticism. They bring examples from
the lives of the predecessors of the religion, special companions and
the rightful scholars, and sometimes describe the horrible vices and
detestable moral traits. They bring references to support their
arguments from the works of Ghazālī, Shāfi'ī and their likes and present
them in the most eloquent fashion, without any stutters and lisps. They
mention the verses and narrations relevant to a topic in an organized
manner. However, these preachers themselves are so infatuated with this
world, and so polluted with the vices that if the organizer of the
gathering becomes heedless of then for even a moment with regards to
their arrival or departure, or if the organizer fails to meet certain
protocols that signify their respect and nobility, or if an organizer
does not assign them as the last speaker of the ceremony (which is one
of the undesirable innovations of this group of people - i.e. whoever is
greater in status, must be the one to end the ceremony), or if an
organizer happens to give them an amount less than his counterparts -
for example, even two riyals less - they gets upset. They complain,
criticize, speak bad, and at times even give the money back, never
visits that place again, consider their speaking abilities a great
talent, and considers the payment of the organizer very little. They
start to find faults in the behaviour, character, or in any little
affair of their counterparts and do not consider them to be on par with
themselves.

Despite being in such a horrible condition and carrying out these
detestable acts, they speak against the people who love the world, and
consider themselves men of God, and men of the Hereafter. It is as if
their mentioning a few references and sources from the pulpit, have kept
them distanced away from the diseases of the heart and from committing
ugly deeds.

For an insightful individual, it is not a hidden matter that by such a
horrible apparent conduct and an ugly soul, they are included in the
description of those that the previous narrations have mentioned. They
will definitely feel regretful and remorseful in the Hereafter and will
be punished rightfully.

In 'Uyūn al-Akhbār of Sheikh Ṣadūq, it has been narrated that when
Zayd - the brother of Imam al-Riḍa (as) - rebelled and Ma'mūn captured
him and brought him to the Imam (as), the Imam (as) reprimanded him and
said:

*"However, if it were the case that your father Musa ibn Ja’far (as)
obeyed God, but you disobey God and claim to be equal to him (as) in the
Hereafter on the Day of Judgement, this would imply that you are dearer
than him (as) in the sight of Allah (swt). By Allah (swt), no one can
attain the ranks near Allah (swt), the Honourable the Exalted, except by
obeying Him (swt). Do you think that you can attain such ranks by
committing sins? Surely you are wrong." Zayd said: "I am your brother
and the son of your father." Then Abu al-Ḥasan al-Riḍa (as) told him:
"You are only my brother when you obey Allah (swt), the Honorable the
Exalted."* 54

At that point, he (as) mentions the story of Prophet Nūh (as) and his
son, whom Allah (swt) did not consider to be from the family of Nūh (as)
due to his sins. The Imam's (as) message was that Zayd had also become
disassociated from his brotherhood due to his sins. Therefore, if sins
can cease the relationship of brotherhood with such an Imam (al-Riḍa),
and from being the son of such an Imam (al-Kaẓim), there is no way that
a foreigner who sins, would remain associated with them, and continue to
serve as their servant and helper.

In conclusion, from all that we have said, it is clear that even if the
people of knowledge and scholars - God forbid - become afflicted with
the symptoms of these individuals (who have been described in the
narrations and verses), they will also fall into the abyss of
destruction. If they are to use deceit in order to use their knowledge
as a source of income and wealth, they will also be punished likewise.
In fact, the greater the knowledge one possesses, or if the knowledge
was gained in order to use as a source of showcasing their merits and as
a tool to gather wealth, their punishment will be more severe and their
regret will indeed be greater. There are too many reports that describe
such scholars, however since this treatise was not written specifically
for them, we have not mentioned them.

IS OSTENTATION IN WORSHIP PERMISSIBLE?
--------------------------------------

It has been said that some of these reciters have diminished the value
of the condition of sincerity from this act of worship. On the contrary,
they consider ostentation permissible in it. In fact, they consider it
to be one of the merits of Imam Ḥusayn (as) that although ostentation in
all forms of obedience to Allah (swt) and worship ruin the act, it does
not harm this specific act of worship. Due to the Imam's closeness to
Allah (swt), He (swt) ignores this condition and accepts this act of
worship even if it is accompanied by ostentation.

The root of this misconception lies in the permissibility of tabāki55
which has been mentioned in a few narrations - and they have been
alluded to in the introduction. That is to say, anyone who cries, makes
another person cry, or pretends to cry, has a certain allocated reward.

This foolish, senseless person, who has slandered Allah (swt) and his
Messenger (pbuh), does not even know that if an authentic narration
which can be utilized, happens to permit ostentation in obedience and
worship, it has to be understood and explained away differently as it
goes against the explicit message of the Qur'ān, Sunnah, intellect and
the consensus of the scholars. This vague word (tabāki) does in no way
signify the meaning of ostentation and has no connection with their
corrupted goals (i.e. deeming ostentation in this act of worship
permissible). What is meant by this word is something much more
important. Something that some of those who fulfil their
responsibilities can utilize as a means to ask Allah (swt) for their
requests, and thus it is a part and parcel of the laws of Allah (swt).
From the narrations of the Ahl al-Bayt (as) it can be understood that
this was an act that enables some to help perfect their internal
spiritual traits.

In order to understand this point, consider the good traits such as
satisfaction, dependency on Allah (swt), asceticism, perseverance etc.
upon which the human-ness of mankind is reliant and suspended. Thus, the
acquirement, firmness and consistency of every single one of these
traits in the heart results in certain actions and effects. The
intellectuals and people of insight are able to witness these effects
and come to the conclusion that this individual possesses these certain
spiritual traits.

For example, the reality of asceticism is this that one sincerely
distances themselves from the world, does not feel attracted to it, does
not tie his heart to it, does not unnecessarily like it or feel happy
with attaining it, and if he gives away from it, he does not feel upset
over it. Anyone who attains such a position, certainly does not feel any
desire or greed towards finding it, attaining it and accumulating it. He
does not express happiness when he attains it and neither does he feel
stressed, upset or depressed when he loses it. Furthermore, obeying the
commands of Allah (swt) that relate to giving away from his wealth -
whether it is obligatory like Zakāt or Khums, or whether they be
recommended such as all types of charities - becomes an easy task for
him. In fact he carries out this obedience to his Lord with pleasure,
because he sees no difference between gold and rocks, and silver and
sand. From this outwardly behaviour of his, it is possible to determine
that he is a real ascetic.

However, it is important to keep in mind that in order for this
individual to express such behaviour, it is necessary for him to be a
true ascetic. Sometimes, a person who is not a true ascetic will also
show apparent signs of an individual who is an ascetic, when in reality
his heart has not distanced itself from the world, rather it has
attached itself to it completely. The latter category of people can be
divided into two groups:

1) Those whose purpose of carrying out an act, is nothing but to show
off and to find a spot in the hearts of people so that they consider him
to be one with a noble status and a beloved of God. He uses this
apparent show of asceticism to attract the worthless wealth of this
world. This behaviour is a form of hidden polytheism, from which it is
incumbent upon us to stay away from, and there is absolutely no
permissibility for this behaviour in religion.

2) Those, who although do not hold a noble status or possess good
qualities, are sincere in their quest to attaining them through means of
gaining knowledge and acting upon it, in accordance with the prescribed
methods given by the scholars of ethics. In fact the love and closeness
that they have with the material world disgusts them, and they detest
the fact that it is difficult for them to eliminate this love and
relationship. One of the ways that such individuals attempt to attain
those noble qualities is by acting upon the advices of the Imams (as)
and expresses those apparent signs and behaviour - despite them being
tough to carry out at times - with the hope that these qualities will
become a part and parcel of their true self, and that they will attain a
noble status. They hope that that this apparent behaviour fixates itself
in their hearts after constant practice of it, so that eventually they
become easier on them to perform. In other words, they go through
hardships by performing these actions, but after constantly going
through these hardships, those actions slowly and steadily become
fixated in their hearts and it becomes easier for them to perform them.

Thereby, it is understood that those actions whose effects are positive,
are at times expressed from a person in whose heart those good qualities
truly exist. At other times, they are expressed by a person whose heart
is empty from these good qualities. In both cases, the actions are
considered good and will be counted as a form of worship. Other than
that, the actions are miles away from what is considered to be
ostentation and showing off. Besides the fact that this discussion can
be understood through intuition, and can be tested, heard and seen in
real life, a few narrations from the Ahl al-Bayt (as) have also reached
us regarding this topic. In the book Ghurar wa Durar, it has been
reported that Amīr al-Mu'minīn (as) said:

*"If you cannot forbear, feign to do so because it is seldom that a man
likens himself to a group and does not become as one of them."* 56

On the same page, there is also another narration from him (as) stating:

*"One who does not feign to forbear, will never forbear."* 57

Since we have understood this premise, we can say that mourning upon Abu
'Abdillah (as), despite being the job of the limbs and the eyes, is
caused by the love that resides in the heart. From the mere
conceptualization of the great hardships that befell upon His (swt)
beloved (as), the heart catches fire and causes tears to flow. The
Prophet (pbuh) has said:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن لِقَتْلِ الْحُسَيْنِ حَرَارَة فِي قُلُوبِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ لَا
تَبْرُدُ أَبَدا
</p>

*"Surely there exists in the hearts of the believers, with respect to
the martyrdom of Ḥusayn, a heat that never subsides."* 58

He (pbuh) is also reported to have said: Every believer has love for
Ḥusayn (as) in their heart.

Upon hearing the hardships, this love heats up, which then causes one to
mourn. Many times, a believer would love to be in such a state, but due
to that love being diminished, or because the worldly desires have
covered that love, or there are obstacles that prevent one from
conceptualizing the hardships, or other obstacles that do not allow the
heart to burn, prevent him or her from mourning. He becomes deprived of
this great blessing, and hates it, and wishes that he could mourn like
the rest. Thus it is for someone like him - whose heart has been
polluted, and he wishes to cleanse it - that it has been prescribed to
force himself to cry and bring himself in a state like others and
express the signs of one whose heart is intensely burning from hearing
about the hardships.

If he performs this action (tabāki) with the intention of attaining that
easiness, he will be rewarded and a path will open up for him that will
allow his heart to become illuminated with the light of love and
guardianship (wilāyah) of the Ahl al-Bayt (as).

Another point that is important to mention here is that, this same
action has been prescribed regarding crying from the fear of Allah
(swt). In al-Amāli of Sheikh Tūsi and in Makārim al-Akhlāq of Tabrasi,
it has been reported from the Prophet (pbuh):

*"O Abu Dharr! Whoever is given knowledge which doesn't cause him to cry
simply because he has been given knowledge, it will not benefit him.
Allah has described the learned and said, "Surely those who were given
knowledge of it before, when it is recited onto them, they fall upon
their faces in prostration and they say, "Glory be to our Lord. Surely
the promise of Allah shall be done." They fall on their faces crying and
they increase in humility. O Abu Dharr! Whoever is able make his heart
weep, should then make it weep. Whoever is not able to cry then let him
have his heart feel sadness and let him try to cry. O Abu Dharr, surely
the hard heart is far from Allah (swt), but they don't realize."* 59

It should also be pointed out that the word "ta'āwun", which is on the
same pattern and paradigm of "tabāki", also has another graceful
meaning, and perhaps this is the meaning that is implied. That is, the
believers enjoin each other towards mourning, like when the brothers and
sisters who have lost a father or a mother, gather around each other and
recall the memories of their lost one and remember their good traits and
their good works. They remember the hardships their loved one had gone
through and essentially mention and describe anything else that comes to
their mind for each other, and make each other cry, wail and at times
even cause each other to hit their cheeks. The result of all this would
be that those who faced hardships, those who recall the hardships, the
mourners and others around them, all would have mourned.

What further solidifies this probable implication of tabāki is that
which has come in the chapters pertaining to the behaviour one should
have on 'Āshura. In the narration of the famous Ziyārat al-'Āshura, Imam
al-Ṣadiq (as) has reported to have said:

*"Then he must mourn and lament over Ḥusayn (as), and order everyone in
his house to lament him (as), hold a gathering in his house narrating
his tragedies and express restlessness upon his (as) tragedy, meet one
another weeping and consoling one another over the Imam's (as)
tragedies."* 60

In any case, the form of tabāki which has been praised and is loved, is
considered to be an obedience and a form of worship. It does not possess
a taint of ostentation, which is a type of hidden polytheism.

Glory be to Allah! All the troubles that the Imam (as) had to endure was
for the sake of strengthening the fundamental laws of religion whose
basis is monotheism. He did it to exalt the truth, solidify the
foundations of the true religion, and protect it from the various
innovations of the godless ones. How could a person with conscience then
suggest that the Imam (as) is that exception where one of the greatest
sins which is polytheism, becomes permissible?

Rather the reason for this corrupt and Satanic imagination is their lack
of contemplation over their own ugliness, or the concealment and
justification of their extreme greed and love for wealth and money.

THE IMPERMISSIBILITY OF TELLING LIES AND FABRICATING TALE WHEN RECITING
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

What we have described so far with regards to the reciters, had to do
with them not meeting the condition of sincerity and their seeking of
wealth and position through this act of worship.

However, besides those issues, at times they may also become afflicted -
God forbid - with attributing lies and fabrications to Allah (swt), the
Messenger (pbuh), the Holy Imams (as), and the knowledgeable scholars.
Or they may send a child to recite something in a tone that will get the
crowd ready, before they themselves recite. Other times without the
permission of the organizer - or sometimes even when the organizer has
explicitly not allowed them - they visit a place and recite from the
pulpit, and torment those in the audience who are not able to cry with
words that suggest that the reason they are unable to cry is because of
their illegitimacy.

Or they may promote falsehood at the time of supplication or before
them, or praise someone who is not worthy of praise, condemn the
scholars of the religion, reveal the secrets of the Ahl al-Bayt (as),
promote corruption, help the cause of the tyrants and help such culprits
feel proud, cause the lewd person to feel courageous, belittle sins in
the eyes of the audience, mix one narration with another, interpret the
Qur'ānic verses with their own opinions, narrate a narration with a
false meaning, issue legal edicts - whether the edicts are correct or
incorrect - even though they are not jurists, lower the position of the
Prophets and the Messengers in order to lift the position of the Imams
(as), omit parts of narrations due to them not being in line with the
corrupt message they wish to get across, say contradictory things, mix
one story with another, beautify their words and speech with the words
of the unbelievers and storytellers in order to spark up the gathering,
make use of disgusting and lewd poetry in order to prove their incorrect
point, discuss certain issues with regards to the pillars of the
religion and leave them unanswered or do not have the ability to answer
them, or ruin the foundations of the religion for the Muslims who are
weak in faith, mention things that are against the infallibility and
purity of the Ahl al-Bayt (as), or extend their speech in order to get
their false message across, deprive the audience of the gathering from
praying at its earliest and meritorious time, and many other similar
things for which I do not have the strength to list.

When a reciter resorts to things like this, his initial capital is all
prohibited. Using it for business purposes is like doing business with
the meat of pork, a dead body, intoxicants or prohibited musical
instruments. Since his corrupted intention to speak was to attain wealth
and position, subsequently his speech will also be corrupted.
Furthermore, all that he attains from speaking will also be prohibited
and he will remain indebted to the organizer of the gathering.

As a matter of fact, if he is popular and has a position of authority in
this skill, such that the rest of the reciters imitate him, learn from
him and copy his style, he will be responsible for the seditious and
wrong-doings of all those who learned from him. He will be a partner and
have a share of their acts recorded in his own record of deeds without
anything being subtracted from the record of those who learned from him
and acted upon it. This notion can be seen in various reports such as:

"*Whoever establishes a bad Sunnah, then upon him is the sin of it, and
the sin of those who act upon it, without the decreasing of the sins
from their recompense in any way."* 61

The ignorant and pitiful reciter should contemplate a little upon his
own state and the narrations of the Ahl al-Bayt (as). He should be
reciting the many narrations of the Ahl al-Bayt regarding the different
issues and problems - which he has chosen willingly and consciously -
for himself. He should cry and wail and feel pity over himself for the
great bounties he has abandoned, while transmitting them to others. He
has deprived himself of those blessings, and has registered his name in
the record book of the ugly deeds. All he had to do was put in a little
effort, and purify his intention of sincerity in

order to ensure that his name got registered alongside the names of the
charitable, praiseworthy people and the transmitters of the narrations
of the Ahl al-Bayt and others like them.

*This is nothing, but a sheer loss.* 62

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE ORGANIZERS AND MOURNERS TOWARDS THE RECITERS
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The purpose of this brief chapter is to mention the responsibilities of
a reciter in relation to the usage of his skill of oratory, which he has
dedicated much of his time towards. The spirit of this skill is in it
being performed sincerely. It should be utilized with the goal and
desire to obey the command of Allah (swt), to bring happiness to the
Prophet (pbuh), the Imams (as) and to assist the cause of Lady Faṭima
al-Zahra (sa). This is because the reciter himself is of the belief and
persuades others to believe that they (as) are present and witnessing
this gathering of mourning, looking at the mourners, and are taking
participating in the gathering alongside them. The spirit of this skill
does not reside in showing-off, or in attracting the wealth of this
world.

However, others who benefit from this reciter and progress to higher
spiritual statuses also have a responsibility. Whether they are the
organizers of the gathering or just attending as listeners, their
responsibility is to help the reciter, recognize their position, their
honour, and their favour upon them. They should assist and gift him with
their wealth, with their praise of him and through any other means
possible for them. Whatever they do, they will never be able to fulfil
the right of what he has done for them with his act, and neither will
both their actions be equal. No matter how much from the luxuries of the
world they give to him, it will not equal even one strand of heavenly
dresses that they had attained from his service.

Thus, no matter how much the listeners give to him, it is still less,
and no matter how much they do for him, it is not enough. This is in
line with the introductory discussion presented in this book, and also
in correspondence with the life of the Imams (as) and their behaviour
with the people who were from this group (i.e. reciters), or others like
them such as teachers of the Qur'ān. The great Sheikh, Ibn Shahr Āshūb
in his Manāqib records a narration:

*al-Mansūr (the Abbasid caliph) asked Imam al-Kaẓim (as) to attend the
Festival of Nayrūz to receive gifts from all walks of life. The Imam
said: “I have examined the reports transmitted to me from my grandfather
(pbuh) the Messenger of Allah and I have not found any details regarding
this day of celebration. This had been the practice of the Persians,
while Islam has abolished it, and Allah's (swt) refuge, that we should
enliven that which Islam abolished.” al-Mansūr said: “I observe this
festival as a political policy for strengthening ties with the army. I
ask you by Allah (swt) to attend this festival.” So the Imam attended,
and the governors and commanders and soldiers, came to the Imam,
congratulated him on the occasion and presented him with donations and
gifts. The servant of al-Mansūr who was standing next to the Imam,
counted the gifts one by one. At the end of the festival, an aged man
came to the Imam saying: “O Son of the daughter of Allah’s Messenger! I
am a needy man who cannot present you with a gift. Instead, I have three
lines of poetry which my grandfather has composed for your grandfather,
Ḥusayn ibn 'Ali:*

*I am astonished at the sharp swords that were raised upon you*

*On the day of turmoil, while upon you was a dust cloud*

*And at the arrows that pierced your body, in sight of the free-women*

*Who were calling upon your grandfather, as the blood flowed
plentifully, saying:*

*Why had the arrows not fallen apart, and why had they not been
prevented*

*From hitting your body, due to its honour and greatness"*

*The Imam (as) said: "I accept your gift. Please sit and may Allah (swt)
bless you.” He raised the man's head towards the servant of Mansur, Imam
Kaẓim (as) said, “Go to the Amīr al-Mu'minīn and inform him of the gifts
and ask what he is going to do with all these gifts.” The servant
carried out the task, came back and said: “Mansur says: All are gifts
from me to him (as). He can do with them whatever he (as) wishes.” Imam
Kaẓim (as) said to the old man: “Take all these gifts which is my grant
to you.”63*

In another narration from the same book, it has been reported that:

*It has been said that 'Abd al-Raḥmān al-Sulamī taught one of the sons
of Imam Ḥusayn (as) Surah al-Ḥamd. When the child read the Surah in the
presence of his father, the Imam (as) gave a 1000 dinars to 'Abd
al-Raḥmān and a thousand suits of clothes, and lavished him.*

*Somebody asked the Imam (as) about his act (as to why he (as) had given
away so much) and the Imam (as) replied, “Where is this act of mine,
compared to what he has given" - meaning his teaching, and then he
recited a couplet.64*

Abu 'Ali, the son of Sheikh Tūsi, in his al-Amāli records a narration
from Imam Musa al-Kaẓim (as) as follows:

*"I (Imam Kaẓim) was sitting with our master (i.e. my father) Imam
al-Ṣadiq (as) when Ashja' al-Sulamī came to his presence wanting to
praise him, but found him to be ill. He sat beside him (as) and
refrained from praising him. So our master Imam al-Ṣadiq (as) said to
him: 'Ignore my illness and say what you had come here to say.' So he
recited:*

*May Allah (swt) robe you with health - from it (illness)*

*In your slovenly sleep and in your insomnia*

*(May Allah) remove from your body the illness - just like*

*He (swt) removes the insignificance of questions from your neck*

*The Imam (as) asked his servant: "O servant, how much do you have with
you?" He said: "400 dirhams." He (as) said: "Give them to Ashja'." Imam
Kaẓim (as) said: "Ashja' took them, thanked him (as) and left." Imam
Ṣadiq (as) said: "Call him back." Ashja' said: "O my master, I asked and
you gave and made me needless, so why have you asked me to return?" Imam
Ṣadiq (as) said: "My father has narrated to me from his fathers, who
narrated from the Prophet (pbuh) who said: 'The best givings are those
that continue to remain as a blessing.' That which I had given to you
will not continue to remain as a blessing. So here is my ring, if they
(the buyers) do not give you ten-thousand dirhams for it, then return it
to me at such-and-such a time, and I will give you the money."65*

Quṭub Rāwandi in his al-Kharāij records that because Farazdaq had
recited his famous poem in praise of Imam Sajjad (as) in front of
Hisham, the Imam (as) had sent an amount of money for him. Farazdaq
returned it back and said that he had recited the poem out of piety,
love and likeness of the Imam (as). The Imam (as) sent the amount back
to him and said: 'Allah (swt) is thanking you for your act.' Since
Hisham had locked Farazdaq (in a prison) and the Imam had gotten him
released, they had erased his name from the treasury book which had the
names of those who would get government funds. Farazdaq complained to
the Imam and the Imam asked: 'How much was it?' Farazdaq mentioned the
amount, and the Imam gave him enough wealth to cover him for 40 years,
and he died in the year 40th Hijri.66

Sheikh Kashi records this event as follow:

*The Imam (as) sent him (Farazdaq) twelve-thousand dirhams and said:
"Please excuse us O Aba Firas! If we had more than this, we would have
gotten it to you". Farazdaq returned it back and said: "O Son of the
Messenger of Allah (swt), I did not say what I said, except in a state
of anger for the sake of Allah (swt) and for His Messenger, and I did
not want to lose anything from that sake." So the Imam (as) returned the
amount back to him and said: "For my right that I have upon you, accept
the amount, for surely Allah (swt) has seen your station and knows about
your intention." Then Farazdaq accepted the amount.* 67

Sheikh Mufīd in his book al-Ikhtisās records a narration from Jābir bin
Yazīd as follow:

*“He (Jābir) said: "It did not take long before Kumayt entered upon the
Imam and said to him: 'May my soul be in ransom to you; do you permit me
to recite poetry for you?' So the Imam (as) said: 'Recite,' and so he
recited a poem. The Imam said: 'O servant, take out a badrah68 from that
room and give it to Kumayt.'*

*Then Kumayt said: 'May my soul be in ransom to you, do you permit me to
recite another poem for you?' So the Imam (as) said: 'Recite,' and so he
recited another poem. The Imam said: 'O servant, take out a badrah from
that room and give it to Kumayt.' The slave took out the badrah and gave
it to him.*

*Then Kumayt said: 'May my soul be in ransom to you, do you permit me to
recite a third poem for you?' So the Imam (as) said: 'Recite,' and so he
recited a poem. The Imam said: 'O servant, take out a badrah from that
room and give it to Kumayt.'*

*Then Kumayt said to the Imam: 'By Allah! I do not praise you for the
sake of the world intending to seek it from you. I do not intend
anything from it except the kinship of the Messenger of Allah (swt) and
to fulfil your right which Allah (swt) has made obligatory upon me with
regards to you.'*

*Then Imam Bāqir (as) prayed for him and said: 'O servant, return the
money to its place (i.e. Kumayt's house).”*

'Alam al-Huda Syed Murtaḍa in Ghurar wa Durar narrates that: Di'bil bin
'Ali and Ibrahim bin al-'Abbas who were both friends, came to the
presence of Imam Riḍa (as) after he (as) was coerced to accept the
successorship to the throne of al-Ma'mūn. Then Di'bil recited these
lines:

*The schools for the Qura'nic verses are void of reciting now*

and the landing site of Revelations is left like a barren desert

Ibrahim bin al-'Abbas recited a poem, whose beginning is like this:

<p dir="rtl">
أَزَالَتْ عَزَاء الْقَلْبِ بَعْدَالت جَلدِ \* مَصَارِع أَوْلَادِ
النبِيِّ مُحَمد
</p>

*After enduring calamities, they will remove the weariness of the
hearts:*

*The shrines of the children of the Prophet Muḥammad*

Then Imam al-Riḍa (as) gave them both 20,000 dirhams (10,000 each) upon
which Ma'mūn had minted the name of the Imam. Di'bil went towards Qum
with his share and the people of Qum bought each of his dirham for ten
dirhams and he sold his entire share for hundred-thousand dirhams.
Ibrahīm had instead kept his money saved until he died.69

In 'Uyūn al-Akhbār, it has been reported that Ibrahīm had kept most of
his money until he died, except for an amount which he had donated or
used for his family. The expense for his coffin and burial was paid for
by using that money.

In some reports, the amount that the Imam (as) had given to Di'bil after
reciting that poem are different. In some reports it has been recorded
that besides dirhams, the Imam also gave him an agate ring, and a green
fur coat and said to him: Protect these, as I prayed a thousand rak'ah
on thousand nights with these, and finished the Qur'ān a thousand times
while wearing them.

In some reports, instead of a fur-coat, the word jubbah70 is mentioned.
There is a story regarding that jubbah and the people of Qum, which they
ended up taking for a thousand coins. They gave Di'bil a piece of it,
and a miracle is also attributed to that piece and it was finally placed
with him in his coffin.71

The amount of narrations we have mentioned should suffice for our
purpose.

Furthermore, we say that spending one's wealth on the reciters is one of
the best type of spending. If it is done for the sake of Imam Ḥusayn
(as), it will be a beloved act and carrying it out is a good deed, and
the person will be rewarded greatly for it.

Sheikh Turayḥi in his book Majma' al-Baḥrayn, records:

*"In the narration of the whispered prayer of Prophet Musa (as) he said:
O Allah, why did you honour the nation of Muḥammad (pbuh) over all of
your other nations? Allah (swt) replied: I have honoured them because of
ten characteristics. Musa (as) replied: What are those ten
characteristics that they will act upon, so that I can command the Bani
Isrā'īl to also act upon them? Then Allah (swt) replied: Prayers, Zakāt,
Fasting, Ḥajj, Jihād, Jum'ah, Congregational Prayers, Qur'ān, Knowledge
and 'Ashūrā.*

*Musa (as) said: O My Lord, and what is 'Ashūrā? He (swt) said: It is
crying and doing tabāki for the grandson of Muḥammad (pbuh) and reciting
eulogies and mourning upon the calamites that befell the son of Mustafa
(pbuh). O Musa, there will be no slave from my slaves during that time,
who will cry, and do tabāki, and console each other upon the son of
Musṭafa (pbuh) except that heaven will be permanent for him.*

*And there will be no slave who will spend from his wealth a dirham or a
dinar for the love of the son of the daughter of his Prophet (pbuh), on
food or besides that, except that I will bless him with seventy dirhams
in this world, for each dirham he spends, and he will be in a state of
amnesty in heaven and I will forgive his sins."*

Since in this section, brevity is being taken into consideration, we
will suffice here with what we have written.
