Section 1: The Narrators and Their Narrations
=============================================

One of the narrations widely known among Sunni Muslims is the narration
to which they have made recourse in order to argue that the Commander of
the Faithful, Ali (a.s.) married out his daughter, Umm Kulthum, to Umar.
They have transmitted this narration in their sources and we will cite
it from their most famous booksOne of the narrations widely known among
Sunni Muslims is the narration to which they have made recourse in order
to argue that the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.) married out his
daughter, Umm Kulthum, to Umar. They have transmitted this narration in
their sources and we will cite it from their most famous books

1. Ibn Sa’ad’s Narrations in Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra
------------------------------------------------

As far as we know, the earliest narrator who has passed on this
tradition is Muhammad bin Sa‘ad b. Mani‘ Zuhri (d. 230 A.H), the author
of Al- Tabaqat Al-Kubra. He has included several narrations in his book
on this subject which are as follows.

### The first narration

Umm Kulthum was the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib ibn Abdul Muttalib ibn
Hashim ibn Abd Manaf ibn Qusai. Her mother was Fatima, the daughter of
the Messenger of Allah (S)[^1] and Khadijah bint Khuwailid ibn Asad ibn
Abdul Uzza ibn Qusai. She was a young girl when Umar married her. The
fruit of this marriage was a son called Zaid and a daughter called
Ruqayyah. Umm Kulthum remained Umar‘s wife until he was killed.

After Umar, Awn ibn Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib ibn Abdul Muttalib married her
(!)[^2], but Awn too died and thereupon, Awn‘s brother, Muhammad ibn
Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib became her husband. He too, passed away.

Then his brother, Abdullah ibn Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib married Umm Kulthum
after the death of her sister, Zainab, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.). Umm Kulthum made reference to it saying: “I feel embarrassed
towards Asma bint Umais whose two sons died when they were in my
company, and I am worried about the third one! Umm Kulthum died in
Abdullah ibn Ja‘far‘s house and did not bear a child with anyone of
them!”

### The second narration

Umar ibn Al-Khattab asked Ali ibn Abi Talib for the hand of Umm Kulthum
in marriage. Ali said: “I have kept my daughters for the sons of
Ja‘far.”

Umar said: “Marry her to me, O Abul Hasan, for by Allah, there is no man
on the face of the earth who seeks to achieve through her good
companionship that which I seek to achieve.”

Ali said: “I have done so.”

Then Umar came to the Muhajirun (lit. migrants) between the grave (of
Rasul-Allah) and the pulpit. They — Ali, Uthman, Zubayr, Talhah and Abd
ar-Rahman — used to sit there, and whenever a matter used to arrive from
the frontiers, Umar would come to them there and consult with them. He
came to them and said: “Congratulate me.”

They congratulated him, and asked: “With whom are we congratulating you,
O Amirul Mu‘meneen?”

He replied: “With the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib.[^3]

Then he told them the story and said that he had heard the Prophet (S)
say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means will be cut off and every lineage severed on the Day of
Judgment except my lineage.”[^4]

I was a companion of the Prophet and I also loved this relationship to
be maintained.

### The third narration

Waki‘ ibn Jarrah narrates from Husham ibn Sa‘ad, he from Ataa Khurasani
that he said: “Umar paid forty thousand [dirhams] as dowry [marriage
gift] to Umm Kulthum!”

### The fourth narration

Muhammad ibn Umar Waqidi and others have said, “Umar asked Ali for the
hand of his daughter, Umm Kulthum, in marriage. Ali replied that she had
not yet attained the age (of puberty).”

Umar replied: “By Allah, this is not true. You do not want her to marry
me. If she is underage, send her to me.”

Thus, Ali called Umm Kulthum, they prepared her and made her up. Then he
asked for a piece of cloth which he folded and handed over to Umm
Kulthum telling her to take the garment to Amirul Mu‘meneen and tell
him: “My father has sent me to you instructing me to convey you his
greetings and said that if you liked the garment, take it or else,
return it!”

When Umm Kulthum went to Umar, the latter said: “May Allah bless you and
your father, I like it.”

Umm Kulthum returned to his father and said: “He did not unfold the
garment, but just looked at me!”

Then Ali married her to Umar and she bore him a child named Zaid.

### The fifth narration

Waki‘i ibn Jarrah narrates from Ismail ibn Abi Khalid, he from Aamir
Sha‘bi that both Zaid ibn Umar and Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali,
died. Ibn Umar offered funeral prayer consisting of four takbirs (Allahu
Akbar). He placed Zaid on the side he had stood and Umm Kulthum in the
direction of Qiblah and prayed on both of them.

### The sixth narration

Ubaidullah ibn Musa says, “Israil narrates from Abi Hasin, he from Aamir
who said, ‘Ibn Umar offered a funeral prayer on Umm Kulthum, the
daughter of Ali, and her son. He placed Zaid on his side and prayed on
those two.’”

Waki‘i has reported a similar account from Zaid ibn Habib, from Sha‘abi
and added: “During the (funeral) prayer, Hasan and Husain, the sons of
Ali, Muhammad ibn Hanafiyah, Abdullah ibn Abbas and Abdullah ibn Ja‘far
stood praying behind ibn Umar.”

### The seventh narration

Ubaidullah ibn Musa and Israil have narrated from Jabir, he from Aamir
Sha‘bi that he said: During the prayer on the corpse of Zaid ibn Umar
ibn Khattab, Abdullah ibn Umar led the prayer while Hasan and Husain
prayed behind him. Had he known that it was good to say more takbir‘
(Allahu Akbar), he would have said it.”

### The eighth narration

Ubaidullah ibn Musa narrates from Israil, from Suddi, from Abdullah ibn
Baha that he said, “I saw Ibn Umar pray on Umm Kulthum and Zaid ibn Umar
ibn Khattab and that he placed Zaid on the side where the Imam (the
prayer leader) was standing while Hasan and Husain were witnessing the
prayer.”

### The ninth narration

Waki‘ibn Jarrah, from Hammad ibn Salamah, narrates that Ammar ibn Abi
Ammar (Mawla[^5] of Bani Hashim) said, “I was present on the day on
which Saeid ibn Aas, who was then the governor of Medina, prayed on
those two with eighty people from the companions of Prophet Muhammad (S)
following him in prayer.”

### The tenth narration

Ja‘far ibn Awn narrates from ibn Jurayh that Nafi‘ said, “The bodies of
Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib and wife of Umar ibn
Khattab and her son Zaid were brought in for funeral prayer. On that day
Saeid ibn Aas was the prayer leader.”

### The eleventh narration

Abdullah ibn Numair narrates from Ismail, he from Ibn Abi Khalid who
narrates from Aamir that, ‘Ibn Umar offered prayers on the dead bodies
of his brother Zaid and that of Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali. The
corpses of those two were in one casket and Zaid‘s body was on the side
close to the prayer leader.”[^6]

2. Dulabi’s Narrations in Al-Durriyat Al-Tahira
-----------------------------------------------

Another scholar who has reported and recorded narrations in this regard
is Abu Bushr Muhammad ibn Ahmad Al-Dulabi (d. 310 A.H). In his Al-
Durriyat Al-Tahira, he has reported several narrations regarding Umm
Kulthum bint Fatima, daughter of the Holy Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his descendants.

### The first narration

Al-Dulabi says, “I heard Ahmad ibn Abdul Jabbar saying: I heard Yunus
ibn Bukair say that he had heard from Ibn Ishaq that Fatima, the
daughter of the Holy Prophet (S), gave birth to three sons named Hasan,
Husain and Mohsin. The latter died at a young age. She also gave birth
to two daughters named Umm Kulthum and Zainab.”

### The second narration

Ibn Ishaq says, “Aasim ibn Umar ibn Qatadah narrated to me as such: Umar
asked Ali for the hand of his daughter, Umm Kulthum in marriage and Ali
replied that she had not yet attained the age (of maturity).

Umar replied, “By Allah, this is not true…[^7] You do not want her to
marry me. If she is underage, send her to me.”

Thus, Ali gave his daughter Umm Kulthum a dress and asked her to go to
Umar and tell him that her father wanted to know what this dress was
for. When she came to Umar and gave him the message, he grabbed her hand
and forcibly pulled her towards himself. Umm Kulthum asked him to leave
her hand, which Umar did and said, “You are a very mannered lady with
great morals…[^8] Go and tell your father that you are very pretty and
you are not what he said of you!”

With that Ali married Umm Kulthum to Umar.

### The third narration

Ahmad ibn Abdul Jabbar narrates from Yunus ibn Bukair, from Khalid ibn
Saleh, from Waqid ibn Abdullah ibn Umar, from some of his relatives that
Umar ibn Khattab Umar ibn Khattab asked Ali for the hand of his
daughter, Umm Kalthum bint Fatima (daughter of the Holy Prophet (S)) in
marriage.

Ali said to him, “She has other guardians also, wait until I get their
permission. Then Ali (a.s.) went to Fatima‘s sons and informed them
about Umar‘s proposal whereupon they said, “Marry her to him.”

Ali called Umm Kulthum, who was then a young girl then, and said to her,
“Go to the Commander of the Faithful, and tell him: My father sends you
his regards and says that he has fulfilled your wish.”

Upon reaching Umar‘s house, Umm Kulthum conveyed him her father‘s
message whereupon Umar grabbed her and held her to his bosom (!!) and
said, “I sought Umm Kulthum‘s hand in marriage and her father married
her to me.”

They said to Umar, “What do you mean? She is a little girl?!”

Umar said, "Do not disparage me [for marrying a young girl], for I heard
the Prophet say, upon him be blessings and peace:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Every means will be cut off and every lineage severed on the Day of
Judgment except my means and lineage.’

I desired to place myself in the Prophet's lineage through this
marriage.”

### The fourth narration

Abdul Rahman ibn Khalid ibn Muni‘ says, “Habib, the writer of Malik ibn
Anas‘s book, narrates from Abdul Aziz Darawerdi, from Zaid ibn Aslam,
from his father, who was the freed slave of Umar ibn Khattab, saying,
‘Umar asked Ali for Umm Kulthum‘s hand in marriage whereupon Ali
discussed the matter with Abbas, Aqil and Hasan. Aqil was annoyed
telling Ali, ‘The lapse of days and months will only add to your lack of
insight and astuteness in your work. By Allah, if you do this, such and
such will happen.’

Ali told Abbas, ‘By Allah, he is not talking wishfully, but the whip of
Umar has impelled him to say what you are hearing.’[^9]

Therefore, Hazrat Amir (a.s.) did not declare his acceptance to this
marriage to be out of good will.

Of course the surprising part is in the rest of the above narration,
where we are seeing that the opinion of Amirul Mu‘uminin Ali (a.s.)
changed at once; and that too was not because of the threats from Umar,
but because of the urge of Umar to form a relationship with the
Messenger of Allah (S) (!!).

Then Ali turned to Aqil and said, “Oh Aqil, I swear by Allah that it is
not because of my inclination to you and your opinion, but Umar ibn
Khattab informed me that he heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means will be cut off and every lineage severed on the Day of
Judgment except my lineage.”

### The fifth narration

Abdul Aziz ibn Muni‘ has narrated from Abu Al- Darda‘ Marwazi, from
Khalid ibn Khedash; also, Ishaq ibn Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Sulaiman
ibn Bilal ibn Abi Al-Darda‘ Ansari has reported from Abu Jamahir
Muhammad ibn Uthman who said, “Abdullah ibn Zaid ibn Aslam, from his
father, from his grandfather, narrated that Umar ibn Khattab, married
Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib, with a dowry of 40,000
dirhams!”

### The sixth narration

Abu Osama Abdullah ibn Muhammad, from Hajjaj ibn Abi Muni‘, from his
grandfather, from Zuhri who narrates, “Umar ibn Khattab married Umm
Kulthum, the daughter of Ali and his wife Fatima and they were blessed
with a baby boy named Zaid.”

### The seventh narration

Ahmad ibn Abdul Jabbar, from Yunus ibn Bukair, from Ibn Ishaq who
narrated, “Umar ibn Khattab married Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali and
they were blessed with a baby boy named Zaid and a daughter. Umar died
whilst she was alive.”

### The eighth narration

Abu Osamah Abdullah ibn Muhammad Halabi, from Hajjaj ibn Abi Muni‘, from
his father, from Zuhri who narrates, “After Umar ibn Khattab, Awn ibn
Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib married Umm Kulthum (!!) and she did not bear a
child from Awn, until the latter died.

### The ninth narration

Ahmad ibn Abdul Jabbar, from Yunus ibn Bukair, from Ishaq, who narrates,
“When Umar, the husband of Umm Kulthum bint Ali, died, Awn ibn Ja‘far
married Umm Kulthum and he also died in her lifetime without her bearing
a child with him.”

### The tenth narration

Ibn Ishaq says, “My father Ishaaq ibn Yasaar narrates from Hasan ibn
Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib, who said, ‘When Umm Kulthum, the daughter
of Ali ibn Abi Talib was widowed of Umar, her brothers Hasan and Husain
went to her and said, ‘You are known as the first lady of Islam and the
daughter of the best lady of the world. We swear by Allah that if you
leave your decision to Ali, he will definitely marry you to one of his
orphans (!!) and if you wish to get much wealth, you will definitely get
it.’

‘I swear by Allah, no sooner they got up than Ali arrived while he was
leaning on his walking stick. Praising and thanking Allah, he reminded
them of their status and dignity to the Prophet of Allah (S) and said:
‘O the children of Fatima, you are aware of your status and dignity and
you know well that I have given you priority over my other children
owing to your position and relationship to the Messenger of Allah (S).’

They said, ‘You are right, may Allah bless you and may He reward you on
our behalf.’

Ali turned to his daughter and said, ‘My daughter, Allah has granted you
the authority to handle your matter yourself, but I wish you leave that
to me.’

Umm Kulthum said, ‘Dear father, I swear by Allah that I am also a woman,
and I too have the aspirations and desires of all other women. I would
love to enjoy the world as much as any other women do; I wish to decide
for myself what I should do in this regard.’

Ali said, ‘My daughter, I swear by Allah that it is not your view but
rather that of these two!’

Then he stood up and said, ‘You will either do this or you will never
talk to any of these two!’

Hasan and Husain grabbed their father‘s dress and said, ‘Dear father,
sit down. By Allah, we cannot afford to miss you. Then they told Umm
Kulthum, ‘Leave the decision of your marriage to him.’

Umm Kulthum said, ‘I have done so.’

Ali said, ‘I will marry you to Awn ibn Ja‘far, who is an adolescent.’

Thereupon, Ali returned to Umm Kulthum taking her four thousand dirham.
Then he informed his nephew and sent her to him.

Hasan ibn Hasan says: ‘By Allah, ever since the beginning of creation as
of now, I know of no love to be like her love of Awn.’”0

### The eleventh narration

Abu Ishaq, Ibrahim ibn Ya‘qub ibn Ishaq Jouzjani narrates from Yazid ibn
Haroon, from Hammad ibn Salamah, from Ammar ibn Abi Ammar that he said,
“Both Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali, and Zaid, the son of Umar died.
We shrouded those two and Saeid ibn Aas offered funeral prayer on them
with Hasan, Husain and Abu Hurairah praying behind him.”

### The twelfth narration

Ibrahim ibn Ya‘qub narrates from Yazid ibn Haroon, he from Ismail ibn
Abi Khalid that he said, “Aamir was asked as to how the prayer on the
corpses of men and women were offered to which he replied, ‘When I
arrived, I saw Abdullah ibn Umar offering funeral prayer on his brother
and his mother Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib.’”[^10]

3. Hakim Nishaburi’s Narration in Al-Mustadrak
----------------------------------------------

Hakim, Abu Abdullah Nishaburi (d. 405 A.H.), has narrated only one
tradition in this regard as follows:

Hassan ibn Ya‘qub and Ibrahim ibn Ismat, both fair and just, from Sarri
ibn Khuzaymah, from Mu‘alla ibn Asad,[^11] from Wuhaib ibn Khalid, from
Ja‘far ibn Muhammad [i.e. Imam Sadiq (a.s.)], from his father, from Ali
ibn Hussain, who said, ‘Umar asked Ali for the hand of Umm Kulthum in
marriage and said, ‘Marry her to me.’

Ali said, ‘I have kept my daughters for Jafar‘s son.’

Umar said, ‘Marry her to me, for by Allah, there is no man on earth who
seeks to achieve through her good companionship that which I seek to
achieve!’

Then Umar came to the Muhajirun and said, ‘Don‘t you congratulate me?’

They asked, ‘With whom are we congratulating you, O Commander of the
Faithful?’

He replied, ‘With the daughter of Ali and Fatima, daughter of the
Messenger of Allah (S). I head the Messenger of Allah (S) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means will be cut off and every lineage severed on the Day of
Judgment except my lineage.”

I desired to include myself in the Prophet's lineage through this
marriage.’

After reporting this narration, Hakim then says, ‘This tradition is
authentic in terms of the chain of transmission, but Bukhari and Muslim
have not narrated it.’[^12]

4. Bayhaqi’s Narrations in Al-Sunan Al-Kubra
--------------------------------------------

Abu Bakr Bayhaqi (d. 457 A.H.) has reported some narrations in this
regard which are as follows.

### The first narration

Abu Abdullah, Hafidh (i.e. Hakim, the author of Al-Mustadrak) from
Hassan ibn Ya‘qub and Ibrahim ibn Ismat, reports that Sarri ibn
Khuzaymah reported from Mu‘alla ibn Asad, he from Wuhaib ibn Khalid who
narrated, “Ja‘far ibn Muhammad (i.e.Imam Sadiq (a.s.)) reported from his
father, he from Ali ibn Hussain; Likewise from Abul Abbas, Muhammad ibn
Ya‘qub, from Ahmad ibn Abdul Jabbar, from Yunus ibn Bukair, from ibn
Ishaq, from Abu Ja‘far (i.e. Imam Baqir (a.s.)), from his father, from
Ali ibn Hussain that:

When Umar married Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib, he
came to the Muhajirun between the grave (of the Messenger of Allah) and
the pulpit where the people in attendance congratulated him and wished
him well.

Addressing the people, Umar said, ‘Behold! I swear by Allah that what
impelled me to marry her, was a tradition that I had heard from the
Messenger of Allah (S) who said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means will be cut off and every lineage severed on the Day of
Judgment except my lineage.”

Having quoted this narration, Bayhaqi says, “This is the text of Ibn
Ishaq‘s narration, but it is, in terms of the chain of transmission,
considered to be ‘mursal’[^13] and ‘hasan’ (good). That is because it
has also been narrated with a broken chain of transmission.

### The second narration

Abu Husain ibn Bishran reported from Da‘laj ibn Ahmad, from Musa ibn
Haroon, from Sufyan, from Waki‘ ibn Jarrah, from Rooh ibn Ubadah, from
Ibn Jurayj, from Ibn Abi Malikah, from Hasan ibn Hasan and he from his
father that he said:

Umar asked Imam Ali for the hand of Bibi Umm Kulthum in marriage. Ali
said, ‘She is too young to be married.’

Umar said, ‘I heard the Prophet of Allah (S) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means will be cut off and every lineage severed on the Day of
Judgment except my lineage.”

I desired to place myself in the Prophet's lineage through this
marriage.

Ali turned to Hasan and Husain and said, ‘Marry Umm Kulthum to your
uncle!’

They said, ‘Umm Kulthum, like all other women, is free to choose
whomever as husband.’

Ali stood up angrily (!) but Hasan pulled his lap and said, ‘We cannot
afford to miss you.’

Ali said, ‘Then marry her to Umar.’[^14]

Bayhaqi has included this narration again under “The Narrations about
Fathers Marrying out Their Virgin Daughters.”[^15]

Turkmani, the author of the book of Al-Jouhar Al-Naqi, says, “Bayhaqi,
in this section of his book, has narrated the marriage of the Prophet
and a six-year-old Aisha, the marriage of Umar and Ali‘s daughter at a
young age, and some of the Prophet‘s companions who married out their
young daughters…. As for Aisha and Ali‘s daughter, they were young (and
had not yet reached the age of puberty).”

5. Khatib Baghdadi’s Narrations in Tarikh Baghdad
-------------------------------------------------

Khatib Baghdadi (d. 463 A.H.) explaining the biography of Ibrahim ibn
Mahran Marwazi in his Tarikh Baghdad, narrates a tradition with his
chain of transmission. The narration reads: Laith ibn Sa‘ad Qaysi, a
servant of Bani Rafa‘ah in the year 171 AH in Egypt, reports from Musa
ibn Ali ibn Rabah Lakhmi, from his father, from Uqba ibn Aamir Juhani,
who narrated:

Umar ibn Al-Khattab asked Ali ibn Abi Talib for the hand of Umm Kulthum
(daughter of Fatima) in marriage, and frequently visiting Ali‘s house on
this matter. He told Ali, ‘O Abul Hassan, what has made me to come to
you time and again is a saying which I heard from the Prophet of Allah
(S) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means will be cut off and every lineage severed on the Day of
Judgment except my lineage.”

I wish to place myself in the Prophet's lineage through this marriage.’

Ali stood up and called for his daughter, made her up (!) and then sent
her to Amirul Mu‘meneen, Umar. Seeing Umm Kulthum, Umar stood up and
grabbed her ankle and said, 'Tell your father that I am willing, I am
willing, I am willing.’

When the girl returned to his father, Ali said, ‘What did Amirul
Mu‘meneen say?’

Umm Kulthum said, ‘When Umar saw me, he got up, took me in his lap,
kissed me (!), and when I got up to leave, he grabbed my ankle and said,
'Tell your father that I am willing.’

Then Ali married her to Umar. She gave birth to Zaid ibn Umar ibn
Khattab who lived until he grew old and died.[^16]

6. Ibn Abd Al-Barr’s Narrations in Al-Isti’ab
---------------------------------------------

Ibn Abd Al-Barr Qurtubi (d. 643 A.H.) has also reported some narrations
in this regard which are as follows:

### The first narration

Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib, was born before the
demise of the Prophet of Allah (S). Her mother was Fatima Zahra, the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah (S). Umar ibn Khattab asked Ali ibn
Abi Talib for her hand in marriage.

Ali said, “She is young.’

Umar said, “Marry her to me! I shall observe her dignity more than
anyone else.”

Ali said, “I will send her to you, if you like her, I shall marry her to
you.”

Ali then sent the girl with a piece of cloth and told her to say [to
Umar] 'This is the scarf that I was talking about'. She conveyed these
words to Umar, who said, “Tell your father that I have accepted.” Umar
then touched the girl's calf pulling aside the garment.[^17]

She exclaimed, 'You have done this to me? If it hadn't been for the fact
that you are the Commander of the Faithful, I would have broken your
nose'. The girl went home and repeated the episode to her father,
stating 'You sent me to a foul man.'

With that Ali said, “My daughter, he is your husband.”

Thereupon, Umar went over to the Muhajirun near the pulpit of the
Prophet (S), where the early Muhajirun used to gather. Addressing them,
he said, “Congratulate me.”

They said, “What for, O Amirul Mu‘umeneen?”

He said, “I have married Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib.
I heard the Prophet of Allah (S) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Every means will be cut off and every lineage severed on the Day of
Judgment except my lineage.’

I was related to the Prophet (S) but I wish to place myself in the
Prophet's lineage through this marriage.”

The Muhajirun congratulated him.

### The second narration

Abdul Warith reports from Qasim, from Khushani, from Ibn Abi Umar, from
Sufyan, from Amr ibn Dinar, from Muhammad (Ibn Hanafiyah) the son of
Ali, who narrates, “Umar ibn Khattab asked Ali for her daughter‘s hand
(Umm Kulthum) in marriage. Ali replied that she was too young.

They told Umar, ‘Ali has rejected you.’

Umar returned to Ali to ask again for his daughter‘s hand in marriage.

Ali said, ‘I will send her to you, if you like her, she will be your
wife.’

Then Ali sent her daughter to Umar, and Umar pulled away the cloth from
her calf (!). Umm Kulthum said, ‘Take off your hands! Were it not for
the fact that you are the Commander of the Faithful, I would have
blinded you.’

### The third narration

Ibn Wahab reports from Abdul Rahman ibn Zaid ibn Aslam, from his father,
from his grandfather who narrates that: Umar ibn Khattab married Umm
Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib with a dowry of four thousand
dirham!

### The fourth narration

Abu Umar says: Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib, gave
birth to two children named Zaid and Ruqayyah from Umar ibn Khattab. She
and her son Zaid died on the same day.

Zaid was injured in a battle which took place overnight among Bani Adi
clan. He had gone to settle the dispute between the warring parties when
someone hit him in the dark. He got fatally injured and collapsed. A
while later he died, his death coinciding with the death of his mother.

Ibn Umar prayed on both of them as suggested by Hasan ibn Ali.

As they say, two traditions were performed about these two people:

None of them inherited from the other, since it was not clear who passed
away first.

Zaid‘s corpse was placed in front of his mother‘s corpse on the side
where the prayer leader stood.1

7. Ibn Athir’s Narrations in Usd Al-Ghabah
------------------------------------------

Ibn Athir Jazari (d. 630 A.H.) has also related some narrations in this
regard in his book titled Usd Al-Ghabah. His narrations are as follows:

### The first narration

Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib and Fatima, the daughter
of the Messenger of Allah (S) was born before the demise of the Holy
Prophet (S).

Umar ibn Khattab asked Ali ibn Abi Talib for his daughter‘s hand in
marriage. Ali replied that she was too young.

Umar said. ‘There is no man who seeks to achieve through her good
companionship that which I seek to achieve.’

Ali said, ‘I will send her to you and if you are pleased, I shall marry
her to you.’

Then Ali sent Umm Kulthum to Umar with a piece of cloth and instructed
her to tell Umar that it was the cloth he was talking about.

Umm Kulthum conveyed Umar her father‘s message. Umar told her, ‘I am
pleased, may Allah be pleased with you.’ He then touched her!

‘Why are you doing this?’ Umm Kulthum objected. ‘Had it not been for the
fact that you are Commander of the Faithful, I would have broken your
nose.’

Then she went home and repeated the episode to her father, stating 'You
sent me to a foul old man.'

With that Ali said, 'My daughter, he is your husband'.

Thereupon, Umar went to the place of the Muhajirun near the pulpit of
the Prophet (S), where the early Muhajirun used to gather. He sat beside
them and said, ‘Congratulate me.’

They said, ‘What for, O Amirul Mu‘umeneen?’

He said, ‘I have married Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib.
I heard the Prophet of Allah (S) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Every means will be cut off and every lineage severed on the Day of
Judgment except my lineage.’

I was related to the Prophet (S) but I wish to place myself in the
Prophet's lineage through this marriage.

Then the Muhajirun congratulated him.

Umar married Umm Kulthum with a dowry of forty thousand dirhams! The
fruit of this marriage was two children named Zaid son of the Greater
Umar and Ruqayyah. Umm Kulthum and her son, Zaid, died on the same day.

Zaid was injured in the battle which took place overnight among Bani Adi
clan. He had gone to solve the dispute between the two warring sides
when someone hit him in the dark. He got fatally injured and collapsed.
Zaid was alive for a while but then he breathed his last on the same day
as his mother.

Ibn Umar prayed on both of them as proposed by Hasan ibn Ali. When Umar
was killed, Awn ibn Ja‘far married Umm Kulthum!

### The second narration

Abdul Wahab ibn Ali ibn Ali Amin reports from Abu Fadhl Muhammad ibn
Nasir, from Khatib Abu Tahir Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Abi Saqar, from Abul
Barakat Ahmad ibn Abdul Wahid ibn Fadhl ibn Nadhif ibn Abdullah Farra
who narrates that he told Ahmad:

“Has Abu Muhammad Hassan ibn Rashiq narrated to you?”

He said, “Yes, Abu Bushr Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Hammad Dulabi reported
from Ahmad ibn Abdul Jabbar, from Yunus ibn Bukair, from Ibn Ishaq, from
Hasan ibn Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib who said:

‘When Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) was widowed
of Umar, her brothers Hasan and Husain went to her saying:

‘You are known as the chief of Muslim women and the daughter of the best
lady. We swear by Allah that if you leave your decision to Ali, he will
definitely marry you to one of his orphans (!) and if you wish to get
substantial wealth (!!), you will definitely get it.’

I swear by Allah, no sooner did they stand up than Ali arrived while he
was leaning on his walking stick. Praising and thanking Allah, he
reminded them of their status and dignity to the Prophet of Allah (S)
and said: O the children of Fatima, you are aware of your status and
dignity and you know well that I have given you priority over my other
children owing to your position and relationship to the Messenger of
Allah (S).

They said: ‘You are right, may Allah bless you and may He reward you on
our behalf.’

Ali turned to his daughter and said: My daughter, Allah has granted you
the authority to handle your matter yourself, but I wish you to leave
that to me.

Umm Kulthum said: Dear father, I swear by Allah that I am also a woman,
and I too have the aspirations of other women (!!), I would love to
enjoy the world as much as any other women; I wish to decide for myself
what I should do regarding this matter.

Ali said: My daughter, I swear by Allah that it is not your view but it
is that of these two!

Then he stood up and said: You will either do this or you will never
talk to any of these two!

Hasan and Husain grabbed their father‘s lap and said: Dear father, sit
down. By Allah, we cannot afford to miss you. Turning to Umm Kulthum,
they said: Leave your matter to him.

‘I have done so,’ Umm Kulthum answered.

Ali said: I will marry you to Awn ibn Ja‘far, who is an adolescent.
Thereupon, Ali returned to Umm Kulthum giving her four thousand dirham
and sending her to Awn.

This narration has also been reported by Abu Umar.

8. Ibn Hajar’s Narrations in Al-Isabah
--------------------------------------

Ibn Hajar Asqalani, who died in the year 852 A.H., has also reported
some narrations in this regard which are as under:

### The first narration

Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib was a descendant of
Hashim, her mother was Fatima, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah
(S). She was born during the lifetime of the Prophet of Allah, peace be
upon him and his descendants.

Abu Umar says, ‘She was born before the demise of the Holy Prophet (S).’

Ibn Abi Umar Maqdisi says: ‘Sufyan reported from Umar, from Muhammad ibn
Ali [Imam Baqir (a.s.)] that he said: Umar ibn Khattab asked Ali for her
daughter‘s hand (Umm Kulthum) in marriage. Ali replied that she was too
young.

They told Umar, ‘Ali has rejected you.’

Umar returned to Ali to ask again for his daughter‘s hand in marriage.

Ali said: I will send her to you, if you like her, she will be your
wife.

Then Ali sent her daughter to Umar who pulled away the cloth from her
calf! Umm Kulthum said: Take off your hands! Were it not for the fact
that you are the Commander of the Faithful, I would have blinded you.

### The second narration

Ibn Wahab reports from Abdul Rahman Ibn Zaid Ibn Aslam, from his father,
from his grandfather who narrates that Umar married Umm Kulthum with a
dowry of forty thousand dirham!

### The third narration

Zubair says: Umm Kulthum bore two children from Umar by the names of
Zaid and Ruqayyah. Umm Kulthum passed away on the same day as her son.

Zaid was injured during the battle that took place amongst Bani Adi,
where he had gone to settle the dispute between the warring parties when
someone hit him in the dark. He got fatally injured and collapsed. His
mother was also sick, and they both died on the same day.

### The fourth narration

In his Al-Durriyat Al-Tahirah Abu Bushr Dulabi narrates on the authority
of Ibn Ishaq:

Hasan ibn Hasan ibn Ali says: When Umar, the husband of Umm Kulthum died
and she was widowed of him, her brothers Hasan and Husain went to her
and said to her: If you yourself make your decision and want to get
substantial wealth, you shall definitely get it.‖ Then Ali entered the
house, thanked and praised Allah and said: My daughter, Allah has
granted you the authority to handle your matter yourself, but I wish you
leave the matter to me.

Umm Kulthum said: Dear father, I swear by Allah that I am also a woman,
and I too have the aspirations and desires of all other women and I
would love to enjoy the world as much as any other women do.

Ali said: My daughter, I swear by Allah that it is not your view but
rather that of these two!

Then he stood up and said: You either do this or I will never talk to
any of these two!

They surrounded Umm Kulthum and wanted her to accept the proposal.

She accepted and got married to Awn ibn Ja‘far.

### The fifth narration

Dar Qutni has referred to Umm Kulthum in in Al- Ikhwah and has said:

When Awn died, his brother Muhammad married Umm Kulthum! After a while,
Awn too died whereupon his brother Abdullah married her (!) and Umm
Kulthum died in Abdullah's house.

Ibn Sa‘ad has also reported a narration similar to the above saying at
the end: Umm Kulthum used to refer to the incident saying: I feel
embarrassed towards Asma bint Umais whose two sons died when they were
in my company, and I am worried about the third one.

Umm Kulthum died in Abdullah ibn Ja‘far‘s house and did not bear a child
with anyone of them.

### The sixth narration

Ibn Sa‘ad reports from Anas Ibn Ayadh, from Ja‘far ibn Muhammad, from
his father who said:

Umar ibn Khattab asked Ali for his daughter‘s hand in marriage. Ali
said: ―I have kept my daughters for the sons of Ja‘far.

Umar said: Marry her to me, for by Allah, there is no man on earth who
seeks to achieve through her good companionship that which I seek to
achieve.

Ali said: I have accepted.

Umar went to the place of the Muhajirun and told them: Congratulate me.

They congratulated him, and asked: Whom have you married? He replied: ―I
have married the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib.

Indeed, the Prophet of Allah (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means will be cut off and every lineage severed on the Day of
Judgment except my lineage.’

I had given the Prophet a daughter, but I also loved to (marry a
daughter from his family).[^18]

[^1]: In spite of the fact that in Sunni sources the greeting‘ (salawat)
after the Holy Prophet‘s name is written incompletely, we, as the
Prophet (S) himself recommended, have written it completely.

[^2]: We have used signs of exclamation (!!) in our translation of some
of the weird, unthinkable and objectionable passages cited from their
sources.

[^3]: Ibn Sa'ad, Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra vol.8 p.338 (ed. Dar Al-Kotob
Al-'Ilmiyyah, Beirut 1990)

[^4]: Some translators have translated this tradition as such: “On the
Judgment Day every means will be cut off and every lineage severed
except my lineage.”

[^5]: A freed slave is known as ‘Mawla’

[^6]: Al-Tabaqatu Al-Kubra,8/338 – 340.

[^7]: In the printed copy of the book, it has been written in this part
of the books as such: There is a word here which is not readable! But
the original sentence is this: “No, I swear by Allah! That is not true.”

[^8]: In the printed copy of the book, it has been written as such:
There is a word here which is not readable! But in the tradition of
Muhibuddin Al-Tabari, there is not any word.

[^9]: From the collection of traditions and the above statement, it is
concluded that Hazrat Ali (a.s.) was against this marriage and because
of the threats from Umar, Aqil wanted this marriage to take place and
his anger too, was because of this.

[^10]: Al-Durriyat Al-Tahirah, 157 – 165.

[^11]: In the text of Al-Mustadrak , it has been recorded as ―Mu‘alla
ibn Rashid‖ which is wrong.

[^12]: Al-Mustadrak, 3/153, Ma‟rifat Al-Sahabah (Manaqib Amirul
Mu‟uminin Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him), No. 4684).

[^13]: Hurried or a tradition in which the chain of narrators is omitted

[^14]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, 7/101 and 102 numbers 13393 and 13394.

[^15]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, 7/185 number 13660.

[^16]: Tarikh Baghdad, 6/180.

[^17]: Al-Isti‟ab, 4/509 & 510.

[^18]: Al-Isabah, 8/464 and 465.


