Section 2: A Study of the Chains of Transmission of the Narrations
==================================================================

The narrations that you went through were the most important reports
that have been passed on by Sunni Muslims’ most famous books. Some of
these narrations relate to the allegation that the Commander of the
Faithful, Ali (a.s.) married his daughter to Umar. Some relate to the
marriage of Umm Kulthum after Umar‘s death and others relate to the
event of her death and her son.

Based on Sunni Muslims’ rules and principles in the science of hadith
(tradition) and relying on the sayings of their scholars in \`ilm
al-rijal [the science of narrators‘ biographies], if one carefully looks
and examines the chains of the transmission of these narrations, he will
come to understand that the story in its entirety is baseless and
unsubstantiated let alone the relevant details and minor incidents in
connection with it?[^1]

Now, before verifying the chains, we shall remind you of a few points
concerning these narrations:

The stories that you went through in the previous section have not been
reported in the two well-known and respected books, namely Sahih Bukhari
and Sahih Muslim. The authors of these two books have disregarded these
narrations, not mentioning them in their books.

These narrations have also not been narrated in the other Sunni books
which are widely known as Sihah Sittah. Hence, all the authors of the
six so-called authentic books have disregarded these traditions and
agreed not to narrate them.

This story has not been related in other hadith books such as Musnad of
Ahmad ibn Hanbal. He and a group of his followers maintained that
anything that is not recorded in this book – Musnad Ahmad – is not
authentic.[^2]

It is worth noting that in many cases and in different topics, Sunnis do
not present their arguments with reliance on the narrations which are
authentic simply because Bukhari and Muslim have not narrated them in
their books or that they have not been recorded in the other Sihah
books!

The Focal Point in this Regard
------------------------------

The focal point that can be mentioned in this regard is that this story
has been narrated by their narrators from the Shia Imams, the Ahl
Al-Bayt (a.s.). The above narrations have been transmitted in the books
of Al- Tabaqat of ibn Sa‘ad, Al-Mustadrak of Hakim, Al-Sunan Al-Kubra of
Bayhaqi and Al-Durriyat Al-Tahirah of Dulabi.

Two points must be noted concerning these narrations.

**The first point:** Following years of studying and reviewing Sunni
Muslims‘ narrations, we have found out that when Sunnis and the
opponents of the Ahl Al-Bayt (a.s.) wanted to relate a narration to the
Ahl Al-Bayt (a.s.) which is in no way in harmony with those noble men‘s
opinion and doctrine, they have always embarked on fabricating a
narration ascribing it to one of the members of the pure progeny of the
Holy Prophet, peace be upon him and his descendants.

When they wanted to find a fault with Allah‘s Prophet (S) and his noble
daughter, Fatima Zahra (S.A) as well as his successor Amirul Mu‘meneen
Ali (a.s.), they made up a story ascribing a saying to the Ahl Al-Bayt
that they said that, for example, Ali (a.s.) sought marriage to the
daughter of Abu Jahl. (Refer to the treatise that we have written
concerning this subject.)

When they wanted to propagate the prohibition of temporary marriage they
made every effort to criticize Ibn Abbas, who until the last moment of
his life believed that temporary marriage was lawful. Thus, they forged
a narration forbidding the temporary marriage and quoting a saying from
Ali rebuking and taunting Ibn Abbas for believing in the permissibility
of temporary marriage. They also fabricated traditions quoting them from
his sons. (See the research work that we have written concerning this
topic.)

When they wanted to fabricate a tradition on the merits of the
companions, they made this tradition imputing it Imam Ja‘far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said that the companions were like stars. (See the book
that we have written concerning this topic.)

Therefore, there is no doubt that the story of Umm Kulthum‘s marriage to
Umar is a fabricated story which has no basis at all.

**The second point:** The Sunni Muslims have narrated this story from
Imam Sadiq (a.s.), from his father as narrated in Ibn Sa‘ad‘s Al-Tabaqat
or from Imam Sadiq (a.s.), from his father, from Imam Sajjad (a.s.) as
narrated in Al-Mustadrak or from Hasan ibn Hasan as narrated in Al-
Durriyat Al-Tahirah or from Hasan ibn Hasan, from his father as narrated
by Bayhaqi in his Al-Sunan Al-Kubra.

Therefore, if the Sunni Muslims’ aim of quoting these narrations is to
base their argument on them to prove their side of the story on the
basis of their own standards and principles, then it depends on the
authenticity of the narration according to them.

Hence, it is not possible to use the foregoing narrations on the
authority of the Ahl Al-Bayt (a.s.) because Ibn Sa‘ad, the writer of
Al-Tabaqat Al- Kubra has spoken insolently and disrespectfully of Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) saying: He has several narrations that cannot be used to
argue with since they are weak and unreliable. He was once asked: Did
you hear these narrations from your father?

He said: Yes.

He was asked again and he said: I found them in my father‘s book.[^3]

Likewise, in his Al-Mustadrak, Hakim Nisharburi narrates a tradition
from Imam Sajjad (a.s.) on the authority of Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
considering it to be authentic. Commenting on that tradition, Dhahabi
says: The chain of transmission of this narration is cut off.[^4]

Concerning that narration, Bayhaqi, says: This narration is mursal‟
(hurried or a tradition in which the chain of narrators is omitted.[^5]

The narration that has been narrated from Hasan ibn Hasan in Al-
Durriyat Al-Tahirah, is also similar to this. On top of that, its
narrators have been weakened as shall soon be clarified. Certainly,
there is no interruption in the narrations transmitted in Bayhaqi‘s
Al-Sunan Al-Kubra from Hasan ibn Hasan, from his father but their chains
of transmission lack authenticity and credibility especially because the
narrator narrates this tradition from Hasan ibn Hasan ibn Abi Malikah.
We shall provide the details soon.

On the other hand, if their aim of relating these narrations is to make
Shiites accept them, simply because they have been narrated from the Ahl
Al-Bayt (a.s.) through those who narrated traditions from the Holy
Messenger of Allah (S), such an effort depends on the fact that the
followers of Ahl Al-Bayt (a.s.) should verify and authenticate the
transmitters of these narrations according to their own viewpoint, and
this is the beginning of the debate between Shi‘ism and the Sunnite
school.

Hence, the most important narrations which Sunni Muslims have made
recourse to and pointed out in their books are verified and proven be
unreliable and unauthentic. (By extension, other relevant narrations
would be void and unauthentic).

Notwithstanding this, we shall discuss at length in this regard. To
begin with, we shall discuss the chain of the transmission of the
narration that has been narrated in Al-Sunan Al-Kubra of Bayhaqi, from
Imam Baqir (a.s.) and from his respected father Imam Sajjad (a.s.) and
in Al-Isti‟ab, from Imam Baqir (a.s.) and in Al-Sunan Al-Kubra from
Hasan ibn Hasan. Then we shall study their isnad (documentation) and
chains of the transmission of the other narrations so as to draw a
conclusion and to expose the opponents by concrete arguments and proofs.
On this basis, we say:

Bayhaqi has reported this narration in Al-Sunan Al-Kubra from Hakim
Nishaburi, from Imam Baqir (a.s.), from his father Imam Sajjad (a.s.).
The point is that Ahmad ibn Abdul Jabbar is also present in the chain of
the transmission of the narration, and we shall now study his biography.

Ahmad ibn Abdul Jabbar as Seen by Biographers
---------------------------------------------

Some of the comments made by biographers concerning Ahmad ibn Abdul
Jabbar are as follows:

Ibn Abi Hatim says: I have written many narrations reported by Ahmad,
but because a lot of people are speaking [highly of] him, I have
refrained from narrating them.

Ibn Mu‘ein says: He used to lie.

Abu Ahmad Hakim also says about him: Ahmad ibn Abdul Jabbar is weak
according to biographers. That is why Ibn Uqdah has disregarded his
narrations.

Ibn Adi also says about him: The people of Iraq unanimously consider him
as weak (untrustworthy).[^6]

Yunus ibn Bukair as Seen by Biographers
---------------------------------------

Yunus ibn Bukair is also in the chain of the transmitters of the
narrations. Some biographers’ sayings about him are as follows:

Ajuri, from Abi Dawud narrated that Yunus ibn Bukair is not trustworthy
according to him. He used to take a clause from Ibn Ishaq‘s sayings and
attach it with the traditions.

Nesai says about him: Yunus is not good in narrating traditions. He has
also been reported as having said: Yunus is weak in terms of narrating
traditions.

Jowzjani says about Yunus: It is appropriate to look into his work
carefully.

Saji says: Ibn Madini never transmitted narrations from Yunus;
nevertheless, he is counted among the honest narrators by Sunni Muslims.

Ahmad ibn Hanbal says about him: The people hated and detached
themselves from no one as much as they hated and detached themselves
from him.

Ibn Abi Shaybah says: He was characterized by weakness

Saji says: Yunus was a truthful person, the only flaw with him was that
he used to follow the rulers and he was a follower of the Murji‘ah‘[^7]
sect.[^8]

Amr ibn Dinar as Seen by Biographers
------------------------------------

This narration has also been quoted by Ibn Abd al-Barr and Ibn Hajar on
the authority of Imam Baqir (a.s.) with Amr ibn Dinar being present in
the chain of the transmission. We have mentioned below comments made by
some biographers about him:

Maymuni narrates from Ahmad ibn Hanbal that Amr ibn Dinar is weak in
terms of transmitting narrations and that he was a reporter of weak
[munkar] traditions.

Ishaq ibn Mansur narrates from Ibn Ma‘ein that he is not noteworthy from
a biographical perspective. Ya‘qub ibn Shaybah has also narrated from
Ibn Ma‘ein that he said that Amr ibn Dinar is a dhahib Al-hadith.[^9]

Amr ibn Ali says about him: ―The narrations from Amr are weak in terms
of transmission.‖ He narrated munkar[^10] traditions from Salim, from
ibn Umar, from Allah‘s Messenger (S).

Abu Hatim has narrated the same saying: ―All of his narrations are
denounced.

Abu Zur‘ah says about Amr: His narrations are vagarious.

Bukhari says: He is a man who should be looked at with uncertainty and
hesitation.

Abu Dawud says about his narrations: They are not noteworthy.

Tirmidhi says: He is not strong in terms of transmitting traditions.
Nasai declares his opinion about Amr by saying: He is not reliable since
he has narrated denounced traditions from Salim.

Elsewhere, he says: He is weak in terms of transmitting traditions.

Jowzjani and Dar Qutni have made similar remarks about him.

Ibn Hibban says: Whoever looks at his narrations, becomes surprised; he
has narrated Mawdu’ah[^11] traditions from trustworthy narrators.

In the book of Al-Awsat, Bukhari also writes as such about him: His
narrations can neither be followed nor can they be considered authentic.

Ibn Ammar Mawseli says about Amr: He is weak in terms of transmitting
traditions.

Saji also makes a similar remark saying: He is weak in terms of
transmitting traditions for he has narrated denounced traditions from
Salim.[^12]

These were some of the remarks made by biographers concerning Amr ibn
Dinar. Hence, the conclusion is that the narration which he has
transmitted in connection with the subject matter is worthless. What is
more, Sufyan ibn Uyainah is also in the chain of these narrators.

Sufyan ibn Uyainah as Seen by Biographers
-----------------------------------------

Bayhaqi has also reported this narration from Hasan ibn Hasan, from his
noble father (S). Among the people in the chain of the transmission of
the tradition is Sufyan ibn Uyainah. What follows is what some
biographers have some commented on him:

Ibn Ammar says: I heard Yahya ibn Saeid Qattan saying: Bear witness that
Sufyan ibn Uyainah lost his mind in the year 197 (A.H.). Therefore
anyone who heard a narration from him in this year or in the following
years, cannot be trusted.

After quoting Ibn Ammar, while answering the question of Dhahabi, Ibn
Hajar Asqalani says: This has been reported by Dhahabi only because Ibn
Ammar is among the trusted intellectuals. There would be no problem, if
Yahya ibn Saeid heard it from a group of pilgrims in that year and
testified it simply because he trusted them due to the fact that there
were many people who reported the same.

I found a saying from Yahya ibn Saeid that can form a reason why Ibn
Ammar narrated from him, concerning Ibn Uyainah. While elaborating on
the biography of Ismail ibn Abi Saleh Muadhin, in Tarikh Baghdad, Abu
Sa‘ad Sam‘ani narrates, with a strong chain of transmission from Abdul
Rahman ibn Bushr ibn Hakam, that he heard Yahya ibn Saeid saying: I told
Ibn Uyainah: You have written traditions but when you narrate them these
days, you add and omit something from their chains of transmission!’

He said: You should obtain the traditions in the same way as you heard
them earlier, because I have become old now.

Abu Mu‘een Razi writes as part of the annotations which he has written
on Ahmad ibn Hanbal‘s Al-Iman: ―Haroon ibn Ma‘aruf told Ahmad: The
health condition of Ibn Uyainah had deteriorated during the last moments
of his life.‖ Sulayman ibn Harb also told him: Ibn Uyainah has made a
lot of mistakes in most of the narrations that he has reported from
Ayyub.[^13]

Waki’ bin Jarrah as Seen by Biographers
---------------------------------------

Another narrator who has transmitted this narration is Waki‘ bin Jarrah.
In his Mizan Al-E‟tidal, Dhahabi quotes Ahmad ibn Hanbal about Waki‘ bin
Jarrah‘s incredibleness and unreliability as a reporter because he used
to curse the predecessors, drink intoxicants and give false
verdicts.[^14]

Khatib Baghdadi narrates on the authority of Na‘eem ibn Hammad that he
had his dinner – or breakfast – with Waki‘. Waki said: Which one do you
like me to bring you, old men‘s special nabiz (wine of raisins or dates)
or young men‘s special nabiz?

I said: Do you speak of such things?

He said: I believe this is more halal (permissible) than the
Euphrates‘water.[^15]

Ibn Hajar reports from Ahmad that Waki‘ has erred in as many as five
hundred traditions.[^16]

He has reported from Muhammad b. Nasr Marwazi that in the last days of
his life, Waki‘ used to narrate traditions from his own mind changing
his sentences.[^17]

Ibn Juraij as Seen by Biographers
---------------------------------

Ibn Juraij too, is one the transmitters of this tradition. Regarding
him, Ibn Hajar writes: Malik says: ―When it comes to narrating a
tradition, Ibn Juraij is like someone collecting firewood in the
darkness.[^18]

Ibn Mu‘een says: ―The narrations that he has narrated from Zuhri are not
worthy of attention.

Ahmad says: When Ibn Juraij says: ‘Someone said,’ and ‘I am reporting,’
he is in fact narrating a denounced [munkar] narration.

Yahya ibn Saeid says: Whenever Ibn Juraij says that someone (or so and
so) said, it is like he is speaking out his own mind [he is not
reporting from anyone].

Ibn Madini says: I asked Yahya ibn Saeid concerning the narrations
reported by Ibn Juraij from Ata Khurasani.

He said: His narrations are weak.

I told Yahya: Ibn Juraij says that Ata Khurasani reported to him. Yahya
said: His words are not noteworthy; they are all weak. Ata only has
given him a book.

Ibn Hibban says: Ibn Juraij used to practice tadlis[^19] (concealing).

Dar Qutni says: Keep away from the concealing and deceit of Ibn Juraij
since his tadlis [concealing] is mean.[^20]

Concerning Ibn Juraij‘s personality, Dhahabi writes in his Mizan Al-
E‟tidal: He used to practice tadlis in narrating traditions.[^21]

In this regard, Ibn Hajar says: Ibn Juraij used to practice tadlis in
narrating narrations and used to narrate traditions by way of irsal (the
absence of the link between the successor and the Prophet).[^22]

Most importantly, Ahmad ibn Hanbal says about him: Some of the
narrations that Ibn Juraij has narrated by way of irsal are forged. It
was not important for him as to where he was narrating from.[^23]

Ibn Abi Malikah as Seen by Biographers
--------------------------------------

His name is Abdullah ibn Ubaidullah and it is enough to say about him
being untrustworthy that he was a special muadhin‟ (one who calls people
to prayer) and the judge of Ibn Zubair.[^24]

Now we shall once again look back at the tradition and see the narrators
in the chain of transmission of the tradition which he has reported.

In the narrations of Ibn Sa‘ad and the narrations that Ibn Hajar has
narrated from Ibn Abi Malikah in Al-Isabah, there is Waki‘ bin Jarrah
whom we became familiar with through the details provided above.

Husham ibn Sa’ad as Seen by Biographers
---------------------------------------

One of the narrators is Husham ibn Sa‘ad about whom Dhahabi writes in
his Mizan Al-E‟tidal:

Ahmad has said about him: Husham was not a memorizer.[^25] On the other
hand, Yahya ibn Qattan did not narrate from him.

Dhahabi further writes: On another occasion, Ahmad says: There is no
sound and authentic tradition among Husham‘s traditions.

Concerning him, Ibn Mu‘een says: His traditions are neither strong nor
ignorable.

Nesai has describes him as such: Husham is weak in narrating traditions.
In another statement, he says: Husham was not strong in terms of
narrating traditions.

Ibn Adi says about him: Although Husham was weak in terms of narrating
traditions, they are worth writing down and recording.

Ibn Hajar says about him: Dowri narrated from Ibn Mu‘een that Husham is
weak in terms of narrating traditions.

Commenting on him, Abu Hatim also says: The traditions of Husham are
recorded but they lack the capacity to be used for argumentation or
evidence-based reasoning.

Ibn Sa‘ad says about Husham: He used to narrate a lot of traditions but
he was generally considered to be weak; he was inclined towards
Shi‘ism.[^26]

Ibn Wahab as Seen by Biographers
--------------------------------

Ibn Wahab has appeared in the narration that Ibn Abd al-Barr and Ibn
Hajar have narrated with their own isnad[^27] from Aslam, the freed
slave of Umar. Now, we shall see who he is and what biographers have
said about him.

Ibn Wahab is that same Abdullah ibn Wahab Al-Qurashi who is Egyptian by
origin but was allied with the Quraish.

Ibn Adi and Dhahabi have recorded his name in Al-Kamil fi
Al-Dhu‟afa[^28] and Mizan Al-E‟tidal respectively.[^29]

Ibn Mu‘een has also said something about him with intent to reproach
him.[^30]

Ibn Sa‘ad says concerning Ibn Wahab: He used to practice tadlis.[^31]
That is, he concealed the truth about the isnad of the tradition to
create the impression that he heard the hadith in person.

Ahmad ibn Hanbal says about him: The traditions which Ibn Wahab has
narrated from Ibn Juraij need to be examined and contemplated upon (for
they may not be true).

Confirming what Ahmad ibn Hanbal has said about Ibn Wahab, Abu Awanah
says: Ahmad has said the truth, because Ibn Wahab has transmitted
reports which none other than him has reported.[^32]

Musa ibn Ali Lakhmi as Seen by Biographers
------------------------------------------

Khatib Baghdadi has reported this narration with his own isnad from
Laith ibn Sa‘ad, from Musa ibn Ali ibn Rabah Lakhmi, from his father,
from Uqbah ibn Amir Juhani who are all verifiable in terms of
trustworthiness and reliability.

According to Suyuti: Musa ibn Lakhmi was the governor of Egypt from 155
until 161 A.H.[^33]

Ibn Hajar says about him: Musa took the governorship of Egypt in the
year 161 AH.[^34]

Sam‘ani says concerning Musa Lakhmi: He was the governor of Egypt.[^35]

Ibn Mu‘een has commented on him by saying: Musa is not good in narrating
tradition.

Regarding Musa Lakhmi, Ibn Abd al-Barr writes: The narrations that Musa
has narrated alone are not strong.[^36]

Ali ibn Rabah Lakhmi as Seen by Biographers
-------------------------------------------

Ibn Hajar has studied Ali Lakhmi‘s life and made reference to certain
facts about him in his book in which he writes:

He came to Muawiyah as a representative.

He used to say: I shall not pardon whoever named me Ali‘ because my name
is Ulai‘.

He was treated with respect by Abdul Aziz (the son of Marwan and brother
of Abdul Malik who was for some time the governor of Egypt) until a time
when Abdul Aziz got angry at him and sent him to a battle in Africa. He
remained there in Africa until he died.[^37]

Uqbah ibn Amir Juhani as Seen by Biographers
--------------------------------------------

Uqbah has been criticized and considered unreliable by many biographers:

He was one of the governors and agents of Muawiyah ibn Abi Sufyan.
Sam‘ani says: Uqbah was present during the conquest of Egypt and he got
the measurement of that area. In the year 44, after the death of Utbah
son of Abu Sufyan, he served as the commander of Muawiyah‘s army in
Egypt. Then in the year 47, Muawiyah dispatched him for a naval
combat.[^38]

Ibn Hajar says about Uqbah: He was appointed governor of Egypt by
Muawiyah in the year 44.[^39]

Suyuti has also said the same thing about him.[^40]

He was the murderer – or one of the murderers – of Ammar ibn Yasir. In
this regard, Ibn Sa‘ad writes: Ammar (may Allah bless him) was killed at
the age of 91. He had been born before the Prophet of Allah (S). In the
Battle of Siffin, Ammar was confronted by three people; Uqbah ibn Amir
Juhani, Umar ibn Harith Khulani and Sharik ibn Salamah Muradi. When they
had surrounded him, Ammar told them: I swear by Allah, if you attack me
and push us back as far as to Hajar palm grove, I would still be sure
that we are on the right side and you are not.

It was then that they attacked and killed him. Some people thought that
Uqbah ibn Amir had killed Ammar.

He was the man who bate up Ammar by the order of Uthman.

After the above account of the conversation, Ibn Sa‘ad says: Uqbah is
the person who bate Ammar at the behest of Uthman bin Affan.[^41]

Based on the foregoing account, we do not see any need to examine the
biographies of Laith bin Sa‘ad and other people in Khatib Baghdadi‘s
chain of the transmitters of the narration.

Ata Khurasani as Seen by Biographers
------------------------------------

One of the narrators of this narration is Ata Khurasani. Bukhari has
mentioned him in the book titled Al-Dhuafa Al-Saghir.[^42]

Ibn Hibban has made mention of him in Al-Majruhin.[^43] Uqaili has
mentioned his name in his book titled Al-Dhuafa Al-Kabir.[^44]

Dhahabi has provided Ata Khurasani‘s biographical details in two of his
books namely Mizan Al-E’tidal and Al-Mughni fi Al-Dhuafa’.[^45]

Sam‘ani says about Ata Khurasani: He was a man of bad memory, had a lot
of mistakes, erred unknowingly and these narrations were transmitted
from him. When these problems were noted with his narrations, they were
no longer used as proofs and reasons as they were considered worthless
and unacceptable.[^46]

In addition, there is interruption and disconnection with this narration
of his because Ata was born in the year 50 and he died in the year 133
or 150 of the Islamic calendar. Therefore he must have narrated these
narrations from someone else whose name he has not mentioned.

Muhammad ibn Umar Waqidi as Seen by Biographers
-----------------------------------------------

One of the narrators who have reported this narration is Muhammad ibn
Umar Waqidi. Biographers have also said a lot about him:

Ahmad ibn Hanbal says: He is a great liar and a person who tampers with
narrations.

Bukhari and Abu Hatim say: Muhammad ibn Umar is an obsolete person.

Likewise Abu Hatim and Nesai have said: He used to forge narrations.

Ibn Rahwaih says: In my opinion, he is one of those who fabricated
narrations.

Ibn Mu‘een says: He is not a reliable and trustworthy person.

Dar Qutni says: He is characterized by weakness in terms of narrating
traditions.

Ibn Adi says: Traditions transmitted by him are not protected and
coherent; evil and complications arise from them.

Sam‘ani says: Much has been said about him.

Ibn Khallakan says: The biographers have weakened him in terms of
narrating traditions and they have said a lot concerning him.

Yafe’ei says: Prominent traditionists have labeled him as weak.

Dhahabi says: There is an all-out agreement about disregarding his
narrations.[^47]

Abdul Rahman ibn Zaid as Seen by Biographers
--------------------------------------------

Another person who has narrated this tradition is Abdul Rahman ibn Zaid.
Abu Talib says: Ahmad ibn Hanbal said concerning Abdul Rahman ibn Zaid:
He is weak in terms of narrating traditions.

Abdullah ibn Ahmad says: I heard my father disparaging Abdul Rahman and
saying: ―He narrates denounced traditions.

Dowri says: Ibn Mu‘een says about Abdul Rahman: His narrations are not
noteworthy.

Bukhari and Abu Hatim say about him: Ali ibn Madini has strongly
disparaged (weakened) him.

Abu Dawud says: Zaid ibn Aslam‘s children are all weak in terms of
narrating traditions.‖

Nesai and Abu Zur‘ah have said about Abdul Rahman: He is weak in terms
of narrating traditions.

Abu Hatim says: Abdul Rahman is not strong in reporting traditions.

Ibn Hibban comments on Abdul Rahman by saying: Owing to ignorance, he
used to narrate the traditions inversely to an extent that he narrated a
lot of mursal [lit. hurried] traditions as marfu [attributed] traditions
and a lot of the mawquf[^48] traditions with chains of transmission and
it is because of the same reason that his narrations are denounced and
disregarded.

Ibn Sa‘ad says: He has reported a lot of narrations, but surely he is
weak in terms of narrating traditions.

Ibn Khuzaymah says: Abdul Rahman is among the people who are of poor
memory due to which the scholars and experts never use his narrations to
present their argument.

Saji says: His narrations are munkar [denounced].

Tahawi says: His narrations are weak according to scholars of hadith.

Jowzjani says: Zaid‘s children are weak in terms of narrating
traditions.

Hakim and Abu Na‘eim say: Abdul Rahman used to narrate forged traditions
from his father.

Ibn Jauzi says: Biographers are unanimous about him being dhaif
[weak].[^49]

Zaid ibn Aslam as Seen by Biographers
-------------------------------------

Another narrator of this narration is Zaid ibn Aslam. Biographers have
written that he has transmitted narrations from Jabir ibn Abdullah
Ansari and Abu Hurairah, while Ibn Mu‘een has said: Zaid had never heard
any narration from either Jabir or Abu Hurairah.

Thus many narrations reported from other companions have been attributed
to him to make the impression that he himself has reported those
narrations from them whereas in fact he had never heard them.

Ibn Abd al-Barr has also said the same thing about him and Ibn Hajar has
quoted him and seen eye to eye with him in this regard. He says: Ibn Abd
al-Barr has said things in the introduction to his book Al-Tamhid which
show that Zaid practiced tadlis in narrating traditions.

Moreover, Ibn Umar has been quoted as having said: I do not know any
weaknesses in him other than the fact that he interpreted the Quran
based on his own personal opinion and he went to extremes in doing
this.[^50]

What was said above ignores the biographies of the narrators of this
tradition in between Ibn Abd al-Barr, Ibn Hajar and Ibn Wahab.

Zubair ibn Bakkar as Seen by Biographers
----------------------------------------

Ibn Hajar has reported this narration in his Al-Isabah from Zubair ibn
Bakkar. Zubair was the judge of the city of Makkah and was among the
people who disobeyed the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.) and the
Prophet‘s Household (a.s.) going astray. With that said about him, he
has also been disparaged and reproached by Sunnite scholars. Zubair died
in the year 256 A.H.

It has been reported from Ibn Abi Hatim that he saw Zubair but he did
not write any traditions from him.

Ahmad bin Ali Sulaymani has mentioned Zubair ibn Bakkar in Al- Dhu‟afa
(a book on weak and unreliable narrators) and has commented on him as
such: His narrations are denounced.

In addition, Ibn Hajar‘s narration from Zubair has been transmitted by
way of irsal (the absence of the link between the successor and the
Prophet (S)).[^51]

A Study of the Chains of Transmission of Narrations about Umm Kulthum’s Marriage to Umar
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What has been mentioned had to do with the main story which was, by way
of the biographical study, proven to be baseless. Now we shall review
the narrations concerning the marriage of Umm Kulthum after Umar‘s
death. Sunni sources have passed on narrations concerning Umm Kulthum‘s
life as per which the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.) married Umm
Kulthum to ‗Awn ibn Ja‘far. The main and original source of this
narration is Al-Durriyat Al-Tahirah which other sources such as Usd
Al-Ghabah, Al-Isabah, Dhakhair Al-Uqba etc. have cited from.

This narration from Hasan ibn Hasan has been reported through Ahmad ibn
Abdul Jabbar, Yunus ibn Bukair and Ibn Ishaq, from Hasan ibn Hasan. Of
course we have already examined the chain of the transmission of this
narration.

Dulabi has transmitted this narration with his own chain from Ibn Shahab
Zuhri, who was among the famous deviants going astray from the path of
the Prophet‘s household, peace be upon them.[^52]

In this study, we have skipped the biographies of other narrators and we
are just reminding you of one thing and that is, Ibn Muni‘ – who has
narrated from Zuhri – was the brother of Husham ibn Abdul Malik‘s
wife.[^53]

A Study of the Authenticity of the Narrations Concerning Umm Kulthum’s Death
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The narrations which are about Umm Kulthum‘s death have, for the most
part, been narrated by Ibn Sa‘ad in his Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra. We shall
now examine their chains of transmission and then their significations.

There is no doubt that most of the chains of the transmitters of this
narration end to Amir Shu‘abi. Hence, we shall now explore his
personality and try to figure out who he is.

### A Look at the Biography of ‘Amir Shu’abi

He was born during the last six years Umar‘s reign. He died after the
hundredth hegira year. His narrations are, therefore, mursal (i.e. the
chain of narrators is omitted). Shu‘abi was the judge of the Marwan
family.

He was amongst the deviants who opposed the Commander of the Faithful,
Ali (a.s.) to the extent that he went to Hajjaj and spoke ill of him
(a.s.) and cursed him. Hasan Basri was enraged witnessing this. He
advised him not to curse Ali (a.s.).[^54]

His grudge and enmity impelled him to say: ―Ali had never read the Quran
nor had he memorized it!‖ This unconsidered saying made some people
oppose him and reject what he had said about Ali (a.s.).[^55]

It was because of this enmity that he was led to fabricate narrations
such as the following:

Abu Bakr prayed on Fatima, the daughter of Allah‘s Prophet (S) and
recited four takbirs.

When Fatima passed away, Ali buried her at night and took Abu Bakr by
his arm helping him to offer prayer on Fatima.

The fact that this narration is fabricated is so obvious that Ibn Hajar
has been compelled to write under it: ―This narration is weak and
disconnected.[^56]

Likewise this enmity has made him go as far as to consider Harith
Hamedani as a liar (because he was Shiite) but he was objected to for
having leveled such an accusation against him.

Ibn Hajar says in this regard: While quoting Ibrahim about Shu‘abi
refuting Harith, Ibn Abd al-Barr writes in his book titled Al-Ilm: I
think Shu‘abi should be punished because he has refuted Harith and
called him a liar. This is because Harith had not been seen lying, and
his only crime was his excessive love of Ali, peace be upon him.[^57]

### A Look at the Biography of Ammar ibn Abi Ammar

In view of the fact that some of the narrations end with Ammar ibn Abi
Ammar, a quick glimpse into his biographical account reveals that a
number of the leaders of Jarh‘ (lit. to injure) and Ta‘dil‘ (lit. to
adjust)[^58] such as Shu‘abah ibn Hajjaj, Bukhari, Ibn Hibban and others
have reproached him.[^59]

### A Look at the Biography of Nafi’

Some of these narrations are connected to Nafi‘, the master of Ibn Umar.
Hence, we must have a short glimpse of his biography. To understand the
type of his character, it is enough to know that Abdullah ibn Umar had
said to Nafi‘:

‘Oh Nafi‘ fear Allah and do not ascribe lies to me in the same way as
Ikramah used to ascribe lies to Ibn Abbas.’

This saying of Ibn Umar about Nafi‘ and Ikramah, is famous.
Additionally, Ahmad ibn Hanbal‘s saying about Nafi‘ is worthy of notice.
He says: Nafi‘s narrations from Umar are cut-off and disconnected.[^60]

### A Look at the Biography of Abdullah Al-Bahi

Some of these narrations are connected to Abdullah Al-Bahi who is better
known as Abdullah ibn Yasar.

Concerning him Ibn Hajar says: Abdullah was the master Mus‘ab ibn
Zubair, therefore, his narrations are mursal’ (incompletely
transmitted).

Whenever this man narrates from Aisha, he says, ‘Aisha narrated to me.’
The scholars have refuted him and said that he narrates only from Urwah
ibn Zubair.

Ibn Abi Hatim has also made mention of Abdullah Al-Bahi in his Kitab
Al-Ilal reporting from his father that argument cannot be built on Al-
Bahi‘s narrations as they are disordered and shaky.[^61]

What has so far been said was about the chains of the transmitters and
documentation of the narrations regarding Umm Kulthum.

Of course, we have, for the sake of brevity, closed eyes to biographies
of other individuals who have transmitted this narration.

[^1]: We can divide the narrators of these narrations into two groups:
People who have been weakened (considered as unreliable) and accused of
lying by Sunni scholars; People who are though trusted by Sunni
scholars, their hatred and malice towards the Commander of the Faithful,
Ali (a.s.) was an obvious and indisputable historical reality. It is
pertinent to mention that, the narrations from this group of narrators –
especially those against Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) – are not acceptable
to Shia.

[^2]: Vide: Nafaht Al- Azhar, 2/27 and next.

[^3]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 2/94.

[^4]: Talkhis Al-Mustadrak, 3/142.

[^5]: Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, 7/102.

[^6]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 1/47.

[^7]: Murji‘ah was a group of Muslims who proclaimed: ―No sin is harmful
with faith

[^8]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 11/383.

[^9]: Meaning the traditions transmitted by him are worthless.

[^10]: Munkar literally means 'denounced'. If a narration which goes
against another authentic hadith is reported by a weak narrator, it is
known as munkar.

[^11]: Hadith Mawdu', a tradition fabricated by the narrator and falsely
ascribed to Prophet Muhammad (S) or his descendants, peace be upon them.

[^12]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 8/27.

[^13]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib: 4/108 and 109.

[^14]: Mizan Al-E‘tidal, 7/127.

[^15]: Tarikh Baghdad, 13/477.

[^16]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 11/111.

[^17]: Ibid, 11/114.

[^18]: This phrase is used in scientific books to make a sarcastic
remark about mixing up of the right and wrong and truth and falsehood.

[^19]: A person reports from his shaikh whom he met, what he did not
hear from him, or from a contemporary of his whom he did not meet, in
such a way as to create the impression that he heard the hadith in
person. A mudallis (one who practices tadlis) here usually uses the mode
("on the authority of") or ("he said") to conceal the truth about the
isnad.

[^20]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 6/354 and 355.

[^21]: Mizan Al-E‟tidal, 4/404.

[^22]: Taqrib Al-Tahdhib,1/617.

[^23]: Mizan Al-E‟tidal, 4/404.

[^24]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 5/272.

[^25]: According to some scholars, a memorizer in the science of diraya
(biography) and traditions is said to be a person who has memorized one
hundred traditions together with their chains of transmission.

[^26]: Dhahabi adds: ―Ibn Abd al-Barr has mentioned his name among the
people who are counted as weak but whose narrations are written, and
Ya‘qub ibn Sufyan has also considered him to be among the weak.

[^27]: The chain of authorities attesting to the historical authenticity
of a particular hadith.

[^28]: Al-Kamil fi Al-Dhu‟afa: 5/336.

[^29]: Mizan Al-E’tidal, 4/223.

[^30]: Al-Kamil fi Al-Dhu’afa, 5/336 and 337 and Mizan Al-E’tidal: 4/223
and 224.

[^31]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 6/67 and 68.

[^32]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 6/67 and 68.

[^33]: Husn Al-Muhadharah, 2/12.

[^34]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 10/323.

[^35]: A-Ansab 5/134.

[^36]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 10/323.

[^37]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 7/271 and 272.

[^38]: Al-Ansab, 2/134.

[^39]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 7/209 and 210.

[^40]: Husn Al- Muhadharah, 2/8.

[^41]: Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra, 3/196.

[^42]: Al- Dhuafa Al-Saghir, 178 and 179.

[^43]: The book of Al-Majruhin, 2/130 and 131.

[^44]: Al-Dhuafa Al-Kabir, 3/405.

[^45]: Mizan Al-E‟tidal, 5/92, Al-Mughni fi Al-Dhuafa, 2/59.

[^46]: Al-Ansab, 2/337.

[^47]: See: Mizan Al-E’tidal, 6/273, Al-Mughni fi Al-Dhuafa, 2/354,
Al-Kashif, 3/65, Mir’at) Al-Jinan, 2/36 in the happenings of the year
207, Al-Ansab, 5/567, Taqrib Al-Tahdhib, 2/117 and Tabaqat Al- Hifadh
(page 81), 149 and other sources.

[^48]: Mawquf refers to a narration attributed to a Companion, whether a
statement of that companion, an action or otherwise."

[^49]: You can find this matter and other sayings in the book of Tahdhib
Al-Tahdhib, 6/162 and 163.

[^50]: You can find these statements and also other sayings in Tahdhib
Al-Tahdhib volume 6 pages 162 and 163.

[^51]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 3/278.

[^52]: Refer to the treatise I have written concerning the narration
about Ali's proposal to Abu Jahl's daughter.

[^53]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 7/13.

[^54]: Ihya Al- Ulum, 2/346.

[^55]: Ghayat Al-Nihaya fi Tabaqat Al-Qura‟, 1/541.

[^56]: Al- Isabah, 8/267.

[^57]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 2/135.

[^58]: The phrase Al-jarh wa Al-ta'dil refers to a systematic approach
to critiquing a narrator's position as a narrator.

[^59]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 7/341, Taqrib Al-Tahdhib, 1/707.

[^60]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 10/370.

[^61]: Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, 6/82 and 83.


