Section 3: The Text of the Narrations and their Significations
==============================================================

Truth-seeker! Come with me so we may, after we have examined the
biographies of the narrators of this story, look into the text of the
narrations and their significations. This has to be done so that we
should, throughout the stages of the story, look from close the
malevolence and spiteful behaviors of the enemies of the household of
the Holy Prophet, peace be upon them.

We shall carry on this discussion from several dimensions.

The first dimension
-------------------

In the concocted story about Umm Kulthum‘s marriage to Umar, it has been
narrated that the reason given by Imam Ali (a.s.) for not consenting to
his daughter‘s marriage to Umar was the former‘s young age and that he
had kept her for the son of his brother, Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib.

It has been narrated in the narration by Ibn Sa‘ad that Ali (a.s.) said:
I have kept my daughters for the sons of Ja‘far.

In the narration of Hakim, the Imam has been quoted as having said: I
have prepared her for the son of my brother.

In another narration quoted by Ibn Sa‘ad, it is reported that the Imam
said: She is a young girl.‖

Of course Ibn Abd al-Barr, Ibn Athir and others have also reported the
same thing. In Bayhaqi‘s narration, it has been reported that the Imam
(a.s.) said: She is too young (for marriage).

So in these narrations, nothing else has been reported from the Imam
(a.s.), except that Umar returned again and said: Marry her to me; I
swear by Allah! There is no one in this world that….

According to these narrations, the Imam (a.s.) did not do anything
except that he sent her daughter to Umar so that he could see her….!

It has been added in some narration that the Imam (a.s.) ordered her to
be prepared and made-up. So that she was beautified and adorned and
then, the Imam (a.s.) sent her to Umar so that if he liked her and
agreed to marry, she would then become his wife!

It is surprising to see how the Imam‘s position changes in respect of
Umm Kulthum‘s marriage from total and decisive refusal to quick
acceptance, thus reversing and changing his mind so quickly?

Who believes this? At least this report is dubious and suspicious and
requires some thought and reflection. Certain facts are revealed to the
reader who goes through different narrations in this regard, facts that
they have attempted to continue to hide in some old works authored by
the scholars of hadith. Now we shall mention and elaborate on some of
those narrations:

Ibn Maghazali (d. 483) narrates through his own chain from Abdullah ibn
Umar that Umar ibn Khattab mounted the pulpit and said: Oh people! I
swear by Allah! What made me talk persistently to Ali ibn Abi Talib
concerning his daughter was the fact that I heard the Prophet of Allah
(S) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع (يوم القيامة) إلا سببي وصهري فإنهما يأتيان يوم
القيامة يشفعان لصاحبهما
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every lineage and means and grooming relationship will be severed on
the Day of Judgment except my lineage and grooming relationship with me,
and these two will come on the Day of Judgment and will intercede for
their owners.”[^1]

Through this narration, it becomes clear that the Companions and their
followers were surprised hearing this story and it was even talked about
in the city making Umar to go on the pulpit and explain to the public
his aim of this marriage proposal, and he swore that he had no other
reason for this act of his except that he had heard the Messenger of
Allah (S) about it and he was bent on doing that only for the same
reason.

The point to be taken into consideration is that there is no detail as
to Umar‘s persistence and insistence and it has not been explained why
he insisted on marrying Ali‘s daughter and what the latter‘s reaction
was to it.

In Khatib Baghdadi‘s narration, it has been reported that Umar ibn
Khattab proposed to Ali ibn Abi Talib for his daughter, who was from
Fatima (a.s.), and went to him time and again and said: O Abal Hassan,
What has made me to come to you time and again is only a saying that I
heard from the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) ….

It has been stated, in this narration, that Umar visited Ali (a.s.) many
a time.

According to some narrations, Umar used threat to intimidate Ali (a.s.)
in order to make him accept the offer. For instance, Ibn Sa‘ad reports:

When Imam Ali (a.s.) told Umar that Umm Kulthum was a young girl, Umar
said: I swear by Allah! That is not your excuse, but we know what your
intent is.

In the narration reported by Dulabi and Muhib Tabari from Ibn Ishaq, it
has been said that Umar said: I swear by Allah! That is not what you
want to do, it is only that you want to stop me from marrying Umm
Kulthum.[^2]

In some other narrations it has been clearly stated that Umar‘s whip
also played an important role in this incident. In the narration that
Dulabi has narrated through his own chain from Aslam, Umar‘s master, we
read: Umar proposed to Ali ibn Abi Talib for his daughter, Umm Kulthum,
and he discussed the matter with Abbas, Aqil and Hasan.

Aqil got angry and told Ali: The passage of days and months will only
add to your lack of insight and astuteness in your work. By Allah, if
you do this, such and such will happen.

Ali told Abbas: By Allah! He is not talking wishfully, but the whip of
Umar has impelled him to say what you are hearing.[^3]

On the other part, Abu Na‘eim Isfahani has also passed this report from
Zaid ibn Aslam, from his father, but he has omitted Umar‘s whip from the
report. Let‘s read this narration together:

Zaid ibn Aslam narrates from his father that Umar ibn Khattab called Ali
ibn Abi Talib to his place and had a private conversation with him.
Thereupon, Ali stood up and walked up to sufah[^4] and consulted Abbas,
Aqil and Hasan regarding Umm Kulthum‘s marriage to Umar.

Ali Said: ―Umar has informed me that he heard the Prophet of Allah (S)
say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means and lineage is severed on the Day of Judgment except my
lineage and means.”[^5]

Apart from being an underage girl and the fact that Umm Kulthum had been
kept for the son of Ja‘far, Ali (a.s.) also gave another reason for his
refusal where the Imam (a.s.) said: She has also two other guardians
apart from me.[^6]

What the Imam (a.s.) meant by those two were Imam Hasan and Hussain
(a.s.). According to the narrations, Ali discussed the matter with Hasan
and Hussain (a.s.), Aqil and Abbas.

This narration that has been reported from Aslam implies that Imam Hasan
(a.s.) kept silent about this proposal, and his silence has been taken
as a sign of his consent and approval.

In another narration it is reported that Hussain kept quiet and Hasan
started to talk. Thanking and praising Allah he said: Dear father, apart
from Umar, who else is more appropriate for marriage with Umm Kulthum?
He was a companion of the Prophet of Allah (S) and when the Prophet (S)
passed away, he was pleased with him. He has taken the caliphate and has
acted justly!

Ali said: You are right, my son, but I did not want to finish a task
without seeking the opinion of you two.[^7]

This narration contradicts the narration that Bayhaqi has reported from
Ibn Abi Malikah, from Hasan ibn Hasan. It is reported in that narration
that Ali told Hasan and Hussain: Marry her to your uncle.

They said: She is also like all other women and has the right to choose.
Thereupon, Ali stood up angrily but Hassan grabbed his cloth and said:
Dear father, we cannot afford to miss you.

Ali said: Then marry her to Umar.[^8]

Nevertheless, a group of people have intentionally and knowingly paid
heed to these forged narrations. Now, you should give careful attention
to the narrations. This same contradiction has been reported from Hasan
ibn Hassan in connection with the marriage of Umm Kulthum with Awn ibn
Ja‘far. In that narration, it is reported that when Umm Kulthum, the
daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib became a widow after the death of Umar ibn
Khattab, her brothers Hasan and Hussain, came over to her and said….[^9]

This is a long narration that contains shameful lies and laughable
statements.

The second dimension
--------------------

It has been stated before that as per many narrations the reason Imam
Ali (a.s.) opposed to Umm Kulthum's marriage to Umar was the fact that
she was young and underage. It is inferred from these narrations that
Umar did not accept what Ali (a.s.) put forth as excuse. That was why he
went to Ali time and again persistently asking him for his daughter‘s
hand in marriage. He went as far as to use threat to intimidate Ali
(a.s.) to accept the proposal as evidenced by narrations reported by
Dulabi and Muhib Tabari.

Ali said: "She is young."

Umar said: “I swear by Allah! That is not what you want to do, it is
only that you want to stop me from marrying Umm Kulthum. If what you say
is the case, send her to me…"[^10]

Since such actions are not in keeping with the reverence and respect of
the second caliph according to Sunni scholars, some narrators and hadith
experts have avoided to report on the opposition of the Commander of the
Faithful, Ali (a.s.) to his daughter's marriage to Umar and also the
latter's insistence, threat and refutation. One who refers to Khatib
Baghdadi's narration will readily admit this fact.

Third dimension
---------------

Ibn Sa‘ad narrates from Waqidi and others and says: Then Ali requested
for a piece of garment which he folded and told Umm Kulthum to take it
to Umar.

It has been stated in Muhib Tabari‘s report from Ibn Ishaq that Ali
called Umm Kulthum, gave her a piece of cloth and told her: Take this to
Umar…

This was done to make Umar see her. That was why when Umm Kulthum
returned to her father, she said: Umar did not unfold the cloth and he
did not look at anything except me.

Surely, such a behavior from the Muslim‘s caliph has been seen by some
Sunni scholars e.g. Sabt ibn Jauzi, as filthy and unpleasant. We shall
soon point out his words in this regard. It is for the same reason that
some narrators have not made reference to this topic in their
narrations.

Abu Bushr Dulabi has narrated as such: Ali called Umm Kulthum, who was a
little girl, and said to her: Go to Amirul Mu‘meneen and tell him: My
father sent you his greetings and said that he fulfilled the request
that you had made.

Khatib Baghdadi has also reported a similar narration: Umar proposed to
Ali for his daughter‘s hand in marriage and said: Marry her to me.

Ali said: I have kept her for the son of my brother, Abdullah ibn
Ja‘far.

Umar said: I swear by Allah, there is no man on the face of the earth
who seeks to achieve through her good companionship that which I seek to
achieve.

Thereupon, Ali married her to Umar and the latter went to the
Muhajireen.

The Fourth dimension
--------------------

In this story, filthy and unpalatable things have been quoted including
the following:

Ibn Sa‘ad narrates from Ibn Waqidi as such: Ali ordered Umm Kulthum to
be made up and adorned so that she could go to Umar. She was prepared
and adorned (as ordered by her father).

In the narration transmitted by Khatib Baghdadi from Uqbah bin Aamir, it
has been reported: She was adorned.

In the narration reported from Imam Baqir (a.s.) by Ibn Abd al-Barr and
others, the Imam has been quoted as having said: When Umm Kulthum went
to Umar, Umar pulled away the cloth from the calf of her leg!

Truly, these reports are at the highest level of obscenity. The question
is that, are the liars and forgers of these narrations not ashamed of
doing such obscene and loathsome acts? Their conducts are so mean and
despicable that even if a lay person hears them, he will readily despise
them and testify to their obscenity. Are they not ashamed of forging and
attributing such filthy stories to Imam Baqir, peace be upon him?

Indeed it is so shameless and it is owing to the same reason that we see
some Sunni narrators trying to misreport and concoct such stories in
order to prove their side of the story. Ibn Athir modifies the story and
makes it look a bit modest. He says: Umar placed his hand on her.

In this respect, Dulabi and Muhib Tabari have reported as such: Umar
took hold of her arm.

Elsewhere they say: Umar grabbed her and pulled her to his bosom! Others
such as Bayhaqi and Hakim Nishaburi have not narrated anything in this
regard. When reporting such narrations, Muhib Tabari says: Ibn Samman
has made a brief but implicit reference to this subject.‖ However, what
he has reported does not include anything from the reports transmitted
by the narrators whose names were mentioned above.[^11]

In addition, some of the narrators of this story, have stated clearly
that this story is a lie. Concerning this same issue, Sabt ibn Jauzi (d.
654) says:

My grandfather writes in Al-Muntazam that Ali sent Umm Kulthum to Umar
so that he could see her. Umar pulled away the cloth from the calf of
her leg and then touched her!

Sabt ibn Jauzi further says: In my opinion – I swear by Allah – this is
a despicable act; even if she were a slave girl, she would not have been
treated as such.[^12]

On the other hand, Muslims are unanimous about touching a non– mahram
lady being prohibited in Islam. The question is: Why are they
attributing all this to Umar?[^13]

The author says: ―I wish it was only touching. In Khatib Baghdadi‘s
narration, Umar is said to have even kissed and grabbed the calf of Umm
Kulthum‘s leg!

The fifth dimension
-------------------

The text of the narration narrated by Ibn Sa‘ad and others, in a way,
contains praise and congratulation. We have read that Umar told Meccan
migrants: Congratulate me and they congratulated him.[^14] In other
words, Umar requested a special congratulation and said: ―Congratulate
me on wives being considerate and empathetic and on having more
children.[^15]

It is pretty obvious that this kind of congratulation was customary in
the period of ignorance which, according to all Muslims, the Messenger
of Allah (S) had prohibited. In this regard, Ahmad ibn Hanbal narrates
through his own chain that Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Aqil says: ―Aqil
son of Talib had married, he came to us and we congratulated him in the
way which was customary during the period of ignorance. Aqil said: ―Calm
down! Do not congratulate me in such a manner because the Prophet of
Allah (S) prohibited us from congratulating in such a manner and he
said:

You should say ―May Allah bless you, may Allah make it blessed, may it
be blessed.[^16]

Since this statement of Umar depicts his ignorance and a lack of
knowledge about the things that the Messenger of Allah (S) prohibited as
well as indicates the fact that he wanted to revive the customs and
norms of the period of ignorance, some Sunni scholars have endeavored to
alter the text and manipulate it in a way which is consistent with their
own values and standards. That is why in Hakim‘s Al-Mustadrak, we read:
Umar went to the Muhajirin and said: Will you not congratulate me?

In Bayhaqi‘s Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, it is reported that Umar went to the
Muhajirin and they prayed and wished him well. Let‘s not forget that
Khatib Baghdadi has never narrated this incident in his Tarikh (history
book).

The sixth dimension
-------------------

Another aspect of this story that can be studied and examined is the
fruit of this false marriage; it has been reported in some narrations
that following the marriage of Umm Kulthum to Umar, she gave birth to a
son allegedly named Zaid. It has been reported by Sa'ad and other
narrators that she gave birth to bin Umar and Roqayyah, daughter of
Umar.

When it comes to the number of Umar's children, Nawavi narrates as such:
"Fatima and Zaid whose mother was Umm Kulthum…"[^17]

In another narration passed on by Ibn Qutaibah about the daughters of
the Commander of the Faithful, Ali, peace be upon him, it has been
stated as such: "Umm Kulthum gave birth to children whom I referred
to."[^18]

The seventh dimension
---------------------

One of the topics discussible in this fabricated story is Umm Kulthum's
marriage after Umar; it has been mentioned in many a number of
narrations that after Umar's death, Awn followed by Muhammad sons of
Ja'far married Umm Kulthum but the same people who have reported that
these two married Umm Kulthum have said: "Awn and Muhammad were killed
in the battle of Shushtar which took place during Umar's caliphate."

Ibn Abd Al-Barr says: "Awn son of Ja'far bin Abi Talib was born in the
time of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his descendants.

Awn's mother and that of his brothers Abdullah and Muhammad sons of
Ja'far bin Abi Talib was Asma daughter of Umais Khath'ami. Awn and his
brother, Muhammad, were martyred in the battle of Shushtar without them
leaving any children behind."[^19]

He further says: Muhammad bin Ja'far bin Abi Talib was born in the time
of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his descendants. He is
the one who, after the death of Umar bin Khattab, married Umm Kulthum
daughter of Ali bin Abi Talib… and was martyred in the battle of
Shushtar.[^20]

Concerning Awn bin Ja'far's martyrdom, Ibn Hajar says, "Awn bin Ja'far
was martyred in the battle of Shushtar which took place in the time of
Umar's caliphate. He did not have a child."[^21]

Ibn Athir has made a similar comment.[^22]

It is pertinent to mention that the battle took place during the
caliphate of Umar and historians have made clear reference to it in
their accounts.[^23]

In this passage quoted from Ibn Hajar, he has made mention of the same
fact. Indeed, a truth-seeking researcher is amazedly mindful of the
contradictory reports and narrations transmitted by these people.

The eighth dimension
--------------------

An important question in connection with the topic under discussion is:
Which one of the two brothers married Umm Kulthum, Awn bin Ja'far or
Muhammad bin Ja'far? Sunni traditions provide different accounts in this
regard. Ibn Sa'ad and Dar Qutni, as stated in Al-Isabah, says: "Awn died
during the lifetime of Umm Kulthum and his brother, Muhammad, contracted
marriage with her. Then, Muhammad died and Abdullah married her."

Ibn Sa‘ad narrates as such: Umm Kulthum said: I feel embarrassed towards
Asma bint Umais whose two sons died when they were with me, and I am
worried about the third one!‖ Umm Kulthum died when she was with
Abdullah ibn Ja‘far.[^24]

Ibn Qutaibah narrates this story differently; he says: When Umar was
killed, Muhammad ibn Ja‘far married Umm Kulthum and died during her
lifetime. Then Awn ibn Ja‘far married her and Umm Kulthum died when she
was married to him.[^25]

You can see that Ibn Qutaibah has mentioned the marriage of Muhammad ibn
Ja‘far with Umm Kulthum before the latter‘s marriage to Awn ibn Ja‘far
and she died when she was still married to Awn. Qutaibah has made no
mention of Abdullah bin Ja‘far.

Moreover, although Ibn Abd al-Barr has discussed Umm Kulthum‘s life, he
has not stated anything regarding her marriage after Umar‘s death, nor
has he said anything about her marriage to Awn. Nevertheless, when it
comes to Muhammad bin Ja‘far‘s life, he says: Muhammad ibn Ja‘far ibn
Abi Talib is the one who married Umm Kulthum, the daughter of Ali ibn
Abi Talib, after the death of Umar ibn Khattab.[^26]

The ninth dimension
-------------------

In this section, we shall now have a short look at the biography of
Abdullah ibn Ja‘far. He was the husband of the Wise Woman of Bani
Hashim, e.g. Zainab, the daughter of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali
(a.s.). Lady Zainab (S.A) used to live with her husband Abdullah until
his death after the tragedy of Karbala.

Concerning Zainab (a.s.), Ibn Sa‘ad writes: Zainab was the daughter of
Ali ibn Abi Talib. Abdullah ibn Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib married her. They
were blessed with four sons namely; Ali, Awn Akbar, Abbas and Muhammad
and a daughter named Umm Kulthum.

Ibn Sa‘ad goes on to report a narration from Muhammad ibn Ismail ibn
Fadik, he from Ibn Abi Ze‘b that he said: Abdul Rahman ibn Mahran told
me as such: Abdullah ibn Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib, married Zainab the
daughter of Ali. At the same time he had married Ali‘s widow, Laila Bint
Mas‘ud; both Zainab and Laila were his wives.[^27]

After counting the number of Abdullah‘s children, Nawavi says: Their
mother was Zainab, the daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib from Fatima, the
daughter of the Prophet of Allah, peace be upon him and his
descendants.[^28]

Concerning Hazrat Zainab (a.s.), Ibn Hajar writes: Zainab was the
daughter of Ali ibn Abi Talib ibn Abdul Muttalib. She was Hashemi and
the granddaughter of the Messenger of Allah (S) and her mother was
Fatima.

He further writes: Ibn Athir describes Zainab as such: She was born
during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (S). She was an
intelligent and a learned woman as well as a great orator. Her father
married her to the son of his brother, Abdullah ibn Ja‘far whereupon
they were blessed with children. When her brother Imam Husain (a.s.) was
killed, she was in his company but thereupon she was taken to Sham
(Syria). She was present in the court of Yazid son of Muawiyah. While in
the court, a man from Sham wanted to take her sister Fatima as a slave.
Addressing Yazid, Zainab delivered a speech that showed her intelligence
and strong heart. This story is well-known.[^29]

Therefore, if the woman who was called Umm Kulthum and who died during
the reign of Muawiyah is the very daughter of the Commander of the
Faithful, Ali (a.s.) and she Abdullah ibn Ja‘far‘s wife after the death
of Awn and Muhammad (as also reported in the narrations), then it
implies that Abdullah ibn Ja‘far married two sisters at the same time,
something which is prohibited and obscene in Islam.

That is why Ibn Sa‘ad has carefully reported saying: Umm Kulthum was
married to Muhammad ibn J‘afar. After his death, his brother Abdullah
ibn Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib married her following the death of her sister,
Zainab.

The tenth dimension
-------------------

Another question that comes up is, who prayed on Umm Kulthum after she
died? The answer to this question is found in the reported narrations,
but there are contradictions and discrepancies in those reports. The
contradictions are found even in the narrations reported by one
narrator.

When it comes to the prayer on Umm Kulthum and her son Zaid, Ibn Sa‘ad
narrates from Shu‘abi and Abdullah Al-Bahi as such: Ibn Umar prayed on
them.

He has also reported the same story from Ammar bin Abi Ammar and Nafi‘
who said: Saeid bin Aas prayed on them.

It is interesting to note that some historiographers have narrated from
Ammar ibn Abi Ammar that Sa‘ad ibn Abi Waqas prayed on them.[^30]

In any case, regardless of who offered the funeral prayer, the
narrations indicate the fact that she died during the reign of Muawiyah
because the narrations report that Imam Hasan and Imam Hussain (a.s.)
attended the prayer.

However, what is proven through historical accounts is that Umm Kulthum
and her sister Zainab (a.s.) were present in the event of Karbala. When
they were taken to Kufah as slaves, she delivered a famous speech in
that city the text of which has been recorded and narrated in many
books.

Ibn Taifur (d. 280) has narrated Umm Kulthum‘s speech in the book of
Balaghat Al-Nesa. Ibn Athir and a few other famous scholars and
traditionists have also mentioned it under the term ‗farth‟ in their
books such as Al-Nihayah, Lisan Al-Arab and Taj Al-Arus.

Perhaps it is because of the same reason that in Abu Dawud‘s narration
from Ammar ibn Abi Ammar, it is reported that Ammar ibn Abi Ammar said:
―I was present in the funeral prayer on Umm Kulthum and her son. Her
son‘s corpse was placed on the side where the Imam was standing to which
I objected but Ibn Abbas, Abu Saeid Khedri, Abu Qutadah and Abu Hurairah
were also in attendance. They said that the way they placed the corpses
in front of the prayer leader was customary.1

Ammar ibn Abi Ammar ends the story without mentioning the name of the
Imam who prayed on those two. Likewise, he has not clarified as to who
Umm Kulthum and her son were.

It has been reported again in Nesai‘s narrations from Ammar ibn Abi
Ammar that he said: I was attending the funeral prayer of a lady and a
son. The corpse of the son was placed in front on the side at which the
Imam was standing and that of the lady was placed behind him when the
prayer on those two was offered. Among the people in attendance were Abu
Saeid, Ibn Abbas, Qutadah and Abu Hurairah. I objected to the way they
had positioned the corpses and they said that it was customary.[^31]

Here Ammar ibn Abi Ammar has only reported that tradition and he has
failed to mention the Imam‘s name, and those of the two dead bodies on
which prayer was offered nor has he stated anything about the relation
between the woman and the boy.

Summary
-------

As you noticed, we presented and examined the chains of the transmission
of the narrations about the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.)
marrying his daughter to Umar ibn Khattab, and other narrations
pertaining to this great lady of the Household of the Prophet (S).
However, we could not find in them a chain of transmission that could be
relied upon or which an argument could be based upon. We also
investigated meticulously the text of the narration regarding Umm
Kulthum‘s marriage to Umar. We looked carefully into the sayings of
Sunni scholars and their reports on this topic. We found out that their
reports are contradictory and refuting each other.

Moreover, we also studied the significations of the narration and it was
made clear that the entire story is baseless and undocumented. The
probability here is that the forgers of this story sought to create a
virtue for Umar ibn Khattab who himself is one of the narrators of this
prophetic tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means and lineage will be severed on the Day of Judgment except
my means and my lineage.”

This tradition signifies the virtues and merits of the Prophet‘s
Household especially the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.). As also
stated by Manawi, even Hakim Nishaburi has narrated the above tradition
as a proof of the virtues of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali
(a.s.).[^32] That was why they forged the story of Umar‘s proposal to
the daughter of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.) in a bid to
include Umar amongst those who were linked to the Prophet (S) and to
finally establish a virtue for him. This is further evidenced by the
fact that a number of great Sunni traditionists have reported this
tradition from Umar without mentioning this story, and they have
reported the same tradition from other individuals without making
reference to Umar‘s marriage proposal and the relevant story.

Muttaqi Hindi has cited this tradition from different sources. As per
his report, the Messenger of Allah (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means and lineage will be severed on the Day of Judgment except
my means and my lineage.”

However, he writes under the tradition as such: Khatib Baghdadi and
Hakim Nishaburi have narrated this tradition from Umar. Likewise, Khatib
Baghdadi has narrated from Ibn Abbas and Miswar. He further says that
Ibn Asakir has also narrated from Ibn Umar that the Prophet of Allah,
peace be upon him and his descendants, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every lineage and grooming relation will be severed on the Day of
Judgment except my lineage and grooming relation.”[^33]

Ibn Maghazali has reported this tradition in Manaqib Al-Imam Ali ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.) that the Prophet of Allah (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means and lineage will be severed on the Day of Judgment except
my means and my lineage.”

Then he narrates this tradition through his own chain from Saeid ibn
Jubair, from Ibn Abbas, from Umar.[^34]

There is a narration similar to this one reported from the Holy Prophet
(S) about Fatima‘s position and rank. He has been quoted as having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاطمة بضعة مني
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Fatima is a part of my body…”

The Holy Prophet (S) has been quoted by different companions to have
said the above on a number of occasions. When some enemies of the
Prophet‘s Household (a.s.) saw the different aspects and implications of
this sound and authentic tradition which has been recorded in their own
Sihah, they deliberately embarked on fabricating the story of the
Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.) making a marriage proposal to Abu
Jahl‘s daughter, something which they linked to the above tradition to
prove their own side of the story.[^35] Thus, both of the traditions
relate to marriage proposals, one of them about Umar asking the daughter
of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.) for her hand in marriage
and the other is about Ali (a.s.) proposing marriage to Abu Jahl‘s
daughter!

Umar‘s marriage to Umm Kulthum would make him a groom of Fatima Zahra
(S.A) while Ali‘s marriage to Abu Jahl‘s daughter would hurt Fatima and
injure her feeling! As stated earlier, Umar‘s proposal was owing to the
fact that he had heard the Prophet of Allah (S) say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كل سبب ونسب منقطع يوم القيامة إلا سببي ونسبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every means and lineage will be severed on the Day of Judgment except
my means and my lineage.”

Ali‘s proposal was opposed by the Messenger of Allah (S) and he was
offended to the extent that he, peace be upon him, wanted Ali to divorce
his daughter!

In short, given the outcome of the research conducted into this story,
it is very clear that the entire story is fabricated and outrageous.

When it comes to the narrators of this story, they are Umar‘s slave,
Qadhi ibn Zubair, the killer of Ammar Yasir and the clerics who were
affiliated to the Ummayad family.

The narrators in the chain of transmission are a few liars, fabricators,
weak and mudallis (one who practices tadlis) in terms reporting
traditions.

Most probably, the main reason for fabricating this story is what we
just mentioned as evidenced by the fact that some of the narrators are
involved in the transmission of both of the stories.

### One Question

Based on what was said, a question arises as to whether or not there is
any probability or an occasion to which the narrations regarding this
story could be applied after assuming their authenticity and the
reliability of the chains of their transmission notwithstanding the fact
that this story is famous among Sunni Muslims and there are few shadh
(irregular) narrations reported in this connection through Shiite
channels as well.

### Answer

In reply to this question, we must say that there is no doubt that the
statements and narrations reported in this regard contain allegations
and claims which are not permissible to accept under any circumstances.
For instance, go through the following narration that they have related:

Ali sent Umm Kulthum to Umar so that he could see her. He also ordered
that she be adorned and beautified! There are many other such narrations
which we do not mention here for the sake of brevity.

Obviously the reason these narrations are invalid and false is quite
clear. Another instance is the story of the death of Umm Kulthum during
the time of Muawiyah as reported by Sunni narrators. The report that she
died during Muawiyah‘s reign is untrue because she was present in the
event of Karbala and there are reports confirming her presence in the
incidents that took place on the Day of Ashura.

Therefore, that lady who died on the same day as Zaid, and on whom a
certain individual prayed was one of Umar‘s wives with her name being
either Umm Kulthum (as she had wives whose names or nicknames were Umm
Kulthum) or she was someone bearing a name other than Umm Kulthum.[^36]

Assuming the authenticity of their narrations and their isnad [chains of
transmission], this probability is reaffirmed by the narrations of Abu
Dawud, Nesai and others. Thus, there is no reliable report to prove that
Umm Kulthum, the daughter of the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (a.s.)
bore Umar a child called Zaid. That is because there is no evidence
apart from the narrations that were proved to be worthless and
fabricated.

Likewise, there is no report or evidence to prove that she gave birth to
a daughter, not to mention the fact that the narrators themselves have
discrepant views as to the story itself as well as the name of that
daughter.

It is further reaffirmed by Muslim scholars who have said: When Umar
died, Umm Kulthum was still young and immature. One of those scholars is
Sheikh Abu Muhammad Nawbakhti who is one of the early Shiite scholars.
In his Al-Imamah, he writes: Umm Kulthum was young and juvenile and Umar
died before consummating marriage with her.[^37]

Likewise, Sheikh Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Abdul Baqi Zarqani Maliki
(d.1122)[^38] while elaborating on the meaning of kinship of the holy
Prophet (S) makes reference to the same point saying: Kinship refers to
people who are related to the closest grandfather of the Messenger of
Allah (S) i.e. Abdul Muttalib because the Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من صنع إلى أحد من ولد عبد المطلب يدا فلم يكافئه بها في الدنيا فعلي
مكافاته إذا لقيتني
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whoever treats well any of the children of Abdul Muttalib and does him
a favor and he does not not make up for the favor in this world, it will
be necessary upon me to make it up on the Day of Judgment when he shall
meet me.”

Tabarani has reported this tradition in Al-Mu’ujam Al-Awsat. Hence,
those who are related to people before Abdul Muttalib like the children
of Abdul Manaf, or the people who are in the same level related to Abdul
Manaf, for example the children of Hashim, the brothers of Abdul
Muttalib or the people related to him but who did not see him or
associated with him, are excluded from his kinship.

It seems that kinship does not refer to the men and women who were in
the company of the Messenger of Allah (S) and did not see him; but it
refers to Ali and his children; Hassan, Hussain, Mohassin and Umm
Kulthum, the wife of the second caliph, Umar ibn Khattab.

In fact, Umar died before Umm Kulthum reached the age of puberty and Awn
ibn Ja‘far married her. He also departed and she got married to his
brother, Muhammad. He too died and she got married to Abdullah, the
brother of those two. Umm Kulthum died in his house and did not bear a
child with any of those three, except Muhammad, for whom she bore a
daughter who died, while still a child. Thus, Umm Kulthum does not have
any children or descendents as the author mentioned in the second
section of this book.[^39]

Furthermore, assuming that Umar married Umm Kulthum, the fact that Umm
Kulthum did not bear a child is reaffirmed by Umar who stressed that he
did not want anything by making a marriage proposal but to be the son-
in-law of Holy Prophet (S). He insisted that he wanted to be one of the
members of the Prophet‘s household (a.s.). He declared that he did not
seek to gain anything except relationship with the Messenger of Allah
through marriage with Umm Kulthum.

[^1]: Manaqib Al-Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), Ibn Maghazali, 134 &
135.

[^2]: Dhakhair Al-Uqba fi Manaqib Dhawi Al-Qurba, 286.

[^3]: Al-Durriyat Al-Tahirah, 160.

[^4]: A raised place with a roof made of leaves of date-palm trees and
it is a resting place for the poor and miserable.

[^5]: Hiliyat Al-Awliya‟, 2/42.

[^6]: Dhakhair Al-Uqba, 289.

[^7]: Dhakhair Al-Uqba, 289.

[^8]: Al-Sunan Al- Kubra, 7/185 number 13660.

[^9]: Al-Durriyat Al-Tahirah, 162 and 163; Dhakhair Al-Uqba, 290.

[^10]: Al-Durriyat Al-Tahirah, 157 and 158; Dhakhair Al-Uqba, 286.

[^11]: Refer to: Dhakhair Al-Uqba, 289.

[^12]: It is worth mentioning that in the Islamic laws (of both the
Sunni and Shia sects) specific laws on how to treat a slave have been
discussed which are not comparable with the laws regarding a free woman.
In any case, the meanness and obscenity of Umar‘s action remains in
place and what Ibn Jauzi Hanafi means from the above statement refers to
the very point.

[^13]: Tadhkirat Al-Khawas, 288 and 289.

[^14]: Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra, 8/339, Kanzul Ummal, 13/269 number 37576,
Al-Isti‟ab, 4/509, Usd Al- Ghabah, 7/378, Al-Isabah, 8/465.

[^15]: Dhakhair Al-Uqba, 287. To understand the meaning of this kind of
congratulation, refer to Lisan Al-Arab and other books in Arabic grammar
to find the word ―Rifa‘a‖.

[^16]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, 4/484. Refer to Wasail Al-Shia, 14/183
tradition number 25550.

[^17]: Tahzib Al-Asma wa Al-Lughat, 2/334.

[^18]: Al-Ma'aref, 122.

[^19]: Al-Isti'ab, 3/315.

[^20]: Al-Isti'ab, 3/423 and 424.

[^21]: Al-Isabah, 4, 4/ 619.

[^22]: Usd Al-Ghabah, 4, 302.

[^23]: Tarikh Tabari, 3/ 174, Al-Kamil fi Al-Tarikh, 2/550.

[^24]: Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra: 8/338.

[^25]: Al Ma‟arif, 122.

[^26]: Al-Isti‟b, 3/424.

[^27]: Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra, 8/340.

[^28]: Tahdhib Al-Asma, Wa Lughat, 1/249.

[^29]: Al-Isabah, 8/166 and 167.

[^30]: Tarikh Al-Khamis, 2/285.

[^31]: Sunan Al-Nesai, 4/374 number 1976.

[^32]: Faidh Al- Qadir, 5/27.

[^33]: Kanzul Ummal, 11/183 number 31911 & 31912

[^34]: Manaqib Al-Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), 133 & 134.

[^35]: Refer to the thesis that we have written in this regard.

[^36]: Ifham Al-A‟ada Wa Al- Khusum, 2/72 – 212.

[^37]: Bihar Al-Anwar, 42/91.

[^38]: His biography can be read in Silk Al- DurarfFi A‟ayan Al- Qarn
Al-Thani Ashar, 4/32

[^39]: Sharh Al-Mawahib Al-Ladoniyyah, 7/9 and 10, theme: Mabhath
Qarabat Al-Nabi (S).


