Bibliography
============

Ihya Uloom Al-Deen, Abu Hamed Ghazzali, Dar Al-Ma‘refah, Beirut,
Lebanon.

Al-Isti’ab, Ibn Abd Al-Barr, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon,
first edition, 1415 AH.

Usd Al-Ghabah, Ibn Athir, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon.

Al-Isabah, Ibn Hajar Asqalani, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon,
first edition, 1415 AH.

Ifham Al-A‟da wa Al-Khusum, Allamah Sayed Nasir Hussain Musavi Hindi,
New Naynaw Library.

Al-Ansab, Sam‟ani, Dar Al-Fikr Publications, Beirut, Lebanon, first
edition, 1408 AH.

Behar Al-Anwar, Muhammad Baqir Majlisi, Dar Al-Ihya Al-Turath Al-Arabi,
Beirut, Lebanon, third edition, 1403 AH.

Tarikh Baghdad, Khatib Baghdadi, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut,
Lebanon, first edition, 1417 AH.

Tarikh Al-Khamis, Diyar Bakri, Dar Sader Publication‘s, Lebanon.

Tarikh Al-Tabari, Tabari, Uroomiyah Bookstall Publications, Qom, Iran

Tazkirat Al-Khawas, Sibt bin Jawzi, Ahlul-Bayt (a.s.) Institute, Beirut,
Lebanon, 1401 AH.

Taqrib Al-Tahzib, Ibn Hajar Asqalani, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut,
Lebanon, second edition, 1415 AH.

Talkhis Al-Mustadrak, Dhahabi, Dar Al-Ma‘refah, Beirut, Lebanon.

Tahzib Al-Asma wa Al-Lughat, Nawavi, Dar Al-Fikr, Beirut, Lebanon, first
edtion, 1416.

Tahzib Al-Tahzib, Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalani, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut,
Lebanon, first edition, 1415 AH.

Husn Al-Muhadherah, Suyuti, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon,
first edition, 1418 AH.

Hilyat Al-Awlia, Abu Na‘eim Isfahani, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut,
Lebanon, first edtion, 1418 AH.

Dhakahir Al-Uqba, Muhibbuddin Tabari, Al-Sahabah Library, Jeddah, Al-
Sharqiyah, Al-Tabe‘ein Library, Cairo, first edition, 1415 AH.

Al-Durriat Al-Tahira, Muhammad bin Ahmad Ansari, Razi Dulabi, researched
by Sayed Muhammad Jawad Husseini Jalali, Islamic Publications Institute,
Qom, Iran, 1407 AH.

Silk Al-Durar fi A‟yan Al-Qar Al-Thani Ashar, Muradi, Al-Muthanna
Library, Baghdad Iraq.

Sunan Abi Dawood, Abi Dawood, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon,
first edition, 1416 AH.

Al-Sunan Al-Kubra, Bayhaqi, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon,
second edition, 1414 AH.

Sunan Al-Nesai, Nesai, with annotation by Suyuti and Marginal Notes by
Sindi, Dar Al-Ma‘refah, Beirut, Lebanon, third edition, 1414 AH.

Sharh Al-Mawahib Al-Laduniyah, Qastalani, Dar Al-Ma‘refah, Beirut,
Lebanon, 1414 AH.

Al-Dhu‟afa Al-Kabir, Uqaili, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon.

Tabaqat Al-Huffadh, Suyuti, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon,
second edition, 1414 AH.

Al-Tabaqat Al-Kubra, Ibn Sa‘ad, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon,
second edition, 1418 AH.

Ghayat Al-Nehayah fi Tabaqat Al-Qura, Jazari Shafe‘i, Khanji Library,
Egypt, 1351 AH.

Faidh Al-Qadir, Manawi, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon, first
edition, 1415 AH.

Al-Kashif, Dhahabi, Dar Al-Fikr, Beirut, Lebanon, first edition, 1418
AH.

Al-Kafi, Muhammad bin Ya‘qub Kulayani, Dar Sa‘b, Dar Al-Ta‘aruf
Publication‘s, Beirut, Lebanon, third edition, 1401 AH.

Al-Kamil, Ibn Athir, Dar Al-Fikr, Beirut, Lebanon, 1399.

Al-Kamil fi Dhu‟afa Al-Rijal, Ibn Adi, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut,
Lebanon, Beirut, first edition, 1418 AH.

Kitb Al-Majruhin, Ibn Hibban, Dar Al-Ma‘refah, Beirut, Lebanon, 1412 AH.

Kanzul Ummal, Muttaqi Hindi, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon,
first edition, 1419 AH.

Lisan Al-Arab, Ibn Madhur Afriqi, Beirut, Lebanon.

Turathuna Magazine, Aalulbayt (a.s.) Institute for Reviving (Islamic)
Legacy, Qom, Iran.

Majma‟ Al-Zawaed wa Manba‟ Al-Fawaed, Haythami, Dar Al-Fikr, Beirut,
Lebanon, 1412.

Mukhtasar Tarikh Dimashq, Ibn Mandhur, Dar Al-Fikr, Syria, Damascus,
first edition, 1404 AH.

Mer‟at Al-Jenan, Yafe‘ei, Dar Al-Kotob Al-Islamiyah, Cairo, Egypt,
second edition, 1413.

Al-Mustadrak, Hakim Nishaburi, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon,
first edition, 1411 AH.

Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, Ahmad b. Hanbal, Dar Ihya Al-Turath Al-Arabi,
Beirut, Lebanon, third edition, 1415 AH.

Al-Ma‟aref, Ibn Qutaibah, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon, first
edition, 1407 AH.

Ma‟refat Al-Sahabah, Abu Na‘eim Isfahani, Beirut, Lebanon.

Al-Mughni fi Al-Dhu‟afa, Dhahabi, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut,
Lebanon, first edition, 1418 AH.

Al-Manqib, Ibn Maghazali, Dar Al-Adhwa, Beirut, Lebanon, second edition,
1214 AH.

Man La Yahdhuruhu Al-Faqih, Shaykh Saduq, Dar Sa‘b, Dar Al-Ta‘aruf,
Beirut, Lebanon, 1401 AH.

Mizan Al-E‟tidal, Dhahabi, Da Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah, Beirut, Lebanon,
first edition, 1416.

Wasail Al-Shi‘ah, Sheikh Hurr Amili, Dar Ihya Al-Turath Al-Arabi,
Beirut, Lebanon, fifth edition, 1403 AH.


