Publisher's Note
================

Studying the life and *sira* of the Infallible ones (as) is incumbent
upon every Muslim, as their life is a full-length mirror reflecting the
Islamic thought and they are considered as the symbols of the purified
Prophetic Sunna. First of all, it is to be noted that both the Prophet
Muhammad (S) and the Imams (as) have all enjoyed Divine and human
virtues and excellences. From this perspective, there is no difference
between them; and if a virtue is more saliently symbolized in one of
them, it is due to the circumstances and conditions that the Imam has
been situated in.

The Imams (as), themselves, say: “Whatever we have is from the Holy
Prophet (S) and whatever the Holy Prophet (S) has is from Allah
(S.W.T.).”

In *Surat al-Shura,* Allah (S.W.T.) says to His Apostle:

> قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
> الْقُرْبَىٰ ۗ وَمَنْ يَقْتَرِفْ حَسَنَةً نَزِدْ لَهُ فِيهَا حُسْنًا ۚ
> إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ شَكُورٌ {23}

***﴾Say, “I do not ask you any reward for it except love of [my]
relatives.” Whoever performs a good deed, We shall enhance for him its
goodness. Indeed Allah is All-forgiving, All-appreciative. ﴿(Q:
42/23)***

It may be said that over one fourth of the Holy Qur’an concerns the
values which can be found in the Prophet (S.A.) and his pure and noble
progeny, all enjoying a sublime status before God Almighty. The Holy
Prophet (S.A.) states: “The parable of my Ahl al-Bayt among you is that
of the Ark of Noah; whoever boards it is safe; and whoever remains
behind, is drowned.”[^1] He is also quoted as saying: “The parable of my
Ahl al-Bayt is that of the Remission Gate (*Bab Hitta*) among the
Israelites, whoever enters it is forgiven.”[^2]

Accordingly, the Shi‘as believe that the Prophetic Mission is sealed
with the Prophethood of Muhammad (S); however, the *wilaya*, which is
the continuation of Prophetic Mission, would live on and sustain through
holding on fast to the twelve Infallible Imams (as). Besides, continuity
of Imamate and *wilaya* is secured with the existence of Imam al-Mahdi
(as), who will one day fill the world with justice and equity with his
reappearance.

The Islamic Research Foundation of Astan Quds Razavi is honored to
undertake the promotion of the thoughts and words of the Infallible
Imams (as), which represent the pure Islamic intellectual thought.
Accordingly, with the translation of *Chahardah Akhtar-i* *Tabnak* into
English (*The Fourteen Luminaries of Islam*) and publishing it in a
single volume as well as fourteen separate volumes, this Foundation has
tried to take a step, however small, toward the introduction of these
luminary figures and the dissemination of Islamic and human values.

*Chahardah Akhtar-i* *Tabnak*, originally written by the late eminent
researcher Ahmad Ahmadi Birjandi (a member of the Islamic Research
Foundation), is such a valuable and concise work that has managed to
address a great number of seekers after perfection and has been
published several times. Being decided to be published in English;
however, the Persian version was assigned to the IRF Department of
History of Islam to be revised and then handed over to the Translation
Department to be rendered into English.

It is hoped that this English translation may pave the way for further
familiarization of the interested readers with the profound and
prominent Islamic culture.

Islamic Research Foundation of Astan Quds Razavi

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, 23/124.

[^2]: Ibid, 23/119.


