The Twelfth Infallible, Hadhrat Imam ‘Ali al-Naqi, al-Hadi, The Tenth Imam
==========================================================================

Imam ‘Ali al-Naqi (as), the tenth Imam of the Shi‘ites, has reportedly
been born on mid-Dhu'l Hijja, 212/March 6, 828. His father was Imam
Muhammad al-Taqi, Jawad al-A’imma (as) and his mother was Samana, a
righteous and chaste woman who had been divinely commissioned to bring
up and train him for the sublime position of *Wilayat* and Imamate; a
mission she carried out most diligently and with the highest efficiency.

His name was ‘Ali, his patronymic was Abu al-Hasan, and his popular
nicknames were Hadi and Naqi. Upon his noble father's martyrdom, Imam
al-Hadi (as) attained the position of Imamate which lasted 33 years.
During this time, Imam ‘Ali al-Naqi (as) took high steps in
disseminating the Islamic precepts and teachings, and introducing the
Ja‘fari school as well as training honorable disciples and companions.

Not only was the tenth Imam (as) involved in teaching and guarding the
Islamic culture in Medina and never retreated from familiarization of
people with religious truths, but he was untiringly engaged in
encouraging the good and prohibiting the evil and in secret and open
struggled with the tyrannical caliph of his time, i.e., the Abbasid
Mutawakkil.

That was why ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar, the governor of Medina wrote a letter
to Mutawakkil, the caliph of the time, replete with animosity due to his
chronic enmity and innate malevolence, maligning and abusing the Holy
Imam and accusing him of conspiracy and even tyranny; the accusations
being more fit to Mutawakkil, which were unjustly and tyrannically made
against the Infallible Imam (as).

This was all because the charisma of the Holy Imam (as) and his
*Wilayat*, erudition, and piety brought people from all over the world
of Islam to Medina; however the narrow-minded and debased world-lovers
who were seeking physical rule and worldly-oriented governance, were
unable to see the Imam (as)'s spiritual splendor. “The historians and
scholars of *hadith* are quoted as saying that the prayer leaders of the
two Holy Mosques (of Mecca and Medina), installed by the caliphate,
wrote to the Abbasid Mutawakkil: If you still need Mecca and Medina,
expel ‘Ali b. Muhammad (Hadi) from this land, which has mostly been
dominated and subdued by him.”[^1]

This letter and the one written by the ruler of Medina indicate the
spiritual influence that Imam Hadi (as) had in the strong opposition to
the tyrannical Abbasid ruling system.

Since the time of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) and Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq
(a.s.) and the formation of the four-thousand-seat seminary of that
fruitful era, many disciples have been trained in the field of Islam, of
whom each had been a torch-bearer of Ja‘fari jurisprudence and different
knowledge fields of that time, thus guarding generation by generation
the foundations of Ja‘fari academy and the Islamic culture position.

Since the era of Imam al-Ridha (as), the Shi‘ite Muslims have somehow
enjoyed peace of mind concerning the promulgation of Ja‘fari Islamic
knowledge (Ma‘arif). However, if this invaluable opportunity had not
come up in the era of Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (as), it would be unknown
where this Ja‘fari Ma‘arif would wind up.

Particularly that, since the time of Imam Musa b. Ja‘far (as)’s
imprisonment, such widespread chances for teaching and dissemination of
Islamic knowledge did not come up as they should have for our noble
Imams (as) who were under restrictions and control of the tyrannical
rulers.

In these years, however, lovers of this school and companions and
adherents of the pure Imams (as) would go to see their dignified Imams
(as) by any means possible in order to solve their religious problems,
to receive instructions and take measures, to strengthen the opposition
and to achieve their goal, to break through the caliphate's superficial
power, and would benefit from the fountainhead of their knowledge and
insight.[^2]

Thus the tyrannical ruling system and their functionaries were
constantly scared of the Imam (as)'s cultural and revolutionary
position. This endless fear is reflected in the letter written by the
governor of Medina and the like.

The ruling system found out little by little that the two holy
sanctuaries (Mecca and Medina) might fall under the obedience of Imam
(as) and rebel against the caliph of the time. Therefore, a series of
letters started to be written and sent to Mutawakkil Abbasi until he
ordered Imam al-Hadi (as) to be transferred from Medina to Samarra, the
seat of the caliphate.

Mutawakkil commanded his special chamberlain to incarcerate Imam al-Hadi
(as) near himself and then to detain him in the quarter of ‘Askar for
several years so that his life could remain under surveillance of the
caliphate.

Some noble scholars have reported the length of this imprisonment and
surveillance to be twenty years. When Imam al-Hadi (as) arrived in
Samarra accompanied by Yahya b. Harthama, who had been commissioned by
Mutawakkil to carry out this mission, the governor of Baghdad, Ishaq b.
Ibrahim Tahiri, learned about the Imam (as)'s coming to Baghdad and told
Harthama: “Man! This Imam al-Hadi is the son of the Apostle of Allah (S)
and you know that Mutawakkil has no liking for him, so if he kills him,
the Prophet (S) will call you to account.” Yahya replied, “I swear to
Allah that Mutawakkil does not have a bad attitude toward him”.
Similarly, in Samarra, Mutawakkil had a Turk functionary called Wasif
Turki, who also advised Yahya to be tolerant and merciful to the Imam
(as).

It was this Wasif who informed Mutawakkil of the arrival of Imam al-Hadi
(as). He trembled at the news of Imam al-Hadi (as)'s arrival and was
overwhelmed by an inexplicable fear.

This event, narrated by Yahya b. Harthama, who was commissioned to
arrest Imam al-Hadi (as) clearly illustrates the spiritual magnificence
and influence of the Imam (as) on Mutawakkil and his courtiers; and it
also shows deep apprehension that the tyrannical regime of Baghdad and
Samarra felt of the Imam (as)'s situation and his specific position
among his adherents and Shi‘ites.

Anyway when the Imam (as) entered the house that had already been
allotted to him, Mutawakkil asked Yahya: “How was ‘Ali b. Muhammad
living in Medina?” Yahya replied: “I saw nothing in him but good
character, healthy personality, pious manners, virtuousness,
indifference to the world, and perseverance in going to the mosque and
performing prayers and fasting. And when I inspected his house, as you
had instructed, I found nothing but the Holy Qur’an and scholarly
books.” Mutawakkil became happy to hear this and felt relieved.

Although Mutawakkil was an obstinate enemy of Imam ‘Ali (as)'s
household, who had the resplendent tomb of Imam al-Husayn (as)
inundated, banned the pilgrims from performing pilgrimage at his holy
shrine, and revived the enmity of Yazid and his followers against the
household of the Holy Prophet (S), he was always fearful and humble
before Imam al-Hadi (as)'s majesty.

Chroniclers have reported: Mutawakkil's mother heartily believed in Imam
‘Ali al-Naqi (as). Once Mutawakkil fell sick with an injury and the
physicians were unable to cure him. His mother made a vow that if the
caliph recovered; she would send plenty of property to Imam al-Hadi (as)
as gift.

Then, she ordered Fath b. Khaqan, one of the courtiers of Mutawakkil, to
send someone to ‘Ali b. Muhammad (as) to ask for her son's remedy. Fath
dispatched someone to his Holiness. Imam al-Hadi (as) said: “Put such
and such drug on his wound, he will get well with the consent of Allah.
They did so, and the wound got healed.

Mutawakkil's mother sent a sealed leather bag containing one thousand
*dinar*s to Imam al-Hadi (as). A few days after this event, one of the
adversaries of the Imam (as) informed Mutawakkil that a considerable
amount of *dinar*s had been found in the house of ‘Ali b. Muhammad
al-Naqi (as). Mutawakkil sent Sa‘id Hajib to his Holiness' house to see
into the matter.

This man climbed onto the roof of the Imam's (as) house. Upon seeing
him, his Holiness ordered him to halt where he was until a lantern was
brought, lest he would be injured. The man said: “When the lantern was
brought I noticed that Imam al-Hadi (as) was sitting on his prayer rug
engaged in saying midnight prayers.” The Imam (as) then told the man
that the house was at his disposal.

At this moment he ransacked the house and found nothing but the bag of
*dinar*s sent to the Imam (as) by Mutawakkil's mother and another sealed
bag, which had her seal on it. The Imam (as) said to the man: “There is
a sword under the mat, take it together with these two bags to
Mutawakkil.” This made Mutawakkil and the malevolent agent extremely
abashed.

Being unwilling and indifferent to the world and the worldly gains, the
Imam (as) would always wear woolen clothes and a headgear and sit on a
mat spread on sands, in a similar manner to his honorable ancestor ‘Ali
(as), and like him would give away whatever he had in Allah's way.

However, Mutawakkil was always apprehensive of Imam al-Hadi (as)'s
revolt against him and thus of losing his caliphate and superficial
chairmanship. This was further instigated by talebearers and opponents
of the Imam (as).

One day Mutawakkil was informed that: “‘Ali b. Muhammad had gathered a
large quantity of arms and wealth and there are lots of letters sent to
him by his followers from Qum.” Being shocked by this news, Mutawakkil
ordered Sa‘id Hajib, who was one of his close relatives, to enter the
Imam (as)'s house without prior notice to verify the news. Such
intrusions and keeping close watches were common during the twenty years
of Imam al-Hadi (as)'s stay in Samarra.

It is also reported that: “Mutawakkil commanded his troops, consisting
of 90 thousand Turks residing in Samarra, to fill up their horses'
nosebags with roses and pile up on one spot in a vast desert. They did
so, making a mound as high as a hill, which they called Makhali (i.e.,
nosebags).

Then the caliph climbed up the mound and asked Imam ‘Ali al-Naqi (as) to
join him up there, stating: “I called you here to witness my troops.” He
had already ordered his troops to appear in complete military array and
fully armed, planning to show off his power and glory lest the holy Imam
(as) or one of his Ahl al-Bayt (as) would revolt against him.”[^3]

In the twenty years of the Imam (as)'s stay in Samarra, his life events
and the people who frequented his house were, directly or indirectly,
watched over by the functionaries of the Abbasid rule. For instance, the
presence of a group of Abbasids in the funeral procession of Imam's (as)
son, Hadhrat Sayyid Muhammad, whose burial place is near Samarra
renowned as Balad is just one of many examples. This also implies that
some relatives and agents of the caliph would frequently call on Imam
(as)'s house.”[^4]

The Tenth Imam (as)'s Companions
--------------------------------

Among the tenth Imam (as)'s companions, we see figures like ‘Ali b.
Ja‘far Minawi who was imprisoned by Mutawakkil with the intention to
kill him. Another of his companions was the famous literary scholar, Ibn
al-Sikkit who was martyred by Mutawakkil.

The reason for his martyrdom is reported to be as follows: When
Mutawakkil's two children were studying with him, Mutawakkil found out
through his children that Ibn Sikkit was an advocate of Imam ‘Ali (as)
and his progeny (as). Being an adamant enemy of ‘Ali's household (as),
Mutawakkil once summoned Ibn Sikkit to his court and asked him: “Who are
more honorable and superior, my children or ‘Ali's sons, Hasan and
Husayn?”

Being a Shi'ite and a loyal lover of ‘Ali's household (as), Ibn Sikkit
fearlessly replied: “Your children are not comparable to Imam al-Hasan
(as) and Imam al-Husayn (as) who are two newly blossomed flowers of
Allah's Garden of Eternity. How can your kids be compared with the
beloved sons of Mustafa (S)? They cannot be compared even with Qanbar,
the retainer of Imam ‘Ali (as).”

Extremely disturbed by this reply, Mutawakkil immediately ordered to cut
off Ibn Sikkit's tongue, thus killing as martyr the pure Shi‘a and the
genuine companion of the tenth Imam (as).

Hadhrat ‘Abd al-‘Azim Hasani is among other companions of Imam al-Hadi
(as). As Muhaddith Qummi has stated in *Muntahi al-Amal*, “His noble
lineage is traced through four generations back to Imam al-Hasan
al-Mujtaba (as). He was among the great transmitters of *hadith* and the
most pious scholar of his time. He was also a companion and comrade of
Imam Jawad (as) and Imam al-Hadi (as). Sahib b. ‘Ibad has written a
short treatise on his noble life.”

It has been written that, Hadhrat ‘Abd al-‘Azim was scared by the caliph
of his time and was forced to wander from town to town as a courier and
messenger until he arrived in Rey and took shelter in a Shi‘ite man's
house.”[^5]

“Hadhrat ‘Abd al-‘Azim enjoyed an ardent belief in Imamate. It is
implicated that the fear this great scholar of *hadith* and ascetic had
of the authority of the time was not due to his being an ascetic or a
transmitter of *hadith*, rather it was because of his political culture
and outlook.

Like other great propagators and *mujahid*s of truth and justice, he
made attempts in dissemination of genuine political culture and
rectification of leadership principles in the Islamic community;
probably being sent on such missions by the Imam (as), because it is not
likely that a man of such status, religiosity, and piety – the one who
used to present his ideas to the Imam (as) to be verified and reassured
– to have had social and positional actions contrary to the Imam (as)'s
ideas, and without his consent. This has been the case, whether the
consent has been asserted, or Hadhrat ‘Abd al-‘Azim had himself attained
it by religious culture and political jurisprudence”.[^6]

Imam al-Hadi (as)'s Countenance and Conduct
-------------------------------------------

The 10th Imam (as) was neither short nor lanky and his cheeks were
slightly chubby and whitish pink. He had large eyes and bushy eyebrows.
He was very generous. He was so awe-inspiring that whenever he entered
the court of Muttawakkil the tyrannical caliph of the Abbasids, the
latter and his courtiers would immediately rise to their feet as a sign
of respect and reverence.

The caliphs contemporary to Imam al-Hadi (as) were: Mu‘tasim, Wathiq,
Mutawakkil, Muntasir, Musta‘in, Mu‘tazz, and Mu‘tamid, who were all old
enemies of the ‘Alawi family and Imam al-Hadi (as) out of their
infatuation with temporal power and the worldly pleasures.

Although they somehow openly displayed their enmity, yet they admitted
the competent features and the high piety and erudition of the Holy Imam
(as). They had also tested and observed by experience his virtues,
scholarly insight, and mastery over Islamic and jurisprudential issues
and had witnessed his vast field of knowledge, like that of his
honorable ancestors (as), in debates and argument sessions.

At nights, his time was mostly spent in prayers, supplication, reading
the Qur’an and communion with the Beloved Allah. He used to wear a rough
robe and sit on a straw mattress. Any gloomy person who glanced at him
would get delighted. He was loved by all. There was always a smile on
his lips, though it was his awe-inspiring charactre that greatly
captured people's hearts.

Imam al-Hadi (as)'s Martyrdom
-----------------------------

Imam al-Hadi (as) was martyred with poison by the Abbasid Mu‘tamid in
Samarra in 254/868, in a house where only his son Imam al-Hasan
al-‘Askari (as) was at his bedside. From this year on Imam al-Hasan
al-‘Askari rightfully attained leadership and shouldered the trusted
responsibility of Imamate. Imam al-Hadi (as) was finally buried in the
same house where he had been under home arrest for twenty years.

Imam al-Hadi (as)'s Wife and Children
-------------------------------------

Imam al-Hadi (as) had married a woman named Susan or Salil, and had five
children:

1. Abu Muhammad al-Hasan (as) (Imam al-‘Askari, the eleventh Infallible
Imam).

2. Husayn.

3. Sayyid Muhammad, who died a year before his father's Martyrdom. He
was a refined and virtuous young man who was thought by many to be
appointed as the next Imam. Frequently visited by Shi‘ites, his
sanctified grave is near Samarra

4. Ja‘far.

5. ‘A’isha, or as quoted by Shaykh ‘Abbas al-Qummi, ‘Aliyya.

Some Sayings of His Holiness Imam al-Hadi (as):

I. Whoever is selfish and self-satisfied, people will soon be infuriated
at them.

2. The grievance for the person who is patient is single, but for the
one who laments and wails is double.

3. Idle talking and joking is a character of the unwise and the feature
of the ignorant.

4. Staying awake for long makes sleeping enjoyable and bearing much
hunger increases the joy and delight of eating.

5. Divine decrees will show you things which have never struck your
mind.

6. Wisdom will not have any impact on corrupt natures.

7. To Allah belongs shrines in which He likes to be prayed and to answer
to prayers. Imam al-Husayn (as)'s burial place is one of them.

8. He who takes heed of Allah, people will take heed of him. He who
obeys Allah, will be obeyed by people. The one who is obedient to Allah
does not fear the created ones, and anyone who enrages Allah, would
certainly be enraged by people.

9. Verily, it is not possible to describe Allah, except through what He
has described Himself. How could He be described, whereas senses fail to
perceive and imaginations cannot reach Him.

[^1]: Imam dar ‘Ayniyat-i Jami‘a, p. 82.

[^2]: Imam dar ‘Ayniyat-i Jami‘a, pp. 84-85 (summarized and slightly
changed).

[^3]: Imam dar ‘Ayniyat-i Jami‘a, p. 95.

[^4]: Ibid, p. 88.

[^5]: Muntahi al-Amal, (with a slight change).

[^6]: Imam dar ‘Ayniyyat-i Jami‘a.


