The First Infallible Hadhrat Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah, the Holy Prophet of Islam
==============================================================================

Over fourteen hundred years ago, a baby was born in Mecca on the 17th of
Rabi‘ al-Awwal (April 25, 570 CE).

His father, ‘Abd Allah, died on the way back from Sham (Syria) in
Yathrib (Medina), unable to meet his newly born son, Muhammad. ‘Abd
Allah's wife, Amina, was the daughter of Wahb b. ‘Abd Manaf.

Based on a custom among the dignitaries of Mecca, Amina left his beloved
son, Muhammad, with a wet nurse called Halima, to be reared on the vast
expanse of the desert away from the corruptions of town.

The affectionate, pure-hearted Halima got highly attached to this lovely
child whose presence in her tribe brought a source of blessing and
abundance. Not for a single moment was she neglectful of taking care of
him. Nobody knew that this orphan child, whom the other wet nurses had
refused to look after, would one day become the Prophet of Mercy; his
sublime name would be uttered by millions of Muslims throughout the
world and from top of minarets, and become an honor to the world and its
people.

When Muhammad was five, Halima took him back to Mecca as per his
mother's insisting demand. Two years later, when Amina went to Medina to
visit her parents and her husband's tomb, she took her beloved son with
her. One month later, Amina and her son returned to Mecca, but on the
way back she died at a place called Abwa’, and Muhammad who was now six
years old, lost his mother too and his pure heart and delicate soul
deeply felt the agonies of being orphaned.

Thereupon, a woman named Umm Ayman took this orphan boy, the withered
newly-blown flower, back to Mecca with her. It was God's will that the
boy be parted from his parents at the outset of his life having to taste
the bitter and heart-rending sufferings of this world and be severely
tested in the crucible of hardship so that in future he would be able to
commiserate with the sufferings of mankind, and comprehend the way the
underprivileged feel.

Since then, he was reared and looked after by his grandfather ‘Abd
al-Muttalib who treated, with deep kindness, his noble grandson whose
forehead was radiant with greatness. Two years later, on the demise of
‘Abd al-Muttalib, Muhammad was deprived of his grandfather as his
guardian. ‘Abd al-Muttalib's great concern at the last moments of his
life was about his grandson. Perforce, at the age of eight, Muhammad
went to his uncle's house, Abu Talib (Ali's father), and lived under his
guardianship.

Abu Talib protected and took care of his beloved nephew with utmost
benevolence and kindness to the last moments of his life, i.e., for over
forty years. Even in the most adverse and unpleasant events, when the
nobles of Quraysh and black-hearted rebels had vilely associated to kill
Muhammad, he made himself a shield of protection for him, as he was
scared of nothing and took no heed of reproaches.

Muhammad's repose, grace, and thoughtful mien were fully recognized
among his peers since adolescence. Abu Talib loved him to such an extent
that he always wanted to be with him and caress him in order to remove
the agony of being an orphan.

He was 12 when his uncle took him to Sham (Syria) on a business trip
which at that time was common in Hijaz. On this trip, at a place called
Busri, an area in Sham, Abu Talib visited a Christian monk called
Buhayra. The latter, upon meeting Muhammad, assuredly found out the
signs and cues he had read in the Holy Scriptures, that this boy would
be the Prophet of the end of time.

In order to be further assured, the Christian monk asked him to swear on
the Lat and Uzza – two of the idols of Mecca – to tell the truth in what
he was asked about. Getting perturbed and agitated, Muhammad replied, “I
am an enemy to the idols you just mentioned. Swear me on God.”

Buhayra was certain that he would be truly the great messenger of God,
who believed in no one and nothing but the one God. So he strongly
admonished Abu Talib to protect him against the evils of the enemies,
especially the Jews since soon he would be assigned to a great mission
to carry out. Muhammad passed through his days of adolescence and youth.

During this period of time, which for the common people is an age of
pugnacity and indulgence in lustfulness and transient fads, for the
young Muhammad was replete with purity, righteousness, and honesty.
Truthfulness of words, honesty in manner, leniency, and patience were
manifest in his behavior. He was aside from the corrupt milieu of Mecca
and kept aloof from the impurity of idolatry to such an extent that
everyone was amazed, and he was so trusted that he became renowned as
“Muhammad the Trustworthy” (*Muhammad al-Amin*).

Since the very beginning of his youth, traces of grace, power, and
bravery were evident in his countenance. At the age of fifteen, he took
part in one of the battles of Quraysh with Hawazin clan, where he
defended his uncles against arrows. This can reveal his spiritual and
physical strength.

Later on, this bravery became more and more brilliantly evident in wars
waged for Islam. Accordingly, ‘Ali (as), being himself one of the
bravest in his time, has said about Muhammad (S):

“Whenever things got hard on us at the battlefront, we would seek refuge
in the Apostle of Allah, and none of us was closer to the enemy than he
was.”[^1] However, he would always avoid useless and childish battles.

Arabia was the center of idolatry at that time. People or tribesmen used
to carve idols out of woods, stones, or dates and worship them. The
milieu in which Muhammad (S) lived was afflicted with promiscuity,
obscenities, wine drinking, and war waging; in such an environment,
however, Muhammad (S) was never indulged in any of such sins and
impurities, and remained aloof from idols and idolatry. One day Abu
Talib said to ‘Abbas, Muhammad (S)'s youngest uncle:

“I have never heard Muhammad (S) tell a lie and I've never seen him play
with other children in the lanes and alleys.”

It is amazing that amid so much indecency and the presence of corrupt
women and men who were even proud of their indecent acts, and the
prostitutes who used to put up flags on the roof of their houses,
Muhammad (S) lived so decently and innocently that nobody – not even his
enemies – could find the smallest fault with him. How can one read about
his life history (*sira*) and demeanor from childhood through youth and
old age, without humbling himself before his greatness and purity of
soul and body?

A Remembrance of the Brave Youth Pledge (known as half Al-Fudhul)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In the past, a covenant called *half al-fudhul* was established among
some tribes based on defending the rights of the oppressed and the poor,
and its founders were the ones whose names were either “Fadhl” or one of
its derivatives. The Pledge which was later made by a group of Quraysh
followed the same goal.

One of the features of this pledge was to defend Mecca and its
inhabitants against foreign enemies. However, if someone other than
Meccans and their confederates were living in that city and were treated
with cruelty, nobody would come to their help. It is related that one
day a man from Bani Asad tribe came to Mecca to sell his merchandise. A
man from Ben Sahm tribe, called ‘Asi b. Wa‘il, bought the goods without
paying off the money.

The defrauded man sought assistance from the Quraysh, but nobody helped
him. He was forced to climb up the Abu Qubays Mountain near Ka‘ba for
help. His plea for justice affected a number of Qurayshi youth, who,
perforce got together in the house of ‘Abd Allah, son of Jad‘an to do
something for the poor man. In this house, where Muhammad (S) was also
present, they took a pledge to allow no injustice on others.

As for the man, they took back the money for his goods and returned it
to him. Thenceforth, the Holy Prophet (S) used to speak highly of this
pledge. He said, “In ‘Abd Allah Jad‘an's house I witnessed a pledge
which if I am called to even now (that I am appointed to Prophethood), I
will accept it. That is, I am still faithful to my covenant.”[^2]

Muhammad (S) joined this covenant at the age of 20, but before that, as
well as after that, he supported the poor, the helpless, orphans, and
the women who had lost their husbands in wars, and did whatever he could
for the deprived. His motive for joining this covenant was nothing but
willingness to aid the poor and remove injustice from the oppressed.

Muhammad (S)'s Marriage
-----------------------

As Muhammad (S)'s honesty spread around, a wealthy woman from the people
of Mecca called Khadija, daughter of Khuwaylid, who had married twice
before and possessed plenty of wealth with matchless chastity and piety
dispatched Muhammad (S) on a business trip to Syria offering him a share
of its benefits. Muhammad (S) accepted that contract.

Khadija sent her retainer, Maysara, along with Muhammad (S). When they
returned from that lucrative trip, Maysara reported the trip in detail
to Khadija, telling her anecdotes about Muhammad (S)'s honesty and
truthfulness. What he related to Khadija about him included this: “When
we arrived in Busri, Amin sat in the shade of a tree to rest. At this
time, a monk in his prayer house noticed Amin. He came forward, asked me
his name, and then said: 'The man who is sitting under the tree is the
same prophet the tidings about whom I have read in Torah and Gospel'.”

Khadija became enchanted with Muhammad (S)'s honesty and truthfulness.
Sometime later, she offered to get married to Muhammad (S). He accepted
the proposal. At this time she was 40 and he was 25.

Khadija left all her wealth at Muhammad (S)'s disposal and gave her
slaves up to him, who immediately freed them. It was his first step
taken in a struggle against slavery. Muhammad (S) practically wanted to
show that it is possible to live a simple life free from fleeting carnal
desires and lust, and without any slaves and maids as well.

Khadija's house was a safe haven for the poor and the helpless before
marriage, and remained exactly the same after marriage, since she would
always be generous to the needy.

During the years of drought and famine, Halima, Muhammad (S)'s foster
mother used to come to her foster son, who spread his mantle for her to
sit on, would listen to her talk, and when she wanted to leave, he
helped her in whatever way he could.

Once received the authority over Khadija's wealth, Muhammad al-Amin (S),
instead of being entrapped in transient temptations, was engaged in
charity matters and helping the poor. Most of his free time, he would go
to the outskirts of Mecca and would spend hours in mountains and inside
the cave of Hira’, contemplating on God's creation and wonders of the
world and whispering lovingly to the Lord of the world. Several years
passed in this way.

His beloved and faithful wife knew that whenever Muhammad (S) was not at
home, he was in the cave of Hira’. This cave is located in a mountain
north of Mecca where now longing pilgrims eagerly visit to enjoy the
eye-refreshing effect of its soil.

This secluded place, being away from the tumult and idolatry and
corruption of the city, was a witness to amorous whispers of Muhammad
(S) especially in Ramadan, during which he would spend the whole month
there. The cave and the black rocks have witnessed the descent of
“Revelation” and the radiation of Divine Lights in the pure heart of the
“Quraysh Beloved”. This is the same “illuminating mountain” (*jabal
al-nur*) that is still diffusing light.

The Beginning of the Prophetic Mission (Bi‘tha)
-----------------------------------------------

Muhammad al-Amin (S) was engaged in worship and supplication to the Lord
of the worlds in Hira’ before the night of Rajab 27, having true and
dreams just like real world. His great soul was gradually getting ready
to receive the Revelation. At that magnificent night, Gabriel, the angel
of Revelation, was appointed to read some of the Qur’an to Muhammad (S)
and to honor him with Prophethood.

Muhammad (S) was forty at this time, when, in silence and solitude and
totally absorbed in the Beloved Creator of the world, was demanded by
Gabriel to recite these verses:

> اقْرَأْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ {1}

> خَلَقَ الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ عَلَقٍ {2}

> اقْرَأْ وَرَبُّكَ الْأَكْرَمُ {3}

> الَّذِي عَلَّمَ بِالْقَلَمِ {4}

> عَلَّمَ الْإِنْسَانَ مَا لَمْ يَعْلَمْ {5}

***﴾Read! In the name of your Lord, who created; created man from a
clinging mass. Read, and your Lord is the Most Generous, Who taught by
the pen, taught man what he did not know.﴿***[^3]

.  
 Being unlettered, Muhammad (S) said: I am not able to read. The angel
enforced him to read the Tablet. But to this he gave a similar response.
The third time, he felt he could read the Tablet in Gabriel's hand.
These verses commenced his arduous and toilsome mission. Gabriel had
carried out his task as Muhammad (S) descended Mount Hira’ and went to
Khadija's house. There, he related his story to his kind wife.

Khadija found out that Muhammad (S)'s great mission had started. She
comforted and encouraged him. “Undoubtedly the compassionate God would
not allow evil on you because you are kind to your family and relatives,
you help the poor, and assist the oppressed”, she added.

Then Muhammad (S) said: “Cover me!” Khadija covered him. He fell asleep
for a while.

Khadija went to her cousin, Waraqat b. Nawfal, who was one of the
learned Arabs, and told him the incident. The man said: What has
befallen Muhammad (S) is the beginning of his Prophethood and the great
honor of the Message.

Khadija returned home, confidant and assured.

The First Muslims
-----------------

The Prophet (S) started the call to Islam from his own home. First, his
wife, Khadija, and his cousin, ‘Ali acknowledged their faith in Muhammad
(S). The first calls were totally secret.

Muhammad (S) and several of his companions said their prayers in remote
and secluded places out of people's sight. One day Sa‘d b. Abi Waqqas
was saying prayers together with some other Muslims in a valley outside
Mecca. A group of idolaters saw them venerating their Creator. They
began to ridicule and persecute them. The Muslims, however, set to
defend themselves.

After three years, during which the Muslims were engaged in worshipping
and calling people to Islam along with their Holy Prophet, a Divine
command descended:

> فَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ {94}

***(So proclaim what you have been commanded, and turn away from the
polytheists.﴿***[^4]

Thus, the Prophet (S) was urged to reveal his call. For this purpose he
was ordered to begin with his nearest kinsfolk and close relatives
through this Divine command:

> وَأَنْذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ {214}

***﴾Warn the nearest of your kinsfolk.﴿***[^5]

When this command was given, the Prophet (S) ordered ‘Ali, who was
around 15, to prepare a meal and invite the household of ‘Abd
al-Muttalib so that the Prophet (S) would announce his call to them.

In this meeting about forty people, including Hamza, Abu Talib, and Abu
Lahab, participated. Abu Lahab, whose heart was filled with hatred and
jealousy, however, upset the gathering with his absurd and sarcastic
remarks. The Prophet (S) deemed it advisable to repeat the call the next
day.

When the people had their meals, the Holy Prophet began his words with
the name of God, adoring Him and professing His Oneness: “…Verily no
guide of a community tells lies to his kin. I swear by God Who is Unique
and there is no god but Him that I am His Messenger to you and to the
people of the world. My kinsmen! You die just as you go to sleep and as
you wake up you are restored to life on the Day of Judgment and will see
the outcome of your acts and deeds.

The everlasting paradise of God and eternal Hell are prepared
respectively for the righteous and the wrongdoers. Nobody has ever
brought better for their kin than what I have brought to you. I have
brought to you the good of this world and the next. I am appointed by
God to call you to Him. Anyone of you who supports me will be my
brother, trustee (*wasi*) and successor”.

When the Prophet's words ended, silence prevailed over the whole
session. Everybody was deep in thought. Finally, ‘Ali (as), then a
fifteen-year-old youth, stood up and said: “O Prophet of God! I am ready
to support you.” The Messenger of Allah beckoned him to sit down. He
repeated his words three times, and each time ‘Ali (as) would stand up.
Then, the Prophet (S) addressed his kinsmen and said:

“This young man (‘Ali) is my brother, *wasi*, and successor among you.
Listen to his words and follow him.”

When the meeting was over, Abu Lahab and some others told Abu Talib,
‘Ali's father: “You see! Muhammad ordered you to follow your own son. He
chose him your superior!”

It was evident from the very beginning of the prophet (S)'s call that
these high-ranking Divine positions, i.e. Prophethood and Imamate
(*wasaya* and *wilaya*) were not separate; it was also evident that
‘Ali's spiritual power and his faith and knowledge of Prophethood were
so high that he, unhesitatingly and regardless of all the problems,
declared his support for the Prophet (S) in a session attended by Arab
chieftains.

General Call to Islam
---------------------

Three years had passed the Prophetic Mission when, after calling his
kinsmen to Islam, the Prophet (S) declared his Prophethood to the
public. One day he climbed up the mountain of Safa and called out
loudly; *Ya Sabaha*! (An expression used for warning and summoning.)
Some tribesmen hastened towards the Prophet (S). Then, the Prophet (S)
addressed the people as follows: “O people! If I tell you that your
enemies are lying in ambush behind this mountain aiming to assault on
your lives and property, will you believe me?”

They all replied: “We haven't heard a lie from you so far.” “O people!
Save yourselves from the Hell Fire,” he continued.

I alarm you of God's painful punishment. Like a sentinel seeing the
enemy in the distance and warning his folks of the danger, I too warn
you of the hazards of the Judgment Day torments.”  
 People became more aware of the Prophet's (S) great mission. Here
again, however, Abu Lahab responded light-mindedly to the critical issue
of Prophetic Mission.

Early Muslims
-------------

As soon as the Prophetic Mission was publicly announced, many people's
stance towards Muhammad (S) changed. Those who had pretended to like him
began to persecute and harass him.

Those who were pioneers in accepting his call to Islam were the ones who
knew him well, and believed in righteousness of his deeds and words.
Apart from Khadija, ‘Ali, and Zayd (Haratha's son) – who was a liberated
slave by the Holy Prophet (S) – others who were pioneers in faith like
Ja‘far (Abu Talib's son), Abu Dhar Gaffari, ‘Amr b. ‘Abasa, Khalid b.
Sa‘id, Abu Bakr, etc., would spare no time in making the youth of Mecca
aware and encouraging them to become Muslims. Balal, Yasir and his wife
(Sumayya), Khabab, Arqam, Talha, Zubayr, Othman, Sa‘d, etc., were among
the early Muslims. Altogether, the number of Muhammad (S)'s followers
within the first three years amounted to twenty people.

Persecution by the Opponents
----------------------------

Little by little the differences deepened. Those who had converted to
Islam tried to summon idolaters to the One God. On the other hand,
idolaters who saw their interests and their dominance over a bunch of
people who were more ignorant than themselves as jeopardized attempted
to persecute Muslims, forcing them to give up their new religion.
Muslims, and above all the Holy Prophet (S) himself, were harassed by
the idolaters.

Once, as the Prophet (S) was saying prayers in Ka'ba holding down his
head, Abu Jahl – a stubborn enemy of Islam – emptied the content of a
sacrificed camel's tripe over the Holy Prophet (S)'s neck. Since the
Prophet (S) used to leave his house very early for morning prayers, some
people put thorny bushes on his way to scratch his feet in the dark.

Sometimes, the infidels would throw dust and stones at him. One day, a
number of Quraysh nobles assaulted the Prophet (S) and one of them
called ‘Aqabat b. Abi Mu‘it threw a piece of cloth around the neck of
the Prophet (S) and tied it so tight that the Prophet (S) was about to
pass away. Such persecutions took place time and again.

As Islam became more and more widespread among people, the idolaters
intensified their harassment and plotting. Muslim youth were persecuted
by their infidel fathers and brothers. The truth-seeking youth who had
abandoned their fathers' false and superstitious beliefs and had
converted to Islam were thrown into jails, and even their own parents
refused to give them food.

These faithful Muslims, however, went on worshipping God even though
their lips were parched due to hunger and thirst, and their eyes were
sunken and tearful. The infidels clothed the slaves in coats of mail and
threw them on the hot sand in the scorching sunshine to burn their skin.
They burned some of them with a hot iron bar, and tied a rope on some
other's legs and pulled them on the burning pebbles.

Balal was an Abyssinian slave, whose master would in the burning heat of
the midday sun throw him on the ground and put large boulders on his
chest. Balal, however, would tolerate those persecutions. Repeatedly
saying the One, the One, and remembering the One God.

Yasir, ‘Ammar's father, was tied with rope to two strong camels moving
in opposite directions till his body was torn apart. Sumayya, ‘Ammar's
mother, too was very painfully martyred. But, in spite of all the
tortures, the pure-minded Muslims lovingly risked their lives almost to
death, and didn't give up their faith in the One God.

Idolater's Confrontation with Muhammad (S)
------------------------------------------

Failing to achieve their goals through persecutions, the infidels
started by way of threatening and allurement, since Muhammad (S) became
more and more popular with all the tribes and people of the land, and
found more and more followers.

The infidels first decided to have a meeting with Abu Talib, Muhammad
(S)'s uncle, and his only supporter. At the meeting, they addressed him
and said: “Abu Talib! You are superior to us by nobility and age. Your
nephew insults our gods and speaks ill about us and our fathers’
religion and regards our beliefs as mean and worthless. Tell him to stop
doing such things, not insulting our idols. Otherwise, leave him to us
and withdraw your protection from him”.

When the Quraysh infidels felt that Islam was penetrating into tribes
and among people, and the verses of the Qur’an were winning people's
hearts and influencing them, they were more and more alarmed. Hence, to
prevent that danger, they visited Abu Talib, the head of the Quraysh and
the chief of Banu Hashim now and again, and each time Abu Talib talked
to them gently and considerately, and promised to report their message
to his nephew. Nevertheless, the Great Prophet of Islam replied to his
uncle:

“Dear uncle, I swear by God if they placed the sun in my right hand and
the moon in my left hand to make me give up the religion of God and its
propagation, I would not accept. I should either achieve my goal, i.e.,
the spread of Islam, or sacrifice myself for it.”

Abu Talib said to his nephew: “By God, I will not withdraw my support
from you. Go on and carry out your mission.”

Finally, the haughty Meccans in their illusions came up with allurement
sending a message that they were ready to provide Muhammad (S) with
whatever he wished, like wealth, kingship, and beautiful women, provided
that he abandoned his new religion and gave up affronting their idols.

The Prophet (S), however, ignored their proposals which originated from
thoughts worthy of themselves, and asked them to believe in Allah to
attain mastery over Arabs and non-Arabs.

Being narrow-minded, they failed to accept worshipping the One God
instead of 360 idols.

Thenceforth as mentioned before, Abu Jahl and others began to maltreat
and persecute the Holy Prophet (S) and other Muslims, using whatever
they had at their disposal to ridicule and harass the Prophet (S) and
the believers in Islam.

Prophet (S)’s Perseverance
--------------------------

In spite of all the persecutions inflicted on him, the Prophet (S) stood
against them as firm as a mountain. He talked of God, the Islamic rules
and ordinances, and the Qur’an whenever and wherever he saw a few people
gathering together, trying to soften their hearts and incline them
towards Islam by reciting Divine verses to them.

He would say: “Allah is the One God and the Master of this world and the
Hereafter. He alone should be worshipped and feared. All powers belong
to God. We will all be restored to life again and will be rewarded for
our good deeds and punished for our evil acts. O people! Beware of sins,
lies, calumny, and abusive language.”

The Quraysh were so impressed by the Qur’anic verses that they had to
ask for Walid's assistance to make a judgment in this regard. Walid, who
was their judge in problems of life and their helper in difficulties,
after hearing the Qur’anic verses, told them: “I heard a word from
Muhammad today that is not the same kind as man's or jinn's words. It
has special sweetness and beauty. It resembles a tree whose branches are
laden with fruits and the roots with blessing. It is an outstanding word
which no other word is superior to it”.[^6]

When the infidels learned about the sweetness and attractiveness of
God's words and felt humiliated before it, they found it inevitable to
stigmatize the Divine words as “Sorcery”, and in order to evade
believing in Muhammad (S)'s Prophethood, they started to make excuses.
For example, they demanded from the Prophet (S) to make God and the
angels available! They wanted him to display a golden palace with a
garden full of streams! And so on. Muhammad (S) replied: “I am but a
messenger, and cannot perform miracles without permission from Allah.

Emigration to Abyssinia
-----------------------

In the fifth year of the Prophetic Mission, a group of Prophet (S)'s
companions numbering 80 people who were formerly persecuted and harassed
by the infidels left for Abyssinia with the agreement of the Prophet
(S). Abyssinia was a safe and peaceful land, and Najashi, the king of
that country, was a benevolent Christian. The Muslims wished to worship
God there while leading their business. But even there they were
persecuted by Meccans.

The latter asked Najashi to return the Muslims to Mecca, and in order to
win his favor, they sent him some gifts. But the king of Abyssinia Said:
“From among all lands, they have chosen mine. I must investigate to know
what they say and what their complaint is about. “Then he ordered to
summon the Muslims. Upon their arrival, he asked them to explain the
reason for their emigration and to introduce their new religion. Ja'far
b. Abi Talib, on behalf of the emigrants, stood up and said:

“We were ignorant people, worshipping idols, feeding on carcass, doing
hideous acts, and violating our neighbors' rights. The powerful would
trample the weak, until God selected from among us a Prophet whom we
knew as righteous and honest. He urged us to abandon worshipping the
wooden and stone idols; to be righteous, honest, kin-loving,
well-behaved, and pious; to avoid evil acts and stop devouring orphan's
wealth; to give up adultery; to say prayers; to fast; and to give alms.

Thus, we believed in him and became his followers, accepting such a
religion, we were much oppressed and ill-treated by our tribesmen to
give up the faith, return to idolatry, and restart evil doings. When the
injustice and the distress inflicted on us became unbearable, we took
refuge in your country and chose you from among the kings. We hope, with
your support, we are protected from oppression.”

“Recite some of the divine verses that your prophet read to you.”
Najashi said. Ja'far read the beginning verses of *Surat al-Maryam*.
Najashi and his retinue were deeply impressed and began to weep.
Najashi, a Christian himself, said: “I swear by God, those words have
originated from the same source as the words of Jesus (as).” Then,
Najashi told the infidels of Mecca: “I will never surrender them to
you.” The infidels were intensely outraged by being defeated, and
returned to Mecca.

Economic Sanction
-----------------

In order to constrain Muhammad (S) and other Muslims, the infidels of
Quraysh signed an agreement to break relations with him and his
followers; to have no marriage and trade bonds with them; and to join
hands with enemies of Islam in all events. They hung the agreement
parchment inside the Ka‘ba and swore to observe its content.

Abu Talib, Prophet (S)'s supporter, asked children of Hashim and
Muttalib to keep away from idolaters and settle in a valley named Shi‘b
of Abu Talib. The Muslims started there, under straw parasols, a new
life and built watchtowers to prevent the enemy's surprise attacks. This
depressed and adverse sanction took three years.

Only in holy months (Rajab, Dhu’l Qa‘da, Dhu’l Hajja) would the Prophet
(S) and the Muslims leave the “Shi‘b” in order to propagate the religion
and shop for a little provisions, but the infidels, especially Abu
Lahab, would buy out the goods or ordered the prices to be raised so
that the Muslims fail to purchase anything. Hunger and hardship reached
their highest degree. The Muslims, however, didn't give up their
resistance.

One day the Prophet was informed through Revelation that the agreement
parchment had been eaten up by termites and just the term “*Bismik
Allahumma*” (In your name, O Allah!) was left intact. Abu Talib declared
this event to the gathering of infidels. Verifying the incident and
finding out the Prophet (S)'s truthfulness, they lifted the sanction.

Muslims gave a sigh of relief … but alas! In a few months Khadija, the
Prophet (S)'s faithful wife and Abu Talib, his supporter passed away,
and it was a great loss to the Prophet (S). Once again the infidels
began their persecutions.

Spread of Islam in Yathrib (Medina)
-----------------------------------

At the time of Hajj pilgrimage a group consisting of six people from
Medina met the Prophet (S) and learned about the pure doctrines of
Islam. People of Medina, on account of wars and conflicts between the
two tribes of Aws and Khazraj and the pressure inflicted upon them by
the Jews, were supposedly awaiting this holy doctrine to impart to them
its redemptive message. These six Muslims returned to Medina and talked
a lot in favor of Islam and the Prophet (S) and prepared people to
welcome Islam.

On a similar occasion the next year, twelve people got acquainted with
the Prophet (S) himself and the holy doctrines of Islam. The Prophet (S)
dispatched one of his companions with them to instruct the Qur’an and
the Islamic ordinances. Similarly, the year after, those twelve people
swore allegiance to the Prophet (S) at a place called ‘Aqaba and pledged
to support Muhammad (S) just like their own kinsmen.

Following this allegiance, 73 other men and women swore allegiance to
the Prophet (S) and promised to protect him against the enemies of Islam
even at the cost of their own lives. Thereupon, the way was paved for
the emigration to Yathrib, which later on was named Medina.

Mi‘raj (Ascension) – Journey to Ta’if
-------------------------------------

Before emigration to Medina which took place in Rabi‘ al-Awwal, 13 Years
after the advent of *Bi‘tha*, two events came about in the Prophet (S)'s
life, which will be pointed out briefly as follows:

The *Mi‘raj* of the Prophet (S) took place in the 10th year of *Bi‘tha*,
which was a Journey commanded by Almighty God in the company of the
Revelation Angel (Gabriel) resting on a swift flying mount named Buraq.

The Prophet (S) started this splendid Journey from the house of Umm
Hani, ‘Ali (as)'s sister headed towards Jerusalem and visited Bethlehem,
which is the birth place of the Prophet Jesus (as), as well as the
residence of Prophets (as).

Then he began his heavenly journey, visiting celestial creatures and
Paradise and Hell, as a result of which he became aware of the mysteries
of existence and the vastness of the created universe and signs of
Almighty God's infinite Power.

He finally reached *Sidrat al-Muntaha* (Cedar-Tree in Paradise) and
found it totally covered with grandeur, magnificence, and majesty. Then,
he returned to Mecca through the same way, and dismounted Buraq at Umm
Hani’s house before daybreak. Shi‘as believe this journey has been made
physically rather than only spiritually as believed by some other sects.
In the Holy Qur’an, this magnificent journey is referred to as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي أَسْرَىٰ بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلًا مِنَ الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ إِلَى الْمَسْجِدِ الْأَقْصَى الَّذِي بَارَكْنَا حَوْلَهُ
لِنُرِيَهُ مِنْ آيَاتِنَا ۚ إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***﴾Immaculate is He who carried His servant on a journey by night from
the Sacred Mosque to the Farthest Mosque whose surroundings We have
blessed, that We might show him some of Our signs. Indeed He is the
All-hearing, the All-seeing.﴿ (Al-Qur’an, 17: 1).***

It was in the same year and at the same night of the *Mi‘raj* that God
enjoined the Prophet that his *umma* say prayers and worship the Lord of
the two worlds five times a day; for saying prayers is the spiritual
ascension for the faithful.

The other event is the Holy Prophet (S)'s Journey to Ta’if. In the
eleventh year of his Prophetic Mission, due to the suffocating milieu of
Mecca and persecution inflicted by idolaters and the hostility of the
Meccans, he decided to move to another place. So, by himself, he set out
for Ta’if to contact with Thaqif heads of tribes and introduce Islam to
them. But those hard-hearted people didn't listen to the Holy Prophet
(S) and even started to harass his Holiness.

The Holy Messenger (S) stayed in Nakhla, somewhere between Ta’if and
Mecca, and since he was fearful of the idolaters’ vengeance and
hostility, he considered finding someone to ask for quarter – according
to the custom of that time – to secure his return to Mecca.

Thus, he sent someone to Mecca to ask for quarter from Mut‘im b. ‘Aday.
Mut‘im took responsibility of protecting Prophet (S)’s life, and treated
him with favor. Later on, the Holy Prophet frequently remembered
Mut‘im’s favor and kindness to him.

Emigration to Medina
--------------------

With the Prophet (S)’s permission, all Muslims went to Medina, except
the Prophet (S) himself, ‘Ali (as), and several others who were either
ill or in the prisons of the infidels.

When the idolaters found out about the Prophet (S)'s decision to
emigrate, they made an arrangement, following meetings and negotiations,
to assign forty people from among the tribes in order that on the eve of
emigration they invade the Prophet (S)'s house and murder him, so that,
in this way, all tribes share a hand in his blood, and consequently, his
blood would be trampled on.

The Angel of Revelation, however, informed the Holy Prophet (S) of their
ominous plot.

The night, when the Qurayshi murderers intended to carry out their
devilish plan, ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as) slept in the Prophet (S)'s bed and
the Prophet (S) secretly left the house. First, he entered in the Thawr
Cave (south of Mecca), and from there, he emigrated, accompanied by Abu
Bakr, to Yathrib or Madinat al-Nabi, which was later known as Medina.

Arrival in Medina
-----------------

On Monday 12th of Rabi‘ al-Awwal, the Holy Prophet (S) and his
companions reached Quba, at a place about 12 kilometers to Medina. The
Prophet (S) remained there till the end of the week (Thursday) for ‘Ali
(as) to arrive. The Quba Mosque at this place is a reminder of those
days.

After the emigration of Muhammad (S), ‘Ali was appointed to return
people's deposits to them, and accompany to Medina the Hashemite women
including Fatimah (as), the Prophet (S)’s daughter, Fatimah daughter of
Assad, and the Muslims who had not managed to emigrate till that day.
‘Ali and the company began the trip, a hard and hazardous one.

With injured and swollen feet, ‘Ali (as) joined the Prophet (S) after
three days, and was favorably and kindly welcomed by him.

The people of Medina, after three years of waiting anxiously, welcomed
their Prophet exuberantly and with cries of exaltation.

The Importance of Emigration
----------------------------

The arrival of the Prophet (S) and the Muslims in Medina marked a new
era in their life. It was actually like stepping out of a contaminated
and suffocating environment, retreating into a fresh and healthy
atmosphere. It is on this account that emigration in the way of God and
for spreading His religion is considered equal to *jihad* (holy war) and
is equally splendid.

Emigration means abandoning all your existing interests, leaving behind
your old habits and customs, and move towards a new life. Moving from
ignorance towards light and knowledge is also considered emigration.
Moving from impurity towards purity is emigration as well.

The emigration of the Prophet (S) and that of the Muslims from Mecca (an
atmosphere of suppression, contamination and hatred) to Medina (a city
of purity, assistance, and brotherhood) and towards laying the
foundations for an Islamic social life, was the first great step taken
towards victory and spread of Islam as well as its being universalized.
It was due to the importance of emigration that later on, in time of the
second Caliph this year was suggested by ‘Ali (as) as the beginning of
the Islamic calendar (Hijra).

The First Step
--------------

When the Prophet (S) noticed such warm reception and exultation from the
people of Medina, the first thing he did was to propose the construction
of a mosque for the Muslims. The mosque was not solely for saying
prayers. Rather, all legal and social affairs of Muslims were taken care
of there.

The mosque was to be the center for the Islamic education and
assemblies. Muslims all together and the Holy Prophet (S) together with
the Muslims eagerly and enthusiastically were busy constructing the
mosque. The Holy Prophet (S) would personally carry stones on his
shoulders and work like a simple laborer. That same mosque is still
standing magnificently, only second to Masjid al-Haram, which is the
first in the world.

The Prophet (S) made peace between the two tribes of Aws and Khazraj
which were in battle for years. He established bonds of brotherhood
between the Emigrants and the people of Medina, i.e., the Helpers
(*Ansar*) who hosted the Emigrants (*Muhajirun*) in their houses.

The Prophet (S) stabilized the Islamic unity, ideological bonds, and
brotherhood for tribal relations. By using a charter, he actually
devised the constitution of the Islamic community in Medina, and
declared the Muslim people equal in rights and limits. He granted
quarters to Jewish tribes who were living both inside and outside
Medina.

To sum up, the Prophet (S) created a unified, brotherly, high-minded,
and self-sacrificing community out of a revengeful and misled people who
were ignorant of laws and social systems. From the second year,
gradually, defensive military measures were taken against attacks by
enemies of Islam.

The Prophet (S)'s Battles
-------------------------

The old revengeful enemies of Islam, namely the infidels of Mecca,
planned – in any possible way – to defeat the newly established Islamic
community; thus, they waged several wars. Accordingly, the Prophet (S)
ordered the Muslims to prepare for defense. So, since the development of
Islam in Medina, several battles took place which will be briefly
pointed out. It should also be mentioned that the wars in which the
Prophet (S) attended in person were called *ghazwa* (battle), and the
other ones taking place in his time were called *sariyya* (expedition).

Battle of Badr
--------------

The battle of Badr occurred in 2/623. In this unbalanced battle the
number of enemy's army reached 950, being fully equipped; the number of
Muslims, however, was only 313. The Muslims fought with the power of
faith and full fidelity, defeating the enemy in a short time. The enemy
retreated, leaving behind 70 killed and captives as well as lots of
spoils. Abu Jahl, the bitter enemy of Islam, was also killed in this
battle. This victory was the opening chapter to the later victories.

Change of the Qibla
-------------------

In the same year, it was commanded by the Almighty Allah that the
Muslims should change the direction of their prayer from Jerusalem
towards Ka‘ba. The reason for this was that the Jews regarded the
lacking of an independent *qibla* as a deficiency for Islam, which was
known as a perfect religion, and thus they didn't believe in its
universality. The Two-*Qibla* Mosque (*Masjid Dhu Qiblatayn*) is
reminiscent of that significant event.

Battle of Uhud
--------------

A year after the battle of Badr, enemies of Islam, equipped three times
as much as that of the battle of Badr, set out for Medina with the
intention of taking revenge on the Muslims. The Prophet (S.A.W)
consulted with his companions upon which it was decided to array the
troops along the mountainside of Uhud. At the outset, the Muslims – weak
in number but strong in faith – won the battle.

But, since the guards of the valley behind the battlefield left their
trenches covetously to get their share of the spoils, the Islamic troops
were defeated, and a number of them including Hamza, the Prophet (S)'s
brave uncle, were killed. However, as a result of self-sacrifices by
‘Ali (as), who had received many injuries, and other brave combatants,
as well as the new technique that the Prophet (S) applied in this
battle, once again the Muslims gathered together and chased the
despicable enemy, and finally achieved victory.

Battle of Kandaq (or Ahzab Confederates)
----------------------------------------

A group of Jews, including Bani Nadhir tribe, were living in Medina. At
the beginning, the Prophet (S) entered into a friendship and cooperation
alliance with them, but they were always, through hypocrisy and
deception, attempting to strike Islam. In spite of all his kindness and
mercy, the Holy Prophet (S) wouldn't overlook hypocrisy and conspiracy,
and would punish the hypocrites and the plotters.

When the Bani Nadhir tribe found their plots brought to naught, they
united with the infidels of Mecca and some other tribes and, in the
fifth year of Hijra, a huge army consisting of ten thousand swordsmen
commanded by Abu Sufyan was formed to invade Medina aiming at uprooting
the Islam.

It was a time of trial and self-sacrifice. On the advice of Salman and
agreement of the Prophet (S) a ditch was dug around Medina. When the
enemy reached Medina, it faced a wide ditch. The Jews of Bani Qurayza,
like other Jews, began to practice their hypocrisy and treachery. Severe
and critical moments were impending.

With his appealing war plans, the Holy Prophet (S) dispersed the battle
front of the enemy. ‘Amr b. ‘Abduwad, the peerless commander of Mecca,
was killed by ‘Ali (as) in a person to person fight; the Prophet (S)
described ‘Ali (as)'s strike that killed ‘Amr as more valuable than the
worship done by jinn and mankind. After ‘Amr was killed, the enemy was
struck with terror. Pessimism among the invaders and Jews, shortage of
provision, severe night hurricanes, and fatigue, all in all led to the
victory of the Islamic army, and made the infidel troops flee back to
Mecca.

The 6th Year of Hijra – Hudaybiya Peace
---------------------------------------

In a dream, the Holy Prophet (S) saw that the Muslims were engaged in
performing their Hajj Pilgrimage in Masjid al-Haram. He made the Muslims
prepare for an 'Umra pilgrimage in Dhu’l Qa‘da.

Everybody got prepared for the pilgrimage and the caravan departed.
Since this trip was being made in a Holy month and the Muslims had
nothing with them but a single sword which every traveler carried with
him, and on the other hand, since the Quraysh was informed of the
Muslims’ intention to set out for the pilgrimage and prevented their
entering Mecca, the Prophet (S) made a treaty with Meccans which was
renowned as “Hudaybiya Treaty”.

According to this peace treaty, the Prophet (S) and the Muslims
dispensed with the ‘Umra. They were supposed to perform ‘Umra the
following year. This treaty demonstrated the peaceful spirit of Muslims
to all. Accordingly, a ten year truce was agreed upon by the two sides
that were also free to visit each other's territories. This peace was
indeed a victory for Islam. Thus the Prophet (S) got relieved of the
internal menace and found an opportunity to call the rulers of other
countries to Islam.

The Holy Prophet (S)'s Letters to the Kings
-------------------------------------------

We know from the Holy verses of the Qur’an that Islam is a universal
religion and the Holy Prophet (S) is the last messenger divinely sent to
people[^7]. According to this mission, the Holy Prophet (S) sent letters
to the eminent heads of states, such as Khusrow Parviz, the king of
Iran; Heracles, Roman Emperor; Muquqas, the king of Egypt, and so on,
calling them to Islam.

His letters, still extant, were clear, decisive, and brief. These
letters were delivered by faithful, devoted, and experienced couriers.
The Prophet (S) has, through these letters called them to Islam, word of
Truth, brotherhood, and equality and warned them in case of
heedlessness, of God's chastisement. It was these messages that paved
the way for universal development of Islam.

Battle of Khaibar
-----------------

Khaibar, or better to say the oasis of Khaibar, consisted of seven
citadels in a fertile land 200 kilometers north of Medina, and was a
major shelter for the Jews. The Jews became more and more treacherous
and bothersome to the Muslims. The Prophet (S) decided to teach these
hypocrites their place and repel their evil. To this end, he ordered the
Muslims to go to Khaibar to conquer it.

After great endeavor and resistance, their trenches were conquered one
after another. Following the conquest of Khaibar citadels, the Jews who
lived in the village 'Fadak”, 140 km to Medina surrendered without any
fight and resistance, and accepted the leadership of the Holy Prophet
(S).

According to the Islamic rules, places which surrender without war
belong to the Prophet. The holy messenger granted this village to his
daughter Fatimah al-Zahra (as). The story of its usurpation later on is
recorded in the history up to the time of ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, which
we will talk about in the biography of Fatimah al-Zahra (as).

Conquest of Mecca
-----------------

In 8/629, something happened that proved the perfidy of Quraysh. Hence,
the Holy Prophet (S) decided to take over Mecca and cleanse it of the
impurity of the idols and idolaters. Thus, in a quite unprecedented way,
and without anybody knowing the time of command for departure and the
course of movement and destination, the Prophet (S) ordered ten thousand
Muslim troops to move toward Mecca on the tenth of Ramadan.

The city of Mecca surrendered without any resistance. The Prophet (S)
accompanied by Muslims entered his hometown. Idols were smashed into
pieces and a great victory was achieved for Islam.

In this conquest, the Prophet (S) who had full authority and was able to
revenge his old stubborn enemies, granted them amnesty and mercy and
showed the whole world that the goal of Islam was to tear away the
chains of captivity and slavery from man's hands and feet and to call
them toward Allah, and toward goodness, purity, and righteousness. From
this year on, non-Muslims embraced Islam by groups and got familiar with
its reviving and humanizing decrees.

Upon the conquest of Mecca, battles of Hunayn, Ta’if and Tabuk took
place. In the first two, the Muslims defeated the enemy; in the battle
of Tabuk, however, although the Prophet did not encounter the enemy and
did not wage any war, a series of spiritual gains were attained by the
Muslims in this extremely adverse battle. With such tortuous journey,
the Prophet (S) paved the way for the conquest of Sham (Syria) and Rome,
and taught methods of battle against great powers to his faithful
companions.

The Death of the Holy Prophet (S)'s Beloved Son
-----------------------------------------------

 In the early years the Prophet of Islam suffered the loss of his three
sons named Qasim, Tahir and Tayyib as well as his three daughters
Zaynab, Ruqayya and Umm Kulthum and was very impressed by their demise.

But once again the death of his beloved son, Ibrahim, an offspring of
Mariya, intensely hurt the Holy Prophet (S)'s sensitive heart. The
Prophet (S), while embracing Ibrahim who was as a newly blossomed flower
surrendering his soul to God, uttered the following eloquent statements:

“My dearest Ibrahim! There is nothing we can do for you. Nor will God's
destiny change, your father's eyes are tearful and his heart is mournful
for your passing away, but I will never say a word which would outrage
God…”

Some companions were surprised by the Prophet (S)’s weeping; the Prophet
(S), however, like every time in the past taught the Muslims a great
lesson, i.e., the lesson of affection and kindness to one's children.

Love of one's children is among the most sublime and purest
manifestations of human soul and an indication of its health and
gentleness. The Holy Prophet (S) would always say: “Honor your children
and be kind to them.” However, the only child that survived and
perpetuated the luminary lineage of *Wilayat* and Imamate was his
daughter Fatimah al-Zahra (as), the wife of ‘Ali (as), i.e., the Prophet
(S)'s executor of testament.

Farewell Pilgrimage – the Last Journey of the Prophet (S) to Mecca
------------------------------------------------------------------

 A few years had been left of the Holy Prophet (S)'s blessed life. It
was 10/631 when the Prophet (S) announced to people to get prepared for
performing the Hajj pilgrimage. Over one hundred thousand people were
gathered. The Holy Prophet (S) donned the garb of a pilgrim (*ihram*) by
wearing two pieces of white cloth from the Mosque of Shajara near Medina
and so did the Muslims.

*Labbaik Allahumma Labbaik, La Sharika Laka Labbaik* was the melodious
chanting reverberating in the air. Thousands of people were repeating
this heavenly call of the Prophet (S). It was a manifestation of the
magnificence of the Islamic unity, equality, and brotherhood.

The Holy Prophet (S) taught the sacred rites of the Hajj pilgrimage to
the Muslims for the first and the last time. This great Journey
represented fruitful outcome of long time efforts of the Holy Prophet
(S) who sincerely had dedicated his life and wealth to the actualization
of the Islamic ideals and Divine decrees, and delivered Divine messages
to the people of the world. On ‘Arafat, after noontime and afternoon
prayers, the Holy Prophet (S) addressed thousands of pure-minded Muslims
as follows:

“O people! Listen to me! Maybe I won't meet you again at this place. O
people! Your blood and wealth are respected like this day and month, and
any intrusion on them is unlawful, until the day you stand before the
Exalted Allah.”

Then he called people to equality and brotherhood, advised them to
observe women's rights, admonished them not to exceed Divine bounds,
bewared them of violating one another's rights, and exhorted them to
piety.

In the Arena of Ghadir Khumm
----------------------------

On the way back to Medina when the Holy Prophet (S) and tens of
thousands of Muslims reached a place called Ghadir Khumm, the Revelation
Angle, Gabriel, descended on the Prophet (S) and inspired the Divine
Message in him as follows:

> يَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ بَلِّغْ مَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۖ
> وَإِنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلْ فَمَا بَلَّغْتَ رِسَالَتَهُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ
> يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ النَّاسِ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ
> الْكَافِرِينَ {67}

***“O Messenger! Proclaim whatever (Message) has been sent to you from
your Lord. If you do not, you would not have fulfilled and proclaimed
your Mission. Allah will guard you against people's evil.”***[^8]

The people wondered what the fulfiller of religion was, without which
the true religion would not be complete. That was truly the Prophet
(S)'s last measure to determine the line of Executorship (*wisaya*) and
Imamate. The Prophet was to – by God's command – clarify people's duty
after his demise.

Under the scorching sun and on the hot sands of the desert, the Holy
Prophet (S) introduced ‘Ali (as), through a long sermon, as his *wali*
(guardian) and successor to the people, particularly by uttering this
statement: “Whoever I am the master (*mawla*) of, ‘Ali is also the
master of”, which has been narrated by both Sunni and Shi‘a scholars.

On that day, 18th of Dhu'l- Hajja, people swore allegiance to ‘Ali (as).

About two months later, that is, on the latter days of Safar 11 AH, the
Holy Prophet (S) closed his eyes to the world and was laid to rest next
to the mosque constructed by himself.

This Holy Shrine is now a center of pilgrimage for over a billion
Muslims from all over the world.

The Qur’an and the Household of the Prophet (S)
-----------------------------------------------

A *hadith* has been related from the Prophet (S) as follows: “I leave
two great and precious things among you; as long as you hold on to them,
you will never be led astray: the Book of Allah and my *‘Itrat*
(Household).”

The Qur’an
----------

the Qur’an consists of verses which gradually descended on Prophet
Muhammad (S) within 23 years. It includes 114 short and long *sura*s and
about 6400 verses. All *sura*s of the Qur’an begin in the name of Allah
(*Bismi’Allah al-Rahman al-Rahim*) except *Surat* *al-Tawbah*
(Repentance).

The verses of the Qur’an are arranged as ordered by the Prophet (S)
himself.

The *sura*s revealed in Mecca are called Makki and the ones revealed in
Medina are called Madani. Each *sura* has a name which is taken from
within the *sura* text such as: *al-Nahl*, *al-Baqara*, *al-‘Alaq*, etc.
As soon as a *sura*, a verse, or several verses were revealed to the
Prophet (S) some trusted people, called “Writers of Revelation”, would
write them down. The most famous among these writers were ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib (as), ‘Abdullah b. Mas‘ud, Zayd b. Thabit, Mu‘adh b. Jabal, Ubayy
b. Ka‘b, etc. The advantage of the Qur’an over other scriptures is that
in the Qur’an not the slightest distortion or change has occurred.

The Qur’an is a perpetual and durable miracle of the Prophet (S). It is
explicitly pointed out in some parts of the Qur’an that if you are in
doubt of the Qur'an, then produce some *sura*s, or even a single *sura*
consisting of three verses like these; of course, the Qur’an itself has
pointed out that the imposters will never be able to do so.

The Qur’an is a miracle not only in wording and eloquence, but also in
meaning and in containing consistent decrees and ordinances and eternal
laws. The more human knowledge develops and the more the world's secrets
are unveiled, the mystery of the eternality of Islam and the Qur’an will
be further clarified. The Qur’an has so far been translated into over
one hundred world languages and several times into Persian, English, and
French.

In the Qur’an attention is, above all, drawn to worshipping of the One
God; Divine attributes of Beauty and Majesty; greatness of the creation
order; going through quarters of the world and nature; studying the
states and lives of the past; devotional, social, and legal ordinances
laws; the Resurrection; great Divine Prophets’ biographies; and taking
lessons from the past folks and generations.

In order to be able to comprehend the deep inner and outer aspects of
the Qur’an, we should, first of all, get familiar with the eloquent and
rhetorical language of the Qur’an, which is a benevolent, everlasting,
and truthful guide.

‘Itrat or Ahl-al Bayt (as)
--------------------------

 It includes ‘Ali (as), his children, and Fatimah al-Zahra (as), most
dear and devoted daughter of the Holy Prophet (S), who was called by the
latter as *Umm Abiha*, i.e, the mother of her father. ‘Ali (as) was
several times introduced by the Prophet as his executor of will,
successor, and an Imam, as was Aaron to Moses.

The children who were born to ‘Ali (as) and Fatimah (as), of whom the
last one was the promised Mahdi (as), are all Infallible and far from
impurity and sins. Other children from this noble tree are many and have
always been sources of benevolence, blessedness, and virtue everywhere
and at all times.

The Holy Messenger's Wives
--------------------------

The Holy Prophet (S) married nine wives throughout his life. It was, of
course, due to the circumstances of the society then as well as the
situation of the Prophet (S) himself. Before the advent of Islam,
polygamy was widely common among various tribes. Later on, Islam allowed
having up to four wives, provided that justice is maintained among them.

We know that the Prophet (S) did not get married until the age of 25, at
which he married Khadija who was 15 years his senior and lived with her
along for about 25 years. When she died, he married another widow called
Suda. Afterwards he got married to ‘A’isha. Other wives that he married,
were all after ‘A’isha; and except Suda, all were widows and not very
young. The Prophet (S) would grant them their rights, do them justice,
keep their due turns, and treat them all very kindly.

The women that the Prophet (S) married were either among the unattended
widows whose husbands had been martyred in war, or of the war captives
who were quite respectfully living in the Prophet (S)'s house. His
Marriages, particularly in the last ten years of his life, were in
general socially-oriented and were for producing affection among the
hearts and creating kinship with the tribes to maintain relation with
those whose conversion to Islam would have reinforced Islam and Muslims.

Contrary to what has been said by some enemies of Islam or foreign
orientalists, the Prophet (S) had by no means intended to seek sexual
pleasure – particularly since the Prophet (S), as mentioned in the
Qur’an[^9], would spend during daytime two thirds of the night
worshipping and reading the Qur’an, and was busy engaged in social
affairs and wars, and furthermore these marriages had not occurred at a
young age.

The Prophet (S)'s Behavior and Temperament
------------------------------------------

God says about His Holy Messenger, Muhammad b. ‘Abdullah (S):

> وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلَىٰ خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ {4}

***﴾And indeed you possess a great character﴿ (68:4).***

What can a man with a little knowledge say about a Messenger who is all
piety, mercy and a source of benevolence and magnanimity? What I say
here is a single drop out of an ocean.

The Prophet (S)'s temperament, behavior, and conduct are indeed a model
for all Muslims and a paradigm for all human beings and are in fact
manifestations of Islam. The Prophet (S) regarded all Muslims as
brothers and treated them extremely kindly and lovingly.

He would be dressed so simply and would sit on the ground so humbly
among the companions that if a stranger arrived, he could not realize
which one of them was the Prophet (S).

Although always wearing simple clothes, he considered cleanliness of
garment and body as very important. His performing ablution (*wudhu*)
was always accompanied by brushing teeth. He would not exclude using
perfume. He was always polite to the old and the young. He would always
surpass others in saying *salam*. There was always a sweet smile on his
face; however, he would avoid laughing loudly. He would frequently visit
the sick and attend the Muslims’ funerals. He was hospitable.

He would specially favor the orphans and the distressed, and
affectionately caress the heads of the orphans. He avoided sleeping on a
soft bed, saying: “In the world, I am like a rider who is resting for a
while in the shade of a tree and then leaving.” Although he was kind and
gentle toward the subordinates, he was strongly harsh to the enemies and
hypocrites.

He was never frightened in the wars and was closer in battle field to
the enemy than all other soldiers. He pardoned stubborn enemies such as
the Quraysh infidels in the conquest of Mecca, who, in turn, were
attracted by the Prophet (S)'s character and converted to Islam in
scores.

He would avoid worldly riches. He distributed public property among
people as quickly as possible, and although he was a commander and the
messenger of God, he would never take a bigger share for himself. His
holiness was truly an example and a paradigm for all people.

Some Sayings of His Holiness Prophet Muhammad (S):

1. “The best things given to a person are a thanking tongue, a tolerant
and patient body, and a God remembering heart.”

2. “It is true that you cannot attend to people by your wealth and
satisfy them. Then try to attend to them with your good temper and speak
kindly to them”.

3. “The worst people are those who do not accept an excuse and do not
forgive a slip.”

B 4. “Imparting knowledge to the unfit is like hanging jewelry and
pearls round the neck of a swine.”

5. “The best and the most valuable things that a person acquires are
forbearance and knowledge.”

6. “Hope is a source of mercy for my followers; if there were no light
of hope in the hearts, no mother would feed her baby, and no gardener
would plant a young tree.”

7. “The one who goes shopping and buys gifts for his family is like the
one who wants to help the needy; and when he wants to distribute the
gifts among the family members he should first hand one to his daughter
and then to his son.”

8. “Shall I not inform you of the things that if you do, the Satan will
get as far away from you as the distance between west and east?” Prophet
(S) asked. Those who were present replied: “Yes by all means.” The
Prophet (S) said: “Fasting makes the Satan black-faced, giving alms
breaks his back, and friendship only for God's sake and perseverance in
good deeds eradicates his root. Asking for Divine pardon and repentance
cuts off Satan's artery. For everything, there's a *zakat*, and the
*zakat* of the body is fasting.”

[^1]: Furugh-i Abadiyyat, vol. 3, p. 214.

[^2]: Furugh-i Abadiyyat, vol. 3, p. 152.

[^3]: Al-Qur’an, 96: 1-5.

[^4]: Al-Qur’an, 15: 94.

[^5]: Al-Qur’an, 26: 214.

[^6]: Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, vol. 1, p. 287.

[^7]: Al-Qur’an, 34; 18.

[^8]: Al-Qur’an 5; 67

[^9]: Al-Qur’an, 73: 25.


