The Third Infallible, Hadhrat Fatimah al-Zahra
==============================================

For Muslim women, Fatimah al-Zahra (as) is undoubtedly the most popular
religious, moral, pious, and literary figure among the Muslims and other
people of the world. The personality of Fatimah al-Zahra (as) is
superior to all women of the world; she is a perfect paradigm for all
the women who are enamored with chastity and piety.

It was on her chaste and immaculate lap that the two dignified and
eminent Imams, i.e., Imam al-Hasan (as), the manifestation of tolerance
and grace, and Imam al-Husayn (as), the master of the martyrs, were
raised and brought up; so was also Zaynab Kubra (as), a corporeal epic,
an embodiment of bravery, who was matchless in eloquence and a
truth-seeker who proclaimed the message of ‘Ashura to the world and
removed the mask of hypocrisy, polytheism, meanness, and worldliness
from the face of Yazid and members of his sect.

Nobody denies that a mother has much more participation in rearing
children, especially her daughters. And it was Fatimah al-Zahra (as) who
imparted the Islamic spirit of education to her sons and daughters in
pure atmosphere of chastity and piety of family.

Her Parents
-----------

Born to Khadija, Fatimah was the only child survived from her marriage
to the Holy Prophet (S). What can be said about a father who was the
seal of the prophets, beloved of Allah and a savior for mankind? A
father, whose moral perfections and dispositions may not be described
even by the most eloquent orators.

As for her mother, Khadija daughter of Khuwaylid was one of the most
virtuous women before the advent of Islam; and in the Islamic era she
was the first lady to acknowledge her faith in her husband, the Holy
Prophet (S), and to embrace Islam, and generously bestow her wealth on
the development of this religion.

The history of Islam will never forget the degree to which Khadija was
faithful and loyal to the Prophet (S) in giving out her wealth and soul
lavishly to Islam.

‘A’isha, the Prophet (S)'s wife, is quoted as saying: “No other women
were as much respected as Khadija was. The Apostle of Allah (S) used to
recall her with fondness and so much respect as if there existed no one
like her.”

‘A’isha further said: “One day I told the Prophet (S) that she [Khadija]
had been only a widow. Hearing this, he got so upset that his face
turned red. Then he said: I swear by Allah there existed no other woman
better than Khadija to me. The day when all people were infidels and
idolaters she acknowledged her faith in me. The days when everybody
accused me of sorcery and telling lies, she confirmed me.

When everybody had turned their back on me, Khadija put all her wealth
at my disposal and spent it generously in my way. God bestowed a
daughter on me through her, who was a manifestation of purity, chastity,
and piety.” Then, ‘A’isha said: “I told the Prophet (S) that I did not
mean to talk evil about her, and I repented my words.”

It is said that Khadija gave birth to seven children from the Prophet
(S):

Qasim, whose name brought forth the nickname Abu al-Qasim for the
Prophet (S), and died before the *Bi‘tha* (Prophetic Mission) of the
Prophet (S) at the age of two. ‘Abd Allah, or Tayyib, who was born at
the outset of *Bi‘tha* and died after that. Zaynab, who was married to
Abu al-‘As.

Ruqayya, who got married first to ‘Ataba and then to ‘Uthman b. Affan,
and died in the second year after *Hijra*. Umm Kulthum, who also married
‘Uthman – after Ruqayya's death – and died four years after *Hijra*. The
seventh one was Fatimah al-Zahra (as) who got married to Hadhrat ‘Ali
(as). The fruits of this blessed and noble marriage were the holy
progeny consisting of our honorable and Infallible Imams.

The birthday of Fatmat al-Zahra (as) is known to be on Jamadi al-Thani
20, 5 years after *Bi‘tha* in Mecca. Thus, at the time of Hijra she was
about nine years old.

Her names and nicknames, which all represent her heavenly
characteristics and moral virtues, include: Siddiqa Tahira, Zakiyya,
Zahra, Sayyidat al-Nisa al-‘Alamin, Khayr al-Nisa, Batul, and so forth.

The most amazing name she is famous for is Umm Abiha, i.e. “mother of
her father” which indicates her intense love for her great father, and
that from early childhood and in spite of her young age she was – like
Khadija – a spiritual haven and mental support.

The nickname Umm Abiha was given by the Prophet (S) to his beloved
daughter. In Arabic, Umm has a second meaning besides mother i.e. source
and origin. As in Umm al-Khaba’ith (the source of all evils) which is
used for wine, and Umm al-Qura, which is attributed to Mecca, so Umm
Abiha also means the origin and source of *Nubuwwa* (Prophethood) and
*Wilaya* (Guardianship). And, in truth, Zahra was like a shady tree,
giving forth sweet fruits of Imamate and *Wilayat*.

Lifetime of Fatimah al-Zahra (as)
---------------------------------

Fatimah al-Zahra (as) inherited eminent features from her great mother,
e.g. generosity, benevolence, and instructiveness; and Divine and
Heavenly characteristics from her noble father. She was a compassionate,
kind, and devoted wife for her husband ‘Ali (as). In her heart, there
was nothing inscribed except monotheism, worshipping God Almighty, and
love of the Prophet (S); and she stood aloof from the impurity of
paganism and idolatry.

She lived nine years of her early life in her parents' peaceful and
serene house and another nine years with her honorable husband ‘Ali
al-Murtadha (as), engaging in dissemination of the Islamic doctrines and
social services, as well as doing the exhausting housework.  
 She used to spend her time educating her children, doing household
chores, and in worship and remembrance of God. Fatimah (as) was a lady
who grew and fostered within the Islamic educational school of thought,
with faith and piety being permeated into all aspects of her life.

Fatimah (as) was raised at her mother's side and in the warm-hearted
bosom of her father. She learned Divine knowledge and sciences from the
fountainhead of Prophethood; and in her husband's house, she put into
action what she had learned for years.

Like an aged mother and an experienced housewife who has left behind all
her life span, Fatimah (as) would give her full attention to her
household and well-being of her husband and education of her children.
She would also take into consideration whatever took place outside their
house, and would defend her own and her husband's rights.

How Fatimah (as) and ‘Ali (as) Got Married
------------------------------------------

From the beginning it was known to all that no man was there to match
Fatimah (as) as a spouse except ‘Ali (as). Nevertheless, many of the
Prophet (S.A.W)'s companions and those who thought to be close to him,
cherished marriage with her, and fostered this aspiration in their
minds.

It is reported that, following all these aspirations, a number of the
companions asked ‘Ali (as): “Why do you not make an effort to marry with
the only daughter of the Prophet (S.A.W)?”

‘Ali (as) said: “I have no [financial] means to step forward for this
purpose.” And they commented: “The Prophet (S) will not ask for anything
from you.” Eventually, ‘Ali (as) found a chance to bring up the request.

One day he went to the house of the Holy Prophet (S) for his proposal,
but was held back due to bashfulness. This was repeated for a couple of
times, it is said. At the third visit, the Holy Prophet (S) asked ‘Ali
(as): “Do you require something?” Yes, replied ‘Ali (as). The Prophet
said: “Perhaps you came to seek Zahra's hand in marriage?” ‘Ali (as)
said he did. Since this marriage was ordained by God and the Prophet (S)
was informed through revelation about its importance, he was to let his
daughter know about this proposal and asked her opinion in this
relation.

The Prophet (S) said to his daughter Fatimah (as): “You know ‘Ali very
well; he is the closest person to me. He has precedence over others in
service and virtue. I besought God to choose the best husband for you.”

“God ordered me to give you in marriage to ‘Ali (as). Tell me what you
think.” Fatimah kept silent. The Prophet (S) interpreted her silence as
consent and became happy, starting to say *takbir* [*Allahu Akbar*]. The
Prophet (S), then, gave the glad tidings to ‘Ali (as), and determined a
bridal gift as an equivalent of 2000 grams of silver. Then in a
gathering where some of the companions were present, the Prophet (S)
recited the marriage sermon and the auspicious contract of marriage was
concluded.

It can be said that ‘Ali (a.s.) did not own anything but a sword, a coat
of armor, and a camel for carrying water. The Prophet (S) told ‘Ali:
“Keep the sword for *jihad* and the camel for carrying water and trips,
but sell your armor to provide means for the marriage.” The Prophet (S)
told Salman to sell the armor, and he sold it for five hundred
*dirham*s. Then a sheep was slaughtered and the marriage banquet was
held. It took place in the month of Dhu'l Hijja, 2 years after Hijra.
All the objects brought into Fatimah (as)'s house as dowry did not
exceed 14 items as follows:

A scarf; two pieces of cloth; a bath towel; a piece of wool *chadur*
(top to toe cover); four pillows; a straw mat; a wooden bowl; a clay
jar; a water goatskin; a water pitcher; a wooden bed; a laundry basin; a
ewer; a couple of hand mills; and some fragrance and perfume.

These included all the dowry and household of Fatimah (as), chief of the
ladies of the world, and the wife of ‘Ali (as). At the night of
consummation, Sulami, ‘Umays's daughter undertook taking care of Fatimah
(as) in place of her mother, Khadija, who had passed away.

The Holy Apostle of Allah (S) together with a number of his companions
from among both *Muhajirun* and *Ansar* took part in the wedding
ceremony. The chanting of *takbir* and *tahlil* (saying *la ilaha illa
Allah* = there is no God but Allah) had filled the lanes and streets of
Medina with Divinity, and waves of felicity had been delighting people's
hearts.

The Holy Prophet (S) put the hand of her daughter in the hand of ‘Ali
(as) and prayed for good blessing to them and bade farewell to them.
Thus, the wedding ceremony of the best of men and women in the world was
held in such a simple way.

From Delight to Sorrow
----------------------

In the year 11/632, at the end of Safar/May, the heart-breaking demise
of the Holy Prophet (S) occurred, and how painful it was for Fatimah
(as) to part from her father, who, before all his travels, the last one
he hugged and kissed goodbye was his beloved daughter, and when he
returned, the first one he visited was also his daughter. He would
always inquire after her state and health and whispered secrets in her
soul's ear. Since childhood, she had been constantly next to her father
and taking care of him.

Sometimes she would rush along with Hashemite women to the battleground
to inquire about her father's state. In the battle of Uhud, for example,
where a rumor was spread that the Prophet (S) had been killed, she
rushed to the slope of Uhud Mountain to wash blood off her father's face
and take care of the wounds by pouring some ashes from a burnt mat on
them for remedy.

She was such a woman that whenever she found free time from her
housework and child-rearing, she would go over to his father to enjoy
his company. But alas! The moment for separation of the father and
daughter had come too soon. The Prophet (S) fell sick in his bed, with
his face getting pale implying his last moments.

‘A’isha is quoted as saying that at the last moments of his life, the
Prophet (S) called for his beloved daughter and seated her next to
himself and whispered something in her ear, at which she burst into
crying. Then, he told her something else that suddenly made her
delighted and smiling. Everybody was bewildered by these two conflicting
reactions.

When asked what secret she was whispered to, she said: “The first time
my father told me of his death; I got very sad and lost my patience and
wept. He became sad too, and whispered again in my ear: ‘My dear
daughter! Know that you are the first in the family who will soon join
me’. I got very delighted to hear this good tiding. My father said: ‘Are
you pleased to be the Chief of the Ladies of the World and the Chief of
the Ladies of this *umma*?” And the Fatimah (as)’s answer was: “I am
pleased with what God and you are pleased with.”

To sum up, Fatimah (as), the chief of the ladies of the world and the
ladies of this *umma*, and the freshly blossomed flower of the garden of
Prophethood, soon started to wither and after a while joined her beloved
father. Alas! How short was the blessed life of the most pious and
paramount lady of Islam.

Indeed, her father's death and the events which followed made Fatimah
(as) weary in body and soul. The days following her father's demise
passed over her in bitter grief and unending weeping. She could not
tolerate being separated from her father, and thus when she heard from
her father about her death, she smiled. She would rather die than
outlive him.

Finally, disturbances and sorrows became more and more debilitating for
her to the extent that the daughter of the Prophet (S) fell seriously
ill. In this dire situation, obviously nobody, except a couple of the
oppressed and underprivileged like Balal and Salman, sympathized with
this honorable lady.

However, the women, both of the *Muhajirun* and *Ansar*, especially the
latter, who were informed of her illness, rushed to her bedside to visit
and appease her sympathetically. At her sickbed, in reply to those who
inquired about her health, the Prophet (S)'s daughter would speak
eloquent words, which in those days seemed to be the laments and
complaints of a bereaved and tyrannized lady, but were actually warnings
to Muslims against disunion and mischief coming up in future.

Indeed, she said what should have been said, and upon the painful
affliction of bereavement of her beloved and affectionate father, she
hastened to Paradise to join her noble father (S) by the pond of
*kawthar*.

The passing away of the Prophet (S)'s daughter made ‘Ali (as) very
distressed and mournful. This separation and “deep affliction” is too
vast to be explained here.

The Story of Fadak as a Historical Reality
------------------------------------------

Fadak was a cultivated piece of land 140 km off Medina. It was a
personal property since it was not obtained in a war or taken over as
spoils of war. Rather, when the story about Khaybar reached the village
of Fadak, all the people there consented to make peace with the Prophet
(S), providing him with half of Fadak and keeping the other half for
themselves, for which they demanded to hold their own religious rites
quite freely and the security of their territory to be maintained by the
Islamic state.

It is said that when the verse, ﴾And give the kinsman his right…﴿
(Al-Qur’an, 17: 26), was revealed, the Prophet (S) presented Fadak as a
gift to her beloved daughter, Fatimah (as).

It was barely ten days after the demise of the Holy Prophet (S) when
Fatimah al-Zahra (as) was informed that the caliph's agents have
expelled her workers from Fadak and taken over the land. Thereupon,
along with a group of Hashemite women, Fatimah (as) went to the caliph
to take back her usurped land, and some talk was exchanged between them
accordingly.

The Prophet (S)'s daughter asked Abu Bakr why he had deprived her of her
right and dismissed her workers from the land. The caliph said, “I have
heard your father say that the Prophets bequeath nothing.” “My father
bestowed Fadak on me while he was still alive and it was since then that
I have been the owner”, said Fatimah (as).

The caliph asked. “Do you have any witnesses for this?” Fatimah (as)
said, “My witnesses are ‘Ali (as) and Umm Ayman, [and as some believe,
al-Hasan (as) and al-Husayn (as)] who have all borne witness. Then ‘Ali
(as), who was present as a witness, said to Abu Bakr, “Whom do you ask
for witness when I lay claim to a property which is in the hand of a
Muslim? Do you ask me, who am a claimant, for a witness or the other
person who is in possession of the property?” The caliph said, “In this
case I would call you to witness.” ‘Ali (as) said: “It is a long time
since Fadak has been in our possession and disposal; now that the
Muslims claim it to be a public property, they should bring in their
witnesses.”[^1]

In order to appropriate Fadak, the caliph appealed to a *hadith* which
is in brief as follows: “Prophets do not bequeath anything, and whatever
they leave behind after death is alms.”

Contrasted to the Qur’an, this *hadith* proves to be incorrect. It is
also rationally incorrect to believe that the prophets bequeath nothing
to their children, as it is pointed out in *Surat al-Maryam*, (verses 5
and 6) reflecting Zechariah's supplication: ﴾Indeed I fear my kinsmen,
after me, and my wife is barren. So grant me from yourself an *heir* who
may *inherit* from me and *inherit* from the House of Jacob, and make
him, my Lord, pleasing [to You].﴿

Also in *Surat al-Naml*, verse 16, God says: ﴾Solomon inherited from
David﴿. Instigated by the people surrounding him, the then caliph
intended to deprive the Prophet (S)'s daughter and ‘Ali (a.s.) of the
revenue from Fadak, so that they become unable to give alms to the poor
and the needy and as a result those who gathered around them intending
to gain alms would disperse.

Furthermore, under Abu Bakr, some people shunned paying alms tax and
thus the incomes to the public treasury began to subside. A fertile and
cultivated piece of land with numerous palm groves, Fadak yielded about
seventy thousand *dinar*s. Consequently, Abu Bakr took over Fadak from
the daughter of the Prophet (S) and many of other Umayyad and Abbasid
caliphs followed him. For the first time, however, Fadak was returned to
the offspring of Fatma (as) and Hashemites by ‘Umar b. ‘Abdul ‘Aziz.

When the news about the usurpation of Fadak reached Fatimah (as), she
called in her kindred and kinfolks. As they gathered in the Mosque of
the Apostle of Allah (S), Fatimah (as) took a seat behind the curtain.
Hearing her anguished cries and lamentation due to her father's absence
and tyranny of the Muslims, both the Emigrants and the Helpers began to
weep vehemently. Fatimah (as) paused a while for the silence to prevail
and then delivered a fervent sermon.

She began by praising and glorifying Allah the Almighty, as follows:
“Praise and glory belongs to the Lord whose generous Hand brought into
the world of being the creatures abiding in the desert of non-existence.
Praise is to God who taught us – His servants – the lesson of
thankfulness and assigned gratefulness as our obligation.

He is the Lord who has existed before everything and will exist after
everything.”' Then she went on to say: “Here I am, the daughter of the
Prophet, professing the Oneness of Allah and acknowledging that Muhammad
(S), my father, is His servant and messenger. O you, the group of
Emigrants and Helpers! You pledged allegiance to your Prophet (S) to
spread around his religion with your own hands and have the world of
mankind turn round the pivot of his faith.”

She then proceeded to talk about Islam and the Book of Allah, the
Household of the Prophet (S), performing prayers, fasting, Hajj, and
*jihad*, and said:

''O Muslims! You are advised not to leave us and not to leave your
Prophet's children alone and to be faithful to his Household.”

Introducing herself for the second time, she said: “...standing before
this sacred tomb nobody can tell lies. I am not exaggerating... this is
my father lying in his grave... My father, Muhammad (S), was sent to
teach you morals, virtues, and the codes of humanity at the school of
piety and ethics. You are the ones who slipped back to your old faith
and the time of paganism as soon as he passed away... then you took to
incompatibility and practiced hypocrisy and detachment... I assume Satan
has overshadowed your minds and diverted your heedless steps from the
straight path.”

Then she uttered some words that hit down like a sledge hammer on the
heads of the usurpers of her right, saying: “Who has said that Fatimah
is to be deprived of her father's inheritance? Who is the one who has
broken apart the lawful limits of inheritance and has interpreted the
verses of the Qur’an to his own whims? O Emigrants and Helpers! I am
astonished by what this old man says.

Abu Bakr supposes he can take over the inheritance of Abu Qahafa,
whereas the inheritance of Muhammad (S) is unlawful for Fatimah. Nobody
is allowed to quote a *hadith* from my father as against the Qur’an.”
Then Fatimah al-Zahra (as) recited some verses from the *Surat al-Naml*,
in which the Qur’an talks about Solomon's inheriting from David, and
David bequeathing to Solomon. Then she read Zechariah's words from
*Surat Al-i Imran*, and inheritance rules from *Surat al-Nisa*, to the
Emigrants and Helpers and then she continued:

“O Emigrants and Helpers! What do you say on these manifest verses and
how do you want to weaken a general law by a single *hadith*? How do you
want to deprive Fatimah, daughter of Muhammad (S) and his dear one who
was reared and trained by him, of her father's inheritance?'' And then
she faced Abu Bakr and said indignantly: “On the day of Resurrection, I
will seize your collar to demand my right from you which is trampled on
today.”

Then she turned toward the youth of Medina and after that turned toward
the tribesmen and the Helpers and said: “O Zealous youth! O loyal
comrades and helpers of Islam! What lassitude and negligence you are
engaged in! O group of Helpers! Why are you as bleak and dormant as ice,
while a bunch of hypocrites and inept have taken away my rightful lot
and my father's memorial to me? O you who have power in your arms and
gold in your palms! What has become of you that you would not move on?
What has happened to those stern muscles and mountain-crasher fists
which you used to fight with the infidels? How admirably you rose up and
how contemptibly you sat back and kept quiet!”

Against such scathing logic given by the daughter of the Prophet (S),
Abu Bakr had no choice but submission. The malevolent, however, did not
let the right reach the rightful and the caliphate and *Wilayat* settle
in their deserved position. The fervent words of Fatimah (as) were so
impressive and influential that the powerful and authoritative people
present there were feared lest a rebel and revolution would ensue.

Fatimah (as) swore not to talk to Abu Bakr and ‘Umar any longer. Then,
turned her face away from the crowd to the sacred grave of her honorable
father and fell grievously on it, saying: “My father! They tyrannized me
and will soon get the punishment for their actions on the Day of
Resurrection. My father! I will cry for you as long as I live, and my
eyes will not fail shedding tears...”

The women from the Bani Hashim wept a lot and took the daughter of the
Prophet (S) away from her father's grave and took her home, creeping
along.

‘Ali (as), Fatimah (as)'s husband, also asked her to be patient and
tolerant in this gloomy time when the sun of the truth is covered with
clouds of conspiracy. He himself, in order to prevent the newly planted
tree of Islam from drying up, got along with patience.

Fatimah al-Zahra (as) gradually became emaciated due to the tragic
events and sorrows, which if poured upon bright days, they would turn
into dark nights, and passed away on 3rd of Jamadi al-Thani, 95 days
(or, according to some sources, 75 days) after her father's demise.

Fatimah al-Zahra (as) advised her dear husband to bury her body at
night-time. And it was done as she had wished. The most heart-rending of
all was the fact that the resting place of the Holy Prophet (S)'s
daughter is still unknown; some consider it to be in Baqi‘cemetery,
others say it is besides the resplendent Shrine of the Holy Apostle of
Allah (S). With tears in his eyes, ‘Ali laid the body of his beloved
wife secretly in grave and without leaving a trace or sign filled it up
with earth, whispering the following lines distressfully with tearful
eyes:

“My soul is imprisoned in my bitterly painful sighs and laments. I wish
the bird of my soul would fly out of this cage and take my laments
along. Verily, there's no use in my life without your presence (my dear
wife). My tears are flowing down because I fear lest my life after you
would last long (and I would keep on burning in separation from you).”

Then, he took the hands of his dear children, the orphans of Zahra (as)
– al-Hasan, al-Husayn, Zaynab, and Umm Kulthum – and returned to the sad
house, from where Zahra (as) was absent for ever.

Some Sayings of Her Holiness Fatimah al-Zahra (as):

“God has ordained the faith a means for purifying from paganism; prayer
(*salat*) a means for refraining from arrogance and rebelliousness;
following the household of the Messenger a factor for the solidarity of
the Islamic community; Imamate as preventive of disunity; and *jihad*
(holy war) as a way of maintaining the glory of Islam.

Praise and glory belongs to the Lord whose generous Hand brought into
the world of being the creatures abiding in the desert of non-existence.

Praise and glory belongs to the Lord who taught us to be grateful and
decreed thankfulness as our duty. Allah is the Lord who had existed
before everything and will exist after everything.

O Muslims! You have been advised not to abandon us and not to leave the
children of your Prophet alone and to be faithful to his progeny.

My father, Muhammad (S), came to teach you virtuousness and morality in
the school of piety and ethics and taught you the doctrine of humanity.”

(Part of her Scathing Sermon in the Mosque of Medina)

[^1]: According to the Islamic law, the claimant has to bring in a
witness and the denier has to utter an oath.


