The Sixth Infallible, Hadhrat Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, The Fourth Imam
===================================================================

The name of the sixth Infallible is ‘Ali (as). He is the son of Husayn
b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as), and is nicknamed as Sajjad and Zayn
al-‘Abidin (ornament of the pious). Imam al-Sajjad (as) was born in
Medina in 38/659. He was present in the tragedy of Karbla but due to his
illness his life was spared, because *jihad* is not incumbent on the
ailing and his noble father did not let him fight, even though he was
very eager to participate in that tragic battle.

It was the Divine expediency to hold on the link and preserve Imam
al-Sajjad (as) as the heir to the great mission, i.e., Imamate and
*Wilayat*. His sickness lasted no more than a few days. After that he
lived 35 years, during which he spent his lifetime in battle, serving
people, worshipping, and communing with Allah.

Imam al-Sajjad (as), according to different narrations, was about twenty
four years old on the day of ‘Ashura of Muharram 61 (A.H.), when
following his father's last will and testament and the command of Allah
and the Messenger of Allah (S) he assumed the Imamate. His mother is
known to be Shahrbanu, the daughter of Sassanid Yazdgird.[^1]

What was required in the event of Karbala was the exploitation of this
unique uprising and matchless epic as well as the dissemination of Imam
al-Husayn (as)'s martyrdom message, which was spoken out loud enough
with unrivaled valor, bravery, and strength by Imam al-Sajjad (as) and
by his aunt Zaynab (as) in their captivity. It was a cry which is still
resonating over the past centuries and will remain so for ever.

The ‘Ashura tragic event with all its great and matchless aspects filled
with epical fervent and fidelity and pure faith apparently ended in the
evening of ‘Ashura; however, the mission of Imam al-Sajjad (as) and
Zaynab Kubra (as) began thenceforth.

The captives of the Ahl al-Bayt were rendered apart from the site of
“love-martyrs” and the travelers toward Allah and from beside the
mutilated bodies lying in their blood. Imam al-Sajjad (as), who was
sick, was placed on a bare camel's back with his two feet fastened from
under the belly of the animal with fetters.

The other captives were also placed on camels and sent toward Kufa. The
Kufans were quite perplexed under the heavy strangulation over the city,
not daring to utter a single word, since Ibn Ziyad had ordered the
chiefs of tribes to be thrown into jail and the people to leave their
houses unarmed.

Meanwhile, he ordered the sacred severed heads of the martyrs to be
handed out among the chiefs of the tribes who were in Karbala carrying
the head of Imam al-Husayn (as) in front of the caravan. In this way,
they led the caravan into the city of Kufa. ‘Ubayd Allah Ziyad intended
to create terror in people's minds and to show off this manifest
conquest before their eyes.

But with all these intense security measures, why couldn't they prevent
the unwavering and fiery statements and impressive message of the
irresistible lady of history, Hadhrat Zaynab (as)? As if waking from a
deep slumber, people began to find out that the captives were children
of ‘Ali (as) and the progeny of the Prophet (S), whose men were killed
in Karbala with the sword of injustice.

There appeared a great commotion among those people, which little by
little turned into bursts of weeping. Fatigued and sick and in
captivity, Imam al-Sajjad (as) looked at those people and said: “Are
they weeping for us? Who has killed our dear ones then?” Zaynab (as)
called people to silence and after praising the Almighty Allah, and
greeting His Holy Messenger, Hadhrat Muhammad (S), said: “...O people of
Kufa! O impostors and plotters and traitors! May this weeping of yours
be never soothed! You are like that woman who spins her cotton into
thread from dawn till dusk and then starts unraveling it all along till
dawn. Beware that you have founded your faith on fraudulence and
trickery...!”

Hadhrat Zaynab (as), thereupon severely reproached the Kufans,
asserting: “Verily, you have defiled yourselves with such a great
disgrace and infamy that it could not be erased from you till the
Resurrection. May baseness and abjection be upon you! Do you not know
how you beheaded the beloved grandson of the Apostle of Allah (S), broke
off so many pledges, took captive the nobles of his household and the
freeborn of his progeny, and shed his pure blood unjustly...?”

The Kufans kept so silent and motionless as if birds had perched on
their heads!

Zaynab's scathing words, as if uttered through ‘Ali (as)'s pure mouth
astonished the unfaithful Kufans. It surprisingly sounded like ‘Ali
(as)'s voice reverberating in Kufa...

Imam al-Sajjad (as) called his aunt to silence.

Ibn Ziyad ordered Imam al-Sajjad (as), Zaynab al-Kubra (as), and the
other captives to be brought into his court, where he hurled the most
contemptible insults at the sacred head of Imam al-Husayn (as) and the
captives of Karbala, and displayed his meanness and baseness to its
highest degree, and exposed his nasty nature as vividly as it really
was.

The Message of Blood and Martyrdom
----------------------------------

Upon having conversed with the captives of Karbala in his court, Ibn
Ziyad, or as he is famous with, son of Marjana, ordered his men to
transfer them to a jail next to the Grand Mosque of Kufa, and ordered
the sacred head of Imam al-Husayn (as) to be carried around in town in
order to intimidate the people.

In reply to the letter from Ibn Ziyad who had written to him about the
martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as) and his companions and capturing his
household, Yazid demanded that Imam al-Husayn (as)'s head and those of
his companions together with captives be sent to Sham. Imam Sajjad (as)
was chained on the hands, feet, and neck and seated on a camel, and the
household were placed on unsaddled camels like the captives of Byzantine
and Zanzibar and dispatched to Sham.

The Infallible Ahl al-Bayt (as) arrived in Sham through Ba‘albak. The
first day of Safar, 61 A.H, while Damascus was filled with rejoice and
exultation because Yazid had introduced captives of Karbala, the pure
progeny of the Prophet (S), as alien rebels in his claws. Yazid had the
captives and heads of the martyrs passed by Jayrun, which was his
countryside amusement place and debauchery resort. With much pleasure
and delight, he watched the captives led by “Jayrun,” feeling like an
indisputable conqueror.

Along the streets, people stood watching the captives. A Shami old man
stepped forward and stood before the caravan of the captives and said:

“Thanks God your men were killed and the cities of Islam got rid of
their evil and Yazid the commander of the faithful became victorious
over you.”

In reply to the old man who had at that age not been secure from the
Umayyads' poisonous propaganda, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (as) said: “O
Shaykh! Have you read the Qur’an?” “Yes,” replied the old man. Imam (as)
asked him if he had read this verse, ﴾Say, “I do not ask you any reward
for it except love of [my] near of the kin.”﴿ (Al-Qur’an, 42: 23). The
man said, “Yes.”

The Imam (as) said: “Those near of the kin love of whom Allah Almighty
has ordered and regarded as the reward for the Prophethood of the
Messenger (S), are we.” Then, he recited the verse of *tathir* which had
been revealed to the Prophet (S) concerning his own household

> إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
> الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا {33}

***﴾And Allah only wishes to remove all abomination from you, ye members
of the Family, and to make you pure and spotless.﴿ (Al-Qur’an, 33:
33).***

Then the Imam said: “We are the ones referred to in this verse, and whom
Allah has made pure of any external and internal impurity.” The old man
got astonished and wept, admitting how negligent he had been. Then he
asked the Imam (as) “Will I be forgiven if I repent? The Imam reassured
him of this. Then he was killed as a martyr for this awareness.

In any case, the caravan of the Godly captives was halted in front of
Damascus Grand Mosque. Then, being roped together, the captives were
transferred to a prison. They spent several days in that prison which
was like a ruin. However, Yazid intended to invite the prominent of
every school, ambassadors, dignitaries, and the court's flatterers to a
ceremonial feast to display his ostentatious triumph.

In this meeting, Yazid did the same insults as his vile hireling, lbn
Ziyad, had done in Kufa. That is, with his walking stick he hit on the
lips and teeth of Imam al-Husayn (as) which were frequently kissed by
the Apostle of Allah (S), ‘Ali Murtadha (as), and Fatimah al-Zahra (as).
When Zaynab (as) noticed this impudence was being done by Yazid who at
the same time said to Imam al-Sajjad (as),

“Thanks God that He finally disgraced you,” she rose to her feet at
once. Extremely outraged, she started to chide and reproach Yazid and
his followers, stating eloquently the message of the Martyr's blood and
exposing the wrongdoings and meanness of Yazid and his gang. In this
way, she degraded Yazid even more notoriously than the Kufans. Yazid,
however, cast his head down, tolerating the scathing and defaming words
which ruined his false personality, and in reply he only recited a
couplet as follows:

“Wailing and lamenting by the bereaved is permissible, and the death of
the dead one sounds easy for the hired women mourners.”

Imam al-Sajjad (as) in Damascus
-------------------------------

Besides the words Imam al-Sajjad (as) uttered with reference to the Holy
Qur’an and exposed the truth, when he encountered Yazid and as he was
chained all the way down to Damascus, he said: “O Yazid! By God what do
you think the Messenger of Allah (S) would do if he saw us in this poor
condition? This statement had such a deep impact on Yazid that he
ordered the chain removed from him and then all the companions wept over
that.

A better chance that the fourth Imam (as) found was a day when the
formal preacher got on the pulpit and started to speak ill of ‘Ali (as)
and his pure progeny and praise Mu‘awiya and Yazid. Imam al-Sajjad (as)
asked Yazid: “Would you allow me, too, to go upon this pile of wood to
say words which would both please Allah and bring forth reward for the
people?” Yazid did not like to permit, since he was aware of the
knowledge and eloquence of the infallible household (as) and was scared.

The people insisted, so he had to agree, and the fourth Imam (as) got
upon the pulpit and spoke in such a way that rent their hearts and
brought tears to the eyes of both men and women. Following is a brief
summary of what the holy Imam (as) said:

“O people! Allah has granted six privileges to us and our superiority
over others is based on seven things. Knowledge is with us, so also are
forbearance, generosity, eloquence, bravery, and heartfelt friendship of
the believers. Allah has ordained that the faithful people love us, and
this is what our enemies cannot prevent.”

He went on to say: “The Apostle of Allah (S) belongs to us, so are also
his successor and legatee (*wasi*), ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (as), Hamza Sayyid
al-Shuhada, Ja‘far al-Tayyar, the two grandsons of the Prophet (S),
al-Hasan and al-Husayn (as), and the Mahdi of this *umma* and the Lord
of Time.”

Then the Imam introduced himself, causing such a commotion that forced
the agents present around to interrupt and to silence the Imam (as) by
ordering the muezzin (man who calls to prayer) to recite the call to
prayer (*adhan*).

The Imam kept silence, but as soon as the muezzin said: “*Ashhadu anna
Muhamadan rasul Allah* (I bear witness that Muhammad is the Apostle of
Allah)”, he took the turban off his head and said: “O muezzin I swear
you by this Muhammad to get silent.” Then, facing Yazid, he said:  
 “Is this noble Prophet your ancestor or ours? If you say he is your
ancestor, everybody knows you are telling a lie; and if you admit he is
ours, then why did you kill his son al-Husayn (as)? Why did you kill his
children? Why did you plunder his property? Why did you take his women
and children as captive?”

Then the Imam (as) took hold of his own collar and tore it down [as a
sign of disgust and protest], and those present in the gathering burst
into wailing and tears. A commotion rose up again. This was indeed an
epic message of ‘Ashura being delivered to all ears; and the call of the
truth addressed to the history.

Upon hearing these protests, Yazid started cursing and damning Ibn Ziyad
and even – apparently – reprimanded some of the troops that had
accompanied the captives. At last, being apprehended, he turned away
from them and tried to contact less with people.

However, owing to the disclosures by the Imam (as) and the distressing
conditions, Yazid decided to console the captives. He asked Imam
al-Sajjad: “Would you like to stay with us in Sham or go to Medina?”
Imam al-Sajjad (as) and Zaynab Kubra replied: “We like to be near our
ancestor's grave in Medina.”

Leaving for Medina
------------------

In Safar 61/October 680 the Infallible Ahl al-Bayt (as) left for Medina
with dignity and honor. Nu‘man b. Bashir, along with five hundred men,
accompanied the caravan. Imam al-Sajjad (as) and the other members of
Ahl al-Bayt (as) were approaching Medina when the Imam (as) selected a
place in the outskirt and ordered the caravan settle there.

He ordered some tents be pitched there. Then, he told Bashir b. Jadhlam
to write an elegy and inform people of Medina of their arrival. Bashir
went straight to Medina and to the tomb of the Prophet (S) and stood
there before the Madinans, reciting his poems as follows:

“Behold! O people of Medina! There is no chance here for you to stay any
longer, for Imam al-Husayn (as) has been killed, and now here are my
tears rolling down. Alas! His pure body, smeared with blood and dust,
was left behind in Karbala, and his head on top of a spear was carried
around cities.” The people at once burst into a frenzied wailing, among
whom were the Hashemite women wailing and lamenting with the most heart
rending cries.

The people left their houses and raced outside the city. Bashir said: “I
abandoned the horse and hastened to the tents of the Ahl al-Bayt. At
this time Imam al-Sajjad (as) came out of his tent and while wiping his
flowing tears motioned people to silence.

Then, after praising Almighty Allah, he started talking about the
heart-rending tragedy of Karbala. Here is part of what he said: ‘If our
ancestor, the Apostle of Allah (S) had ordered to murder and plunder and
persecute us, there would have been no more cruelty than this on us;
whereas there had been clear instructions for protecting and respecting
us. We implore Allah to have mercy and blessing on us and revenge our
enemies.”

Thereafter, Imam al-Sajjad (as), Zaynab Kubra (as) and their companions
and the bereaved mourners of Imam al-Husayn (as) entered Medina. First,
they went to the holy mausoleum of their ancestor, the Apostle of Allah
(S) and then to Baqi‘cemetery, complaining with tearful eyes of the
disdainful people.

For a long time there were mourning rituals held in Medina for Imam
al-Husayn (as), during which Imam al-Sajjad (as) and Zaynab Kubra (as)
talked about the appalling tragedy of Karbala and clarified to people
the purposeful martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as) and his message to
people, exposing the corruption of the Umayyads ruling system so that
the people would know the extent of the tragedy and tyranny and learn
how to take revenge of the oppressors of their time.

In that era, there were four extremely sensitive and important spots in
the Muslim world: Damascus; Kufa; Mecca; Medina, i.e. the Holy Shrine of
the Apostle of Allah (S) and the center for preserving the memories of
the adorable Islam and the respected Prophet (S). In all four spots,
Imam al-Sajjad (as) played an influential role, following which people's
awakening and different kinds of revolts and dissidence ensued.

Thenceforth, the history of Islam witnessed uprisings which were
inspired by Imam al-Husayn (as)'s great uprising in Karbala, including
the battle of Harrah,[^2] taking place a year later in which Yazid'a
agents committed a tragic massacre against the uprising of the people of
Medina. ‘Ali (as)'s children, each in a corner of the Muslim world, were
planning to revolt and take revenge, which finally led to the uprising
of Abu Muslim Khurasani and the overthrow of the corrupt dynasty of the
Umayyads.

Fighting with and criticizing the selfish and unjust conducts of the
Umayyad and Abbasid caliphs gradually mounted in various ways among
Muslims, especially among the Shi‘ites of Imam ‘Ali (as) throughout the
history, whereby Shi‘ism was introduced as a combating and resistance
movement delivering the message of martyrdom. Although the Shi‘ites have
always suffered atrocities and tortures, they have retained this
revolutionary spirit to the present after over fourteen centuries.

Although Imam al-Sajjad (as) was apparently staying at home, he would
always express the message of martyrdom and fight against tyrants
through his supplications and sermons and keeping in touch with his
close Shi‘ite followers such as Abu Hamza Thumali and Abu Khalid Kabuli.

At the same time, he was also engaged in enjoining good and forbidding
evil; his sincere followers received religious knowledge and Islamic
decrees from his holiness and spread them among others. Thus, Shi‘ism
developed in many aspects. It was due to these overt and covert
campaigns that Imam al-Sajjad (as) was for the second time captured and
sent to Sham in chains by order of ‘Abd al-Malik, the Umayyad ruler, and
returned to Medina after a while.[^3]

During his 35 years of Imamate, Imam al-Sajjad (as) would, wherever
necessary, attempt in awakening the people and inciting them against
tyranny and aberration and in many cases rendered plenty of social
services in support of the poor and the unattended families, as well as
dissemination of the Islamic knowledge, purification of people's souls
and morality, and awakening them by means of supplications compiled in
*Sahifat al-Sajjadiyya*.

Sahifat al-Sajjadiyya
---------------------

Ranking among the most valuable Islamic works, *Sahifat al-Sajjadiyya*
includes 57 supplications containing the most accurate theistic,
devotional, social, and ethical issues, known as Psalms of the Household
of the Prophet (S).

One of the historical events that reflects a perspective of Imam
al-Sajjad (as)'s bright character is the elegy that Farazadaq, the poet,
recited in praise of the Imam (as) before the House of Ka‘ba.

Historians have stated: “During the rule of Walid b. ‘Abd al-Malik, the
heir apparent (*wali ahd*) and his brother went to Mecca with the
intention of performing Hajj pilgrimage and stepped into the Holy Mosque
to perform circumambulation (*tawaf*). As they approached the Ka‘ba to
pay tribute to the Black Stone (by touching and kissing), the pressing
crowd obstructed their way to the Hatim, forcing them to retreat and sit
on the pulpit to wait for the crowd to recede.

Around them also gathered the dignitaries of Sham who accompanied them
and watched the circumambulation ritual. At this moment the majestic
light of Imam ‘Ali b. Husayn (as), whose countenance was the most
glorious and whose attire was the neatest and whose fragrance was the
most pleasant of all those attending the circumambulation ritual,
appeared from one corner of the Mosque and began to circumambulate the
Ka‘ba.

As he got near the Black Stone, the huge crowd stepped back at the sight
of his grandeur and majesty to open the way to the Black Stone for the
Imam (as) and his retinue, so he could touch and kiss the Stone in
convenience.

Watching this scene incited a wave of fury and jealousy in the heart and
soul of Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik, and while he was burning in disgust,
one of the nobles of Sham faced him and asked with astonishment: “Who is
this person to whom all the people turned in adoration and respect and
cleared the way for him to go on with the circumambulation?”

Although he knew the Imam (as) and his status quite well, Hisham feigned
ignorance and replied that he did not know him out of intense hatred and
for the fear that his courtiers might be impressed and enchanted by the
Imam (as) and his position and words.

At this moment, Abu Faras (Farazdaq) who witnessed this scene became
very agitated by Hisham's feigning ignorance and although he was a court
poet himself and without feeling endangered by the wrath and violence of
that arrogant prince, he addressed the Shami man and said: “If you want
to know who that person is, ask me as I know very well who he is.”

Then, Farazdaq, in a moment of great sublimation and manifestation of
faith and ascension of soul, recited his everlasting ode revealed to him
by his fully awake conscience with utmost fever. Here is a part of that
ode:

“The one you know not is the one whose footsteps are known by the land
of Batha’ and the one who is known by the Ka‘ba and the sanctuary,
inside and out.”

“He is the one whose grandfather is Ahmad Mukhtar upon whom be peace and
Mercy of Allah as long as destiny prevails… He is the son of Fatimah
(as), the chief of the ladies of the world, and ‘Ali (as), the legatee
and successor of the Prophet (S) from whose sword would brightly blaze
Allah's wrath fire and revenge flames.”

When Farzdaq ended his recitation, Hisham, like someone awakened from a
deep sleep, retorted to Farzdaq: “Why have you not written such eulogies
in praise of us?” He replied: “Bring an ancestor like his, a father the
same in rank as his and a purely virtuous mother as his, then I will
praise you, too.”

Hisham got outraged and ordered the name of the poet be eliminated from
the award list, and himself be imprisoned in the land of ‘Asfan,
somewhere between Mecca and Medina.

When the news reached Imam al-Sajjad (as), he sent twelve thousand
Dirhams to Farzdaq as an award and apologized for not being able to send
more. Farzdaq did not accept the award and sent him the following
message: “I wrote this ode to please Allah and his Apostle (S), and to
defend the Truth, not wanting an award.” The Imam (as) sent back the
award and swore him to accept it and reassured him that its real value
would not be belittled before Allah.

Anyhow, it was these values that provoked the enemy's spite and
vindictiveness.

It is written that finally Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin – Sayyid al-Sajidin –
(as) was poisoned by Walid b. ‘Abd al-Malik who was instigated by
Hisham, the Umayyad ruler, and was buried in Baqi‘cemetery.

Some Sayings of Imam al-Sajjad (as)
-----------------------------------

Glory be to Thee, Outdazzling in signs, Creator of the heavens, Author
of the spirits! To Thee belongs praise, a praise that will be permanent
with Thy permanence! To Thee belongs all, the praise everlasting through
Thy favor! To Thee belongs praise, a praise that will parallel Thy
benefaction!

My Lord, bless Muhammad and his Household, those whom Thou hast chosen
for Thy command, the treasurers of Thy knowledge, the guardians of Thy
religion, Thy vicegerents in Thy earth, and Thy arguments against Thy
servants, purified from uncleanness and defilement through a
purification by Thy desire, and made the mediation to Thee and the road
to Thy Garden!

My Lord, bless Muhammad and his Household with a blessing which makes
plentiful Thy gifts and generosity, perfects for them Thy bestowals and
awards, and fills out their share of Thy kindly acts and benefits! My
Lord, bless him and his Household with a blessing whose first has no
term, whose term has no limit, and whose last has no utmost end!

My Lord, bless them to the weight of Thy Throne and all below it, the
amount that fills the heavens and all above them, the number of Thy
earths and all below and between them, a blessing that will bring them
near to Thee in proximity, please Thee and them, and be joined to its
likes forever!

O God, surely Thou hast confirmed Thy religion in all times with an Imam
whom Thou hast set up as a guidepost to Thy servants and a lighthouse in
Thy lands, after his cord has been joined to Thy cord! Thou hast
appointed him the means to Thy good pleasure, made obeying him
obligatory, cautioned against disobeying him, and commanded following
his commands, abandoning his prohibitions, and that no forward-goer go
ahead of him or back-keeper keep back from him! So he is the
preservation of the shelter-seekers, the cave of the faithful, the
handhold of the adherents, and the radiance of the worlds![^4]

[^1]: Imam al-Sajjad (as)'s mother, i.e., Shahrbanu daughter of Yazdgird
the last Sassanid King of Iran, had died about 24 years before Karbala
tragedy. See: Barrasi-yi Tarikh-i ‘AShura, p. 122.

[^2]: See: Chenarani, Muhammad Ali, The Battle of Harrah, translated
into English by Ahmad Rezwani, Islamic Research Foundation, Mashhad,
2009.

[^3]: Jala’ al-‘Uyun.

[^4]: William C. Chittick (tr.), The Psalms of Islam, Al-Sahifat
al-Kamilat al-Sajjadiyya, (Supplication 47) Muhammadi Trust, London,
1988.


