The Seventh Infallible, Hadhrat Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, The Fifth Imam
======================================================================

The blessed name of the fifth Imam is Muhammad. His nickname is Baqir or
Baqir al-‘Ulum, as he split knowledge and uncovered the mysteries of
sciences. Certain other nicknames have also been mentioned for him, each
one of which indicating an attribute of that noble Imam, such as Shakir
(grateful), Sabir (the one who patiently endures), and Hadi (guiding to
the right)

Abu Ja‘far was his patronymic. His mother was Fatimah daughter of Imam
al-Hasan; therefore, his lineage from mother side traces back to Imam
al-Hasan (as) and from his father's side to Imam al-Husayn (as). His
father was Sayyid al-Sajidin, Imam Zayn al-Abidin (as).

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) was born on Friday, Safar 3, 57/December 16,
676 in Medina. In the tragic event of Karbala, he was in the company of
his grandfather Imam al-Husayn (as), near the age of four.

His Imamate began in 95/714, upon the martyrdom of his father Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin (as), and lasted until 114/733, that is, some months over
nineteen years. During the Imamate of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) and
his son, Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (as), such events as the fall of Umayyad
dynasty, seizure of power by the Abbasids, disruption of political
disputes, the appearance of imposters and commanders like Abu Salma
Khallal and Abu Muslim Khurasani, etc. took place; some books on
philosophy were translated, and theological debates initiated; a number
of Sufi Shaykhs, ascetics, and wandering dervishes affiliated to the
ruling caliphate also came into being.

Judges and theologians were installed arbitrarily by formal officials
and authorities to expound and interpret jurisprudence, ideology,
theology, and ethics to the expediencies of the caliphate and the ruling
centers, and to deviate the teachings of the Qur’an, especially the
issue of Imamate and *Wilayat* which had after the tragedy of ‘Ashura
attracted the attention of many truth-seeking people toward the
righteousness of the Household of ‘Ali (as) and revealed the
ugly-featured Umayyad tyrants and those who bartered their Hereafter
with the worldly gains and also to throw the Prophet (S)'s traditions
into oblivion.

Some had also forged traditions in favor of the ruling system or were
busy forging some, or transforming them to the benefit of the tyrant
usurpers of caliphate. These were really menacing factors which were to
be withstood by the protectors and guardians of religion.

To this end, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) and after him, Imam Ja‘far
al-Sadiq (as) took advantage of the favorable political milieu to
disseminate the true Islamic teachings and truthful knowledge and
founded the Academy of Shi‘ism and Islamic Sciences.

That was because these noble Imams and their disciples were in fact
inheritors and the true guardians of the teachings of the Prophet (S)
and the Islamic laws and justice; they were to train knowledgeable and
practical disciples and competent and self-sacrificing companions, and
to gather, compile, and teach the jurisprudence of Muhammad (S)'s
progeny. That was why Imam al-Baqir (as) was always surrounded by
scholars, scientists, and narrators of *hadith*, and famous orators and
poets.

In his didactic school, knowledge and piety were taught to people. Abu
Ja‘far Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) was the “custodian of alms” of the
Prophet (S) and Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (as) and distributed those alms
among Bani Hashim and the poor and the needy, and managed them
financially. Imam al-Baqir (as) possessed praiseworthy features and was
characterized by Islamic courteous behavior.

He was always well-dressed and would walk around with utmost dignity and
grace. When he was asked why he put on costly garments while his
ancestor would wear inexpensive clothes, he replied: “My ancestor's
piety and governance demanded so in the times when the poor and the
deprived were in great number. If I wore those clothes, I would not be
able to enhance the religious rites in such a revolution of thought.

The fifth Imam (as) was very light-hearted and cheerful to the believers
and friends. He would shake hands with all companions and encourage
others to practice it, too. He would somehow mention in his talks that:
“Shaking hands will eradicate internal indignations and will cause the
sins of both sides to fall off as leafs of trees do in the fall.

Imam al-Baqir (as) was quite observant of giving away alms and donations
and Islamic manners such as helping the needy, performing the funeral
processions of the believers, visiting the patients, and respecting the
courtesy and Islamic code of conducts and religious norms. He wanted to
revive the traditions of his ancestor, the Apostle of Allah (S), among
the people and impart noble moral traits to them.

On hot days, he would go out to manage the farms and palm groves, and
would help workers and farmers with plowing the land. Whatever he earned
from the farm products – with his hardworking and labor – he would give
away for Allah's sake.

Whenever he went to the mosque of his ancestor, the Apostle of Allah
(S), to say prayers, people would gather around him to benefit from the
bright rays of his knowledge and virtue.

For twenty years Mu‘awiya (in Sham) and his functionaries (in other
Islamic lands) did their best by means of force, money, trickery, and
hiring mercenary scholars to misrepresent the Islamic truths.

Therefore, after the tragic event of Karbala and the unprecedented
oppressions by the children of Abu Sufyan, when people realized the
righteousness of the Infallible Ahl al-Bayt (as), Imam al-Sajjad (as)
and his noble son, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as), exerted great attempts
in correcting people's beliefs, especially in Imamate and leadership,
which only the Infallible Imams (as) deserved, and taught the true
knowledge in different aspects to people.

As a result, the dissemination of the Islamic jurisprudence and
ordinances became so widespread that Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (as), the
honorable son of Imam al-Baqir (as), established a university with four
thousand students and spread the Islamic traditions (*hadith*s) and
doctrines all over the Muslim world of that time.

Imam al-Sajjad (as) had paved the way for this significant endeavor
through invocations, supplications, and reminding the tyrannies of the
Umayyad and by commanding good and forbidding evil. Similarly, Imam
al-Baqir (as) further prepared the ground by holding teaching circles
and clarifying the relevant religious problems for people.

Through his insight and in light of his divinely revealed intuition, the
Holy Prophet (S) had determined the duties his progeny and Ahl al-Bayt
would be holding as well as the role they were to play in identifying
and introducing the true knowledge in the years to come, as the
following *hadith* indicates:

One day, Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah Ansari, who had lost his eyesight late in
his life, had an audience with Imam al-Sajjad (as). Hearing a child, he
asked, “Who are you?” The child answered: “I am Muhammad b. ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn.” Jabir called him near, took hold of his hand, kissed it, and
said:

“One day I had an audience with your grandfather, the Apostle of Allah
(S). He told me: You may live so long as to see Muhammad b. ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn, one of my grandsons. Give my greetings to him and tell him:
May Allah grants you the light of wisdom; disseminate the faith and
knowledge!” Commanded by his grandfather, the fifth Imam embarked on a
life-long dissemination of religious science and Islamic knowledge, as
well as teaching the Qur’anic truths and Prophetic traditions.

Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah Ansari is the one who on the *arba‘in* (the fortieth
day of Imam al-Husayn's martyrdom), the first year after the tragic
event of Karbala, went there together with ‘Atiyya, who was also one of
the pious scholars and noble interpreters, made *ghusl* (major ablution)
and while ‘Atiyya was holding his hand, he sat down beside the holy
grave of the master of martyrs, Sayyid al-Shuhada (as), and recited the
*ziyara* of that Holy Imam.

Anyhow, Imam al-Baqir (as) was a source of radiant divine wisdom and a
reservoir of divine ordinance. His celebrated name is on hundreds of
traditions and wise sayings and exhortations which he had expressed to
guide his talented and competent disciples and pupils, especially during
his 13 years of Imamate. As it is related, in no other scholastic
circles had the scholars been more humble and modest than the ones in
the presence of Muhammad b. ‘Ali (as).[^1]

In the time of Imam ‘Ali (as), it was as though the status of science
and value of knowledge was not – as it had to be – clear for the people
yet. It seemed that the Muslims had not stepped out of the restricted
material world; had not drunk from Imam ‘Ali (as)'s transparent spring
of knowledge; had remained thirsty at the infinite ocean of ‘Ali (as)'s
presence; and no one but a few had appreciated such precious jewel as
him.

That was why the Master of the Faithful (as) had repeatedly said: “Ask
me [questions] before you lose me!” And he would often say: “I am more
familiar with the routes of the heaven than those of the earth.” Alas!
Nobody would appreciate his precious presence.

However, people gradually began to taste the pleasure and joy of the
knowledge of Ahl al-Bayt (as) and the Islamic teachings, particularly in
the time of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as); and like thirsty ones who had
been deprived of fresh water or who had not appreciated it, they began
to quench their thirst with the splendid and palatable divine knowledge
of Imam al-Baqir (as) and gave in to his scholarly status. According to
a historian, “At this point, the Muslims turned away from battle fields
and warfare to conquering the doorways of knowledge and culture.”

Since there was no possibility at the time for armed uprising – due to
intense stranglehold and a lack of chivalrous combatants – Imam al-Baqir
(as) deemed as more appropriate the dissemination of the Islamic
knowledge and scholarly activities as well as ideological and spiritual
struggle against the Umayyad ruling system, and since a full course of
Islamic law had not yet been instructed in details and comprehensively,
he undertook the fruitful scholarly endeavors in this respect.

However, as the personality of the Imam (as) and the nature of his
teachings – in different dimensions and directions – were considered
detrimental to the ruling authorities, he was often persecuted and
offended by them. Nonetheless, Imam al-Baqir (as) never neglected the
importance of his dutiful role in starting a rebellion against the
oppressive ruling system, but encouraged it in another way, i.e., by
admiring and confirming his rebellious brother Zayd b. ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn.

There are narrations denoting that Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as), who was
the greatest intellectual and cultural pioneer of his time, had a
significant role in promulgation of ethics, genuine Islamic philosophy,
specific worldview of the Qur’an, training such disciples as Imam
Shafi‘i, and formulation of the Islamic school of thought. He is also
said to have confirmed his brother Zayd's revolutionary position; e.g.,
he is quoted as saying: “O Lord! Strengthen my back by [my brother]
Zayd.

It is also said that one day Zayd paid a visit to Imam al-Baqir (as). On
visiting Zayd, the Imam (as) recited the following verse: ﴾O you who
have faith! Be maintainers of justice and witnesses for the sake of
Allah﴿ (Al-Qur’an, 4: 135). He then continued: “O Zayd! By God you are
an example of the one who acts according to this verse.”

It is known that Zayd, who under the instruction of his brother, Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (as), had undertaken an uprising to establish justice
and faith, was finally ruthlessly murdered by the despotic ruling system
of the Umayyad Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik in 120 (or 122)/737 (or 739),
when he revolted against the latter during the Imamate of Imam Ja‘far
al-Sadiq (as). Zayd's sacred body was held hanging from the gallows for
years and then set on fire.

And as related in history, although Zayd's movement ostensibly did not
lead to victory and neither did other uprisings and endeavors in this
period, these revolts and movements in the history of Shi‘ism prompted
awakening an activism; initiated the culture of martyrdom targeted
against tyrannical rules; kept the pure blood of the Shi‘a seething; and
carried on the red line of martyrdom through the history of the Shi‘a up
to the present time.

Even though Imam al-Baqir (as) and Imam al-Sadiq (as) apparently did not
involve in the above uprising for they did not regard the situation as
appropriate, they attempted, at any chance they found, to correct the
outlook for the society on the statehood and to teach and disseminate
the Islamic principles and to illuminate people's minds and thoughts,
being in itself an alternative to battle and warfare against the enemy.

Since in this era the Umayyad rule was fading out and the ‘Abbasid
rebellion was cracking down on them, the best circumstances had risen
for promulgation of dynamic thoughts and training disciples and
dignitaries as well as demarcating the right lines of statehood, which
was indeed a political struggle laying the foundation for and
formulation of the Islamic doctrine and principles.

However, as maintained above, wherever the caliphate system's benefits
were concerned and the rulers felt that the Imam (a.s.) was unveiling
their cruel faces and teaching the right path to recognition of the
“Infallible Imam” and Imamate which followed “Prophethood” and finally
the “Rule of Allah”, they would proceed to persecute and even torture
the Imam (as), and sometimes would exile and incarcerate him.

To give an example of the above, a historical event is narrated as
follows:

“One year when Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik, the Umayyad ruler, was going on
a Hajj pilgrimage, Ja‘far b. Muhammad, Imam al-Sadiq (as) together with
his father, Imam al-Baqitr (as) were also on the pilgrimage. One day,
Imam al-Sadiq (as) was giving a speech in an assembly in Mecca,
emphasizing the issue of leadership and that the Imams, rather than
others, are the true leaders and caliphs of Allah on earth, and that
following their footsteps and swearing allegiance to them rather than to
others would bring forth social happiness and salvation.

These words, being uttered in the period of Hisham's full power and
during the Hajj rituals in Mecca, began to echo widely around and
reached Hisham. In Mecca, Hisham did not dare to interfere, nor was it
advisable for him to do so. But when he arrived in Damascus, he
dispatched an envoy to Medina asking the governor there to send Imam
al-Baqir (as) and his son to Damascus, which was done accordingly.

Imam al-Sadiq (as) said in this regard: “When we arrived in Damascus,
Hisham called us to his court. When we entered, we saw him sitting on
his throne and having his men fully armed, arrayed in two rows by his
sides. He also had a target board installed before him on the other end
of the hall, and the dignitaries among his entourage were engaged in an
archery match.

As we entered the courtyard of Hisham's palace, my father was in front
and I was following him. When we got near, Hisham asked my father: 'Why
don't you take part in the match?' My father replied: 'I have become old
and am not in a position to do this. It would be better if you exempt me
from this.' Hisham swore: 'By God who honored us by His Religion and
Messenger, I won't exempt you.' He then commanded one of the Umayyad
nobles to hand his bow and arrow over to my father [Imam al-Baqir (as)]
so that he too could take part in the match.

My father took the bow from the man, picked an arrow, put it in the bow,
pulled the string powerfully, and shot it right to the center of the
target. Then, he took another arrow and shot it at the notch of the
previous one… numbering to nine successive shots. Infuriated by this
event, Hisham said: 'You did a great job O Abu Ja‘far! You are the most
skilful among the Arab and non-Arab archers. Why did you say you were
not able to do it? Tell me who taught you the archery?' My father
replied: 'You know that this sport is common among Medinans. I used to
practice it when I was young'.”

Then, Imam al-Sadiq (as) pointed out that: “Hisham got mad with the
whole affair and made up his mind to murder my father. At the same
gathering, Hisham talked to Imam al-Baqir (as) over leadership and
caliphate. Imam al-Baqir (as) expressed his opinion on the leadership of
the faithful leaders and how an Islamic community is run and what
characteristics a leader of an Islamic society must have.

All this further perplexed Hisham who lacked those requirements and who
had usurped that position.” It is reported by some that Imam al-Baqir
(as) was incarcerated in Damascus. When Hisham got informed that the
prisoners of Damascus have turned into Imam al-Baqir (as)'s disciples
and followers, he freed the Imam and hastened to have him sent to
Medina.

Before the Imam's departure, Hisham sent forth a courier to spread ill
rumors against them (i.e., Imam al-Baqir and Imam al-Sadiq – A.S.) in
the villages and towns en route, so that people would not get in touch
with them and might not be influenced by their sermons and conducts.
Nevertheless, on this journey the Imam did not spare any chance to
contact people – even the Christians – and to make them aware of the
whole situation.

It is interesting and instructive to know that in his last will, Imam
Muhmmad al-Baqir (as) enjoined his son Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (as) to
allocate after his demise a part of his property to be spent during Hajj
pilgrimage at mourning ceremonies for him for ten years in Mana, where
Hajis gather for throwing stones at Satan and making sacrifices.

Drawing attention to the issue and determining the location is
considered very important. According to the author of *al-Ghadir* – the
well-known ‘Allama Amini – the purpose of this testament is to make the
great Islamic community acquainted with the true leader of the religion
at that Holy Land and guide them to the right path, so that they would
break away from others and join these leaders; and this is the utmost
eagerness for guiding people and rescuing them from the claws of tyranny
and misguidance.[^2]

Martyrdom of Imam Muhmmad al-Baqir (as)
---------------------------------------

Imam Muhmmad al-Baqir (as) lived on for 19 years and ten months after
the martyrdom of his father, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (as). During this time
he was engaged in doing his crucial duty of Imamate, spreading and
propagating the Islamic culture, teaching disciples, leading companions
and people, implementing traditions of his noble ancestor among the
people, drawing the attention of the usurping ruling system toward the
right line of leadership and guiding people in realizing the real leader
and the Infallible Imam who is the genuine vicegerent (caliph) of Allah
and His Apostle (S) on earth, and spared no moment in accomplishing his
duties.

Finally, on Dhul Hijja 7, 114/January, 28, 733, when he was 57 years
old, he was poisoned by the order of Hisham in Medina and departed to
the Heavens. His sacred body was buried in Baqi‘cemetery next to his
honorable father.

His Wives and Children
----------------------

The children of His Holiness are reported to be seven: Abu ‘Abd Allah
Ja‘far b. Muhammad al-Sadiq (as) and ‘Abd Allah who were born to Umm
Farvah, daughter of Qasim b. Muhammad b. Abi Bakr. Ibrahim and ‘Ubayd
Allah, who were born to Umm Hakim and both died during the lifetime of
their noble father. ‘Ali, Zaynab, and Umm Salama, whose mother was an
*umm walad* [a concubine].

Some Sayings of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as):

1. Islam is founded on five pillars: Prayers (*Salat*), alms tax
(*zakat*), Hajj pilgrimage, fasting, and *Wilayat* (allegiance to the
Imam). When asked about *Wilayat*, the Imam answered: by *Wilayat* the
Muslims' affairs will be put into order and discipline.

2. Nothing is better liked by Allah than requesting Him and begging
requirements from Him.

3. Nothing is better for fending off calamities and dire accidents than
supplication.

4. The worst defect is to stare at others' faults and ignore one's own
faults; to enjoin people to do things which one is unable to do oneself;
and to persecute one's friend or companion who has no supporter and
helper, and not to hasten to assist him.

5. When you are sitting in the presence of a scholar, be more eager to
listen than to talk; learn to listen well as well as you learn to talk
well, and do not interrupt the speaker.

6. The servants will not turn infidel if they do not state any ideas
when having no knowledge, and do not deny what they have not understood.

7. A scholar whose knowledge is beneficent to people is superior to
seventy thousand worshippers.

8. Whoever is not appointed as his own preacher by God, others’
exhortation will not have any effect on him.

[^1]: Majmu‘a-yi Zindigi-yi Chahardah Ma‘sum ‘Alayhim al-Salam, p. 175.

[^2]: Imam dar ‘Ayniyat-i Jami‘a, from page 53 on (with slight changes).


