The Eighth Infallible, Hadhrat Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq, The Sixth Imam
===================================================================

Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (as), the chief of Ja‘fari School of thought
(Shi‘ism) was born on Rabi‘ al-Awwal 17, 83/April 20, 702 in Medina.

His father was Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as) and his mother was Umm
Farvah, daughter of Qasim b. Muhammad b. Abi Bakr. His patronymic was
Abu ‘Abd Allah and his nickname was al-Sadiq.

Up to the age of 12, Imam al-Sadiq (as) was contemporary to his noble
grandfather Imam al-Sajjad (as) and was primarily trained under his
supervision and gleaned from the knowledge stack of his grandfather.

After the demise of the fourth Imam (as), he lived in the service of his
honorable father, Imam al-Baqir (as) for 19 years amounting to 31 years
of spending his life serving his grandfather and father who were each at
his own time a proof of Allah obtaining light directly from the Divine
source.

Thus, in addition to the Divine aspects and Holy blessings that every
Imam receives, enjoying the presence of his noble father and grandfather
caused Imam al-Sadiq (as) who possessed innate talent, scholarly sense
and abundant brilliance, to achieve perfection in knowledge and ethics
and to become the greatest figure on knowledge and learning.

After his father's demise, his Imamate lasted 34 years, during which he
founded Ja‘fari School (*Madhhab* al-Ja‘fari) and contributed to the
reconstruction and revival of Muhammad (S)'s law (*shari‘a*).

The prolific and productive life of Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (as) coincided
with the rule of five Umayyad caliphs (Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik, Walid b.
Yazid, Yazid b. Walid, Ibrahim b. Walid, and Marwan Himar), each one of
whom inflicted much persecution and sorrow upon the lofty soul of the
Infallible Imam (as); two of the ‘Abbasid caliphs (Saffah and Mansur)
also usurped the caliphate in the time of the Imam (as) and proved to be
more tyrannical and unjust than the Umayyads. Consequently, Imam
al-Sadiq (as) lived his last ten years of life in insecurity and
discomfort.

The Era of Imam al-Sadiq (as)
-----------------------------

Imam al-Sadiq (as)’s era is characterized as one of the most turbulent
periods in the history of Islam, during which, on one hand, frequent
rebellions of different groups, particularly by revenges for Imam
al-Husayn (as)'s blood, took place, including the uprising by Abu Salama
in Kufa and Abu Muslim in Khurasan, which were the most important of
all.

It was this revolution that finally toppled down the ominous rule of the
Umayyads and liberated the people from their injustice and tyranny. But
finally, the Abbasids took over the rule and caliphate with fraudulence
and conspiracy. The transference period of the Umayyad rule to Abbasids
was the most violent and chaotic time in the life of Imam al-Sadiq (as).

On the other hand, his era was a time of clashes among schools and
ideologies and an age of contradiction of different philosophical and
theological thoughts which were raised by the encounter of the Islamic
nations and those of the conquered lands as well as through the
relations between Islamic centers and the rest of the world, creating
enthusiasm and eagerness in Muslims for understanding and researching.

It was an age in which the slightest negligence or unawareness and
inactivity by the true guardian of Islam, i.e., Imam al-Sadiq (as),
would have ruined the faith and marred the life-giving teachings of
Islam, both from inside and out.

It was then that the Imam (as) was facing great troubles and bearing
topmost responsibility. In such a critical situation, the sixth Imam
(as) had to be concerned with the salvage of the thoughts of Muslim
masses from atheism and infidelity as well as preventing the Islamic
principles and knowledge from deviating from the right path and the
religious decrees from being wrongly and reversely interpreted and
articulated by the caliphs of his time.

In addition, he had to skillfully and with accurate planning liberate
the Shi‘a from being annihilated and wiped out, which was, amid the
stranglehold and tortures by the previous rule, taking the last breaths
and its great men and scholars were either hiding or absorbed by the
pomposity and gaudiness of the tyrannical occupying regime and did not
dare to reveal their faith.

The new rule was no better in murder and injustice than the previous one
and the situation was so adverse and dire that all of the Imam (as)'s
companions were in danger of being killed, with their elite being
already on the blacklist.

Jabir Ju‘fi, one of the Imam (as)'s special companions and envoys, was
dispatched by his holiness to Kufa on a certain mission. On the way, the
swift-riding courier of the Imam (as) caught up with him and said: “The
Imam advises you to feign insanity.” Following this advice, his life was
spared; that is, the governor of Kufa who had secretly received a
command from the caliph to assassinate him refrained from killing him on
the ground of madness.

An intimate companion of Imam al-Baqir (as), Jabir Ju‘fi has said: “Imam
al-Baqir (as) has taught me seventy thousand *hadith*s, which I have not
narrated to anyone and will never do.

One day he humbly said to the holy Imam (as): “You have told me some
secrets, which neither I can endure, nor I have a confidant to entrust
them to; and I am about to go insane.”

“Go to the desert,” the Imam (as) said to him, “and dig a well, put your
head onto it and say in the quiet of the well: “Muhammad b. ‘Ali – i.e.,
Imam al-Baqir (as) – related such and such to me…”

Truly, the Shi‘a s were about to be wiped out, i.e., the genuine Islam
was going to take the color of the caliphs and turn into an Umayyad and
Abbasid Islam.

In such a dire situation, the Holy Imam (as) undertook the
revivification and reconstruction of the Islamic knowledge, and set up a
great scholarly school whose end-product and output was fourteen
thousand expert disciples (such as Hisham, Muhammd b. Muslim, etc.) in
various disciplines, who spread over the extended Islamic lands of the
time.

Each one of them were, on the one hand, the representative of Imam
(as)'s logic which denoted the logic of Islam, the guardian of religious
and scientific legacy, as well as the protectors of the true Shi‘ism,
and on the other hand, were defenders against infiltration of
anti-Islamic and destructive thoughts among the Muslims.

The establishment of such a school of thought and such reconstruction
and revival of the Islamic teachings, made Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (as)
known as the head of Ja‘fari school (i.e., Shi‘ism).

Shortly afterwards, however, upon reinforcement of their influence and
foundations, the Abbasids assumed the same tyrannical procedure as the
Umayyads, and even surpassed them in their atrocities.

Having always been an untiring combatant and a radical revolutionary in
the arena of thought and action, Imam al-Sadiq (as) did what Imam
al-Husayn (as) had done in his bloody uprising, albeit in the form of
teaching and setting up a school of thought, training people, and,
putting up an all-out *jihad*.

Scientific Movement
-------------------

Political discrepancies among the Umayyad and the Abbasids, division of
Islam into different sects, and the appearance of materialistic ideas
and the influence of Greek philosophy in the Islamic countries gave rise
to a scientific movement, which was founded on indisputable facts.

Such a movement was crucial both for purging the religious truths of
superstitions and forged traditions and resisting against the heretics
and materialists with the power of reasoning to condemn their shaky
opinions. His Holiness' scholarly talks and debates with atheists and
materialists such as Ibn Abi al-‘Awja’ and Abu Shakir al-Daysani, and
even with Ibn Muqaffa‘, are well-known.

Nobody was capable of creating such a scientific movement in that
chaotic and dark era; the only one deserving this great status was the
one having Divine mission and being upheld by Allah, so that he would be
able to relate to the unseen through revelation power, purity of soul,
and God-fearing, and to obtain the truths of knowledge from the
boundless ocean of Divine knowledge, and impart them to those who would
appreciate their value.

It was only the Holy Imam al-Sadiq (as) who was worthy of having such a
position, and it was just he who by withdrawing from politics and
political controversies since the beginning of his Imamate, made great
efforts in spreading the Islamic knowledge, the genuine traditions of
the true religion, and disseminating the ordinances and teachings as
well as training the Muslims.

The era of Imam al-Sadiq (as) was actually the golden age of knowledge
and promulgation of divine ordinances and education of disciples who
would each carry the brilliant torch of knowledge to the nooks and
corners of the world and, like their honorable teacher and leader, make
endeavors to guide people through self-knowledge and knowledge of their
Lord.

It was in this splendid era that the Islamic theology and philosophy –
in contrast to Greek philosophy – thrived and great philosophers and
sages were trained in the world of Islam.

Simultaneous to the scientific movement and development of knowledge by
Imam al-Sadiq (as) in Medina, Mansur, the Abbasid caliph, out of hatred
and envy thought of establishing another school which would be able both
to be scientifically independent against the Ja‘fari school and keep the
people busy and distracted from plucking flowers of knowledge from the
rose-garden of the Imam (as)'s school of knowledge. To this end, Mansur
set up a school in Karkh neighborhood of Baghdad.

In this school, Mansur utilized Abu Hanifa in legal issues and had
scientific and philosophical books brought from India and Greece and had
them translated. He also installed Malik, the chief of the Maliki sect,
as the head of jurisprudence department. However, these schools were
unable to carry out their guiding duties as expected.

Imam al-Sadiq (as) compiled and formulated the dispersed juristic,
scientific, and theological issues, and in every discipline trained
numerous disciples who later on spread the Islamic knowledge throughout
the world. That was the beginning of Imam (as)'s worldwide spreading of
different disciplines such as jurisprudence, philosophy, theology,
natural sciences, etc. Ja‘fari jurisprudence is the same as Muhammadan
jurisprudence of religious rulings, which were revealed by Allah to the
noble Prophet (S) through the revelation of the Qur’an.

Contrary to other sects in which views and ideas were arbitrarily
manipulated, the Ja‘fari jurisprudence was indeed the elaboration and
elucidation of the same principles and laws set forth from the beginning
in Islam. Abu Hanifa, the head of Hanafi sect, has stated about Imam
al-Sadiq (as): “I have neither seen nor known anyone more learned in
jurisprudence than Ja‘far al-Sadiq.”

The legal judgment (*fatwa*) by the greatest contemporary jurist of the
Sunni world, Shaykh Muhammad Shaltout, the dean of Al-Azhar university,
who explicitly proclaimed as permissible the practice of Ja‘fari
jurisprudence just like that of other schools, is in itself an
acknowledgment of the rightfulness of Ja‘fari jurisprudence. These are
but the outcome of Imam al-Sadiq (as)'s endeavors in those days.

Imam al-Sadiq (as) frequently debated on philosophy and *hikma* with his
companions and even with those who were away from religion and belief in
Allah. An example of his statements, which proves the existence of the
Almighty Allah is addressed to one of his disciples called Mufadhdhal b.
‘Umar. These statements are reported in a book called *Tawhid
al-Mufadhdhal*.

The debates of Imam al-Sadiq (as) with the Indian physician, which is
the subject of a book called *Ihlilaja*, also includes sagacious points
which are a small portion of Imam al-Sadiq (as)'s unfathomable ocean of
knowledge. In order to know a master (*ustad*) there are normally two
ways: first, getting to know his works and words; second, getting to
know his disciples and the ones educated in his school.

A great number of wise sayings, writings, and traditions are related
from Imam al-Sadiq (as), which cannot be represented except as a drop
from an ocean.

As for the disciples and students of Imam al-Sadiq (as), they number
over four thousand, of whom one is Jabir b. Hayyan. He was from
Khurasan. His father was a druggist in Tus and was murdered by the
followers of the Umayyads. After his father's murder, Jabir b. Hayyan
went to Medina. First, he studied with Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as),
then, he joined the students of Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (as). Jabir is
actually one of the wonders of the time and a great genius of the Muslim
world.

Having written numerous books on sciences and arts, especially
chemistry, he stated everywhere in his treatises that Ja‘far b. Muhammad
(as) told him or taught him or related to him so and so. Among his
discoveries are nitric acid, aqua regia, and alcohol. He has also
discovered several metals and metalloids. In the Renaissance period in
Europe, around 300 treatises of Jabir b. Hayyan have been translated
into German and are preserved in Berlin and Paris libraries.[^1]

By the intrigues of Mansur ‘Abbasi, Imam al-Sadiq (as) was fatally
poisoned and buried in Baqi‘ cemetery in 148/765, when he was 65 years
old. Because he lived a longer life than other Imams (as), he is named
as Shaykh al-A’imma.

Imam al-Sadiq (as) had seven sons and three daughters.

Following Imam al-Sadiq (as), the position of Imamate was ordained by
Allah to be handed over to Imam Musa al-Kazim (as).

Isma‘il was the eldest of Imam al-Sadiq (as)'s sons, who died before the
Imam (as)'s martyrdom. The Isma'ilis believe that he is the next Imam
after his father.

The Temperament of Imam al-Sadiq (as)
-------------------------------------

Like his noble ancestors, Imam al-Sadiq (as) was eminent amongst his
contemporaries in all his dignified traits and moral qualities. He was
endowed with a heart radiant with divine light and was like his
ancestors in benevolence and *infaq* (helping out the poor) toward the
needy. He also enjoyed great wisdom and knowledge and influential speech
with powerful eloquence.

He would quite humbly and at the same time with the highest magnanimity
do his own work in person, and do farming with a spade in his hand on
his farm in the scorching sun of Hijaz, saying: “If in this state I meet
my Lord, I will be very delighted, as I am earning my own living and
that of my family through manual labor and hardworking.”

Ibn Khallakan wrote: “Imam al-Sadiq (as) is one of the twelve Imams of
the Imamiyya School and one of the descendants of the Holy Apostle of
Allah (S). He was called al-Sadiq for whatever he said was true; his
piety is beyond description.” Malik said: “I was accompanying Imam
al-Sadiq (as) on a Hajj pilgrimage when we arrived at the *ihram*
location (where pilgrimage garb is put on).

The Imam, who was riding a camel, was so awe-stricken that he was about
to fall off the camel and unable to utter *labbayk* (here I am) however
he tried. I told him, “O son of the Prophet! You have perforce to say
*labbayk*.” He replied: “How would I dare to say *labbayk*, as I fear
that my Lord would say in response: *‘La labbayk* and *la sa‘dayk* (you
are not here for Me and you are not given blessedness)’.”

Some Sayings of Imam al-Sadiq (as):

1. The most content people are those who are not trapped in avarice.

2. Apathy toward this world brings about comfort of soul and well-being
of the body.

3. When Allah wishes well for a person, He would make them indifferent
to the world, aware and knowledgeable on religion, and conscious of
their flaws. Whoever is given these traits, they are given the good of
this world and the next.

4. Our followers are those who initiate good deeds and avoid evil acts.
They make goodness known and take the lead in doing good for their love
of the Almighty Allah's mercy. They are of us, and wherever we are they
are with us.

5. How repulsive it is for the faithful when they have a request that
ends in their humiliation.

6. A believer is harder than iron, for if iron is melted in fire its
color will change, but if believers are killed and restored to life and
are killed again, their hearts will not swerve from their faith.

7. In his deathbed, where his relatives were gathering around him, Imam
al-Sadiq (as) said: “Our intercession (*shifa‘a*) will not include those
who take their prayer (*salat*) lightly.

The Debate of Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (as) with Abu Hanifa

There are references to arguments or debates in the biographies of the
noble Imams (as) that they have had with the atheists and people of
different faiths and denominations. For example, we relate here one of
Imam al-Sadiq (as)'s scathing, decisive, and at the same time, brief
arguments to display his vast power of speech and logic, as a little
indicates much:

One day Abu Hanifa went to Imam al-Sadiq (as)'s house and asked for an
audience with him, but the Imam (as) denied him admittance. Abu Hanifa
said: “I lingered a while at the doorway until a number of the Kufans
turned up and sought an audience, which was granted.

I went in with them too. When I was in his presence I said: ‘It is
worthwhile that you send an envoy to Kufa and prohibit the people there
from abusing the companions of Muhammad (S), as there are over ten
thousand people in this town giving bad names to the Prophet (S)'s
companions.”

The holy Imam replied: “People will not accept it from me.” Abu Hanifa
said: “How is it possible that the people will not accept it from you as
you are the grandson of the Prophet (S)? The Imam said: “You are
yourself one of them who did not pay attention to me. Did you not enter
the house without any permission? And did you not sit without my
allowing you? And did you not start talking without asking for
permission? I have heard that you give *fatwa* (legal ruling) by
analogy.” To which Abu Hanifa nodded.

The Imam (as) went on to say: “Woe to you! The first one who judged this
way was Satan. When Allah ordered him to prostrate before Adam, he said
he would not do that, for he had been created of fire and Adam of earth
(i.e., fire is more precious than earth).”

Then, (in order to falsify the analogical *fatwa*, he pointed out some
instances of the Islamic laws contradicting this principle,) he said:
“Which one do you think is more criminal, murdering or adultery?”

Abu Hanifa replied: “Murdering.”

Imam: “So, if judging according to analogy is right, why then two
witnesses are required to prove a murder case, but for proving adultery
four witnesses are needed? Is this Islamic law compatible with analogy?”

Abu Hanifa: “No.”

Imam: “Which one is filthier, urine or semen?”

Abu Hanifa: “Urine.”

Imam: “Then why has Allah ordained *wudhu* (minor ablution) in the
former case and *ghusl* (major ablution) in the latter one? Is this
ordinance compatible with analogy?”

Abu Hanifa: “No.”

Imam: “Is prayer more important or fasting?”

Abu Hanifa: “Prayer.”

Imam: “Why then is it mandatory for menstruous women to make up fasting
but not praying? Is this ordinance compatible with analogy?”

Abu Hanifa: “No.”

Imam: “I heard that you have interpreted the verse

> ثُمَّ لَتُسْأَلُنَّ يَوْمَئِذٍ عَنِ النَّعِيمِ {8}

***(Then, that day, you will surely be questioned concerning the
blessing﴿***[^2] ***as:***

“Allah will call the people to account for the delicious foods and cool
water they had in summer.”

Abu Hanifa said: “That is right; I interpreted the verse that way.”

The Imam said: “If someone invited you to his house and served you with
tasty food and cool water and then held you indebted for his favor, what
would be your judgment about such a person?”

Abu Hanifa replied: “I would say he was a miserly one.”

The Imam said: “Is Allah so miserly so as to call us to account for the
foods that he has given to us?”

Abu Hanifa asked: “What is then meant by the blessings and favors that
the Qur’an says man will be questioned about?”

The Imam said: “It is the blessing of loving us, the household, and the
Ahl al-Bayt of the Holy Apostle of Allah (S).”[^3]

[^1]: Sadiq ‘Alayh al-Salam.

[^2]: Al-Qur'an, 102: 8.

[^3]: Munazira dar Rabita ba Masa’il-Ideology.


