Monotheism
==========

The essential basis of the orders of the Holy Quran is Monotheism which
is emphasized everywhere in the Holy Quran itself. The following verses
are as examples:

1-Say: "He, God, is One ,..., And there is none like unto Him."
(Al-Ikhlas, 1 and 4)

2-“And commanded thy Lord hath that thou shalt worship not (any one)
but Him ...”(Al-Asra, 23) and many other verses.

The above mentioned basis has also been emphasized in the Gospel and
other parts of the New Testament including:

1- " And this is eternal life, to know You, the only true God, and
Jesus Christ (A.S) whom you have sent." (John 17:3)

2-"... And one of the scribes... came forward to question him, "which
is the chief commandment of all?" Jesus (A.S) answered him, "The chief
one is, “Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord ... ."(Mark
12:29-30) .

3- "It is written , ‘You shall worship the Lord your God and serve him
alone'." (Luke 4:8)

4-" Now concernig food that has been dedicated to idols, we know that
no idol really exsits, that there is no God but one. Even if there are
so-called gods either in heaven or on earth, such as in-deed there are
many gods and many lords, for us there is one God ... ." (The First
Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians 8:5-7)

**The Origins of Polytheism and Heterogenity with Monotheism**

Despite the monotheistic definitions available in the Gospels, there
are some heterogeneous words involved in polytheism in some Gospels that
are as follows:

1-"... And we have believed and have grown certain that you are the
Holy One of God." (John 6:70)
2-" I and the Father are One... And understand that the Father is in Me
and I am in the Father." ( John 10: 31 and 39)
3-" She responded, "Yes, Lord, I have faith that you are the Christ,
the Son of God, who was to come in to the world." (John 11:27)
4-"... Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father in
Me?... Believe Me that I am in the Father and the Father in Me." (John
14:10-11)
And such beliefs are numerous in the New Testament. This is the same
issue of the Trinity and one of the basic principles of Christianity by
which the masters of the Church are confused. In this contents, Gary
wolff

says:" It must be said the uncomprehensive relations among the members
of the Trinity (the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit does not seem
reasonable. This issue has always confused divine men (Illahiyon).
According to the teachings of the Church God is one but in spite of
this,the above ‘three persons’ are inseparable because the Trinity is
inseparable, however, each part of the Trinity is independent."

William M. Miller, a christian scholar, says in this regard: "... These
Gospels are not inconsistent with each other! but are complementary.
They are like four photographs of one person taken from four different
sides. I know that you are going to ask now, If God is One then how it
is possible for Jesus (A.S) to be the Son of God? To answer this
question, it must be said that these two issues are secrets, which their
understanding dose not seem reasonable, of course, in our limited
intelligence.

The rationalistic inability is obvious in the above issue and thus we
should discuss the issue of the Trinity in another place. Here, we just
refer to a Quranic verse in this regard: " O’ People of the Book!
overstep not in your religion, and say not upon God except the Truth;
Verily; Verily, the Messiah Jesus(A.S), son of Mary, is only an apostle
of God and His Word which He conveyed unto Mary, and a Spirit
(proceeding) from Him; Believe therefore in God, and His apostles, and
say not (that there are) three (gods); Desist! It is good for you;
Verily, Verily, God! (there is) only One God! Far be it from His
(Absolute)-purity that there be for Him a son; His is whatever is in the
Heavens and whatever is in the Earth; God is sufficient as a
Protector.(An-Nisa, 171)

**The Jesus (A.S)'s Nativity according to the Holy Quran**

A part of Surah Maryam describes the Jesus (A.S)'s Nativity as
follows:

"And mention in the Book (Quran) about Mary (also) when she withdrew
herself from her family (in the house) eastward, then she took a veil
(coverherself) from them; then sent We unto Our Spirit, then he (the
Spirit)

appeared unto her a man sound (in form). Said she: " Verily I fly for
refuge in The Beneficent (God) from thee, (be gone from me) if thou art
God-fearing." Said he:" I am only a messenger (Angel) of thy Lord: so
that I give to thee a son purified". Said she: " How can there be unto
me a son while hath not touched me (any) man and nor was I unchaste!"
Said he: " So shall it be; thy Lord sayeth, It is easy for Me, and that
We will make him a sign (miracle)(of Ours) unto the people and a Mercy
from Us; It is a matter (already) decreed." So she conceived him and
retired with him (away from her people) to a remote place. And the
threos (of child birth) forced her to betake herself unto the trunk of a
palm-tree. She said: " Oh! Had I died ere this, and had been lost in
oblivion totally forgotten! " Then (a voice) called out unto her from
beneath her; "Grieve not thou, verily thy Lord hath caused from beneath
thee (to follow) a stream!" And shake towards thee the trunk of the
palm-tree, it will drop on thee dates fresh (and) ripe. Then eat and
drink and refresh the eye. Then if thon seest any man say: 'Verily I
have vowed unto the Beneficent (God) a fast so never shall I speak today
unto any man." And she came with him unto her people carrying him (with
her). Said they: " O' Mary! Indeed thou hath come with an unusual
thing!."

" O' sister of Aaron! thy father was not a bad man, nor was thy mother
an unchaste woman!" But she pointed out him. They said:" How can we
speak unto one who is (yet) a child in the cradle." He (Jesus
miraculously) said: " Verily I am a servant of God; He hath given me a
book and made me a Prophet!" (Maryam,16-30).

**The Jesus (A.S)'s Nativity according to the New Testament**

"The birth of Jesus (A.S) came about this way : when His mother Mary
was engaged to Joseph, before they came together she was found to be
with child from the Holy Spirit. But as Joseph, her finance, was
fair-minded and did not want to disgrace her publicly, he planned to
breakwith her secretly. But while he was considering this, an angel of
the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, "Joseph, son of David , be
not afraid to take Mary as your wife, for what is conceived in her is
from the Holy Spirit. She will give birth to a son and you are to call
Him Jesus, for He will save His people from their sins."All this took
place in fulfilment of what the Lord had said through the prophet, "
Behold ! The virgin will be with child and shall bear a son, and they
will name Him Immanuel," which means, God with us." (Matt. 1:18-35)

Luke narrates the birth of Jesus (A.S) as follows:

"... In the sixth month of Elizabeth's pregnancy the Angel Gabriel was
sent by God to Nazareth, a town of Galilee, to a virgin named Mary, who
was engaged to Joseph, adescendant of David. The angel, as he approached
her, said," Greetings, favoured one.The Lord is with you." But she was
troubled at his message and reflected what sort of greeting this might
be. The angel said to her, "Have no fear, Mary, for you have found
favour with God. And lo, you will conceive in your womb and give birth
to a son and you will call Him Jesus. He shall be great and will be
called son of the Highest, and the Lord God will give him the throne of
His father David. He will be king over the house of Jacob for ever;
there will be no end to His kingdom." Mary asked the angel, " How will
this be, since I have no husband?" The angel answered her," The Holy
Spirit will come upon you and the power of the Highest will overshadow
you; therefore that holy offspring will be called the son of God." (Luke
1:26-36)

**The Common Points Regarding the Jesus (A.S)’s Nativity**

As it is apparent by comparing the Holy Quran and the Gospel we see
common points between them that some of them are as follows:

1- The appearance of the Angel Gabriel before Maryam and giving her
good tidings about conceiving Jesus(A.S)
2- The virgin Mary
3- Mary's fear while seeing the Angel
4- Jesus(A.S), a fatherless child

But the disagreements among them are as follows:

1- Mary s' engagement to Joseph
2- calling Jesus (A.S) as the son of God

The Holy Quran has referred to the above disagreements. The Qurun
documentarily rejects existence of any husband for Mary and calling
Jesus (A.S) as the son of God is one of the main differences between the
Quran and the Gospels which has been repeatedly rejected by the Quran
that says Jesua (A.S) is only a servant of God and also His prophet. It
is now better to refer to some parts of the Gospel of “Barnabas” which
has a great similarity with the word of the Holy Quran: " In these last
year a virgin called Mary, of the lineage of David, of the tribe of
Judah, was visited by the angel Gabriel from God.

This virgin, living in all holiness without any offence, being
blameless, and abiding in prayer with fastings, being one day alone,
there entered into her champer the angel Gabriel, and he saluted her,
saying: “God be with thee, O Mary.” The virgin was affrighted at the
appearance of the angel; but the angel comforted her, saying "Fear not,
Mary, for thou hast found favour with God, who hath chosen thee to be
mother of a prophet, whom he will send to the people of Israel in order
that they may walk in his laws with truth of heart.” The virgin
Answered0:” Now how shall I bring forth sons, seeing I know not a man? “
The angel answered: “O Mary, God who made man without a man is able to
generate in thee man without a man,because with him nothing is
impossible.” Mary answered:” I know that God is almighty, therefore his
will be done.” The angel answereed:” Now be conceived in thee the
prophet, whom thou shalt name Jesus ...”. (The Gospel of Barnabas 1:1-9)
" Mary having known the will of God, fearing the people, lest they
should take offence at her being great with child, and should stone her
as guilty of fornication, chose a companion of her own linege, a man by
name called Joseph, of blameless life ... ." (The Gospel of Barnabas
2:1)

According to the above mentioned Gospel, there is not obvious
disagreement beween this Gospel and the Holy Quran, and we do not see
here any sign of two disagreements stated before; because firstly, the
Gospel of Barnabas does not say that Jesus (A.S) is the son of God. And
secondly, it ponits out that Mary's engagement with Joseph was after(and
not before) her pregnancy.

**The Prophetic Mission of Jesus (A.S)**

The Holy Quran says : "And (appoint him) an Apostle to the children of
Israel (and who will declare) that now I have come unto you with a sign
from your Lord ... ." ( AL-e-Imran , 49) and or " He (Jesus
miraculously) said :' Verily I am a servant of God; He hath given me a
book (Evangel) and made me a prophet! " (Maryam, 30). The prophethood of
Jesus (A.S) has been referred in many verses of the Holy Quran. Jesus
(A.S) has also been referred in the Gospel with the same title as
follows : " ... for the works which My father has given me to
accomplish - the activities in which I am engaged - these are my
evidence that the father has sent me . And the father who sent Me has
Himself testified on My behalf; only His voice you never yet heard,
neither have you seen His form, nor do you even have His message living
within you, because you do not believe the One whom He sent." (John
5:36-38)

" ... Jesus (A.S) replied, 'This is God's work, that you believe in Him
whom He sent." (Of course, there are also other verses regarding the
Jesus (A.S)'s prophethood that we just mention their addresses in the
Gospel of John as follows: "6:29; 7:17,29,34; 8:32,43; 9:4; 16:5").

The unity among God and Jesus has been repeatedly emphasized in
different parts of the Gospel which refers to the belief of the trinity
that is one of the basic principles of Christianity. Some of these
verses are as follows:

"... I and the Father are One..." (John 10:30)

"... Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father in Me?
The words that I give to you all, I do not speak just from Myself; the
Father who dwells in Me carries on His works. Believe Me that I am in
the Father and the Father in Me ... ." (John 14:10-11).

Now, the masters of the Church are responsible for finding the solution
for the issue of the Jesus (A.S)s' prophethood and unity and also the
issue of the Trinity. Perhaps they answer: " By the man's weak
intelligence, it is much certain that the above issues do not seem
reasonable for him."

**The Miracles of Jesus (A.S)**

In this regard, the Holy Quran says : "Out of clay will I make for you
like the figure of a bird, and I will breathe into it, and it shall
become a flying bird by God's permission; and I shall heal the blind and
the leper and will raise the dead to life by God's permission."
(Al-e-Imran, 49).

Like the Holy Quran, the four Gospels have also mentioned the miracles
of Jesus (A.S)for many times that are almost the same as the Quran. The
folliwing verses of the Gospels will elucidate Jesus (A.S)'s miracles:
"... When He had come down from the hill, great crowds followed Him. And
a leper came up and knelt before Him... Reaching out His hand He touched
him saying, ‘I am willing. Be cleansed’. And instantly his leprosy was
cleansed." ( Matt.8)

"... While Jesus was walking away, two blind men followed Him, crying
out, 'Son of David, pity us!' Then when He had entered the house, the
blind men came up to Him and Jesus said to them, ‘Do you believe I can
do this?' They answered Him, ‘Yes, Lord." He then touched their eyes and
said, ‘According to the measure of your faith it shall be to you.' And
their eyes were opened. "( Matt. 9) "... Jesus replied to them, "Go and
report John what you hear and see: the blind see, the lame walk, lepers
are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised and... ." (Matt. 11)
The main contradiction between the Quran and the Gospel is that
according to the Quran Jesus's miracle is due to God's permission, but,
it is said in the Gospel that Jesus's miracle refers to His own power.
So, it is much certain that the Quran lays too much strees on monotheism
but the second seems to emphasize polytheism.

**Jesus (A.S) as Kalimat Allah (the Word of Allah)**

The word of Allah is the title attributed to Jesus (A.S) by the Holy
Quran in several verses that some are as follows:

"... Verily, Allah giveth thee the glad tidings of a Word from Him;
whose name shall be Messiah, Jesus, son of Maryam ... ." (Al-e-Imran,
45)
"... Verily, Allah giveth thee the glad tidings of (a son) Yahya
(John)(who shall be) the confimer of a word from Allah ... ."
(Al-e-Imran, 39)
"... Verily, Verily, the Messiah Jesus, son of Mary, is only an apostle
of God and His Word ... ."(An- Nisa, 171)

In this regard, we read the following verses in the Gospel of John:

" In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God. This is the one who was in the beginning with God. Through
Him every thing came into being and without Him nothing that exsits came
into being. In Him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men...And the
Word became man and lived for a time among us, and we viewed His glory-
such glory as the only-begotten Son receives from His Father- abounding
in grace and truth. John testified about Him and cried out, ‘This was
the One of whom I said, He who comes after me ranks ahead of me because
He was before me.

' For from His abundance all of us have received more and more grace;
for while the Law was given through Moses, grace and truth came through
Jesus Christ." In this contents, there is a similarity between the Holy
Quran and the Gospel because both of them have regarded Jesus (A.S) as
the Word of Allah and have referred to John's testimony about Jesus's
legitimacy. But the contradiction between the two texts relates to the
monotheistic aspects as the Quran knows Allah the unique power in the
universe while the Gospel believes that Jesus is parallel to God and His
son. In order to prove the Jesus's greatness and holiness the Holy Quran
has allocated different verses to Jesus (A.S) and abiut 175 Quranic
verses including 3163 words equal to %41 of the whole words of the
Quran. But the secret of the Quran in calling Jesus the word of Allah
itself is a discussion which needs to be commented, and in this regard
the commentators have stated their opinions as the following is one of
them:

" The Word refers to Jesus, the son of Maryam. He has been referred by
the Word to remember that He is an unusual creature and so deserves only
to be attributed as the Word although all creatures are indeed the word
of God.”

**The Disciples of Jesus (A.S)**

A group of people have been called "The Disciple" by the Holy Quran. As
it is obvious from the contents of the Quranic verses, they were
specific and directly instructed Jesus (A.S)’s students as if they
accompanied Him while traveling or at home:

"... The Disciples said ‘We are the helpers towards God! We believe in
God!" (Al-e-Imran, 52)

"... And when I, revealed unto the disciples, ‘Believe in Me and Mine
Apostle (Jesus)' said they, We believe,... ." (Al-Maidah, 111)

"... As said Jesus, Son of Mary unto (his) disciples: ‘Who (among you)
will be my helpers unto (the work) of God?' said the disciples (of
Jesus):

‘We are the helpers (in the cause) of God!" (As-Saff, 14)

The Gospels have also mentioned the diciples in different verses for
many times. The following verse is an example:

"... Calling His 12 disciples to Him He gave them power over depraved
spirits to cast them out, and to heal every disease and every malady.
Now these are the names of the 12 disciples: first, Simon, called peter,
and his brother Andrew; James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John;
Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew, the tax collector; James,
the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus; Simon the Zealot and Judas Iscariot,
who also betrayed Him. These 12 Jesus sent out with the charge: ‘Do not
go to the Gentiles ... And as you go, preach that the kingdom of heaven
is at hand. Heal the sick; raise the dead; cleanse lepers;expel demons
... ." (Matt. 10:1-9)

**Jesus (A.S)'s Confirmation of Legitimacy of The Torah**

In this regard, the Holy Quran says: "And We caused to follow in their
footsteps, Jesus son of Mary, confirming the law (The Torah) which
wasbefore him, and We gave him the Evangel... ." (Al-Maidah, 46)

The same meaning can be found in the Gospel for example, "... Do not
suppose that I came to annul the Law (The Torah) or the prophets. I did
not come to abolish but to complete them; for I assure you, while heaven
and earth endure not one iota or one projection of a letter will be
dropped from the Law until all is a accomplished. Whoever, therefore,
abolishes the least significant of these commands and so teaches the
people, he shall be of least significance ... ." (Matt. 5:17-20)

"... But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for the
smallest part of a letter of the Law (The Torah) to become invalid... ."
(Luke 16:17)

"...For if you believed Moses you would believe Me, since he wrote
about Me. But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe
My teachings?" (John 5:46)


