Worships
========

The Holy Quran says in this regard as follows:

" Verily Prayer is, (imposed) upon the believers as (a) timed
Ordinance." (An-Nisa, 103)

The Gospel has also emphasized on the prayer in several verses:

" He was praying in a certain place and, when He ceased, one of His
disciples said to Him, ‘Lord, teach us to pray as Johh, too, taught his
discipels. He said to them, ‘When you pray, say: ‘Father, your name be
held holy. Your kingdom come. Daily grant us our food for the coming
day. And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every one indebted to
us. And bring us not into temptation." (Luke 11:1-4)

" And when you pray, do not be like the hypocrites, for they love to
pray standing in the synagogues and at the street corners to be seen by
the people." (Matt. 6:5)

The Gospel of Barnabas, too, has repeatedly referred to the issue of
worshipping in the following verses:

" Whe he had finished the prayer of dawn... ." (106:198)

"... For in every idle word man sinneth, and our God blotteth our sin
by reason of prayer. For that prayer is the advocate of the soul; prayer
is the medicine of the soul; prayer is the defence of the health; prayer
is the weapon of faith; prayer is the bridle of sense; prayer is the
salt of the flesh that suffereth it not to be corrupted by sin."
(119:10-16)

"Make prayer unceasingly... ." (36:8)

**Supplication (Du’a)**

In this regard, the Quran has the following verse:

" Call ye on your Lord, humbly and secretly; Verily loveth not God the
transgressors. "(Al-A’raf, 55)

And the following verse is from the Gospel attributed to Matthew: Ask
and it will be given you; seek and you will find, knock and it will be
opened to you. For every one who asks receives, and the seeker finds,
and to him who knocks it is opened." (7:7-8)

And the following verse is from the Gospel attributed to Mark:

" I tell you, therefore, whatever you ask in prayer, believe that you
have received it and it will be yours." (11:24)

**Fasting**

The following Quranic verse is in this regard:

"O' ye who believe! Fasting has been ordained unto you as it was
ordained unto those before you so that ye guard yourself (against
evil)." (Al-Baqarah, 183)

The Gospel includes the following verses:

" When you fast, do not be sad-faced like the hypocrites, for they
disfigure their faces to show others their fasting. I assure you, they
have received their full reward. But when you fast, anoint your head and
wash your face, so that no one except your heavenly Father who is there
in the secet place may notice your fasting. And your Father who sees in
secret will reward you." (Matt. 6:16-18)

" John's disciples and the Pharisees were observing a fast; so they
came and said to Him, ‘Why do John's disciples and the disciples of the
Pharisees fast, but Your disciples do not fast?' Jesus replied to them,
‘Can the wedding guests fast while the bridegroom is in their company?
So long as the bridegroom is with them they can not fast, but a time
will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them, and then will be
their day to fast." (Mark 2:8-20)

"... Whereupon Satan will seek to cause that he shall not fast in any
wise, under pretext of sickness... ." (Barnabas 107:17)

But the way of performing prayer and fasting has not been elucidated in
the Christianity even briefly in the present Gospels and so its
difference with that of Islam can not be determined. In other words, the
Gospels just show the existence of prayer and fasting in the
Christianity (without elaborating the way of performing them).


