Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

All Praise belongs to Allah alone, and honorable and perfect blessings
be upon Muhammad and his infallible, immaculate Progeny.

Unfortunately, scholars have not regarded adequately three questions
concerning the Prophets’ missions. The first question is the conveyance
of the Lord’s message being the original mission of the Prophets. This
point is in fact the pivot on which the Prophets’ missions and actions
are grounded, and is purposed for substantiating the Lord’s claim on His
servants. A Prophet is then a conveyor of an epistle; he fears the Lord
and works for evading His ire and torment in case he violates the
instructions. For this reason, the Prophets were wont to call people to
witness on the perfection of their conveyance. In addition, they are not
asked to enforce people to admit and accept their promulgations and,
similarly, not admitted to submit people to their missions.

As a second rule, coercion in matters of the divine religion is
rejected. It is obligatory to preserve people’s freedom of believing or
refutation. They are, likewise, free to commit themselves to the
religion or to deviate. This is the very meaning of opening the school
of life in this world and testing people in guidance or deviation by
giving them the ability to do good and evil, and the result will be
declared on another stage and in another world. Drawing people to the
religion by force is contrary to the principles of this divine test as
well as to the freedom of choice.

The second question is the Prophets’ goals being to minister to the
grand issues of people and societies. A messenger of Allah is compared
to an engineer specialized in the construction of cultures, societies
and history. The Prophets’ missions should thus be looked upon from
these angles. A scholar must ask himself how people’s cultures and
history should have been if a certain Prophet (S) had not been given the
Divine Mission, and what changes had been made when that Prophet (S)
conveyed the Lord’s Message.

In other words, we should wonder how paganism would have looked like
nowadays if Prophet Abraham had not been chosen for conveying the Divine
Mission or if he had not established the principles of monotheism. We
should also wonder what the situation in the Arab lands in particular
and the whole world in general would have been if Prophet Muhammad
(S)[^1] had not been chosen for the Divine Mission and what would have
occurred had he not perfected the belief of monotheism giving it its
current form.

The Holy Prophet (S)’s mission was to establish a nation and to lead it
to occupy an advanced, if not pioneer, position amongst other nations,
and this formation has been proved the best in content and structure. It
is undeniable that the Holy Prophet (S) was keen on giving the
leadership of the *Ummah*[^2] to his Ahl al-Bayt[^3] (a.s.)[^4] as they
have been the choice of Allah Who purified them thoroughly[^5] and gave
them His Book in heritage exclusively.[^6] If people reject the Ahl
al-Bayt’s divinely commissioned Imamate,[^7] it will then make no
difference for anyone to hold it, in order that Allah might bring about
a matter that was to be done, which is the advent of the Concealed Imam
(al-Mahdi the Expected).

The third question is that the Holy Prophet (S)’s personality is
indisputably present and effective, yet limited and minute, in the
process of the conveyance. None can deny the fact that the Holy Prophet
(S) was intelligent, genius, worthy of leadership and free to act as
well as divinely selected, though his own identity is restricted during
the promulgation of the Mission. What is meant by identity is not the
opposite of mechanism, since the Holy Prophet (S)’s obedience to what
was revealed to him was the result of perfect satisfaction, faith and
observance.

The area in which the Holy Prophet (S) was allowed to practice his
personal inference formed a narrow point in proportion to the large area
of his practices.

Hence, he was just like an engineer whose manager binds him with giving
effects to a large project. This engineer is satisfied that he should
contact his manager frequently so as to evade any mistake and,
meanwhile, he works, thinks and carries on working; still he contacts
the center so that he receives the strategies and consults saving from
problems. This example is, however, a highly microscopic view of the
Holy Prophet (S)’s mission.

Regarding the Center of the Holy Prophet (S), Almighty Allah is
unparalleled in entity and deeds. Depending upon the previous, any study
of the Holy Prophet (S)’s life account should regard three matters;

(1) the Holy Prophet (S)’s mission was to carry what was revealed to
him,

(2) his task was to build a nation and help it find its way in history
and,

(3) he ought to follow the Lord’s instructions in each and every action.

A deep look at the Holy Prophet (S)’s life proves the three
aforementioned points. Almighty Allah has obviously managed the Holy
Prophet (S)’s affairs from start to finish, and the Holy Prophet (S)
obeyed his Lord’s instructions submissively. Therefore, the results of
his deeds achieved an extraordinary attainment that exceeded all the
intellectualities and senses of sociologists.

The Holy Prophet (S) created an international, civilized and ideological
extension in a relative period with the least material and humane
casualties. Despite the truculence of the Holy Prophet (S)’s foes that
waged fierce wars against him, the casualties of both sides did not
attain two thousand victims, since it was the Lord who supervised the
Holy Prophet (S)’s management.

The Holy Qur’an was uninterruptedly revealed to the Holy Prophetsince
the first day of his Mission up to a few days before his decease.
Archangel Gabriel visited him frequently with Qur’anic Verses,
revelation, instructions, directives, answers and like things. There are
innumerable examples on the Divine presence and intervention to save a
situation in the life of the Holy Prophet (S) proving that he would not
have behaved personally except when he applied the general lines and
carried on the detailed commandments drawn by the Divine Revelation. On
many occasions, the Holy Prophet (S), having waited for the Revelation,
would not act personally. He is reported to have said, ‘I have been
given the Book and its like.’

‘Its like’ stands for the instructions carried by Archangel Gabriel that
later on took the form of Hadith.[^8] This means that his traditions
were also revealed to him, just like the Holy Qur’an.[^9] Besides, these
instructions included his personal affairs such as marriage, divorce,
dress, eating, sleeping, ablution and even brushing the teeth. The Holy
Prophet (S)’s endowment, detriment, cherishing, malice, residence,
touring, satisfaction and rage; all were determined by revealed
instructions.

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) told the story of an atheist who disputed, belied,
harmed and threatened the Holy Prophet (S) face to face. The Holy
Prophet (S) became so angry that the vein of ire was clearly seen
between his eyes. As he nodded his head down, Archangel Gabriel came to
him and revealed, ‘Your Lord asked me to carry His compliments to you
and to inform you that the man in front of you is generous and he used
to serve food to people.’ At once, the Holy Prophet (S)’s anger
vanished; he spoke to the man, ‘I would have banished you and made you
an example had not Archangel Gabriel came to me and told, on behalf of
my Lord, that you have been generous as you used to serve people with
food.’ ‘Does your Lord favor generosity?’ asked the man. ‘Yes, He does,’
answered the Holy Prophet (S). ‘I now declare that there is no god but
Allah and that you are the Messenger of Allah. I swear by Him Who sends
you with the truth, I have never rejected a beggar’s request,’ declared
the man.[^10]

One day, a man asked Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) whether the Holy Prophet (S)’s
nomination of Imam \`Ali as his successor and the Muslims’ next leader
had been a personal conduct or a divine directive. ‘Woe is you!’ Imam
al-Baqir said angrily, ‘The Holy Prophet (S) was too reverent to say
what Allah did not order him to say. Like the prayers, zakat,[^11]
fasting and Hajj,[^12] the Holy Prophet (S)’s nominating Imam \`Ali for
his vicegerencey was a divine order.’[^13]

The Holy Prophet (S)’s Succession Being a Simple Theme
------------------------------------------------------

The question of holding the Holy Prophet (S)’s position after his
decease is simple, not complicated. The Ahl al-Bayt and their Shi\`ah
–followers- claim the Holy Prophet (S)’s nominating Imam \`Ali (a.s.) as
Muslims’ next leader and it is thus unacceptable for people of
Quraysh,[^14] or any others, to choose anyone else since the Holy
Prophet (S)’s nomination was only the conveyance of the Lord’s
instruction. People of Quraysh, unfortunately, denied this nomination a
few hours after the Holy Prophet (S)’s demise[^15] claiming that the
Holy Prophet (S)’s ‘authority’ should be distributed among the
twenty-three clans of Quraysh. Therefore, they selected Abu-Bakr who
belonged to the Qurayshite clan of Taym ibn Murrah for the leadership.
This man nominated \`Umar ibn al-Khattab who belonged to the Qurayshite
clan of \`Adi as his successor. By the so-called Shura (the Advisory
Council), \`Umar nominated another Qurayshite man who belonged to the
clan of Umayyah ibn \`Abd-Shams, namely \`Uthman ibn \`Affan, as his
successor.

They neither elected any of Ansar,[^16] because they were not from
Quraysh and thus had no right in the authority of the Qurayshite Prophet
(S), nor any of the Hashimites[^17] though they were the worthiest of
this position, because they were, in the view of the conspirators
against the leadership of Islam, just like the other Qurayshite clans
most of whom did not want for the Hashimites to win the position of
leadership after they had won the ‘position of Prophethood’!

Thus, the matter is very simple; did the Holy Prophet (S) nominate a
successor or not? Nevertheless, it is very complicated that people of
Quraysh and their fans do not want to discuss because it demolishes
their structure and legality. Furthermore, they have warned all people
not to discuss this matter claiming its being arduous, complicated and
even haram[^18] to be discussed!

The Verses of Ghadir[^19] are only a part of the Qur’anic texts that
declared Imam \`Ali and the Ahl al-Bayt as the divinely commissioned
leaders of the *Ummah*. Late and current Sunni and Shiite authors and
exegetes have been authoring books discussing the Verses and Hadiths
about the Ahl al-Bayt and their roles in the *Ummah*. In this regard,
let us refer to two well-known and available references:

(1) Al-Hafiz Abu-Na\`im al-Isfahani: Ma Nazala fi \`Ali Min al-Qur’an
(Qur’anic Verses respecting \`Ali)

(2) Al-Nassa\`i: Khasa\`is Amir al-Mu\`minin \`Ali (Peculiarities of
\`Ali Amir al-Mu\`minin).[^20]

The Three Verses of Ghadir
--------------------------

***“O Messenger! Deliver what bas been revealed to you from your Lord;
and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people.”*** ***[Surah al-Ma\`idah 5:67]***

***“This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My
favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion.”*** ***[Surah
al-Ma\`idah 5:3]***  
***“One demanding, demanded the chastisement which must befall.”***
***[Surah al-Maarij 70:1]***

Throughout our discussions of these three Verses of Ghadir, we will
attract attentions to their firm relation to the Holy Prophet (S)’s
sermons during the Farewell Hajj.[^21] It hence seems necessary to
discuss these six sermons as well, since they contain the Holy Prophet
(S)’s instructing his people to follow the two weighty (precious)
things—the Qur’an and the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.).[^22] He also carried the
good tidings to his people, in the Sermon of \`Arafat, that Almighty
Allah has solved the question of the vicegerencey and has thus chosen
the twelve divinely commissioned Imams. Moreover, it seems essential to
discuss the relationship between the Holy Prophet (S) and the Qurayshite
chiefs pertaining to the leadership of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s.).

We hope these would be useful discussions by which Almighty Allah may
reward us in the Hereafter and include us with the intercession
(Shafa\`ah) of Muhammad and his immaculate progeny, peace be upon them
all.

Al-Mustafa Center for Islamic Researches  
 13 / Rajab / 1419 A.H

[^1]: (S) abbreviation of “Ŝalla’l-Lāhu °alayhi wa ãlihi wa sallam”:
“peace and Allah’s bessings be upon him and his holy progeny”

[^2]: Ummah is the Islamic Nation—the Muslim’s community founded by
Prophet (S) Muhammad, comprising individuals bound to one another
predominantly by religious ties.

[^3]: The Ahl al-Bayt (People of the House) is a term dedicated to the
family of the Holy Prophet (S). More precisely, it is dedicated to
definite individuals; namely, Imam \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, Fatimah
al-Zahra\` (the Holy Prophet (S)’s daughter and Imam \`Ali’s wife),
al-Hasan ibn \`Ali, and al-Husayn ibn \`Ali. The nine Immaculate Imams
(namely, \`Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sajjad, Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Baqir,
Ja\`far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq, Musa ibn Ja\`far al-Kazim, \`Ali ibn Musa
al-Rida, Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Jawad, \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Hadi,
al-Hasan ibn \`Ali al-\`Askari, and al-Mahdi the Awaited) are also
within the Ahl al-Bayt.

[^4]: (a.s.) abbreviation of “°Alayhi-ha-hum assalām”, “peace be upon
him, her or them”, that has been used besides the names of the prophets,
anglels, the members of Ah al-Bayt and the Women of Paradise (Khadīja,
Fātima, Maria, Asyiah).

[^5]: This is an indication to Allah’s saying in the Holy Qur\`an (Surah
of al-Ahzab 33:33): “Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness
from you, O people of the House! and to purify you a (thorough)
purifying.”

[^6]: This is an indication to Allah’s saying in the Holy Qur\`an (Surah
of Fatir 35:32): “Then We gave the Book for an inheritance to those whom
We chose from among Our servants.”

[^7]: Imamate is the succession of the Holy Prophet (S).

[^8]: Hadith is the body of traditions concerning the sayings and doings
of the Holy Prophet (S), considered to be second in authority to the
Holy Qur\`an.

[^9]: Sunan al-Darimi; 1/145

[^10]: Al-Kulayni: al-Kafi 4/29.

[^11]: Zakat is the obligatory payment made annually under Islamic law
on certain kinds of property and used for charitable and religious
objects.

[^12]: Hajj is the pilgrimage to the Sacred Mosque at Makkah undertaken
in the twelfth month of the Muslim year and constituting one of the
religious duties of Islam.

[^13]: Al-Kulayni: al-Kafi 1/298.

[^14]: Quraysh is the name of the tribe that inhabited Makkah in the
time of the Holy Prophet (S) and to which he belonged. Quraysh, yet, was
the name of one of the Holy Prophet (S)’s forefathers.

[^15]: In fact, people of Quraysh denied the whole matter and claimed
that the Holy Prophet (S) had never nominated or elected anyone for
vicegerencey.

[^16]: Ansar is a title said to the people of Yathrib, later on
al-Madinah (al-Munawwarah), who supported and received the Holy Prophet
(S) and his followers after they had immigrated from Makkah.

[^17]: Hashimites are the sons and descendants of Hashim ibn
\`Abd-Manaf, the second grandfather of the Holy Prophet (S) and the
Hashimites are thus the uncles, cousins, and descendants of the Holy
Prophet (S).

[^18]: Illegal according to the Islamic doctrine.

[^19]: Ghadir -or Ghadir Khumm- is a place between Makkah and Medina
where the Holy Prophet (S) declared Imam \`Ali as the next leader of the
Ummah and made it incumbent on Muslims of all generations to obey this
leadership and consider it as a divine directive. See Muhammad Baqir
Ansari: What Happened in Ghadir, translated by Badr Shahin, Mowlood
Kaaba Publications, Qum – Iran, 2000.

[^20]: Al-Tabari has also compiled a book, in two volumes, in this
regard entitled al-Wilayah (The Vicegerencey). Unfortunately, this book
has not been printed yet.

[^21]: The Farewell Hajj is the final ritual collective pilgrimage led
by the Holy Prophet (S).

[^22]: This is an indication to the Holy Prophet (S)’s famous statement:
“I am leaving among you that which will save you from deviation forever
if you only adhere to: the Book of Allah and my progeny—my household.
Have I conveyed (to you this matter)?” Al-Ya\`qubi: al-Tarikh (Book of
History) 2/92.


