The Three Verses Of Ghadir
==========================

Almighty Allah has instructed the Holy Prophet (S) to guide his people
to the rites of the ritual Hajj after he had guided them to the ritual
prayer, fasting and zakat. That was just before starting the Farewell
Hajj. He, the Exalted, also instructed his Prophet (S) to show them
publicly the next leader. Throughout the history of humankind, the
Almighty did the same thing with all of His Prophets who had departed
this world only after they had perfected the religion and delivered the
divine Mission to their nominated heirs whom they must have designated
publicly.

The Holy Prophet (S) carried the Lord’s instruction when he summoned
people to participate in that final Hajj so that he would teach them the
rites and would nominate Imam \`Ali as his vicegerent and people’s
leader. Nevertheless, he anticipated that people of Quraysh would object
to such a nomination for they had already born envy and malice to the
Hashimites. He also expected that they would criticize his divine
Prophethood and accuse him of establishing a monarchy for his household
similar to these of Khosrow (king of Persia) or Caesar (king of the
Romans). If that happened, it would create a movement of apostasy among
Muslims. At any rate, the Holy Prophet (S) performed the Farewell Hajj
and addressed five sermons in Makkah, \`Arafat and Mina in which he
guided people to the rites and regulations of the religion, foretold
about the coming Twelve Imams out of his progeny and emphasized that
people would not be saved against deviation unless they would hold fast
to the two weighty things; the Qur’an and the Ahl al-Bayt. He also
warned against the devious leaders and against [some of] his companions
who would avert and, as a result, the Lord should deprive them of
joining the Holy Prophet (S) at the Divine Pool on the Resurrection Day.

Because of people of Quraysh’s irritable situation, the Holy Prophet (S)
did not emphasize on the coming leadership of his progeny officially. He
tried to pass up ordering them to pay homage to \`Ali during the
ceremonies of the Farewell Hajj.  
 During the journey back to al-Madinah, Archangel Gabriel carried to the
Holy Prophet (S) Almighty Allah’s saying,

***“O Messenger! Deliver what bas been revealed to you from your Lord;
and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people.”*** ***[Surah al-Ma\`idah 5:67]***

Immediately, the Holy Prophet (S) ordered the caravans to halt at Ghadir
Khumm and delivered the Lord’s message. He raised \`Ali to the
minbarlike height made of saddles, took him up from the arm and declared
him as the next leader. He also ordered to establish a tent in which
\`Ali would sit and Muslims would congratulate him on this leading
position. The attendant Muslims offered congratulations and paid him
homage. On that occasion, Almighty Allah revealed,

***“This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My
favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion.”*** ***[Surah
al-Ma\`idah 5:3]***

That was on the eighteenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah.

Before and after his arrival at al-Madinah, people of Quraysh and the
hypocrites started their activities against the Holy Prophet (S). All of
their plots were foiled by the Lord Who protected His Messenger against
any movement of mutiny or apostasy during his lifetime. Various means
were used for this purpose. One of these was the heavenly chastisement
inflicted upon those who objected and protested against him. Jabir ibn
al-Nadr ibn al-Harith al-\`Abdari whose father was the chief of the
[tribe of] \`Abd al-Dar and the commander of the polytheists’ army
against Muslims during the Battle of Badr was one of those objectors:  
 Abu-\`Ubayd al-Harawi, in Gharib al-Qur’an, records the following:  
 After the Holy Prophet (S)’s conveyance of the Lord’s commission in
Ghadir Khumm had been widely known, al-Harith ibn al-Nu\`man al-Fihri
(or Jabir ibn al-Nadr ibn al-Harith ibn Kildah al-\`Abdari, according to
Abu-\`Ubayd’s report) came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said, “O
Muhammad! You have ordered us, on behalf of Allah, to declare that there
is no god but Allah and that Muhammad being the Messenger of Allah,
perform the prayers, observe fasting in the month of Ramadan, undertake
the [obligatory] Hajj and defray the zakat; and we have admitted.
Nevertheless, all these have not sufficed you until you raised your
cousin from the arm and preceded him to us saying, ‘\`Ali will now be
the master of him whosever master was me.’ Is this your own directive or
is it due to Allah’s?” The Holy Prophet (S) answered, “By Allah there is
no god but Whom I take the oath, it is surely Almighty Allah’s
directive.” Jabir turned his face towards his riding animal saying, “O
Allah! If Muhammad’s words are true, then rain us with a heavenly stone
or inflict a painful chastisement upon us.” Before Jabir could reach his
animal, the Lord rained him with a stone that fell on the head and went
out from the anus. Hence, he was killed and, consequently, Allah
revealed,  
***“One demanding, demanded the chastisement which must befall.”***
***[Surah al-Maarij 70:1]***

Despite the fact that a good number of Sunni reference books of Tafsir
and Hadith have adopted the same exegeses of the three Verses revealed
for the event of Ghadir Khumm, others have adopted other opinions most
of which are contradictory.

The following discussions are introduced as preliminary introductions to
the exegesis of the three Verses of Ghadir.


